The Chinese Classics, Vol. 5, Part 1: The Ch'un Ts'ew (Spring and Autumn Annals) (James Legge (trans.), 1872)
==========================================================
Vol. 5 Part 1 of Legge's Chinese Classics — the first English translation of the Spring and Autumn Annals. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

THE CHINESE CLASSICS. 

VOL. V. 

THE OH'DH TS‘EW, wrra THE TSO CRUEN. 


3 , V. pt., i. IV. 2. 


THE 


CHINESE CLASSICS: 


wmr 

A TRANSLATIOIs^, CRITICAL ATO EXEaETICAL NOTES, 
PROLEGOMENA, AND COPIOUS INDEXES. 


JAMES LEGGE, D.D., LL.D., 

OP THE LONDON MISSIONABY SOCIETY. 


IN SEVEN VOLUMES. 


VOL. V.-PART I, 

CONTAINING 

DUKES YIN, HWAN, CHWANG, SON, HE, WAN, SEUEN AND CHTNG; 

AND THE PHOLEGOMENA. 


Bonbon: 

HENBY FROVi’’DE, 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, E.C. 


PREFACE. 


The author is glad to be able to j)ublish his fifth volume in less 
than twelve months after the publication of the fourth. Thei*e 
remain now only the Le Ke and the Yih King to be translated and 
annotated, and then the task which he undertook will be fully 
accomplished. As he must return to England in the course of next 
year, he cannot say when the publication of those two Works may 
be looked for. He will certainly not allow anything to interfere 
■with the completion of his labours upon them; but the Le Ke is so very 
voluminous, and the Yih King is so entirely sui generis^ that this will 
yet require some years. It will then have to be considered whether 
he can get them printed in England, or must return once more to 
Hongkong for that purpose. Moreover, the publication of them must 
depend in a good measure on the sale which the volumes already 
issued may continue to have. 

The present volume contains not only the Ch‘un Ts‘ew of Confu- 
cius, but also the Commentary on it by Tso K‘ew-ming. Had the 
author been content to publish merely the text of the Classic, with 
. a translation of it, the volume would have been of small compass. 
But without the narratives of Tso the annals of the Sage would 
have given a most meagre and unsatisfactory account of the period 
covered by them. He did not therefore shrink from the great addi- 
tional labour required to translate the whole of Tso’s Work; and he 
believes it will be acknowledged that he has thereby rendered an 
important service to students of Chinese literature and to his readers 
generally. From the narratives of Tso there may be gathered as full 
and interesting an account of the historj'^ of Cliina, from b.c. 721 to 
about 460, as we have of any of the nations of Europe during the 
Middle Ages. 


PEEFACE, 


The translation of the Chh.ni Ts‘e\v itself may be made by an 
ordinary Chinese scholar currente calamo; but it is not so with the 
translation of the Tso Cliuen. And the author had not the benefit 
of the labours of previous translators with either of them. In pre- 
paring his former volumes, he did liis work in the first place 
without reference to those who had traversed the same fields before 
him, but he afterwards found it occasionally of advantage to com- 
pai’e his versions with those of others. This he has not been able 
to do in the present case. If any Sinologue be at times inclined to 
differ from him in the rendering of a passage of Tso, the autlior 
would ask him to suspend his judgment for a little. Prolonged 
study may perhaps show him that the meaning has seldom been 
mistaken. To have introduced notes vindicating his rendering!?, 
where the meaning was not immediately evident, would have greatly 
increased the size of the volume, already sufficiently large. His 
object has always been to translate faithfully, without resorting to 
paraphrase, which he considers a slovenly and unscholarly practice; 
yet he hopes that his versions are not in language that can be 
represented as uncouth, or unpleasant to read. 

He has received the same assistance as in the case of the fourth 
volume in reading most of the proofs. And his obligations to the 
Rev. Mr. Chalmers have been even greater than before. Not only 
did he prepare the indexes of Subjects and Proper Names, but the 
author is indebted to him for the valuable maps of China in the 
Cli‘un Ts‘ew period, for the chronological table of the lunar months 
during it, and for various assistance on other points. 

Hongkong, September 26th, 1872. 


CONTENTS 


I. THE PEOIiEGOMBNA. 

CHAPTER 1. 

THE KATCRE A2a> VAIEB OF THE CH'HN TS'EIT. 

SEOXrOS PAGE 

I. Disappointment of the expectations raised by the earliest accounts of the Ch'nn 

Ts'ew 1 

n. The Sources of the Ch‘nn Ts‘evr, and its ISfnturc. Did Confucius allow himself 

any liberty of addition or retrenchment in the use of his authorities?.. 6 

m. Recovery of the Ch‘un Ts'ew daring the Han dynasty. Was this indeed the 

Ch‘un Ts'cw of Confucius? 16 

rv. The three early Commentaries on the Ch'nn Ts'ew 22 

Y. The value of the Ch'un Ts‘6\r 68 

APPEXTIIX 

L Spedmens of the Commentaries of Kung-yang and Kuh-leang 64 

D. A letter questioning the Confucian authorship of the Ch'un Ts'Sw, by Yuen Mei.... 81 

CHAPTER n. 

THE CHROXOI.OGT OP THE CH'UX TS'EW. 

SECTIOK 

I. The chronology of the Text; — ^vith tables of solar cdipses, and of the lunar 

months for the whole period 85 

H. The dates in the Tso Chuen 97 

in. Lists of the kings of Chow, and of the princes of the principal fiefs, from tlie 

beginning to the close of the Chow dynasty..'. 102 

CHAPTER in. 

THE CRIHA OF THE CH'OX TS'ETV PERIOD; — CONSIDERED UT RELATION TO ITS TERRITORIAL 
extent: the DISORDER WHICH PREVAILED; THE GROWTH AND ENCROACHMENTS OF 

THE larger states; and the barbarous TRIBES WHICH SURROUNDED IT 112 

CHAPTER IV. 

LIST OP THE PRINCIPAL WORKS WHICH HAVE BEEN EMPLOTED IN THE 
PREPARATION OF THIS VOLUME. 

SECTION 

I. Chinese Works ; with brief notices of them 13S 

H. Translations and other Poteign Works 117 


CONTENTS. 


* • • f 


Vlll 


n. THE BODY OP THE VOLTBIE. 

BOOS 

I DnIcG Yin 1 


11 


Ilwiin 

86 

Ill 


Chu'.-inpf 


IV 


Min.....’ 

123 

V 


He 

i;i2 

VI 

II 

■\Vtt 1 

227 

vri 

*’ 

Senen 

28+ 

VJII. 

M 

Ch in" 

8.86 

IX 


Soiin^ 

411 

X 

’* 

t'lraou 

568 

XI 


Tin". 

742 

XIT 

,1 

Gae. 

792 

Supplement of Tsu 


III. INDEXES. 


I. Index of Sn^ioct.!’..... 866 

II. Index of Pr..p;ir Names....' 876 

UI. Index of Chinese characiers and phrases 888 


r-.nnATA. 


IX 


KHRATA. 


1. IK Tin: ciiisrsi: ti;xt ai* tiic cii'ps ts'kw. 


r.'.je 

f’afjT.'ia 1 

1 Page 

Cofiimn 

8. 


103, 

4, 

after Me comma. 

*• 


221, 

s, 

Me 


7, „ 

291, 

o 

*•1 

forg^ |'*,4^rcad|^ 


5, after Me rimima. 

471, 

h 

„ 0 read 

4C, 

135, 

4. fer road gj). 

8, tlal. „ ^ read ^ 

742, 

o 

" 3E- 


Miiro tlnn one half of the nh-nv are merely errors ns regards the text of the K‘nng-he Ch'un 
Ts'eir. mill h ire nri<en fr.mi tlie eoinpusitors iiatherin.? the clinmctcrs from copies in which the 
text of "IVo-she was nlso_«eiher .iilhere.l to. In the same way is to be cxpliiiiied the occasional 

occurrence of for in the text, and of -^p for in the Chuen. 


II. IK TIIC Ctlixnsc TEXT OT THE CHEEK. 


JPiiye Cotunn 
20, 11, for ^ read 

2D, 2, „ begin a column. 

.. S. » jft~P 

128, 9, before insert ^5- 

185, 8, defc o beside 

143, 15, for^ 

204, 9, „ ^ „ p, . 

259, 1, „ 2^0, „ ^.j 

8S6, 8. , ■ 


Page Column 


418, 

8, 

for 


451, 

8, 

II 

m 

C45, 

G4C, 

u 

91 


679, 

4, 

99 


721, 

12, 

99 


776. 

11. 

99 

'm 

815, 

10, 

19 


822, 

16, 

99 

M 

823, 

10, 

91 

m 


rend 


II 

ff 

l> 

91 

91 


m- 


y 


St- 


HI. CQIKE8E CBAIUCTEKS IK THE KOTES. 


J’cffe Columitr^iine 
4, 1, 8, for read 

SO, 2, S2, inse r^Ku ng and Sub hare 

» „ 40, „ Kang has 

59, . 2, 8, „ Kunghns.UjP „ J^. 

77, 1, 6, „ Kung and Kuh hare 

for 

219, 2, 67, „ Kuh has for 

237, 2, 80, for read 

287, 2, 8, insert Kang has for 

291, 1, 10, „ Kong has for 


Page Column Line 

305, . 1, 6, insert after 

335, 1, 12, „ Kong has ^ forj^. 

427, 2, 14, for read 

455, 1, 8, ., ^(5 „ 

595, 1, 7, insert Kang and Kuh hare 

M- 

688| 2| ioT T0Ad ffr 

791, 2, 35, ,, 

806, 1, 4, „ ^ 

829, 1, 18, insert Kang has for 


IV. CBIKESE CHABACTEBS IK IKDEX HI. 


Page Col lA. 

889, 32, 82,83. for ^ ^ read Q . 


Page Col' LI 

898, 2, 47, for ^ read 3*E- 


X 


EKRATA. 


V. IN Tin: 

i*jjoli:co.mi:na. 

Page 

Notes! 

Line 

after insert 

1 Poye 

Notes 

Line 

8, 

7, 

Im, 

1, 

12, 

12, 

iK* 

i 

j 

1 

. 

21, 

11, 

„ f^rend^^. 

• 54, 

Col. 2. 

25, 

2, 

M ‘W 
” iH » 

1 «8, 

1, 

25, 

4, 

„ ^ rend ^ 

. i 79, 

„ 1, 


VI. IX THE TRAXSLATIOX. 


for rend [j^. 


for » 


rend 


„ 18, .iftor insert 


for invnkcd road invaded. 
„ T'flng, „ Tfliig. 


I. iv. 4, 

U. ii. 6; vii. 3, 

m.xxvii.ljctflZ.jSope, „.Ke(;|5^) „ K‘e. 

V. ix, 2, „ Tsnou „ Ts'aou. 

„ xsix. 4, for greatfalla ,, agreatfall. 

VI. ii. 1. 1. 2, „ he „ the 

Vin. ii. 9, „ Kung-ts‘o „ Euug>tszc. 


IX. xvi. 7, 
„ xxii., 

X. ii. 4, 

„ vii. 8, 

„ xiii. 4, 
„ xi.v. 2, 

„ XX. 4, 

XI. xiv. 13, 


for Ts‘e 
„ thirti/‘SccomI 
K'c-.'sini 


Nearly all the above errors might be corrected from Index 111. 


„ Ling 
„ T*ing-K*lhv 
„ SJie 
„ Cli'ing 


Sliou 


road I'sin. 

„ ticc/i/t/secoiid. 
,. Kc'Sun. 

,. So.iiig. 

„ P‘ing-h*cw'. 

„ Cliv. 

,, Chin. 

„ Cliuu. 


VII. IX THE XOTE8. 


Pays Column Line 


15, 

1, 

l5 

etaZ., for Ke read K'e. The 
account of K*e’s capital in the 
par. is also wrong; but this 
and some other geographical 
mistakes in the notes can be 
corrected from Index III. 

23, 

2, 

30, 

for 5 read 4. 

42, 

1, 

40, 

dele dis.. 

60, 

1, 

13, 

for a marquisate rend an 
earldom. 


2, 

2, 

for earldom read marquisate. 

61, 

2, 

35, 

,, 8 „ 3. 

90, 

9 

20, 

„ Ten-chow „ T‘ae-gan. 

112, 

1, 

47, 

„ Tuen-chung read Yuen 
Chung. 


Pane Column Line 


119, 

2, 

12, 

for 6 read 6. 

125, 

1, 

16, 

„ Koo-loh .. Loh-koo. 

199, 

1, 

31, 

„ dis. of Ivwei-cliow read 
Kwei Cliow. 

214, 

1, 

15, 

„ 2 rend 3. 

217, 

9 

*•2 

16, 

,, 3 „ 4. 

304, 

2, 

10, 

„ 8 of Inst read 2 of 7th. 

805, 

1, 

4, 

after K-ih insert K‘wan. 

867, 

1, 

47, 

for 3 read 4. 

J9 

9f 

51, 

„ Par. 4 „ Par. 3. 

99 

99 

57, 

„ 5 „ 4. 

373, 

2, 

6, 

., 12 „ 18. 

404, 

1, 

8, 

„ Jin-shin,, Jin-jun. 

681, 

2, 

30, 

„ diarists „ chariots. 

650, 

2, 

62, 

1, 3 ,, 90. 


Vm. IX THE FBOX-BGOMEXA. 


P<7^e Line 


9 

1, 

note, for Pt. i. read Pt. ii. 

15, 

8, 

after thing insert a comma. 

21, 

17, 

for sufficint read sufficient. 

23, 

30, 

after period delA 

23, 

5, 

note, carry 2 over to 

24, 

10, 

„ page 24. 
for title read title®. 

25, 

4, 

„ King „ king. 


Page Line 

43, 22, after 9th dele comma. 

44, 37, „ Ch'ing „ ]. 

45, 22, „ remonstrances ,, comina. 

79, 17, col. 1, for appiont read appoint. 

88, 9, note, „ Mouments „ AlDiiuments, 

112, 8, „ Ch'nn „ Ch'un. 

118, 15, after States insert a comma. 

122, 20, before commerce insert of. 


PEOLEGOlilENA. 


CHAPTEE I 

THE NATURE AND VALUE OP THE GHm' TS‘EW. 

APPEJs'DIXES.— 

L SPECDIEXS OF THE COIDIEXTAKIES OP KTJXG-TAXG AXO KTH-LEAXG. 

II. A ICTTEB QrEPnoXlXG THE COXFCCIAX AriHOKSHIP OF THE CHCE TSW BY YCEX 

3IEI OF THE PBE5EXT DTXASIT. 


SECTION L 

DISAPPOINTMENT OF THE EXPECTATIONS BAISED BT THE EARLIEST 
ACCOUNTS OF THE CH'DN TS'EW. 


1, In the prolegomena to toI. L, on page 1, I hare said that of 
the five King or classical works, the authorship, or compilation 
rather, of which is loosely attributed to Confiicius, ‘ the Ch*an Ts‘ew 

Was the Ch'un Ts'Sw na*i is the Only oue wliich can rightly be described 
hyConfachis? > OS ofhis own 7720^7*77^.’ If I had been as familiar 

with the Ch‘un Ts‘ew in 1861 as I am now, instead of appearing, 
as in that judgment, to allow that it is an original Work of die 
sage, I should have contented mj^elf with saying that of it alone 
has the making been claimed for him. The question as to what he 
really did in the matter of this Classic is one of great perplesi^. 

2. The earliest authority who speaks on the subject is Mencius. 
No better could be desired; and the glowing account which he gives 

Mendtis' account of the 1 of t^ie^ork excites our liveliest expectations. 
Ch*unTs*gw. f jg[jg language puts it beyond doubt that in his 

time, not far removed from that of Confucius, there was a book 
current in China, called the Ch*un Ts‘ew, and accepted without 
question by him and others as having been made by the sage. 


PROLEGOMENA.] NATUKE AND VALUE OE THE CII‘UN TS'EW. 


[cii. I. 


“ The world,” he says, ‘ was fallen into decay, and right principles 
had dwindled away. Perverse discourses and oppressive deeds were 
again waxen rife. Cases were occurring of ministers who murdered 
their rulers, and of sons who murdered their fathers. Confucius 
was afraid, and made the Ch‘un Ts‘ew.’i hie describes the work as 
‘of equal value with Yu’s regulation of the waters of the deluge, and 
the duke of Chow’s establishing his dynasty amid the desolations and 
disorder which had been wrought bj^thelatersovereignsof thedynasty 
of Shang. ‘Confucius completed the Cli‘un Ts‘ew, and rebellious 
ministers and villainous sons were struck with terror. Going more 
particularly into the nature of the Work, and fortifjdng himself with 
the words of theMaster, Mencius says, ‘The subjectsof theCh‘un Ts‘ew 
are Hwan of Ts‘e and Wan of Tsin, and its style is the historical. Con- 
fucius said, “ Its righteous decisions I ventured to make.” ’3 And 
again, ‘ What the Ch‘un Ts‘ew contains are matters proper to the 
son of Heaven. On this account Confucius said, “Yes! It is the 
Oh‘un Ts‘ew which will make men know me; and it is the Ch‘un 
Ts‘ew which will make men condemn me.”* The words of Mencius, 
that ‘Confucius made the Ch‘un Ts‘ew,’ became thereafter part of 
the stock phraseology of Chinese scholars. If the Work itself had 
not been recovered under the Han dynasty, after the efforts of the 
tyrant of Ts‘in to destroy the ancient monuments of literature, wc 
should have regretted its loss, thinking of it as a history from the 
stylus of the sage of China in which had been condensed the grandest 
utterances of his wisdom and the severest lessons of his virtue. 

3. The making of a history, indeed, is different from the making 
of a poem, the development of a philosophy, and other literary 


1 Mencius, HI. Pt. L LX. 7, 8;— IM; a il » ?|5 Ift # fr W ft. B 
W tl 8 Men, IV. Pt.il. XXI. 

8=-^ » iij ^ g ^ ^ ? 0. s # M .fi * m 

Wo must suppose that Hwan of Ts‘o and Wttn of Tsin are here adduced as two of the most 

raiwrlcablc pcrsonugos in the Ch‘iin Ts'iiw, and that the first clause is not intended to convey the 
idea that the Work was all about tliein, I have mused often and long over the other parts of the 

paragraph, might be translated;— ‘The text is from the historiographers.’ 

But where tlicn would tiicre be any room for ‘the righteous decisions’ of Confucius himself? I 
must Imld to the version I have giveti of the observation quoted from the sage, and it seems to 
n>quire tiie ^nslatiun of the previous clause as I have publislied it. Julien lias: — EJits stilus, tunc 


hislo rirys . Coti/nrius aidtat, JIac equitas, tunc rno Khicou privutim stimnsiUlam.' i ITT Pt i rv 

ml t i -t i i t' * ^ ^ ^ ^ « tt »■ « 


srcT. j,] 


DlSAPrOINTAffiNT WITH THE WORK. 


[PBOLBaOMEKA. 


achioveinents in which we expect large results of origin al'thouglit. 

wiint we arc to expect in a Jiistory. In tliosG wc look foi’ new Combinations 
of the phajnomena of human character, and new speculations on 
the, divine order of the universe, — ‘things unattempted yet in 
prose or rhyjne.’ But from the historian all that we are entitled 
to require is a fjMthful record of facts. If he would win our 
special approval, he must weave his facts into an interesting nar- 
rative, trace their connexion with one another, and by unfolding 
the motives of the actors teach lessons that maj?^ have their fruit in 
guiding and directing tlie course of events in future generaliops. 
The making of liistory should be signalized b}’^ the vigour and 
elegance of the composition, and b}*^ the correct discrimination, im- 
partiality, and comprehensiveness of the author’s judgments. 

When, with these ideas of wliat a history should be, we look into 
the Ch‘uii Ts‘ew, we experience immediately an intense feeling of 

' Our disappointment in roadinewitiq disappointment. Instead of a history 

such expectations the cii‘unTs‘ew. j events woveii artistically together, 
we find a congeries of the briefest possible intimations of matters in ^ 
which the court and State of Loo were more or less concerned, 
extending over 242 years, without the slightest tincture of literary 
ability in the composition,, or the slighest indication of judicial 
opinion on the -part of the writer. The paragraphs are always 
brief. Each one is designed to commemorate a fact; but whether 
that fact be a display of "surtue calculated to command our admira- 
tion, or a deed of atrocity fitted to awaken our disgust, it can 
hardly be said that there is anything in the language to convey to 
us the shadow of an idea of the author’s feeling about it. The 
notices, for we cannot call them narratives, are absolutely unimpas- 
sioned. A base murder and a shining act of heroism are chronicled 
just as the eclipses of the sun are chronicled. So and so took 
place; — ^that is all. No details are given; no judgment is expressed. 
The reader may be conscious of an emotion of delight or of indigna- 
tion according to the opinion which lie forms of the event mentioned, 
especially when he has obtained a fuller account of it from some 
other quarter; but there is nothing in the text to excite the one 
feeling or the other. Whether the statements found in the Ch'un 
Ts‘ew be all reliable, and given accox'ding to the truth of the facts, 
is a point of the utmost importance, which will be duly considered 
by and by. I am at present only concerned to affirm that the 
Work is not at all of the nature which we should suppose from our 

a] 


pnoLEGOMESA.] NATURE AND VALUE OF THE CU‘UN TS'EW. 


[cn. I. 


previous conception of it as a history by a great man, and from the 

accounts given of it by Confucius himself and by Mencius.^ 

4. If I have given in these remarks a correct, though brief, idea 

of what the Ch‘un Ts‘ew is, we know not what to make of the state- 

The saying of Confacins that he had made') ment of ConfuciuS qUOtcd by Mcn- 
the righteous decisions in the Cli‘unTs‘e,r. / himself Ventured 

to make the righteous decisions contained in it. Whether the book 
which we now have be that which Confucius is said to have made, 
or another,, we examine it in vain for any ‘ righteous decisions,’ for 
decisions indeed of any kind, on the events which are indicated 
in it. This difficulty is a Gordian knot which I do not see any way 
of untying, and I have often wished that I could cut it by denying 
the genuineness of the present Ch*un Ts‘ew altogether.^ But, as 
will by and by appear, the evidence which connects and identifies 
the existing Work mth that made, whatever be the sense in which 
we are to take that term, by the sage, cannot be rebutted. The 
simplest way of disposing of the matter is to set the testimony of 

1 It is amusing to read the following account of the Ch*un Ts'ew given by the writer of the 
treatise ‘On the Antiquity of the Chinese,’ on pp. 47, 48 of the Ist vol. of the ‘Memoires Con- 
cemant les Chinois:’ — 

‘te Tchnn-tsieou est nn livre eerit de g4nie. Notre Socrate y manie I’Histoire en homme 
d’Etat, en Citoyen, en FMlosophe, en Savant, et en Moraliste. Son laconisme naif et sublime le 
force a serrer sa narration, poor presenter les faits tout nouds et detaches, pour ainsi dire, de la 
chaine des ev€nemens ; mais ils sont dessines, culor4s, ombrds et peints avec tant de force et de 
feu, qu’on sent d’abord ponrquoi et jusqu’oii ils sont ^gnes de louanges ou de blAme. Nous ne 
connaissons point de livre en Europe, ou I’on volt si bien le commencement, le progr^s, le denoue- 
ment, et le remede des r€volations dans I’Etat et dans les moeurs ; les vrais signes de roideur ou 
de moUesse, de tyrannic ou de discredit, de moderation simul4e ou d’inconsequence dans le Gk)u- 
vemement ; les differences du talent, du gdnie, de Texperience, de la_ profondeur des vues, de la 
hont4 du conp-d’oeil, et des ressources d’un esprit f<fcond dans les Princes et dans leur ministres, 
I’imposant d’une administration bruyante et le faux d’une politique pateline, les souterrains de 
la trahison et les maneges de la negociation, les premieres etincelles d’une r4volte qui commence 
et les derniers eclats d’une ligue epuisee ; la raaniere enfin^dont le Chang-ti (Dieu) dirige le cours 
des eveneinens, pour clever ou renverser les Trones, et punir ou recompenser tour-a-tour les Sujet's 
par Icurs Princes et les Princes par leurs Sujets. Le Tchun-tsieou, envisage sous ce point de 
vne, est le modcle de toutes les Histoires. Confucius a un style qui ne va qu*!! lui. II semble 
que chaque caractere sut ete fait pour I’endroit oh il le place. Plus il est avare de mots, plus 
ceux qu’il emploie sout clairs et expressifs.’ 

The above is certainly of a piece %vith the estimate of the ancient odes of China which I quoted 
from the same article in the prolegomena to vol. IV., pp. 114, 115. Dr. Williams (Middle King- 
dom, vol. I., p. 512) gives a more fair account of the Ch'un Ts‘ew_, but even he thinks that it 
contains much good matter of which we find no trace; — ‘It is but little better than a dry detail 
of facts, enlivened by few incidents, but containing mnny_ of those practical observations which 
distinguish the writings of the sage.’ Anyone who looks into the_ body of_ this volume will see 
that the text consists of nothing but a dry detail of facts or incidents, without a single practical 
ohsercalion, Confacian or non-Confueian. 

1 There have been Chinese scliolars who have taken up this position. Wang Taou, in a mono- 
graph on the subject, places Ma 'I’wan-lin among them; but this is more than Ma’s words, quoted 

in the third section, will sustain. With more reason he gives the name of Hoh King (SR ^5^) 
of the Ming dynasty, who contends that the Ch'un Ts'ew of Confucius was not transmitted, and 
that we have only fragments of it in Tso-she. Wang also says that according to Tung Cliung- 
shoo and Kze-ma Ts*Sen the te.xt consisted of several myriads of characters, in several thousand 
paragraphs, whereas Chang Gan of the T'ang dynasty found in it only 18000 characters. But 
there can bo no doubt the present text is snbstan’.ialiy the same as that known in the Han 
dynasty. S,.o Appendix 11. 


}.r.cT. 1.] 


DISAPrOIKTMEST WITH THE WORK. 


[rnOLEQOMEKA. 


Jlenciiis on one side, though that method of proceeding can hardly 
be vindicated on critical grounds. 

There can be no doubt, however, that tlie expression in Mencius 
about ‘tlie righteous decisions’ has had a most powerful and pernir 
cious influence over the interpretation of the Classic. Chaou K‘e, the 
earliest commentator on Mencius, explains the jDassage as intimat- 
ing that the sage in making the Ch'un Ts‘ew exercised his preroga- 
tive as ‘the unsceptred king.’ A subject merely, and without any 
order from his ruler, he yet made the Work on his own private 
authority; and his saying that he ventured to give his own judg- 
ments on things in it was simply an expression of his humiiity.2 
Chaou gives the same explanation of those words of Mencius, that 
‘what the Ch‘un Ts‘ew contains are matters proper to the son of 
Heaven.’ ‘Confucius,’ says the commentator, ‘made the Ch‘un 
Ts‘ew by means of the Historical Records of Loo, setting forth his 
laws as an unsceptred king, which are what Mencius calls “the 
matters of the Son of Heaven.” 

Hundreds of critics, from Kung-yang and Kuh-Ieang downwards, 
have tried to interpret the Classic on the principle of finding in 
almost every paragraph some ‘idghteous decision;’ and in my notes 
I have in a hundred places pointed out the absurdities in which 
such a method lands us. The same peculiarity of the style, such as 
the omission of a clan-name, becomes in one passage the sign of 
censure and in another the sign of praise.^ The whole Book is a 


“ ?L ^ S ^ S ^ i -a- -P A R 

^ 0 # ^ IB. K » I S. a -? 


la- 

4 It maj I)c irell here to give the discussion of one notable case, the occasional omission of the 

term kiny : — taken from Chaou Tilj’s HZ .' — 

‘Every year should commence with “In the spring, in the king’s first month,” or if there was 
notliing to be recorded under the first month, “In the sjprlng, in the king’s second month,” or 
“In the spring, in the king’s third month;” the object being thereby to do honour to the king. 


honour the king, is it likely that for such an omission the classic would have detried the year to 
be the king’s? Moreover, such omission was most likely to occur when the court was in confusion, 
as in the troubles occasioned by the princes T'uy, Tae, and Chaou; and yet we find the years of 
those times all with the regular formula. How unlikely that the csilendar should have been given 
out in seasons of disorder, and neglected when ail was tranquil in the times of Yin and Hwon! 
’Yoo’s explanation is inadmissible. 

‘Ch‘ing E-ch‘uen says, “Duke Hwan succeeded to Loo by the murder of his predecessor, and 
in his first year the author wrote ‘ the king’s,’ thereby by a royal law indicating his crime. The 
same expression in the second year in the same way indicates the crime of Tub of Song in murder- 
ing his ruler. Its omission in the third year shows that Hwan had no [fear of the] king before 
his eyes.’’ But this is very inconsistent. If we say that the omission of “ the king’s ” shows that 
Hwan had no fear of the king, surely it ought to have been omitted in his first year, when he was 
guilty of such a crime. If we say that its occurrence in the first year is to indicate his crime, 

5 ] 


pnotEGOMENA.] NATURE AND VALUE OE THE CII‘UN TS'EW. 


[cn. T, 


collection of riddles, to ■svliicli there are as many answers as there 
are guessers. It is hardly possible for a Chinese to cast off from his 
mind the influence of this ‘ praise-and-ccnsure ’ theoiy in studjdng 
the Classic. He has learned it when a child by committing to memo- 
ry at school the lines of the ‘ Primer of Three Characters,’’'' and it has 
been obtruded upon him in most of his subsequent reading. Even 
a foreigner finds himself occasionally casting about for some such 
way of accounting for the ever varying forms of expression, unwill- 
ing to believe that the changes have been made at random. I 
proceed in another section to give a fuller idea of the nature of the 
"Work, and to consider what were its sources, and whether we have 
reason to think that Confucius, in availing himself of them, made 
additions of his own or retrenchments. 

are wb to infer that wherever it occurs it indicates the crime of the ruler? Wliat had Loo to do 
•with Tuh of Sung’s murdering his ruler? Is it reasonable that Loo’s historiographers should 
have constructed their annals to punish him? 

‘ Ho Hew says, — “ In [Hwan’s] 10th j'ear we find ‘ the king’s,’ because ten is the completion of 
numbers, and we find it in liis 18th year, because that was the last of his rule.” According to 
this we ought to find “ the king’s ” only in the year of a ruler’s accession, in his tenth j'ear, and 
the year of his death; but the practice in the Ch’un Ts’ew is quite different from this. Ho 
Hew’s remark is unintelligible. 

‘If. may be said that since the Chow commencement of the year was not universally followed 
during the Cli‘un Ts’ow period, some States reckoning by the Ist month of Yin and others by 
that of Hea, although Loo generally held to the ritual of Chow, yet its irregularities in the matter 
of intercalation show that it did not keep to the first month of Chow. Perhaps the historio- 
graphers did so sometimes, and then Confucius wrote “ the king’s first month,” by way of distinc- 
tion, while he left the cases in which they made the year begin differently unmarked by such a 
note, — ^thereby condemning them.’ This last is poor Chaou Yih’s own explanation of the phseno- 
menon, not a whit better than the devices of others which he condemns I It shows the correctness 
of my remark that it is next to impossible for, a Chinese scholar to shake off the trammels of tlie 

' creed in which he has been educated. 5 
see the ^ ^ 11. 79, 80. 


^V'^WV^V^^VW^WWWVW^^WWX/* 


SECTION II. 

THE SOURCES OP THE CH’UN TS'EW, AND ITS NATURE. DID CONFUCIUS 
ALLOW HIMSELF ANY LIBERTY OF ADDITION OR RETRENCHMENT 
IN THE USE OF HIS AUTHORITIES? 

1. What were Confucius’ authorities for the events which he 
has chi’onicled in the Ch‘un Ts*ew? In proceeding to an inquiry 
into the Sources of the Work, it will be well to give at the com- 
mencement an explanation of its name. 


SKcr. 11 .] 


MEANING OF THE NAME. 


[rROLECOStfNA. 


The two characters, translated literall)^, simply mean Spring and 
Autumn. ‘Anciently,’ says Mijou K‘e-ling, ‘the historiographers, in 
Meaning oiihcnnmc,— the ch‘anTs‘sw. recording events, did SO Avith the 
specification of the day, the month, the season, and the j^ear, to 
which each event belonged,* and to the whole they gave the name 
of annals. It was proper that under every year there should be 
written the names of the four seasons, and the entire record of a 
year went by the name of Spring and Autumn^ two of the seasons, 
being a compendious expression for all the foiir.’i ‘Spring and 
Autumn ’ is thus equivalent to — Annals, digested under the seasons 
of every j-ear. An inspection of the Work will prove that this is 
the proper meaning of its title. Even if there were nothing to be 
recorded under any season, it was still necessary to make a record 
of the season and of the first month in it. Entries like that in the 
6th year of duke Yin, — ‘It was autumn, the 7th month,’ where the 
next paragraph begins until ‘In unnter,’ are frequent. If now and 
then a j-ear occurs in which we do not find every season specified, 
we may be sure the omission is owing to the loss of a character 
or of a paragraph in the course of time. Chaou K‘e explains the 
title in the same way,® and so does Too Yu in the preface to his 
edition of the Tso Ghuen.® Other accounts of the name are only 
creations of fanej^, and have arisen from a misconception of the 
nature of the Work. Thus Dr. Williams says, ‘The spring and 
autumn annals are so called, because “their commendations are life- 
giving like spring, and their censures are life-ufithering like 
autumn.’'^ Tiie Han -scholars gave forth this, and other accounts 
of a similar kind, led away by their notions as to the nature of the 
W^ork on which I have touched in the preceding section. Not 
even, as I have said, in the Work itself do we find such censures and 
commendations; and much less are they trumpeted in the title of it. 


T. “ 


c. « IB 


» IB ♦ K » ^ H ■ jsa 0 » .0 . ja j M B#, ja It p #. 

^ ^ passage K'ung Ting-tah quotes the foUo-nring iroras from Ch'ing 

K'ang.shing:-^^^ It W H ; and then he adds himself. 

Middle lUngdoni, voL I., p. 512. Sec to the same effect 
Du Halde's ‘JDeicription dc I’Empiro de la Chine, et dc la Tartaric Chinoise,'* toI. IL p. 318. 


n 


[cil. X. 


moiiEGOMEyA.] NATURE AND VALUE OE THE CH‘UN TS'EW. 


2. That we are not to seek for any deep or mystical meaning in 
the title is still more evident from the fact that the name was in 


TiK„™eOirtmT»'8« w»8 in n>nl "SO tcfore it was given to the compila- 
before the time of Confucius. > tioii of Confucius. The first narrative 

of the Tso Chuen under the second year of duke Gh‘aou, Avlien 


Confucius was only eleven years old, shows that this was the case 
in Loo. Then the principal minister of Tsin, being on a visit to 
the court of Loo, examined the documents in the cliarge of the 
grand-historiographer, and ‘saw,’ we are told, ‘the Yih-with its 
diagrams and the Ch‘un Ts‘ew of Loo.’^ 

But the records, or a class of the records, of every State in the 
kingdom of Chow appear to have been called by this name of 
Spring and Autumn. In the ‘Narratives of the States,’ the appoint- 
ment of Shuh-heang to be tutor to the heir-apparent of the State 
of Tsin is grounded on ‘his acquaintance with the Ch‘un Ts'ew.’^ I 
take the name there as equivalent to history in general, — the 
historical summaries made in the various States of the kingdonii 
Shuh-heang’s appointment was made in B.c. 568, about twenty years 
before. Confucius was born. In the same Narratives, at a still earlier 
date, it is laid down as a rule for the heir-apparent of the State 
of Ts‘oo, that he should be taught the Ch'un Ts‘ew.® According to 
Mencius, the annals of Loo went by the name of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew, 
while those of Tsin were called the Shing, and those of Ts‘oo the 
T‘aou-wuh.^ All these, however, he says, were books of the same 
character; and though the annals of different States might have 
other and particular names given to them, it seems clear that they 
might all be designated Ch‘un Ts‘ew. Thus we have a statement 
in Mih Teih that he ‘had seen the Ch‘un-ts‘ew histories of a 
hundred States’;® and elsewhei’e we find him speaking of the Oh‘un 
Ts‘ew of Chow, the Ch‘un Ts‘ew of Yen, the Ch'un Ts‘Sw of Sung, 
and the Ch‘un Ts‘ew of Ts‘e.® 


In my translation of this pas- 


and tlic whole mis:ht he 


sago on p. 683, 1 have omitted inadvertently to render the ^ ^ 

taken ns if ‘the Ch‘un Ts'ew of Loo’ were not one of the documents in the keeping of the histo- 

2 ^ If- ^ m 75 ® if * T ^ H 


IPO 


riographer. 


W ^ ’ Hll’ end. 3 ^ ^ ^C;-Sec the ||^ ^ 

prince to be taught was the son of king Chwang, who died a. c. 390. 

® — a- = # ^ ^ 

hce the ^ ^ appended to the I5tli IJook of liis Works. G In liis 

ML* T 


i Jt’ 

4 Men IV. Pt. ii. XXL 


8 ] 


s»:cT. H.] 


THE SOUKCES OE TilE'WOKK. 


[rHOLEGCJUiXA-. 


4. The Clihin Ts‘cw of Loo supplied, it seems to me, the materi- 
als for the sage’s AVork; — if, indeed, he did any thing more tlian 

Tho cii'nn Ts‘c\v of Loo siiiiiiHcd t!ic) out Avliat Aias ready to his hand* 
material, for the c^.isti^gCll‘anTs‘e^^•.j■JJQ £^,^0118 Han editor of 

Kung-yang’s commentaiy on it, in his introduclory notes to the 
first year of duke Yin, quotes from a Min Yin to the effect that 
Confucius, having received the command of Heathen to make his 
(’h‘un Ts‘e\v, sent Tsze-hea and others of his disciples, fourteen men 
ill all, to seek for the historical records of CIioav, and that they got 
the precious books of 120 States, from Avhicli he proceeded to make 
his chronicle.^ This, however, is one of the Avild statements Avhicli 
lA’C find in many Avritors of the Han and Tsin dynasties. There is 
nothing in the Work to make it necessary to suppose that any other 
records were consulted but those of Loo. Tliis is the view almost 
uniA’ersallj' entertained by the scholars and critics of China itself, as 
in the statement given from Cliaoii K‘e on p. 5. Tlie omission, 
moreoA'er, of many cA'ents Avhich are narrated in the Chuen of Tso- 
she makes it certain to my mind that Confucius confined himself to 
the tablets of his native State. Whether any of his disciples AA^ere 
associated Avith him in the labour of compilation Ave cannot tell. Pan 
Koo, in the chapter on the Litei’ary History of the early Han 
dynasty, says that Tso K‘eAV-raing AA'as so.^ Hoav this Avas aauU be 
considered Avhen I come to speak of Tso’s commentary. Sze-ma 
Ts‘een’s account Avould rather incline us to think that the AA'hole 
was done by Confucius alone, for he says that when the Work was 
completed and shoAvn to the disciples of Tsze-hea, they could not 
improve it in a single character.^ 

5. The Ch‘uu Ts‘ew of Loo then Avas the source of the Ch'un 
, Ts‘ew of Confucius. The chronicles or annals Avhich Avent by this 


note toLe^r Bin’s catalogue of the tablets of the Ch'un Ts'eir and Works on if, — 

~ i ' » -J-.. Yen P-ang-tsoo, another scholar of the early Han dynasty, gives 

■lather a different form to Tso’s association with Confaciiis in the AVorfc, — that they went togctiier 
Chow to examine tl»e Books in the keeping of tlie historiograjiiicrs at the roval rourt; — 

fe ® a a. ^ |ii & £ W iin » ® J1 

Quoted by K‘ung A’ing-tah on Too Vu’s Preface to tlie Tso Chuen. 

* fc. M ti! ii] #|. -f - * * IB 


ruouEGOMEKA.] NATUllE AND VALUE OF THE CII'UN TS‘EW. 


[on. I. 


Ts^'w ^ were the work of the ])i.storiogr.aphers or 

I’ecorclers, who, we know, were attached to the royal court and to 
the courts of tlie various feudal princes. 1 have spoken of those 
officers in the prolegomena to vol. III. p. 11, and in those to vol. 
IV., pp. 24-^26. Pan Koo in the same chapter from whicli I have 
made a quotation from him in the preceding paragraph, says that 
the historiographers of the Left recorded words, that is, Speeches, 
"Charges, &c., and those of the Right recorded affairs; that the words 
formed the Shoo, and the affairs the Gh‘un Ts'ew.^ 

; But if we are to judge of what the Ch‘un Ts‘ew of the States 
were from what the one Gli'un Ts'ew preserved to us is, the state- 
ment that they contained the records of events cannot be admitted 
without considerable modification. There can have been no details 
in them, but only the briefest possible compends of the events, or 
references to them. 

. That there were the records of events, kept in the offices of 
historiography, must be freely admitted, and it will appear, when I 
eome to speak of the commentary of Tso IC‘ew-ming, that to them 
we ai’e mainly indebted for the narratives which impart so much 
interest to his Work. But the entries in the varioiis Gh‘un Ts‘ew 
were not made from them, — not made from them fairly and honestly as 
when one tries to give in a very few words the substance of a narrative 
which is before him. Those entries related to events in the State 
itself, at the royal court, and in other States with which it maintained 
friendly relations. Communications about remarkable and ominous 
occurrences in one State, and about important transactions, were sent 
from it to others, and the receiving State entered them in its Ch'un 
Ts‘ew in the terms in which they were made out, without regard 
to whether they conveyed a correct account of the facts or not. 
Then the great events in a State itself, — those connected with the 
ruling House and the principal families or clans in it,* its relations 
with other States, and natural phsenomena supposed to affect the 
general wellbeing, also found a place. Sometimes these things were 
recorded under the special direction of the ruler; at other times we 
must suppose that the historiographers committed them to their tablets 
as a part of their official duty. How far truth, an exact conformity of 
the record with the circumstances, was observed in these entries about 
the internal affairs of a State, is a point on which it is not competent 
for me at this point of the inquir}’’ to pronounce an opinion. 


Mtct. u.] FULLEK ACCOUNT OF THE NATUllE OF THE WORK. CpRor,EOOMESA. 


{>. In the ]n*olegoinena to vol. IV. p. 25, referring to the brief 
neeotint whicli we Inivc in 'the ofiicinl Book of Chow of the duties 
of tljc historiographers of the Exterior at the royal court, I liave 
made it appear that they had charge of the Histories of all the 
States,^ rendering the character die by ‘Histories.’ M. Biot, in his 
translation of the OHicial Book, has done the samej but^Maou K‘e-, 
ling contends that those che were the Ci)‘nn Ts‘ew of the different 
States, or the brief notices of which they were made up.^ I have 
failed, however, to find elsewhere an}’^ evidence to support his 
view;3 and when he goes on to argue that three copies of those 
notices were always made, — one to be kept in the State itself, one for 
the royal court, and one to be sent to the historiographers of the 
various feudal courts with which the State was in the habit of ex- 
changing such notifications, — the single passage to which he refers 
by no means bears out the conclusion which he draws from it and 
indeed, as man)* copies must, have been made as there were States to 
whicli the notice was to be sent. In other respects the account 
which he gives of those notices is so instructive that I subjoin a 
summary of it. 

Thej’^ were merclj’’, he says, ‘slips of subjects,’ and not ‘sum- 
maries’ or synopses, — containing barely the mention of the subject to 

Mnou K'p-iing’a account of the contents') which each of them referred.® It 
of the Ch‘un Ts'evv of the States. f necessary there should be nothing- 

in them inconsistent with, or contradictory to, the fuller narratives, 


dPi . 8 Compare the use of in Mencius, III. Pt. i. 11. 3, and Pt. ii. 1. 1., and in tlie 

Tso Chuen on VI. ii. 1 ; vi. 3 : VII. sii. 2 ; Vin. iv. 7 ; et al 4 Prom the Q 0-, ^ 
k. Art. 7, — at the end. 5 Ace. to Maou, the contents of the ancient Ch'un Ts'ew might 
all be arr.ii]gcd under twenty-two heads 1st, the chnugiiig of tlie first year of a ruler i 

2d, the new ruler’s solemn accession ; Sd, the birth of a son to the ruler ; as 

in n. -vL 5) ; 4th, the appointment of a ruler in another State ( ^ ; as in I. iv. 7) ; 5th, court 
and complimentary visits in tlie various forms of 

I '^)i 6tli, covenants and meetings ( §§ in the various forms — ^ ; 
^ HI’ ^ li.’ ^ incursions and invasions, 

in the various forms— ; •ffei Ai Bi liBi Z 

removal and extinction of States in the various forms — ; 

nf in the various forms— 1^; 

^ ^ ’ WL ^ ®”i^rtainments and condolences 


11] 


[cil. II.. 


ruoMCGOMKNA.] NATURE AND VALUE OP THE CII-UN TS'EW.. 


but they themselves gave no indication of the beginning or end of 
the events to which they referred, or of the various circumstances 
which marked their course. For instance, suppose the subject was 
going from Loo to the court of Tsin. — In VIII. xviii. 4, we are told 
that ‘the duke went to Tsin,’ the occasion of liis doing so being to 
congratulate the new marquis of Tsin on his accession; whereas, in 
IX. iii. 2, we have a notice in the same characters about the child- 
marquis Seang, his going to Tsin being to present himself to that 
court on his own accession to Loo. Suppose, again, the subject to be 
a meeting between the rulers of Loo and Ts‘e. — In III. xiii. 4, we 
are told that it is said that ‘duke Chwang had a meeting with the 
marquis of Ts‘e, when they made a covenant in Ko,’ the object 
being to make peace between the two States after the battle of Shing- 
k‘ew; whereas, in xxiii. 10, we have the notice of a meeting and 
covenant between the same princes in Hoo, having reference to an 
alliance by marriage which they had agreed upon. 

After furtlier illustrating the nature of the notices, Maou observes 
correctly, that to look in them, for slight turns of expression, such 
as the mention of an individual’s rank, or of his clan-name, or the 
specihcatioi) of the day when an event occurred without the month, 
and to find in the presence or absence of these particulars the 


(“y, p=); 11 til, deaths and burials in the various forms of ^ 

_« W t I-»- A /vE3 A. % 


iii ® ■’ 'S ^ ’ IRI M ■’ ® ■’ ^ illE •’ ® ) •> huntiuKS in tl,e various 

forms of Si’ ^ ^ 14th, building (J^ in the various forms 


the 


forms of |JJ 1 ^ l^*^b 6°°^ years 


and bad in the forms 

ominous occurrences in the forms of ^ ^ ^ 


M •’ ; M lift 5 A 7K ; yjc ; ; yc ’• 


; ^ 


M 18th, 


forms of ; {Ij ? jii ’> ? ^Oth, entering a city or State Jg, in the forms 

M ! A 5 i ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 5 SIst, ruffians and murders 

ci.^rfc.Tsbi ■ 


.'j'.rr. ti.j 


WllKTllKlJ COXrUCiUS AL-TKIJKI) 11 IS AUTIIOIUTIES, [rnoLKooMEXA; 

I'xprcssion of praise or l)l!une. is Jio belter tlinn the gropiiigs of a 
man in ii dream. In this I fully agree with liim, but as he has said 
that the ‘slip-notices of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew’ should not be inconsistent 
with the facts in a detailed narrative of the events to which they 
ri'fer, he seems to push the point as to the colourlessness of the 
notices to an extreme, when he adds the following illustration of it 
on the authority of a brother of his own: — ‘Tiie deaths of princes 
and great oflicers recorded in the Ch‘un Ts‘ew took place in various 
ways; but they all appear under the same form — “died.” Thus in 
A’', xxiv. 5 it is said that “E-woo, marquis of Tsin, died,” the fact 
being that he was slain ; in X. viii. 2 it is said that “Xeih, marquis 
of Ch‘in, died,” the fact being that he strangled himself; in II. v. 1 it 
is said that “Paou, marquis of Ch*in, died,” the fact being that he 
went mad and died; in XI, xiv. 6 it is said that “Kwang, viscount 
of AVoo, died,” the fact being that he did so of wounds received in 
battle; in XL iii. 2 it is said that “Chhien, viscount of Woo, died," 
the fact being that he burned himself to death; in III. xxxii. 3 it is 
said that “the ICung-tsze T'a died,” the fact being that he was com- 
pelled to take poison; in X. iv. 8 it is said that “Shuh-sun P‘aou 
died,” the fact being that he was stan’ed to death; in X. xxv. 7 it is 
said that “Shuh-sun Shay died,” the fact being that he did so in 
answer to his own prayers; and in X. xxix. 3, it is said that “ShuhE 
died,” the fact being that he did so •v\dthout any illness. The one word 
“died,” is used in such a variety of cases, and it is only one who knows 
profoundly the style of the text who can explain the comprehensive 
meaning of the term.’® But there is no meaning in the term beyond 
that of dying, and the conclusion of the mind is that the death in- 
dicated by it was a natural one. It is not history in any proper sense 
of the term which is given in such an un discriminating style. 

- 7. The reader has now a sufficiently accurate idea of what all 
the annals that went under the name of Ch‘un Ts‘ew were, of what 
especially the Ch‘un Ts‘ew still existing and with which we have to 
do is. It only remains for me in this section to inquire whether we 

Did Confucius in compiling his ch'un Ts'eu’’) have reason to believe that Con* 
add to or take from his authorities? 1 fucius made any clianges in the 

style of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew of Loo. 

On this point, as on so many others connected with the Work, 
we have not sufficient evidence to pronounce a very decided opinion. 
We are without a single word about it from Confoeius himself, or 
from any of his immediate disciples; and from later scholars and 

13 ] 


[cil. I. 


PR0LEG0^^ESA.3 2sATURE AND VALUE OF THE C1I*UK TS"E\\. 


critics we have the most conflicting utterances regarding it. I liave 
quoted a few words on p. 9, from Sze-ma Ts‘een‘s account of the 
Ch'un Ts‘ew, but I now give the whole of it: — ‘ The master said, 
“Xo! i!so! The superior man is distressed lest his name should not 
be honourably mentioned after death. My principles do not make 
way in the world : — liow shall I make myself known to future ages?” 
On this, from the records of the historians he made the Cli'un Ts'ew, 
commencing with duke Yin, coming down to tlie 14th year of duke 
Gae, and thus embracing the times of twelve marquises. He kept 
close in it to [the annals of] Loo, showed his affection for Chow, 
and. purposely made the three d 3 masties move before the reader.i 
His style was condensed, but his scope was extensive. Thus the 
rulers of ^Yoo and Ts‘oo assumed to themselves the title of king; 
but in the Ch'un Ts‘ew they are censured by being onlj’^ styled 
viscounts. Thus also the son of Heaven was reall}- summoned [by 
the marquis of Tsin] to attend the meeting at Tseen-t‘oo {V. xxviii. 
8), but the Ch'un Ts‘ew conceals the fact, and says (par. 16) that 
“ the king .by Heaven’s grace held a court of inspection in Ho-yang.” 
Such instances serve to illustrate the idea of the master in the cen- 
sures and elisions which he employed to rectif}*’ the ways of those 
times, his aim being that, when future kings should study the work, 
its meaning should be appreciated, and all rebellious ministers and 
viUaiiious sons under the sky become afraid.^ When Confucius 
was in office, his language in listening to litigations was what 
others would have employed, and not peculiar to him ; but in 
making the Ch‘un Ts'ew, he wrote what he wrote, and he retrenched 
what he retrenched, so that the disciples of Tsze-hea could not 
improve it in a single character. When his disciples received from 
him the Ch‘un Ts‘ew, he said, “ It is by the Ch'un Ts'ew that after 
ages wiU. know me, and also by it that they will condemn me.” ’3 


I shall be glad if any Sinologue can make 
out the meaning of tliis passage more clearly than I have done. Chang Shovr-tseeh ) 

the glossarist of Sze-ma Ts'een under the T'ang dynasty (His preface is d ated in the 8th mrath 
of AJ>. 736), says on the last chiuse— 

2 Here again Sze-ma’s style is involved, and far from clear: 4W- gi 

^ ifnii ^ kf ft E 

jiSc J* 3 He (Proleg. to voL UL, p. 205) has a strange note on this utter. 


i-f] 


\ 

sKcr. «.} ^Ynv;nu^^v cosvucu^jfi nis A\- n\ouvnus. 

A thoiisaiu] expressions of ojnniou, nunlolKal U}'on tiuit ot'Sw tnn 
Ts‘cen, might easily be addneeil, all, it seems to me, a^s I have saiil 
already, prompted by an ondeavoin* to reemu'ilo the twisting AYtn'k 
with the accounts oi' the Ch*nn Ts‘e\v given in Mtateins, Aa 
AYC come down the course of time, we titul the seholars t>r tlhina 
less positive in the view that Oonlneius tnade any ehange in the 
text of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew of Loo. Ohoo lie says, ‘The entries In the 
Ch‘un Ts‘c\v, that, for instance, “Stieh a mttn did stitih a thing” are 
according to the old text of the historiographers ol' Loo, eitme down 
to us from the stylus of the sage, (ransta’ihing or rt'trtauililng, 
Kow»a-days, people, when they see the (Mthm M's'hw, are aurt' tt» 
say. “Such and stich a character lias its stigma for uneh and ain^li a 
man,” so tlint Confucius tints took it on Inm, fujeording to Ida pri- 
vate views, to dispense without authority Ins ju'uic.o or hiauie. 
But Confucius simply wrote tlie thing corrcc.tly as it was, and tint 
good or evil of it was manifest of itself. If people that tlmy 
must express themselves as I. have said, we imiat get iiJlo oiir iinudti 
the old text of the historiographci'H of Loo, so that, '('.onipai'ing It 
with what we now have, the dilfereiKaj <ind agreeme-iit iKstween 
them would be apparent. But this is now ImporHihle/'* 

Chaou Yih adduces tAvo paragraphs I'roni the ‘Anjiala of tluj 
Bamboo Books,’ which, he thinks, may he tlu! original I'onn of two 
in the Ch‘nn 'IVcw. The one is — ‘ ()id<e Vin of Loo and didtn 
Chwang of Choo made a covenant at Koo-jneeh/"' em'rejipmiding to 
I. i. 2, ‘III the tliird month, the duke and ICdbo of Cl/oo made a 
covenant in Miieii.’ *^l’lie other ik— ‘ l)rdfe llf'-uu of 'ffon united 
with the aniiy of Yu, and, attacking Kv/oli, e^jlingnirtlied 
yang/^' corrtisjjondiiig to V, ii. 8, ‘An (uwy of Yti and an army 
of Tsin fexringuishefl IL-a-yarig.’ ‘'i'he«". two efa;e;t,’ ob.nerves ( Jliaon, 
‘5llo^v rhat the style of the hi^toriographenj of the KtaOti*; v/a«i, We, 
inav sav. ^imilai' to tJiat of the Cfi^un f and tliat Oo/dneift^ on 
dfcliherarion only altered a few cimraeter?. to lodge hi rdhert' of hh 
own liis prei-e or cen?:ureV Bfit to make thw-/; two hmUitU'Aii 
exactly to poifit- it would he n^/yjs^ary that iliey should omff 
in the annali of the State of Iao, f^ota^how preserw^'l f// tn-., Beside, 


■ ' . . M 1 ^ s . 


c£5 


[cil. 1 . 


rnOLEGOMESA.] 


KATUK15 AKD A^VLUE OF TJIE CII-UN TK'EW. 


the expressions ‘ duhc Clnvang ’ and ‘ dnke Hcen ’ are ]*etrospective, 
and not after the manner of the Clihin Ts‘ew. 

With regard to the cntiy in ITT. yVi. 2, that ‘at midnight tliere 
was a fall of stars like rain,’ referring, we must believe, to a grand 
appearance of meteors, Kung-yang tells us tliat the old text of the his- 
toriographers, was — ‘It rained stars to within a foot of the earth, when 
they re-ascended’? Certainly the text was not altered here b}’^ Confu- 
cius to express either praise or censure. And if Kung-yang Avas able 
thus to quote the old text, it is strange he should only have done it 
in this solitary instance. If it had been so different from the present, 
with his propensities he would not have been slow to adduce it 
•frequently. I must doubt his correctness in this case. 

■ After the first entry under the 14th jmar of duke Gae, Avith AAdiich 
according to all Chinese critics the labours of Contucius terminated, 
Tso she gives no fewer than 27 paragraphs, bringing the history 
down to the death of the sage in Gae’s 16th year. Tliose paragraphs 
Avere added, it is said, from the Ch‘un Ts‘eAV of Loo by Confucius’, 
disciples ; and I can see no difference between the style in them, and 
in the more than a thousand Avhich passed under the revision of the 
master. 

Is it a sign of my having imbibed something of the prejudice of 
native scholars, of Avhich I spoke in the end of last section, that I do 
not like to express my opinion that Confucius did not alter a charac-. 
ter in his authorities? Certainly he made no alterations to conA’^ey 
his sentiments of praise or blame; — the variations of stjde Avliere 
there could be no change of sentiment or feeling underlying them 
forbid our supposing tliis. 


SECTION III. 


liECOATEnY OF THE CH'UX TS‘EW DUKING THE HAN DATNASTY. AVAS 
THIS INDEED THE CH‘UN TS‘EW OF CONFUCIUS? 

1. Lliw Bin’s catalogue of the Works in the imperial library of 
the early Han dynast}^, prepared, as I haA’-e shoAvn in tlie proleg. to 
vol. I., p. 4, about the commencement of our Christian era, begins, 

Kvuifnco of Lvw Hill’s Catalogue) ^hc Cli'iiii rs‘ew, Avith two Collections 
of the llan imperial library ; CUsSlQ ‘TllC old tOXt 

o( the Ch‘un Ts‘cw in twcL’e ; tmd ‘The text of the Ch‘iiii 


srcT. ni.] 


Till-: TKXTS IX Tim IIAX CATALOGUE. 


[PKOLEUOMKXA. 


Ts‘o\v in eleven kuen or Books.’! Tliis is followed by a list of the 
Cliuen, or Connnentaries, of Tso, Kung-yang, Kuli-leang, Tsow, 
and Kcuh;- so that at this early time the text of the Classic was 
known, and there were writings of live different masters in illustra- 
tion of it, the greater portion of which, the Ghuen namely of Tso, 
Kung-yang, and Knh-leang, remain to the present day. A dozen 
other Works follow, mostly by Kung-yang and Kuh-Ieang or their 
follower.^, showing how the Classic and the commentators on it had 
already engjiged tlie attention of scholars. 

2. Were the texts mentioned in the Han catalogue derived from 
the commentaries of Tso, Knng-yang, and ICuh-leang, or from some 
other indej^endent source? In a note to the entry about them, Yen 
The texts in tiic Hnn Cntaiostic. Szc-koo of the T‘ang dynasty says that 
they were taken from Kung-yajig and Kuh-leang. Many scholars 
confine his remark to the second collection, and it gives some coun- 


tenance to this view that the commentaries of those two mastera 
were then in eleven. Books; but it is to be observed on the other- 
hand that with the differences which exist in their texts they could 
hardly have been formed into one collection. 

With regard to the first entry — ‘the old text in twelve 
is tlie general opinion that this was the text as taken from tlie Work 
of Tso. And there can be no doubt that during the Han dynasty the 
text and the commentary were kept separate in that Work, for Too 
Yu tells us that in his edition of it, early in the Tsin dynasty, he 
‘ took the years of the text and arranged them along with the cor^ 
responding years of the commentary.’! Moreover, in the Han 
dynasty, Tso’s school and that of Kung-yang were distinguished as 
the old or ancient and the new or modern.^ To myself, however, 
the more natural interpretation of ‘the old text’ in the entr 3 >^ appears 
to be — tlie text in the ancient character; and if there were evidence 
to show that there was an edition of the text in Lew Hiu’s time, 
independent of that derived from the three commentaries, the result 
would be satisfactory. Yuen^ Yuen was the first, so far as I know, to 


_i^ 

H S: TJr n z 4- ^ 

at the hegiiining. 3 Uto —see the proleg. to toL L. p. 133. 


rEOLEGOXES K j 


^*ATUI^E AND VALUE OF THE CII-U2: TS E^. 


[CK. I. 


do this, in the present century. In the preface to his ‘Examination of 
the text of Tso's Commentary and Khing Ying-tah's Annotations on 
it.*"^ he calk attention to the fact that amon«r the discoveries of old 
tablets in the wall of Confucius* house^ there were those of the 
Ch‘un Ts'evr. Pan Koo indeed omits to mention them in his 
appendix to Lew Hin's catalogue of the Shoo and orks on it. 
where he speaks of the Shoo, the Le Ke. the Lun Yu. and the Heaou 
King as having been thus found: but Hen Sliin. in the preface to his 
dictionarv'. the Shwoh Wan, published a.d. 100. adds to the tablets 
of these Works those of the Clrun Ts‘ew.® I am willing therefore 
to believe that it was this copy of the text of the CIrun Ts*ew in 
the ancient character which headed the catalogue of Lew Hin: and 
if it were so. all question as to the genuineness of our present 
Classic may be considered as at an end. 

- 3. There are many of the scholars of China, who would liesirate to 

concur with me in this view, and prefer to abide by the opinion of 
which very full expression has been given by !Ma Twan-iin. He 
. Msw on the suiiseet of Ma Tvran-iin. savs, ‘Although there appears in the 
cataloorue of the Han dvnastv ‘“The ohl Text of the Clihin Ts*ew,'' 
yet the original text, as corrected by the master, was never discovered; 
and the old texts compiled in the Han dynasty and subsequently 
have all been taken from the three commentaries, and called by 
the name of “The correct text." But there are manv differences-in 

mf 

the texts which appear in those commentaries, and it is impossible 
for the student to decide between them. For instance: — ^in I. i 2 
Tso gives the meeting between the marquis of Loo 'and E-foo of 
Choo as having taken place in Meeh (^), while Kung and Kiih 
give the name as so that we cannot tell winch of these charac- 
ters the master wrote. So Mei (Jgg), in III. xxviii 4, appears in 
Kung and Kuh as Wi’ and Keueh-yin (^^), in X. xi. 7, appears 
in Kung and Kuh as Instances of thk kind are innumerable, 

but they are generally in the names of places and unimpoitant. 
In 1. iii. 3. however, we have in Tso-she the entry g- ^ which . 
would he the notice of the death of Shing Tsze, the mother of duke 
Yin, whereas in Kung and Kuh we read ^ referring to the 

death of a high minkrer of Chow: so that we cannot reU whose 
death it was that tlie master chronicled as having taken place on 


* ^ "5 •c5.L,pp.I2..I3 

^ ^ ^ rifn m f E- ^ is 


I'' 


■J 

1 


sr,cT. 111.] 


MA TWAN US OH THE HAH TEXTS, 


[FROLSaOMEXA. 


the day Sin-niaou of the 4th month of the third year of duke Yin.i 
‘And not only so. In the 2l8t year of duke Seang, both Kung- 
yang and Kuh-leang have an entry to the effect that Confucius 
was then born. But in the Ch‘un Ts‘e\v only the births of the 
heir-sons of the rulers of States were entered, as in 11. vi. 5. In 
.other cases, the births even of hereditary nobles, who exercised an 
all-pow^erful sway in the government of their States, like the members 
of the Ke family [in Loo], did not find a place in the tablets; and 
though the master be the teacher of emperors and kings for myriads 
of ages, yet at his birth he was only the son of the commandant of the 
city of Tsow. The historiographers of Loo would not make a record 
of that event, and to say that he himself afterward entered it in the 
classic which he prepared, is in the highest degree absurd. 

‘ Moreover Tso, after the capture of the Un in the I4th year of duke 
Gae, has further protracted the text to the 4th month of the 16th 
year, when the death of Cliung-ne is recorded; — which even TsO 
Ching-nan considered to be not far from an act of forgeiy. 

* Thus there are not only additions in the three commentaries to 
the proper text of the Ch*un Ts‘ew of things which are strange and 
partly incredible, but the authors of them added [to the text] and 
suppressed [portions of it] according to their pleasure. In what 
they write under the 21st year of SSang, Kung and Kuh added to 
the text, to do honour to the master from whom tliey had received 
it, and Tso made his addition in the 16th year of Gae, to show his 
■grief for the death of the; master; — neither addition was in the 
original text of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew. Tlie three writers made their 
commentaries according to what was current in men’s mouths, and 
what they heard with their ears, in their time, and each of them 
thrust in whatever addition he desired to make. Subsequent scholars 
again have adopted what they found in the three commentaries, one 
favouring this and another that, and tryiiig to make it clear; but 
that they have attained to the mind of the sage in the use of his 
stylus^ now writing down and now retrenching, a thousand years 
before them, is what I am not able to believe.’- 


1 Sec my note on the passage in question, where I approve of a «lifrorent interpretation of tlie 
text of ICnng and Ivui> from Hint wliicii Ma Twan-liii inentiims. Jfy Chinese text in tliat p.i.*sat;e 
is tiiat of Kung and Kuh. and I taicc tliis opportunity to say that the text liirouglinut i« p.ithenxi 
from tlic K'ang-he edition of llic Classic, Tlie eilitors gcncmily follow Tso-she ; Imt occa«ionalIy, 
a-s in tliis case, tlrnv adopt the text of Rung or Kuh. They have not fold ns l»y what principles 
they were guided in ti«e formation or preference of that wliicl« tliey Iiavc given. 


19J 


pnoi.BGOMEVA.3 NATURE AND VALUE OF THE CII'UN TS'EW. 


[cn, I. 


4. I have given tlie whole of Ma’s remarks, because of the 
weight of his authorit}’^ and the freedom with which he has 
expressed his views. Tlie points, however, on which he insists do 
Ma’s conclusions seem overstrained, not make SO unfavourable .an impression 
on my mind against the integrity of .our present text as they did 
upon his. That there was not in the Han dynasty a text of the 
Classic besides the texts found in the three commentaries is not 
so certain as he makes out. Very possibly, as 1 have shown in 
the second paragraph, a distinct text was found, as related by Heu 
Shin, in the year b.c. 153. But if we base the text simply on what 
is given in the commentaries, we must feel that we approximate very 
nearly to what it was when they made their appearance, to w’hat it 
had been before the tj’rant of Ts‘in fancied that he had made an 
end of it. There is no evidence that anyone of them suppressed 
portions of the text as Ma affirms; and the additions of which he 
makes so much are onty two, one by Kung-yang and Kuh-leang 


Wl » it fW #T in a « Jt a ® 1 

^ > "'T I 1 ^ m .. -- -- - ^ ^ ^ mm ..m* 


r- 


# m S ^ ^ — t(n Q. M itk # :g ^ ift ♦ Tie 


.. tit 


14 - a B ^ s: ^ S S 5 S S’ ^ $ 


JIKCT, m.] 


MA’S OBJECTIONS DVEBSTRAINED. 


[PROr.BGOMESA; 


(with a variation, however, to which he does not advert), and one 
b}' Tso, for we ina}’’ consider all the paragraphs that follow the 
account of the capture of the lin as one addition. They were both 
veiy natural, and I should suppose were intended originally as 
notes rather than additions to the text. The various readings 
again in the three are really not of great importance. Occurring 
mostly inutile names of men and places,® they need not trouble us 
morethan different ways of spelling unusual words in different edi- 
tions of an English book would do. The most important variation 
of another chariicter between them is that on which Ma insists so 
strongly, — ^ and ^ in I. iii. 3. This is not what we may 
compare to an error of orthography, arising from writing the same 
sound in different waj^s; — it is evidently an error of transcription. 
Tso, I am of opinion, copied down ^ instead of and then tried, 
ingeniously but unsatisfactorily, to account in his commentary for 
the unusual combination of Kung and Kuh copied 

correctly, but their historical knowledge was not sufficint to enable 
them to explain who ^ ^ was. Ma has altogether overlooked the 
consideration of the value attaching to the various readings as showing 
the independence of the three recensions. Adding to them the two 
of Tsow and, Keah which soon perished, we have five different texts 
of the Gh^un Ts‘ew in existence in the second century before our 
era. Tso, Kung- 5 mng, and Kuh-leang, had each his school of ad- 
herents, who sought to exalt the views of their master above those 
of his rivals. It is stiU competent to us to pronounce upon their 
respective views, and weigh the claims which they have to our 
.consideration; but the question at present is simply about their 
texts. Notwithstanding the differences between these, there is 
no doubt in my mind that they flowed from a common original. 


8 The following passage from Woo Gliding 1249-1333), may be considered a® 

decisive on this point. I adduce it in preference to others, ^ be cause he touches^ou some other 


-pzi 


1^ 


matters which will interest some of my readers. — ^ 

« - «. it iS K « X. Bn H. S fifim M 

* * R. * « * ^ ^ ^ IS ^ ro a- ® ^ ft # r.0 

s » fa A « «s ;g 2 « sa s ^ ^ ^ ^ lit M - # 

* ^ ft- ^ S' Ss ft * « 3 i A- fin 

21] 


rKOiXfiOMESA.] >’ATURE A^■D \AIXV. Ol- TllK riM*N Tfi‘KW. 


[CII. Ti 


an original which must Imve been compiled by Confucius from 

the Ch‘mi Ts‘ew of Loo. On the subsequent preservation of that 
text it is not neeessary to enter, excepting in so far as the early 
bistoiy of the three commentaries iS concerned. When the authori- 
ty of them was once established, there was a succession of scholars 
who from dynasty to dynasty devoted themselves to the illustration 
of tliem, the Works of liundreds of whom are existing at the present 
day. It may not be possible for us to determine the exact reading, 
of names especiall}^, in every paragraph, and there may be lacunaj 
in other paragraphs, and some paragraphs perhaps were lost before 
the three texts were transcribed ; but the text as formed from them 
. must in ihy opinion be considered, notwithstanding its various read- 
ings, as a fair reproduction of what Confucius wrote, a sufficient 
copy of the Work by which he felt that posterity would judge him. 

I proceed in the next section to describe the tliree early comment- 
aries, after which we shall be prepared to estimate the value of the 
Work itself. 


SECTION IV. 


THE THREE EAELT COMMENTARIES ON THE CH‘UN TS'EW, 


1. Of the three early commentaries the first which made its 
appearance in* the Han dynasty, and incomparably the most 
The commentary of Tso. important, was that of Tso, or of Tso-k‘ew, for 
the opinions of scholars differ both as to the surname and the name 
of the author.^ The account of it given by Pan Koo is — ^that Tso 


1 It is a common opinion, which Mr. Wylie (General Notes on Chinese Literature, p. C) 
endorses without hesitation, that the ‘Narratives of the States’ was by the same author as the 


Commentary about which we are inquiring ; and we have the testimony of Sze-ma 'I’s'een’s autO' 


biographical letter to a friend ^ 

his surname being Tso-k‘cw, and name Ming (;^ JGc ^ ^ ^ @ ^5 

). Our Tso would then have the surname of Tso-k‘ew, This is still held by many. 
Choo E-t8unj)arti^lnrly insists on it as a point ‘ exceedingly clear,’ and explains the dropping of 
the K‘Sw (_£^ or from a superstitious feeling not to be always repeating the name of the 
Pan Koo appears to have considered the simple Tso to be the surname and 

with him. Others maintain that the sur- 
Vi® “ virtually now, for the Work is 

‘ ^ ° Chuen. On these disputes about tlie surname and name, Hwang TsiU 


pHH* 


BECT. IV.] 


. COMMENTAKY OF TSO. 


[t’ilOLEGOMEN'A. 


K‘ew-Tning'\vas a discipleof the sage, whoconsulted along with him the 
historical records of Loo, before making his great "Work; that when 
it was made, it was not advisable to publish it because of the praise 
and censure, the concealments and suppressions, which abounded in 
it, and that therefore he delivered it b}”" word of mouth to the disciples, 
who thereupon withdrew and gave different accounts of the events 
referred to in it; that K‘ew-ming, in order that tlie truth might not 
be lost, made his coinmentaiy, "or narratives of those events, to make 
it clear that the master had not in' his text used empty Avords; and 
finally, that it was necessary for liim to keep his work concealed, 
to avoid tlie persecutions of the powerful rulers and ofiicers Avhose 
conduct Avas freel}' and fully described in it.- Pan Koo’s account 
is correct thus far, that Ave haA'e in Tso’s Work a detailed account 
of most of the events of Avhich the text of Confucius gives oidy 
hints. The Ch'un Ts'cav ma}- be loosely compared to 'the headings 
or summaries of contents Avhich are prefixed (o the chapters in many 
editions of our Bibles, and Tso's commentaries to the chapters them. 
Beh-es. But. AA*e shall find that they contain more than this. 

2. AVho Tso Avas it is not eti.'iv to ssia’. In the Analects, V. 
xxiA’., Confucius says, ‘ Fine Avords, an insintiating appearance, ntid 
AviioTsowfls. excessiA’e respect; — ^Tso-k'iiw i\Iing Avas ashamed of such 
things, atul 1 also am ashamed of them. To conceal resentment against 
a ])erson, and a])pear friendly Aviih him; — Tso*k‘eAV Mi»)g AA'as ashamed 
of such conduct, and 1 also am ashamed of it.’* Cliaon Iv‘c says, oji 
the authority of lv‘ung Gan-kAA'oh, that the person Avhom Confneitis 
spoke of thus, Avas the grand-historiographer of Loo. but adds tjotliing 
as to his being contemporary Avith the sage, or of aji earlier time, 
'j'he critics jienerallv hold that he was some Worthv of an earlier age. 
o:i the ground that Confucius only drew comparis»uis hetween hitu- 
Velf ami men of a former period.- I am not fully convincctl hy their 
reasonings. The Chinese text of the Analects is not so tlefmite ns 
the, Ktiglish translation of it. What Confucius says nhotit Tso k'pw 
Ming might he rcndcreil in the prc.sent tense in the .sanic Av.ny as 
Avhat he says nl>out himself. Xothing, Imwever, Avonid he gaifa d 
hy di^eu^^illg a text on A\hi«h it i** ti'.u {H»*-‘-ihle arriv*' at a 

t Ur-.- ipj 


f(!«. I. 


VlWtiEGOMESA,.] 


KATUKE AKD 


VALUE or THE CII'UA’ TS'EW. 


positive decision. At tlie same time I may say that the view tliat 
Tso Nyas a disciple of the master has very formidable difficulties to 
encounter. The Classic stops in the 14th )'ear of duke Gae, 3 ).c, 
480, but Tso’s commcntaiy extends to tlie 4tli 3 '’ear of duke Taou, 
Gae’s successor, b.c. 403. Jn tlie last paragraph of it, moreover, 
there is an allusion to the ruin and death of Seiin Yaou or Che Pih, a 
great officer of Tsin, which took place in 452, 27 or 28 years after 
•the close of the Ch'un Ts‘e\v. Not only so. The Head of the 
Chaou family is mentioned in the same paragraph by his posthu- 
mous or honorary title, and of course he could not have received it 
till after his death, which took place in B.c. 424, 56 years after the 
capture of the Zm, and 54 years after the death of the sage. Is it 
possible to believe that one so much jmunger than Confucius was 
among his disciples and possessed Iiis confidence to the extent which 
the coinmonlv received accounts of the making of the Ch'un Ts'ew 

«/ W 

suppose? 

3. Leaving these speculations about the name and person of 
Tso, we find that his commentary made its appearance soon after 

Eirst appetirance and subseq.uent) TISC of the Hail dyUaSty. HcU bhlll 
history of his commentary. f hig acCOUIlt of the discOVCry of tllC 

Ch^un Ts‘ew in the wall of Confucius house, quoted on p. 18, sub- 
joins the statement that Chang Ts‘ang, marquis of Pih-p‘iiig 
sented the commentary of Tso written in the old cliaracters of the 
Chow dynasty.^ Now this Chang Ts‘ang had been high in office 
under the Ts'in dynasty, in charge, it would appear, of the imperial 
library. Having joined the party of the duke of P‘ei, the founder 
of the Han dynasty, he became at last a favourite with him, and 
was placed in various positions of the greatest trust.^ His appoint-, 
inent to be marquis of Pih-p‘ing^ took place in b.c. 200, about fifty 
years before the discovery of the text in the wall of Confucius’ 
house. Heu Shin says that ‘Chang presented’ the Work, meaning? 

I suppose, that he did so to the first emperor of Han, who was too 
much occupied, however, with the establishment of his dynasty to 
give much attention to literary matters. But after the time of 
Chang Ts‘ang we never lose sight of Tso’s commentary. From him 
It passed to Kiia E, of whom we have many notices as a famous 


memoir. 8 I'ih-p'ing embraced the present department of Vung-p'b'lf' 
t-liiH-le, and i-omc tndjnccnt territory. 


Mi l. IV.j 


Tin: COMMEXTAIIY OF TSO. 


[ri:oi.i:Go.\n':.vA. 


seliolnr nml siatcsinnii in tlic reign of the emperor Wan (b.c. 178 — 
lie publlshetl a AVork of his own upon it;^ and then it 
parsed on (o liis grandson Kea Kea,<5 and Kwaii Kung,^ a great 
scholar at the court of King Heen of llo-keen,® through whom an 
attcn»]>t was made to obtain for it the imperial recognition, which 
was defentod by the friends of the commentary of Kung- 3 ’’ang. 
This, though later in making its appearance, had already found a 
place in the itnperial college.*’ Kwan Kung transmitted liis treasure 
to his \*oungest son, named Chang-k‘ing,*o and from him it went on 
to Chang Ch’ang” and Chang yn,*2 f-mious men of their time. 
To one of them, no doubt, belonged the ‘Niceties of the CIi‘un 
Ts‘ew, by Chang-she,’ mentioned in Lew Hiii’s catalogue.^® Yu 
was intimate with Seaou Wang-che,*'^ perhaps the most dis- 
tinguished man of the time, whom lie interested in the AVork 
of Tso, so that he called the attention to it of the emperor 
Seuen (n.c. 72-48), and it might now have heen formally recog- 
nized hut for Yu’s death. The names of Yin Kang-ch‘e^® and 
his son Yin Heeiij^^* of Teih Fang-tsin,^^ Hoq Chang, ^8 and Kea 
Hoo^® lead us from Yu to Lew Hin.^o Hin’s connexion with Tso’s 
AA^’ork may be considered as forming an era in its histoiy. ‘ Having 
found,’ weare told in hisbiography, ‘in the imperial library, the Ch‘un 
Ts‘ew and Tso’s Chuen in the ancient characters, he became very 
fond of them. At that time Yin Heen, a secretary of the prime 
minister, being well acqunintcd with Tso-she, examined along with 
Hill the text and coiiimentaiy. Hin took his opinion in some 
particulars, and sought to learn the correct interpretation and great 
aim of the AA'orks bj' application to the prime minister Teih Fang- 
tsin. Before this, because of the manj?^ ancient characters and 
ancient sajdngs in Tso’s Chuen, students had contented themselves 
with simpljr explaining their meaning; but when Hin took it in hand, 
he quoted the words of the commentary to explain the text, and made 

i, H -i- A A- ® M it ^ ^ If f/I 


8 See the proleg. to vol. IV. p. 11. 9 K'ung Ying-tah, 

in his preface to Too Yu’s edition of the Tso Chuen says; — nf.M 


10 


11 


12 


13 


-J— 14 There is a long and interesting memoir of 1dm in the 

We find him, on bis first introduction to the emperor Seuen, appesh'ng to a pass.ige 
in the Ch'un Ts*cw. 15 ^ 16 ^ 17 ^ 18 


25] 


I-K'JLBGOMESA.] NATUllE AKD VALUE OF THE CII'UN TS‘E\V. 


[uii. 1. 


them throw light on cnch other, and from tliis time the cxhil)ition 
of them in paragraplis and clauses wfis cultivated. Hin preferred 
Tso to Kung-yang and Kuh-leang, considering that lie agreed in his 
likings and dislikings with the sage, and that he had himself seen 
the master, — a very different case from that of Kung and Kuh wlio 
were subsequent to the seventy disciples The history then relates 
the disputes between Hin and iiis father Meang, wlio was an adherent 
of the commentary of Kuh-leang, and how he made an attempt to get 
the emperor Gae (b.c. 5 — a.i>.) to give Tso a phice in the imperial 
college along with Kung and Kuh, which was defeated bj^ the jealousy 
of their supporters. F roin this time, however, the advocates of Tso-slie 
became more numerous and determined to liave justice done to their 
master. They were successful for a short time in the reign of the 
emperor P‘ing (a.d. 1 — 5), but Tso’s Work was again degraded as 
of less authority than the other two commentaries; and though Kea 
Kwei-'- presented an argument on fort}' counts to prove its superi- 
ority, which was well received by the emperor Chang (a.d.' 76—88), 
it w^ not till A.D. 99, under the emperor Ho, 23 that the footing of 
Tso in the imperial college was finally established. The famous Ch‘ing 
(a.d. 127 — 199) having replied to three Works of Ho 
Hg w, the maintainer of the authority of Kung-yang, against Tso and 
Kuh-leang, and shown the superiority of Tso, the other two comment- 

« melancholy to 

rea4 the hst of writer on Tso during the second and third dynasties 

in A fragmentary sentences remaining; but 

n A.D. 280, Too Yu or Too Yuen-k‘ae, a scholar and general at the 

Tso ! !1 Explanations of the Text and Commentary of 

rpmni chapters. ’26 This Work still 

taSn^orSm^Hter^ ^ monument of the scholarship and pains- 

21 See the ' )ifi — * _ i.. - i - 4^ — ^ - 

tlio Work oimM- ±’ W ii# 1 1*™ onrofnUr re»J over 


SKCT. IV.] 


THE COMMENTARY OF TSO. 


[PROtEGOVEN-.V 


4. Nothing need be said on the history of the commentary 
of Tso since the beginning of the Han dynasty. Some of the 
scholars of tliat age traced it back from Chang Ts'ang to nearly the 

Attempt to trace Tso’s Work of Confucius, and K'ung Ying-tah in 

nearly to the time of Confucius, j |^jg preface to Too Yii’s Work qnotes, the 
following from a production of Lew Heang (b.c. 80 — 9) which is now 
lost: — ‘Tso K‘ew-ming delivered his Work to Tsang Shin. Shin 
transmitted it to Woo K‘e,- Woo Ii*e to his son K‘e; K‘e to Toh 
Tseaoii, a native of Ts‘oo, who copied out selections from it in 8 
books; Toh Tseaou to Yu K‘ing, who made 9 books of selections 
from it; Yu K‘ing to Seun K‘ing; and Seun K‘ing to Chang 
Ts‘ang.’i I wish we had different and more authority for this state- 
ment, as Heang was not himself an adherent of Tso’s AYork. In 
his son Hin’s catalogue which I have already referred to, two 
Works are mentioned by Toh-she and Yu-slie, but there is nothing 
in their titles to connect them with Tso and Sze-ma Ts‘een saj^s 
nothing in his memoir of Seun K‘ing about any connexion that he 
had with the transmission of the commentary.^ Tsang Shin was 
the grandson of Ts&ng Sin, one of Confucius’ principal disciples, — 
the Tsang Se of Mencius, II. Pt. i. I. 3. Tso’s coimnitting his 
Work to him would agree with what I have said in par. 2, and cast 
a doubt on his being a contemporary of the sage himself. 

5. I have said that generally we have in the Work of Tso the 
details of the events of which we have but a shadow or the barest 
Tiie nature of Tso’s Work, intimation in the text of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew; 
but we have more than this. Of multitudes of events that during 
the 242 3 ’ears of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew period took place in Loo and 
other States, to which the text makes no allu.sion, we Iiave from 
Tso a full account. Where he got his information he does not tell 
us. Too Yu is probably correct when he says that Tso was himself 
one of the historiographers of Loo.^ Whatever of the history of 
that State was on record he was familiar with. If the records of 
other States were also collected there, he had studied them equally 
with those of his own. If he did not find them there, he must 


[CII. I. 


j'noi.KGOMESA.] NATUHIvi AND VAXUI*. OF IIIK Cll'UN JS‘EA^. 


have gone in search of them, for he is as much at home in the 
events of Ghow, Tsin, Ts‘e, Sung, Ch‘ing, Ts‘oo, and other States, 
as he is in those of Loo. And not only does he draw from tlie 
records about the ruling Houses of the States, but also from the 
histories of the principal families or chins and the cliief men in 
them.2 From whatever quarter, in Avhatever way, lie got his 
information, he has transmitted it to us. The events and the cha- 
racters of the time pass as in reality and life before us. In no 
ancient history of any countiy ha%m we such a vivid picture of any 
lengthened period of its annals as we have from Tso of the 270 
years which he has embraced in his Wort. Without his Chuen the 
text of the sage would be of little value. Let the former be preserved, 
and we should have no occasion to regret the loss of the latter. 

To myself it appears plain that Tso’s Work was compiled on a 
twofold plan. First, he had reference to the text of the Ch‘un 

Tso*s Work compiled on a two-fold plan.) Ts‘ew, and wislied to give the details 
He wished first to explain the text. f of the eveiits wliich Were indicated 

in it. Occasionally also he sets himself to explain the words of 
that text, being sometimes successful and sometimes not. He lays 
down canons to regulate the meaning and application of certain 
characters, but it can hardly be said that we find him under the 
influence of the ‘ praise-and-censure ’ theory. In this respect he 
differs remarkably from Kung-yang and Kuh-leang; and I have 
. ^sometimes fancied that the characteristic is an evidence that he lived 
before Mencius, and had never read the accounts of the Classic 
which we find in him. His object evidently was to convey to his read- 
ers a knowledge of the facts given in the master’s paragraphs as 
if independent and isolated in their connexion with one another. 
Hence he often mentions new facts which are necessar}’^ for that , 


2 The following passage from Tan Tsoo of the T‘ang dynasty sets forth correctly this 

characteristic of Tso’s work, and I adduce it wi thout referent:e to Tsoo’s peculiar opinions about 

o»r .rt.or:-5t K # S IS- 15 # H # 

M # iij — » A ^ fe 5ic. M 0 ft ^ ■ 


“O* •>"/ — I ^ r-irt >» ZmL ✓IIV ^ /Jli' -5? 


Tin; I’OM.MIIXTAIIY Dl- TSO. 


[I'noi.ncojrrv.v. 


n.’. 


pnrjtosc. As lu* goncrnlly iiitrodtiwjs them eln’onologically, nt tlic 
time <>r their otMMirroiiee, he solmus at times merely to increase the 
mass of imliirotetl matter: but hv and bv we find wlnit he has thus 
related to stand in the relation of cause, to something subsequently 
chronicled. Ibit his method with these additions to the text, 
which are yet connected with it, is very vnriotis. As Too Yu says, 
‘Now he atiticipates the te.xt to show the origin of an atfair; now 
he comi‘S after the text [with his narrative] to bring out fullj^ the 
meaning; now he lie.s alongside the text to discriminate the princi- 
]>les in it; and now he appears to cross the text to bring together 
thiiijrs that dilfer: — thn.s various according to what he considered 
the requirements of the case.’’* What is very surprising is that he 
does not ajtpear to he conscious of frequent discrepancies between 
the details of his narratives and the things as stated bj^ Confucius. 
Now and then, as on VI. xviii. 6, he sa 3 ’^s that the text conceals the 
nature of the fact; but gcnerall}’^ he seems insensible of the untrust- 
wortliiness of the representation in it. 

Let it be understood, however, that Tso docs not give the details 
of eveiy event which the Classic briefl}'^ indicates. We must suppose 
that where he does not do so, his sources of information failed him, 
and he was obliged to leave the notice of the text as it was. There 
is the erroneous or defective entiy in III. xxiv. 9, — ‘The duke of 
Kwoli.’ Oji it Tso says nothing. So on the five paragraphs of 
Chwang’s 26th j^ear he has nothing to say, while he introduces brief 
narratives of two other things, for tlie latter of which only we can 
account as being given with an outlook into the future. Generally 
speaking, the information given iu the Chuen is scanty or abundant 
in proportion to its distance from or nearness to the era assigned to its 
compilation. The 18 j’^ears of duke Hwan, b.c. 710 — 693, occupy in. 
the following Work 37 pages; the 15 years of duke Ting, b.c. 508 — 
494, 50 pages. The 32 years of Chwang, b.c. 692 — 661, occupy 59 
pages; the 32 of Gh‘aou, b.c. 540 — 509, 173 pages. This certainly 
gives us for the Work one attribute of verisimilitude.^ 


S la ite ^ # Bit -ft * Ja ^ a. ^ ^ 

, — see Toe's preface. 4 I take the opportunity to advert 

here to a quesTion whiuli has produced no end of speculation and discussion among the scliolars 
of China. — Why does the Cli‘un Ts'ew begin OTth duke Yin? Might we not have expected the 
sage to go back to the first origin of the State of Loo? I believe that the only reasonable answer 
to these inquiries is this , — that the annals of the State previous to duke Yin’s rule had been 
altogctlicr lost, or were in such a miserable state of dilapidation and disarrangement tiiat nothing 
could bo made of them. Wo might Imve expected a sentence or two from the sage to enligiitcn 
U6 on the subject; but his oracle is dumb. Nmther does the Chuen say anytiiing about it. "How 
different the practice of writers of liistory in the West! 

29 ] 


rKoi.r.r.ojTr.SA.] J^.VTLT.l-. AN*!) VALl’l-: OF TIIF. CIFFX Tii l-AV. 


(,( 1 . 


But Avliile Tso intended lus Work to be a connnentary on the. text 
of the Cli‘un Ts*e\v. I believe that he had in view another and higher 
. rm * • obleet, and wislied to jiive his 

The second 'View of Tso: — to sivo n "onenu) ' , . i i • 

view of the history of China duriiiir the Clmin .'- readers a "Cncral View of the lllS- 


T&ew period. ) couiitrv throughout all 

•* •* 

its States during the Chhin Ts'ew period. The account of the Gluieii 
quoted above from Too Yu carries us a considerable way to tliis 
conclusion. Tso shows the origin and issue of many events, one 
phase of which merely is mentioned in the text. The unconnected 
entries of the classic are thus woven togetlier. and a history is made 
out of them. But the new matter introduced bv him is so verv much, 

fc* ^ 

and often having no relation to anvthins: stated in the text, yet 


calculated to bring the whole field of the era before us, and to 
indicate the progress of events on towards a different state of the 
kingdom, that we must suppose this to have been a prominent object 
in the author’s mind. This characteristic of the Work has not 
escaped the notice of native scholars themselves. As early as the 
Tsin dynasty, Wang Tseeh preferred to it the commentary of Kimg- 
yang on this account. ‘ Tso’s style,’ said he,’ is so rich, and his aim 
so extensive, that he is to be regarded as an author by himself, and 
not having it for his principal object to illustrate the classic.’^ Nearly 
to the same effect is the account of Tso’s Chuen given by Wang 
Cheh of the Sung dynasty. After praising Tso as a skilful reader of 
the old histories and collector of various narratives, so that he 
accumulated a very complete account of the events in the Ch‘uu 
Ts‘ew, he yet adds: — ‘ But though his book was made as an appendix 
to the classic, yet, apart from and outside that, it forms a book by 
itself, the author of which was led away by his fondness for strange 
stories, and carried his collecting them beyond what was proper. 
He was remiss in setting forth the fine and minute ideas of the sage, 
but yet his Work has a beginning and end, being all the compilation 
of one hand. C/hinese scholars write of Tso under the influence of 
their admiration and veneration for the sage. I could wish that he 
had vrvittQTi altogether independently of the Classic, in which case 
we might have had a history of those times as complete as a man 


the 


quoted from him his contrary ' 


« Sf ^ » W ^ ® @ m a 


?i;CT. IV.3 


Tin; COMMKKTAUY OF TSO. 


[I'KOLKGOMKKA. 


knowing only the heroes and events of his own country could make. 
It is not too much to call Tso the Froissart of China. The historical 


novel called ‘ The Historv of the various States ’ shows the use which 
can be made of his narratives. They lie necessarilj^ in my pages so 
many f/w/rc/a membra, butsome one may yet give, mainly from them, 


an account of the closing centuries of the feudal state of China that 
shall be found to have an universal interest. 


6. Three more points in regard to Tso’s Work have yet to be 
considered: — the manner of liis composition; how far his narratives 
are entitled to our belief; and whether there is reason to believe 
that addiiions were made to them bv writers of the Ts‘in and 
Han dynasties. By the manner of Tso s composition I do not mean 
the general character of his style. There is but one opinion as to 
that. It is acknowledged on all hands that he was a njaster of his 
recuUarity«rTso*s composition, art. Condensed, yet vivid, he is eminently 
pictorial. The foreign student does not for some time find it easy 
to make out his meaning, but bj* and by lie gets familiar with the 
style, and it then has a great charm for him. In the words which 
the foremost of French sinologues once used to me of him, Tso was 
grand ecrivain.^ But the peculiarity which I have in view is the 

way in which Tso constantly varies the appellations of the actors in 
his naiTatives. Very often they are named by their sacrificial or 
honorary epithets which were not given to them till after their 
death, so that it is plain he did not copy out the contemporaneous 
accounts or records which we suppose him to have had before him, 
and some critics have from this contended that the narratives were 


entirelv-constructed bv himself, not drawn from historical sources.s 
But such a conclusion is more than the premiss will justify. Tso 
might very well call his subjects of a former time by the titles 
which had been accorded to tliem after their death, and by which 


0 1 W 0 . * «; # K S * R ^ ift. # * ^ ® 

"fi’ S ® 81 ffii' ^ Bii @ 

1 I select ouly t^ro Chiucse testimonies of the excellence of Tso’s style. The first is from 
Sexm Sung of the Tsin drn.asty:-S ^ ^ 

M tIc’ H ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

E-tsua of the present dynasty : — .Ic 

E. jr. Lew Hwang of the T^ng dynasty says 

•t> A S S ^ A M ^ 111. IE IS 


[fH. I. 


WIOLEOOMKXA.] NATUllE AND VALUE OF 'J’lIE UlI-UN TS*E\V. 


men genernlly would in Iiis days speak of them. What is really 
perplexing is that in the same account the same individual is now 
called by his name, now h}' his honorary epithet, and now by his 
designation, or by one or other of his designations if he had more 
than one, so that the narrative becomes very confused, and it 
requires considerable research on the part of the reader to make 
out who is denominated in all this variety of ways. To give only 
one example: — in the account of the battle of Peih, in the 12th 
year of duke Seuen, of the leaders on the side of Tsin, we have, 1st, 
Seun Lin-foo, who b}' and by is st^ded Hwan-tsze;® 2d, Sze Hwu}^, 
who is variously denominated Woo-tsze of Suy, Suy Ke, and Sze 
Ke, while elsewhere he is called Woo4sze of Fan p 3d, Seen HavoIi, 
also called Ohe-tsze, and elsewhere Yuen Hwoh, or Hwoh of 
Yuen;» 4th, Seun Show, called also Che Chwang-tsze and Che 
Ke;6 5th, Han Keueh, by and by Han Ileen-tszep (ith, Lwan Shoo, 
bj^ and by Lwan Woo-tsze;^ 7th, Chaou Sob, by and by Chaou 
Chwang-tsze;® and 8th, Keih Kdh, by and by Keih Hecn-tsze.^® 
Similar instances might be quoted in great number. Chaou Yih 
says that such a method of varying names and tippellations was 
characteristic of the style of that time.^i If, indeed, it was 
characteristic of the time, I must'think that Tso possessed it in an 
exaggerated degree. The confusion produced by it in his Work 
seems to have led to its cure. Sze-ma Ts‘een and the writers of the 
Books of Han are careful, at the commencement of their bio- 
giaphies, to give the surname, name, and designation or designa- 
tions of their subjects, so that the student has none of the perplexity 
in reading them, which he finds with Tso’s Chuen. 

The other two points regarding the Work, which I indicated are 
of moie importance, and I \vill consider them to^’ether. Have we 

o 


Are Tso’s nnrratires reliable ? 
they supplemented or added to. 


Werei reason to receive Tso’s narratives as 
^ reliable, having been transcribed by 
lim fiom pre-existent records with merely such modifications of 
^yle as suited Ws teste? Or did he invent some of thorn himself? 
Or were they added to by writers in the Ts‘in dynasty and that of 


SKCT. IV.] 


TJIE COIIMENTAEY OF TSO. 


[rBOtEGOMESA. 


the Former Han ? It is difficult to reply to these questions cate- 
gorically. What has the greatest weight with me in'favopr of- 
Tso’s general credibility is the difference between his commentary 
and those of Kung-yang and Kuh-leang. What of narrative belongs 
to the latter bears upon it the stamp of tradition, and evidently 
was not copied from written records but from accounts current in 
the mouths of men. It is, moreover, of comparatively small com- 
pass. Tlieir Works must have been written when the memory of 
particular events in the past had in a great measure died out. If 
Tso’s sources of information had been available for them, they 
would, we may be sure, have made use of them. The internal 
evidence of the three Works leaves no doubt in the mind as to the 
priority of Tso’s. And as they all made their appearance early in the 
Han dynast}^, we are carried back for the composition of Tso’s into 
the period of Chow. As his last entr}’^ is about an affair in the 4th 
year of duke Taou, who died b.c. 430, and he mentions in it the 
Head of the Chaou family in Tsin by his honorary epithet of Seang- 
tsze, which could not have been given before 424, we can hardly be 
wrong in assigning Tso to the fifth century before Christ. Thig 
brings him close to the age of Confucius who died in b.c. 478. 
Tso may then have been a young man ; — he could hardly be a 
disciple enjoying that intimate association with the sage which 
Lew Hin, Pan Koo, and other Chinese scholars were fond of 
asserting. 

But to maintain the general credibility of Tso’s Chuen as having 
been taken from authoritative sources and records acknowledged as 
genuine among the States of China when he wrote, leaves us at 
freedom to weigh his narratives and form our own opinion on 
grounds of reason as to the degree of confidence which we ought to 
repose in them. There are few critics of eminence amon g the Chinese 
who do not allow themselves a certain amount of liberty in this 
respect. Chfing E-ch‘uen laid down two canons on the subject. ‘The . 
Chuen of Tso,’ he says, ‘ is not to be entirelj’^ believed; but only that 
portion of it which is in itself credible.’^® Xo jjjjig objection' can 
be taken; but he opens a very difficult question, wdien he goes on, 

‘ We should from the Chuen examine the details of the events referred 
to in the text, and by means of the text discriminate between what 


PRor.EOOMESA.] NATURE AND VALUE OF THE CII‘UN TS‘EW. 


[cii. I. 


is true and false in the Ghuen.’^s On this I simll have to give an 
opinion in the next section, and only remark now that if we find 
the statements of the text and the Chuen in regard to matters of 
history irreconcileahle, the most natural' course would seem to be 
to decide in favour of the latter. 

. The K‘ang-he editors defer in general to the authority of Tso; but 
even they do not scruple to suppress his narratives occasionally, 
or to elide portions of them. They suppress, for instance, tlie 
account of the conference between the marquises of Loo and Ts‘e 
at Keah-kuh, given under XI. x. 2, considering the part which 
Confucius is made to play at it to be derogatory to him. . 

Wang Gan-shih^^ of the Sung d 5 masty published a treatise under 
the title of ‘ Explanations of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew,’ in which he undertook 
to prove from eleven instances that the Chuen was not composed 
by Tso K‘ew-ming of the Chow dynasty, but by some one of a later 
date, under the dynasty, probably, of Ts‘in,i-^ Wang’s treatise is 
unfortunately lost, and we know not wluit all the eleven instances 
were. One of them was the use of the term fo/d® in the Chuen on 
V. V, 9, to denominate a sacrifice after the winter solstice, winch, it 
is contended, was first appointed under the dynasty of Tsfin. It 
may have been another where in IX. xi. 10 and xii. 5 we find men- 
tion Tftade of military commanders of Ts‘in with the title of 
shoo chang,^^ which, again it is contended, was of later date than the 
Chow dynasty. Chfing E-ch‘uen at any rate adduces these two as 
cases in the Chuen of purely Ts‘in phraseology.i^ 

• Apart from any discussion of these instances, I venture to state 
my own opinion, that interpolations were made in the Chuen after 
Tso had put his finishing touch to it, and probably during the d}'- 
nasty of the former Han ; and there are two classes of passages 
which seem to bear on them and in them the evidence of having 
been so dealt with. ' 


[i] There ate the mornlizings which conclude many narratives 
and are interjected in others, generally with the formula— ‘The 
superior man will say, and sometimes as if quoted from Confucius- 
They have often notliii.g or next to nothing to do with the subject 
oi the narrative to wi.icli they are attached, and the manner in 
winch they oeeastonally bring m quotations from the odes reiniinls 


the -H' -h ■ 


SECT. IV.j 


THE COMMENTARY OF TSO. 


[PBOLBaOMBXA. 


US of Han Ying’s lllnstrations of the Slie, of which I have given 
specimens in the proleg. to vol. IV. Choo He well asks what con- 
nexion the concluding portion of the Chuen after I. vi. 2 has to do 
with what precedes, and points out many reflections in other parts 
which cannot be considered as the utterances of a superior man but 
the speculations of a mere scliolar.'s Lin Leuh of the Sung dynasty 
and a multitude of other scholars attribute all these passages to 
Lew Hin.^® They certainly seem to me to bear upon them the Han 
stamp. 

[ii.] There is a host of passages which contain predictions of the 
future, or allusions to such predictions, grounded on divinationj 
meteorological and astrological considerations, and something in 
the manner or deportment of the parties concerned; — predictions 
which turn out to be true. We may be sure that none of these 
were made at the time assigned to them in the Chuen. Some of 
them which had their fulfilment before the end of the Ch'im Ts‘ew 
period may have been current in Tso’s days, and incorporated by 
him with his narrative. Others, like tiie ending of the Chow 
dynasty after an existence of so many hundred years, the fulfilment 
of which was at a later date, were, no doubt, fabricated subsequently 
to that fulfilment, and interpolated during the time of the first Han. 

But after deducting all these suspicious portions from Tso’s 
Chuen, there remains the mass of it, which we may safely receive 
as having been compiled by him from records made contemporaner 
ously with the events, and transmitted by him with the graces of 
his own style. It is, in my opinion, the most precious literary 
treasure which has come down to posterity from the Chow dynasty. 


144 


« * If ^ ^ 0- ft K ^ $ PI 

p 19 » ^ K ^ ^ ft- at 0 * s w Ii ^ A 

“ ■ ■ '■ ■ 

-see the 


Jsl - _u 

'ang-he Ch 


Critical Introduction to the K'ang-he Ch'un Ts‘e\r, pp. 28, 29. 19 


20 The following is a list of piassagcs of the 


xi. 2, 3, and after 3 j xii. 8 ; xv. 2, and after 6 ; xviii. at the beg.; xx. at tlte beg.; xxi. at the l»eg, 
1 ; XXV. 1 ; xxxi. 7; xxxii. 2, 4; XI. ix. 3; xv. 1: XII. ix. after 4. In the 


85] 


ruoucGOMESA.] NATURK AND VALUE 01' THE Cll-UN TS‘EW. 


[cii. 1 . 


7 . On the other tv'o early commentaries, those of Kung-yang 
and Kuh-leang, it is not necessary that I sliould write at so much 
Ti.= coran>ontaricsotKung-l length. There IS really nothing in them to 
yang and ivuii-icnng. j entitle them to sorious attention. Down to 
the present day, indeed, there are scholars in China who publish 
their lucubrations in favour of the one or of the other ; but I tliink 
that my readers will all agree with me in the opinion which I have 
expressed about them, when thej’^ have examined the specimens of 
them w^hich are appended to this chapter. 

The commentaries themselves and various "Works upon them are 
mentioned in Lew Hin’s catalogue; — as stated above on page 17. 

With regard to the Work of Kung-yang, Tae Hwang, of the second 

Kung-yang. Han dynasty, tells us that Kung-yang Kaou received the 
Ch‘un Ts'ew and explanations of it from Confucius’ disciple Puh 
Shang or Tsze-hea, and handed it down to his son Kung-jmng P‘ing; 
that P‘ing handed it down again to his son Te; Te to his son Kan ; Kan 
to his son Show; and that, in the reign of the emperor King (b.c. 
155 — 14.0), Show, with his disciple Hoo-woo Tsze-too, committed it 
to bamboo and silk. According to this account, the Work was not 
committed to writing till about the middle of the second century 
before Christ. If it were really transmitted, from mouth to mouth, 
down to that time from the era of Confucius, we can hardly suppose 
that it did not suffer very considerably, now receiving additions 
and now losing portions, in its onward course.- The fact, more- 
over, of its having been confined for more than 300 years to one 


^ ^ W •& . rr ib ® tl? B s cv. xiv. 3), ^ ^ 

ific’ M ^ ^ S If . (DL Tii. 2), ^ % ft ffi ^ 

Epcaks Tcry douUIully about Tso's Clmen. E. g. 

but this last insinuattou is mere surmise. 


' • ** Wa tb t ft S Wl A VA VfttU WAftbOOIW AAWIAJ 

inoutb wai tomniaiulcil liy Coufucius, from his forcknovrlcilgc of the attempt of tl»e tyrant of 
Ts-in to l.urH ali tl.o momimcnts of ancient literature !—?[. 431 ^ ^ iS 

Hii; O ®. 

.‘ 10 ] 


StA'T. IV.] 


KrXG-VAXn AND KlTIl-LKAXG. 


[l>KOM>CO.Mr.KA. 


fjunilv takes n\vav IVoin the confidence whicli we niidit otherwise 

*' * O 

be inclined to repose in it. 

Tlierc can be no doubt, liowovcr, tlint it was made public in the 
reign of Ki>ig, and was .acknowledged and admitted by his successor 
AYoo (n.c. 131) — 86) into the imperial college. Hoo-woo was aeon- 
temporary and friend of the scholar Tung Cliung-shoo;® and in the 
biography of the scholar Kiiang Kung,-^ an adherent of Kiih-leang’s 
commentaiy, we are told tliat the emperor Woo made Keang and 
Tung dispute before him on the comparative merits of their two 
Masters, when Tung was held to be the victor. The emperor on 
this gave in his adliesion to Kung-j^ang, and his eldest son became a 
student of his Work. 

It is not important to trace the history of Kung-j-ang’s commentary 
farther on. Tlie names of various writers on it and of their Works 


are preserved, but the Works are lost till we arrive at Ho Hew (a.d. 
129 — 183), who published his ‘Explanations of Kung-yang on the 
Ch‘un Ts‘ew.’« This still remains. Ho Hew did for Kung- 3 ^ang Avhat, 
as we have seen. Too Yu did at a later period for Tso K‘ew-ming. 

The commentarj'^ of Kuh-leang is, like that of Kung-yang, carried 
back to Tsze-hea ; but the line of transmission down to the Han 
Kuh-leang. dynasty is imperfectly given. The general opinion is 
that Kuh-leang’s name was Ch‘ih,® but Yen Sze-koo says it was He. 7 
The next name mentioned_as intrusted with the text which Ch‘ih 
or He had received, and the commentary which he had made upon 
it, is Sun K‘ing, the same who appears on p. 27, as the 6th in the 
list of those who handed on the Work of Tso. From Sun K‘ing it 
is said to have passed to a Shin Kung of Loo.t^ Keang Kung, men- 
tioned above, received it from Shin, -7 and though it did not win the 
favour, as advocated by him, of the emperor Woo, yet it gained a 
place in the imperial college in the reign of Seuen (a.d. 72 — 48), 
and for some time was held generally in great estimation. It has 
been preserved to us in the Work of Fan Ning, a famous scholar 
and statesman of the Tsin dynasty in the second half of the 4th cen- 
tury; the title of which is, ‘A Collection of the Explanations of the 
Chuen of Kuh-leang on the Ch‘un Ts‘Sw.’® 


^ M -f*. ;g # S ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ # f# # ^ 


For the biography of Fan King, see the -q “p* ^ JZq *T* 


[cil. 1 . 


rnotxooMEyA.] NATURE AND VATATE OF THE CII‘UN TS‘E\V. 

7, One cannot compare carefull}' even the specimens of the two 
commentaries Avliich I have given witlioiit seeing that there is often 
a great similarity between them, and having tlie conclusion sug- 

• 1 , N ffcstcd to the mind that the one 

Speculation as to a connexion between the) » i i 

commentaries of Rung and Kuh; and thatS waS not made WltllOllt rctereiice tO 

ibcse were only one ^ tile Other. It is not to be wondered, 

at that some scholars, like Lin Hwang-chung of the Sung dj'nasty, 
should have supposed the two to be the production of the same writer.i 
But the differences between them, and occasionally the style of 
composition, forbid us entertaining such a view. That they were 
one man has been maintained on another ground. The surnames 
of Kung-yang and Kuh-leang ceased with the publication of the 
commentaries. No Kung-yang nor Kuh-leang appears after that in 
Chinese history.2 This is certainly strange, especially when we 
consider that there were five Kung-yangs concerned, according to the 
received account, in the transmission of the commentary from Tsze- 
hea to the Han dynasty. I must leave this matter, however, in its 
own mist. Ch‘ing Ts‘ing-che,3 Lo Peih,^ and other Sung scholars 
held that the author of the two commentaries had been a Keang, 
and that Kung-yang and Kuh-leang were merely two ways of 
spelling it;» but the method of spelling by finals and initials was, there 
is reason to believe, unknown in the Han dynasty. 

1 The K‘ang-be editors in their CriUcal Introdnction, p. 7, quote on tliis point from Clioo He: 
• 2 ^ ^ chi.. 147. 156. 


SECTION V. 

THE VALUE OF THE CHTJN TS‘EW. 

1. I come now to what must be considered as the most important 
subject in this chapter, — to endeavour to estimate the value of the 
Object of this sccUon. Ch‘un Ts‘cw as a document of history; and this 
will involve a judgment, first, on the character of Confucius as its 
author, or as ha\nng made himself responsible for it by copying it 
from the tablets of his native State and giving it to the world with 

38 ] 


f IS Tiuicn r.N* ivr.w mn:? ^l•l^ou•.«oMl:^■A, 

iii' u.Tr 'v;. tr.;r. r.nit, m on th«‘ inlluciicc* which it. hns 

on '•nriV'-vivc irovonnucjii^ »it* China and on tlic Chinese 
at 

*• My have re^vived, I a distinct idea of the 

nauirv oj ths* \\ n»-j; ix< made np of the briefest j)ossii)Io notices of 

the « vents of tho time wliich it covers, without 
rmy n’.temn! *0 exiniiit tie* connexion lietween tliem, or any expres- 
si-nt of tt*,jn{„n ns to die moral character which attaches to many of 
ti«cm. I f>nve spol;en of tin* disappointment which this occasions 
O'*, when We !iihlr€‘.-s ourselves to its perusal with the expectations 
W'hieli it- efJiera! reputation and the glowing accounts of it given 
by Menein«; have awakem-Mi, We cannot tvconeilc it with our idea 
oft'onfueius tliat he should have proilueed so trivial a Work; and 
we ranuot eompreln’tid how his countrymen, down to the present 
day, shoidd helieve in it. and set it forth a.s a grand achievement. 

If there were no other attribute but this triviality belougingto it, 
we might dismiss it from onr notice, and think of it only as of a 
mirag'S which had from the chuulhmd lured us to ithy the attractive 
appearances which it presented, all vanishing as we approached it 
and .subjected it to a clo.se examination, lint there are other attri- 
butes of the Work which arc of a serious elmrncter, and will 
not permit us to let it go so readily. On p. 13 I have applied the 
term colon rlivsvc<s to the notices composing it, meaning thereby 
simply the absence of all indication of feeling or opinion respecting 
the .stdihjcLs of tliem on the part of the writer or compiler. But are 
the thing.s so tlispassionately told correct in point of fact? Are all 
the notice.^ really informing, or are many of them misleading? Is 
the very brief .summary a fair representation of the events, or is it 
in many case.s a gross misrepresentation of them? 

In wluit I have said in the preceding sections, I have repeatedly 
intimated my own opinion that inanj’' of the notices of the Oh‘uii 
Ts'iiw are not true; and the proof of this is found in the contradic- 
tions which abound betw'een them and the events as given in 
detail in the Chuen of Tso, contradictions ivhich are pointed out 
in my notes in hundreds of cases. It may occur to some that the 
Classic itself is to be believed rather than the narratives of 
Tso and the other commentators on it. If we are to rest in 
this dictum, there is of course an end of all study of the Ch'im 
Ts'iiw period. From the Work of Confucius, confessedly, wm 
learn nothing of interest, and now' the relations of Tso which are 

30] 


rKOLEGOMKXA.] XATUHK AND VALUE OF THE Cll‘UX TS-IAV. 


[cu. i; 


SO rich in detail are not to be credited; — the two centuries and a 
half become a blank. But it is impossible to rest in this view. 
The innltitude of details which Tso gives makes him the j)rincipal 
witness in the case; bnt Knng and Kiih, greatly differing as they 
do from him in the style of their commentaries, very often bear 
out his statements, and arc ef[ually irreconcileable with the notices 
of the sage and the inferences which we natnrallv draw from theni. 
How is it that the three men, all looking up with veneration to 
Confucius, yet combine toTcontradict him as they do? Kung and 
Kuh have their praise-and-censure theory to explain the language 
which the master uses; but we have seen that it is inadmissible, and 
it supplies no answer to the question which I have just put. And 
the mass of Chinese scholars and writers, for nearh' 2000 years, 
have not scrupled to accept the history of the Clihni Ts'ew period 
given by Tso as in the main correct, maintaining at the same time 
their allegiance to Confucius as ‘ the teacher of all ages,’ the one 
man at whose feet the whole world should sit, accej)ting every 
paragraph from his stylus as a divine oracle. The thing is to me 
inexplicable. There have been many times wiien I have mused 
over the subject iu writing the pages of this volume, and felt that 
China was hardly less a strange country to me than Lilliput or 
Laputa would be. 

o. The scholars of China are readv, even forward, to admit that 
Chinese scholars admit that) ConfuciuS iu the Cll^im Ts‘eW ofteil CODCeals^ 
e cia--jc conceals things, > the trutli ahout tilings. Oil V. i. 6 Kung- 

yang says, ‘The Ch‘iin Ts‘ew conceals [the truth] on behalf of the 
high in rank, out of regard to kinship, and on behalf of men of 
worth. - On y. i. 1 Tso says that it was the rule for the historio- 
graphers to conceal an}' wickedness which affected the character of 
the State.® But this ‘ concealing’ covers all the ground occupied by 
our three English words — ^iguoring, concealing, and misrepresenting- 
[i.] The Ch‘un Ts‘ew often ignores facts, and of this I will 
content myself with adducing two instances. The first shall he 
It ignores facts, comparatively, if not quite, an innocent omission. The 
1 1 ook, containing the annals of duke He, commences simply with 
the notice that ‘it was his first year, the spring, the king’s first niontli.’ 


stcr. v.J 


THE CH'UN TS‘EW IGNORES FACTS. 


[rnOLECUMUNA. 


It is not said tliat ‘he came to the [vacant] seat,’ that is, that he 
did so with the formal ceremonies proper to' celebrate his accession 
to tile marquisar.c. Tso asks why this notice was not given, and saj^s 
it was because the duke He had gone out of the State. ‘ The duke,’ 
saj's he, ‘had fled out of the State and now re-entered it; but this 
is not recorded, being concealed (i. e., being ignored). To conceal 
the wickedness of tlie State was according to rule.’ On the murder 
of duke Chwang’s son Pan, who should have succeeded to his father, 
Shin, who became duke He, had fled to the State of Ghoo, and a 
boy of eight years oM, known as duke Min, was made marquis, and 
when, within less than two 3’ears, he shared the fate of Pan, Shin 
returned to Loo, and took his place. What connexion all this had 
with the omission of the usual pageantry or ceremonies, and whe- 
ther we Iiave in it the true explanation of the absence of the usual 
notice, I am not prepared to sa}^ ; but we cannot see what harm 
there could liave been in mentioning duke He’s flight from the 
State and subsequent return to it. A good and faithful chronicler 
would have been careful to do so, especially if the events did affect, as 
Tso says, the inauguration of the new rule.'* 

The second instance of ignoring shall be one of more importance. 
It is well known that the lords of the great States of Ts‘oo and 
Woo usurped during the Ch‘un Ts‘ew period the title of kiiig^ thus 
renouncing their allegiance to the dynasty of Chow which acknow- 
ledged them only as viscounts. It is by this style of viscount 
that they are designated in the Oh'un Ts‘ew; but the remarkable 
fact is that it does not once notice the burial of anyone of all the 
lords of Ts‘oo, or of Woo. The reason is that in such notices he 
must have appeared with his title of king. The rule was that 
ever}' feudal lord, duke, marquis, earl, or baron, should after death be 
denominated as kung or duke, and to this was added the honorary 
or sacrificial epithet by which he was afterwards to be known. 
When a notice was entered in the Ch‘un Ts‘ew of Loo, say of the 
burial of the marquis Ch‘ung-urh of Tsin, the entry was that on 
such and such a month and day they buried duke Wan of Tsin. 
But the officers, deputed for tlie purpose from Loo, had assisted at 
the burial not of any duke of Ts‘oo or of Woo, but of king so and 


•4 It will be well for tlie student to read the lonjr note of Iv‘Hng Yln{r-t.nh on Too Yu's remarks 
on the Chuen here. He acknowledges that it is impossible to say when the rule for conce.nliitf; 
things was observed and when not. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 


m 


41 ] 


i-nowiooMUNAO NA'rUKK AND VADUK OF 'J’lIIi CII'UN TS'KW. 


f«:n. I. 


SO. What were tlic histonogrnphers to do? If they culled the king 
when living a vi.-eonnt, it would seem to us reasonable that they 
might Inive been sutUfied fo eall him’ a duke when dead. 15ut tliis 
would Inive been a direct falsification of the notification which tliey 
had received from the State of the deceased. The}' therefore 
ignored the burial altogetlier, and so managed to make their su- 
zerain of Chow the only king that, appeared in their annals. 
Confucius sanctioned the practice; or if he suppressed all the 
paragraphs in which .the burials of the lords of Ts‘oo and Woo Avere 
entered, either as dukes or kings, then specially against him lies the 
charge of thus shrinking from looking the real state of things fairly 
in the face, jis if he could make it any better by taking no notice 
of it. 

[ii.J A large list of cases of ignoring might be made out by 
comparing the notes and narratives of i'so with the entries of the 
Ch‘un Ts‘ew, but the cases of concealing the truth are much more 
It conceals the truth about tilings. HUmcrOUS; and ill fact it IS difficult tO 
draw the line in regard to manj'^ of them between mere concealment 
and misrepresentation. I have quoted, on p. 13, from Muou K‘e-ling 
many startling instances of the manner in which the simple notice 
‘ he died’ is used, covering almost every possible way of violent and 
unnatural death. It may be said that most of them relate to the 
deaths oi princes of other States, and that the historiographers of Loo 
simply entered the notices as they were communicated to them 
from those States. Might we not have expected, however, that 
when their entries came under the revision of Confucius, he would 
have altered them so as to give his readers at least an inkling of the 
truth? But it is the same ivith the clironicling of deaths in Loo 
itself. D like Yin was basely murdered, ivith the connivance of his 
brother who succeeded him, and all that is said about it in 1. xi. 4 
is — ‘ III winter, in the 11th month, on Jin-shin, the duke died. 
His successor , was murdered in turn, ivith circumstances of peculiar 
atrocity, and tlie entry in IL xviii, 2 is simply — ‘ In summer, in 
the 4th mouth, on Ping-tsze, the duke died in Ts‘e.’ In III. xxxii. 
three deaths are recorded. We read:— ‘In autumn, in the 7th 
tnonth, on Kwei-sze, duke [Hwau’s sou] Ya died;’ ‘In the 8th month, 
ou Kwei-hae, the duke died in the State-chamber;’ ‘In winter, in 
the lOtU month, the duke’s son Pan died.’ Only tlie second of 
t lese eaths was a. natural one. Ya was compelled to take poison 
by a hall-brothcr Ke-yliw, under circumstances which arc held by 
12J 


arxT. V.] the CH'UN TS‘E\V CONCEALS THE TRUTH. [rnoLi30OMKN-;k. 

many critics to justify (he deed. Pan who was now* marquis, 
though lie could not he entered as such by the historiographers till 
the year had elapsed, was murdered by an uncle, who wished to 
seize the inarquisate for himself, without any mitigating circum- 
stances. How is it that these three' deaths, so different in their nature 
and attendant circumstances, are described by the same word? 
Here it is said -Ya died,’ and ‘Pan died;’ and they did not die 
natural deaths. In I. v. 7 it is said — ‘duke [Ileaou’s] son K‘ow died,’ 
and in VIII. v. 13 we have — ‘Ke-sun Hang-foo died;’ and they both 
died natural deaths. What are we to think of a book which relates 
events in themselves so different without any difference in its forms 
of expression? The K‘ang-he editors are fond of the solution of 
such perplexities which says that Confucius meant to set his 
readers inquiring after the details of the events which he indicated; 
but why did he not obviate the necessity for such inquiries 
altogether by varying his language as it would have been very 
easy to do? But for the Chuen we should entirely' misunderstand 
a great number of the entries in the text. 

To take two instances of a less violent kind than these descriptions 
of deaths, — in III. i. 2, we read that ‘ in the 3d month the [late duke 
Hwan’s,] wife [Wan Keang] retired toTs‘e,’ and in X. xxv. 5 we read 
that ‘in the 9th, month, on Ke-hae, the duke [Oh‘aou] retired to Ts‘e.’ 
In both passages ‘ retired’ is equivalent to ‘fled.’ Duke Hwan’s widow 
was understood to have been an accomplice in the murder of her hus- 
band, and to have been guilty of incest with her half-brother, the mar- 
quis of Ts‘e; — she found it unpleasant, probably dangerous, for her to 
remain in Loo, and so she fled to Ts‘e, where she would be safe and 
could continue to follow her evil courses. All tliis the historiogra- 
phers and Confucius thought it necessary to gloss over by writing . 
that she withdrew or retired to Ts‘e. The case of duke Ch‘aou was 
different. He had been kept, like several of his predecessors, in a 
state of miserable subjection by the principal nobles of the State, 
especially by the Head of the Ke-sun fllm^l 3 ^ Instigated by his sons, 
high-spirited young men who could not brook the restraints and 
shame of their condition, he attempted to cope with his powerful 
minister, and got the worst of it in the struggle. The consequence was 
that he fled to Ts‘e; and the text is all that the Ch*un Ts‘ew tells us 
about these affairs, unless we accept its most important entrj' of the 
ominous fact that a few months before the duke’s flight ‘grackles 
came to Loo and built nests in trees!’ Everv one will allow that 

43] 


rROM;ooMi:sA.] NATUKK AND VALUK DI' TriK CH UN TS'EW. 


[cii. I- 


sons should speak tcndcfly of tlie errors of their parents, and ministers 
and subjects generally tlirow a veil ov(M’ the faults of tlieir rulers; 
but it seems to be carrying the instinctive feeling of dutiful for- 
bearance too far when a historian or clironiclcr fries to hide the 
truth about his ruler’s conduct and condition from himself and his 
readers in the manner of the Ch'iin Ts‘cw. It should be kept in 
mind, moreover, that the historinfyvowlioTo »i* v/iVaou had 

ruler of would, probably, not have scrupled 
to say that Ke-sun E-joo drove him out, and that he fled to Is e. 
Where their own State was concerned, they dared not look the trutfi 
in the face. Had Wan Keang been the marchioness of another State, 
they would have thought that it did not come within their province 

to say aiiy thing about her. ^ ^ ^ ^ 

Two more instances of concealment will finish all that it is neces- 
sary to say on this part of my indictment against our Classic; and 
they shall he entries concerning the king. In \ . xxviii.^ 1(), it. 
said that ‘the king [b}'] Heaven’s [grace] held a court of inspection 
at Ho-yang;’ and we suppose that we have an instance of one of those 
exercises of the royal prerogative which distinguished the ki.ngdom 
in normal times. But tiie fact was very different. In’ the 4tn 
month of the year Tsin had defeated Ts‘oo in a great battle, and the 
States of the north were safe for a time from the encroachments o 
their ambitious neighbour. Next month the marquis of Tsin calls 
a great meeting of the northern princes at which he required the 
king to be present. The king responded to the summons of his 
feudatory, and a brother of his own presided over the meeting; 
though botli of these facts are ignored in the text. In the winter, 
the marquis called anotiier meeting in Ho-yang, a place in the present 
district of Wan, in the department of Hwae-k‘ing, Ho-nan, at whic i 
also he required the presence of the king, and which is chronicle 
in the 16th paragraph, 'fso quotes a remark of Confucius on the 
case, — that ‘ for a subject to call his ruler to any place is a thing not 
to be set forth [as an example];’ but to this I would reply that, the 
fact being so, it should not be recorded in a way to give the readei 
quite a different idea of it. 

The other instance is less flagrant. In V. xxiv. 4 it is said, ‘The 
king [by] Heaven’s [grace] left [Cliow], and I’csided in Ch‘ing]* 
The facts were tlnit a brother of the king had raised an insuiTCCtion 
against l\im, so that be was obliged to leave bis capital and the 
imperial domain, ami take refug<* in (’li‘ing, where lie reinainofl 

M] ' 


SECT, v.] THE Cn‘UN TS‘E\Y MISREPRESliNTS FACTS. [pkolegomena. 

until in the next year he \yas. restored to the royal city by an army 
of Tsin. But as the C.h.^iin: Ts‘e\v says nothing of the troubles 
■which occasioned the king’s flight, so it says nothing about the 
manner in which he was I’cstored. The whole history, of the case is 
summed up in the paragraph that I have qjioted, which conceals 
the facts, and of itself would not convey to us anything like an 
accurate impression of the actual circumstances. 

[iii.] I go on to the third and most serious charge which can be 
brought against the Ch‘un Ts‘ew. It not only ignores facts, and con- 
The cirun Ts'ew misrepresents, ceals them, but it also often misrepresents 
them, thus not merely hiding truth or distorting it, but telling us what 
was not the truth. The observation of Mencius, that, when the 
Ch'un Ts‘ew was made, rebellious ministers and villainous sons be- 
came afraid, suggests the instances by which this feature of the 
Classic may be best illustrated. 

Let us first take the case of Chaou Tun, according to the entry in 
VII. ii. 4, that ‘ Chaou Tun of Tsin murdered his ruler, E-kaou.’ 
The fact is that Tun did not murder E-kaou. The marquis of Tsin 
was a man of the vilest character, utterly unfit for his position, a 
scourge to the State, and a hater of all good men. Tun was his 
principal minister, a man of dignity and virtue, and had by his 
remonsti’ances, excited the special animosity of the marquis, who at 
one time had sent a bravo to his house to assassinate him, and at 
another had let loose a bloodhound upon him. Wearied out with 
the difdculties of his position, Tun had fled from the Court, and 
had nearly left the State, when a relative of his, called Chaou 
Ch‘uen, attacked the marquis and put him to deaths on which Tun 
returned to the capital, and resumed his place as chief minister. 
The onlj^^ fault which I can see that he committed was that he con- 
tinued to employ his relative Ch‘uen in the government; but the 
probabilitj’’ is that he had not the power to deal with him in any 
other way. Had he been able to execute him, and proceeded to do 
so, it would have been, I venture to think, a proceeding of doubtful 
Justice. But I ask my readers whether it was right, considering all 
the circumstances of the case, to brand Tun Jiimself as the murderer 
of the marquis. 

According to Tso, the entr}' in the text was made in the first place 
by Tung Hoo, the grand-liistoriographer of Tsin, wdio showed it 
opcnlj^ in the court, and silenced Tun when he remonstrated with 
him on its being a misrepresentation of himself. Tso also gives a 

45] 


pnoLnooMENA.] NATURE AND VALUE OF THE CII'UN TS'EW. 


[cii. I. 


remark of Confucius, praising Tiujg Hoo, who made it his rule in 
what he wrote ‘not to conceal!’ and praising also Chaou Tun who 
humbly submitted to a charge of such wickedness. '‘Alas for him!’ 
said our sage. ‘If he had crossed the border of the State, he would 
have escaped the charge.’ The historiographers of Loo had entered 
the record in their Ch‘un Ts‘ew as they received it from Tsin; but 
I submit whether Confucius, in revising their work, ought not to 
have exercised his ‘pruning pencil,’ and modified the misrepresenta- 
tion. A sage, as we call him, he might have allowed soinctliing for 
the provocations which Tim had received, and for the wickedness 
of the marquis’s government; he ought not to .have allowed Tun to 
remain charged with what was the deed of another. 

Let us take a second case. In X. xix. 2 we read — ‘ Che, heir-son 
of Heu, murdered his ruler Mae.’ This, if it were true, would com- 
bine the guilt of both regicide and parricide. According to all the 
Chuen, Che was not the murderer in this case. He .was watching 
his sick father, and gave him a wrong medicine in consequence of 
which he died. We have no reason to conclude that there was 
poison in the medicine which the son ignorantly gave. Some 
critics say that he ought to have tasted it himself before he gave it 
to his father. He might have done so, and yet not have discovered 
.that it would be so injurious. There is no evidence, indeed, that 
he did not do so. The result preyed so on the young man’s, mind 
that he resigned the State to a younger brother, refused proper 
nourishment, and soon died. Even if it were he himself who 
insisted on the form of the entry about his father’s death, Confucius, 
if he had feeling for human infirmity, would have modified it, and 
not allowed poor Che to go down to posterity charged with the 
crime of parricide, which, if we had only the Ch‘un Ts‘ew, there ^ 
would be no means of denying. 

Let us take a third case. It may seem to come properly under 
the preceding count of concealment of the truth, but I introduce it 
here, because of its contrast with the record in the next case 
which I will adduce. In X. i. 11, it is said, — ‘In winter, in the 
11th month, on Ke-yew, Keun, viscount of Ts‘oo, died.’ The vis- 
count, or king as he styled himself, was suddenly taken ill, 
which Wei, the son of a former king, was informed, Avhen he 
was on his way, in discharge of a mission, to the State of Ch‘ing. 
He returned iniincdiately, and entering the palace as if to inquire 
for the king’s health, he strangled him, and proceeded to put 

4G] 


SECT. T.] THE CH*UN TS'EW MISEEPEESENTS FACTS. {pbolegomena. 

to death his two sons. Here certainly was a murder, which 
ought to have been recorded as such. No doubt, the murderer 
caused a notification to be sent to other States in the words of 
the Oh'un Ts‘ew, 'sa 3 dng siinplj’' that Keun had died, as if the death 
had been a natural ojie, and the historiographers had chronicled it 
in the terms in which it reached them; but ought not Confucius, in 
such a case especiall}’', to have corrected their entry? To allow so 
hiisleading a statement to remain in his text was not the way to 
make ‘rebellious ministers afraid.’ 

The fourth case relates to the death of the above Wei, also called 
K‘een, the murderer of his king. Twelve j^ears afterwards he him- 
self came to an evil end. In N. xiii. 2 it is said — ‘In summer, in 
the 4th month, the Kung-tsze Pe of Ts‘oo returned from Tsin to 
Ts‘oo, and murdered his ruler K‘een in Kan-k‘e.’ The real facts 
were these. Wei or K‘een displayed in his brief reign an insatiable 
ambition, and was guilty of manj^ acts of oppression and cruelty. 
Ha^’ing despatched a force to invade Seu, he halted himself at Kan- 
k‘e to give whatever aid might be required. Certain discontented 
spirits took the opportunity of his absence from the capital to 
organize a rebellion, which was headed by three of his brothers, 
one of whom was the Kung-tsze Pe. This Pe had fled to Tsin 
when K‘een murdered Keun, and was invited by the conspirators 
from that State back to Ts‘ae in the first place, and forced to take 
command of the rebel forces. These were greatly successful. They 
advanced on the capital of Ts‘oo, took possession of it, and put to 
death the sons of the absent king. The intelligence of these events 
thrcAV him into the greatest distress and consternation. His army 
dispersed, and he took refuge with an otficer avIio remained faithful 
to him, and in his house he strangled himself in the 5th month, 
unable to endure the disgrace and misery of his condition. What 
are we to make of such opposite and contradictory methods of 
describing events? Wei murdered Keun: and the deed is told as 
if Keun hud died a natural death. The same AVei strangled him- 
seU* and tlie deed is told as if it had been a murder done b}’ tlie 
Kung-tsze Pe. Pe was led bj* the device of a brother, K‘e*tsih, 
to kill himself in the 5th month, perhaps before Wei had coimnitted 
suicide. The Ch‘un Ts‘ew saj’-s of this event that ‘ Ke-tsih put to 
death — not 7 mirdered — the Kung-tsze Pe;' and we may suppose that 
K‘e-tsih, who became king, sent word round the Statc.s that Pe had 
murdered his predecessor: but surely Confucius ought to have 

47] 


PKOLEGOMESA.] NATUKE AND VALUE OF Till: CII-UN TS*E\V. [cii. i. 

taken care that the whole series of transactions should not be misre- 
presented as it is in his paragraphs. 

- ^ ^ said that ‘ Ch‘in K‘eili 

0 s e imii^red his ruler l‘oo.’ In the previous year, Ch‘oo-k‘e\v, 
inaiqius of s e, had died, leaving the State to liis favourite son 

00, V 10 was only a child. His other sons, wdio were grown up, 

6 in 1 1C w inter to a arious States. Ch‘in K‘eih, one of the imincipal 
ministers of tlie State, finding that the government did not go on well, 
sent to 00 foi lang-saiig, one of Gh‘oo-k‘ew’s sons, who liad taken 
refuge there, and so managed matters* in Ts‘e that he was declared 
maiquis, and the child T'oo displaced. Yet K‘eih had no malice 
^ainst^ 00, and so spoke of him in a dispute wdiicli he had wdtli 
ang-sang, not long after the accession of the latter, as to awaken liis , 
^ars lest the minister should attempt to restore the de-graded child. 

1 he consequence w^as that he sent a trusty officer to remova Too from 
the city where he had been placed for safety to another. Whether 
it was by the command of the new marquis, or on an impulse 

himself, that officer took the opportunit\^ to murder 
the child on the way. This man, therefore, whose name was Choo 
Maou, w^ the aotaal murderer of T‘oo. If he were too mean in 
portion to obtain a plwe in the Ch-an Ts‘gw, the murder sl.ould 

serv. *''« marquis Taou, by whose 

sen ant and in whose interest, if not by whose command, it was 

committed. To ascribe it to Ch‘in E‘eih must be regarded as a 
gross misrepresentation. I cannot think that the existing marquis 
of Is e could have sent such a notification of the event to Loo, for 
for Imn to ma,ke Cli-in K'eih responsible for the deed was to declare 
*”®“^^®acy of the State Was unjust, as if was Cli'in 
hi ought it about. Are ive then to ascribe the entry 
onfucins.-^ ^ And arc w^e to see in it a remarkable imoof 
lini rebellion and usurpation, and his determination to 

motivplfifT”^ distant, and under wdiatcver 

from it? 6 > responsible for all the consequences flowing 

The sixth and last case winch I will adduce may be said not 1 

aL vo^T r five case 

IrLlu Ir] T 1 -. 1 ^” -Im takes fh 

awaken a "rente ^ 

ihan jinv of them IirVII ^ ‘‘'S‘‘ii»st the record and its compile 

® tl«a( ‘Hea Ch‘ing..shoo o 


oi* coxrucius. 


[lT.OI.COOJ»i:.VA. 


v.j 

Cl»*in murdered hit: ruler P'ing-kwoh.* The circumstances in which 
the murder look jihu'C arc sufliciciit, I am sure, to make us- pro- 
noum-e it a ease of justiliahlc homicide. lica Cli‘ing-shoo’s mother, 
a widow, was a vile woman, and was carrying on a licentious con- 
nexion wifli (he manjuis of Oh*in and two of his ministers at the 
.•‘amc lime.’ Tlie things wln‘ch are related about the four are 
inexpre.-ssihly iillhy. As the 3'oung man grew up, lie felt deeply 
the disgrace of his family; and one dn^f when the marquis and his 
ministers wore feasting in an apartment of his mother’s mansion, or 
rather of his own, for he was now the Head of the clan, he over- 
heard tlicm joking about himself. ‘ He is like 3 'ou,’ said the marquis 
to one of his eompanions. ‘And lie is also like j-onr lordshi]?,’ 
returned the other. The three went on to speculate on what share 
eatdi of them had in the youtli, till he could no longer contain hira- 
.‘;elf, and made n violent, attack upon them. The ministers made 
their e.seai)e, and the tnnrquis had nearly done so too, when, as he 
was getting through a hole in the stable, an arrow from the young 
nian*s bow transfi.xed him. So he died, and the Ch‘un Ts‘ew records 
the event as if it had been an atrocious murder! The poor youth 
met with a horrible fate. In the following year, the viscount of ' 
Ts'oo, himself flaunting the usurped title of king, determined to do 
justice upon him. Aided by the forces of otlier States, he invaded 
Ch*in, made a prisoner of Hea Ch‘ing-shoo, and had him torn in 
pieces bj' five chariots to which his head and his four limbs were 
bound. This execution is coldlj' related in xi. 5 by ‘The people 
of Ts'oo put to death Hea Cli*ing-shoo of Cli‘in.’ The text goes 
on to tell that the viscount entered the capital of Ch‘in, and 
restored the two ministers, partners in the marquis’s adulterj^, who 
had made their escape to Ts‘oo; the wliole being worded, according 
to Tso, ‘to show liow he observed the rules of proprietj:^ I’ 

4. It remains for me, having thus set forth the suppressions, 
the concealments, and the misrepresentations which abound in the 
Ch‘un Ts*ew, to say a few words on the view which we must take 

Wmt arc vre to think from the) ^0’^ of Confucius as its author or com- 
Ch'anTs'ihr of Confucius? > piler. Again and again I have spoken .of 

the triviality of the Work, and indicated my opinion of its being 
unworthj:- of the sage to have put together so slight a thing. But 
these positively bad characteristics of it on which I have now 
enlarged demand the expression of a sterner judgment. 

l Sec vol. IV. rt. 1. xii. ode JX 


49 ] 


I’KOmOOMBKA.] 


NATURE AND V’’ALUE 


OF THE CII'UN TS‘E\r. 


■ [CII. I. 


taken care that the whole series of transactioiTs should not be misre- 
presented as it is in his paragraphs. 

Let us take a fifth case. In XII. vi. 8 it is said that ‘ Ch‘in K‘eih 
of Ts‘e murdered his ruler T‘oo.’ In the previous 3 'ear, Cli‘oo-k‘e\v, 
marquis of Ts‘e, had died, leaving the State to his favourite son 
T‘oo, who was only a child. His other sons, who were grown up, 
fled in the winter to various States. Ch‘in K‘eih, one of the principal 
ministers of the State, finding that the government did not go on well, 
sent to Loo for Yang-sang, one of Ch‘oo-k‘ew’s sons, who had taken 
refuge there, and so managed matters in' Ts‘e that he was declared 
marquis, and the child T‘oo displaced. Yet K‘eih had no malice 
against T‘oo, and so spoke of him in a dispute which he had with 
Yarig-sang, not long after the accession of the latter, as to a waken his 
fears lest the minister should attempt to restore the de-graded child. 
The consequence w,as that he sent a trusty officer to remove T‘oo from 
the city where he had been placed for safety to another. Whether 
— it was by tlie command of the new marquis, • or on an impulse 
ron:.x, opportunity to murder 

scholars and critics, it was b&'aerse 

toriographers in the past and the entire want' mean in 
— that the sage undertook the revision of the Ch‘un 
Might not the history of the institution in that ante-Christian 
be adduced as a good illustration of what Lord Elgin once said, th\ 

* at all points of the circle described by man’s intelligence, the Chw 
nese mind seems occasionally to have caught glimpses of a heaven 
far beyond the range of its ordinary ken and vision?’^ 

Well — we have examined the model summary of history from the 
stylus of the sage, and it testifies to three characteristies of his mind 
which it is painful to have thus distinctly to point out. First, he 
had no reverence for truth in history, — I may say no reverence for 
truth, without any modification. He understood well enough wliat 
it was, — the description of events and actions according as they 
had taken place; but he himself constantly transgressed it in all 
the throe ways which I have indicated. Second, he shrank from 
looking the truth fairly in the face. It was through this attribute 
of weakness that he so frequently endeavoured to hide the truth 
from himself and others, by ignoring it altogether, or b}’^ giving an 
imperfect and misleading account of it. Wherever his prejudices 
Avere concerned, he Avas liable to do this. Third, he had more 

1 Sco lAittcrs and Journals of Jnnios, ciglitli Earl of Elgin, p. 892. 
oO] 


M;ct. v.] 


JUDGMKNT OF COKFUCIUS. 


[rliOtCOOMUNA. 


Cli'in murdered his ruler P‘ing-kw‘oh/ Tlie circumstauces in which, 
the murder took place arc suflicient, I am sure, to make us' pro- 
uouuec it a. ease of justifiable homicide. Hea Gh‘iug-shoo’s mother, 
u widow, was a vile womau, aud was canying ou a licentious con-, 
uexiou witli the marquis of Ch‘in and two of his ministers at the 
same time.' The things which are related about the four are 
incxpro.ssibly filthy. As the young man grew up, he felt deeply 
the disgrace of his family' ; and one day when the marquis and his 
ministers were feasting in an apartment of his mother’s mansion, or 
rather of his own, for he was now the Head of the clan, he overr 
heard them jokii.g about himself. ‘ He is like j'ou,’ said the marquis 
to one of his companions. ‘And he is also like your lordship,’ 
returned the other. The three went on to speculate on what share 
each of them had in the youth, till he could no longer contain him- 
self, and made a violent attack upon them. The ministers made 
their escape, and the inai’quis had nearly done so too, when, as he 
was getting through a hole in the stable, an arrow from the young 
man’s bow transfi.xed him. So he died, and the Cli‘un Tslewyacftreif- 
tlie event as it it had been understand, the religious, moral, 

met with a horril^ilp condition of China, and that I might see and 
Ts‘oo, hipfic most likely methods of accomplishing its improvement, 
justifying stands in the way of this improvement so much as the 
Qfevotion of its scholars and government to Confucius. It is he who 
leads them that causes them to err and has destroyed the way of 
their paths. 

5. The above sentence leads me to the last point on which I 
proposed to touch in this section, — the influence which the Ch‘un 

In9.»c ^ a. WS.. cni Ts'Sw has had on the successive govern- 
Chinese governments and the people.) mcnts of China and on the Chinese people 

at large. And here I will be brief. 

A great part of the historical literature of the country continues 
still to be modelled after our Classic and the Chuen of Tso. Immedi- 
ately after the Chow d 3 masty the name of Ch'un Ts‘ew was given 
to a species of Work having little affinity with that of Confucius. 
We have the Ch‘un Ts'ew of Leu Puh-wei, the chief minister of Ts‘m, 
Luh Kea’s Ch‘un Ts‘ew of Ts‘oo and Han,i and many others, which 
were never held in great repute. In the after Han dynast}’", how- 

2 See the An nWis, VH. jcxst. 3 See a review of my 1st volume, in the Edinburgh Beview, 
April, 1869. 

See Chaou Yih’s first chapter 

on the Ch*nn Ts^ew, where he gives the names of a score of these Works. - 

-51] 


PROLEODMEjfA.] MATURE AND VALUE OF THE CII‘UN TS‘EW. 


[cn. I. 


ever, there was composed the ‘Chronicles of Han, - on the plan of 
the Ch‘un Ts'ew. Histories . of this kind received in the Sung 
dynasty the name of ‘General Mirrors,’® and ‘General Mirrors, with 
Summary and Details,’® the summary corresponding to the text of 
the Ch‘un Ts‘ew, and the details to the Chuen. Down to the 
present d}- nasty Works have, been composed with names having 
more or less affinity to those; and in reading them the student has 
to be on the watch and determine for himself how far the details 
bear out the statement of the summary. Such Works as the ‘Digest 
of the History of the Successive Dynasties’^ are more after the plan 
of the text of the Ch'un Ts‘ew, but they become increasingly com- 
plex and difficult of execution with the lapse of time and the 
increasing extent of the empire. 

But the influence of the Gh‘un Ts‘ew on the literature of China 
is of little importance excepting as that influence has aided its 
moulding power on the government and character of the people; 
and in this respect it appears to me to have been verj^ injurious. 
The three defects of Confucius which have left their impress so 
clearly on his Work have been painfully conspicuous in the history 
of the country and the people down to the present 'day. The 
teachings of Mencius, bringing into prominence the lessons of the 
Shoo and the She concerning the different awards of Providence, 
according as a government cherished or neglected the welfare of the 
people, have modified the extreme reverence for authority which 
was so remarkable in Confucius; but there remain altogether un- 
mitigated the want of reverence for truth, and the shrinking from 
looking fairly at the realities of their condition and relations. And 
these are the great evils under which China is suffering at the 
present day. During the past forty years her position with regard to 
the more advanced nations of the world has been entirely changed. 
She has entered into treaties with them upon equal terms; but I do 
not think her ministers and people have yet looked this truth fairly 
in the face, so as to realize the fact that China is only one of many 
independent nations in the world, and that the ‘ beneath the sky,’ 
over which her emperor has rule, is not all beneath the skj^, but only 
a certain portion of it which is defined on the earth’s surface and 

2 composed by 'j^, at the command of the emperor Hcen (J^ 3 E. g., 

Sre-ma Ktrang's ^ and Choo He’s ^ 3^ g . g means a net^-the 

by which the whole is drawn together and the eyes or meshes of which it is composed. 4 


52] 


BKCT. V.]. 


JUDGMENT OP CONFUCIUS. 


Criioi.nQOME}fA. 


can be pointed out upon tlie map. But if they will not admit this, 
and strict!}* keep good fnitli according to the treaties wdiich they have 
accepted, the result w’ill be for them calamities greater than any that 
have yet befallen the empire. Their lot has fallen in^critical times, 
\Yhen the books of Confucius are a very insufficient and unsafe guide 
for them. If my study of the Ch‘un Ts‘e\v help towards convincing 
them of this, and leading them to look away from him to another 
Teacher, a great aim of my life will have been gained. 


APPENDIX I. 


SPECIMENS OP THE COMMENTARIES OP KUNG-TANG AND 

KUH-LEANG. 


ft 3EiE M 


The first year of duke Yin^ par. 1. 

It was the [duke’s] first year, the spring, the king’s first month. 


ij?n# w lE^. 

•tfe. 

mRZU. 

R tS^. * ^ -tfi. & ffl A 


Hn lul Z^^ M ® R tfff 

iPtaiUdS^A^^BlW 
Vj ^ flU Z±.,^te. 
•Ifc. 


■t&. 

JiRttte-ifi,. 

mm.)S.Azm.T^mAz 

IRiJ^^jEil-fEr-ffc,.^* 


i@)R 

# a. R'j Jit # 

a.atR^a. 


m:^; 


315.# ^^'Si.Z 
B5^ja»te.R'J®jfeJt^§ 

-(^ -a.® 

i?n S S 5t ja a/)'S. 

®^R'l^-ffi.. 


64 ] 


ArriM*JX 1.3 CO^t^^:^*TAKIES OF KUNG-YAKG AXD KUII-LEAJfG. [i-noLBCOMESA. 


The Ch«on of Knnjr-pjnsj' pnv!*; — 

is :no»ut by TC^ ?' The first 
year of tfio niU'r, 

is iiH'aut by ^ (spring*) ? The 
first season of tUo year. 

What is meant by ^ (thoking)? 
It UK’.aJis kij«ir Wan. 

Why docs {‘the tost] first give “king," 
and then “first month r" [To show that] 
it was the king’.s first month. 

Why does it [so] mention the king’s 
first inontti r 

To magnify the union of the kingdom 
[under Itu* dynasty of Chow]. 

Why is it not said that tho duke came 
to the [TOwnt] seat? To give full ex- 
pression to tho duke's mind. 

Itx what, way docs it give full expres- 
sion to the duke’s mind? The duke 
intended to bring the State to oi*dor, and 
then rc.store it to Hwan. 

What is meant by restoring it to 
Hwan? 

Hwan was younger, but nobler [than 
the duke by Girth]; Tin was grown up, 
but lower [than Hwan by birth]. The dif- 
ference between them in these respects, 
however, was small, and the people of tho 
Statedid not know [their fathcr’sintention 
abont the sncccssipn], Yin being grown 
up and a man of worth, tho great officers 
insisted on his being made marquis. K 
he had refused to bo made so, he did 
not know for certain that Hwan would 
bo raised to the dignity; and supposing 
that he were raised to it, he was afraid 
that the great officers might not give 
their assistance to so j^oung a nder. 
Therefore tho whole transaction of Tin’s 
elevation was with a idew [in his mind] 
to the elevation of Hwan. 

But since Yin was grown up and a 
man of worth, why was it not proper 
that he should be made marquis? 

Among the sons of the wife proper, 
the succession devolved on the eldest, and 
not on the worthiest and ablest. Among 
a ruler’s sons by other ladies of his 
harem, tho succession devolved on the 
noblest, and not on the eldest. 

In what respect was Hwan nobler [in 
rank] than Yin? 

His mother was of higher position 
[than Yin’s mother]. 

Though the mother was nobler, why 
should the son bo [also] nobler? A son 

55 ] 


Tlio Chnon of ICuli-lcang sa^’s : — ‘AI- 
iliough {hero was nothing to bo recorded 
[under tho first month], it was necessary 
to specif)* it ; — ^its being tho commence- 
ment [of tho rule] required this attention 
to be paid to it. 

Why is it not said that tho duke came 
to tho [vacant] seat ? To give full ex- 
pression to tho duke's mind. 

In what way does this give full osqiresl 
sion to tho dnko’s-mind? It tolls that 
Yin did not himself care to ho duke. 

What is meant by sn)’ing that ho did 
not himself care to bo dnko ? That he 
intended to resign tho marqoisato to 
Hwan. 

Was it correct in him [to wish] to 
resign it to Hwan ? 

It was not correct. 

The Ch*im Ts’iiw gives full expression 
to men’s c.xcollcnt qualities, but does not 
do BO to their cnl; — ^why should it give 
such expression to [tho intention of] Yin* 
which was not correct? 

With a view to show detestation of 
Hwan. 

How does that detestation of- Hwan 
appear ? 

Yin intended to resign in his favour, 
and yet Hwan murdered him; — showing 
Hwan’s wickedness, Hwan murdered 
him, and yet Yin would Lave resigned in 
his favour; — showing Tin’s goodness. 

If Yin was thus good, why do you say 
that he was not correct ? 

In the Ch’un Ts’ew, what is righteous 
is hold to be noble, and not what is 
[merely] kind. It would lead forward in 
&e [straight] path, and not in the crook- 
ed. A filial son tries to display the ex- 
cellent qualities of his father, and not the 
eidl ones. The father was not correct, 
but peiwei'se, in seeking to give the State 
to Hwan. Notwithstanding, he overr 
came this perversity of mind, and the 
State was given [at last] to Tin; but Yin 
had fathomed the pm^ose of their father, 
and thereon would have given the State 
to Hwan; — canying out their father’s 
wickedness. That there should be elder 
brother and younger brother is in tho 
order of Heaven. A man receives his 
sonship fiom bis father; and a feudal 
prince receives his i-ank from the king. 
To disannul the order of Heaven, and 
forget his ruler and father in order to do 
a small kindness, is what is called walk- 
ing in a small path. Looking at Yin, we 


niOljKOOMKSA.] 


COMMENTAKIES OF KUNG-TANG AND KUH-LEANG. 


[oil. n 


was hold to share in tho nobility of his 
mother; and a mother shared in the 
[subsequent] nobility of her son.’ 


may say that ho could make light of a 
State of a thousand chariots, but could 
not tread tho way that is right.' 


m <&-.+ ^ w A m 


The eleventh year of duhe JSwan^ par. 4. 
The people of Sung seized Chae Chung of Ch‘ing. 


'fP.Ki S ^ liifc. 

■ I . fJLm. — *££ -■ ■ - — ■- ».«.■ 


I'l JsaiJ:®. i?n .-s W Jia i«: 

^ rr«'.-^ 9 Et: 

% ig‘.« a ^ a . @ sstsja 
=?Ta.^WAJiii4Ta.isA 
«|f.trAiai 1 ¥.#^ 

Tho Chuen of Kung-yang says: — 

‘Who -was Chae Chung? 

Tho chief minister of Ch'ing. 

^Vliy is ho not mentioned by his name? 
Because of his worth. 

lint u’cifthincss was there in Cline 
Chung? 


*0A-(i?-i..SSS-ffe. 

The Chuen of Knh-leang says:^ — 

* ^ [people] here means the duke of 
Sung. 

Why is he designated (the people, 
or one of the people)? 

To condemn him.’ 


AvrtXDix 1.] COJLMENTAKIES OF KUNG-rANQ AND KUH-LEANG. [ritoLKooMUNA 


He is to bo considered ns knowing how 
to act nccording to circumstances. 

In what way did he knoAV to act accord- 
ing to circmnstanccs? 

jiVjicicntly the capital of ChSng was in 
Lew. A former carl of Chh'ng was on 
friendly terms %rith the dnko of Kwei; 
and haring an intrigue with his wife, he 
took the capital of Kwei, transferred that 
of Ch‘ing to it, and left Lew to become 
a wilderness. After the death of duke 
Chwang, Chao Chung was going to inspect 
the state of Lew ; and as his road lay 
through Sung, the people of that State 
seized him, and said, “Drive ont Hwuh 
(Cliwang’s eldest son, who was now earl 
of Ch'ing) for us, and raise Tub (Hwnh’s 
brother) to the earldom.” 

If Chac Chung did not do as they re- 
quired, his raler must die, and the State 
perish. If he did as they required, his 
rnler would exchange death for life, and 
the State be preserved instead of perish- 
ing. Then by and by, [by his gradual 
management]. Tub might be sent forth 
as before, and Hwuh might return as 
before. If these things could not be 
secured, he would have to suffer [under 
the imputation of evil conduct], but yet 
there would be the State of Ch‘ing. 
When the ancients acted according to 
the exigency of circumstances, they acted 
in the way in which Chae Chung now 
did. 

What is meant by acting according to 
the exigency of circumstances? 

It is acting contraiy to the ordinary 
course of what is right, yet so that good 
shall result. Such a course is not to be 
adopted apart from the imminent danger 
of death or ruin. There is a way to re- 
gulate the pursing of it. A man may 
adopt it when the censure and loss will 
fall on himself, but not to the injury of 
another. A superior man will not slay 
another to save himself nor ruin another 
to preserve himself’ 


luioLKooMKSA.] C0MMENTAUII5S OF KUNG-YANG AND KUll-LEANG. 


[CH. I. 


The fifteenth year, par. 1 . 

In spnng, in the second month, the king [by] Heaven’s [grace] 
sent Kea Foo to Loo to ask for carriages. 


The Chaen of Kung-yang says: — 

‘ Why was this entry made ? 

By way of censure. 

Censure of what? 

The kings did not ask for anything. 
To ask for carriages was contrary to 
propriety. 


The Chuen of KuliJeang says: — 
‘Anciently the feudal princes at the 
[proper] times presented, to the son of 
Heaven their offerings of the tilings 
which they had in their States. He 
might thus decline, but he did not de- 
mand or ask for, [anything]. To ask for 
carnages was contrary to propriety; to 
ask for money was still more so. 


The fourth year of duke Chwang, par. 4. 

The marquis of Ke made a grand leaving of his State. 

StMfs.mA e z 

nM & m- ^ IE. 

> lit 
litw -til. 

S8] 


mm 


The Chuen of Kuh-leang says: — 
‘“Made a grand leaving” is as much 
as to say that [the marquis] did not leave 
a man behind him. It tells us that the 
people did not cease to follow him till all 
were gone in the space of four yeai’S. 
The marquis of Ke was a worthy ju’inco, 
and the marquis of Ts'e extinguished his 
State. The text does not say so, hot 
that ho inatio a grand leaving of it, there- 
by not alloiving [the injurious action »•! j 
a small man towards a superior man In 
appear. 


t . ‘ op ,. / 


irf^eftferfallW 

ji."' ^'ilMan fu,^u . / 


lf|- ■^iilfii-^, 

ft ?® not sav t? / 

j, ."■® oc'ano- rn, ouf «/■ / 

o*fr„ TsV; to / 

men o7 ®°«ceaJs/ 
°-«nnesa of ^h. V 

p®“S-eance fo- Jf “S-eance / 

”‘2?*‘«fCi“’W«g.®w‘|^» «>«e«7 

&'9 r* “’’“M to „ / 

tfc? ^r/ 


VJM)I.K«0MBNA.] COMMENTARIIvS OF KUKG-YAXG ASV KUII-LEANG. 

How many gcnorations removed from 
R im was the remote ancestor ? 

Nine. 

May an injury be avenged after nine 
generations ? 

Yes; even after a hundred. 

May [the Hoad of] a clan take such 
vengeance ? 

No. 

Why then may [the ruler of] a State 
do it? 

■ The ruler and the State are one. The 
. disgrace of a former ruler is the same as 
the disgrace of the ruler of to-day. The 
; ■■ disgrace' of the ruler of to-day is the same 
. as the disgrace of a former ruler. 

How are the ruler and the State con- 
• eidered'as one? 

The . ruler regards the State os his 
body, and one ruler comes after another; — 
hence the ruler and the State form one body^ 

But the present [marquis of] Ke had 
been guilty of no offence; — ^was not this 
■ textanction of him] a case of rage? 

’ No. If there had been in the ancient 
lime an intelligent son of Heaven, 'the 
[then] marqxiis of Ke -would have been 
taken off, and there would have been no 
[more any] marquis of Ke. His not 
having been taken off, and there being 
slall a marquis of Ke, was the same as if 
there were no intelligent son of Heaven. 

Anciently the princes had -their occasions 
of meeting together, and their inter- 
changes of court and complimentary -vis- 
its, when they made reference in their 
language to -their predecessors as fmmish- 
ing the grormd of their intercourse ^ but 
nothing of the kind ever took place be- 
tween Ts'e and Ke; — it was incumbent 
on -them not to exist together under the 
same sky. Therefore [when Ts‘e] set 
about remo-ving -the marquis of Ke, it 
could not but remove [the State of] Ke. 

If there had been [now] an intelligent 
son of Heaven, could duke Ssang have 
done what he did ? 

No. 

Why then did he do it? 

When there is in the highest position 
[as it were] no son of Heaven, and below 
him no president of the quarter of the 
kingdom, one can for himself repay his 
long-standing wrongs and obligations of 
a contrai^’ kind.’ 


GO] 


wrrMtv r{»!.Mi:NTAFni:S Ol- Kl Xr.-YAXCF AND KUII-LnANG. [i*nou:coJiBM. 


SA - 

I 


The si'Cimd t/enr o f (hike Ht\ par. 8. 

All iiriiiy of Yu ami an nvinv ofTsiii oxiinguislicd IJea-yang. 


jr- -T‘ ±mt±. . 

Si 'S’ !!S^ RSI; ^13) 
:T^5fl5.3tS;1fm,-gi‘5-A*Wii 

zmMmz&mMeM'W 

ii.#-iBr^^.)it4V0Mi 

f«lk a-rsw ^ 


w |r^ |-»J 1 rt|V f...l^O ^ ^>1— 

:S=tmii.fiiJ0.«trRiJ« 

Mw^ ammifiiB^ H® 
tfi) "Cr W>^m^ "ffii.fe 

S^.®B5S.WAA0.e 

61 ] 


j5®f«0j^aBff0«,g 
Ml# -Hi. 

E«sfini.it0riii?.-firFii.ja^ 

W ^ SS •!:& ®l. ^ A 0 . # 

nr'inmmzm.mmz 


WlS 


0.il:kW'B 

mm^MZ^i^m.mmz 

wzMAm.m‘omw.x 

M‘l -^SZM ^ @ 

^ M. ro ,® — H •2 #. jtfc 

'l^Mii(±,7immz.s:n 

na'^m.wz^mB.w^ 

xi^asmzM.'gz^m 

B,^BWt;KiJMm.Xm 

zssM.mxm^m^w, 

■ <&tril.3L#iin##E. 


[cii. i; 


vnoLKOOMiiNA.] COMMUNTAinUS OF KUNG-VAXG ANJjTJvlIll-LKANG. 


life +11 


The Clmen oI‘ Kung-yniig sa3’a: — ‘Yn 
was a small State; wb^' is it tLat it is 
liere made to take precedence of a great 
one? To make Yu take the lead .in the 
wickedness. 

Why is Yu made to take the lead -in 
the wickedness? 

' Yn received the bribes with Avhich 
- those who [were going to] extinguish the 
State [of Kwoh] borrowed a way through 
it, and thus brought on its own ruin. 

How did it receive [those] bribes? 
Duke Heen [of Tsin] gave audience to 
his great officers, and asked them .why it 
was that he had lain all night without 
sleeping. One of them advanced and 
said, “Was it because you did not feel at 
ease [in your mind]? or was it because 
your [proper] bedfellow was not by your 
side ?” The duke gave no answer, and 
then Seun Seih came forward and said, 
“Was it because Yu and Kwoh were ap- 
pearing to you ?” The duke motioned to 
him to come [more] forward, and then 
went with him into an inner apartment 
to take counsel. “ I wish,” said he, “ to 
attack Kwoh, but Yu wiU go to its relief, 
and if I attack Yu, Kwoh^will succour it; 
— what is to be done ? I wish to consid- 
er the case with you.” Seun Seih re- 
plied, “ If you -mil use my counsel, you 
shall take Kwoh to-day, and Yu to-- 
morrow; why should your lordship be 
troubled?” 

“How is this to be accomplished?” 
asked the duke. “ Please let [me go to 
Yu],” said the other, “ vrith your team of 
K'euli horses and your white peih of 
Ch'uy-keih, and you are sure to get 
[what you want]. It wiU only be taking 
your valuable [pei 1 i\ from ^ your inner 
treasury, and depositing it in an outer 
one, and taking your horses from an in- 
ner stable, and tying them up in an outer 
one; — ^your lordship will lose nothing by 
Iho duke said, “Yes; hut Kung 
® *** there. W^hat are we do with 
him?” Seun Seih replied, “Kung Che- 
kjo is indeed knowing; but the duke of 
i u is covetous, and fond of valuable 


G2] 


# J. $ .iS iw 0 .MP.'I 


The Clincn of Kuli-leang sa^y.s: — ‘ The 
use of the term “ extiiigni.shpd,” when it 
is not a State tlint is .spoken oi’, arises 
from the importance of lieu yang. 

Yu had no army ; — WI13' is its army 
nieiitioneil here? • 

Bec.'iuse it took tlic Icjad of Tsin [in 
the allair], and it was nece.s.saiy therelore 
to speak of its armj’. 

How did it take the lead of ^J\sin? 

. It presided over the extinguishing of 
Hea-j’^ang." Hea-juing was a .strong cit^'^ of 
Yu and Kwoh. If it could be extinguished, 
then both Yu and Kwoh might be dealt 
with. 

In what way did Yn preside over t.he 
extinguishing of Hiia-yang? 

Duke Heen of Tsin wanted to invade 
Kwoh, and Seun Seih said to him, “Why 
should not 3mur lordship take your team 
of K'enli horses, and 3mnr pe/Zi of Gh‘u3'- 
keUi, and with them borrow a way 
through Yu?” “ Those are the most pre- 
cious things in the State of Tsin,” said 
the duke. “ Suppose Yu should receive 
my offerings, and not lend us the passage, 
in what position should we be?” “ Bat,” 
replied Seun Seih, “this is the way in 
which a small State serves a great one. 
If Yu do not lend us the right of way, it 
will not venture to i*eceive our offerings. 
If it receive our offerings and lend us the 
way, then we shall [merely] be taking 
[the peih] from our own treasury, and 
placing it [for a time] in one outside, and 
taking [the horses] from our own stable, 
and placing them [for a time] in one out- 
side.” The duke said, “There is Kung 
Ohe-k'e there; — ^he "will be sure to pre^ 
vent the acceptance of our offerings.” 

“ Kung Che-k‘e,” replied the minister, 
“is an intelligent man, but he is weak; 
and moreover, he has grown up from 
youth near his ruler. His very intelli- 
gence will make him speak too briefly; 
his weakness will keep him from remon- 
strating vehemently; and his having 
grown up near his ruler will make that 
ruler despise him. Moreover, the attrac- 
tive objects will be before the ruler of Yu’s 
senses, and the danger will be hid behind 
another State. The case, indeed, would 
cause anxiety to one whose intelligence 
was above mediocrit}’’, but I imagine that 
the intelligence of the ruler of Yn is 
below mediocrity.” 


-APi'BSbix I.] CpaiMENTAEIES OF KUNG-YANG AND KUII-LEANG. [prolegomena. 


curios; — ^lie is sure not to foUow liis min- 
ister’s advice. I beg you, considering 
eveiytbing, to let me go.” 

The deliberation ended ndthduke Heen’s 
adopting the proposed com'se; and when 
the duke of Yu saw the valuable [offer- 
ings], he gitmted what [Tsin] asked. 
Kung Che-k‘e did indeed remonstrate, 
saying, “There are the words of tlie Re- 
cord, ‘When the lips are gone, the teeth 
are cold.’ Tu and Kwoh are the saviom-s 
of each other. If they do not give mutual 
help, Tsin will to-day take Kwoh, which 
Tu rvill to-morrow follow to ruin. Do 
not, O ruler, grant rvhat is asked.” The 
duke did not follow his advice, and ended 
by lending n passage [through his State 
to Tsin] to take Kwoh. In the fourth 
year after, Tsin returned, and took Tu. 
The “duke of Tu [came], carrying the 
peih and leading the horses, when Seun 
Seih said [to the marquis of Tsin], “What 
do you now think of my plan?” “ It has 
succeeded,” said duke Hiien. “The peih 
is still mine; but the teeth of the horses 
are grown longer*.” Tlris he said in joke. 

. What was Hea-yang? 

A dtiy of Kwoh. 

Why is the name not preceded by the 
name of the State? 

It is dealt with as if had been itself a 
State. 

Why so ? 

Recause [the fate] of the ruler of the 
State was bound up with its fate.’ 


On this duke Heen sought [in the way 
proposed] for a passage [through Tu] to 
invade Kwoh. Kmrg Che-k‘e remon- 
strated, saj-ing, “Tire words of the en- 
voy of Tsin are hitmble, but his offerings 
are great; — ^tlre matter is sure not to be 
advantageous to Tu.” The duke of Tu, 
however, would not listen to him, but re- 
ceived the offerings, and granted the pas- 
sage through the State. Kung Che-k‘e 
remonstrated [again], suggesting that the 
case was like that in the saying about 
the lips being gone and the teeth becom- 
ing cold, after which he ffed with his 
wrfe and children to Ts'aou. 

Duke Heen then destroyed Kwoh, and 
in the fifth year [of our duke He] he - 
dealt in the same way with Tu. Seun 
Seih then had the horses led forward, 
while he carried the peili in his hand, and 
said, “ The peih is just as it was, but the 
horses’ teetir are grown longer !” 


^ iff 


gl 


The sixteenth year, par. 1. 


In spring, in the king’s first month, on i\Iow-sIiin, the first 
thay of the moon, there fell stones in Sting, five of them. In the 
same month, six fish-lunvks flew backwards, past the capital of Sung. 


M.m ^ m iw s.. 


•tii 


rnoLEOOMnxA.] COMMENTARIES OF KUNG-YANG AND KUII-LEANG. [cii. 1. 


#.ii9 £# 

Bn # 

H m fl. la -1 -a.il S W 


3S.:S:km^m9MM-^i 


The Chuen of Kung-yang says: — 

‘How is it that the text first says, 
“there fell,” and then “stones?” 

There fell stones is a record of what was 
heard. There was heard a noise of some- 
thing falling. On looking at what had 
fallen, it was seen to be stones. On ex- 
amination it was foimd there were five of 
them. 

What is the meaning of “ in the same 
month?” 

That the thing occurred just within 
this month* 

Why is the day not given? 

It was the last day of the moon. 

Why does the tejA not say so? 

The Oh*nn Ts‘ew does not enter the 
last day of the moon. When anything 
happened on the first day of the moon, 
it was so written; but although anything 
happened on the last day of the moon, 
the day was not given. 

Why does the text say “six,” and then 
“ fish-hawks?” 

“ Six fish-hawks backwai-ds flew ” is a 
I’ecord of what was seen. When they 
looked at the objects, there were six. 
When they examined them, they were 
fish-hawks. When they examined them 
leisurely, they were flying backwards. 

Why is this account given of [those] 
five stones and six fish-hawks? It is the 
recoifl of a strange thing. 

But strange things in other. States are 
not recorded; — why is this given here? j 

Beenuso [Sung belonged to the de- 
scendants] of the kings [of Shang],’ j 


W jB. ft # i^.iW It A 


The Chuen of Kuh-leang says: — ‘Why 
does the text first say “ there fell,” and 
then “stones?” There was the falling, 
and then the stones. 

“In Sung” means within the four 
quarters of that State, The number fol- 
lowing after indicates that the stones 
were scattered about. [The language] 
has respect to the hearing of the ears.- 

“ In the same month ” says definitely 
that it was not on the same day, but 
[some time] in the month. 

In “six fish-hawks flying backwards, 
past the capital of Sung,” the number is 
put first, indicating that [the birds] were 
collected together. [The language] has 
respect to the seeing of the eyes. 

The master said, “Stones are things 
without any intelligence, and fish-hawks 
creatures that have a little intelligence. 
The stones, having no intelligence, are 
mentioned along with the day [when 
they fell], and the fish-hawks, having a 
little intelligence, are mentioned along 
with the month [when they appeared]. 
The superior man [even] in regard to 
such things and creatures records nothing 
rashly. His expressions about stones 
and fish-hawks being tlius exact, how 
much moi’e will they be so about men ! 
If the language ha!d not been as it is 
about the five stones and six fish-hawks, 
the royal way would not have been fully 
exliibited.” 

Where the people collect is called “ the 
capital.” * 


64 ] 


ArrrsDix i.] COMMENTARIES OF KUNG-YANG AND KUU-LE^VNG. [pKOLEcoMf.vA. 


The eleventh year of duhe Wdn^ par. 6. 

Ill Avintcr, in the tenth month, on Keah-woo, Shuh-sun Tih-shin 
defeated the Teih in Heen. 


za 


Mi&n.:kZ^. 


The Chnenof Ktmg-yang says: — ^‘"WTiat 
is meant by “the Teih?” 

A gigantic Teih. There were three 
brothers, one of whom went to Ts‘e, an- 
other to Loo, and the third to Tsin. The 
one that went to Ts‘e was killed by the 
king’s son Ch‘ing-foo. The one who came 
to Loo was Fnow] killed by Shnh-snn 
Tih-shin. I do not know anything abont 
the one who went to Tsin. 

Why is the word “ defeated " nsed? 

To magnify the affair. 

Why is the day specified? 

To magnify the affair. 

Why is the place given? 

To magnify the affair. 

Why is the thinar recorded? 

As a record of what was strange. 


RW-tfc.Tt M— 

- - - 


0*4 1 


The Chnen of Knh-leang says : — 

‘ How is it that we find here “ defeated,” 
and nothing abont “leading a force ?” 

The langnage indicates that the defeat 
was only of one man. 

How is “defeated” nsed with reference 
to one man ? 

Becanse he [was equal to] a multitude. 

It is recorded that there were three 
gigantic Teih, who, one after another, 
threw the Middle States into conihsion, 
and whom tiles and stones could not hnrt. 
Shnh-snn Tih-shin was a skilfnl archer, 
and sent an arrow into the eye [of this 
one]. The giant’s body 'stretched over 
9 acres. His head was cut 6^ and put 
into a carriage, when the eye-brows ap- 
peared over the cross-bar. In these 
circumstances, why is it not said that he 
was captured? Anciently they did not 
inflict a second wound, nor capture a 
gray-haired enemy. Captured is not nsed 
here, to conceal the thing out of regard 
to Loo. 

The giant that went to Ts‘e was killed 
by the king’s son Chfing-fbo. Nothing is 
knotvn a’oont the one who went to Tsin.' 


65J 


i.kou:gomi:sa.] COJniKNTAKIES OF KU2sG-YANG A^'D KUH-LEAKG. 


[cii, J. 


-j-* ^ 0 Aa ^ ^ 

M a # 


P 3 


The fourteenth yeai\ seventh paragraph. 

The people of Tsin undertook to establish Tseeh-tsze as viscount 
of Choo, but did not [or, were not able to] do so. 


# 1 # 0 . ^ ^ A 

•tfc. 

»^.fP *AW H. 

# iii 

® W *fi -tfi. . * M'J W * 

ur'mm^MnT' 


S '# ifc 

fit 

The Chuen of Kung-yang says : — 

' Wliat is meant by (to restore)? It 
nieatis to ttnake to) enter. 

Why is it said they ■were not able to 
restore him? 

To’ magnify that fact, 
hy is it magnified? 

Keih Keuoh of Tsin led a foi-ce of 800 , 
chariots of leatlier. to iii-state Tseeh-tsze ' 

t?(5] 


;S ±. M M T S5 # 


5 P IS. ^ tfe Bn 0 ^ 

iB£ 

s 


mil. f} >£ # ® ifc. „ 
r ih -a. tij.. » tu tfc. « 

The Chnen of Kuh-leang says : — ‘ [Th® 
leader hero] -was Keih Keueh ; — ^why is 
he called (man)? 

To make light of him. 

Why does [the text] make light of 
him? 

He had 800 chariots with their long 
naves, extending over a thousand le o* 
ground. He passed by Sung, Ch'ing, 
T'Sng, and Seeb, and entered at length 
a State of a thousand chariots, wishing 
to change the ruler whom the peopl® 
had set up. But when he came beneath 
the wall of its capital, he then knew [the 
error of his enterprise]. How late was 
he in coming to that knowledge! 

“He was not able to in-state,” It i® 
not said that he had invaded Uhooj — ^how 
is mention made of his inability? 

That “ was not able ” shows that [suc- 
cess] was forbidden by righteousness. 
Tsceh-tsze’s mother waS a daughter of 
Tsin, and K'woh-tseu’s was a daughter 
of Ts‘e. K‘woh-tsen was the proper [suc- 
cessor to their father], and Tseeh-tsze 
was not,’ 


1.1 COMMEKTAPIES OF KUSG-YASO AND KUII LEANG. [pnoi.uoo.ME>A. 


in Choo-low : — a foifc puroly more tlmn 
FufiKr5i.'nt for tho purixise. lint when be 
[im)j>oscsl3 to iii.stnto him. tbo people of 
(Jhoivlow Ffticl. “ TFeeb-tFr.o is tlio son of 
n dnuerhtor of 'JVin, nncl KSvoh-tsou of n 
tltiugrhtor of Ts‘o. IVy thorn on your 
Gngor!!; — there will he four for Ts'ceh- 
tszc, nnd six for KVoh.tseu. If you will 
coni]'el u.s by tho power of your great 
State, wo do not yet know whether Ts'o 
or Tsin will take the lead. In rank tho 
men are both noble, but K‘woh-tson is 
the older.'" Keih Kcueh said, “ It is not 
that my stront^th is insufllcicnt to iiwstatc 
him, but in point of right I cannot do so." 
With this ho let! his army away, and 
•therefore the superior man inngniiics his 
not in-st.ating [T.sech.ts 2 o]. 

Tho actor hero was Keih Kouch Of 
Tsin; — wly is he called ^ (a man)? 
To condemn him. 

Why is ho condemned? 

Ilfot to allow a great officer to take it 
on him to displace or to set up a rulor. 

How does it not allow this? 

The actual [statoincnt] allows it, hut 
tho style docs not allow it. 

Why docs tho style not allow it? 

According to tho right idea of a great 
officer, ho cannot take it on him to dis- 
place or appoint a ruler.’ 


A ^1 ^ B, M 


The eighth year of duhe Seuen^ paragraph three. 

On Sin-sze there was a sacrifice in the grand temple, when Chang 
Su}’ died at Ch‘u3^ 


I'J ftl P. M ^ 

67] 


inoLiJGOMENA.] COMMENTAKIES OE KUNG-YANG AND KUII-LEANG. 


[CII. I. 


The Cbiien of Knng-yang* snys: — * Who 
lyns Chung-suy? 

The Kung-tszo Siiy. 

Why is ho nob here styled Kung-tsze? 

By way of censure. 

Why is censure expressed? 

Because of his murder of [Wan’s] son 
Ch‘ih. 

But why was not the censure (or, de- 
gradation) expressed at the time when ho 
committed that murder? 

Because he had [then] heen guilty of 
no offence against [duhe] Wan, and there 
had [since] beeu no year [in which to 
signify his offence] against fWun’s] son,’ 


The Chuen of Kuh-liiang says: — ‘This 
looks as if he had first reported the 
execution of his mission and then died. ' 

Ho was a Kung-tsze; — why does he 
appear hero simply as Chung? 

To treat him as if his relationship [to 
the ducal family] had heen distant. 

Wh}' deal with him so? 

To vitiate the notice of his dying. If 
he had not heen so dealt with, that notice 
would not have been vitiated. 

Why then mention his dying at all? 

To convey censure of [duke] Seuen. 

Why to censure [duke] Seuen? 

On hearing of the death of a great 
officer, ho shonld have removed the musi- 
cians and finished the business [in which 
he was engaged].’ 


The fifteenth year^ par. eighth. 

For the first time a tax was levied from the produce of the acres. 


W W liiJ I® 


■H 


ft — ffi? Sm. 

•ft ^ /MS. ^ ft — . 

The Cbnou of EZimg-yang saj's: — 
‘ What is the meaning of 
Eor the first time. 

"W hat is meant by levying a tax from 
the acres? 


a. « 0 # B. # ffl ^ 

W ^ B B ^ ^ 

#. M ^ B ^ ^ 

-ffc. 

MM. 

The Chuen of Kuh-leang says: — ‘ 
means for the first time. Anciently, a 
tenth of the produce was levied by the 
mutual cultivation of the public fields, 
and the others wore not taxed. To com- 
mence levj’ing part of the produce from 
[all] the acres Avas not right. Anciently, 


APPHNwix I.] COMMENTARIES OF KUNG-YANG AND KUH-LEANG. [prolegomena. 


"Walking* over tlio acres, and levying 
j)art of the produce. 

Whj' i.s an entry made of this first 
le\ying part of the produce of the acres 
[generally]? 

To condemn it. 

"What was there to condemn in it? 
The introdnetion of the system of walk- 
ing over the acres, and levying part of 
the produce. 

"What was there to condemn in the 
introduction of this system? Anciently 
a tithe was taken [for the State] by the 
mutual labour of the people on the pub- 
lic fields. 

Why did they anciently appoint this 
system? 

The tax of a tenth [thus procured] is 
the justest aud most correct for all under 
the sky. If more than this tenth be 
taken, we have great Kcehs and little 
Keebs." If less, we have great Mih and 
little Mih. A tithe is the justest and 
most con*ect for all under "the sky. 
"Wlien a tithe is the system, the sounds 
of praise [everywhere] arise.’ 


300 paces formed a lo, and a square of 
that sizo was called the nine-squares 
fields, consisting of 900 acres, of which 
the* public fields formed one portion. If 
the jneld from thij private fields was not 
good, the officer of agriculture was 
blamed, if the yield from the public 
fields was not good, the people were 
blamed. [The recoi’d of j this first levy- 
ing part of the produce from all the acres 
blames the duke for putting away the 
system of the public fields, and walking 
over all the fields to take a tithe of them, 
because he thereby required from the 
people all their strength. Anciently, 
[the people] had their dwellings in the 
public fields; there were their wells and 
cooking places; there they grew their 
onions and scallions.’ 


H H 


The third year of dvke ChHng, par. four. 

On Keah-tsze the new temple took fire, when we wailed for it 
three days. 


¥ If H.ff s 

S®. I'J 


The Chuen of Knng-yang says: — 
‘What was the new temple? 

The temple of duke Seuen. 

‘Why is duke Seuen’s temple called 
the new temple? 


iSiMlf 

ifc. S 0 51. « -tfe. ^ fll 

iii. 

The Chuen of Kuh-leang says : — ‘ The 
new temple was the temple of the duke’s, 
father. 

To wail for three days was expressive 
of [great] grie^ but that grief was ac- 
cording to the rules of propriefy. 


69 ] 


rnoLnoOMrNA.] COMMENTARIES OK KUNG-YANG AND KIJII-LEANO. ' 


[cii. I. 


[The duke] could hot bear to aa3' 
[directly that it was his father’s temple] . 

Why is it said that they wailed for it 
three days? 

It was a rule that, when a temple was 
burned, there should be a wailing for 
three days. 

Why was this entry of the burning of 
the new temple made? 

To record the calamity.’ 


In consequence of the near relation.ship, 
[the duke] did not dare fo call it by his 
father’s honoraiy title; — thereby show- 
ing his respect, 

Tlio language being respectful, and 
the grief great, there is no condemnation 
of duke Ch‘ing to be sought here.’ 


The seventh year of duke Scang^ par. ten. 

K‘wan-hwan, earl of Ch'ing, went to the meeting; but before he 
had seen the [other] princes, on Ping-seuh he died at Ts‘aou. 


■a. - 

itt 

* w 

matit-tii. 

The Chuon of Kung-yang says: — 
‘ "NVhat was Ts'aou? 

A citj’ of Ch'ing. 

When a prince died anj’whero within 

ro] 


The Chuen of Kuh-leang says: — ‘As 
he had not seen the [other] princes, how 
is it said that he went to the meeting? 

To express folly his purpose. 

According to the rules, princes were 
not named when they were alive; — ^Avhy 
is he so named here? 

Because of his death. 

If he is named because of his death, why 
is the name placed before the statement 
that he went to the mooting? 


xrrESPJX 1.] COMMENTARIES OF KUNG-YANG AND KUD-LEANG. [i*kom?oomf.i.-a. 


his ovni territories, the place was not 
mentioned; — why is it mentioned here? 

To conceal the fact. 

To conceal what fact? 

His innrder. 

”\Tho munlered liiinr 

His great officers. 

"Why does not the text say so? 

The thing is concealed on acconiit of 
the jMiddlc States? 

TYhy so? 

When the carl of Cli*ing was about to 
go to the meeting of the States in Wei, 
liis great officers remonstrated with him, 
saying, “The Middle States are not 
worth adhering to; you had better join 
with Ts‘00.’ When the earl objected to 
this counsel, they said, “If you tliink 
that the Middle States are righteous, 
they [notwithstanding] invaded us when 
we were mourning [for the last earl]; if 
you say that they are strong, yet they 
are not so strong as Ts‘00.” With this 
they murdered lum. 

Why is he named — “ the earl of Ch'ing, 
HSvan-ynenr” 

[To express sorrow] that having been 
wounded, and being on his retnrn [to his 
capital], he died before he reached his 
halting place. 

As he did not see the [other] princes, 
why is it said that he went to the meet- 
mg? 

To express fully his purpose.” 


To show that he died through going 
to the meeting. 

How does it show that he died through 
going to the meeting? 

The eai*l of Ch'ing was going to meet 
[the princes of] the Middle States, and 
his ministers wished him to follow Ts*oo. 
Not succeeding, they murdered him, and 
he died. 

Why is it not mentioned that he was 
murdered? 

Not to allow it to appear that barbar- 
ous people (i. e., the ministers who wished 
to follow the barbarous Ts‘00) had dealt 
so with a priuce of the Middle States. 

The place was outside [the capital]; on 
the day he had not crossed the bo:^ers 
[of the State]; the day of his death and 
the time of his burial [are given, as if 
all] had been correct’ 


— + ^ £ #,“f" S.'t' W — . 
^ ^ m is, m.f'i T M 


The ticenty-jifth year, tenth par. 

In the 12th month, Goh, -viscount of Woo, invaded Ts*oo, and 
died in an attack on one of the gates of Ch‘aou. 


rKOLEGOMESA.3 COMMEUTAllIES OE KUEG-YAXG AKD KUII-LEAKG. 


[cn, I. 


The Chuen of Ktmg-yansr says: — ‘TVTiat 
is meanfc by 

That- he entered a gate in Ch'aou and 
died. 

In nvhat way had he entered a gate in 
Ch'aon and di^? 

He had entered a gate of Ch'aou and 
died. 

"Why does the visconnt of IVoo appear 
with his name Teh? 

[To show that] he was wounded and 
di^ before he could return to the station 
[of his own troops].’ 

The Chuen of Knh-leaug says.: — :‘In 
consequence of being engaged in an in- 
vasion of Ts'oo, he attacked one of the 
gates of Ch’aou and died. 

The words “ of (or, at) Ch'aon ” show 
that that place was outside Ts‘oo. By 
attacking the gates of Ch'aou, he [would 
be able to] invade Ts‘00. 

A prince was not named when alive. 
Here the name, properly given to him 
when dead, is taken and placed before his 
invasion of Ts*oo, to show that it was in 
consequence of that invasion that he died. 

How does it show that it was through 
his invasion of Ts‘00 that he died? 

Anciently, when [the army of] a great 
State was passing by a small cily, the 
rule was that that small city should man 
its walls and ask what was its offence. 
Teh, the visconnt of "Woo, in [proceeding 
to] invade Ts*oo, came to Ch'aou, and- 
entered one of its gates, when the gate- 
keeper shot him, so that he returned to 
the station [of his troops], wounded by 
an arrow, and died. Although an under- 
taking be of a civil natme, there should 
be at the same time military preparation. 
[The entry] condemns Ch‘aou for not 
manning its walls and asking what was 
its offence, [and also] condemns the vis- 
count of Woo for his careless exposure of 
himself.’ 


72 ] 


Air» >MX i.J CUMMKNTAKIKS OP KUXy-YAXG AND KUIl-LKANG. tiitoLLiioAtiiXA. 


The fourth xiear of duke Cldaou, jxarr. 3 and 4. 

In nnlninn, in (he sevcnlh month, the viscount of Ts‘oo, the 
nnuMjtiises of 'Ps'ne ami Cli‘in, the bnvon of Hen, the viscounts of 
Tun, IIoo, and Slun, ami the Hwac tribes, invaded Woo. They 
•seized K‘ing Fung of Ts‘c, and put him to death. 


% Jlf R. W ii!5 -111 , 

% n m R.. m m ^ m 

rIt ^ irj' -lllj 

The Chiicii of Kunp-yang' Fays: — * This 
was all invasion of Woo; — how is it thaf 
the paragraph tolls us of the seizure of 
KSng Fung of Ts‘e? 

He was token oil’ in behalf of Ts‘e. 

How was it that ho was taken off in 
behalf of Ts‘o? 

K‘ing Fung had run away to Woo, 
and Woo had invested him ’ivith Fang. 

In that case why is it not said that 
they invaded Fang? 

Hot to allow to the feudal princes the 
right of granting investiture, 

t^Hiat was the critiio of K'ing'Pung? 

Ho had exoreised a pi’ossure on the 
ruler of Ts'o, and thrown that State into 
confusion.’ 


Ms. — 0. 

't.:y:jalL®iL-4,.?L-f-0. 

mBmti.myE T' ^ if 

zmm. 

The Chnen of Kuh-leang says: — ‘Here 
they must have entered [the place where 
K'ing Fung was] and slain [him]; — ^why 
does the text not mention that entering? 

K'ing Pnng had been invested with 
Ohung-le of Woo. 

Why does it not say that they invaded 
Chnng-leP 

Not to allow to Woo the right of 
granting investiture. , 

Why is “ Ts'e ” put before “ K‘ing 
Fung” like a clan-name? 

[To show that] he was punished in 
behalf of Ts‘e. King Ling sent a man 
to go round the army with liim, and pro- 
claim, “ Is there anyone like K'ing Fung 
of Ts‘e who murdered his ruler?” K'ing 
Fuug said to the man, “ Stop a moment ; 

I also have a word to say.” With this 
he cried out, “ Is there anyone, who, like 
tlie Kung-tsze Wei of Ts'oo, mnidered 
the son of his elder brother, and made 


73 ] 


r.r.OLUGOMENA.] 


COJIMENTARIKP OF KL^'G-YAXG A^*D KUII-LEAXG. 


[cii. I. 


[ himself ruler in his placer" The soldiei*3 
I all laughed and chuckled. 

K‘ing Fung had murdered his ruler, 
but that crime is not mentioned here in 
connexion -with him, because he Tvas not 
subject to king Ling, and the test ■would 
not allow to Ts‘oo [the right] to punish 
him. It is a part of the righteousness of 
i the Ch'un Ts'l^v to emplov the noble to 
regulate the mean, , and the worthy to 
regulate the bad, but not to emplov the 
disorderly to regulate disorder. Do we 
not have the same sentiment in what 
Confucius said. “Let a man who himself 
cherishes what is wicked punish another, 
and that other will die "without submit- 
ting to him?” ' 


^ ill 

The nineteenth year^ parr. 2 and 5. 

In summer, in the fifth month, on Mo-vr-shiu, Che, heir-son of 
Hen, murdered his ruler Mae. In ■winter, there was the burial of 
d.uke Taou of Hen. 


•a. 

*11 — (is. wi m B ,®!. ® tR— 

(i!i H>1 JIS m M. ft *11 — 

74 ] 


0. 0 

IE 45-. Wi iJ: J!n 

H®. ^ it •&. It; 0. 56 M 

* ^ M. 5? "S: It tF 

IB It t « ro » <: -a. 

s» 'CS ' ^ 

•&, ^ la a. iTff ;g © ^ 

«g. s ^ P ;g # 


roMMrsrAUt!'-' or KOSU-YANO ASO KriM.KAXfi. rnioi.t;0OMi:v,». 


i\- r t JK 11; Hi . if i'.r W : ti i>) tf 5: P iH ., 

;i4,ir#-Ui. 

'rjie CliUi'H of Kuh-li-aiip siivs: — ‘ Tlio 


^V. h\ P. 

,y. 

ili 

■hill: 

■infi.il: 


•'))' i'3i' ■Hi. 


1 ).r 

nil 


Hiiw 

dp h,'.»,P 

Ih 

r harial ri'p ir.h-vl lifn*. 

whU<». *1 j-5,t 

IImi 

' .!5;ut\l« n'r’ was 

ni«t Vft 

j']!i»i>.h< dr ' 

n-.p 

tl.im: did nat am 

ount trt 


fi Ti'.HrvJcr. 

<!!i 5 it j)ii| to ii nmnli'r: 


•li'i* allows (liiii till' (loatli was n nnlnrnl 
oni*. As it was so, Clu* did not. murder 


Clip ravp ’htu totlsrrj mi'divinp. and 
iV.p nn'.tii-jiw i;ilUd Idtn. 

In tlir p rir\’nm*.tnmvs why does llio 
tp.\i ray that flio mimlrnsl Jiiin'r 

'I'o {'I'ti'o.irv fin* for not folly «Uf-plmr^- 
in^ tin* duly of n son. 

ilow dot'.* it iN'iisori' his failurv in (liatr 
Yoh.i'hinc Tsre.ph'un. when wnlphinir 
his aiel; (fntlipr], would trivo him nn 
ndditional dish of rice, {ninl watch] 
cafrcrly whether if inndc him hetter; or 
he would pivo him a dish loss, and watch 
the result oaporly. lie would jmt on 
him a parment. more, or a parment less, 
than usual, in the same way. Che pave 
the mcdicino, and the medicine killed 
[his father], and therefore the superior 
man clinrpcd him with murdcrinp him. 

In the [former] entry that, ‘('he, heir, 
son of lleii, nnmlorcd his ruler !^^ao,” the 
superior man allows the charpo npninsfe 
Che; in the [second] entry about the 
burial of duke I’nou, he pardons CHio. 
Ho pardons Che, that is, ho withdraws 
the charge against him.' 


. [his father], 'riiouph ho did not murder 
; hint, it is said that he did; — to reprove 
: Che. Clio said, “ I am (lie .same as a 
f murderer, and will not stand in my 
[ father’s ]>laco.” On this ho resigned the 
1 .*^tnte to his hrother ITwiiy, wept and 
wailed, and lived on congee, without 
taking a grain of rieo, (ill in less than a 
3*cnr ho di»-'d. The superior man hero 
reproves him according ns ho reproved 
himself. 

The specineniion of the day of tho 
death and of the season of tho bni'ial 
docs not allow Che to Ho under the 
charge of murdering his father. 

When n son is born, if he escape not 
death from fire or water, it is the cinme 
of his mother; if ho have gi’own up to a 
bo3' with two tufts of hair, and do not 
go to a teacher, it is the crime of his 
father; if ho go to a tenebor, and his 
studies are dcsultoiy, and his mind do 
not become intelligent, it is the crime of 
himself; if ho become intelligent, and the 
fame of his name be not beard of, it is 
tho crime of his friends; if tho fame of his 
name bo heard of, and tlie officers do not 
bring him into notice, it is the crime of 
the officers; if the officers bring him to 
notice, and tho king do not employ 
him, it is tho fault of the king. The 
heir-son of Heu did not know [his duty] 
to taste the medicine [for the ruler], and 
that ruler was involved [in the conse- 
quences of Ills ignorance]. 


yc — M.yc^ 


runi.t;ooMRNA.] COI^rMENTATlir.S OF KUNG-YANG AND KUIIrLEANG. 


fen, li 


. sffi BP -fe. 

m ^ H . ift; -1^ 0 H o ^ ^ 

The Chaen of Kung-yang says: — ‘How 
is it that Ting has no &st month [in his 
fii*st year]? 

[The mention of] the first month is to 
adjutt the [ruler’s] coming to the [vacant] 
seat; and Ting’s having no first month is 
tjecanse his coming to the [vacant] seat 
whs later. 

How was it later? 

[The coffin of] duke Ch'aou was [still] 
outeide [the State], and whether it would 
he hllowed to enter or not was not yet 
known. 

HoW was it iiot yet known? 

It depended on the Head of the Ke 
family. 

In [the records about] Ting and Gae 
there are many ohscure expressions. If 
they — the rulers — had read the text and 
inquired about its explanation, they would 
not have known whether they were 
charged with crime or not. 

As it was on Kwei-hae that duke 
[Ch'aou’s] coffin came from Kan-how, 
bow was it that it was Mow-shin before 
['I'ing] ascended the [vacant] seat? 

"When the coffin had been jilaced right 
between the two pillars, then he ascended 
the [vacant] scat. ^ly master Sliin-tsze 
said, ‘ ^Yhen the funeral rites of the 

7(i] 


The first year of duke Tirig^ pari\ 1, 2. 

Ill the [duke’s] fii’st year, in spring, the king’s^ In summer, m 

the si.Ntli month, on Mow-shin, the duke came to the vacant seat. 

IP -ft Jii # JS 4- it # 


fclE-ffli 

^ip-fe-ifc. 

^iP-fetfc. 

piZAmB.m^mzA 
••a. 0. frm. ja# 

0^-tfc. 

ittM* B,1^^.MZ^ 


A^m.M 
A^.#A:T:^.iaA0.ll 
# E -tfc. fl A'^tfii, # A 0. 

WJ ^ pT -ffii. iSfc ® A # A 


jrrr.M'jxj.] COMMr.NTAnirs Ol- urNfl-VANO AND KUII-LKANG. O’noi.roosiKKA. 


(ff>rn‘.*T' viih’r li«il in flu’ • 'I'lu* C!uu*n of Kuh-loang snys: — ‘Tho 

i't.vto, th«n ‘m’W ntlor] took i loxl tltK’S not inontion tlio first month, 
(vjM'rtnt ( { Im'I'jmjso 'I’ in^r lind no first month [in his 

Tho »U»y of tnkin^’ ttmt .‘•••nt .xhnuUl not j first your], 

1>«’ civo'or—liow is it jr5''«’n lu-ror | Wliy lind Ting no first montli? 

It s* n m'linl of wh.nt t*»ol: plntv in | tirivinso (hike Chnon's (lonth tvns not a 

1a>o itxolf.* j pjvpi'r tlonth, utui Ting’s connnouccmcnt 

i of his rnlo was not n proper comincncc- 
j nn-nt.. As (Mnion’s was not a jn-oper 
j death, 'J'ing eould not have a jiroper 
I hegitniing. It is not said [hero] that he 
Ktnn* to tins [vacant] seat, bccanso 
[Oljnon's] eofiin was outside the State. 

'i'Jio coffin was now placed in state, 
ami so he took tho [vacant] seat 
’Ting’s having no first j-cnr shows that 
there was soniothing which pi'evcnted 
him frotn hn\'ing it. But tho reason of 
its not being said that ho came to the 
vacant scat when the. year [in which 
duke Cli'non died] was o.vpired, was that 
[tho coffin] of the former duke was [still 
outside]. The notice of coming to the 
[vacant] scat was tho regular way of 
declaring that tho State was passed from 
one ruler to another. If the former did 
not die a proper death, the latter^ could 
not have a proper beginning; and vice 
rerfitt. The notice that duke [Ting] came 
to the [vacant] seat on Mow-shin, is an 
instance of tho care observed [in sneh a 
matter]; — it was necessaiy that Ting|s 
accession should be thus dc^itely marked. 

How is the daj' of tho duke’s accession 
given? 

[To show that] it was on the day 
Mow-shin. 

It was on Kwei-hae that duke 
[Ch'aou’s] coffin came from Khn-how, — 
how was it not till Mow-shin that [Ting] 
took the [vacant] seat? 

Tho proper ceremonies in the State 
ninst be gone through for the [former] 
rnler, before that could be done. Sliin- 
tsze said, “ When the coffin was placed 
light between the two pillars, his succes- 
sor took the [vacant] seati’’ 

The great affairs within a State WSre 
mentioned with the day. The taking 
the [vacant] seat was a great affair for 
the ruler; — v?hy is it [geneinlly] given 
without the day? 

It was made to dotnmentiS with the 
year, and not regnlated by the day, 
then is ^e day given here? 

To give emphasis to it. 

In what way does it give emphasis to 
it? 

To have taken the [VUcaiit] Seat whSn 


77 ] 


rnoiEOOMKNA.] COMMEXTARIES OF KUXG-YANG AND KUII-LEANG. 


[cii. I. 


i the year was exjiireil. wouKl havo l)Ot*ii 
! lin'/nJilotis; anil besides th»?re was a jioint 
; ot vightoousnoss in tho case. Helbre the 
! coilin [of his prodeoessovl was set in state, 
n prince would not dare to show hiinsell' 
as nder to the ministers, even thoiiyh he 
had the charge oi’ the son of IJoaveti. 
There iniglit bo a death equally in Chow 
and in Loo. From Chow a ine.ssage of 
condolence would be sent, bat not from 
Loo. In Chow they would say, “ Ho was 
our subject; wo may send to condole [on 
his death].” In Loo they would say, 
“ He was our ruler. Was like oi:r father. 
Wo cannot send a great officer [to otfer 
our condolences].** In this way from 
Chow they sent to condole, but not from 
Loo, for the time was not long removed 
from Ch^ng and K'ang. The king was 
the most honourable; yet [the new ruler 
of Loo] would not dare to leave his 
father’s coffin, and go to Chow on a visit of 
condolence ; how much less would he show 
himself as ruler to the ministers, before 
the coffin was placed in Stalel 


The sixth year of duJee Gae^ 7, 8. 


Yang-sang of Ts‘e entered [the capital of] that State. Ch'in 
K‘eih of Ts‘e murdered his ruler T‘oo. 


lit ^ ^ 


H Bii W 

■ 

B. 

H'j R'J ^ JLL.^ 

Zfc V# W PT S RH .IP ^ 


Mi -S H. W Pnl T- H Hf 

78 ] 


A#. iE. . 

W Ifi S tile 


ATrEXDix 1.3 COMMENTARIES OF KUNG-YAXG AND KUH-LEANG. [rsoLEOosESA. 


*<2^5E.-flff^±. It'S ISA 
^.®AA^?F.g 0 .R-S 0 . 

t.R-S H.#rr®i?.SfJ« 
?p i® . ^ A A ^ 0 |g. * 
ilE;^J±^ga.flDS^ 

It'g0.llk.#-4.B.^A 

The Choen of Ktmg-Tang' says: — 
‘ ^Murderers aad setters up [|of new rolersj 
are not mentioned as Iiigli ministers (i.e.. 
witli clnn.name and name following tlie 
name of the State),* — how is such a notice 
iliven here? 


The Chuen of Knh-leang says: — ^“It 
was Tang-sang who entered [Ts'e], and 
murdered his ruler; — ^how is it that Ch^ 
K‘eih is represented as taking the lead in 
the deed? 

2fdt to allow Yang-s3ng to be ruler 
over T‘oo. 

TThy does {|the text) not allow Yang- 
sung to be mier over T'oor 

Yang-sung was the proper heir [of 
Ts*el, and T'oo-was not 

3f T'oo were not the proper heir, why 
is he called tiie ruler? 

Although he was not the proper heir, 
he had received the appointment [from 
his father]. 

“ Enfei^ " denotes that the enterer is 
not received. Since T'oo was not the 
proper heir, why use that style? 

he had received the appointment, 
that style might be employed. 

TTliy is the name of the State used as 
if it were Yang-sung’s dan-name? 

He took the State from Too. 


Eecause of [Cli'in K'eih'sj deceit. { 

How did he show his deceit? 

Duke King said to him, “I wish to 
make Shay (f .j. Tso's T*oo) my successor: ; 
what do yon say to it?" He replied, ' 
“ lY^omsoever yon would be pleaded to see • 
as ruler, and \vish to appoint as your | 
successor. I will support him ; and whom- | 
soever yon do not wish so to appoint, 1 1 
will not support. If your lordsliip wish f 
to appiont Shay, I beg to be allowed to i 
sapjTort him." Yang-sSng said to Ch'in j 
K'eih. *' I have heard- that you will not | 
be willing to raise me to the marqnisate." | 
Tlie minister said, “ In a State of a thous- 1 
and chariots, if you wish to set aside the | 
proper heir and appoiut one who is not I 
so. yon must kill the proper heir. My ; 
not snpportiug yon is the way I take to ; 
preserve yonr life. Fly." And hereupon i 
ho gave Yaug-sang a seal-token of jade, j 
with which lie Sed! 

^Vhen duke King died, and Shay had : 
been made niarqnis. Ch'in K*eib bad • 
Yanc-King brought back, and kept him 
iu hss house. Whea the moamiusr for 


I'JtOl.GOOMHNA*] 


COMMI0NTAKI15S Ol< KUSG-rAJiG AND KUil-LliANG. 


duko King was over, and all tlio great 
oHicers were at court, Oli'in K'oih said, 
“ My niotlior is celebrating a sacrifice witli 
fisb and beans; I wish you all to come 
and renovate mo at it," All accoiitod tlio 
. invitation, and when they wore coino to 
bis house, and sitten down, bo said “ I have 
some bnffcoats which I have made; allow 
mo to show tboin to you.” To this they 
assented, and ho then made some stout 
fellows bi’ing a largo sack into the open 
court. The sight of this frightened the 
oflScei’s, and made tboin change colour; 
and when the sack was opened, who 
should come forth from it but the Kung- 
tsze Yang-sang? “ This,” said Ch‘in 
K'oih, “ is our ruler,” Tho officers could 
not help themselves, but one after another 
twice did obeisance with their faces to 
the north, and accepted pTang-sJing] as 
their ruler; and from this he wont and 
murdered Shay.’ 


[rn. 1. 


+ € = <a- # w # ^ 


The thirteenth year, paragraph 3. 

The duke had a meeting with the marquis of Tsin and the 
viscount of Woo at Hwang-ch'e. 


©■Ui, 


a. 


ArrasDlx n.] COJUIENTAEIES OF KUNG-YANG AND KUH-LEAUG. [pBOLEGOMEifA.. 


Tho Cliuen of Kung-yang- says Why 
is [the lord of] Woo styled viscount? 

fccnuso Woo took the direction of tho 
meeting. 

If Woo took tho direction of the meet- 
ing, why does [the text] first mention the 
marquis of TsinP 

Not to allow a barbarous [State] to 
take tbe direction of the Middle States. 

What is tho force of before the 
viscount of Woo? 

It serves to point out the meeting as 
ono of two presiding chiefs. 

As [the test] does not allow a barbar- 
ous [State] to take tbe direction of the 
Middle States, why does it represent the 
meeting as one of two presiding chiefs? 

Because of the weight of Woo. 

How had Woo so much weight? Woo 
being there, the [other] princes of the 
kingdom would not dare not to come. 


MB MM jli ■?* 

The Chuen of Huh-leang says: — ‘ Is not 
the riscoimt of Woo advanced at this 
meeting in Hwang-ch‘e? Here it is that 
: he is [siyled] viscount. 

Woo was a barbarian State, where 
they cut their hair short and tattooed 
their bodies. [Its ruler now] wished, by 
means of the ceremonies of Loo and the 
power of Tsin, to bring about the wearing 
of both cap and garments He contri- 
buted [also] of tbe products of the State 
to do honour to the king approved by 
Heaven. Woo is here advanced. 

Woo was the grmtest State of the 
east. Again and again it had brought 
the small States to meet the feudal 
princes, and to unite with the Middle 
States. Since Woo could 'do this, was it 
not loyal? Woo is here advanced. King 
is the most honourable title, and viscount 
is comparatively mean. [The ruler of 
Woo, however,] declined the honourable 
title, and was content with the mean one, 
to meet with the other princes and do , 
honour to the king approved by Heaven. 
Foo-ch‘ae, king of Woo, used to say, 

“ Bring me a good cap.” Confucius said, 

" Great was Foo-ch‘ae!” Foo-ch‘ae could 
not have told you about the caps [of dif- 
ferent ranks], but he wished for a cap. 


APPENDIX II. 

.A LETTER QUESTIONING THE CONPUGIAN AUTHORSHIP 
OP THE CH'UN TS‘EW BY YUEN ME! OP THE PRESENT DYNASTY. 


I have found tbe following letter in a large collection of the letters 
of the writer, published first, with glosses, in 1859 by Hoo Kwang- 
tow ^ a great admirer of them, under the title of ^ 

:# IJU p K fiS- The writer, Yuen Mei styled Tsze-ts‘ae 

7j-) and Keen-chae (j^ was a member of the Han-lin college, 
and died in 1797, at the age of 82. The letter was written in reply 
to Yeh Shoo-shan also a member of the Han-lin college. 

- 811 


CONFljCIUf? 1)11) NOT XIAKli Tllli CII'UN TS'KW. 


[UII !• 


E B5 BE « H P# WiM i^7b ^ #.?L « ^ f-, 

■T-.-^ *o"# * ^ ^ ?L ^ <fp J3i # ,f .§. 

51 » Jnr «■ liil ® l& ^ le * lit 1 

fT ^ ^ « l: IF- "/J 

filf ^Mrf- Z-%l(nfA^ § i 

rsg ffi ^ * )3jf ^ ^ it ip # I® ■a.'S ?E -f- 1* 

ai ^ sK 'fl'3 A -Top rU iMfe n m it Blr r 


U C, ?iiV ^ 'R *30 JTj m =Z HU 

J mM ffi T' ^ ^ » ja # # ^ # 2; ?L f 

a m # t S- m l#.?L 

ip ^ If.fc it.® X « t 

W T- ® :S @ # ti) T' ® a g 

;2: a m «.3E « «.« tr A S B'l <a ^ ifi) 2^ 

^ M S * 1IC.« RU til.5fe « T' :§ 


4* ;i S- 31 * m.+ #.# 

‘ I have received your “ Kecondite Meanings of the ChSin Ts'ew,” in which yoni 
exquisite knowledge is everywhere apparent. While availing yourself of [the Works 
of] Tan Tsoo and Chaou K'wang, you have far excelled them, and that of Hoo Gan- 
^ ting is not worthy to be spoken of [in comparison with yours]. But in my poor view 
I always feel that the Ch'un Ts'ew was certainly not 'inado by Confucius. 

‘Conlucius spoke of himself as “a transmitter and not a maker (Ana. VII. !.)• 
To make the Ch'un Ts‘ew was the business of the historiographers, Confucius was 
not a historiographer, and [he said that] “ he who is not in a particular office has 
nothing to do with plans for the administration of its duties (Ana. VIII. xiv.); 
how should he have usurped the power of the historiographers, and in an unseemly 
way made [this Work] for them? 

‘ In the words, “It is [the Ch'nn Ts‘inv] which will make men know me, aiid 
make tneii condemn me (Mencius, III. Pt. ii. IX. 8),” he appears to take the posi- 
ti.).i of an unsceptrod king; but not only would the ma.ster not have been williuj, to 
d 1 this, blit the rnlcr and ministers au;l historiographo r.s of Loo would not have 
borne it. 

‘It is saiil that “Conrncius ivrote what ho wrote and retrenched what ho 
trenched, so that neither Yiiw nor Ui'a were sdilc to imjn'ovo a single character (8ec 
the quotiilioii from S/.o-ma T.Vemi, cm p. 1 1-).’* Now the x/y///s ol Confucius ceased 
its lab mr., nheii the bu wit.^ :.cken, but the i. Ii‘mi 'IViiw i.s coutinued after that, 

82 ] 


Anr,M*>\ n.l Ci^KriTH’S DID NOT MAKF. THIC CII-UN TS'KW. [rnm-rcojinNA. 


wliii-li jM sjirinir ofj Oni*’s I Hli Y»*.'w, niid only oiuls with the 

«ii*)vlh in flu* l«’*th j'onr; — whose ali/hts have wc during those 
three year.-^. and hy whtnn was this portion of the work improvodi' It is clear that, 
as lyx* hud its lii'Jtoriograjdiors. the preservation or (lie loss of the Ch‘nn Ts'tiw had 
no Ciinnexion with Unifueins. 

•Of all the hooks [ahont Confuehis] (here is none so trnstworth}' as the Analects. 
They (ell ns (hat (he sahjects which ho (ntigh( were (he Odes, the Shoo, and tho 
inaintennni't: of tin* rules of Projiriely (Ana. VII. xvii.), and how, stimulating him- 
self, lie .said, (hal, [if his life were prolonged], ho would give fifty j'cars to tho study 
of (he Till; hut (here is not half a charaetor in (heiii about tho Cli'iiii Ts'ew, 

‘ When Han Seiien-lsy.e wn.s on a eoiiipliinoiitary visit, (o Loo (Soo above, p, 8), ho 
saw the Yili with its diagrams and (ho Ch‘un T.s'ew of Lao. In tho “Narratives of 
the Stato.s,’* under the State of T.s‘oo, wo find Shin Shnlusho, tho tutor of tho 
oldest .son of king Chwnng, (onching him tho Ch'nn IViiw (Ib.), and under the State 
of T.sin wo havo-Tnug-shoh Heili colobrntcd for his acquaintanco ivith tho Ch'nti 
Ts'iiw (Tb.). Thus hoforo Confucius, tho States of the four quarters of tho kingdom 
had long had their Ch‘un- Ts'iiw. Perhaps when Confucius returned from Wei to 
Lao, in his leisure from his correcting labouns on tho Ya and tho Sung (Ana. IX. 
xiv.), lio happened to road the Cli‘nn Ts‘ew, and made some slight improvements in 
it, so that wo find Knng and Kuh quoting from what they call “ tho nnrevised 
Ch'un Ts'ew.” On this wo cannot speak positively; but certainly there was no such 
thing ns tho niahing of tho Ch‘an Ts'ew. What is still more ridiculous. Loo T'ung 
laid tho three cornmcntarios up high on his shelves, and would only look at the 
text to search out tho beginning and end [of tho things referred to]. But [if we 
adopt that plan], wo liavo the entry that “ the king [Ijy] Heaven’s [grace] held a 
court of inspection in Ilo-yang (V. xxviii. 16),” which is to the effect that king Seang 
of Chow hold a court of inspection, without any cause, at a spot so far — a thousand 
le — [fixim his capital]. Tlion again, dukes Yin and Hwan were both murdered, and 
tho text simpl3’’ saj^s that they died. In this way tho upright s/yltis of the sage turns 
out not to be equal to that of Tung Hop of Tsin, or to Ts'e’s historiographer of the 
South. What is there [in^the Ch'un Ts'ew] to serve as a warning to make rebellious 
ministers and villainous sons afraid?’ 


Having arrived at rny own conclusions about the Ch'un Ts'ew 
before I met with Yuen Mei’s letter, I was astonished and gratified 
to find such a general agreement between his views and mine. He 
puts on one side with remarkable boldness the testimony of Mencius, 
on which I have dwelt in the firist section as presenting the 
greatest difficulty in the way of our accepting the Ch'un Ts'ew as 
the work of the sage. He would fain deny, as I have said I should 
be glad to do, that Confucius had anything to do with compiling 
the chronicle; but the evidence is too strong on the opposite side, 
and his supposition, that Confucius, without any great purpose, 
made some slight improvements in the Ch'un Ts'ew of Loo towards 
the end of his life, does not satisfy the exigencies of the case. He 
has the same opinion that I have of the serious defects of the Work, 

83 ] 


rnoLKGOJiESA.] COSFUCIUS DID XOT MAKE THE CH‘UK TS'EYT. 


[CH. I. 


aud on that account be ^Yould deny an}^ authorship of Confucius in 
connexion -with it; while I have ventured to reason on those defects 
as symptomatic of defects in the character of the compiler. 

While not scrupling to brush away traditions with a bold hand, 
Yuen yet mentions one which served his purpose, — ^that Confucius 
ceased his laboui’s on the Ch‘un Ts‘ew when the lin was taken in the 
14th year of duke Gae. Some say that it was the appearance of 
the lin which induced Confucius to set about the compilation of 
the classic as a lasting memorial of himself. Others say that the 
appearance of the lin was to signalize the conclusion of the sage’s 
Work, but how long he had been engaged upon it previously they 
do not pretend to say. Nothing really is known upon the subject; 
and the silence of the Analects in regard to it, to which Yuen calls 
attention, is really note-worthy. 


!‘vcr. t,] 


Tin: ciiKnxoi.onv of Tin; CU'UX ts‘E\v. 


[rKOLROOVKYA. 


CIIAPTER IL 

Tin: CHROXOIiOGY OF THE CH'UN TS'EVT.— 
wim TArt-rj: or poi.ai; Fci.trrr.^; or the YKAriS asp i.ukau months or the whoee 

jriHOn; AND OK THE KJ.VOS, AND THE ritlXCES OE THE W:iNCn>AL FIBre, 
rnOM THE COMMESCEMEKT TO THE CU)SE OV THE CHOW DYNASTY. 


SECTION I. 

THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE TEXT. 

1. I have observed on p. 10 that natural phicnomena, supposed 
to affect the general well-being of the State, formed one class of the 
things recorded in the Ch‘un Ts‘e\v. Of this nature Yvere eclipses 
of the sun, included by Maoii K‘e-ling, in the note on pp. 11, 12, 
among the “ calamities and ominous occurrences,” that are the 18th 
of the divisions under Yvhich he arranges all the subjects of these 
Chronicles. It must not he supposed that these eclipses were re- 
corded Y\dth a \iew to the accumulation of astronomical facts for 
any scientific purpose ; — ^the whole doctrine of the ancient Chinese 
concerning them was that giY^en in the 9th ode of Book IV., Part II. 
of the She, made on occasion of an eclipse before the Ch'un Ts‘ew 
period, and Yvhich gives us the first certain date in ancient Chinese 
histori'. 

“ The sun Yvas eclipsed, 

' A thing of Y'ery CYdl omen. 

For the moon to he eclipsed 
Is hut an ordinary matter; 

Now that the sun has been eclipsed, — 

How bad it is!” 

But whatcY’^er was the motive for recording the eclipses, they are 

needipses recorded in the Ch‘ani of ^^“ost value for determning the 
Ts‘ew deteiimne its chronology. ) chronology of the time Comprised in our 

Classic. It contains altogether the entries of thirty-sis eclipses, the 
table of which giY’^en by Mr. Chalmers at the conclusion of his article 
on the “ Astronony of the ancient Chines^” in the prolegomena to 
my third Y*olume, with his own calculation of the times of their 
occurrence, I reproduce, here with some slight Y’’ariations. 

85 ] 


cn. 11 .] 


CIIKONOLOGY OF THE CII'UN TS‘E\V. 


[pnoLF.eo.Mr,SA. 


SOLAR ECLIPSES RECORDJCD IN TJ-IE CJ-PUN TS‘EW. 


AS RECORDED IN TUB TEXT. 


Duke's sac. title. 

Year of Rule. 

Year of Cycle. 

il700/l. 

Day of Cycle. 


m-& 

8 

58 

II. 

6 

1. 


8 

9 

VII. 

29 total. 

ir. 


17 

23 

X. 


III. 


18 

42 

III. 


IV. 

9i 99 

23 

V 

49 

VI. 

8 

V. 

it }i 

20 

50 

XII. 

60 

VI. 

« l> 

80 

64 

IX. 

7 

VII. 


5 

3 

IX. 

45 ■ 

viir. 

V 99 

12 

10 

III. 

7 

IX. 

99 f} 

Ifl 

13 

V. 


X. 


1 

32 

II. 

60 

XL , 

99 99 

15 

46 

VI. 

88 

XII. 

MSf 

8 

67 

VII. 

1 total. 

xiir. 

99 99 

10 

69 

IV. 

53 

XIV. ' 

99 99 

17 

6 

VI. 

40 

xy. 


16 

28 

VI. 

3 

XVI. 

99 99 

17 

24 

XII. 

54 

xvn. 


14 

39 

n. 

82 

xvin. 

99 99 

15 

40 

vin. 

54 

XIX. 

99 99 

20 

45 

X. 

53 

XX. 

» H 

21 

46 

IX. 

47 

XXI. 

9t 99 

21 

46 

X. 

17 

XXII. 

99 99 

23 

48 

n. 

10 

XXIII. 

99 

24 

49 

VIL 

1 toted. 

XXIV. 

99 99 

24 

49 

vm. 

30 

XXV. 

» » 

27 

52 

XD. 

12 

XXVI. 


7 

3 

rv. 

41 

xxvn. 

99 SI 

15 

11 

vr. 

64 

XXVIII. 

11 11 

17 

13 

VI. 

11 

XXIX. 

IS IS 

21 

17 

vn. 

19 

XXX. 

11 99 

22 

18 

xn. 

10 

XXXI. 

*9 99 

24 

20 

am 

32 

XXXIL 

» 99 

81 

27 


48 

XXXIII. 


5 

83 

RJlH 

48 

XXXIV. 

SI 99 

12 

40 

XI. 

3 

XXXV. 

11 1» 

IS 

43 

VIII. 

17 

XXXVI. . 


14 

67 

V. 

67 

XXXVII. 


No, 


86 ] 


M.‘CT. 1.] 


TABLK OF SOLAB ECLIPSES. 


[MlOtEGOSIEXA 


SOLAR ECLIPSES RECORDED IR THE CH'DN TS'EW. 


BY CALCULATION. 


I'lror. 

Mflnth (5* th^. 

iVric style. 

Chinese Moon. 

Day of Ci/ck. 


—710 

February 

14 

III. . 

6 

Visible at sunrise. 

—70S 

iTuIr 


vm. 

29 

Total about 31i. p.m. 

— C94 

October. 


XL 

7 

Visible — ^Afternoon. 

— C75 

April 


V. 

49 

Sunset. 

—CCS 

M.ty 


VI. 

8 • 

Alorning. 

— CC7 

November.... 


XII. 

60 

Morning. 

— CC.3 

•••••«*•••■ 


IX. 

7 

Afternoon. 

— Ci54 

AU{!USt 


IX. 

45 

Afternoon. 

—647 

Miirch 


V. 

7 

Afternoon. 

—644 

J.nnuary 


III. 

21 

visible. 

—623 

Jnniinrr 


III. 

60 

Visible at Noon. 

— Cll 

April 


V. 

38 

Sunrise. 

—600 

September.... 


X. { 

1 

Total Sb. SOm. p.m. 

— oOS 

February 


IV. i 

53 

A'isible at Sunrise. 

—591 

October 


XI. 

8 

Not visible. 

—574 

May 


VI. 

3 

Visible at Noon. 

—573 

October 

17 

XL 

54 

Morning. 

— 558 

•Tnuunry 


II. 

32 

Noon. 

—557 

May 


VI. Inicrctil. 

oJt 

Scarccljf visible at Sunrise. 

—552 

August .'. 

23 

X. 

53 

Noon. 

—551 

August 

13 

IX. 

47 

Noon. ' 

— 531 

September... 

i 

X. 


No Eclipse. 

— 530 

December.... 


11. 

10 

\ Visible at Sunrise. 

—548 

June 


VII. 

1 

Total about 111. 1 5m p.M. 

—.■>48 

.Inly 


VIIL 


No Eclipse. 

— 545 

October 


XI. 

12 

Visible in the Morning. 

—534 

^[sireb 


IV. 

41 

Forenoon. 

. —526 

April 


V. 

54 

Forenoon. 

—524 

August 


IX. 

10 

Afternoon. 

—.520 

.Time 


VII. 

19 

Forenoon. 

—519 

November..., 


1 XII. 

10 

Afternoon. 

— 517 

April 


V. 

32 

Sunrise. 

—310 

November .... 

/• 

XII. 

48 

Forenoon. 

— 5t;4 

F'ehru.'iry 


III. 

48 

Noun. 

—49# 

s. pteinber ... 

»• »•••■•••••••••• 1 o 

X. 

O 

Forenoon. 

— *94 

till" 


VIII. 

17 

Forenoon. 


—iso 


rnoLuaoMENA.] 


' CIIKOXOLOGY OF THE CIPUN TS‘EW. 


[cii. n. 


2. In the table in the prolegomena to vol. III. Mr. Chalmers has 
referred these eclipses in the Ch‘un Tsew to the emperors, or kings 
rather, of Chow in whose reigns they occurred; as we have to do 
here only with the period of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew, I have substituted for 
the titles of the kings those of the marquises of Loo, in connexion 
with whom the eclipses are mentioned in the text of the Classic. At 
his request also 1 have given the j^ears in his calculation as--719,“ 
708, &c., instead of n.c. 719, 708, &c., as being in accordance 
with the usage of astronomers.^ His calculation of the month and 
day, according to new st 3 de, remains unchanged, because it makes 
the comparison of the Chinese moons with our own, in relation to 
the solstices, plainer and easier for general readers. I have also 


introduced a 37th eclipse, which is recorded, in the brief siq^plement 
to the Classic, in the 4th paragraph after the text j^roper terminates. 
Comparing now the times of the 36 eclipses as recorded and 

Results of the comparison of the) calculated, it will be seeii, that two 

eclipses as recorded and oalcnlnted.j Qf 0,^5 entirely eiTOlieOUS, and COuld 

not have taken place at all. Two eclipses are given as having occurred 
in the 21st and 24th years of duke Seang, corresponding to — 551 
and — 548, on successive months; — a thing physically impossible. 
On p. 491 of this volume I have given the remark of a scholar of 
the T‘ang dynasty that such a thing perhapsdid occurin ancient timesi 
No reasonable account of the twice repeated error has ever been 
given. Possibly two eclipses did occur some time during the Ch‘un 
Ts'ew period on the months and days mentioned, but in other years; 
and the tablets of them got misplaced, and appear where they now do. 
In the mean time the records must be regarded as entirely erroneous.2 


1 Mr. Chnlmcrs lins sent me the following extract of a letter from Professor Airy — ^now' Sir. G.B. 
Airy — ^tlie Astronomer Royal, with whom he corresponded through a friend some years ago on the 
subject of these ancient Chinese eclipses: — ‘The year [of tl:e eclipse in the She-king] may he 
expressed in cither of these forms: — 


— 775 for Astronomical purposes; 

B.C. 77G for Chronological purposes.’ 

2 The three early commentaries do not touch on this error. Their writers, no doubt, _ were not 
aware that there was any error. In the note npiicndcd to the article on ‘The Antiquity of tiic 
Chinese proved by Mouments,’ in the 2d volume of tlto ‘ Mcinoircs concernnnt los Chinois, the 
texts of these eclipses are given and translated without any intimation of their being wrong. 
the article, however, p. 98, the writer says on the eclipses in the Ch‘un TVew: — “Si, dans la 
inultiiudo, il s’en trouve quelqtiCB>uncs (comme il s’en trouve on effet), qiii n’ aiciit pu avoir cu 
lieu, (lisons alors que, comme la contumc a toujours etc que les Cnleulatcurs Assent part nu 
rcsultnt de lours Calcnls, plusicurs jours avnnt oh dovant nrriver Teclypse, afin qu’on disposfit tout 
pour los cero'monies qui sepratiquoient dans ces sortes d’oeensions, il est arrive qne les Astnnioines, 
I'nutc do bonnes Tables, nynnt prddit une fnussc eclipse, dont I’nnnonco a etc livrec aus Ilistono* 
gmplics, ctnix-ci on ont tenu registre de la mtfme mnnierc que si cllc avoit ctd vraic; soil qu’ils la 
crussont telle, pnree qu’ un ciel obscur et chargd do nuagos avoit cmpGchc d'ohsorver; soit quo, 
par negligence, on par un simple oubli, ils eiissent manque U la rnyor du cntnloguc dcs cvciic* 
mens.’ The explanation bere suggo.'sted is specially iniippHcable to the two eclipses under nofU’C. 


88 ] 


n:cT. I.] EimORS IX THE DATES OF SO.ME ECLIPSES. [rJiotEqoMKyA. 

It will be seen, sccimdh/, that two more of the eclipses are somehow 
given incorrectly. The 10 th is recorded as happening in the 1 st 
month of the 15th year of duke He, corresponding to -644. As 
proved by calcnlation, there was an eclipse in the 3d Chinese moon 
of that year, but it was not visible in Loo. This error, like the two 
former ones, must be left une.xplained. The 15th eclipse appears 
as having occurred in the 17th 3 'ear of duke Seuen, corresponding 
to -591, in the 6 th month, on the cycle day Kwei-maou. But there 
was then no eclipse. Chinese astronomers discovered this error in the 
time of the eastern Tsiii djmastj'; but the}’^ have found no way of 
accounting for it. Tliej* have called attention, indeed, to the fact 
that an eclipse was possible on the Ist day of the fifth month; 
but that would be visible only in the soutliern hemisphere. 
It occurred to Mr. Chalmers, however, to try the 7th year of 
duke Seuen, and he found that that 3 fear, in the 6 th month, on 
Kwei-maou, which was then the day of the neAv moon, there was 
an eclipse visible in Loo. No doubt, this was the eclipse intended 
in the text, inaccuratel 3 '- arranged under the 17th year instead 
of the 7th. This happy rectification of one error shows in what 
direction the rectification of the other errors is to be sought. 

It will be seen, thirdly, that of the remaining 32 eclipses, the 3 'ears, 
months, and C 3 ^cle-da 3 's of 18, as determined by calculation, agree 
with those Avhich are given in the text, Avhile of the other 14 the 
years and C 3 'cle-da 3 's agree, and the months are different, generally 
by one month or two, and in two cases by three months. The dif- 
ference of the months, however, gives confirmation to the truthfulness 
of the text, shoAving, indeed, that it is not absolutely correct, but 
proA'ing, to my mind, that the historiographers entered the eclipses in 
the current months of the years Avhen they Avere observed. In order to 
make those current months agree with the true months it Avould have 
been necessary that the process of intercalation should be regularly 
and scientifically observed. But it AA^as not so observed in the time of 
the Ch‘un Ts‘eAA^ In proof of this I need only refer the reader to 
what, Mr. Chalmers has said on the subject in the prolegomena to 
vol. III. p, 99, and to his A’-aluable table of the 3 ^ears and months of 
the Ch‘un Ts'cav, Avhich concludes this section. There Avas not room 
for the same error with the C 3 ’-cle-days. No science was required in 
their application. Each successive day had its name determined by 
the successiA'e terms of the cycle; and, AA'hen these AA’ere exhausted, 
the historiographers had only to begin again. Whether the months 

89] ' 


I’KOhEOOMENA.] 


CHKONOLOGY OF THE CIVVH Cn‘EW. 


[cn. IT. 


were long or slioi’fc, and wlietlier the j^ear contained an intercalary 
month or not, the cyclical names of the days were sure to he given 
correctly. All that was necessary was not to let any day go by 
.unmarked. Those 14 eclipses,^ correct as to the years and cycle- 
days of their occurrence, and incorrect, only in the months to which 
they are referred, from an assignable cause, are to be accepted with 
as little hesitation as the 1 8 in regard to the date of •which the record 
and the calculation entirel}^ agree. The errors in them are of such 
a character as to sho'w that tlie text was not constructed subsequent!}',' 
but Avas made by the historiographers of Loo, in the exercise of their 
duties, along the whole course of the period. 

3. It is hardly necessary to point out how the long list of 
eclipses thus verified determines the chronology of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew 
period. The first eclipse occurred in the 3d year of duke- Yin, in 

The chronology is determined) “7 1 9, and therefore wc kiiOAV that the period 
bytheecUpsesj-asinpar.i. | commenced in -721. The last eclipse oc. 

curred in the last year of duke Ting, in -494, from which Ave have 
only to subtract 14 years of duke Gae’s rule to get the last year of 
the period; and indeed in the supplementary text Ave have an eclipse 
occurring in Ga'e’s 14th year, or in -480. 

I have called attention in . the preceding paragraph to the fact of 
the cycle-days being ahvays given correctly for the eclipses. So 
they generally are for other events; but sometimes they are given 
Avrong, — as Aviil be seen by comparing the subjoined table with the 
text, the days Avhich could not be verified being omitted in the 
table. The errors of this kind, Avhich are on the Avhole Avonderfully 
fcAv, are for the most part pointed out in the notes, according to 
the calculations of Too Yu, who says that there must be an error of 
the month or of the day. In some cases there may be a corruption 
of the cyclical names through carelessness of transcribers, which 
Avould give an error of tlie day; more frequently, 1 believe, the 
month is Avrongly given, through tlie same irregularity of interca- 
lation Avhich has made the months given for the eclipses differ 
from the true months as ascertained by calculation. 

4. I take tins opportunity to touch on another subject Avhich has 
often perplexed students of ancient Ohinese history, — the different 
commencements of the year in the three great ancient dynasties of 

Tiic different cotnmcnccnicnts of the I 11 ea, Shailg, and GllOAV. AcCOl’diug tO^ 
year in the three nneiciit dynnsties. 1 the representations of the SCllolai’S ot 

3 Of the third and fourtli of tliosc eclipses the text docs not give the cj'clical days ; hut I hiivc 
not thought it worth wtiile to call attention to this in «/y text. 

yo] 


frcT. j.] THE IMPFEEENT C0MM15NCEMEKTS OF THE YEAB. [wiolegomesa. 

the Han and all subsequent d 3 *nasties, the beginning of the year was 
changed, to signalize the new dynast}', b}' an exercise of the royal 
prerogative. Indeed, the phrase occurring in the Shoo, 
HI. ii. 3, has been iiiterpreted as meaning the ‘three commencements 
of the j'car;’ in which case it would be necessary to suppose that 
even before the Hea djniasty the year had begun at different dates 
and in different months. But if I were translating the Shoo-king 
afresh, I should feel compelled to cast about for another meaning 
for the phrase in that passage. In point of fact the Cli‘un Ts‘ew 
seems to show that the new commencement arose from the necessity 
of . error which there was not sufficient science to correct. The 
year of the Hea dynast}' began originally with the first month 
of spring. By the end of that dynasty, through the neglect of 
the intercalation, it commenced, I suppose, a month earlier, and 
hence the sovereigns of Shang made that the beginning of their 
year. But during their tenure of the kingdom, the same process 
of error took place, and the year, I suppose again, had come 
to approximate to the time of the winter solstice when the kings of 
Chow superseded them. They adopted the retrogression, and made 
it their theory that the yeqr should begin with the new moon pre- 
ceding the winter solstice, t.e., between our November 22 and 
December 22. But their astronomers and historiographers had 
not knowledge enough to keep it there. An inspection of Mr. 
Chalmers’ table following this paragraph shows a very marked 
tendency, increasing as time went on, to make the year begin in 
the month before the new moon preceding the winter solstice. 
Previous to the time of duke He, many of the years begin in the 
commencing month of the Shang dynasty; but subsequently, 
the 30th, 32d, and 33d years of duke He, the 18th year of 
Wan,, the 3d, 4th, and 6th of Seuen, the 1st, 4th, 7th, 10th and 
i2th of Ch‘ing, the 16th, 19th, 21st, and 27th of Seang, the Ist, 
4th, 15th, 20th, and 28th of Ch'aou, and the 2d, 7th, and 10th of 
Ting, all began in the month before the proper commence- 
ment of the Chow year. This was, no doubt, the ordinary 
commencement of the year when the dynasty of Ts‘in superseded 
that of Chow, and so its emperor declared that the year should 
then begin; — ^three months before the period of Hea, embracing a 
whole season, so that what was called its spring was actually tlie 
winter of the year, and the names of all the seasons were wrongly 

^ mlE 


91 ] 


niotUGOMENA.] CHIiONOLOGY OF THE CH‘UN TS‘EW. [on n.- 

applied. Thus each, of the four djmasties which ran out their course 
hetore our Christian era liad its different commencement of the 3 ^ear. 
Chinese writers, however, generally speak only of ‘three correct 
beginnings,’ being unwilling to allow the djmasty of Ts‘in to rank 
with those of Hea, Shang, and Chow. 

As has been pointed out in the ‘Astronomy of the ancient Chinese’ 
by Mr. Chalmers, after the. establishment of the Han dynast}^, the 
Chinese endeavoured to open communications with the west; and 
from India they must have received great additions to their astro- 
nomical knowledge. Their scholars became able to make a reformation 
of the calendar; and adopting the maxim of Confucius, that tlie 
seasons of Hea should be followed, they determined and arranged 
that the year should thenceforth commence with the beginning of 
spring, as it has since, with more or less of correctness, done. 

The above observations show that of the four ‘ correct beginnings 
of the year,’ (including that of Ts‘in), one only was correct, and the 
proper nomenclature regarding them would be ‘one correct and 
three erroneous beginnings.’ They should also end the partial and 
bigoted pretensions of Chinese writers, when they talk of the universal 
knowledge of their ancient worthies, and the more culpable partiality: 
and bigotry of some Sinologues who try to bear out their assei’tions. . 

5. In the following table the intercalary months are indicated 
by a line. The principal guide in determining them has been the 
cycle-days given in connexion with many of the events referred to. 
According to the theory of the Chinese year, as explained in vol. 
III., p. 22, there ought to be 7 intercalary months in every 19 j^ears. 
It will be seen that during the Ch‘un Ts‘ew period these months 
were introduced very irregularl 3 ^ 

The small figures denote the cjmlical numbers of the days men- . 
tioned in the text, so far as they can be verified. A small capital (e) 
indicates an eclipse. The most important thing to be observed in 
the table is the changing position of the first month, sometimes 
preceding, sometimes following, the winter solstice, without any 
apparent rule. 


92 ] 


*>•'•1. 1.; 


TAUi.i; vv Tin: vkaui; and months. 


[l‘KOl.KtiO«KNA. 


.Y. .' t 

N*- '.vtr 
J>.u: 


n 


J 

r - 1 

10 1 
10 I 
I 

fo I 

r.i 1 

o* 1 

i-2 1 

47 1 H .VI 


T.HNAK months AtTOHDINH 'JO CONKUCirS, Vkvks. 

<!•>' ;Af CycU^iit t tyj in tht I/tsiory. v — 

II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII , 721 


non lit <7 IV IN . 


. VllI 

. VIII 17 . 


XII r>'j 

. XII 20 , 

XII IS — , 


720 


niv7 . 

Ill 10 . 


vr.s , 

» • « 

. VI so. VII 7 


715 


VI 


IX 23 


IX 15 X 


AS I , . IV 41 

SI . . IV 45 , 

3 1... 

1.1 I . . 

101 20 . 

24 I . 

20 1 II 30 . 

SI 1 10 . 

.19 1 , , . 

45 1 57 . . . , 

r.o ' I . 

65 I . 

60. 1 II . . 

0 1 ... 

H 1 . in32IV6 . 

10 I . 

21 1 53 II . 


vn 19 . 

» • * 

VH29k . 

« * * 

• • • 

. VIH 19 IX 4 


XI 29 


no 


705 


V 14 


r 20 . . . IX 

VI 39 VII 24 VIII . 


. XII 43 
XI 23 XII 44 


, 700 

""■'""‘i 


VI 


VIII 9 . 


xn64 , 


V 43 VI 14 . Vin 30 . 


X7e 


27 I 

132 . . 

87 I 
42 I 
48 I 
53 I 
581 
1 3 

9 131 
114 
19 I 
24 I 
30 I 
85 I 
401 

45 1 

51 1 
561 
1 I 
6 1 
112 

17 I 
221 50 
127 
32 I 
381 


IV 13 V 34 


X 12 . 


. XII 26 , 


301 22 , 


IV 28 . 


15 V 


VI 2 , 

vnsi virisi. 

15 . 


XI 20. 


vinsi 


IV49E. 


VI 54 


V 56 . VII36. 
. ATI 83 . 


Xn 51 


695 


690 


685 


680 


676 


670 


ATni4, 


V 50 VI8e . 


ruoLEOOMENA.] CHRONOLOGY OF THE CH‘UN TS‘EW. 

143 . . XIIGOe — 

48 I* ■ • ** ■ * 

153 . 11161 IV44 — 

59 I 

41 ^^JIGO IX7i: . 

1.9 ^ — 

14 I viisoviiifio. xno. 

20X - • « • • VI 58 ■ • • ■ . • j 

125 . . . V22 . .VIII 38 

30 I . . . ‘ . . VII 5 . . X 19 . 

3o. I . . . 18 . ..... * 

41 1 . . 

46 1. .. .. .... ...1 

lol . . . . . . . ' “““ 

I 56 

12 

X7 Xir44, 

I 12 . XIX 14 . . . VII 22 . IX 5 . -. . , 

171 

123 

28 1 . . IV7e XII 14 , 

Ids i. .. .' . . . — — 

38 I . ..... VXII 28 . . . . ! 

44 I 1121b IX 16 XI 59 . , 

45149 . m9 IV83 . . VTI 1 

I 54 . ... . .. ... XII 12 ' 

691 . . . V 15 . .24 Vni . . . . , 

15 .... VI 46 . ..... ' 

10 I . . . ^ V 42 . ..... .» 

151 xn 60 , 

120 vm 44 . . XI 6 . , 

I 2o ... V 27 . ..... . '"f 

131 

I 36 43. Ill rV 10 XII 60 

41 1 56 

146 . . . . VI 27 . vm 32 . . . XH 11 , 

I 52 . m 43 IV 6 V 50 9 . . , 

I 57 I 

I .2 . . • ... IX 31 . . . 

17.. . * * * * . * * * ^ 

I 13. . IV 26 XII 16 , 

I . 18 . IV 18 . . . . . . xn 42 , 

I 23. meOEiVSi X 44 . . , 

128 n 1 m 42. . . . vm 4 . . . . 

I 34 XII 6 

891 ... . .... • XI 39 . I 

144 . m 48 X 21 . . , 

I 49 . . . . . . vm 12 . . . . ■» 

651 . m 11 IV 26 

ICO vm 45 . X19 . . , 

1 5 II 38 . . . . . . IX 10. . . 1 

no . . m 28 

I 16 ...••■ . , XI 31 • . I 

1 2m37 . . XII 55, 

I 26 . . . V 19 26 xn , 

1 31 . . . 12 V VI 10 . . IX 21 . . . , 

I 37. . . VI38e . ..... , 

142 . . VI 5 . VIII8 . . , . , 

94] 


[cn. II. 


665 


660 


XII54, 

» 

> 


655 


650 


645 


640 


635 


630 


625 


620 


615 


610 


sect. X.J 


I ^ the : 

^ • •''2 14 • XV GO . 

J5S • . 

XiOstl ' . ^X 10 , 

^ <! ■ . * • 

X -s . • . 

J Jf • ' . ■ * ^^22* 

X 30 , ‘ 

^ Si • . * . 

.^33 . • • . * • . ‘ 

■T 43. • . -Vijg. 

150 ^ • -TVsajj v^g 

X So 

^ CO. • . • • . 

I 6 • ■ ■ • 62 Vl 

^ • • .V9 • • . 

J2l • . • ^Xio 

X 27 ' ' 

^ 32 ‘ss ■ . ■ . • '^^66 . ‘ 

X37 ' . . • Vl£jj 

^ iSiSUi, ' XV38. ' • 

m “« 

. -vr- ■ • • ’ • 

X 9 • • . ^^^9 . 

• • * 

I# • - "ty^^ * 


TABtE op Tim rr,„„ 

Wo ^'osTffa 


VX 20 


XV53JJ vgg 

• • 

• « 

• • 

. ■ • •B2Vj‘ 

• V9 . ■ 

. ‘ • Vl4o‘ . • 

• yisG 

. ■ * Vl£jj • 


■s:23 . 


68 xx 

• • 


» 600 


Xi:2i. 


^I’ls , 

693 


JV 03 • . ; ■ • X 59 ’ 

• . ‘ . * ^IS3 

• . • • . ‘ -^J43. * . . 

• Vl 70 * . • . » 


X .3 • 

j J 9 . • • 

j ^ 14. 

^ . 19 

X 24 ■ • 

^ ..SO* 

X35 * 

^ 40. ' 

X 43 

X 51 ■ XII 42 

^ 50. ■ • X^ 

■^Jo/ • 

J e. • • . 

Ill 

^ ir • 


■'•'.• ■ ’>TIU • ’ • ■ , ■ 

• • * • * 

• vivj- Vii,3. • . • sW . • 

'■■.■•. • Wsr. ■ 

* . f 


X 51 ■ XII42 ’•.*•• ■ • .^L 

^ 60 . ■ ■ 1V8 ' ' 'Viir . \yo-: 

Hot ' • ■ ^’Xsb . • vui Ir ^ “ • 

X fi ■ • ' ^X22. • . v’.o • ' 

II. • . ■ • • . • ; -wrs • . 

I ir • . • • . ^I2R XI154B-J 

^ ^Wa7. 

' S ■ ' «.». ■ ' ■ ■ . . • . ■ . • 3 ; 

X43 • • ’ • . ' • . ■ • -L 

^ 4'S . ■ • . • . . ’ • . • XII s 

63 • . p." • . * i 59 — ^ * , 

• . ■ I'si . • , • -ramo. • • . ■ . ®I®, SB 

*• • • • rkM ^ . 

. * ' 't^XISG. • 

• • 

• • _ 


^ 3S. ’ Xll to ^ 

' • . 

> ^ 48 . 

^ S3 • 

Io9 • T;- , 

* 4. • . 

I9 • 

1 * ;pji • IV se . 

X ^ gP x?t!° • v*eo 

1 ^ •‘CIS. 

• 51 • . 

• “ • 


• xii ^7^ 


t 


xy 17 _ • ^ 

V" 00 * ^XI34b. ■ • ’ * 

• ■ . ■ ■ . \ ' '^60. • . 

• * . • * 


''pjssviliss. ’ • . 

* * Ox , • 

~^r^^'33E. 

X^XTe.b 


rn0LKG05tKSA.3 


C^RO^'OLOGY Ol? THE CI1‘UN TS'EW. 


[cu> 11. 
550 


156 VII 58 ...... 

I 2 niOElII 6 .... ViniG . X 12 . . 

17 . . . • . . VUIe . e . . . . , 

1 12 . . . V12 VI49 . 6 VIII . . . . . , 

I 1711 28 VIII19 . . . . , 

I .23 . . . . Vn . 18 . . . XIII2 e 

I 28 . XII 51 , 

I 33. . . V 7 . . . . . . , 

138 . . . V3l 

- I 44 . . . . VI 18 . . IX 30 X 10 . . , 

I .49 - . . VI 54 . . . . XI4(! . , 

' I 54 

14459 ", 

I .4 . . VI43 . . -. . . XIlr,2 , 

X 10 . . ... "VII o . . . . . } 

I 15. in . . VI23 . . . . . . 

120 . . TV41e . . . VIII 5 . . XI 20X1160 , 

I 25 . . rV 38 X 19 . 

131 57 n. .. . . . .'. . . > 

16 vn25 Xlll, 

I 41. . IV54V21. . . 1X36. XI 34 . 

146 . in 9 

I 62 Vni 11 . . . . , 

I 37. ........... 

I 11210 . . . V154e. . . . . . , 

.1^. * . . . . VIII36 .... 9 

I 13 IX 4 XIOe . . . 

I 13 . . . V 19 . . . . . . . j 

I 23. • . V o... . . . .9 

I .28 VIII48 . . XI 28. , 

I 34 VII19BVini2 . . . . , 

1 39 . . rv 2 XIIIOe, 

14450 vns Vin32. ...» 

I 49n 23 . . V32 e . . Vm . 34 . . . , 

I 55 . . . . . VII . 1X36 X56 XI36 . "j 

I 60 IX 57 . . . r 

15..., 

1 .10 . IV23 . , V1I30 

I 16 . . IV 37 , 

I 21. . ' . . VI 17 . ...... 

126 . . IVS4 XII48B , 

I 31 XU 56 , 

I 37. . . . VI60 VU30 


I .42 . .V 29 J 

I 47 11 28 ' 

I 52n . 30 IV 17 ^xr 7 . ; 

1 57 . UIISe . . VI33 V1I49 

X 60 3. . . . . .. . , , . 9 

1 . 8 . ......... 'j 

I 13 vns 

118. . . IV 45 

1 .24 .... ■ ..... 9 

I 29 

1 34. ...... . 60 XISe • '9 

130 ...........9 

I 45 1118 ....... ... — I 

150 11 :?S . . V 48 . VlIO VIU17E 1X54 

1 "IS . . IV18 ......... 

I ♦KJllOO . 1V13 . . . vmii .... 


545 


540 


535 


530 


525 


520 


515 


510 


505 


500 


4!>5 


SECT. I.] 


DATES Df THE TSO CHUEN. 


[PSOLEGOMEKA. 


16 . . rV31T28 . vnis . . X 40 

111 n47 . . . TI3S . Yinsi . . . , 490 

I 16. ...... ISIO ... — ^ 

121 V1I27 ..... 

I 27 Vni46. . . . — 

132 XHGO , 

^3fll . . . . . , . , , j 485 

I 42. in35. . 

148 . . . Vll . Tnss . 

I 53 . . . V41 

I 58 

13 . . IV47y37 . . ymss .... 480 

19 

I I'i ' • IT 26 . . . . . . . , 478 


SECTION II. 


THE DATES IN THE TSO CHUEN. 


1. The chronology of the ChHin Ts‘e\7 period, as it appears in 
the Tso Ohuen, is the same as that yrhich appears in the test; but 
the dates of many events mentioned in both differ by one or two 

ThcdatcsofeTentsintheTsoChuen) “onths; and where those dates are at 
often differ from the dates in the te.xt. I beginning of a year, the 

years to which they are assigned will also differ. Tliis circum- 
stance has wonderfullj'^ exercised the ingenuity of tlie Chinese 
critics ; but a sufficient solution of the want of correspondence is 
found, in much the greater number of cases, in tlie fact that the 
feudal States were by no means agreed in using the commencement 
of the year prescribed by the dynasty of Chow. I have sho-wn, in 
par. 4 of last section, that the Shang and Chow dj'nastics adopted 
each a different month for tlie beginning of the year from that 
empWed by the dynasty of Hca, not by arbitrary exercise of 
sovereignty to signalize their possession of the kingdom, but in 
consequence of the disorder into which the months of the year 
had fallen through the ncfflect or irreirularitv of intcrcal:uion. The 
peculiarity now under notice further shows the feebleness of the sway 
exercised bv the kiims of Chow over the feudal States, for severr.l 
of those ruled by chiefs of the Chow surname yet co ntinued to hold 


to the Ilea bcirinninsr of the vear. 

For example, in the narrative introdtjccd In* Iso 
wo are told that Ch'ing si tu pluuderint: vxiKdit sots'* it 


after I. tit 
the r 


rilyLKGOMHNA.J 


CUIIONOLOGY OF THE CH-UN TS‘E\V. 


[cii. n. 

domain, wliicli Mn the 4th month carried oil the wheat of TVan. and 
in the autumn the rice of Glring-chow;* meaning evidentlv the 4th 
mouth and the autumn of tlie Hea rear. 

Again, in ^ , v. 1. ^Ye are told that ‘ in spring, the marquis ofTsin 
put to death his heir-son Shin-sang,' ■whereas, accordinsr to the 
Ghuen, the deed was done in the 12th month of the preceding vear. 
In ^ . X, o, Le li'ih of Tsin murders his ruler in the first month of* 
the year, whereas, according to the Chuen, he did so in the 11th 
month of the previous year. In V. xv. *13, a battle was fought 
between Tsin and Ts'iu in the 11th month, while in tlie Chuen it 
take* place in the 9th, vTsin evidently regulated its months after 
the Hea calendar. 

In Ts e, whose princes were of the surname Iveansr, it "would 
appear that the year continued to commence with the natural 
spring, for in ^ I. xiv. 9 the murder of Shav, marquis of Ts'e. 

appears as taking place in the 9th mouth, whereas the Chuen gives 
it in the 7 th. 

In Sung, where the descendants of the kings of Shangheld sway, 
they naturally followed the calendar of Shang, Thus in I. vi. 4, an 
army of Sung appears as taking Ch'ang-koir in winter, while Tso 
says it did so in the autumn. And in the Shoo, T. viii.*, containing 
the charge to the viscount of TTei on his appointment to be the first 
duke of Sung, it would appear from par. 1 that authoritv is eiven 
to him to use all the institutions of his ancestors. 

2 ? commencement of the year among the, feudal States 

of Chow may be substantiated from other sources besides the Ch-'uu 
Ts‘ew and the Tso Chuen.i It not only shows, as I have said, the 
feebleness of the dynasty of Chow: but it affords a strong confirma- 
tion of the genuineness of Tso s narratives. Had they been con- 
structed to illustrate the text, or even been introduced as subsidiary 
to It without being occupied with events referred to in it, the coni- 
pilci w ould ha's e beeii careful to avoid such a discrepancy of dates* 

As Lew Yuen-foo of the Sung dynasty observed, ‘The months and 
days in Tso-she often differ from those in the text of the classic, 
because he copied indiscriminately from the tablets of the historio- 
giaphers of the different States, which used the three different 
commencements of the year without any fixed rule.'- 

1 Sw in the Work of Chaou Yih, Bk. II., his appendix to the section headed 

9 rs ■=KT J- t-C. CT ^ 


«r,cT. n.l 


KltliniJS IX SOMK OK TIIK OA'l'KR OK TSO. 


[rnoi.KflOMj:v.i. 


2. What I have said in the above paragraph goes strongly to 
support tile genuineness ofTso's narratives. Tiiere are some other 
dates, however, in his coinmentary to which m'y attention has been 
called by l^fr. Chalmers, and which would seem to sliow that they 
were introduced at a later period; some of them perhaps in the Han 
dynasty. Tso gives the daj^ of the winter solstice in two years; — the 
5th of duke He, aiid the 20th of duke Ch'aou. In the former case, 
ii.c. Ool, he says that the day Sin-hae (the 48th cyclical number) was 
the day of the winter solstice, and the first daj)^ of the first month; 
but this is an error of one da}' in regard to the new moon, and of 
three days in regard to the solstice, which fell that year on Keah-yin 
(the 51st c3'clical number). In the latter case, b.c. 521, he says 
that the solstice fell on the day Kc-ch‘ow (the 26th cyclical number), 
whereas it fell on Sin-maou, two da3's later, and the day of new 
moon was also one day later. ‘Here,’ sa3"s Mr. Chalmers, ‘the far- 
ther back the greater the error, so that the date and the method 
could not have been handed down from any previous time. If a 
year had been sought in duke He’s time, when the new moon and 
solstice coincided, 646 would have been right; and 665 (646-f-19) 
or 627 (646-19) would also have been the proper commencement 
of a C3'cle of 19 years, which might have been repeated down to the 
end of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew period without much error. The error 
accumulates in reckoning onwards of course as well as in reckoning 
back, so that bj' the time of the Han dynasty the cj'cle would have 
to be shifted on to another set of years. But the text of the Chuen, 
and the commentary which you give under the 20th j’^ear of duke 
Ch‘aou, were evidently written from a Han point of view. Twenty- 
two cycles of 19 years ai’e reckoned back from the time of the 
emperor Woo,— say B.c. 103 (103-|-19X22=521), and disaffirmed 
that in 521 the solstice coincided with the new moon because it 
did so in 103, But it did not do so, nor did the new moon then 
fall on the day assigned to it. That a writer near the time of Con- 
fucius should give wrong dates is very likety; but that they should 
be systematically wrong, so as to agree with an imperfect method of 
calculation adopted some centuries later, and founded on observations 
then made — about b.c. 103 — of the actual position of the sun and 
moon, is so improbable that I cannot believe it. The Metonic C3'cle 
cannot be repeated twenty-two times without incurring an error of 
two or three da3's.’ 

Again, on IX. xxviii. 1, and in some other passages, Tso mentions 
the place of the 3'ear-star or Jupiter, and Mr. Chalmers contends 

99] . - 


1>R01.F.G0MKS\.] 


CHRONOLOGY OF THE CH‘UN TS'EW. 


[cn. II. 


that they were all interpolated at a subsequent date. Oh the 
case in IX. xxviii. 1, he observes: — ‘The position of the planet 
Jupiter was observed in the year b.c. 103, and recorded correctly 
by Sze-maTs‘een, in Sing~lce (Sagittarius-Capricorn) ; and he thought, 
as the writer of the notices in the Tso Chuen evidently did likewise, 
that Jupiter’s period was exactly 12 years. But if this had been 
the case, Jupiter should not have been in Sing-Ice in the 28th year 
of duke Seang, b.c. 544, because the intervening time of 441 years is 
not divisible by 12. Moreover, Jupiter was not really in Sing-Tee in 
B.c. 544, but he would be there in 542, two years later. How then 
did the writer of the Chuen say that Jupiter was in Sing-Tee^ or ought 

to have been there, but “ had licentiously advanced into 

(Capricorn-Aquarius) ?” Probably because such was the course of the 
planet, and such the Chinese manner of viewing it 240 (12X20) 
years later, — say in b.c. 304. It might be 12 years before or after. 
And. the writer, knowing this, ventured to count back two centuries 
and a half in cycles of 12, and then to affirm that the same phseno- 
menon had been observed b.c. 544, and to found a story thereon. 
Tie could not have lived earlier than the time of Mencius. He might 
have been later. Jupiter in fact gains a sign every 86 years, or he 
completes seven circuits of the starry heavens in about 83 years 
instead of 84, and hence the discrepancy of 3 years, or 3 signs, 
between the observations of Sze-ma Ts‘een and those on which Tso 
based his calculations. If he, or any authorities he had to quote 
from, had observed the planet in b.c. 544, they would have said 
it was in Ta-lio (Libra-Scorpio), not in Sing-Ice, and much less m 
Heiien-heaou. There would then have been a discrepancy of 5 signs 
between him and Sze-ma instead of 3. In the matter of the “year- 
star,” as in that of the winter solstice, Tso-she is systematically 
wrong.’ 

I am not prepared to question the conclusions to which Mri 
Chalmers thus comes regarding the dates of the winter solstice, and 
the positions of the planet Jupiter, given in Tso’s commentary. But 
instead of saying, as he does, that Tso could not have lived earlier 
than the time of Mencius, and may have lived later, I would say 
that the narratives in which the Year-star is mentioned were made 
about that time, and interpolated into his Work during the Ts‘in 
dynasty or in the first Han. The}’' will come under the second 
class of passages for the interpolation of which I have made provision 
on p. 35 of the first Chapter. But after all that Mr. Chalmers has 
said, my faith remains firm in the genuineness of the mass of Tso’s 

100] 


fr.oT. ii.J 


Tin: DATiKo OF i:vi:n rs. 


[IMIOI.KOOMKNM. 


narratives ns composetl by liini from veritable documents contempo- 
raneous witli the events to which they relate. 

3. Before passing pn from the chronology of the text and of the 
Tso Chuen, it deserves to be pointed out that neither in the Classic 

‘'><= Commentary liave wo any 
yo-nrs of the kings of Chow. j indication of the dating of events 

with reference to the age of the dynasty of Chow or to the reigns of 
its kings. In each State they spoke of events with reference to the 
years of their own ruler.s. Tlie Classic, divided into twelve Books 
according to the 3 'enrs of the twelve marquises of Loo, is one example 
of this. Another is found in the Chuen on VI. xvii. 4, where a 
minister of Ch‘ing, defending his ruler against the suspicions of Tsin, 
runs over various events, giving them all according to the 3 'ears of 
the carl of Ch‘ing, without reference to those of the king of Chow 
or of the marquis of Tsin. We have a third in the Chuen at the 
end of 11. ii., where Tso gives a resume of certain affairs of Tsin, 
pi’ior to the Ch‘un Ts‘ew period, specifying them by the years of 
duke Hwuy of Loo. 

Frequentl 3 ^, in order to make definite the date of an event, some 
other well known event, contemporaneous with it, is referred to. 
Thus, in the Chuen after IX. ix. 5, when the marquis of Tsin asks 
the age of the young marquis of Loo, Ke Woo-tsze replies that he 
was born in ‘the year of the meeting at Sha-suy.’ Again, in X. vii., 
in the 4th narrative appended to par. 4, a panic in Ch'ing is referred 
to ‘the 3 'ear when the descriptions of punishments were cast;’ and 
on par. 8 it is said that one of the sons of the marquis of Wei was 
horn ill' ‘the year when Han Seuen-tsze became chief minister of 
Tsin, and went among the other States, paying complimentary visits.’ 

I need not adduce more examples. In these two ways are the 
dates of events determined ; — by referring them to the years of some 
ruler of a State, or to some event of general notoriety, contempo- 
raneous with them. They are not in any single instance determined 
by reference to the era of the dynasty or to the reigns of the kings 
of Chow. This peculiarity seems again to indicate that the sway 
which Chow exercised over the States was feeble and imperfect, 
Chaou Yih calls attention to the fact that the princes or nobles in 
the early part of the Han dynasty -continued to exercise the preroga- 
tive of dating events from the year of their appointment or suc- 
cession, and that the practice was stopped when the emperors of Han 
began to feel secure in their possession of the empire. It was in truth 
but a nominal supremacy which was 3 uelded to the kings of Chow. 

101 ] 


, TUI*' 
«)UO('.V ov 


■1\S‘U\N’. 


,-srs OF enow, of ,,„ ,-„n 


Kings 


1 . 

pvinces 

■y 'V^OO..-* 

9 CU'i^'B 


0 ^ 


».».*•• ^ \VT‘ 

,5 of t'FO States, 

.. 1,077- 


3 , 


Eang ■ 


.t)S:x 

..m 


^ Cliao^ 

....!#. 

K Mnli..' 

U« 

.....!#• 

Q ^ %\xyiS 

.c®:), 

7 . 

.i#x 

g Ueaon. ... 

*TTI . • • 

.c®- 

9 . 

.c)pi> 


V 

51 

55 


1 , 051 . 
1 , 000 . 
945 . 
933 .' 
908 . 
893 . 


18. Se^'g 

19 . cfe 

20. K'"'”-’''^ ciS-X 

21. (#, 

22. • ^), 

23. 1““5 eftX 

24. (iJfi), 

25. ,(^), 

26 . 

27. CWaB-f"" ' 

1 


n.c. 


tbc 

650. 

617. 

611 . 

605. 

584. 

570. 

543" 


55 

55 

15 

55 

l 

55 


..®. 
,■'....«. , 

..(fei, 


10. ue.'*’** 

11. Seue^ 

12 . 

13 . 

14 . ” 

;^ 5 . Cbvraiig 

16 . 

_ H'way 

princes of 1*0° 

Tbe diike 


1 =* 5 


.t*.'>. 


55 

877 . 

28 . 

K.‘aon 

826 . 

29 . 

'^eUeeVi .. 

« 

780 . 

30 . 

Gan 

11 

769 . 

31 . 

E’eeli 

F-* 

CO 

• 

32 . 

Seen 

695 . 

33 . 

Shin-tsiai 

680 . 

55 

675 . 

34 - ' 

Beiga endea.. 


,...#>• 


:B!t. 


55 

55 

55 

55 

55 


5l8. 

474. 

467. 

439. 

424. 

400. 

374. 

367. 

319. 

313. 

255. 


Surname 


1 . 


2 . ' „ 1 . 061 - 

3. „ 1,067. 

4. (®1, „ 1.061- 

6. ,*ax 


g Seeti 

9 _ 

10. 

11 . 


E- 


C 


6. ■^®^ 

Ee 


12. C#^. 

18 . -■^). 


14. 


B-^vuy 


„t tue 


iiiso-’ 


ir'^^teof t\ie accession brings 

ma^e'e it ont in several cases. ^ ^ 

being divn Cliwaag .pib „ 

rfo' 

15 . 

16 . 

. 102] 


it 

rJg'^lV 

693- 

ggo. 


fl'titM.rCOMCN'A. 


t!' 


ri:iN{ i:s or \vr;i .\Nl» Ts.\i:. 


p.'. 

Ho 

/ •* 

. ■•(:!'. 1..', 

G.'.S 

*• w » 


«). 

li.r. 

5J0. 

2‘. 

W;-.!: .. .. .. , 


«:2.'.. 


Titiir.. 

(/f:\ 

tJ 

608. 

21, 

8. ;*,i. n 

All/. „ 

G'»7. 

2G, 

tJai* ... 


?t 

•103. 


nrh:- 


4»*» 

» . 

'J'noii ., 

('Ki). 

J1 

•166. 

2:;. 


4 i »' » 

‘ V vi * *• 

:.ri. 

2K. 

y Ill’ll . 


Jt 

420, 

2;* .Mnh }u-. 

t'n h r Midi l/m 

I'liliridv 

tost it>: 

iiiih’jx'iidoiico. 

Afier 

him 


Wo — r.i», Kntsi: .*u. Kv«m^ ( jji*)’ 

;;j, W;'in J?.’*. K'ijur <tt(.\ wl*'» was JVthic-od k> the condition of a 

I'rivnto tsi:in hv kini.* K'aoiNlooh of'lV'on in n.<*. 2t^'. 

111 . Prinros of Wei Surnsuiu: Kt*. iAlnnjuisus; Imt for 

.•^otnc time thi>y h;u! iltc title of Pili tis prcsitliiig over sevenil 

Ollier States. 


1, 


O. 

•I. 

G. 


„ 
It 
It 
J? 


0:{;{. 

008. 

80:1. 


K'nne Shid/J[)|l.‘ ; foe the S‘Ii«m», 

[V.ix.) 

K'niij.* I'ih “ffl^ •*.('. 1 , 077 . 

K'aoii l*ih 

T.<;-.o riii...(riiiil fl-p. 

T.M”t.h Pih (JJi 'f|!p, 

Tfing-Pili (iiiHfl), 

7. ChingPili 

8. K‘ing (lil'i; siinplv marquis), 

„ 8 G. 5 . 

0, Le (^f ), or He 

10. Kunif Pih (jl^ fl:]), 

11. Woo ipt\ 

12. Clnvun-....(jffi), 

1:J. llwan 0{lS), 

1-1-. Sc'ucn ( M ), 

15. liwuy (El), 

IG. K'uon-inowCjli^ 

[ato, 

17. E &. 


1). 


l.s'. Tno 

P.». Wan (^), 

20. Ch'ing 


21. Midi 

22. Ting (/^), 


tt 

t1 

t> 

tt 


It 

tJ 

tt 

It 

tJ 

tt 


855. 
811. 
811. 
75G. 
733. 
717. 
„ G08. 

interinedi- 
G95. 
C67. 


Jt 

t9 


it.c. 6*50. 
G58. 
033. 
508. 
687. 

0:5. lleen (/,(;7P, 

21-, Shnng. 667; intermedi- 

fate till 646. 

25. Si-ang »> ^^2. 

20. Eiug „ 533. 

27. Ch‘nh (j^), „ 401. 

28. Chwang...(j|£), 478; intermedi- 

[nto for one year. 

20. Pnn-sze C^jll fllplj 477, inter* 

. [mediate. 

30. Keun-k‘e...(^‘^), 477, intei’- 

[icediato foi’ two years. 

31. Taou „ 467. 

32. King „ 440. 

S3. Ch‘aou „ 430. 

34. Hwae ,, 424. 


35, Shin (‘{^)> 413. Under Shin Wei lost its independence, and became attached 
to Wei We have after him: — 36, Shing (^), 371; 37, Ch'ing (^> he was 

reduced in rank); 38, P'ing C^), 331; 39, Tsze Kenn still farther redno. 

ed); 40, Hwae Kenn ('j^ ^), 281; 41, Yuen Kean 250; 42, Kenn Keoh 

(^' •^), W'ho ivas reduced to the condition of a private man by the second emperor 
of Ts‘in. 

IV. Princes of Ts‘ae (^). Surname Ke. Marquises. 

1. Ts'ae Shuh-too< 


2. Ts'ae Chnng-hoo(^^^*|^^i5)j 
Too’s son. 

Wasrestoredto Ts'ae, in B.c. 1,106. 
(See the Shoo, V. xidi.) 


'Wn' 

a brother of king Woo. Was 
subsequently banished. B.c. 1 ,121, 


103 ] 


TROLEGOMENA.] 


CIIKONOLOGY OF THE CII'UN TS-E\y. 


[cii n. 


3. 

Ts'ae Pih-hwang 

• 


B.C. 

1,052. 

4. 

Ts'ae Kung-how 

• 


946. 

5. 

Le 


892. 

6. 

Woo 


862. 

7. 

E 


)} 

836. 

8. 

He 


1) 

808. 

9. 

Kung 


760. 

10. 

Tae 


» 

758. 

11. 

Seuen 

.(®), 

)) 

748. 

12. 

Hwan 

.(te). 


713. 

13. 

Gae 


99 

693. 


Died a captive in 


Ts‘ 00 , in 


99 

674. 


14. 

Mtth 

XP). 

B.C. 

673. 

15. 

Chwang 

.C 7 U), 

f 

» 

644. 

16. 

wrm 

x^). 

99 

610. 

17. 

King 


99 

590. 

18* 

Ling 

(g). 

99 

541. 


Killed in Ts ‘00 

, in 5o0. 


19. 

P'ing 

Restored by T 

s‘oo in 

99 

627. 

20. 

Taou 

X'l:^), 

99 

620. 

21. 

Ch‘aou 

XJIg). 

99 

617. 

22. 

Ch'ing 

x;t), 

97 

489. 

23. 

Shing 

xm 

99 

470. 

24. 

Yuen 

(TCI 

99 

455. 

26. 

Ts'e 


19 

U9. 


Ts'ae was extinguished by 
[Ts ‘00 in 


V. Princes of Tsin (^). Surname Ke. Marquises. 


1 . T'ang Shuh-yu ()||* 

was invested with 
T‘ang in B.o. 1,106. 

2. His son SSeh C^) re- 

moved to Tsin, and 
was the first marquis 
of that State. Then 
we have; — 

3. Woo 

4. Ch'ing 

5. Le 

whose years cannot 
be determined. Then 
come: — 


7. 

Le 


B.C. 

839. 

8. 

H6en ...... 

(®). 

>7 

821. 

9. 

Muh 


99 

810.. 

10. 

Shang-shuh. 

99 

783. 

11. 

wan 


99 

779. 

12. 

Ch'aon 

,.(®. 

99 

744 . 

13. 

Heaou 


99 

737 . 

14. 

Goh 


97 

722. 

15. 

Gae 

cSx 

99 

716. 

16. 

Seaou-tsze . 


99 

707. 

17. 

Min 


99 

702 . 


6- Tsing (ifl), „ 857. 

For several rales Tsin had been maintaining a failing struggle against that 
branch of the ruling House which had been established with the title of earl m 
K‘euh-yuh ({tij and Hwan Shuh y^) and Chwang chiefs of 

K.*euh-yuh, enter in some lists into the line of the princes of Tsin. At last Ch ingTi 
the successor of Chwang Pih, put Min to death, in 678, and was acknowledged by 
the king as ruler of Tsin, He is: — 


18. 

Woo 

B.C. 

677. 

25. 

Seang ., 

....(Sx 

B.C. 

626. 

19. 

Heen 

99 

675. 

26. 

Ling..., 


19 

619. 

.20. 

He-ts'e ....(^^ 

99 

650. 

27. 

Ch'ing . 

■.xM\ 

99 

605. 

21. 

Ch‘oh-tsze(J^ "iF'X 

99 

650. 

28. 

King... 


99 

598. 

22. 

Hwuy 

99 

649, 

29. 

Lo 

...X®). 

99 

579 . 

23. 

Hwao 

99 

635. 

30. 

Taon ... 

..xl:#), 

99 

671. 

24. 

Wrm C^), 

9f 

63 1. 

31. 

P'ing . . 


9! 

.556. 


104 ] 


tux, }n.j 


I’KISCKS OK TS‘AOU AND CIMNO. 


ft'UULCuUML.VA. 


nKaou . 


l!.C. i»30. 

37. 

J cw ... 

....( 1 ®), 

r.c. 437. 


K*ing.... 

..cyi). 


3!?. 

Id'ch... 


„ 418. 

r>i. 

Ting 


„ olrt. 

3.0, 

Jlcaou. 


„ 391. 

o5. 

Ch*nh.,., 


., 473. 

40. 

Tsing.. 

....gJ®), 

„ 37G. 

U. 

Gao 

..sM\ 

.. 455. 


In liis Fivoml yonr IVingr wn*? doprivrtl of Ins Stato nnd fiflc. It Imd, indeed, boon 
otdy a nominal pos-i(son which the ropresenlaHvos of T‘nng- Shnh-yu had for some 
time onioved, for thov wore morciv pnppets in (ho hands of the marquis of Wei 
(SS). The gjeat S<a(o ofTsin was broken up into throe great marquisafes, which 
mbscquontly claiincil to ho kingdoms; — (hose of Wei (^), Chaon nwd Han 

CiJjfilt tbe independent existence of which dates from “J-02, ajid which continued till 
they were absorbed by Ts‘in, 

VI. Tlic princes of Ts'aou (^). Surname ICe. Earls. 


1. 

Chin-toh. ...C^^ a brother of 

[king IVoo. 

14. 

Lo or Ho 

or 

), B.C. 

609. 

n 

«i^« 

Tno Pill (% 10). 

D.C. 

1,0.51. 

IS. 

Ch'non.... 

...cJlS), 

If 

660. 

3. 

Cluing KcnnCl*!^ ^ ), 


1,000. 

16. 

Kung 

.. 

A 

651. 

4. 

Hung Pill. ..CB Ifi), 

9) 

933. 

17. 

wan 

...Cat). 

11 

616. 

5. 

HCaon Pih..C^^ ifi), 

JJ 

893. 

18. 

Senen 


11 

594. 

6. 

E Pih 

11 

863. 

19. 

Ch'ing 

11 

576. 

7, 

Yew Pih....fl^ 

n 

833. 

20. 

Woo 


11 

653. 

8. 

TaoPih 

Hwny Pih..(^ 

t> 

824. 

21. 

E'ing 

...m 

11 

526. 

9. 

9) 

794. 

22. 

Taou 


11 

522. 

10. 

Shih-foo (-ib 

ft 

759. 

23. 

Shing 

.. .(]^), 

If 

613. 

11. 

Duke Mnh.CT^-^), 

9» 

758, 

24. 

Yin 

...(IE), 

11 

508. 

12. 

Hwan (^1^), 

11 

755. 

25. 

Tsing 

..‘if). 

11 

503. 

13. 

Chwang CJJil), 

11 

700. 

26. 

Pih-vansr.. 


If 

500. 

Pih-yang was made captive by Sung in 

486, and Ts'aou was then extingnished. 


"^^1. Princes of Cli‘ing C^). Surname Ke. Earls. 


1. Yew C.^), a brother of king 
Seuen, received investiture in 
B.C. 805. He is known as duke 

Hwan Ofe 


2. 

Woo 


B.C; 769. 

3. 

Chwang.. 


„ 742. 

4. 

Ch‘aon ... 


„ 700. 

5. 

Le 

.CM),699. 

Hefledfirom 


the State in 696, 

and Ch‘aou 


9. 

Mnh...., 

...CP), 

B.C. 

626. 

10. 

lung... 


If 

604. 

11. 

Seang... 


11 

603. 

12. 

Taon.... 


If 

585. 

13. 

Ch'ing.. 


11 

588. 

14. 

Le. .(^ 

f), or He (f^I, 

11 

569. 

15. 

Keen — 


11 

564. 

16. 

Ting 


If 

628. 


returned, but was murdered in 
694. __ 

6. Tsze-mei.. « 694. 

7. Tsze-ying or Tsze-e 

693. He was killed 
in 679, and Le restored. 

S. -SYan 


17. 

Heen... 


91 

512. 

18. 

Shing... 

...W, 

11 

499. 

19. 

Grae 


11 

461. 

20. 

Knng... 

...0(5. 

11 

458. 

21. 

Y5w 

...effli. 

11 

423. 

oo 

Seu 


rj 

421. 


671. 


CIlRONOLOGr OF THE C1I‘UN TS'EW. 


fen. n. 


1’Uot.KooMr.s.v..] 

S 3 U was mu.^oroa in 395, bat boforo tUnt Cb-ing bad baoomn antoly dopendant 
on the new State of Han. This allowed one other marquis known as Kem 
O'* extinguished the State in 374. 

VIII. The princes of Woo (^). Surname Ke. First, earls; then 
viscounts. After a time usurped the title of king. 

The State of Woo, under a branch of the House of Chow, began before the rise 
of the Chow dynasty, under T‘ae-pih >f0; the eldest son of the lord of Chow 
afterwards kinged as king T*ao by his great-grandson the duke of Chow;,- w 
from Chow, along with his next brother, under the circumstances referred to m 
Vlil. i. He was the first ruler of Woo. We have: 

1. T-'ae-pih 'ffiX 4. Shuh.tah.....(:^d^- 

2. Chung.yung S. Chow-chahg .CjS 

S. Ke-keen 

In Chow-chang’s time king Woo overthrew the dynasty of Shang, and con&m 
him in the possession of Woo as a fief of the dynasty of Chow, Svith the title o ea ^ 
The point about the title is not clear; and we do not know when earl was exchange 
for viscount. After Chow-chang we have:— 


6. Heung-sny _ 

7. Ko-sSang ./W®. 

8. K‘eang-k6w-e 

9 . Tu-k‘eaou-e-woo ^ ^ ^ 

10. Ko-loo 4^®X 

11. Chow-yaou 

12. K‘euh-ya 


..(I 


p 

0 


.MX 


20. 

Choo-fan. , 

...mm 

B.c. 669; 

23. 

XiCROTL •••• 

21. 

Tu-chae... 


„ 546. 

24. 

Hob-len .. 

22. 

Tu-moh ... 


„ 542. 

25. 

Foo-ch'ae 


13. E-WOO ... 

14. Khi-choo 

15. Chuen ..s^ 

16. P‘o-kaou 

17. W.pe £• 

18. K‘ea-ts‘e 

^ _ ^ ^ 19. Show-mung 

In his time Woo -first began to have communication with the nortliem 
which constituted the kingdom of Chow proper. Most of the names of its pno 
do not sound like Chiuese names. 

{!^\ B.c. 525. 

Z'mm » 

...c^HX 7. 

— — •• — -w— - - - . - - '■••• 177 - - 

In 472 the king of iTueh extinguished Woo, when Foo-ch‘ae killed himse 
IX. The princes of ten (ff). Surname Ee. Sometimes called mar- 
quises, sometimes only ehrls. In the end assumed the title o ”1^0 

Descended from Shih, duke of Sbaou often mentioned in ■&© 

(See Y. xvi., et al.'). He was the first ruler of Ten. Eight of his descendan s, w 
names and years cannot be ascertained are said to bare ruled in it, an 
come to: — 

10. Hwny h-C- 8^3- 

11. He(lS^)orLe(#f|),„ 825. 

12. Kfing C^^X 789. 

IS. Gao „ 765. 

14. Cbihjg „ 763. 

106 ] 


15. Muh B*C- 

16. Senen « fIX » 5^09. 

17. Hwan (IS^^X >» 

18. DukeChwangC^-^X « 

19. Seang 


656 . 


:CT. III.] 


PRINCES OP OIMN AND SUNQ. 


[rnOI-EGOMESA. 


20. 

Scucn 

cji:). 

B.c. 

GIG. 

32. 

21. 

Ch'aou 

(iig), 

99 

600. 

83. 

22. 

Woo 


99 

685. 

34. 

23. 

Wiln 

c3t). 

99 

572. 

85. 

24. 

E 


99 

547. 

86. 

25. 

H^vuy 

<;€>. 

99 

543. 

87. 

26. 

Taou 


99 

634. 

28. 

27. 

Kung 

(dio 

99 

627. 

89. 

28. 

P'iug 

m 

99 

522. 

40. 

29. 

Keen 

m 

99 

603. 

41. 

30. 

Heen 


99 

491. 

42. 

31. 

Heaou 

C#), 

IS 

463. 

43. 


Min 

LeorHo or 

Hwan (fe, 

‘Wan 


CU'aoii,.. .(flS 3E), 

Hwuy ... dE), » 
Woo.ch‘ing(^ljS:i\ » 

Heaou .... » 

TliekingHeCjE „ 


B.c. 448. 
„ 432. 

„ 401. 

» 371. 

„ 860- 
„ 331, 

, „ 819. 

„ 310. 

„ 277. 

270. 
266. 
253. 


He was made captive, and the State estingnished, by Ts'in in 291. 

X. The princes of Cli‘in (jJ^). Surname Kwei (^), as being 
descended from Shun. Marquises. 

King Woo, it is said, gave his eldest daughter in marriage to a Kwei Mwan 
the son of his chief potter, and invested him with Ch'in. He was the first 
marquis, and is known as duke Hoo Cj^ him come:— 


2. Shin...,...(^). 

3. Seang 

4. Heaou 

5. Shin 

6. Tew (ft 

7 . Le (^) or He (t§), 

8. Woo C;^), 

9. E .(H), 

10. Ping (^), 

11. Wan (^), 


12. Hwan... 

13. Le (^), 

14. Le (fij), 


B.c. 853. 
830. 
795. 
780. 
777. 
754. 


99 

99 


15. Chwang (Tf^fc), 

16. Seuen.... ®), 

17. Muh (^), 

18. Kung C^), 

19. Lincf (^S), 


20, Ch'ing ... 

21. Gae 


9; 

99 

99 

99 

99 

99 

99 

99 

99 


743. 

706. 

699, 

698. 

691. 

646. 

630. 

612. 

597. 

567. 


Gae strangled himself in 533, and the State was held by a prince of Ts'oo till 528, 
when the Kwei line was restored. We have:— 


22. Hwuy ...C® B.c. 527 24. Min ({^), b.c. 500. 

2l Hwae. .., Cft), „ 504. 

Min was killed, and the State estingnished by Ts'oo, in 478, — the year in which 
Confucius died. 


XI. The princes of Sung C^). Surname Tsze C-^), as being the 
descendants of tbe sovereigns of Yin or Shang, the representatives 


of T‘ang the Successful. 

1. K‘e, viscount of Wei ^ 

was made duke of Sung, — say in 
B.C. 1,111 (See the Shoo, V.viii.) 

2. Wei Chung (0 #), b.c. 1,077. 

107] 


3. K*e, duke of SnngC^>^^)* 

B.c. 1,052. 

4. Duke Ting ("T* -^1, „ 999. 

5. Min (S^ « 534. 


rROI.EGOMEXA.] 


CITROT^JOLOGy OP THE cn‘UN TS‘EW. 


[cn. II. 


6. 

Tung 


n.c. 

907. 

20. 

Ch'ing ... 

... ()&>, 

n.c. 

635. 

7. 

Le 


1} 

892. 

21. 

Ch'aon ... 

... (ilS), 

11 

618. 

8. 

Le 

... (ffi). 

19 

857. 

22. 

Wan 


11 

609. 

9. 

Hwuy 


11 

829. 

23. 

Kung 

.... C^), 

11 

587. 

TO. 

Gae 


11 

799. 

24. 

Fing 


11 

574. 

11. 

Tae 


11 

798. 

25. 

Tnen 

...S7U\ 

11 

530. 

12. 

Woo 

... c^), 

It 

764. 

26. 

King 


11 

615. 

IS. 

Seuen 


11 

746. 

27. 

Ch'aou ... 


11 

451. 

14. 

Muh 

... 

It 

727. 

28. 

Taou 


11 

403. 

15. 

Shang-..,. 


1? 

718. 

29. 

Hew 

...cm 

11 

394. 

16. 

Chwang ., 


11 

708. 

30. 

Peih 

... 

11 

371. 

17. 

Min ...(g 

i or*^), 

91 

690. 

31. 

T'eih-ch'ing.. 

11 

368. 

18. 

Hwan 

(Is) 

11 

580. 

32. 

Ten 

... (-111), 

11 

327. 

19. 

Seang 


11 

649. 


Ter 

L took the title of king 

in 817 

but Sung was extinguished by Ts'e in 

285, 


and Ten fled to Wan and there died. Indeed from the time of duke Taou, Svmg 
had become dependent on Ts‘e. There is much difficuHy in fixing the number of 
years that dokes Eling and the second Ch'aon ruled. 

XIL The princes of Ts^e (^). Surname KSang (^), as being 
descended from Yaou’s chief minister. Marquises. 


1. Shang-foo ("j^ appears to have been one of the principal advisers 

of Wiin and Woo both in peace and war, Was invested by Woo with Ts‘e, and is 
known as T‘ae Kung dst&y Then we have: — 


2. 

DukeTingC J 

b.c.1,076. 

3. 

Tih ... . 

... 

„ 1,050. 

4. 

Kwei ... 

...eg). 

„ 999. 

5. 

Gae ... . 


„ 933. 

6. 

Hoo ... . 

...rsa). 

„ 892. 

7. 

Heen... 


„ 858. 

8. 

Woo ... 


„ 849. 

9. 

Le 


„ 823. 

10. 

wan ... 

...c3t). 

„ 814. 

11. 

Ch*ing. 


„ 802. 

12. 

Chwang. .Cjlll), 

„ 793. 

13. 

Le or He or 

„ 729. 

14. 

Seang., 

• • • 

„ 696. 

15. 

Hwan., 

....(tl), - 

„ 683. 


16. 

Heaou..., 

.X#). 

B.C. 

641. 

17. 

Ch'aou .. 

.Ml 

11 

631. 

18. 

B 

.(ft). 

11 * 

611. 

19. 

Hwuy.... 


11 

607. 

20. 

Kflng..,., 


11 

597. 

21. 

liing 


11 

580. 

22. 

Chwang. 

sM\ 

11 

552. 

23. 

King 


11 

546. 

24. 

Gan Tu-tszeC^*^ 

.. 

488. 

25. 

Taou 


11 

00 

• 

26. 

Keen 


11 

483. 

27. 

P'ing 

■X^). 

11 

479. 

28. 

Seuen.... 


11 

454. 

29. 

K'ang.... 


11 

403. 


Por a considerable time the princes of Ts'e had been at the mercy of the Head® 
of the ChSu family, the most powerfid in the State. A prince of ChHn took 
rofago in Ts‘o in b.c. 671 (See the Chnen on m. sadi. 8), and his descendants ero 
louff grew into a powerful claui and conceived the idea of superseding the lin® 


108 ] 


rniN(‘i:s or ts oo. 


fj’noMraoMr.NA. 


»S5.1 


T'ar-kuMg Iln 88-'i. 

5. Min 


n.c. 312. 

Ilwnn ,. .*183. 

(5. Srang ... 


„ 281. 

King Wei. ^). ,. :}77. 

7. Ki’on 


„ 263. 

King Sem»n(*i.T ?•). ,. 331. 


Kt'sui!*. Thi'y won' known n*^ Cli'ins I’jjt lluit. siirnnino (hoy oxchnn!<-o<l for 

Tn^’O — >{ IP no! known whon «r why. In T'oon JIo (|||5|j|I) nnnovod 

ihiko K'jinc from hk o.ipilnl. nml plnonl him in n city noitr (ho son, whom ho migrlit 
mnintniu tho suorifiiVit to his nnoostors; untl (hero ho led jm ing^lorioiiB life (ill 
when the lim* <»riCoatjy iviino (o n close. T'oon IIo inmlo upplica(i(m to (ho kiiiyof 
Chow ami to the fomla! prinoos (« ho ncknmvloiljforl hiinsoirns nmnpii.H of'JVe, which 
was neivdeil to, and his tirst year iln(os fnnn JJSo. 

Of (he lino ofT'oon ij» Tfi‘o wo have: — 

1 . 

o 

^ • 

;k 

• 1 . 

Keen continnod till (ho (irsi year <»f (he dynasty of Ts'ijj, li.c. 220, when lie made 
his suhmission to (ho new Power, at:d the indnpendent existence of Ts‘o ceased. 

XIII. Tlic princos of Ts‘oo (^). Surname Me (^S). Viscounts- 

They claimed to ho dosccndetl from the ancient eniperor Clmen-houh 
hut tho first Avho had the surname Me appears to have been a Ko-leon 
about tho dawn of historic times. A Yuh Honng ( glj is mentioned with distinc- 
lion m the lime of king Wan, and his great-grandson, Hoang Yih (f ^ M), was 
invested with Ts'oo by king Ch'ing, as a viscount. It w-as not very 'l^g till the 
title of A-iscount was discarded, and that of king usm-ped. The Heung was a clan- 
name, derived from Yuh Heung. 

17. Kang Woo b.c. 739. 

Tho title of king was 
assumed in 703, 

18. Wan „ 688. 

19. Heung Keen, title Chwang-gaon 

675. 


1 . 

2. 

3. 

4. 


7. 

8 . 

9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 


HcimgYih fjrn 
Hiiung E ... (^), B.c. 1,077. 

„ Tab (|g), „ 1,051. 

„ ShingCf^), „ 1,000. 

„ YangOj^) „ 945. 

„ K*eu C^^). Ho assumed 
tho title of king about 886, but 
gave it up again throngb fear 
of king Lo of Chow. 

Heung Ohe-bung(^^^Il),n,G.866. 
„ Yon (fe 

„ YungC.^), 

91 ^ on 

„ SeangC^I'), 

„ Seun Cf^), 

- „ Oh 

„ B, title Joh-gaou(‘f^> 

» 789. 

„ K'an, title Seaou-gaou 

„ 762. 


865. 

845. 

836. 

826. 

820. 

798. 


20. King Ch'ing BE, , 

21. Muh (®), 

22. Ohwang (jfi*), , 

23. Kung (^), ,, 

24. K|ang (^), , 

25. Heung Kean, title Keah- 

gaonC^,0^^, ,, 

26. King Ling...(^3E). „ 

27. P'ing (^), „ 

28. Ch'aou 

29. Hwuy, 


teuen, tiflePun-maou 

„ 756. 

109 ] 


30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 


Keen . 
Shing. 
Taou .. 
Suh... 


(A 


Souen 


670. 

624. 

612. 

689. 

668 . 

643. 

639. 

527. 

514. 

487. 

430. 

406. 

400. 

379. 

368. 


VUOl.V.OOMF.SA.] 


CHRONOLOGY OF THE CII'UN TS-EW. [rn. n. 


35. 

Wei (ji;). 

B.c. 

338. 

39. 

36. 

Hwae 

IJ 

327. 

40. 

37. 

K‘ing-scang (^^1, 


204. 


38. 

K‘aou-lcoh ..(^^llX 

it 

201. 


Yinv n.t!. 3*‘W. 

Tile King' Hoo.ts‘oo(3E 

.. . 25C. 

Ts‘in extingnisheil Ts‘oo in 23‘2. 


XIV. The princes of Ts‘in (p). 

onlv earls. 

■/ 


Surname Ying (^). At first 


They claimed to be descended from the ancient emperor Chuen-heub, throng’U 
Pih-e ( [|^ or Pih-yih ( ^), the forester of Shun (Shoo, II. i. 22), Avho is said 

to have given him the surname of Ying. Sze-ma Ts'ecn traces the family down 
through the Hea and Shang dynasties, but there is much that is oAndontly fabnions 
in the statements which ho makes. At last wo arrive at the time of king Hiiaou of 
Chow, who was so pleased with the ability displayed by Fei-tsze scion of 

the family, in keeping cattle, that he employed him to look after his herds of horses, 
* between the K'een and the Wei ^ invested him with the small 

territory of TsHn, as chief of an attached State, there to maintain the sacrifices to 
the Ying. Pei-tsze occupies the first place in the list of the princes of Ts'in. 


1. Pei-tsze "^1, b.c. 908. 4. Ts'in Chung... b.c. 843. 

2. Tsfin How. ^), „ 856. 0. Duke Chwang(^± „ 320, 

3. Kung-pih. „ 846. 6. Seang 

Seang gave important assistance to the House of Chow in the troubles connected 
with the death of king Yew, and the removal of the capital by king P'ing to the 
east, and his rank was raised in 709 to that of earl, and Ts'in had now an independent 
existence anong the other fiefs of Chow. Its territory was also greatly increased, 
and Seang received, what Chinese writers think wss of evil omen, the old domain of 
the princes of Chow from mount K‘e westwards. 


7. 

Duke Wan 


B.C. 

764. 

8. 

King 


3J 

714. 

9. 

Ch‘ah-tsze . 

..cm T). 

it 

702. 

10. 

Woo 

..(^X 

it 

696. 

11. 

Tih 

...Cfl), 

it 

676. 

12. 

Seuen. 

...(Sx 

it 

674. 

13. 

Ch'ing 


79 

662. 

14. 

Mnh 


7J 

658. 

15. 

Kang ... . 

.. cR). 

it 

619. 

10. 

Kung 

...c^t). 

it 

607. 

17. 

Hwan 

...cfe), 

it 

603. 

18. 

King 


it 

575. 

19. 

Gae 


a 

535. 

20. 

Hwny 

-xM), 

it 

499. 

21. 

Taou 


it 

490. 

oo 

Lo-kimg... 

...® 

it 

475. 


110 ] 


23 . Tsaou (^), b.c. 441 . 

24 . Hwae (‘^), „ 427 . 

25 . Ling (^) „ 423 . 

20 . Keen (ffl), „ 413 . 

27 . Hwuy ^^^X n 

28 . Ch*uh-tsze...C{J^ „ 385 . 

29 . Heen ^^kX « 

80 . Heaou „ 360 . 

31 . King Hwuy-wanC^ ^ 

^X . 336 . 

It was in B.c. 324 that the title 
of king was fii'st assumed. 

32 . King Woo...C^i) „ 309 . 

33 . Ch'aou-seangCJl^^^), ,> 305 . 

34 . Hiiaou-wun. ,» ~ 49 . 

35 . Chwang-sSangCj^^^l, ,> ~ 48 . 

36 . Ching (jJ^X » 


ti.or. 11.3 


[J’HOI.KOOMKNA. 


TAnLi: t>i' TriK cyclk. 

IJtvaTUo Icinir hi 21 Ti, ami succcotloil in MialiHshinj;' his sway over nil tho otlior 
States in 22(>, fiMin wlhrli year dates the comnicncomcnt. of tlio IViu dynasty. He 
reigned under the style of ^ 'ijj*, emperor tho Firsts till SOU. In 208 be ivas 
Fuecewlotl by his son, omjieror tho Second (JH ‘jll; ^ ^)> and with bis death in 
SOI the shoridivcd dvnnstv may be said to have ended. 


IT SUEMS DESIRABLE AT THE CLOSE OF THIS CHAPTER TO 
APPEND A TABLE OF THE CYCLE OF SIXTY. 


1 1:14 -jF- 

16 ci ^p 

31 1^ 4 

46 a® 


32 Zi ^ 


a Pa K 

■9 E 

33 Pa ejs 

48 ^ 

4 T^P 

10 i.!)-- 

34 T® 


iJciS 


33 ^ a 


21 ^ 1^4 

36 a ^ 

31 ^ a 


- 

22 Zi W 

37 

62 Zi ^P 

8 

c 

23 

33 ^ a 

63 

0 i p 

4 

24 T 

33 41? 

31 tB 

10 

“ iS ■?• 

40 

55 )X^ 


26 B i 

1^ M 

66 a 


MM 

42 B B 

37 ^1^ 

13 

28 

« Pa 4 

68 % g 


23 •3b: M 

44 T ^ 

69 -i 

“ J®'#' 

^ E 

33 ]g ^ 

CO 


Ill] 


IMIOWJGOMUXA.] THE CHINA OE THE CII'UN TS'EW PERIOD. 


[cir. HI. 


CHAPTER III. 

THE OHIXA -OP THE OH‘UN TS‘EW PERIOD;— CONSIDERED IN 
RELATION TO ITS TERRITORIAL EXTENT; THE 
DISORDER WHICH PREVAILED; THE GROWPH AND ENCROACH- 
MENTS OP THE LARGER STATES; AND THE BARBAROUS 
TRIBES WHICH SURROUNDED IT. 


1. On the territorial extent of the kingdom of Chow, and the 
names of the feudal States composing it, during the Ch‘nn Ts‘e\v, 
Territorial extent and component States, period, I have nothing tO add tO 
what I have said, on the same subjects for the period embraced m 
the Book of Poetry, on pp. 127—131 of the prolegomena to volume 
IV. A study of the large map accompanying this Chapter, in its 
two-fold form, with the names on the one in Englisli and on the 
other in Chinese, will give the reader a more correct idea of these 
points than many pages of description could do. The period of the 
Book of Poetry overlapped that of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew by more thaii a 
hundred years. No new State arose during the latter, though several 
came into greater prominence than had formerly belonged to them; 
and the enlargement of territory which took place arose chiefly from 
the greater development which the position of Tsin, Ts‘oo, and Ts‘in 
enabled them to give themselves. 

2, It is often said that the period embraced in the Ch'un Ts'eiv 
was one of disorder, — a social and political, disorganization to be 
compared with the physical disorder caused by the inundating waters 

Disorder of the Ch‘un Ts'ew period; — 7 which Called foi’th the laboUl’S of the 
referred to Its causes. y gr 0 at Yu SO man}' ages before.^ Men- 

cius tells us that the Classic does not contain a single instance of a 
righteous war, a war, according to him, being righteous only when 
the supreme authority had marshalled its forces to punish some 
disobedient vassal, whereas, during the period chronicled by Con- 
fucius, we have nothing but the strifes and collisions of the various 
feudal States among themselves.^ This is not absolutely correct, but 
it is an approximation to the truth. The disorder of the period, 
however, Avas only the sequel of the disorder that preceded it. Not 
long before it commenced, king P'ing had transferred the capital to 
the east in 769, in consequence of the death of his father king Ye^v' 
at the hands of some of the wild tribes of the Jung. This movement 
Avas an open acknoAA'ledgment of the weakness of the soA'creign 


1 See Mencius, HI. Tt. ii. IX. 11. 

112 ] 


2 Mencius, AHI. I’t. ii. II. 


v’u, nt.] 


DISOUDUU OP Tin-: cii*uk ts-k\y period. 


[n!Oi.i:GOMi:xA. 


power, which hsul been brought veiy low towards the end of the 
first half of the iUli century, n.c., and had only partially revived 
during the long reign of king Seuen. I doubt, indeed, whether it 
had been very strong in what is regarded as its golden age, after 
the duke of Cliow had consolidated the dynasty, and introduced his 
code of ceremonial and political regulations. The theory was then 
good, but the practice was veiy indiflerent. 

The process of degeneracy and disintegration, however, was very 
marked from the beginning of the 9th century. It is an acknowledged 
fact that about n.c. 880 the chief of the i)owerful southern State of 
Ts'oo usurped for a time the title of king, and wislied to declare himself 
independent of the kings of Chow. When the Cii‘un Ts‘ew period 
opens upon us, we find existing an all but anarchal condition of 
things. There was virtually no king in China in those daj’^s, and 
the lord of each feudal State did what was right in his oaati eyes. 
In 706, the earl of Clding the most recentl}^ established of all tlie 
States, if perhaps we should except Ts‘in, engaged in hostilities 
with the king himself, who was wounded in the battle between them. 

King Woo and the duke of Chow had parcelled out their conquest 
— the kingdom of Shang — among the scions of their own family and 
their adherents of other surnames, with the representatives of T‘ang 
’ the Successful and other great Names in the previous history of the 
country. How many the feudal States, great and small, were at the 
most, I will not venture to say even approximately. The. theory of 
the constitution left them very considerable liberty in the administra- 
tion of their internal affairs, and in their relations with one another. 
They were to be content with their allotments of territory and not 
infringe on those of jtheir neighbours, maintaining a good mutual 
understanding by means of court visits® and visits of friendship or. 
compliment,^ and by interchanging communications on all important 
events occurring within their borders. Any breaking of the peace 
or unjust attack of one State by another was to be represented to 
the royal court, and the king would then call into the field the 
. unwield}’- forces at his disposal, and deal justice on the offender. 

But this beautiful theory of government presupposed a wohder- 
: ful freedom from jealousy and ambition on the part of the feudal 
lords, and an overwhelming superiority of force on the part of the 
king; and, neither of these things existing, the constitution of tlie 
kingdom was torn into shreds. Instead of the harmony which the 


113 ] 


VROLEGOStEKA.] THE CHINA OF THE CIPUN TS'EW PEBIOD. [cir. in. 

principles of benevolence and righteousness, carried out with 
courtesy and in accordance with the rules of propriety, should liave 
produced, we find the States biting and devouring one another, 
while the large and strong oppressed and absorbed the small and 
weak. In the Chuen on IX. xxix. 7, during a dispute at the court 
of Tsin on some encroachments which Loo had made on the territory 
of K‘e, an officer reminds the marquis of what Tsin itself had done 
in the same way. ‘The princes,’ said he, ‘of Yu, Kwoh, Tseaou, 
Hwah, Hoh, Yang, Han, and Wei were Kes, and Tsin’s greatness is 
owing to its absorbing of their territories. If it had not encroached 
on the small States, where would it have found territory to take? 
Since the times of Woo and Keen, we have annexed many of them, 
and who can call us to account for what we have done?’ The fact 
was that Might had come to take the place of Right; and while states- 
men were ever ready to talk of the fundamental principles of justice, 
benevolence, and loyalty, the process of spoliation went on.° The 
number of States was continually becoming less, the smaller melting 
away into the larger. ‘The good old rule’ came more and more 
into vogue, 

‘ the simple plan. 

That they should take who have the power, 

And they should, keep who can.’ 

‘ 3. To ameliorate the evils arising from this state of disorder 
and anarchy, and to keep it moreover in check, there arose during 
the Ch‘un Ts‘ew period the singular device of presiding chiefs, — tlic 
The system of presiding chiefs, system of One State taking the lead and 
direction of all the others, and exercising really royal functions 
throughout the kingdom, while yet there Avas a profession of loyal 
attachment to the House of Chow. The seeds of this contrivance 
were sown, perhaps, at the very commencement of the dynasty, 
when the dukes of Chow and Shaou were appointed viceroys over 
the eastern and western portions of the kingdom respectively, and 
other princes were made, on their firet iiiA’estiture, ‘chiefs of regions, i 
embracing their own States and others adjacent to them. These 
arrangements were disused as the kings of Chow felt secure in their 
supremacy over all the States, and the nominees in the first instance 
had been sincerely loyal and devoted to the establishment of tlie 
dynast}’^; but now in the Ch‘un Ts‘ew period the kings were not 

5 See the fliscoiirso of Kc AVfln-tszc in the Cliuen on VI. .wiii, 9 as a sncciincn of tlic adinir.ihlc 
6cutinicnts Inch men, tiicmsolvos of questionable character and course, could express. 

■ ^-fa- 


ll 1] 


CJ!. r.i.J 


THK SVSTKM UF I’UKSIDINO STATKS. 


[>>»oli:comi:na 


suiVu'ionlly pure ofnny oftliuir vassnls to delegate tlieiii to such nn 
ollicc. ^Vhen one raised himself to the position, they were obliged 

imwillimrlv to confirm him in it. 

« % 

Five of these presiding chiefs arc named during the time under 
our review-: — Ihvau of Ts‘e (683-6-12); Wiin of Tsin (634-627); 
Seang of Sung (6^10-636); Muh of Ts‘in (658-620); and Chwang of 
Ts‘oo (612-590). Tlic first two, however, are the best, and I think 
the only representatives of the system. Hwan was endowed with an 
extraordinary amount of magnanimit)', and ^yun had been disciplined 
by a long experience of misfortune, and was subtile and scheming. 
Both of then were full}’ acknowledged as directors and controllers of 
the States generally by the court of Chow; and it seems to me not 
unlikely that if Wfiii had been a younger man when he came to the 
inarquisate of Tsin, and his rule had been protracted to as great a 
length as that of Hwan, he would have gone on to supersede the 
dynasty of ChoAV altogether, and wc should have had a dynasty of Tsin 
nearly ninchundred years earlier than it occurs in Chinese chronology. 
As it was, his successors, till nearl}’ the end of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew period; 
claimed for their State the leading place in the kingdom; and it was 
generally, conceded to them. Though the system of which I am 
speaking be connected with the names of the five princes which I have 
mentioned, it yet continued to subsist after them. They were simply 
the first to vindicate, or to endeavour to vindicate, a commanding 
influence for the States to vdiich they belonged throughout the king- 
dom; and though neither Hwan nor Wan had any one among their 
successors fully equal to them, they had many who tried to assert a 
supremacy, and Tsin, as I have said, was long acknowledged to be 
‘ lord of covenants.’ 

Seang of Sung was not entitled to a place among the five chiefs, 
either from his own character, or from the strength and resources 
of his State. He appears rather as a madman than a man of steady 
purpose; and many scholars exclude [his name from the categoiy, 
and introduce instead Hoh-leu of Woo or Kow-ts‘een of Yueh. 
Nor is Muh of Ts'in much better entitled to the place assigned 
to him, for though he was a prince of very superior character to 
SSang, his influence was felt only in the west of the kingdom, and 
not by the States generally. Chwang of Ts‘oo, moreover, did 
certainly exercise the influence of a chief over several of the States, 
but he was not acknowledged as such by the king of Chow, and the 


115 ] 


2 Bee Mencius, VI. Pt. ii. Vn. 


vK0i.iiG0MKSA.] THE CHINA OF THE CH‘UN TS-EW PERIOD. [cn. m. 

title of king wliicli he claimed for himself sufficiently showed his 
feeling and purpose towards the existing dynasty. Still he and other 
kings of Ts‘oo called the States frequently together, and many 
responded to their summons, knowing that a refusal would incur 
their resentment, and be visited with direst punishment. 

I am inclined to believe that the system of presiding chiefs, or 
rather of leading States, did in a degree mitigate the evils of the 
prevailing disorder. Ts‘e and Tsin certainly kept in check the 
encroachments of Ts‘oo, which, barbarous as it was, would other- 
wise have speedil}^ advanced to the overthrow of the House of Chow. 
Yet the system increased the misery that abounded, and if it retarded, 
perhaps, the downfall of the descendants of king Woo, it served to 
show that that was unavoidable in the end. It was most anomalous,—^ 
an imperiuminiinperio ^ — and weakened the bond of loyal attachment 
to the throne. Of what use were the kings of Chow, if they could 
not do their proper work of government, but must be continually 
devolving it on one or other of their vassals? No line of rulers can 
continue to keep possession of the supreme authority in a nation, if 
their incompetenc}^ be demonstrated for centuries together. The 
sentimental lojmlty of Confucius had lost its attractions by the time 
of Mencius, who was ever on the outlook for ‘ a minister of Heaven, 
who should make an end of Chow and of the contentions among the 
warring States together. 

But the system also increased the expenditure of the smaller 
States. There still remained their dues to the kings of Chow, even 
though they paid them so irregularly that we have instances of 
messengers being sent from court to Loo, and doubtless they were 
sent to other States as well, to beg for money and other supplies. 
But they had also to meet the requisitions of the ruling State, and 
sometimes of more than one at the same time. There are many 
allusions iu the narratives of Tso to the arbitrariness and severity 
of those requisitions. On X. xiii, 5, .6, for instance, we find Tsze- 
ch‘an of Ch‘ing disputing on this point with the ministers of Tsin. 

‘ Formerlj’’,’ said he, ‘the sons of Heaven regulated the amount of 
contribution according to the rank of the State. Ch‘ing ranks as the 
territory of an earl or a baron, and yet its contribution is now on 
the scale of a duke or a marquis. There is no regular rule for 
what we have to pay; and when our small State fails in rendering 
what is required, it is held to he an offender. When our contribu- 
tions and ofierings have no limit set to them, we have' only to wait 
for our ruin.’ It is evident, as ■we study the history of this system 

116] 


cii. ni.j 


TUE GliO^YTU OF THE LAllGE STATES. 


[PKOI.EGOJIES-V, 


of a leading Stale, that there was no help to come from it to the 
House of Chow, and no’ permanent alleviation of tlie evils under 
which the nation was suffering. 

i. At the close of the Gh‘uii Ts‘cw period the kingdom was in a 
worse and more hopeless condition than at its commencement; and 
it seems strange to us that it did not enter into the mind of Confu- 
cius to forecast that the feudal system which had so long prevailed 
in China was ‘waxen old and ready to vanish away.’ But what 
State was to come out victorious from its conflicts with all the 
others, and take the lead in settling a new order of things? Only 
tiic event could reveal this, but it could be known that the struggle 
for supremacy would lie between two or three powers; and the 

The growth of some of the SUtes nn important} Study of their growth SUJ)plieS 
subject of study. The causes of it. j- of important leS- 

sons which the Work of the sage and the Commentary of Tso are 
calculated to teach us. 

A glance at the map shows us that the China proper of Chow 
was confined at first within narrow limits. Even at the beginning of 
the Ch‘un Ts‘8w period it consisted of merely a few States of no great 
size, lying on either side of the Yellow River, from the point- where 
its channel makes a sudden bend to the east onwards to its mouth. 

North of the Royal Domain was Tsin, but, though a fief dating 
from the commencement of the kingdom, its growth had been so 
slow, that it is not till the second year of duke He, b.c. 657, that it 
appears in Confucius’ text, on the eve of its subjugation of the 
small States of Yu and Kwoh. This was the first step which Tsin 
took in the career of enlargement by which it ere long attained to 
so great a size. 

South of the Domain was Ts*oo; and, though it had been 
founded in the time of king Chfing, it does not appear in the 
text of our Classic till the tenth year of duke Chwang, b.c. 683. 

It is then called King, and we do not meet with it under the name 
of Ts‘oo till the first year of duke He, b.c. 658. 

West from the Domain was Ts‘in, the first lord of which was given 
a local habitation and name only in b.c. 908; and it did not become 
an independent fief of the kingdom till the year 769. Its first 
appearance in our text is in the fifteenth year of duke He, b.c. 644. 

A long way east from Ts‘oo, and bordering on the sea, was the 
State of Woo, which, though claiming an earlier origin than the 
kingdom of Chow itself, is not mentioned in the classic till the 
Seventh year of duke Ch'ing, b.c. 583. 

117 ] 


rnOLKGOMESA.] 


TIIH CHINA OF THE CH‘UN TS‘EW FEIHOI). 


[cit. in. 


But it will be observed that tbese four States bad from their 
situation grand opportunities for increasing tbeir territory and their 
population ; and tbe consequence was that before tlie end of the Gli‘nn 
Ts‘cw period each of them occupied an extent of countr}^ many times 
larger than the Royal Domain, wbileTs‘oo was nearl3>^ as large as all the 
Middle States, as those of Chow proper were called, together. The way 
in which it and Tsin proceeded wasb)’^ extinguishing and absorbing 
the smaller States adjacent to them, and by a constant process of 
subjugating the barbarous tribes, which lay on tlie south and west of 
Ts‘oo, and on the north and east of Tsin. Ts‘in laj^ farther off from 
the settled parts of the country, and its princes had not so much to 


do in absorbing smaller States, but they early established their sway 
over all the Jung, or the Avild hordes of the Avest. The leadership, 
which I have said in the preceding paragraph is improperly ascribed 
to duke Mull of Ts‘in as being over the feudal States belonged to 
him in his relation to tlie Jung. The sea forbade any extension 
of the border of Woo on the east, but it found much land to be 


occupied on the north and south, and its armies, going up the 
Keang or Yaiig-tsze, met those of Ts‘oo, and fought AAUth them for 
the possession of the country betAveen that great river and the Hwae. 

The States of ChoAv proper had little room for any similar 
expansion. They were closely massed together. From the first 
immigration of the ancestors of the Chinese tribe, their course had 
been eastwards and mainly along the course of the YelloAv River, and 
most of the older occupants of the country had been pushed before 
them to the borders of the sea. Ts‘e extended right to the sea, and 
so did Ke which the other absorbed. Then came the small States of 


K‘e and Keu, the latter of which had a sea border, while they do not 
seem to have ever thought of pushing their Avay into what is now called 
the promontory of Shan-tung. The people of both K‘e and Keu were 
often taunted by the other States with belonging themselves to the 
E barbarians. South from Keu there was a tract extending inland 
a considerable Avay, occupied by E tribes and the half-civilized peo- 
ple of Seu, and reaching doAvn to the hordes of the Hwae, which 
Loo pleased itself Avitli the idea of reducing, ^ but which it Avas 
neA’^er able to reduce. Altogether there Avas, as I have said, hardly 
any room for the groAA'th of these middle States. Ts‘e was the 
strongest of them, and longest maintained its independence, ulti- 
mately absorbing Sung, which had itself previousl}'- absorbed Ts‘aou. 
Of the others, Heu, Ts'ae, Ch‘in, the two Choo, Loo, and in the end 


1 See the She, Part, IV., Bk. II., ode III. 


118 ] 


cif. ni.l THE nXAT. STKUGGLE FOR SUFREMACY. [rnoLEOOMEKA. 

Ch'inj: foil to Ts‘oo, niul Wei became dependent on one of tlie mar- 
qnisates or kingdoms into which Tsin was divided. 

Woo for a time made rapid progress, and seemed as if it would 
at least wrest the sovereignt}* of tlic south from Ts‘ooj but its down- 
fall was more rapid than its rise had been. It was extinguished by 
Yuch a very few years after the close of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew period, 
and Vueh itself had ere long to succumb to Ts‘oo. 

Thus, as time went on, it became increasing!}’- clear that the final 
struggle for the supreme power would be between Ts‘in and Ts‘oo. 
If Tsin had remained entire, it would probably have been more 
than a match for them both; but the elements of disorganization 
had long been at work in it, and it was divided, about the year 
n.c. 400, into three marquisates. The lords of these soon claimed, 
all of them, the title of king, and the way in which they maintained 
for a centuiy and a half the struggle with Ts‘in and Ts‘oo shows 
how great the power of Tsin unbroken would have been. Ts‘e and 
Yen also assumed the ro 3 'al style, and made a gallant defence 
against the powers of the west and the south; but they would not 
have held out so long as they did but for the distance which inter- 
vened between them and the centres of both their adversaries. 
Ts*m at last bore down all opposition, and though of all the great 
States that developed during the Ch‘un Ts‘ew period it was the 
latest to make its appearance, it remained master of the field. 
From the kings of Chow it cannot be said to have met with any 
resistance. Their history for three hundred years before the 
extinction of the dynast}' is almost a blank. They continued to • 
hold a nominal occupancy of the throne so long only because there 
were so many other princes contending for it. 

The above review of the closing centuries of the dynasty of Chow, 
and of its overthrow' by the king of Ts‘in, seems to prove, brief as 
it has been, that, given a number of warring States or nations, vic- 
tory will in the long run declare itself in favour of that one w'hich 
has the most extensive territory and the largest population. Ts‘in 
and Ts‘oo, when they first came into contact with the States of 
Chow proper, were, no doubt, inferior to them in the arts of civiliza- 
tion generally, and among these of the art of war; but they had 
vast resources and a rude energy, which compensated in the first 
place for w'ant of skill, and they soon learned from their adversaries 
w'hatever was required for their efiective application. A fixedness 
of purpose and recklessness in the expenditure of human life char- 
acterized their measures, and the struggle came at last to be mainly 

119] 


1’nOLEGOMES.V.] 


THE CHINA OF THE CII‘UN TS‘EW PERIOD. 


[cii. mi 


between tbemselves. It ended more from the exhaustion of the 
combatants than from any real superiority on the part of Ts‘in. 

While tlie downfall of Chow has led me thus to speak of the 
success which must inevitabl}^ attend the efforts of the combatant 
whose resources are the greatest, if the contents of my volume led 
me to trace the history of China downwards for a few more years,- 
it would be as evident that, while material strength is sure, when 
not deficient in w'arlike skill, to gain a conquest, it cannot consoli- 
date it. Tlie brief existence of the Ts‘in djmjist}^ seemed but to 
afford a breathing time to the warring States, and then China 
became once more horrid with the din of arms. Most of the States 
■which had contended over the throne of Chow again took the field, 
and others with them, until, after sixteen j^ears more of strife and 
miserj’’, the contest was decided in favour of the House of Han, 
which joined to force of arms respect for the traditions of the coun- 
try, and a profession at least of reverence for the virtues of justice 
and benevolence. 

6. 'An incident occurred during the time of duke Seang which 
deserves to have attention called to it, as illustrating the saying that 
‘there is nothing new under the sun,’ where we should not expect 
its illustration. The strife between Ts‘oo and Tsin was then at its 
height; and the States generally were groaning under the miseries 
which it occasioned. It occurred to Heang Seuh, a minister of 

An endeavour made to put an? ^^ng, that he "would be deserving well o 
end to war by covenant. ^ couutry if he could put an end to the 

constant wars. The idea of a Peace Society took possession of his 
mind. He was by no means without ability himself, and had a 
faculty for negotiation and intrigue. He was, no doubt, sincerely 
desirous to abate the evils which abounded, but we are sorry to find 
that he was ambitious also ‘ to get a name’ for himself by his measure, 
and had an eye to more substantial advantages as well. How his 
scheme worked itself out in his own mind we do not know; but 
after long brooding over it, he succeeded in giving it a practical 
shape, which may have been modified by the force of circumstances. 

Being on friendly terms with the chief ministers of Tsin and 
Ts‘oo, he first submitted his plan to them, and procured their assent 
to it. In Tsin they said, ‘War is destructive to the people and eats 
up our resources; and it is the greatest calamity of the small States. 
Seuh’s plan will perhaps turn out impracticable, but we must give 
it our sanction; for if we do not, Ts‘oo will do it, and so improve 
its position with the States to our disadvantage.’ Similarly they 

120j 


CH. 111.] 


PLAN FOK PUTTING ^VN END TO WAB, 


[Pi!0I.£G03m'.V. 


reasoned and agi’eed in Ts‘oo, Ts‘e, and Ts‘in, The great powers 
appeared all to be willing. 

Having succeeded thus far, Seuh proceeded to call a meeting of 
the States geiierall}’-, and in the summer of 535 the representatives 
of not fcAver than fourteen of them met in the capital of Sung. 
Various jealousies were disjDlayed in making the arrangements pre- 
liminary to a covenant. Ts‘e and Ts‘in were exempted from taking 
the oath, so that the agreement was narrowed to a compact between 
Ts‘oo and Tsin, and the States which adhered to them respectively; 
and though this would secure a temporaiy peace to the kingdom, yet 
the two other great States, being left unbound, might take advan- 
tage of it, to prosecute their own ambitious designs. Ts‘oo, more- 
over, displaj'ed a fierce and unconciliating spirit which promised ill 
for the permanence of the arrangement. However, the covenant 
was accepted with these drawbacks. There should be war no more I 
And to assure so desirable an end, the princes who had been in the 
habit of acknowledging the superiority of Ts‘oo should show their 
respect for Tsin bj*^ appearing at its court, and those who had been 
adherents of Tsin should similarly appear at the court of Ts‘oo. 
Thus these two Powers would receive the homage of all' the 
States; and it was implied, perhaps, that they would unite their 
forces to punish any State which should break the general peace. 
Nothing was said of the loyal serHce which was due from them 
all to the kings of Chow; and Ts'in and Ts‘e were left, as I 
have said, unfettered, to take their own course. I apprehend 
that the princes and ministers who were at the meeting separated 
without much hope of the pacification being permanent; — as indeed 
it did not prove to be. Heang Seuh alone thought that he had 
accomplished a great work; aud without being satisfied, as we wish 
that he had been, with the consciousness that he had done so, he 
proceeded to ask a grant of lands and towns from the duke of Sung 
as a reward for ‘ arresting the occasion of death.’ His application 
was acceded to, but it did not take effect. Seuh showed the charter 
of the grant which he had obtained to Tsze-han the chief minister 
of the State, who said to him, ‘It is by their arms that Tsin and 
Ts‘oo keep the small States in awe. Standing in awe, the high and 
low in them are loving and harmonious, and thus the States are kept 
quiet, aud do service to the great powers, securing their own pre- 
servation and escaping ruin. Who can do away with the instruments 
of war? Thej’^ have been long in requisition. By them the lawless 
are kept in awe. and accomplished virtue is displayed. On them 

121 ] ■ 


ritOLKGOStKNA.j 


THE CHINA OF THE CII'UN T5*EW PERIOD. 


[CII. III. 


depends the preservation or the ruin of a country; — and you have 
been seeking to do away with them. Your scheme is a delusion, 
and there could be no greater offence than to lead the States astray 
by it. And not content with having escaped punishment, you have 
sought for reward !” With this he cut the document in pieces and 
cast it away, while Seuh submitted, and made no further claim to 
the grant which had been assigned to him. 

So ended the :first -attempt which was made in the world to put 
an end to war on principles of expediency and by political arrange- 
ments. It was a delusion and proved ;a failure; but there must 
bave been a deep and -wide-spread feeling of the miseries which it 
was intended to remove, to secure for it its temporally acceptance. 
Though a delusion it was, it was a brilliant one. Though Seuh was 
a dreamer, I liave thought that his name should have prominent 
mention given to it. More than two thousand years have elapsed 
since his time; Christianity, calling to universal ‘ peace on earth,’ has 
come into the field; and under its auspices nations unheard of, it 
may be said unborn, in the era of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew, have attained a 
wondrous growth, with ■appliances of science and a development 
commerce, which were then all-unknown: — and is it still .a -delusion 
to hope for arrangements which will obviate the necessity 0^ 
a recurrence to ‘the last resort,’ the appeal to the force of arms? 

6. Of the wild tribes which infested the territory of China pro- 
per during the Ch‘un Ts‘ew period, and surrounded it on -e-very 
side, it is impossible to give an entirely satisfactory account. After 
we have -gathered up the information supplied by Confucius and 

The rufle tribes in China and|around it. the •Commentary of Ts.O, there OCCUl* 

questions -connected with -them to which we do not ‘find any roply- 
In the Shoo Y. ii., at the final struggle of king Wo.o with the last 
king of -Shan g, we find ‘ the Yimig, the Shiih, the Keang, the Maoji) 
theWei, the Loo, theP‘ang, andthe Fuh,’ eight-tribes from the south- 
west, having their .seats mostly in -Ihe present iprovimces of .Sze-oh‘.oen 
and Hoorpih, alLassisting the former. As most of them appear during 
the Ch‘un-Ts‘ew period, o.ccupyiiug -the same locations, the probability 
is, that, when -Shang w.as subdued, the-y ireceived their share of .tlm 
spoils, andreturned to -their fastnesses. Some honours and titlesmay 
have been conferred, besides, on their chiefs by Woo, but it do.es not 
appear that they acknowledged any allegiance to -the House of Chow- 
If they did, Ave may be sure it was nothing more than nominal. 

The wild tribes are generally divided into four classes, called by 
different names, according to their situation relative to the Middle 

122] 


cH. m.J 


THK TKIBES OF TIIK JUNG. 


[PJlOlEOOMrNA. 


States, Tlieiv were the »Tnng,* or hordes of the west; the Teih,^ or 
hordes of the north; the or hordes of the east; and the Man,^ or 
hordes of the south. These designations are in the main correct, 
yet we find Jung tribes widel}^ diffused, and not confined to the 
west only. When wc bring together the hints and statements of 
the Text and the Commentary, the knowledge obtained concerning 
the four classes may be brought within small compass. 

First, of the Jung. Seven divisions of these are indicated. 

[i.] At the beginning of the period, we find tribes in the neigh- 
bourhood of Loo, which are simply called Jung, and whose seat was 
in the present district of Ts‘aou, department Ts‘aou-chow. Yin is 
introduced twice in his 2d 3'ear covenanting with them. In his 
7tli year, we find them making captive an earl of Fan, on his 
return from Loo to the royal court, and carrjdng him off with them 
to their own settlements. Duke Hwan covenants with them in his 
2d year. Duke Chwang in his 18th year pursues them across the 
Tse river; and in his 20th year they are invaded by a force from 
Ts‘e. In his 24th year they make an inroad into the State of Ts‘aou, 
and compel a Ke, who may have been the earl of it, to flee to Ch'in, 
The duke appears in his 26th year conducting an expedition against 
them; and after that we hear nothing more about them. We may , 
suppose that they were then finally subdued, and lost their indh 
viduality among the populationfof Loo. 

[ii.] There were the ‘Northern Jung,’® the ‘Hill Jung,’® and the 
‘ Woo-chungs,’7 are referred to the present Tsun-hwa Chow® in 
Chih-le. Tso mentions an incursion which they made in the 9th 
year of duke Yin into Ch‘ing, when they sustained a great defeat, 
chiefly because they fought on foot, and had no chariots like the 
States of Chow. According to him, moreover, they invaded Ts‘e in 
the 6th year of Hwan, and were again defeated through the assistance 
of Ch'ing. In the 30th year of Chwang, they reduced the State of 
Yen to great distress, and Ts‘e directed an expedition against them, 
which brought away great spoil. In the lOth year of He, the mar- 
quis of Ts‘e and the baron of Hen appear engaged in an invasion 
of them; and we hear no more* of them till the 4th year of 
Seang, when Kea-foo, viscount of Woo-chung (according to Too, the 
capital of the Hill Jung), presents a number of tiger and leopard 
skins to Tsin, begging that that State would be in harmony with the 


123 ] 


rnoT.KGOMnNA.] 


THE CHINA OF THE CIFUN TS‘EW PERIOD. 


fen. in. 


Jung. Ill a discussion at the court of Tsin on the advances thus 
made, one of its ministers argued for a conciliatory policy on five 
grounds, the first of which was that these tribes were continually 
changing their residence, and were fond of selling their lands for 
goods, so that thc}' might be acquired without the trouble and 
risks of war. Lastly, in the first year of duke Ch‘aou, an officer of 
Tsin inflicts a great defeat on the Woo-cliungs and the various tribes 
oftlieTeih; after which we have no further mention of the Hill 
Jung, the Northern Jung, or the Woo-chungs. They, no doubt, 
disappeared among the multitudes of Tsin. 

[iii-] There were the ‘Jung of Luh-hwan,’® who had also the 
names of the ‘Jung of the surname Yun,’^® the ‘Little Jung,’^^ the 
‘Keang Jung,’i2 the ‘Yin Jung,’i3 and the ‘ Jung of Kew-choAv. 
These had originally dwelt in the far west, in the territory Avbicli 
now forms Suli Chow^® in Kan-suh, which they^ called Luh-hwan; 
but in the 22d year of duke He, Tsin and Ts‘in united in removing 
them to E-ch‘uen, or the present district of Sung,^® in the department 
of Ho-nan. In Chwang’s 28th year they are called the Little Jung, 
and it appears that the mother of duke Hwuy of Tsin belonged to 
their tribe. In the 33d year of He, they give, as the Keang Jung, 
important help to Tsin in a great defeat which it inflicted on the 
troops of Ts‘in in the valley of Heaou. In the 3d year of Seuen, 
Ts‘oo invaded them, and they seem to have coquetted subsequently 
both with Ts‘oo and Tsin, which led to the final extinction of their 
independence by the latter power in the 17th year of Ch‘aou. I^^ 
his 7th year a body of them appears as the Yin Jung, under the 
command of an officer of Tsin, and mention is made of how they 
had troubled the Royal Domain, and the Ke States generally, since 
their removal from their original seat. In the Chuen on Ch‘aoti, 
xxii. 8, another body of them is called the Jung of Kew-choAV, and 
the same branch of them is mentioned as late as the 4th year of Gae. 

[iv.] There were the ‘Jung of Yang-k‘eu, Ts‘euen-kaou, and 
about the E and the Lob,’i7 who had their seats about those two 
rivers, in the present district of Loh-yang, and perhaps other parts 
of the department of Ho-nan. Yang-k‘eu and Ts‘euen-kaou are 
taken to be the names of their principal settlements or towns. ' Thus 
these tribes infested the Royal Domain, and they were at one time 


w jiij 4H 5®. 


16 


124 ] 


12 


cn. nt.] 


THE TRIBES OF THE JUNG. 


[rnOI.EGOMEXA. 


very troublesome to the capital itself. Tn the 11th year of duke He, 
on the invitation of the king’s brother Tae, they attacked it with all 
their strength, entered the royal citj*, and burned one of its gates. 
Tsin and Ts‘in came to the help of the king, and obliged the Jung 
to make peace with him; but in the following year the services of 
the marquis of Ts‘e, who was then the presiding prince among the 
States, were required for the same purpose, and in He’s 16th j’ear 
he was obliged to call out the forces of all the States to occupy the 
Domain, and keep the Jung in check. Tn the 8th year of Wan, an 
officer of Loo, having gone to the west to meet a minister of Tsin, 
took the opportunity to make a covenant .with these Jung, who, it is 
supposed, were them meditating an attack on Loo. Onl 3 »^ once again 
do we meet with them. In the 6th j^ear of duke Ch‘ing they are 
associated with other tribes, and with the forces of Tsin, Wei, and 
dicing, in an incursion into Sung. By this time they had probably 
settled down in the Domain as subjects of Chow. 

[v.] There were the ‘Man,’i® called also the ‘Jung Man’^^ to 
distinguish them from the Man of the south, and the ‘Maou Jung,’^o 
whose seats were in the present Joo-chow,2i Ho-nan. The Jung who 
are mentioned in the Chuen after VI. xvii. 5 as having been sur- 
prised by Kan Ch‘uh of Chow, when they were drinking spirite, 
belonged to these; and in the first year of Ch‘ing the royal army 
received a severe defeat from them. The Mans are enumerated 
among the other tribes in the expedition against Sung in the 6th 
year of Ch‘ing, as mentioned above. In the 5th year of Seang we 
find the king sending a member of the royal House to the court of 
Tsin with a complaint against them. In the 16th year of Ch'aou, 
Ts‘oo appears in the field, inveigles Kea, viscount of the Man, into 
its power, and puts him to death; then establishes its superiority 
over all their territory, and appoints Kea’s son as viscount in his 
room. Thenceforth this branch of the Jung appears to have been 
subject to Ts‘oo. They rebelled against it in the 4th year of duke 
Gae; and when their viscount Ch‘ih was driven to take refuge in 
Tsin, that State gave him up to Ts‘oo; — a proceeding which is justly 
deemed to have been disgraceful to it. 

[vi.] There were the ‘Dog Jung,’— whose original seat was in 
the present department of Fung-ts‘eang, Shen-se. !Many critics 
identify them with the Heen-yun of the She in H. i. VH. and 
other odes, though Choo He says that these belonged to the Teih. 

IS®^. 193K®. 20^^- 


125 ] 


THE CHINA OF Tin; CII‘UN TS'EW J'Einon. 


[cii. in. 


iMior.Kr.oMKK.\.] 

Jn B.c. 770 they made common cau.se with the marcjiiis of Slun, and 
joined him in his measures against king Yew. Then, contrary to the 
wishes of the marquis, tlicy gave the reins to their own greed of 
plunder, spoiled the capital, — the old capital of Fung, and put tlie 
king to death. Tsin and Ts‘in came to the relief of the court, and 
drove the Jung away; but some brandies of them apjiear to have 
maintained themselves in the more eastern regions which they had 
found, so attractive. In the 2d year of Min, the duke of Kwoh 
defeated them near the junction of the Wei with tlie Ho, and again, 
in the second j^ear of He, at a place in the present district of Wan- 
heang, Shen Chow, 23 Shan-se. This is the last we hear of them. 
Their original territorj^, no doubt, fell to the lot of Ts‘in, hut any 
portion of the tribe, which had settled on the east of the Ho, would 
be absorbed b}^ Tsin. 

[vii.] There were the ‘Le Jung,’^^ who occupied in the present 
district of Lin-t‘ung, department Se-gan. According to the Chuen 
on III. xxviii. 1, duke Heen of Tsin invaded their territory, the 
chief of which, who had the title of baron, gave him his daughter in 
marriage. She was the Le Ke whose union with Heen was the occasion 
of so much confusion- and misery in Tsin. That State, soon after, 
put an end to the independent existence of the tribe. 

The above are all the tribes of the Jung mentioned in the Gh‘un 
Tsew and in Tso, excepting the Loo Jung, of whom I shall have to 
speak when we come to the Man of the South. Neither the sage nor his ' 
commentator had occasion to bring forward any others, for only these 
made their appearance in connexion with the States of China during 
the Ch‘un-Ts‘ew period. There were, however, many more tribes, 
which constituted, properly speaking, the Jung of the west, by the 
absorption of which it was that Ts‘in reached such an eminence of 
power. 

Second, of the Teih. Sze-ma Ts‘een and Too Yu, the latter led away 
probably by Sze-ma, place some tribes of these on the west of the Ho; 
but so far as the evidence of Confucius and Tso-she goes, they ar® 
all to be sought on the east of that river, and appear extending 
from it, along the north of the different States, as far as the pre- 
sent Shan-tung. Up to the time of duke Seuen, we read in the 
text only of the Teih, but subsequently there appear two great 
divisions of them, — ^the ‘Red Teih, ’25 and the ‘ White Teih.’^® Then 
the Red Teih are no more mentioned after the third year of duke 

24 25^.>fg. 2GQfg. 

126 ] 


oil. 111.1 


THE TKIBES OF THE TEIH. 


[PBOLEGOMBKA. 


01i‘ing, and the extinction of several tribes of them is recorded; but 
the White continued beyond the Ch‘un-Ts‘ew period, and one tribe 
of them held its own till the time of the Warring States, when its 
chief took the title of king, and contended with the other combatants 
for the possession of all the dominions of Chow. 

Of the Red Teih six tribes seem to be specified: — the ‘ Kaou-lohs 
of the eastern hills, whose seat was the present district of Yuen- 
k -euh, Keang Chow, Shan-se ; the Tseang-kaou-joo,28 whose seat is 
unknown ; the ‘Loos,’29 who have left their name in the district of 
' Loo-shing, department Loo-gan, Shan-se; the ‘Keahs,’®® who occu- 
pied in the present district of Ke-tsih, department Kwang-pfing, 
Chih-le; the ‘Lew-yu,’3i in the present district of T‘un-lew, depart- 
ment Loo-gan above; and the ‘Toh-shin,’®^ who were also somewhere 
in the same department. 

Of the White Teih there were three tribes: — the ‘Seen-yu,’ or the 
‘Ohnng-shan,’33 in the present district of Ching-ting, department 
Ching-ting, Chih-le; the ‘ Fei,’®^ in Kaou-shing district of the same 
department; and the ‘Koo,’®® in Tsin Cliow, also in Ching-ting. 

I will now give an outline of what is related about the Teih in 
the text and in Tso. 

[i.ij While there is no intimation of any general distinction among 
their tribes. 

They appear first in the 32d year of Chwang, invading the small 
State of King, which was by no means able to cope with them. 
Ts‘e went in the first place to its rescue, but in the first year of He 
Hing removed its principal city to a situation where it would be 
more out of the way of the Teih, and the forces of Ts‘e, Sung, and 
Ts‘aou are introduced as fortifying the new capital. 

About the same time the Teih attacked the more considerable 
State of Wei, and nearly annihilated it. In the 2d j'^ear of i^Iin, 
they took its chief city, the inhabitants of which fled across the Ho. 
There only 730 people, men and women, could be got together 
again, and when to them were added the inhabitants of the two other 
chief to WHS of the State, the whole did not amount to more than 5,000 
souls. This gives us a correct, but not an exaltedidea, of the resource.s 
of many of the -States of Chow in those days. Ts‘e went to the help 
of AVei, as it had done in the case of Hing, gathered up the ruins of the 
State, and called out the other States to prepare a new capital for it. 

2 - ^ 2 s /g ^ 2 ® ^ lA:- 31 

127 ] 


I'UOLKUUMKNA.] 


Tllli CHINA OF TIIK CII‘UN TS'EW PEIHOD. 


[cii. Ill< 


, While the Teih were thus successful against Hing and Wei, they 
came into contact with the Power which was ultimately to destroy 
their independence. In the 2d year of Min, the marquis of Tsia 
sent his eldest son against the settlements of the Kaou-lohs. Other 
expeditions followed, and in the 7th year of He a general of' that 
State inflicted a defeat oii.a portion of the Teih; hut, when urged 
to follow up his victoiy, he said that he onl}' wanted to frighten 
them, and would not accelerate a rising of all their tribes. The 
consequence was that in the following year we have the Teih 
retaliating by an invasion of Tsin. 

, In duke He’s 10th year they penetrated into the Royal Domain, 
and overthrew the State of Wan,3<> the viscount of which fled to Wei. 
From that time, for several years, we find Wei, Cliflng, and Tsin, 
one after another, suffering from their incursions. In He’s 18th 
year Ts‘e was in confusion in consequence of the death of duke 
Hwan, and the Teih went to succour the partizans of his younger 
sons; and two years after, Ts‘e and they made a covenant in the 
capital of Hing. In the 24th j^ear they invaded Chflng, Avhich the 
king, who was then in great distress from the machinations of 
his brother Tae, took for some reason as an acceptable service to 
himself. He married a daughter of one of their chiefs, and made 
her his queen; — a position of which she soon proved herself un- 
worthy. 

In He’s 31st year we find them again actively engaged against 
Wei, which was compelled to make another change of its capital. R 
was able, however, the year after, to make in its turn an incursion 
into their settlements, when they entered into a covenant with it, and 
left it unmolested till the 13th year of duke Wan. Meanwhile they 
continued their incursions into Ts‘e, and went on to attack Loo and ^ 

' Sung, notwithstanding a check which they received from Tsin m 
the last year of duke He. Loo also defeated them in the 12th year 
of Wan. 

[ii.] In the time of duke Seiien and subsequently, we read no 
more in the same way of the Teih, but of the Red and the White 
Teih. Of the latter we have an earlier mention in the Chuen, m 
the account of the battle of Ke, when Tsin defeated the Teih, as I 
have mentioned above. It is then said that a viscount of the White 
Teih was taken prisoner. From some hints which are found in Tso 
it appears that about this time jealousies began to spring up among 


c». ni.] THE TRIBES OF THE TEIH. 'i;ritoi,j;coMESA. 

the Teihs themselves. . The Red tribes were trj’ing to assert' a 
superioritj’’ which tlie White would not allow, and so they were left,- 
unsupported, to cope witli Tsin for which they were b}’' no means a 
inatcli. 

. . » 

That great State had now' consolidated its resources, and it made, 
short w'ork of the Red Teih. They invaded it in Seuen’s 4th and 
7th 5 'ears, and met with little opposition; Tsin purposely retiring, 
before them to increase their arrogance. But in his 15th year an 
army entirely reduced the tribe of the Loos, and carried off their 
viscount Ying-urh; and next year another army similarly reduced 
the Keahs and the LSw'-j'U. In the Sd year of Ch‘ing, Tsin and, 
Wei joined in an invasion of the Tseang-kaou-joo, w'ith wdioin they 
dealt probably in the same w'ay; for w'e have no further mention of 
the Red Teih. Wherever the Teih are mentioned after this, other 
circumstances show' that the White Teih are meant. 

[iii.] The White Teih made a bolder resistance, nor w'as Tsin 
ever able to destro}' the independence of the tribe of the Seen-yu. 

In the 8th year of Seuen, we find the White Teih associated w'ith 
Tsin in the invasion of Ts‘in. They would seem to have broken off 
entirely from the Red Teih, and to have been willing to join with 
the State w'hich was in deadly hostility with them. Three years 
after, the marquis of Tsin had a great meeting, at a place within 
their territories, w'ith all their tribes. ■ 

The alliance thus formed betw'een them and Tsin w'as not very 
lasting. In the 9tli year of Ch'ing, they are confederate wdth Ts‘iii 
and Ts‘oo in invading Tsin; but they took nothing by their fickle- 
ness, for Tsin inflicted a defeat upon them in Ch‘ing’s 12th year. 

In Seang’s 18th year, an embassy from them visited the court of 
Loo, — for w'hat purpose w'e cannot tell. Ror are they again mention- 
ed in the sage’s text, though the Chuen speaks frequently of them. 

In Seang’s 28th year, they appear, w'ith the States w’hich acknow- 
ledged the presidency of Ts'oo, visiting at the court of Tsin, — in 
accordance w'ith ithe treaty of Sung. It would th us appear that 
they had gone over finally to the side of Ts*oo. They soon suffered 
for their course. In Ch‘aou’s first year, an army of Tsin, under 
Seun Woo, defeated them .xit Ta-loo. In his 12th year, the same 
commander put an end to the independent existence of the Fei 
tribe, and carried aw'a}' their viscount pr-isoner. So lie dealt with 
•the Koo tribe in Ch'aou’s loth j'ear; but he subsequently restored its 
viscount, W'hich seems to have encouraged them to revolt again, and 
in Ch'aou’s 22d year, ‘ Seun Woo a second time extinguished Koo.’ 

129] : r 


I'KOUKOOMUNA,] 


Tiu: CIII.VA OK THE CII'UN TS‘EW PEKIOD. 


fell. Ul. 


The Seen-yu were not so easily disposed of, Tsiii attacked this 
tribe in Cli‘aou’s 12th year, and in his 13th and loth, but without 
any decisive success. In the 3d year of Ting tlie army of Tsin was 
defeated by it, but returned to the attack in tlie following year, 
assisted by a force from Wei. Soon after this, the great families of 
Tsin began contending among themselves, and no elfective action 
could be taken against the Seen-)^. The tribe maintained its 
independence on into the period of the Warring States, and finally 
yielded to the kingdom of Chaou about the j'ear u.c. 296. 

Third, of the E. Confucius is reported, in the Analects, IX. xih., 
as declaring that he would like to go and live among ‘ the nine 
E,’ on which expression it is generally said that there were nine 
tribes of the E. There may have been so many originally, 
Confucius ma}' have used a phrase which had come down as desenp* 
tive of them from a former time. But we do not find nine tribes, 
nor even half that number, mentioned in the Cli‘un Ts‘ew or m 
Tso’s Commentary. I believe that the power of the E tribes had 
been broken, and that many of them had disappeared among the 
inhabitants of the eastern States, before the time under our notice. 
We have to do only with the ‘E of the Hwae river, of ‘ KSae,’®^ 


‘Lae,’®^ and of ‘ Kin-mow. 

[i.] The tribes of the Hwae were the orilj'^ E whose power- and 
numbers were considerable in the Cli‘un-T.s‘e\v period. The Cbnen 
on V. xiii, 3 mentions that they were at that time distressing the 
State of K‘e, so that they must have penetrated a long way north 
from the river about which lay their proper seats. From that time, 
for more than a hundred years, we do not again meet with them; 
but in the 4th year of duke Ch'aou, at the first meeting of the 
States called by Ts‘oo, we find that the chiefs of these tribes were 
also present, and that they went on, immediately after, under the 
leading of Ts'oo, to invade Woo. One other reference to them 
all that occurs; — under the 27tli year of Ch'aou. Then, in the 
meeting at Hoo, Fan Heea-tsze of Tsin, when enumerating tlie m * 
iiculfcies in the way of restoring duke Cli'aou to Loo, says that tiie 
Head of the Ke family had succeeded in securing the adherence 
of the Hwae E. All these tribes fell in the end to the lot of Ts'oo. 

[ii.] Keae was the name of a small tribe of the E, — ^in the present 
Keaou Chow, department of Lae-chow. In the 29tli year of dulm 
He, their chief comes twice to the court of Loo, when Tso tells 


40 


130 ] 


CH. XU.] 


THE TBIBES OF THE E ANp MAN; 


[pJfOLSQOUSKA, 


ridiculous storj' about his interpreting the lowing of a cow. ^ His 
visit, no doubt, had reference to an incursion which his tribe made 
the year after into Seaou, a dependency of Sung. Keae must have 
been absorbed either by Ts‘e or by Loo. 

[iii.] Lae was in the present district of Hwang, department 
TS,ng-chow, — on the borders of Ts‘e. Its original inhabitants 
appear to have been brought to comparative civilization, and been 
ruled by a viscount of the surname Keang, before the Chhin-Ts‘eW 
period. We find Ts‘e, however, in constant hostility with it from 
its first appearance in the 7th year of duke Seuen to its extinction 
in the 6th year of Seang. 

[iv.] Kin-mow was the principal town of a small tribe of E, — in 
the present district of E-shwuy, department E-chow. Its capture 
bj'' Loo is mentioned in the 9th year of duke Seuen, and afterwards 
it appears, in tlie Chuen on X. viii. 6, as the most eastern city 
belonging to the State. 

Fourth, of tlie Man. We have not much information in the Ch'un 
Ts*ew or in Tso about the tribes of the south, and that for the same 
reason which I have mentioned as making our authorities almost 
silent about the Jung proper, or the hordes of the far west. Ts'oo 
kept the Man under its control, and lay between most of their tribes 
and the States of Chow, so that the two hardly came into contact 
or collision, and the historiographers of the States had little occasion 
to refer to what was taking place among the southern populations. 
What we find related about them will be given under the divisions 
of the ‘Loo Jung,’*i the ‘various tribes of the Man,’^^ the ‘many 
tribes of the Puhj’-^s and the^tribes of ‘Pa.’^* 

[i.] In the Chuen at the beginning of the 13th year of duke Hwau 
we have an account of a fruitless expedition from Ts‘oo against the 
small State of Lo,^® Lo being assisted by an army of the Loo Jung, 
One of the names in king Woo’s ‘ Speech at Muh,’ which I have 
referred to, thus comes here before us. - These Jung occupied what 
is now the district of Nan-chang, in the department of Seang-yang, 
Hoo-pih. Tso says that, tliough they were called J ung, they be- 
longed to the Man of the south. Geographically, they must be 
classed with them. They must have been reduced to subjection by 
T&‘oo not long after the above expedition, and their chief settlement 
converted into the town of Leu;'^® for in the CJmen on VJ. xvi. 6,. 


Ying-tah says this \rns the same ns 


131 ] 


43 p. 44 Q. 

, It should, perhaps, be pronouned Loo. 


46 


rnoLi;«oMr-KA.i TIIK CIIIKA OF THE CIT-UN' TS'EW PEniOD. [cir. ui. 

Ave have an nriny of Ts‘oo marching on from Lon, wliere the Xioo 
Jung had dwelt, and throwing open its granaries to soldiers and 
officers alike. ■ 

[ii.] It is only in the Chnen just referred to, in the 16 th year of 
duke Wan, that mention is made of the ‘many tribes of the Man. 
There was then, we are told, a great famine in Ts‘oo, and the people 
of Yung, who are also mentioned in the Speech at Muh, and who 
had by this time coalesced into a State of some order and civilization, 
took advantage of it to incite a general rising of all the tribes of the 
south against that Power. The Man came to join in the movement 
from their seats in wdiat are no\v the departments of Shin-chow and 
Yuen-chow in Hoo-nari. It was a critical time in the history of 
Ts‘oo, and it was proposed that the capital should be abandoned. 
But bolder counsels prevailed; an army took the field; assistance 
came from Ts‘in and Pa; the Man were severed from the combination, 
and made a covenant on their own account; and Yung was extin- 
guished, that is, the sacrifices of its chiefs were abolished, and it was 
reduced to be a cit}' of Ts‘oo. There is no further mention of the 
Man. in the Ch‘un-Ts‘ew period. It was not till the time of the 
Warring States that Ts‘oo succeeded in depriving them of their 
independence. 

[iii.] The Puh, it has been seen, were among the auxiliaries of 
king Woo in the conquest of Shang. The ‘hundred’ or many 
tribes of them took a principal part in the rising against Ts‘oo, of 
which I have just spoken, and appear in it under the direction of 
the people of Keun,^" a small State between Yung and Lo. Where 
their own settlements were is uncertain. Some say they were in the 
present department of II‘euh-tsing, Yun-nan, which is too far off, 
though some tribes may have wandered there at a subsequent 
period; others, with more probability, place them in the depart- 
ments of Ch‘ang-tili and Shin-chow, Hoo-nan. On the occasion 
under our notice, Wei Kea, one of the generals of Ts‘oo, said about 
them, ‘Thej'^ think that we are unable from the famine to fake the 
field. If we send forth an army, they are sure to be afraid, and 
will return to their own country. The Puh dwell apart from one 
another; and when they are hurriedly going off, each tribe for its 
own towns, who among them w'ill have leisure to think of anybody 
but themselves?’ It happened as he said. In fifteen days from, 
Ts‘oo’s appearing in force there %vas an end of the attempt of the Puh* 


cn. m.1 


THE tiuih::5 of the soirrii. 


[l>UOr.KUCMCNA. 


Only twice more arc they mentioned in the Chuen. In Chaou’s 
9 th year, on occasion of a dispute between Chow and Tsin, the 
representative of the royal court says boastfully that, when Woo 
subdued Shatig, Pa, the Puh, Ts*oo, and Tang were the territories 
of the kingdom in the south; and in his 19th year, we have Ts‘oo 
preparing a naval expedition against the Puh. AYhat became of 
them afterwards I have not been able to ascertain. 

[iv.] Pa in the time of the Ch‘un-Ts‘ew appears as a State ruled 
by viscounts of the surname Ke. It has left its name in the present 
district of Pa, department Chung-k‘ing, Sze-ch‘uen. In the Chuen 
on the 9 th year ot duke II wan, we find it in good relations with 
Ts‘oo, and co-operating with that State in the siege of Yew, a city 
in the present department of Yun-yang, Hoo-pih. Under the IStli 
year of duke Cliwang, Tso tells us that Pa then revolted from Ts‘oo, 
and invaded it, its army advancing even to attack Ts‘oo’s capital. 
The onl}^ other mention of it is in the text of Wan’s 18th year, in 
connexion with the rising of the southern tribes against Ts‘oo, when, 
as has been stated above, Pa and Ts‘in came to the assistance of the 
latter. In the time of the Warring States, Pa fell to the share of 
Ts‘in. 

I have thus gathered up into as brief space as possible the 
information that we derive from the Ch‘un Ts‘ew and Tso about 
the rude and uncivilized or serai-civilized tribes that infested the 
kingdom of Chow or surrounded it. The strongest impression 
which I receive from the review is one of grave doubt as to 
most of Avhat we are told about the previous dynasties of Shang 
and Hea. Is it possible that they could have held the territory 
occupied by the States of Chow for a thousand years before the 
rise of king Woo, and that we should find it, five and six cen- 
turies after his time, in the condition which is revealed to us bj’’ the 
sage and his commentator? I do not think so. We have seen that 
the China of Chow was a small affair; that of Shang and Hea must 
have been much smaller; — extending not so far towards the sea on 
the east, and to a smaller distance north and south of the Yellow 
river. It was evidently, however, in the plan of Providence that 
by the Chinese race all the other tribes in the space now included 
in China proper should be first broken to pieces and stript of their, 
individualities, and then welded as into one homogeneous nation. 
Its superior culture and capabilities fitted it for this task; and the 
process went on very gradually, and with many disturbances and 
interruptions, frequently with ‘hideous ruin and combustion.’ 

133 ] 


I-KOLKGOMKSA.] 


THE CHINA OF THE CII'UN TS'EIV rKIlIOD. 


[CH. III. 


Having first- made good a settlement along tlie Yellow river, in the 
so nth -western parts of the present Slian-se, and perhaps also on the 
other side of the stream, the] early immigrants sent forth their 
branches, scions of diflbrent families, cast, west, north, and south, 
as so many suckers, among the ruder populations sparsely 
scattered about, which gradually gathered round them, till they 
lost their original peculiarities, and were prepared to be collected 
into larger communities, or into States. The first stage in the 
formation of the Chinese nation terminated with the ascendency of 
the State of Is^n and the establishment of its short-lived dynasty. 

We have seen that of the more considerable of the wild tribes 
during the Ch‘un-Ts‘ew period their chiefs had titles like the princes 
of the States of Chow. We read of the viscounts of the Loos, of 
Fei, of Koo, and of tlie Keang Jung, and of the baron of the Le 
Jung; and it has beeii asked whence they derived those titles. "1 he 
Tso Ghuen gives us no information on the point, and I am inclined 
to suppose that they assumed them themselve.s, to assert thereby tlieir 
equality with the feurlal nobles of Chow. ’ Where they claimed to 
be the descendants of some great name in former ages of Chinese 
historv, it would be easier to do so: and the title might- be acknow- 
lodged by the kings of Chow. Or where intermarriages were forinea 
with them by the royal House, or by the princes of the States, as 
we know was frequently done, the fathers of the brides might be 
ennobled for the occasion, and then the titles would be jealously 
retained. But the title was generally, I believe, the assumption of 
arrogance, as the Chinese would deem it. 

There is one passage in the Chuen which shows that the tribes 
differed from tlie Chinese not only in their habits of life, but also m 
their languages. In the account of the meeting at Heang in the I4th 
year of duke Seang, which was attended by the representatives of 
more than a dozen States, and by the chief of at least one of the 
Jung tribes, Avho was a viscount (though the text does not say so), 
Fan Seun-tsze appears as wanting on behalf of Tsin to seize the 
viscount, who belonged to the Keang Jung or the J ungof Luh-hwan, 
attributing the loss of Tsin’s power and influence to unfavourable 
reports of its proceedings leaking out through them among the 
other States. The viscount makes a good defence, and says in con- 

48 There is tlie saying of Confucius in the Analects, HI, v.: — ‘ The rude tribes of the cast and 
north have tlieir rulers, and are not like the States of our great land wliicli are without them- 

jtnout adopting: the view of Ho An u'liich I have given in my note upon the passage, I conciH 
that the sage is merely uttering a lament over the disorganization and disobedience to authority; 
Which lie saw going on in Loo and other States. The rude tribes obeyed tlie ‘ Powers tliat were 
among tiicni, titled or untitled ; but very dliTerent was the state of tilings in Chinn. 

134 ] 


CH. 111.3 


THE LANGUAGES OF THE TBIBES. 


[l'ill>l.KG031£NA; 


elusion: — *Oiir food, our drink, and our clothes are all different from 
those of the Flotvery States; we do not exchange silks or other 
articles of introduction with their courts; their language and ours 
do 7iot admit of intercourse heiiveen us and them: — what evil is it 
possible for us to have done?’ If it was so with those Jung, it was 
the same, doubtless, with other tribes as well; and they had, probably, 
different languages among themselves, or at least different dialects 
of the same language which would render communication between 
them difficult. Even where the oiitljung chiefs or princes claimed 
connexion with the House of Chow, or traced their first appoint- 
ment to it, the languages spoken in their States may have been 
different from that of China proper. I have pointed out how the 
names of the lords of Woo, both in structure and sound, do not appear 
to be Chinese. And in the account of Tsze-wan who had been 
chief minister of Ts‘oo, given in the Chuen on VII. iv., his name 
of How-woo-t‘o6 is explained by reference to the fact that he had been 
suckled by a tigress, when he was a child and cast away in a forest. 
The people of Ts'oo, we are told, called suckling now^ an d their name 
for a tiger was woof 00; and hence when the child was grown up, he 
was known by the name of Now-woof oo, or Tiger-suckled. It 
woiild so happen that the languages of the people, who were not of 
a Chinese origin, and of their chiefs, would differ for a time; but in 
the end, the culture and the force. of the superior race prevailed to 
bring the language and other characteristics into conformity with it. 


135] 


rSOLKOOSIKNA,] 


JJOOIC USED IX 1'IIEI‘AKIXG TIIK WOIIK. 


[C'H. IV. 


CHAPTER IV. 

LIST 01' THE HllECIPAL WORKS WHICH HAVE BEEN E5IPL0TBD 
IH THE PREPARATION OP THIS VOLUME. 

SECTION I. 

CHINESE WOHKS; WITH BRIEF NOTICES OF THEM. 

r T pi-olcg. to vol. 1., p. 129);— 

[’•] ^ ^ f-vj- nit ^ “f' ^1 ‘Tlio Ch ‘un Ts‘civ and the 

Ohueii o£Tm, wirh Cominiintary and E-vpIanations: in 60 Books;’ 

["•] ‘ The Ch ‘nn Ts‘ew and 

t le Ohuen of Kung-yang, with Coinmentai-y and Explanations; in 

Pii-] ‘The Ch‘un Ts‘ew and tka 

Oliuen of ICuh-leang, with Commentary and Explanations; in 20 
Books.’ 

Tlie above three Works are of course K‘ung Yin<r-tah’s edifioiis 
of the labours of Too Yu, Ho Hew, and Fan Hing, oii the text of 
the Ch‘un Ts‘eNv and the early Commentaries of Tso-she, Kung- 
yang, and Kuh-lSang; of all of which 1 have spoken in the first 
^chapter of these prolegomena. K'ung’s own explanations are as 
learned and prolix as in the case of the other Classics. Very little 
is to be gleaned after him from the books that have come down to 
us of the dynasties from the Han to the T‘ang. I have generally 
used the edition of the thirteen King by Yuen Yuen; and to the text 
of the She in it I have referred in the prolegomena to vol. lY., p. 172. 
ihe student should use no other, where this is procurable. The 

contain Yuen’s examination of K‘ung’s texts 

1^ gS ‘Compilation and Digest of Com- 

mentaries^ and Remarks on the Ch‘un Ts‘ew. By imperial 
aut ority. In 40 Books, the first two being occupied with intro- 
uctoiy matter. The Work was ordered and its preparation 
entrusted to a committee of the principal scholars of the empire 

period K‘ang-he, and appeared in 

1 ^ generally called it the 

ng- le Ch un Ts‘ew. It deserves the praise which I have 
bestowed on the imperial editions, in the present dynasty, of the 
Shoo and the She, though I have been disposed to dissent more 
136] 


C», iv.j 


HOOKS USKl) IK PKKl’AUIKG TllK WOlUv. 


[i'Uoi.i;uu.ni;xlv. 


frcqm'iitly iVoin the tlecisions of the editors themselves. Tlic}' drew 
in preparing it from 134 writers; — 3 of the Chow dynasty; 10 of 
the Ilan; 1 oftheTsin: 2 of the Su}'; 13 of tlie Pang; 57 of the 
Sung; 12 of the Yuen; and 36 of the Ming. 

According to their plan, tliere arc subjoined to the text occasion ally 
brief notices of tiic diiVerent readings, tiie pronunciation of characters, 
and the matter. Then follow the Commentaries of Tso, Kung-yang, 
Kuh-leang, and Hoo Gan-kwoli ^ styled for the 

most part in full; but the editors sometimes take it on them to curtail 
or even suppress them entirely where they think them to be in error. 

IIoo Gan-kwoh was a scholar and officer of the Sung djmasty 
(born in 1,074; died in 1,138). His commentary on our classic, in 
30 Books, is not intrinsicall}* of much value, but it was received 
on its ptiblication with great applause bj’ Kaou Tsung, the first 
emperor of the southern Sung djmasty; and all through the Ming 
dynasty its authority was supreme. It formed the standard for. 
competitors at the litcrar}' examinations. Having given those four 
Commentaries, the editors draw upon their host of Authorities 
(^4 ff^), and conclude, when they think it necessaiy, with their own 
decisions 

6. There was published in 1,677, at the district city of Keun-shan 
[ip, department Soo-chow, K§ang-soo, a large collection of W orks . 
on the Classics, under the title of taken from the name 

of the hall or library of the gentleman to whom the books belonged. 
The expense of publication seems to have been borne by a Manchoo, 
called Nah-lan Ch‘ing-tih, with the style of Yung-joh }jk& 

The Collection contains 33 Works on the Ch‘un Ts'ew, all 
but the last by writers of the Sung and Yuen dynasties. I have had 
the opportunity of consulting: — 

[i.] ^ ^ ‘ Commentaries on the Ch‘un Ts‘ew.’ In 15 

Books; by Lew Ch‘ang C^J styled born 1,019, died 1,077. 

The author had written an earlier Work on the Ch'un Ts‘ew, called 

under notice remained in manuscript, until' 
the publication of the Collection in which we now find it, Still there 
seems no doubt of its genuineness. Lew draws largely on the thi'ee 
early Commentaries, but decides between them according to his own 
judgment, having adopted, however, the praise-and-censure theory 
from Kung-yang and Kuh-leang. 

[ii.] ^ ^ ‘ Commentaries on the Ch‘un Ts‘ew.’ In 20 Books, 

by Yeh Mung-tih styled and also called 

These last two characters are generallj' prefixed to the title of 

137 ] 


i*ko?,i:oomi:na.] 


HOOKS USKl) IN* I’llEPAHING THE WOHK. 


[cit. ir. 


tlie Work, to distinguish it from the preceding and others. The 
author 'vvas born in 1,077, and died in 1,148. He shows on the one 
Imnd his dissent from Sun Fuh and others who wished to discard 
the three earl}^ Commentaries altogether, and not go beyond the text 
for its explanation, and on the other hand from Soo Cheh, who held 
to Tso-she and paid no regard to Rung and Kuh. 

[hi.] ‘A general Exposition of the Ch‘un Ts‘e\v.’ 

In 13 Books; by Hwang Chung-yen (fit styled 
scholar of the Sung dynasty, who seems for some reason or other not 
to have advanced beyond his first degree. His Work was completed 
in 1,230. He entirely discards the pi’aisc-and-censure theory, and 
is more than necessarily independent in his treatment of the three 
early Commentaries, 

[iv.] ‘ Collected Comments on the Clrun Ts'ew.’ In 

11 Books; by Chang Heah (jJRJ&j styled a scholar of the 

first half of the 13th century. He had previously prepared a Work 
on the classic, which he called and, dissatisfied Avith 

the finish of it, he prepared the present one, in which he strove to 
imitate the style and manner of Choo He on the Analects and Men- 
cius; — and hence its name of It is a useful Work, very 

perspicuous. 

[v.] . ^ ^ ^ 59, ‘The meaning of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew Catechetically 
elicited.’ In 20 Books; by Leu Ta-kwei C § ;/c styled ^ 
also called who took his 3d degree in 1,247. The catechetical 

form enables the author to bring out his views Avith force; but there 
is nothing Avhich can be called peculiarly his OAvn. As betAveen the 
early commentators, he adheres to Tso for the facts, and to Kuh-leang 
for the principles, having much to say against Kung-yang, and more 
against Ho Hew. 

[vi.] ‘Digest to help in reading, the Ch'un Ts‘eAV. 

In 12 Books; by Ch‘in Shin stjded who lived botli 

in the Sung and Yuen dynasties. He had given to his study th® 
name of ^ which characters often enter info the title of his 
Work. He makes constant use of Tso’s Commentary, but is an 
advocate of the vicAvs of Hoo Gau-kwoh. 

[Aui.] ‘The Records in the Cli‘un TseW 

arranged under the States to Avhich they severally belong.’ L* 
Books ; Ts‘e Le-k‘een ^ ^ ; styled 'j^). His preface is 
dated in 1,319. The peculiar character of the Work is shoAA'u in 
the title. He has placed the notices belonging to Loo before those 
of Chow; — very naturally, it seems to mo, but the critics profess to 

138] 


Cll. IV.j 


BOOKS USKl) IX rilHPAUlXr; TIIK WORK. 


[FJtOnBCIOMtiN'A. 


be sljocketl by the arrangement. A good deal of freedom is shown 
in the handlijig of subjects. 

[viii.] ijjlC pje 111 ], * The meaning of tlie Chhin Ts‘e\v Catecheti- 
eally elicited.’ In 10 Hooks; by Ch'ing Twan-heoh 
styled called also who took his third degree in 1,321. 

lie was much employed in the ollice of historiography, and corn- 
po.‘!cd the Work next mentiotied and another on the Ch‘un Ts‘e\v 
before he felt ecjttal to this, which is reckoned his chef d^mivre. It 
betrays a sceptical disposition ifi reference to the three early Corn- 
inontnrie.s, and is particularly rich in adducing the opinions of the 
Sung scholars. 

[ix.j ‘The proper Meaning of the ChMin Ts‘ew.’ 

In 30 Hooks; b}' Ch'ing Twan-hiioh above. This was his earliest 
AVork on our Classic, and shows the same tendencies which are 
full}' developed in ‘The Meaning Catcchetically elicited.’ He gives 
the names of 176 Works and Authors, which he had consulted in 
preparing for his task. 

[x,] ^ ^ the Commentaries on the Ch‘im 

Ts‘ew in one view.’ In 24 Books; b}' Le Leen styled 

The Author’s preface bears date in 1,349, towards the end of the 
Yuen dynasty. The substance of the three early Commentaries, 
and of their editors, Too Yu, Ho Hew, and Fan Ning, of K‘ung 
Ying-tah, Hoo Gan-kwoh, Ch'ing E-ch‘uen, Ch'in Foo-leang 

and Chang Heah, is all to be found here, with the judgments 
on their different views of Le Leen himself. It is a Work of great 
value. 

[xi.] ^ ^ till ‘My Master’s Teachings on the Ch'un Ts'ew.’ 
In 3 Books; by Chaou Fang styled First pub- 

lished in 1,348. The author had studied under Hwang Tsih 
famous for his knowledge of the Yih King and the Ch'un Ts‘ew; and 
here he gives what he had learned from him on the true meaning of 
those Classics, and the successes and failures of previous commenr 
tators. 

[xii.] ‘The Style and Expression in the Ch'un 

Ts'ew on similar Subjects.’ In 15 Books; by the same author 
as tile above. This is an ingenious attempt to make out the 
principles by which Confucius was guided in his work of compil- 
ing the Ch'un Ts'ew from the historiographers of Loo. His princi- 
pal Authorities are Too Yu and his own master Hwang Tsih ; 
but he often differs from them. He did his work well; but we have 
seen that all conclusions on the subject must be very uncertain., 

139] 


. noONS IJSKJ) IN I’HKl'AniNG TllH WOKK. 


fell. IV. 


[xiii.] ‘4^ llii K t'JJ fsili ilitj ‘ Supiilcmciifary Gojiiincnts on the 
Chnen of Tso-slic*.’ In It) l^oolc.s, tlio same Cliaoii Fang. A valu- 
able Work. 'J'lie writer lia.s before him the three early Commentaries, 
and it is Iiis oliject to correct errors and suppl}' defects in Tso from 
Knnir-yang and Knli-lcang. He lias also before him the labours of 
Too Yii on T.so and of Clrin Foo-leang on Kiih-leang, and lie en- 
deavours ‘ to take wliat is long in tlie one to supplement what is short 
in the other.’ 

19. ^ iflj, ‘ The LaAvs of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew Explained. J3y 

Too Yu; in 10 Books. This was a production of Too Yu, after he 
had completed his great \York on Tso’s Chuen. It contains laws of 
style under 42 heads; then proceeds to the names of places, gene- 
alogies, and Too’s scheme of the chronology of the Ch‘un-Ts'ew 
period. It seems to me tliat three different Works of Too have 
here got mixed together. Ohoo E-tsun mentions the Laws of Style 
as a Work b}^ itself, published under the Sung dynasty in^ 1^ 
Books; noting that he had not been able to see it. He also notices 
the CIironolog 3 ' as a Work by itself, saying that only Too’s preface 
to it remains. Indeed the Avhole was long supposed to be lost, but 
it was reproduced, as we have it now, in 1,777, from a Collection made 
in the period Yung-loh (1,403-1,424) of the Ming dynasty. 

20. The ^ 1^. contains several Works on the Cldun Ts Sw 

by the scholars of the present dynasty. I have used: — , 

[!•] ^ ^ lit 15? jEi ‘ Supplement, with Corrections, to Toos 

Explanations of the Tso Chuen.’ In 3 Books; by Koo Yen-Avoo (See 
proleg. vol. IV., p. 101). Contains many useful hints ® 

translator of Tso. Koo makes much use of tAvo scholars of the Ming 

^), who had made 


dynasty, — Shaou Paou (§|5 and Foo Sun 
it their business to discover the mistakes of Too. 
[ii.] 


iy>«As ‘Jottings in the study of 
In 10 Books; by Wan Sze-ta styled 

1,633, died in 1,783. Wan was Avell acquainted Avith the Le 6j 
the official Book of ChoAv, and the E Le, and most of his remar s 
are based upon them. Chinese scholars praise him as having alAvays 
good ground for AA’hat he says. I confess I have been incline 
to call in question — noAV his Authorities, and noAV his interpretation 
of them. 


[iii.] ‘Commentary on the Ch‘un Ts‘ew by 

!Maou.’ This is the A\'ork of Maou K‘e-ling of whom I have ha 
much to saj’’ in my previous volumes. In 35 Books. It is every- 
Avherc referred to in m}’^ notes. Occasionally one has to differ from 

140] 


v’lt. IV. 5 


noOKS USKI) IK l‘HKI*ARIKO THK WOUIC, 


[ruonrccMK-vA. 


the author, but his views have in general coininanclecl iny approval, 
I thought at one time of simply translating liis AVork instead of 
civin" all tlte Tso Chuen; but I considered that to do the latter 
would be more useful for students. Agreeing for the most part 
with Tso, Maou seems glad u-hen he finds reason to differ from liim; 
and he makes How Gan-kwoh his butt. 

D'*-] tiH ‘Errors in the Tablets of the Cli‘un 

Ts‘ew.’ Iti two Books; b}' Alaoii Iv'c-ling. Tliis is a defence of the 
t ON t of Tso against the different readings that are found in Kung 
and ICuh. 

[v.] ® J-'Il IB, ‘An E.vhibition of the Style of the 

Ch‘un Ts‘‘ew according to the analogies of the Subject-matter.’ In 
two Books. Also by Maou K‘c-ling. It contains a good demon- 
stration of the baselessness of the praise-and-ceiisure theoiy, and is 
intended to vindicate Maou’s own four laws of interpretation, given 
in the introduction to his Comnientaiy. 

[vi.] ‘Discourses on the Ch‘un Ts‘ew.’ In 15 Books; 

by liwuy Sze-k‘e (^. dt st 3 ded ^i[i He was also called 
and these two characters are often prefixed to the titles of his Works. 
This one on the Ch‘un Ts‘ew is of great value. The notices in the 
Classic arc all classified; the views or illustrations of them afforded 
in the earl}’^ Commentaries adduced; and the whole adjudicated on 
by the author. 

[vii.] ^ ^ ‘The Geograply of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew 

Examined and Determined.’ In 4 Books; by Keang Yung (See 
proleg, vol. IV., p. 98, n. 6). Displays much research; and is 
particularly valuable as bringing down the identifications of the 
ancient places to the geographical arrangements of the country at 
the present da}^ A foreigner is apt to err, as I have sometimes 
done in this matter, by accepting the geographical determinations in 
the K‘ang-he edition of our classic, and then finding that the 
arrangement of departments and districts in a province has since 
been changed. 

[viii.] ^ ^ ‘Short Glosses on the Ch‘un Ts‘ew 

and Tso Chuen.’ In one Book; by Shin T‘ung styled ^ 

and also who lived from 1,688 to 1,752, and was em- 

ployed by the government in various literary tasks. He published 
‘short glosses’ on several of the other classics as well as the Ch‘un 
Ts‘ew. I have found them usefuL 

[Lx.] ^ ^ ^ ‘ Supplementary Comments on the Ch‘un 

Ts'ew and Tso Chuen.’ A Work similar to the above. In 8 Books; 

141 ] 


ruoLKooMKNA.] 1J(,0KS USKl) IN niEPAIilNG THE WOUK. Lc». iv. 

^3" *.7 stylocl /i 2 ^). It line! bec*ii growing lip in 

Ins iaiiiil 3 .- for tlirco guiUM’utions, until lie revised the labours of his 
•It lei, gi.u id father, and great-grandfather, added to them his own 
researches, and pnlilished it in 1,7C8. The reader of Too Yu will 
get consuleralde help from it. 

[^•] ^ ‘ J he Language of the Clihin Ts‘ew Deteriniiied 

and Regulated. In 13 Books; by Chwang Ts'un-j’u 

a scholar of the K‘ccn.lung period. The Work is lor the most p.art an 
examination of the Classic according to the views and nomenclature 
of Kung-yang and Ho Mew. 

^ ^ ^ ^S^B^P^^'^i^cntniy Explanations of the 

^ ^^ooks; by Tscaou Semn (jlft#; 
styled ^ and The writer’s principal object was to sup- 

plement K‘ung \ing-talis Explanations of Too Yu’s comments on 
Tso. 

[xii.]^ ^ ^ si, ‘Supplementary’' Comments on the 

tL '^s‘ew and Tso Chuen.’ In 3 Books; by Ma Tsung-leeii 
Intended as a supplement to the Work with the same 
title by Hwuy^Tung, noticed above. 

. ^ ^ ‘On the Laws of Ilo Hew in explain- 

ing the ^mmentary of Kung-yang.’ In JO Books; by Lew Fnng- 
luh (JlJ^ ji^; styled ^ •^), a scholar of the Kea-k‘ing peribcl. A 
Work similar in design to No.x. 

^ ‘Glosses on Ho Hew’s E.^plana- 


W s Ihese are four Works by the same author. I( have 

^t tianslated the titles because they refer to controversies in tlm 
Han dynasty between Ho Hew and Ch‘ing K‘ang-shing. The 
writers object is to maintain the authority of Kung-yang and even 
of Kuh-leang against Tso-she. ° 

[xix.] ^ ^ ^ ^ ‘ Glosses on the different readings in tlie 


text of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew.’ In 13 Books; by Chaou T‘an 
a scholar of the Kea-k‘ing period. 

r?- ^ ‘Remarks on the rules of ceremony insisted 
on ^ y vung-yang.’ In l Book; by Ling Shoo H^); of the same 
period. a believer in Kung-y^ang. 

‘Recollections of Lessons on the meaning of 
PI ‘ Books, three of which are occupied with the 

Wang Yin-che, whose ‘Recollections of Lessons 
the She are noticed in the proleg. to vol. IV., p. 178. 

142 ] 


c». sv.l 


HOOKS irsKi) ik ruKi’AinKG thu wokk. 


[i*koi.j:oomi;sa. 


•11. ^i!i ^ E.\*ainiii{Uion into the jNTames of 

j>hu;fs in the Ch‘mi Ts‘e\v.’ In 1-1 Books; by Kaon Sze-ke 
11^; styled v)^* A^ ^ gfcat scholar of the K‘ar.g-he period. The 
writer sometimes defeats his end by the minuteness of his researches. 
The Work is valuable, but not .'^o convenient for the student as that 
on the same subject by Keang Vung. which I have already noticed. 

•12. ‘"The principal things in the Cli‘un Ts‘e\v 


exhibited in a tabular form.’ In 50 Books, witli one Book of Plates, 
nnd an Appendix. By Koo Tung-kaou (^;fj ; styled iRJI’), a 

scliolar and olliccr of the K‘ang-he and K‘een-lung periods. I have 
met with no Work on tljc Cl>‘un Ts‘c\v more exhaustive, and cer- 
taiid\' with none from which I have myself derived more assistance. 
Tlie authors tables and disquisitions suppl}' the most abundant 
matter for study and research. 

4o. ft '6' ii K ‘ The old Comments on the Ch‘un 

Ts‘cw and Tso Glinen Collected and Preserved.’ In 3 Books (.^ ^0; 
by Yen Wei styled A); published in 1,788. The Work 

is an attempt to gather and preserve the Comments of Fuh K‘een 
and other Commentators of the Han dynasty, to which the writer 
think.s Too Yu was often under obligation without acknowledging it. 

44. ^ ^ iftj ‘ Collected Discourses on the Ch ‘un Ts‘ew 

of Tso-she.’ In 10 Books; with two Books of Introduction and 
Appendix, chiefly on the Laws of the Ch‘un Ts'ew. B}" Choo Goh- 
ling styled and also called ^), a graduate of 

the i\Iing d 3 'nast 3 * who lived on into the present. The Work is 
useful, principallj' because the author is constantly quoting from 
Tan Tsoo and Chaou K‘wang of the T‘ang dynasty, though he does 
not himself agree with them. 

4o. ^ ^ M ‘ ^'he Articles on Divination in the Ch‘un 

Ts‘cw.’ in 3 Books. This is another Work bearing on the inter- 
pretation of the Tso Chuen by Maou K‘e-ling, which has not been 
reprinted in the The title is incorrect, because the 

references to divination in the text of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew are the 
briefest possible, and the Work deals with articles in the Tso Chuen. 
It is said correctly in Maou’s introductory notice that no satisfactory 
attempt to explain those articles had been made by Too Yu, K'ung 
Ying-tah, or any other of the critics. It was bold in Maou to try 
to do so; but I do not think he has succeeded. So far as I have 
attained hithei*to in the study of the Yih King and the ancient divina- 
tion of the Chinese, I have failed to understand their principles; — 
if there be aity principles in them. 


143] 


IMlOH;r,0MKSA.] 


BOOKS USED IN 1‘REI’AIIING THE WOIIK. 


[cH. nr. 


46. ^ ^ i3 ‘ Connexion bet-vveen tlje Notices in 

the text of tlie Cli‘un Ts‘e\v.’ In 11 Boobs; also l)y Maoii K‘e-ling. 
The Work arose out of a dispute between Mnou and the other 
Examiners at the competition for the tliird degree in 1,685, they 
contending that the connexion could only be discovered by means 
of the Chuen, and he that it could be ascertained from the text itself 
The editors of the ‘ Catalogue of the Books in the Imperial Libraries 

’ condemn it as inferior to Maoii’s other 
productions on the Ch‘un Ts‘cw; but, like eveiy other thing tiiat he 
■wrote, there is a great deal of force in many of his reasonings. 

47. ^§ci ‘The most important Points in the Interpreta- 
tion of the Ch‘un Ts‘ew Determined.’ In 6 Books; by Le Shin- 
kuli ^ ^ ; st3’'led ^). The writer adopts the K‘ang-he 
Ch‘un Ts‘ew as the standard for interpreting the Classic, but now 
and then introduces a view of his own. It is a useful Work. 

48. ^ ^ ‘Occasional Jottings to help in reading the 

Tso Chuen.’ In 16 Books; b}^ Ch'ang Mow-lae stj’led 

^ jH). This is one of the most recent Works on our Classic, the 
author’s preface being dated in 1,867. He tells us that tlie Tso 
Chuen had been the mental food of his whole life, and that he had 
published two Works on special subjects connected with it. But 
he was in the habit of reading his favourite author, and the long hst 
of critics and commentators on him, with pencil in hand; and wher- 
ever their remarks seemed to require addition or correction, he made 
his own notes; and so the materials for the present Work grew^ up 
graduallj'- under his hand. One get a good many suggestions 
from it. 

49. ^ ^ ^ ^ ‘ Quiet Discussions on Tso’s 

on the Ch‘un Ts'ew.’ In 3 Books; by Yu Yueli styled jig- ^ 

like the last, a very recent writer. These 3 Books are onlj^ a portion 
of a large AVork on all the classics, published in 1,866. He is help n^ 
in determining the punctuation of the original; in fixing the exa ^ 
meaning of characters; and on the interchanging use of character^ 
by the ancient writers. 

50. ‘ The Elegancies of Tso.’ In 30 Books; by Fung Le-lm n 
st}ded ^ and Luh Haou ; styled 

various preliminary matter on the best -way of reading the f** 
Chuen, &c., the pages in the body of the AYork are divided into t^o 
parts. In the lo'wer part there are given the text and Tso’s Com 
mentary, with the comments of Too Yu at length, Luh Tih-min^ 
pronunciation .of characters, and the glosses of Lin Yaou-sow 

144 ] 


cn. TV.] 


BOOKS USED IK PBEPABIKG THE WORK. 


[rnoi-EGOJreyA. 


IS® of the Sung dynasty, these last often abbreviated, but of real 
value. There are occasional!}^ quotations from K‘ung Ying-tah, and 
from Koo 'i en-\voo’s Work, the first of those mentioned above from the 
Miffs S?- The upper part of the page is occupied with Fung and 
Lull’s own remarks, mostly designed to show the force find beauty 
of Iso’s style. These give the name to the Work. 

^ f'lii ‘ Aids to the reading of Tso.’ In 50 Books ; 
by Kcang Ping-chang, whose Work on the Slie King I have noticed 
in the proleg. to vol. IV., p. 175. The present Work, first publislied 
in 1,768, deserves much of the praise wliich I gave to the former. 
He differs from Too Yu on the laws of style in the classic, and thinks 
that Confucius .simply copied the historiographers of Loo without 
altering or abbreviating their text. 

From the first chapter of these prolegomena it will be seen that I 
have very much adopted these views myself, though aware of the 
objections that can be urged against them. Keang appends short 
essays or disquisitions of his own on the events related to the nar- 
ratives of Tso. 


52. ^ ^ fi, ‘ Explanations of the Ch,‘un Ts‘ew 

and the Tso Chuen from all Sources.* In 60 Books. This Work 
is still in manuscript, having been prepared, with a special view to 
^y own assistance, by my friend Wang T‘aou. It is entitled to the 
praise which I have bestowed, in the proleg. to vol. IV., p. 1/6, on 
his Work on the She. 

53. ^ B ^ # if, ‘ An Examination into the firet days ot 
the moon, and the intercalary months, during the Ch un-Ts 
period.’ In 3 Books; also by Wang T‘aou, and in manuscript. He 
shows the unsatisfactory nature of the chronological schmes pro- 
posed by Too Yu, Koo Tung-kaou, and Ch‘in Hoiv-yaou 

and then proceeds to his task, taking his data ^nowfrom the text, an 
iiow from the Chuen. His mind was first thoroughly stimulated on 
the subject by the Bev. Mr. Chalmers. There is certainly no V ork m 
Chinese on the chronology of the Ch‘uii-Ts‘ew period at a equa o 
this. He has also prepared in Chinese a table of 
nioon and of the winter solstice for the whole period 

54. ^ a ^ 1^, ‘ The Eclipses mentioned in the Ch un 

Ts‘ew, with Plates, and Disquisitions.’ In 1 Book, .^so by V ang 
T‘aou, and in manuscript. For the matter in this treatise, as for that 
in the above, Wang is mainly indebted to Mr. Chalmers. ^ 

■ 55. ^ ^ m ‘Difficulties with regard to the Ch un Ts ew, 

by way of Question and Answer.’ In 1 Book; by V’ang T aou, and 


145 ] 


t'KOI.CGOMKKA.] 


BOOKS USED IN TBEPARING THE WORK. 


fcir. IV. 


in manuscript. This treatise may be considered as AYang’s endeav- 
our to repl}^ to questions proposed b)^ myself, while engaged in the 
preparation and printing of this volume. It embraces most of tlie 
subjects wliich I have discussed in the previous chapters of these 
prolegomena. His answers are more or less satisfictory, but show the 
conservative character of the Chinese mind in regard to the views 
on the classics which have been current since the Han dynasty. 

56. ‘Extracts from the Tso Chuen.’ In 23 
Books; b}^ AA^ei He fj; styled :;]C of the Ming dynasty. This 
AA^ork contains the greater number of the narratives in Tso, those 
of them belonging to the same subject, which in his commentary are 
scattered over several 3 ^ears, being brought together. Explanatory 
glosses from Too Yu, Lin Yaou-sow, and \A^ei He himself are occasion- , 
ally interspersed' throughoutTso’s text, and each paragraph is followed 
by reflections of a general or historical character from the compiler. It 
has been useful to me from the large characters, finely cut, in which 
the cop 5 ^ that I have is printed ; and which is probably a repi^t 
from an edition published in 1,748 by P‘ang Kea-ping 

st 5 ded The fli; of the title is hardly translatable, and 

is taken from a remark by Ohwang-tsze of the Chow dynasty about 
the Ch‘un Ts‘ew ® lit jb S ^ 

57. -S'*#? ft ‘Ancient Compositions, with Notes on their 

meaning.’ In 16 Books; by Lin Yun-ming styled 

who took his third degree in 1,658, The AYork is a little of the 
same nature as some volumes of “ Elegant Extracts ” from our 
English masters, which I have seen. A selection is made of the 
most celebrated pieces of composition from the Chow dynasty 
downwards, with explanations of the meaning and notes on the 
style interspersed, with a disquisition at the end on the subject; 
matter by the compiler. The first two Books are occupied with 
pieces from the Tso Chuen. Lin Yun-ming was called a bibliomaniac 
by his neighbours; but scholars speak contemptuouslj’^ of 
his AA^orks. A\^ang T‘aou calls the one before us ‘ a series of Lessons 
for a village school (^pj) ^ The foreign student, 

however, is glad to get hold of it, especiall}'^ at the commencement 
of his studies in the Tso Chuen. 

The class of A\^orks represented by the preceding is numerous. I 
have consulted the the the 

^ W', the * ^ It; the i±; the ^ M; 

rhe ^ ^ =^; and the ^ Unfortunatel}* they all deal 

with nearlj'' the same pieces in Tso’s AYork. 

146 ] 


on. IV.] 


TIlAXSL.VrrONS AND OTIIEIl POREIGN WORKS. [pnoLEoosiENA. 


I have not folt it necessaiy to introduce in the above list the 
Dictionaries aiul Works of general reference, with many others on 
tile olassic.s iti general, which were mentioned in the lists in my 
in’cccding volumes, and have again been referred t 9 as occasion re- 
(juired. 


SECTION 11. 

TR A ySLATIOKS AKD OTHER FOREIGN WORKS. 

I have not to add to tlie Works of this class mentioned in my 
former volumes. 

Dr. Bretscluieider of Peking having stated in the Chinese Recorder 
for December 1870, p. 173, that the Chhin Ts‘cw had been translated 
into European languages, I made inquiry on the subject, to which 
that gentleman replied in the Recorder for July, 1871, pp. 51, 52. 
'Some 40 years ago,’ lie says, ‘Father Daniel, of the Russian Eccle- 
siastical Mission at Peking, translated the Ch‘un-ts‘iii into Russian; 
but, so fill* as I know, this translation has never been published. The 
manuscript exists still. Besides this, parts of the Ch‘un-ts‘iu were 
translated into Russian, and published by other Russian Sinologues.’ 

I have not seen these translations. Dr. Bretschneider refers also to 
a translation of the first book of the Ch‘un Ts'ew by Bayer, with a 
Latin translation, which appeared in the ‘ Commentaria Academice 
Pelropolitayicc,' vol. 7; but neither have I met with this. 


147 ] 


THE Cn‘UN TS‘EW; 
WITE THE TSO CHUEW. 


BOOK I. DUKE rm. 
First year. 


s ^ 2^ # j3.j5.<a- s 

iJf — ^ ^ ^ m M ^ 

^ i i i ¥ 


*1 


fi ^ M 


JS^ 


MM 


T 

Me 


2 


THE CII‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHEUN. 


BOOKI. 


© m © * X z -s.H.m'sr %m f ^ f $ 

^y2t A = -bzm mM T' m f 

+ S f? K # W- ^ 

n,m IE ^ H.-fsr.^- # « f 

Jl^.A-fiaE # S' A «• W t*: ^ }|f $ 

Ei:7icll.±¥ iil ,®. W fli -If S 

» ® K 8i PI J!!l l.^c. a «.f i 

S!l.» 5tc ■tii.in S' f i ^ i-i-S 


i!* 


a 

Efc 

Vi/ 


m^T'Z ja m 1 ^.^' s g s 

If. f * it i 1 ^ «.i I I-l f 

#0 W^itAAf f 

^ M 1*8 r4 ii 15.* K ® 

6S.W. w ;So iiiM S‘f 4 . 

A 1 ». A @ ^ 0*=^ ? 5 S 

m.MM ^ |n * f . 

M A #..A my2fM ^ * I f 5 f f 
33i R# » ^.e A ^ ^ S 

f ^ s I f f l‘i f *‘S 

^ «t :«r -tfc * f ^ f f i 

H.'i^. m % m‘m a ^ bm ^ f* 

# a « 1 ^.^ # A ^ 1‘7‘f 

m smAf 

A H,B4 ^ 0.^,S 0.B ^ ffi. 

-0. m siM mmm^Bg §.T'S 

PI ^ B.ii.f M s.^ S :| a. 

A K « ;2: T B.M S ^ 


ffif 


IBl 


I 


4 


5 


fit it'd i,. • y"» 

&;••''' 't: Sr/'- 

.«r?/ ^«n„/ * A"" "*'^W C' n/ 

ariil.t...., AVI. ^ 


4 


THE CH'UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK I. 


; the 28th of Scucn of Ts'nc 
the 22d of Clnvftng of Ch'ing 
; the 85 th of Hwan of Ta'aou 5 

the 28a of Hwan of Ch'in ;|:M the 
29th of Woo of Kc ■^)i t**® of 

Muh of Sung 

Ts'in and the 19th of Woo of 

T6‘oo ^). 

Par. 1. Tills paragrapli, it will be seen, is in- 
complete, the adjunct merely of a 

which is found at the beginning of nearly every 
other booh. The reason of the incompleteness 
iTill be considered below. 

— ‘the Ist year.’ The XJrh-ya ex- 
plains by ‘the beginning,’ ‘ first,’ and 
Kung-yang makes the phrase simply = 

‘ the prince’s 1st year.’ Too Yu tries 

to find a deeper meaning in the phrase, saying 
that the 1st year of a rule stands to all the fol- 
lowing years in the relation of the ori^nal 
cAaos to the subsequent kosmos, and is therefore 
called yuen, to intimate to rulers that from the 
first moment of their sway they arc to advance 
in the path of order and right. This considera- 
tion explains also, he thinks, the use of JP, ^ » 

‘ the right month,’ for ‘the 1st month ( 

# in -fe-flSfl « M jE. 

^ ^ The Urh-ya, 

however, gives i|^ as=^r, ‘the most elevated,’ 

' the senior.’ But in the denomination of the 
1st month as ‘the right or correct month,’ we 
must acknowledge a recognition of what are 

called ‘the tliree eking | f-* ),’ — the tliree 

different months, with which the dynasties of 
Hea, Shang, and Chow commenced the year. 
Hea began the year with the 1st month of 
spring; Shang, a month, and Chow, 2 months 
earlier. It became so much a rule for the be- 
ginning of the year to be changed by every new 
dynasty, that Ts'in made its first month com- 
mence a lunation before that of Chow. To a 
remark of Confucius, Ana. XV. x., we are in- 
debted for the disuse of this foolish custom, so 
that all dynasties have since used ‘the seasons 
of HSa.’ — ^After all, there remains the question 
why t he fir st month of the year should be called 

t^ing (TP). 

-p‘ Tp ^ » — ‘ the king’s first month.’ The 
‘king’ here can hardly be any other than P'ing, 
ttie king of Chow for the time then being, ns 
Too Yu says; — and in this style does the account 
of very many of the years of the Ch'un Ts'Sw 
begin, as if to do homage to the supremacy of 
the reining House. Kung-yang makes the 
r”? Wttn ; but though he was the founder 
of the Chow dynasty, the commencement of the 
year was not yet changed in his time. 


TIjo remaining character in tins par. occasions 
the foreign student considerable perplexity, 
'riio commencement of the year was really in 
tlic 2d month of winter, and ycl it is hero said 

to have been in the spring. — 

We have spring wlicn it really was not spring. 
It must be kept in mind that the usual names for 


only denote in 


the seasons—; 

tlie Ch'un Ts‘£w tlnTfour quarters of the Chow 
year, beginning witli the 2d month of winter. 
It was, no doubt, a perception of the inconve- 
nience of such a calendar whicli made Confucius, 
loyal as ho was to the dynasty of Chow, say 
tliat ho preferred that of Hea to it. Strange as 
it is to read of spring, when the time is really 
winter, nnd of winter when the season is 
still nntnmn, it will appear, as we go on, that 
such is really the stylo of the Ch'un Ts'ew. 
Maon, fully admitting all this, yet contends for 
a str ange interpretation of the text, in which ae 

joins nnd together, making the phrase 
to stand for the kings of Chow, — ‘Spring kings, 
wlio reigned by the virtue of wood, the first of 
the five elements ( 97. 

in support of this view, tli e wo rds of Tso-sheon 
tliis paragraph, — 


which show, he says, that Tso-she joined ; 
with -p , as he himself would do; but Tso-she s 

language need not be so construed, nnd 
dently stands by itself, just as the names of the 
other seasons do. 

We come now to the incompleteness of the p»^ 
already pointed out. According to the anaioCT 
of the style in the first years of other duKS, 
shordd be stated that in his 1st year am 

month of it> the duke took the place (g jj 
of his predecessor. According to the ^ 
Chow, on the death of a sovereign — and 
princes were little kings in their several 
— ^his successor, acknowledged to be sncli as 
chief mourner on the occasion nnd .. 

direction of the proper ceremonies for the uwar 
ed, ‘ ascended the throne by the bier, 
is an interesting account of such an accessi 
the Shoo, V. xxii. The thing was done so 
riedly because ‘ the State could not beji^ 

day without a sovereign (j^ 

,’ or because, as we phrase it, fhe 

king never dies.’ What remained 
however, was held to belong to the reign o . 
deceased king, and the new reign hegan 
the beginning of the next year, when tner 
a more public ‘taking of the place, tlio^ 
do not know that we have any mi, -first 

ceremonies which were then performed. J- n , 

‘place-taking’ was equivalent to our access » 
the second, to our ‘ coronation.’ Tlie P*'®P® j. ,, g 
planation, therefore, of the incompleteness o 
paragraph is that Yin omitted the o™ , ^ 

‘ place-taldng ’ ceremonies, and _,„do 

could be no record of them. Perhaps nc n 
the omission, Iia^ng it in mind to 
long in favour of his younger brother (s^ 

she); but to say that the usual 'liL 


Yriti I. 


DUKE YIN. 


by Confiit'lu*. citber to show his np- 
|in>vrtlortU<appruvnl of Vln, ns 

foUiovtslby llw* G.in-kwtih ic H’ 

— l,l:tS)An(li\hunilrci1otht'rcoinnu*ntntors. 
j« n«*t to explain the text, but to perplex the renti- 
er with vain fitnelcs. 

I’ar. V*. There was nothin}: proper for reconl 
in the 1st nu'l 2il m inths of the year, anti wo 
rosnehere to the thlnl month. Choo (wo have 

Cb.tkvlow, in IvunR-yantt) was n small 

State, nearly all .«urr«unilwl by I^oo,— the pros, 
tlis. of Tsow (|jj{), th'P- Ycn-chow. At this 
time it w.a5 only a Foo-yunp (pjf^- nttadi- 

Ctl to 1.00 (see Mencius, V. “|\, 114.); but in n 
few years after this Its chief was rnisetl to the 
dignity of viscount (■^)- The House had the 

surname of Ts’aou (T|[i ), .and liad been invested 

with the territory by' king Woo, ns being de- 
scended from the ancient emperor Chuen-heuh. 
The cliiors name, ns we learn nftcrwnnls from 

the Ch'un 'IViiw, was K‘ih (^); E-foo (^, 
read in the 2d tone, found appended to many 
desigJiations, by way of honour) is his designa- 
tion (i^). given to him hero, s.ay8 Tso-she,’by 
wav of honour,’ for which remark tltcro seems 
to be no ground. Meoh (Ktih and Kung both 
have J|^, nith tlie same sound) was a place be- 
longing to Loo,— in the pres. dis. of Szo-shwuy 

nothing 

of m>v special object sought by the ‘covenant- 
ing’ hete. Tso-she merely says that the duke ar- 
ranged for it to cultivate friendly relations with 
his neighbour, at the coniracnccracnt of Ids tem- 

porarj' administration. beads the record, here 

and in most other accounts of meetings and cove- 
nants on tlic psirt of the marquises of Loo with 
otlierprinces;—.anonler proper in tlichistoriogm- 
phers of tliat State. I can thinkof no better word 
for ^ tlian ‘covenant,’ ‘ to covenant.’ On all 
occ.asions there was the death of a victim, over 
wliicii the contracting parties appealed to superi- 
or Powers, wishing that, if they violated the 
terms of their covenant, they might meet with 
a fate like that of the slain animal. One de- 
finition of the term is ^ ‘an agreement 
with an oath.’ Compare the account of Jacob 
and Lab.m’s covenant, Genesis, xxxi. 

TJie 23^ after ^ is to be taken ns simplyss 
M, ‘ with ‘ and.’ Kung, Kuli, and others find 
rcranditc ’meanings in it, which will not hear 
examination. 

J Tso-she, after this paragraph, gives an in- 
bnt of the 4th month, in summer, that ‘ the 
earl of Pe led a force, and walled Lang,’ adding 
that no record of it was made, beannse it was not 
done with the duke's order. See the 1st note 
on ‘The speech at Pe’ in the Shoo. I have 
tr.anslatcd the notice according to the view of 
Ch'in Sze-k‘ae given there; but Tso-she could 

sot have intended ^ to be taken as mean- 


ing ‘ Earl of Po.’ hut merely ‘Pih (sonic scion of 
the Ilimsc of Loo) of Pe.’] 

Par. a. CiPing was an earldom which had not 
been of tong duration. In B.C. 805, king Scuen 

had invested his brotlier Yew(^^) witli the lands 

of Clt‘ing, in the pros, llwn Cliow (3^ dep. 
T‘uug-chow, Siicn-so. YThr’s son, Kcueh-tuh 
(^1^ ^), known ns duke Woo (;|^.^), con- 
«inercd a territory more to tlie cast,— the country 
of Kivoli mid Kwei (^J| f|| ;^) - and 

settled in it, calling it ‘NewClPing;’ — the name 
of which is still retained in the district of Siu- 
ch‘iug(^||jj), dep. K'ae-fung, llo-nan. Woo’s 

son, Woo-slmng known ns duke 

Chwang (*|j[*) nnd born in B. C. 756, is the earl of 
tliis par. Twan was his younger brother. Yen 
has left its name in the dis. of Ten-ling (^|^ 

Tso-she’s account of the event in the 
text is tlie following:— 

‘ Duke Woo of ClPing had married a daughter 
of the House of Sliin, called Woo Kenng, wJio 
Imre duke Chwang nnd his brother Tivnn of 
Kung. Duke Cliwnng was born ns slie was 
waking from sleep [the meaning of the text 
hero is uncertainj, wiiich frightened the lady 
so that she named him Woo-slmng (= born 
in waking), and hated him, while she loved 
Twan, nnd wisiicd him to be declared bis 
fatlicr’s heir. Often did she ask this of duko 
Woo, but he refused it. When duke Chining 
came to the earldom, she begged him to confer 
on Twnn the city of Che. “ It Is too dangerous a 
place,” was the reply. “Hie Younger irf Kwoli 
died there; but in regard to any other place, you 
may command me.” She then requested King; 
and there Twan took up bis residence, and came 
to be styled T’ac-shuh (=the Great Younger) 
of King city. Chung of Chae said to the duke; 
“Any metropolitan city, whose wall is more 
timn S,000 cubits round, is dnngerons to the 
State. According to the regulations of the 
former kings, such a city of the 1st order can 
Imve its wall only a thii-d as long as that of the 
capital; one of the 2d order, only a fifth as long; 
and one of the least order, only a rduth. Now 
King is not in accordance with these measures 
nnd regulations. ^ As ruler, you will not be able 
to endure Tiean in sueA a place.” The duke re- 
plied, “It was our mother’s wish; — how could I 
avoid the danger?” “The lady Keang," re- 
turned the officer, “ is not to be satisfied. You 
had better take the necessary' precautions, and 
not allow the danger to grow so great that it 
will be difficult to deal with it. Even grass, 
when it has grown and spread all about, cannot 
be removed; — ^liow much less the brother of 
yourself, and the favoured brother as well I” 
The duke said, “ By his many deeds of unrighte- 
ousness lie will bring destruction on himsdf. 
Do you only wait a while.” 

‘After this, T‘ae-shuh ordered the places jp’' 
the western nnd northern bonlers of the St^r 
render to himself the same allegianTO,,i-^ 
did to the earl. Then Kung-tsze 
duke, “A State cannot sustain tlie^ 
services; — ^what will you do n**'' 


6 


THE CU‘UJJ TS*EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK I. 


to give Ch'iny to T'ac-shuli, ttlloiv me to £erve 
him as n subject. If }'OU do not mean to give it 
to him, allow me to put him out of the way, that 
the minds of the people be not perplexed.” 
“There is no need,” the duke replied, ‘'/or suc/t 
a step. His calamity will come of itself.” 

‘T‘ac-slnili went on to take ns his own the 
places from which he had required their divided 
contributions, as far ns Lin-yen. Tsze-fung [the 
designation of Kung-tsze Leu above] s.aid, 
“Eow is the time. With these enlarged re- 
sources, he will draw all the people to himself.” 
The duke replied, “ They will not cleave to him, 
60 unrighteous ns he is. Through his prosperity 
he will fall the more.” 

‘T‘ne-shuh wrought at his defences, gathered 
the people about him, put in order buif-coats and 
weapons, prepared footnicn, and chariots, intend- 
ing to surprise Ch‘ing, while his mother was to 
open to -him from within. The duke heard the 
time agreed on between them, and said, “Now we 
can act.” So he ordered Tsze-fung, with two 
hundred chariots, to attack Iving. King revolted 
from T‘ae-shuh, who then entered Yen, which 
the duke himself proceeded to attack ; and in 
the 5th month, on the day Sm-ch*ow, T‘ae-shnh 
fled from it to Kung. 

‘In the words of the text, — “The earl of 
Ch‘ing overcame Twan in Yen,” Twan is not 
called the earts younger brother, because he did 
not show himself to be such. They were as two 
hostile princes, and therefore we have the word 
“overcame.” The duke is styled the earl of 
Ch'ing simply, to condemn him for his failure to 
instruct his brother properly. Twan's flight is 
not mentioned, in tlte text, because it was diflicalt 
to do so, having in mind Ching’s wish that Twan 
miyht be killed. 

* Immediately after these events, duke Chwang 
placed his mother Keang in Shing-ying, and 
swore an oath, saying, “I will not see yon 
again, till I have reached the yellow spring [t.c., 
till I am dead, and under the yellow earth].” 
But he repented of this. By and by, Ying 
K'aou-shuli, the border-warden of the vale of 
Ying, heard of it, and presented an offering to 
the dtike, %vho caused food to be placed before 
him. K‘aou-shuh put a piece of meat on one 
side; and when the duke asked the reason, he 
said, “1 have a mother who always shares in 
what I eat. But she has not eaten of this meat 
which you, my ruler, have ^ven, and I beg to 
be allowed to leave this piece for her.” The 
duke said, “You have a mother to give it to. 
Alas! I alone have none.” K‘aou-shuh asked 
what the duke meant, who then told him all the 
circumstances, and how he repented of his oath. 
‘‘Why shoiild you be distressed about that?”' 
said the officer. “ If you dig into the earth to the 
yellow springs, and then make a subterranean 
passage, where you can meet each other, who 
can say that your oath is not ftdfilled?’ The 
duke followed this suggestion ; and as he entered 
the passage sang, 

“Tliis great tunnel, within. 

With joy doth run.” 

When his mother came out, she sang, 

“ This great tunnel, without, 

The joy flies about.” 

[After this, they were mother and son as be- 
fore. 

‘A superior man may say, “Ying K'aou-shuh 
was fllial indeed. His love for his mother pass- 


ed over to and nflcctcd duko Chwang. Was 
there not here an illustration of what is said in 
the Book of Poetry, 

“ A filial son of piety unfailing, 

TI)orc shall for ever be conferred bless- 
ing on you 

Space would fail mo were I to make any re- 
marks on the criticisms interspersed bj’ Tso-slio 
ill this and other narratives, or vindicate the trans- 
lation of his narratives which I give. The retid- 
cr will perceive that without the history in the 
Chuen, the Confucian text would give very little 
idea of the event which it professes to record ; and 
Ihero nro numberless instances, more flaunt 

still, in the Book. The who moralizes, 

is understood to be Tso-shc liimself. We have 
no other instanccin the Ch'on Ts'ew of used 
as in this paragraph. 

Par. 4. ^3E. ‘Heaven’s king,’ or ‘king 
by Heaven’s grace,’ is of course king P'ing. The 
sovereign of Chinn, as He-ivcn’s vice-gerent over 
the empire, is styled ‘ Heaven’s son ;’ 

in his relation to the feudal princes as their 
ruler, he was called y , ‘Heaven’s king.' 

second Tsze,’ i. e., the daugh- 
ter of the duke of Sung, who became the 2d 
wife of duke Hwuy as mentioned in the note on 
the title of this book ; not Hwuy’s mother, as 

Kuh-lfiang absurdly says. is e.xplained in 


the diet, as ‘presents to the dead, 

± A ^ P # 

to the presiding, mourner to bury Jus nean. 
But such presents were of various kinds, ana 


denotes the gift specially of one or more car- 
riages and their horses. So both Kung and Kuh. 
The king sent such presents on the death of anyot 
the princes or their wives; and here we have an 
instance in point. But there is much conten- 
tion among the critics as to who the messeng^ 

was; — ^whether the king’s chief Minister 


or some inferior officer of his department. 

The former view is taken by Kuh-leana ^ 
affirmed by the editors of the K'ang-he Ch un 
Ts‘ew ; — ^but, as I must think, erroneously. 

derthe^^or;^ were two 


and four 


, called by Biot Grand-admims- 


- • , A 

trateur general,’ 'Sous-adminstrateursyeneraux, an 
aides-administrateurs generaux’ It belonged to i 
department of the last, on all occasions of co - 
dolence, to superintend the arrangements, wi 
every thing that was supplied by way of P * 
seats or o&rings, — the silks, the nlcnsils, t 
money, &c. (see the Chow Le, I., m. ^ 
The officer in the text was, no doubt, one of tne. 
aid-administrators; and this removes _ all oi - 
Acuity which the critics find in the mention oi an 
officer of higher rank by his name. . , 

The rule was that princes should he bunro 
five months after their death, and Tso-she saj 
that the king’s message and gift arrived .' 

so far as duke Hwuy was concerned, i'* 
criticism may be correct; but he goes on to tny 


Ykau I. 


DUKE TIN. 


that Chunir Tszo was not yet dead, and the 
message niid gift were too carl^’, so far ns she 
was concerned. Tlie king could never have 
been guilty of such an impropriety as to antici> 
pate the Indy’s dentlj in tills ^rny, and the 
view of Tso-slic can onl^’ provoke a smile. He 
adds: — ‘The king’s burial took place 7 months 
after ids death, wlien all the feudal princes were 
expected to be present. Tlic prince of n State 
was buried 5 months after liis death, when all 
the princes, with whom he had covenanted, at- 
tended. The funeral of a groat oiliccr took 
place 8 months after his death, and was attend- 
ed by all of the same rank ; that of an oQiccr, 
at tlic end of a month, and was attended by Itis 
relatives by affinity. Presents on account of a 
dcatli were made before the burial, and visits of 
condolence were paid before the grief had as- 
sumed its greatest demonstrations. It was not 
proper to nntidp.atc such occurrences.’ 

On first translating the Ch'un Ts‘cw, I con- 
strued the p.ar. ns if these were a ^ between 

and 'frjl, and supposed that only one carriage and 
its horses were sent for the funeral of Chung Tsze, 
who had been the wife of Hwuy. I gave up 
the construction in deference to the prevailing 
opinion of the commentators; but it had been 
adopted by no less n scholar than Ch'ing E 
® 1^5 A. D. 1033-1107). 

[I’so-shc has Iiere two other entries under 
this season:—* In the 8th month an officer of Ke 
attacked E;’ and ‘There were locusts.’ He 
adds that E sent no official announcement of 
the attack to Loo, and that therefore it was not 
recorded ; and that no notice was entered of the 
locusts, because they did not .amount to aplague.] 

Par. 5. Sung was a dukedom, — ^liaving its 
chief city in the pres. dis. of Sh.aiig-k‘ew ( 
^{3)i Kv-ei-tih, Ho-nan. The charge given 
to the viscount of V7ei on his being appointed to 
the State is still preseired in the Shoo, V. viii. 
The dukes of Sung were descended from the 
kings of Tin or Shang; and of course their sur- 
name was Tsze Suh was a small State, 

in the present Tung-p'ing ^) Chow, dep. 

T‘ae-gan, Shan-tung. It was thus near Loo, 
but a good way from Sung. Its chiefs were 
barons with the surname Fung 

Tso-she tells us that in the last year of duke 
Hwuy, he defeated an army of Sung in Hwang, 
but that now duke Tin sought for peace. It 
was with this object that the covenant in the 
te.\t was made. 

I translate .as if preceded for so the 
want must generally be supplied throughout the 
classic. Kung .and Kuh both understand some 
inferior officer of Loo >^ )i but in other 
places they themselves supply 

however, we must understand an officer of 


7 

Sung. It is better to translate so than to say 
simply —‘a man of Sung.’ 

[Between this par. and the next Tso-she has 
the three following narratives : — 

‘In winter, in the 10th month, on the day 
Kfing-shin, the body of duke Hwuy was removed 
and burled a second time.’ As the duke was 
not present, the event was not recorded. 'When 
duke Hwuy died, there was war with Sung, and 
the heir-prince was young, so that there was 
some omission in the burial. He was therefore 
now buried again, and in another grave. The 
marquis of Wei came to be present at the buri- 
al. He did not have an interview ivith the 
duke, and so his visit was not recorded.’ 

‘After the confusion occasioned by Kung-shuh 
of Cli'ing, Kung-sun Hwah [Tivan or Kung- 
shuh’s sonjl fled to WeiJ and the people of "Wei 
attacked Oh'ing in his behalf, and requested 
Lin- 3 'en for him. Clring then attacked the 
southern border of Wei, supported by a king's 
army and an army of Kwoh, and also requested 
the aid of troops from Choo. The viscount of 
I Choo sent a private message to Kung-tsze Tu 
cf Loo, who asked leave from the duke to go. 
It was refused ; but he went and made a cove- 
nant with an officer of Choo and an officer of 
Oh'ing in Tih. No record was made of this, be- 
cause Yu’s qoing was against the duke’s order.’ 

‘The southern gate of the city was made 
new.’ It was done without the duke’s order, 
and so was not recorded.] 

Par. 6. Chae [so is here read] was an 

earldom, in the present Oh'ing Cliow jf‘j'|), 
dep. K‘ae-fung, held by the descendants of one of 
the dnke of Chow’s sons. Acc. to Tso-she the 
earl here was a minister at court., and came 
to Loo, for what purpose we know not, without 
the orders of the king. Kung’-yang, indeed, 
thinks he came as a refugee, and that is 

the designation of the individual merely (-^), 
and not his title; while Kuli-leang makes the 
coming to have been to do a sort of homage to 
duke Tin. But this is simply guess work. 

Par. 7. Of Tih-sze we know nothing but what 
this brief par. tells. He was ‘ a duke’s son,’ but 
whether the son of Hwuy, or of Hwuy’s father, 
we cannot tdl, It is best in such a case to take 
as if it were the surname. So Ho Hew 
says here, 

Kuh-leang finds a condemnation of TIh-sze in 
the omission of the day of bis death; but the old 
method of interpretation which found praise or 
blame in the mention of or sOence as to days, in 
the use of the name, the designation, the title, 
and such matters, is now discarded. is the 
proper term to use for the death of an officer. 

Tso-she gives the designation of Tih-sze as 
CliuDg-foo, and says that the day of his death 
is not recorded, because the duke did not attend 
at the ceremony of dressing the corpse, to it into 
the cofiin. 


8 


THE CU‘UN TS*E\V, WITH THE TSO CIIUEK. 


book I. 


ft 

e 


Second year. 

f-s ffls M* Mt 

■ “ " s 


=f + J^.A 


-f 


^ fl 

Zx 

A 

A 


M 

i'M 

#r 


H M. A A t 


A i 

ISl.T 


A 

m A 

^”1 

w — tf I 

JP'o 


O 


;<: A 


T «3S: ^ S ^ 1 

. , - # .g.# W g S A 1 1; 

hI -ffe # ^ ® IE * * 1^. 1 S 

ii- # iH M ^ f S‘ S“ 

■ ■ ^ #> -S 5> 1 


ifeo ^ 


;2 ^ 

iii 

ifs 

W m S' 


jn*** H 

A A 

.BUM ’ # »-^ w - - , ftrlfll 

II. 1 In his second year, in spring, the duke had a meet t, 

the [chief of the] Jung at Ts'een. entered 

2 In summer, in the fifth month, an army o 
Heang. . 

Woo-heae led a force and entered Kein. TC-'ino'-shin, 

In autumn, in the eighth month, [on the day] 

the duke made a covenant with the Jung +i,e°bride 
In the ninth month, Le-scu of Ke came to me 

In L"X\enth month, the duke’s eldest daughter 

went to her home in Ke. onf atMeiin 

7 Tsze-pih of Ke and the count of Keu made a coven n]ce’s] 

8 In the twelfth month, on the day Yih-inaou, the L 
wife, the lady Tsze, died. 

9 An army of Ch‘ing invaded Wei. 


3 

4 

5 

6 


' u. 


ao 


BOOK I. 


Til 1C 01I*UN TvSMCW. WITH THIC TSO CIIUEN, 


of Kc. AVe know that ho comos hoiv to n»oet /t!s 
prince's brhio from tho phraso 
n miuistor is Ooscrihod as coming to Loo to 
inoet n ladv of tho llonso for !>i\nscU, ho is said 
'mm ‘ to moot such and such n lady Ko.* 
lie comos of course because ho was sent, but it 
Avas not proper, accord inj; to tho ‘rules for mar- 
riage,' that that should be stated. 

I’ar. (5. This is tho sequel of tho last par. 
As it is tho first par. of a season, it seems pro- 
per that it should stand by itself, and not malco 
one with the other ns in tho K‘nng-he edition, 
c=3 * to bo married,' siwkcn of the lady. 

Her husband’s house becomes her home. 

Par. 7. Ts7.e-pih, (in Tso-shc ) ‘s ex- 

plained by Too Yu ns tho designation of Le-seu 
in par. ». Kung savs ho had not hoard who 
was ; aiul Kuh makes a verb and 
construes thus;— ‘The viscount of Ke, consider- 
ing himself an earl, took precedenoo and cove- 
nanted Avith tho viscount of Keit.* This is sulll- 
ciently absurd, and besides, the chiefs of Kc 
Avere marquises, Avhich makes ^Yoo Ch‘ing 
t^A. 1). 124‘J — 133S) suppose that 
may Iuva’c got, by some mistake, into the text 
instead of -0^. Too Yu’s view may bo ac- 
cepted as most likely, lie says al8() that Meih 
Avns a town belonging to Kou ; — in dis. of Ch‘nng 
yih ( ^)i dep. Lao-ohow, Tins places it a 
cousidui'able way from Keu, though near to Ke. 
Tho identiticatiou of tho site may be accepted, 
but one does not see how a place at such* a dis- 
tance from Ken should have belonged to it. Wy 


friend, the scholar AVang Tnou, has saggeslcd 
that the chiefs of Ke\i themselves occupied origin- 
ally in the territory of Jjae-choAv, and might 
cliiim jurisdiction over places (hero after they 
moved to the south. There Avas anotherMeih 
Avhich is mentioned in the Cli'un Ts'uw in Ho- 
nan. 'T.so-she says that tlie meeting was ‘on 
IjOo’s acc(»tmt,’ Avhich 'J'oo-yu o.xplaius ns ntoiui- 
ing that the count of Ke, kindly disposed to Loo 
through his recent marriage, arranged for tho 
meetiitg, to heal a loitg-slandiug alienation be- 
tween Luo and Keu. 


by 


Par. 8. I hnve translated 
y ‘the duke’s Avife;’ meaning, of course, duko 
Yin. Too sujqmses tho secottd Avlfe of 
Ik) tho ladv meant, in anticipation of whoso 
death the icing sent a funeral pix’sent in tho 
previous year;— a view Avlnch confutes itseij- 
Kung tidnics tho lady Avns Yin’s mother. _^Kun 
takes the view I have done. The term i® 

appropriate to narrate the dentil of 
princes. It is licre ajipUed to the death oi 
prince’s Avife; — ‘the honmir duo to the husbni 
passing to her.’ 

Par. 9 Wei Avas a mnniuisato held by tho 
scendauts of K‘ang>s)iulit one of the sons ot k i, 
Wiln, whose iiiA’Cstituro Avith it is ‘describe 
the Shoo, V.ix, it may be roundly p,® 
embrneed tho pros. dep. of Wci-hwuy 
Ilo-nan, — lying, moM of it, north of the Ho; b» 
it oxtondod onstu’nrds, across part of Lhi »■ o> 
into SImn-tung ns well. Its oapilnl-subsoqiigt- 
ly changeil—- was tho old Cheaou-ko (t^ 
of Bhang, in pres. dis. of ]v‘o reason 

of Ch'iag’s invasion of Wei is sulUcientlj in* 
cated in one of the supplementary notices, v 
Tso-sho of the oecurreucc.s in the lOth ni»n 
of last year. • .^jjj as »/| pai.- 


Third year. 


2JJ- 


^ ^ 

Ml 

^'S' -i ^ 

i^-l# 

® s # ' ■^" 

w§% 

■e 

;® ^ 

l-l'f -^'-f f ‘f • 

It If 

^•%f 


12 


THE cn irs rs'EW wmi the tso ciicex. 


BOOK I. 


31; ZM m ii ffr ^ m r# ^ 

@ n? i».« >1 ■lii.S'ic ii ^-MJiTr M 0^ M «. 

MM T) W, m il E ii *n idi #.7 S 

miM K ffr J® S.ffii 

75 ZM.W ffij tii.m ^ if # MM m 

» 5^ * MMMM iS mM.m r#. 

III. 1 In his third year, in spring, in the kings second month, 
on the day Ke-sze. the snn was eclipsed. 

2 In the third montii, on the day Kang-seuh, the king [by] 

Heaven’s [grace] died. 

3 In summer, in the fourth month, on the daj’ Sin-maou, 

[an officer of] the Yin family died. 

4 In autumn, a son of the Woo family came [to Loo] to ask 

for the contribution of money towards the [king’s] burial. 
6 In the eighth month, on the day Kang-shin, Ho, duke of 
Sung, died. 

6 In winter, in the twelfth month, the marquis of Ts^e and 

the earl of Gh'ing made a covenant at Shih-mun. 

7 [On the day] Ewei-we, there was the burial of duke Mun 


of Sung. 

Par. 1. Thi? is the 1st of the 36 eclipses of 
the son mentioned in the Ch‘un T-sew. From 
the table in the proleg. to the Shoo, pp. 103. 101. 
it •will be seen that it occnrred on the 14th 
Fehruaiy, B. C. 719, being the 6th cycle day. or 
Ke-sre, of the 3d month of the Chovr ye-ar. Tliere 
is an error therefore in the text of 2 for 3. The 
mathematicians of Ciiina were themselves aware 
of this, as early as the Suy dynasty (A. D. 3S9- 
617). Evidently this year commenced on Ja- 
nnary 16th, instead of a month earlier, by 
some* previous error of intercalation. Generally, 

the’ character ‘the 1st day of the moon.' 


follows the name of the day of the eclipse; and as 
it is wanting here, Kang and Knh conclude that 
the eclipse was really on the last day of the 
previous month. But this involves mneh greater 

difficulty than to suppose that the was 

omitted through inadvertence of the historio- 
graphers. or has dront somehow out of the text. 

‘The sun had something which was devouring 
it.’ The phenomenon had suggested this idea 
to the earliest Cliinese, and the phrase became 
stereotyped in the language. On the ceremonies 
observ^ at an eclipse, * to save the snn.’ see the 
Shoo. IILiv.4, and note. Knng-yang thinks 
eclipses were recorded as extraordinary events 

; hut the Knng-he editors approve rather 
the •view that it ■^vas as calamitous presages ( 

Par. 2. ‘the fall of a mountain,’ is the 

appropriate term for the death of a sovereign. 
Tso-she says that king I’-ing really died on the 
day Jin-ssuh, i. e.. 12 days before Kang-senb, 


save the wronedate. which tras therefore 
ed ; and Too Vn tlunks the date was wrongly w® 
municated to hurry the princes to the ' 
But there must be some othear ■<ray o^ ;p. 
ing Tso-she's statement, if it be conech 
death of the sovereign w.as commamcatett 
the princes of the States, avhose dntv “ 
was to send off to the capital a high in«ust» 
take p.art in the preliminary funeral 
present the various offerings of moiwy, , 

required on such an occ-asion. Tne V ' 
themselves did not go to the rapital tdl the tun 

of burial was arrived. ^ 

Par. 8. Who is denoted by the 
is all-uudetermined. Tso-she reads instead 

of and is something likeonr'royd 

lady.’ meaning doke Tin’s mother. Knng*y®i= 
and Knh-leang both hare ^ and suppose tha 
by is intended some minister at thecourt 

of Chow of that surname, intimating that 

whatever office he held had 
in his family, ilany other explanation 
words hare been attempted. The *5®** ?a "D. 
ble appears to be that of Kin Le-ts'eang ( ■ 
1.232—1.303), which is stronglv 
ilaou. — ^that the person intend^ •«ras 
of Ch‘inff. of whom •we shall read m 
Chuen. on the duke's 11th ye.ar, where tne u 
here will again be touched on* TsO-sne 

that the term is used here for the la J* * 
death, inste.ad of ^ for three reasons: becanss 
1st, no notice of her death was sent to o. cr 


hut that the olEcIal communication of the event 1 States in covenant tvith Loo: duse Xic. 


^^'ab iu_ 


u 


THK CII‘UN TS'KW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK J. 


llwiou-pih lliiit ilk'll curly. Tnc Kwci. wlio 
hull neci>nip;ink'il her to the* hnreni, liml n Ruti. 
H'/ii; iriis nJlrrwnriU ilukc Ilwnn. nnil who was 
chcrishc'tl by CIiw,iiii» Kiianpr ns her own chilli. 
'Jlicrt* was nho Chriw-yn, unollicr son of tlic 
duke hy ii favourite coneiihine, a favnan'il chik]. 
nml foriil of liis weapons, not restrniiieil hy the 
duke, but linted by Chwnnp Kiianp. Sbili Tseoli 
remonstrnteil with the duke, sayin;,'. Voiir ser- 
vant has heard tliat, when you love n son. you 
Bhould teach him righteous w.ays, and 'not 
help him on in the course of depravitj*. There 
are pride, extravagance. lewdness, and dissipa- 
tion, by which one depnaves himself ; but these 
four vices come from over-indulgence and allow- 
ances. If you .are going to make Cliow-yu your 
successor, settle him in tliat position; if you 
have not yet decided on such a step, 3*011 arc 
paving the wa3'’ for him to create disorder. Few 
there are who can be favoured without getting 
arrogant ; few arrogant who can submit them- 
selves to others ; few who can submit themselves 
without being indignant at their position ; and 


few who can keep jmtient under such a feeling 
of indignancy. And moreover, tiiere arc what 
are called the .«1.\* instances of insubordination, 
— when tlie mean stand in the wa}* of tlie noble; 
or the .voting prcsnnie .again.st their elders; or 
diitant relnlive.s cut out those wiio are nu.ar; or 
new friends alienate from the old; or a small 
I’ower attacks a great one; or lewdricss defeats 
righteousness. The ruler righteous and the 
minister acting accordingly; the father kind 
mill the son dutiful ; the elder hrotlier loving 
and the 3*ouiigc'r respccffnl: — tiiese arc what 
arc called the six instances of wh.at should he. 
To put uirn3' what slioiild he and follow what 
should not be, is llic wa3* to accelerate c.alaniity; 
and when a ruler of men accelerates the calamity 
which it .slioiild be his object to keep off. is not 
the case a deplorable one? ” The diike^ did not 
listen to this remonstrance; and Tseoli’s wn, 
How, became a companion of Cliow-yu- The 
father tried to restrain him, but in vain, mien 
duke Ilwan succeeded to his father, Tseoh with- 
drew from public life on the plea of old age.J 


Fourth year. 


VrAi: IV 


^UKE YIN. 


f f § f ffi‘1 i I I‘S f -l.f f m.mml 


15 


✓ »l* 

?■ 

I' 

in 

'feo 


ly. 


^ Ufa »-4,yri m 3^ sv .5^ m.a 

?"‘-|?f|I|||ltatff| 

*■ gfi.ts-g'i|||pffs 

1 if # i f i g‘f f ‘S'f f il 

lifllll Iflillt 

I f S"f 

|K4llf 

SfiSllF 

* » * 


B. 
ftf 
A 
1 


fiift — 
■&M 

mm 

Mm 


Ts s » ^ B, 


“ f: ,-7' -'ll I3C. 

S $Mm 

§.^.S5#n 

* A i.f‘ 

^ Am M 


3 

4 


In l.b fourth your in Tor^nl i A ^ « 

m ”i” '‘j™-’’ invadeS’Ke an//”®,’®-,? “““‘i. 
[On Aeday] Mow-shin, Chow-ynol^o^.^ 

Hwan. murdered his ruler 

In summer, the duke and the’ duke of 
The duko of Sung, the marquirof Ch‘in »® 
and an army of Wei invoked Chw’ 

In autumn, Hwuv lpt^ o 

Sung, the mai^uis^ofct^^the^ joined the duke of 

In ,f in the“ivtS„*?Sf ““ ‘ho 

taS'ur^'’ nt Chow-yu to 

^ of ’Woi raised 


ax ae-ning. it lay bel 

Keu on the south, and Ts‘e and Ke ap) on 

e^T?!;' aJ? '"7 de^^cendants of the 
^at lu, and of course had the surname Sze 

^^);peeAna.nLr. The capital was changed 

TsTw M T Ch«un 

near to Keu;-iu dis. Choo-shing 


; out that Confuciuu onr»T 7 • 
his hatred of such an show 

Keu, especially as this is *he part of 

cnptt^Vone^ S.Vte‘Vf .?oitv‘or**"°.'= 

corded lu this classic Riu another, re- 

•m ™ J”’ ,“ *01.,, ,1,0 OOP. 

cord of it was e/i reg/e. ^ ‘'*e «* 

n.i"«ra^' 4“: ;:,te 


16 


THE CII‘UX TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK I. 


by a son. To understand the record fully, re- 
fer to the last narrative luidcr last year from 

the Chuen. Kuli-lcang, here and below, has jjijj 
for ^*1*1 ; and deep meanings are found in the 

omission of ‘duke's son,’ before the 

name ; — about which we need not be particular. 
Avas the name of the son of duke Chwang 

of Wei, mentioned as himself duke Ilwan (/{‘M) 

in the n.'irrative referred to. It might appear 
that this par. belonged to the 2d month, but Too 
Yu remarks that in that month there was no 

Mow-shin day. Tlic characters ^ should 
be at the commencement of the p.ar. 

Par. 3. is simply ‘ to meet,’ as if without 

previous agreement, and this is the meaning put 
on the term here ; but such an interpretation 
would be meaningless. Why should a casual 
incident of that nature he rcconlcd? In the 
Le Ke, I. Pt.U.ii. 12, we are told that ‘inter- 
views between the princes before the time 

agreed upon were called So Tso-she in- 

terprets the Avord here, and Too Yu c.alls the 
interrfew *a hurried arrange- 

ment.’ Tso-she s.iys ; — ‘ In spring Cliow-yn of 
Wei had murdered duke HAvan, and taken his 
place. The duke and the duke of Sung Imd ar- 
ranged for a meeting as a sequel to their coA’e- 
nant at Sub pn the 1st year]; but before the 
time came, they got the dbavs of the confusion 
in Wei.’ In consequence of tlus, it would fol- 
low, they had only a harried meeting. Ts‘ing 

was in Wei, — in dis. of Tung-o 
Yen-chow. 

Par. 4. Chin was a marquisate, having its 
chief city in Yuen-k‘ew in pres. 

dis. of Hwae-ning dep. Chin-chow (so 

called from the ancient State), Ho-nan. Its 
chiefs were Kweis (j^), descended from Shun. 

Chin and Ts'ae were the most southern of the 
States of China proper in this period, and expos- 
ed consequently to danger from the barbarous 
Ts‘oo, by wliich they were ultimately absorbed. 
Tsliealso was a marqnisate. Arith which Idng 
Woo invested his brother Shnh-too at the com- 
mencement of the dynasty; — ^in dep. Joo-ning 

Ho-nan. Its capital at this time was 

in Shang-ts'ae (Jl^. dis. To understand 

the par., we must keep in mind the Chuen un- 
der par. 5, last year. Tso-she adds here; — 

‘ Wlien Shang came to the dukedom of Sung. 
Ping, the son of duke Muh. fled to Chlng. Avhere 
there ATas a \rish to vindicate his right to Sung. 
And now, when Chow-yn had nTade Mmsclf 
ma^uis of Wei. he thought at once of patting 
to rights his fatlier’s grudge against Ch*ing (sre 
the 2d Chuen after p. 5. 1st year], and of getting 
for himself the favour of the princes, in order to 
make his people better .affected. He sent a 
message, therefore, to the dnkc of Sung, saying. 

** If you will invade China' to remove the danger 
that is there to yourself [/.e. Stub’s son P-iugl. 
you shall bo chief of the expedition; and all my 


levies, ns well as Chin nml Ts'ac, winfoHotv 
you: — this is the desire of the State of Wei." 
Tliey ncceded in Sung to the request; nnd as 
Cliln ntiil Ts'ac Averc titen friendly with Wei, 
the duke of Sung, the marquis of Chin, an 
army of Ts'ne, and an army of Wei, inA-aded 
Chlng, nttd laid siege for (lA-e days to the east- 
ern gate of its c.apital; — when the a* returned. 

‘The duke of Loo asked Ciumg-chung Avhether 
ClioAv-yti of Wei Avould accomplish his ambition. 
“Your scrA'nnt has hc.ard,” s.iid the officer, 

‘ that the people nmy ho made aa-cH affected by 
A-jrtue; I haA'c not heard that they can be made 
so by violence. To use A’iolcnco Avith that view 
is like trying to put silk in order and only raA-el- 
lingit. ChoAA'-yu relies on his military force, and 
can do cruel things. For his military likrngs 
the multitudo Avill not cle.'ivc to him; and for 
his cruelty his relatiA'es aaIII not. IVith the multi- 
tude reboilious, and his friends IcaAing . 
Avill be difiicnlt for him to be successful. 
tary Aveapons are like lire; if you don’t lay tlie 
fire aside, it Arill burn yourself. 
murdered his prince, and he uses his P^P 
oppress! A'cly, thus not ni.aking excellent virtu 
his pursuit, but Avishing to succeed b.v 
lence; — he Avill certainly not escape calaimt. . 

Par, 5. This HAvuy Avas an officer of 1 k) 0, a 
son, indeed, of the previous duke. He was at . 
wards concerned in the murder of oaKe i 
ami Kung and Kuh think that he is here 
tioned simply by his name, denuded of 
‘duke’s son.’ as the s.agc’s punishment ot 
for his share in that deed. But this . 
quite inadmissible. Tso-she thinks the omusiou 
shows Confucius ’ dislike of him in the 
here mentioned ; but neither need Are s pp - 
that. The historiographers bad merely 

lus n.ame The is little more than the ^ 

of other paragraphs. The Chuen i® 
autumn, the princes again invaded Cmina. , 
the duke of Sung sent to ask the 
force from Loo. Ta-foo [the designation of 
Havuv] asked leave to join them with . 
The ’duke refused, when he stronglv 
request, and Avent. Hence the brief ^ 
the text, expressive of dislike to his e . 

The army of the princes defeated the _ 
of Ch'ing, carried off the paddy from th 
and returned.’ _ 

Par. 6. Here and in p.7, 

‘ the people of Wei,’ as if the 

the consent, and Avere, indeed, the doin^ ^ 

all. Chow-yu might have been ment. 

being the ruler de. facto; but 1‘® 
had occupied his position only for a 
and the marquis Hwan w.as not ye 
Pah was in Chin, near a river so name . 
she gives the foUovring account of CIiow , 

‘Chow-yu finding himself_ unable to 

the people to himself, SAth TseohssonH • - 
Ills father how to establish the pnne ffoins 
State, Shih said, “ It may be done by hi» 
and having an andience of the hing. 
hoAv can this audience be obuiueu . .j, 

Hwan of Chin,” replied the father, is 
favour with the kinir. and Chin and ■, 


tavour wim tno King, and CIi1<* ,.,j, 

on friendly terms. If the /.lawns go m 
court of Ch‘in, and get the duke to 


Yr.\K V. 


DUKE yiK. 


17 


mullcnce for liim, it may bo pot.” On this How 
wont with Cliow-yu to Cli'in 5 t)ut Sl)ili 'JVcoli 
pent infonimtion to Ch‘in, fnyinp, “Tlic State 
of SVci is narrow and small, and I ain aged 
and can do nothing. Tlioso two men aro 
the real nnmlerors of my prince, and I ven- 
ture to ask that yon will instantly take flic pro- 
j<rr mcasuros with them.” The people of Ch*in 
made them prisoners, and requested Wei to send 
and manage the rest. In the 9th month, the 
l>eoplo of ^Vci sent Ch*ow, the superintendent 
of the Kiplit. who put Chow-yu to death, at Puli, 
and Shill Tseoh sent his steward, Kow Yang- 


keen, who put Shill How to death in the capital 
of Ch'in. A superior man may sa}% “ Shih Tseoh 
was a minister without blemish. He hated 
Cliow-yn, with whom his own son How was 
art and part ; — and did he not so afford an illus- 
tration of the s.aying that great righteousness 
is supreme over the affections?’” 

Par. 7. Tsin was a brother of duke Hwan, 

and had fled to the State of Hing They 

now sent to Hing for him, and raised him to the 
mnrquisatc. 


Fifth year. 


A 

1 


ipf 


+ A 


n. 


E. 


MM Pi 
MM 
A W Aw ^ 

it =f- MM 


H.ffl M Km ja w 0 .* 
I» 7 s s # A ■■ 


if® 
:.S!5te 


« jffi BM ^ M.T s. 

B A W! ^ -fi- .fp in II M.M. # 

MM iL.I®.il5 M m MMMMMM m & 

M 45:.S A T -Ifc.® if » W fl A Jif 
if Kd'' iS ilt # M *.4 b 

A0PMZ^‘W'~ - 


JM m 

mmm 

m B 


#A 


^ .... _ - — M 

§ f ro f « f S.I1 tf.# fi # ^ 

i M ZM ill m.m mmm m k 
M wmfirrmT' §m * m ii .a m 
2 1 i ^ S f § k-ium.z iK « i* 

R *4 « « IS H ^ «IM ^ -fS 

St iliM <& If lf.<: ^ ^ ffi.S 


voi, r. 


3 


TUE CII'UN TS-EW, WITJI THE TSO CHIUEN. 


BOOK I. 


nrniy had pot, tlie man replied, “They h.ave 
not yet reached our city.” The duho was anpry, 
and stopped his measures, dismissinp the mes- 
fienper with the words, “Your prince in Ins 
message requested me to have compassion on 
the peril in which his altars were, and now you 
tell me that the enemy has not reached your 
city; — I dare not take any notice of the case.”' 

Par. 6. This is the record of a plague 
— ‘ some evil c .auso d by the misconduct of men 
^ described 
as a grub that eats the heart of the growing 
grain (g ^ ^ 0 !l]S);’-it developes 

into the locust ( iliiit-ife)- It is named 
from the place of its injurious action, lying hid 
in the heart of the plant 


h 

Par. 7. This Kunp-\«zc K*ow is the same ns 
the Tsanp lle-pili in the Ciiucn on p. 1. K'ow 
was his name, •md his/ designation was Tsze- 
Isang (-y- Ilfs grandchildren would 

first receive the clan-nailiAOf Tsanp, from his 
designation; and he is siA-Surnarned in the 
Chuen ns the ancestor of tljc'^Tsang family. 

He (f.tA) is the honorjiry title gitjn cite*" i*'® 

death. On this par. the Chuen j^’s : — ‘On the 
death of Tsang Ile-pih, fhe duke said, “My 
uncle was angry with me [j. c., for not listening 
to his remonstrance]; but I dare not forget his 
fniihftdncss” He caused him to be buried with 
the honours of one rank above what was his due.’ 

Par. 8. Ch‘ang-koli was a town of Ch‘ing;— 
its name remains in the dis. of Ch‘ang-koh, in 

lieu (g^) Chow, no-nan. This expedition, 

Tso-she observes, was in return for Ch'ing’s 
attack of Sung mentioned in par. 5. 


Sixth year. 

^ t m mm S! 

^ ^ T WiS 


^ © @ 
z ie M 

M in M 
g. 

W ^ 


# fe .S- 

m 


^ sra 

m 

mm.1^ 


® ^ S 15 . 

2 5 it 
^ B, 


«. m # ft. ^ © *, 

^ ft. W bI ^ ® B^. £ ^ 
A $ « K S. 

m n m mjx m 

ft?ais#<a-ii5^^.jS§ 

« B,z n 0. » ^ 
^ B fi f 6 a fS i 

g g. ^ ft * # tt. -a. 
^ M -^.B J- m.:k 

® ^ H So 

^ ^ ik Z & 

M ^.z m ^ 9 m. 

M. ^ # <0 

M ^ H. tfc. ^ ^ If 

# A W SS :S:.ai5.T 

m z m m m m m 

^ ill. z.^ M m 
^ ^ w B, m 


mS§ 

z 0- 

__ . . m ^ I . 


^ at c 

§ 

iE 

0 ii 

z ^ 
* ^ . 


W 


Ykau VI. 


DUKE YIN. 


21 


A"L 1 111 [the duke’s] sixth j^ear, in spring, an officer of Ch‘ing 

came [to Loo] with overtures of peace. 

2 111 summer, in the fifth month, on [the day] Sin- 3 ^ew, the 

duke had a meeting with the marquis of Ts‘e, when 
they made a covenant at Gae. 

3 [It was] autumn, the seventh month. 

4 In winter, an army of Sung took Ch'ang-koh. 


Pnr. 1. The text liero has 
Rung and Kuli, wlnlo Tso-sho reads ^ 2pl. 
But both the former commentators explain 
their phrase by ‘to the ^uin of peace,' 

Tso-she explains his by = ‘which 

changed their relations of enmity, and there was 
peace,’ meaning ‘to change.’ Later 

critics have taken in the sense of ‘to 
present,' ‘to offer;’ and thus a meaning is got 
out of the more likely rending, which comes to 
the snnm ns the view of Tso-she. There was 
reason for the overture of pence on the part of 
Ch'ing. Before Yin succeeded lus father, he 
had been taken prisoner in an expedition against 
Ch'ing, and detained there. He made his escape, 
but might be supposed to be ill-affected towards 
it. When, however, he rejected the application 
from Sung tlm year before for assistance against 
Cli'ing, that State thought the time a favourable 
one for initiating proposals that Loo and it 
should be at amity. 

[Tlie Chuen has here another note about the 
affairs of Tsin:— 

The nine original clan-branches of Yih [». e., j 
Tsin], with the representatives of the five minis- 
ters of the time of Yin, and KSa-foo, son of 
K'ing-foo, went to meet the marquis of Tsin in 
Suy [see the Chuen after Ist par of last year], 
and escorted him back to Goh. The people of 
Tsin called him the marquis of Goh]. 

Par. 2. Gae was a hill in Loo;— ^ the north- 
vrest of the dis. of Mung-yin |^), dep. 
Ts'ing-chow. Loo and Ts'e had been at feud 
before the time at which the Ch'un Ts'ew opens. 
This meeting and covenant were the commence- 
ment of peace between them. 

[The Chuen here adds; — ‘In the 5th month, 
on the day Kttng-shin, the earl of Ch'ing made 
a sudden raid into Ch'in, and got great spoii. 
The year before, the earl had requested peace 
from Ch'in, when his proposals were rejected. 
Woo-foo remonstrated with the marquis of 
Ch'in,. saying, “Intimacy with the virtuous and 
friendship with its neighbours are the jewels 
of a State. Do you gr.mt Ch'ing’s request,” 
Tlie marquis replied, “My difficulties are with 
Sung and Wei; what can Ch'ing do?” And so 
he repulsed Ch'ing. 


‘A superior man may say. Good relations 
should not bo lost, and evil relations should 
not be prolonged; — does not this seem to be 
illustrated in the case of duke Hwan of Ch'in? 
When a -man goes on to prolong enmity, the 
consequences naturally come upon himself; and 
though he may wish deliverance from them, ho 
will not obtain it. The Shang Shoo says, “The 
evil issues of enmity develops easUy, as when 
there is a fire blazing on a plain. It cannot be 
approached, and stiU less can it be beaten out 
(Shoo, rV. vii. Pt. i. 12).” Chow Jin [see Ana. 
Xyi.i.6.] has said, “ The Head of a State or of a 
clan looks upon evil relations as a husbandman 
looks upon weeds or grass, which must be re- 
moved. He cuts down, kills them, collects 
them, and heaps them up, extirpating their 
roots that they may not be able to grow ; and 
then the good grain stretches itself out.” ’] 

! Par. 3, There was nothing to record in all 
the autumn of this year; but still it was neces- 
sary, according to the scheme of these annals, 
to indicate the season and the 1st month of it. 

Par. 4. See the siege of this place in the last 
par, of last year. Too Yu says that the siege 
had then been unsuccessful, but that Sung 
returned this year, and took the place by 
surprise. He says also, after Tso-she, that the 
captime was made in autumn, but was only 
commimicated in winter to Loo, so that the 
historiographers entered it under that season. 
But as Sung was held by the representatives of 
the House of Shang, its months would be those 
of that dynasty, and part of its autumn would 
be Chow’s winter. 

[Tso-she appends here the following two 
Chuen: — 

‘In winter, an announcement came from the 
capital of famine there, to meet which the duke 
asked the courts of Sung, Ts'e, Wei, and Ch'ing, 
to be allowed to purchase grain in their States. ' 
This was proper.’ 

‘The earl of Ch'ing ivent to Chow, and for the 
first time sought an audience of king Hwan. 
The king did not receive him courteously, 
when the duke Hwan of Chow said to him, 
“Our Chow’s removal to the east was all. 
through the help of Tsin and Ch'ing. You 
should treat Ch'ing well, to encourage other 
princes to come to court ; — and still there is fear 
that they will not come. Now when he receives 
discourtesy, Ch'ing will not come again.” ’] 


22 


the OH'DIf TS.EW, WITH THE ISO CHBEN. 


BOOK I. 


Seventh year. 

M 

!s 6a 


M M ^ 


mm 


if i-f S'2 ' f I a » f ® ftl.f 0. 


i| 1.11.1 


IJ W M E.£ 

gg w S "fS 

# II R 0J 


1.^ 

$ /L 
56 le 

-Ec, 


>?.?}?■ 8f 


S3t 

^.la 
<&■*. 
■a 


^ 

»i^ ■ 
Sffl, 
■tfe.T 


mm^ 

■if^M 

M. ik 

m M 1^ 


VJT IT,. ^ IHJ 

the^d^lv« ?i 1° the king’s third month, 

! In summer, ire Traill ChuDS-fc-gw. 

younger brother Ncen [to 

5 Tn J . I™ndly jiiquiries. '■ 


YtAn VII. 


DUKE yusr. 


23 


Par. I. Tlie iwarriago of the duke’s eldest 
daughter to the marquis of Kc is entered in the 

2d year, pp. 5,G. There the ^ «=3 ‘ went to be 

married to,’ ‘went as the wife;’ here the ^ 

has only the significance which appears in the 
tninslation. Wien the daughter of a State was 
married, the rule was that she should bo aceom- 

panied by a half-sister and a cousin ( — ■ — * 

^j^). Tlien two other States sent cadi a prin- 
cess to attend her f*~^. ), each of 

whom was similarly accompanied by two rela- 
tives. Thus altogether a prince’s marriage 
brought nine ladies to his harem — ' 

In the case in the text, the girl 

had Iwn too young to accompany her sister in the 
2d year, and had w.iited five years, till she 
reached the statutory age of 15, and could pro- 
ceed to Kc. She .apiiears twice again in the 
chassic; and it is contended that such promi- 
nence was given to her, humble though her 
rank, to mark the sages sense of her worthiness. 

Par. 2. T-ang was a small State: — ^in dis. of 
Tilng, dept. Ycn-cliow, held by thcdescend.mts 

of Shuli-sew ^), one of king IVoo’s bro- 
thers. Its chief is here styled marquis, but af- 
terwarvis he appears only a^ viscount, his rank 
liaviiig been reduced. According to the gener- 
al practice of the Chnm Ts‘ew, the name as wdl 
as the title should be given in the notice of the 
death. The w.ant of tiic name here is probably 
an omission of the bistoriographer; but Tsa-she 
s,avs that it is in rule, berause duke Yin and 
tlie roarqms had never covenanted together. 

lie adds. • At covenants between the princes, 
they were mentioned by name; and therrfore on 
the" death of one of iheni, his name was given 
when the event was communicated to oUier 


learn that among States in the same quarter of 
the empire, there ought to have been every year 

‘the intei change of inquiries 
every two years ‘ the interchange of p^ing 
($M Conciliatory offerings of silk 

and pieces of jade were made at such times. 

Par. 5. Acc. to the Chuen, this attack of 
Choo was a cowanlly proceeding on the p.irt of 
Loo; and a covenant of peace had been made 
between the two States, not long before; — see 
the Ist ye.ir, p. 2. — ‘ This autumn, Sung and 
Ch‘ing made peace, and in the 7th month, on 
the day K3ng-shin, covenanted at Sub. The 
duke proceeded to attack Choo, — so pomshing 
it to gratifv- Sung.’ 

Par. 6. Tliis e.irl of Fan was a high minister 
and noble at the court. Fan was in tbe pres, 
dis. of Hwuy dep. Wei-hwny, Ho-nan. 

Not only was there an interchange of friendly 
missions among the princes themselves, bnt also 
between them and the king. Indeed, tbe king 
was supposed to send annuallj* to every one of 
them to inquire abont his welfare ^ 


Chow Lc; XXXVm. 17) ; but as Ch*ing E ob- 

sen'es, for the king to send such a mission to 
Yin, who bad never sent one to court, was deroga- 
tory to his dignity ^ 

Par. 7. These Jung are prob.abIy the same 
.as those mentiimed in the 2d year, pp. 1,5. 
Ts‘oo-k‘ew Avas in the east of the pres. dis. of 
Ts'aou, dept. Ts'aon-chow. Tlie incident shows 
howlaivlesstbetime was. The Chuen relates that, 

Slates. At the same time his, successor ivas I ^hem- 

nlso mciitioneil, — for the continuance of friend- * selves at Chow in homage, and distributed pres- 
ship. and ^the assuraure^ of tlie I ents among ilie high ministers, but tliat the 

earl of Fan had not received them courteously. 
Tliey took advaat.age therefore of the opportuni- 
ty presented by his jcetnrn from Loo, att.acked 


was one of the standing regulations of tht kiag~ 
doin' 

Par. 8. Chung-k‘ew was in dis. of Lan-slian 
jjj), dep. E-cbow. No doubt there was ^ 
some exigency requiring it to be fortified. Tso- 
she, lio'vcver, says the record is made, because 
of the unseasonablcncss of tbe undertaking, cdl- 
ing tlie people off from their field labours. 

Par. d. Tso-sbe tells us that this Neen’s de- 
signatiou w.os E-diung 

visit iu the text ivas to cement the covenant 
made the year before (p. 2) by Loo and Ts^e. 
Tliese p'iiig or missions of friendly inquiries 
Wore regubir institutions, by wluch tbe princes 
mnintinned a gtwd understanding with one an- 
other: — sc-e the Le Ke. I., Pt. II. iL 12, ^ 

employment by Tsvs of the prince's brother, 
instead of the officer usually charged with such 
a mission, was a special honour done to Loo. 
From the Chow Le. Bk.XXXVUL. p.24, we 


The 


him, and carried iiim off. according 

to Kung-yang means that the Jang made the 
earl prisoner Too Yu says that 

they did not seize him X inflnenced, 

probably, by a rem.ark of Koli-Ieang that the 
phrase denotes something fighter than seiznro 


). And the K‘ang-he editors say 
this interpretation is much the better of the 
two. Tliey are also stumbled at tlie use of the 
word ‘attacked ' in p. 6, as too weighty for the 
occasion. Tliere, however,'-^ is ; and I appre- 
hend ^ .also is only a gentle way of telling 
that the earl was capturetl and carried oSl 
[The Cliuen has hero: — 

‘Ch‘in and Ch‘ing made peace. In the 12 th 
month. Woo-foo of Chun went to Gi'ing, and on 
1 the dav Jin-shin made a covenant with the earl, 


24 


THE CII‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK I. 


and smeared his mouth with the blood of the vic- 
tim, as if he were forgetting what he was doing. 
Seeh Pih said, “ Woo-foo will not escape a violent 
death. This covenant will be of no use to him.” 
Leang Tso of Ch'ing went to Ch‘in, and on the 
day Sin-sze made a covenant with the marquis, 
when he also perceived the disorders which were 
imminent in Ch'in.’ 


‘ Hwuh, son of tlie earl of Ch'ing, had lived 
at the king’s [ns a hostage; see the Chuen, after 
p.3 of tije 3d year] ; and on this account ac- 
cording to Too Yu, thinking it likely he would 
be n favourite with the king] the marquis of 
Ch'in proposed to give him his daughter to 
wife. The earl acceded to the proposal, and 
the marriage was determined on.’] 


Eighth year. 


JiW 


0M HJ! a A <6 * 

A 


A 


4 


9M 

3c 


T If # 


m 


/ 


T 


Yr*^ V»If. 


nrjjr vtK. 


25 


w «f: 

im yd z w 

Z.^ ;i:.?l 

<m r? Cs 3c 
)u -u zi'- 
-r lit l/H. 
35 yti.ns 
J]t 1"! R IM III) 
J?;, ff ja ill m 

r? -r-M T- 


u^\ 

It'l 

?c 

t; 

tiV'i 

151 


?1- fl' 

m iH. 

•Ui.?!' 

n -3 

?i' H 

1111 la 
iip z 

iMKl 
in. 
7jt Jl: 

'S-K. 


{? 'M 
f7i A 
f!li nil 

'.H- ft 
hZ 3ii. 
H Jit 
lajiE 

i4iif 

fR -Hi, 


.© -T- ?? f'7 13, ». 
A 3E A 0 fi- MS 
;j fill (ff£ 

PJ lit ¥ r/.33 ^ 
;il.33S 31 li 
m M ISf S.A. 

-fl’l ri T RE 3fe 

la 2: e?ii. 31 an 

?¥ =fR,3ii:. ffll rfij 
A m ^ 

13) # ill. 

31. ili. iS « 

e jlll •l!l. 3 =- 


vm. 1 

n 


•1 

5 

G 


8 

9 

10 


Itj [?}»«• tlulcoV] <‘i"lnli yo.nr, in spnn.cr. the duke of Sung 
nnd the m:ir(juif< of Wei met nt Cliuy. 

In the third month, the earl of Ch'ingfcent Yuen [to Loo] 
to give up PjitJg. 

On [the day] Kang-yin wc entered Pang. 

In summer, in the sixth moutli, on [the day] Ke-liac, 
K‘aou foo, marqtiis of Ts‘ac, died. 

On [tile day] Sindine, the baron of Suh died. 

In autumn, in the seventh month, on [the day] Kung- 
voo, the duke of Sung, the marrpiis of Ts‘e, and the 
mnnpiis of Wei made a covenant at Ya*uh. 

In the. eighth montli, tlierc \va.s the burial of duke Seuen 
of 'rs‘nc. 

In the nintli month, on [the day] Sin-maou, the duke and 
an oflieer of Ken made a covetiant nt Fow-lae. 

There were the 7)jjn(7-insccfs. 

In winter, in the twelfth month, Woo-hene died. 


r«r. 1. On tliis r.nrnpr.ip1i Tfo-.'ltc myt:— 
•Tli(*ni.ir«jn!» *if T#‘c wanted to bring nbout jicaco 
tiotwccn Sung and Wei cn i/.e one haml and 
C)i‘i «7 on the other, and Iiml flxctl n lime for a 
incetinp teith the princes of the lira fanner States. 
•liic duke of Sung, liowcvcr. fcril presents to 
Wei, and beggcil tlint tlic marquis and iiimscif 
miciit liavc a prerion.s mcc’ting&^/jwn ifiemselces. 
Tlic marquis agreed, and Ihej* met accordingly 
nt K‘cucn-k‘cw.’ Ilegulnted by tills account, 

the meaning of ^ differs sliglitly from tliat 
laid down on par. 3 of tlic 4tli year. Tlic idea, 
liowcvcr, of tt ‘hurried ' meeting remains. Tito 
meeting proposed by Ts'e was hold in the 7tU 
mnntii; this was a preliminary meeting of Sung 
and Wei to consider how tiicy siiould receive 
Ts'c’s proposals, K'cuen-k'cw in tlie Ciiuen, 
and Ciiuy in the text, arc two names of the 
fame place; — ^Too-yu says it was in Wei, on tlic 
nortit of the dcp. city of Ts‘aou-chow; but sec 
on II. i. 2. 


Par. 2. TsO'Shc says here: — ‘Tlic earl of 
Citing intimated Iiis wisli to give up the sncrifico 
nt mount T‘ne, and to sacrifice to tlic duke of 
Chow, and to cxclinngc therefore Pflng near 
mount T‘nefor the licldsof Hcu. In tlic 3d month, 
accordingly, he sent Yuen to give up Pang to 
Loo, and no tnore used the mount T‘ae sacrifice.’ 
nut to understand tliis, an explanation is ncces* 
snry, which is supplied by Too Yu. — ^Wlien king 
Cbing built the city of Loli, and was meditating 
tlic removal of iiis capital to it, he granted to 
the duke of Chow the lands of Hcu (in the south- 
west of the present Hcu Chow, dep. K'ne-fung), 
where the princes of Loo might reside when 
they visited Loh on state occasions; and subse- 
quently a tciiipic was built there to the duke of 
Chow. But tlic first c.arl of Clring. as a brother 
of king Seuen, had tlie town of Pang, near 
mount T‘ae, where he and Iiis successors might 
rest, when called there on occasion of the 
king’s eastern progresses, and having then to 
assist at tlic sacrifices on or to the mountain. 


vot. V. 


4 


26 


THE CH‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK I- 


Owing to the decay of the royal House, there 
was now an end of the kingly progresses. The 
earl concluded that Ch‘ing had no farther oc- 
casion for P&ng, and therefore offered it to Loo, 
to which it was near, in exchange for Heu, which 
was near to Ch‘ing, volunteering to maintain 
there Loo’s sacrifice to the duke of Chow. — ^If 
all this be correct, yet we know that Loo’s part 
of the arrangement did not take effect for some 
time; — see the 1st year of duke Hwan, p. 2. 
Yuen, of coiurse, was .an officer of Ch‘ing.- 
Par. 3. Kung and Kuh lay great stress on 
the mention of the day here; — but without 

reason. The use of ^7^, however, seems strange, 

as that character should denote a hostile entry. 
[The Chuen appends here; — 

‘ In summer, Ke-foo, duke of Kwoh, for the 
first time became a high minister and noble at 
ihz court of Chow.’ 

‘In the 4th month, on the day Keah-shin, 
Hwuh, son of the earl of Ch‘ing, went to Ch‘in, 
and met his Kwei bride. On the day Sin-hae, 
he commenced his return with her. On the day 
Keah-yln, they entered the capital of Ch'ing, the 
officer Keen of Ch'in acting as escort to the 
lady. The prince was first mated, and then 
announced the thing in the ancestral temple. 
The officer Keen sai4 “ These are not husband 
and wife ; — ^he is imposing on his fathers. The 
proceeding is improper. How can they expect 
to have children?” ’] 

Par. 3. Sub; — ^see on p. B of 1st year. The 
name of the baron should follow the title, but is 
wanting; — through an omission of the historio- 
grapher. 

Par. 6. The meeting here is that spoken of 
in the Chuen on par 1, as called by Ts'e. Atten- 
tion is called to it by critics as the first meeting 
in the Ch‘un-Ts‘ew when more than two pnnees 
came together to consult and covenant on the 
affairs of the time. As it was called by the 
marquis of Ts‘_e, lie should appear 1st on tlie list ; 
but, says Too Yu, he did honour to the duke of 
Sung, ceding the presidency of the meeting to 
him. Tso-she says they first met at Wiln, and 
then covenanted together at Ya-uh. A recon- 
ciliation was effected between Sung and Wei 
and Ch'ing, and the siege of Ch'ing’s eastern 
gate was condoned Ya-uh was in the king’s 
domain,— 20 le south of the dis. city of Wei- 

ch*uen jH)’ 

Par. 7. [To this the Chuen appends: — 

“In the 8th month, on theday Ping-seuh, 
the carl of Chung, through the marquis of Ts‘e, 
appeared at court. This was proper.’] 

Par. 8. Pow (Kung and Knli read ‘^)-lae 

was in Keu; — 20 le west of the pres, city of Keu 
Chow. In the 2d year, p. 7, we have a meeting 
between the count of Keu and an officer to bring 
about a good understanding between Keu and 
Loo. This was tlie sequel of that, — * to carry 
out the good wishes of Kc.’ 

Par. 0. Sec on paragraph 5, 5th year. 

[The Chuen adds here; — ‘In winter, the mar- 
quis of Ts'e sent a messenger to inform the 
duke that he had ofTected the pacification of the 
three States [Sung, Wei, and Ch'ing]. The 
duke sent Ciiung-chung to reply to him, “Tliat 
you have reconciled tlie conjiictinp schemes of 
the three Rt.itos, and given rest and settlement 
to tlieir people, is your kindness, O prince. I 


have heard your message, and dare not but ac- 
cept and acknowledge your bright virtue.’” 

Par. 10. Woo-heae; — see paragraph 8 of the 
2d year. The Chuen has here : — ‘ On the death 
of Woo-licae, Yu-foo [the designation of Hwuy, 
IV., B] requested for him an honorary title and 
a clan-name. The duke asked Chung-chung 
about the clan-name, who replied, •‘When the, 
Son of Heaven {would ennoble the virtuous, he 
gives them surnames from their birth-places (or 
the birth-places of their ancestors] ; he rewards 
them with territory, and the name of it becomes 
their clan-name. The princes again confer the 
clan-name from the designation of the grand- 
father, or from his honorary title [the text 
is here difficult to construe]. Or when merit 
has been displayed in one office by members 
of the same family for generations, the name of 
that office may become the clan-name, or the 
name of the city held by the family may become 
so.” The duke determined that Woo-heae s 
clan-name should be Chen, from the designation 

of his grandfather . .. 

Q’oo Yu illustnates what the Chuen says 
the procedure of the king by the case of the 
chiefs of Ch‘in. They were descended from 
Shun, who was born near the river Kwei; hence 
they got the surname of Kwei. When they 
were invested with Ch'in, that became their 
clan-name, to distinguish them from ouier 
branches of Shun's descendants. He says fur- 
ther, that the princes of States could not 

surnames (jjf^), but only clan-names (^)» 

wliicli they did in the way described. 

But while the theory of surnames and cian- 
names in ancient China may have been as h^ 
described, they were often assumed and ackno - 
ledged without any conferring on the part of w 
kingor the princes. SeeMaou K‘e-linginroc- 
says : — ‘ When a ruler of Loo died, 
recorded ; when the ruler of another State » 
that also was recorded, when the announcemen 
of it arrived. The de.aths of great officers, scioM 
of the ruling family, were sometimes recorara 
and sometimes not ; with the accompammen 
of their clan-names or without; j ^i, 

mention of the, month and day of the dean 
or without it: — all this proceeded from tne iiw- 
torioavaphers of Loo, and the Mastiw J 
transcribed their record without making any 
ohnnge in it himself. Wehave here the menti 
of SYoo-lieae’s death, without liis clan-name, ]U 
as we have similar records of other officer s iii A v • 


6.; IX. S; &c. 

‘Now according to the ordinary view of the 
matter, the clan-name was only conferred on me 
who had been distinguished for their Tirtu®. 
But on tills principle few officers mentioned m 
the Ch‘un Ts‘ew could have received it, '"'fi®*'®® 
we find it given to many of the V®*!?* f 
meters, and to be abhorred for tlieir flagrant 
wickedness. It is impossible to suppose tnn 
the ol.-m-namcs of tlio officers of Loo were an 
given by the marquises. The general rule 

that ilic son of a deceased ruler was styled 

or “duke’s son;” his son again, 
or “ duke’s grandson.” But in the next descent, 
the son took ns n matter of course the designa- 
tion of his grandfather, or his honorap’ 
or the name of his office, or of his city, and 


Yvxr. IX. 


1)1:KK VIX. 


27 


i! Iil< own rl-niMiirnt.'. One 5tirnnine 
out Into ininy c!.’in-tmiuo.«, niid one 
dtR'Sjauii- l>nine1i«l out nsMlu hito lu.tuy 

fstuily n.atnM 

« iiuM make it njt- 


I here tlml Woo-litac hnd no cinn-nnmo till 
; nfter Iiifi (lentil ; — which la not to be believed. 
Ills record of events is very tmich to be relied 
on ; hut ns to every ten of Ins devices to cxjilnin 
the style of the classic, he is suns to be luistnkcii 
j in live or si-v of them.’ 


Ninth ycai\ 


^ 75- sffl.fli i- ^ is T i 

i H IS ® f « 

A m mM g.3K •l!i.5R. 

A # M JDt Jit ® 
m A W.T- 
5S; * -SS.Bff ® 

esi.il BiJ.t ^ f 
«.>i :!? A !g ill 


«3E 

^.x 


A is n# ft A -p,-. 

^ S A 
A 

#.Aa. 
-t&.Jia 

Hi 


IX. 1 In [the duke’s] ninth year, in spring, the king [by] Hea- 
ven’s [grace] sent Nan Ke to Loo with friendly inquiries. 

2 In the third month, on the day Kwei-j^e^v, there was great 

rain, with thunder and lightning. On [the day] Kang- 
shin there was a great fall of snow. 

3 Heeh died. 

4 In summer, we walled Lang. 

5 It was autumn, the seventh month. 

6 In winter, the duke had a meeting with the marquis of Ts^e 

in Fang. 


Yr-n: IX. 


DUKK YIN. 


29 


<*.© m S IE iit f.f |;-i * 
W A 5f4! A -ffl A-bh^X^-^^ S.'fl t 

m JS J’i.® |1| fS.^^ 

■ • M Jt fiiS <a- ^ ^ 

p^. qp <5ir aS ^ • 


Ar>r. 

A» 

(Sli.-tfl 

U'J A 
iS ilc. 
£ 


a. jit w a.:- . 
:?•: A ;» -t.W ^ ffl £ 
ft £ riil) It Hi £ £ 
^&A £.iis a J. 
±.£|!A.SSi'fSa3i4^ 

#■ *13 B.A ^ MM 
£ £ ES Sli.3^S. X.1 
.£^£ 2 1 


i>j. m ft. A 
-fit 3fe-.A » SB 
m % « Bill A 
^ Z.ZAX- 
m m -fit sii.-ft 

A.s M.fS £ 

^ Cfli A ^ tSiJ, 

4. A . 

MrM £ iic 
ift ffi Be. A 

\ 1 111 liis tenth year, in spring, in the king’s second month, the 

duke had a meeting with the marquis of Ts‘e and the 
carl of Ch‘ing in Chiing-k*ew. 

2 111 summer, Hwu}' led a force, and joined an officer of Ts‘e 

and an officer of Ch‘ing in an invasion of Sung. 

3 In the sixth month, on [the daj'] Jin-seuh, the duke defeated 

an amy of Sung at Kwan. 

4 On the day Sin-we, we took Kaouj on the day Sin-sze, we 

took Fang. 

5 In autumn, an army of Sung and an army of Wei entered 

Ch‘ing. . 

6 The army of Sung, the array of Ts‘ae, and the army of Wei 

attacked Tae. The earl of Ch‘ing attacked and took 

them [all] , , t. 

7 In winter, in the tenth month, on the day Jin-woo, an army 

of Ts‘e and an army of Ch'ing entered Shing. 


Par. 1. Cliunp-k‘cw,— 8eeVn.S. T^ismeet- 
inir was a Ecauel to that in p. 6 of last year. 
The Chuen says on it: — ‘In the 1st month, the 
fluke had a meeting with the pnnccs of Tse 
nod Ch'inc in Cliung-k‘cw, and on tlie day 
Kwei-ch*ow they made a covenant in Tang, set- 
tling the time when they should take the ^dd. 
From this it appears they made a covenant at 
this time ; and to the question why it is not re- 
corfed in the test, all that Too Yu can say is 
that the duke only mentioned tlie meeting in 
the report he took back to his ancestry temple. 
Too also observes that the day Kwei-ch ow was 
the 2Cth of the 1st month, and tlmt second month 
in the text must be an error. But all through 
this sVar, as often in other years, the months 
md Ws of the King and Chuen do not accord. 

Par. 2. The Chuen on this is: — ^‘In summer, 
in the SUi month, Yu-foo, preceding tJte dale, 
joined the marquis of Ts'e and tlie carl of Ch'ing 
in invading Sung.’ If this be correct, then both 


the marquis and carl are simply styled 
‘man’ in the text; — contrary to the general 
usage of the Work, where either denotes an 
officer, not of very high rank, or a force under 
the command of such an officer. Agreeing with 
the Chuen, Too Yu says that Hwuy hurried 
away, ambitious of joining the two princes, and 
without waiting for orders from the duke, and 
that thcreffire his name only is mentioned by 
the sage. But this is not more reasonable than 
the theory of Kung and Kuh mentioned on p. 5 
of the 4th year. The text leads us to suppose 
that the princes of Loo, Ts‘e, and Ch'ing all 
sent officers and troops against Sung, in antici- 
pation of their own advance. 

Par. 8. The Chuen is: — ‘In theCth month, 
on the day Mow-shin, the duke had a meeting 
with the marquis of Ts'e and the enid of Ch'ing 
at Laou-t'aou, and on the day Jin-seuh he 'de- 
feated an army of Sung at Kwan.’ Too Yu from 


30 


THE CH'U:!? TS'EW. TTITH THE TSO CHI:e>'. 


BOOK 1. 


, troops 

eppesr to bare been ideatiSed. Too ssy* it ttss [ Treie joinsd bv a fores from Ts-se, and prscsed- 
ia Snag, _ _ _ 1 ed to attack *Tae. In the Sth month, on fca 

Par. 4. The Cbnenis: — ‘On the dag KSng- f dar Jin-seuh. the earl of Chdng snironndsd 
t^col the armv of Chnng entered Kaon, and on ; Tac: on KTref-hae, he leducad it; taking at the 
Sia-t'TethsearieaveitoTertons. OnKSeg-shin i same time the three armies- After Snug and 


, r. goes ^ ^ 

to marajlze ots his ijarratiTe:— 'The roperior ' thsmselfes-’and thej Ts-ere defeat^' Knngand 
taan ’ ' 

"With the sing's command he tras pnnishi 

I and seem to think, that Chinn a!I at oz 


ISS-di 


it the higher nobHitv of 
instance'bf correctness.' 
south-east from the pres. 

Tea-<± 

Ten-chotr, •vrest of the dis- ciir of Ena-heans i and Ts^e. 


the vie—. foSovred in the * History of the 

acconnt of the s^^- 
na r r a t ive in the Chnen 


Par- 5. This vsus intended as a crrersion. to i 
cemp^ Caing to vrithdravr from Sang. 

Par- 6. Tsas a smaE Sta:& having its 


cinef etjinpres. dis. of Kraou-shing 
dsn. Ep-s-tSu Ho-nan. Its lords had the 


to understand if it vrsre spoken .of the 

capitne of a chy, - 

_ [There is a short Chnsa appended her^ that 
'in the 9th month, on the day 3Io'P'-vin- the ; 
earl of Ch&g ersn; entered Snag.'^. r' 

Par. 7. This' is nndenstcod the Cnnen ; 
TT,r-= c-—- - Tt- s^tjended to v.ri. Tsa says here that the .vnies / 

0^^ ojd Ho^ or Snng. It si&s to pnmsh its dEobedienee 

appear tnat the oSoars of Snng and TTei, aster t cormstsnd.' Shing,~se« on p. S oi 

Altering Chung, had been joined by a b:dy of f the Sth'V^r. 


' .-p-A 


:r. 


0t<a' 


M RiJ ^ ^ <Xi 'fKi 

g 2 ® ^ g 

^ AM.m a.x -a. 0.0.3s 


Yi:\u XI. 


DUKE YIN. 


31 


^ © jfij.iB mm M,m. 

» I * -fS # ii..ic JW « « IE * a g.-b « ^ 

•a.m Kt ® A.iji.# m ^ m m -ffi m m 

S! iii.3^ 2^ w * #c.ia )tb.jii 

m ii a ;a # m « p © If Bn # ^ ffl 

=?T ^ Bi! m.^i m^MTs^ ^.1^ m z,t- -pj 

Bn © ii ^ ^ •fe.iB © m #.®i 0.^ ^ 
fi ;$: ffi 111 ^.il #.7ir a I^.^.Bn # # i5 ;A H « 


z ffl z.a 

fill ^ i®. 

•i..®i.g la 

iil Bn 


;f:®|i 

s,« 

E 

fi IB. 
Tslli 
1% 
m 


3E 

Z 


>!« 1. 

m.A 

a » ^ 

3ti ^ 

%' 

Bn ffl. ^ 

^ F.. Jtt 
A.S. 
Am. ^ 
^ iSl 


?fil. 


jg 

la 


* 
la 


f :5^ ^ itb ^ ^ 5fi a 

A.^.m -tfc.w An Ai^ 
fi) ^ =t » ^ # JS.IBIS 

# l^.lf ^ ^ Av« S.« iS.SiF 

ife 

^ ^ Dl.S ^ # A 

^.z B.mm^mTimm 
w m jl tr s m A # 

SS l&.Bn z<'^^ — s SAM 

m^^:i^nsf=: /.i^m 
Bn Bn ffl Sg.ili IS5 It ®i 

ife a it Bn a ja it.-fs <&• is 

F ffl «E HE ^ * BE 1^ 

-g- SE l§ K ^ PS- 


s 

5* 

ffl 


M 


^ itj^ w ja Ja # 


iS s IE A^.tn ^ m M-K * 

Jtrt: Tnr -42r .fAf ivr =fcr y7«»^ 


Ii3 ^ 


g 5^ 


fs. 

t£,S 

s 

M 


Bn ^ 75- A # W W ^.T- 

s- mmmz m.m s * <& «i5 

■»! Bt 0.S 

la m ^.z,^ m ^ m m T 

3E 

M. mA^:A.m»A-MMt^z. m 
n it.m » A m.z- m.. # 
^.iRff:T:#^=S H,#.« M 
... W^&pfU&.A^.^iK^ 

ig:. » 

% BffTltfc.a^5gBE»#X ja 
m ».* 3E ffi ^ a^i a.w ja ^ 


32 


THE CH'UK TS‘EW, WITH THE ISO CHUEN. 


BOOK I. 


m 5C ^ ; 

flii ^ it g& 

m R.n 

m 4 15 n # ® 

^.^.+ fln A <&■ ® H 

5E5C^.4 4e^.# 
3 t it m 

^S 4 ^A^!lf 0 . 
M ie.ri ZMM 
■tfi..jS; H.lt ^ M 
. ® It m.^ ^ iP' 


Ifli,© ^Ei ^ @ 

«i^rjit=^3;^iiiii5 
R + r- fi.A M 

H.RIJ 7t J15 ro 1: Bn « 
M 9.m i& m 7J.ii.f-. 
X- X m.ja 

M.Rij xmn a.ft ^ 

X If ^.tIc.® m ^ M 
tii «: 4 ffl 
JK.g X }^,X XZ% 

X f .*.A 

» /L M fi: f tr 4 
4 tn ^ * 4.P.-t6-.*. 


51. 1 In [the duke’s] eleventh year, in spring, the marquis of 

T’Sng and the marquis of SSeh appeared at the court [of 
Loo]. 

2 In summer, the duke had a meeting with the earl of Ch‘ing 

at She-lae. 

3 In a.uturan, in the seventh month, on the day Jin-woo, 

the duke, with the marquis of Ts‘e and the earl of Ch'ing, 
entered Heu. 

4- In winter, in the eleventh month, on [the day] Jin-shin, 
the duke died. 


Par. 1. is here, of course, a verb; but it 
is difiScult to give an exact rendering of it. 
Knng-yang saj's that the ch^aou was of the same 
nature as the p'inff , — ‘ a friendly A'isit,’ the "dif- 
ference being that the visitors in the p'inff were 
officers, representing the princes, whereas in the 


ch'aou, the princes appeared themselves 

Accord 

ing to the rules of the Chow dynasty, ever 
prince within ‘tjie five tenures’ was required t 
appear at the king’s court, at least once, ever 
six years; — see the Shoo V.xx. 14, and note 
hut this statute was little observed in the tim 
of the Ch’un Ts‘ew. The princes were als 
required to appear at one another’s courts. Tsc 
she says, on p. 3 of the 15th year of duke Wfti 
that thej* did so once in 5 years ; but acc. to th 
Chow Le, XXXVIII. 24, a prince visited hi 
brother princes at their courts only one 
^ilL Whatever the rule was, thcr 

was now no consistency in the ob.scrvaiice of ii 
SC-ch was a inarquisate. near to T-Sng. bavin 
its chief town 40 le south of the j)re.«. dis. cil, 


which still hears the name of T'Sng. Its lords 
were recognized as descended from Hwang-te, 
and had the surname of Jin (‘ff-)- 
In connection with this par., the Chuen • 
— ‘The two princes contended which should 
have the precedence. The marquis of Seeh said, 
“ My fief is the older.” The marquis said, ‘-Oiy 
ancestor was the chief minister, of divination to 
Chow. Yours is a different surname from that 
of our royal House. I cannot go after yo”- 
The duke sent a request by Yu-foo to the 
marquis of Seeh, saying, “Your lordship an* 
the lord of T'Ong have condescended to visit 
me. There is a common saying in Chow, • J hc 
mountain has trees, but the workman nic.asurc 
them; Guests have certain rules, Init the host 
selects them.’ Now the House of CIiow at covc- 

nnnt.s Jirsl rccor/A the princes of its own surnanie, 
and those of diiTorent surnames come alter. I' t 

were at the court of Seeh, I should not dare to 
take rank with the .Tin. If your lord-^Inp will 
condescend to confer kindness on me. allow me to 
iiiakea request in favourofT’.Ingin this matter. 
The ninnjuis of Sfvii agreed, and gave the pre- 
cedence to the marquis of 'i''5ng.’ 


Tear XI. 


DUKE YIN, 


33 


Par. 2. After Kung and Kuh have 
^ . For ^ Kung has and Tso 

simply She-lae was in Ch'ing, 40 fe to the 

east of the dep. city of K‘ae-fung. The meeting 
was preliminary to the invasion of Hen, the 
result of which we have in the next par. The 
Chuen says: — ‘The duke and the earl of Gh'ing 
met at {lae, to make arrangements for the invasion 
of Heu. The earl being about to attack Heu, 
in the 5th month, on the day Keah-shin he took 
his weapons of war out of the grand temple.' 
Kung-sun Oh and Ying K'aou-shuh contended 
for a chariot [a prize offered by the earl to the 
strongest of his officers]. K‘aou-ahnh took 
the curved end of the chariot pole under his 
arm, and ran off with it, while Tszc-too [the 
designation of Kung-sun Oh] seized his spear, 
and pursued him as far as the highway, without 
coming up with him. Tsze-too was enraged.’ 
See this Chuen and the next told graphically in 

Par. 3. Heu was a small State, whicii has 
leffits name in the pres. Heu Chow, Ho-nan. 
Its lords were barons, having the surname 
Keang and being descended from Yaou’s 

chief miimter,the 'Pour Mountains’ of the 1st 
Book of the Shoo. The State was on the 
south of Ch'ing, and suffered much from that 
greater Power, being often reduced to the verge 
of extinction, but manifesting a wonderful 
tenacity of life. Its capital at this time was 

Hou-ch'ang ^ )> 80 le to the oast of the 

pres. Chow city. Tlic CImeu is: — ‘On tlie day 
Kftng-shin, the three princes wore close to Heu, 
when Ying K'aou-shuli took the flag tnow-hoo of 
the carl of Ch'ing, and was the first to mount the 
wall. Tsze-too pierced him with an arrow from 
below, and be fell down dead. Ilea Shuli-ying 
took up the flag, and again mounting the wall 
witli it, he waved it all about, and shouted. 
“Our lord lias mounted.” All the army of Clriiig 
then forced their way up ; and on tlic day Jin-woo 
the princes entered Heu, duke Ciiwnng of whieli 
fled to Wei. 'riio marquis of Ts'e rcfu.'scil to ac- 
cept Heu, and wisiicd tlie duke to tike it; Imt 
the duke said, "You said, my Lord, tlmt the. 
baron of lieu did not perform his duty, 
and I therefore followed you to punish liiiii. 
ITo has paid tlic penalty of his eriiiio; but. 
If.-! to his State, I dare not take any notice even 
of your commands.’ Heu tlicrcfore was given 
to Cli'ing, tiic carl of whieli made Pili-lc. an of- 
ficer of lieu, take charge of a younger broilicr of 
tbc baron wlio bad fled, and reside witli liiiii in 
the eastern border of tlie State, saying, " Heav- 
en lias sent calamity on lieu it must lie tiiat 
tlie Spirits were not plcaswl with its lonl, and 
made U.SO of me, unwortby as 1 niii. to jnmid, 
him. But I liavc not liccn aide to secure tlio 
repose of my uncles and cousin« in Cli'ini; 
dare I coiisiiler that IToii lias come to me from 
my merit? I bad a younger tirotiier, whom 
I could not retain in hnniumy. and wiioiii I 
c-nised to wander alHUit tilling his inonih in 
diflVrvnt .‘^fntos; — c.an 1 long enjoy the 
sioti of Uen? Do yon, Sir, maim.aiti this youth, 
and help biin to so-'llie ttndc>>nifort the pi'i'ple 
of lien; and 1 will send viy ofrer Hweh to as- 


sist you. If I live out my days in the land, 
’and Heaven then graciously repent of the 
calamities inflicted on Heu, shall not the lord of 
Heu again worship at his altars ? Then when 
Ch'ing has requests and messages to send to 
Hen, he will condescend to accede to them as 
intermarriages tliat have existed between our 
States might suggest, and there will he no 
people of other families allowed to settle here, 
and press upon Ch'ing, contending with it for 
the possession of this territory. In that case my 
descendants would have all their time occupied 
with defending themselves from overthrow, 
and could in no wise maintain the sacrifices 
of Heu. When I appoint yon, Sir to dwell hero, 
I do so not only for the sake of the State of 
Heu, but also to strengthen my own borders.” 
Accordingly the carl sent Kung-sun Hwoh to 
reside in the western border of Heu, charging 
him. “Do not place your equipments and vari- 
ous wealth in Heu, but when 1 am dead, quick- 
ly leave it. My predecessor was the first to 
establish his capital here in Ch'ing. Even the 
royal House has become small, and the descend- 
ants of Chow arc daily' losing tlieir patrimonies. 
Now the lords q/'Hcn arc the posterity of T'ac- 
yoh ; and since Heaven is manifesting its dissatis- 
faction with the virtue of Chow, am 1 able to 
go on contending with Heu?” The superior 
man may say that in this matter duke Chwnng 
of Cli^ng behaved with propriety. It is pro- 
priety which governs States and clans, givo-s 
settlement to the tutelary altars, scenres tho 
order of the people, and provides for the good of 
one’s future heirs. Bccaiisc lieu transgressed tho 
law, the carl punished it, and on its submission 
he left it. Ills arrangement of affairs was 
ncconling to his measurement of his virtue; his 
action proceeded on the estimate of his strength; 
his movements were according to tho exigency 
of tho times: — so ns not to embarrass tho«c who 
should follow him. He may be pronounced ono 
who knew propriety.’ 

‘The carl of Ch'ing made cvcr.v hundred 
soldiers contrilmtc a pig, and every five ninl 
twenty contribute a fowl ami a dog, and ovrr 
their blood curse the mail wiio had shot Ying 
K'aou-sliub. Tlic siijicrior man iiuay say hrrr that 
duke Chwnng of Cli'iiig failed in bis inethotls 
of government and imiiishiiioiit. Government 
is seen in the ruling of the fieople, and piini>h- 
nient in dealing riglitly with the had. As he 
sliowcd neitlier the virtue of government, nor 
tiie terrors of piinisliiiiciit, his ojiirrrr lH'e,mi(> 
dcpravcil. Of what U'lielit was il rimjdi/ to 
curse the man who liad so become dej»ra\ed? 
[Tliercarebcrc.'ippendctDlirec Ollier Chuen: — 
‘From Ch’ing the king took Woo, l,vw, and 
the fields of Wei nod Yn; and he gave to Cleing 
tlic fields whieli had liven granted to Sv> Fao- 
sHng, ennt.'iining the towns of Wftn. Yt;tn. He, 
F.'iii. Seih-sbing. Ts'w.an-maim, Hi’arg, Mi'.nv’, 
Chow. Hin'g. T'liy, and Hw.ie. Tb" '■up r.- r 
man from this tMusaeiain may kn <w ili.ai king 
Ilw.an had Ii>‘t Ch'ing. To ar: towarii* 
on the principle of reeipro'ity :» the p-tt> m of 
virtue, the sl.aiid.ard rule of prnpriViy. Itu: I'l '-i 
the king t ok wh.at h ’- C-’uM n •: lie' I liirtii- If ta 
give to nretlii-r. ai.a« ii rm ii> I.-, i tp* :.•* iJ.tt 
that otlwr would r. ■>! v ni>’ to f.i. c- 'irl : ' 

•CliSlgand S- th bf. t »"te 'f 
on which t?'.-' n'.-arqai* "f Iv-.h inv* }.■-! C? irj. 

1 . 


TOl V. 


34 


THE CH‘UH TS'EW WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK I. 


Tlie curl foaiplit with him in the horders, when 
the array of Seib received a great defeat, and 
retreated. Tlie superior man from tliis transac* 
tion may know that Seili would soon perish. 
Its lord did not consider the virtue of Ms 
opponent; he did not estimate his own strength; 
he did not cherish the regard which he should 
have done to his relative phe chiefs of Ch'ing 
and'Seih were of the same sumatnej; he made 
no examination into the language which was 
causing the strife; he did not try to ascertain 
whose the wrong was; — but guilty in all these 
five points, he proceeded to attack the othM 
side. Was it not right that he should lose Ids 
army?’ 

winter, in the tenth month, the earl of 
Ch‘ing, aided by an army of Kwoh, invaded Snug, 
and on the day Jin-seuh indicted a great defeat 
on its army, thus taking revenge for Sung's en- 
trance into Ch‘lng Oieyear before. Sung made no 
annoimcement of this to 'Zoo, and tlierefore it 
was not entered in the Idstoriographer’s tablets. 
Wliatever. announcements were received from 
other princes were so entered; but where there 
was no announcement, no o^cial record was made. 
Tlie rule ■was also observed in regard to the 
good and evil, the success and defeat, of all 
military e^editions. Though the issue should 
be the extinction of a State, if the extinguished 
State did not announce its ruin, and the victor 
did riot announce his conquest^ the event was 
not written in the tablets.*] 

Par. 4. The reader supposes from this para- 
^aph that duke Yin died a natural death, 
instead of being murdered, as was really the 
case. And numerous other instances irill occur 
throughout the classic, which make the foreign 
student think very doubtfully of the merits of 
Confucius as a historian. The Chinese critics, 
however, can see no flaw in the sage. It was 
his duty, tliey say, to conceal such a nefarious 
transaction which reflected dishonour on his 
natire State. And yet, they think, there are in- 
timations of the real nature of the event, in its 
not being stated wliere he died, and in ho entry 
being made of his burial! Of this and anaiogous 
peculiarities of the Ch'un Ts‘ew I have spoken 
in the prolegomena. 

The account of Tin’s death, as given in the 
Chuen is; — ‘Yn-foo asked leave to put duke 


' Hwnn (Tin’s younger brother and successor] to 
' death, intending thereon to ask to be made 
chief minister. The duke said, “I shall resign 
in his favour; — have not done so yet simply be- 
cause of his youth. I have caused T‘oo-k‘ew to 
be built, and mean there to spend my old age.' 
Yu-foo was frightened at what lie had done, 
and went and slandered the duke to Hwan, re- 
questing leave to murder him. When he was 
a young man, the duke had fought ^rith an 
army of Ch'ing at Hoo-jang, and was tak® 
prisoner. Ch'ing kept him in confinement in 
the house of the officer Yin. He bn^ this 
Yin. and prayed to Chung-woo, the Spirit whose 
shrine Yin had set up in his house. After this 
he and Yin returned together to loo, and tliOT 
he set up an altar to Chung-iyoo. the 
eleventh month he was in the habit of going to 
sacrifice to this Clmng-woo, fasting in mo 
enclosure of the altar to the Spirits of 
land, and lodging in the house of the offica 
Wei. On the day Jin-sliin, Yu-foo employed 
ruffians to murder the duke in the house of the 
officer Wei. He then raised duke Hwan fo the 
'marquisatc, and punished several members of tlio 
Wei family ■with death.’] 

Tso-she adds that the burial of duke Tin does 
not appear in the text, because the funeral rites 
were not paid to him. ^ 

The K’ang-he editors have a note here on 
the circumstance that only in flie 
eleven years is the ‘first-inontb 
corded. Rung and Ehh see in the om isrion^ 
intimation that Yin 

If-- , ‘did not consider himself, or was not, the 

riglitful holder of the State.’ Disclaiming this 
view, the editors seem to think that the omis- 
sion is in condemnation of Yin’s never having 
returned any of the king’s friendly messages, 
and never having gone birasdf to the capital, 
thereby being the first to set the example of not 
doing honour to the ruling monarch by gomg 
or sending to receive the calendar for the yew 
from him. Tliis is being irise above 'mw 
written. To seek for meanings in the Cli'U“ 
Ts'ew in this way makes the whole book a ntt- 
dle, which two men will not guess alike. 


BOOK n. DUKE HWAK. 
First year. 


+ ± ^ 

h o yko T 


@ © HI m.M ^ MS, ffi ^ JM Hi, 

M ^.ai 5 

# ® S ii.fti )&i& M Sr M A 
:5£ -f^ A A ¥ •i.,m Twm = ^m 
« n S.ll ^ A.«: if MM m 
S m. J1 0.iii,-& -t&.B.SR ffl.aiE 

I. 1 In his first year, in spring, in the king’s first month, the 
duke succeeded duke Yin. 

2 In the third month, the duke had a meeting with the earl of 

Ch'ing in Chuy. 

3 The earl of Ch‘ing borrowed the fields of Heu for a peih 

symbol. 

4 In summer, in the fourth month, on [the day] Ting-we, the 

duke and the earl of Ch‘ing made a covenant in Yueh. 

5 In autumn there were great floods. 

6 It was winter, tlie tenth month. 


,Sr±. 

8D1f 

-fe.0. 

# 7C 


The mtee op the Booh. 'Duke 

HTran.’ See what is said on the title of the 
former booh, where it is related how this Hwan 
was a younger brother of Yin, and would have 
succeeded to the marquisate on their father’s 
death hut for his youth. It appears that Yin 


had altrays intended to resign the dignify In his 
favour, when he should have gro^vn up. 
young man, however, was impatient, or perhaps 
he was doubtful of his brother’s intentions; so 
lie lent a ready ear to the slanders of their near 
relative Kung-tsze Hwuy, and gave his sanction 
to the murder of Yin. He thus bectune marquis 


36 


THE C11‘UN TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK H. 


of Loo by a deed of atrocious guilt. — Szc-ma 
Ts'een gives his name ns Yun (y^)j 'tt’liile 

other authorities say tlint it wns ICwei 
The honorary title Hwnn denotes — ‘ Extender of 
cultivation and Subjugator of the distant 

Hwan’s rule lasted 18 years, B. C. 710 — 693. 
His 1st year synchronized ■with the 9th year 
of king ^van ; the20th year of He of Ts‘e ; the 
7th year of Gae (J^) of Tsin ; the 8th of Seuen 

( *^ ) of Wei; the 4th of Hwan (3^) of Ts'ae; 
the 33d of Chwang of Ch'ing; the 46th of H'wan 
of Ts‘aoa ; the 34th of Hwan of Ch‘in ; the 40th 
of Woo of Ke (>|»£|); the 9 th of Shang of 

Sung; the 6th of Ning of Ts'in; and the 
30th of Woo of Ts'oo. 

Par. 1. After what has been said on all the 
phrases in this par. in the notes on the 1st par. of 
the former Book, it is only necessary to deal here, 
rather more at large, with the characters iP& 

They are somewhat difScult to translate. To say 
‘ came to the throne’ would be inaccurate, because 
Loo was only one of the feudal States of the king- 
dom; and ‘came to the place’ or ‘ to the seat,’ 
would be awkward. The reader will see how I 
have dealt with it. On the death of duke Yin, 
in the 11th month of the year before, his brother 
-had immediately taken his place; still what re- 
mained in that year was counted to Yin, and 
the first day of the next, his successor announced 
the beginning of the new rule in the ancestral 
temple,— ‘changed the beginning 
it is called, — and took solemn possession of the 
vacant dignity. This is the accession in the text; 
but here comes a great questioning Avith the 
critics. It seems to be a rule in the Ch'un Ts‘ew 
that the pltrase ‘ came to the place ’ is not used 
'i\‘here the preceding marquis has been murder- 
ed. So we find it at the accessions of Chwang, 
Min, and He. How is it that vre find the phrase 
here, describing the accession of H^van, charge- 
able with being accessory to the murder of his 
brother? The answer given byChoo He is the only 
sensible one. The paragraph simply relates what 
took place. Hwan omitted no ceremony that 
should liaA'e been proper on the occasion. He 
denied that hehndbecnaparty to the murder, and 
would have his accession gone about, as if Yin 
had died a natural death. No contrivances of 
Confucius, to construct his record so as to 
brand the noAv marquis, were necessary. His 
own conduct was the strongest condemnation 
of him. 

Par. 2. Chuy, — sec on I. viii. 1 ; but if Chuy 
belonged to Wei, as is stated there, Too Yu 
thinks it Avould hardly have been the meeting 
place of the marquis of Loo and the earl of 
Ch'ing. Kua Kwei thought it was in 

Loo, which seems more likely ; — it is easier to 
suppose that the lords of Sung and "Wei might 
have met in Loo on the occasion in I. viii. 1. 


This point .however, need not afibet the identifi- 
cation of the place, for Loo and Wei were con- 
terminous on the norlli-west of Loo. Hwan 
would be glad to get the countenance of Ch'ing, 
considering the circumstances in which he had 
just succeeded to Loo, and it appears from the 
next par. that Ch'ing had also something to gain 
by the meeting. 

Par. 3. See the Chuen on I. viii. 2, and Too 
Yu’s explanation of it. Tso-she says here: — 
‘ 'riie duke on his accession Avould cultivate the 

friendship of Ch'ing, and the earl 

again requested liberty to sacrifice to tlie duke 
of ChoAv, and to complete the exchange of the 
fields of Pling. The duke acceded, and in the 
8d month tlie earl borroAved the fields of Heu 
for R »ei7(-6tonc; — Avith reference to the sacrifice 
to the duke of ChoAv, and to Pang.’ 
appear that the exchange of the lands of ^^ng 
and Heu, proposed by Ch'ing to duke Yin, 
had not as yet taken full effect. Loo bna 
taken possession of Pang, but Heu Im nut 
been given over to Ch'ing. Whatever difficult 
there was in the matter Avas noAV adjustea. 
K'ung Ying-tali thinks that Heu Avns of more 
value than Pang, and that Loo reqiwed some- 
thing additional for it; and Soo Ch'elumd Hoo 
Gan-kAvoh folloAv his vieAV. Ch'in Foo-leang 

dynasty) thinks that 

the addition of the pe>7i and the word ‘ borrow- 
ing * Avere simply to gloss over the teansnction. 
This is more likely. For the tAvo princes to ex- 
change lands granted to their States by an net 
of the royal House, Avithout any 
the reigning king, showB how his authority WM 
reduced. ■ 

The peih Avas one of the five sceptres or sym- 
bols of rank held by the princes from the king. 
Counts and barons received peih, diffferentiate 
by the figures engraved upon them. But t ie 
princes carried other peih, called 


their visits among themselves; and it Avas, no 
doubt, one of these Avliich Avas given at this time 
to Loo. All the peih were made round. 

Par. 4. Yueh is the same as Chuy ; and the 
place had thus three names; — Chuy, Yueh, an 
K'euen-k'ew. This covenant was the seque o 
the meeting in p. 2, ‘ to settle finally the ex 
change of Pilng and Heu.’ Tso-she says t a 
among the Avords of the covenant were these,—' 
May he avIio departs from this covenant no 
enjoy his State!’ _ j. 

Par. 6. Acc. to Tso-she, the plirase 
great floods,’ is used Avhen the Avnter is out a 
over the Ica'cI plains. 

Par. 6. See on 1. vi. S. 


The Chuen appends here; — 

[‘In Avinter, the carl of Ch'ing [came, or sent] 
to render thanks for the covenant.’ 

‘IlAva-foo Tull of Sung happened to see the 
wife of K'ung-foo [Confucius’ ancestor] on the 
Avny-. lie gazed at her as she approached, and 
folloAvcd her Avith bis 03'cs Avhen she had Pass- 
ed, saying, “IIoav handsome and beautiful!” J 


yKJin 11, 


DUKE inVAN. 


.37 


Second year. 


i‘?S 

+ S5:.S 

. ip A ^ .■St.&M JL ^^..1.— jfe 0. 

^ m ® ± ^ •#■ TO Stm =. 

W;2:.if5ass«^##5t=^. 

■ p K @ W ^ ^ S 

^ ^ MM ■& ’W 

^flgja-(6l» iS^: 6P ^ III S ^ if ?L 


38 


THE CH'UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK II. 


f .^.4 f © f m if.m* B A 
jRS ® m-ii # ^ m 

A * ^ W iib.M 3ft A M A M ft: 


0 « f ti%]e:±«M-ft^ 


0 

0 .S ^ 0 
2fi: A ft iE.ei 
IE A |i 


g. 

iti* 


It'&ti 

^.A ^ ^ 

* tfii ft M f 
la 5lc 

SW'.AiftA 
***«•?■. K 

* ja#iE^ 

* § ^.i‘g ■■ 

ft.S.E S M 

Bn Afc ;S IJl 
T ft n ^ 

•f- + ^ ^ 

ms ^ Bn Ji^ 


iTilll 


-A. 

PH HT . 

W.-^ i& ^ ft -ffii. 

# A ft.Ril # 

# ii: ^ 4 , M 


a 

3 l 5 


i'i SIM. % 

® 3 Tf.ft ■ftl.§ ® 

nM ± A ® # 

A ft S- ft g ja 

® % ft ±. 

JS "?■ fS WJ 


B.« # ft ft.fi 1 . 

^ tfij B MtS 

i& in l.M fl 8 f 

ft. if ffl I s 

flS « t.# ^ 


.1 


I& t & ^ 

^ ^ ^.1 
fl3 ts 
A W S.X M, 


S‘A ?P S.i 

SKIS. 
I-S S.t| 

^^#|j « * 

M M S 99 1 
ft ^E A i&.S 


iSii 


9 » 


ffij _ 
ft ft ® 

0 .® xmM 
«il.f ftf 
A iS.@ 
M 3E ^ :g f 
* 5 E ft |f^ 3 i 


Ymc 11. 


DUKK mViUt. 


39 


llll 1$ JH ^ 
\'k ^3 Z m 

ai.iu.-ta- 
Si, te lis 


0i m M 
ife P A 
M ‘^,± 
#. s.’li 3t 


UM + ^.W S JIS W 
^ }i£ 31 li A i?. ^ ® 
^ 1(i z ± -f' m 
R-f3J nil ra # 5E. 


III I M> 

+ 


II. 1 In the [duke's] second j-ear, in spring, in the king’s first 
month, on [the day] Mow-shin, Tuh of Sung murdered 
his ruler Tu-e, and the great officer K‘ung-foo. 

2 The viscount of T‘ang appeared at the court of Loo. 

3 In the third month, the duke had a meeting with the mar- 

quis of Ts*e, the marquis of Ch‘in, and the earl of CIi‘ing, 
at Tseih, to settle the confusion of Sung. 

4 In summer, in the fourth month, the duke brought the 

tripod of Kaou from Sung, and on [the daj'] Mow-shin 
deposited it in the Grand temple. 

5 In autumn, in the seventh month, the marquis of Ke came 

to the court of Loo. 

6 The marquis of Ts‘ae and the earl of Cli'inff had a meeting 

at T‘anir. 

7 In the ninth month we entered Ke. 

8 The duke and the Jung made a covenant in T‘ang. 

9 In winter the duke arrived from T‘ang. 


r.nr. 1. Tlic Clnion at the end of last year 
v.qs prclinunar}’ to tins par. Tso-she adds 
],ore: — ‘In the duke’s 2d year, in spring, Tuh 
attacked the K*ung family, killed K‘ung-foo, 
and carricil off his wife. The duke -wns angry, 
and Tuh. in fear, proceetlcd also to murder him. 
The superior man understands that Tuh was 
one who had no regard for his ruler in his heart, 
and that thence pnHreeded his wicked move- 
ments. It is on this account that the text men- 
tions first his murder of his ruler, though it vras 
stcojid in ftoint of fact.' See farther on par. 3. 

Hwa-foo Tuh was a grandson of duke Tao 
Song (died B. C. 7C5). See about 
Kung-foo Kca in the proleg. to vol.L, p.o". 
Tiie written sometimes is a respect- 
ful adjunct sometimes of the clan-name, and 
sometimes of the design.ation. 

P.ar. 2. Sec on 1. xi. 1. The only thing to be 
notice<l here is the descent of the title from ‘mar- 
quis' to ‘viscount,’ which lists given rise to an 
immense amount of speculation and writing. 
IIoo Gan-kwoh’s view may be mentioned, — tliat 
Confucius here degrades the m.arquis to condemn 
him for risiting a villain like the duke of Loo! 
The only satisfactory account of the difference 
of the titles is that given by Too Yu, that, for 
some reason or otlier. the lord of T'flng had been 
deeraded in rank by king Hw.in. — Tlie visit was. 
no" doubt, to congratulate duke Hwan on his 
succession. According to the rule in the Chow Le 
(see on I jd.l ). all the other princes in this part of 
the kingdom should in the same way have come 
to Loo. 

Par. 3. Tseih was in Sung; — somewhere in 
the pres. dep. of K‘ae-fung. Tso-sho says that 


though the meeting is cautiously said in tho 
text to have been ‘to settle the confusion of 
Sung.’ it w.as really brought about by bribes 
(see on next p.ar.). to m.aintain tlie pow'er of the 
Hwa family. He adds ‘ During the 10 vears 
of duke Shang's rule in Sung, he had fought 11 
battles, so that the people were not able to en- 
dure^fAe constant siimiuouscs to thcjield. K‘ang- 
foo Ivea was the minister of War, and Tuh was 
the premier of tho State. Taking advantage of 
the dissatisfaction of the people, Tuh first set 
on foot a report that the constant fighting was 
owing to the minister of War. and then, after 
killing K*ung-foo, he nnmlered duke Shang. 
Immediately after, he called duke Chivang (the 
Kung-tsze Ping; see the Cliuen on I.iii.5) from 
Ch‘ing, and raised him to the dukedom r-in 
order to please Ch‘ing. bribing also the duke of 
Loo with the great tripod of Kaou. Ts‘e, Ch‘in, ' 
and Ch’ing all received bribe.®, and so Tuh acted 
as chief minister to the duke of Sung.’ 

Par. 4. We Imve met with a city of Kaou 
alre.ady in Sung; — see I. x. 4. If Kaou mention- 
ed here were not the same, it is yet placed by 
Too in the same dis., that of Shing-woo in Ten- 
chow dep._ Perhaps there had been a small 
State of this name, which had been absorbed by 
Sung. The tripod in the text had belonged to 
it, either made in Kaou, or more probably pre- 
sented to it by king AVoo, when he distributed 
among the princes many of the spoils of Shang. 

It was now held by Sung, and as a valuable 
curio was given at tliis time by Ilwa Tuh as a 
bribe to Loo. Ihave translated by ‘brought,’ 

without seeking to find any mysterious implica- 
tion in its employment, — that' the ‘marquis of 
Loo was taking from Sung what Sung had no 


40 


THE CH‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK II. 


tijfhr to give, nnd he had no right to receive.’ 
The ‘grand temple’ was tliat of the duke of 
Chow. 

. There is here a long Chuen;--*TIu8 act of 
the duke was not proper, and Tsang Gkie-pih 
fson of Tsang He-pih, famous for his remon- 
strance addressed to duke Yin; — see I.v. 13 re- 
monstrated ivith him, saying, “He who is a 
ruler of men makes it Ids olycct to illustrate 
Ais virtue, and to repress in others vrhat is wrong, 
that he may shed an enlightening influence on 
his ofScers. He is still afraid lest in any way 
he should faVLio accomplish these thingsi and more- 
over he seeks to display excellent virtue for the 
benefit of his posterity. Thus it is that his 
ancestral temple has a roof of thatch ; the mats 
in his grand chariot are only of grass; the 
grand soups [grand, ns used in sacrifice] are 
without condiments; the millets are not finely 
cleaned: — all these are illustrations of his 
thrift. His robe, cap, knee-covers, and mace; his 
girdle, lower robe, buskins, and shoes; the cross- 
piece of his cap, its stopper pendants, its fastening 
strings, and its crown; — all these illustrate 
his observance of the statutory measures. His 
gem-mats, and his scabbard, with its orna- 
ments above and below; his belt, with its 
descending ends : the streamers of his flags and 
the ornaments at his horses’ breasts: — ^these 
illustrate his attention to the regular degrees of 
rank. The flames, the dragons, the axes, and the 
symbol of distinction r^resented on his robest — 
these illustrate the degance of his taste. The 
five colours laid on in accordance with the ap- 
pearances of nature; — these illustrate with what 
propriety his articles are made. The bells 
on his horses’ foreheads and bits, and those on 
his carriage pole and on his flags: — these il- 
lustrate his knowledge of sounds. The sun, 
moon and stars represented on his flags : — ^these 
illustrate the brightness of his intdligence. 

“ Now when thus virtuously thrifty and ob- 
servant of the statutes, attentive to the degrees 
of high and low ; his character stamped on his 
elegant robes and his carriage; sounded forth 
also and brightly displayed; — when thus he 
presents himself for the enlightenment of his 
oflicers, they are struck with awe, and do not 
dare to depart from the rules and laws. But 
now you are extinguishing your virtue, and 
have given j-our support toa man altogether bad. 
You have placed moreover the bribe received 
from him in the grand temple, to exhibit it to 
your ofiScers. If your officers copy your example, 
on what ground can you punish them? The 
ruin of States and clans takes its rise from 
the corruption of the officers. Officers lose 
their virtue, when the fondness for bribes on the 
pari of their ruler is displayed to them ; and here 
is the tripod of Kaou in your temple, so that this 
could not be more plainly displayed! "When king 
Woo had subdued Shang, he removed the nine 
tripods to the city of Lob, and the righteous 
Pih-e and otherSf it would appe-ar, condemned 
him for it ; but what can be said when this hri}>c 
is seen in the grand temple.*— this bribe of wick- 
wlness and disorder?” The duke did not listen 
to the remonstrance, hut when Chow’s historio- 
grapher of the Interior heard of it, he said, 

•• ’fsang-sun Tah shall have posterity in I.oo 1 
llis prince was doing wrong, nnd lie* neglected 
not to administer to iiim virtuous reproof.” ' j 


Parr. 5,7. See I. iv. 1 ; nnd p. 2. Tso-shc says 
that the marquis of Kc behaved at tins tima 
disrespectfully, and tliat it tvas to punish him 
for this that the expedition in p. 7 was under- 
taken. Kung-yang nnd Kuh-lciing, however, 

read instead of in p. 5. 

Par. G. There was a small State tailed T'iing, 
n long way off to the west ne.ar the river Han; 
but the Thing here wnsacity ofTs‘ae,35fe sonth- 
east from the pres. dis. city of Ycn-shing 

K'ae-fung. Acc. to Tso-she, the lords 

of Tshne and Ch'ing met here, in fear for the 
first time of the encroachments and growing 
power of Ts'oo. , 

Parr. 8,9. Sec Lii.1,4. The duke and the 
Jung met now, says Tso-she, to renew the 

relations between the J ung .and I<oo. Tlie ^ 
in p. 9, intimates that the duke on his return to 
Loo gave notice of his arrival in his .anccstna 
temple. Tso-she says:— ‘On setting out on an 
e.\pedition, the duke announced the inoveme 
in the ancestral temple. On his return, 

drank in celebration of tluat (■^ .^) 
temple ; and when he put down tlie cup, be had 
the transaction entered in the t.ablets; this 
the rifle. lYlien only two parties were eoncs - 
ed at a meeting [as in these parr.], 
is mentioned both in the account of the set g 
out and of the return, ns if to signify „ 

had declined to take the presidency. ” 
three or more parties were voncemOT, tiun 
place is mentioned in the account of the ^ w 
and on the return it is said, “The duke w 
from the meeting." intimating that there w 
president, and the business was completert. 

[Tso-she has here a narrative about c 
fairs of Tsin; — “Years back, thewifeof _ ' 

marquis of Tsin (B, C. 811—784), n lady 
gave birth to her eldest son, at the hme ® . 

expedition against T’eaou, and on that ac 

there was given him the name of K‘cw (j/U 
“ enemy,’’). His brother was bom at 
of the battle of Ts'cen-inow, and he 

ference to it the name of Ching-sze ** 

‘ gnand success ’’). Sze-fuh said, “ Ho'’’ 
the names onr lord has given to his sons, 
names should be definitions of wh.at is , •- 
doing of what is right produces 
proper ; those rules again are enihouicrt 
practice of government; and 
its issues in the rectification of the P 1 
Tlicrefore when government is complete * 
way, the people are obedient; when tins * 
is changctl, it produces disorder. A go«a P- 
ncr is called Fei =‘ consort’); a grumlihnff 

partner is called K‘cw Cjfh '= ‘ enemy ’)s ® 

are ancient designations. Now our lonl la* 
called his eldest son Enemy, and Ins sccon • ^ 
Grand Success; — this is nii early omen 01 • 

orrler. ns if tlio elder brother would be 
ed.” In the 24fh vear of duke Hwn.v 
(B. C. 744). T^in l>eg.an to he in eoiifiisi<">. «»« 
the mnrqiiis Ch'aon [.•son of K'ew ahomj .1 
]>ointcd ilwan Shiili [his tinelo. thenlxive t'On'S 
.•sze] to K'Ciili-yiili. with Lwnn I’in, gr.nn'b'on 
the marquis Tsing, as his minister. Szc-fun .'no • 


tbab m. 


DUKE HWASr. 


41 


"I hnTo licnnl tliat in the setting np of States 
nnd clans, in order to the security of the parent 
Stnto,Vhilc its root is large, the branches must 
he small. Therefore the son of Heaven estab- 
lishes States; princes of States establish clans. 
Heads of clans establish collateral families; 
great ofHccrs have their secondary branches; 
ofTiccrs have their sons and younger brothers as 
their servants; and the common people, me- 
chanics nnd traders, have their diifcrcnt relatives 
of various degrees. In this way the people serve 
their superiors, nnd inferiors cherish no ambi- 
tious designs. Now Tsin is a mnrquisatc in the 


Teen domain; and, establishing this State, 

can it continue long, its root so weak ? In the 
30th year of duke Hwuy, Enn-foo killed the 
marquis Cli'nou, nnd endeavoured without suc- 
cess to establish Hwan-shuh in Ts'in. The peo- 
ple of Tsin appointed the marquis Hcaou. In 
the 45th year of duke Hwy, Giiwang, earl of 
K‘cidi-yuh, attacked Yih, and murdered the 
marquis Hcaou. The people of Tsin set up his 
younger brother, the marquis Goh. Gob begat 
thcmarqriis Gnc. Gaeoverranthelandsof Hing- 
t‘ing, which were on his southern border, and so 
opened the way for K‘euh-yuh to attack Yih.’] 


w 

M. 


=65? 


Third year. 

T ^ m.T 

M°^ ft :#.a _ 

a M ^ /L ^ ^ 3^ 

” 1 0 ^ a 1f 

■&,M 

m # #.M M S ^ fl-W 5 ® 

tti i ifc. 

mM ± wj wj <& 

z T'm~p±mz ta. 


roii. T. 


6 


THE CI1‘U1J TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOKU. 


42 


III. 1 111 his third year, in spring, in the first month, the duke 

had a meeting with the marquis of Ts‘e in Ying. . 

2 In summer, the marquis of Ts‘e and the marquis of Wei 

pledged each other at P‘oo. 

3 In the sixth month, the duke had a meeting with the 

marquis of Ke in Shing. 

4 In autumn, in the seventh month, on [the day] Jin-shin, 

the first day of the moon, the sun was totally eclipsed. 

5 Duke [Heaou’s], son, Hwuy, went to Ts‘e, to meet the 

[duke’s] bride. 

6 In the ninth month, the marquis of Ts‘e escorted his 

daughter to Hwan. 

7 The duke and the marquis of Ts‘e had a meeting in Hwan. 

8 The [duke’s] wife, the lady Keang, arrived from Ts‘e. 

9 In winter, the marquis of Ts‘e, sent his younger brother 

Neen with friendlj'- inquiries. 

10 There was a good year. 


princes had met was put in writingi and rearf 
out in the hearing of them both; but they sepa- 
rated, simply pledged to each other in a certain 
line of conduct, without having gone througn 
the formalities of making a convenant. 

Par. 3. Tso and Kuh both have lierc ;fB|. 

while Kung-yaug reads The K‘nng-ho 

editors think Kung’s reading is right. 

Ke and Shing, they say, were afraid of 

Ts'o, and wore cultivating the friendship o 
Loo as a counterpoise to the other powo 
State. Shing, — see I.v.8. , 

Par. 4. Sec on Liii.l. 

Tliero was a total eclipse in this year, n® ^1!^ 

Jin-shin ; but the month, ace. to Mr, Cliaim 
table, should be the 8th, and not the 7tU. 
proiegg. to the Shoo, p. 103, . ^ 

Par. 6— 8. Scoonlai.6. The ancient praobto 
of the princes going themselves to meet 
brides had long fallen into disuse, thonS 
might sometimes be observed, especially oy 
lord of a small State intermarrying wii« " 
larger. Hwuy (I. iv. 6 ; x, 2) appears Iiore 
his full title of ‘ duke’s son,’ — ace. to Tso-sh 
of respect to Ins father, a former niarqu , 

Loo, and who, it might be presumed, was pic 

with tlio match ; but the reader need no* '' f 
himself in trying to account for the 
of style in this matter between this and m 
paragraphs. • i • ^ 

Hwan was in Loo, — in pres. dis. of Pci-s nng 
Ts'e-nnn. It was contrary I® 

the regular rule for the ninrquis 
escort liis daughter; but probably' be bn® ® . 
business of nnothcr kind to discuss 
marquis of Luo. Tso-slic says:— ‘It . 

trnry to the rule for the marquis of is® 
escort ills daughter. In nil cases of ‘"®. , 
riagos of tiio daughters of princes: — ,.i 
iiiarringc wore witli a State of equal dignity » 

, . ■ -j —I* ” 1 *' '=• I power, and tiio ladies were sisters of tlio rui 

other; the subject about which the two j prince, n minister of tlie liighcst rank cscorie 


TTso-she here continues his narrative of events 
in Tsin; — ‘In the 3d year, in spring, duke Woo 
of K‘euh-yuh [son of earl Cliwang], proceeded 
against Yih, and halted in Hing-t‘iiig. [His 
uucle], Han Wan drove his chariot, having on 
his right Lcang Hwang. They pursued the 
marquis of Yih [i.c., Tsin] to the banks of the 
Pun, when the trace of one of his outside horses 
got entangled about the yoke, and f/is carriage 
stopped. Tliey caught Iiini in the night, and 
Kung-shuh of Lwan with him.’] 

Par. 1, The absence of ‘king’s,’ after 

and before | ^ , has given rise to end- 

less speculation and oonjecture, espeoi.ally as 
the character is wanting in most of the years of 
Hwan. 'Poo Yu thinks that tlie king had not 
sent round the calendar to tlie princes on those 
years. Kuh-lcnng thinks the omission is to 
mark the sage’s condemnation of duke Hwan’s 
character. But then it should have been omit- 
ted every year, — especially in the 1st. Even 
Ton’s explanation oaiiiiot be admitted in all the 
omissions of the term tliroughout the classic. 
We can only accept the omission without trying 
to account for it. Ying 'belonged to Ts‘e,— 50 
/e to tlie sonth-ciist of the pres. dep. city of 'f'ae- 
gnn. 'riio object of the meeting here was to 
settle a marriage between the duke and n prin- 
cess of 'rs‘o. 'Phe K'ang-he editors say here 

that as intimates that the mover to the 
meeting was not Loo but the outside party, and 
we must suppose here tliat the mover was really 
the inarcpiis of Loo, wisliing to strengthen him- 
self ill ins ill-acquired dignity by an alliiincc 
with a iioworfvil House, the term is used to mark 
Confucius’ coiulcmnntiun of Ts‘e. But tlie thing 
itself w:is tlio condouniation of 'Ps'o, and wo need 
not look for it in the simple term. 

Par. 2. P‘oo was in Wei, — in tlio pros. dis. 
of Cli'ang-j'uen j:^ ) dis., dep. Ta-niiug, 

Cliih-lc. tifj’ ‘charged each 


Vka.r IY. 


DUKE JIWAN. 


43 


thorn, out of respect to their father, the former 
lord of the State; hut if tlicy were daughters of 
file ruling prince, only a minister of a lower 
rank escorted them ; if the intonnarriage were 
with a greater State, even in the case of a daugh- 
ter of the ruling prince, a minister of the highest 
rank escorted her ; if the intermarriage were with 
the son of Heaven, all the ministers of the State 
went, only the ruler himself did not go; and 
if it were with a smaller State, then the escort 
was only a groat officer of the 1st class.’ Observe 

the bride is here called ‘ladj’ Kcang,’ 

ns being still in Ts'e and with her father. 

The duke may be said to have obsen-od the 
ancient ceremony of meeting his bride, ns Hwan 
was on the bortlers between Loo and Ts'e. 

Par. 8. Having now entered Loo, the bride 

has passed into the wife 

see the last par. of the previous year. 

Par. 9. See I.vii. 6, and note. Tso-shesays 
that the object of this mission was to cariy her 

parents’ salutations to the wife 

Too Tu adds that it was to inquire also about 

her deportment, whether it was becomingly 


modest and reverent, and to show the earnest 
regard which the union might be supposed to 
produce between the States. A mission of this 

kind sent from Loo would be called 

coming to Loo it has the general name of 

Such a mission was sent three months after the 
lady had left her parents. If she were not giv- 
ing satisfaction, she might be returned. (So 

Ying^.l, my* W ^ ^ ^ 

Par. 10. The phrase is expressive of 

a good year, no crop failing (5£ ^ ^ 

It is strange that the critics should find a mys- 
tery in this simple paragraph, as if the sage 
had preserved the record to show how things 
tum^ out in Loo as they ought not to have 
done under so bad a ruler as Hwan. 

[Tso-she appends here: — ‘Juy Eeang, the 
mother of Wan, earl of Juy, indignant at him 
because of his many favourites, drove him out 
of Juy, and he took up his residence in Wei 


Fourth year. 

?|5 16 ^ 3E n . 

T<a-3E#. 

S. ft S M. 9 

w es ^ w. ft flf. 3? ^ if 

'f6W3E-t&. 

B m. iis M. e® is, If, m -a, m. fr. m 

IV. 1 In his fourth year, in spring, in the first month, the duke 
hunted in Lang. 

2 In summer, the king [by] Heaven’s [grace], sent the [sub-] 
administrator, K‘eu Pih-kew, to Loo with friendly in- 
quiries. 


Par. 1. here is the name of the winter 

hunt celebrated, as_ Tso says, ‘at the proper 
season;’ for in reality Chow’s 1st month, was 
the 2d month of winter. This is an instance in 
point to show that Chow’s ‘spring’ did really 
include t>vo months of the natural winter. 
Lang, — see lix. 4. 

Par. 2. See Li. 4, for the meaning of 

K‘ou was the name of a city in Chow, from 
which tlie official family to whom it was granted 
took their clan-name. Tso-she says the name 
(Pih-kew) of the messenger is given because 
his father was still alive. If he had not been 
so, we should have read 
There is no entry here under antumn or win- 
ter ; not even the names of those seasons and 
their first months. This is contrary to the rule 


of the classic, and we mnst believe that a 
portion of the text is here lost. Of course many 
of the Chinese critics arc unable to accept so 
simple a solution of the matter, and will have 
it that the sage left those seasons out of the 
year, to express his displeasure •with duke 
Hwan, and his condemnation of the king for 
sending friendly inquiries to sueffi a man as he 
was! 

[Tso-she has two brief notes of events that 
happened in the second half of this year:— 

‘In autumn, an army of Ts‘in made a raid on 
Jay, and was defeated. It was defeated through 
nial^g too light of Juy.’ 

‘In -winter a king’s army and an army of 
Ts*in besieged Wei. The army of Ts'tn captured 
the carl of Juy, and carried him back to Ts'tn 
with it.’] 


44 


THE CH'HN TS‘EW WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK ir. 


Fifth yeat. 


■& 

ia 

* 


m 


A. 


A- 


IE 

¥ 

B 


> 1*0 


® ip 5i « 2^ it.s.m.'fa % 

m A. m Vi dm m m m m >0:. M ^ 4 S:' 

f f • 


SB 'n 


;2. — ^ ;S.E.A.il,5e ^ 

t6 0 . i *g <a-. * ^ 0. S ^ ia. 

ER.# 7^ 0.S m, 

^ izm MM T-m,7cm,^ 

M. » M * :K.K m m m 

wi m ti M M A m 

s ^ m s^.i!f.^ mm ±m'm 

-(& ±^m:k-(^ :^m m.A ik 

m A.s.m m ^ m m. 

^tatp^m^Mm^W S.ilJ 
M m m,w m m Ja i& 

^ m ^ m.M. m,m A s- m 

3E,^ ^ ^ miM M ZM IS :2:. 


m 

Wi 

jsa 


^ i' 

A ¥ 

■f- 

^ 3 

® i‘ 

A 

^ •& g 

i i” 

p # 
gL -{&. 


Year V. 


DUKE IIWAN. 


45 


M.m ^ Bn 5ii.® -i..# 

M Bn WM & fir- ^ P4 
iifn M M jnE,n$ W, iL 


V. 1 In the [duke’s] fifth year, in spring, in the first month, on 
Koah-seiili or Ke-ch‘ow, Paou, marquis of Gh'in, died. 

2 In summer, the marquis of Ts‘e and the earl of Chfing went 

to Ke. 

3 Tlie king [by] Heaven’s [grace], sent the son of Jing Shuh to 

Loo with friendly inquiries. 

4 There was the burial of duke Hwan of Ch'in. 

5 We walled Chuh-k‘ew. 

6 In autumn, an army of Ts‘ae, an army of Wei, and an army 

of Ch‘in followed the king and invaded Ch'ing. 

7 There was a grand sacrifice for rain. 

8 There were locusts. 

9 In winter the duke of Chow went to Ts'aou. 


Par. 1. There is here evidently some cor- 
ruption of the text. Between Keah-seuh and 
Kc-ch'ow there are 14 dear days. We can 
hardly conceive how the historiographers coiUd 
have entered the deatli of the marquis as h.adng 
occurred on tlie one day or the other. If by 
any possibility they had done so, here, if any- 
whe^ there ivas need for the pruning pencil of 

Confudus Tso-she says that two 

different announcements were communicated to 
Loo, and adds, ‘At this time Ch‘in was all in 
confusion. T‘o, the son of duke Wan, had killed 
the marquis’s eldest son. Wan [so ^ is here 
read], and superseded him. Tlie disorder arose 
•when the marquis was very ill; the people got 
scattered ; and so two announcements were taken 
to Loo.’ But this is an explanation made to suit 
the text. Ch‘ing E supposes that after Keah- 
seuh some entry has dropt out which constituted 
the 1st par.; and then a second par. might com- 
mence with 3 This is a reasonable 

conjecture, but there is another ^ffioulty in the 
text wliich renders it inadmissible. The day 
Ke-oh‘ow was in the 1st month of this year, 
but Keah-seuh was in the 12th month of the 
preceding. Tliis error of the month, as preced- 
ing ffl is equally fatal to the solution of 

Kun^ang and Knh-leang, that the marquis, 
in a fit of madness, or some other way, disap- 
peared on the first of the days mentioned, and 
was found dead on the second. The text is 
evidently corrupt. Leave out the two charac- 
ters ^ and the difficulty disappears. 

Par. 2. as inDLS, simply=^, ‘to 

go to.’ Tso says that ‘the lords of Ts‘e and 
Ch-ing went to the court of Ke wishing to sur- 
prise it, and that the people of Ke knew their 
design.’ Tiie marquis of K^ it is understood, 
then communicated their visit and its object to 
Loo, to which alone he looked for help ^ and so 
the entry of a transaction, apparently foreign 


to Loo, was made by its historiographers. We 
slmli see, hereafter, that Ke’s fear of Ts'e was 
well founded. 

Par. 3. Por Kuh-leang has Com- 
pare 1. iii. 4. Jing Shuh must have been a great 
officer of Chow. The critics are much concern- 
ed to determine whether Jing Shuh himself 
were dead, or only old, so that his son was em- 
ployed instead of him, and whether he took it 
upon liim to send his son, or the son was direct- 
ly commissioned by the king. The last point 
seems to be settled by the te.xt ; the others only 
give rise to uncertain speculations. Tso-she 

simply says the messenger was ‘a youth 

Par. 5. Chuh-k‘ew is believed to hai'u been 
50 k to the south-east of the pres. dep. city of 
E-chow, Too thinks it was walled as a pre- 
caution, in consequence of the designs of Ts'e 
on Ke. 

Par. 6. On this paragraph Tso-she gives us 
the following narrative : — 

‘The king deprived the earl of Ch‘ing of all 
share in the government of the kingdom, and the 
earl in consequence no more appeared at court, 
lu autumn the king led several of tlie princes to 
invade Ch'ing, when the earl withstood him. 
The king drexo tip his forces so that he himself 
was in the centre, while Lin-foo, duke of Kwoh, 
commanded the army of the right, having the 
troops of Ts'ae and Wei attached to him, and 
Hih-keen, duke of Chow, commanded on the left, 
having the troops of Ch'in. Tsze-yuen of Ch'ing 
asked the earl to draw their troops up in squares, 
on the left opposed to the armies of Ts'ae and 
Wei, and on the right to the men of Ch'in. 
“Ch'in,” said he, “is at tliis time all in confii- 
sion, and the people have no heart to fight. If 
we attack them first, they will be sure to run. 
The king's soldiers seeing this will fall into 
disorder, and the troops of Ts'ae and Wei will 
set them the example of flight without making 
any resistance. Let us then collect oar troops 


THE C^‘U^’ TS‘EW. WITH THE TSO CHEEX. 


BOOK 11. 


and fall upon the king ; — in this vrsty -vre may . 
calculate on success.” The. earl followed this 
counsel. Man-pih commanded the square on 
the right ; Cliae Chung-tsuh that on the left : 
■while Yuen Fan and Kaon K‘eu-me, with the 
earl, led the centre, which was drawn up in 
fish-scale array. There w.as alwa.rs a force of 
25 chariots, supported by 5 files of 5 men each, 
to maintain a close and unbroken front. The 
battle was fougbt at Seu-koh. The earl com- 
manded the squares on the right and left to wait 
till they saw his flag wjived, and then to advance 
■with drums beating. The troops of Ts'ae, Wd, 
and Gh*in all fled, while the king’s were thrown 
into disorder. The forces of Glring then nnited 
in .an attack on the opposite centre. The king 
received a great defeat, and an arrow shot by 
Ghuh Tan wounded him in the shoulder : but, 
notirithstanding this, he retreated, still maintaining 
an able fight. Ghuh Tan asked leave to pursue 
him, but the earl said, “A superior man does 
not wish to be always sho^wing superiority over 
others ; much less dare he ofier insult to the 
son of Heaven ! If we manage to save our- 
selves, and tlie altars of Ghnng take no damage, 
we have accomplished very much.” At night 
he sent Tsuh of Cliae to comfort the king, and 


to ask after the ■welfare of his officers.’ 

Par. 7. *a sacrifice in time 

of drought.’ The Chuen says that to offer this 
sacrifice — or at least the grand sacrifice for rain — 
in the autumn was unseasonable, and therefore 
the record of it appears here, Tso-she adds : — 
‘ With regard to the sacrifices in general, at the 
season of K‘e-chih the emergence of insects 
from their burrows — the 1st month of Hea, and 
the 3d of the Ghow year], the border sacrifice 
rto Heaven] was offered : at the season of Lung- 
heen the appearance of the Dragon (see the 
Shoo, on Pt. L, par. 5);’ — the 4th month of Hea, 
and the 6th of Chow], the sacrifice for rain; at 
the season of Ch-e-shah comencement of death 
— the 8th month of Hea, and the 10th of Ghow], 
the Shang or sacrifice of first fruits : and at the 


Sixth 


season of Pei-chih [‘the closing of insects in 
their burrows;’ — the 10th month of Hea.and 12th 
of CIjow]. tlie Ghing or winter sacnfice. If 
any of those sacrifices were offered after the 
season for them, the historiographers made an 
entry of it.’ According then to Tso-she, this 
sacrifice for rain was competent to Chow and 
its various States only in the 6th month, its 
object being to supplicate for rain in the begin- 
ning of summer, that there might be a good 
harvest; — of course it was out of season to offer 
this sacrifice in any month of Ghow's antunin. 
But I believe, ■with Maou K‘e-ling, tlijit. .■‘‘’hile 
tliere was the regular sacrifice at the beginning of 
the natural summer, special s.acrifices might be 
offered at any season of prolonged drought, and 
it does not follow, therefore, that the sacrifice 
in the text was unseasonable. As to the name 
‘grand,’ characterizing the sacrifice her^ it has 
given rise to much controversy. Kea Kwei 
thought the sacrifice was addressed to Heaven 
or God by the princes of Loo, rmder sanctioii 
of the grant to their ancestor to ■use imj^M 
rites, and is therefore here called ‘grand-’ This 
point we must leave. 

Par. 8. ir-nncr-vflTiEr- AT® dc- 


I Par. 8. (in Kung-jang, ^ 
scribed by Too Yu as 

I of locusts.’ . . 

Par. 9. Ghow was a small State, m pres. Qis. 

of Gan-k‘ew ^). dep. Tsfing-chow. Its 

prince appears here ■with the title of 
— it is supposed because some previous loro • 
been one of the three Kung or dukes at ^ 

king’s court. His capital ■was Shnn-yh (|^ 
•^p). Ts^ou was an earldom, held by the de- 
scendants of one of the sons of king WSn >■“*** 
capital was Ts‘aon-k‘ew ( ^ 

of Ting-t‘aou, dep. Ts'aou-cliow. 
on the par: — ^‘Ih winter, the duke of .-D*. 
went to Ts‘aou, reckoning that his State ^ 
a perilous state; and he did not return to i • 

year. 


#E 4.J3.A ra.A H 0 . 

fj T« M.TM. # 

la. TiB. ♦ M. 


V 1^0 P k ^ ' 

m.§ ^ ^ ^ d!? ^ mM m 

1. g M 1 5 « -fS ® ^ ® ^ ff I 


48 


THE Cllint TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK n. 


# ^ ® M WI tt ilj B 7 

T^m^z^'^r.nmsBDwm zm ^ « j^i 

g H •&.« LU.S.it.ii.® M It i^ji: * Jit 1 1. 
m ^ If tS^.* iiiE.S m Jit 

iij. ^<g>«#jitjiijii ±..ii m ^ Jit 
WM If 13.;Jc®^-f!|^-Jilllt.MU:?JSJitliJ 
<&dE 4J7.* 43) ?{f ^ Jit ^ Jlf A ^ Jll. 

VI. 1 In the [duke's sixth year, in spring, in the first month, 
Shill came to Loo. 

2 In summer, in the fourth month, the duke had a meeting 

with the marquis of Ke in Clung. 

3 In autumn, in the eighth month, on Jin-woo, [the duke] 

held a grand military revie^Y. 

4 The people of Ts‘ae put to death T‘o of Chfin. 

5 In the ninth month, on [the day] Ting-inaoii, the [dukes] 

son, Thing, was born. 

6 In winter, the marquis of Ke came to [our] court. 


Par. 1. According to all the three Chnen, 
tins is a continuation of the last par. in last 
year. Tso-shesays: — ‘In the spring, lie came 
from Ts'aou to the court of Loo. The text 

intimates that he did not return again 
to his otrn State.’ In tliis iray, ^^=‘for good,’ 
and Too Yu defines it by W- Ku^^-'vndKuh 

explain it by and ‘this nia 

Cluing E and Hoo Gau-kwO. houever, suppose 
that Sliih was the name of the duke of Chovr. 
A prince, Imng. ought not to be called by his 
name, but this poor duke, a fugitive frotn his 
State, never to return to it, wsis in his princely 
character as good as dead, and might be named. 
The lv‘ang-he editors say both views are to be 
preserved. The point is one of trivial importance. 

[There is appended here in the Chnen the 
following narrative: — ‘King Wo^i of Tsmo [this 
viscount of Ts‘oo had usuriied the ti'le of ‘ king ’J 
burst suddenly into Suy. and sent Wei Chang to 
b^ that Ts“oo and Suy might be on goovl terms 
with each other, meanwhile waiting with his 
army at Uea for intelligence. Tlie court of 

Suy sent Shaou-sre : this is evidently 

the name of an ofiico ; but nothing can be ascer- 
tained about it. I have therefore followed the 
example of the Ijeeh-kwoh Che wlucli calls tlie 
phrase the nane of the marquis of Suy's fa- 
vourite] to manage the conclusion of a tivaty of 
peace. Tow Pih-pe said to the viscount of Ts‘ 00 , 

“ Tliat wo have not got our will on the cast of 
the Han is all owing to ourselves. We have 
displayed our three artuies, our men all cquipt 
With their buff coats and weapons, and so ■av? 
have presented ourselves to the States in all our 
piwer. ^hey have been afraid, therefore, and 
have united togiitlicr to provide r.gninst our 
«.i'SsgTis. It is thi< which makes it d.ilicult to 
^jeiratc them. Of the St.atO'^ ea<t of the Han t 
^uy IS the greatest. Let Suy ct.tx be elated, and ' 


then it will spurn the smaller 
will become alienated from it ; — this will be 
the advantage of Ts‘ 00 . This Shaou-Ke is 
vain extravagant man; let us inflate hnii 
making our army .appear as if it wore 
Hiiung Leiih-tseu-pe said. “While Ke 
in Stsy, of what use will this be ?”_ Tow r»ii-I 
replied, “It will serve as a basis for 
measures; — Shaou-szeis his prince’s 
‘ The king, ncconiiitg to Pik^pc's «>Knso> g‘ 
his army a dilapidated appearance, and * ^ 
receivod*Shaoii-sze, who on his return to ^ y 
reiiuested leave to pursue tlie army of 
The marquis was about to grant it. . 
Leangsiopt him saving. “Heaven 
ing power to Ts‘oo. Its e.xliibition of 
was only made to deceive us. Wiys J, * 
be so hasty ? I have heard that the , 

in which si small State c.an niatcii with a ? 
one. is when the small one is ruled acoonh 


one. IS wnen uie siiiaii one is rmw , 

reason, and the great one is absuidoiiw 


ana a isuriiiiu worship oi me 
the ruler thinks oisli; of benefiting the 1’’-. f 5 
that is loval loving of them; when the 
words are ^l correct, that is faithful wo . ^ 
Xow our people are famishing, and the P . , 
indulges his desires ; the priests are ' 

in their sacritiees: — ^I do not ’L..r. 

there is tlie condition of success.’’ in^ • ,j 
quis said. • jMy victims are the best, anu .. 
tatted ; the millet in the vessels is 
complete : — where is there any want of si v 
rity?" KeLcang replied. “The state o^,t‘*‘^PJ’ *. 
is what the Spirits regard. Tlie sage kings tin 
fore first seciirwl the'wclfare of the 1’‘^’1^‘'’.,;,, 
tticn put forth theirstrength inserriny dic Spir -• 
Thus when they presented their victims, a 
announced thorn* as large and fat. they nioa 
that the people's strength was all ’ 

that to thi* was owing the large growth of 
animals; that to thU'wRs owing their froi'o*’ 
from scab or itch; that to this it was oi'ii'.'- 


rs*t, VI. 


IM'Kr. UWAX. 


49 


t!-fr ' fr.{, f.r;-! errtf'ly Wlu^n 

tl'.fir c»{ (uit'c’i fiU i ftn> 

I". ••irt.v'Ht Ri RR-l 

!*.R! in r.n s?-.!'' {Sjtw ju» hsrjtt tlom* 

?»■> ?hi* v.v.n.'rf liW'Kw.try; that th<* 

RftI thi» (riv‘!. \VIirn tlicy 

jlittH?*--! ««;! »w»vt nntl 

ih^rA r« aJmiral>!<*, Riitl pxvl, 

thi-y ntfan: thsi! an»i {nfcrlnw nil 

ft s aSrsco. .itvl tlirir In no’.h'inj: 

whai wn* tcrnnal the 
a»; !rty frsiTran.v tx'ally that th»’t\* 

'»ci\'*r. > trDir* «■’!■ wirhi'l men. In lhl» 
WAT It w.T» th-ii thry cXfT!*^ thrm'oln-* tJi.at 
tJ..' of tht* thKv Jc.VtinT fhouhl K* per* 

thry ouithatoil nnJ IncnkMlcrl tlio tiro 
RTVtt du!!''T of f.vsoty; tlioy chcrj«hc-'l nnd 
I’rcKJ-'tt'l the affooti-'n that jlunsM oxi«{ fltnonfr 
the r.in<- oI-.t*'-* <’! kirtiltwl; nml from Ihl? they 
t.T th'-ir pun? ».acrillco'*. Thu« their 
wen* harmfiMhnt*, nnil the Sjilrit* rout 
t5”wn i>i i!»at every movement they 

nn l<'rt>'k ws* aucwMful. If<nr the pe'iiiloV 
1 :m«« an* all .-.t r.ari.'.nov‘, nad the Spirit* have 
ro Icinl f >. f- none whinn they will rerve, nml 
rrrvo l>v Werrini:]. AUlioiif;!i you M an in- 
tliviilssal mav K* liN-ro! m y'>‘ie a, -ft of tr<'rff.tn, 
what Mc-rinc can that hrlnR? 1 pray you to 
cul:lv.ate p’oil government, nml Iks friendly with 
the State* of j-our lirothcr princc-«; then pcrliaps 
voii trill c*ropv' calamity.” 

‘Tlie m.aniuis of Suy tr.as nfraid, nnd .attcndwl 
prop'rly to hii' dolicj of pjvernmcnt ; nnd Ts'oo 
did nol’dare to nttack him.'] 

Par. 1'. Teo says tho marquis of Kc came to 
this mcctinp to consult with Ixw nbout his 

dilllcaltics trilh Ta*c. Tlio in the te.xt is 

from Kuh-lcanp. Tso nnd Kunp both rc.ad 
which makes Too give the situation differently 
from that of llie other in I.r. 3 90 le north-c.ast 
from pres. dis. dty of Ning-yang. 

[The Chuen has here.— ‘The northern Jung 
had invaded TsV, vrhich sent to ask tho nssist- 
nneo of a force from Ch‘ing. Htruh, the eldest 
eon of the carl of Ch'ing, led n force accordingly 
to the help of Ts'e, nnd inflicted n great defeat 
on the Jung, capturing their two leaders, Tac- 
Icangand Shaou-Ieang, whom he presented to 
the marquis with the heads of 300 of their buff- 
coated warriors. At that time the great offleers 
of many of the princes were keeping guard in 
Ts*e, and the marquis supplied them with cnttic, 
cmploving the officers of Loo to arrange the order 
of distribution. These placed the troops of 
ChHng last, which made Hwuh indignant, con- 
sidermg that his had been the merit of the vic- 
tory ; and it gave rise to the battle of Lang [see 
- the 10th yc-ar]. 

* Before the duke of Loo had married the 
daughter of Ts'e, the marquis had wished to 
many her — Wan Keang — to Hwuh: but he had 
refused the match. Some one asked the rc.ason 
of his refusal, when he replied, “People should 
be equally matched. A daughter oj Ts'e is too 
great a match for me. The ode says, ‘ For him- 
self ho seeks much happiness (She, III. i. 1. 6).’ 

I have to do with what depends on myself 
simply; what have I to do with a great Slate?” 
A superior man trill say that Htcuh did welt 
in thus making himself the centre of his plan 
of life. On this occasion, when he had defeat- 


f*! tho army of tho .Tung, the marquis of 
TsV »>:.nin oKki*.! Iiim to take another of his 
dtuchten* to Wife, hm ngiun ho firmly refused. 
Ih-ing ntke<i ihe jv.i^oii, Ite said. “J'orinorly 
when I had had imtiiing to do in T.t'e, 1 still did 
not dan? to marry one of its prinee.tscs. Now I 
hutTlci!^ here hy our ruler’s onler to succour 
Ts'e in its exigency; if I tvturneil from it tvilli 
n wife, it tvoiilil K* ns if 1 had won her by arm*." 
In this way lie dcclini*d the nllinnec on tho 
gnnind of wanting tlie earl of Ch'liig'.s command.* 

Tso-«he seems to Iinvc forgotten here that ho 
had already n.irrnfitl the inarri.'igc of IJwuh of 
Ch'ing to a daughter of the house of Ch'in, un- 
der I.viii. 3. The marquis of Ts'e would hnnlly 
have offcKKl one of his daughters to fill a 
sccouilary place In liwuh’s harem.} 

Par. 3. Iiy-jffj Iji ,lg ‘ to examine tho 
chariots and horses.* Tins was an annual corc- 
niony, to which the winter liunt was Mibsidinry. 
See the Chow I.e, Hk. XXIX., pp. 24 — 34. Many 
of the critics think th.at the holding this review, 
ns here, in the Stli month in autumn, was tiu- 
sc.asonnhlc, nnd that it is recorded to condemn 
it. But the duke miglit easily have lind rcn.sons 
sniilcient to justify him for holding such a re- 
view nt this time. 

P.ar. 4. Tso-.slic has no Cliuen here, but wo 
find what serves for one under tlic 22d year of 
dukeChwang. Wclmvcseen,undcrV.l, tlmtT'o 
had killed the eldest son of the marquis of Ch'in, 
nnd supcrscdi'd liim. But tliat son’s younger bro- 
ther was a son of a princess of Ts'ae, and in his 
interest Ts'ae now did justice on T*o. T'o lind 
not yet Iwn recognised as marquis of Ch'in, 
nnd therefore wc linvo simidy Ids name, witli- 

ont his title. I have translated * fk® 

people of Ts'ae,’ after tho analogy of 
In I.iv.6,7. Knli and Kung account for ins death 
nt tho hands of sonic people of Ts'ae by saying 
th.at he had intruded into the territory 'of Ts'.oe 
in hunting or for n worse purpose, and was kill- 
ed in a quarrel about a birtl or a woman. Their 
Ciiucn, however, where matters of history are 
concerned, arc not to be compared with Tso- 
she’s. 

Par. S. Tso-shc tells us that tills entry of 
T'ung’s birth intimates tliat he was received 
with all the lionours proper to the birth of a 
eon and heir: that an ox, a sheep, and a pig 
were e.ncriticed on tlic occasion ; tiiat an officer 
of divination carried him on his back, and bis 
wife nursed him; nnd that the duke, with the 
child's mother, Wiln Keang, and the wives of the 
duke’s noble kindred, gave him his name. This 
last ceremony took place on the 3d month after 
the birth. Tso-she adds: — 'The duke asked 
Sliin Sea about names, who replied “Names are 
taken from five things: — some pre-intimathin; 
some anepicc of virtue; some striking appear- 
ance about the child; the borrowing the name 
of sonic object; or some similarity. Wlicii a 
child is born with a name on it, that is a pre-in- 
timation [a character, such as may seem 
to be made by some marks on the body, and s» is 
taken as tlie name] ; when a child is named from • 
some virtue, this is called an auspice [Ch'ang, 
the n<a_nie of king Wan, is an instance in point] ; 
when it is named from some resemblance about 
it to something, this is c.al]ed naming from the 


VOLT. 


i 


50 . 


THE CH‘UX TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK H. 


appoarnnce [Confucius vas so named Ne-k‘cw 
; when it is named from some ob- 
ject, this is called borrowing [the name of Con- 
fucius’ son Pih-yu ('§&, ‘the fish’) is an in- 

stance] ; when the name is taken from something 
about the father, 'this is called a name from 
similarity [see below]. The name must not be 
taken from the name of the State ; or of an office ; 
'or of a momitain or river; or of any malady; 
or of an animal; or of a utensil, or of a cere- 
monial offering. The people of Chow do not use 
the name which theg bore in serving the Spirits 
of the dead; and the name is not mentioned after 
death. To take the name from the State would 
do away with the State's name; one from an 
office would do away with the office; one from 
a hill or stream would do away with the sacrifice 
to it; one from an animal would do away with its 
use as a victim; one from a utensil or a cere- 
monial offering would do aw.ay with its use in 
ceremotues. The name of the marquis He of 

Tsin [he was called ^^] made the title of 
minister of Instruction be discontinu- 


ed in Tsin. So ^vith duke IVoo of Sung and the 
title of minister of Works ("^ >^ ). Our 

former dukes Hcen [called A] and Woo 

[called ^5^) caused two hills to lose their names. 

Tlierefore the names of such great objects and 
offices must not be given to a child.” The duke 
said, “Well, his birth and mine were on the 
same day.” So, from that similarity, the child 
was named T‘ung [the Similar].’ 

As this is the only instance in the classic in 
which the birth of a* Son of any of the marquises 
of Loo is chronicled, there is much speculiition 
as to the reason of the entry here. Some think 
it is a clear case of the pencil of the sage, who 
would thus show that duke Chwang was re^ly 
the son of the marquis of Loo, and not the frait 
of the incestuous commerce which his mother 
subsequently indulged in ! 

Par. 6. Tso-she says this visit from 
quis of Ke was to beg the services of the auko 
to ask the king's order to bring about P®®®, 
between Ke and Ts'e, but that the duke torn 
liim he could do nothing in the matter. 


Seventh year. 


m w 

Z.'h 

vir. 1 

2 

3 


^ij. ifl) m.m m m m 

m. m ^ 


la his seventh year, in spring, in the second month, oil 
Ke-hae, the duke hunted wdth fire in Heen-k‘ew. 

In summer, Suy, earl of Kuh, came to [our] court. 
Woo-le, marquis of T'ang, came to [our] court. 


Par. 1. Heen-k“cw was a district, and pro- 
bably the name of a town in it, belonging to 

Loo; — somewhere in dep. of Ten-chow. 

herc = ABB. ‘ to hunt with fire.’ This ap- 
pears in the Urh-ya as another name for the 
winter hunting gg The object 

in using fire n-as to drive the birds and ani- 
mals from their coverts. Too says the record is 
made here to condemn the duke for his wanton- 
ne.«.s in carrying on the operation, so that nothing 
should escape. IJnt this does not appc.ar in the 
Chuen has nothing on the par. 
i’arr. 2, 3. Kuh v r.ts a marqiiisatc, with the 

«uma;ne Ting and has loft its name in 

tils' pro*. dt». of K'lh-'hing. dep. Se.ing-y.me. 


Hoo-pih. T-iIng was not far f™™ Kuh, a® 
earldom with the surname Man 

place it in pres. T-ang Chow, dep. * . 

Ho-iian; others find its principal city, - 
north-east of the dep. city of Siiang-yimg * 
Hoo-pih. But the two identifications need n 
clash. What brought these two distant W * 
to Loo we cannot tell. Tso-she says they a 
mentioned by name in contempt; but ’'’® 
find a better reason in a rule of the Lc Ke, I. • 
Ilii. 21, that princes who had lost their Stn <■ 
were mentioned by name. The siippo.«ition I y 
I the princes in the tc.vt were in this conditio 
1 adeiiuatoly c.vpiaiiis their coining .all the lo . 

' way from their former fiefs to Loo. 


Yvu; VIll. 


51 


DUKi; 

iWHrr^l in niituinn orvinfrr |i 
l.irt’ cii*,cT''l* "lint lin» Ki'n 

i5ii*,— >51 tbi* It'i y<'flr. 

rr, nj'jvm!* iii-5\* twi> jltiirJ riiui'ii: — 

• ali i 11 <m! 5R «>‘55clit li rin* nf jH-niv (nnii 

t'h’iiii; ntx't5'*>t5f lln* I'I.kv iiifiitiiini-<I 

Sii •>’n’ K<{ 0)>' l'litn>!5 niiiiiT I. .\i.Ji. n* i.’rniiliil liy 
t'liiir lo rii'it'R. It "'n* tlu'rv »niil llml ('liniv 
550! tin-ill. ninl it ivoulil niUK-ar llnit 


invAS. 

(’ll•^ltf; nlffi fomid it clinicult to do so], nnd 
!ifl*T\vnr»l5 lirokf tliotn. In niitiiinn, nn nrniy 
Ilf (Ih'Injr. nn nrniy of 'J'n'c, nnd nn nnny of Wei 
invadiil Mfln;' nnd IK^'in^r. when the Icing re- 
ninrcd ihi'ir inlinh!tnnl.<i to Kilith.’ 

•In winliT, the enrl of K'eiih-ynli Inveigled 
the child-innnitiiH of Tidn, nnd put him to 
deafli.’3 


Bujhlh year. 


Dili.®. 
515. 3E * Tjfc. M 
M ^ S E2 i 
^ K §. 
3E # ^ 

js ±m 


0 . M m M 

M 

It A » Bff K.-t-.f 
3E.K ±-^ m 

^ MM 


© 


pf ^ K 
.,ii « ^ Sf 3K 
%.Z *•. 

m n B^. % 

T Hri ^ 

WMi^ * 


Hi' # Pi. -a. Ira M 

m'J'" TW - 
sum eis z.n,^ „ 

16 la M z.m ^ ^ m j:k 

ai m 0.# w 

m. -B. M. M' 16. m 

m m M M m,iii m n m 


0. 

A 


VIIT. 1 In tlie [duke’s] eighth year, in spring, in the first month, 
on Ke-maou, we offered the winter sacrifice. 

2 The king [by] Heaven’s [grace] sent Kea Foo to Loo with 

friendly inquiries. 

3 In summer, in the fifth month, on Ting-ch‘ow, we ofiered 

the winter sacrifice. 

4 In autumn, we invaded Choo. 

5 In winter, in the tenth month, there was snow. 

6 The duke of Chae came [to Loo], and immediately after 

went to meet the king’s bride in Ke. 


52 


THE CH‘UN TSW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


•BOOK Hr 


Far. 1. ^rns the name of the sneriflec 
offered in the ancestral temple at mid-winter. 

— ‘all;’ — all the l.ibours of the_ j’car 
liad been completed, and the fruits of the earth 
gathered in. They could therefore be now pre- 
sented more largely than at the other seasonal 
sacrifices. Tliis is supposed to be tlie reason of 
the name. Chow's 1st month was the 2d month 
of Hea’s winter. The diing sacrifice was now 
offered, therefore, at the proper time; but a re- 
cord of it is here entered, the critics think, to 
show the absurdity of offering the same again 
in summer, as in par. 3. 

Par. 2. See I. vii. 6. is the clan-nnme,= 

the surname, and is the designation. The 
rule was, it is said, that great ofiicers of Cliow 
sent on such missions to the States should be 
mentioned with their designation ; but I am not 
sme of the correctness of such a rule. 

[Tso-she adds here that ‘ in the spring there 
•was'the extinction of Yih ;’ i.c. the earl of K‘euh- 
yuh extinguished Tsin, or thought he had done. 
so.Q 

F ar. 3 . Tlie proper sacrifice at this time was 
the J||pj. To repeat at this season the winter 
sacrifice was certainly a strange proceeding. 

[Tso-she here gives the sequel of the Chuen 
tmder VI. 1 ‘ Sbaou-sze became more the fa- 
vourite in Suy; andTowPih-pe of Ts‘oo said, 
“Our enemy presents an opening, which we 
must not lose.” Accordingly, in summer, the 
viscount of Ts‘oo csilled the princes of the south 
together at Ch‘in-luli ; and as Hwang and Suy 
did not attend, he sent Wei Chang to reprove 
Hwang, while he proceeded himself to attack 
Suy, encamping his army between the Han and 
the Hwae. Ke Leang begged the marquis of 
Suy to make offers of submission. “ If Ts'oo re- 
fuse them,” he said, “ and we figlit afterwards, 
this will have made our men indignant and the 
thieves remiss.” Shaou-sze, however, said, “ We 
must fight quickly, for, if we do not do so, we shall 
lose the army of Ts'oo a second time.” The mar- 
quis took the field ; and as he surveyed from a 
distance the army of Ts'oo, Ke Keang said, “In 
Ts'oo they attach greatest importance to the left ; 
the king is sture to be on the left. Don’t let us 
meet him, but let us attack their right. There are 
no good soldiers there, and they -^rill be beaten. 
When a part is beaten, the whole •will be disor- 
ganized.” Shaou-sze said, “If we do not meet the I 


king, wc arc no soldiers.” The marquis would not 
follow Kc-LSang's advice. The battle was fought 
in Suli-kc, and the army of Suy was completely 
defeated. The marquis fled. Tow Tan cap- 
tured his war-chariot, and Shaou-sze who had 
occupied the place in the right of it. In au- 
tumn, Suy and Ts'oo made peace. At first the 
viscount was unwilling to grant pence, but Tow 
Pih-po said, “Heaven has removed from Suy 
him who was its plague ; it is not yet to be sub- 
dued.” Accordingly the viscount granted a cove- 
nant, and withdrew with his army.’] 

Par. 4. The critics are much divided on-the 
question ■whether the duke himself commanded 
In person in this expedition or not. I do not 
see that it can be determined; and have left the 
matter in the t rnnslation indefinite. Many of . 
the neighbouring small lords had been to loo 
since Hwnn’s accession, but he of Choo had not 
made his appearance. Tliis invasion was tne 
consequence probably. __ 

Par. 6. Tliis was only the 8th month of tleai 
and snow was unseasonable. , . 

[Tso-she has here:— ‘In winter, the king 
ordered Chung of Kwoh to establish Mm, 
er brother of the marquis Gae, ns marqms 


rp_«n O 

Par. G. In Li. 6, we have an earl of Gb“e. 
The duke in the text may have been the same, 
or a son of that earl, here called Aany or nu ^ 
ns being one of the king’s three highest ' 
ters ; — see the Shoo, V. xx. 6. Wb^ the w 
was taking a wife from one of the 
rule was that one of these kung should m 
her, and one of the princes, of the some surn 
as the royal House, act as director m the an • 
The king himsdf could not appear m it, 
sistency ■with his supreme position, x* J 
thing in this p.ar., therefore, is, as Tso-she Ii 
‘ proper.’ The duke of Chae comes from CMw, 
gets his orders from the duke of «niiH 

goes to Ke to meet the bride, whom Loo co 

not designate ‘daughter’ of Ke, simplli 

she was going to be ‘queen The po®^ 

marquis of Ke had, no doubt, managed 
the match about, ns a forlorn hope agains 
attempts on him of the lord of Ts‘e. Mao 
serves that as this was the ISth y^r ot 
Hwan, it cannot be supposed that he na 
mained queen-less up to this time, and tna 
daughter of Ke was being taken by him 

second irife 


3RT 


a: 


Ninth year, 

=f 

MoMo M 


j\^ 


I 


Vtiii IX. 


DUKE inVAN. 


m.5C -ffe © fii ib.i 


ss 


IX. 


B.f V dfi mm fi i.I 

yt^-f 


p ® 

... ... .... .. g 


#Ug0 
5t & 


± 

m mm' 

1 


msmmiili 

iisiimxiMf 


-fe ajiii z 6i 
w m 


f: flS B .^.3E 


i SiSSaiiiiW 


4.®*^ 

16, 


^msm 
z,m ~ 


i S: ja ^ 


2 

3 

4 


--- 

In the [duke’s] ninth year, in spring, the -lady Eeana 
fourth daughter of [the marquis of] Ke, went to her 
palace in the capital. 

It was summer, the fourth month. 

It was autumn, the seventh montL 

In winter, the earl of Ts‘aou sent his heir-son, Yih-koo to 
our court. ’ 


Far. 1. This is the sequel of the last par. 
of Inst year. Tso-she observes that the historio- 
graphers did not enter any intermarriages of 
other States, excepting ivheie they were with the 

royal House. is the 4th in order of birth, 

and appears here as the designation of the lady, 
so that the' translation might have been simply 

— * Ke Keang of Ke.’ see L ii. 6. I have 

here rendered it 'to her palace,’ as Ke 'Keang 
was a royal bride. On ^jji Kung-yang 
says, 'The phrase denotes the dwelling of the 
son of Heaven. means “great;" and.j^fjj 
means “all.” Where the son of Heaven 
dwells must be described by su(^ terms'.’ 

Parr. 2, 3. See on I. vi. 3. 

[Tlie Chuen adds: — ‘The viscount of- Fa sent- 
Han Fuh with an announcement to Ts'oo, ashing. 
Ts'oo’s services to bring about good relations be- 
tween it and T'Sng. The viscount of Ts'oo then 
sent Taou-soh, along with'- the -visitor from Fa, 
to present a friendly message' to T'Sng, but the 
men of Yew, on the southern borders of T'Sng, 
attacked them, carried off the presents they 
were bearing, and slew them both. Ts'oo sent 
Wei Chang to complain to the- lord- of T'Sng of. 
the matter, but he- would not acdmowledge that 
he had any hand in' it. ' 

* In summer, Ts'oo sent Tow Leen with a force 
and a force of Pa to lay siege to Yew, to the 


relief of which the lord of T'iing sent his nephews 
Yang and Tan. They made three successful 
attacks on the troops of Pa, and Ts'oo and 
Pa were likely to faU. Tow Leen then Hbrew 
his force right in between the troops of Fa, en- 
gaged the enemy, and took to flight. The men 
of T'ttng pursued, them, tiU their backs were 
towards the troops of Fa, and they were at- 
tacked on both sides. The army of T'ttng re- 
ceived a great defeat, and during' the night the 
men of Yew dispersed.’ 

‘In autumn, the -brother of the duke of 
Kwoh, the earl of Juy, the earl of Leang, the 
marqms of Seun, and the earl -of -Kea, invaded 
K‘euh-yuh.q 

Par. 4. The earl of Ts'aou himself was iU, 
and therefore sent his son to visit ‘the marquis 
of Loo in his stead. Tso-she says : — * The son of 
the earl of Ts'aou' was received, as was proper, 
with the honours due to a minister of the high- 
est rank. At the ceremonial reception which' was 
given to him, when the flrst cup was .presented, 
as the music struck up, he sighed. -She-foo said, 
“The prince of Ts'aou will scan be sad indeed. 
This is not the place fOr- sighing.’” 

The critics are much divided in their views of 
this -visit, and labour hard 'to find -the sage’s 
work of ‘condemnation ’ in' it. 


52 


THE CH‘UN TSW, WITH THE TSO CHUEIST. 


BOOK U. 


Par. 1. was the name of tlic sacrifice 
ofiered in the ancestral temple at mid-winter. 

‘all;’ — all the labours of the_ year 
had been completed, and the fruits of the earth 
gathered in. Tliq^ could therefore be now pre- 
sented more largely than nt the other seasonal 
sacrifices. Tliis is supposed to be the reason of 
the name. Chow’s 1st month was the 2d month 
of Hea’s winter. The chtng sacrifice was now 
offered, therefore, at the proper time; but a re-* 
cord of it is here entered, the criticS| 
show the absurdity of offering 
in summer, as in par. 3. ■ ' 


king, we arc no soldi 
follow Kc-Lcang'f 
in Suh-kc, and 
defeated. 
tured his 
occupic'’ 
tumn 
Vi'- 


'mm 


s. 

n, 

t 


19 


ikMM ^ -Si.te ffij 

mm Timm mm 

# A ® il5 Sr tfe.it S ZM A 

Wmmm m « zM,B,m m 
be' 6® ».« m m m'iu 

» ®f il5 It ^ SI5.fa.3t MM^SrU 
^.Z,A ^,Z,^ i^,ZM ^ 

ifet 15 W M. EE MM. 


gS©* 

».# 0. 

J0 rtf + 

^52* 

6® A #. 


X 1 


w ® A ^ -a 

In 


/XSr 

n^. 

Hi » 


~ 0,^ m ■ 

the [duke’s] tenth year, in spring, in the king’s first 
month, on Kang-shin, Chung-sang, earl of Ts‘aou, died 

In summer, in the fifth month, there was the burial of duke 
Hwan of Ts‘aou. 

In autumn, the duke [went to] have a meeting with the 
marquis of Wei in T'aou-k‘ew, but did not meet with 
him. 

In winter, in the twelfth month, on Ping-woo, the marquis 
of Ts‘e, the marquis of AVei, and the earl of Oh mg 
came and fought [with us] at Lang. 


Far. 1. Farr. 1,2. See tbe Chuen on last 
par. of last year. A great m 3 ’ 8 tery is found in 
tbe reappearance of -!|[-‘ ; — ‘in the 10th year, the 

completion of numbers.’ Tso blends the two 
parr, together, saying that ‘in the spring duke 
llwnn of Ts'aon died.’ 

[Tso-shc adds here; — *Tlie brother of the duke 
of Kwoli^ slandered his great oflicer Clicn Foo 
to tiic king. Chen Foo was able to rebnt the 
slander, and witli an nrmj' from tlio king at- 
tacked Kwoh. In summer, the duke of Kwoh 
fled to Yu.’j 


Far. 3. T‘aou-k‘ew was in Wei; 50 
the west of the present dlst. city of Tung-o 
jj^), in dept. Tung-ch‘ang. The meeting lind 
been agreed upon, and the duke was aux'ous to 
detach Wei from the party of Ch‘ing, • 

threatening Loo; — see next par. Tiio ^*“^*1, 
of Wei, liowcvcr, changed his^mind, ana u 
termined to go with tlie otlicr side. 

[Tso-slio adds: — ‘In autumn, Ts'in restore 
Wan, carl of Juj-, to Juy.’ See the Cliucn at 
the end of the 4 th year. 


V> XI. 


uuKi: nwA.v. 


55 


•TSu’ ;-l l r «'! JU>' <>f Yh It.-xl n 
i- ;’.V >>f vliirh tlu'diiko n*Uv.l »if 

1 , 1 ! 5 . IJv nTii‘ '«5 i!. !>s«! nfl. rwjinli' rvjviUiil. 

i' till* I'nucrli in (.'Imw. 'A 
t:nv linii* JU» rriitlt-i—tliaS Jti' kii'IK Ills 
i-,’. hiss* Thi" i? of lin h*i' (o 

j. -.I';— ‘hall 1 Vs»v wy Imr! vitli it;" Ho tln’ii 
n:f.l it tii’tiio iliiko, "Jin "cut on to a?k 
■1 {.rot-ion* nttor-l "lil.'Ji Iti' TJii' younj* 
krctls-r tl-.'-n f- /.i-'-Jr', ••Tirm iii.m i* in* 
•ati:!’.'!*'; In* "iU rt acli to niy |iori<o:i.'’ 

Hi' tJii'rxf' fo .ntt.icVvil tin' tlukc, "lio "n* 
to tlfi' to K«!ij:-v1iv.‘3 

r.ir. 1. J.in;:. — w 1. is. •!. T<<n-slio .i.-ty.* ;~ 
• in "int.-r. T»‘«% NVii. an-.l t'h'inj: c-init' tn finlit 
v'ifh «* in i.anr: l'«t "o i-onlil ospl-iin "liai 
tl.. \ c<' 5 n{'!.ttii!.A ol'. rornKrly when the nortlnirn 


Eleventh year. 


.htnp "vre ili.'«tre.**iiii: Tk'o, woi.y o/'tlio princes 
front to iti» n-lief, ninl liwuli. Vnn of the carl 
of t'li'infr, neiinireil nifrit. Wlien (lie ivooplo of 
T;<V were fromliiif; cattle roiiiitl to the din'erent 
inwp*. the oflieer.f of law were cniployctl to 
nrranfje tlie order of distrilnition. TJioy dhl so 
act'onlinp to tlie rule.* of pix'cedcnce .it tlic court 
of ('how, and sent hist to Cli'in^. Tiie men of 
Clrine wen* nnery, and the c.trl requested tlio 
liel]> of n force from 'I’s'e. whieli {tninted it and 
jrot troojis from Wei he.'ide.'?. In tlic.-ie circuiu* 
.'t.ancc!i tlie te.'ct dw.« tiot s|>eak of tlieir nttackinpr 
Loo Covertly or ojn'iily, hut that they came wtd 
jtmyht. It ai.'O puts 1 V'e and Wei liefore Cli'ing, 
tho':yh Ch'iny teax the jtrimr mnrer nj'ihe t-xjtcflitiiin, 
—In the onler of tlicir rank a*, fixi'd hy tlie king.' 
The battle was, wc may suppose, bloodless. 


56 


THE CII'UN TS‘E^Y ^yITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK II. 


mjja^ A©m. 

■ k. *>*1^ #i A ' > » I i<i — ■ » _. ■■ 1 *^ MV* 


.. . 

■& M> 
S:,T 

JS 

Sf 


A 


0 


z.M m ZM ■& 

« f?n 0.* MM ® ®t 2^, 


^ jll 

<S-.^ flS ^ A 

m^Mrnmiik -^m a 

it # 5E,^ K 15 ;§ # 


ZZMiS 

Zx^ 

^^mz 
s- « # Ifc. 

•tfii.A 0.^ 


XL 1 In the [duke’s] eleventh year, in spring, in the first month, 
an oificer of Ts‘e, an ofiSlcer of Wei, and an officer of 
Gh‘ing made a covenant in Goh-ts‘aou. 

2 In summer, in the fifth month, on [the da}'] Kwei-we, Woo- 

sang, earl of Ch‘ing, died. 

3 In autumn, in the seventh month, there was the burial of 

duke Chwang of Ch‘ing. 

4 In the ninth month, the people of Sung seized Chae Chung 

of Ch'ing. 

5 Tub returned to Ch‘ing. 

6 Hwuh of Chfing fled to Wei. 

7 Yew had a meeting with the duke of Sung, the marquis of 

Ch‘in, and the third brother of [the marquis of] Ts'ae, 
in Cheh. 

8 The duke had a meeting vdth the duke of Sung in Foo- 

chung. 

9 In winter, in the twelfth month, the duke had a meeting 

with the duke of Sung in K‘an. 


Por.l. Tlie position of Goh-ts‘aou is not 
kno^m. This meeting \ras, no doubt, a sequel, 
in some -way, to the expedition of the three 
princes, the pre^-ions month, against Loo. Tso- 
she says that Ts‘e, Wei, Ch'ing and Sung all 
united in the covenant, and Too thinks therefore 

that * is \ranting in the text. But the men- 
tion of Sung is supposed by many, and I think 
correctly, to be an error of Tso. But who were 
tlie covenanting parties? Sun Keoh 

early in Sung dyn.), Hoo Gan-kwoh, the K'nng- 
he editors, and many other critics, contend that 
they were the princes of the three States, who 

arc called A , — in condemnation. But why 
were they not called in the par. immediate- 
ly before? It is better to understand here, 

ns in many other places, of officers appointed bv 
the princes to act for them. 

n>o-she appends here: — • K‘enh Ilea of Ts'oo 
was about to make a covenant witli Urh and Chin, 
when the people of Yun took post with their 
army at r‘oo-saou, intending, with Sjuv, Keaou, 


how, and Leaou, to attack the wmy of Tskw. 
he Moh-gaou [this was the name of an othco 
Ts‘00. The party intended is K'ciih HeaJ was 
oubled about it: but Tow Leen said, ‘Tfjepeo- 
e of Yun, having their army in their s“Ourb i 
e sure to be oflT their guard; and tliey arena y 
ixious for the arrival of the forces of tn 
her four States. Do you. Sir, take npn po - 
rn at Keaou-ying to withstand the 
those forces, and I will make an attack uj 
in at night with a nimble, ardent troop. i 

jn of Yun are anxiously looking out, and relj g 

theproximity q^their city, so that they 

nd to fight. If we defeat the army of Inn, 

B other four cities will abandon thar 
th it.” Keuh Hea replied, “ Why not ask t ho 
Ip of more troops from the king [«• «•> ‘h® ' 

lint of Tsoo] ? ” The other said. “ An nriiij 
nquers by its harinony, and not by its nnniner . 
in liave heard how unequally' Shaiig aiul uno 
re inatcheil. Wo have come forth jy*"* ** 
nplcte army ; — what more do wo want ?’ The 
>h-gnou said, “ Let iis divine nl>ont it. _ ‘‘ " o 
■ine,” rcturnwl the other, ‘‘to determine i 
•es of doubt. Where we have no doiibt.s, wnj 


Yeah XII. 


DUKE inVAN. 


57 . 


rfiouin wc divine?" Tmnioilintcly lie defeated 
tlieanny of Yim in P‘oo-saou. Tlie covenant 
fwitl* Urh and Chin] was coninlctcd, and tl»cy 
returned.’ 

‘ When duke Ch’aou of Cli'inp [i. o., tlic carl’s 
son llwuli, afterwards duke Cli’aouJ defeated 
tlie northern Junp, the lu.arquis of Ts‘c wislicd 
to give him one of his daughters to wife. When 
lie declined tlie nmteh, Chac Chung said to Iiini, 
“You must take her. Our prince has many 
favourites in his family. Without some greM 
support, you will not be able to secure the 
succession to yourself. Your three brothers 
may all aspire to the earldom.” Hwuh, however, 
did' not follow the advice.’] 

Parr. 2, 2. The carl of Ch'ing was certainly 
the ruling spirit of his time, shrewd, crafty, and 
daring, — the hero of the first part of the Ch'un 
Ts'iiw. llis burial should not have taken place 
till the 10th month. There must have been 
somctliing in the circumstances of the State to 
cause it to be hurried. Tso-she appends to par. 
2: — ‘Cliung Tsuh had been bordcr-wanlm of 
Chac, and became a favourite with duke 
Cliwang, who made him one of Iris chief 
ministers, lie had got the duke married to 
n lady ^lan, one of the daughters of the House of 
T’flnp, and tlie produce of the union was duke 
Ch*aou [the duke’s son Hwuh.] It was on this 
account that Chac Chuug secured the succession 
to him.’ 

Parr. 4 — 6. Chao was a place or district in 
Ch'ing, of which Chae Chung, as we learn from 
the last Chuen, had been warden ; and it became 
equivalent to his surname, and actually the sur- 
name.of his dcsccnd.ants. Too says that Chac 
was really his surname, and Chung his name ; 
but I must believe that Chung was the dcsigna* 

tion, and Tsuh (J^) the name. A’ 

— ‘the people of Sung;’ like in 

VI. 4. A literal translation of would be 
‘grabbed.’ Tlie re.ason of the seizure of Cliae 
Chung is told bj' Tso-she: — ‘Tlie officer Tung 
of Sung had married a daughter, called Yung 
K'eih Tung was the father's clan- 

name; K'cih the surname] to duke Cliwang of 
Ch'ing. She bore a son [iiif/i], «*^o bfcame duke 
Tie. The Yung clan was in favour with dnke 
Ghwaiig of Sung, who therefore beguiled Chae 


Chung, seizing him, and telling him that, unless 
he raised Tuh to the earldom, he should die. 
At the same time he seized diikeLe [^Tuh], and 
required ific promiie of bribes fnnn hint. Chae 
Chung made a covenant with an officer of Sung, 
took duke Lc back with him to Ch'ing, and set him 
up.' The action of pp. 5, 6 was almost contem- 
poraneous. As the Cliiien s.ays: — ‘In the 9th 
month, on Ting-hne,dukc Ch'aou fled to Wei, and 
on Ke-hae [12 days after] duke Lc was acknow- 
ledged in his room.' As Ilwnh had been both 
tie Jure and dc facto earl of Ch'ing since his fa- 
ther’s death, the critics are much concerned to 
find the reason why he is mentioned here sinqily 
by his name, without his title. Kung-j-ang 
thinks the stylo is after the sinqilicity of the 
Tin djmasty, which called the son by his name 
in presence of the father ; and the former earl 
might be considcrcil as only just dead, — in fact, 
as almost still alive. Ivuh-lcang thinks the 
name is given, ns to a prince who had lost his 
State. Hoo Gan-kwoh thinks the name is con- 
demnatory of him, for having refused the strong 
alliance which Ts'e had pressed on them. Too’s 
cxjilanation is more likely. The announcement 
of his exit, he says, was from Ch'ing, which 
gave iris name in contempt, aud the historio- 
graphers of Loo entered it as it came to them, 
lint see on XV. 4. 

Par. 7. The situation of Cliiili has not been 
determined. Tew was a great officer of Loo, 
who, acc. to Tso-she, had not received a clan- 
name. On Too Yu says that is 

the name, and IMaou agrees with him. It serves, 
indeed, the purpose of a name; but I prefer to 
render the word, according to its sig nifica tion, 

as in the translation. So, Sun Puh 

Parr. 8,9. Poo-chung (Kung rends was 

in the small State of Siring und K‘nn 

was very near to Shing, belonging to Loo; — ^iri 
the west of Wan-shnng J[2.) district. At 
this time Loo and Sung, for some reason, be- 
came, or wanted to become, close friends. We 
shall find that their two princes had three meet- 
ings in the course of the next year. Tlie af- 
fairs of Ch'ing were, no doubt, a principal topic 
with them. 


Tivelfth year. 


A5A.<a' 


S 


von. V. 


58 


THE CH‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOKH. 


T m +• m 

tR.-® ^ 


k 


% 


p5*# 

'T + 1 

ifc 4^ 41^ * 

T T - i 

*, :kw. 

<a- A. 


m 

^ -tfe lU ^ H.© M.« 'fft i!^ f § 

;S.;S A * W' -ft * fe® 5 W 

1S « H.« BS jr 

-(fi mz.Amm mM mm ^ m k * ». 

^ e® S ^ A ZM * « ^ « wf $ f> 

S ^,m Bn ^ A iS M mflf . » ^ f .-f 
;S!.A S.® ^ W 3® 

XII. 1 It the [duke's] tw^reh/ year, the spring, the jfir^ 

month. ' . . , I'-V'Ti 

2 In summer, in the sixth month, on Jin-yin, the duke na 

a meeting \vith-‘the marquis of Ke and the vi^ount o 
Keu, when, thej- made a covenant at K‘euh-ch‘e. 

3 In autumn, in the seventh month, on Ting-hae, the du ^e 

had a meeting with the duke of Sung, and an otnce 
of Yja^^hen they made a covenant at Kuh-k‘ew. . 

4 In-tlfrmghtli month, on Jin-shin, Yoh, marquis ot Oh m, 

■ died. „ . 

5 The duke had a meeting with the duke of oung i 

6 In winter, in the eleventh mouth, the duke had a meet- 

ing with the duke of Sung in Kwei. ^ 

7 On Ping-seuh, the duke had a meeting with the earl o 

Oiling, when they made a covenant at Woo-foo. 

8 On Ping-seuh, Tsin, marquis of Wei, died. 

9 In the tw'elfth month, [our army] and the armj" of Oh mg 
invaded Sung; and on Ting-wc a battle Avas fought in 


=f 


Wi, 

¥ 


Sung. 


Yr.\xt xrr. 


DUKE inVAN. 


pAr. 1. ScoonT.vi.3. 

Par. 2. Tor Ko >|s{^ v*c hare in ICunp and 

Kuli. For lUl IIIIj ’-li’li- K'uuii- 

cli'c was in Loo; — 10 tc to the nortli-cast of pros, 
dis. city of K‘i;u1j-fow. AVo niiglit translate 
tlic characters — ‘the pool of K‘euh.’ nicro is 
or was such n pool, having its sonrco in Shih- 


uifin (sn> iiiii. 

Tso-sho s.ays the object of this meeting was 
* to reconcile Kc and Kcu.’ which had been at 
feud sini*e Keu invaded Ke in the 4th year of 
duke Yin. 

Par. 3. Kuh-k'cw was in Sung;— 30 Ic north 
from the dcp. city of Ts'aou-chow. Tso-she 
says; — ‘The duke, wishing to reconcile Sung 
and Cli'ing, had a meeting in the autumn with 
the duke of Sung, at the height of Kow-tow 
JGc)*’ This is another name for 
Kuh-k'cw. Yen here is the ‘southern’ Yen, n 
small earldom, whoso lords had the surname 


K'cili (/|^)> professed to be descended from 

Hwang-te. It was in the pres. dis. of Kcih 
Ho-nan. Sung had re- 
qmrcd very great promises from Tuh, as the 
price of establishing him in Ch'ing; and the non- 
fulfilment of them created great animosity be- 
tween the two States. Loo, at Ch'ing’s solici- 
tation, tried to act ns mediator; but without 
success. But if this meeting ^Tere, ns Tso-slic 
says, held simply on account of the differences 
between Sung and Ch'ing, we cannot account 
for the presence of an ofiicer of Yen, whose 
weight in the scale, on one side or the other, 
would luirdly be appreciable. IV oo Ch'ing 


the great Yuen commentator) thinks, 
therefore, that the meeting was called for an- j 
other purpose in which Yen had an interest, and i 
that Loo took the opportunity to touch on ; 
Ch'ing matters. The ' History of the Different 
States* gives quite another turn to the par., and j 
makes to be the earl of the 'northern 

Yen,’ who happened to arrive at Kuh-k'ew, 
while the meeting was being held, on his way 
to the court of Sung. 

Par. 4. Tlds marqnis was canonized as duke 
I,e burial is not recorded, be- 

cause* Loo did not attend it. See on Liii.7. 
Ho Hew foolishly supposes that this marqnis was 
the son of T‘o, and therefore his bnrial is not en- 
tered, ‘ in condemnation of T‘o.’ Too Yu obser- 

ves that the day Jin-shin was the 23d of the 7th 
month; and explmns the error of entering the 
death under the Sth month ns having arisen 
from the historiographers of Loo, simply taking 
down the dato as it was given them erroneously, 


59 

so far ns the inonlli was concerned, in the mes- 
sage from Cli'in ^|t). 

Parr. 15, C. T.«o-slio sn.vs; — ‘Uncertain whe- 
ther Snug would lie reconciled to Ch'ing or not. 
Loo persevered in its endenronrs ; and tlicdukc 
had the meetings in these two paragraphs.’ 
lieu and Kwei were both in Sung; but their 
positions are not well determined. 

Par. 7. Sung l>nd now positively declined to 
be reconciled, and Loo takes decidedly the side 
of Cli'ing. Woo-foo was in Ch'ing, — in the 

south-west of pres. dis. of Tung-ming 
dcp. Ta-ming, Chili-lc. 

Par. 3. ’riiis is the only instance in the 
Gli'iin Ts‘ew, in which, when entries of two or 
more different things that occurred on the same 
day arc made, the name of the da}' is given 
with each of them. 

Par. 9. This is the sequel of par. 7. The 
text, however, is not so precise as usnol. Wo 

want a subject before which should be ‘the 
duke' or -a® as I have given it. Then the 
clause at the end is quite indefinite, so that 
Kung and Kuh both say that Loo and Ch'ing 
quarrelled, and fought between themselves, — 
whereas we find them fighting on the same side 
in the 2d par. of next year. Tso-she, after men- 
tioning'thc meeting of Loo and Ch'ing at Woo- 
foo, adds; — ‘Immediately after, they led thdr 
forces and invaded Sung, with which they 
fought a battle, — to punish it for its want of 
good faith. A superior man will say, “If there 
be not the appendage of good faith, covenants are 
of no nse. It is said in the Poems (II. v. lY. 8), 

'The king is continually insisting on cove- 
nants. 

And the disorder is thereby increased;’ — 
which was from the want of good faith.’ 

(The Chuen adds here : — ‘ Ts'oo invaded Keaon, 
and attacked the south gate of the cityl The 
Moh-gaou. K'euh-liea, said, “Keaon being small 
will be lightly moved. Lightly moved, its plans 
will be with little thought. Let us leave our 
wood-gatherers unprotected and so entrap it.’ 
His advice was followed, and the people of 
Keaon caught 30 men. Next day they struggled 
to get out to pursue the service-men of Ts'oo 
upon the hill. The army took post at the north 
gate, and an ambuscade had been placed at the 
foot of the hill. Keaon received a great defeat. 
Ts'oo imposed a covenant beneath the wall, and 
withdrew. In tliis invasion of Keaon, the army 
of Ts'oo waded through the P'Sng in separate 
divisions. The people of Lo wished to attach 
them, and sent Pih-kea to act ns a spy. He 
went thrice round the troops, and counted them.’] 


60 


THE Cri‘UN TS‘EW WnTH THE TSO CHUEN. 


book II. 


Thirteenth year. 


ss 


I “ 


KfS.f . . ^ 

± .li » <2r. a <&■ w 


r— vA 


% 

<^■0 


» 

a 


M E>-t 
AfliB 


tR m^.-a i^tii ^ « sif ifli ;2: a.*' J| 
^ ^ ® Bn ^.g ^ II.A 2 S ' 

li ^ ^ ffl ^ II ^.1 


^ ^ n as -f-.g.^ 

1 ::|C s ifif ^ IS: i 0., 


»M 


^ wy'f ^ px • ^1, 

- 2 .^- « ^ * f # i* 

n Bi JK ft :t mm mM,M » 

XIII. 1 In his thirteenth year, in spring, in the second month, 
the duke had a meeting with the marquis of Ke and 
the earl of Ch‘ing; and on Ke-sze they fought with 
the marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the marquis 
of Wei, and an officer of Yen, when , the armies of 
Ts‘e, Sung, Wei, and Yen received a severe defeat. 

2 In the third month there was the burial of duke Seuen 

of Wei. 

3 In summer there were great floods. 

4 It was autumn, the seventh month. 

5 It was winter, the tenth month. 


J^Tbo-sIio Rivos the followinp narrative ns 
prior to the light in par. 1 : — ‘ In spring, K‘cuh 
lliia of Ts ‘00 proceeded to invade Lo, and was 
escorted part of the xrai/ by Tow I’ili-po. As 
Pili-pe was returning, he said to his charioteer, 
‘‘The Mok'gaou will certainly bo defeated. He 


walks liigh on his tiptoes; — his mind is not 
firm.” Immediately after, lie had an interview 
with tlio viscount of Ts‘ 00 , and bogged mm to 
send more troops. Tlie viscount refused, ana 
when he lind gone into liis paince told his 
a aian of T'iliig [see on VII.3] about tlic matter. 


y»:.vu XIV. 


DUKE HWAN. 


61 


“Vour fircat oflUvr’s wonls,” said slio, “were 
«iit i.icnit! for the salco of sriuliiifi more troops; 
his tiu'anin.!; was tlint you should comfort the 
inferior people by i,\wr pood faith, instruct all 
the oflleers hy your virtue, and awe the Jfoh- 
paou hy t!,c Jotr of ]uiuishinent. The Moli- 
pnou, aeCHstcmied (o sitcresn hy the action of 
r‘(>o-sao\i [see the Chiieu n])pended to XI. 1 ; 
hut iH‘rhai>s for l’‘oo-saou we should read Keaon] 
will pre.'iune on his own ahility, and is sure to 
make too little of Lo. If you do not control him 
and comfort thr anuy, the Jloh-paou will not make 
the ne-cessary preparations. IMh-pe’s meaning 
certainly is that you, my Lord, should instruct 
nil the people, hy gocKl trords controlling him 
nnd comforting them ; that you should call the 
oflicers nnd stimulate them on the subject of 
e.'ccellent virtue; that you slunild see the Jloh- 
gaou, nnd tell him how Heaven docs not make 
use of hasty, supercilious men. If this were 
not his me.aning, he tcould not speak as he has 
done;— i\ocs he not know that all the army of 
Ts ‘00 has gone on the cxjtcdilion ?” The viscount 
on this sent a Sian of Lae after K'Vuh Uca, but 
lie could not overtake liim. Jlcamrhile the 
iMoh-gaou had sent an order round the army 
that whosover remonstrated with him should be 
punished. V’hcn they got to the river Yen, the 
troops got disordered in crossing it. After that, 
they observed no order, nnd the general made 
no preparations. Vnicn they got to Lo, its .armj* 
nnd one of the Loo Jung [sec the Shoo, V. ii.4.] 
attacked them, nnd indicted a grand defeat. 
The ]Moli-gnou strangled himself in the valley 
of Hwang, and all the principtil officers of the 
cx]icdition rendered themselves ns prisoners at 
Yay-foo to await their punishment. But the 
viscount of Ts'oo said, “The fault was mine,” 
nnd forgUTO them all.’] 

Par. 1. Tlie three Chuen all differ as to the 
parties in whose interest this battle was fought. 
Kung-yang thinks they were Loo and Sung; 
Kuli-lcang, Ive and Ts‘e; and Tso-she, Sung 
and Ch'ing. The K'ang-he editors prefer the 
view of Kuh-lenng, re ferri ng to the nrguings of 

Cbnou K'wang ; of the T‘ang dyn.), 

Hoo Gan-kwoh, Sun Eeoh, and Woo Ch'ing in 
its favour; and place the scene of the battle in 


Something may be said in favour 
of each view, but a fourth one, advocated by 
Maou Ke-ling. is to my mind still more likely, 
lie sees in the battle Loo’s return to Ts‘e and 
Wei for their attack in the duke’s 10th year. 
Then Cli'ing was associated with them under 
llwnh, but Hwnii had managed to make Ch'ing 
under Tub confederate with him to piinish the 
other two States. The battle ho thinks was 
fought in Sung, like the one in the preceding 
par., which seems to account for tlie place not 
being mentioned in the tc.vt. Tso-sho’s account 
is:— “Sung kept constantly requiring the p.ay- 
ment of the bribes promised by the earl of Ch'ing. 
Ch'ing could not endure its demands, nnd with 
the help of Ke nnd Loo foiiglit with Ts'e, Sung, 
Wei, and Yen. Q'iie name of the place of the 
b.attle is not in the text, because the duke was 
too late to take part in it.’ The last observation 
is sufficiently absurd. The marquis of Wei is 
mentioned, the son, that is, of Tsin, whose 
death is mentioned in the 8th par. of last year. 
As the father was not yet burled, the son ought 
not, it is said, according to rule, to be mentioned 
by his title. But would that rule hold, when a 
new year came between the death nnd burial of 
the former prince ? Then the son would publicly 
* come to the vacant place,’ and a new rule be 

inaugurated. means a great defeat.’ 

Tso-she says, under 'the 11th year of duke 
Chwang that Ef ® phrase 

indicates a min like the fall of n'great moun- 
tain.’ The defeat in- 

volved the loss of merit nnd character. 

Par. 8. See on 1.5. Wang Paon ( 

Sung dyn., about contemporary with Hoo Gan- 
kwoh) says: — ‘Nine times is the calamity of 
floods recorded in the Ch'un Ts'ew: twice in the 
time of Hwnn, nnd thrice in the time of Chwang. 

Of the nine calamities flve of them occurred in 
the days of the fatlier nnd his son. Slay we 
conclude that they were in retribution to the 
father for his wickedness accumulated nnd un- 
repented of, and to the son for allowing his 
father’s ^vrong to go unavenged ?’ So speculate 
Chinese scholars. 


Fourteenth year. 


G2 


THE CH'UN TS‘EW, T;\'ITn THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK II. 


iBA.A.A, A.K U E. 

i&mm 

n.im ■¥.».» m.z m ■¥.4 


A 
it 0. 

g W.0 


XIA''. 


A# 

ft A 

MM ^ m W 515. 

1 In his fourteenth year, in spring, in the first month, the 
duke had a meeting witli the earl of Ch'ing in Ts‘aou. 

2 There was no ice. 

3 In summer, in the 5th [month ^the earl of Ch‘ing 

sent his younger brother Y u to f l-oo to make a covenant. 

4 In autumn, in the eighth month, on Jin-shin, tlie granary 

of the ancestral temple was struck with lightning. 

5 On Yih-liae we offered the autumnal sacrifice. 

6 In winter, in the twelfth month, on Ting-sze, Liih-foo, 

marquis of Ts‘e, died. 

7 An officer of Sung, with an officer of Ts‘e, an officer of 

Ts'ae, an officer of Wei, and an officer of Gh‘in, invad- 
ed Ch'ing. 

Par. 1. Since the meeting of the duke and 
earl at Woo-foo in the 12th year, Loo and Ch‘ing 
had been fast allies, and this meeting was, no 
doubt, to cement the bond between them. Too 
says that, as they met in Ts‘aou, the earl of 
Ts'aou was also a party at the meeting. Tso- 
she adds that the people of Ts'aou supplied, 
cattle and other fresh provisions ; — ‘ Avliich was 
proper.’ 

Par. 2, The 1st month of CIiow was the 11th 
of Hea, the 2d month of winter, when there 
ought to have been ice. 

Par. 3. After y there is wanting tlie char- 
acter M , * month and perhaps other characters 
as weU. Or it may be, as some critics think, 

^^**‘*' y is an interpolation. 

Instead of Kuh-leang has Tso-she 
says : — ^ The son of dnlce Chwang of^Ii'ing, Tsze- 
jin t^A ; this was the designation of Yu, and 
afterwaids became a clan-name] came to renew 
the covenant ^ ], and to confirm the 

meeting in Ts'aou.’ I suppose this meeting had 
then been agreed on. Kuh-Ienng lays down a 
law, tliat where the day of a covenant is not 
given, it intimates that the covenant had form- 
erly been arranged^ for. The law is arbitrary; | 
but tlie fact in tliis case was, probably, as*it 
would assume. 

Par.4. Woo CliHng says: — ‘When the prince 
is in his chariot, ho is in immediate proximity 


to his charioteer, ^ ^ 

j)^ ). Therefore tlie charioteer 
the men whom the prince approaches nearest, 
and also of the things which die prince bimseii 
uses. The granaiy was that in which the 

rice which was produced from the field cultivated 
by the prince himself was stored, used to supply 
the groin for the vessels of the ancestr.al tempi^ 
and which it was not presumed to apply h* nny 
other use.’ This is an attempt to explain tn 
use of here; and it is strange the dictionary 
takes no notice of the term in this passage. Iho 
phrase might be rendered by ‘ the duke s ov 
granary,’ as well as by those I have employen ^ 

the translation. = ivitli calamity; 

but acc. to Tso-she, in the Cli‘un Ts'cw the 
term is used specially of ‘calamity by fire from 
Heaven ^ ^).’ 

Par. 6. The Chang was a regularly recurring 
sacrifice, and as ordinarj’ and regular things are 
not entered in the Ch‘un Ts*ew, thp critics are 
greatly concerned to account for this onto'- “ 
sufficient reason seems to be supjilied m ‘Ue 
date. The Chang was due on the Sth month o 
Hea, and it was now only the 8th month ot 
Chow, = the 6th month of Hea. But the grain 
for it would have to lie supplied from inc 
granary which had been burned; and by the 
mention of the sacrifice immediately after that 
event, the text seems to intimate some connec- 
tion between the two things. Tso-she simply 


Yeau XV. 


DUKE HWAK. 


63 


snys that tlie proximity of the texts shows that 
‘110 harm was done’ by the lightning; i. e., 
observes Too, ‘ the lire was extinguished before 
it reached the grain.’ Bu^ contends Kuh-lcang, 
to use the miserable remains of the grain scath- 
ed by tiic lightning was very disrespectful; and 
not to divine again for another day on which to 
offer the Sliang, after such an ominous disaster, 
lino Gan-kwC shows, was more disrespectful 
still ! To a western reader all this seems ‘ much 
ado about nothing.’ 

Par. 7. Too Yu gives here, from another part 
of the Chuen, a useful canon about the use of 
in the text and similar paragraphs ; — ‘When 
armies can be ordered to the right or the left, 


is used.’ The character simply » m 

‘used, in tins case the troops of Ts‘e and other 
States were at the disposal of Sung. Once in 
the She — IV. i. [iii.] V. — we find the same usage 

of The invasion of Ch'ing was in reprisal 

for the events in par. 1 of last year, and XII. 8. 
The Chuen soys : — ‘ In winter, an officer of Sung, 
aided bt/ armies from several princes, invaded 
Ch’ing, to avenge the battle [or battles] in 
Sung. The allies burned the K‘eu gate ^ its 
outer wall and penetrated to the great road. 
Then they attacked the eastern suburbs; took 
New-show; and carried off the beams of Ch'ing's 
ancestral temple to supply those of the Loo gate 
of Sung [carried off the year before].’ 


Fifteenth year. 


+ % A.# It 4 IS 

M A.« TMidB 


■= 54 *' 

o 


^ .10 ^ ^ 

# A5j5 


T # 

m 


A 


BOOK n. 


Gl 


THE CII‘ry TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 

^ M z.m 

Sff # il5 # it nM ® Bii M iff # * 

mM B.* ’9- #.5^ # 0. 

MM lu.w MM ft m if ».«i + 

mmm m.m ^ 0 .® sn ¥ ^.sif.-re 

aAjt. f f. 

if.®^ A. 

^ 'ffi.ilF A .^ ZM K I 

MW*. . f g 

■^M g# 

m.Jg ?E 

In the [date’s] fifteenth year, in spring, in the 

month, the king [by] Heaven’s [grace] sent Kea Foo 
to Loo to ask for carriages. , 

In the third month, on Yih-we, tlie king [by] Heavens 
[grace] died. 

In summer, in the fourth month, on Ke-sze, there was 
the burial of duke He of Ts‘e. 

In the fifth month, Tuh, earl of Ch‘ing, fled to Ts‘ae. ^ 
Hwuh, heir-son of Chains:, returned to his dignity m 
Ch'inff. 


XV. 1 

2 

3 

4 

5 


\yu. ixi^« 

6 The third brother of [the baron of] Heu entered into Heii. 

7 The duke had a meeting with the marquis of Ts‘e in Hae. 

8 An officer of Choo, an officer of Mow, and an officer 0 

Koh came to [our] court. 

9 In autumn, in the ninth month, Tuh, earl of Gh'ing, en- 

tered into Leih. 

10 In winter, in the eleventh month, the duke joined t le 

duke of Sung, the marquis of V~ei, and the marquis 
of Ch‘in, at Ch‘e, and they invaded Chfing. 

aware of the desism. and said to 
‘•Whether is a father or a hnsbaiid the nca^ 

and dearer?” llie mother said, ••Any in. •. 

be husband to a woman, but she 

one father. How c.an there be .anr o r . 

between them?” She tlien told , .-nfi.nds 
s.aj-ing, -Yung is Ic.iving his aoii^* * 
to fe.astyou hi the suburbs ««// 

I got him to tell me by guile. On • .*. 

Chung killed Yung ICew. and thre" 
bwlv bv the pool of the Ghow faiuil, . 
carl took it witli him in his carriage, and Ktt 
the State, s.ayiiig, "‘It was right he ^\'o*** ‘L 
who comniunicated his plans to ms 
Ta'.’s in summer duke Lc quitted Clrmg. _ai 
fled to Ts*ac.’ Here Tub b.as his title given 
him. which, we saw. was withheld fnnn Iiwiin 
in XI. 6. Some of the reasons assignctl by the 


Par- 1 - seeVni. 2 . On the whole 

ptir., see on I. iii. 5 . Tso-she says here; — ^“Tliis 
mission was contrary- to propriety. It did not 
^long to the princes to contribute carriages or 
dresses to the king: and it was not for the son 
of Heaven privately to ask for monev or valua- 
bles.’ 

Par. 2 . See on I. iii. 2 . 

Pjir. 4. Tlie Cliucn relates : — ‘ Ch.ae Chung 
monopolized the government of Clring. to the 
great trouble of the carl, who employed Chung's 
son-in-law, Yung Kew fthis Yung Kew had 
come to Cli-ing with Tub from Sunn, and niar- 
n«l a daughter of Chao Chung] to kill him. 
I\cw prop<'«c<l doing so at a feast which ho was 
Chung in the suburbs, but Yung Ke 
[Kew’s wife, and Chung's daughter] became 


Yi:ak XVI. 


DUKE IIWAN. 


65 


critics for tlmt willilioWing were then nchluccd. 
hut nnothcr inny licre be suggest eil. Under 
llwuli, Loo nnd Ch‘ing wore and continued after 
this to he enemies. Uuder Tuh, they were 
friends. These different conditions betray them- 
Folvcs in tiie Iiistoriograjihcrs, nnd Confucius 
did not care to alter their style in XI. G. In 
this p.nr. it should seem that there ought to bo 
some mention of Chne Chung’s cxpclliug his 

prince; but the characters |j|j ‘went out 
nnd fled,’ imply an impelling violence behind. 

Par. r». The feeling of Loo against Hmih 
appears here also in his being only called 

•jjj- or ‘ heir-son.’ Tso says ' In the Gth 
month, on Yili-hao, duke Ch'nou entered.’ The 
phrase |^, however, implies his recovery 
of fonner dignity. In a CInien on duke Ch'ing, 
X\TII.6, Tso has-^ ^ 'fe EF ^ ® 
• restoration to one’s dignity is expressed by ^ 

M- 

Par. 6. See the long Chuen on the nifnirs of 
Heu on I.xi.3. The Heu Shuli here is the 
voting brother of the baron who had lied before 
Ch'ing and its allies, nnd whom the carl had 
placed in the eastern borders of the State, as if 
with some prevision of what now occurred. After 
sixteen years, the young man recovered the 

possession of his fathers. A here has not the 
hostile meaning which it generally boars, though 
the K'ang-hc editors think such a term is used 
to convey some blame of Heu Shuh, for taking 
possession of the seat of his fathers without an- 
nouncing his purpose to the king, and getting 
his sanction to his undertaking. But of what 
use could such a proceeding have been ? The 
king was hardly able to sustain himself. The 

after seems to distinguish this use of 
from the cases in which it is followed direct- 
ly by its object. 

For. 7. Tso-she says the object of this meet- 
ing was ‘to consult about the settlement of 


IIcu;’ but the critics doubt this view ns nothing 
is found in the Ch'un Ts‘ew or elsewhere to 

condrin it. See I. vi. 2. For Kung has j^, 
nnd Kuh 

Far. 8. Choo, Slow, and Eoh were all small 
States, though the lords of Choo came to be called 
viscount nnd marquis, nnd the chi ef of Eoh 

was an carl, with the surname Ying (^^). It 
was in pres. dis. of Ning-ling 
Kwei-tih. Mow was merely an ‘attached ’ State, 
in pres. dis. of Lnc-tvoo |^)i T‘ae- 

gan. Too Yu thinks the three visitors tvere all 
the heir-sons of the three small States; the 
chiefs of which, ns being merely ‘ attached,’ would 
be entered by their names, and their sons, there- 
fore, would simply be called ‘men,’ and not 
named ; but this is mere conjecture. We may 

adhere here to the translation of by ‘oflScer.’ 

Far. 9. Leih was a strong city of Ch'ing, in 
pros. Yu Chow, dep. K*ae-fung. Tso-she says : 
— ‘In autumn, "[Tuh], the earl of Ch'ing, pro- 
cured the death of T'au Pih [the commandant 
of Leih] by some of the people of Leih, and im- 
mediately took up his residence in it.’ The 

meaning of ^ here is intermediate between 
its purely hostile significance, and that in par. 
G. Eung-ynng supposes that this occupation of 
Leih was equivalent to the recovery by Tuh of 
Ch'ing, led away probably by the ‘earl cf 
Ch‘ing,’ in which we agiiin see the favour which 
Loo bore to Tuh. 

Par. 10. Ch'e was in Sung; — ^in Suh Chow 
dep. Fung-yang, Gan-hwny, Tso- 
she says the movement was to restore duke Le; 
and that it was unsuccessful, and the invaders 

returned. Kung-yang has after 

and for Sung was induced to join the 

undertaking, probably by assurances from Tuh 
that, if he were once again re-established in 
Ch'ing, he would fulfil the promises be had 
formerly made. 


VOL V. 


9 


66 


THE CII‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. BOOK II. 

l-f IPSf f S'ii 

S 1 fl‘f 2'1 f § §4 ^ ® S.5: 15.15 0. 

^ + f ^ «. J |a |g.:g 

-jp — . TE. ^ S3>. 4rtn .^-+* »t KT^ 2!i2 


XVI. 1 


P !.i I i.i i'K i I' 
Hi ill I If. 11* 


Sf 


m 

J. 


S" 


» -W m - w w W^m |S| O 

In his sixteenth 3'tar, in spring, in the first month, the 
alike had a meeting with the duke of Sung, the mar- 
of Ts'ae, and. the marquis of Wei, in Ts'aou. 

2 In summer, in the fourth month, the duke joined the 
duke of Sung, the marquis of Wei, the marquis of 
Oh ‘in, and the marquis of Ts‘ae, in invading Ch‘iDg. 
a In autumn, in the seventh month, the duke arrived from 
the invasion of Ch‘irjg. 

I In winter, we walled Heang. 

5 In the eleventh month, Soh, marquis of Wei, fled to Ts'e. 

and Ch‘in againsT'ch^tel^'ln'tli^ mif'mn’ undertakings was not 

the last yearhad K yet come, according to the natural reading of 

princes of Loo, Sung, and Wei now* moot simply says the thing was done 

• another; and they have Ts‘ae also 
onw confederacy, Tso-she says ‘ The 
object of the meeting was to plan about invad- 


Par. 1. 


ing Ch'ing ^ . 

the sequel of the last par.; and 
i-li m re-appears in the expedition. In accounts 

nlnoo?i I expeditions, Ts'ae is always 

placed before Wei, as in par. 1, while here it is 

• ^ of Ts‘ae was ‘ the last to ar- 

^'0 Ying-tah, however, quotes from 

Pan Koo (historian of the Ist Han), to the 
effect that, from Yin to the 14th year of duke 
Lhwang,— a period of 43 years,— there was no 
regular order of precedence among the princes, 
ns no really leading one among them rir) 
had yet arisen.’ 

Par. 3. Sec on II, 9, 

is mentioned before. I.ii 2 timt 

VILiv. i; wo read 
Uiatdnkc Soiien attacked Ken and took Hcanc 
But iicrc wo find duke Ilwan fortifying Hfiana 
^ Ins can hardly have been the B.amc p?ace bm’ 
MV* ^ belonging to Loo.^Too Yu 

s res 


Mie par., wiiicn simply says the tiling was done 
in winter; and as the next par. begins with the 
specification of the 11th month, we conclude 
that Heang was Availed in the 10th; — which 
was only the 8th month of the Hea year. To 
justify Tso-ehe’s observation, therefore. Too 
contends that though no month is mentioned 
here, we must understand the 11th month; and 
he says also that the sixth month of this year 
was intercalary, which of course would carry 
the 11th month of Chow fonvard to the term for 
for such an undertaking. All this, however, is 
very uncertain. 

6. Tso-she has here a melancholy narra- 
jf ' — before this, duke Seuen of Wei 
had committed incest with E-keang fa concu- 
bine of his father; — comp. 1, Cor. v. 1], the pro- 
duce of Avhich Avas Keili-tsze, the charge of 
whom he entrusted to Cliih, his father’s son hy 
the occupant of the right of the harem. Jn course 
of time, he made an engagement for Keih-tsze 
AvitJi one of tile princesses of Ts‘o, but took her 
o Jiiinself in consequence of her beauty. Slie 
gave birth to two sons, SIioav and Soh, the former 
ot Avhom he gaA’c in charge to his father’s son 
by tlio occupant of the left of the liarem. E 
*ierself ; and Seuen Keang [the 
wirii , 1 o’l" been Keih-tszo’s 
r? ’ against Keih-tszo, till the 

dcikc sent lum on a mission to Ts‘c, employing 

dcilh"® Sin, and put^iim to 

lc.Ath. Sliow told Keili-tsze of tlie scheme, and 


pi ;:t- 


< 1 / 

♦ -.-Kj.t y 


,,<,•• * .1 • ■ * ■ ■ - l*'r M ' » I'l •*'•'’• ’’ 

''■ '" ■ .. ; ■ ,• {.-r.-nvn'-ta 

:., ^ :• ,5 :■; SJ\. 


V . -.f. ••■• 


IS.A'fi' ^ ‘1 M' 

I IK 41 II I 

II ll 


y 4 » I XV • » •# 

I'B 


I 


f m W- ^ ^ 

A lyj 

-f' Ull: 

IE 

U 


f .^4il 

J » — T!'“ 


r.. 

o 


»u 

im 

_nn 


T 


jk* 


.w 

la 


, w. !'?•: 

^ r.i. 
W I.; 

» ■''4 

i. m ii'H 
! ?:5 

r 

r.. «« 

i; W. 

!!: Jia 

3. ^ 


111. 
yc 
-T- 
- =fT 
M . I?. 


'iW 

}yi 

0. 


V.*: 

VJ'* 


'1 

>] 


Ik 5- 

H;i'«.r=i 1;; 
•Mi 1® te 


fS 

■Hi, 

II 


% 

0 


V^‘ 

1 1 1 

liK- 


u 4 


11 


ri 


11 
'ii 

n. 

.T^ 


I!!*. '/A' 


-f •• 


K 

A 

& 


Z 1i^ 
•Ul ■" 


fljl 1 . 
IS. ft 
!1I- "*) - 

j5 at- 

iJii 

ivii. ira 
^ i'lii 
-t"! 3| 
-§8 ^ 
JSJS. 
itfi 


A H- ^ 

S W 

3'? m 
fitt. ® ^ 
ii IR S- 

’ll ^ ? 

W f 

I?f . ®i S; 
& 

0.-lil.^ 
Sjlii 3A li. 
® •& 
rfr ^ ^ 


J. & 
rS; fS 
® 0 . 
A* -t- 
•Ul.-fc 


41 

ii 


¥ 


IS w as -t it ^ 

ri Mo^§?^aCV^°°*-u tenth 

inT-Se* „, \„T(va\Yiv=> . 


Yiuu XVIII. 


J1UKE IIWAN. 


Tnr. P. This eclipse took plnre, Oct. Jlil. B. C. 
tV.M. nnil on Kftnji-wtm, the "tli «iay of the cycle. 
Till* *1.iy of the cycle is not piven in the te.vt. 
lK>c,inse. nee. loT.so-.she, ‘thootUeer.s hntl lo.st it.' 
He mills. ‘Tlie son of llenvcn liml his “olllcer of 

the «lny.s ( princes their “su- 

perinlcnilcnt of the days ( UfltP)-” Thcofllccr 
of the tlays hatl the rank of n hipli inini.ster, 
nnil it w.nis his hnsine.ss to repnlatc the d.ay.s of 
the year. The sni>erintcndcnts of the days* were 
rfjuirfii iiof to lose the days [which they had 
rcceivixl from the kinp's olllcer], hut to deliver 
them to the difft. ofUccrs in their princes’ courts.’ 
It may hare been so that the nutnlier of the 
d.ay was thus lost ; but it is simpler to suppose 
th.nt the historioprapher.s on this occasion omit* 
toil it. This is the view taken by many critics; 

— as Chaou K'w.anp j^; T'ang dyn.), 
Ch‘in Foo-lcang (||^[ 12th cent), and 

Chan Joh-Bhwuy (j;^ ^ Ming dyn.). 

Tlic K*anp-hc editors observe, that, during the 
Han dynasty and previously, astronomers could 
only dctomiino the first day of the moon, np- 

pro.\inintcly, in an average way from I 


69 

the average motion of the sun and moon, but 
that from the time of Lew Hung, ; the 

After Han dyn.), and through his labours, it 
lKN:nmc possible to determine e.vnctly the time 
of new moon 1j^), by adding to or 

subtracting from the average time, ns nught 
be necessary. .Still, this want of c.vnctitude 
in these times could not affect the day of 
the cycle on which a phnenonenon like an eclipse 
was to bo recorded. 

[The Chuen appends hero: — ‘Tears back, 
when the carl of Ch'ing [Woo-shang, duke 
Chwang, the e.arl] had wished to make K.aou 
K‘eu-nie one of his high ministers, duke Ch'aou 
[then the carl’s son Hwuh], who disliked Eaou, 
had remonstrated strongly against such a me.<is- 
uro. The carl did not listen to him; but 
when duke Ch'aou succeeded to the State, Ivaou 
was afraid lest he should put Iiiin to death. On 
the day Sin-maoii, therefore, he took the initiative, 
and killed duke Ch'aou, raising up his brother 
Wc in his room. A superior man will say that 
the prince knew tlie man whom he disliked. 
Kung-tszcTnh said, “KnouPih [Kaou K'eu-me] 
indeed deserved an evil end I His revenge of an 
ill done to him was excessive.” *] 


Eighteenth year. 


p T Mm ^ n.-f- 

M.Wof .Ml A 

a 

^1 mm m IE 


70 


THE CH'UH TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


f 

BOOK IL 


^ a m m ^ ^ m m ® h.# 

% Zm 0.-1 in B& 

^3^.* ^ ^ m ^ m ■& A 

ifA *. R ^ BE ^ a w. aE •(& ± ^ ^.0. 

ikM m.m i& n m ^ m ^ ^ u # ^ 


5YIII. 


1 In his eighteenth year, in spring, in the king’s first 

month, the duke had a meeting with the marquis of 
Ts‘e, near the Luh, after which the duke and his wife, 
the lad}^ Keang, went to Ts'e. 

2 In summer, in the fourth month, on Ping-tsze, the 

duke died in Ts*e; and on Ting-yew, his coffin ar- 
rived from Ts^e. 

3 It was autumn, the seventh month. 

4 In Avinter, in the tAvelfth month, on Ke-ch^ow, we buried 

our ruler, duke Hwan. 


Par. 1. Once more, at the commencement of 
duke Hwan’s last year, the character re-ap- 

penrs, and the fancies to which its re-appear 
ance has given rise are numerous and ridicrdous. 
It would be as fruitless to detail as to discuss 
them. We must read the two entries about the 
meeting on the Luh, and the going to Ts‘e, in 

one par. because of the which, as a 

Pr 1» **'■ connecting events,’ links 

them together. Tlie character ffii in the second 
part does not occur in Kung-yang; and Twan 
Yuh-tsae, in his * Old Text of Tso-she’s Ch'un 
Ts'ew’ omits it, contending that Kuh-leang also 
did not have it. It is, however, in all the 
editions of Kuh that I have seen. Twan says 
that it is *a vulgar addition’ to Tso-she 

The critics generally receive it, 
however. The conjunctions and 

are those proper to the Classic, and for the 
here they account by insisting on its eq^ui- 

valence to ‘to grant,’ ‘to allow.’ It was 
contrary to propriety for the duke’s wife to go 
to Ts'e, but she was bent on going, and the 
duke weakly allowed her to accompany him. 

The (prononnced Luh or Loh) was a 
stream, which flows into the Tse in the north- 
west of the dls. of Leih-shing ( dep. 

Tse-nan. We have no intimation of the busi- 
ness discussed at this meeting between Loo 
and Ts'c; and the ordinary view is that it had 
been brought about by duke Scang of Ts‘o sim- 
ply with a view to bring Ins sister and him to- 
RClher, and then to get her farther to accompany 
l>im to his capital. The only scholar who con- 
troverts this view is Wan Szo-ta 

of the pres, dyn., who argues, feebly Imwcvcr, ! 
that Scang was a younger brother of AY«n I 


Keang, and that the incestuous connection be- 
tween them originated .at this meeting. , 
The Clmen says * In spring the duke, being 
about to travel, allowed at the same rime his ' 
Keang to go with him to Ts‘e. Shin Sen , 
“The woman has Ijerlmsband’s house; the 
has his wife’s chamber; and there must “ 
defilement on either side;— then is there wiiac 
is called propriety. Any change m tins me 
is sure to lend to ruin." Notwithstanding tms - 
monstrance, the duke had a 
marquis of Ts‘e near the Luh, 
on with Wftn Keang [liis wife was styled V an, 
from her elegance and accomplishmentsj to i » 
where she had criminal connection witn 
marquis, her brother. The duke o,ngcUy 
preached her, and she told the 
Par. 2, In continuation of the last Cl » 
Tso-she says: — ‘The marquis teestei the “ , 

and then, [having made him drunk], emp J 
P'ilng-sftng, a half brother of his own, , 
him to his lodging in his carriage. The 
died in the carriage, and the people ®f _ 

a message to the marquis oyTs'e, saying, 
poor lord, in awe of your majesty, did n®* ‘ 
to remain quietly at home, but went to re 
the old friendship between your State ana ■ 
After the ceremonies had been all ’ 

he did not come back. We do not fix the 
on any one, but the -nicked deed is bnois” am b 
all the princes, and we beg you will . 
shame of it away with P‘aiig-sang. On in , 
the people of Ts‘e put P'ang-siliig to dentil. 

The reader will find all the iii®*^®®t® 
Hwan’s visit to Ts‘e, his wife’s misconduct, i 
death, &c., graphically told in the ‘History 
the Different States,’ Bk. XIII. As to Confucius 
silence about them in the text, sco the note to 
I.xi.4, Choo He says very lamely, ‘ConfucJijS 
gives a straightforward narration, and ms 
judgment lies in the facts themsch’es. AVlicn 
he says, “The duko met with the marquis of 
Ts‘e in such and such a place; the duke and 
his wife Keang went to Ts‘e; the duke died in 
Ts‘c; the duke’s coffin came from -Ts'o; the 
duke’s wife withdrew to Ts*c;” — ^ivith such on- 


yi.au xvm. 


DUKE inVAN. 


trio« i>la!»ly bvfojv o«r oyos. we couW umlor- 
stusul the tintnix* of them without nny CI>«on.’ 

gj is to ho taken here ns 

•the eoflln witli the hotly in it ;* — sec thct1iction> 
ary. in vch% 

i’.ar. pr?o-sho pives heretwonnrmtivos; — 
‘In antninn, the manniis of Ts'e went with n 
fonv to Sliow-ehe, and tliere Tsro-we [the new 
earl of Uleinp; stv the Clincn at the end of last 
year] went to have a ineetinp with him. Know 
*K‘cn-ine I'oinp in attendance as his minister. 
In the Tih month, on Mow-senh, the marquis 
put Tsre-we to death, and oaijsed Know K‘eu- 
jne to K* torn in pieces hy chariots. After Mis, 
Chne Clump sent to Ch'in for another .<on of 
duke Chwanir, met him. and inade him earl of 
Ch'inp. IIV.cii 7Vie-irc uml A'vii-Hir were scltinp 
out for .‘!how-che. Chne Chunp. knowinp what 
woidd liapjien, made a pretence of heinp ill, and 
vtiuld not accompany tliein. Somoiieople said. 
‘‘ Chae Chnne esc ijH'd hy his intelligence,” and 
he himself said that it was so.’ 

‘The duke of Chow [llih-kik'n; see the 
Clmcn on V. 15] wished to nmrdor king Chwnnp, 
ami set Ids lirother Ivuh [the king’s brother; 
another son of king Ilwan] on the throne. Sin 
Till told the king of it. and then he and the king 
put the dnke of Chow, llih-keen, to death, 
while the king’s hrother K'ih fled to Yen. 
rormerly. Tsze-e [the designation of K’ih] was 
the favourite with king Ilwan, who placotf him 


71 

under the care of the dnko of Chow. Sin Pih 
remonstrated iriMMcMM-c, saying, “Equalqucens 
[». f., a concubine made the equal of tiie 
queen], equal sons [i. r., tiie son of a concubine 
put on the same level ns tlie queen’s son], two 
governments [»■ r.. favourites made equal to 
ininistera], and equal cities [i. r., any other for- 
tified city made os large ns tlie capital] those 
all Icitd to disorder.” The duke paid no liccd to 
this advice, and ho consequently came to his 
had «irf.’] 

P’lic marquis of Ts‘e, having committed 
incest with his sister, and murdered iii.s brother- 
in-law, jiroccedcd to c.vccute the justice wliicU 
tlie fornicr of theso narratives describes to awe 
princes and people into silence about liis own 
misdeeds. 'I'lic division of the body by five 
chariots was a horriblo pnnislimcnt. Tlio 
head, the two arms, and two legs were bound, 
c.nch to a carriage in which an ox was yoked, 
c.'ich animal placed in a seiinrntc direction. 
*rhe o.von were then urged and beaten till tho 
head and limbs were torn from the body.] 

Par. 4. The burial took place later than it 
should have done; and imlcod, accortling to 
Kung and Knh, it should not have taken plnco 
at all until the real murderer of the duke was 
punished. Hut what could Loo do in tho cir- 
cumstances? Tlio evil man liad come to an 
evil end; and tho best plan was to consign his 
coffin to the earth. 


First ysar. 

...Sijsffli 

§'11 K 


% 


'h 


fe 4 ^ # '4 & $ 


.-w« 4 S.| 

i *• ^ ^r i .r„ts-e. 

'“,«® -0 >” 

■XVieta^S® f T;s‘e o?^F,\p5 o(\ K®- 


;rta *® rto Loo^ “ •- 

tV>etaoS® f -Ts'e ®?^FF 5 o(\ ^'^■ 


Ybab I. 


DUKE CHWANG, 


73 


Title op the Book. — ^ ‘Duke 

Chwang.’ This was the son of Hwan, whose 
birth is chronicled in n. vi.5, and who received 

tlie name of T'ung (j^)? in the manner de- 
scribed in the Chuen on that paragraph. He 
was therefore now in his 13th year. The 
honorary title Chwang denotes — ‘ Conqueror of 

enemies and Subduer of disorder 

SLBm 

Chwang’s rule lasted 32 years, B.C. 692 — 661. 
His first year synchronized with the 4th year of 
king Chwang the 6th of SSang of 

Ts'e; the 12th of Min of Tain; the 7th of 
Hwuy (^), and the 3d of K‘een-mow (|^ 
of Wei [Hwuy is the Soh of II. xvi. 6. See 

the Chuen there] ; the 2d of Gae of Ts'aej 

the 8th of Lb, and the 1st of Tsze-e, of Ch'ing 
[see the Chuen appended to II. xviii. 8]; the 9th | 

of Chwang (^) of Ts'aou ; the 7th of Chwang 
(^) of Ch'in; the 11th of Tsing (j^) of Ke 
the 17th of Chwang (^) of Sung; the 
6th of Woo of Ts'in; and the 48th of Woo 
of Ts*oo. 

Per, 1. See on Li. 1, and II.i.l. There is 
here the same incompleteness of the text as in 
I.i.l; and no doubt for the same reason, — that 
the usual ceremonies at the commencement of 
tise rule of a new marquis were not observed. 
The young marquis’s father had been basely 
murdered; he tookTliis place; but with ns h’ttle 
observation ns possible. Tso-she says that ‘ the 
phrase is not used here because Wfln 

Keang [his mother] had left the State.’ This 
occasions some difiiculty, as will be seen, with 
the next par. 

Par. 2. The char. read swn, and in the 
3d tone, is«»^, ‘to retire,’ ‘to withdraw;’— a 

euphemism for ‘fled.’ It is evident that 
wan Keang had returned from Ts'e to Loo; 
—when she did so, does not appear. From Tso- 

Bhe’fl observation above, tlint the plwaso gp ^ 
wasomittcdintlienccountof Chwang’s accession, 
because l)is jjiotber was then in Ts'e, it would 
appear as if she returned subsequently to th.it 
event. But that c.vi>lnnation of tlic omission is 
inadmissible; and the view of JInou and otiiors 
is much more probable, tliat slic had retunied 
to Loo at the same time tl>at the cortin and 
corpse of duke llwnn were brouglit to it. Slie 
probably felt her position tlicn? c-vcecdingiy un- 
pleasant. Guilty of incest witli licr brotlicr, 
and of complicity in the murder of l»cr hu.-b.ind. 
she could not be’looko<l kindly on l>y licr son or 
tiie people of Loo; and now tlieroforc she fl«l 
to Ts'e. 

Mysteries are found in tlm omission of the 
wonis ‘ the l.wly Keang.' after ■ 

on wliich we need not toucli. Tso->lie s.\vs they ! 
arc left out. ‘ as n disowning of tier, and not 


acknowled^ng her kinship; — ns was proper;’ 
but even this is doubtful. 

Kung and Kuh give a very strange view of 
the par. They think that WUn Keang had not 
returned at all to Loo; and that duke Chwang, 
just at this period of the mourning for his 
father, was led to think sorrowfully of her 
absence, and ordered the entry in the text to be 
made about her. This is clearly most unlikely 

in itself, and contrary to the usage of whicli 

we shall meet with in other passages. 

Par. 3. A treaty of marriage had for more 
than a year been going on between Loo, on 
behalf of the ro}’al House, on the one hand, and 
Ts'e on the other. When the king wanted to 
marry one of his daughters to any of the princes, 
it was considered inconsistent with his dignity 
to appear in l!>e matter himself ; and a prince of 
the same surname was employed as internuncius 
and manager. This duty was frequently de- 
volved on the princes of Loo; and Hwan had 
undertaken it in this instance. His meeting with 
the marquis of Ts'e at Luh, in the first montit 
of last year, had reference perliaps to tliis very 
matter. When the marriage was fixed, the rule 
was that tlie king should send the lady, escorted 
by a high minister, to the court of the managing 
prince; and tliere she was met or sent for by 
her future husband. 

Accordingly, wo have in the text the earl [n 
royal minister, so titled] of Shen [the name of 
the city assigned to iiim in the royal domain] 

escorting the Indy ^[jj, a royal Ke] to Loo, 
On this view of tiie paragraph, all is plain; but 
instead of Kong and Kuh, followed in this 

instance by the K'ang-ho editors, haro 
‘met.’ This necessitates our understanding 1^. 

as the surname and desigmation of an oilicer 
of LOo, spccinlJy commissioned, somehow, to 
meet and convoy the king's danglitcr to Loo. 
One can easily see how and might bo 

mistaken, the one for the other. There can be 
no doubt, it seems to me, that Tso-siic's rending 
should be foUoweil. 

Par. 4. It was autumn, when the king’s 
daughter arrived at thce.apit.al ofLoo. Tliec.n.«o 
was n hard one, as CJiwang was still in mourn- 
ing for his fat her. To be managing the marriage 
of the king’s daughter to the man who had 
murdered his own fatiier. was a grc.atcrdiificulty 
still. The case was met, in part at Ic.T'-t, hy 
not receiving the indy in the pal.ice or tlie an- 
cestral temple, but building a pj'f. a sort of hall 
or reception-house for her, outsiile the city. Tso- 
she says, ‘This iros treating her as an outsider 
which was proper.’ 

Pur. <5. is u-cd here as in the S!:oo, V. 

viii. 4, meaning tlie symbols of inveniiiirx- or 
more genernlly of roy.al favour. Thew v « ri* of ' 

9 kind--, all of whieli efiuld K‘ tviif. mrl only 
on the linhliT of u fief of the first .a du’i.’e 

or n mnrqnic. An e.arl iiiighs I’.'ite }.■•»,;» «if 
them; .a vl-viiiint orn t-an>:i. n!.- I'rt';* r {■! t.”,* 
for c.'!;ferring thi-m v.::* o iirt. on tiie 
nobli's ptrs":).-!! np;» ar.ar.'-.-;! nt tl, y r'ifbr :'»■< 


76 


THE CII‘UN TS‘EW', WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK m. 


Par. />. Ilwah (Kung and Kuli Imve 
acc. to Too, belonged to Clring; — in Suy Chow 
)» Kwei-tih ; but ^faoii and many 
other recent critics think it was the name of a 
small State near to Ch'ing. Tso-shc says that 
the duke wanted to have a meeting with the 
earl of Ch‘ing (Tsze-e), to consult if any thing 
could be done for Kc, but that the carl x)lcadcd 


his own difliculties [arising from his brother 
Tub], and declined a meeting. In explanation 
of the term Tso adds; — ‘In all military 
expeditions, where a halt is made for one night, 
it is called ; where it is for two nights, it is 

called ; and when for more thau two nights, 
it is called 


Fourth year. 


I 4 \^\£i -J- WTO -is, -J- v.:. 

1 ‘t S 1 1 f ‘i I ‘i°i 0 

* la ## i Tic ro M s MM.A gf. 
^ M ^ IS m.:t 
■ K.mA A 


IV. 1 In the [duke’s] fourth year, in spring, in the king’s second 
month, [duke Hwan’s] tvife, the lady Keang, feasted 
the marquis of Ts‘e at Chuh-k'etv. 

2 In the third month, [duke Yin’s] eldest daughter, [who had 

been married to the marquis] of Ke, died. 

3 In summer, the marquis of Ts‘e, the marquis of Ch‘in, and 

the earl of Ch'ing met at Ch'uj^ 

4 The marquis of Ke made a grand leaving of his State. 


Teau V. 


6 

7 


DUKE CHWAKG. 


77 


In the sixth month, on Yih-ch‘o\v, the marquis of Ts‘e 
interred [duke Yin’s] eldest daugliter of Kef 
It was autumn, the seventh month. 

In winter, the duke and an officer of Ts‘e hunted in Choh. 

but much more likelj* is the view that it was 
Tsze-e [see the Chuen after p. 5 of n.xviii.]. 
The word M is used instead of " 


Par. 1. Chnh-l:‘ew, — see on IT.v.S. It ap- 
pears from this that the duke’s mother had 
returned to Loo, after her meeting with her 
brother in II. L Her now getting him to come 
to Loo, and openly feasting him, shows how they 
were becoming more and more shameless. 

Par. 2. This is the lady whose marriage was 
chronicled in I. ii. 5, G. The death of daughters 
of the House of Loo who had been married to 
other princes was chronicled by the historiO' 
graphers ; and sometimes their burial also. 

[Tso-she adds here; — ‘In the 3d month of 
this year, king Woo of Ts'oo, made new arrange- 
ments for marshalling the army, and supplied 
the soldiers with the hooked spear. He was 
then going to invade Suy; and, being about to 
fast before the delivery of the new weapons, he 


„ j probiibly 

because the meeting wanted some of the usual 
formalities. 

Par. 4. Tso-she says ‘ The marquis of Ko 
was unable to submit to Ts‘e, and gave over 
tlie State to his 3d brother. In summer, he 
* ^ escape the oppression 

-.1 f - marquis was unable to cope 

with his relentless enemy, and rather than 
sacrince the lives of the people in a vain strua- 
gl^ he gave the State over to his brother, who 
f aeder the jurisdiction 

of Ts*e (in. 4). Too says that ‘to leave and not 
return is called a grand lesiving.' Tlie phrase is 


went into his palace, and told his wife, Man here complimentary. Kung-yang, indeed, .orOTcs 
of T'ang [see the Chuen after H.xiii. 1] tlisit liis fbe style of the paragraph, concealing the 

heart felt all-agitatedr TnniocfT'’o I fact that Tr'p 

Qit., revenues],” said 
end. After fulness 

such is the way of Heaven. The former rulers 
[in whose temple he was going to fast] must 
know this ; and therefore, at the commencement 
of this military undertaking, when you were 
about to issue your great commands, they have 
thus agitated your majesty’s heart. If the e.\- 
pedition take no damage, and your majesty die 
on the march, it will be the happiness of the 
State.” The king marclied immediately after 
this, and died under a mun tree. The chief 
minister [see Ana. V.xviii.], Tow K‘e, and the 
Moh-gaou, E‘cuh Gh‘ung, made a new path, 
bridg^ over the Cha, and led their army close 
to Suy, the inhabitants of which were afraid, 
and asked for terms of peace. The Moh-gaou, 
as if by the king’s command, entered the city, 
and made a covenant irith the marquis of Suy, 
asking him also to come to a meeting on the instead of 
north of the Han, after which the army returned. 

It was not till it had crossed the Han that the that by is intended the m.’irquis of Ts 

Virifr’c \T*ns nini^n Tennwn. sinil tlii> fiinoMl i_! ij* 


- — thereby 

revenged the wrong done in B. C.893 to one of 
his ancestors, who was boiled to death at the 
court of Chow, having been slandered by the 
then lord of Kc! The marquis of Ts'e, therefore 
was now only discharging a duty of revenge iti 
destroying the House of Ke J Into such vagaries 
do the critics fall, who wUI find ‘praise or cen- 
tre ^ m the turn of every sentence in this 

CrlftSSlC, 

Pw. 5. The leaving his wife unburied shows 
to what straits the prince of Ke had been re- 
duced, when he went nw.ay. Tlie marquis of 
Ts‘e, we may suppose, now performed the dutvof 
interment, with all Hie honours due to the ladv’s 
r.nnk, partly in compliment to Loo, and partly 
to conciliato the people. 

Par. 7. Here, as in H. 4, Kung-yang has 
Both Kung and Kuli s.ay 


king’s death was made known, and tlie funeral 
rites began.’] 

Par. 3. Ch‘ny, — sec I. viii. 1. The meeting 
here had reference, probably, to Kc, which was 
now near its end as an independent State. Hoo 
Gan-kwoh and many other crities think Tub. 
or duke Jjc, is the carl of Ch'ing here intended; 


himself ; 
<iDr ■ ' 


but Too simply sjiys the phrase— 
■, ‘a mere officer,’ adding that the nature 
of the whole transaction.— the duke's crossing 
his own borders and bunting in another State 
with one of inferior rank,— is sufficientlv an- 
p.arcnt. ' 


Fifth year. 

^ ^ ^ MM M ^ 
A» A, w 


78 


THK Cri‘UN TST-W, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN:. 


BOOK nr. 


-a. ,1- ^ ^ ^ SK 0. * 

<S- ^ -ffe -fe. S ^ ^ «. 5E ff 

V. 1 It was [the duke’s] fifth year, the spring, the king’s first 

month. 

2 In summer, [duke Hwan’s] wife, the ladj’ Keang went to 

the arm)' of Ts‘e. 

3 In autumn, Le-lae of E paid a visit to our court. 

4 In winter, the duke joined an officer of Ts‘e, an officer of 

Sung, an officer of Ch‘in, and an officer of Ts‘ae, and 
invaded Wei. 


Par, 2. The army of Ts‘e iras probably in 
Ke at this time. WSn Keang nonr joined her 
brother, in the sight of thousands. WangPaou 
says: — ^“The month of former meetings, as at 
Choh and Chuh-k*enr, Tras mentioned, intimat* 
ing that after some days the marqtus and his 
sister separated. Here the season is given, 
intimating that they remained together for 
months.’ 

Par. 3. E QKnng-y.mg has was a small 

attached territory under the jurisdiction of 
Sung,— in pres. dis. of T'Sng, dep. Ten-chow. 
Its chief, as Tso says, had not received &om the 

king any symbol of dignity "dp )> 


therefore he is mentioned by his name,— Le (Tso 
has ^>-lae. The chiefs of attached territories 
are mentioned botli by their names, and desig- 
nations. Hoo Gan-kwoh thinks that the name 
indicates that the territory is that of some bar- 
barous tribe. Tung Chung-shoo "Pp ? 
e-arly in the Han dyn.) says that when the ter- 
ritory contained 30 square fc, Uie chia 
mentioned by his designation; when it had omy 
20 square /e, simply by his name. All this is 
very doubtful. 

Par. 4. The object of this expedition was the 
restoration of Soh, or dukeHwuy; — seeILxn.£>. 


Sirf/i year. 


AM. 


^ nM 


m m 

#oA 

A » S # tr 

mM m- @ ® A W 
t S ^ ±3E^ 

^,m mm 

Ilt&m 

m f .E. A ® A i ;s,i 1 

^ ® ^ -ta.is m fi5.3t 

ft =i.tt ^ # 

$ I' ^ ^ 

T' ^.Jlt H.tfi,, 


HU 

^ ^ ki 

nM Si f f ^ 

# ^ ■& A. 

jfe -f- 


Yeai; VII. 


DUKE CHWANG. 


79 


VI. 1 In the [duke’s] sixth year, in spring, in the king’s first 
month, Tszc-tuh, an oflicer of the king, [endeavoured to] 
relieve [the capital of] Wei. 

2 In summer, in the sixth month, Soh, marquis of Wei, en- 

tered [the capital of] Wei. 

3 In autumn, the duke arrived from the invasion of AVei. 

4 There were the /nm^-insects. 

5 In winter, an officer of Ts‘e came to present [to Loo] the 

spoils of AVei. 


Tnr. 1. Kmip and Kwli both rend here 
^ ^ iniitc.nd of IE- TIic king made nn ofTort 
toTupiiort Wei against the attempt to rc-instato 
Soh ; hut liis ministers all declined tlie risk of 
commanding the c.xpcdition. Only Tsze-tuh in 
the text, not even a ‘ great olllccr,’ would linzard 
himself on the entorprizo. Too, followed by 
Ving-tah, and a host of others, consider tiint 
Tszc-tuii was the officer’s designation, wliile 
Kung and Kuh have many critics, and among 
them for once Moon K‘e-ling, affirming that 
it was his name. I think the former view is the 
correct one. 

Tar. 2. As Soh had boon de facto marquis of 
Wei, the descriptive of iiis 

restoration, is peculiar. Comp.II.xi.o, xv.B; 
ct al. Tlie phrase seems to be condemnatory of 
him, entering as an enemy into his capitaL 
Tso-sho says: — ‘In summer, the marquis of 
Wei entered; drove Kung-tsze K‘een-mow [see 
the Cliuon to II. xvi. 6] to Chow, and Ning Kwei 
to Ts'in; and put to death Sceh and Chili, the 
sons of duke llAvau by the two ladies on the 
right and left of the harem. After this he took 
his place ns marquis. Tlie superior roan will 
say, “ The action of the two sons of duke Hvian 
in raising K‘een-mow to the roarquisate was ill- 
considered. He wlio would be able to make 
sure the scat to which he raises any one, must 
measure the beginning and tlie end /«s protege, 
and then establish him as circumstances direct. 
If lie know the individual to have no root in 
himself, he dismisses liiin from his plans. If he 
know that his root will not produce branches, it is 
vain to try to strengthen him. The Book of Poetry 
says, “ The root and the branches increase for 
a hundred generations [She III. i. 1. 2).” 


Par. 4. See I. v. 6. 

Par. 5. Kung and Kuh both read here 
for and Tso-she also has in his Chuen, 
so that Too suspects to be an error 
of the text. It need not be so, however, for 
may signify either prisoners or precious 
spoils generally. See an instance of the latter 
application of it in the Preface to the Shoo, p. 
14. Tso-she says that this gift of the spoils of 
Wei was made at the request of Witn-keang. 

[The Chuen adds here: — King Wttn of Ts'oo' 
was invading Shin and passed by T'ilng. K‘e, 
marqnis of T'Ung, said, “ He is my sister’s son 
and thereupon detained and feasted iiim. Three 
other sisters’ sons, called Clmy, Tan, and Yang 
requested leave to 2 )ut tlie viscount [t. e., the soi- 
disant king] to death, but the marquis refused 
it. “It is eertainly this man,” said they, “ who 
will destroy the State of T'ttng. If we do not 
take this early measure, hereafter you will 
have to gnaw your navel; — will you then be 
able to take any measures ? This is the time to 
do what should be done.” The marquis, how- 
ever, said, “i/’/ do this deed, no man will hereaf- 
ter eat from my board ‘ what I have 

left;’ ».e., what remains to me for my own .use,- 
after all the sacridcial offerings].” 'I’hey replied, 
“If you do not follow our advice, even .the 
altars will have no victims, and where will you 
hereafter get food to put on your board ?” Still 
the marquis would not listen to tliem ; and in .the 
year after he returned from invading Shin, the 
viscount of Tb ‘00 attacked T‘fing. In the -IGth 
year of duke Chwang, he again attacked and ex- 
tinguished it.] 


Seventh year. 


ffi R.W ^ fa. WT # -fci 
ft 


80 


THE pn'US TS'EIV, IVITII THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK IIL 


m . «. -Hi. m m m p;5' 

WlZ- m PI5 *n -{fc. M. 'll ““ 


^ -b & 
#. 0 . 


« # 


VII. 1 In the [duke’s] seventh year, in spring, [duke Hwan’s] 
■wife, the lad}^ Keang, had a meeting with the mar- 
quis of Ts‘e at Fang. 

2 In summer, in the fourth month, on Sin-maou, at night, 

the regular stars were not visible. At midnight, 
there was a fall of stars like rain. 

3 In autumn, there were great floods, so that there was no 

wheat nor other grain in the blade. 

4 In winter, [duke Hwan’s] wife, the lady Keang, had a 

meeting with the marquis of Ts‘e in Kuh. 


Par. 1. Pang, — see 1. ix. G. As Fang was in 
Loo, Tso-slie says that this meeting was sought 
by Ts‘e. Of course, when a meeting between the 
brother and sister was in Ts'e, he would say 
that wan Keang was the mover to it. 

Par. 2. is read keen, ‘ to appear,’ ‘ to be 


visible.* 
and for 


For the 1st Kuh-leang has j 
, in this other and passages, Kung- 


yang has K'ung Ying-tah says, ‘ The term 

“ night ” covers all the space from dusk to dawn, 
but as we have here “ midnight ” specified, we 
must understand the previous “ night ” of the 
time before midnight, — the time after twilight. 
Then the stars were not visible it is not said 
that they were not visible during all the night. 

Kuh-leang reads for and defines 

as meaning the time between sundown and Se 
appearance of the stars. But during this time 
of course the stars would not be visible, and 
why should that regularly recurring fact be 
mentioned in the text as a thing remarkable?’ 

*1® ^ *0 understand the stars 

generally,— all ‘constantly, regularly,’ visible, 
or that may be expected to be so. Maou Se-ho 
would confine the phrase to the stars in the 28 
constellations of the zodiac, and take the ^ 
below of the other stars. But it is not ne^ 


sary to do so. Before midnight the sky was very 
bright, as if a flush of sunlight were still upon it, 
BO tliat the stars were not visible as usual. As 
Tso-she says, ‘Tlie night was bright.' After imd- 
night came a grand shower of meteors, me 
phrase ‘the stars fell as rain,’ 

seems plain enough. Tso, however, and Kuh- 
leang take ‘ and.’ The former says : 

— ‘ The stars fell along with the rain the lat- 
ter, ‘ There fell stars, and It rained.’ Kun^yang 
says, ■without giving any authority, that, 
Confucius revised the te xt (rf the Ch|u n T s w 

of Loo, this entry was — 

rained stars to within a foot 
of the earth, when they reascended 1’ 

Par. 8. — ‘ see II. i. 6 ; ct 

this time the wheat was getting to 
while tlie rice, millet, &c., were only in theblaoe. 
The floods washed all away; yet Tso-she says 
‘ they did not hurt the good grain,’ meaning 
there was still time to sow the paddy and muiec 
again, and reap a crop before the winter, me 
K‘ang-he editors cast out of the text this re- 
mark of Tso’s; indicating thereby, ns on otne 
occasions of the same suppression, their dissent 
from it. 

Par. 4. Kuh belonged to Ts'e, —was in the 
pres. dis. of Tung-o 


Eighth 

year. 


ppm 

i« 

T 

IE 


A. 


h 

M 

• 

m 


m 

7^ 

JG^ 

A. 

m 


Year VHI. 


DUKE CHWAKU. 


81 


bM ift 4 


R 


« a i>i PI.# ® + 
^ ttl « t5 i£.:4 - 


-T-I V>/ -"I ’ ^ 

■p f# ^ 


n i-u-ii-r >=i lAC iw »i»>V ITT PJ Wi 

.1 « # W jEfe # fl# IP..^ T 

.#,li'.-$i.5E W Srt-* tJ «#y:* -ff' -4-^ iH" nktf ttf^ T-rt Enj 't~ ijas 

‘ ‘ V? 0.i 


✓Kl* — » I rv-* y>V tef Vr“»4'-RS 

j&.<^ - - 


PI 


I^.P1 a T ^ M f.li MM 
if ^ « jg ss.# m # Bf 

.« 0.<a' ^»A mm Si,iP ^ m 
^MM 0 m MM #. 
i^ « # 0 . 

^ S T in Bff #,^ M m n 

&.QMB M. 
Wr iL T.^F ^ Z.± M ^.ZM flff 
3iiimmm w.a ro a ^ 

If.# i* T.# AMMM A ^.m 
^.ZM ZM 


flS 

z mM. 

E&.# 


# ?c 

B s=fe 
& 

.B. 

T- 


VIIL 1 

2 

3 

4 

5 


In the [duke’s] eighth year, in spring, in the king’s first 
month, [our] array halted at Lang, to wait for the 
troops of Ch‘in, and the troops of Ts'ae. 

On Keah-woo, Ave exercised the soldiers in the use of their 
weapons. 

In summer, [our] army and the army of Ts‘e besieged 
Shing. Shing surrendered to the army of Ts‘e. 

In autumn, [our] array returned. 

In winter, in the eleventh month, on K\vei-we, Woo-che 
of Ts‘e murdered his ruler, Choo-urh. 


Pnr. 1. Lang,— see I. is, 4; et al. TIjc duke 
had probably nwdo .in ngrceincnt with the princes 
of Ch‘in and Ts'ac to join in the att.ick on Siting; 
and ns their troops had not arrived at the time 
agreed on, the army of Loo was obliged to wait 
for them here at Lang. Thi.« is the natural 
explanation of the par. Fan Ning. on ICuh-lliing. 
and Ho lliiw, on Ivung-.vang. suppose that the 
halting of the troops at Lang was to iiiL-et a real 
or pretended invasion of I .00 by Ts‘ac and Cliin. 


Tar. 2. Kung-yang reads for Iiul 
with the same meaiiing. Tso-she says tliai the 
J£, wliatover it wa<, took place in the an- 

ccsinil teinjile.and was proper. Hut it took pl.-tce, 
evidently, al I-ang, while the tro<ijis were halting 
for those of 'IVac and Cifin. As to the e.vt.res- 
« ^ * 
siiiii it is n teeliiiieal phrase, ihi- exaet 

meaning of whieli it is didicul: to iletenuine. 


voi. V. 


II 


82 


TIIK C1^U^' TS EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK III. 


In the Chow Le, XXIX. 25— 43, we h-ivc an 
account of the huntings at the four seasons of 
the year, and tlie militarj* exercises practised in 
connection with them, under the direction of the 
minister of War. At mid-spring tlic men were 
taught at mid-summer, at 

mid-autumn, and at mid-winter, 

. Biot there translates 

by ‘ au miltev de Vautomne il ensctgnc I'art dc faire 
Ja guerre, ou conduirc lessoldals en expedition' But 

was not used anciently for ‘soldiers,’ but 
for weapons of war, especially pointed, offensive 
weapons, though buff-coats and shields may also 
be adnutted under the term. 1 think that 
denotes the putting the weapons, offen- 
sive and defensive, in order, and the methods 
of attack. Some critics find fault with Tso’s 
saying that the ^ was in order here, 
when the exercise was appropriate to mid- 
autumn ; but it was so appropriate only in times 
of peace. Now Loo was engaged in war, and it 
was then appropriate, whenever it would be 
advantageous. 

Par. 3. Siting (Kung has see L v.8. 

As no mention is made of Ts'ac and Ch'in, their 
troops probably had not come up at all. And 
we do not know the circumstances sufficiently 
to understand why Siting surrendered to Ts‘e 
alone, and not to the allied army of Ts‘e and 
Loo. That a slight was done to Loo, we under- 
stand from the CItuen: — ‘When Shing surren- 
dered to the army of Ts‘e, Chung K-ing-foo 
asked leave to attack that army. The duke 
said, “No. It is I who am really not virtuous. ; 
Of what crime is the army of Ts‘e guilty? The 
crime is all from me. The Book of Hea saj-s:— 
‘Kaou-yaou vigorously sowed abroad his vir- 
tue, and it made tlte people submissive (But 
BW on the Shoo, II.fi. io).> Let us meanwhile 
give ourselves to the cultivation of our virtue 
and bide our time.”’ It would appear from’ 
this narrative that duke Chwang was liimself 
with the army, though the style of aU the 
paragraphs makes us conclude that he was not 
himself commanding. 

Par. 4. The return of an army is not usually 
Jronicled in the Ch’un Ts‘ew as it is here. 
T.-.o-she observes that from tlie mention of it 
here the superior man will commend duke 
^^ang. It is not e.asy to see the point of the 
remark, unless we take it as referring to the 
duke s words in the preceding Chuen. 

of Ts e..^uke^ang 'W^.ehe was a son of E 
Chung-neon (^ ^fjj ^n uncle of the 

*narqui.. The marquis .nnd he therefore were 


first cousins. The Chuen on this par. is:— 
‘'nie marquis of Ts‘e had sent Lecn Ch‘ing and 
Kwaii Chc-foo to keep guard at K‘wei-k‘ew. 
It was the season of melons when they left the 
capital, and he said, “ Wien the melons are in 
season again. I will relieve you.” They kept 
guard for twelve months ; and no word coming 
from the niarqnis, they requested to be relieved. 
But their request was refused, and in conse- 
quence they fell to plot rehellion. 

‘ E Chung-neen, oivn brother to duke Be, bad 
left a son, called Kung-sun Woo-che, who was 
a favourite with He, and had been placed by 
him, so far as his robes and other distinctions 
were concerned, on the same footing as a son ra 
his own. Duke Seang, however, had degraded 
him. The two generals, therefore, associated 
themselves with him to carry out their plans. 
Tlicre was a first cousin also of Leen Ch’ing in 
the duke’s harem, who had lost his favour, and 
her they cmploj’ed as a spy upon his 
ments, Woo-che having declared to her that, ii 
their enterprise were successful, he would make 
her his wife. 

* In winter, in the 11th month, the marquis 
went to amuse himself at Koo-fun, and was 
hunting on Pei-k‘ew, when a large boar made 
his appearance. One of the attendants said, 
“It is the Kung-tsze P‘fing-sSng [see the 
Chuen on II. xvii. 3].” The marqms was 
enraged and said, “Does P‘Sng-s5ng dare to 
show himself.” With this he shot at the 
creature, which stood np on its hind 
a man. and howled. The marquis was afraid, 
and fell down in his carriage, injuring one m 
his feet, and losing the shoe. Ha^’mg retoned 
[to the palace where, he was lodging], he re- 
quired his footman Pe to bring the shoe, and 
when it could not he found, scourged him, tih 
therblood flowed. Pe ran out of the room, and 
met several assassins at the gate, who seiz^ wd 
bound him. “Should I oppose you?” said Pe, 
baring his body, and showing them his back, on 
seeing which they believed him. He then request- 
ed leave to go in before them, when he_ hid the 
marquis, came out again, and fought with them 
till he was killed in the gate. Shih-che Pun-ioo 
died fighting on the stairs, on whicli the assas- 
sins entered the chamber, and Mled MSng 
Tang [who had taken the marquis’ place] in 
the bed. “This is not he,” they soon criOT. 

“ It is not like him.” They then discovered thfe 
duke’s foot, [where he was hiding] behind the 
door, murdered him, and raised up Woo-che m 
his place. 

‘ Before this, when duke Seang came _to the 
marqulsat'e, Paou Shuh-ya, seeing his irregu- 
larities, said, “ The prince is making the 
despise him; — there will soon be disorder;” and 
he fled to Ken with He’s son Seaon-pih. When 
the disorder broke out, Kwan E-woo and Shaou 
Hwuh fled to Iioo with Kew, another of Hes 
sons. 

‘ Before his elevation, Kung-snn Woo-che had 
behaved oppressively to Yung Lin.’ 

It will be seen from this narrative that Woo- 
che was not the actual murderer of the marquis 
of Ts'e, nor indeed the first mover to the taking 
of him off. Still, as he was the one who was to 
profit by his death, the Ch‘un Ts'ew charges 
the deed on him. The marquis deserved his fate. 


VtAK IX. 


DUKE CllWAXG. 


83 


Ninth year. 


Am; A 

m ^ ^p. 

m m. 

A ® fp, T m A m 
WKAff, »iA.A 

Tm.mm 

M-. BP p ® T m 

M ffi # 4 ' Wc.M 

T <&•. 6 

pT BJk M M.Z,^ T m.s *.# Sr ^.± 

•i,.# ‘^z.n m «• MM Mm:^s; m.n if 

m 0 . 

^ W an ■('i> f; V ^ m M S; m W, A A 
fl5 W S M.W Pip )ft A # 


0 f M I/O ^ 1 I I »— I rri V ^ 

«.ia.T if ia lt.« -f- m 

m m M ^ ^ -tuM ■& ^. 7 ^ M, f 

«.Bn« W.ififif ® m 

■& ^ 

W.-S^ ZM <C1' ti- Pffi T B5 i if 


IX. 1 In the [duke’s] ninth year, in spring, the people of Ts‘e 
killed Woo-che. 

2 The duke made a covenant with [some] great officers of 

Ts‘e at Ke. 

3 In summer, the duke invaded Ts‘e, intending to instate 

Kew; [but] Seaou-pih [had already] entered Ts‘e. 

4 In autumn, in the seventh month, on Ting-yew, there was 

the burial of duke Seang of Ts‘e. 

5 In the eighth month, on Kang-shin, we fought •with the 

army of Ts‘e at Kan-she, when our army received a 
severe defeat. 

6 In the ninth month, the people of Ts‘e took Tsze-kew, and 

put him to death. 

7 In winter, we deepened the Shoo. 


84 : 


TriK CII'UN TS-I2W, WITH Till-: TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK III. 


Pnr. 1. I irniislntc here hy ‘the 

people of Ts'o,* after the aunlo^y of 1. iv. G, 7, c.t 
al. Tso-she tells ns, however, that the real slayer 
of Woo-che was YuntrLin, inentioncd at tin; end 
of the last Chuen. Woo-che had takc.n his place 
ns marquis of Ts'e ; hnt only a month had elajjsed, 
nnd his title had not heon aeknowlodfred hy the 
other princes, lie is therefore mentioned in 
the text simply by his name. 

Par. 2. Ke (Knng nnd Kuh have was in 
Loo, — 80 h to the east of the dis. city of Yih 
^cp. Yen-chow. On the death of Woo- 

che, great ofiScers wore sent to Loo to arrange 
about making Kew, who had taken refuge there 
soon after the murder of duke Bcang, marquis 
in his room. This was the subject of the cove- 
nant at Ke. Tso-she explains the fact of the 
duke’s covenanting with them, a thing beneath 
his dignity, by saying that there Avas at this time 
no ruler in Ts'e. 

Par, 3. It does not immediately appear wlij* 
the duke should invade Ts'e to instate Kew, see- 
ing that Kcav’s elevation had been matter of 
covenant between him and representatives of 
Ts'e. Opposition, probably, was anticipated 
from Seaou-pih, and the militar}' force was to 
provide against it. But the duke’s movements 
were not speedy enough to effect his object. 

Tso-she, both in his text and Chuen, has 

instead of which Avould indicate that 

Ipw wsis the older of the two brothers. And 
the evidence does preponderate in faA'our of 
tins view, though the opposite one has many 
advocates of note. Tiie K‘ang-he editors spend 
a whole page in reviewing the question. The 
Cliuen on VIII. 4 states that Seaou-pih had fled 
toKeu, andhereitissaid:— ‘Duke Hwan had 
Deen beforehand in entering Ts'e from Ken.’ 

Par. 4. It was now the ninth month since 
tlie nnorder of tlie marquis. His burial had 
been deferred in consequence of the troubles of 
the State. 

Par. 6, Kan-she w.as in Ts‘e,--in the north 
of pres. dis. of Poh-hing ( dep, Ts'ing- 
ciiow. Notwithstanding that Seaou-pili had 
anticipated his brother, and got possession of 
Ts'e, the duke of Loo persevered in his efforts 
in favour of Kew, and suffered this defeat. 


.<<00 on Il.xiii.l. Tso-she says:— ‘At 


this battle the duke lo.st his Avnr-chariot, but 
got into nuolluT, and proceeded homeiynrds. 
Ts'in-tszc and Lii.ang-tszc [wlio had heen-in the 
chariot witli him] took hi.i Hag, and separated 
from him by il lower road [to deceive the enemy] ; 
and the con-scquence was that tliey ivcre both 
taken.* Thu.*!, tlie dnkc himself comnmnded in 
this expedition, — a fact which tlie te.vt is so 
constructed as to conceal. 

Par. G. It is liere said that 'the people of 
Ts'e took Tszc-kew, nnd killed him,’ but in 
reality they Avero Loo hands Aidilch put him to 
death. 'I’o require his death Aims cruel on the 
part of Ts'e, 'J’o deliver him up, to kill Inm in 
fact, Avas ba..<c in the extreme on the part of Loo. 
A foreigner loses all patience Avitli Confucius 
and the Ch'iiu Ts'caa', Aidicn he finds the 
of history so misrciircsentcd in it. The Chuen 
says: — 'Paou Shuh led an army to Loo, ana 
said to the duke, “Tsze-kiiAV isour princes near 
relatiA'o ; avc beg of you to take him off. K'van 
and Shaou are his enemies; Ave beg them to he 
delivered to us, nnd our jirince Avill feel satisfiea. 
On this Ave killed Tszc-kew in Silng-tow, when 
Shaou HavuIi died Avith him, Avhile Ipvan 
Chung asked to bo kept ns a prisoner, imm- 
shuh received him from Loo, and set him tree 
AA’hen they had got to T'ang-foAV. On their re- 
turn to the capital, he informed the marquis oi 
all the circumstances, saying also, “Kivan Jt- 
Avoo’s talents for government are tiian 

those of Kaou He [a minister and noble of Is ej. 
If you employ him ns your chief minister ano 
helper, it Avill be Avell.” The marquis folloAvea 
the advice.’ . „ 

3Par. 7. The Shoo Avas a river floAving from 
the north-east of Loo in a south-Avest direction- 


till it joined the Yuen after which their 

united stream floAved on to the Sze The 

object in deepening it aa’bs to make it a better 
defence against the attempts of Ts'e. Ihe 
critics are all severe against duke CliAvang tor 
wasting his people’s strength in this under- 
taking. It may haA^e been foolish and useless, 
but it Avould be hard to extract any condemna- 
tion of it from the text. 

[The student who is familiar Avith the 
lects and Mencius Avill noAv' haA'e recognized 
tAvo names Avell known to him ; — duke Hwan or 
Ts'e, the first and in some respects the greatest ot 
the five or leaders of the princes, and liAvan 
Chung, or KAvan E-avoo, his chief minister,] 


Tenth year. 


\x.iU X. 


Dl-KK (MIWAXG, 


85 


noi zik a ffi Hi - iff) mM ■& <& 

M III Sv ^ YT Si |g ®1 Rij H.H.^Sc X + 

5li T fiili «|? (Siii 4' m -M #. 

sg M T- z.^i i.M.e.¥ tt m m m. 


•tll.^ f;,|ill ^ W S-T-.f 3i g.i! r® -S ®(i 16 S: H.-ffe 

M't<« •*->*fi t. r>**« .I.IJ. .. Mr. .. * •* ». *Exs^ .*« . 


li 7i ii » 
si. ill. Hi ^ ®. 
^ i f 
^.I3.«|. 
•g « 

nM 


'•r’V •* ^ »r»*^ rrw 'f'r ^ ■ 1 *^1 

bj.B.m m it.fn 

m ^ mM ^ z.'Sf mM.AM m 

A r® S: S.PS ®i| si?- if if » It ^ 
H- S ^ S: 3£ BM 0.B.B.ffi..g. 
iff? M.Z.^ S:.^ ^J' ^J' n ^ 

^ ZM WM ZirnMAm 
^EM ^ B.T B.m * ^ .1. A 
A ffe.^.fi.ra B> 
<& * H.^.^- w.w mm-M^ 


m 


X. 1 In his tenth year, in spring, in the king’s first month, the 
duke defeated the army of Ts‘e at Ch*ang-choh. 

2 In the second month, the duke made an incursion into Sung. 

3 In the third month, the people of Sung removed [the State 

of] Suh. 

4 In summer, in the sixth month, an army of Ts‘e and an 

army of Sung halted at Lang. The duke defeated the 
army of Sung at Shing-k‘gw. 

5 In autumn, in the ninth month, King defeated the army of 

Ts‘ae at Sin, and carried Heen-iroo, marquis of Ts‘ae, 
back [to King]. 

6 In vinter, in the tenth month, an army of Ts*e extinguished 

T‘an. The i,iscount of T‘an fled to Keu. 


86 


«on lins "''*» »‘n X-oo, but It 

w-«, rtSi'f?;'’ “nd ti,„\"^™j’ Of a54''j;>-/ 

introducerl # ”? ,-^s'«ou 7i-„J*^® ^'-ns / 


S,?“ * "^SS'Vp’SoTi "“'’S: 

oald^ “Cfotl^®®*"^otVeJj?i *'® o*Icod 
fojJlied Kj5*!*OfG then/?^ -^Pose 


»»' fS'-fr" “0 s?ff ‘"<i"Tn"C‘/oS;; 

*““^e it a bejrond la satV'^^^l’^B, 

'oorelia,^'' «laioiig(fj?P»'proci^“? «<i 
iieartedn *”®"’ered cii*/>i^* ^ i’^i'Jt t 

®a«i, «7vr„fr®®s 


""‘fnlUhV 

’■"^ed in tb- „„ ’‘-ojild seen, /n f ter- 

tor n7r ®“"^- ^Vo ’'•itAin 

different verb, ^Jere the f 
^ tanir ^^SaiticationU 

I tbe dis,’ o/tsT^^^' ®'“Vic'e»ri8 re- 

ti>e allied foj^pf {'® i^^^tiScation 
Jjnps they bnrf^f moved frn^l r®‘^°”‘®cf, then 

ffone north to's1f^“*''*tod, and Por- 

rf‘P onpiei" T,*‘^P of sSar 


r “Cr ‘9 

£°1£T GS' “wofe 


f ~*“«ff-Jc‘ei 

r^riFpSS\s^5i“«‘ 

I "■"• investej T””,?””' f #6 

InOf^g nf tr* tlilfl' Oh<* 

Tan va *^'tJe ofWp’ tiw 

®®c.apitai 

-^®o®t from deferred _ 


-as t^e 0/ 1/« 

/ ^) r r “"*• ®®®-apitai 

Pii^. ^-•- 

y title of iin®®’ ®®“nff-Jc‘eu ^°°' 

time, but o iraa “®“^Ted 

f ^‘““ffC^^>'BN^^®aaantlvrefln *opped 

“‘•"ofKi»j.r,,(^y 


Vkxk XI. 


DUKE CIIWANQ. 


87 


'I'hu visco\»nt of Ts'oo nt this flrst njipoar- 
nnVo of till* House in tlio text was king Wttn 
(*• a son of 'Woo, by name llcung-tsze 

(f)!? «)• 

' t5in belonged to Ts'ne, and was in thcbordcrsof 
pres. dis. of .loo-yauB ‘I'-’P- doo-ning, 

lti>-i\an. llik’n-woo (Kuh has was tlic 
of II. xvii. fl. The style of the par. is 
unusual, the name of tlie State — King— being 
mentioned, and no ‘viscount of King,’ or ‘officer.’ 
Too finds in this an evidence of the still barbar- 
ous condition of King or Ts‘oo unacquainted 
wiili the forms of the States of ‘the Middle 
country.’ 

The Chuen says; — ‘The marquis GacofTs'ae 
Imd martieil a daughter of the House of Ch‘in, 
and the marquis of Scih had married another. 
When the latter lady 'Kwei of Seih.’ 

Kwei was the surn.vine of Ch'inJ on one occasion 
was going back to Seih, she passed by Ts‘nc, 
and the marquis said, ‘ She is my sister-in-law.” 
He detained her, therefore, and saw her, not 


treating her us a guest should be treated.- When 
the marquis of Scih heard of it, he was enraged, 
and sent a messenger to king Wttn of Ts‘oo, 
saying, ‘ A ttack me, and I will ask assistance 
from Ts'ac, when you can attack it.” Tha 
viscount of Ts‘oo did so; and in autumn, in the 
9th month, Ts‘oo defeated the army of Ts‘ae at 
Sin, and carried off the marquis, Ilcen-woo.’ 

I’ar. 6. T‘nn was a small State, whose lords 
were viscounts, within the circle of Ts‘e. Its chief 
town was 70 /c to the south-east of the dis. city 
of Leih-shing, dep. Tsc-nan. This is the first 
instance in the text of the ‘ e.xtinction ’ of a State. 
The term implies the destruction of its ruling 
House, the abolition of its sacrifices, and the ab- 
sorption of the pco])lc and territorj' by the pre- 
vailing Power. The Chuen says : — ‘ When the 
marquis of Ts‘e [i. c., the present marquis] fled 
from the State [see the Chuen on 'V'111.6], and 
was passing by T‘nn, the viscount showed him 
no courtesy. When he entered it again, and 
the other princes were all congratulating him, 
the viscount did not make his appearance. In 
winter, therefore, an army of Ts‘c extinguished 
T‘an, which had behaved so improperly. Tho 
viscount fled to Keii, having formerly made a 
covenant with the lord of it.' 


=f 


^ T 

7 iC 


Eleventh year. 


l-J'-a -. - yr - 


t 


3E I 

J. IE 
I* J!. 


3B 

•T-ira 


3® ^ =95 » K W W A.:R fCL.m.m. ■at w 

BB tr Z ^.3E 1i B,Z>+ 

•y*. i.'Wr At Lit TO. ASs jt=e /V 6a; t 

m AM 


RH= ^ ■& w ^ ^ ^ili 0 0 ^ 

M ® * * *. 

mBM-B.nm s.t bb ^ 

m X 0.0.».ii w ro 

0.it ^mzm% ZM m m 
©.K -ft 00 z,A 

s; M.'lf m:¥m ® z 

M zmM.^mM 

W.B.mM -fl' 5c n W.Ii u.iii:. 
^ ^ if # 0.|i^ ^ « 0 H -K 


gg THE CH‘UX TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CllUEX. BOOK IH. 

XI. 1 It was the [duke’s] eleventh, year, the spring, the king's 
first month. 

2 In summer, in the fifth month, on Mow-yin, the duke de- 
feated an army of Sung at Tsze. 

8 In autumn, there were great floods in Sung. 

4 In winter, a daughter of the king went to her home in Ts‘e. 


Par. 2. Tsze was in Loo, — in ilep. of Yen- 
cKow ; difift. from the Tsze in 1. 8. The Chuen 
says: — ‘Because of the action at Shing-k‘cw, 
Sung now- made an incursion into our State. 
The duke -u-ithstood the enemy; and pressing 
on them before they were formed in order of 
battle, he defeated them at Tsze.’ Then follows 
an explanation of various military terms: — ‘In 
all military expeditions, ichcn an action is Jcrccd 
before the enemy’s army is drawn up, the text 
says,...*' defeated such and such an army.” 
When both sides are drawn up, it is said,... 
“ fought,” “ a battle was fought.” Wlien there 
has been a great overthrow, the style is, ...“dis- 
gracefully defeated.” Wlien any one oif extra- 
ordinary valour is taken, it is said... .“vanquished 
so and so.” When the defeat is utter, it is 
-said, “took such and such an army.” Wlien 
the army of the capital is defeated, it is said, 
“The king’s army was disgracefully defeated in 
such and such a place.” ’ 

Par. 3. Comp. II. 1.6. Tlie Chuen says: — 
‘In autumn, there were great floods in Sung, and 
the duke sent a messenger with his condolences, 
saying, “Heaven has sent down excessive rains, 
to the injury of the millet for sacrifice. I feel 
that I must condole ivith you.” The answer 
•was, “I am as an orphan, and must confess my 
want of reverence, for which Heaven has sent 
down this plague. And moreover I have c.aused 
you sorrow, and beg to acknowledge the conde- 
scension of your message.” Tsang Wan-chung 
said, “Sung must be going to flourish. Xu and 


T'ang took the blame on themselves, and they 
prospered grandly. Kceh and Chow threw tue 
blame on others, and their ruin came swiftlv. 
Moreover when a State meets with calamity, it 
i« the rule for the prince to call himself an or- 
phan. With language showing anxious fear, 
and using the right name. Sung cannot he far 
from prosperity.” Afterwards it was kn^n that 
the answer was in the words of duke Cntcanys 
son Yu-yueh, and then Tsang Sun-tah said, 
“ This man deserves to be ruler. He has a heart 
of pity for the people.” ’ 

Pjir. I. Sec on 1. 3,4,7. Like his predecessor, 
duke Hwan of Ts‘c had sought a royal bnac, 
and the arrangements for the marriage lina, a 
before, been put under the management ol t 
marquis of Loo. Tso-she says that ‘ the ™^rq' 
of Ts‘e came to meet his bride, Kung Ke, whe 
Kung(^=^) is the honorary title by which 

the lady was known after her death. 

[The Chuen adds here: — ‘In fh® i,-. 
Shing-k‘cw, [in the 10th year] the duk^vith 

arrow called Kin Puh-koo [ -^ niigld 

be translated “ Steel Servant-lady,” but 
two characters are often written dicftly.J si 
Kan-kung Chang-wan, after which the spearman 
on the right, Chuen-snn, took him prisoimr. 
was subsequently released at the request ot 
people of Sung, but the duke of Snug noicn 
him, saying, “Formerly, I respected vou; 
since you have been the prisoner of Loo, I resp 
you no more.” This annoyed Ch‘ang-wan. J 


Twelfth year. 


n.:k. -k B ffi 

m life ■§• si 


Y» jir. XH, 


DUKE CIIWASG. 


89 


^ M I MM ^ 5.^ A t m 


XII. I 


> j III# |- »Tii'-*v J r 

■M ZM lisli.lfiff m~UZ:Bm-m A.iSi.g,. 

A Z « ZM ^ T ?J.iJ ^ e BMWik 

iJ K )«.!!&, ij'.iffi ® — -f- {.t.Bff i5{ H ^ ;S. 

In the [(]ukc*.s] twelfth year, in spring, 'in the king’s first 
motif h, duke [Vin’sJ third daughter, [who had been 
married to the marquis] of Ke, went [from Loo] to 
liwuy. 

It was summer, the fourth month. 

In autumn, in the eighth month, on Keah-woo, Wan of 
Sung murdered his ruler Tslieh, and his great officer 
K‘cw-muh. 

In winter, in the tenth month. Wan of Sung fled to Ch‘in. 


Pur. 1. Th>' iHnrriapo of thi? liulr, suclt ns it 
T-n*. wn< ciiti-nd in I. vii. 1 fco ilic note on 
vincij par. Wc Iiavc soon in wliat circum 
KTanocs tlic innniuis of Ko finally nimtulonvil 
iiis State (tv. 4). Ic.nvinR liis vifu-imiper «n- 
imritii. It wfliiM seem tliot the lady in (lie tc.vt 
had then relumed to l.oo; lint ns (lie innrqiils’ 
lirolluT lind I'cen admitted into Ts‘o wiili the 
city of llwny (lit. 4), and lliore maintained the 
sacrificos to Ids nnce.«lor.«, she considered that 
ns iier home, ami now uroeeeded to it. Her 
imshand was ]iroh.-ilily hy tins time nmorg the 
departed chiefs, who had their shrinc.s in the 
ancestral temple. Her conduct, from a Chinese 
point of view, was specially virtuous. The force 

of hcre«=‘wcnt to her homo,’ 

I’nr. .1. 'llio Chuen s.ays: — ‘Wan of Sung 
murderi-d duke Jlin in jrHnp-t.«ih; and. meeting 
K*ew-nmh in the pate, he killed him with a slap 
of his hand. lie then met (lie chief minister, 
Tuh. [see II. ii.l] on the wc.st of the eastern 
palace, and also killed him. lie raised Tsze-yew 
to the dukedom, wliile all the sons of fariiicr 
dukes fled to Seaon, e.vcept Yn-ynch [see the 
Chuen on XI. 3], wlio tied to Toll, to liesiege 
wldcli Xan-kung Xcw and Jiang-hwoh led a 
force.' 

The Wan lierc is, of course, the Xnn-kung 
Cliang-wan of the Ciiucn at the end of last 

year, the Chang ti'pre being probably his 

designation. K‘ew-mnh was tlie name of tlie 
officer who was killed, and soinecrifics, thinking 
it iicccssarv to account for his being mentioned 
merely bv' his name, say there was nothing 
gocil about him wortliy of commendation. The 
par. is one in point to show the futility of look- 
inp for praise or blame in such matters. The 
murderer i.s here mentioned by his name, and so 
also is the officer who died in attempting to 
pnnish him for his detfd. 

I’ar. 4. Tlic Chuen is: — ‘In the 10th month. 
Shull Ta-sin of Senou, and the descendants of j 


the dnkes Tac, Woo, Seuon, Muli, and Chwnng, 
with an army of Ts'aou, attacked the force that 
was liesmiinff Poh. They killed Xan-knng Nisw 
in the fiplit, and afterwards killed Tsze-yew in 
the capital, raising duke Hwan [theYu-yueli 
mentioned in two jircvious Chuen] in his place. 
Mllng-hwoli fled to Wei, and Xang-kung Wan to 
Ch'in. Wan took liis mother with him in a car- 
riage [a harrow] which Ito liimself- pushed along, 
ntmomplisliing all the journey [more than 70 
miles] in one day. The people of Sung requested 
Wei to deliver up Mfing-hwoh to them; and 
when there was an unwillingness to do so, Shih 
ICe-tszc said, ‘Kcfiise him not. Wickedness is 
the same all under heaven. If we protect tho 
man who has done wickedly in Sung, of what 
advantage will our protecting him he? To - 
pain a follow and lose a State ; to favour wick- 
edness and cast away friendship, is not wise 
counsel.’’ On this the people of Wei gave 
Ilwoh up. Sung also requested Nan-king Wan 
from Ch'in, offering a bribe at the same time. 
Tlie people of Ch'in employed n woman to make 
him drunk, and then hound him up in a rhino- 
ceros' hide. By the time that he reached Sung, 
his hands and feet appeared through the hido. 
The peoidc of Sung made pickle both of him 
and MBng-hwoli.’ 

Tlius CIiang-w.an paid the penalty of his 
gniit ; but as we learn this only from the Chuen, 
and it is not said in the text-^j^ 
the critics have much to say on the condemna- 
tion of tlie people of Sung, which the silence of 
the text implies! Then it does not mention 
the burial of duke Min whom Wim 

murflcrecl, and that is understood to indicate 
Confucius’ disapproval of him! It is snipris- 
Ing th.it the K-aiig-he editors should not have 
been able to emancipate themselves from the 
bondage in which the early interpreters of the 
Ch’un Ts'ew were held. 


vob. V, 


12 


90 


THE CIPUN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


book III. 


Thirteenth year. 


SfT A. A. 

T # J?,^.^.^F.A.A.fi. 
mm n # ^ Sic 


^ s 

^ A ^.Ik ^ 


m A 


ag m.± * 

^ 7^ S 
iL« ^ ^.0. 


XIII. 1 


3 

4 


In the [duke’s] thirteenth j’^ear, in spring, the marquis 
of Ts‘e, an officer of Sung, an officer of Ch‘in, an of- 
ficer of Ts‘ae, and an officer of Choo, had a meeting at 
Pih-hang. 

In summer, in the sixth month, an army of Ts‘e ex- 
tinguished Suy. 

It was autumn,' the seventh month. 

In winter, the duke had a meeting with the marquis of 
• Ts‘e, when they made a covenant at Ko. 


Par. 1. Pili-httHg was in Ts*e, — in the pres, 
dis. of Tung-o, dept. Yen-chow, The meeting 
here was called by the marquis of Ts‘e, as Tso- 
she says, ‘to settle the disorder of Sung.’ But 
it has a greater historical interest as the first of 
the gatherings of princes of States under the 
presidency of one of their number, who w.as ac- 
knowledged, or wished to be acknowledged, as a 
sort of viceroy. Hwan of Ts‘e was the first to 
attain to this position, and liis leadership dates, 
according to many, from this year, B. C. 680, 
though it could hardly be said to be generally 
recognized till two years later. Whether he 
had^ the king’s commission to undertake the 
pacification of Sung docs not clearly appear. 

Kuh-lcang reads ^ ^ instead of ^ 
though he believes that the marquis is really 
intended, and that the duke of Sung and the 
lords of Cli'in, Ts'ae, and Choo were the other 

or ‘men’ present at the meeting, the call- 
ing them ‘men’ and denuding them of their 
titles being the device of Confucius to condemn 
tbcir whole proceeding! The K‘nng-lie editors, 
maintaining the received text of yet agree 
with Kuh in interpreting all the other ^ of the 
prinees. Of course, if the rending bo re- 


tained, there can be no eensure in the ns 
n|)plicd to the otlicr princes, for II wan was the 
greatest sinner of tliciii all; and to intcqiret the 
word ns.«‘people,’ to indirnte that the presiden- 
cy of the States was now given by a kind of j 


‘general consent’ to Hwan, which is the view 
of Soo Ch‘eh 

mystifies the whole subject. We must take 
as in the translation; — see I. i.5, Il-xi. 1, 
cf al .; — as yet the other princes distnisted Ts‘e, 
and only sent ofiScers to the conference. 

Par. 2. Suy was a small State, within 
limits of Loo, and near to Shing 

whose chiefs had the surname of Kwei 
as being descended from Shun. Its chief toum 
was 30 fe to the north-west of the pres. dis. city 
of Ning-yang, dep. Yen-chow. Tso-she says 
that ‘no ofiicer had been sent from it to the 
meeting at Pih-httng, and in the summery a 
force from Ts‘e extinguished it, and occupied it 
with a body of men on guard.’ As to the trans- 
lation of here by ‘army,’ see on I. ii. 2. 

Par. 3. Sec I. vi. 3 ; et al. 

Par. 4. Ko was in Ts‘e, — in pres. dis. of 
Tung-o, dept. Yen-chow. Tso-she s.ays that 
‘ this covenant was the first step to peace be- 
tween Loo and Ts‘e.’ Kung-yang relates a 
story in connection with it, which has obtained 
general currency and belief ‘ When duke 
Cliwang was about to meet with Hwan, the 
oflieer Ts'aou [the Ts'aou Kwei of the Chuen 


than to live.” “In that case,” said Ts‘nou, “do 
you prove j'oiirself a match for the ruler, and I 
will prove myself a match for his inini.'ster.” 


Ybjir XIV. 


DUKE CinVANG. 


"Vfn* woll,'* ropUrtl the «luko; nml fho 
tuci'Jjjifr wnn lii-M. WJun tlio cliiko n«i’oiulo<l 
tlu’ nhar, Ts'nDU follitwni liiin witli Iiiii Rwiml 
in liii hnml. Kwan Chunj* mivnnccti, niui sniil. 
•* \\ hat tlu* inaniuiH minirt' ?” Ts-nou ro- 
j*lii'il, “ Oiir Titles an* ovortlm>wn, nntl our Inir- 
tlers ojijnvs'wl. Does your ruler jtol cuutihicr 
it?" "What thou (liK’s ho require?" the other I 
n’i»cat«\l, anil 'JV'non Baitl, '• Wo wisli to ask 
the rfsn'iittion of the country on the north of 
the Wfiu." Kwan Clmiifr lookwl at II wan, atul 
Bait!, '• Poes your lonlsliip jjraul the request ?” 
'Jlte nianiuis saitl, “ Yes." Ts'aoti tlien rcqtiest- 
T<1 a covenant, nntl tluke II wan descended frotn 


the altar, and made a covenant. When this 
was done, Js'nou threw away his sword, and 

i'** covenant like this 

n iRht Imyc been disrcRnnlcd. but duke Hwan 
did not break it. 'J’lie ofllccr Ts'aou might 
i have been regarded as his enenm but duke 
Ilwau did not n-sont his conduct. Tlio good 
faith of duke Ilwnn began from this covenant 
at Ko to be acknowledged tliroughout the kimr- 
doni.’ 

['Hie Chuen adds here:— ‘The people of Sung 
renounced the engagements at the meeting of 
Pill-hang.’] 


Fourieenth year. 

mi ^ 

SP.fw# W # A.^. 

A « 


^ ^ ^ ^ 3Eg ^ if 

JW ^ I aM 2 g # -h' 

m mm mm mm ^ mm m¥ 

I'M f 

^ I S'.l'i i'i't.f .1 ?.| 

mi' S S‘$'^ f ‘f ‘i 1 ^ s s ^ ^ 

w,ip S^iM^BfeA — ® 4i 15 h ra 

iA- f " 

■f-.m » -f- W ^ -ffl :#.ii ;jc H.il s 

^.A A ife ^ it A — ^ 

KA,mm.AKmMA9r¥^,m 


92 

•a. 


the CII‘UX TS'EWi WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK III. 


iia 


W p 


^ ;k MB, 


ii. JR 


z z 


XIY. 1 


- . « 


m 


■C ;g- 


*5 =. 


B ffij 0. 

f -b A. ^ 3t ... 

^ J^.m JM X m A. 


A, 


’ ' ^ «c • rv&«p X ^1 

[dulces] fourteenth year, in spring, an arniy of 

Ch‘in, and an arnw of Ts‘aou, in- 
vaded Sung. . J } 

Shen joined in the invasion of 


Sung. 

In autumn in the seventh month, King entered [the 
capital of] Ts‘ae. *• 

n ivintei^ tlie earl of Slien had a meeting with the inar- 

the duke of Sung, the marquis of Wei, 
and the earl of Ch‘ing, at Keuen. 

The answer was, “ Wlicn men arc full of fear, 
their breath, as it were, blazes up, and brings such 
tilings.^ Alonsters and monstrous events ttike 
their rise from men. If men afford no cause for 
them, they do not arise of themselves. AVlicn 
nien abandon the constant course of virtue, then 
monstrosities appear. Therefore it is that there 
are monsters and monstrous events.” 

^ entered Ch'ing, he put 
Foo Hiia to death, and sent a message to Yuen 
Fan_[sM the Chuen, after I. v. 2. Tan had taken 
a pnucipal part in the establisliiug of Tsze-e], 
saying, “Foo Hen was divided in his allegiance 
to me, and for such a case Chow has its regu- 
lar penalty ; — ^ho has suffered for his crime. To 
u restored me and had no wavering in 
their allegiance, I promised that they should be 
great officers of the first class; and now I wish 
®®^sider the matter with you, uncle. When 
I fled from the State, you had no words to speak 
for me in it; now that I have re-entered, you 
^aiu have no thought about me : — I feeldispleas- 
TO at this.” Yuen Fan replied, “Your ancestor, 
duke Hwan, gave command to mj' ancestor to 
take charge of the stouc-shrincs in the ancestral 
temple.^ Wliile the altars of the land and grain 
had their lord fin the ruling earll, what greater 
treachery could there have been than to turn 
one s thoughts to another out of the State ? So 
tong as he presided over those altars, among nil 
the prople of the State, who was there that was 
not his subject? Tliat a subject should not 
have a double heart is the law of Heaven. 

1 ^-e held the earldom for fourteen years 
Old not those who took measures to call in 
show a divided allegiance? Of 
the chil^n of duke Chwang, your father, there 
are still 8 men ; if they were all to proffer oflices, 

®hd other bribes, so ns thereby to 
acconnihsh their object, what would become of 


This invasion was in consequence of 
the fact mentioned in the last Chuen. Hoo 
Gan-^oh says that the X I'ore indicates that 

fe^ bS\he 

the K ang-he editors demur to sneb n 
cp as appUeable to aU casS^7 tim Sfo? 

A- ^ Se adds that for 20 years the marquis 

tion they show to be false. No doubt, the A 
here indicates tliat the princes of tbo 

A Ar« 2, TIjg Gflrl of Slion — s«> cm T q 

at Ta-lifg, he eSred and 
you let me eo T said, “If 

Ch'ing ’H and hie ♦ * jT' ' a son of 

S n and his two sons, and restored duke 

oatSdo,ad‘ inside and one 
fate of the capital till the‘!,fc- 1‘" * southern 
It was six vo.vrs jiffnV.i • msulc one was Idlled. 

The duke [of Loo] lieard"of*tl*^*’^® entered, 
and asked Shin Seh sa“S. taiounistanco, 

twn coiDp yv.— .i.-.’ - *u„, y/osT«//i*Mo» — 


^>'*ue'~sce X. 6. The Chuen s.iys:— 

marquis Gac [Ileen-woo of X. 5] of Ts‘ac, 

tion comcVn7tZ't’ r^ora « Sin. talked with the 

f that Bupcnuatural appearance admiringly about the lady K woi, 

11 ranee, e/rtc wary, «s of Seili. The viscount went to 


Ykak XV. 


DUKE CinVANG. 


S'ih. mill cntorwl tlio citv with the npiilianiTs 
iif A fon<t to viilcrtuin tlio nmnini!), niul took 
tliL' o|i]><irttin!t,v to i’Ntini;ii!!>1i tho State, lie 
tiHik tlio ninniuis’s Aifo back with liini to 
whero ?he bore to him Too-paou mul mi- 
d'rr jtori, trf.t) ajlrnrardx kinjr Ch'iiij'; hut 
nUd.it tiw fhe iipvor ijiake a wonl. The viscount 
A-kinp the reason ol her i-ilcncc, slio replied, 
•‘It has licen iny lot to servo two husbands. 
’J liouch I have not been able to die, liow should 
1 ventim* to siH’.ak?" Tlic viseouut, considering 
that the mnn)uisof Ts‘ne had liccti tiie occasion 
of his extingui^hing Seih, procecticd to invade 
’J's‘ne [to please tiie Indy] ; mul in nutunin, in 
the gth month, Ts‘oo entered thr capital ^Ts'ae. 
The sui>erior man may say that in the case of the 
marquis Gae of Ts'.ae we have an illustration of 
what is said in tho Hooks of Shang [SItoo, IV. 
vii. rt.i. 12] about tho easy progress of wioked- 


93 

I ness, that it is "liko a fire blazing out in a plain, 
whicli cannot bo approached, and still less can 
! be beaten out.'” 

Par. 4. Kcuon was in "Wei,— in the pres, 
dop. of Tung-ch'ang ^ ), SImn-tung, 20 

le to the cast of the city of Puh Cliow 

TsO'She says that this meeting was held ‘ because 
of the submission of Sung.’ Prom this time, 
the position of the marquis of Ts‘c may be said 
to liave been fully acknowledged by all tho 
States of what was the then ‘China proper.’ 
The proseneo of the carl of Shen, the king’s re* 
prescnlative, gave the royal sanction to his 
claim to be the leader of the other princes, and 
the lonis of Sung, IVci, and Ch'ing, who had 
formerly resented his ambition and stood aloof 
from him, now gave in their adhesion. 


Fifteenth year. 


-f 

nMi^Ax A I 


Ax 


ro ns 15 S(i. * ^ m., 

z A « r • 


% 

i 


-ft 

k yfC jLZft 

flS.I* 


i. at 0 . * 

; #. + 


XV. 1 In the [duke’s] fifteenth year, in spring, the marquis of 
Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the marquis of Ch‘in, the 
marquis of Wei, and the earl of Ch'ing, had a meet- 
ing at Keuen. 

2 In summer, [duke Hwan’s] wife, the lady Keang, went to 

Ts‘e. 

3 In autumn, a body of men from Sung, one from Ts‘e, and 

one from Choo, invaded E. 

4 A body of men from Ch'ing made an inroad into Sung. 

5 It was -svinter, the tenth month. 


Par. 1. Wo have the same princes here, ns 
in the meeting at the same place a month or 
two before, with the addition of the marquis of 
Cb'in, Tso-she say.s that that now ‘for the first 
time Ts‘e was pa, or lender of the States,’ which 
is true in so far as the representative of the 
king had returned to Chow, and without his 
presence, the other princes acknowledged tho 
authority of Hwan. Tho carl of Ch'ing here, 
and at the previous meeting, was, of course, 
Tull, or duke Le. 


Par. 2. Here again the restless and unprin- 
cipled WSn Keang appears. Wlint now took 
her to Ts'e we do not know, but her going there 
was contrary to rule. The daughter of one 
State, married into another, might at certain 
times revisit her parents ; but, after their death, 
she could only send a minister to ask after the 
welfare of her brothers and other relatives. 

Par. 8. For here Kung-yang has 
It is the same as ^ in V. 3, and was af terwards 


94 


THE C1I‘UN TS-EW. “^nTn THE TSO CHL'EN. 


soos nL 


known as ‘Uttlo Choo (yJ^ 5^I)V Tso-sho ' 
says that *tho princes invailed E in the interest • 
of Sung.* Sung is entcrcvi before TsS.\ as Iving ' 
the principal party in the expeiiition, whicii 
moreover was a small one. Tiiero is nothing in 
this circumstance inevusistent. as some think, 
with the presidency of the marxinis of Ts'e. ; 

Par. 4. ^Vh^lc Sung was engage\l with the ' 
expedition against E. Ciring to^'k advantage of ' 
the opportunity to make a ntid upon it (Tso-she - 


PpI ^ fflj -ffi 

owed his first elevation to the e-arlcom to Scar, 
and sub.'C<iuently the pc-sition which hei^— - 
tainctl in Leih : but ho I-nd never teen reatiV ca 
gooti terms with duke Chwsag; and now t-at 
he was dead, and the ruling deke haa h:s nanci 
full, he took the onportunlty to make the inrraa 
in tlio text. His doing so was^ contrarv me 
oblignticns under whi;^ both Snag snu Cc’nu 
stead to Tsv. 


Sivitcnth ijicar. 

c' 


W W ffi if # T = ^ «5 S K 


t.6iB A S. W 

# -ft 

$ K ^ 

jfe S S tin 


MMM ^ iU mffi 
^ 


a 

+ 


1 k 


XTI. 1 


C) 


O 

t 


m ^ ^ ^ rm M 

a* « M # 5 # 

S) ii + ? KS. A» 

^ ^ iL 

■ ts” .H ^ ^ 

s m 

M ^ 

It vras the [duke's] sixteenth yesr. the spring, the king* 
first month. ” ’ ' ^ . 

In summer, a body of men firom Song, one fioni 
and one from "VVeL invaded Chnng. 

In aunimn. Kins: invaded Gh'ms. 


“IM. 


T3 C ) 


ft 

* 


Year XVI. 


DUKE CHWANG. 


quis of CIi‘in, the marquis of Wei, the earl of Ch‘ing, 
the baron of Heu, the earl of Hwah, and the viscount 
of T‘ang, when they made a covenant together in Yew. 
5 K‘ih, viscount of Choo, died. 


Par. 2 This expedition was ‘ on account of 
Sung,*— to punish Ch'ing for its inroad on Sung 
in the previous autumn. Sung, ns in the attack 
on E, commanded in the expedition, and its 
men are therefore mentioned before those of Ts'e. 

Par. 3. Ts ‘00 or King here takes another 
step in advance, and comes more tlirenteningly 
near to the States of the 'Middle kingdom.’ 
Ch'in, Ts'ne, Heu, and Ch'ing lind all to bear 
the brunt of its ambitious inroads; and from 
this time Ch'ing especially beaime the field of 
contention between it and Ts'e with the other 
Powers dominntiug in the north. The reason 
for its present invasion of Ch'ing is given by 
Tso-she:— ' When the e.arl of Ch'ing entered the 
State from Leili [sec the Chuen after XIV. 2], 
he was dilatory in announdng the thing to Ts'oo, 
in consequence of which Ts'oo this autumn in- 
vaded Cli'ing, and penetrated as far as Leih: — 
because of the e.arl's want of the proper courte- 
6y«* 

[The Chuen adds:— ‘Tlie earl of Cli'ing set 
himself to deal with those who had taken part 
in the disturbances connected with the death of 
Yung Kew [see the Chuen on II. xi'. 4]. In the 
9tli month be put to death the Kung-tsze Oh 
[there must be a mistake here either of the name 

or of for ^ .^] and out off tlie 

feet of K'eang-ts'oo [these men had been par- 
tiziins of Chne Cliung]. Kung-foo Ting-shuh 
[<^5^ dan-name ; the designation ; 

the hon. title] fled to Wd, but after 3 years 

the earl restored him, saying, “Kung-shuh [bro- 
ther of duke Chwang, the Kung-shuli Twan of 
the Chuen, I.i.3. He was grandfather to this 
Kung-foo Ting-shuh] must not be left without 
posterity in Ch'ing.” He made him enter the 
citvin the 10th month, saying that it was "a 
good month,” with reference to ten as the com- 
pletion of the numerals. The superior man 
may say that K'eang-ts'oo was not able to de- 
fend his feet [a poor joke on his punishment; 
meaning that he should have from the 
State]. 

Par. 4. This was no doubt an important 
gathering, and might be called the inaugur.ation 
of the msurquis of Ts'e’s presidency. We have 

here the phrase ^ ‘they covenanted to- 
gether,’ which has not occurred before; and the 
critics make great efforts to deteniiine its me.'m- 
ing. Kung makes it= ‘covenanted 

with a common desire;’ to w^ich Kuh-ieang 
adds that the common object was ‘ to honour 
Chow.’ Tso-she siiys that the meeting was 
held with reference’ to the settlement of the 

affairs of Ch'ing and its submission 

whidi makes Too define the phrase as= 

‘ the submission of all who had had a different 
mind,’ i.c.. had been nnwilliiig to acknowled^ 
the authority of. Ts'e. IVlicro the meaning is 
thus undetcrinined, the safe plan is to keep to a 


literal rendering. The contracting parties were 
numerous; they united in acknowledging the 
presidency of the marquis of Ts'e, and under- 
took with him to support the House of Chow. 
Yew, where the meeting was held, was in Sung, — 

in the pres. dis. of K'aou-shing (4^ 

Kwei-tili. Kung-yang reads before and 
certainly we must understand that it was duke 
Chwang himself who was present on the part of 
Loo. Too, indeed, supposes that the absence of 
any subject before "1^ indicates tliat the re- 
presentative of Loo was some officer of inferior 
rank Gan-kwoh and 

others, believing that the dnke was present, 
think that the was purposely left out to 
conceal the fact. 

Up to tills par., Wei has always taken pre- 
cedence of Cii'in, where their marquises were 
mentioned together, but here and subsequently 
Chfin is enumerated first. It is supposed that 
the marquis of Ts'e made this arrangement in 
honour of Shun, whose descendants hdd Ch'in, 
and to mark his sense of the importance of the 
State ns a bulwark, though small in itsdf, 
against the encroachments of Ts'oo. Hwah 
here is difft. from the small State of the same 
name in IH. 5. This was an earldom, whose de- 
scendants had the Chow surname of Ke 

Its chief town was Eei 20 le south of the 

pres. dis. city of Yen-sze, dep. Ho-nan. Be- 
tween ^ and Kung and Kuh 

both liiive 1^ 

Par. 5. This K'ih was the name of E-foo, 
lord of Choo, who appears in I.i. 2. At that time 
Choo was only a State attached to Loo. Here 
its chief appears as a viscount. The only rea- 
sonable account of this is that given by Too Yu, 
that the marquis of Ts'e had obtained from the 
king a patent of nobility for Choo. Kuh-leang 
seems to think, absurdly enough, that the en- 
nobling was from the pencil of Confucius I 

[Tlie Chuen here calls our attention to the af- 
fairs of Tsin; — 'The king sent the duke of 
Kwoh to confer on the e.nrl of K'cuh-yuh the 
title of marquis of Tsin, — to maintain only 
one aniiy.’ 

‘Before this, duke Woo of Tsin had attacked 
E, and captured' Kwei-choo [E was in Chow; 
and the city held by Kwei-choo, a great officer 
of the court], whom, however, he let go on the 
petition of Wei Kwoh. But for this service, 
Kwoh got no acknowledgment, .and he therefore 
raised an insurrection, and said to the people of 
Tsin, “ Attack E with me, and take its lerriton-.’ 
Accordingly he attacked it with an army ’of 
Tsin. and kilIo<l Kwei-choo. Ke-foo. duk’c of 
Chow, fled to the Stote o/'K woh. and it was not till 
after the accession of king Hwuy that he was 
restored.’] 


^ T«SO 
rViTU 'TUr- 

ScxcntccnO^'^ 

'a'lltil,! » 


a # ^ 0. 

It 

I ® ViS A ^ 0Cv „„. in spriOo' , 

' T tVieVi*®®, riien ot^"' ^V'''®'’® Inefto'*^ 

f\Ve ma^^® „rof T;® ® '" ® aI W® ®®“ 

* ?niere ^vev® 

, -1. Tl-te ®'“ ?'■? Cl>''''S. ''^fcS»\‘'’'”'“S«»"''’-. 


2 

3 


5®e-e '’y ^ office. ^so-s^e says iM gtoX'OP''^'^^ . T-s-c. . aeef.-^® 

ca Wtn , .g ucne. ^so ^.^urt \ of T-® gpecies - spe- 

,oi7.ed * ^ga s \iccattse^®\ XiOO -ffiiB »n® .^g aesci'*® teici*^ 

«e. artfvif \ i luh .,.~«icisf 


tetia *“ 

it* tot ''"‘“:i.w^”'- \ »« “' r.!i 4^- ® •rui<>'‘®“' ?*• 

to let 'Virti se®®'\ Ts'e \ meant fhe a- it ^tjont 

la fn °"^%Tppea«A "tYie ^vitvtet tt. ^lag^e- 

vntioned wen ^n.g people, » ^ ^s'e \ time of ^ „r a variety oi . a P 

^Went Vi* ^''ciinln saysA out red deer, s ^^le 

t^eenieU °. oribed. ■&ung-f®^’ \ apP®"’’^®^ V, otbets ^ •, tecord®^* 

■“'T^® ®'^^o^mdtile S®f^"itiie men of\ oftbeirePP 

Jdo 


i'EAl! XVIU. 


^ « S'® • J m'S‘3 ^M'^‘% S t f .is © 


T 3 r 

I 

e? 


5»«# 

^•^•5 60.1 Ilf 

w •.# ® B 

XVlJl -X ^ ^ • s*- ^ -K,.- /g ^ T [7 

1 In the rduteM 1- . ^ MM A « ff 

^ autumn thej-e v ^ o 

^ if «'as T^-intp,. *7 
%fe which is here *• ^ 


v^rii > 7 \ 

^ #■ i 

f‘W ^ li£,m a 

jmsSSa 

Bill 1 B,M 4 h 

M ih ^ 

f. in 


Bwur.'J capital. sj,e '7,0?, “‘’“c ac- / “deeded to sunee^t "Bti 

i I^-o c,« *, ^ ®«st be at „7 

^^g:mi4smsss}^ 


98 


THE CIHUN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK III. 


Nineteenth year. 


a WBjE +' 
-ffe » A » ^ 0 J?.# 

iJ A.* TJ 3 . A 

iP. Kim -& iK. 


E.B 


ZMM g £ f .,f •© 
K «.» ^ ^ S B m.MM « f f §.^ g4 
fr.!ll.5g 3E ?fij -f- A «.i f 

fi M 2 tA m w « i ? f S‘ 
'(U.M mm ^ ^ ti ^ # t.? ± 


^ ^ 

A 
^ A 


ft.W 
® 'fft 
615 i. 

6ffi :^. 

XIX. 1 

2 
3 


4 

5 


® 5< iS: 3E ti ta .e es 


,_ . . „.. BB 

m z 

■7" ffii i 'fe,'? K M )i1 ^ 

^ ffi il.ffi ?A1 

« ^ ^ Bn ^ 

^ ^ ^iJ ^ 

11 ' (r’s 

It was the rduke’s'l nineteenth year, the spring, the 
first month. 

It was summer, the fourth month. ^ 

In autumn, Keeh, a son of duke [Hwan], was escortinffi.^® 
Keuen a daughter to accompany to the harem the 
of an officer of Ch‘in, when he took occasion to makl^ 
covenantwiththemarquis of Ts‘e and the dukeof Sun|j6* 
[Duke Hwan’s] wife, the lady Keang went to Keu. l 
In winter, a body of men from Ts‘e, a body from Sung,' 
and one from Ch‘in, invaded our western borders. 


ia « EE -f- 
IR B ^ 


h.P’ 5 [After par. 1, 

tno last Chucn is continiiccl : — ‘ In sprint, the 
viscount of Ts'oo mot them, and sustained a 
Rreiit defeat at Tsin ; and on his return to </ic 
citjf, 1 iih-k‘cuen [the porter of the gate] refused 
to admit him. On this he proceeded to attack 
ri wnng, and defeated its army at Tseoh-ling. As 


he was returning, ho fell ill at Tseaou, and died 
in summer, on Kfing-shin, in the 6th moiitn. 
Yuh-k‘enen buried him in Seih-shih * 

he killed himself, and svas buried in T cen- 
hwanp. , 

‘ Before this, Yuh-k'euen had addressed a venc- 
ment remonstrance to tlic viscount, and wnc 


VrAU XX. 


DUKE CinVAXG. 


99 


tl:c vi?count ironUl not follov it, ho proceeded } ®|j. ‘ when he c.'ime to Keuen,’ and not 
ti> threaten him with a we.'spon. tor fear of j -* 

which tlie other aJoptwl his adnee. Vuli- i Tliat phrase sliows that all the escorting 
kMion said. ‘‘I h.ave frichtcnctl my ruler with a j was to Kcuen.’ 

woap^m ; no crime could be greater.” He then ! With resard to the action of Keeh's leaving or 
cut otr his own feet, llie i>eople of Tsoo made j delavins the object of his Journev. and msikinw 
liint their grand porter, and stylctl him T-ae-pih, j a covenant with Tsv and Suns, of course he had 
m.aking the oflice .also horedit.ary to his descend- no authoritv for it frtim duke" Chw.an"-. Great 
ants. Tlie superior man Arill s.ay that Yuh- i officers, however, had a discrctionsin" power in 
kSJuen lovcvl his prince. He rcmonstratwl with • such matters. If thev could do cbod service to 


is much difference of opinion about the par. j j,nd a subsequent Ansit to Ecu are veiy^ 


filthv. 


Who the ladv was. and who “the man of Ch'in.’ 

was, are questions grevatlv apWted. My own j chuen has here a marmtive about trou- 

view mjhemnslatmn^i^tha^_dcfe^^^^ | bl« at court Before this, a ladv Taou had 


park for 
was near 


- • i tooktheganicnof WeiKwoh toniakeap: 

opimon that ‘the man o. Clmn wm riot Ujo j the mansion of P&n Pih wa 

maiqms, but same one o. inferior raiik. Clnng . royal palace, he o/so appropriated it; and 

Iv. however, thinks that some great Hwse of j |jg took their fields as irt// from Tsze^kfin. 
Keuea was ma^ymg a daughter to an officer of j Kwei, and Clien-feo. keepins back tr.ore- 
Ch‘in. and that iveeh is hero escorting a daughter , jj,g allowances of Ids cook.’ Because of 


escorted to the State from which the wife pro- i the Soo clan.’ 

per was to bo mamed, riiat they niight foll^ j t jj, autumn, the five great officers raised the 
her from thence : and the words of the text, j standard of Tsze-thiy to supersede the king; 

“ to Kcuen*’ seem to determine in ; but they were irasuntcssful, and fled to Wun, 
favoi^of Ch-inc*s interpretation. Ting-tah. in- | ;^J>ae the chirfof the Soo dan fl^ to Wei with 
deed, to meet tile view of Rung and Kuh, s.ays ! 

Keuen KMonged to Wei; that Chdk wks 1 
marrving a ladv of the House of Wei; that j tmv on the thror^J 

Koch wls escorting his charge to Wei'; and ! The reasons for this confed^tion 

that when he got to' Kcuen. he halted with her. • 

oiai. T>„. jf. . 1 ,- Chen of Ts'ing. when he fled from Ts-e. fiVIl. 

and m.".de a covenant, as related. But if the , ... „ ■ v 


and ma 

case had been thus, we should have read 


S), and Eotnething connected with the proceed- 
■ iugs of Keeh, in the autumn of this year. 


Twentieth year. 


M 'm ^ ^ ^ i: 

® S il S R.'®.S.S.^ M S I ^ ® © 


■& 3 ja.m is * 

m -4..^ BM.m sab m.s b. 

A s {S #F ^ ife ^ ^ S J # 

a ^ A -ffl ^ + 

-S.A.il./t i 15! t% ^ 


THE CIPUN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK III. 


100 

XX. 


1 


2 

3 

4 


In the [duke’s] twentieth year, in spring, in the king’s 
second month, [duke Hwan’s] wife, tlie lady Keang, 
went to Keu. 

In summer, there was a great disaster from fire in Ts‘e. 
It was autumn, the seventh month. 

In winter, a body of men from Ts‘e smote the J ung. 


Par. 1. See on the 4th par. of last j’ear. 

[The Chuen here resumes the narrative in- 
troduced after par. 4 of last year : — ‘ This spring, 
the earl of Ch'ing attempted to liarmonize the 
royal House, hut without success; hut he seized 
Chung-foo of Ten. In summer, he brought the 
king back with him, who took up his residence 
in Leih. In autumn, the king and the earl 
entered into Woo, from which they surprised 
Ch‘ing-chow, brought away the valuable articles 
from it, and returned to Leih. In winter, king 
Chwang's son T‘uy feasted the five great officers, 
when all the royal music and pantomimic dances 
were performed. The earl of Ch'ing heard of it, 
and said to Shuh of Kwob, “This lhavehcard, that 
when sorrow or joy is unseasonable, calamity is 
sure to come. How king Chioantfs son T‘uy is 
singing and dancing as if he were never tired ; 
— ^it is being joyous over calamity. When the 
minister of Crime executes the penalty of death, 
the ruler does not have his table fully spread; — 
how much less would he dare to be joyous over 
calamity 1 What calamity could he greater 


than to take violent possession of the king’s 
throne? Wlicn one, in a time of cnKimity, 
forgets to bo .sorrowful, sorrow is sure to come 
to liiin. Wliy sliould we not restore the king?” 
Tlie duke of Kwoh said, “ It is what I desire 
to rfo.”3 

Par. 2. Sec n.xiv.4. Kung-yang, indeed, 
says that ^ ‘ cmndation 

/. c., tliere was a great plague afifecting peoples 
bealtli in Ts‘c. But this meaning of can- 
not be applied to the other passages in the Clas- 
sic where the term occurs. 

Par. 4. Kuh-lcang has ^ instead of 
Tlie two characters miglit easily be confounded ; 
but the received rending is to be followed. Loo 
had been troubled with these Jung two years 
before; — the attack on them now by Ts'e was 
probably intended to conciliate Loo. The mar- 
quis of Ts‘e had certainly been rather remiss 
in his position of pa. He ought pot to have 
allowed Ch'ing to take the lead in supporting 
king Hwuy against the rebels in Chow. 


Twenty-first year. 


PB 


A 


3S. 


n. 

% 

n. 


vkau xxir. 


DUKE CnWAXG. 


101 


XXI. 1 It Avas the [il like’s] tAventy-first year, the spring, the 
king’s first month. 

C* 

2 In summer, in the fifth month, on Sin-A-e\A^, Tuh, earl of 

Ch‘ing, died. 

3 In autumn, in the sc\-enth month, on MoAV-seuh, [duke 

IlAA'an’s] Avife, the lady Keang, died. 

4 In Aviuter, in the tAA’elfth month, there AA’^as the burial of 

duke Lc of Chfing. 


I’nr. If. Continuing tlic Cliucn nflcr tlic 1st 
p.ir. of Inst year, Tso-slic says: — “In tlic duke's 
Ulst year, accordinnly, in spring, they [the carl 
of Cli'ing and Slinh of KavoIi] plcdgoil each 
other at Me; and in summer, they together nt- 
taekcil the royal city. Tlic carl entered, along 
Avith the king, at the south gate, and Shuh of 
KavoIi entered at the northern, Avhen they killed 
Tsro-l‘uy and the five great oflicers. The carl 
of Ch‘ing fcastcil the king in the apartment on 
the Avest of the gatcAvay Avith the representa- 
tions of the penal code. There Aras a complete 
scrricc of music, and the king gaA-o him Avhnt 
had formerly hecn granted to duke AVoo, — all 
the territory castAvard from Doo-Iaou. The 
carl of Yuen said, “The carl of Ch'ing is fol- 
loATing the bad example which he condemned in 
Tssc-tHiy. He also Avill meet Avith calamity.” 
In the 6th month, duke Lo of Ch'ing died.’ 

On Tuh Avho here passes off the stage, Chang 
Heidi 5 a ■uTitcr of the 13th cent.) says 

—‘Tuh Avas only the son of duke Chwang by 
a concubine, yet after Ids father’s death he 
snatched the earldom from HAvuh; and tho’ 
driven out fot a time by Chae Chung, he enter- 
ed again into Lcih, and in the end made him- 
self master of the State. Thus it is that Ave 
liaA-e no statement of Hwuh, A7o, and E’s hold- 


ing the earldom, because they could not keep 
it, and the different stjde about Tuh is under- 
stood to indicate that, first and last, he Avas able 
to maintain himself. Here then Avas a man, a 
usurper and a fratricide, and the Ch'un Ts'eiv 
calls him ruler from his beginning to his end, 
and records morcoA'cr, however, hoAv he died in 
his dignitj* : — ^it is in this Avay that it shows how 
mean men are permitted to get their Avills, re- 
bellious villains come to a good end, the royal 
laws hai-e no course, and the ivorld is thrown 
all into confusion!* 

Par. 3. Tlie reader is not sorry to have done 
Avith Wan-kcang. 

[Tlie last Chuen is here completed: — ‘The 
king made a progress of survey of the fief of 
Kwoh, Avhen the duke made a palace for him in 
Pang. The king granted to Kwoh the territory 
of Ts‘ew-t8‘euen. AVhen the earl of Ch'ing 
feasted the king, the king had given him a 
queen’s large girdle with the mirror in it. The 
duke of Kwoh now begged for something, and 
the king gave him a drinking cup. This was 
tlie first occasion of the hatred which the earl 
of Ch'ing [dnke Wan, son of Tuh] cherished 
against the king. In Avinter, the king returned 
from Kwoh.] 

Par. 4. Something had occurred to make 
the burial be delayed beyond the regular time. 


Twenty-second year. 


^ tgf jS 7^0 A 


da 


I 


A 


102 


THE CII‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK III. 


T ^ flii It m M f ,* 

^j'l ^ 5c ^ ± t # 

s 11 ^ it * %,T' ^ M ^ ^ 0. 

# 5c.±.;S ^ M A ^ 1' # M F4 * 

t; #f a H.S -f- 1 ^ ^ g.+ 

H A ± -tfc.Ji S iE s « BSkMMt M =■ 

^ hM S iE !5Cltt #.« fe IS fil .« % 

# A.^- H 0 -tfe.ffl.W.i: a.S Jig ^ % ii; It 

i^.R H ?il ® a ^ rS t A 

H S lit * ^ T ;S.:^ I^.«F a f f 
itlll^W^SAKfl^jE Hit 

* T 9^M 0.» nmM- 

" " 0.|; 

M ±.a ;S lit II tt A # S S 


I 1 > 

^ L 

* ® 1-^ • *i— I < ■•« -« ■. 1 'Vm '— - ✓ ^ .r^ "J 'il I ■ . 

^ W Ui ^ A ^ 

H=fe Jl^ •±Jm . f _ — - A rr-^ » k r _t-k -Urt -TTt^ — IlSt 


3C 


i ^ m.^.fij Ji ^A mzAmz 


w- w — r7U •• ^ « •''j • ■ " f * ^ t ^ 


ZUA 


... ^ ;2: 0.a ffi f 2: 

tr #.s S ra ^ a M li.E *• 
•ifc.A # ig #.s i.ja :R.iift 5S h s a i t 
" 1 « W.ifn ffi itt # It a » * a 


».? «.®: # ^ S 


® ^ » SR ^ ^ )L ^ 

^ ;s ^ ^ <a- ^ 

i& -^.a ja a # -gl * i® ir 
A lU $ A M #.|1{ ;e M ^ ® 


XXII. 1 In his twenty-second year, in spring, in the king’s first 
month, [the duke] pardoned [all] inadvertent offences 
however great. 

2 On Kwei-ch‘ow we buried our duchess, Wan Keang. ^ ^ 

3 The people of Ch‘in put to death Yu-k‘ow, son of their 

marquis. 

4 It was summer, the fifth month. 

5 In autumn, in the seventh month, on Ping-shin, the 

duke made a covenant with Kaou He of Ts‘e in Fang. 

6 In winter, the duke went to Ts‘e, and presented the 

marriage-offerings of silk. 


Par. 1. Ill the Shoo, II. i. 11, -we rend that it 
was a rule with Shun, ^ ^ ‘that 

inadvertent oaences, and those caused by mis- 
fortune, were to he pardoned,’ and how far he 
carried it, we learn from iL 12, ^ 

• You panlon inadvertent offences, however 
great.’ Chwang, therefore, appears here to have 


done nothing more than was sanctioned bj t 
example of Shun. I do not know wlij 
critics should find such fault with li«n_ as y 
do. Kuh-leang followed by Kca Kwei, tliinKs 
the grace was done at this time, as some atone- 
ment for the wickedness of Wan Keang, t ic 
duke’s mother, who was about to be bunci 
For Eung has . 


Yi:ak XXII. 


DUKE CHWAJfG. 


103 


Par, 2. ^ — sec Ana, XVI. xiv. 

According to the rule laid do^m there >j|^ 

was the style for the wife of the prince of 
n State used by tlie people in speaking of her 
to the people of other States, takes the 

place of as the entry here is in the annals 

of Loo itself. The maranis being styled duke 
after death, I liave styled his wife duchess. 
Keang, we know, was her surname, as being of 
the House of Ts‘c; 'VViln was the honorary title 
given to her on account of her beautj- and ac- 
complishments, no account being taken of her 
extraordinary wickedness. 

Par. 3. For Knng and Kuh read 

The real killer of Yu-k‘ow was liis father,— 
‘duke Senen,* the reason for the deed being 
unknown. It is supposed that the statement in 
the text is according to the form in which the 
announcement was made to Loo, — to conceal 
the nature of the affair. 

The Chiicii says:— ‘In spring, the people of 
Ch‘in killed the amr^/w’s eldest son, Yu-fc‘ow, 
on which the Kung-tsze Hwan and Chuen-sun 
fled to Ts‘e, and the latter thence to Loo. The 
marquis of Ts-e wanted to make King-chung 
[the designation of the Kung-tsze Hwan] one 
of his high ministers, but he declined, saying, 

‘ Your subject is here an e.\ile. I am fortunate 
if 1 obtain your forgiveness, and enjoy the 
advantage of your indulgent government. Tliat 
von panlon my want of practice in the lessons 
of instruction, and hold me guiltless of crime, 
and remove me from a life of toil;— this is yoitr 
lordship’s kindness. AVhat 1 obt.ain is much,— 
should I dare to disgrace a high position, and so 
accelerate the slanders of other ofiScers ? Let 
me die if I do not decline t/ie honour you propose. 
The ode says [this ode is not in the tihe], 

‘From tJiat distant chariot, 

They call me with the bow ? 

Do i not wish to go? 

But I am afraid of my friends,”' 

The marquis then made him superintendent 
of all tlie departments of labour. One day he 
was entertaining the marquis at Ins house, who 
bcc.imc joyous over the spirits, and said, “Let 
us continue it with lights.” But he refused, 
saying, “I dinned about the d.iy; but I have 
not divined about the night ; — d.ire not do it.” 

‘Tlie superior ma» will say, “In diinking 
there should be the complete observance of the 
rules; but not to carry it on to excess w.as 
righteousness. Completely to observe the rules 
with his prince, and then not to allow him to go 
to excess, was truly virtuous.” 

‘At an earlier time, the great o/^ccrE consult- 
ed the tortoise-shell about giring his daughter 
in marriage to lling-chuug. His wife sought 
the meaning of the indication, and said. “It is 
fortunate. The oracle is 

‘The m.alc and female phccnix fly 
together, 

Singing harmoniously with gem-like 
sounds.” 

The posterity of this scion of the Kwoi [sur- 
name of the House of Ch'in] will be nourished 
among the Keang [surname of the House of ; 


Ts'e]. In five generations they will be prosper- 
ous, and the liighest ministers in Ts'e; in eight, 
there will be none to compare with them for 
greatness,” 

‘Duke Le of Cli'in was the son of a daughter 
of the House of Ts‘ae. In consequence, the 
people of Ts'ac put fo death Woo-foo [the same 
who is called T‘o of Ch‘in. See H, vi.4, and 
notej, and raised him to the marquisate. He 
begat King-chung, during whose boyhood there 
came one of the historiographers of Chow to see 
the marquis of Ch'in, having with him the Chow 
Yih. The marquis made him consult it by the 
milfoil on the future o f the boy, when he found 

the diagram Kwan [==1 and then by the 

change of manipulation, the diagram P‘ei [^§J. 

“Here,” lie said, “is the deliverance;” — * We be- 
hold the light of the State. Tins is auspicious 
for one to be the king’s guest. [See the Yili on 
the 4th line, counting from the bottom, of the 
diagram Kwan].’ Shall tliis boy in his genera- 
tion possess the State of Ch‘in ? or if he do not 
possess this State, does it mean that he shall 
possess another? Or is the thing foretold not 
of his otvn person, but of his descendants? The 
light is far off, and its brightness appears reflect- 
ed from Bometliing else. K'wlln [Z Z] represents 

the earth; Sun j — -j, the top part of the diagram 

Kwan], wind; K'een ], heaven; Sun becom- 
ing K‘Sen over earth [as in the diagram P‘6i], 
represents mountains. Thus the boy iias all the 
tre.'isures of mountains, and is shone on by tho 
light of heaven he will dwell above the earth. 
Hence it is said, “ We behold the light of the 
State. Tills is auspicious for him to be the 
king’s guest.” A king’s guest fills the royal 
courtyard with the display of all the productions 
of his Slate, and the offerings of gems and silks, 
— all excellent things of heaven and eartli ; hence 
it is s.aid — ‘ It is auspicious for him to be the 
Idng’s guest.’ 

‘ “ But there is still th.!! word — * behold,’ and 
therefore I say the thing perhaps is to be hcre- 
I after. And the wind mores and appe.nrs upon 
the earth ; — therefore 1 say it is to be perhaps 
in another State. If it be in another State, it 
must be in tliat of the Keang;— for the Keang 
are the descendants of the Grand-mountain 
[Yaou’s chief minister]. But tho mountains 
stand up as it were the mates of heaven. Thera 
cannot be two things equally grc.'it; as Ch'in de- 
cays, this boy will flourish.” 

‘When Ch‘in received its first gre.at blow 
[B. C. 533], Ch'in Hwan [the representative of 
the Kung-tsze Hwan in the 5th genemtioaj had 
begnn to be great in Ts‘c. When it finally 
perished [B. C. 477], the officer Ch‘ing was 
directing the government of that State.’ 

[Tlie descendants of the Kung-tsze Hwan 

became the T'een family wliicli 

gradu.ally encroached on the authority of the 
House of Keang. and ended by superseding it in 
the possession of the State of "Ts'e. ^le farrago 
of the Ciiucn is intended to show how all tliis 
was prognosticated beforehand. I call it <i 
farrago, for it is no plainer in the original nor in 
"the ^ianchu version, than it is in my transkition.] 

Par. 4. In an entry like this, pving merely 
the season and a month of it, the month ought 


104 


THE CII‘UN TS‘EW, ^YJTH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK III. 


to be the first of the season. Such is the rule 
observed throughout the Clihin Ts'ctv, excepting 
in this passage. Many of the critics hold that 

^ is a mistake for |7]^ ; bnt I prefer to think, 

with Sun Full and others, that the par. is imper- 
fect, thei'c rcninining only the commencement of 
it, and that characters containing the account 
of some event have been lost. It is difllcult to 
believe that some have held that Confueins 
purposely made the summer commence 'with 
the 5th month, to indicate his indignation at 
the marriage, which began to he gone about 
this j-ear, of duke Chwang to the daughter of 
the man who murdered his fathcrl Yet this is 
the view propounded by Ho Hew. And the 
K‘ang-he editors think it worthy of being pre- 
served, and call special attention to it ! 

Par. 6. Fang,— see I. ix. C. There were rea- 
sons for this covenant on both sides; and though 
Ts'e had attacked Loo in the end of tlie duke’s 
19th year, it had since then smitten the Jung 
to propitiate Loo. Eung-yang thinks tliat the 
‘ covenanter’ on the part of Loo was ‘ an inferior 

person understand 

before Chaou K'wang lays 

down a correct rule;— ^ 


ijJig -jj^, ‘In all accounts of covenants, 
where the agent of Loo is not specified, the 
duke is meant.’ 

Par. C. The presenting of silks was thefourth 
step in treaties of marriage, on the part of the 

intending husband; — it was called 
when the prince of a State was a party conceni- 
cd, these gifts were to bo sent by a great officer. 
For the marquis liimsclf to go to Ts'e with them 
was ‘contrary to rule,’ which he violated in 
another respect, — arranging for his m-irriage so 
soon after his mother’s death. There must 
Iinvc been reasons for liis urgency irhich we do 
not know. The common belief is that this 
marriage had been arranged for by Wiin Kenng 
immediately after the young lady’s birth, about 
20 years before this, and that before her de.'itJi 
she had insisted on Chwang’s fulfilling the 
engagement immediately, u’ithout reference to 
that event, he having already deLiyed so 
unwilling to marry the daiigliter of his father s 
murderer. But he had not continued single all 
that time, — ns we learn from the events ot ms 
32d 3 ’enr. The marriage he no\v proi^ded to 
enter into was an evil one for him. Tlie lady 
was hardly better than her aunt, his mother, 
had been. 


Twenty-third year. 


r^o 


M)h 


=r 


M 


A 


"S' 


Yea-u XXIIL 


DUKE CHWAXG. 


105 


^ s s © 

# & ZM 

f « #.¥ s « 
zf-±mB,z 

s -a * 

^ m a.'i 
ZM & 

^ 0 jij ^ 


.ii(' z.m m MIS mfiii± 


Bti # ».M «■ w. 


k^ J9 " \Jt * -A^ ■^JUt -•Hf* — .>A 


m±m 

wa. 


XXIII. 1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 


In his twenty-third year, in spring, the duke arrived 
from Ts'e. 

Shull of Chae came to Loo with friendly inquiries. 

In summer, the duke went to Ts‘e to see [the service 
at] the altar to the Spirits of the land. 

The duke arrived from Ts‘e. 

An officer of King came to Loo with friendly inquiries. 

The duke and the marquis of Ts‘e met at Kuh. 

Shull of Seaou paid a court visit to the duke. 

In autumn, the duke painted red the pillars of [duke] 
Hwan’s temple. 

In winter, in the eleventh month, Yih-koo, earl of 
Ts'aou died. 

In the twelfth month, on Keah-yin, the duke had a 
meeting with the marquis of Ts‘e, when they made 
a covenant at Hoo. 


Par. 1,4. Se« II. ii. 9. Chang Heah observes 
here, that the practice, intimated in the of 
announcing the return to the capital in the an- 
cestral temple was after the example of the ear- 
liest sovereigns of the Slioo, and refers to Il.i.10 
of that Book, where it is related that Shun, on 
returning after the close of his tours of inspec- 
tion, ‘went to the temple of the Cultivated 
ancestor, and offered a sacrifice.' 

Par. 2. By Chae Shuh we are to understand 
either the earl of Chae, or one of his brothers. 
He, or his father, is called 'duke of Chae,’ in 11. 
viii. 6, as being one of the king’s three principal 
ministers. If the carl himself be here intended, 

as is most likely, the is his designation. 


Prom the form of the par., difft. from II. viii. 2, 
and others, we conclude that this visit was 
unauthoriz<k[, and undertaken for some private 
end, — ^was, as the phrase is, ‘contrarj- to rule.’ 

Par. 3. This act of the duke was of the same 
kind as that of Yin in going to see the fishermen 
at Twng;— I. V. 1. Tiiere was something re- 
markable about the sacrifice in Ts'e w'hich 


attracted visitors. Woo Ch'ing says ; — ‘The Siay 
was an ordinaij' thing,— the sacrifice 
offered by princes to the Spirits of the land 
within their States; other princes did not go to 
witness it. But it was a custom in Ts‘c to take 


the opportunity of this sacrifice to assemble its 
armies, and make a boastful display of their 
majesty and numbers, assembling others to wit- 
ness it. It was this which afforded a pretext 
to the duke for going at this time to Ts'e. The 
Ciiuen has: — ‘When the duke was taking tins 
step, which was contrary to rule, Ts'aou Kwei 
remonstrated witli him, saying, “Do not go. 
The rules of ceremony are all designed for the 
right adjustment of the people. Hence there 
are meetings of the princes [at the royal court], to 
inculcate the duties severally incumbent on the 
high and low, and to lay down tlie amount of 
contributions which are to be severally made. 
There arc court visits, to rectify the true position 
of the different ranks of nobility, and to ar- 
range the order of the young and the old. 
Tlicre arc punitive expeditions, to punish the 
disobedient. The princes have their services on 
the king’s behalf, and the king has his tours of 
inspection among the princes ; — when tliose meet- 
ings and visits are observed on a grand scale. 
Excepting on such occasions, a prince docs not 
move from his own State. 'J'he micr’s move- 
ments must be written down. If there be written 
ccnceniittff you what was not according to the 
laws, how ■\rill yonr descendants look at it?”* 
[Tim Chnen adds here tijc following, nbont 
the affairs of Tsin:— ‘In Tsin, tlie circle of 
families descended from Hwnn and Cliwnng 
fllwnn is the llwan-shuli, or “Grand Succe:*,” 


VOL. r, 


H 


106 


BOOK III. 


•■•rilE CIPUN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


of tlie Cliucn appended to\he 2d year of II wan, 
where earl Chwang is also i^cntioned] began to 
press on duke Ilcen, [the inmiuis at this time], 
who was distressed by them. \ Sze Wei said to 
him, “Let us do away with\tlic ollicer Foo, 
[Some take ^ as meaning— “Let us 
do away with the Arealthy amo^g them ’’] and 
then all the other descendants of the two princes 
may bo dejilt with.” The duke asked him to 
attempt the thing, Avhen Wei consulted Avith all 
the others, calumniated Foo to them, and then 
took him off.’] 

Par. 6. With this commenced Ts'oo’s inter- 
courses of courtesy Arith Loo, and indeed Avith 
any part of China proper. 

Par. 6. Kuh,— see VU.4. Tliis Avas but a 
hurried meeting; but it serA'es to show hoAr 
anxious duke ChAvang was to get his marriage 
treaty carried through. 

Par. 7. Shuh of Seaou is the same as Shuh 
Ta-sin of Seaou, mentioned in the Chuen on 
XII. 4. Up to that time he had merely been a 


great ofllccr of Sung, holding the city of Seaou; 
but because of the serA'ices lie then rendered in 
the troubles of the State, duke IlAvan erected 
Seaou into a Foo-yung or attached territory, of 
AA'hich this Shuh and his descendants were the 
lords. Here Are find him paying a visit to the 
duke of Loo. Tlie par. is not in the usual form, 

fiu 

Kuh, and not at the court of Loo. The city of 
Seaou Aras in the pres. dept, of Seu-chow 

(1^ jl'J'l )» 1 0 north from the dis. city of Seaou. 

Par. 8. According to rule, the pillars were 
required to be of a very dark colour, nearly 
black. The painting them red, it is understood, 
Aras to dazzle the young wife who Avould soon be 
appearing in the temple, and to propitiate the 
spirit of IlAvan, when the daughter of his mur- 
derer should be presented as the Arifeof his son! 

Par. 10. Hoo Aras in Ch‘ing, — ^in the north- 
Avest of the pres, district of Yuen-woo(j^jE^)i 
dep. Hirae-k'ing. It is supposed the meeting 
had reference to the impending marriage. 


Twenty-fourth year. 


V»;\u XXIV. 


DUKE CinVAXG. 


107 


- S B«.© 
=sr-.i? ffi 

?1- T?' ?5 ± 

!ji' ^ m m 
X 

m.w ^ M 
u 

'^±-f 


* ^ ^ 0 rt.M «/t: * 

A »ii, f sc se A #.» . E 

a @ M W 0. 

m m cii.aE is m. is a - 

7iW BIM ff 'h » IB 

m 

W Bff 15 ^ a # 0.<i 
.%,M fi. 


■tli.'fe.l® + 
A A^S-tfc.H 
BM 

ss =t # # 


XXIV. 


1 In the duke’s twenty-fourtli year, in spring, in the 

king’s third month, he carved the rafters of [duke] 
Hwan’s temple. 

2 There was the burial of duke Chwang of Ts‘aou. 

3 In summer, the duke went to Ts‘e to meet his bride. 

4 In autumn, tlie duke arrived from Ts‘e. 

5 In the eighth month, his wife, the lady KBang, entered 

[tlie capital]. 

6 On Mow-yin, the great officers belonging to the ducal 

House, and their wives, had an interview with her, 
and presented offerings of silks. 

7 There were great floods. 

8 111 winter, the Jung made an inroad into Ts'aou, when 

Ke of Ts‘aou fled to Ch‘in, and Ch‘ih returned' to 
Ts'aou. 

9 The duke of Kwoh — 


Far. 1. This act ^Tas of the same nature as 
the painting the pillars in par, 6 of Inst year. 
TsO'She says; — ‘Tl»is was another act contrnjy 
to rule. Yu-sun [the designation of K‘ing(j^), 
n great officer, tlie master of the Workmen. See 
the jg remonstrated, 

saving, “Your subject lias heard that economical 
moderation is the reverence of virtue, and that 
extravagance is one of the greatest of wicked- 
nesses. Our former ruler possessed tlint reverent 
virtue, and you are as it were carrying him on 
to that great wickedness; — is not this wliat 
should not be?” ’ Kuh-lcang tells us that the 
rule for the rafters of the temple of a son of 
Heaven was that they slioiild bo hewn, and 
rubbed smooth, and then polished bright with a 
fine stone, while in tliat of the prince of a State 
the rafters were only hewn, and rubbed smooth, 
and in that of a great officer they were simply 
hewn. 

Parr. 8, 4. The duke went himself, acc. to 
the ancient custom, to meet his bride, and then 
on his return, announced his arrival in the ances- 
tral temple, whieli was also according to rule. 

Far. 6. On this par. Maou K‘c-liiig says; — 
‘As the duke met the lady Jvcnng in person, he 
ought to have entered with her on the same 
day. As to the reason of their entering on dif- 
ferent days, Kung-yang (as expounded by Too 


I Yu) thinks that ns MBng Jin [the duke’s earlier 
mistress of the harem], was in the palace, Kenng 
was unwilling to enter, and must have made 
the duke agree to remove Milng Jin, while she 
herself came leisurely on. And so also it was 
that, when she entered the capital on the day 
'jRng-ch‘ow, she did not immediately present her- 
self in the ancestral temple; but it was the next 
day. Mow-yin, when she repaired thither, and 
the ceremony of giving audience to the wives of 
the great officers wiio were related to the duke 
by consanguinity, was gone through.’ Here 
surely is nn example where the rule about the 

meaning of mentioned on Lii. 2, cannot be 

applied. Where was the hostility here on tlie 
part of the ‘enterer,’ or the ‘unwiUingness to 
receive ’ on the part of the ‘ entered ?’ Yet Kuh- 
lcang would make it out that the term Indicates 
n kind of horror in the temple at the entrance of 
the daughter of the man who had murdered 
duke Hwan! 

‘the wives of great officers of the same 
surname as the duke.’ Many of them would 
have received other clan-names, but they were 

«U Kes (^). m 

‘Tlie first interview, when introductory presents 
were used, was called The used pro- 


108 


THE CII'UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK III. 


pcrly of gifts of silks, inny also comx)rc1icn(l other 
offerings, — such ns gems. Tlic intervieu' spoken 
of took place in tiic ancestral temple, on the iicn* 
•wife’s first appearance there, nearly equivalent 
to our celebration of a marriage in a church. 
Tlie great officers were there officiallj', and at 
such a time their •wives accompanied them. In 
the compendious style of the narrative of the 
paragraph, the student may think that only the 

•wives are spoken of, hut we must take ^ 

as in apposition with and not under 

its regimen. This appears clearly from the 
Chuen : — * In autumn, when Gae Ivcnng arrived, 
. the duke made the wives of the great officers, 
at their first interview, offer silks and gems ; — 
■which was contrary to rule. Yu-sun said, “ The 
offerings of males are, the greatest of them, gems 
and silks, and the lesser, birds and animals 
[that sometimescs*^^, see the 

tlie different things illus- 
trating their rank. But the offerings of women, 
are only nuts, dates, and pieces of dried flesh, — 
to show their respect. Now males and females 
use the same offerings ; — there is no distinction 
between them. But the distinction between 


males and females is a grand law of the State, 
and that it should be confounded by the duchess 
surely is what should not be.” ’ 

[The Chuen continues here the narrative after 
par. 3 of last year about the affairs of Tsin:-— 
‘ Sze Wei of Tsin again took counsel with all the 
other scions of the ruling House, and got them to 


put to death the two sons of the Yew family. 
He announced the fact to the marquis, saying 
“Things are in progress. It will not take more 
than two years to relieve you of all trouble.” ’] 
Par. 7. See on II. 1, 6. 

Fa x. 8. Ke here is said by Too Yu to have 
been -1;^^ ‘the heir-son of Ts‘aou.’ 


He nmst therefore have succeeded to his father 
in the end of the last year (sec XXHL9), and 
he is here mentioned without any title beenuso 
of his weakness and incompotency to ‘hold Ins 
own.’ Too also says that Ch'ih was duke Ho, 
who follows, in the list of lords of Ts'aou, after 
duke Cliwang. But thcHistorical Kecords say 

that lie's name was E (^^)i make no men- 
tion of nnj* Ch‘ih. Wo have not the information 
necessary fully to elucidate the par ag raph. 

Kung-yaiig reads— 

joining on the two characters of the next par., 
and understanding the whole thus:-^here was 
a duke of ICwoh whose name was Ch'ih. He 
had lost his own territory, and now finding 
Ts'aou without a lord, he entered and took pos- 
session of it I . t , 

Par. 9. 'I'liis paragraph is plainly incomplete, 

unless we suppose that should be and 
then the meaning would be ‘Kwoh perished. 
Compare in V. xix. 7. 

The latter way of dealing with the par. is 
adopted by many, and in support of it a passage 
is quoted by Mnou from tlie writings of the 
philosopher Kwan, the marquis of Ts‘e s prime 
minister [This is a mistake. The passage is m 
Lew Heang’s ^ ^i-'Duke Hwan 

of Ts'e went to Kwoh, and asked an old man how 
the State had come to ruin. The r^ly 
“ It was because our lord loved the good an^^ 
hated the evil.” “According to your worfs, 
said the duke “he was a worthy prince. How 
could be come to ruin ?” The old man answere p 
"He loved the good, but he was unable to 
employ them. He hated the bad, but he was 
unable to put them away. Therefore it was t le 
State perished.” 

Possibly, we ought to read 
then, it is not known wliere this Kwoh was. 


Tioeniy-Jifth year. 


T PI*.® ® 
Sp ifl 


tt T 

T it. 


M. AJR 
H 


Vk»f. XXV'. 


J)UKK CJIWANG. 


109 


i'£ iS) 
4V=^. 

i-. t i' 


c 


Ivl jj,? 


fi- 

?«■ ± 
i’c?5; 

zn 

mM 

V) 4V 
T- 
m i}!i 


Z 5!f '/ff JZi? If # 

I'i- =rr ffl i%i5!..Z.:k i 
fi? ^ 2ic. ?i? 0 I’fii ®- ^ 0. 

MJ!5 Pf- M T Ta jE M ^ ;2:,^ - 
Jfl tl;.i5 J ft 7^ iili: 11!?.+ 
# -lil.tt « ^.:2: + ?M.T^ $ 
n JL + M T- f J Ji. H ;g.S 
>33ciJt. +£k/iE#=t ■ 


XXV. 1 

o 

* 

3 

4 

5 

G 


In the [<hiko*s] twenty-fifth year, in spring, the marquis 
of Ch‘in scnt*looShuh to Loo witli friendly inquiries. 

In summer, iti the fifth month, on KM'ei-ch'ow, Soh, 
marquis of "Wei, died. 

In the .si.xth month, on Sin-we, the first day of the moon, 
tlic sun was eclipsed, when we beat drums, and offer- 
ed victims at the altar of the lattd. 

The duke’s eldest daughter went to her home in Ke. 

In autumn, there were great floods, when we beat drums, 
and oflered victims at the altar of the land, and at 
the [cit}*] gates. 

In winter, duke [Hwan's] son Yew went to Ch'in. 


I’ar. I . i f rciul ns r^, Jeo, tlie elan-name of 

fi fftmJl.votCT‘ln,ccllincctcu with llicrulin^rhoure. 

I* the fntUvidual'a dcficnntion. Tfo-ahe 
r.iy* ihnJ now ‘firat was n contract of friendship 
made with Ch'in;’ nicanlnf; flr#l *incc the in- 
Tn»ion of the wcBicm border* of Loo by Ch'in in 
the dithe’* U'th year. He adds that the de.'signa- 
tion of the nier.'cnper i* ured and not the name, 
to expre.'.* commendation of his niirsion; but 
rach a canon for the u*e of names, &a, is with- 
out found.iUon. And so i» the rule iiwisted on 
lir Kuh-Icang, that the designation shows that 
Joo’s oflicial appointment in Ch'in liad been 
conflrmcd by the king. 

Par. 2. Soh ; — see II. xvi. 6 ; III. vi. 2. 

Par. 3. Tins eclipse took place in the morn- 
ing of the 18fh May, B. C. OCS. With regard 
to the ceremonies which are mentioned, the 
Chuen savs they were ‘ e-xtraordinaiy*,' adding: 

• Only on the’ first day of the moon in the 1st 

month of summer], when no encroachment 
of the Pin iiifiuencc [on the months of the 
year] had j'Ct begun.on occasion of an cclipseof the 
Eun.did they prc.'cnt offerings ofsilkat the altars 
of liie laud, and beat drums in the court.’ Tlie 

Chuen, on the 17th year of duke Ch'aou 
par. 2, says that 'the king did not have his table 
spread so liberally ns usual, and made drums be 
beaten at the altars of the land ; and that princes 
of States presented offerings of silk at the altars, 
and had drums beaten in their courts.’ Now in 
the text the drums are beaten at the altars, — one 
irregular thing; and rictims are offered instead 
of silks;— another. As to Tso-she’s statement 
that the things he mentions were done only on 
the 1st month of summer, when the masculine 


energies of nature were all predominant, it may 
be doubled whether the in the scntcnco 

mjEMZiB is correctly taken by Too 
Yu (whom I iiavo followed) in the sense of 
‘only.’ Tlie same obserronces took place, pro- 
bably, at all eclipses. That in the Shoo, III.ir. 
■1, in connection with which we hare them, was 
in the Otli month of Ilva. 


Par. 4. On the Ist par. of the 27th year, Too 
observes that 'the eldest Ivc’ here was duke 
' Cbwang’s daughter. She must have been so, 
for any daughter of his father would, long ere 
this time, have been married away. Many cri- 
tics dwell on the fact that nothing has been said 
here about the meeting of the lady, as in the 
marriage of duke Yin’s daughter I. ii. 5. The 
point is unimportant. The husband was not 
the marquis of Kc, but his son. 

Par. 6. The calamity of ’great floods* has 
been mentioned several times; but this is the 
first mention of special dcprechtoiy services on 
such an occasion. Perhaps the regular cere- 
monies were now' first departed from. The 
Chuen says: — 'The observances here were also 
extraordinary. On all occasions of calamities 
from the hand of Heaven, there were offerings 
of silks, and not of victims. And drums were 
not beaten, excepting on the presage of calami- 


ties by the sun and moon.’ Too defines as 

gates,’ whidi is doubtless 
correct. But the Chuen says nothing about the 
drumming and sacrificing at them. Kung- 
yang says it was improper; but 1 do not know 
of any authority for his saying so. 


110 


THli: CII‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CUUEN. 


BOOK m. 


[The Cliucn, continuing the nnrratirc of the 
affairs of Tsin, appended to par. (! of Inst year, 
says : — *Sze Wei of Tsin got all the other scions of 
the ruling House to put to death all the hmnehes 
of the Yew family, after which he walled Tscu 
for them to reside in. In winter, the marquis 


of Tsin besieged Tscu, and slew all the sons of 
the former marquisos.’J 
I’ar. (». This Yew was an own brother of 
duke Chwang, — a man of virtue and ability. 
His ^^sit here to Ch‘in was to return the 
‘fricndli* inquiries’ from that State in the 
spring. 


Tiueniy-sixth year. 


* 

H - #.* ± 

% A.^ 


' Ml 


ffi 


XXVI. 


A Wi ^ ^ dr w] iS w 

1 In his twenty-sixth year, in spring, the duke invaded 

the Jung. 

2 In summer, the duke arrived from the invasion of the 

Jung. 

3 Ts'aou put to death one of its great officers. 

4 In autumn, the duke joined an officer of Sung and an 

officer of Ts‘e in invading Seu. 

5 In winter, in the twelfth month, on Kwei-hae, the nrst 

day of the moon the sun was eclipsed. 


^rr. 1,2,4. The 1st and 4th paragraphs are 
Iffobably both descriptive of operations against 
Accepting the position of the Jung 
wmeh most troubled Loo as given correctly in 
the note on I. iL 1, they were within the limits 
of the ancient Sen-chow of Tu, — see the Shoo 
LU. i. Pt. i. 28 ; and though the State of Seu in 
tne tune of the Ch'nn Ts'etv was not so exten- 
the old Seu-chow, the Jung, we may con- 
mnd^ found sympathy and support from it. 

c ^^**^*' Jung of Seu were a thorn in 
the ^ate of Loo from its commencement ; — see 
tte Shoo, V.sxix.l. Dukes Tin and Hwan 
kept on good terms with them (Lii.l,4:IL 
«• S) ; but hostile relations prevailed in the time 
of Chwang [XVm. 2). Ts‘o attacked the Jung 
on behalf of Loo in his 20th year; but we find 
them here still unsubdued. That the marquis 
of Loo should join otficers of Sung and Ts*e in 
t le expedition against Sen seems to show that 
l-oo was principally interested in it. 


The lords of the State of Seu were vijcouids, 
whose chief town was 80 le north from the p 
Sze-chow W ^ Gan-hwuy. They pro- 
fessed the same ancestry as the State of f 
(^^1, and were of course Tings (^^)* 
[Toparr. 1,2. The Chuen appends:— ‘In 

Sze Wei ofTsinbecamegrand minister ofy or j 

and in summer, he enlarged the walls of Keang, 
as to secure a greater depth for the palace, j 
Par. 3. Tso-she says nothing on this pa • 
We do not know who the officer put to . 
was, nor what was the offence charged ngam 
him ; and the par. should be left in this obscurity 
like the 8th of the 24th year, also relating to 
the affairs of Ts‘aou. 

[To par. 4, the Chnen appends: — ‘In autur^, 
a body of men from Kwoh made an tnouroion 
into Tsin, ; and in winter, another body did tue 
same.*] 

Par. 5. This eclipse took place in the morn- 
ing of the 3d. Nov., B. C. 667. 


Wxn XXVll. 


lJUKK CinVAXG. 


Ill 


Twenty-seventh year. 


«.3E ^ ^n.i^ M m,W 0 ^ #.,& p « 

SH m M Bn^ « in ^ -fa ^ a ^ ^ 0. 

-s sg a mM'm sRF ^.0 » ^ ^ T s.'^ ^ - 

3!5.?R.<: *R ffl, #» + 

±^0^'tt,.P9R ».3c=¥. 

■a.» # -fe.ts s^.ii T 3i5 *. issR 

m w ¥9 BMS.ji #.-i,, 

7^® ^ #M# 

JL -t&.W n.* '^. A ^ # *.^B 

if -ta. 


XXVII. 1 In his twenty-seventh year, in spring, the duke had a 
meeting with his eldest daughter, [married to the 
heir] of Ke, in T'aou. 

2 In summer, in the sixth month, the duke had a meet- 
ing with the marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the 
; marquis of Ch*in, and the earl of Ch‘ing, when they 

/ made a covenant together in Yew. 

/ 3 In autumn, duke [Hwan’s] son, Yew, went to Ch'in to 
/ the burial of Yuen Chung. 

/ 4 In winter, the duke’s eldest daughter — ^she of Ke — came 

[to Loo]. 

5 K‘ing of Keu came to meet the duke’s third daughter 
as his bride. 


book III. 


H 2 


G 

7 


r.ti.rv TS'liW WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 

THE CH'liN TbL."i 

It Sutl.S'alnCtirfg wiX marquis of Ts‘e i 

due once a year ^yimc the— 


in 


Tlic (hil 

Shing'puH 


rnr.l. Twm tnf-niiUJJ its site 

In 1^.0 ; nntl the itv of Puh Chow 

tis no Ic. to the Fotith of the clt} 01 ^ „ 

cfe j|>I>l),dcp.T9‘nou-chow. ButKcnnglung 

(*}T 5fc) ohscrv'cs thnt Ko Iny cnat from Eoo, 


Boo to meet licr father. 

is the same ns 


part of the btalc, so 
would have crossed 
He therefore concludes thnt ^ 

mentioned in the Cliucn tmder par. 4 of 
the 7th year of duke Ch'aou, and to bo referred 
to the pres. dis. of Sze-hwuy, dop. Yen-chow. 
This, no doubt, is the better identiflention. 

Tso-she condemns the meeting, saying: — 
‘There was no proper occasion for it. Tiie son 
of Heaven ts supposed to make no tour of inspec- 
tion unless it be for the publication of righteous- 
ness; the prince of a State to make no move- 
ment unless it be on the people’s business; and 
a minister not to go beyond the boundaiies 
of the State unless by his ruler’s coinmmond.’ 
Possibly, however, there may have been circum- 
stances which justified it. Ch'oh Urh-k‘ang 
( ^ J^5 of the Ming dyn., Ist part of 

17th cent.), for instance, supposes that the pride 
and jealousy of the duke’s young Ts‘e wife may 
have rendered a preliminary meeting necessary, 
before this daughter of the duke could pay the 
visit of duty mentioned in par. 4. 

Par. 2. Comp. XVI. 4. The place of meeting 
here is the same, and we have also the phrase 

^ , in both para. Tso-she says the covenant 

was made ‘on occasion of the submission of 
Ch‘in and Ch'ing.’ Too, in explanation, of the 
Chuen, refers to the troubles of Ch'in in 
Chwang’s 22d year, when Ts'e received King- 
chung who had fled from it, and to the fact of 
the earl of Ch‘ing having made a treaty with 
Ts‘oo in the 26th year, so that the loyal affection 
of the two States to Ts'e might be doubted, but 
a good understanding was now come to. 

Par. 3. Yuen is the clan-name, and Chung 
the designation, which is here given, because, 
after the death of a minister, the rule was to 
mention him by it, and not his name. The 
Chuen says that the journey of Yew was 
‘ contrary to rule,’ and adds that Yuen-chung 
was an old friend of Ke Yew. But the 
journey, acc. to the Chuen on par, 1, was 
only ‘contrary to rule,’ if it was made with- 
out ^thc prince’s authority. Chang Heah, Woo 
Qi'ing, and Wang K'ih-hwan, all advocate 
the view that Ko Yew had obtained that sanction ; 
and the K‘ang-he editors further add that, if he 

hnd not done so, the character would not 
have been used of his journey. 

Par. 4. Tlic Chuen says this visit was 
'** J^cturn to salute her parents.’ Such a 


State comes back 


a 

the 


is uBcd; Vhen she returns divorted, 


ttic ptec Jjs © |« h 

wife of « prin“ eoc« to ii«lt 11“ p . , 

•ftti “she goes to such and 

Solor ” .S'l.o goes liooi it is - 

not Vo so now. a Victory oyer us. 

If h^s on an occm*®” J his own 

he w\ll be sure to J-fSiei" Bynip»tl*y' 
pcopl\. If when ,4h .to make 


theTa^taik him. though ho him? 

head a^minst ® and music, and 

Now cultivation of. Affection, are the 

the pron\-)tion o^^'adness a . jp^uced. 

means \X- whifgli a spirit in 

brought to he CO 


their relati\ .gs, and to ST«'’® - ht. 

then they he Sd.frequ®** 

does not nounir<ah those conditions, 

hostilities, its poopl® 


ly engaging in 
to a condition oV 
Par. 6. Here! 
comes himself to ! 
whom he had sot 
ofiScer of Loo, of th 

been the agent of thJ ^ 

arrangements. Thai IW; this has not 
ed does not mdicate \ +!,«+ there wa 

Par. 6. In II. ii. 6 thdof £, lord of Ke ^ 
of marquis. As he has'"’? nt only ta 
earl, Too Yu concludes tli^hw^ his rank oi® 
been reduced by tlie king;.^he -which „ 0e, 
known. It may. have been li,gg f .^van, Chwa o> 
orHwuy. ^ds‘: , jent 

[The Qiuen adds here: — ‘VstCThe '’arflois 

Leaon, earl of Sliaou, to convey the ® 


hostilitiCSi 

,f famine.’"] , ^cer of Ke«. 

.Kg»g, a ask*. 

meet a daug ^ gjest 

^^,ght in ;,o«ld havo 

.ei, surname K^ ^giy 
'? duke mall 

oything 

that tiieic ••• 

irregular or improper ^ the the th'® 


of Ts'e his appointment of him I’®' 

of the States, and to ask liim to atijut tiack ^ 
cause the marquis of it had raised *^ed .'fsZC' 
the throne (See the 2d Chuen aP.^®t\}P®®“® 
XIX. 4).'] 

Sliing-puli was in Woi,t«ln autuithcP 

^ S>*A«iraii.e 


Par. 


dis. of Ts'aou, dcp. Ts'.iou-chm ^ an Inc’jwais a 
to the borders of the State of *’“? ®‘';,*t 

nvA/tfin«w •««Aa nwAlinv f n (If*!.* to f.llA, ^ 


this meeting was preliminary to tli.'j morn- 
of Wei, with whicli the king had d 

marquis of Ts'e. Sec the Inst Chue"- 


iciit 

the 


Tear XXVIII. 


DUKE CHWANG. 


Tioenty-eiglith year. 

ff — . -u<-r nrf Bi Jti* 


^ ^ Si[ 113 A. W “P 

w ^ B •y si* _L 


fcf 


# nM.m ^ 

A.iB.Tf AA 


At A TC 

A. *R » «.#• 


It 

It.# 


^l▼o 


T&.feS 


S,Jfe7C#)a7Ctfff-®^W1SWgg.*.S + 

igt.±,5..:4 3S; w, 

V >¥. ^ '« ^ ^ i** ;sr -3^ S = 7flR *ns ^ ^ 


Tt; -5^ ^ O Hi M Hi S ^ j 

» T X'^ A ¥ — n IS iS ® K lUi A- A *. 4 

W) ± A 5' 1 X ^ 7= "-?? g JS Ttc 36- ,dt » 


A s ® 7C s w.<- «.tx.7r 5« j 55J w 

IIRAff ^ 


VOL V. 


114 


THE Cn‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK in. 


f i f I f i i Mf 


0 0 H H # ^ Jl # 


XXVIII. 1 In 


/!•» 
O 


it.^ 0.£ J 


2 In 


3 

4 

5 

6 
7 


Par. 1. 


the [duke’s] tweuty-eightli 5 'ear, in spring, in the 
king’s third month, on Keah-jdn, an army of Ts‘e 
invaded Wei. The men of uei and the men of 
Ts‘e fought a battle, when the men of Wei re- 
ceived a disgraceful defeat, 
summer, in the fonrtli month, on Ting-we, So, 
viscount of Choo, died. 

In autumn, King invaded Ch'ing. 

The duke joined an officer of Ts‘e and an officer of 
Sung in relieving Ch‘ing. ' 

In winter ^Ye enclosed Mei. 

There wms a great •want of wheat and rice. 

Tsang-sun Shin represented the case to Ts‘e, [and ob- 
tained leave] to bu)*' grain there. 

great Jung, bore Ch*«ng«Tirh, and the other, who 
T WhenTsm 


, - on 1. Tso-she 

says hCTe:—‘ losing, the marquis of Ts'e in- 
Taded W ei; defeated the army of Vi’’ei in battle; 
declared the command he had received from 
the king ; took bribes and returned.’ It appears 
account that the marquis of Ts-c liim- 
selt took part, if we ought not to say commanded, 
to the mvaaon and defeat of Wei; and hence 
^ses a difficulty in accounting for the first 

mx- "Tho Vu thinks that tlie announcement 

of the affair to Loo was so constructed as to 
make xt appear that only an officer was in 
clia^e of the army, and so the shame of accept- 
mg bribes mght be averted from the marquis. 
Whatever be thought of this view, it proceeds 
on the acknowledgment of ^ ^ as properly 

Te'e-’.and does not sanction 
marquis is here purposely 
railed a man, or ‘an officer,’ to signify the 
disapprobation of his conduct. But we 
need not depart from the usual application of 

The marquis accompanied the armj', hut 
he did command it. Tliis is the view of 

Sma’inedTr« 5 ?^-‘'‘“® marquis 

TOmainect in SInng-puh, expecting that a 

demonstration would be enough to cSree Wei 
mto submission, whereas the .army of "Wei rashlv 
p ovoked a battle. This account of the matter 
^ves confirmation from the g A P«ceding 
W A *he second part of the par, 

here resumes its account of the 
daucbier 1 ?"^® married .a 

-ung, the one of wj.oni, c.allwl IIoo Ke of the 


— — — —••7 — — 

was of the small Jung, boro E-woo 

invaded the Le Jung, their chief, a baron, gave 
him to wife his daughter, Lc Ke, who bore a son 
called He Ts‘e, wliile her younger sister bore hmi 
Ch‘oh-tsze. Lc Ke became the favourite with me 
duke, and wished to get her son dedared ms 
successor. In order to this, she bribed two offi- 
cers, who were favourites with him, — ^Leang-woo, 
of the outer court, and another, Woo from Tung* 
kwan, and got them to speak to the marquis^ to 
this effect “ K‘euh-yiih contains your lordship s 
ancestral temple; P‘oo and Urh-k*ciih are your 
boundary cities. They should not be without 
their lords residing in them. If your ancestral 
city be ivithont its lord, the people will not feel 
awe; if the others be without their lords, that 
will lead the Jung to form encroaching projects. 
When they do so, the people will despise the 
government as being remiss;— to the ^ harm of 
the State. If the heir-apparent he put in charge 
of K‘eiih-yuh, and Ch‘ung-urli and E-woo be 
put in charge, the one of P'oo, and the other ot 
Urh-k‘eiih, this will both awe the people and keep 
the Jung in fear, and display, moreover, 
lordship’s effective rule.” She made them both 
say farther, “The wide territory of the Teih will 
in this way be a sort of capital of Tsin. Is i*®®* 
right thus to extend the country of the State ? 

‘ The marquis was pleased with these suggest- 
ions, and in the summer he sent his eldest son 
to reside in K*euh-yuh, Ch‘ang-urli to reside in 
the citj’ of P'OO, and E-woo in K'cuh. Thus all 
his other sons were sent away to the borders, 
and only the sons of Le Kc and her sister were 
left in Kcang. The end was that the two Woo 
and Le Ke slandered the others, and got He-ts‘e 
appointed heir to the State. The people of 
Tsin called the two Woo the pair of ploughcrs.’J 
Par. 2. This So li.nd been viscount of Cboo 
for 12 yo.irs. He was succeeded by his son, 
Keu-ch'oo 


Year XXIX. 


DUKE CnWANG. 


115 


Pnrr. 3,4. King, — see on X.5. In par. 4, 
after Kung-yang lins WHA 

Tlio Chuen has: — ‘Tsze-yuen, cliief-mfi^ter of 
Ts‘ 00 , wished to seduce the widow of king Wtln, 
and made a hall by the side of her palace, where 
lie set on foot exhibitions of dancers. Wlicn 
the lady hc.ard them, she wept, and said, “ Our 
deceased lord by means of these dances practised 
prcp.arations for war. But now the minister 
m.ikos no use of them against our enemies, but 
exhibits them by the side of me, waiting solitary 
for my dcatli; — ^is not this strange?” One of 
licr attendants repeated these words to Tsze- 
yuen, who said, “ She does not forget the duty of 
surprising our enemies, while I on the contrary 
have forgotten it.” 

‘In autumn, with GOO chariots, he invaded 
Ch'ing, and entered its tcrrilorgby the barrier-gate 
of Kceh-teeli. He Iiiinsclf, witli Tow Yu-kcang, 
Tow Woo, nndKang-chePulj-pe,lcd the way with 
streamers flying; wliileTowPnn, Wang-sun Yew, 
and Wang-sun He, brought up the rear. Alt tile 
chariots entered by the Shun gate, and advanced 
to the market place on the high way. The port- 
cullis gate, leading to the city, however, was open, 
and people were coming out who spoke the 
dialect of Ts'oo. Tsze-yuen said, “Ah, there 
arc men in Cli'ing!” When the princes came 
to relieve it, the army of Ts'oo retreated in tlie 
niglit; and when the people of Ch'ing were 
about to flee to T'ung-k'cw, their spies brought 
word tliat there were birds about the tents of 
Ts'oo, so they stopped thdr flight.’ 

Par. 6. Mei was a town of Loo of no great 
size,— in the west of pres. Tung-p'ing Chow, 
dept. T'ao-gnn. Kung and Kuh botii read 

Tso-she says: *Mei was not a city (^). 
AJl towns having an ancestral temple, with the 
Spirit-tablets of former rulers, were called cities 


; those without such a temple were called 
towns ( ^). Walling a town is called chuh ; 


walling a city is called shing C^)-’ According to 


this account, it is not said that Mei was now 
built, but only that it was enclosed, though not 
with the strong wall which would have served 
for the defence of a mty. 

[Tso-she’s account of Too and Yih, cities and 
towns, is not very clear. Unless the capital of 
a State were changed, how could there be ances- 
tral temples, with tablets of the former rulers, 
anj'where but in it? Maou observes that tlie 
clans springing from the descendants of the 
princes would of course have a tablet of the 
prince to whom tliey traced their origin in tlieir 
ancestral temple; and the principal city held by 


them might be called a too. Prom the Chuen 
on I.i.3, it appears that the too were, of three 
degrees. Tlie ground of distinction between 
cities and towns in England is not in all cases 
clearly ascertained. There is an interesting 
coincidence between Tso's statement that an an- 
costrnl temple constituted a city in China and 
the view that it is the cathedral of a bishop 
whicli constitutes one in England.] 

Par. G. Ying-tali says on this: — 'Tlie wheat 
was ripe in the summer, and the labours with 
the rice were completed in autumn; but this 
entry is made under winter, because then there 
was full)' discovered the insufficiency of the 
harvest in the other seasons.’ 

_Par. 7. Tsnng-sun Shin is better known by 
his designation and hon. title, — ^Tsang WSn- 

chung belonged to a dis- 


tinguished and loyal family in Loo. We have 
his great grandfather, Tsang He-piii, in the 
Chuen on I. v. 1 ; and his grandfather, Tsang 
Gae-pih, in that on ll.ii. 4. Gae-pih appears 
again in the Chuen on III. xi. 3, by his surname 
and name, — Tsang-snn Tali. In that Chuen the 
name Tsang Wttii-chung oecurs, but the text 
must be corrupt. In Chwang’s 6th year, Wiln- 
chung was but a young boy. 

Kung and Kuh both take as = =^, ‘to 

ask leave,’ but I prefer to take it as in the trans- 
lation. Shin’s proceeding, Tso-she says, was 
according to rule. But m.any critics condemn 
it, as if he had gone privately, unauthorized. 
There is a detailed account, however, in the 

® ^ jt’ Wan-cliung 

recommends the measure to duke Chwang, ond 
obtains leave to go to Ts'e. He took with him 
valuable offerings to duke Hwan to support his 
request, who, with the magnanimity proper to 
him, returned them, while lie allowed grain to 
be sold to Loo. 

Kung and Kuh say that there ought to have 
been no necessity, on one year’s dearth, to apply 
for help to a neighbouring State; and th.at the 
prince who had not stores accumulated, sufficient 
for three years at least, was sure to lose liis 
State. That there was not sufficient prorision 
in the State itself for the emergency shows how 
ineffirient the government of Chwang had been. 
Wliere there is no commerce with ffireign na- 
tions, a kingdom can only provide for the 
occurrence of bad years by the accumulated 
superabundance of good ones; but such super- 
abundance requires not only benignant skies, 
but a good government and a well-ordered, in- 
dustrious, people as well. It must be long since 
China had a supply of one year’s provisions 
accumulated in its granaries. 


Tiventy-ninth year. 


IIG 


THE CIl'UK TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


, BOOK III. 


© BB iffi m.± fiili.H.Bn H * f 

m MM 3!i # Bi 0 Bi m f .ff 

& 0 M # n mM,m A Bff It sf 0. 

M ;!lc -aiJC n. MM ill M « mM.n r- 

i.i?5 -f; A Bii'-fc.45B tH.K 0 0 S & i t 

*.iE M H J'L K- T' *.SI.a. Ki 'I’ -i &A 


XXIX 


1 In the [duke’s] twent)Miinth year, in spring he repaired 

his stables. 

2 In summer, a body of men from Cli‘ing made an in- 

cursion into Heu. 

3 In autumn, there was [a plague of] fei insects. 

4 In winter, [duke Yin’s] third daughter — she of Ke 

died: 

5 We walled Choo and Fang. 


Par.l. Maou says, Iff 
* the term |ff denotes the repairing of the old.’ 

This seems to he the correct interpretation. 
Ho Hew says that the repairing of an old tiling 


is called |ff ; if additions be made to the old, 
the character is used; when a thing is 
made for the Ist time, we say Others, how- 

ever, will have it that in this case the old stables 
were removed, and entirely new ones erected. 

Ch'ing Twan-heoh Yuen 

w :-ff # Hi: ^ # jfii — iff ;2: 

• Wr Kuh-leang says that by we are 

to understand |^, the duke’s stables.’ 
The special import of is not known. We 
might translate it ‘long;’ and Wang Paou 

aptly compares with it the ‘ iong treasury 
mentioned Ana. XI. xiii. 1. As to 
the character of the transaction, Tso-she ob- 
serves that ‘it was unseasonable. The horses 
were let out of their stables at the vernal equi- 
noic, when the day and night were of equal 
length, and brought back at the autumnal.’ 
The season of Chow’s spring, or Hea’s winter, 
therefore was not the time to repair the stables. 

Par. 2. The Chuen here gives definitions of 
terms: — ‘An expedition with bells and drums 

was called ^an attack or invasion); one 

without them, (a stealthy incursion); one 

made quickly and with a small force, ^ (a 
surprise).’ 

Par. 3. Tso-she says that these Jei constitut- 
ed ‘a plague; — and that the appearance of sucA 


creatures was not recorded unless they amounted 
to a plague.’ The canon is probably applicable 
here, but the appearance of unusual things is 
.also found, where the idea of their being a 

plague is inadmissible. But what the 
is much disputed. Lew Hcang, Ho Hew, and 
others, think they were a kind of bug, produce 
in Yueh, and extraordinary in Loo. More 
is the opinion of others that the/ei was a kind o 


locust, that called the 
of the She; known also as the 


Lew Ch‘ang(g|] A. D. 1019-1077) ah 
surdly identifies the fei with a monster mentioned 
in the Ui » «.-■ like an ox, with a white 
head, one eye, and a dragon’s tail,’ &c. 

Par. 4. — see I. vii. 1 : HI. xii. L 

There was no State of Ke (J£) now; but the 

lady for her worthiness retains her title. 

Par. 5. Choo was 30 fe to the south-west of 

the pres. dis. city of Choo-shing ( 

Ts'ing-cliow. Fang has occurred several times. 
The Chuen says the walling of these was sea- 
sonable, and adds ; — ‘ With regard to all labours 
in building, when the frst stars of the Dragon 
[see on the Shoo, I. 6] appeared [the Hth 
month of Chow), the labours of liusbandry were 
finished, and the people were warned to prepare 
for these others. When the Ho (Fire) star 
appeared (after the previous ones), the materials 
were all ready for use. When Mercury culmi- 
nated at dusk, the work should he going on. 
By the solstice, all should bo finished.’ 

[The Chuen adds: — *P*o of Fan rohcllcd 
against the king.’) 


Yi:au XXX. 


. DUKE CinVANG. 


117 


Thirtieth year. 


mm 


-- - 


fij 


=2--^- 


7M 

>=7 

tjsl 


M 


4^» 


-f 


=r 


mK 


=f rt% M Vk ^ 


l-U ^ ^ @ il © ^ ife P5 id* ^ <2^ 

^ ^ M MM.M ■?■ it.Rff H -ft ^ MM 

■***'• w'f M t S‘ J[ f fl i4 f ^ S 


# S 

=f=ir /j 


s es,,. 


TC 


-r- :S; ® ^ — 


^ "was tliG [^dulvGsJ thirtictli ycai’j tli6 sprinff, tliG 

first month. ^ oj 6 


2 In sumniGr, [our] troops halted at Ch‘ing. 

3 In autumn, in the SGVGiith month, a body of men from 

Ts‘e reduced Chang. 

4 In the ^ eighth month, on Kwei-hae, vre buried [duke 

1 in s] third daughter, — her of Ke. 

5 In the ninth month, on Kang-woo, the first day of the 

eclipsed, when we beat drums 
and oflered victims at the altar of the land. 

6 In winter, the duke and the marquis of Ts‘e met on the 

Loo side of the Tse. 

7 An officer of Ts‘e invaded the hill Jung. 


[The Chuen inserts after par. 1;— ‘In spring, 
the idng commanded the duke of Kwoh to punish 
P'e of Fan; and in summer, in the 4th month, 
on P‘ing-shin, the duke entered Pan, seized 
Cliung-p’e, and carried him to the capital.’} 

Par. 2. Ch’ing, — scelLvLS. Tso-she’s text 
has no before but the rrant does not 
affect the meaning. By we are to under- 
stand a small body of troops under the command 
of a great officer. Maou observes that the 

spoken of Loo, is equivalent to the so often 

used in speaking of the troops of other States. . 


' Tlie troops in the text had probably been 
despatched from the capital, in consequence of 
j®,® ®, Chang (in next par.l; — to 

defend Chang, as Kuh-leang says, or to be 
prepared for any troubles on the borders of Loo. 
They stopped, however, at Ch'ing through fear 
of Ts'e. 


[The Chuen continues here, the narrative 

about the affairs of Tsoo from XXVIII.4: 

* Yuen, son of Iv'ny TTbo of Ts'oo, on his return 
from the invasion of Ch'ing, took up his residence 
in the king’s palace. Tow Yili-sze remonstrated 
with him, and afterwards seized him and put 
him in hand-cuffs. . . . 


118 


THE CIVVS TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK III. 


_ ‘ In nutumn, Tow Pnn, duke of Shin fna the 
viscount of Ts'oo Inid usurped tlic title of kinp, 
here one of Ins oflicers is styled d»jko], put 
Tszc-yxien to de.itli. Tow T*oo-woo-t‘oo be- 
came chief minister, and etnptieil his house 
of everything to alleviate the diflicuUies of the 
State.’] 

Par. 3. Chang w.is a small State, wliosc chief 
town was GO le cast of the city of Tung-p‘ing 
Chow, dep.T‘ae-gan. Its chiefs were Keangs, and 

it is said to have been a Poo-yung of Ive 
But it seems to have been too distant from that 
State to be attached to it. ^ (hmmj), used 

actively, signifies to reduce. It indicates that 
little or no resistance was made ; — Chang surren- 
dered on the appearance of the onemv, and 
thenceforth was part of Ts*e. 

Par. 4. Iioo sent a great officer to superintend 
this service. 

Par. 5. This eclipse took place on the 21st 
August, B. C. 6G3. As to the observances em- 
ployed, see on XXV. i. 


Par. 0. I'he river Tse (see the Shoo, IH.i. Pt. 
i. 20,27: Pt. ii. 10) served ns part of thoboundnry 
lino between Ts'e and Loo, and so we li.'ive 

and the Ts'e side and the Loo 

side of tlie Tse. Tlic hurried meeting here is 
said by Tso-she, to have been to consult about 
the Hill Jung, who had reduced the State of 
Yen to grc.at distress. 

Par. 7. Tlie Hill Jung, or northern Jung, 
had their seat in the pres. dep. of Yung-p‘ing 
^)i Cltili-lc, in the north-east of tliat 
province. There is a most graphic account of 
tins expedition in the “P * 

; but I fear it is mostly fabulous. It proceeds 
on the supposition th.it the marquis of Ts’e liim- 
sclf conducted his troops, attended 
Chung. ICung and Kuh also both think tnat 
he did so, but their %'iew p rocee ds on a laisa 

interpretation of the phrase 7^ See the 
note by the K*nng-he editors in foe. 


Thirty-fa'st year. 


IF i.M n ^ S 


m m M n.m 


[ -p 


0 . 

1 In his thirty first year, in spring, [the duke] built a 
tower in Lang. 

In summer, in the fourth month, the earl of Seeh died. 
[The duke] built a tower in Seeh. , 

In the sixth month, the marquis of Ts‘e came and 
presented [to the duke some of the] prisoners and 
spoils of the Jung. 

In autumn, [the duke] built a tower in Ts‘in. 

In winter, there fell no rain. 


2 

3 

4- 


5 

6 


This might be called a vear ( 
♦SrV These various entries show ho 

^duke was carrying his penchant in this r 
^t to extravagance. Lang,— see I. Lx. 4 ; et « 
bceh was in the south-east of the pres. dis. ( 
T ang, dop. Yen-chow. Ts^n was a little ws 


south of the pres. dis. city of Pan 
Ts‘aou-chow. 

Par. 2. Seel.si.l. There we h.ave the ‘ mar- 
quis’ of Seeh, and here only the carl. 
supposed that the rank of marquis had ^n 
reduced, as in the case of Kc, XX^^I• 6. " 


Ykau XXXII. 


DUKE CinVANG. 


119 


Yv tliinks thnt the name of the carl is not given, 
heenuse Loo had never covenanted -with him. 
Many of the canons for the style, however, 
delivered in this way, are questionable. Yu 

Kaou Yuen dyn.) s.tys here that the 

omission of the name and of the day of death is 
simply a defect of the text. 

Par. 4. here <= # in VI. 6. sug- 
gests the idea of spoils rather than of prisoners of 
war, but I suppose they should both be included 

here. is used of offerings by an inferior to 

a superior, and, as used here, must intimate 
thnt the whole thing was a piece of vainglory 
and display on the part of the marquis of Ts'e. 


The idea of a march past Loo, of the returning 
with all the spoils displayed, which many of the 
critics have adopted from Kung-yang, is properly 
rejected by the K'ang-he editors. The Chuen 
says : — ‘ This affair was contrary to rule. When 
a prince has gained successes over any of the wild 
tribes, he presents the spoils to the king, who 
employs them to terrify other tribes.x Spoils 
taken by one State from another are not so 
presented ; and the princes do not send of their 
spoils to one another.’ 

Par. 5. This entry is made as of an unusual 
thing. Some of the critics say that as there 
were 'no crops on the ground, the want of rain 
could, do no harm. It would, however, occasion 
much suffering. 


Thirty-second year. 


“4^ 


a 


B. 


xIJeeT 


''ffi 

m 

T 


T 

% 

m 


m 


-f 


4^ 


* ft « JB ± if- 0.» fi H 

S ZM Ba.« H.a ® ja ^ a + 

# s..* &m.^z. mM •ifc.w ts.ii - 

A tr.if %Z 

tiff tr.H.it t: I it f* 0.T iS 

nM H.Jtt X H ® ® 

§■ mtr E.ro ft # K. ZM I is, 
i *8 A ^ MM ft. ra mM 

I" M f p.tt.a. ® «' ft * # 

^ B: Zi^.^ ft W tfe. 


■f-wim 

Z.J'l M 

S 

A 

© z. 

ii ffi.r 


'1^ 


mjfii 

3:>: nf 


m mm 


120 


THE CI^U^' TS‘E\V, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK III. 


XXXII. 


In the [duke’s] thirty-second year, in spring, he walled 
Seaoii-kuh. 

In summer, the duke of Sung and the marquis of Ts‘e 
met in Leang-k‘ew. 

In autumn, in the seven tli month, on Kwei-sze, duke 
[Hwan’s] son, Ya, died. . . 

In the eighth, month, on Kwei-hae, the duke died in 
the State-chamber. , 

In winter, in the tenth month, on Ke-we, the [dukes] 
son, Pan, died. 

Duke [Hwan’s] son, K‘ing-foo, went to Ts‘e. 

The Teih invaded Hing. 


Par. 1. Tso-she says that ‘this •vraUing of 
Seaou-kuh -was on hehalf of Kwan Chnng;’ and 
Too Yu adds, in explanation, that duke Chwansr. 
moved by the virtue of Hwan of Ts‘e, to grati^- 
Hm walled the city which he had assigned to 
Kwan Chung, his adviser and minister. K this 
be correct, then Seaou-kuh was, as Too saj-s' 
in Ts^, the same as the Kuh in VU.-i, XXIII. Q. 
It occurs often hereafter, and always bv the name 
of Kuh; and in a Chnen appended to’X. xi. 9, it 
K said that duke Hwan walled it, and placed 


I replied, “When a State is about to flourish, 
intelligent Spirits descend in it, to simvey i 
virtue. When it is going to perish, Spirit^- 
descend in it, to behold its wickedness. _ i^n“ 
there have b^n instances of States flounsmn„ 
from Spirits appearing, and also of States 
ing; cases in point might he adduced 
dynasties of Yn, Hea, Sbang and Chow. _ 
iMg then aske^ what should he drae in tn 
case of this RnirrK nnil Ivo reulicd. “Present t 


it its own proper onerings, wjut*. „ 

Chung m It. But that city is called proper to the dav on which it came.” The king 
I’an Ifing. there- acted accordinglV, and the historiographer went 
■‘^ben he says that to Kicoh. and presented the ojfferings. There he 
was a town of Loo; and they urge that if heard that theduhe q/'Kwoh had been req,uestin„ 
iso-s^ opimon were correct, the text would the favour of enlarged territorg from the Spuit, 
have before tlie name of the place. From bis return, he said, “ Kwoh is sure o 

the text alone we certainlv conclude that Rs.nu. .. ^be duke is oppressive, and hstens 


— — tv « iUUL 

O’ * town of Loo; and thev urge that if 
Iso-she s opimon were correct, the text would 

have ^ before tlie name of the place. From 

the tpt alone we certainly conclude that Seaou- 
Imn belonged to Loo. 

Par. 2. Le3ng-k‘ew was in Ts'e, 30 fe to the 
MS. of the present dis. city of Shins-woo, dep. 
Ts\^n-chow Tso-she says that ‘the marquis 
pt is-e, with a view to punish Ts‘oo for its 
Ch-ing [in the duke’s 2Sth vesirl. 
dnv ? the princes, and that tlie 

^e of Sung requested an interview -ivith him 
others, in consequence of 
“ Leang-k'ew.' Too adds 
tnat the marquis was so pleased with this ze.>ii, 
the duke appear before liirasclf 
^ account of their meeting ! 

strange narrative:— 
In an.umn, in the Tth month, there was the 

iLl 

mr *be liistorio- 

tfraptur of the Interior, the reason of it, and he 


Spirits.” , „ 

The Spirit stayed in Sin six months, ^b®*^ tn 
doke of Kwoh caused the prayer-master iing,tne 
superintendent of the ancestral temple lv'cu, ana 
the historiographer Yin. to sacrifice to 
Spirit promised to give him territory. _ The his- 
toriographer Yin said, “ Alt ! Kwoh will perisn. 
I have heard that, wlien a State is about to 
flourish. I’fs rider receives liis lessons frp*” 
people; and when it is about to pcrish._ he 
receives his lessons from Spirits. The 
are intelligent, correct, and impartial, -^bnir 
course is regulated by the feelings of men. TJic 
slenderness of Kwoh's virtue extends to manj 
things; — how can any increase of territory bo 
obtained ? ”] 

Par. 3. “ Ya died,”— He was in fact niurrlor- 
cd, or done to dcatli, and the statement in the 


Ykaii XXXII. 


DUKE CIIWAXG. 


121 


text is fnsltionod to concc.il the deoil perpetrated. 
The Clnion relates: — ‘At an early time, the 
duke huilt a tower near the residence of the 
Uhang fanii)}', from which he got a sight of 
hiring .lin [f.e., ‘the eldest Jin.’ Jin was the 
surname of tlic Cliangs], and followed her; but 
she shut tlie door ngtainst him. He then said 
he would make her I^is wife, when she consented 
to his desiras, entfing at the same time her arm, 
and ti'M the Hood making a covenant with him. 
She afterwards bore a sun to the duke, who was 
called Pan. 

‘ On oecasion of a sacrifice for rain, the duke 
was discoursing on the subject at the residence 
of the Lcang family, Avhile his daughter was 
looking on at what was takinff place. The chief 
groom Loh was outside the wall, and attempted 
to made sport with her, which incensed her 
brother Pan, so that he ordered Loh to he 
scourged. 'NVhen the duke heard of it, he said, 
“ You should have had him put to death. He 
is nut a man to be scourged. Loh is possessed 
of great strength, and can throw the cover of a 

carriage [The meaning of here is much 

disputed] over the south g.ite.” 

‘When the duke was ill, he consulted his 
half-brother Shuh-ya about who should be his 
successor, and Ya said, ‘K‘ing-foo [Ta's own 
full brother] has ability.” The duke also asked 
his full brother Ke-yew, who replied that he 
would support Pan to the death. “A little 
ago,” said the duke, ‘‘ Ya mentioned the ability 
of K‘ing-foo.” On this Ch‘ing Ke [Ch'ing was 
the hon. title of Ke- 3 ’ew] sent a messenger with 
the duke’s order to command He-shuh [Shuh-ya. 
He was his hon. title] to wait in the farail}' of 
the officer K‘een-woo, where he made Iv’een Ke 
present poison to him, with the message, “Drink 
it, and your posterity shall be preserved in the 
State. If .vou do not drink it, 3 'ou shall die, and 
your posteritj’ shall be made no account of.” 
He drauk the poison, returned as far as K*wei- 
ts’eaen, and died. His son was made the first 
of the Shuh-sun family'.’ 

The critics for the most part justify Ke-yew 
for taking off Shuh-ya in the maimer described 
in the Chuen. Yew was the full brother of 
duke Chwang, and faithful, having the interests 
of the State at heart. K‘ing-foo and Shiili-v’a 
were half-brothers of Chwang, themselves IWl 
brothers; and King-foo’s ambitions and crafty 
disposition was well known. He was carrying 
on a criminal intrigue with Gae Kenng,'nnd 
his aim was to become marquis himself. From 
what occurred at the duke’s deatli-bed, it ap- 
peared to Ke-j’Sw that Ya was confederate with 
his brother, and he therefore took liira off, as 
the best wa.v to weaken K‘ing-foo, aud secure 
the succession of Pan. Shih Keae ; 

A.D. 1003 — 1057) discourses on the subject in 
the following way: — ‘Affection between bro- 
thers, and righteousness between ruler and 
subject: — neither of these things can be dis- 
pensed with- But if a paramount swai- be 
allowed to the affection, it may happen 'that 
the righteousness cannot be maintained ; and 
if it be allowed to the righteousness, it may 
happen that the affection cannot have its course. 
■When such cases occur, it requires sagely wis- 
dom and virtue to deal in them aright. ’iVhen 
king Woo died, his brothers Kwan aud Ts‘ae led 


on Woo-kftng to rebel. If the ’duke of Chow- 
had regarded merely' his affection for his bro- 
thers, the kingdom must have been ruined, and 
the young king imperilled. He would not 
sacrifice tlie kingdom to his own iudividuol 
feelings, nor allow his private affection to over- 
rule the righteousness due from him as a subject 
to his sovereign ; and so, in the strength of great 
^ righteousness, he punished his brothers with 
death, in the case before tts, Shuli-ya wanted to 
raise K‘ing-foo to the lordship of Loo. If Ke- 
yew had regarded merely his affection for his 
brothers, Kdiig-foo must have become marquis, 
and Loo would have been thrown into confusion. 
Yew would not allow his private feelings to 
prevent the discharge of his public duty, nor 
exchange for the life of one man the benefit of 
the whole State ; and so, in the stern discharge 
of great public righteousness, he poisoned Ya. 
After ages can surely examine the nature of his 
deed. When the duke of Chow cut off his 
brothers Kwan and Ts'ae, be proclaimed their 
guilt. When Ke-yew poisoned Shuh-ya, he 
concealed the deed. The crime of the duke of 
Chow’s two brothers was displayed ; the crime 
of He-shuh was still hidden, and could not be 
known. And hence it is that it appears in the 
text as if he had died a natur.*!! death.’ 

Par. 4. ^ is expl.'iiued by Kung, Kuh, 

and others, as— TF* ‘the right chamber.' 
See the note in the Shoo, on V. xxii. 10. The last 
or innermost of the gates of the king’s palace, 
or of the palace of the prince of a State, was 
called , and inside it were the apart- 

ments called ts'in (|{^). That character 
means ‘to sleep,’ but the is‘in were not bed- 
rooms, in our sense of the term. They did not 
form part of the harem. There were three of 
them, — the Kaou (|^j) or ‘High’ ts'iii, the 

Zoo ts'in, and the Seaou (/J>) or ‘Small’ ts'in. 

The Loo was the State cliamber, where the 
king or prince gave audience to his ministers, 
and sometimes feasted his guests ; and here it 
was proper he should die, oxien to the visits of 
his ministers, and with none of his wives or 
female attendants about him. The Chuen says 
that ‘on tiie duke’s death, hi- sun I’an sueecrd'cd 
to him, and stopped in the house of tlie otiicer 
Cliang [As appears from the j>rovious Cliuen, the 
house of his mother’s family.]’ 

Pur. a. Here we have another concealment 
of the truth, for the new marquis was murdered, 
without any of the mitigating circumstances 
which liave been urgcv! to justify tlio deed of 
Ke-yew in putting Slmh-yu to dentil. The 
Chuen says: — *Kung-cliung [K-ing-foo. Kong 
is the hun. title, and Clmng the desigii.'itiniil 
enipiored tlie chief groom Lull to murder t.'ie 
young marquis Pan in the liuuso of the Clia;!!' 
family. Ch'ing Kc tiicn fied to Clrin, t.ni! 
another son oj Chwang, hnaten as dukc 3Iin. mis 
raised to tlie murquisatc.’ Witli regard to tlie 
Inngn.agc of the parngrnpli, simply 

means ‘ tlie son Pan.’ Pun liad, indcetl, succeed- 
ed to Ills fatlier. but Cliwang was .«till miburied. 

The year, moreover, liad not closed, and a new 
rule had not been publicly inaugurated. *i'be 


Id 


VOL. V. 


122 


THE CH'UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


jSOdtClh. 


new mnrquis, therefore, is not ncknowicdgcd ns 
such. His rule wns nhortivc. He is not cnilcd 
or and his death is described by 

instead of Instead of Q Kung and 

Kuh rend ; but Zj^ was in the llth 

month, not the 10th. 

Par. G. K*ing-foo liad murdered Pan, and 
aimed to become marquis himself. Somethiug, 
however, was in the wa}’ of his immediately ac- 
complistiinghis object, and here he goes to Ts'e, 
probably to rejiresent the things which had oc- 
curred in Loo in the manner most favourable to 
himself, and to pave the way for his further 
projects. . Maou thinks that is a euphem- 
ism for ; but there is no necessity for that 
view. But who had secured the succession of 
duke Min? The last two clauses of the Inst 


have translated the concluding one passively; 
but the K*nng-ho editors carry on ^ to 

"ff ns its subject. I do not see how Ch'ing Kc, 

himself compelled to flee the State, could effect 
the acknowledgment of Min. Probably K‘ing- 
foo saw that if, after murdering one of Cliwang’s 
sons, he proceeded at once- to sot the other a- 
side, public feeling would bo Too strong for him; 
and he therefore co-operated with other officers 
in the designation of Min, then only 8 years 
old ; — ^meaning to deal with him ere long. • 
Par. 7. Hing was a marquisatc held^ by de- 
scendants of the duke of Chow. Its cliief town 

was at first in the pres. dis. of Hing-t'ae, (M 
dcp. Shun-tih, Ciiih-lc ; but^ in two years 

after this time, at a place 12 le to the soutl^west 
of the pres. dep. city of Tung-ch‘ang, Shan- 
tung. Teih is the general name for the^ wild 
tribes of the north. This is the first mention of 
them in the Ch'un T8‘cw. 


book 


BUKE JfiK. 


»9.sM 

B§M 


M ^,'sp 

«SM 


124 


THE CII'UIs TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK IV. 


I. 


1 It was [the duke’s] first 3 ’^ear, the spring, the kings first 

month. ' 

2 A body of men from Ts‘e [went to] relieve King. 

3 In summer, in the sixth month, on Sin-yew, we buried our 

ruler, duke Chwang. , . » 

4 In autumn, the duke made a covenant with the marquis of 

Ts‘e at Loh-koo. 

5 The officer Ke came back to Loo. 

6 In winter, Ohung-sun of Ts‘e came [to Loo]. 


Title op the Book. — ^ ‘Duke Mifi.’ 

This was a son of duke Chwang, by a half-sister 
of the duchess Gae Kcang, one of the ladies, who 
accompanied her from Ts‘e to the harem of Loo 
in Chwang’s 24th year, and who is generally 
mentioned as Shuh Keang He 

could only be, therefore, about 8 years old at his 
father’s death. Called to the marquisate in 
consequence of the murder of his brother Pan, 
his own brief rule was closed in as hapless a 
manner by a similar end. His name was K‘e-fong 

appears in the Historical Kecorcls 
as , because the emperor King f of 


the Han dynasty was also named K‘e 
and another K‘e could not appear in a work then 
published. The honorary title Min denotes — 
‘ Victim of calamity in the State 

B 


Min’s rule embraced the years B. C. 660, 658. 
His Ist year synchronized with the 16th of 
of king Hwuy the 25th of Hwan 

of Ts’e; the 16th of Keen of Tsin; the 


8 th of E (^) of Wei; the l'4th of Midi (^) 
of Is’ne; the 12th of W&n of Clding; the 
1st of Pan, duke Ch’aou (]|g ^ 3 ^) of 
Ts'nou ; tlie 32d of Soucn of Ch'in ; the 

12th of llwuy of Kc; tlic 21sl of llwtin 


I of Sung; the 8 d of Ch-ing(^) of Ts'inJ 
! and the 11th of Ch'ing (^j^) of Ts‘ 00 . 

Par.l. SeeonI,i.l;ni.i.l. Tso-she that 

the par. does not conclude with gjj 
Cciuse the State was in confusion. * 

Par. 2. The Chuen has here ‘ The Teih had 

invaded Hing. Kwan Kiug-chung 
Kwan E-woo’s hon. title] said to the marquis of 
Ts'e, “The Teih and Jung are wolves, to whom 
no indulgence should be given : within the Sta es 
of the Great land, all are nearly related, an 
none siionld he abandoned; luxurious repose is 
a poison, ivhich should not be cherished. ® 
ode says, ‘Did we not long to return? 
were afraid of wliat was written in tlm ta e s 
[The She, Part II. i. VIII.] ;’ meaning that the 
States should compassionate one another m 
calamities they were exposed to. I beg you 
succour Hing, in accordance with what is com 
manded in the tablets.” On this a force went rom 
Ts‘e to succour Hing.’ indicates that 

the marquis of Ts‘e did not go to Hing himself, 
nor send a great officer. It would hai e been 
better if he had done so. See on V.i. 2. 

Par. 3. lliis interment took place late, c 
cause,’ saj's Tso-she, ‘of the troubles an 
confusion in the State.’ 

Parr. 4, 6. Tlie Chuen says:— ‘Tlie duke 
covenanted with the marquis of Ts'e at Loh- o^ 
and bcsouglit liini to restore Kc-yiiw [who a 


Ybar L 


DUKE MIN. 


fled to Cli'in. See the Cliuen on ni.xxxii.o]. forces they extinguished the States of Kfing, 
The marquis consented, and sent to call Ye\r Hbh, and Wei ; see on the title of the 
from Ch'in, tlic diike linlting at Lang to wait She, I.ix.) and on the return of the expedi- 
for him.’ On p. 6 Tso says that tlie simple tion the marquis walled K‘euh-yuh for his son, 
stvlo Kc-tsze, ‘27/c Ke’ or ‘the officer Ke,’ Kfing to Chaou Snh, and Wei to Peih 

indicates commendation. P'”' 

^ oze Wei said (o/itmse(/l "Iheviarguts's eldest son 
The cliild-marquis must have had the meet- wiU not get possession of the State. He has 


ing with tiie marquis of Ts‘e arranged for him, 
and the question has been much discussed 
among tiic critics ns to wlio suggested to him to 
request the return of Ke-yew. After all thej’ have 
said, I think it may have proceeded from the 
boy himself. The ^ gives a pretty 
account of his liolding tlic marquis by the skirt, 
and asking him to bring Kc-yew back to save 
him from K‘ing-foo. Koo-loh was in Ts'e, — ^in 


been separately established in a capital city 
[See the Chuen appended to HI. x.\viii. IJ, 
and had the dignity of a high minister [as 
leader of the 2d army]. His greatness has al- 
ready culminated; — how should he become mar- 
quis in ndition to this ? He had better make 
his escape to some other State, and not allow 
the charge of guilt to fall upon him. Might he 
not be satisfied to play the part of T‘ae-pih of 
Woo [See on Ana. VJII. 1] ? He will still have 
an excellent fame : — how much better than to 


pres. dis. of P‘ing-yin |J^), dep. T‘ae-gan. calamity come on him! Moreover, 

Par. 6. Chung-sun was a^fficer of Ts'e, — a proverb says, ‘If one’s heiirt have no flaw, 

grandson of Chung, himself a son of duke Seang he regret ha^ng no family?’ If 

r/dl wEt AL JL Jtb FP- Heaven mean to confer dignity on our eldest 
or duke He (’(ip ^ f ^ ;2: prfnce, shall there be no Tsin f^ him ? ” 

The two characters are here used as an- .Tl,e diviner Ten said, “The descendants of 
other clan-name. His n.nme was Tseaou (]^). Peih Wan are sure to become great. ^(=10, 
Tlie Chuen says: — ‘In winter, Chnng-sun Tscaou 000)is the completion of numbers, and Wei 
ofTs'ecame to investigate the difficulties of our =]ofty) is a grand name. That his rewards 
condition, and is here mentioned by Iiis clan- should commence with this Wei is a proof that 
name, in commendation. On his return he said, Heaven is opening up his way. With reference 
“If K‘ing-foo be not removed, the troubles of jg ggg g£ Heaven we speak of ‘the millions 
Loo will not have an end.” “But how shall he gf jjis people;’ with reference to the prince of a 
be removed?" asked the duke. “ Exciting troub- state, of ‘the myriads.’ Since, in the case of 
les without ceasing,” replied Tseaou, “he will Pem Wan, the grand name, i.e.,i|, is followed 
destroy himself. Toucan wait for the issue.” ^ 

The duke said, “May we now take Loo to our- ^gjtitudes wiU belong to his posierity” 
selves ?” Tseaou answered, “No. Loo stiU ^od, Peih Wan had divined 

holds fast to the rules of Chow, and these are ^^out his becoming an officer of 

a sure foundation for a State. I have heard ^ ^ 

the saying, that when a State is about to perish , 

.. i V j . j j * 1 . .,1 and aftenvards, by the manipulation, Pe 

its root must first be destroyed, and then the =— ^ . . , . ^ , 

destruction of the branches and leaves will fol- (=M>- Sm Leaou interpreted it to be lucky. 

low. While Loo does not abandon the rules of ” Chun,” said he, “ indicates Firmness, and 


Chow, it will not be possible to move it. Let Pe indicates Entering; what could be more 

^ ^ fortunate ? — ^he must become numerous and 

it be the object of your grace to quiet the 


troubles of Loo, and be friendly to it. To be 


prosperous. Moreover, the symbol Chin f ; 


friendly with States that observe the rules of loirex^part of Chun) becomes that for tlic 

propriety ; to help those that have in them the c^rth ( ); the lower half of Pe.) Carriages 

elements of solidity and strength; to complete and horses follow one another; he has feet 
the senaration of those that are divided and to stand on; an elder brother’s lot; the pro- 


propriety ; to help those that have in them the 
elements of solidity and strength; to complete 
the separation of those that arc divided and 
disaffected; and to overthrow those that are full 
of disorder and confusion: — these are the me- 
thods by which a prince with the functions of 
president among the States proceeds.’” 

[The Chuen here returns to the afihirs of 
Tsin: — * Tlie marquis of Tsin formed two armies 
[See the Chuen after lll.xvi.5) taking the 
command of the 1st one himself, while his eldest 
son Slun-sfing commanded the other. Cliaou 
Suh drove the marquis’s chariot, and Peih Wan 
was the spearman on his right. With these 


tection of a mother; and is the attraction of the 
I multitudes. Thesesix indications [arising from 
the change of the lowest line in the di.igrnm 
Chun] will not cliangc. United, tliey indicate 
his firmness; in their repose, they indicate his 
majesty : — ^the divination is that of a duke or a 
marquis. Himself tbc descendant of a duke 
[Peih Wan was descended from one of the lords 
of Peili; but of the early histoiy of that princi- 
p.ality we know nothing], his posterity shall 
return to the original dignity.”*] 


126 


THE CII'UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK lY. 


Second year. 


AH.^ 


yfJbtr^ ^ 

i^o 1^ 


§ 


rfrr 


iE 

n. 


235 


=^. 


A 


_ T A 

I i‘£ 1-5‘i i ^ if i'f f f S #'?■ 

* U * ' m I 1 ^ l_Jil S B rt K ^ ^ >ff . ** *'- ■ » • %A. - ■ - XbJC^ ^ ••^'^ 


—T ■^. '"‘<1 /yi o -rti 

<a- K «. [ 

0fcA^SI^tr.;S: 
S A WJ 

S $ 5!<.5 * * ® h 

t.^ii ^l.H a i: 

f f i » i‘^ ^ 

I.*;'®? ■?‘.® B iit .2;.^ 

fj m w ^ *, 

A.M 5K.® #, ;S ^ 


M Kmvt A 
± ®.A M. 
± ^ 

* # # ;2.*. 
A # 0. JSsi[ # 
a ^ I& # 
Bff #f ^ IB 
» I' 


0 . 


^ Bx-& 

mm&n ^ 

M A m A M 

p B. 


fi 

0 

ii. 

■ffil. 


VUAR II. 


DUKE »riN. 


127 

as 31; ^ iJ © S ¥ « » Jii n 

M *."?■ $iM # M A m &.Z m A 
ifc J'l s * ?Br.0. 

# :«• il ^ ji ^ # Hn K 3iS) a m mM 
^ * nkM ja ZM s s ajii X =f -tfi,.® it 
#.0.^ M M.M -g- m ffi = W.it -& ^ 

m.z.^ wm 

mm m 

^ M’MM *k g.T- 

r^mwi^ 9 &9M ? #. A 

gfi A ® If M T\A ¥ ^ Ul JfiT ® ® ^ 

S ■? 7-M M m A A ll.^a- A A;. 

H.Jt.ro #. ^ M ® a 

p ^ w ^.s #.-* s % Pf.ii mm:^ 

S.« ^ #.S ikt.9 ® Jar.-fft ^ 

W Bff •tfc.SS.W) MMM 

m.MM 9iU%:^m±Jt f.B.^ = f- 

m,z ^ i.® ^Affi + ssg«7j 
xwT^m H.s A # ^ ai# -f - mmmz m,-?t 

JE g ^ l.S ±M T- iiS.^ M gift »:j!Z. 
z.^.r- *.# ro ¥ ^ 3c JE mm w,s 
it min &.)^ nm^ = s wj 

¥'Mg«B#if:S-t?5^giS ^.ii It. W :* Z.^ 

gf m,zM ^ ^ 

S.« ¥ ® ES a#.A 9 ¥-.# * S A ¥ W ^ H. 

Its ^ Z,^ ¥ 3^ A.A A % ± W ¥•.¥ 

H ft 0.^ ♦ ftJ'I ¥• S # &..Z H H M ¥ 

KK.3i¥-fe.ft:^^0.W.gKg Tt<^-^ 
0.¥ ^ 9R gift B SI A.A.Jt-tfc. 

¥ iw if 3 c. 0 .ii.S m^ 9 A. &M 
¥.M ‘^M MM-HAM^Zm JMZmm 

z.^ Mm,z»^ # w.« g a 


dbb 

¥ ¥ 9M Z gift mW'Bi m 

■fs 91 ¥ » s m.iB.®. 0.# 
mm 9, B.m mm ^ ^ ¥ -a. 
JS ffM gift ^^Z z,:k ^ 

mm9$9MZZZBM.^B. 
^ S- ¥ M 9M ^S.Z^ 
27. A S.^ ^ ■fe.® S.S.M ♦■ 
ft A # ^ itt # fe i -ffii.# 
S 0.^ 


w ^ A A 
•ca-ffli A.ftJ. 

.f .K.® A 
^ 3^ A g. 
IS 51 A,^ 
A T S: ^ 
SI,A.<£^ ;2. 
¥ A3S A 


128 


THE CH'ljS TS'EW, WITH THE TSU CTIUEX. 


BOOK IV. 


# f.m m © 

7j 7c x,;2; m 


X. 


= ii-Jil * 
il.:4f .ffi it. 


Ji M © .* flJ © flff SI 5i.M 

® ^ ^ ^ iz B, 

Bn a Jil M lii IP 
ii fill it m 

m iiJt » 34' * H.X 

■& m -l&.il 


MM Z 
M'iil.TC 
imzL^. 

4s 


H ^IS ■&■ 


lir 

JlU\ 


E ^ 

m'M. 


II. 1 In the [duhe’s] second year, 


fill 

$ #'4'4.i 

in the kin.£j’s first 


S- 


5 

6 


7 

8 

Par. 1. 


V..V, isvitjviju ^'uuij in Springy m mt; ••* 

month, a force from Ts‘e removed [the people of] Yan^. 

In summer, in the fifth montli, on Yih-yciv, [the duke] of- 
fered the fortunate ie sacrifice on [placing the tablet of] 
duke Clnvang [in the ancestral temple]. 

In autumn, in the eighth month, on Sin-ch‘ow, the duke 
died. 

In the ninth month, [duke Chivang’s] wife, the lady Keang, 
withdrew to Choo. 

Duke [Hwan’s] son, K‘ing-foo, fled to Keu. 

In wintei’, the ofiSicer Kaou ofTs‘e came and made a cove- 
nant. 

In the twelfth month, theTeih entered [the capital of] YTei. 

Chfiiiff threw awav its armv. 


awaj 

Tang ^vas a marqnisate, held by 
some br.anch of the House of Chow. It is r«^ 

ferred to the pres. dis. of E-shwuy TjO 

dep. E-chow. ^,--seeIII.i.8;.x.3. Itissup- 
posed that Ts*e removed the people to the pres, 
dis. of Tih-too ^), near the seat of its 

oum power. Wliether duke Hwan altogether 
extinguuhed the House of Yang, or permitted it 
to continue its sacrifices in its’ new site as an 
att^hed territory, we cannot tell. 

[The Chuen has here: — • In spring, the duke 
of Kwoh defeated the Dog Jung at the bend of 
the Wei. Chow Che-k'eaou said, “Success be- 
stowed where there is no virtue is the prelude to 

Par. 2. The meaning of here is determin- 
ed by the ^ -which precedes it, though tliat 

’^^.hen the period of 


r, and 


Its arm}’ 

service on these occasions was called jji}[ 
also the latter term h.aving reference to the 
sacrifice offered to all the Spirit-occupants of 
the temple, the former to the discrumnation of 
the order of kindred according to which the 
new tablet received its place. is employed 

of other sacrificial occasions, but they are not 
to be thought of here. But 25 months at least 
must have elapsed from the death before tne 
new tablet could be placed in the temple, ana 
duke Chwang had now been dead only --i 
months ; — the service was performed before the 
proper time. As Tso-she says, it was too early 

M-Si)* 

Par. 3. Again we h.ave a case of base mur- 
der spoken of ns if it had been a natural deatn. 
The Qiuen says : — ‘Before this, the duke’s tutor 
had violently taken away some fields belonging 
to Pull K‘e, the duke not forbidding him. _ Jn 
the autumn, at tliis time, Kung-chung 
K‘ing-foo] employed Puli K‘e to murder tne 
duke at the IFoo side-eate of the palace. 

Par. 4. Ctomp. m.l2. aiic difference be- 
tween the two parr, is, that here the ladys 
surname ( 3^ ) is given, while there it is sup- 
pressed. But we cannot account for the differ- 
ence, and must accept the entries ns they cimie 

‘ -acx- no.. 


laWnf r 1 r — men jus Spirit- 

nio ♦!. solemnly placed in the ancestral tem- 
ple, the tablet of one of his an^tors 
mmov^, according to a certain pres^bed order 

tiiI.inim)^s™of*tim/”t^ remain 

. V, rl'J^SS Ot time, it was m turn nu«hi»,I 1 -'o *uubi. iu:i;v;iii. mv wiituvB 

the Doctrinc*of* tho^ i^ipsr or prince:— see i f«>n> the historiographers. Kea,Enh(^, 

can, XIX. 4. The whole j and other critics, say that Gae Keang has her 


Ycau IL 


DUKE MIK. 


129 


surname given to her because she was not so 
wicked as Wftn Keang! The reason of her with- 
drawal from Loo is plain. K‘ing-foo had now 
procured the death of two of Chwang’s sons, 
and had only increased the general odionr with 
which he was regarded. Gae Ke.mg and he were 
living criininally together. She had probably 
been privj' to the deatiis of Pan and duke jUju. 
She was obliged to withdraw from the storm of 
popular indignation. Tl>e reason of her going 
to Choo was, perliaps, to make friends with Ke- 
yew, wlio liad also taken refuge in that State. 

Here, ns in otlier places, Kung-yang has 

instead of W- 
Par. o. K‘ing-foo also was obliged to flee the 
State. The Chuen says : — ‘ Ch‘ing-ke, immedi- 
aieli/ on the duke's death, had gone to_ Choo, 
taking with him dttke Chwang's remaining son, 
who was afienoards duke He ; and when Kung- 
chung fled to Keu, he returned to the State, 
and raised this son to the marquisnte. He 
afterwards sent bribes to Keu, and requested the 
delivery of Ivung-chnng. Tlie people of Ken 
were sending him back; but when ho got to 
Meih, he sent duke Hwan's son, Yu, to hegfor 


month, the Teih invaded Wei, the marquis of 
which, duke £, was noted for his fondness for 
storks. So fond was he of the creatures, that 
some of them were carried about in great offi- 
cers’ carriages. When the time for fighting 
came, and the people received their bnff-coats, 
they all said, “ Employ the storks. The storks 
truly have their revenues and dignities; — how 
should we be able to fight ?” The duke gave his 
semicircle of jade to Shih K‘e; and an arrow to 
King Chwang, and appointed them to guard the 
dty, s.T.ying, “ With these emblems of authority 
aid the State, doing whatever you shall deem 
most advantageous.” To bis wife he gave his 
embroidered robe, saying to her, “Listen to these 
two officers.” He then mounted his war-chariot, 
K‘eu K'nng being charioteer, and Tsze-pih the 
spearman on the right. Hwang E led the way 
in front with one body of men, and K'ung Ying- 
ts'e brought up the rear. A battle was fought 
with the Teih nCiir the marsh of Yung, when 
the army of Wei was shamefully defeated, and 
the State itself might be said to be extinguish^. 
The marquis would not leave his flag, which 
made the defeat the ^ater. . The Teih 
made prisoners of the lilstoriographcrs Hwa 
Lung-hwah and Le K'ung, and were carrying 


his life. The request was refused, and Yu went r:., « “ 

bact weeping loudly as he went. IFhen Kung- 

Sg hZd him, he said, “It is the voice It the superstition of the 

hS rthe name of the Kung-tsze Yu],” and historiographers, 

xi«s “““ b j» Tj,g sacrifices of the State are really m our man- 

agement ; and if we do not go before j-ou, the city 
cannot be taken.” On this they were allowed 


hanged himself. 

‘Duke ifin was the son of Shuh Keang, a 
sister of Gae Keang, on which account the peo 
plo of Ts'e had promoted his appointment to be 
marquis. Kung-chung had been esurying on a 
criminal intrigue with Gae Keang, who wished 
liinr to get the State, and she jiad, with that view, 
been privy to the death of Alin. She had there- 
fore tvithdrawu to Choo, but an officer of Ts'e 
took her, put her to death in E, and carried her 
body back with him. Duke He requested that 
it might be given to him, and then buried her.’ 

[Here follow in the Chuen some p.articulars 
about Ke-yew ; — ‘Just before the birth of Chliig- 
ke, duke Hwan made the father of Ts'oo-k'cw, 
master of the diviners, consult the tortiasc-sliell, 
which ho did, saying, '• It will be a boy, whose 
name shall bo called Yiiw. His place will be at 
the right of the duke, liotwccii the two altars of 
the land. He shall be a liclji to the ducal House; 
and when the family of Ko shall perish. Loo 
will not flourish.” He also consulted the milfoil 
about the child, and obtained the diagram Ta- 


yew ( ==) , and then K'cen 

“He shall come back,” said he, “to the same 
distinction as his father. They shall reverence 
him ns if he were in their ruler’s place.” I’nicn 
the boy was born, there was a figure on his hand, 

—that of the character Yew •'md he was 

named accordingly!’] 

Par. 6. Ivaou is inentione<l without name or 
designation, but with a simple .after the 

clan-name, as in the c.ase of Kc-t.'zo. I. .V ’Tlie 
object of bis coming to Loo was to hell* in the 
re-ostablislinient of onlor. and that lie might In? 
able to report al>oul the character of tlie new 
roarquis. Wit!» him he made the covenant.— tni 
behalf ofTsv. 

Par. 7. The min whieh the Teih de.nlt on 
Wei is relatcil in the Chuen:— ‘in the ll’th 


to go before the pursuers; and when they reached 
the wall, they said to the officers who had been 
left to guard the city, “ You must not remain 
here.” That same night, Sliih and King left the 
city with the people; and the Teih entered it, 
and then pursued, inflicting another defeat on 
the fugitives at the Ho. 

‘Before this, when duke Hwuy [Soh of H.xvi. 
HyCtal.} succeeded to Wei, he was young, and 
the people of Ts'e required Ch'aou-pih to form 
a connection with Scuen Keang [See tlie Ciiuen, 
on II. svi. n. Scuen Keang was Soli’s motlicr, 
and ChMou-pih was a half-brotlicr]; and when 
he refused, they compcllc<l him to do it. From 
this nnion there sprang Ts'c-iszc. .SK/n who was 
aftenrards duke Tae, Iltriig who was a/trr wards 
duke Wfiti. the wife of llwan of Siing^ and the 
wife of Mull of Hen [See on the She, 1. iv. X.]. 
Ilwny had gone to 'I’s’e. liefore //<•’ inrashn of the 
Trill, liecaiise of the many troubhw of Wei; ninf 
after their two defe.its, duke Hwan of Sune met 
the fugitives at the Ho, and earriwl them over 
the river at night. 

‘ r\ll that remained of the people of W<'i, mm 
and women, only nmounto<l to 7;;o men: ami 
when to these were added the peojih- of Kuii.t 
and T*ang. the number was only .V.io. Slin, cr 
duke Tac. was raiswl to E’s place, and lin-J in 
a hut in Ts'aou. [another town of Wt-D. Ga 
this oetniion the wife of Muh of licit made the 
Tmc ChV 5"^. The She. I.iv. f-.V .Y.J. 
Tlie marquis of ’FsH* sent hi* r’l’/sr son. W(»w 
k‘wei. with i-hariot* .md .” ••'Xm-ile-l ttmn, to 
j gn.anl T<*.nn!i. He .iNo ‘ont to fh-dnte.-. 
j of 4 horse*; ‘«it< of ft,--, 

j sheep, pij-*. fotrls and d-v**, in -ij n; -rd 
j niaicrial* fer d'lor*. H*- ale, .« -n; • , 

I gniat cnrriaj:,- < rn'.m.-ntfd r;;h *. -!• 

. skin, and r.O pb'ccs ef i:!:? re; l-.r.-J 


vot V. 


17 


130 


THE CI1‘UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CTIUEN. 


BOOK IV. 


The text snys that ‘the Tcih entered Wei;’ 
and tlio critics arc divided on tlie amount of 
meanin" in the term * entered.’ Fan Ning thinks 
it is equivalent to ‘extinguished.’ Sun ICuoh 
thinks that, ns we afterward find Wei mentioned 
in the Ch‘un Ts‘ew, the Tcih could not Imvc ! 
taken possession of the territory. The Chuen 
sliows that the entry of the Tcih into tlic State, I 
and their capture of its capital, were not follow- 
ed by the extinction of the State. Sec what lias 

been said about A on I. ii. 2. 

Par. 8. The Chuen says on this par. : — * * The 
earl of Ch‘ing hated Kaou K‘ih, and sent him 
with an army to the borders of the IIo, where 
he remained stationed for a long time, without 
being recalled. Tlie troops dispersed, and re- 
turned to their homes. K'aou K‘ih himself fied 
to Ch‘in ; and the people of Ch'ing, with reference 
to the affair, made the Ts‘ing Jin (Tlie She, I. 
vii. ode V.).’ K‘nou K*ih was an officer of 
Ch'ing, covetous and disrespectful to Iiis ruler, 
who wanted to get rid of him, and took the 


method described in the Chuen to do so. 

‘abandoned its army’ i.e,, sent it away 


to the borders, and then took no more thought 
about it. 

[Here follow four narratives in the Chuen : — 
1st. ‘The marquis of Tsin proposed sending 
his eldest son Shin-sSng to invade the Kaou-Iuh 
tribe of the eastern hills [in Shan-sc], when Le 
K‘ih remonstrated, saying, “It is the business 
of the eldest son to bear the vessels of millet 
for the great sacrifices, and for those at the 
altars of the land and the grain, and rlso to in- 
spect the provisions cooked for the ruler every 
morning and evening. On this account he is 
styled the ‘great son.’ When the ruler goes 
abroad, he guards the capital; and if another 
be appointed to guard it, he attends upon his 
father. When he attends upon him, he is called 
‘ Soother of the host;’ when he stays behind on 
guard, he is called ‘Inspector of the State;’ — 
this is the ancient rule. But to lead the army 
and determine its movements and plans, issuing 
all commands to the troops: — this is wliat the 
ruler and his chief minister have to provide for; 
it is not the business of the eldest son. The 
conduct of an army all depends on the definite 
commands which are given. If the son receive 
the commands of another, it is injurious to his 
majesty; if he determines himself the com- 
mands, he is nnfilial. For this reason the ruler’s 
proper son and heir ought not to have the com- 
mand of the army. The ruler fails to employ the 
nght man in devolving the command on him ; 
and if, as commander, he lose the majesty which 
belongs to him, how can he aftenvards be em- 

moreover, has hoard 
that the Kaou-lohs will fight. Leave, I pray you, 
your Bcm alone, and do not send him.” The duke 
siud, “ I have many sons, and I do not yet know 
« ■ appoint my successor.” And on 

this K ih withdrew, without making any reply. 
When he saw the duke’s eldest son, the prin4 
asked him whether ho was to be disowned, and 
K ih replied, “ Let the people know liovv you 

attending to these two thinn’s* whv 

should you be disowned? As a son, moreover. 


you have to fear lest you should not be filial ; 
you have not to fear lest you should not be ap- 
pointed to the succession. Cultivate yourself, 
and do not be finding fault with others; so 
shall you o-senpe calamity.” 

‘WJicn liis eldest son took the command of 
the nnny, the duke gave him a robe of two 
colours, and hi.*! golden semicircle to hang at his 
girdle. IIoo Tuh was his charioteer, and Seen 
Yew the spcaminn on his right. Lcang Yu-tsze- 
ynng was cljnriotccr to Han E [who led the 
2d host], and Seen Tnn-muh was the spearman 
on his right. TJie great officer Yang-sheh acted 
ns adjutant. 

‘ Seen Yew said, “ It is only on this expedition 
that ho has worn this parti-coloured robe, and 
carried this important sjTnbol. Let him exert 
himself, nud admit nothing evil in his own half 
of his person. With his present power, he 
ought to keep calamity far away. Giving him- 
self no occasion for it, what has he to feim ? 
Hoo Tuh, however, sighed and said, “ The time 
is the proof of the thing; the garment is the 
distinction of the person; the symbol is the 
manifestation of the feeling. Were there a rem 
interest in the expedition, the order for it would 
have come earlier; the robe for his person would 
have been of one colour ; and the proper feelmg 
would have given the proper symbol for the 
girdle. This parti-coloured robe shows a wish 
to remove his person; this golden senurarcla 
for the girdle shows the abandonment of kindly 
feeling. The robe thus indicating a wish for 
the removal of the person ; the time shutUng 
the prince up from success ; the garment tmn ; 
the winter killing; the metal cold; and the 
symbol the imperfect circle; — what is there in 
these things to be trusted to ? Although the 
prince may wish to do his utmost, can the Xeiu 
be utterly destroyed ? ” , 

* Leaiig Yu-tsze-yang said, ‘ Tiie commander 
of an army receives his commands in the an- 
cestral temple, and the sacrifidnl flesh at the 
altar of the land. He should wear the ortoary 
dress also; and since the prince cannot do so, 
but has this parti-coloured robe, the nature ot 
the duke’s command may be hence understMd. 
Than tliat the prince should die for being unflii- 
al, it is better that he should make his escape. 
Han E said, “Tlie parti-coloured coat is 
strange and uncommon; the gold semicircle 
shows a wish that he should not retimn;-— 
though he do return, of what good will i* 

The duke has his mind made up.” Seen Tan- 
inuh said, “Even a madman would have Ins 
doubts excited by this dress. The duke’s coni- 
uiand was, ‘Destroy utterly the enemy, and 
then return;’ but can the enemy be utterly 
destroyed ? Even if we should make an end of 
the enemy, there are calumniators in the court ; 
we had better abandon the expedition and go 
away." Hoo Tuh also wished to go ; hut tlie great 
officer Yang-sheh said, “ Tiiis is wrong. If we 
prince disobey his father’s command, he will he 
unfilial; if he abandon the business entrusted to 
him, he will be unfaithfiil. Although he knows 
the cold feeling of his father, he must not choose 
to do evil. Bather let him die in obedience.” 

‘When the prince was about to fighti Hoo 
Tuh remonstrated with him, saying, “Do not 
do so. Sin Pih gave counsel to duke Hwan oi 
Chow fScc the 2d Chuen, after II. xviii.8] say- 
ing, ’’rhe favourite of the harem made equal 


Yeah II. 


DUKE MIN. 232 


to the queen; the favourites of tiie court made 
equal to the ministers of the government; the 
son of a concubine made equal to the legitimate 
son; and another great city made as large as the 
capital: — these are the foundation of disorder.” 
But the duke of Chovr ivould not listen to him, 
. and so came to his unfortunate end. Tlie root 
of disorder is already formed in ITsin. Can 
your succession to the State be made sure? Be 
filial, and seek the repose of the people;— lay 
your plans' for this. It n’iH be better than 
endangering your person, and accelerating the 
imputation to you of guilt.’” 

2d. ‘When Ch‘ing Fung fthe mother of duke 
He. Fung rvas her surname, and Ch‘ing her 
lion, title] heard the oracles concerning Cli'ing- 
ke, she honoured him [See the Chnen introduced 
after par. 5] and sought his guidance, entrusting 


also her son to him. This was the reason why 
Ke secured the succession of duke He.’ 

3d. ‘In the 1st year of He, duke Hwan of 
TVe removed the capital of Hing to E-e, and in 
his second established Wei in Ts‘oo-k‘ew. The 
people of Hing moved to their new seat ns if 
they were going home, and the State of Wei 
forgot its ruin.’ 

4th. ‘Duke Wfin of Wei, in garments of coarse 
linen and a cap of coarse silk, laboured to 
improre his resources; encouraged agriculture; 
promoted trade; treated the mechanics kindly; 
reverently sought the moral instruction of the 
people; stimulated them to learn; imposed no* 
thing but what was right; and employed the able. 
The consequence nras that while his leather 
carriages in his first year were onlj’ SO, in his 
last year they amounted to 300.'] 


BOOK V. Duias HE. 


First year. 


>\ 


E. 


■*B 


A X ®.<a-. 
Keik m 

m, 

-m 


m 

f6, 

*5 

A, 


T~ ^ j^ 


, m W IE 


M 

J 


m 

A 


m 


\'tXK 1. 


DUKE HE. 


133 


AZA 

•m.:^ z 

#5 » B 
'3< 

ifi.M 
ji ® 
B W. 

:* a 


■i!i,?!S ^.!|f 
a !® 


m^A^ 
K mM. 

zm^ 

ffl.-t&.s 

TkmM. 


A mMMMM 

;3.«g ^ Jl Jil5 S 

&mAmm 

itp ^ 

liiB li m.«, 

T m»m 
m. mta.'m 
m Mb^-m 
£ -tfc.P.^. 

z muife 

jM, 


m m B.i&M 
AMm^B, 
A mJ&M tc 
mm 


M-M, 

m HI 

a» 


AM. 


Will 


ZM, Z St, 
W W ■&,■& 

mm mta 


I. 1 It was the [duke’s] first year, the spring, the king’s first 
month, 

2 An army of Ts‘e, an army of Sung, and an army of Ts'aou 

halted at Niieh-pih, [in proceeding] to the rescue of Hing. 

3 In summer, in the sixth month, Hing removed [its capital] 

to E-e. 

4 The army of Ts'e, the army of Sung, and the army of Ts'aou 

walled [the new capital of] Hing. 

5 In autumn, in the seventh month, on Mow-shin, duke 

[Chwan^’s] wife, the lady Keang, died at E, an officer of 
Ts‘e taking her [body] back with him. 

6 A body of men from Ts‘oo invaded Ch'ing. 

7 In the eighth month, the duke had a meeting with the 

marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the earl of Ch‘ing, 
the earl of Ts‘aou, and an officer of Choo, in Ch'ing. 

8 In the ninth month, the duke defeated an army of Choo 

at Yen. 

9 In vdiiter, in the tenth month, on Jin-woo, duke [Hwan’s] 

son Yew led an army and defeated an army of Keu at 
Le, taking Neu of Keu. 

10 In the twelfth month, on Ting-sze, the coffin of duke 
[Chwang’s] wife arrived from Ts'e. 


Title op the Book.— ‘Duke He.’ 
Tlie mother of duke He iras Ch'ing Fung, men- 
tioned in the 2d narrative of the Chuen appended 
to Min’s last year, and a concuhine of duke 
Chwaug. His name was Sliin ( ^ His rule 


lusted S3 yesirs, B. C. 638—626. His honorary 
title, He, denotes ‘ Careful and Cautious (./J> 


His 1st year sjTichronized with the ISth of 
iring Hwuy; the 27th of Hwan of Ts'e; the 
18th of Heen of Tsin; the 1st of Hwuy, duke 


Wttn ^ of Wei ; the 16th of iluh 


of Ts'ae ; the 14tb of WSn of Ch'ing; the 3d of 
Ch'aou of Ts'aou; the 34th of Seuen of Ch'in; 
the 14th of Hwuy of He; the 23d of Huun of 
Sung; the 1st of Jin-haou, duke Mnh (3 ^ 

of Ts'in; and the 13th of Ch'ing ot 

Ts'oo. 

Far. 1. See on I. i.l; lH.i.1; rv.i. 1. Tso, 
indeed, says needlessly, that the characters iff 
are not found, ‘because the duke was out 
of the State. He n-ent ont and re-entered, but 
there is no record of it ; — to conceal the wicked- 
ness of the State; which was according to rule.’ 


134 


THE CII'UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK .V. 


Par. 2. The j^]|j after is tlic reniiing of 

Kung and Kuh. Tso-shc has '^j^, evident- 
ly a mistake. Ncoh-pih was a place in Hing, 
north-cast from the i)res. dis. city of Lcnou- 

shing (}^p ^j^), dep. Tung-ch‘ang. The Teili 
had again invaded I ling, which applied to Ts*e 
for help, and accordingly we have the armies of 
Ts*e and otiicr Stitt es Im re proceeding to its re- 
lief. The phrases ^ [JjJj, &c., imply that, 

while tlie relieving forces were considerable, 
they were under the command of great officers, 
and not of the princes of the States themselves. 
The critics are much divided in their opinion 
on the allies' halting in their m.arch to relieve 
Hing, most of them condemning it ns improper 
in the urgency of the case. We do not know 
the circumstances sufficiently, however, to judge 
whether it was a prudent measure merely, or 
an artful one, — ^to make their help more prized 
by Hing when ^ven at last. 

Par. 3. E-e (Kung, |J^ -j^),_scc on III. 

xxxii. 7. is here used intransitively. The 

removal is spoken of as if it had been Hing’s 
own act. The Chuen says:— The princes were 
proceeding to relieve Hing, when the people 
dispersed, and fled to the allied armies, w’bieh 
then went on and drove out the Teih. Tliey 
collected all the furniture and other articles of 
the people, and brought them away, without the 
soldiers appropriating anything to themselves. 
In summer, Hing removed to E-e.’ 

Par. 4. ^The Chuen says:— ‘The princes 
walled the city for Hing, thus relieving it in its 
distress. It was the rule for the president of 
the princes to relieve the distressed, to distribute 
to the necessitous in times of calamity, and to 
punish offending States.’ 


Kaou E'ang Sung Dyn.) observes 

—'The marquis of Ts'e was dilatory at first ii 
relieving Hing;— that was his fault. Pinallj 
he did succour it;— that was his merit. Th< 
does not conceal his fault on the grounc 
of his merit, nor does he conceal his merit be 
cause of his fault;— this is royal law.’ 

- latter part of the Chuen on IV 

m. 6 has anticipated this par. The marquis ol 
ls‘e, in his capacity of leader of the States 
ueternuned to execute justice on Gae Keang 
notwithstanding his near relation to her, con. 
sidenng her too bad to be allowed to live. Hi 

Choo, whetbei 

* j from LoO| to E, somewhere in Te'e 

and there put her to death, or obliged her tc 
officer, who superintended 
the deed, took her body back to Ts'e;— so we 

must understand Kuh-lSang, and, 

sent her back to Loo;’ — contrary to theii 
^neral usage, and specially to par. 10. Th« 
marquis of Ts‘e did not hesitate to execute hit 
'"Wickedness was so atrocious; 
pi r ° ®°;“als the nature of her death 
Par. 6. Here for the 1st time we meS 

With the name instead of which hat 

tree waV^called 

e her Ts oo or King, and the same usage obtain- 


ctl with the name of the State, though, ns Too 
seems to intimate, the name Ts‘oo was about 
this time publicly assumed. Tso-shc says tlint 
Ts'oo attacked Cii'ing, ‘because of itsndlicrcncc 
to the alliance with Ts'e,’ and that the meeting 
at Cti‘ing was followed by a covenant at Loh 
(^^), with a view to the relief of Ch'ing. fTlie 
Loll here in the Chuen may be, as Too says, an- 
other name for Ch‘ing(y{^),oritmny be Hint the 

princes, after their conference at Ch'ing, moved 
a little way off to another place, c.nllcd Loh, and 

there covenanted.] Ch‘ing in Kung-yung) 
was in Ch‘jng, somewhere in the pres. Ch‘in 
Chow, dep. K‘no-fung, Ilo-nan. 

Par. 8. Yen (Kung-ynng, j^) "'ns in Loo,— 

in pres. dis. of Pc, dep. Yen-chow. Wc do not 
know what grounds of quarrel there were at 
this time between Loo and Choo ; and ns dnke 
Ho and an officer of Choo bad been in good 
fcllowsliip at the meeting in Cli'ing the month 
before, this makes the entry the more strange. 
Tso-she says the defc.'it was inflicted on the 
guards of Heu-k‘cw, wlio were about to return. 
Too Yu explains this by supposing 
k'cw was in Choo, and that Clioo bad stationed 
troops there, after sending Gae Keang to her 
death in Ts'e, intending that they should iiiaKe 
an incursion into Loo. On finding, 
that Ts'e gave up the body of Gae Keang to 
Loo, and that the two States continued on good 
terms, Choo was afraid, and was proceeding to 
withdraw its troops, when duke He, 
become aware of their original object, attackea 
and defeated them. A fatal objection to this 
explanation is, that Heu-k‘ew must be assigned 
to Loo, according to the analogy of •‘b 
passages in which the duke of Loo is said to 
have defeated the forces of another 
any place. TJie most likely account of tnc 
collision which I have met with, is one suggests 
byWangTaon, — ^that when Ke-yew fled witn 
the prince Shin to Choo, on the murder .? 
Min, they had made great promises to Choo, i 
that court would help them to regain Loo ; ana 
that Choo now, claiming the merit of their re- 
storation and Shin’s elevation to the marquisate, 
had sent a force to s^e and keep possession o 
Heu-k‘ew, to enforce his demand that ttie 
promises should be made good. He caught oiuy 
loss, however, by his greed. 

Par. 9. Le (Kung, Kuh, j^) belonged 
to Loo. The Chuen says : — ‘ In winter, an officer 
of Keu came seeking for bribes, but duke * 

son, Yew, defeated his troops at Le, and tooJc 
Neu, the younger brother of the viscount of Ke". 
Tso-she adds that Neu was not a high minister 
[intending thus to account, by one or nis 
canons, for the mention of the individual simpiy 
by his name], and that the whole par. is in 
commendation of Ke-yew for the capture oi 
Neu. After this, the Chuen resumes, The 
duke for this gave Ke-yew the fields on the 
north of the "Wan, and Pe.’ _ 

The Chuen on IV.ii.6 tells us how Ke-yeW 
bribed Keu to deliver up K‘ing-fop. Wot 
satisfied with what he had then received, tho 
viscount had sent his troops to require further 
payment. Both Choo and Keu, we may assume, 


yi.Ai: II. 


DUKE HE. 


vtfrx’ ji:x'EiiHMn}T llint llu‘ ik*w rule would bo too 
wxnk to rvjisi tliiir doui.-inds. 

jivol luitimlly Itads to tlic cunclusion 

lb.ll Nx’H w.is c.'i|iturod nlivo; wbii-b is incoii.si.st- 
cnl with n vjTsiiin of tlio triinsnction pi von by 
Ktili-li-anp: — iliat Ko-yJov projio'iod to Non tbnt 
tlioy tvo>Iutulti diH-’ido tbo contest by boxinp, 
nod" let tlirir bud: on.niid tb.it tlicn, when 

bo found lie wn« pottiup tbc worst, bo disposed 
of bis .mt.iponist witli .1 dipper wliioli be enrried 
al'out ids ivrson. 

I’nr. 10. 'J'lie w.int of boro before 
is evidently n siiuplo error of the text. It is 


nstoiiisiiiiip wb.it nonsense even Hie K‘nng-..tf 
editors write, on tiie supposition tliat ‘Confucius 
could not e.vjiress bis condemnation so well ns 
by leaving out lier surname in this place.’ Tso- 
sbe observes Hint tlie superior man may say that 
• Hie people of Ts‘e dealt too severely with Gae 
Keanp in imttinp ber to death ; for that a woman 
follows — has her obediences to be rendered to — 
the detorniinnte male relatives.’ His me.iiiing 
seems to be that, ns she had married from Ts‘e 
into Loo, it belonged to Loo to deal with her; 
she was no longer amenable to Ts‘e. Comp, II. 
xviii. 2. 


Second year. 


if® — • 

A + A. A It®, S' 3E 

Il h.M M.W Si M, #. 

ili, 7 ; A. ^ ^ 3E 

E. IE 

=f*T m M, 


=f * T m M. 

^ ^ 

m,A #.if 

Ifc.lfiF « J, # 0. 


« j, # 0 . 

-K w il. A M.w w 1:.® mr-<m -i,.- 
li.ifi? TO ^ -tfe r- &-& 1 H 

jl-tt 0 . 0 .S. *. 

A; i®.* M.S 1S -i. I? m 

# IB mzm^ MM * ' £ 

'^zs, MM 0.i» m 

)H MM IS a z.m. m.m,n bm z m 

x.misi' ik & m B,m.‘s # m. w 

tr -tfii.W ZMn M. 

, Ms,:kt m m M m ^ m. ^ 

^ tr S® ffe Si.# Z,Z M,M # 


THE CII'UX TS*EW, WITJI TIIK THO CIIUKN. 


BOOK V. 


l3G 

1 


2 


3 

4 


5 

6 


In the [clukc’s] second year, in spring, in tlie king’s first 
month, we [aided in the] walling of Ts‘oo-k‘cM’’. 

In summer, in the fifth month, on Sin-sze, we buried our 
duchess, Gac Keang. 

An arni}' of Yu and an army of Tsin extinguished Hca- 

yaiig- . , 

111 autumn, in the ninth month, the marquis of Ts‘e, the 
duke of Sung, an officer of Kiiang, and an officer of 
Hwang, made a covenant in Kwan. 

In winter, in the tenth month, there was no rain. 

A body of men from Ts'oo made an incursion into Ch'ing. 


Par. 1. Ts’oo-k'cw was tlio new capital of 
Wei. /riie nbanrionment of the old cu)utnl [Sec 
on I. ii. 9], and the su1)scq.ucnt destruction of it 
by the Teili, have been described in the Chuen on 
IV. ii. 7, wliere also it is stated how* the shat- 
tered remnant of the State collected again in 
Ts'aon. The marquis of Ts‘e, liowever, decided 
that Ts‘oo-k‘ew [difft. from another place of the 
same name, also m Wei, mentioned in I. vii. 7], 
— GO h east of the pres. dis. city of Ilivali 


), dep. Ta-ming, Chih-le, — would bo a bet- 

ter site for a capital, and arranged with the 
other princes to raise its walls. The Chuen 
says: — ‘In spring, the princes walled Ts'oo- 
k‘ew, and established Wei there.’ Tso thinks 
that no mention is made in the text of any 
previous meeting of the princes for this purpose, 
because Loo was late in arriving 1 
In par. 2 of the previous year, it is stated 
that the armies of the States ‘walied King 

my the reason being that the marquis and 

people of Hing had ah'eady taken up their 
quarters in E-e, as the head-city of their re- 
vived State. Here it is not said that the armies 

‘walled Wei because the marquis and 

people were still at Ts'aou, and would remove 
to Ts‘oo-k‘ew only when it was ready for their 
reception. 

Par. 2. See III. xxii. 2. 

Par. 3. For the 1st time the States of Yu 
and Tsin appear in the text of the Ch‘un Ts'ew: 

the former on the eve of its extinction ; the 
mtter soon to develope into one of the greatest 
Powers of the period. Yu was held by tlie 
descendants of Chung-juing second 


son of king T‘ae, grandfather of king Wan, 
with the title of duke. Its capital was 46 k 
east of the pres. dis. city of Ping-luh 


Kcae Chow ( 


. . . ^ _ _)i Shan-se. Tsin wasamgr- 
quisate, held by the descendants of Shuh-yu 

a son of king Woo. Its capital at this time 
was at Keang, which has left its name in the 
pres, Keang Chow (^) of Shan-se. Its position 
Tsin ^at opportunity for enlarging its 

of the great 

pro^M wh^, ,t made. Ilca-y.mg (Knng and 
ivnli, ^ „.„5 second city of tlie State 


of Kwoh, in tiio nurth-c.'ist of the pres. dis. of 
P‘ing-luli (2p[^), dep. P‘ing-ynng. The pos- 

8c.^sion of Ilca-yang was all important to Kwoji, 
the State to wiiicli it belonged, and indeed to i u 
nlso. Tsin by acquiring Ilcn-yang could go on 
witliout diOicnlty to annex both the States. 

Tlie Ciiticn saj's : — ‘ Scun^ Scih of Tsin re- 
quested leave from the marquis to take Ins team 
of K cull horses and his pci/t of Ch'uy-keih jade, 

! and with them borrow a way from Yu to maren 
through it and attack Kwoh [Yu was on tne 
south of Tsin, and Kwoh again on the south oi 
[ Yu]. “They are the tilings I hold most preci- 
i oils,” said the marquis. Seih replied, “But u 
you get a way through Yu, it is but like 
them in a treasury outside the State for a time. 
“There is Rung Che-k‘e in Yu,” objected t ie 
duke. “ Rung Che-k‘e,” returned the other, is 
a weak man, and incapable of remonstrating 
vigorously. And, moreover, from his youth up 
he has always been with the duke of Yu, who is 
so familiar with him, that though he should re- 
monstrate, the duke will not listen to him. 
The marquis accordingly sent Seun Seih to bor- 
row a way through Yu, ivith this message: 
^'Formerly, K‘e [a small State], against right an 
reason, entered your State from Teen-linft aim 
attacked the three gates of Jling. It „ 
for its doing; — all through your Grace. J>o' 
Kwoh, .against right and reason, has been keeping 
guards about the travellers’ lodges, to maK 
incursions from them into iny southern borders, 
and I venture to beg a riglit of way from 
ask an account of its offence.” The duke of X' 
granted the request, and even asked to take tne 
lead in invading Kwoh. Rung Che-k‘e remon- 
strated with him, but in vain; and he raised his 
army for the enterprize. 

‘In summer, Le K‘iJi and Seun Seih brought 
on the army of Tsin, made a junction with that 
of Yu, andinvaded Kwoh, when they extinguish- 
ed Hca-yang. 

‘The army of Yu is mentioned first, because 
of tlie bribes which the duke accepted.’ . 

To speak of ‘extinguishing Hea-yang,’ 
was not a State, sounds strange; but Knh-leang 
accounts for the language on tlie ground of tlie 
importance of the place. Maou K‘e-ling even 
says that Hea-yang is here another name for 
Yu. — See Mencius, V. Pt.i.IX.2. 

Par. 4. Keang ivas a small State, held by 
Yiugs (^^), — in pres. Ho-nan. Its exact place 
is not determined, — some placing it in dis. of 


Yiur. in. 


137 


DUKE HE. 


riiin;;*v.mj:(J |2 jily-). clcp. .Tno-ninp; ftnd rnmo 

in di5. of K»rnn(r-clio\v 

Ilw.mfr wn!« alfn n ^ninll Plnfo, lirltl liy Yinpn, 
in llu’ ^n^«c Kwnup-cliow. Eotli KO.'uip ni«l 
n«anf: ni’lcnnwloiliri’d llio Jiipcriorlfy ofTs'oo; 
their noir trnnsforrinp tlicir nllcpinncc to Ta‘o 
imlientivc of the approaching rlnigglc be- 
tween tlio«c two great Smtoa. Tfo says this 
nireting was held to rcreivo the submifMon of 

Keanp and Hwang. Kwnn (Ivung, 

was in Sung, — 10 If Fonth-enst from dis. city of 
Tr'.anu, dcp. Ta*ann-chow. 

[The Chnon adds licre: — lat. 'TCaon of Ta'e, 
chief of the eunuch?, for the l.sl time let out the 


contemplated expedition of duke Jliran in To-yu.’ 

2d. ‘The duke of Kwoh defontod the Jung 
at Snng-t‘eon. The diviner Yen of Ts'in said, 
“Kwoh is sure to perish. The duke is not 
afraid, though he has lost Ilcn-ynng. but goes 
on to acquire more military fame; — Heaven is 
taking away his insight, and increasing his 
disease. He is sure to take his dilBcuItics with 
Tsin easily, and show no kindness to his people. 
He will not have five more harvests.’] 

Par. 5. See III. x.xxi. 6. 

Par. G. The Cliuen says that, at this time, 
‘Tow Chang carried off prisoner T'an Pih of 
Ch'ing.’ 


Third year. 


^ #.;fe 


iffl M.® J 


z m B.i& 
ti.m mM Wi 


T 

^z m ill 


III. 1 In the [duke’s] third y;ear, in spring, in the king’s first 
month, it did not rain. 

2 In summer, in the fourth month, it did not rain. 

3 A body of men from Seu took Shoo. 

4 In the* sixth month, it rained. 

5 In autumn, the marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, an 

oificer of Keang, and an officer of Hwang, had a meet- 
ing at Yang-kuh. 

6 In winter, duke [Hwan’s] son. Yew, went to Ts‘e to make . 

a covenant. 

7 A body of men from Ts‘oo invaded Ch'ing. 


TOL V. 


IS 


138 


THE CII‘UN TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


Parr. 1, 2, 4. Tl»c Cliucn snys; — ‘In spring 
it ilid not rnin, but in sinnincr, in tiio Gtb ntontli, 
it did. Prom tlic lOlh month of the previous year 
to the end of the otii inontli of this, there had 
been no rain; but ns it is not said “there \vns u 
drought,” it Imd not mnounted to n cnlnmity.’ 
The mention of its mining in the Gth month is 
dwelt on by the critics. Tlicy contrnst the 
three — might sny four — entries here ni)out min, 
■with VI.ii.4, where seven montlis’ wnnt of min 
is summed up in one par., saying that tlio various 
entries here, and csiiecially tiic Inst one, show 
how duke He must have sympathized with the 
Buffering of the people. 

Par. 3. Seu, — see III. sxvi. 4, Shoo was a 

small State;— in pros, dis, of Lcu-kiiang 

dep. Leu-chow, Gan-hwuy. It is not 

easy to determine the force of ‘took,’ 

■which has occurred once before in III. ix. 6, with 
rather a difft. application. Kung-ynng thinks 

that M indicates the case with which the 

capture was made, and Too that it indicates that 
only a small force was employed against Shoo. 

Some think that m is heres=^^^, ‘extin- 
guished;’ but the meaning is not so intense as 
that. The K‘nng-he editors approve the view 

of Le Leen ; end of the Yuen dyn.), 

■which is reasonable; — that Slioo belonged to the 
party of Ts‘oo, and that Seu now took, and held 
it for a time, in the interest of Ts'e, to facilitate 
the progress of the contemplated expedition to 
the south. 

Par. 5i Tso says this meeting was * to plan 
about tlife invasion of Ts'oo.’ See on p. i of last 


year. The K*ang-he editors agree with Tao's 
account of the object of the meeting, though. 
Kung and Kuh do not mention it. They say 
that tlio expedition against Ts'oo had been deter- 
mined on in tiic meeting at Ch'ing 
He's 1st yo.ar, and that tho subsequent meeting 
at Kwan, and this at Yang-kuh, were held 
specially to secure the adherence of the powerful 
Sung, and of the distant Kiiang and Hwang. 
Yang-kuh was in Ts'e, 80 /c north-east from the 
pres. dis. city of same name, dep. Yen-chow. 
Par. G. Kuh has before Both ho 

and Kung read for 6® 

to and take part in.’ The covenant here was 


a sequel of tho meeting at Yang-kuh (Tso mys: 

Loo had not been represented at the meeting, 
but tile duke here, at the request of Ts'e, sends 
Kc- 3 ’cw to take part in the covenant. 

Par. 7. TJie Cliuen says,—* On this occasion, 
the carl of Ch‘ing wanted to make P®®®® 
Ts'oo, but K'ung Shuh objected, saj’ing, Ts e 
is now activelj’ engaged on our behalf. It w_m 
not be an ausnicious movement to cast away its 


kindness.”’ . 

[Tlie Clmen adds; — ‘The marquis of Ts e ana 
Ke of Ts'ae [one of his Indies] were m a boat 
on a lake in tho park, when she made it rooR 
The marquis was afraid, changed colour, ana 
forbade her; but she persisted. The 
was angry, and sent her back to Ts'ne, without 
absolutely putting her awaj'. They marriea 
her away there, however, to another^] ’ 


Fourth year. 


YKxn IV. 


DUKE HE. 


139 


n. A. A.A.tt 
* * ^ m.-st + m 


A. A.A.t S ^ S 

if # » ^ 


<a-. 

^ j. @ ic.-i,.* 0 .S <a- ® * 


mM w a.w a a 
^z'^n OT.fi-. %\BMnmT' a.m n i&m 
ja OT .^ ^.z m.m 

|aj^»®ja ^'^B.yicz.if.^ ^T^mm m 
ZM^M. ^ mm minim m.^.A.zjR m 

i JttA -i- -•» =fl»t LU jr>^ tUi Arf ^55E? Ot.A -TT ivt ll. fc*. 

O 


A ^ Ilf 


.iH ;i ifi BE Jia fi,.# 


A - A.OT.m. a ^ ».?fe 

^Sfl'-Ril .P ^ I® H M. 0.1^ # If * 6f 

^,— ^ i®.it fi.it is # It S' w 

xz.zmmm^mMm.zm, 

II + w^isi.m7r>mzmmmm m 

^.mm m^Mm.zm^W'M, 
WM!ii'ZMMmT^m.:^mm 

0.a m 0.» M 0.® M # ■i..'® 

i«,.OTSt.^S&%SA®.-|iJM. 
9A.B, — zm^^M^M 

WM'^ #. ^ mm it mm wcm m ^ 

M. ^ is, ^ n a.® » fls T # 

a> s. I' I ffi a E-u m i :». ti- h 

ft #? A. K JK ^ ffi 0 ,B® 

« a ^ m-n mmusww 
llS.0.«.tfi)T'S 0. 
^.riii n m » s A ^ ?nr.j« s 
sa # A ® 

K.K. ® E.at 
<1 It s jpi * S.A ^ m, m, 
Z-'M M- ■&.'@.:® ft p A s 
w ro a ^ A P 4 .ii.s A 

a w. A.-^ s ® » 4 t: A ® 


SB A 


4 1 

^ 9=l.\Si »— • I 

— 5 ^ — J-* 

^^JLL m — ‘ 

A 

•<»? 


53 ^ 


=# 

ffl Sin Jia 


140 


THE C1I‘UJJ TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CllUEN. 


BOOK Y. 


H.if B 

^ ^ ®.+ ^ m 0 jii.«? 0.^ m ic 12.^ St^f 


# »< W± S t WmM ¥ IMf 0.4 

:^- M # ii 5*P •/* M ^ 4 


® JX =fT M iii' 0.W' ».§.». 


IV. 1 In his fourth year, in spring, in the king’s first month, the 
duke joined the marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the 
marquis of Ch‘in, the marquis of Wei, the earl of Ch‘ing, 
the baron of Heu, and the earl of Ts‘aou, in an incur- 
sion into Ts‘ae. [The people of] Ts'ae dispersed, wh^^^ 
the [allies] proceeded to invade Ts‘oo, and halted at King. 

2 In summer. Sin 'Chin, baron of Heu, died. 

3 K‘euh Hwan of Ts‘oo came to make a covenant in [the 

camp of] the armies. The covenant was made at Shaou- 

4 The army of Ts‘e made Yuen T‘aou-t‘oo of Ch‘in prisoner. 

5 In autumn, [the duke], with an officer of Keang and an 

officer of Hwang, invaded Ch‘in. 

6 In the eighth month, the duke arrived from the invasion 

of Ts‘oo. 

7 There was the burial of duke Muh of Heu. 

8 In winter, in the twelfth month, Kung-sun Tsze led a 

and joined an officer of Ts‘e, an officer of Sung, an on^ 
cer of Wei, an officer of Ch‘ing, an officer of Heu, and 
an officer of Ts'aou, in an incursion into Ch'in. 


Par. 1. The Chuen says; — ‘In this year, in 
spring, the marquis of Ts'e, with the forces of 
mdny of the princes, made an incursion into 
Ts‘ae, and, when me niar 9 'U{san(fj>eqpfe dispersed 
andjled, proceeded to invade Ts'oo. The viscount 
of Ts ‘00 sent a messenger to the allied army to 
say io the marquis, “ Your lordship’s place is by 
the northern sea, and mine is by the southern; 
so remote are our boundaries that oru: cattle and 
horses, in the heat of their excitement, cannot 
affect one another. Without my having any 
Wea of it, your lordship has come to my country. 
What is the reason of your doing so?” Kwan 
Chung replied, “Duke K'ang of Shaou de- 
livered the charge to T‘ae-kung, the first lord 
of our Ts'e, saying, ‘Do you undertake to 
punish me guilty among the princes of all the 
five degrees, and the chiefs of aU the nine pro- 
vinces, in order to support and help the House 
of Chow.’ So there was given to our founder 
rule over the land, from the sea on the east to 
the Ho on the west, and from Muli-ling on the 
south to Woo-tc on the north. Your tribute of 
Cfsea of U'c three-ribbed rush fShoo 
J;. *• *’ rendered, so that the king’s 

sncnflccs are not supplied with it, and there is 


nothing with which to strain the 
this we have to ask you an account. 
Ch'aou moreover never came back from t 
expedition which he undertook to 

g ing Ch'aou had been drowned in the Han, i 
C. 1,016. How the thing happened, wm 
never clearly known. Kwan Chung seems i 
insinuate that there had been some treache^ o 
the part of Ts'oo. But it was late now to be in- 
quiring into an event more than three centunes 
back] ; and into this also we have to 
The messenger replied, ‘ That the tribute has no 
been forwarded is the fault of our lord;— mow 
should he presume not to pay it? As to 
Ch'aou’s not returning from the south, you shoum 
inquire about it along the banks of the 
After this the army of the allies advanced, ana 
halted at Hing.’ 

Hing was in Ts'oo, — in pres. dis. of Yen-shing 
Heu-chow(g^ Ho-nan. The 

inroad into 'rs'ae was a feint, intended to con- 
ceal the great object of the eaqiedition, so that 
the allies might be able to fall on Ts'oo unpre- 
pared. The incident mentioned in the Chuon 
at the end of last year furnished a pretext for it. 


Ykxu IV, 


DUKE HE. 


thoir lord ( PPi^STK Ff Vm)-’ They dis- wJjo ngreed with it. After this. Shin How had 
V, * <■ ,5s :cv •».-»- an interview with the marquis, and said, “The 
appear hkcwntcr(}^^^^J|^;2^'^). army has been in the field a long time. If it 


Ts‘o certainly does not appear with advantage 
in the conference with the messenger of Ts'oo. 
For three years preparations had been making 
for the c.\*pedition. The marquis and Kwan 
Cliung ought to liavo declared openly and boldly 
the grounds on which they were conducting all 
the States of the north to attack Ts'oo, instead 
of urging merely trivial matters. Tliere is 
something to be admired, however, in the ap- 
proval which a hundred critics give to the way 
in which matters were conducted, so ns to obtain i 
the submission of Ts'oo without the cfTusion of i 
blood ; but they overlook the fact that it was 


march through the eastern regions, and meet 
with enemies, I fear the soldiers will not be fit 
for use. If it march through Cli'in and Ch'ing, 
which can supply them with provisions and 
sandals, it will be a better arrangement.” The 
marquis was pleased, and gave Shin the town 
of Hoo-lnou, while he seized at the same time 
Yuen T'aou-t'oo.’ 

Par. 6. Tso-she says this was done ‘to pun- 
ish Ch'in for its unfaithfulness.’ It would ap- 
pear, then, that the marquis of Ch'in had been 
privy to the artful counsel of Yuen T'aou-t'oo; 


only a feigned submission which was obtained, or perhaps, ns TTang Ts'eaou [T Ming 
Par. 2. Tso-she says, on p. 7, that the baron dyn., of the 16th century] sup'^es, he had 
‘died in the nrin.v,* which is probably correct, otherwise indicated his intention to join the 
though Lew Ch'nng and other critics say he side of Ts'oo. Tliis is more likely. The mar- 
had returned from the array ill, and died in Heu. quia of Ts'e had devolved the punishment of 
Knou K'ang says that tins Sin-chin was the same Ch'in on Loo, Kenng, and Hwang, 
as Heu Shuh of II. XV. 6, and that he had ruled Par. 6. Kuh-leang here lays down a rule, 
his StAtc for 42 years. that if the duke had been absent on two encraae^ 

Par. S. The Chuen says;— 'In summer, the ments, then the entry of his return should be 
viscount of Ts'oo sent K'euh Hwan to the army associated with the latter ; but if the second were 
of the allies, which retired, and halted at Shaou- smaller than the other, then with the first 
ling. The marquis of Ts'e hod the armies of But such a rule is unnecessary. The attack of 
all the princes drawn up in array, and took Ch'in was only an incident growing out of the 
K'Suh Hwan with him in the same carriage to invasion of Ts'oo. 
survey them. He then said, "Is it on my un- p-. 7 U’ho Phnon 

worthy account that these are here? No, but ’’ ^he Chuen says.— DuLeMuh(;^; 

in continuation of the fr^ntlship of the princes Kung, M) of Heu died in the army, and was 
with my predecessors. HVhat do you think of . . , 

Ts'oo’s being on the same terms of friendship with the ceremonies due to a marquis, 

■with me?” K'euh Hwan replied, “If from As a rule, when a prince died on a visit to the 


your lordship’s favour the altars of our land 
and grain may receive blessing, and you will 
condescend to receive our prince, this is bis 
wish.” The marquis then said, “Fighting with 
these multitudes, who can withstand me? What 
city could sustain their attack?” “If your 
lordship,” was the reply, “by your -virtue, seek 
the tranquillity of the States, who will dare 
not to submit to you ? But if you depend on 
your strength, our State of Ts'oo has the hill of 
Fang-shing for a wall, and the Han for a moat. 
Great as your multitudes are, you could not use 
them.’ K'guh Hwan made a covenant, on the 
part of Ts'oo, -with the princes.’ 

Shaou-Iing was in Ts'oo, — fS le east from the 
dis. city of Yen-shing, Heu Chow, Ho-nan. From 
the text it might be concluded that two cove- 
nants were formed; but it was not so. K'euh 
Hwan came to the camp of the allies, and in- 
timated the wish of the viscount of Ts'oo to 
make a covenant with them, if th^ would 
retire a little ; — which was done. It ■will appear 
on the whole that there was here a lame and 
impotent conclusion to Ts'e’s expedition against 
Ts'oo. 

Par. 4. The reason of this seizure is given 
in the Chuen : — “Yuen (Kung and Kuh have 
without the T'aou-t'oo, a great officer 
of Ch'in, said to Shin How, a great officer of 
Ch'ing, “If the armies march through Ch'in 


onriea wjtn tne ceremonies due to a marquis. 
As a rule, when n prince died on a visit to the 
king, or at a meeting with the other princes, his 
rank was advanced one depee. If he died while 
engaged in the king’s business, it was advanc^ 
two degrees. On this occasion, Mnh might 
have been laid in bis coffin with a duke’s robe.’ 

' Par. 8. The Chuen says: — 'Shub-suii Tae-pih 
pChis was the Kung-sun Tsze (Kung, hero 

and afterwords, gives the name as He 

was • grandson of duke Hwan, and chief of 
the Shuh-sun clan. Tne is the hon. title, and 
Pih his designation as the eldest of his family] 
led a force, and joined the forces of the otW 
princes in an incursion into Ch'in, which vow 
sought peace, and Yuen T'aou-t'oo was restored 
to it.’ 

rehe Chuen here brings up the affairs of 
Tsm: — ^“Before this, duke Heen of Tsin had 
■wished to make Le Ke his Tvife. The tortoise- 
shell indicated that the thing would be unlucky, 
but the milfoil pronounced it lucky. The duke 
said, “1 will follow the milfoil.” The diviner 
by the tortoise-shell said, “ The milfoil is reckon- 
ed inferior in its indications to the tortoise-shell. 
You had better follow the latter. And moreover, 
the oracle was: — 

‘The change made by inordinate devotion 

Steals away the good qualities ofthe duke. 

There is a fragrant herb, and a noisome one; 

And ten years hence the noisomeiiess will 
continue.’ 


142 


THE CH‘U2f TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHTEN. 


BOOK V. 


Do not do as you propose.” The duke would 
not listen to this advice, and declared Le Ke 
his wife. She gave birth to He-ts‘e, and her 
sister bore Ch‘oh-tsze. 

‘Wlien the duke was about to declare He-ts‘e 
his heir, having determined on his plans with 
the great officers about the court, Ke [i.e., Lc Ko] 
said to his eldest sou, “The duke has been 
dreaming about Ts'e Kcang [the eldest son’s 
mother]^ you must soon sacrifice to her.” The 
young prince sacrificed to Ids mother in K‘cah- 
j-ub, and sent some of the sacrificial flesh and 
spirits to the duke, who was hunting when 
they came. Ke kept them in the palace six 
days, and when the duke arrived, she poisoned 
them and presented them to him. The duke 
poured some of the spirits on the ground, 
which was agitated by them. He gave some of the 
Jlesh to a dog, which died ; and some oj the spirits to 
one of the attendants, who also died. Ke wept 
and said, “This is your eldest son’s attempt to 


murder you.” Tlie son fled to the new city 
[K'euh-jTih] ; but the duke put to death his 
"tutor, Too Yiien-kwan. Some one said to the 
son, “Explain the matter. Tlie duke is sure 
to discriminate.” Tlie son, however, s.nid, 
“"Without the lady Ke, my father cannot enjoy 
his rest or liis food. If I expliun the matter, 
the guilt will be fixed on her. T^ie duke is 
getting old, and I wiH have taken his joy from 
him.” The friend said, “Had you not better 
go away then ?” “The duke,” replied the prince, 
“will not examine into who is, the gp'dty party; 
and if I, with the name of such a crime, go away 
from the State, who will receive me?” In the 
12th month, on Mow-shin, he strangled himself 
in the new city. 

*Ke then slandered the duke’s two other sons, 
saying that they were both privy' to their bro- 
ther’s attempt, on which Ch*ung-urh fled to 
P‘oo, and E-woo fled to Keuh.’] 


Fifth year. 


± :tM 1 =. # W « 


^ -ll- L 1 . ^ till ^ I » 

’(iJt -y. ^ ^ ^ ^ nr fdl 


-i«r -iuT rr- IV- ' *. ‘'i' T’ ^ 

^ f m m.MJcM &M B IE B. 


DUKE IIK 


w tM E -S' lit si m m a'gi §,e 

At? nn ->r ifsft -fis *A -irr un ^ rL -M- r?-l- =4+: ^ 


ifcji A mm B.f.g m.^ m » 

w -1^, ^ « iSE w ®l S'.,!, lit A.W, 

::?: Sf- ae 1 1 t.W A' g,. 


s f -tii.ro 

A •» * s m 1 -t z, 

M W » f S.ii f%.:k 

¥ JR xtn'M 'It m ft ^ 

^-.K.B.lit^il'l^^* Ifc. 

mmm j m 

9^0. 

± :s. 

mM i) # -If .^.X iM ® ^ 
SB ^ ^ ^ ^ ^.S J» 

h iiiip »,« mz§ fSM.m if. 

B.Bt H.W ^ tfc.^ tr.S m A 

mA. Z 

* 1® a.-fs ft i?n If 

m%M mM 7 9, ffli.as M 


lit HI) B.-S, ® is -f- MM.<&M TO 

at n A m ^ S,® 

m m w -ft i i® mM ^mmzm mmM 

ft.js Siji’s^ m ■£ n.:9 i&.i6.M 9 mm‘i^ 

0.^ tt Rff ^,Z ft 0.0.3 Ji #.'lt w 

Bs lit ® ^ 5 ft lit ^ -tfc. nmM 

Pp ill ft 3i -tii.Ife' ® :&:.fe.'ffi m ^ Si.^ M 

m 7 ©i xm, •& ft ^ 

ft.s iW: ft * ^ if #f « ® ifeS: H 'It Rff 

^.11 nfi i g|i § # g.# # M.M. 

lit ill ffr m m A.Z -)} iL.ft.!it ^ A # * 

ff fiJf 0.ft.±.<S^ ^ Hi A If lit M ^ ^ 'if' 


jtf' 

#.'it m 

Mli.^ ^ 
ft ^ 
H'lt Rff 


^ 'if 


f.S S. 
S ifff ^ 
ft:®# 
B.^ Z 
#ft.». 
3e ft A 
ft 

^ $0 


a if ^ 

S.®. 


CT OSi 


AM.Z 

itati. 

a iS? :p 
ifii ® ft. 

^.0.* 


] 


144 


THE CH‘UH TB‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


B(PK V. 


V. 


MM Ji. m s,MM n 

1 f S 1 ¥ i ® ^ ® ^ 

f A § ». A mMM •tiL.^E Z. 

*-S 1 ^ ® ^ =^.«.Ri * A 

» # # ZM #.+ ZMWB, 

■^.^M M m — ^ M..M ^ M M Z 

In the [duke’s] fifth year in spring, the marquis of Tsin put 
to death his heir-son Shin-sang. 

Duke Chwang’s eldest daughter came from Ke, and present- 
ed her son at our court. 

In summer, Kung-sun Tsze went to Mow. 

The duke,^ and the marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the 
marquis of Ch‘in, the marquis of Wei, the earl of Ch‘ing, 
the baron of Heu, and the earl of Ts‘aou, had a meeting 
with the king’s heir-son in Show-che. 

In autumn, in the eighth month, the [above] princes made 
a covenant in Show-che. 

The earl of Chfing stole away home, and did not join in the 
covenant. 

An officer of Ts‘oo extinguished H6en. The viscount of 
Heen fled to Hwang. 

In the ninth month, on Mow-shin, the first day of the moon, 
the sun was eclipsed. 

In winter, the people of Tsin seized the duke of Yu. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 
? 
8 


‘ On the day Sin-hae, of 
the King s first month in this year, being the 
1st day of the month, there was the winter 
solstice. The duke, having given out the 1st 
flay of the moon, ascended his observatory to 
Burv'ey the heavens, and caused the record of 
I niade; — in accordance with rule. 

At the equinoxes, the solstices, aud the com- 
mencement of each season, there was required a 
record of the appearances of the clouds, and their 
indications, in order to make what preparations 
should be necessary.’ But the w'inicr solstice 
this year fell on Keah-yin (^|^), three days 

later than Sin-line. Chinese astronomers have 
themselves called attention to this: — see Xeanir 

I ar. 1. According to the Chuen, at the end 
of last ye-ar, Shin-siing committed suicide, 
t riven to do so by his father, in the whiter of 
tliat year. Too e.xplains the entrs' here, by 
follows the announcement from 
ir'"’ followed the calendar of \ 

"''"•■'3ve is according to that 1 
r or h ” 1 the entry here is also .-orrect, ac- I 

riliiv to ih- c.ilindnr of Cliow. Jt sews dc- ■ 

-able ,0 tran...,te jU- ^ 

didercntly from ■ 


-y*, and I know not how to do so but by 

using the term ‘heir-son.’ 

The Chuen has here; — ‘Before this, the 
quis of Tsin had employed Sze Wei to wall P'oo 
and Keuh for his sons, Ch‘ang-nrh and E-woo. 
Wei did not look carefully after the work, and 
placed faggots between the back and facing of we 
walls, E-woo represented the matter t® ^ ^ 
marquis, who caused AA’’ei to be reprimanded. 
That officer, having bowed his head to the 
ground, replied, “ I have heard the sayings that 
when there is grief in a family whore death has 
not occurred, real sorrow is sure to come, and 
that when you fortify a city when there is no 
threatening of war, your enemies arc sure to 
hold it. In walling a place to he held by rob- 
bers and enemies, what occasion was there for 
me to he careful ? If an officer with a charge 
neglect the command given to him, he fails in 
respect ; if he make strong a place to be held by 
enemies, he fails in fidelity. Failing in respect 
and fidelity, how can he sciwe his lord? As 
the ode (She, Ill.ii.X.C) s.-iys, 

‘The chcrisliing of virtue insures 
tranquillity; 

Tlic circle of relatives ser^'cs as a wall* 

I.et our nilfr cultivate his virtue and make 
sure all tlie circle of his liou;e: — there is uo 


Yrii-. V. 


DUKK II K. 


145 


fnrtifirntif'i) •'q«nl lo llii*. In flirrc ycjiK w 
flinll liavi* wnr; wliy 1 he nin'Inl?" 

AYhen he withdiew. he yniij: to )iini;eir, 

“8hnepy is the fos fur; 

'rhree »Inhes in one Stftte:— 
lYhIeh slmll I follow 

* \Yhen the troiihle cajno, the ilukc sent the 
fuuuch rsj to nttnelc J’'oo. CIt'iitig-urh said. 
“ The cojnnituul <if iny ruler nud father is not to 
he Pj'j'oseil;" and he issued an onler to his 
followots. sayinp, “He who iipposos it is my 
eiii'iiiy." He then was pottiiif; over the wall to 
run, when I’Veiit ofl his sleeve, lie made his 
e>eai>e, however, and llwl lo the Teih.’ 

Tar. 2. We have the ninrrinpe of this dauplt' 
ter ofl.oo in the 2.'>th year of duke Chwanp, 
her father. It is disputed whether she was n 
full or only a half si.ster of dnke He; — ilia 
most likely that she was hi.« full .«isfer. Ying- 
tnh puts a stop at and makes 
s= ^j|]. * Till l\e of Kc came /o I^-o fto 

visit her mother]; her son njipcared at the 
cotirt.* To suppose that she came to Loo for 
any purj>ose hut to pay a dutiful visit to her 
mother would he contrary to all Chinese rules 
of propriety; hut ns the fc.\t stands, I cannot 
imt ciinelude that the prc.«cntntion of her son at 
ins nncle's court wn.s tlio reason for licr visit. 

I’ar. ft. The Clnien says: — 'Kung-.sun Tszo 
vrent to Mow; — to mnrrj* a laily nj jl/ow:’ on 
widcliToo remarks, •Shnli-snnTae-pih was mnr- 
Tviiip a lady of Mow. As a minister could not 
ieavc the Slate wiihonl his ruler’s orders, he 
tiiercfore roecivotl the duke’s command to go to 
hlow wifli friendly inquiries, and look the op- 
porttmity to meet his bride, wndAriwy her to Loo.' 
Mow, — sec on II. xv. 8. 

Tar. 4. Sliow-clic (Kung has was 

in Wei,— in the south-east of the present Sny 
Chow (^jl^ «|'J'|), dep. Kwei-fih, Ho-nan. Tso- 
she snj’s that the meeting at this place with the 
king’s eldest son Ch'ing was ‘to consult about 
measures to keep Cliow tranquil.’ The king had 
it in contemplation to degrade iiis eldest son, 
and give the right of succession to a younger, — 
the son. of course, of nnotlier nmther; and to 
prevent the confusion to wltich such a proceed- 
ing would give rise, the niarqids of Ts'e nsseni- 
hled the States, that they might thus publicly 
acknowledge Clring as the lieir to the kingdom; 
— much to llic dissatisfaction of tlie king, as we 
shall see. 

[The Cliiicn introduces here ; — ‘ Yncn Senen- 
chiing [the Yuen T-noii-t‘oo of IV. 4] of Clrin, 
resenting how Sliin How of Ch'ing had been 
tre.acherous to him at Shnou-ling, advised him 
to wall the town wliich Ts'e lind conferred 
upon iiim. saying "To wall it well wili give 
you a great name, wliich your descendants 
will not forget; .and I will aid you by asking 
leave for you to do it.” Aeconlingly, lie asked 
permission for the undertaking, in behalf of 
Shin, from the princes, and the town was forti- 
fied beautifully. Yuen then slandered Shin to 
the earl of Ch'ing, saying that he had fortified 
the city he liad received so admirably with the 
intention of rclielliiig; and from this time Sliin 
Ilow was looked upon as an offender.’] 


I’nr. fi. The prin('o.s had had a mooting with 
the king's s<in, but they did not presume to 
mnkc n covenant wifli him. Tlicy now made a 
covenant among thomsclve.s, to carry out tho 
mem-nre.s determined on to secure In's succession 
to the throne, 

Tnr. 15, Tlie Chuen says : — ‘ In autumn, when 
the prince.s were about to covenant, the king 
made the dnke of Chow call tho carl of Ch'ing, 
and said to him, “I encourage you to follow 
Ts‘00 ; — with it and tho help of Tsin, 3'ou may 
enjoy a little rest.” The earl was delighted to 
receive the king’s commands ; and being afraid 
liecnnsc he had not paid n court-visit to the vmr~ 
tjtiis o/'T»‘e, he stole away to Cli'ing, and did 
nut join in the covenant. K'ung Shuh tried to 
slop him, sn.ving, “Tlic nilcr of n State should 
not act light lj\ By doing so he loses his friends ; 
and when he has lost them, cnlamitj' is sure to 
come. 'Wiieii in his extreme distress, he has to 
lieg for a covenant; — what ho loses is great. 
Your lordship will surely repent ofj’our course.'* 
The earl would not listen to this remonstrance, 
but stole awn^' from his troops, and returned to 
Cit'ing.’ 

Par. 7. llcen was a State, held by Weis 
”> ‘J'C pros. dis. of K'c-siiwuy ^), 
dep. ilwang-cliow, Hoo-pili. Some r^r it to a 
part of Kwnng Cliow Ho-nan; but this 

is a mistake, — occasioned, some suppose, by tho 
fugitive viscount’s having finally taken np his 
residence there. Tlie Cliucn says : — ‘ Tow T‘oo- 
woo-t‘oo [Sec the Cliucn appended to HI. xxx.2] 
of Ts‘00 extinguished llcen, when the viscount 
of Hccn fled to liwang. At this time, JKeang, 
llwang, Taou, and Pih, whicli were in friendly 
relations with Ts'e, iiad affinities by marriage 
witli llcen. The viscount, depending on their 
help, would not perform service to Ts‘00, and 
moreover did not make preparations for an 
emergency ; and so he came to ruin.’ 

Par. 8. Tin's eclipse took place August 11th, 

B. C. G54. 

Par. 9. The Chuen s.iys: — ‘The marquis of 
Tsin again [See on II. 81 borrowed a way 
through Yn to attack Kwoii. Kung Cbe-k‘e 
remonstrated toi/h the duke of Yu, s.a3'ing, 

“ Kwoli is the external defence of Yu. If Kwoh 
perish, Yu is sure to follow it. A way should 
not be opened to the greed of Tsin ; robbers are 
not to be played witii. To do it once was more 
than enough; and will j'ou do it a second time? 

Tlie common sayings, ‘The carriage and its 
wheel-aids depend on one another,’ * Wlien the 
lips perish, the teeth become cold,’ illustrate 
the relation between Kwoli and Yu.” TJie duke> 
said, “ 'Jlic princes of Tsin and Yn are descend- 
ed from the same ancestor. How should Tsiu 
injure us Y" The minister replied, ‘ T‘ae-pili and 
Yu-ebung were sons of kingT'ae; but because 
T‘ae-pili would not follow him against Shang, he 
did not inherit his State. Kwoh Chung and Kwoh 
Shull were sons of king Kc, ajid ministers of king 
M'ifn. 'J'lieir merits in the service of the roj’ol 
House are preseived in the repositoiy of cove- 
nants. If Kwoh be extinguished bj’ Tsin, what 
love is it likely’ to slioiv to Yu? And can Yu 
claim a nearer kindred to Tsin tlian tiie descend- 
ants of llwan and Cliwang [See the Chuen after 
m. xxiii.3], that Tsin should show love to it? 
What crime had tiie families descended from 


YOU V. 


19 


146 


THE CH'UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


Hwanand Chwangbeen guilty of? and yet Tsin 
destroyed them entirely, feeling that they might 
press on it [See the Chnen after III. xxv. S'). 
Its near relatives, whom it might have been 
expected to favour, it yet put to death, because 
their greatness pressed upon it ; — what may not 
Tsin do to you, when there is 3 'our State to 
gain?” 'The duke said, “ My sacrificial offerings 
have been abundant and pure ; the Spirits will 
nut forsake, but will sustain me.” His minister 
replied, “ I have heard that the Spirits do not 
accept the persons of men, but that it is virtue 
to which they cleave. Hence in the Books of 
Chow we read, ‘ Great Heaven has no affections; 
— ^it helps only the virtuous [Shoo, V. xvii.4] 
and, ‘ It is not the millet which has the piercing 
fragrance; it is bright virtue [Shoo, V. xxi. 33 ;’ 
and again, ‘People dp not slight offerings, but it is 
virtue which is the thingaccepted [Shoo, V.v.33.’ 
Thus if o rukr have not virtue, the people will not 
be attached to him, and the Spirits will not accept 
his offerings. What the Spirits will adhere to is 
a man’s virtue. If Tsin take Yu, and then 
cultivate bright virtue, and therewith present 
fragrant offerings, will the Spirits vomit them 
out?” The duke did not listen to him, but 
granted the request of the messenger of Tsin. 

‘ Kung Che-k‘e went away from Yu, with all 
the circle of his family, saying, ‘Yu will not 
see the winter sacrifice. Its doom is in this ex- 
pedition. Tsin will not make a second attempt.* 

In the 8th month, on Keah-woo, the marquis 
, of Tsin laid siege to Shang-yang [the chief city 


of KwohJ, and asked the diviner Yen whether he 
should succeed in the enterprise. Yen replied 
that he should, and he then asked when. Yen 
said, “ The children have a song wliich says, 

‘Towards day break of Ping, 

Wei of the Dragon lies hid in the conjunc- 
tion of the sun and moon. 

With combined energy and grand display, 

Are advanced the flags to capture Kwoh. 

Grandly appears the Shun star. 

And the T‘een-ts‘ih is dim. 

"Wlien Ho culminates, the enterprise will be 
completed, 

And the duke of Kwoh will flee.’ 

According to this, you will succeed at the 
meeting of the 9th and 10th months. _ In t h*; 
morning of Ping-tsze, the sun will be in W“» 
and the moon in Ts‘ih; the Shun-ho Avill be 
exactly in the south: — this is sure to be the 
time.” i . 

‘ In winter, in the 12 th month, on Ping-tsze, the 
Ist day pf the moon, Tsin extinguished 
and Ch'ow, the duke, fled to the capital.^ 
army’, on its return, took up its quarters in 
surprised the city, and extinguished the State/' 
seizing the duke, and his great officer Tsing-pm, 
whom the marquis employed to escort his daugh- 
ter, Mull Ke, to Ts‘in. The marquis continued the 
sacrifices of Yu in Tsin, and presented to the king 
the tribute due from it. The brief language ol 
the text is condemnatory of Yu, and expresses, 
besides, the ease with which Tsin annexed it. 


Siicth year. 


tSi. iISM 

Jt m rfrv 

i'JuPi in m Ik iSiliSlif' 


Vr.u: Vn. 


nt'KK UK. 


147 


VI.' 1 


o 


3 


4 


It Avns the [thiheV] sixtli ycnr, tlie spring, the Icing’s first 
month. 

In .‘^ununor, the duke joincfl the mnrqnis of Ts‘e, the duke 
of Sung, tljc nnirf]ni.s of 01j‘in, the marquis of Wei, and 
the earl of 1s‘aou, in invading Ch‘ing, Avheii they be- 
sieged Sin-shing. 

C? O 

In nutuinn, a body of men from Ts‘oo besieged Heu, and 
the princes Avent from Gh‘ing to relieve it. 

In Avinter, the duke arriA*ed from theinA'asion of Ch'ing. 


[Tlip Churn hero eontlmics tlie nffnirs of 
Tstn; — ‘The marquis of Tsiu soul Kea Uwa lo 
Attack Kcuh. K-woo was iinaMo to maintain 
it, so he made a covenant and wont away, lie 
thought liimscif of flot'ing to the Toih, hut K'eoh 
,Tuy said," Following after yourbrothcr [Ch'nng- 
«rh]. and tlcoing to the same place, it will appear 
ns if yon had been criminals toyrthtr. You had 
better go to Li-ang; if is near to Ts'in, and is 
kin dly regarded hy it.” E-woo went ncciirdingly 
to I.Fang.] 

l’.ir. 2. The Chticn says;— 'In summer, the 
princes invaded Clring, liccauso the carl had 
stolen away from the covenant at Show-ch'c. 
Tlioy laid siege to Sin-raeih which Ch'ing had 
fortified, though it was not the season for such an 
undertaking.’ Tiic Cliucn calls the place Sin- 
niciij, or ‘New Meih,’ and the fo.vt calls it Sin- 
shing, or ‘the New city,' referring to its liaving 
been recently walled. It was 30 k to the south- 
east of the pres. dis. city of Meih, dep. K‘ae-fung. 

Par, 3. ‘ Besieged lieu,' i, c., laid siege to the 
priticipni city of Hen. So we arc to understand 
other passages, where, apparently, the siege of n 
State is siwken of. The Clmen s.ays : — ‘ The vis- 
count of Ts’oo besieged Hen, in order to relieve 


Ch'ing. Tlicprincesreliovod Heu, and he retired.’ 
^Iic implies, ns in the translation, that the 
princes marched their troops from Ch'ing to 
lieu. 

fl'hc Cliucn adds here a narrative which shows 
of what little use the expedition against Ts'oo 
had been. The States in the south continued 
to feel that it was better for them to keep in 
Alliance witli the aggressive Power. — ‘In winter, 
the marquis Mtih of Ts'ne went along with duke 
He of lieu, and had an interview with the viscount 
of Ts'oo in AA'oo-shing. The baron of Heu 
appealed with his hands tied behind his back, 

I and holding a pcih in his mouth. Bis great 
ofllcers wore head-bands and oilier clothes of 
the deepest mourning, and the inferior ofBcera 
pushcdncoflinnlongonacarringe. The viscount 
asked Fung Pih wJmt be should do, who replied, 
“AVlicn king Woo had vanquished Yin, K'e, vis- 
emmt of We, appeared before him in this fashion. 
King Woo with his own bauds loosed bis bands, 
received his peih, ordered away the emblems of 
doom, burned bis coffin, treated him courteously, 
and robed him, sending him back to bis place.” 
Tlie viscount of Ts'oo followed this example.’] 


Seventh year. 


148 


THE CII‘UN TS‘E\Y, WHTH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK V. 


I ¥ 


y -J » ’ J J ims i=* X N. ^ j y' b> 'w 'p-v I I 

* W i| ?fij fSi IS t 

i ifc,^ i® m 0.= # #.0.M % 

mM 0iStm jiji ^ « tf.w # ^ 

^ is ^ fi.- « « S5 A ^.0.19: #.» ^ 

> — .l -* >rrt. V . . > ^Mf« %..A^ •««.« I * » . - • - a; *' I La 


W9,M jf- &: % m 'M' ' 

" ” ■' " ' ■■■ ■“ -ft 0.11 

M^'S WE is 

Z&:kZ^m-& MM ^ 1AM MM 
It.# H.'fe.'oT ilfc 0.ffi Z^ .. 

mmmm^mm inm s-.H.sn l 


ifc.A 

y9 


jE.pij.^ # lit ja % ,# E ^ JP.^ 

M * 5!F # 15.#^ it ja ZM 

# Bd -tfc.iis i5 TJr #5 ^ ^ 

i i S f •? S ® i 

^ ^ Sr ^ ^ Tj ^.E."^ Ji^. 

$ $ % ^ ^ 4- # tt 

mMM 

f.m.ia BS.St.:?: mwni 


:?: ^ S «;e._ 
m m H.:?; ^ 11 fi/ ^ fll A ^ 
*c.|F. ^ ijii. », 0 .:7: M # BE. 

§ iK' ^ s ^ ^.ti ^ i 


p.^ ♦ 
ii5.^^ 

^■a.fi 


)ai5 

feifH. 

H.0. 

tf 

0.^ 
W Z 

^0. 

/© 

^;fg 

M'li 


0.ffi 


’’KJI. 1 In the [duke’s] seventh year, in spring, an officer of T® ® 
invaded Ch'ing. . 

\ 2 In summer, the viscount of Little Choo paid a court visit 
\ [to Loo.] 

3 ^ Ch‘ing put to death its great officer, Shin How. 

4 >Jn autumn, in the seventh month, the duke had a ine6t- 
Nt ing with the marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Suiig» 
'wvwan, heir-son of Ch*in, and Hwa, heir-son of Ch‘in& 
^^len they made a covenant in Ning-moo. 


Ykak VJI. 


DUKE HE. 


149 


i 

5 Pan, earl of Ts'aoii, died. 

6 Duke [Hwan’s] son, Ycav, went to Ts‘e. 

7 In winter, there was the burial of duke Ch'aou of Ts'aou. 


Par. 1. Ch‘ing was in an evil case between 
Ts'oo and Ts'o, and experienced the general 
fate of trimmers. The Clmcn says ; — ‘On this 
occasion, K'uiig Shull said to the earl of Ch'ing, 
“The proverb says, ‘When a man is incapable 
of firm resolve, why should ho feel it a pain to 
be humble?’ You are not able to be strong, and 
you are not able to be weak ; — it is the way to 
ruin yourself; the l^tate is in peril. Let me en- 
treat you to submit to Ts*e, in order to save the 
State.” The carl said “ I know how peace with 
Ts*e can be brought about. Have patience with 
me for a little.” The officer replied, “ men we 
know not in the morning that wo shall reach the 
evening, how can we wait for your deta-minationf”’ 
Par. 2. Scaou or Little Choo is the same as 

E (^1$) of in.T. 3; XY. 3. Its cliief E-lae, it is 

said, had been very assiduous in serving the 
marquis of Ts‘e, who got the king to confer on 
him a patent of nobility, and raise him to the 
rank of viscount. He is here in consequence 
of his elevation, paying a court visit to Loo. 
The name adopted for the new State was little 
Choo, because the viscounts of Choo and the lords 
of E were descended from the same ancestor. 

Par. 8. See on IV. 4 ; and the narrative after 
V.4. The Clvuen says here Ch'ing put to 
death Shin How to please Ts<e, and because of the 
iU report of him given by Yuen T‘aou-t‘oo. Shin j 
How was a native of Shin [^; a son of the mar- 
quis of Shin by a daughter of Ts'oo], and had 
been a favourite with king Wfln of Ts'oo. When 
king W8n was about to die, he gave How apei/i, 
and sent him away, saying, “ It is only I that 
know you. You are all bent on gain, insatiable. 

I have given to you, and allowed you to beg from 
me, ivithout dwelling on your faults ; but my suc- 
cessor will require much from you, and you are 
sure not to escape the consequences of your 
conduct. You must quickly leave Ts'oo; and 
do not go to a small State, for it will not 
be able to bear you.” When king WSn was 
buried. Shin How fled to Ch'ing, where also he 
became a favourite with duke Le. When Tsze- 
wan [Tow T'oo- woo-t'oo, chief minister of Ts'oo] 
heard of his death, he said, “The ancients have 
wdl gnid, ‘No one knows a minister like his 
ruler.’ How's natu re could not be changed.” ’ 
Par. 4. Ning-moo (Kuh-lgang has ^ -^) 
was in Loo, 20 le east of the pres. dis. dty of 
Yu-t'ae, dep. Yen-chow. This was ‘a meeting 
in robes #);’ the princes did 

not have any military follovdng. The K'ang- 
he editors say that ‘ the lords of Ch'in and Ch'ing 
sent their Iwar-sons, Both of these States had 
lately been attacked by Ts'e. Ch'in would 
fain have declined the covenant, but did not 
venture to do so. Ch'ing would fain have been 
present at it, but was not permitted to be so. 
They therefore did not present themselves, but 
sent their sons.’ The Chuen says:— ‘This 
meeting at Ning-moo was to consult about 


Ch'ing. Kwan Chung said to the marquis of 
Ts'e, “ I have heard the sayings, ‘ Call the waver- 
ing with courtesy; cherish the remote with 
kindness ; when kindness and courtesy are shown 
invariably, there are none but will be won.’” 
The marquis accordingly manifested courtesy to 
the princes, and their officers received from him 
the list q/^the tribute their territories had to pay 
to the king. The earl of Chi'ng having sent his 
eldest son Hwa to receive the commands of the 
meeting, the young prince said to the marquis, 
“ It was the three clans of SSeh, K'ung, and 
Tsze-jin, who opposed your lordship’s orders. If 
you will remove them as the basis of a pacifica- 
tion, I will become, at the head of Ch'ing, as one 
of your own subjects, and your lordship will be 
a gainer in every way.” 

‘The marquis was about to agree to his pro- 
posal; but Kwan Chung said, “You have 
bound all the princes to you by your propriety 
and truth ; and will it not be improper to end 
with an opposite policy? Here we should have 
propriety in the form of no treachery beriveen son 
and father, and truth in that of the son’s ob- 
serving his father's commands according to the 
exigenc}' of the times. Ihere cannot be greater 
criminality than that of him who acts contrary 
to these two things.” “Ti’e princes,” replied 
the duke, “have tried to punish Ch'ing, but 
without success. And now when such an op- 
portunity is presented to m^ may I not take 
advantage of it ? ” “Let your lordship,” said 
i Kwan, "deal gently with the case of Ch'ing in 
I kindness, and odd to this an instructive exposi- 
' tion of it, and then, when you again lead the 
! princes to punish the State, it will feel that utter 
overthrow is imminent, and Avill be consumed 
with terror. If on the contrary you deal with it, 
adopting the counsel of this criminal, Ch'ing 
null have a case to allege, and irill not be 
afraid. Consider too that you have assembled 
the princes to do honour to virtue, and if at the 
meeting you give place to this villain, and follow 
his counsel, what will there be to show to your 
descendants? And farther, the virtue, the 
punishments, the rules of propriety, and the 
righteousness, displayed at the meetings of the 
princes, are recorded in everj’ State. Wlien a 
record is made of the place ^ven to such a 
criminal, there will be an end of your lordship’s 
covenants. If you do the thing and do not re- 
cord it, that will show thatyour virtue is not com- 
pete. Lctnot yourlordshipacccde to Iiis request. 
Ch'ing is sure to accept the covenant. And for 
this Hwa, the earl of Uh'infs eldest son, to seek 
the assistance of a great State to weaken his 
own t — ^he will not escape without suScring for 
it. The government of Ch'ing, moreover, is in 
the hands of Shuli-chcn, Too Shah, and Sre 
Shuh, those three good men:— yon would find 
no opportunity now to act against it.” 

* On this the marquis of Ts'e declined the prof- 
fers of the prince, who in consequence of this 


150 


THE CirUN TS-EAV, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK V. 


affair was regarded as a criminal in Ch'ing. 
The earl begged from Ts‘e the favour of a 
covenant.’ 

Par. 5. For Kung has 

[After p. 7, the Chnen says; — ‘In the inter- 
calary month [which must thus have been a 


double twelfth], king ITwuy died. King Seaiig, in 
consequence of the troubles that were occasioned 
by T‘ae-shuh Tne, and fearing his accession 
might not be secured, did not make Ms father's 
death public, and sent an announcement of Ids 
difficulties to Ts‘c.’] 


Eighth year. 


^ # A® 


n. 

T 


AoM WoMoU 


T 

m. 


TwmiE 

A 


> fe g 

# ifn'tl ifii 

... _ V — M - ■* - - Jl XS 1 * * 


E ■p K @ Xl' I'll Ji« B I'll lEl 

^ S # SI5 - 

m.M. Sit A mm, m ^ ^ u ^ 

T 5® ^ ^ gill A ' 

B. h 6 # ^ A igx T if. M 

X « * ^ s.ilj T ^ ^ « m 

a * ^ ii ^ ^ ^ ^ 

llI5 =Ea -*» 5/.i> 4-A. zrA -~n -tt^ v.i* AJ. tn »}»T 


WM sm 
^ i: <a- n H.jg; * ». 

mX^ rSsf^? fc=l ■ _ .V_ -m—K^ >M>i4 ■ ^ > < * » - 


asA^BM &fL 


m. BM 


"fe ^ 


VIII. 1 In his eighth year, in spring, in the king’s first month, 
the duke had a meeting with an officer of the king, 
the marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the marquis 
of Wei, the baron of Heu, the earl of Ts‘aou, and 
Kwan, heir-son of Ch‘in, when they made a covenant 
in T'aou. 

2 The earl of Ch'ing begged [to be admitted to] the cove- 

nant. 

3 In summer, the Teih invaded Tsin. 

4 In autumn, in the seventh month, the duke offered 

the great sacrifice in the grand temple, and [at 


152 


HOOK V. 


THE CH'UN TS'EW, WITH TIIE TSO CHUEN. 


J[Tlie Cluicn adds here : — ‘ The dulcc of Sung 
being ill, his eldest son hjj his recognized wife, 
Tsze-foo, earnestly entreated him, saying, 
brother, Muh-e, is older than I, and is entirely 
virtuous. Do made him your succcessor.” The 
duke gave charge to Tsze-yu [the above Muh-e] 
that so it should be, but he refused, saying. 


“ TiHmt greater virtue could there be than for 
him thus to decline the dignity of the State? — 
I am not equal to him. And moreover, tlie 
thing itself would not be in accordance with 
what is right." W’ith this he ran out of the 
duke’s iircsence.’] 


Ninth year. 


Yjun IX. 


PUKE IlK. 


^ ^ BE Tj Bt.© © 5lc in ^ Ilf* 

I'.n; ill lir -i- T« A ‘ffS- SB, ^ -p: -rtr rfh * /X vff 


« -B 3i itf' fit! W- ^ Jv ? 5E ffn itg -T- ;g: 

<5^ M It ^ Tf fiiii S iSi ^ ?sB,:2:jE W: 'M- m 

^0,^; f Jf « MM Am^^ JS-.-fli. 

S J®, JI«. if IS ^ W. ,®, 0. A W iSn.ii} r^ 


•’^ I ✓ % rj ,#'^•■*0 H i/ ■^1 

^ X SF H.if mm 7k. 

S 1^ ZJm J, flij 

t:MSmT^WAM 

n M 0.B5 ^ + TSJlf J.^ n 

S :S SS '■ffl WA. A a MM ^ tfc.l|g 
±^1if M HB ^ W s>f 1$ Hn M ^ -tJk Z. 


Z- ^ fi.«|! ^ fit 

B. 0.ft ^ -f? ^ 


a ^ ^ iif- 0,# n 

^ AmMMmm 


^ » fv^ V T * p F— • • F — V ^ ^ p * ^iin^ O 9^*0 

^ ®:.'5=' A®. 

'^, m ‘si.z w ^ 0 . a * 0 . 

Mi -tfiJi ^ It JB :?: Bm%ZBM-& 

#, ^ tf 3? if K.». m.P,K m^Am 

J5 3i •fi!i.0,± m + # #.|I 0.;S 

■tfl: W-Z«t:A. = m, 

M B-Tkmm'pi zM,z.zm^.^t 


IX. 1 In tlie duke’s ninth year, in spring, in the king’s first 
month, on Ting-ch*ow, Yu-yueh, duke of Sung, died. 

2 In summer, the duke had a meeting ^vith the [king’s] chief 

minister, the duke of Chow, and with the marquis of 
Ts-e, the son [of the late duke] of Sung, the mar- 
quis of Wei, the earl of Ch‘ing, the baron of Heu, and 
the earl of Tsaou, in JC‘wei-k‘ew. 

3 In autumn, in the seventh month, on Yih-yew, the duke’s 

eldest daughter died. 

. 4 In the ninth month, on Mowrshin, the princes made a 
covenant in K‘wei-k‘ew. 

5 On Keah-tsze, Kwei-choo, marquis of Tsin, died, 

6 In winter, Le K‘ih put to death He^ts'e, the son of Ins 

[deceased] ruler. 


VOLT. 


20 


154 


THE Cn‘UJf TS*EW, TVETH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK y. 


Parr. 1,2. Tu-yueli,— seo the events of his ac- 
cession in the Chnen on III.jdi3,4. He was 
succeeded by his son Tsze-foo 

as duke So.ing In the period of his 

early mourning, before his father was buried, 
Tsz^foo came in mourning garb to this meeting 
at lv*wei-k‘ew, and therefore he is mentioned in 

p.2 as ‘son, or new duke, of Sung.’ 

Tso-she lays down the canon, that the successor 
to the throne, while his predecessor •was unburied, 

was called Seaou-t'ung or ‘boy;’ and 

the successor to a State, in like drcumstances, 
Tsze son-’ Kung and Kuh for 

JE^ read , and for KSvei- 

k‘ew -was in Sung, — 30 Ic east from the pres, 
dis. city of K'aou-sliing (4^ 
fung. The Chnen says; — ‘The meeting at 
Kwa-k‘ ew w as to repe.at tlie former covenant 
[that in Vlil. 1], and to cultivate the good rela- 
tions amorip the princes thansclccs; — ^whicb was 
proper. The Wng sent his prime minister [the 

Shoo, XX. V. 1] K'ung to present 

to the marquis of Ts‘e some of his sacrificial flesh, 
with the message, “Tlie son of Heaven has been 
sacrificing to Xyjln and Woo, and sends K‘ung 
to present a portion of the flesh to his uncle of 
a different surname.” The marquis was about 
to descend the steps, and do obeisance, when 
K*ung said, “Tliere was another command. 
The son of He.aven diarged me to say that, in 
consideration of his uncle’s 70 years, he confers 
on him an additional degree of distinction, — 
that he shall not descend and do obeisance.” 
“ Heaven’s majesty, ” replied the marquis, “is not 
far from me, — not a cubic, not S inches. Shall 
I, Scaou-pih, dare to covet this command of the 
son of Heaven, and not descend and do obeis- 
ance. Jj I did so, I should fear that majestu 
was falling low, and left a stigma on the son of 
Heaven. I dare not but descend and do obeis- 
ance.” With this he descended the steps, did 
obidsance, ascended agidn, and received tlie flesh.’ 

Par. 3. Kung-yang says; — ‘Tliis lady had 
not been married; — ^how is her death recorded 
hCTc? She had been engaged to be married. 
When that took place, the daughter >vas called 
by her designation in the family, and her hair 
was bound up with the pin. If* she died before 
Lcirtp ir.tzrricd, the ceremonies used were those of 
a full-grown woman.’ 

Par. •t. Tlie Cluien says : — ‘ In autumn, the 
marquis of T&‘e made the covenant with the 
princes in K‘woi-k‘cw to this effect ; — “ All we 
who have united in this covenant shall hereaf- 
ter banish everything contrary to good relations 
among us.” Tlie prime minister K'ling had 
previously left to return to the capital; and when 
on the way. he met the marquis of Tsin. and said 
to him. You neeil not go on to the meeting. Tlie 
marquis of TsS? docs not make virtue lus first 
object, and is most earnest al>out what is remote. 
Tliu< in the north he invaded the llill Jung; on 
the south, he invaded Ts'oo; and in the west, he 
has a««c:nblc\l this meeting. As to what lie 
may d' 1 /.rrt-'irJ'r castw.arvl, 1 do not know, but 
b.e will do nothing to the west- Is Tsm ^nng 
to fall into di-order? Let your lordship set 


yoursdf to still all disorder in Tsin. and not be 
anxious about going on to this meeting” ’ 

The K‘ang-lie editors 8.17 they agree wflli 
many critics of former dynasties in doubting 
the truth of tins narrative. 

Parr. 5,6. There is a difficulty hero with the 
date, the day Kcah-tsze being really 4 davs 
earlier than Jlow-sliin of the 4th par. I tlunk, 

therefore, that Keali-scuh EW 

yang’s rending, is here to be preferred, though 
the received text docs not follow liim, while it 

follows Kuli-lcang in giving instead of 

Tso’s 

The Chiicn s.ays;— ‘On the de.ath of duke 
Hcen [whose name was Kwei-choo] ot Tsm, Lo 
K‘ih and P‘e Ch'ing wished to raise Ch‘ur,g~ttrn, 
trho teas qfiencards duke Wfin, to the ™sr- 
quisate, arid therefore raised an insmrMtion 
with liis partizans. and those of his oroUieR, 
Shin-s5ng .and E-woo. Tears before this, duK| 
Hcen had appointed Seun Seih to supennten 
the training of He-ts‘e ; and when he ■was lU, « 
called Seih to him, arid said, •’ I 
lay on you the charge of this diild ; how 
yon uoir do in reference to liim ?” S^h bowM 
iiis he.ad to the ground, and replied, 
forth all my strength and resources on hisbenai, 
doing so ^lith loyalty and sincere . .. 

I succeed, it ■will be Giving to 
influence; if I do not succed, m.v 0““ 
foUow my endeavonrs.” “ Wliat do 
by loyalty and sincere devotion, asked t 
duke. “Doing to the extent of my 
whatever wiU be advantageous to yonr v 
isiovalty. Performing the duties to you, t 
departed, and serving him, the ^ ‘ 

neither of you would have any doubts about m 
is sincere devotion,” 

‘When Le K-ih was fully purposed to au 
He-ts‘e, he first informed Seun 
“The friends of Ch‘mig-urb and his broth^ 
all full of resentment, are about to rise: 

and Tsin wiU assist' them:— what &aii you ao 

in such a case “ I 'will die with H^t*^i . 
plied Smh. “ That wiU be of no use, ’ urged «« 
other. Seun Shuh said. “I told 
marquis so, and I must not s.ay 
now. I am able and willing to make • 

■words, and do von tliink I will grudge my 1 ^ 
do so? Although it may be of rio use, how rau 
I do otherwise? And in their vrisli to sho r ^ 
same virtue for their side, who is not iiKe ^ 

Do 1 ■wish to be entirely faithful and one 
prolcpe, and c-m I say that others should rti 
from being so for theirs ?" TTn.is«i> 

‘ in the^ 10th month. Le K'uh Ml®^ , 
in his place bt/ his father's copin. Seun 
about to die at the same time, but some ont ^ 
to liim. •• You had better raise Chwi-ts^t^ 


I to liim* •' A.Uil iliUA cmivi ’ImlTTI 

I liis brother's place, and give j"our help to i • 

\ Seih did so, and directed the new maiquxs 
the burial of dabr //tVa. ^ ;« 

‘In the iltii month. Le Kuh 
the court, and Seim &ih died whli 
superior man may say that in Seun , 

have what is dodared in the ode [The ..bi, 
lii-lLo].’ 

“A flaw in a white gem 
M.ay bo ground away : 

But for a flaw in speech 
Xotiiing can be done”’ 


Yk-vii X. 


DUKE HE. 


155 


It nwy be well to observe hero thnt these 
luiinU-rs ill this Chuen were not done by ]C‘ih 
liiiiiself; though, ns tlic instrniiionts were om- 
jiioyetl by him, lie is justly ehiivtted with them. 

In p. 6. Kunp-yaiig roads for lle- 
ts‘e ticenme innniiiis of Tsin on tlic denth of his 
father, nnd was K'ih’s or ruler. Kung-ynng 

says he is here styled or son merely, beennse 

the year of his father’s death was still running; 
but sucii a canon dcK's not hold in many other 

instances. AV o might, indeed, read 

— after the analogy of p.2; but the peculiar 

style here, "ji ^ •^, must bo duo to the 

circumstances of the case: — the youth of He- 
ts‘e; his want of a real title to tlic place; nnd 
his c-trly dcatli. 

[I’iic Chuen adds throe notices here: — 

1st. ‘The marquis of Ts‘o, with the armies 
of the princes, invaded Tsin, nnd returned, after 
ad v.ancing as far ns Knou-lcniig. The expetlition 
was to punish nnd put down tlio disorders of the 
State. The order about it did not reach Loo, 
nnd so no record of it was made.’ 

ad. ‘K'eoh Juy made E-woo offer heavy 
bribes to Tsin. to obtain its help in entering 
Tsin, saying to him, “The State is really in the 
posse.ssion of others; you need grudge nothing, 
if you enter nnd can get the people, j’ou will 
have no difllculty about the territory.” E-woo 
followed his counsel. Seih P‘flng of Ts‘o led a 
force and joined the army of Tsin ; and they 
placed E~koo or duke llwuy in duke Heen’s 
place. 


‘The earl of Ts'iii said to K'eoh Juy, “ Whom 
has the duke’s son [K-woo] to rely on ih Tsinf' 
Juy replied, “1 have heard the saying that a 
fugitive should have nojiartizans; for if he have 
piiriizans, he is sure to have enemies also. When 
K-woo was young, ho was not fond of play ; hecould 
show fight, but in moderation. Wlien he grew 
up, thero was no change in these traits. Anything 
else about him I do not know.” Tlic earl then 
said to Kung-suii Clic, “ Will E-woo settle the 
State ?” Che replied, “ I have heard that only 
the pattern man can settle a State. In the 
She it is said of king Wfin (III. i. VII. 7), 

‘ Without the consciousness of effort. 

You accord with the pattern of God.’ 

It is also said [III. iii. II. 8], 

‘ Committing no excess, indicting no 
injury ; 

Thero are few who will not take you 
ns their model.’ 

This is spoken of him who loves not nor hates, 
who envies not nor is ambitious. But now E- 
woo’s words arc full of envy and ambition ; — it 
will bo hard for him to settle the State J” The 
earl said, “Ileiiig envious, he will have many to 
resent his conduct ; how can he succeed in his 
ambition ? But this will be our gain.” ’ 

3d. ‘When duke Seang succeeded to Sung, 
from regard to the virtue of his brother Muh-e 

i see the (Miuen at the end of last year], he made 
iim general of the left, nnd administrator of the 
government. On this Sung was finely ruled, 
nnd the office of general of the left became heredi- 
tary in the Yu family (Yu was the clan-name 
of Muh-e’s descendants)’ ] 


Tenth year, 

■ 


it 


^1 


it 

^ ^ M 


^ ^ T 

jE 

M 

ix MoM # 


if: ^ 


— f ill mM J. A mm 

A ^ 0.5£.Ja W H aE i M 0. 

a a-.fil ^ ffi If IS: A 5S.-^ 


156 


THE CH'UN TS‘EW, ^TH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


“K 

m w 


^ ^ wy w 

Oi'WU -Ifc.-ffl # 15 


mM 


^ ^ H ® v& in 
H.-ffi gt^ S 5 il ^ 
^ 0.11 M ^ -tfc. 
MM jfe.jTiB P4.<:.# 
« ^ J. E M 

m # 

.:A: ill -b H^w la 
^,#,0, 
iz^m ^ 
H & s.,^.n m m, 

hi W' ^ ± H.a fi 5 
% 'iSoiPiffij 


,ZM.m mM,® s. p.^ 
mMmmmMm^^ 

m ^ Ek r- 

M m.m P ik f .# 

M -b ^.m B.M r^s-m 

Bff 0 J. 0 .K:^^.M^. 

2fc. 


^ ^ * w 


M 1 ^ M « 

Z 1 P.$.il.*ii: 
0 , 11 .:^ 11 $ ^ 
'S- # Jil ^ # a 

fl $ M H. 

MM m 

^ Bd * S ^,i<S 

P ^ B ^ 

^.inB ^ 
ft MM # ® ■f’ 


^.0. 

Bn ® 


& W 


0 MM 


X 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 
7 


If# 

^,z 

In his tenth year, in spring, in the king’s first month, the 
duke went to Ts‘e. 

The Teih extinguished Wan: and the viscount of Wan fled 
to Wei. 

Le K‘ih of Tsin murdered his ruler Ch‘oh, and the great 
officer Seun Seih. 

In summer, the marquis of Ts‘e and the baron of Heu in- 
_ vaded the northern Jung. 

Tsin put to death its great officer Le Kflh. 

It was autumn, the seventh month. 

In winter, there was a great fall of snow. 


Par. 1. Tan Tsoo T'ang dyn. 

8tli century) says that the character is al 
ways used of journeys by the dnke and Tninia 
ters of Loo, to visit other courts or presen 
friendly inquiries. Duke He here goes to Ts‘e t< 
appear at the court of the marquis as the leadei 
of the States. 

viscount of Wfin, or the viscounI 
oi&<^ Ya®oneol the descendants of the duke ol 
^ r«»Ucd dale as being one of tlie three bint 
CrinSi • of the king], minister ol 

viJiSJf of the court, thev %ve« 

na^. nf '’Oin'g the 

name of their principal city,— 30 fe west of the 

pres. dis. city of Wcn, dep. Uwao-k‘ing 
^3^7 ), lIo*nan. In the 1 st nar. appended to I. xL 3 , 


t the king grants the territories of the House of 
Soo to Ch'ing. That House, however, must have 
been subsequently re-instated in them. In one of 
the Chuen appended to ULxix. 4, the viscount ot 
S oo appears as confederate against the king with 
Tsze-t'uy, who flies on his defeat to Wfin; and 
they further retreat together to Wei. ^ 

The Cbueu says: — ‘The Teih extinguished 
Wan, because the viscount of Soo_^ was a 
man without faith. He rebelled against the 
king, and went off to the Teih ; but he could^do 
notliing among them, and they attack^ him. 
The king did not relieve him, and so his State 
was annihilated, and he himself fled to WeL’ 
Par. 3. See the Chuen on the 6th par. of 
year. That Chuen says Ch'oh was murdered in 
the 11th month of last year, while here the deed 
appears under the .«pring of this; — but see what 
is said,- oa V. 1, upon tlic difference of dates m 


Ytih M. 


DUKE UK. 


157 


jS-^ Kl'.:.? JiJvl D'jX'c Hcvn lint! Kvn 

nr (*li*nlj-t’<ro .ni>j>o.ir* hi'tx? 
c rh or tMlcr. 

J’sr, I. 'Hu-ii’ nnrttu’rn Junsj wcri' tlip ramo 
R» tJ-.f Dili .tutiK «if ID. xsx. 7 . Why the Kawn 
t * D< lisxo BPC‘inij»an!(yl TaV on 
till* nxjv.'liitt'n vto can"* loll. 

I’nr. .', Tho Churn aaya «>n ihl*:—* In sum- 
n<'T. In tin- Dl« tncnlh. UV-ftM, »hil;o of (Mimn, 
ftruj T.-\njr. «pn of kins: ih i<iinrtl Soih ISlns; 
cf 'r»v in »>vurinsr llu* n't.anli»hn«ont of Ihc 
msi^juli t f T>in. "'ho jnit in ^ItMlh !>• K*jh 

In vli'-ar bins* 'If vf n--v rfir.plirtty irith him 
IS f*.r ir’.jVA If hfiti cfmriitlni. When 

ill' v.'.t ntx'iit Co pul him to ilo.ith, ho rent 
n imu'W to him, r.ijinjr, “nut for you, 

1 iliii'ilii not h.ivo nit.n!iuil to my jiri'acnt 
j»'oiti-.'n; hut ivaiiili-rinc that you munlonil 
ivo r.'.anjui'f* m«l ono fn*at ofilcer, ia it 
rot n il’iRirult thlnp to Iv your rutor? ” K‘ih j 
rvpVn'il. “If others hail not Iwn removctl. 
hiiw enuM > on have fomul ^^l)m to Hut if 

aim vi«h to makf out n manV piilt, thoro is no 
liiRU'uiiy in flr.ilim: emund to do so. I have 
aour vommand." With this Ito cut his 
o^n throat, and diiai. At this time T'ei Cli'inp 
vat nis'enl on n vi«lt of friendly inquiries in 
Ts'in.and tocnirv'at thee.arl to grant some delay 
In tiie payment of the liribes promised to him, 
r » that hee*c.aiv<i/<'r thfjirfsent’ 

Par. r.. [The Chuen appends the ^following 
rturj..__«'n,o marquis of Tsin took up the body 
of his brxither Kung [^7 ^ ‘the eldest 
son Kung.’ Kung is the Iton. title given to 
Shln-s.tng, duke Dei'n’s eldest son! and had it 
re-intorreil. In the autumn, IIoo Tub avent to 
the lower capital [i.r., K‘euli-yuli] in connection 
inVA /Ai*s, when he met theyomer young prince, 
arho made him get up and take his reins for 
him, ns As had hren accuslcmtd to do, and then 
said to him, “ E-woo has violated all propriety. 

1 haa-e presented a request to Goil and obtained 
it I am going to give Tsin to Ts'in, which will 
maintain tlic sacrinccs to me.” Tuh replied, “I 
ii.ave hc.anl that the Spirits of the dead do not 
enjoy the sacrifices of those who arc not of their 
kindred, and that people only sacrifice to those 
arho averc of the same ancestry os themselves. 


Will not the saerifiees to you be thus virtually 
no saerifiees ? And arhat crimes attach to tlie 
lieojde of yjcmf IjCt me ask you to consider 
well hoiv avhat you have done will le.ad to the 
wnang pnnishment of them and the cessation of 
the saerifiees to yourself.” “yes," said the 
other, “I will make another request to God. 
In 7 days, at the wT.aiern side of the new city 
there will be a wizard, through arhom 3‘ou shall 
haa-e an Interadew avith me.” Tub agreed to 
■ tlii.s, and the prince di.<nppcarcd, Wlicn the 
time araa come, the olllccr avent to the iccst side 
of thf tiiy, and recela’eil this message: — “God 
has granf'etl that I punish onf;^ the criminal, arho 
shall Ik! defeateil in linn.” 

‘When P‘e Ch'ing arent to Ts'in, he said to 
the earl, “ Thei* arcre Lett Sffng, K'laih Ch'ing, 
and K'e Juy, arho arould not agree to our mar- 
quie's faijiUiny his promises to you. If j'ou will 
call them to 3*011 1)3* urgonth* requesting their 
presence, I arill then c.\pel the marquis. Your 
lonlship can then restore Ch'ung-urh to Tsin ; 
and ca*ery thing aa*ill be croarned avith success.’” 

Par. 7 . Kung-ynng here has m. for 
Snoav lying a foot deep [Seo the Chuen on 
I. ix. S] arould indeed be a strange phenomenon 
in the autumn of the 3*car. Choav’s avinter avas 
nc.Vs autumn. 

rriie Chuen adds here: — ‘In arintcr, the carl 
of Tsin sent Ling Che to Tsin in return for the 
mission of P'c Ch'ing, and to ask that the three 
ofBccrs mentioned Ch'ing might come to him. 
K'coh ,Tu 3* said, “^riic greatness of his gifts and 
the sarcctncss of his arords arc intended to 
dcco3* us.” Then the3* put to death P'c Ch'ing, 
K'e Ecu, and the sca*cn great officers of the 
chariots, — ^Ivung Hava of the left column, Kca 
Hava of the right, Shuh Keen, Chuy Ch'nen, Luy 
IIoo, Till Kung, and San K'e; idl partizans of 
Lc and P'c. P*c P'aou fled to Ts'in, and said 
to the earl, “The marquis of Tsin is false to 
3*00, gTC.at lord, and envious on small grounds 
of his own officers ; — the people do not adhere 
to liim. Attack him, and he is sure to be 
dria*en from the State.” The earl said, “ Hoar 
can he, who has lost the masses, deal death 
in such a icayf But 3*00 have only escaped the 
calBmit3*; avho can expel your ruler?’”] 


Eleventh year. 


Mr 

-t— 

0 


Tk 

st 


A 


A 


158 


THE CII'UX TS'EW, WITH TIJE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK V. 


S ¥ J f ‘S -ft il® ^ ^ S.@ ffi * 

* a M aE # » A Jiii P 

T 5 * 3 E -tfe t# 


I S.^ ■J' 

*. A *. 

J® Wi^MM 
A <: 


^T.’fe.H, @ a; 


M T' >! 


XI. 


. .. 3 E.» 3 E$ 0 . 

Jt ifii ^.-S -2 

T H'l ^ ^ a #. 

•&.# If dt 3E.iV.3l5 
::iF: ®.-fir * If. ft 
ja ^t.5i « ^ ® 


1 

2 

3 

4 


In the [dulce’s] eleventh year, Tsin put to death its nreat 
officer, P‘e Ch‘ing-foo. 

In summer, the duke and his wife, the lady Keang, had a 
meeting with the marquis of Ts‘e in Yang-kuh. 

In autumn, in the eighth, month, there was a grand sacri- 
fice for rain. 

In winter, a body of men from Ts‘oo invaded Hwang. 


1- See the last Chuen. Tso-she says 
that in spring the marquis of Tsin sent an 
announcement to Loo of the disorder attempted 
to be raised by P‘e Ch'ing. This is Tso’s o>vn 
attempt to reconcile the date of P<e Chlng’s 
death, as given here, with the real date as- 
signed to it in the Chuen referred to. But we 
nave seen that both dates are correct;— this 
according to the calendar of Chow ; that, accord- 
ing to the calendar of Uea. 

[The Chuen adds:— ‘The king by Heaven’s 
grace sent duke Woo of Shaou, and Kwo, the 
historiographer of the interior, to confer the 
symbol of his rank on the marquis of Tsin. He 
received the nephrite with an air of indifference: 

™ return to the court, said to the 
king. The marquis of Tsin is not one who will 
have any successor of his own children. Your 
majesty conferred on him the symbol of in- 
vestiture, and he received the auspicious jade 
with an air of indifference. Taking the lead 
thus m self-abandonment, is he likely to have 
any one to succeed him? The rules of propriety 
are the stem of a State; and reverence is the 
Chariot that conveys them along. Where there 
IS not reverence, those rules do not have their 
course; and where this is the case, the distinc- 
tions of superiors and inferiors are all obscured. 


When this occurs, there can be no transmission 
of a State to after generations.’ See the ^ 


_h). 11.3 

Par. 2. Comp. ll.xviii. 1. It would appear 
from this that duke He had married a lady or 
Ts'e, a daughter probably of duke Hwan. Bid' 
that she should accompany him, as here, to a 
meeting with her father even, was contrary to 
all Chinese ideas of propriety. Too Yu says:-" 
‘ A wife does not accompany or meet a visitor 
beyond the gate ; when she sees her brothers, 
she does not cross the threshold of the liareni. 
To go to this meeting with the duke was contrary 
to rule.’ 

[The Chuen adds: — ‘In summer, the Jungi» 

m_/ __ f t j. T?. nriA 


^ : — ‘jLn summer, wie uii© 

Yang-k‘eu, Ts‘euen-kaou, and about the E ana 

~ ' ttacking the capital, entereu 


the Loh, united in attacking the capital, 
the royal city, and burned the eastern gate; king 
Hvmy's son Tae having called them. Ts'in ana 
Tsin invaded the Jung in order to relieve tlio 
king. In autumn, the marquis of Tsin causea 
the J ung to make pence with the king.’j 
Par. 3. See on H. v. 7. . t 

Par. 4. The Chuen says:— ‘The people oi 
Hwang did not send their tribute to Ts'oo, ana 
a body pf men, therefore, from Ts'oo attnckco 
Hwang in the winter.’ 


Twelfth year. 

§ Ho A 0 H 


Year XIL 


DUKE HE. 


159 


^ ^ * -a.iii.® © ■?• © 

jt m Pi 3E 


±.1t # 11 S 315 ^ . ., 

# K # 1f ^ ^ 

■ mz 


B.Z^yT' 


5S;® 


11 ffl- T :e.^5.^:n # T . 

iiL.z mm 

■f-.a it 75- 75 1^ iS E J^l T 
®.t5? It.S.ii.lE.^ ± ^ 


2 « S.H.'Rf ;S If 

^.5*;^ @ * W.0. 

^ ^ — 

w- a.® 

^ wm 1 


m. 


XU. 


iw ^ ii pg » ^ 

^^#^75rEll^^;^5E. 

1 In the [duke’s] twelfth year, in spring, in the king’s third 

month, on Kang-woo, the sun was eclipsed. 

2 In summer, a body of men from • Ts‘oo extinguished 

Hwang. 

3 It was autumn, the seventh month. 

4 In w'inter, in tJie twelfth month, on Ting-chow, Ch‘oo- 

k‘ew, marquis of Ch‘in, died. 


Par. 1. This oclipse took place in the after- 
noon of March 29th, B. C. Gt7. Too observes 
that the historiographer had omitted to enter 
that Kang-woo was the 1st day of the moon. 

[The Chuen adds here;— ‘In the spring, the 
States walled the suburbs of Ts'oo-k'Sw of Wei 
[see II. 1] ; fearing troubles from the Teih.’] 

Far. 2. The Chuen s.ays; — ‘The people of 
Hwang, relying on the friendship of the States 
with Ts‘e, did not render the tribute which was 
due from tliem to T8‘oo, saying “Prom Ying 
[the capital of 18*00] to us is 900 le; what harm 
can T8‘oo do to us?” This summer, Ts‘oo ex- 
tinguished Hwang. Kuh-lcang says * At the 
meeting in Kwnn [II.4'I, Kwan Chung said to 
the marquis of Ts‘e, “ KSang and Hwang are far 
from T8‘e and near to T8‘oo, — States which Ts'oo 
considers advantageous to it. Should T8‘oo at- 
tack them, and; you not be. able to save them, 
you ■will cease to be looked up to by the States.” 
Tlie marquis would not listen to.him, but made 
a covenant with Keang and Hwang. On the 
death of Kwnn Chung, Ts'oo invaded Keang, 
and extinguished Hwaug; and Ts‘e, indeed, was 
not able to save them.’ Whether Kwan Chung 
gave the ad-rice here ascribed to him at Kwqn 
we do not know; but Kuh is wrong in supposing 
he was now dead;— he died in the loth year of 
duke He. 

Far. 3. [The Chuen gives here two. narra- 
tives: — :st. ‘The king, because of the attack of 


the Jung, proceeded to punish his brother Tae; 
— ^who fled to T8‘e.’ 

2d. ‘In winter, the marquis of Ts‘e sent 
Kwan E-woo to make peace between the Jung 
and the king; and Seih F‘ttng to make peace 
between the Jung and Tsin. The king wanted 
to feast Kwan Cliung -witb the ceremonies due 
to a minister of the highest grade. But Kwan 
Chung declined them, saying, “I an but an 
officer of mean condition. There are Kwoh 
and Kaon in Ts‘e, both holding their appointment 
from the son of Heaven. If they should come 
in spring or in autumn to receive your majesty’s 
orders, with what ceremonies should they be en- 
tertained? A simple servant of my prince, I 
venture to refuse the honour you propose.” The 
king said, ‘Messenger of my uncle, I approve 
your merit. You maintain your excellent vir- 
tue, which I never can forget. Go and dischange 
the duties of your office, and do not disobey my 
commands.” Kwan Chung y?na% accepted the 
ceremonies of a minister of the lower grade, 
and returned to Ts’e. 

The superior man will say; “ Kwan well de- 
served that his sacrifices should be perpetuated 
from generation to generation. He was humbly 
courteous, and did not forget his supwiors. As 
the ode [She, HI. Lode V.3] says. 

“ Our amiable, courteous prince 
Was rewarded by the Spirits.” ’ 

Far. 4. For Kung-yaug reads . j^ . 


160 


THE CHTJN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUE^’. . 
Thirteenth year. 


BOOK Y. 


_ .w m. BM i » © 

^ W.=?f g « S M W 


0 ^ ?i % tr./if' Bff 

JHi ^ 0,iliB,S S 

5 S ^ ^ sM 0.'S 

=s,w.* ^ =t.a.K m "F 

6 iH'tm 

mMrnPim 

^ -fg 

^ -f^ #.l|!.if 1 ® Sf IS 


#i+^ j-j: 

0 ^.01 o — 

M ^ w.^ m- 

£. U.M m f 

IS ^n.f 

1 


^lll- 1 In tlie [^duke’s^ tliirteentli year, in spring, tlie Teili made 
an incursion into TV'ei. 

2 In summer, in the fourth month, there was the burial of 

duke Seuen of Ch'in. 

3 The duke had a meeting with the marquis of Ts*e,_ tli® 

duke of Sung, the marquis of Ch^n, the marquis of 
^ei, the earl of Ch'ing, the baron of Heu, and the 
earl of Ts'aou, in Heen. 

4 In autumn, in the ninth month, there was a grand sacri- 

fice for rain. 

5 In winter, duke fHwan’sJ son. Yew, went to Ts‘e. 


n \ras in anticipation of trouble to 
Wcj from the Teih that the States fortified the 
FUbarlx* of Ts‘oo-k‘CTr ;— as related in the Clinen 
at the commencement of last year. Chaoa 

r -ins-fei ; to^rards the end of the 

Sua^ djn.) suppofo-s that the object of the Teih 
w * V to them the viscoant of 

> -n, V..0 had tied there, as rvlatcd in X. 2 , 


[The Chuen adds here: — ‘This sprinp. ti 
marquis of Ts‘e sent Chun^-sun Tseaon on 
mission of friendly inquiries to Cliow, 
speak about the Idng's brother Tac: but , 
the jemer business tras concluded. TsCaou o* 
not speak further to the king; and tThcn pivin? 
! an account of his mission, on his return, he saw. 
1 “We cannot yet speak about Tac. The kin?- 


Y j:au 


XIV. 


DUKE HE. 


161 


nngLT Ii.ns not subsided. I'crli.nps it will do so 
in 10 ye.irs. But in less tlinn ten years, the 
kinp " ill not recall him.” ’] 

Par. 0. lleen was in Vei, — 60 /e south-east 
from tiie pres. K‘ac Cliow dep. Ta- 

iniii", Cliih-le. Tlie Chuen says; — ‘The meet- 
ing at Ilccn was because the E of the Ilwac 
were distressing Ke, and also to consult about 
the roy.al House.’ 

[The Chnen has here anotlier brief narrative: 
— ‘ In autumn, because of the diflicultics created 
by the .Tung, the States determined to guard 
CIiow; and Chnng-sun Tsenou of Ts‘e conducted 
their troops to it.’] 

Par. 5. Tliis was the .Id visit "-liich TeV had 
now made in He’s time to Ts‘e. Wc see what 
a sway lie must have had in Loo, and what service 
the marquis of Ts‘o required for his protectorate. 

['file Chucu adds here: — ‘In winter Tsiii was 
Euucring a second time a season of scarcity, 
and sent to Ts‘in to bo allowed to buy grain. 
The earl of Ts‘in asked Tsze-sang [Kung-sun 
Clic] whether he should give the grain, and 
that officer replied, “If 3-ou grant this great 
favour, and t/ie marquis of Tsin m.ake a due 
return for it, j-ou will have nothing more to re- 
quire. If 3'ou gr.'int it, and he make no return, 
his people will be alienated from him. If you then 


proceed topunisli him, not having the multitudes 
with him, ho is sure to be defeated. “Tlie earl 
put the same question to his minister Pih-Ie, who 
replied, “The calamities inflicted by Heaven 
flow abroad, and different States have them in 
tlieir turn. To succour in such calamities, and 
compassionate one’s neighbours, is the proper 
waj*; and he who pursues it will have blessing.” 

‘ P'aou, the son of P‘e Ch'ing, was then in 
Ts‘in, and asked leave to lead an expedition to 
attack Tsin, but the earl said to him, “Its ruler 
is evil; but of what ofiTences have his people been 
guilty?” On this Ts'in contributed grain to 
Tsin, vessels following one another from Yung 
to Kiiang; and the affair was called “The 


service of the trains of boats.’”] See the m 


IV. iii. ^), art. 6. Wang Seih 


t8eoh(Ip I 


Ming dyn., A.D. 1584-1610) 
gives an opinion on the merits of the advice 
tendered in the above m.atter by Kung-sun Che 
and Pih-le He respectively, which may well be 
called in question. ‘Pih-le’s words,’ he says, 

‘ were benevolent, kind, and entirely generous ; 
but they were not equal to Kung-snn Che’s, 
based on a calculation of consequences. A tru- 
Ij' worthy minister he was!’ 


Fourteenth year. 


36 K ® 'll 

m. rr 7 

la ii 4 b « Si 

^ B.M 

* « K i f . 

M It 

^ Rn 


6 ? 

^ Jit 


11 m 

BM 

m 0 . 

•g & 

9 z 

S 

St <■ 


^.0. 


^ m 


^15 

/itr 

:k 


m Pi 


WM 

A 

3 


A 

m 

m ^ 
m =? 

w" ifij -^1 


^Ef 0 . 

iic-h 

Ai ^ 

m . 


XOL V, 


21 


THE CH‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEK, 


BOOK V. 


XIV. 1 In tLe [duke’s] fourteenth year, in spring, the States 
walled Yuen-ling. 

2 In summer, in the sixth month, the duke’s youngest 

daughter and the viscount of Tsang met in Fang, when 
she caused the viscount to come and pay the duke a 
court-visit. 

3 In autumn, in the eighth month, on Sin-maou, [part of 

the hill of] Sha-luh fell down. 

4 The Teih made an incursion into Ch‘ing. 

5 In winter, Hih, marquis of Ts‘ae, died. 

Par. 1 . The Chnen says:— ‘The States Trailed married; but they do not consider that the duH 
Tnen-ling, and removed Ke to it, as its capital, in anger at the viscount’s not coming to co , 
The various princes engaged in the irork are annulled the marriage for the time; ana Trim 
not mentioned, through the omission of the afterwards sent his daughter hacK, as - s 
historiographers.’ Tuen-ling iras a tovrn of Ke. not precede so neither does 

of his presenting the bridal gifts and coming to 
fling, Ho-nan, irhere he iras much distressed meet her ; but there is nothing of ^ .Jj 
by the E of the Hirae ; and the marquis of Ts‘e text. Fan Xing had reason when b 
took the lead in the movement, and Erected the the view of Kung and Knh. and rega • 

different States to prepare the city for the con- of Tso-she as having more vensiun 
templated removal. Compare the walling of Knh-lean"' has for wl]* Tsang ttes a 
Ts‘oo-k‘ew in H. 1 . “ " *7* im. . v«i- 

Par. 2. This par. has wonderfully vexed, small State in pres. dis. of Tih ^ 

and continues to vex, the critics. Tso-she gives , , , , .Al'l-v cTaimed 

this account of it; — ‘The duke’s youngest chow. Its lords were Szes 

daughter, married to the viscount of Ts 5 ng, to be descmded from Tn- _ , 

came to Loo to visit her parents. The duke was 3 >p]jp liip of Sha-luh was in Tsin, w 

detain^ her, ^cause the viscount ^ ‘ ^ ^ ^y^ct city of Tuen-shing 

of Tsang had not been to the court of Loo, In «. c 1 c ^ r-c caT= that 

summer, sbe met the viscount in Fang, and made Ta-ming. TheLhuen-.- 

liiin pay a visit to the court.’ This account of the when the diviner Yen of Tsin heard of the event, 
matter is probably the correct one. The diffi- ^ year is comple^ 

culties in its way are the omission of before there will be great calamity, so as nearly to ram 

'iU ^5 and the 9 tli par. of next year, which The repeated incursions and inva- 

wonld seem to be a record of tlie lady’s mar- sions of the Teih show that not only was 
riage to the vi«connt. But when the duke royal House very feeble, but that the po 
detained her, as tSieCbuon snpiioses. in Loo, he, Ts‘e was also waning. 


of Tso-she as having more of vensiunutnoe. 
Knh-leang has for ^p. Tsang was a 

small State in pres, dis, of Tih ((!^)> 
chow. Its lords were Szes claimed 


to be desc-nded from Yu- _ , 

Par. 3 . The hill of Sha-luh was in Tsin, « 


no doubt, considered the marriage to be annull- 
ed. This may account for the omission of the 

; and in the subsequent entry, will = 


ilC. Jk.9 C . ** 

annuli- pj„. - This was duke Jfuh ® 

^ ^ son of the Heen-woo, of whose capttvity^T.- 
— we have an account in HI. 3 :* o* ,q.|. 


— I we nave an account id jji. o'- I9 tb 

‘ wenttoher e/diiome.’andnot ‘went to her new j remained till his death in dnke CbwaDc ® 
home on being married.’ I year, when Hili became marquis of Ts'^. . 

The principal views which have been taken of I ' FThe Chnen relates here_: — ‘ In {<> 

the par. appear in the note of the K-ang-he I was a scarcity in Ts'in, wliich sent to 
tditors; — ‘The meeting of the duke’s daughter ' beg to be allowed to buy grain. They 
with the viscount of Tsflng, without the duke’s ‘ in Tsin. but K‘ing Ch-ing said, * want 

forbidding it, and her asking the viscount to { return for Ts'in’s favour to us ®bows . • 

come to the court of Loo and his listening to j of relative feeling; to make onr Tp-ce; 

i*cr, were both contrary to propriety; and the I calamity of others shows a want of ni,<^T 

thing U recorded in the CIrun Ts-cw to condemn ! to be ^eedy is inauspicious to 
it. Tiie view of lIooGan-kwoh. that the dnke. ; against our neighbours is unrightMUS. 
from hive to hi? d.tnghtcr. allowed her to choose i we have lo.'t these four virtues, how *"• 
byr own husband, i? based on what is said by I preserve onr State Kwoh Yib said, 

Lung and Knh, and scholars generally have 1 the skin has been lost, where can yon pia ^ - 

adopted it; hut it is wrong. Duke He was a hair?*' Ch‘ing replied. “ ^Ye are cas.in^ 
worihy ruler, .•inil hi- o-ife. Siiing Keang. ha? ■ faith, and making a vile return .Jjtv 

the prai‘c of l»,‘ing a virttious lady ; — would they ■ hour: — in the time of onr calamity, who wi I ' 

have bevn willing to ,t11i,w -uch a tliifig? S<inic ■ ns? Cal.vniity is sure to come where 
r.lh-ge th.Tt the s.yle, where dors not 

to_peri-h. Thus It will 


, toperi-h. Thus it will lie with us. actin: 

rrt'^vsle IP show? {hit tile lady wn» not this way." Kwoh Yili s.aid, " Y" y'V' t 


Yn-ui XV. 


DUKE ITE. 


163 


^vollIll not lessen Ts'in's resentment, and we 
should onti/ he kind to our cneinj’.” “Him,” said 
Ch'ing, “ who is uniiralcfiil for favours, and 
makes a gain of tho calamities of others, the 
people reject. Even his nearest friends will feel 


hostile to him; how much more his resentful 
op])onents I” The marquis, however, would not 
listen to his counsel, and K'ing Ch'ing retired, 
saying, “Would that the marquis might repent 
of this!’”] 


, Fifteenth year. 

A ^ ^ 3 l 

0 ^ 

W 0fP. Si 

M ^ M Mo 


» 


f6.T 


=rm. 


T A* 

n. 


A 

A. 


^lE 


■& 


fi.ip 


JmJ 


.i®* 

fa. A 


THE CH-UX TSTiW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


11 

m 

M. -ifii.? 


m 0 m a.® tr A ^ *.-» 14 ^ -tfe 3 l ® 

® * "i » aSE Z'^Aiii $ 0 . 

ii.A mmmi^mm^ *.# ¥.®.«fe ^ ^i.^t 5 
H.ffi m ^.m #.* tf * 2& £. 4 . 

* s :?: ti ^ = li ft » - 2 -lii.^.® 5 f • 

A aJiPp: S 14 M.SJS- il5 ‘i# *. ^ f 

^ ■fc ^ ifi ^ h ^ jB 5 ^ ^ ^ 5 ^ 

M M « « -ffi M m. ■* 
b6#-K^W>W®.5CH# m 

* 11.:$:.^ ffl.-^ iK' ^ M a. ^ H .^.|; f 

* = ^ ^ «5 11 * ;S.:i?h J. :t Kffi 

^.m MM. A mm 1 A ^ f g 

:^M^MmB.AM,3LM a. -ifi..? 

B. -Ifi- 

ill * *. 0 ;^ AM M-& « 

^ ^ ® * * t6..1g ^.W 

® ■lfe..iiii.t?D A ;e S ^ 

^ ^ 

11 . A 0 .¥ M 

Is * ffi ® it BMM Uj.W 
m ^.si A * # a A ft #. 

M ^ 'zr o' 34 A 

^.-t ^ il ^ « m.® ^ 

^ ^ 0 .M M M m 

■is.±.5g' mit!'m-&- 

■&mnmm -ig-,* mm^, 

M A «.]fiL » <a- w.w ^ s 
iS ^M S ^ B.ra 

m^±n,Ar^m^9m 

H.H.-f l» i<^\mM il' ffi.» 
m — ffe.K h #.Ji m ^ 

5 A ^ IS S S. 

0.m.ii4g ja B.<: W 

A.bT ^ HY fii.MIS ^ =p 
S KH:.fe.51 ffn A'.-tJl.^ m W 
A ia Bt J B6 315 0 = 
iffi m BMM f:.v^ ^ 


Ykau XV. 


DUKE HE. 


“h y g Ip* ^ Jf w fi ^ M.A 

p 1^.^ ft <0 ^ ^ W «fe ^ :R- 0.5£ 

M.-i„4.s;.J!it m s ■# ^j. 


ir# yi-4 yiVs>«^ IP PM 7Ul5 |I|J M J J^A 1^ 1® i=?^ 

-f0.-(^ J if ® ^ SM 54.W a0 f 

PH ^ 4tl. "Ai 55- S 22 ;^rf‘ rtr ffcy wa 4^ 


-i H'J »»# 'w .=»=. -^v / 14 XV|^5?S XV XV XJ^ 

3E 0.# ^ f .E 0.* Jt ;p <:.« ffi = * 

M‘S ffi4 e # # » mMM X 

<0 ^ m a.itt 'WM M ^ 

0.g.-i„g ^ z,M :¥w^wn mas 0.# s.* 

® m M.M *.0.ss '(*.0,^ m.m mm # # ^ 

dr .tTi ^ =t; JiTf ^ KPl tJ JEl Cl itr 3E 


ii # ^ ^ ^ * i?5 0.A WJ 5a ro ® * 0. 

C[':!i!:;x;-M''SctVi:siviia~sciA£n£S'ap9M>a sr 


w ® Si‘* TaSSWSRW^JiSlwa «,«> ^ 

^n.it.^ g|!tfii«;5:^tti®j!a ?E.^ 5e.0.^ is? 

/!' « s «.ii.:2.« # iB m - ®.# 

A ^ ^ K ii.-tE.,j. m m ^.95 s ®i 0, 

^ AM S ^ iS.M ZM ±M M 
a ^ M # BM ^.m n 0.» ^ y^M 

# as Ml^ ZMi&M, 

^ # 1 F S 1^ » ffl w.A # w 
» mm^^mnsnAzwAMmzib^ 
m> m.&»}mmm^T^asm.Amu^zM 
vf. A.^nmMWMMMB.mmm^mm 

# # ^.ro.® # » K 75 # » {a Bfr 5a 
m 0.K5iiil0.b #AiS A.HTBic® 

Vdi& t-t£. rf- “TP ^-r* "sSfT XS "C^ Tf kk* «r- -• _» 


|/UI*» '^ rt’§^ f «>w I.JJ* "IS^ yj RTv 'ifc'V 

» id.:^ w 5a mikmmmw zm 


THE CII'UX TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK V. 


166 { 


M 0.#.* A.% ii # tSi S a 

# # Bff a.+ IS B.-ci' r- mM MM ^ 

bS # W - ^ M P •'J' 0.^ * 0 

* X M.m,n — a ■'h m wm 

n AMMM ^ fi =S' M,m 0.A # 

» * 5 -ffl ®.E 0.«.M ^ l; # il iKffi f 
i^^mXT -ifc.Fi ^ M 7 mf 
SEW 

W S ^ ® Jn ^ t?o g i i> 

M f\Z *.M T- ^ % g # -ffi ^ f 
MM «• 0.i5 E.K « ^ Bn ■» ;5:.#.^ 
fi M Bn W B5 #f -fft fi.® ■# ^.H 0 g 

1^ # {If ii B.^.K Bn -y- isJ II * 

W S.TSA.# 5B.g * ii ^ ^ 0.;i # ® #. 


XV. I In his fifteenth year, in spring, in the king s first month, 
the duke went to Ts‘e. 

2 A body of men from Ts*oo invaded Seu. 

3 In the third month, the duke had a meeting with the 

marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the marquis of 
Ch‘in, the marquis of Wei, the earl of Ch‘iiig, the 
baron of Heu, and the earl of Ts‘aou, when they made 
a covenant in Mow-k‘ew, and then went on till they 
halted at KVang. 

4 Kung-sun Gaoii led a force, and, with the great officers of 

the [other] princes, [endeavoured to] relieve Seu. 

5 In summer, in the fifth month, the sun was eclipsed. 

6 In autumn, in the seventh month, an army of Ts*e and an 

army of Ts‘aou invaded Le. 

7 In the eighth month, there were locusts. 

8 In the ninth month, the duke arrived from the meeting 

[with the other princes]. 

9 The duke’s third daughter went to her home in Tsang. 

10 On Ke-maou, the last day of the moon, the temple of 

E-pih was struck by lightning. 

11 lu winter, a body of men from Sung invaded Ts'aou. 

12 The men of Ts'oo defeated Seu at Low-lin. 

13 In the eleventh month, on Jin-seuh, the marquis of Tsin 

and the earl of Ts‘in fought at Han, when the marquis 
of Tsin was taken. 


♦1 ^ ‘ In lii5 1 Otli year. Par. 2. Tso-she says tlwt the reason for tins 

lecluko paid a. court-visit to Ts‘c, and licro again attack was that ‘ Sen had joined the States ’ of 
in Ills 1 5th he doe# the same a court-visit in the north. See on HI. 3, 

^ year#, serving T.#‘e a# the rule required him Par. 3,4. Mow-k'Eir was probably in Tst,— 
to serve the son of Heaven’* 70 le to the north-east of the dis. city of Lcaou- 


yi:.vn XV. 


DUKK HE. 


1G7 


shiiip dcp. Tiinff-ch'nnff. K'wniig 

«its i» 'Wei. — in dep. of Tn-minpr, Cliilwlc. 
T.<o-sJio s.ay.<! tli.it file covennnt nt Jlow-k'ew 
VMS TO eontirni tli.it nt K‘ivci-k‘etv [see IX. 2]. 
.ind for tile nOief of ^ 011 .’ Tlic princc.s voiild 
tiion .seem to have .idvanctil southvMrds to 
K'lvjinir, nnd to It.ivo v.iited tliero, to nllow tlio 
troop.® of 1 . 00 , nml of otlicr States ns well, to 
arrive and effect a junction, before procectlinp 
to try consotiuenccs with tlio nrinv of Ts‘ 00 . 
ivnne-sun Gaou was tlie son of lOinp-foo, of 
wlioin we had so niucli in tlio times of Cliwniifr 
and Min. Ho is nI.<o known ns Jltlng Muh-pili 

-f^)- I’rom p. lil wc SCO that the 
endeavour to relieve Sen was unsuccessful. 
After this the marquis of Ts'o made no more 
arrangements for the relief of any of the States. 
The vigour of his presidency was evidently 
di'clining. 

I’.ir. .'i. T.®o-sho remarks on there being no 
record of the day on which this eclipse took place, 
nnd the absence also of the character ; but 
there was no eclipse in all this year visible in 
Loo. There was indeed an eclipse of the sun on 
January 2Stli, B. C. ; but it could not have 
been seen there. 

Par. C. Lc was one of the subject States of 
Ts*bo,— in the pres. Suy Chow (j^ dep. 

Tili-gan ^), Iloo-pih. The object of 
attacking Ijo was to effect a diversion in favour 
of Sen, nnd so help the relief of that State. 

Par. r. Knng has for See H. r. 8. 
Kuh'lcang tries to l.iy down a canon here, that 
when the iilaguo of locusts was very great, the 
month of its occurrence is given; and when it 
was light, only the season. 

Par. 9. See on p. 2 of last year. 

Par. 10. is hero used ns an impersonal 


Gnn-hwuy. Tso-she says that Seu was defeat* 
ed through relying on the succour of the States 

. "’■•Ji*-. savs:— ‘ When the mar- 

quis of Tsm Jirft entered that State /5w« Ts-in 
[sw the 2d narrative appended at the end of the 
Ptliyear], Miih Ke, tfic curl's trife [see the Chnen 
after H I. .\.\-viii. ]]. charged hiiii to behave kindly 
to the lady Kiia [see the same Chnen j, and also 
to restore all his brothers, nnd the sons of the 
former marquis as well. 

The marquis, however, committed incest with 
the lady Kc.i, nnd did not restore the sons of 
his predecessors, so that Jlnh Ke was full of 
resentment nt him. He bad made, moreover 
promises to several great officers within the 
[ State, all of which ho broke. To the earl of 
Ts'in he lind promised 5 cities beyond the Ho 
with all the country on the east which had’ 
formed the territory of ICwoli, ns far as mount 
Ilwn on the south, nnd to the cit v of Heae-leang 
on the north of the Ho; but he did not surren- 
der any of this territory, any of these cities. 
Afterwards, when Tsin was suffering from 
scarcity, Ts'in sent grain to it : but when scarcity 
came to the lot of Ts'in, Tsin shut its markets 
•and would not allow the sale of grain. In conse^ 
quenco of all these things, the earl of Ts'in 
determined to invade Tsin. 

‘T'oo-foo, the diviner, consulted the milfoil 
about the expedition, and said, “A lucky re- 
sponse; — cross the Ho; the prince’s chariots are 
defeated." The earl asked to have the tiling 
more fully explained, nnd the diviner said, “It is 
very lucky. Thrice shall you defeat Ms troops, 
and finally capture the marquis of Tsin. The 

diagram found is Koo (gg> , of wliich it is said, 

‘The thousand chariots thrice are nut 
to flight, 

■\Vlint then remains you catch, — the 
one fox wight.’ 

That fox in Koo must be the marquis of Tsin. 
Moreover, the iuner symbol of Koo (Sun, ) 


verb. 


The Shwoh-wan explains it by mm 

*n crash of thunder, shaking 
things.’ Of course it was the lightning which 
struck the temple, but the Chinese, like the 
Hebrews, cunsidered the lightning to be a 'hot 
thunderbolt (Psalm, LXX'N’^III. 48).’ Tso-she 
observes that wo may see from riiis that the 
Chen clan (j^ was chargeable with some 

secret wickedness. Apart from this interpreta- 
tion of the event, telling us that the £-pih here 
belongial to thechin of whose constitution wchave 
an account in the t.'hnen on I, viii. 10 [E in the 
text is the honorary title of the officer whose 
temple suffered, nnd Pih was his designation], 
— beyond this we know nothing about him. 
Knh-lcang refei’s to the par. ns a case in point, 
to show that, from the empctvr to the lower 
officers, all had their temples or sliriuc-huuscs ; 
— the emperor, 7 of them ; princes of States, 5 • 
great officers S ; and tower officers, 2. ’ 

Par. 11. Both Sung nnd Ts'aoti were at the 
meeting in Mow-k'iiw. ’Ibis attack boded ill 
for the relief of Sett, and showed how feeble the 
control of Ts'c liad become. 

Par. 12. l.ow-lin was in Sou, — in the north- 
east of the dis. of IIung(j|r[2), dep. rung-yang. 


represents wind, the outer (Kin, =:::) represents 
bills. The season of the year is not” the autumn. 
We blow down the fruits on the hill, nnd we take 
the trees ; — ^it is plain we are to overcome. The 
fruit blown down, nnd the trees all mken what 
can this be but defeat to Tsin 
‘After three defeats of Tsin, the armies came 
to Han. The marquis said to K'ing Ch'ing 
“Tlie robbers have penetrated far; what is to 
Ite done ?” “ It is yonr lordship,’’ replied Ch'inn' 

'• who has brought them so far. and can i-ou ask 
what is to be done ?" “ He is against me," said 
, tlie marquis; and he proceeded to divine who 
: should be the spearman upon his right. Tlie 
response was for K'ing Ch'ing, but he would not 
employ him. Poo-yang acted as charioteer, and 
Kea Puh-t-oo was speannan on the riglit. 'Tlie 

chariot wnsdrnwnhyfoiirsmall horses which had 
bwn presented by tlioc.irlofCIring. KdiigCIring 
said, “Anciently, on great occasfons, tlie prince 
was required to use tiio horses born in his own 
St.ato. Xatives of the climate, and knowing the 
minds of the iwople, they are docile to instruc- 
tion. and acciistonuHl to the roads, — wliitbcrso- 
ever they may bo directed, tlicv arc obedient to 
their driver s « ill. Xow for the fight that is 
licfore us. you are using horses of a different 
5?tate. When they become .afraid, they will 


168 


THE CII-L 3 Tii-EW. -mTii THE TSO CIIUEN*. 


BOOS 


change Ui'jr usual tcay, and go conlraiv to the ' 
■p'ill of their driver. "When thej L*ecoa:C' con- 
fused, they vrill get all excited. Their timorous 
blood "svill gush all their bodies, and their veins ' 
■will everyTvhere stand out. Externally they vrjll 
appear strong, but internally they '.Till lU ex- • 
bausted. Tisey will refa-e to advance or retire: 
they Tvni be unable to rum round. Your lordi , 
ship is sure to repeat employing them." 

•The marquis paid no attention toth:£~aming: ' 
and on the Plh month Tt-s- the ?th month of • 
Heaj he met the army of Tsin. —hen he sent 
Han Keen to survey it. Keen reported. "Their 
army is smaller than ours, but tijtir' spirit for 
gghting is double ours.“ *• For —hat reason r“ 
ashed the duke. ‘•‘V^'hen you fed the State." 
retnmed the oScer, --you sought the help of 
Tsut; trhen yon entered it a^in. it 'rzs it.* 
Tsai's faiiCiur: and in our scart-iry. you ate . 
Tsiris grain. Thrice did you receive Tsdn's 
IsneSts, and jou made no return for them: — on 
this acconnt its army is come, -when TTg 

are about to come to blovrs. -sre are out of spirit 
and they are ail ardour. To say their st/irtt is 
double ours is belo— the tmlh.”" 

•The duke, ixtrsciser. said, ••Even an ordinary 
man should not be made arre-uant hv viVab-a tit 
Awn ; bovr mneh less a State UH TstrS On this ' 
be sent an otter of cattle, saying. ** Feeble as I 
am, ! have assembled aiy mnhitudes. and can- 
not I».ve you. I£ you tviH not return io v'^-jr 
oTn Side. I vrill oetxainly not evade tout <x*m- ■ 
mands.” The earl of Ts-!n sent KunV-sun Che 


and made my f^o lords see cach^ other, n.* 
‘svith gems and slilts. but trilb the iustruurpU 
of trar. If the marquis of Tsm come 
the mominu. tve die in the evening. If be c.-— e 
in the evening, vre die in the morning. 
lord consider the matter, an i cetermme :t. _ j- 


into po: 


ssession of this totver. tvnen it 


dea-hs.’ Ho- <^n I do so? Of trhst 


emsider kindlv the sorrotv of those men. i 
increase their anger: if 1 eat 
be false to Heaven and Earth- unem mnr— -■ 


and not alio— him to coHest ^ 
further mischief." Tsze-ssuF htxsing-=-ta ^ 


■snui Tsply. « Before your lordihSp enters^ scl± *-Ee5tor5 him. and get his r^’ 

voM State, I j^vasjpll of fears for yo2: “lies you asahostass: — ttzII laac to 


But if that be no'sv sseara, dare 1 * refuse to ac- 
cept yonr ccnnnaiids!?*' retirsi SS'^— 

ing. •• Tve shall be fortunate if -n-e onlv mssr ^rtih 
captivi^-.^' 

-On the day Jin-seah. the i^ttle tvas fonsht 


. y _ __ -irvea 

py Te-.z^sz. and havisg K-n-oh Tin on 

^"- 3 - Ts-in, and ttzs about to 

»aj.e nun, -srhen King Chuns prsvsuted 
sendins him avay teTsave ihe'ciarcuis. Ir 


Tsin is: 
nut: 

erO- Morsover. thEm'are the orercs ot i 

toriographer TBi. -Do uor 
nor trust to the disorder cf ct\€rs; c 
increase their anger. Increaesd 
to endure: 

‘The 
and the 
^u E-s 
Afa. 

instructed him hzrs io cti. 
people of the State to the 
them as if "bj command cf tne 
giving them also message cs 
‘Although I may re inm to Trin, enr ^5 
be dissraoed. Consult the tortci 5 S-=--=^ 


, . , . - ^ ^rith dissneveded hair, and 

" “t-e, 2n^ ^m^iue grass m the cten air. The earl 

"Why snonldyoube sodistr^s^d^ 


V' 

b . Iv ti; 'V* 

r\; 

ji ‘■:a r.r * vr;> r 


*z: yzoT s.-rvantr here — v., j..-. n-. an. 


t: h r C; 


be vf ■n lran:ai--.- to <■ nr t: r." i 


170 


THE Cn-L'N TS'EW, VTlTll THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK V. 


Tiff 

P - i l 

m 

T 
fi 


Sixteenth year, 

<&■.+ -H H M.si 
'■ ■■ M.M.iB M 


^ "P* 


>^r-=* 


¥ ¥. 

¥.4S- 


I 


5 , 


H 


I.4-, 


I 

^ ^ i 


15 


S.iT: 


a 

7E 


fl. iS 

S‘§=t § ^ © '‘^'•© © * M $4 

Sii ^ f .• s f f f ^ f 14 i'l i ■ 

M 1 ® ^ «• f !9 s S 0 . 


Ca T a. 

*«s 


:^- irr ^,iiu 'R m /Pi V* 

Ta g “9 »- r_- r ^ » ■» a..^ _ *— 


r* 


^ 'CZ fjl.fi) 

r?n 

Rn 

XVI. 1 


IS33UI ; — ( I <««u « I r r 

H ^ A ^ 

s 1^ 1 s;.w w # # # ^ 


^ ^ H .)», 

A. 

o e 


I • »— • 'XI ' I t=J » ^ 

^ S ^ # 


JW7 


2 

3 

4 

5 


In 


In thn ^dufce sj sixteenth yesr. in spring, in the kings fir®^ 
monthj on ilow-shin, the first day ofthe moon, there foil 
stones in Sung, — ^five [of them]. In the same month, sis 
fish-hawks fiew backwards, past the capital of Sung- 
the third month, on Jin-shin, duke [Hwan’s] son, 
Yew, died. 

In summer, in the fourth month, on Ping-shin, the dukes 
youngest daughter — ^she of Tsang — died. 

In autumn, in the seventh month, on Keah-tsze, Kong- 
sun Tsze died. 

In winter, in the twelfth month, the duke had a meeting 
V ith the marquis of Ts‘e. the duke of Sung, the marquis 
of Ch in, tile marquis of W ei. the earl of Ch’ing, the 
hr.mn of Hen, the marquis of Hinor. and the earl of 
r?T.on in Hv/ae. 


Ykas; XVII. 


DUKi: III-:, 


171 


I'.ir, 1. V‘or Kunp-y-nn}: lin« 'jlj. T8i>- 
»?)(>, 'nvf tlti**-'" 8!oni'? "crv' '.H.Mr.j;’ luit that i8 
iJii-My hU Jntvri'n-l.nlion of tlio ]ilia'i>(ttiu*iuin. 

*' Is 

p!.'iim'«l ns ‘n wntcr-fowl;*— it Is the 

fi*h h.nvk h'pre.si JUeil «>n the »tcrns of jnnks. 
The flyinp h.ickw.'inl*' of tlie 8ix hnwks «‘tts oee.n- 
rloneil. ncv. toTtn-.'he, hy tlie wind, w hieh wn.** so 
Hronpth.it they conld not in.ike Iie.'id ni;.iin«t it, 
and w ere rirriiM h.irk, strupplinp. hy its current. 
The ^ between the two notico.s seems to 

he intr.tducetl merely toe.'cpn’ss thnt the.<tr.inpe 
flipht of tlie h.iwks wns not on the s.'inie dny as 
the f.ili of the sitines. Knnp, Knit, niid'ihe 
iC‘.inp-he ctlitors, all write nonM>nsic.illy on this 
point. 

Till* (Hiuen s.iys;— ‘At this time. Slinh-hiiip, 
historiopnniher of the interior, was in Suiip. on 
a visit of friendly imiuirics fnmi Chow, and 
duke Seanp nskeil hint ntwnt ttroni/r appear- 
cnen, sayinp, “Wlint atv they onii'nou.s of? 
AVIiai pmi fortune or bad do they portend?” 
The historiographer rt'plied. ‘•'J'his ye.ir there 
will bo the deaths of many pront persons of Loo. 
Jfext year Ts'e will Ite all in disonler. Your 
Ianlshi]i will pet the prrsiilenejf of the State.*, but 
will not continue to hold it.”* When he retired, 
he .s.iid to some one, “Tim kinp askesl me a 
wronp question. It is not from these develop- 
ments of the Yin and Yang that good fortune 
and evil are produced. Th'cy are produced by 
men themselves. I answered as I did, liecanso 
I did not venture to go against the duke’s idea.'” 

Par. 2. Sec 111. xxv.O; xxvil3; V.i.fl; a al. 
Tlie K'anp-ho editor.* foolishly agree here with 
Kunp and Kuli in thinking that we have tlie 

the designation and the name 

all together, on purpose to express the sage’s 
anprovai of the character of Kc Yew, 

Par. 3. Sec XIV. 2; XV. 9. 

[Tlie Chuen adds hero: — ‘In summer, Ts'e 
invaded Le, but did not subdue it. Haring re- 
lieved Sen, however, the army returned.’ See 
p. C of last ye.ir.’] 


Par. -1. Tor Kung-yang lias See 

V. iv. S; V, .I. It may ho added hero that he 
w'ns the son of Shnh-ya, whose death or murder 
niii)enr.s in III. xxxii. .'J. 

[The Chuen adds liere three brief notices; — 

1st. ‘In autumn, the Toil) made an Incursion 
into Tsin, ami took IIoo-ch‘oo, and Sliow-toli. 
They then cri).*.''ed the Pun, and advanced to 
Kwun-too;— taking advantage of the defeat of 
Tsin hy T«‘in,’ 

2d. ’The king sent word to 'rs'o of the Irott- 
ble.* still raised by the dung, and Ts'e called out 
trtMjp.t fn)m the various States to guard Chow.’ 

3d. ‘In winter, in the llth month, on Yili- 
imtou, CIriiig put to death the earl’s eldest sou 
Hwa.’ Sec VJl.I', and the Chuen there]. 

Par. o. llwnc wns in the present Szc Chow 
Cian-hwuy, taking its name from the 

llwne rii'cr. \Vc have here for the first time 
the marquis of lling present at these meetings 
of the States, and his place is given him after 
the earl of Clrinp and the baron of Hcu. This 
order is stiiipuseci to have been determined by 
the marquis of 'J's'e. llic Chuen s.iys: — ‘This 
meeting wns licid to consult about Tsilng [which 
wns hard ))rcssed by the H of the Uwnc], and to 
make a ]>rogrcss in the east. It was proposed 
to wall Tsting, but the soldiers engaged in the 
service fell sick. Some one gut on a mound in the 
night, and cried out, “There is disorder in 
Ts’o;” and so they returned without completing 
the work.’ This was the last of the meetings 
called by the marquis of Ts'e as president of 
the States. From the 1st at Pih-hilng(III.xiii. 

1) doim to this, he had held eleven meetings of 

a pacific character 

prelusive of military operations ^ 

■^^). His influence declined after the meeting 
at Iv*wei-k‘cw (IX. 2). The fabric of his great- 
ness had been reared more by Kwan Chung 
than himself. The minister was now gone, and 
the prince wns soon to follow him, by a misera- 
ble end, and leave his own State a prey to 
ye.ar3 of confusion. 


Seventeenth year. 


r fr eg 

A® 


m 

A 


iM 

m 


T 


* 


"fc 


z. 

#o 


W- W- A. "f* 
A M # W 


172 


THE CII-UX TS‘E\V, WITH THE TSO CHUEX. 


BOOK V. 


-f- S If M 4 ». ft ^ ei 

■SfMM 0 mM ^ 

a 5 «5 ft ^ M TO 0.*.t 

X'<ty2:.Z mA-^± 


. . 7^.* M # * = « «.•#.* _ 

# MM -^.A M Z. 

+ ^ ^.0 # « ^ ».l 

— AS 


I 

0 . 

+ 

-b 


Jil It A. 


» 


M A 


^ A # ^ A.M.;$: ^ ^■ 


r- 0^ 


.<^aSII*S{c.;<:S'0l 

^ ja jf =* « ®s ^ is I* ^ ® # s p * 
B.# ^ ^,Z T TO @ A ^ TO 

S « + 4-.K M S;.» g E.g S 
M <&■.# ^ A A * ^ 
TOZ.^A**^f 


W* 


JLL 


^ SE 


^ ® ^ ^ 

x^ai. 1 


2 

3 


# 

;2: 


=s 


^ A A I' ^ 

In the [duke’s] seventeenth year, in spring, a 
men from Ts‘e and a body from Seu invaded 1 
she. 

In summer, we extinguished Heang, , 

In autumn, the [duke’s] wife, the lady Keang, ha 
meeting with the marquis of Ts‘e in P'een. 

In the ninth month, the duke arrived from the mee i o 
[at Hwae]. ^ m 

In winter, in the twelfth month, on Yih-hae, Seaou-p j 
marquis of Ts‘e, died. 

suited the tortoise-shell about the „^i.’ 

son said, ‘She vdll have both a hoj" an .g 
‘Yes,’ added the father, ‘and the s° ... a 
another’s subject, and the 
concubine.’On this account the boy 
Yu [a groom], and the girl *0 the 

[concubine]. When Yu went a 0 / 

west, Ts'eeh became a concubine w we 

2Vtn.’] 

Par. 2. Heang was a small Statc--t e 

of which remains in the dis. of ' * _f 


Par. 1. Ying-she was a small State, which 
actnowledged the jurisdiction of Ts‘oo, — ^in the 
present Chow of Luh-gan Gan-hwuy. 

In the west of the Chow, close on the borders of 
the district of Ying-shan j 1 1), is a city 
called Ying. This expedition was undertaken 
by Ts‘e in the interest of Sen, ‘to avenge,’ Tso 
says, ‘ ihe defeat of Seu by Ts ‘00 at Low-lin,’ in 
the duke's 15th year. 

[Tljc Chuen adds here: — ‘In summer, Yu, the 
eldest son of tAe tr.arquts of Tsin. went as a hos- 
tage to Ts‘in, and Ts‘in restored the territory 
on the cast of the Uo, irAicA had luen eedtd by Tsm, 
giving also a wife to Yu. When duke Uwuy 
[the marquis of Tsin] was a refugee in Yeang. 
tlie carl ot it gave him to wife Leang Ying [Ying 
was the snmanio of the House of Lcang]. 
A« she went in pregnancy beyond the usual 
time, the diviner, Shaou-foo, and his son, con- 


^). dep. Ch^n-chow (|^ 

Kung and Kuh both attribute the extinc 
Heang to Ts'e, and the K‘ang-he editors 
their view ingeniously; but in that case 
would have apjicared in the text. A °°***^,’ 
the present, without the name of another • 

I preceding the verb, must always bo underst 


\ s » » \ ; t 


!>rtu: CM. 


173 


t -r!- l? 


I'. 


T. 


•t 


'J 11'- J?.>* >l«t t- 
; r j rs: .-=-5 «-!i tC-.v 
Iv 1;.* r«-s«fr.-'!. 
it V •» jr.'.tti-r 


t. 


If 

i 

5J. i 

t '• . 
ft- • 

I.;- 


!- s-\; 

1 , 


r!- f .’rtr.i'i.f If--' til 

*:■!» r. V' --.Itt !. ;.'!it J f'vn 
■ it Wc t tfi.'. 

•r t- :: If.-- > -vr. r-' 


•f'lVc 


r.-'n - .-f Ii.tI ;iny » m. TJic mnrtjui; 
n full litntii, anil liml many fiwourile^ and con- 
in it. 'Ilii-ri- vi-rx" .'tv wlio W(.'rv' to Iiim 
■ r.* »ii\f' tin- i-liUr lu' of Wvi, ^'llo liorc Woo- 
, tnVn;.* f.'lil'.;: 1* llto ‘t'lili-r;* WlH). ilio lion, title. 

I * 

■■ 'llii' jHUtti I' conintiinly nicntionc'C Ciy his name 
• \V|M'-V.’*vti Kc ot 

; WM, 'll'!) l«Ti- a olio was ti/tmcards duke 


• at Uo-jii-, an 1 •, I|vuy;n Ko of Clrin^j, who bore a son, n/ier- 
•» o i.'.h t i!i".,n;Ml-.,--l If. '.n *. i , llra'Oj ; a Ytnc of Koh. who boro n 

1'.’. < ‘-,lru>*.i'l il l’ to i ,on. dtiko Ch‘.".ou; a Kc of Meih, who 

f-s .*• -s-.l rl.-n till- ri'«s of it | Ivnro a son, rif!rnc<xrtlt dtiko E; a Tssc of the 

c-1 'I'V wa» .-.Ml' to detain | l!«r.a el.M) of whoboro a son, called Tsze- 

~ r. .\«' ’ ' »-i it l> oo; i-a> V to tm- ! \ un^. 

!}-' > •!: v.l-l b-.\o MiiaitU'd i *Tlu' inarquis and Kwan Cliun;; had given 

r-* at llv.---. ! him "ho wa< afiorwanl.* duke Ili-.aou in charge 

I'-'T. T-. 'i1.i- wif*- e' tlnVi' He «.*.s j>rtd<aiily a I tixlnke Silane of Snne, as the intended heirofthe 


. ] -• 
, » * 


1 l-T 1 f tl’-' 

v-.r.rqni' e 

f T.V;- 

■••■v' on XI. 1*. 

'ir 

• > 

t’-r I'.M K 

i-'.is’.g me! 

the maroitsts 

• r 

I' 

.-V M t!-i 

t li'f..- on 

the duV:i 

’’s sivi'unt:’ 

ro- 

... 

1-/, r-i il 

•tV*. th-.t 1; 

vr obj-vt 

was to pro>- 

ru 

!v 

J-r lo'l 

si’-Vs lil-'t 

atii’U. r 

was in 

I.. 


't fn-m the 

pros. di*. 

, city of i^rc- 

»1. 


Vi 


qui*. he had f.avonr with him ulso, and obtained 
a pnnni'e from him titat Woo-mSng should bo 
his successor. On the death of Kwnu Chung, 
fire p/* f.i.c fix sons all boprged to be declared 
I beir. Wlien the marquis died on Yih-hae of 
l“f.T. i. Tf > say* till- wortUnc of tills par. in- i the 10th month. Yih-ya [the designation of Woo 


ti^lM^s tb-vt. aflt-r tl;e mwting .it Uwae. thero 
l-^ J i«-i-n fnme linsitn-ss of the St.ites. and con- 
pr-ils it; (■<■, it says nothing nlKiut the duke’s 
h.%vir,g ls-< n Vi p: a pri'ener by Tsv. 

Tar. iwso;i-j'':h bad thus had a long rule 
cf ts y.-ars. The Chuon s.nys: — *Tlie marquis 
of TsV l-'.d three wi>c.«:— a Ke of the royal 
House; .V Ying of Scu; and a Kc of Ts‘ae; but 


the cookT cntercsl thr /xi/itcc, and along with the 
cunueh ’ieaou, by the help of the favoured offi- 
cers of the interior, put all the other officers to 
death, and set up woo-k*wci in his father’s 

f lacc, the brother who was aftenvnrds duko 
Icaou fleeing to Sung. The date of the mar- 
quis’s death, as communicated to Loo, was Tih- 
hae ; but it svas the night of Sin-sze [G7 days 
after] before his body was put into a coffin at 
night, sucS iros f/.e disordar and em/utxm. 


Eighteenth year. 


174 


THE Cn‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK T. 


•ai.© 


JUlJo 


A ZAB 


0 H.ja A.^. 

^ H P 


a.* m mm A 

mm. 

^ tin ii Z.^ %.&. 

z^r^ =fn^m 


HS 


SR _ 

■M S tffl. 


:^M in 

M ^ -IS I 


3t. WkB 

M 


^ ^ B» 


MW 
^0. 
fis + 


A 

>0.#* 


A 


A 


XVIII. 


1 In the [duke’s] eighteenth year, in spring, in the kings 

first month, the duke of Sung, the earl of Ts‘aou, an 
^ officer of \Yei, and an officer of Choo invaded^ Ts‘e. 

2 In summer, an army [of ours went to] relieve Ts‘e. 

3 In the fifth month, on Mow-yin, the army of Sung and 

the army of Ts‘e fought at Yen, when the latter 
was disgracefully defeated. 

4 The Teih [came to] succour Ts‘e. 

5 In autumn, in the eighth month, on Ting-hae, there 

was the burial of duke Hwan of Ts‘e. 

6 In winter, a body of men from Hing and a body of the 

Teih invaded Wei. 


Par. 1. Kang-yang, as nsaal^ for has 

um- and also introduces "1^ after 
The object of this moYement on the part of 
Sung -was to fulfil the charge which the duke 
had receiv^ irom the marquis of Ts‘e, to secure 
the succession to his sou Ch'aou, or duke Heaou. 
Tso says: — ‘Duke Seang of Sung with several 
other princes invaded Ts‘e; and in the 3d month, 
the people of Ts‘e put Woo-k'wei to death.’ 

[The Chuen appends here: — ‘The earl of 
Ch‘ing for the first time paid a court-visit to 
Ts‘oo, the viscount of which gave him a quanti^ 
of metal. Afterwards he repented that he had 
d(me so, and made a covenant with the earl, 
when he required him not to use it for casting 
weapons. In consequence the earl made with it 
three bells.T 

Par. 2.^ If this interference on the part of 
IjOO was intended to support Woo-k'wei, it was 
too late. Maou thinks it may have been in the 

interest of P*wan C who was afterwards duke 

Ch'aou, and was married to a daughter of duke 
Tso says that the entry indicates approval 
of the movement. This par., and p.4 below, show 
how indefinite the meaning of sometimes is. 

Par. 3. 1 cn was. in Ts‘c, — in the pres. dis. 
of Lcib-shing dcp. Tse-nan. The 

Clin^-n says The ^e^Jple of Ts‘e wanted to 
rai.-te Ou^e IKaon to the ni.'irquis.itc. but could 
no; overcome f/..- oy.}.ou:!on of the adherents of 
G Ike Hwan s other four sons [onlv four, Woo- 


k'wei being now dead], who then left 

fought with the men of Sung. 

their army in Yen, raised duke Heaou to ^ 

marquisate, and returned to their own ° ' 

It would appear that the combined 

tioned in p. I had dispersed on the j 

Woo-k'wei, and that the troops 

also left Ts'e. In this action, therefore, ^ 

the army of Sung was engaged, ^-t nau 

suddenly called again into the field. _„iiofi 

Par. 4. These Teih had probably been caue 
to their aid by the four sons of ^the 

who were struggling against their brother, 
protege of Sung. 

Par. 6. An interval of 11 months 
red between the death of duke Hwan an 
burial, — owing to the disorder and 
the State. Duke Heaou interred 
cently and barbarously on the top of the x 

Bhow(^-^)hilL 

Par. G. Not long before this, both Hing n" ^ 
Wei had been brought to the verge of „ 
tion by the Teih; and yet here we find <? 
allied with the Teih against Wei. We need 
wonder at the subsequent fate of lling “5 
hands of Wei. The Chuen says:— ‘In ' 

a body of men from Hing, and a body 
Teih, invaded Wei, and invested T‘oo-p oo. 
marquis of Wei offered to resign in , 

any one of his uncles or brothers, or of tneir - •• 

. Yea, having assembled all his officers at 
I said, •‘Jfanyoneisabletode.al with *hc one 1 » 
I. liwuy. will glady follow him.” All 
j proffered dignitg, hoiccver, and the marquis at 


Yr.AK XIX. 


DUKE HE. 


175 


w.anis look up .n position witli liis nrniy nt 
Ts?o-li'H, when tlio nnny of the Toih witlitlrcwV 
More for tlie first time, instc.'nl of the simple 
we have , in wiiicli ex])rcssion Kuh- 

leaivj:, who has iiati many followers of his view, 
saw an increasing appreciation of the Tcili in 
the mind of Confucius. Hut tlicro is really 


nothing more in the addition of the tlian 
t!io exigeiicy of the stylo, ns J[^, followed 

merely hy ^j»^, would be very awkward. 

[TheChiien adds: — ‘The earl of Leang in- 
creased the number of hi.s walied cities, and 
had not people to fill them. One wont by the 
name of Sin-lc, and Ts’in took it.’] 


2^meteeni]i year. 

ftf 3" tP I* 

A ^ ff.T A 
l« t8 A Sli # 


m 

A. 

A. 

M 


A. 


W 

A. 


A. 


=r 


T 

w 


A 


5 

A 


n 

m Z ^ A s.* ® © 

M ^ rfii 8 tfc.iiiB A ^ ^ A tiff :fe 

W 3ft <Sr$t MM 

^1.* -ffe ^.Z — 3i = A,M Z.B, 

m^^ZM ffl.si MM A 

® h ^ Z.J0 A * A ja M 


176 


THE CII'UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


V.A-C. • . .r. J.o— 


. Sif Wl ± ^ 

m 

S ^ ^ 3E. 

m sf tTri s 
mjb m.z 

S ^ R "tfii. 
JR'g.ffiiM 


IP TTv ^ IV14. jia. 75r ^ Zt^ ^ ^ Hi 

^ Z-& Bi# 0.B W ^ § 

MM M. 

fS MM m.'X- 3E St H ^ 

nn I.-9 -rv^. — -Tr MM nn •— «• -Jt^ tXm. An, 


'* liUii VVAItltHi <p3Ji»-^|’ — L. MV |AJU Tj*. >riu 

M. ^»r?n ^ I# ^ 

M M 0.4, # ^ fln 

M w ^ ?5.a # fi ■&.§ * f 


I# A»^ ^ ^ SL ffij ^ ffi» 
fe ^ # S i?ff r?n IS PIfof 4 

^ « fj.^ fi w i 5 


XIX. 1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 


In the [duke’s] nineteenth year, in spring, in the kings 
third month, the people of Sung seized Ying-ts‘e, 
’viscount of T'ang. 

In summer, in the sixth month, the duke of Sung, s® 
officer of Ts'aou, and an officer of Choo, made a cove- 
nant in the south of Ts‘aou. 

The viscount of Tsang met and covenanted [with themj 
in Choo. 

On Ke-ySw, the people of Choo seized the viscount of 
Tsang, and used him [as a victim]. . . 

In autumn, a body of men from Suns invested [the capital 
of] Ts‘aou. 

A body of men from Wei invaded Hing. ' - 

In winter, [the duke] had a meeting with an officer ot 
Ch‘in, an officer of Ts‘ae, an officer of Ts‘oo, and an 
officer of Ch‘ing, when they made a covenant in Ts e. 

Leang perished. 


[The Chuen, resuming the brief narrative at 
the end of last year, adds that, in the duke’s 
19th year, in spring, ‘ Ts‘in proceeded to wall 
the place which it had taken, and occupied it.’3 
Par. 1. The Chuen says notliing to e^lain 
why Sung made this seizure of the viscount of 
T‘ang. Its words are merely, * The people of 
Sung seized duke Seuen of T‘ang.’ The duke of 


Sung is understood to he intended by S 

and the use of is supposed to bo condemna- 
tory of the procedure. But Maou shows that 
such a canon for the use of in the accounts 
of Fcizurcs, cannot be applied all through the 
Classic. The adding the name of the viscount 
of T'ang is supposed by Iloo Gan-kwoh and a 
jiost of other critics to be condemnatory of him ; 
out even the lt.‘ang-he eilitors reject the view. 

P.tr. 2. Kung.yang has ^ instead of 

‘‘"'1 of course ^ for Tlie 
proper reading, however, is "that of the text. 


The duke of Sung was ambitious 
the presidency of Uwan of Ts‘e, and had i 
to get a large gathering of the princes ™_ 
covenant. But not one was present, 
the earl of Ts'aon, in whose State the P*®?*® 
meeting was, did not appear in person; . 

negligent also, it appears, in sending tlie supp* 
of provisions for the covenanting parties; 
the lord of the State where they met was 
way’s expected to contribute. . 

Parr. 3,6. The viscount of Tsang cnnic 
late for the covenant in Ts'aon. V 
had been minded from the first to conic. uce 
detained; or had been summoned, ns ® .jy 

poses, by a special message sent from 
the dnko of Sung, and yet sifter all l>ccn too Ja » 
we do not know. However, too late ho was ; on , 
being fearful probably of the conscqucncM, * 
followed some at least of the covenanters toCiioOj 
and would appear there, from p. 3, to Jia'L 
taken the covcn.aiit. I’liis did not nv.ail, hou - 
ever, to save him from a terrible fate. Tof» 


Yi:*n XX. 


DUKE HE. 


177 


KSfd nu'nnis ttmt tlicy used him ni: nn nninml 
violtm.’ TliP tliiiin was iloiic by Clioo nt the 
ctunmnuil of tiu' duke of Stine. The Cliiicn nar- 
rates : — ‘The duke of Stuie lunde duke AViln of 
Choo sacrifice the viscouut of Tsiliip at nn altar 
on the hank of the Suy, to awe and draw to him 
the wild tribes of the cast, Tlie duke's minis- 
ter of War, Tszc-yu [tiie duke’s brother, Muh-e; 
(see the Cliiien at tlie end of the t^tli year, and 
of the Util)], said, “Anciently, tlie six domestic 
animals wore not used at the same sacrifice; for 
small affairs they did not use preat victims: — 
how much less would they have iiresiimcd to use 
human beinps I Sacrifices are offered for the 
benefit of men. Men are the hosts of the Spirits 
at them. If you sacrifice a man, who will enjoy 
it ? Duke Ilwan of Ts'e preserved three perish- 
inp States, and thereby drew all the princes to 
him ; and yet riplitcous scholars say that his 
virtue was too slipht. Hut now our lord, nt Ids 
first assemblinp of the princes, has treated with 
oppression the rulers of two States, and lias 
f^iirtlicr used one of them in sacrifice to nn un- 
licensed and irrepular Spirit; — ^tvill it not be 
difiicult to pet the presidency of the States in 
this way ? If he die a natural death, he will be 
fortunate.' 

I must add here that Kuli-Ie.anp pives a much 
mitigated meaning of the ‘used,’ thinking 
that all which it denotes is that they struck the 
viscount of Ts3ng on the nose till it bled, and 
then smeared all the sacrificial vessels with the 
blood! 

Par. B. Tlie Cliucn says ; — * This attack of 
Ts'aou was to punish it for its not submitting 
to Suny. Tszc-yu said to the duke of Sung, 

*' King Wfln heard that the marquis of Ts'uiig 
had abandoned himself to disorder, and invaded 
Ills State ; but after he had been in the field for 
SO days, the marquis tendered no submission. 
M’fin therefore withdrew ; and, after cultivating 
afresh the lessons of virtue, he again invaded 
Ts'ung, when the marquis made submission be- 
fore lie had quitted his entrenchments. As is 
said in the She (HI. i. ode VI. 2), 

* His example acted on his wife, 

Extended to his brothers, 

And was felt by all the clans and 
States.’ 

May it not be presumed that the virtue of 
your Grace is in some respects defective; and if, 
while it is so, you attack others, what will the 


result bo ? Wliy not for a time give yourself to 
6clf-c.\nminntiun and tiie cultivation of virtue ? 
You may' then proceed to move, when that is 
without defect.” ’ 

Par. 6. The Chuon says: — ‘This attack of 
Hing was in return for the siege of T‘oo-p‘oo 
(sec on p. C of last yearl. At this time there 
was a great drought in \Vei, and the marquis 
divined by the tortoise-shell whether he should 
sacrifice to the hills and rivers, and obtained 
nn unfavourable reply. The officer NingCliwang 

Cjj-f-" is the lion, title] said, “Pormerly there 

was a scarcity in Chow; but after the conquest 
of Yin there ensued an abundant year. Kow 
Hing acts without any regard to principle, and 
there is no lender among the princes. May not 
Heaven be wishing to employ AYei to punish 
Hing?” The marquis followedliis advice ; and im- 
mediately after the army was in motion, it rained.’ 

Par. 7. Kung has before *1^; and it is 

probable that duke He himself was present at 
this meeting. If he were not there himself, he 
must have been represented by one of his great 
officers. The meeting is important as the first 
general assembly of northern States, to which 
Ts'oo sent its representative. The account of 
the conference given by Tso-she is: — ‘Duke 
Mull of Cli'in asked that a good understanding 
should be cultivated between the princes of the 
various States, and that they should not forget 
the virtue and services of Hwon of Ts'e. In the 
winter, they made a covenant in Ts'e, and 
renewed their good fellowship under Hwan.’ 
But whnt good fellowship had Ts'oo had with 
the States of the north under the presidency of 
Ts'e? The meeting was held most likely to 
consult how to meet the ambition of the duke of 
Sung, against whom we shall presently find 
Ts'oo taking most decided part. Indeed, Keang 
Ping-chang supposes that the meeting was call- 
ed by Ch'in at Ts'oo’s instigation. 

Par. 8. The Chuen says : — “ Leang perished ; 

— ‘ it is not said at whose bands : — ^it brought the 
ruin on itself. Before this, the earl of Leang 
had been fond of building, walling cities which 
he had not people to fill. Tlie people in conse- 
quence got weary, and could not endure the 
toil, and it was said, “ Such and such an enemy 
is coming.” "When they were roofing the duke’s 
palace, they said, “Ts'in will take us by surprise.” 
They got frightened, and dispersed ; and forth- 
with Ts'in took Leang.’ 


mi 

Ttoentieth year 


i 


A 

Mo 

MM 


-h 

A m. 


A 


P5o 


Ai 


m fA 


von v. 


178 


THE CII'UN TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK V. 


R'l * © fl t?n JR ^ II m «.A m ® f i t 

S a.;ijc ii i>A » 'M A Df .PJ 


K F4 g I i A S :t: fli) i? il 

A Z.-& mM ^ a 

# 0’ 

Sfc.a ■ “ ‘ ■ 


J 


j-m 

±.ii 

Jiaifii 


XX. 


A. 

1 


0 . 

It + 


# 


4 

5 


m m m jib. 

H.nt M H.pi 

M * A n a m ft 

a.ro ^ B® S. 

In his Mveutiuth year, in spring, [the duke] renewed and 
altered the south gate [of the capital]. 

In summer, the viscount of Kaou came [to Loo] on a coui 
visit. 

In the fifth month, on Yih-sze, the western palace was 
burnt. 

A body of men from Clifing entered Hwah. 

In autumn, an officer of Ts‘e and an officer of the lei 
made a covenant in King. 

In winter, a body of men from Ts‘oo invaded Sny- 


Par. 1. This was the ‘southern gate’ of the 
capital, as in the translation 

Before this, it was, acc. to Too Yu, 

called the Tseih gate (^^)i tut after the altera- 
tions now made, it got the name of Kaou mun, or 
High gate ( ). indicates the substi- 


tution of a new gate for the old one, ( = 

), and indicates that the new gate 

was on a difft. plan from the old (J^ 

#)• Tlie Chuen says that the record of this 

trasaction was made to show its unseasonableness, 
adding that all works for opening communication 
fsueh as gates, roads, and bridges], or for closing 
it [such as walls and moats], should be under- 
taken as they were required. Tso-slie’s idea, 
of course, is that tliis was a work of ornament 
more than of necessity, and that the season of 
the year for such an undertaking had gone by. 

Par. 2. This Kaou was a small State in the 
pres. dis. of Shing-woo, dep. Ts‘aou-ohow. As 
we learn from the Chuen on XXIV. 2, it was 
held by jthe descendants of one of king Wftn’s 
sons. Kothing is heard of it before or after the 
trivial incident in the text. 

Par. 3. — see ll.xir.4: III, xx.2. What 

building is here spoken of is not well known. 
Kiili's opinion that it was the temple or shrine- 
house of duke Min has been exploded. Some 
portion of the barcin is probably intended. 

Par. 4. Ilw.ah, — sec 111 iii..'i. The Chuen 
bays;— ‘The i cuple of llwfih had revolted from 


Ch’ing, and submitted to Wei; 

Sze, a son of the earl of Cli-iug, and Scch 
k‘ow led a force and entered was 

Par. 6. Tso-sho says that this tovenan^ 

in the interest of King, to ° then 

difficulties it was in from Wm, „ ggpn the 
much distressing Hing, e h XVIH* 
Teih and Hing leagued agw»®t " ei m 
6 ; and the same year, Wei had taken part 
invasion of Ts‘e. „ 

Par. 6. The name of g„„.pih. 

Suy Chow dep. of Tih-gnn (f^ ^ 

It was a marquisate, and its lords were Kes 

(M). The Chuen says ‘ Suy , ''^**^* * ‘° 
ous States east of the Han, had ^ jeft 

Ts‘oo; and this winter. Now Too-wo^«^ 
», led a force against it, s„pVnor man 


Ts‘oo, 


of submission, and returned. I Jm s P 
may say that Suy suffered ins ^nsio 
cause it had not measured its scrent, 
errors of those who move only ai success 

measured their strength are le • others? 

and defeat come from a**® P she [!•“* 
... tjje words of the b"*- l 


The answer is in 
ode VI. 1], 


“Might I not have been there in the cor f 
Httt”there"was too much dew on the path* 


here:— 'Duke Senng 


of 


[The Chuen .adds . j 

Sung wished to call together tlie i’”" j,„ng 
unite them under himself. Tsang 
heard of it, and said, ‘Ho may of 

curbs his own dc.sircs to follow the 
others ; but he will seldom do so w lo 
make others follow his desires.’] 


Ykau XXII. 


• DUKE HE. 


181 


Par. 7. Poh was in Sung, — in tlie'nortli-west 
of pres. ilis. of SlianR-k'cw, dcp. Kwei-tih. The 
Chitcn says, that ‘ witli reference to this meeting, 

Tszc-vn said, “ Onr calamity lias not yet come. . 

‘ — j ■ j|i| I 

. ■ " * *• rii * -1 » b ir — * i w -. V Bi » 


ing to the duke."’ Too says that this meeting 
was not called at tlie duke’s instance, but that he 
happened to hear of it, and went to it. By ^ 


A-h 

€ fie fie ■ - 


^ 


m 


m 

=f 


Jnik 


A. 

Ai^i 

urn 

T i 


± 


IX 

fsT, 


ifii.® ^ © Ji •&• ^ j 

•tfc.M ■? is 'ii.^ lil ^ 

# iiiE.^.wE.^ # 5R.a #■ 

g .W' m m s ja ^ 
m.M. * '^M T T 
^ ja-a.»ja.#.^.)a3£. 

5H5 ■&. 5g 

Bn®:SAW 

mn^nn ^ mm 

MBS 

m B.m 

iSTRjtt 


#.ZEff A B # 


<: -ft ii5.<a- — 

tt.A ^ •fi.B.— 
<a- 4' ffi B 

® ffl.7S.S A m, 

* M « ^X.A 
^ Sn » -ff # @ 

•? jii 

m # # If ± 
ro S # Z 
T-mmm B.m. 


XXI. 1 In tlie [duke’s] twenty-first year, in spring, the Teih 
made an incursion into "Wei. 

2 An oificer of Sung, an oificer of Ts‘e, and an officer of 

Ts'oo, made a covenant at Luh-shang. 

3 In summer, there was great drought. 

4 In autumn, the duke of Sung, the viscount of Ts'oo, the 

marquis of Ch‘in, the marquis of Is'ac, the earl of 


178 


THE CII‘UN TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


M‘] * © r?ff wj.m mm mm is ?t # w ^ 

« F4 all 

.ji c»- in winter, the duke invaded Ohoo. 

6 The people of Ts‘oo sent E-shin to Loo, to present [some 

of the] spoils [of Sung,] 

7 In the twelfth month, on Kwei-ch‘ow, the duke had a 

meeting with [several of] the princes, when they 
made a covenant in Poh, and liberated the duke of 
Sung. 


Par. 1. Tills incursion ivas, no doubt, in the 
interests of King, and a sequel of the covenant 
betiveen the Teih and Ts‘e in p. 6 of last year. 
jPar. 2. Luh-shang ivas in Sung, — in the 

pres. dis. of T‘ae-ho Ying-choiv. 

Gan-hwuy. Tso-she says: — ‘The idea of this 
covenant originated with Sung, and the object 
in it of the duke of Sung was to ask the States 
from Ts ‘00 [i.e. to ask Ts‘oo to cede its influence 
over the various States to Sung]. Ts'oo grant- 
ed the request, when Muh-e, the duke’s brother, 
said, “ A small State is sure to bring calamity 
on itself by striving for the power of command- 
ing covenants ; — ^is Sung now going on to 
perish? We shall be fortunate if there ensue 

defeat only.’ Hoo Ning 5 Sung dyn., 

a little earlier than Choo He), Woo Ch'ing, and 
the critics generally, suppose that the princes 
of the States are intended by A ; but such a 

view lands the translator of the Classic in inex- 
tricable difficulties. Why should the princes be 
reduced to ‘ men,’ simply in this par., and then 
have their titles given to them in p.4? Too 

Yu observes that preceding 

shows that the meeting and covenant originated 
with Sung. 

Par. 3. Too observes that the language in- 
timates that the drought continued after the 

usual sacrifice for rain had been present- 
ed; and Ying-tah expands the remark by saying 
that in the Classic we have sometimes the 
entry and sometimes ; that in the 

former case the sacrifice has been followed by 
rain, while in the latter the drought continues. 
The Chuen says : — ‘ The duke wished, in conse- 
quence of the drought, to burn a witch and a 
person much emaciated. Ts'ang Wttn-chung said 
to him, “That is not the proper preparation in 
a time of drought. Put in good repair your 
walls, the inner and the outer ; lessen your food; 
be sparing in all your expenditure. Be in 
earnest to be economical, and encourage people 
to help one another; — this is the most import- 
ant preparation. What have the witch and the 
emaciated person to do with the matter? If 
Heaven wish to put them to death, it liad better 
not have given them life. If tl«ey can really 
produce drought, to burn them will increase the 
calamity." The dnkc followed his advice; and 
that year, the scarcity was not very great.’ [In 
the Lc Ke, II. I’t. Il.iii.29, there is an account 
of exposing in the sun, in n time of drought, a 


:, or person in a state of emaciation 

^), with the hope that Heaven would 

have pity on him, and send down rain.] 

Par. 4. Yu was in Sung, — in the pres. Suy 
Chow (g§ ‘}|»|), dep. Kwei-tih, Ho-nan. Kung- 

M. The 


yang has and Kuh-lcang has 
Chuen s.ays:— ‘ In autumn, the princes ha 
a meeting with the duke of Sung m Yu. 

yu said, “Shall our calamity come now? 
duke’s ambition is excessive ;— how can n 
sustain the difficulties of his position ? 
this meeting, Ts'oo seized the duke, , . 
on to invade Sung.’ I believe the .. 

duke of Sung was made yra 

text leaves the matter quite „v;pot 

are to make ^1 the princes named the su j 

of then the duke would be one of his own 
captors. Kung-yang says absurdly that t o 
viscount of Ts ‘00 is not of 

sage would not seem to sanction the captu 
a prince of China byja barbarian 1 Tim p. 

he editors approve of the ?olution o ^ 
K'wang and others, that the to 

blame the other princes for not ^oter S 
prevent the outrage. Much 
to suppose that, while Ts‘oo was P . ' 

the other States were ‘art „,_i,;Mous 

transaction, — ^ivell pleased to see the 
pretensions of the duke thus snuffed o . _ 

Par. 6. The Chuen says:— ‘Jm, bun, 
k‘eu, and Chuen-yu, were all held by o 
the surname Fung (J^)f presided 

sacrifices to T‘ae-haou [Fuh-he], service 

to the Spirit of the Tse, thtis ^®”^® fpijonhad 
to the bright great land. -h^li came 

extinguished Seu-k‘eu, the pnime of fii,<ing 

as a fugitive to Loo, and thru'vhirasc f on Ch 
Fung, who spoke in his behalf to t^*® ’ bright 

‘It is the rule of Chow to >;°n°“J^,f!Lv'nnd 

8ncrifice8,ondtoprotectthelittleandtheiei , 

it is misery to Chow, when ““.instate 

disturb the bright great land. If yoi . 
Seu-k‘eu, you will do honour to t^*® ^‘‘Pyregtor- 
Haou and to the Spirit of the Tse, nu^ 
ing them you will remove the timt 

Par. C. See III. xxxi. 4. It here ®PP®®” * 
the viscount of Ts'oo was thc^principa i 
seizure of the duke of Sung. must be sup 
pUed before is to be translated, as m 

many previous passages, by ‘ people. 


ykau xxir. 


• DUKE HE. 


181 


Par. 7. Poh was in Sung, — in tlic'north-wcst 
of pros. dis. of Sliang-k'eV, dep. Kwei-tili. Tlie 
Chncn says, tliat ‘ with reference to this meeting, 
Ts7.c-yu said, “ Our calamity lias not j’et come. 
What has happened is not enough to be a warn- 


ing to the duke.”’ Too says tliat this meeting 
was not called at the duke’s instance, but that he 
happened to hear of it, and went to it. By ^ 

we arc to understand the princes in p.4. 


Ticenty-second year. 

» A E.4-f3* m. 

.AA 


I 


^ T ^ ^ “ 


J J WT ^ — 


^ ® ft Ifc.ja 

^ :t M m 

mm 

A ^ *R W' :tM i». 

5k B.aiJ® H 55 ^ m 

ee ^ 6®. 

^ # IR w ^ 
tl =^.sf 5f- X 
.1 + SI.|ffi.«R # -tfi..*!!. 

m ^ M 0.^ 

^ 3 i® # 

«B0m«:fciRB5 .... „ .. 

MMm um^^m - i,#«^0.»*ii# 


ii.i§ ^ 

it * s.a « # 

S A M Si H il.0. 

w. w,.m 

ZM # AM 


..., K##;*?S ^«5 0 . 

® ro ^.S ^.z in + 
m I m.-f- 

mB.mzsmmMM 

5: » # m 5fe m.Tk m. 
^ ^ ^ ft 

ft W. 

X ^ M MM 

M i. ^ ^ 

i BM.^M # ;n.#. 


^ ^ ^ ii 

^ iiw ^ ffi ^ itfc -ta 
± ?L ».# m 

5-. mm ;ii.^. 

6®>W fh 0, 0. 

3E 51 

mw M 
ZZ 055 W 


182 


IIIE 011‘UX TS-EW. WITH THE TSO OHUEIf. 


BOOK T. 


fr 3E iOi ^ _ 

piM 

s ^ i5.ji ^ ^ 


w MMM W -tn.^ -fe.f 


55L 

n 


^81 ^ S.ic.:?^ # A 

^ * 15 » mM 

s is«w.> 0.^e. 

m.m « ®i 5® 
Jt s A -fei.-y- 
m»A M 
ii.0.®.T 

^mm *.5i m 


b.z. 

*.# -tfc.iS f ® 

?il - « i!» A :^: i i 

S m,m 

§iA 21. 


B5 IS 
M M K m 3t ^ tr 
^.IK =t A. 


H. m in ZM ^Z-^ 


W = 21 i ^ 7 ^ .1 

4 2J.K it i 

S ^ ^ 8 

M 9 A 


*. 


&: 

0. 

■f 

2. 


-K*eu. . , 

the duke of Sung, the marquis of Wei, the 
■ Heu, and the viscount of T‘ang, invaded 


XXII. 1 In his twenty-second year, the duke invaded Ohoo, and 

took Seu-k‘eu. . , ' 

2 In summer, a t^nTra rvPQ«r»rr +T->q nnQT»nnva of Wei. the 

baron of 

Ch‘ing. . 

3 In autumn, in the eighth month, on Ting- we, Ave fought 

with an army of Choo at Shing-hing. 

4 In winter, in the eleventh month, on Xe-sze, the first 

day of the moon, the duke of Sung fought with an 
array of Ts‘oo near the Hung, when the army o 
Sung was disgracefully defeated. 

go to B-ch‘uen, and saw there a man 
in the wilderness with dishevelled hair.^ 
a hundred years are expired,” said he, “I ^-gr 

place will be occupied by the Jung. The p _ 
rules of ceremony are already lost in it. . _ 

autumn, Ts'in and Tsin removed „ ared 

hwitn to E-chuen.’ — ^But more than a 
years from the removal to the eastern P 

had^ela^ed^he gj^gat g^n of the ‘So 

was a hostage in Ts'in, and^ wwhcd to ^ 
his escape and return to Tsin. Be s 

wife, the lady Ying, “Shall I *"^gidcst8on 
me?” But she replied, ‘ lou are the c 
of Tsin, and here you are, the sobi 
grace. It is right that you 0''°“* ,,„njoiaid 
return to your own State; 1™* on 

appointed by the ruler of Ts in t ggyuro 
and hold your towel and conn), fgjigw 
...1 cfnir Rbonlu 1 1"' . .. 


Par. 1. Seu-k‘eu was a small State, whose 
lords were Fungs, with the rank of viscount, 
purporting to be descended from Fuh-he, — ^in 
the pres. Tung-p‘ing Chow, dep. T‘ae-gan. See 
the Chuen on p. 6 of last year. Tso>she says 
here that ‘the duke took Seu-k'eu, and restored 
its ruler, — which was according to rule.’ The 
text says nothing, indeed, of Loo’s re-establish- 
ment of Seu-k'eu; but we find Loo again taking 
it, ill VI. vii. 2 ; so that Tso-she’s account of what 
tras now done must be correct; 

Par. 2. The Chuen says : — ‘ In the 3d month, 
the carl of Ch‘ing went to Ts'oo; and in sum- 
mer, the duke of Sung invaded Cli'ing. Tsze- 
yu said, “What I call our calamity will be 
brought about by this expedition.” ’ His seizure 
in the past year had not taught the duke of 
Sung the folly of matching himself against 
Ts'oo, which he could not but know would re- 
sent this attack of Ch'ing. 

['Phe Cliuon appends hero three narratives : — 
1st. When king P'ing removed from the old 
capital of Chow to the east. Sin Yew happened to 


was 

you itiiu lit/au jvt** |J 

you and ensure your stay. Sboniu - 
you to Tsin, I shall be setting at n 8 .,,,gr 
command. I dare not follow you. hi 


yi;\n XXII. 


DUKE HE. 


183 


d.iro 1 tell of your intention.” On this the 
prince inaile his cse.ape a/onc to Tsin.’ 

till. * Foo Shin spoke to the kinp. snyinp, “Lot 
me enln'.il you to rec.all T‘no-shuli [wlio hnd lied 
to Ts‘e. See tlie Chuen after XII. 3]. It is said 
in the She [II. iv. ode VIII. 12]. 

* 1 hey nsscniblc their neiphbours, 

And* their rehatives nre full of their prtiiso.’ 

If brothers nnionp ourselves cannot agree, 
how can \vc luuriuur at the vant of harntony 
among the princes of the States ?’’ The king 
was pleased, and kinp Hwuy’s son Tao [T‘ao- 
shuhj returned from Ts'e, and trns restored to 
liis r.ank, the king haring called him.]’ 

Par. 3. Shinp-hing was in Loo, but its posi- 
tion has not been precisely determined. Tho 
Chuen says: — ‘Thei>ooplo of Choo, because of 
tho affnir'of Seu.k’eu, catne out against us with 
an ariny, and the duke set about meeting it, 
despising CIiou, and without preparation. Tsang 
Wfin-cluing said, “ However small n State be, 
it is not to be slighted ,* and if prepar.ations be not 
made, however numerous a force be, it is not 
to be relied on. It is said in the She (II. r. 
ode I. C), 

‘ 170 should be .apprehensive and c.areful. 

As if we were on the brink of a deep gulf, 

As if we were treading on thin ice;’ 

and again (She, IV. i. Ft.iii. ode HI.), 

* Let me be reverent, let me be reverent; 

Heaven’s method is clear,— 

Its appointment is not easily preserved.' 

Intelligent as the ancient kings were, they con- 
stantly saw dilBculties tobeovcrcome and dangers 
to be feared ; how mucli more should a small 
State like ours do so ! Let not your lordship 
tliink of Choo ns small. Bees and scorpions 
c.arry poison; — much more will a State do sol” 
The duke would not listen to this remonstrance, 
and in the 3th month, on Ung-we, he fought 
with Choo at Shing-hing, when our army was 
disgracefully defeated. The people of Choo 
captured the duke’s helmet, and suspended it 
over their Fish gate.' 

IVom the Chuen we learn that Loo was here 
shamefully beaten; but the test says nothing 
about that. This is another instance of the 
strange reticence of Confucius. 

Par. 4. Hung was the name of a river. The 
site of the battle is referred to a spot, SO/e 
north of the dis, city of Chay-shing ^), 

dep. Ivwei-tih. The Chuen says: — ‘An army 
of Ts'oo invaded Sung, in order to relieve Ch'ing. 
The duke of Sung being minded to fight, his 
minister of War remonstrated strongly with 
him, saying, “ Heaven has long abandoned the 
House of Shang [Sung was the conservator of 
the Shang sacrifices]. Tour Grace m.ay wish to 
rsiise it again, but siicA opposition to Heaven will 
be unpardonable.” The duke, however, would 
not listen to advice, and in winter, in the 11th 
month, on Ke-sze, the 1st day of the moon, he 
fought with the army of Ts'oo near the Hung. 

‘The men of Sung were all drawn up for 
battle, before those of Ts'oo had all crossed the 
river; and the minister of War s.Tid to the duke, 

“ They are many, and we are few. Pray let us 
attach them, before they have all crossed over.” 
The duke refused ; and again, when the minister 


oskctl leave to attack them after they had 
crossed, but when they were not yet drawn up, 
ho refused, waiting till tliey were properly 
inarshnlled before he commenced the attack. 

‘Tlte army of Sung was shamefully defeated ; 
one of the duke’s thighs was hurt ; and the war- 
ders of the gates [keepers of the palace gates, 
who had followed the duke to the field] were 
all slain. The people of the State all blamed 
the duke, but he said, “Tlic superior man does 
not inflict n second wound, and does not take 
prisoner any one of gray hairs. When the 
ancients hnd their armies in the field, they 
would not attack an enemy when he was in a 
defile; and though I am but the poor repre- 
sentative of a fallen dynasty, I would not 
sound my drums to attack an unformed 
host.” Tszc-yu, [the minister of War], said, 
‘Tour Grace docs not know the rules of fight- 
ing: — Given a strong enemy, in a defile or with 
his troops not drawn up, it is Heaven assisting 
us. Is it not proper for us to advance upon 
him 50 impeded trith our drums beating, even 
then afraid tee may not yet the victory? More- 
over, the strong men now opposed to ns are all 
our antagonists. Even the old and withered 
among them are to be captnred by ns, if we can 
only take them; — ^^vh.at have we to do with 
their being gray-liaired ? We call into clear 
display the principle of shame in teaching men 
to fight, our object being that they should slay the 
; enemy. If our aut.'igonist be not wounded 
mortally, why should we not repeat the blow? 

If we grudge a second wound, it would be 
better not to wound him at all. If we would 
spare the gray-haired, we had better submit at 
once to the enemy. In an army, what are used nre 
sharp weapons, while the instruments of brass 
and the drums are to rouse the men’s spirits. 
The sharp weapons may be used against foes 
entangled in a defile; wlien their noise is the 
loudest and the men’s spirits are all on fire, the 
drums may be borne against the enemy in 
disorder;” 

[The Chnen gives here the following ; — ^‘E.ariy 
in the morning of Ping-tsze, the ladies Me and 
Keaug, the 'wives of Wfin, the earl of Ch'ing, went 
to congratulate the viscount of Ts'oo, and feast 
bis troops, at the marsb of Ko, when the vis- 
countmndethe band-master Tsin display to them 
the captives, and the ears of the slain. Tiie 
superior man trill pronounce that this was con- 
trary to role. A woman, when escorting or 
meeting a visitor, does not go beyond the gate; 
when seeing her brothers, she does not cross the 
threshold. The business of war has nothing to 
do with the employment of women. 

‘ On Ting-ch'ow, the viscount entered the city 
of Ch'ing, and -was feasted. Hine times the cup 
was presented to biro ; the courtymd was filled 
with a hundred difit. objects; six kinds of food 
'were set forth in the dishes more than ordinary. 

He left the city at night after the fe.'ist, Wan 
Me accompanying him to the array; and he 
took the eoTVs tvro daughters vrith him to Ts'oo. 
Sbnh-chen said, "The king of Ts'oo will not 
die a natural death! The ceremonies shown 
on his account hare ended in his breaking down 
the distinctions regulating the intercourse be- 
tween those-ves; .md where this is done, there 
can be no propriety. How should he die a 
natural tieath? The princes m.^y kiiotv that he 
will not attain to the presidency 'of them.” ’] 


184 


TIIK CII'UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 

Twenty 'four 111 year. 


BOOK V. 


i't ^ i If 

1 B ^ S 4 M M,7!, z 4 J.0.^ J. 0. 

+ R S # 5 S ^ ^ ® ^ S # ± 


* i‘f W i ®.A M S.A MM a.tr 0 1^ S 
M 1 1.^ « » A.-a.* P. 

» jl.M'J » 0.« ^ i&. J!5< 

^ S ^ IP.-S ^ tfij A It S 

2‘i‘S^S*« m 5.M it ft.M.ffi) H. f 


m'W F‘± ^ 2f S K ^ ^ 

lifflfi aiffiiii 

liiiiil Sfgf£ill 

itllii'i iS'iiiifi 

SSI^x^S^ 3.^1 5i 

Is'lf ^ jr® ®i.^. ■&.■^ /a ^ jK ^ 

sf <2i ^Ij.aL iS inf F. 


Yujin XXIII. 


DUKE HE, 


185 


ja m 0.11 .■(&.» 
ik AW UM 

g 4- 3i J^' •& If fr » 15 1- w.#.^ :t, 


CcrtA v«.LS» ir-i -• 's r--« •••U 

s:M' Bii #i # 3t ^ ffii S M. 

a 0.0.* s 0 ^ i. 


S f 

a liii 'i ^ ^ 

jili::f 0 AM,&^ mw fi/rMjk 

s.^tM ij 

m.m M if- tig ft ia.0..i.^' IS ^ ;2 

■& zM ■&.* e ^ # jt an 

^ ^ S.W W ^.0.^ ^ M ^ & H.^ 

"MB ^ 0 * » ® ^ 


ro;g: 


m w ffc mwmm&wmM ^.0.« 
s.r^ M.Am m,z # ^ la ^ ®.M.# w ;s.w 
ip ^ 5(f *6 « fi.iil! ® ± •? A ^ ^ n s.® 
" a 0 ^ :)1M » 4fe :e.A.« 3B *.» wmz 
z » ZM # K Ji.a.0 0 m ^ ^ 


S: ZM ■« J9 ® K ^ # i&.-tfc.a ^ <& 


#Tm7 q 


_ _ 2 ^ 1 .K -a.T ^ p ^.3^ * 

BMM H w W # 

m S: Z,.ZM # PJ PI -tli.ii.:::. 

m.m 

XXIII. 1 In the [duke’s] twenty- third year, in spring, the marquis 
of Ts‘e invaded Sung, and laid siege to Min. 

2 In summer, in the fifth month, on Kang-jdn, Tsze-foo, 

duke of Sung, died. 

3 In autumn, an officer of Ts'oo invaded Ch'in. 

4 In winter, in the eleventh month, the viscount of Ke 

died. 


Par. 1. Min (liero and after wards Kuli-lcang 
lias was a town of Sung, — 30 Ic to the north- 

east of the present dis. city of Kin-hcang ( ^> 
^pji/i dep. Yen-chow. Kung-yniig says that the 


mention of besieging a town (j^) such as Min 
is condemnatory of the violence of Ts'e’s action 
against Sung; and Kuli-luang thinks that in- 
vasion and siege, both related in the same short 
par., stamp the action of Ts‘c as excessive and 


VOLT. 


24 


186 


THE CH‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


Neither of these views can be accepted. 
Tso-she s account of the par. is, that the marquis 
of Ts‘e wished to punish Sung because of the 
dukes absenting himself from the covenant in 
Ts‘e mentioned in NIX. 7. Certainly the duke of 
Sung deserved well of the marquis of Ts‘e at the 
hrst, supporting him against his brothers, and 
secunng his claim to the State in the room of 
his lather. We may speculate as to jealousies 
and misunderstandings which subsequently 
spmng up between them; but we have not 
sufficient information to enable us to speak 
positively of the real causes of the invasion of 
Sung here mentioned. 

Ear. 2. Kung-yang gives the name as 

The duke’s death, according to Tso, 
was in consequence of the wound he received at 
the battle of Huug. His career by no means 
corresponded to the expectations excited by 
him on his first appearance in the history of this 
period;— sre the Chuen at the end of the ^th 
year. He is commonly enumerated as one of the 
‘five leaders of the States;' bat he never attain- 
ed to that position. It is difficult to believe that 
lie was reallr snne. 

says;— ‘In autumn, 
Ch rih-sliin of Ts'oo led an army, and in- 
^dcd Ch‘in, to punish it for inclining, agaiTist 

[It would be difficult 
the classic]. 

He took Tseaou and E; walled Tun? and re- 
thinking Tih-shin had done 
appointment as chief 
minister of Isoo in his own room. Shuh-plh 

good of the 

otate he had done so; and he replied, «/ have 
done It to secure the quiet of the State. Wlien 

rendered great service, 
and you do not give them the noblest offices, are 

afiairs of Tsin ; 

~ In the 9 th mon duke H wuy of Tsin died, and 

^ oscapcd from 

'=®'«™anded that none should follow the 

I- months, after whicli there would be pardon 
no more for any that remained with him. 

fatlier did not call them home. In con- 


guilt ? — ^But I have heard your commands.” On 
this the duke put him to death. 

‘Yen, the master of ffivination, saying that he 
was ill, did not leave his house; hut, token he 
Mard of Ttih's execution, he remarked, “It is said 
in one of the Books of Chow [Shoo, V.ix.9], 
‘ So, by a grand intelligence, will you subdue 
the minds of the people’ But when our prince 
puts people to death to gratify himself, is not 
the case hard? The people see none of his 
of his crud executions; — 
IS he likely to leave any of iiis children in Tsin f”’ 
Par. 4. Tso-she says ; — ^“This was tne death 
of duke Ch'ing of Ke. His name is not given, 
because he had never covenanted with Loo 
[The canon cannot be substantiated] . The rule 
was, that when any prince had covenanted with 
others, the announcement of his death was ac- 
companied with his name, and the 'historio- 
graphers recorded it. "'^ere this was not the 
case, they did not enter the name ; — to avoid 
rnaktnff any mistake through want of the proper 
exactness.* 

The lords of Ke, as being the representatives 


.u.uyiuu ui jxB, Bibeniiere, me iuuk. » in- 
duced to that of ‘earl;’ here there is a further 
reduction to ‘ viscount.’ Tliese degradations are • 
supposed to have been made by the kings of 
Chow. 

[The Chuen now takes up the wanderings of 
Ch*ung-urh, who became duke 'W5n of Tsin;— 
‘Wlien Ch‘ung-nrh, son of duke jSSen of 'Ibin, 
first met iritb misfortune, a body of men from 
Tsin attacked him in tlie city of P‘oo, the men 
of winch wanted to fight with them. Cli'ung- 
urb, however, wou)d not allow them to do so, 
sajdng, ‘ By favour of the command of my ruler 
and father, and through possession of the 
emolument he has assigned me, I have got the 
rule over these people ; and if I should employ 
them to strive with him, my crime would bo 
veiy great. I will fly.” 


off ” ‘'*r 1 “ back, you shalfbelct 

vOiPn replied. “ Iho .meient rule w.as that 

*1 Didii oMi bis father 

nr,r l% ^ ^ be faitliful. The 

new o,/., ,r noremvr, wrote liis n.aine on a t.ablet 
nna i.ave the i>lc«1gc of a dead animal to Us lord 

1 .‘'1? ""vering in liis ibS 

. honld tie pmu-hed with death, Now the sons 

f'l, have haii llioir names with 

!;> ^ !!’ J ‘■=' 7 . If I Miouid go on : 

'■«'e-ve fnvii ^ I>t‘ teacliing them to ; 

‘.'i tni.n thi-ir alh'-i.-mce. jf j, 


fatti.r 

I I 

•: ':r 

— . It' 


■mt.l teach thorn to do h-nr s-InmY.i 
. -orvv vonr lor.Miipr Ihmi-h with- 
er inni^tic... .-.ecor-lin- to vonr i-i- 
tl!!'. I- i.ha! .ur -■•nan; liVsire- to 
more ,(,..n i- ri;jht. to 
tot!!’.'! itliaut 


1)1, !•: 


"ill S 


‘Ho then fled to the Teili (B.C.654); and 
there followed him — Hoo Ten, Chaou Ts'uy, 
Tgen Kceh, ^Ye^ Woo-tsze [Woo is the bon. 

title; = officer], Ee-tsze, minister of Works 
[with many others]. In an invasion of the 
Tscang-kaou-joo, the Teih captured tlic two 
daughters of their chief, Shuh Wei and Ke ci, 
and presented them to the prince. He took Ke 
ei to himself as his wife, and she bore him 
Pih-cliow and Shuh-lcw. Her older sister be 
pave to Cliaou Ts‘ui. wlio had by her his son 
Tnn. When he was .about to go to Ts‘c, he said 
to Ke Wei. Wait for tne five and twenty ye.ars; 
and if I have not come back then, you can marry 
another liusband.” She replied, ‘‘I am now 25; 
and if I am to marry again after other 25, 
go to my ctiffin. I had rather wait for J'ou-** 
‘The prince left the Teili (B. C. (M3) attcr 
residing anum'.; them 12 years. Tr.avclling 
throngh Wei. duke Wan treated him discourte- 
ously: anil ai he was leaving it by Woo-luh, he 
w.ns rcihitvd to lieg food of "a countryman, who 
pave him n cIo<i of earth. Tlie priniv was angry, 
and usslieil to sconree him with his whip; tisit 
Tsre-faii [ lliwi Yen j -.aid, “It is Heaven's P>it 
fa pift ot lilt" ; a happy omeiij.” On thi'< Im 
liov.i,j te. ail tn the earth, reevived tite del. 
am! n>->U j; wuh iiim in hi» carriage. 


Yexu XXlll. 


DVKK ui:. 


ivSi «!ivj t ■ fv.i' !n tJ>-* ••f 

‘.f.. » ..!.i 


‘\Yl>cn they came to Ts‘nn«. .htho Kune ?!i Sm« if' n’i* f'u*‘''‘ "‘‘"'‘’"‘I''**’''*' ««*» 
haring iicnrd tint tiie prince** riiu prcjcntcd nJuct iViUnnl 

the appearance of one tolul Iwne, wUhwl to *«- The m^enl M-ri ^'H**)*. 

him naked, nnd prcssctl near to look at him ntiLV?.i I'l. V »’‘t ' 
when he was bathiiiR. The wife of He Vou-lo he l« unlv ' r ntiv i V‘ "( H, 

[an officer of Ts'ami] faid to her hnslnnd iw ’ t* 

» Wlwn 1 look at the follower* of the prince of of Vlnc"f\v !h,V’i;t‘ A ',’'' !''’'*''*' ‘'f «»•«•>» 
Tnn. every one of them is fit to bechtef minister mioht t‘ i ‘ ' * ‘’'•J* **»’”«*» 

of a State. If ho only use their heliiji" ""«rl mlv '“’f 

toK!lumtoTsin andlK!it8mar.iull5and whJn 5riL«? V‘ '^'rilletl in the 

that hapiKiis, he is sure to obtain his ambition J*‘’|"'e» intend* to proMa r a 

and.liecomc lc.ader of the States. H* S hen ’'*"‘5' " »'« ‘TJWes U-av^ 

tmnish all who bnvi> !«>.>« .i:.— *** must incur ert-.at eiitti " * * " 


-- .,™.. w ,.v ii» maniuis: and when tu-ihi'nv \vi.,... . 'inncti in tno 

that hapiKtis, he IS sure to obtain his ambition J*‘’|"'en intend* to proMa r a 

and.liecomc lc.ader of the States. H* S hen ’'*"‘5' " »'« ‘TJWes U-av^ 

punish all who have been di«nniMivn<i.’< I • ” incur grt-at Kullt." * * 

and Ts'aou will be the first to siXr*'’whv 'I'nt the prince nwnv 


.... L..,v imiiniiif; II,, 

iHUinrofmitti!./. ...I... -1 ’ *'* 


188 


THE CH‘IIN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK Y. 


Txoenty-fouTth year. 

M.-ffi 


$ 


i=r 


lif 


I p 


^ f’ © •fi.?^t.© z.= m m ^.?t.© Am MM® 
ro * 11 MM ^ ^ g.T fiJ.K m & 


X TJ » PJ MV a; A ■» sa.-C, 5^; ■K 39- *r.-M- -H ^ 

^.w ».# -d' -fa ® -a.® 

JH g W g ^ ^ W tt *I 

^l‘i 1 # ?^r # ro g g 2 

» -i^ * li a.* ^ * ja ® T z I 

mm:^mm a # ea w a ff J> 

ft ® -f-.fsi m * ^ a ^ iiD ® S 

-F.A.* # ^.(ii « B*.# M m M.# T » -fe 
Bn ^ E a ^ ;2.* 0.^ A 

a M * A.g « 1 f m.M m 

:s.0 #ja=P^^A#^ » •> 

if.:i @ M Z m U m.Z,:^ 

b¥M^<. m.fi * fl5 =?f A.A ^m^MAHSf 

Z g.^.§ M IE ^ -tfi,.??: w 'te A 

m MM f- 

i «.A 3t * ;S IS JK.a ^ ^ a T W 5t J.g 

M It mstm -mj^M m.z ^mmz&mm. 
M mMM z, Tjr ppi ^ = :i.M.A *.f f- 

0 » at jnr EjB ® ^ « ff.m A.a.« 

BP ipj a -nr 5ji -£.41^ -fe,:^ pfi ^ ^ ^ ® 

f § Z.M M. ^ m a -4,.:^ J ^ 

&M ® 4i- -ffl <:.fflE X s.,^M •$ ® 0.^ 

w M I?.; ip WM fiif m m m- i&.a.Bi fg f 

hi n-, ^ « m e-.Tsu,# — ^ M e 


ViAi: XXIV. 


ii iiliiMiilfllft 
^s lllllftlllfllp' 

sf ^l■ififitf Mi-f 

it ilflffllll |«lf 

BK M5 ^ 


^ ^ 2*5 9 §‘l| B 

If- i# 5 ff.fifll ®'i'»f 

>* gft- 5! ^ fcife M i^/nSs M M ^ 


ZZL* I rr, 

s.® 


^^Siflllff fill 


190 


THE CH'UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


© JP * @ -tfec© ® © -^ H a 

JV "T*^ rt 9 f \ >‘4 “a ■> -l\. .>1^ /•£* X "H' * “f*A. 


A 

!lf 

a 

p. 


0 . 


* 

■4*, 


■a. 


sS 

a 

ft 


---w c 

n 


ft. 

XXIV. 


. 1 55 C ^ i ii- ft * 
•l&.-S- Z 7k 

*n.# M 

-g- ji 

M A 0 .« 5 R 
?L^A 0 . ;s^ 
# fE f - ^ S ya- 
ffil tii,^ s 

¥ 0 T#. 

?<.A ^^.# 

P 

*' T B 
)lS il 5 ,w ^ 

f 

A#i-T- 
TH 

■}E.:$: ffi SB 

mrnm^ 


^.In 

A 5®, 

rrS. 

"r as 

mtk 


8 .» 

%iti 


5 c -gilfe 
» ^ T vE. 
* M W.Sit 
IB ft 


.Z. 

m:m 

mm 

'^n 

IB ^ 

mm 

Z.B, 

5ic, 


.... ^ tifa.A.T.#^ 
Z=f^‘Km2M. 
MM^^.ZM ft. 
2 i f:.± I 

■4. 

g.# M.mM ZM 

fe ■?• m M ■? s ^ 

0.0.»T#0.|« 

@ Jt 5ic.vii.A5fcf 

# :?E * ^ J^t dt 0. 

* I- MM 

^ IS ft ft ft.l® 
a M IS ^ ^.f 
Af i 
fii#rafi,^f * 

^.0.® mm^. 


z 

»a . 
0.5: s 
itfc -y-.i? 

A« A 


^iS.I 

M ZM 

m^Em 

SrM'H 
M |li.*J. 

iS 


2 

3 

4 


5 


» -w ^ w .iiija I * ■ - - - 

It was the duke’s tiveiity-fourth year, the spring, the 
king’s first month. 

In summer, the Teih invaded Ch'ing. 

It was autumn, the seventh month. _ 

In winter, the king [by] Heaven’s [grace] left [Chow], 
and resided in Ch‘ing. 

E-woo, marquis of Tsin, died. 

continues tlie nccount of | under Iicnvcn, ns if benring n linltcr nnd bridle, 

* . oflbnccs Imvc l)ocn very ,, 

know them myself, and much more docs yw 
lord.aliip know tlieni, Allow me from Ibis tim 
to disnppenr.’’ The prince said, “ Wherein i « 
not continue to bo of the s.'inio mind ns ni> 
uncle [Tsze-fnn wn.s the brother of the princt 
mother], may the Spirit o/'this clear '‘"•er />««'* 
me/" Ami at tlie fame time he threw 1 1 
peih into the stream. Jlavinff cni.«*ed the no, 
the troops laid sieffc to I.infr-heo, entered • .tnc* 


_ Tar, 1. ^ ...uva .11,; Vl 

the fortunes of Ch'ung-urh in the follosvinc 
natratives: — 

1st, ‘In spring, the carl of Ts'in restored 
Vyii*ung-iirh:— the event is not recorded in 
the text, tiecause tlic mnrqui.s of Tsin did 
not announce his entrance to Loo. When the 
invaders came to the llo, Tfzo-fan delivered 
up to the prince a pair of pril, [which he had 
rvrvived from the earl of T«‘in], r.aying, “Your 
f^rvant iias foJlowcd ^*our lorflfthip nl] about 


VtAU XXIV. 


DUKE HE. 


191 


tf'cucn, ."iiul tool: Kcw-ts'uy. In the 2tl month, 
on Kivih-woo, the nrmy of 'IVin cnmc to meet 
them, nnJ took post nt Leu-liiw. The e.irl of 
Ts-in sent hh ttcnntil Chih, n son of dnke Ch'ing, 
to it, when it retired, nnd enc.nmpcd in Sun. 
Tlicre, on Sin-ch‘ow, lloo Yen nnd tlie grent 
oflicers of Ts'ln nnd Tsin innde n covennnt. On 
Jin-yin the prince entered the nrmy of Tsin; on 
ring-woo, he entered K‘cuh-yuh; on Tinp-wc, 
he went solemnly to tlie temple of duke AVoo ; 
nnd on Mow-.shin, he enused duke Ilwno to be 
put to dentil in Knou-lennp. This does not 
np])enr in the text for the same reason that no 
nnnouneement of it wns made to Loo.’ 

2d. *Lcn nnd Keoh [Leu E-sang and Keoh 
Jny. ministersof dukes 11 wuy nnd Ihv.ac], fearing 
lest tlie iieiv marquis should be h.ard upon them, 
planned to burn the palace nnd murder him. 
i’‘c, the chief of the eunuchs [who had been 
connnissioned by his Aitlicr, duke lli-cn, nnd 
nfterwanls, by li’is brother, duke Hwuy, to kill 
Cli‘unp-nrh]," begged nn interview, but the mar- 
quis sent to reproach him, nnd refused to sec 
him, saying, “ In the nffair nt the city of P‘oo, 
my fntbor ordered you to be. at the place the 
next day, and you came on that same day. 
Afterwards, when I was hunting on the b.anks 
of the Wei with the chief of the Teih, yon 
came, in boh.alf of duke Hwuy, to seek for mo 
nnd kill me. lie orde.red you to reach the 
place in throe days, nnd you reached it in two. 
Altlioiigli the undertaking was by j'our ruler’s 
orders, why were you so rapid in the execution? 
The sleeve’ [of which you cut off a part at P‘oo] 
is still in my possession;— go away.” P‘o re- 
plied, “I said to myself that his lordship, 
entering the State [after so long a period of 
trial], was sure to liave knowledge [of the 
world]. If he still have^ it not, ho will again 
find liimself in ditlicultics. It is the ancient 
rule, that, when an officer receives his ruler’s 
commands, lie think of no otiicr individual. 
Charged to remove the danger of my ruler, 1 
regarded nothing but bow I might be able to do 
it. lYhat was Ids lordship at P*oo, or among 
tlie Teih, to me ? Xow his lordship is master 
of the Slate ; — is there no P‘oo, are there no Teih 
[against which he may need my help] ? Duke 
Hwan of Ts'e forgot all about the shooting of 
the buckle of his girdle, and made Kwan Chung 
his chief minister. If his lordship is going to 
act differently, I shall not trouble him to say 
anything to me. There are very many who 
will have to go away, and not a poor eunuch 
like me only." The marquis then saw him, 
when he told him of the impending attempt, on 
• which the marquis, in the 3d month, secretly 
withdrew, nnd joined the earl of Ts'in in the 
[old] royal city. On Ke-ch‘ow, the last day of 
the moon, tlie palace was set on fire; but Sang of 
Hca nnd Keoh Juy [of course] did not find the 
marquis. The 3 ' then proceeded to the Ho, from 
which the earl of Ts‘in contrived to wile them to 
his presence, when he put them to death. The 
marquis then met his wife, the ladj’ Ting, and 
took her with him to Tsin. The earl sent an 
escort also of 3,000 men as guards, and who 
should superintend all the departments of service 
about the court.’ 

3d. ‘In earlier years, the marquis had a per- 
sonal attendant called T‘aoii-seu, who had charge 
of his treasury. This boj*, when the prince was 
obliged to flee, ran away, carrj-ing the contents 


of the treasury with him. lie had used them 
nil, however, in seeking to procure the marquis’s 
return ; nnd when he did re-enter the State, lie 
sought nn interview with liim. Tlie marquis 
declined to sec him, nnd sent word that he was 
bathing. T'aou-scu said to the servant [wlio 
brought the reply], ‘In bathing, the lieart is 
turnetl upside down [Referring to the position of 
the body in bathing, with the liend bent down], 
and one’s plans are all reversed. It was natural 
I shonhl be told that I cannot sec iiini. Tlioso 
who staj'cd in Tsin were his ministers, guarding 
the altars of the land; and those who went with 
him wereliis servants, carrj’ing halter and bridle. 
Both may stand accepted. Wliy must lie look on 
those who stayed in the countiy ns criminals ? If 
he, now lortl of the State, show siicJi enmitj’ to a 
poor man like me, multitudes will be filled with 
alann.” The servant reported these words to 
the marquis, who instantly granted T‘nou-seu 
nn interview.’ 

4th. ‘ The chief of the Teih sent Ke IVei to 
Tsin, and asked what should bo done with the 
marqnis’s two children by her. The marquis had 
given [a daughter of his own] to Gliaou Ts'uy 
to wife, who bore to him T'ung of Yuen, Kwoh 
of ring, nnd Ying of Low. This lady — Cliaou 
Kc — begged her husband that he would bring 
home from the Teih Ids son Tun, with iiis mother 
SAitA irci. Tsze-yu [C!inoirj’s‘nj'’s designation] 
refused to do so, but Ke said, “ He who in the 
enjoj-ment of present prosperity forgets liis old 
friends is not fit to command others. Yon 
must meet them, and bring them here ” She 
pressed the matter so stroiigl}’, that nt last he 
agreed that they should come. Pindiiig that 
Tun was possessed of abilit.v, she further press- 
ed it earnestly on the marquis, Acr father, to 
cause him to be declared Ts'uy’s eldest son nnd 
heir, while her own three sons were ranked below 
him. She also caused Sliuli Wei to be made 
mistress of the harem, nnd occupied herself in an 
inferior position.’ 

otli. ‘ When the marquis of Tsin was rewarding 
those who had followed and adhered tohim during 
his Jong exile, Kcae Che-ts‘uy [wlio had once cut 
oft' a portion of ids own tl'iigh, to relieve the 
prince’s extreme hunger] did not ask for any 
recompense, and it so happened that none came 
to him. “’I'lie sons of duke Heen,” said he, 

“ were nine, and onlj' tlie marquis remains. Hwuy 
and Ilwae made no friends, nnd were abandoned 
by all, whether in tlie State or out of it. But 
Heaven had not abandoned the House of Tsin, 
and was sure to raise someone to preside over its 
sacrifices ; — and who should do that but the mar- 
quis ? It was Heaven who place.! liim in liis 
present position; and how false it is in those of- 
ficers to think it was tlieir strength which did it! 
He who steals but tlie money of another man is 
pronounced a tliief ; what name shall be given to 
them who seek to appropriate to themselves the 
work of Heaven? They, below, tliink their guilt 
is their righteousness, and the marquis, above, 
rewards their unwortbiness. He above and 
they below are deceiving and deceived; it is 
difficult for me to dwell along with them!" 
His mother said to him, “ Wli.v not go. as weU 
as others, and ask for some recompense ? If 
you die without receiving anj-, [never having 
asked], of whom can you complain?" He 
replied. *' ere I to imitate them in their wrong- 
doing, my offence would be greater than theirs. 


192 


THE CH'UH TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


And I have spoken [what may seem] words 
of resentment and complaint; — will eat 
none of their food.” His mother said, “But 
what say. you to letting your case at least be 
known ?” “ Words,” answered he, “are an em- 
bellishment of the person. I shall withdraw 
my person entirely from the world, and why 
sho^d I use what is employed to seek its 
embellishment?” His mother said, “Canyon 
take this course? Then I will retire and hide 
myself from the world with you.” The marquis 
of Tsin afterwards sought for Keae Che-ts‘uy, 
but in vain, and endowed a sacrifice to him 
with the fields of hleen-shang. “It will be a 
memento,” said he, “ of my neglect, and a mark 
of distinction for the good man.’ 

Par. 2.- The Chuen says on this ; — ‘W hen the 
troops of Clifing entered Hwah [see XT- 4], the 
people of Hwah received its commands; but 
when they withdrew, it went over again to Wei. 
Sze, sou of the earl of Ch'ing, and Seeh Too-yu- 
mei went against it ndth a force, when the king 
sent Pih-fifii and Yew-sun Pih to intercede with 
Ch‘ing in behalf of Hwah ; but the earl, resent- 
ing how king &vuy, on his restoration [to the 
capital], bad not conferred a cup on duke Be 
[S^ the Chuen at lll.xsi.2; 3], and also how 
king Seang now took the part of Wei and Hwah, 
would not listen to his commands, and made the 
two officers prisoners. Hie king was angry, and 
wished to invade Ch'ing with the Teih. Poo Shin 
remonstrated ivith him, saying, ‘ Do not do this. 
Tour servant has heard that in the highest 
antiquity the people were kept in tranquillity by 
virtue. Subsequently to this, the sovereigns 
showed favour to their own relatives, and went on 
from them to others. Thus the duke of iChow, 
grieved by the want of harmony in the concluding 
times [of the two previous dynasties], raised the 
relatives of the roy.il House to the rule of States, 
that they might act as fences and screens to 
Chow. Hie princes of Kwan, Ts'ae, Shing, Hoh, 
Loo, W ei, hlaou. Tan, Kaou, Yung, Ts'aou, T’Sng, 
Peih, Yuen, Pung. and Senn were all sons of king 
Wan. Those of Yu, Tsin, Ying, and Han were 
sons of king Woo. Those of Pan, Tseang. 
Iling. Maou, Tsoo, and Chae were descendants of 
the duke of Chow. Dnkc ^fuh of Shaou, think- 
ing of the defectiveness of the virtue of Chow, 
si«sembled all the members of the royal House 
in Chnng-chow. and made the ode which says 
[She, II. i. ode IV.], 

‘The flowers of the cherry tree, — 

Arc they not gorgeously displayed ? 

Of all the men in the world, 

Hicre are none like brothers.’ 

In the 4th stanza it is said, 

• nrothers m.ay squabble inside the walls. 

But tlicy will resist insult from witliout.’ 

Thue, nltlu»u.ch brotliers mav h.avc sm.all , 
quarrel< .among them«elvc-i, th'ev will not for ; 
them CJistaw.ay their relative anVa-tion. But now. I 
when lour Majesty, unable to bear the resent- • 
“ ‘I'-ht quam-l, is castina away the i 
nffirtinn of Clrin", ohat i* to I>e i-aid? And to : 
eiiij.l.iy the tii'Tit.iriim*, to -how nlTeetion to 
*!;'!■ » rel.a'iv. *. to cultivate the ai-f|n:iinlnniv of 
t.i'i. • Sit ar a! h and to h'lnour the worthv: | 


are the greatest of evils. To cast away what is 
virtuous and give honour to wliat is evil, is the 
greatest of calamities. To Ch'ing belongs the 
merit of assisting king P‘ing and king Hwuy, 
and its [first earl] was most intimate uith Le 
and Scuen; it recently put away its favoured 
minister and son, and has been employing the 
three good men; of all the States of the Kes it 
lies nearest to us: — ^it gives the opportunity for 
displaying the [above] four virtues. He whose 
ear does not hear the harmony of the five sounds 
is deaf ; he whose eye does not distingmsh the 
beauty of the five colours is blind; he whose 
mind does not accord with the rules of virtue 
and righteousness is wayward ; he whose mouth 
does not speak the words of loyalty and 
faith is a stupid chatterer. The Teih approxi- 
mate to all these four conditions, and to follow 
them will display the above four evils. _ When 
Chow was distinguished by admirable virtue, it 
still said that none were equal to briM^j 
and advanced them to the rule of States. M iiiie 
it was cherisliing with gentle indulgenre au 
under heaven, it was still afraid lest mral 
should be offered from without; and knowing 
that to withstand such insult there was no pia 
so good as to treat with distinguishing affectio 
its relatives, it therefore made them a scree 
to its domains. Muh of Shaou also express 
himself to the same effect. And now, 
virtue of Chow is in decay, to proceed at 
time to depart farther from the 
dukes of Chow aud Shaou, and follow me y 
of all evil, surely this is wrong. Before me 
people have forgotten their siiffenngs, y 
make them commence ogoin;--how wul t 
affect the inheritance transmitted by Wan ana 
Woo?” The king would not hstm to ms 
advice, but sent T‘ui Shuh and the officer i. 
forth with the army of the Teih. , 

‘In summer, the Teih invaded •- 

took Leih. The king, feeling grateful for th^ 
service, was minded to make the popgh 
their chief Ids queen. Again Poo Slim 
strated, saying,^ “Do not. Yoiw servant lias 
heard that the rewarder gets med, and 
receiver is never satisfied. The Teili m 
tainly are covetous and greedy, ana y ) 
Majesty is ministering to their disposi 
is the nature of women to be Imutles, i 
desires, and their resentment is .nndipng* „ 

Teih will certainly be your majesty s . ' 

. 1..1 j iiotnn to him. lieiore 


ntivm •> w as(« « wi - 'I.#* 

the favourite of kin" Hwuy’s qticcn, ' _ .tijg 

to get the throne for him, but dying ' 
could be secured, duke Clraou fled t® „ 

the I2th ye.<ir]. King Sc.-ing had restored Jnm 
[in the 22d year]; and now he went p* 
intercourse with the lady Wei [the 
wife], who was thereupon degraded by 
T-ui Shuh and the officer T-aou „ .kn, • 

we who procured the employment oi « . ’ 

their re.«-cnliiicnt will fall on u.«.” On * ' • 


ir.-- 111.- -! 

. 1 . 


ail- 

I r.M-’i ij.., 

"J!*! Ill ■ “-Ar” ltd All 1 t‘i ti-. 1. — lli..*,"* 


queen > 

i- Iioitcr to let the Stale- take 
iH-ea-ion,” lie then left the «“tpil.'k ■' , 

iTi-eleil to KMIl-faii. frotil * IV,,], iV.'l 

bronclit him b.ick. In .lutumn, f''!! • 


Y» vr. XXV. 


m:Ki: in:. 


103 


Tmi'-'IihIi. »nV!Ml(vl Chow 
with nn r.n-.iy i-f ttjv Tr$h, tutVu't.M n Krc.it 

•h-fi-i! •'« tJv' n'Vdl .ioi\ t<*.ih Ko-fw, 

i'J I’lion. c.'.ri* o! Y«i Ji nn.l Mokh. niul 
IN.' S'hin. ‘I'lir hioK hhn»i U to ('-11*105:. 

ujv.l rv*;ih-l in I'aij. while T'nc.j'lnih niul Ihi* 
l.vly Wei tlw. l! ii) Wr.ti.* 
f llic ('htiio Bj>j‘cnil« hen* two other onrrn. 
tin.*;— ‘Ti’;e.t«;<os. yoottjtcr brother of llwn. 
V,>ir>»es\ o( Ch'ioK \_who wit» pul to tU'.ith In the 
li'tii yesr}, hml tU'l to Siwik. Ther>.* he wo* 
fi'ti'l of wf.irir.sr n c.iji itnih* of the fe.iihcr* of 
th*' l.in 5 :ti*h< r. Thi' e.irl of ClrinK hcanl of it, 
Rtiil wn» «li.jiliM«c<l. ni«l ciujiIoxihI (ninie ninmn!> 
to inilnrv him l<i /.-■f’.-s.- tV-i, when, in the Sth 
r.ionih, they hilUil him N'lwwn C'h’in nnti Suok. 
’Jill* j'Ui'i-rior ma»i mny ‘ay that when tin* clothes 
are not Is'fittintr. it iiul’lc.Ucs cal.imity to the 
per.oin. 'Hie w-lc [She 1. xiv. ««K. II .3 says, 

*• Thtwe eriMtutvs 
An* JV't cqu.il to their app.ircl." 

Hie i-lothi's of T#ro.tfnnK were not such ns 
were IhTittini: liiiu. Tlie lanpunfro of another 
Oslo (II. vi. wle lll.fl), 

•* I have myss'lf cnu«e<l the sHstres*,'" 

may he contfsleresl nppUcnhlo to Tsre-tsanR. 
In the Hooks of Ilea [Shoo, ll.ii.ft} it is said, 
The earth isreslnctil to onler, and the inllucncca 
of lic.ivon opcr.itc with efroct:'* — there was a 
conv'jwndcney Iwtwcen them.* 

• Sunp havinp made peace with Ts'oo, duke 
Ch'lnp of Sunp went to Ta'oo, On his return, he 
cntercsl the capital of Ch'inp, whett the carl, 
wisliinp to feast him, asked llwanp Woo-tszc 
alKitit the ceremonies to he employed. Woo-tszc 
replicsl, “Tlie dukes of Sung arc the descendants 
of tlie last dynasty. Tlicy appear as guests at 
the court of Chow. When tlie son of UcaTcn 
CBcriflces, he sends them portions of the flesh; 


when they condole with him on occasion of a 
di-.ith, he howK to tliem ntid tiinnks them. Let 
your connionie.‘ In* nlmndaiit and frenerous." 
The carl nrltil acconlingly, and fea.sttil tlio 
duke of Snug witli estrnnrtllimry ceremonies.'] 

I’nr. 4. 'I’lie (.'hticn says: — “Jn winter, the 
kilt;: sent n nie<.<enger to nnnonnee ids troubles 
to I/xi, sayintr, “ Without goodness, without 
Yirtiie, 1 ofletidcd my own brother Tne, tho 
favoured son of our ntolltcr, and I am now ns a 
Iwrdi-rer in the country of Ch'ing, in I'an. I 
venture to make tlii.s known to my nticlc." 
Tsang Wltn-chnnp said, “The son of Heaven is 
c«)Vei\il willt dust, driven out from Cliow. Wo 
dare not hut fly tn ask for his ofilcors and 
guards." 'I'he king sent Keirn Sre-foo to inform 
Tsin of his circnmstnnecs, nnd Tso Y’cn-foo to 
inform Ts‘In. Tlie son of Heaven cjinnot be said 
to leave Ids country, nnd yet he is said in tlie text 
to have done so; — iiecnusc lie was avoiding tlio 
troubles raised by liis own brotlicr. For tho son 
of Heaven to wear mourning garments, nnd to 
n*snine sucli depreciating names for himself, 
[ns in Ids message to Loo], was proper [in king 
Ssi-ang's circumstances]. Tho carl of Cli'ing, 
witli K‘ungTseniig-tson, Sldh Kcnli-foo, and How* 
Scuen-to, cxnndncd nnd saw that the officers 
sent sufficient supplies to Fan, nnd then attended 
tn the government of their own Stntcp— wliich 
was proper.* 

Par. ». E-woo, or dnko liwuy, died the 
previous year; but it is supposed that tho an- 
nouncement of Ids death was only now made to 
1^0. 

[The Chuen adds hero the following account: 
— ‘A force from Wei was about to inrndoHing, 
when Le Che said [to tho marquis of Wei], “If 
you do not make sure of some of its ministers, 
the State cannot be secured." Let me and my 
brother go nnd take office tbcrc." On tins tho 
two went to Hing, and became officers in it.*] 


Tiventy-fifth year. 


1®.^* MM 


* 


T 


mm 


ry 


jE 

n. 


TOL T, 


25 


194 


THE CH‘UH TS‘EW, \n[TH THE TSO CHUEH. 


BOOK V. 


» A Ji m m mM •!•(: a.'^! M ® * H.lf 

-m¥^wm g 0. 

m ^ ISi.iS m 9 H.ifn ^ S M :f 

^ n.ja M.m A - B .'^ ^ \>mm^ 
+ jft ^ -f- ti /a M i.i # ±.^.f . 

ra^A Ai#.i> 

9 z m,m s ^M ifc.ft 

^ ^If :?t Bn <a- 5l # ?i?. 

M f&Wit #.M # w 
A 5g. » If ^ 

itt ^ ^ ^ _ 

._ iS»®m.^K 0 . f 

^ ^m.Z 9 ZM* 

i ia>? ^ ikz m 


% — •$.= g.t 
A ^.@f 0 J. 

^m.t:z mz 
11.T m «. =t»f ® 
m m.B' m 

dfcfc* 

m 


ffi X TO 
IR ^ Bn i 

mzw^z 

& 0MS 


^.A 

75-M 


f 

m 


^MMB, W.A. 

i&M mm 


Bn 

^ - - 


Sfc SK 

fi H. «.M 


nP3 

^,Z. 

^ KE, 1^ 

^ H. J13 iSi 
^»W 
iaa 

:^Z ^ ^i. 

:A.S? 9 1m 

■ffl. ■?• #, 
R 

m. m 


e® # Xg m Bn 0.^0 

0 H ^Z ^.Bff X.WM 
f A. # ffl.w r.m.^ !• 

;s:w^ = =tff 

iB ^ it U-g 

Hi ^ i;S.^.0.^. 
## M 

-f- Bn H.T * ^ A 


nh 


z. 

iE 


m 

tfE 

■ui. 31; •?• 


r£ i.-i..p| .f. B 

?P IS e® S ;5: 5 

^ ^.z 

H iliia.ia AAs. 
^.W.:fe ^ ra 

5 t B.fi® H.'Bf'fB 

S i Sffi A i&.S 
vf- m- aE.^F- 
B.m. m B.0 
S A 'd' ^ 


?H5. 

1^ 

0 

x&. 

it 

;g. 


m 


Yttx XXV. 


DUKK nr. 


105 


XXV. I 


4 

5 


G 

( 


In tlu' [ilukfV] twenty-fifth yi'iir, in s)>nnji, in the kind’s 
month, on Ping-woo, Wei, ni:ir(|nis of Wei, ex- 
tinguished I ling. 

In Mimmer, in the fourth inontli, on Kwei-yi.*w, AVci, inar- 
»juis of Wei. died. 

The dukes eldest daughter, married to a Tang of Sung, 
came [to I..00] to meet tlie wife [for her sun]. 

Sung]>ut to death [one of] its great oflioers. 

In autumn, a body of men from 'Js‘oo invested [the 
caj»itnl of] Ch‘in, and restoreil tin; viscount of Tun 
to Tun. 

Tiiere was the burial of duke Wan of Wei. 

In winter, in the twelfth month, on Kwei-hac, the 
duke had a meeting with the /n’/V-son of Wei and 
K‘in!i of Jven, when thev made a covenant, in T‘aon. 


Tar. 1. Tl-.f (Inirn «ay*;— • In fitrlnp, n force 
fretn Wi-5 5n».n*l>‘«l Hin;:. TIr’ two I.o tliv 
i.i«{ Ch«cn3 vrvrerollotvlncKwoh-l^je.njulpoin); 
tov.ftil the cjty-wnll, when they li* !<l him fn‘t In 
tliiSr p.rtni', .'stnl went off w ith him to the ontiide, 
hiUinchim. In the lo nioiith, on I'inc-woo. Wei, 
inr.niui* of Wvi, f.\tini:uifhe<l llitij:. /V.e AWi of 
nVior.i/ //•«;) te<tf e/ the ».tnu> jnriifime, nml 
th^^'^'Te the to.\t pivi's the. nnme </».*.<■ vuinjuisf 
— [to hi.* «ii«);Tnce1. Ia' ('lie Junl the tvonl* 
cnitra**"*! on u *'1 pnvs'j'Cil Kwoh-tfre in 

my nrtns nnd kitUM iiim. Ko one ditrctl to stoj) 
mo — [tl»u« puhli'hinff lil.* own jhnine.] 

We *c« tl»nt tlic j're'*crvation of Hinp. one of 
the pv.ti ncliiovcments of duke IhvnnofTf'c 
fis> lll.sxxii.7: V.i. V, a. 4J did not lonp nvnil 
or th.tt Stole. Wimt n'markahle, is that it 
shouid perifli ntln.st at the Itand* of Wei, which 
had iK'cn rwluccd hy tlie *ame Tcilt to even 
preater stT.ait« than itself [si-e IV.ii.Tj. Mo.st 
of lijc critiw lay preal stress, like Tso-sho, on 
the name of tlie marqnis of Wei bcinp found 
here in the text; and a passapo of tlie 1..C Kc [I. 
I’t. II.ii.2l] is rcfcrretl to, whicli would makeit 
out tlmt tlio mention of the name is condem* 
natory, and stamps tlie wickeiincss of tlie mar- 
quis of Wei in cxtinpxiishinp a State held hy a 
prince of the same surname ns himself. But 
the canon in that pa8s.agc was, no doubt, made 
to suit this single text. Choo lie imagines that 
the hero has got into the text, by the error 

of a copyist, from the next paragraph. 

Par. 2. From tlie last Chuen on IV.ii.it 
appears that tills prince was a man of perseve- 
rance and resources. His character, however, 
docs not stand high with the critics; — see the 

remarks of Ke Pun in the on this 

passage. 

Par. 3. Tlicrc was a powerful family of the 
<dan-namc of Tang in Sung, and duke He’s 
eldest daughter must have been married to tlie 
head, or some principal scion of it, though the 
match is not mentioned in the classic. Here 
she comes to Loo to take back a wife, we must 
suppose for her son; but nothing is said from 
what family the young lady was taken. On the 

phrase ^ instead of ^ compare 


in XXX 1.7. The ij^j is determined hy 

tlie tiie hiishnnd's motlicr, being the otlicr 

party in tlie irans.aclinn. 

Par. ■!. Comp.lll.xxvi.S. It is folly to seek 
for iiiyMcries in ilie silence of the text ns to the 
name of the oflieer here sjiokcn of, Kiinp-yang 
thinks that tlie duke of t^unp lind married his 
daughter, and did not dare therefore, in an- 
nouncing Iiis death to Loo, to mention his wife’s 
father. Kuh-ll'anp thinks he was a K'ung 
Confucius purposely kept hack 

the jiaroo of one ofliis ancestors! 

(The Cl.iicn ajipcnds here:— ‘Tlie carl of 
Ts'ln was with an imny on the Ho, intending to 
restore the king fScc 4111 par. of last year], 
avhen Iloo yen said to the marquis of Tsin, “If 
you are seeking the adherence of the States, 
you can do nothing better than to show an 
came.<st interest in the king’s bclialf. The States 
will thereby have faith in you, and you will have 
done nn net of great righteousness. Now is tho 
time to show again such scn’icc as was rendered 
hy the marquis Wfln [Sec the Slino, V.xXviii], 
and to pet your fidelity proclaimed among tlio 
States.” TAc marquis made tho master of divina- 
tion, Yen, consult tlie tortoise-shell about the 
undertaking. lie did so and said, ‘ The oracle is 
auspicious,— that of Ilwang-tc’s battle in Fnn- 
ts'cucn.” The marquis said, “That oradc is 
too great for me.” 'Plie diviner replied, “ Tlie 
rules of Chow arc not changed. The king of 
to-day is the emperor of antiquity.” The mar- 
quis (/ten said, “Try it bj* the milfoil.” They 
consulted tho reeds, and found the diagram 

Ta-yew f==1 , whidi then became the diagram 

KVei rS=l . The diviner said, "This ako is 
auspicious. In tliis diagram we have the oracle, 
— A prince presents his offerings to the son of 
Heaven.’ Abattleand victorj*; tliekingreceiving 
your offerings: — ^Avhat more fortunate response 
could there be ? Moreover, in these diagrams, the 
trigram of heaven (— 1 becomes that of a marsh, 

(~~~] lyingunaer the sun, indic.atinghow the son 
of Heaven condescends to meet your lordship;-^ 


196 


THE CH‘UN TS'EW, WITH THE .TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


is not this also encouraging ? If we leave the 
diagram K'Vei, and come hack to Ta-yew, it also 
tells of success where its subject goes.” On 
this the marquis of Tsin declined the assistance 
of the army of Ts'in, and went down the Ho. In 
the 3d month, on Kcah-shin, he halted at Yang- 
fan, when the army of the right proceeded to 
invest Wiln, and that of the left to meet the king.’ 

‘ In summer, in the 4th month, on Ting-sze, 
the king re-entered the royal city. T'ae-shuh 
was taken in W3.n, and put to death at Seih- 
shing. On Mow-woo, the marquis of Tsiii had 
an audience of the king, who feasted him with 
sweet spirits, and gave him gifts to increase his 
joy. The marquis asked that the privilege of 
being carried to his grave through a subter- 
ranean passage might be granted him, but the 
king refused, saying, “This is the distinction 
of us kings. Where there is not conduct 
to supersede- the holders of the kingdom, to 
make one’s-self a second king is what you 
yourself, my uncle, Avould hate.” Notwith- 
standing this refusal, the king conferred on 
Tsin the lands of Yang-fan, WSn, Yuen, Tswan- 
maou; and Tsin proceeded to occupy the district 
of Nan-yang. . Yang-fan refused to submit, 
and the troops of Tsin laid siege to it. Ts'ang 
Koh cried out, “ It is virtue by which the people 
of the Middle State are cherished; it is by 
severity that the wild tribes around are awed. 
It is right we should not venture to submit to 
you. Here are none but the king’s relatives 
and kin; — and will you make them captive?” 
On this the marquis allowed the people to quit 
the city.’ 

Far. 6. Tun was a small State, whose lords 
were Kes, with the title of viscounts ; — ^in the pres. 
Ho-nan, dis. Shang-shwuy, dep. Ch‘in-chow. It 
was extinguished by Ts‘oo in the 14th year of 
duke Ting. The Chuen says: — "In autumn, 
Tsin and Tsin invaded the State of Job. At 
that time. Tow Klh and E'cnh Yu-k‘ow, with the 
forces of Shin and Seih, were guarding the territo- 
ry of Shang-meili on behalf of Ts’oo. Tlie troops 
of Tsin, passing by a shaded spot near Seih [a 
town of Ts’oo], entered it, and bound many of 
their people [to make them appear as prisoners 
whom they had taken], with whom they proceeded 
to besiege Shang-mcih, taking care to approacli it 
in t he dusk. During the night, they dug a pit, in 
which they placed a quantity of blood, showing 
also a writing over it. pretending that these 
were the proofs of a covenant with Tsze-e and 
Tsze-peen [the above Tow and K‘euh]. Tlie 
people of Shang-meih became afraid, and con- 


cluded that Tsin had taken Seih, and that the 
guards liad gone away to their own State. 
They surrendered, therefore, to the army of 
Tsin, which also made prisoners of Tsze-e 
duke of Shin, and Tsze-peen, duke of Seih. 
Tsze-yuh, chief minister of Ts'oo, pursued the 
army of Ts’in, but could not overtake^ it, on 
which he laid siege to the capital of Chin, and 
restored the viscount of Tun to his State.’ 

Par. 6. [The Chuen introduces here the fol- 
lowing narrative: — ‘In winter, the marquis of 
Tsin laid siege to Yuen, and, having ordered the 
soldiers to be provided with 3 days’ provisions, 
said that if within 3 days Yuen did not surren- 
der, he would give up the siege. On the third 
day, spies came out and told that Yuen was j^- 
ing to surrender next evening. The officers of the 
army entreated tlie marquis to wait till then ; 
but he said, “ Good faith is the precious jewel or 
a State, and what the people depend upon, u 
I get Yuen and lose my good faith, of what pro- 
tection could the people be assured? _My IMS 
would be much greater than my gain. «« 
then withdrew the troops, but Avhen they 
tired 30 le, Yuen sent and surrendered, ine 
marquis removed Pih-kwnn, governor of Yuen, 
to Ke. Chaou Ts'ui was made governor or 
Yuen, and Hoo Tsin governor of Wfin.’] _ 

Par. 7. T‘aou, — see on HI. xxvii. 1. K'lng or 
Keu, see III. xxvii. 5. The Chuen says : we 
had brought about peace between Keu and us. 
By this covenant at T'aou, the duke renewed 
with his son the good understanding which he hw 
had with duke Wfin of Wei, and declared his 
friendship with Keu.’ The late marquis of Wei 
Avas now buried, but his successor is still men- 
tioned here simply as ‘son,’ and not by the 
title ‘marquis.’ The reason probably is that 
the year in which the father died had not yet 
expired, and not to praise him as ‘son-like, 
carrying out the wishes of his father to recon- 


cile Loo and Keu. . . 

[The Chuen adds here; — ‘The marquis o 
Tsin consulted Poh-t'e, chief of the eunuclw, 
to Avho should be put in charge of Yuen. ^ * 
t‘e [the eunuch P‘e, mentioned before], r®P ' 
“Formerly, when Chaou Ts'uy was following 
3’our Avanderings, carrying Avith him a p 
of food, he did not take auy of it, tno g 
he Avas suffering from hunger.’ On tins 
count, Ts'uy was appointed to the charge 
Yuen.’] 


Twenty-sixth year. 


Ybar XXVI. 


DUKE HE. 


197 


M 


0 > ^ T A ^ 


^ A 

m 

7^,IM 


A ^ 1^ A 


F 

■ f - I t -f- tx 

iHS 

t: 


/> 


ib 

jii? 

mk 


^.0 ia m.^ PI zmmmwmm 

m.:?; 0 .* # ■« 0 . 

^ W # * iE #.itb « ®.0.®,# A <a- IE — 
^ft^^iaiasiJa&iSfiSA ».•» s + 
=ti m ^ M It ffi 0.®! m n IB.A 

. k.m s ^ ^ii m #. 
m,^.% ^ *1 ^ m n.m^fe if # as a 
z.n, M # ft ro sf i 0.^.® - 3E 

mm MMM z 0 .a m in 

<a- «g iij s.A as.0 w ^.A »-« s. j. 

■ - g ^ •tfi,.'i‘ ^.mm, & 

TO IS ^ # -S 

ifi: # ffi A ^ la H 

A m W.<&.W «: 

¥.-tfc.A ^ g.S -i.. 

ifn 3t ei JK ^ &,■& 

mm m.m^»m. 
^mzM.B.mm. 
m -fe.s * 

^ if K 
^ ft S ^ SB §., w, 

» z m ^.m.m ® 

±m m m»T ^ 

# ©.•a- i * E ^ 

n.x » ^ s n T 
m m m.z.MM m 

® Bff iSt ir a#, 


z ±w. . 

s * z,m 

-fj ^ if s 
A.0 a- # 0.^ 
S Kt.A S. 
-fc » ^ H AW 
A fi 2.*: 

A ^ ^ 

^ ffi giB ^ « 


s 

:n 

-t- 


M B.M 

a f® a « 
s m iM m ^ 
^■i&m 
m sf.E 
Z,S fe. ffij s. 
« li. S 


E. 

z 

s. 


198 . 
XXVI. 


THE CH‘X7N TS*EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEX. BOOK.V. 

1 In his twenty -sixth year, in spring, in the king’s first 

month, on Ke-we, the duke' had a meeting with the 
viscount of Keu and Xing Suh of VTei, Avhen they 
made a covenant in Heaug. 

2 A body of men from Ts‘e made an incursion into our 

western borders, when the duke pursued the army 
of Ts‘e to He, but did not come up with it. 

3 In summer, a body of men from Ts‘e invaded our north- 

ern borders. 

4 A body of men from Wei invaded Ts‘e. 

5 Suy, son of duke [Chwang], went to Ts‘oo, to beg [the 

assistance of] an army. 

6 In autumn, an ofi&cer of Ts‘oo extinguished K'wei, and 

carried the viscount of K‘wei back with tliem. 

. 7 In winter, a bodj^ of men from Ts‘oo invaded Sung, and 
besieged hlin. 

8 The duke, with an army of Ts‘oo, invaded Ts‘e, and took 

Kuh. 

9 The duke arrived from the invasion of Ts‘e. 


Par. 1. Heang,— see on LiL 2 ; II. xvi. 4. This 
Heang -was probably that of Keu. The Chnen 
tells ns t hat t he count of Keu was styled Tsae- 

p‘ei ^i)> and that Xing Suh [Knng-yang, 

here and afterwards, has 'was the ofScer 


knownhy his honorary title of Chwang 
adding that this meeting was to confirm the pre- 
vious one at T‘aou. The count of Ken had only 
been there by one of his officers, while here he 
attended in person: — ^the reconciliation of Loo 
and Keu might be considered complete. 

Par, 2. Kung-yang has here and Kuh- 

liiang instead of Tso-she has for 

SB- He says that the incursion was made by 
Ts'e, to punish Loo for the two covenants at 
T‘aon and Heang. A better reason may be found 
in the antagonistic position which Loo took to 
the present marquis of Ts‘e on his accession 
see on XVUI, 2. He was a town of Ts‘e, in 
the south-west of pres. dis. of Tung-o, dep. 
Yen-chow. The K‘ang-fae editors have a long 
note on the chan ge of style in the par. from 
^ ^ to ^ gfjj, which has wonderfully 
vexed the critics. If the commonly accepted 
■view, that the term is used of a small body 
of men under a commander of mean rank, and 
IS® is used of a lar^e body of men under a 
Similar command, were indubitably certain, we 
might be perplexed by the change of terms; but 
the text surely an instance in point to show 
that tiif* two forms of expression may bo used 
to convey the same meaning. Or il ft be insist- 


ed on that ^ ^==‘an officer of Ts*e,’ one of 
no great rank, commanding in the incursion, 
the can only mean ‘ the army ' or force 

which he conducted. 

Par. 3. Dnke H5aon of Ts'e was himself pres- 
ent with these invading forces. The Chnen says: 
—‘Duke Heaou of Ts'e invaded our nortbero 
1 borders. Duke He sent Chen He to offer - 
! provisions to the invading forces, having UM 
i made him receiveinstructionsfrom Chenls- irntne 
I famous Lew-heaHwuy, He’s fatlier], Accordmg- 

Iv, before the marquis of Ts'e had entered oar 
borders, Chen He followed in his track, came 
np with him, and said, “My prince, hearing that 
vonr lordship was on the march and conae- 
scending to come to his small city, has 
myself, his poor servant, witli these ® 

your officers.” The marquis asked whe^f ‘ „ 
people of Loo were afraid, '’..mall ' 
replied He, “are afraid; but the superior m 
are not.” “Tourhonses,” marquis, are 

empty as a hanging musical-stone, and 
fields there is no green „.,ror<>d 

rely that they are not afraid x" He an. » 
“They rely on the charge w ere 

Formerly the duke of Chow and f J _ 
legs and arms to tiie House of 
ported andaided king Ch'ing, who^reward^nc™. 
and gave them a charge, saying. ‘ f ® fi„m 

to generation let vonr descendants rcfi^ , 
having one another.’ It fas prese^^^^^ 
the repository of Charges, under the care 
grand-master [of ChowJ. Thus it 
when duke Ilwan assembled the 
taking mc.'isurcs to cure the w.ant of t • ^ 

among them, to heal their *bort-cotn»c^ .j 
relieve those wlio were in disire**- U*}-c.*i 


he was illustrating th.at ancient ebarce. 
your lordship took Ins place, all the 

* He will c-i«T 


full of hope, saving, 
meritorious work of Hwan.* 


W:c.*i 

were 

tfce 


Ytixn XXVII. 


DUKE HE. 


199 


our poor State tlid not presume to protect itself 
by eullectinf; its mu1tituiU‘.«; and now we sny, 
‘Will he. after possessing Ts‘c nine years, for- 
get that iwcirnt charge, anil cast aside the duty 
enjoined in it ? Wliat in that case would his 
father say ?’ Your lordship surely will not do 
such a thing. It is on this that wo rely, and 
arc not afraid.” On this the marquis of Ts'e 
returned.’ 

Par. 4. Tso-shc says this movement of Wei 
was a consequence of the covenant of T'aou. 
Wei and Loo liad proh.ably then agreed to sup- 
port each other against Ts'e. 

Par. f>. Though Loo had succeeded in induc- 
ing the marquis of Ts'e to withdraw his army, 
as related in the last Chuen, it wished to be 
prepansl against Ts'e in the future, and oven to 
connucncc hostilities against it in its turn; — 
this was the reason of this mission to Ts'oo. 'J'lie 
Suy in the text had the clan-name of Tung- 
iiiun, [l)ccausc he had his residence b 3 ’ the 
•eastcni gate’]. The Chuensaj's: — ‘Timg-mun 
Seang [the hon. title]-chung, and Tsang Wfln- 
chung went to Ts'oo to ask the assistance of an 
army. Tsang-sun [the above Wan-chung] had 
an interview with Tsze-j’uh [the minister of 
Ts'oo], and tried to persuade him to attack Ts'e 
and Sung, on the ground of their not performing 
their dutj’ to the king.’ 

Par. 0. K'woi (Kung-j'ang has [|^) was a 
small State in the pres, dis, of Kwei-chow 
jl'l'b’ (!iC ^)i Hoo-pih. 


Its ruling family was of the same surname ns 
the lonls of 'I’s'oo, — an ofT-shoot from the ruling 
House of that State. The Chuen saj's; — ‘'I’lie 
count of K'wei did not sacriflcc to Cliuh-yung 
and Yuh-hiiung [the remote ancestors of the 
Honse of Ts'oo and also of K'wei], and an oillcer 
was srnt from Ts'oo to reprove liim. He replied. 
“The founder of our State, Iluung Che, was af- 
flicted with a disease, from which those Spirits 
did not deliver hiin, and he was obliged to hide 
himself here in K'wei. In this waj' we lost our 
comiteiion with Ts'oo, and why should we offer 
these sacrifices?” In autumn, Ch'ing Tih-shin 
Rhe prime minister ol Ts'oo, Tszc-yuh] and 
Tow E-shin led an army and extinguished 
K'wei, when thej' carried the viscount back 
with them to Ts'oo.” 

Par. 7. Forj^^Kuh-leanghns Mn, — 

see on XXIII. 1. The Chuen sa^-s: — ‘ The duke 
©/■Sung, in consequence of the service which he 
had rendered to the viarqtds q/'Tsin in his wan- 
dcrint/s [see the CImen at the end of the 23d 
}*ear], ventured to revolt from Ts'oo and adhere 
to Tsin. In winter, Tszc-yuh, chief mmistcr of 
Ts'oo, and Tsze-se, minister of War, invaded 
Sung with a force, and laid siege to Min.’ 

Par. 8. This is the sequel of par. 5. Kuh, — 
see HI. vii. 4, ct at. The Chuen siij's: — 'When- 
ever an army is at one’s disposal to move it to 
the right or left, we have the term On 

this occasion, the duke placed Yung, one of the 
sons of duke Hwan of T'se in Kuh, where Yih- 
ya supported him, ns an aid to Loo, while Shuh- 
how, duke of Shin, guarded the place on behalf 
of Ts'oo. Seven of the sons of duke Hwan 
were great officers in Ts'oo.’ 


Tiventy-seventh year. 


200 


THE OH'US TS®H’. WITH THE TSO CHEEX. 


BOOK T. 


» ^ * *i f MM MfJr-h® «.X.i 
* J|5 ifc.ig BM # JH n.AM 7< m If 

te.# 0 . 

- ^ ^ # -fe = # « ^ r 

ife * ^ * -fe ZM «F#AH#¥.+ 


«F # A H # ¥.+ 

1 -t 

m.^ ^ ^ 


tffi M,ZM Z m 'WM :?.* 
M H.tfff m 
s: * Ki :! # # m ji5 ff 

it A ffi «1 ± * Sr $ 0 « ^ 

<8.® S;.S. 0 .E ill « 

Rt 'fin* tRi£i ttdl —ir^ -tJ* J3rl — T— -f-A 


7p ^ aE.P ® K •tK ^ 

zm AMumx'Ww 

nxa •yjtr » - -*- — - — *- AHy- «— 


51.^.^ :&.% w.w •.'S' ^ iW 1^ I? 

# ^ » W Bff 59 *:. 'i' • ^ M 

Ife * S.-^ -fe ^ 1: /If' * litftM.*. 
^ » S ^ ;2:.J« jl 

m MM 7^ ^ iTiM ZM. mMwm 
iE?^^flffa^FnIiJ® M.mn- 

'&.S ^ s ja # * tt 

M ■& » # I# 

T^ 0.^- a M A -fg-.*.® 

m^B.mm>z.z^m, 
=^^Mz,-^7i 7^zmm. 
ffl '?=■ A ^ #.-® -a.T ^.st.zM 
ZM *ii^E®«|5^1S^ B 

ffi B.1s.0.a IS «.ffi,:S 7i. ^ B.flff 

i^.A ® A ^ Z — $1^ ^."tSi.^ ^ 


•,^ ill ja ■?■ MSr 

S' ® W if 

'K^n mm^m. ffi®. 


^if 1^ I? i 

tT • <; ffff A 


II. 1 In tile [^duke’s] twenty-seventh year, the viscount of 
Ke paid a court-visit to Loo. 

2 In summer, in the sixth month, on Kang-yin, Gh'aou. 

marquis of Ts‘e, died. 

3 In autumn, in the eighth month, on Vih-wc, tlierc 

\va5 the burial of duke Heaou of Ts'e. 

4 On Yih-szc, Suy. son of duke [Chwang], led an ann\ 

and entered Ke. ^ . 

6 In Avintcr, an oiiicer of Ts‘oOj the marqui? of 


YExn XXVII. 


DUKE HE. 


201 


the marquis of Ts'ae, the earl of Ch‘iiig, and the 
baron of Heu, laid siege to [the capital of] Sung. 

6 In the twelfth month, on Keah-seuh, tiie duke had a 
meeting -with the [above] princes, when they made 
a covenant in Sunsr. 


Par. 1. The Chuen says; — ‘Dulce Hwnn of 
Ke p-iia a court-visit, and used tl>c ceremonies 
of the EjforAvhich reason he is called merely vis- 
count. The duke despised Kc, because of its 
want of respectfulness.’ This explanation of 
the title viscount here must be incorrect; sec 

what is said on in XXm. 4. Even the 

K’.ang-he editors reject Tso-she’s view in this 
place. Tlic lords of Kc had been degraded by 
the king to the rank of viscount ; we shall find 
here.aftcr that they regained one step of dignity. 
It m.ay be mentioned that the viscount in the 
text is the same who is mentioned in V. 2. as 
presented by his mother, a sister of duke He, 
at the court of Loo, when ho was a child. He 
himself became, a few years after this, a son-in- 
law of He. 

Par. 2. Tlie Chuen says: — ‘ At this time Loo 
had reason for resentment against Ts’e, but the 
duke did not neglect the obscn-ances proper in 
cases of death; — which was proper.’ 

Par. 8. For some reason or other the inter- 
ment was hurried. 

P.ar. 4. Too observes that the date here must 
be uTong;— there was no Yih-sze in the Sth 
month of this year, bat that day was the 6th of 
the 9th mouth. The Chuen says that this at- 
tack of Ke was to punish it for the neglect of 
the proper ceremonies, assumed in the Chuen 
on the 1st par. Most critics condemn the action 
of Loo in making this retvirn to the viscount 
for his visit in the spring; — and properly. 

Cliaou P‘ang-fd |8|| says that the 
true character of Loo may be seen in it c# 

^ S #■ ^ M ”'"1 

orouchhig before the strong, arrogant and 
oppressive to the weak- 
Par. 5. Tlie Chuen s.ays here; — ‘Tlie vis- 
count of Ts‘00, wishing to lay siege to the 
capital of Sung, made Tszo-wfln exercise and 
inspect the troops for the expedition in K'wei, 
and at the end of a whole morning, he 
had not punished a single man. Tsze-yuh 
in the next place was emploj-cd to exercise the 
troops in Wei, and at the day’s end he 
had scourged seven men, amd bored through the 
ears of three. The elders of the State all con- 
gratulated Tsze-wiln [on his recommendation 
of Tsze-yuli], when he detained them to drink 
with him. Wei Kea was then still a boy, and 
came late, offering no congratulations. Tsze- 
witn asked the reason of his conduct, and he 
replied, “Idonotknowonwliat I should congm- 
tulatc you. You have resigned the government 
to Tsze-yuh, thinking, no doubt, that his ap- 
pointment would quiet the State. But with 
quietness in the State and defeat abroad, wh.at 
will be gained? The defeat of Tsze-yuh will be 
owing to your rcoonmicndation of him; and 
w'hat cause for congratulation is there in a re- 
commendation which will bring defeat to tjie 


State? Tsze-3’nh is a violent man, and regardless 
of the observances of propriety, so that he is 
unfit to rule the people. If he be entrusted with 
the command of more than 300 chariots, he will 
not enter the capital again. If I congratulate 
you after he has returned from being entrust^ 
with a larger command, my congratulations will 
not be too late.” 

‘In winter, the visconnt of Ts'oo and several 
other princes laid siege to the capital of Sung, 
the dnke of which sent Knng-sun Koo to Tsin to 
report the strait inwhich he was. Seen Chinsaid 
to the 7Harguis, ‘ Now you may recompense the fa- 
vours received from Sung, and relieve its distress. 
The opportunity is now presented to acquire the 
proper majesty and make sure of the leadership 
of the States.” Hoo Yen said, “Ts*oo has just 
secured the adherence of Ts'aou, and recently 
contracted a marriage with Wei. If we invade 
Ts'aou and Wei, Ts'oo will be sure to go to 
their hel;), and so Sung and Ts‘e will be deliver- 
ed from it.” On this, the marquis ordered a 
hunting in Pe-leu, and Wmed a third army [see 
the Chuen after r\L 1. 6]. He then consulted 
about a commander -in-chief. Chaou Ts'ui said, 
“Keoh Hwoh istheman. I haveheard him speak. 
He e.xplains all about music and proprieties, and 
is versed in the Books of Poetry and History. 
Those Books are the repository of righteous- 
ness, and in music and proprieties we have 
thepntterns of virtue, while virtue and righteous- 
ness are roots of all advantage. In the Books 
of Hea [Slioo, IL i. 8, where there is some 
difference in the text] it is said, ‘They 
were appointed by. their speech; they were 
tested by their works; they received chariots 
and robes according to their sendees.’ Let your 
lordship make trial of him.” On this the marquis 
appointed Keoh Hwoh to command the second 
army, that of the centre, with Keoh Tsin as his 
assistant. Hoo Yen was made commander of 
the first army, but he declined in favour of Hoo 
Maou, and acted as his assistant. The marquis 
ordered Chaou Ts'uy to take the third command, 
hut he declined in favour of Lwan Che and 
Seen Chin, on which Lwan Che was made com- 
mander of the third array, with Seen Chin as his 
assistant. Seun Lin-foo acted as ch.irioteer 
for the marquis, and Wei Ch‘ow was the 
spearman on the right. 

‘When the marquis of Tsin got possession 
of the State, he t.mglit the people for two 
ye.'irs, .and then wished to employ them i« 
iror. Tsze-fan said, “ 'iVliile the people do 
not know righteousness, they will not live 
quietly.” On this, beyond the State, the m.arquis 
settled the troubles of king Seang, and in it he 
studied the people’s advantage, till their lives 
were happy and cherished by them. He then 
wished tu employ them, but Tszc-f.an a^ai/i said. 
‘The people do not yet know good faith, and do 
not understand how they are to be cmplovcd.” 
On this the m.arquis attacked Yuen, .and showed 
them what good faitli was, so th.at in their 


Toi, r. 


26 


202 


THE CH'UX TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK Y. 


bai^ains thev sought no advantage, and intelli- 
gently fulfilled alf their words. “ Slav they now 
he employed?” ashed the marquis, hut Tsze- 
fau once more replied. ‘"While they do not know 
the observances of propriety, their respectfulness 
is not brought out.’ On this, the marquis made 
great huntings, and showed them the gradations 
of diKerent ranks, making special officers of 
degrees to adjust- all the services. When the 
people could receive their orders, without making 
any mistake, then he employed them, drove ont 
the guards ofKuh {see XXYI.S], and relieved the 
siege of Sung. The securing of his leadership 


of the States by one battle was owing to this 
intellisent trainins.’ 

The'" ‘ man of Ts'^oo’ in the test was Tsz^ynh; 
but though he commanded, the viscount himself 
wa-s ^vith the army, — as the Chuen relates. 

Par. G. Eoo now belonged to the party of 
Ts*oo, and the duke therefore went to Son^ to 
prove his adhesion. The critics needlessly fiM 
a great significance in the express mention ol 

‘the duke’ (^), and in the use of the general 
phrase ‘ the princes ’ "'without any 

i special mention of ‘ the viscount of Ts‘00.' 


Tweniy-eiglith year. 

MM H nj 


a A 


o 


115 T ^ 

T 


» 

O^^io 


k S m 


=F 

Tm. 


m m 


I.A^l 


jfBV 

1mJk 


JL 

m 

ng 

iM 


il5 


fi^ 


.,f .i: M _ 

^ W 


^ V >r> 

A @ 
7k KM ft 

A. 


im. 


Ycin XXVIir. 


DUICK IIK, 


203 


ff, 


ta j® m -ai.^ w.# a s ^ m w Ji.fF.H. 

S S'^'S ^ ^ ^ 

^ ^ mm m.m z it g^.pi m s.m ^ s + 

w.-a.f m ^ bb h.® a m ti a 

# m ZM as SS :7^ Z,-^ 5E.;p sBfe T-^M. mM, 

;esMSSi.0.Affl1iIJ^l2Si®. 

• k * . tt . >Ii£a . ■ - ■■_# mm-m t^l .« m^mrn . r . . m ^ k ■ k *« S .* *. . r 


^ H J, ^.g,^ TO M ® -f Ji m iE 1F> 

*.s.g TO |B ^.ai ^ f ±. la ffi.E ji 1® 

z.a w #. m # -fe i« n 
A ^ 0.S ^ f{,^ = W.^ ^AT 41.^ 

iftfe IM JJ. -its “U" — * tr J.IIII da IS* 37 T>i -III >-!-« -.It. ^ 


m Z.^ #.^.S = M 


WJIJ %M 


' !•»■ * I • 4 U^* ^ n V IJ k£.IZa 

F^ ® ^ m,-^ nnz, m at ®r-.x 


'^111+ o iSIl + 


^04 


THE CH'UH TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK Y. 


m ZM f w -^.g =..;S ft ^ ^ «.® 

^ A # W.*.® -tfc.-sr ^.W ^ ^ AM i;. 

■afr ffif tr -jii^ ivr 1=1 n-: ^ ^ 2, ^ A 


A g ja § 0 .^ * ® W ^ A ZMM * B 5 * 

A.g.ffi.g Ji as f.:^ ^ ;e R »A 

f Sf &i 5 *^ 4 ** ^f 

= ^ ^ S-ffl -T- ffi IB Bo -f ® f 

^ ^ 3 t A ffl.U 

Sii 

SS 5!^ -iS. ')4t :s5 tta jtn -ts « mjft -r- hh :£ffi 


>*'o» nsr. »r^o/es >32 -Jii 1 M ^»IM 

t $ $ S A.^. A i 5lf y ‘ I i A 4 ^ 

1 fi.B g.tro J -fir j® 5i.«.B5 5R <: ®.:ll 


yjun xxvin. 


DUKK HE. 


205 


ii. jt syj.'f- )5ii is 

T- HI tl- lE.® ifl.T 

p.®j fi SR •?• 1 HtM a. 
H.-pi ik s: - 3£ pg ft 
^ 0.111 =P s rS,<^ -r-.aE 
SI * fli 3E ® # ‘i’ 

m *t fs.n.# a K.'Tc T 

11.:® WB # ilt.= » » 18 

# ^.lir S ® f i Si ±. 

E 31- B'M A.^ f0 » 
:^: •?■ :i ^ Jii 0.1^.m ^ 
ffi.fj =fS » Ui.I ft T ^ 
0 ^ fli.3E m ii i6 Sf H 
K <&.«! ^.A tK *c a.ji. 
® <a- K is = T 15 

M fi 51 * $0.?®: 5C.*.fli 
•til.®: 55t ® ® )i in 

;e. -fe.-^ I ^ 5® ig. 
^ III ^ Pfl ^.w # m 

itmUM i.®. 

m ^l.li.fe.:f^ m 
If W H ^ E ® 
ii^ *c a a * s m,Wc 

&' ts: ZM.^ :k^M 

m A »M E.$S M Bn 

Bi H W =P.fi. 

# A M m,m J®.iii5 m 

•&.^. 6®.«g5Kfa^ 

:g^w SSTcP.SifStA 
=# A I. A 

^ fp ^ n 

H.* 


^ 3c 
s; M 


st^. 


mm^ —.■!&. 


ags , 

Si 

jca 

m 


j< jB- m.^ ^-zm 

Ilf n 3i (Sin ft A r®. 

'^li.Bn ^ 0. 
s f® 0.5i 5i m M 'J^' 
WiMMm(s 9 z,^n 

K a Bn # ®E ii m.tl 

at @ 5pij 5E mM 0.11. 

m wl a.e.T n 4- s 

Bn -lii.® A 3E H pT 

W M.® if ^ ^ iE -ffc. 
^ aE ;g:.-tii.^ Bn W * 
RB fi <ft A Bn ® 

ZM ^ ®.ll:.M.^ ^ 

Bff :S: 3E ^ ii: 5i BS A 
% 0.^.?! A M if 0 
# A S If M-M &M 
■BT A * IS W Z,^ » 
^ A ± 3 if il -t :R. 
•tfi..A.-tfi,.0.:-= # ^ 3 
0SB51? H 

^ ^ bt ^.it mww 

A A a ^ ^.Ja E i® 


# .m 


•tfc ;$: m.tk ^ S .1 T 
B.A if ^ ® <a- la ¥ 
E Kf^ m Bn m,M. fc. 
a ^ ^ &M 

^ g 


ZMm 


--p- ©.HI -tfc. 
A-.# A A 


n- 

I.. 


umz 


. . 

Bif 

Bn 5B.0.^ 
B.^ ^ H. 
A Elf il 
aifcSi-^ 


jaa.s 

±mm 

.. M 

iffi^ 


206 


THE CH'UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


© -1.1 T ^ ^ fj fi * @ Bn f S f 

db _fcr/ JlL rtfcf j4{ •^9' •4r‘ jf'Jt P.tt J-Ft. =fl= JFt 


« ?lij S M ^ fi 4 m ZM f f . 

4 M ^ ^ .w m,z $ i# g 

= iii ^ M ffijiB.® <a- m ± m,it ni& ff 

t» j — ** =/ir I - fcSr» =n din Trf — =»* ^tiT >«»*. 3E2: -b rrr HH /fccT 


ItM B. ^.ratTTcff^ 

^jpjse^ »» ffl =^. 4 is# 4 f 

N^jaes *4 4 

■■ 


m a.^. # 

mof c6w tf f. P3 


Sf ilt-g-M 
=. ^ A. 
fi.MM m 

^ # Bn H, 


Jlf 

^ z ^>s 

■&ii® 

is.-a.te 

mm-& 


^ "^iBB 

^Bn # 


^^ 44 . 


^ s 

-t&.Bff 
Ini a 
Pl^ 
^^ 4 i. 


i i g‘Al‘ #i.i 


± 

^ij 


ca 

ii&t 

H3 


3E 
4 . 39 = 

4 
?Br 


a w 

Bn ^ 
<:. *ti! 

■a. 


W.^F 


a 

.E 


±. ^ .„ 

® #. # 1 


a 


4.4 m i^M 3 


^mm f y T. 


isg.ix. -eri-j^ 

a f f . I 

«... 0 s a ^ ^ , 9 , 

* 4 K .4 M.S# 

B. :?zWcm ^ 


Z.A'^ 


Sff 

?pj ^ 1 ® ^ 

ZM.^ 

11 ® ^ •:r-i4, 

■It ® S 

an. 

4 4. Ife.f f 


s'l iti 

:)g- )K S ® 


Yj*« XXVIII. 


DUKE 111-:. 


207 


XXYIIl. 


1 In the tlukc’s twenty-eighth year, in spring, the mar- 

quis of Tsin made an incursion into Ts'nou. He 
[also] invaded Wei. 

2 Mac, son of duke [Ghwang], was guarding Wei. [Be- 

cause] he did not do so successfully, [the duke] 
put him to death. 

3 A body of men fromTs‘oo [endeavoured to] relieve Wei. 

4 In the third month, on Ping-woo, the marquis of Tsin 

entered [the capital of] Ts'nou, seized the earl of 
Ts'nou, and gave him to the people of Sung. 

5 In summer, in the fourth month, on Ke-sze, the 

marquis of Tsin, and the armies of Is'e, Sung, and 
T.s‘in, fought with the men of Ts‘oo in Sliing-puh, 
when the army of Ts‘oo was disgracefully defeated. 

6 Ts‘oo put to dc.ath its great oilicer, Tih-shln. 

7 The marquis of Wei left his State, and fled to Ts*oo. 

8 In the fifth month, on Kwei-ch‘ow, the duke had a 

meeting with the marquis of Tsin, the marquis of 
Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the marquis of Ts‘ae, the 
carl of Ch'ing, the viscount of Wei, and the viscount 
of Keu, when they made a covenant at Tseen-t‘oo. 

9 The marquis of Ch‘in went to the [above] meeting. 

10 The duke paid a court-visit in the place where the 

king was. 

11 In the sixth month, Ch‘ing, marquis of Wei, returned 

from Ts‘oo to his rule in Wei. Yuen Heuen of 
Wei left the State, and fled to Tsin. 

12 Kwan, marquis of Ch‘in, died. 

13 In autumn, duke [Ghwang’s] eldest daughter, [mar- 

ried to the former viscount] of Ke, came to Loo. 

14 Suy, son of duke [Ghwang], went to Ts‘e. 

15 In winter, the duke had a meeting with the marquis 

of Tsin, the marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, 
the marquis of Ts‘ae, the earl of Ch‘ing, the Imr- 
son of Ch‘in, the viscount of Keu, the viscount of 
Choo, and an oflicer of Ts‘in, in Wan. 

16 The king [by] Heaven’s [grace] held a court of recep- 

tion in Ho-yang. 

17 On Jin-shin, the duke paid a court- visit in the place 

where the king was. 

18 An oflicer of Tsin seized the marquis of Wei, and 

carried him to the capital. 

19 Yuen Heuen of Wei returned from Tsin to his place 

in Wei. ^ 

20 The princes then besieged [the capital of] Heu. 

21 Seang, earl of Ts‘aou, was restored to his State, and 

forthwith joined theotherprincesinthesiegeof Heu. 


208 


THE Cn‘UJr TS‘EW, ^YITH THE TSO CIIUEN. BOOK V. 


The Chuen snys:— *In spring, the 
in<vqais of Tsin, wishing to invade Ts‘aon, 
asked to he allowed to march througli Wei, but 
the people of Wei refused the privilege. On 
this he retraced his steps, and crossed the Hoat 
Its most southern part, made an incursion into 
Ts aou, and invaded Wei. In the 1st month, on 
Mow-shm, he t^k Woo-lnli. In the 2d month, 
Keoh Hwoh of Tsin died, and Cliin of Yuen cot 


attacked it while in this consternation, and in 
the 3d month, on Piug-woo, (he marqttis entered 
the city, declared to the earl his fault in not 
employing He Iloo-ke; and hnding that there 
were 300 men, who rode in the carriages of 
great officers, lie required him to produce the 
record of their services. He gave orders also 
Hint no one should enter the mansion of He 
Hoo-ke, and granted protection to all his rela* 


Tsin refused. H^n wished to JnS ™“kes such a re- 

of Ts«oo, but theLS of t e S at?d^d It Oa iMs they u-ent 

people ot thi. btatedid not msh I and burned the house of He, when Wei Ch‘ow 


rilis, and thrust him out,- 

a/s6ang-?ieV? niarqius wished to put him to death [for violat- 

The repetition of ‘ the marquis of Tsin ‘ in ti,n i regretting to lose his 


hiiii oiw—Jn V_ % yuiiivu tiie uousc ot He, when wei uuw 

Tsiii. On this he left the can! til please was hurt in the breast i« the conjiaoration. Tho 

ne lett the capital, and resided marqiiis wished to put him to drath [for violat- 


. . — .11^ uuii,£uia ui isin intne 

lexb moicates that the raid infn 'ro«o#«> ....j *». x> , " — -~.o— , .... .. ...viovaiQ... v« 

attack of Wei were two distinct intending, 

previously determined on Tf rtie should he be very ill, to e.xecute him. Ch'ow 

that Tsin seized the oniiortnnitt- i^omiduphisbrenst,nnd,wlienhesawthDmes- 


of the second 


_ have no serious hurt,” jumping up thrice 
at the^snme time, and leaping ci’osswlso thrice. 
On this the marquis let him alone, but he put 
to death TSen Hcch, and sent liis lioad round 
the army, appointing also Chow Che-k‘Saou to 
he spearman on the right of his chariot in the 
“■*s|.« e.,i»iuejioaeatntopieasoit,sn3*inffntthe Cli'ow. 

same tune to the people of Ts‘oo that he puthim Z ^“*'® Sung sent Pan, tlie 

death because he failed in maintaining his guard ’ of t lie gates, to the army of Tsin, to toll 

Maou K‘e-ling calls this account of the execution • niarqnis m what straits ho ivas. Tlio ninr- 


W '"'® should Imve 
9^'ien says:— 'Mao was guard- 

?i!f j unsuccessful in relievingit 

ti'Ll'n® of Tsin, and put Tsze- 

ts ung [i.e., Mae] to death to please it, sni'ingat the 
same i_ me 


— — ... luueirnTes me wpnlr. 

less and vacillation in its government, irliich 
have already been pointed out. We bare here 


cuts OtlU UIinUUU||l IW jvf*** 

us. Wlintistobedonc?” Seen Chin said, “Iict 

. «uv. »ve Jiare Jien» bribes to Ts'e and Ts'in; 

®|{ instead of ^9* the fnrTnn,. to I • ®nd get them to intercede with Ts'oo on its be- 

to tV ^ P™- the meanwhile, let us hold tho carl of 

V j ^ execution of a great officer in the Ts'aou, and give a portion of the lands of Ts'aou 
record made by the historiographers of the the people of Sung. Ts'oo, being 

State, as Kung-yang snvs:-i53 3^ 3SB. -L. ho sure to refuse 


nse of the term in the Chow Lo, pp 

iMhifcrent" *“ illustration of the text,' 

‘® nnothcr instance of the modi- 
signification that must often be allowed to 
5{5^, As Ch'in Foo-liiang savs, sfsfe 

itK “P* »I. * ' tjA 't5C 

Mo nn HE jjl, * Ts'oo wished to relieve 
'' ei, but was not able to do so.’ 

•e • “V ■*•. Pho Omen s.iv.s.— The mnrnnU nr 

itVnck an 

"f his soldiers 

Iwlbi 1 ‘’t *'•'«''« “x’k tin-ir 

Ngn - t^d^’in! ‘horn oiubc iopof 

vniw*'. * 1 *,?. r * ”*’*,"*’ ern-amp amnng tlu-ir 

- ”"'r’ ',7' V/ ‘h.-n" 'l b. 

tb m " hn !• tl.i v l,.„l n,.t. and sent • 

»•><>» ...ril, ip.Mi tl.,. .-5iy. The „rn.v „f Ts „ 


- ...j marquis was })!eascd 
I made tlie earl of 'rs'aoii his prisoner, and^gavo 
_ over to Sung a portion of the lands of Ts'aou 
! and Wei.' 

According to tho Chuen, the marquis of Tsin 
, did not give the earl of Ts'noti over to Sung, 
but only a portion of Ills State. In tho le.vt, 
however, we can supply* jio other direct object 

to J^, but the ^ which precedes. Tho 

policy of Tsin will bo perceived by the n’oder: 
—The marquis’s object was to sot Ts'oo at vari- 
ance with Ts‘c and ’Fs'in, so tli.at tlieso States 
should join him against it. By heaping favours, 
at the cxjieiisc of 'J’s'aon and Wei. on Snug, be 
irritated 'I’s'oo still more against that ^^j***®' •**? 
as not to listen to the solicitations of “Isv aiio 
I’s'in. and be more determined than before to 
wreak its nngiw ujion it. '1's‘oo wonhl tbnsolTeiin 

erfiil nnit tip eo.ul<tl Oil to 


p iviii.. IIS iiiif-er ujimi it. i s‘«o wonio lo"' 
tho two poworftii .‘states, and be go-uletl 
try a b.itllc with Tsitt. 

r.ar. .*<tiin;,-.p«|i — s.v III. xwii. ^ 
Chuen .<..ays: — -J lio vi'<coiint ofTs-eo bad ini .' 


The 


Year XX^T:!!. 


DUKE HE. 


209 


meanime taken np liis residence in the chief 
town of Shin, from which he sent word to Shuh- 
how of Shin to withdraw from Kuh [See on 
8], and to Tszc-yiih to withdraw from 
Sung, saying also to the loiter, “ Do not follow 
the army of Tsin. The marquis of Tsin was a 
fugitive abroad for 19 years, and yet he has 
succeeded in getting possession of the State. 
He has experienced perils, difficulties, and 
liardships; he is thoroughly acquainted with 
the truth and the falsehood of men; Heaven 
has given him length of years, and removed 
those who wished to injure liini : — can he wllom 
Heaven thus establishes be displaced? The 
Art of War says, ‘ "When things are properly 
arranged, then return ‘ When you know your- 
self to be in difficulties, then withdraw;’ and 
also, ‘The virtuous man is not to be opposed.’ 
These three rules are all applicable to the pres~ 
ent case of Tsin. 

‘Tsze-yuh sentPih-fun to Shin to beg to be 
allowed to fight, s.^ing, “ I do not presume to 
say that I shall certainly conquer; but I wish to 
shut the motith of my calumniators.” The king 
p. e. the viscount of Ts'oo] was angry, and gave 
him but a few additional troops ; — only the cohort 
of the west, the guards of the prince of Ts‘oo, 
and the six troops of Joh-gaou, went to join the 
arm}' in Sung. Tsze-yuh then sent Yuen Ch'un 
with this message to the army of Tsin: — “Please 
to restore the marquis of Wd, and re-instate 
the earl of Ts'aou, and I, in my turn, will give 
up the siege of Sung.” Tsze-fan said, “Tsze- 
yuh has no sense of courtesy or propriety !— 
Our lord is to get one advantage, and he him- 
self, a subject, is to get two. We must not 
lose iliis opportunity of Jiyhting.” Seen Chin 
said to Tsze-fan, “ Accede to the proposal. To 
settle the affairs o/men may be called the highest 
exercise of propriety. Ts'oo by one proposal 
would settle the difficulties of three States ; — ^if 
we by one word in reply prevent this settlement, 
then we are chargeable with the want of pro- 
priety; — and on what grounds can we go on to 
light? Ji wo refuse to accede to Ts'oo’s 
proposal, we abandon Sung. Our object has 
been to relievo it; and if we abandon it instead, 
what will the States think of us ? There will 
bo, on our refusal, three States which Ts'oo has 
sought to benefit, three States whose resentment 
we have provoked. When those who are dis- 
pleased with us become so numerous, where 
will be our means to fight? Our best plan will 
be privately to promise to restore the princes of 
Ts'aou and Wei, so alienating them from Ts'oo; 
and at tlie same time lot us seize Yuen Ch'un to 
make 'Ts'oo still more angiy. ^Vfter we have 
fought, wo can t.ake furtlicr measures on all 
these points.” The marquis was pleased with 
this advice, and accortliiigly he kept Yuen 
Ch'un a prisoner in Wei, at the same time 
privately promising the princes of Ts'aou and 
Wei to restore them to their States : and they, 
in consequence, announced to Tsze-yuh their 
.separation from the side of Ts'oo. 'Tsze-yuh 
was so angry with these things that ho followetl 
the marquis* of Tsin. who retreated l)eforo him. 
Tile smaller otlieers of the army said, ‘‘It is 
disgraceliil for the prince of one State thus to j 
avoid the minister of anotlior. The army of _■ 
Ts'oti, moretivcr, lias Iwn long in the field ; why j 
do wo n'tn’at before it?“ T«re-fan s.iid to ; 
them. •' It is the gofvlness of its e.iu<e which ' 


makes an army strong; yon cannot call it old 
because it may have served a long time. But 
for the kindness of Ts'oo, we should not be in 
our present circumstances; and this retreat of 
three stages is to repay that kindness. If the 
marquis showed ingratitude for that and ate 
his words [See the Chuen at the end of the 
23d year], so meeting Ts'oo as an enemy, we 
should be in the wrong and Ts'oo would be in 
the right ; — its host would be as if it had abund- 
ant rations, and could not be pronounced old 
and wearied. If, when we retire, Ts'oo also 
withdraw its army, what can it he said that we 
are requiring of it? But if it do not do so, 
then our prince retires, and its subject keeps 
pressing upon him ; — Ts'oo will be in the 
wrong.” When Tsin had thus retreated 90 fe, 
the host of Ts'oo wished to stop, but Tsze-yuh 
would not do so. 

‘In summer, in the 4th month, on Mow-shin, 
the marquis of Tsin, the duke of Sung, Kwoh 
Kwei-foo and Ts'uy Yaou of Ts'e, and Yin, a 
younger son of the earl of Ts'in, all halted at 
Shing-puh, while the army of Ts'oo encamped 
with the height of £ in its rear. The marquis 
was troubled by the strength of the enemy’s position, 
but he heard the soldiers singing to themselves 
the lines, 

“ Beautiful and rich is the field on the plain ; 

The old crop removed, the new comes amain.” 

The marquis, was doubting about their me.ming, 
but Tsze-fan said to him, “Eight. If we fight 
and are victorious, you are sure to gain all the 
States; if we do not succeed, we have the outer 
and inner defences of the mountains and the 
Ho, and shall not receive any serious injurj'.” 
“But,” said the marquis, “ what of the kindness 
wldch I received from Ts'oo?” Lwan Ching- 
tsze said, “ All the Ke States north of the Han 
have been absorbed by Ts'oo. You are tliinking 
of the small kindness which you received your- 
self, and forgetting the great disgrace done to 
your surname; — the best plan is to fight.” The 
marquis dreamt that he was boxing with the 
viscount of Ts'oo, when the viscount knelt down 
upon him, and sucked his brains. This made 
him afraid again, but'Tszc-fan said, 'The dream 
is lucky. We lie looking to he.aven, %vhile 
Ts'oo is kneeling, as if acknowledging its guilt; 
and moreover, we deal gently with it.” 

‘ Tsze-yuh sent Tow Poh, to request that Tsin 
would fight with him, s.aj'ing, “Let me have a 
g.anie with your men. Your lordship can lean 
on the cross-bo.ard of your carriage and look on, 
and I will bo there to sec you.” The marquis 
m-ide Lwan Che give the following reply, “ I 
have heard your commands. I dared not to 
forget the kindness of the lord of Ts'oo, and 
therefore I am here. 1 retired before his officer; 

— should I have dared to oppose himself? Since 
I have not received your orders not to fight, I 
will trouble you. Sir, to s.ay to yonr leaders, 
‘I’rcp.areyourcluiriots; see reverently to your 
prince's business ; to-morrow morning'l will sec 
you.’” 

• Hie chariots of Tsin were 700. with the liar- 
ness of the hordes on back, brea.'t. K-lIv, .md ' 
hips, .nil complete, 'llie marquis ascend’.-*! the 
old site of Yew-sin to survey the nrmv. when he 
said. “Tlie young ami the old .ire .til proiierlv 
di-sjiosed. TIic treop-* are fit to Ik? emplove*!/’ 
Ther\-!iftir. he i-aii-fd the trees .n*>eut to li-cut 


VOI. V. 


210 


THE CH'Ulv TS-EW, ^riTH THE TSO CHUEN. 


book Y. 


down to increase liis mnnitions of war. On Ke- 
sze, the army was dra^Tn out for battle on the 
north of Sin, Sen Shin, with his command, as the 
assistant leader of the 3d army, being opposed to 
the troops of (Jli'iii and Ts'ae. Tsze-yuh, with 
the 6 troops of Joh-gaon, commanded the army of 
the centre, and said, “To-day shall make an end 
of Tsin;** while Tsze-se commanded on the left, 
and Tsze-shang on the right. Seu Shin, having 
covered his horses vritli tiger skins, commenced 
the battle by attacking the troops of Ch'in and 
Ts'ae, which took to &ght, and the right army 
of Ts ‘00 was scattered. Hoo Maou set up two 
large Sags, and them he carried back, while Lwan 
Che, also pretended to fly, dragging brandies of 
trees behind his chariots [To increase the dust, I 
and make bis movement all the more resemble a 
flight]. The army of Ts'oo dashed after the 
fugitives, when Tuen Chin and Keoh Tsin, irith 
the 1st army and the marquis's own, came cross- 
wise upon it. At the same time, Hoo Maou and 
Hoo Yen attacked Tsze-se on the other side, 
and the left army of Ts'oo was scattered. The 
army of Ts'oo indeed was disgracefully defeated, 
for Tsze-yuh only did not snfiter as the other 
leaders, because he collected his forces, and 
desisted from the fight. The army of Tsin 
occupied his camp, and feasted on his provisions 
for 3 days, retiring on the day Kwei-yew.’ 

Par. 6. Tih-chin died by his own hand, his 
ruler refusing to forgive his waywardness in seek- 
ing a battle with Tsin, and the disgrace incur- 
red by his defeat. That the text should describe 
his death as if he had been publicly executed, or 
at least put to death by the command of the 
viscoimt of Ts'oo, is an instance, tho’ only a 
minor one, of the misrepresentations of fact 
that abound in the classic, and in wldch Chinese 
critics will see only the sagely wisdom of Con- 
fneins. The Chnen says ‘ At an earlier time, 
Tsze-yuh had made for himself a cap of fawn- 
skin, adorned with carnation gems and with 
strings ornamented with jade ; but he had not 
worn it. Before the battle, he dreamed that the 
spirit of the Ho said to him, “ Give your cap to 
me, and I will give you the marsh of MSng- 
choo,” and that he would not make the 
exchange. The dream hecominp hnoicn, his son 
Ta-sin and Tsze-se sent Tung Hwang to remon- 
strate ■with liim; but it was in vain. Tung Ke 
[Ke was the designation of Yung HwangJ said. 
‘•If by dying yon could benefit the State, 
peradventure you would do it ; how much more 
should you be prepared to give up those gems 
and jade! They are but dirt, and if by them 
you can benefit the operations of the army, 
why should you grudge them?” Tlie general 
would not listen to tliis counsel ; and when he 
time forth, he said to liis son and Tsze-se. “A 
Spirit c.mnot ruin a minister like me. If the 
minister do not do his utmost in the service of 
the people, he will ruin himself.” 

* After the defeat, the viscount of Ts'oo sent 
to him tho moss.ige, ‘"If you come here, ho'w 
■will you answer to the elders of Sliin and Scih 
jer the death of their ehildren?" Tsze-se and 
tiuji-pih ['rsze-yuh’s son] said to the titcssrnprr^ I 
‘•Till-shin was going to die. but we stopped 
him. s.vying that the viscount would hini<elf 
like to pm him to death.” Tsze-yuh then 
proer\-<lctl to l.iV-n-kuh, and then’ ditil [coni- 
•■'lici'le'. AVlicn the marquis of Tsin 
hr.trii e! it. hi* Joy wn« gre.at. ‘•There is no ! 


one,” he said, “ to poison my jo^ now. Wei Leu- 
shin will indeed he chief minister in Ts:e-yms 
room. .But he will himself be his mvn care; he 
will not he devoted to the people.”’ 

Par. 7. We liave seen, in the Chnen on par. 
5, that tlie marquis of Tsin had 
restore tho prince of Wei to his State. But the 
latter probably did not believe the promise; and 
in an accession of alarm, on hearing of tlie battle 
of Shing-puh, he fled to Ts'oo. According to the 
canon that princes who have lost their. States 
should he mentioned by name, the critics vex 
thehiselres to account for the omission ‘he 
name here: — see the note of the K‘ang-he editors 
on the subject. 

Par. 8. Tseen-t'oowasCh'ing.inthen^h- 

west of the pres. dis. of Yung-tsih 
dep. K'ae-f ung, Ho-nan. The only difficulty in 
translating the par. is with 
told in the Chnen on the 1st par. how the people 
of Wei had driven out their ruler, who toot up 
his residence in Seang-new, till he fled to I » 
as rdated in the last par. He had Ief‘ 
brother Shuh-woo, however, in charge ot 
State; and he it was who took part in t 
meeting and covenant. We cannot translate 
by ‘ son ’ or ' heir-son,’ because Shuh-woo 
was not the son, but the brother, of the ruler of 

Wei. He seems to be here called 
and have his place assigned after the ew o 
Ch‘ing. of whom in other places the marq 
of Wei takes precedence. , , 

According to the Chuen, the king himselt was 
present at Tseeii-t'oo, and conferred _high 
ours on the marquis of Tsin, 
also to be the chief of the princes, and loan 
the States. These things should have 
recorded in the classic. That they * 

recorded, is another instance — more ™P^^ ^ 
than the last — of the peculiarity of the ^ ' 

now silent as to certain events, now misrep 
senting them. , 

The Chuen savs ‘ On Keah-woo, the margms 
of Tsin arrived at HUng-yung, and caused a 
for the king to be reared in Tseen-t oo. l 
months before the battle of Shing-puli, the . 
of Ch'ing liad gone to Ts'oo, and 
service of his army ; but after the dejeat ol - 
he was afraid, and sent Tsze-jin Kew, 
his submission to Tsin. Lwan Che 
thereon to the capital of Ch'ing, _ and n 
covenant witli the carl, and in tho 6th *®®* ^ 

marquis himself and the earl made a co . 
in Hang-yung. On Ting-wc, 
presented the spoils and prisoners ol . 

the king.-100 clmriots witli their 1>®«®® "IL*" 
mail, and 1000 foot-soldiers. _ Tim ® „ ti,Q 
acted as assistant to the king m treat t. 
marquis with tlie ceremonies witli ^■.•viiil 

P‘iiig had treated his ancestor [Shoo, > 

On Kc-yew. the king fcastetl him wit 
spirits, and conferred on hipi various - 
also comiuis-ioneil the minister 'f 

own brotlicr Hoo. witli tho histonogroi . 
the Interior, SIiuli Iling-foo, to convey t 

— aiqiointnient of the to 

cliief of tiic princes, giving ‘Xi 


ten 

the 


the princes, giving * ,i „nd 

be worn in tiie c.nrriugendonicil with nic ’. 

rar, one rc<i 
Mack l*ow 


tho«e proper for a .;Iiariot of w-'J''- « 


and a hundrv*! rvfl nrrow.«, a 


Year XXVm. 


DUKE HE. 


211 


thousand arrows, a jar of spirits, made from the 
hlack millet, daroured with herbs, and three 
hundred life-guards. The words of the appoint- 
ment were, “The king sajs to his unde, 
Eeverently discharge the king’s commands, so 
as to give tranquillity to the States in every 
quarter, and drive far away all who are ill- 
affected to the king.” Thrice the marquis 
declined his honours; hut at last accepting 
them, he said, “ I, Ch‘ung-urh, venture twice 
to do obeisance, with my head bowed to the 
earth, —and so do I receive and will maintain 
the great, distinguished, excellent charge of the 
sou of Heaven.” YTith this he received the 
tablet, and went out. At this meeting, from 
first to last, thrice he had audience of the king 
When the marquis of Wei beard of the defeat 
of the army of Ts‘oo, he became afraid, and 
fled from Semg-neto to go to Ts'oo. He went, 
however, to Ch'in, and sent Shuh-woo under 
the care of Yuen Heuen to take part in the 
covenant of the princes. On Kwd-hae, Hoo, a 
son of king Hwuy, presided over a covenant of 
them all in the court of the king’s palace. The 
words of it were, “ We will all assist the royal 
House, and do no harm to one another. If any 
one transgress this covenant, may the intelli- 
gent Spirits destroy him, so that he shall lose 
his people and not be able to possess his State 
and, to the remotest posterity, let him have no 
descendant old or young!” The superior man 
will say that this covenant was sincere, and 
that in all this service the marquis of Tsin over- 
came by the virtuous training which he had 
given to his people.’ 

mention is made of king 
Seangs brother Hoo taking part in the cove- 
nant of Tseen-t'oo. Maou says that he is not 
mentioned, b^use, though he presided over 
the covenant, he was not a party to it, and did 
not smear his lips with the blood of the victim 
m covenant WM made, acc. to the text, on 
Kwei^'ow, the 18th day of the month ; ack to 
the Chuen, on Kwei-hae, the 2Sth day. Too 
observes that one or other of these dates must 
be wrong. 

Par. 9. The marquis of Ch’in had been one of 
the adherents of Ts‘oo, but now he wished Uke 
other princes, to join the p.arty of the victorious 
Tsin. He went to the meeting, but did not ar 
rive at Ts6cn-t‘oo, till the covenant was o°^r. 

P.W. 10. Tills p.>ir. implies what is related in 
the Clincn on p. S, that the king in person had 
met the marquis of Tsin on his return from 


Par. 11. — see on ll.xv.6. The 

Chuen says:— ‘Some one accused Yuen Heuen 
to the mareuis of Wei, saying that he was 
tmsmg Shnh-woo to the real niarquisate, and 
ae marquis thereupon caused Beuen’s son. 
Ji.eoh, who was in attendance on him, to be 
put to death, Notwithstatidiug. this, Beaen did 
not disregard the charge which he had received 
trom the marquis, but supported E-shuh fEis 
thehon. title of Shuh-woo, the marquis’s bro- 
wer] in the guardianship of the State. In the 
6th month, the people of Tsin restored the 
marquis, and then the officer King Woo Ton 
the mmquis’s part] and the people of Wei 
m^e the following covenant in Ynen-puh: — 
Heaven srat down calamity on the State of 
\>ei, so that the ruler and his subjects were not 
harmonious, and we were brought to our pres- 
rait state of sorrow. But now Heaven is 
guiding all minds, bringing them in humility to 
Hthei-e had not been those 
woTild have kept 
altars for the ruler? If there had not been 
those who went abroad tcithhim, who would have 
warded his cattle and horses? Became of 
the former want of harmony, we now clearly 
beg to covenant before yon, great Spirits, asking 
you to direct our’ consciences from tliis time 
forward ^ter this covenant, those who irent 
abroad with the mumife shaU not presume upon 
services, and those who remained in the 
State need not fear that any crime will be 
If any bre-ik this covenant 
^citmg dissari^actions and quarrels, may the 
***^.?!4 Spirits and our former rnlets mark 
and des^y them I ” When the people heard this 
coymant, they had no longer any doubts in their 
minds. Afer this, the marqnis^wish^ to eS 
before the the time agreed upon, the 
^cer going before him [to prep^ the 
Tsang who had charge of tlie ’ 
gite, thinkmg he was a messenger, entered in 
the same «arria^ with liim. Mean^^ile the m8r“ 
qms’s brother ai‘uen-keucn, and Hwa 
rode on ahe.ad of him. Shuh-woo was then abo^t 
^tethe; but when he heard that the marquis 
was come, ho ran jojifuily out to meet him 
holding his hair in his hand, and was killed by 

rode on 

fore. J ho IT>nTVl«V» t. - • • . 


the victory at Shing-puh. ‘The king’s place’ 
was of course ‘the palace’ built for him at 
Tseen-t‘oo. Kuh-lSing says that when 
are mentioned, the place should not be gi^ 
and that the mention of the place, where the 
visit is made or the audience had, intimates 
that it is not the proper place for the Idng to 
be in ; but the criticism is groundless. 1 traus- 
late ^ hero sis usmaL ‘Had an audience’ 

K*ih-kwan 
D. 1804 — 1372) observes tliat 
^ is a general term to describe audiences 
«i.h lie r«kr 


■tii! 


^e marams srat after him, and put him to dMt h 
Yuen Heuen fled to Tsin.’ 

The text says tlmt marquis of Wei return- 
^ ‘from ^‘00 C g to which he had fled 

j" fitat 

but Stopt short in his flight, and wem^o tS’ 

^(5 M? i 


Kuh-Ieang infers from tlic ^ 
^ that « waj TeVro which miorol the laar- 

™ ^ T,''oo 

Loo attacks Kc. The visit 1 ^'^ 


212 


THE CH'UH TSW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


undertaken Avith reference to the misander- 
standing between the two States, the mother 
of the viscount of the one and sister of the 
marquis of the other wishing to reconcile them. 
Par. 14. This Avas a visit of friendly inquiry. 

Avhich many reasons can he assigned. 

A l&dy one is that it was a sequel to the cove- 
nant at Tseen-t‘oo, in Avhich both Loo and Ts‘e 
had taken part. 

[The Chuen appends here : — ‘ At the battle 
of Shing-puh, the cattle of the army of Tsin 
ran, being in heat, into a marsh, and tcere lost ; 
the left flag, bdonging to the great banner, was 
lost; — ^through K*e Llwans disobeying orders. 
The provost-marshal caused him to be put to 
death fn consequence; the punishment was made 
knoAvn to aU the assistinff princes; and Maou 
Pei was appointed in his place. On the return 
of the army, it crossed the Ho on Jin-woo. Chow 
Che-k‘gaou had gone home before, and Sze 
HAvny was temporarily made spearman on the 
right. In autumn, in the 7th month, on Ping- 
shin, the troops in triumphal array entered the 
capital of Tsin. The spoils were presented, and 
the left ears that had been cut off from the 
soldiers of Ts‘oo were set forth, in the temple. 
There also the marquis drank the cup of return; 
imd distributed rewards on a great scale, pub- 
lishing the summons for another assembly of the 
StatM, and the punishment of those who waver- : 
ed in their adherence. Chow Che-k‘e’aou Avas 
put to death, and his doom declared throughout i 
the State, so that the people were awed into a 
great submission. The superior man will de- 
clare that duke Wttn excelled in the use of 
punishments, aAving the people by the execution 
of three criminals [Teen Heeh, K‘e Mwan, and 
Chow Che-k‘eaou]. TVhat we read in the Book 
of Poetry [She, m. ii. ode IX. l.j, 

, “ Cherish this centre of the State, 

To give rest to all within its 
four quarters,” 

is descriptive of the right use of the regular 
pAinishments.’] 

Par. 15. Wan, — see V. x.2. It had been 
conferred by king Seang on Tsin, as related in 
the Chuen appended ro par. 4 of the 25th year. 
This meeting was the one, the stimmons to 
Avhich is mentioned in the last Chu en. Kuh- 

leang has not the characters 7^ The 

meettng is memorable as the 1st of these ga- 
therings of the States at which Ts‘in, destined 
to absorb them aU. was represented. 

The marquis of Ch‘in, ImoAvn as dnkc Kung 

had succeeded to his father, AS'hose 
death is recorded in p. 12, but the father being 
not yet buried, he appe.vs here only as ‘ son,’ 
and is ranked after the earl of Ch'ing. The 
Chuen s.ays that at this meeting, measures Avere 
taken ‘to punish the States Avhich Avcrc not 
submissive;’ iue.ming Heu, and perhaps also Wei. 

Par. IG. lIo-yauEt Avas in pres. dep. of llvrac- 
k*ing, Ilo-nan, — within the territory of WCn. 

Kuh has The Clmcn says: — ‘As 

to the a«»embly herv.*, the marquis of Tsin c.alled 
Ihe kin.; to it, ajul tljen wjtii all tlie prince* hail 
an intfrvi.-w witli him. and riiaiJe him hoH a 
ciairt «.f in'j. Chime-nc said. “I'fir a j 

s’-t'j'-vt to Call hi* nihr to any pUee is a thing 1 


not to be set forth as an example.” Therefore 
the text says, — “ The king held a court of recep- 
tion at Ho-yang.” The text thus shows that here 
I was not the place for the king to hold a court, 
i and also illustrates the excellent service of the 
■marquis of Tsin.’ In this Chuen Ave have a re- 
markable admission by Confucius himself, that 
he misrepresented facts, relating events not ac- 
cording to the truth of his knowledge. I sup- 
pose that his words stop at 0j|, and that in 

we have the language of Tso-she; 

intimating that Confucius wanted to give some 
intimation — ^Avhich is very indistinct indeed — 
that the thing Avas not exactly as he said, and at 
the same time to acknowledge the good intention 
of the marquis of Tsin in the whole transaction. 

Par. 17. See on par, 10. Jin-shin was in the 
10th month. The characters bare pro- 

bably been lost from the commencement of the 


par. 

Par. 18. The marquis of Wei had been per- 
suaded by Ning Woo to go to the meeting at 
Wfin; but tbe marquis of Tsin refused to allow 
him to take part in it, and indeed put him un- 
der guard, till be should have determined on 
Ms guilt in the death of his brother. Ning Woo 
and two other officers, K'een Chwaug and Sze 
Yhng, accompanied their ruler to Wfin. _ 

The Chuen says : — ‘ The marquis of Wei mu 
Y uen Heuen pleaded against each other, Tn® 
officer K'een Chwang was rmresenta^e of the 
marquis, as the defendant, Arith King Woo t<^' 
sist him, and Sze Yimg as his advocate. The 
marquis’s pleas could not be sustained ; and the 
marquis of Tsin put Sze Yung to death, Md rot 
off the feet of K'een Chwang. Considermg that 
King Yu [the name of King Woo] had acted a 
faithful part, he let him off ; but he seized the 
marquis himself, and couA’cyed him to tbe cap^ 
tal, where he was confined in a dark room, with 
King Woo to attend to the supplying him with 
provisions iu a bag.’ 

Par. 19. The ^ ^ here is of course mere- 
ly := “was restored to Ms place” as minister. 
Heuen had fled from Wei to Tsin, 
der par. 11, to escape from the marquis. Things 
were now changed. Tlie marquis was a pnsontf , 
and the disposal of the State seemed to rest witu 
the officer. The Chuen says:— ‘Turn Heuen. 
returned to Wei, and raised Hca, another son oi 
duke Wan, to be marquis.’ We must suppo-c 
that Heuen had the authority of the marquis o 
Tsin lor what he did ; but the critics sac unani- 
mous in condemning him. The case of ' 

quis was now in the king’s hands, and 
should liaA'e waited for the roj’al decision aoou 
him and the affairs of the State. 

Par. 20. Heu, though only a small towie, 
was the most persistent in adhering to the lor- 
tuncs of Ts‘oo, influenced probably by t» 
consideration of its oivn contiguity to that otaia 

Tlie 


^ implies that the princes proceeded 

from their niccling at Wfin and audience of 
king, to the attack of Hen, Avithout *A-’tui’nin^ 
their St.Atcs. or engaging in any otlstr cnteri) >-• 
I».ar. 21. The Chuen sa.vs:-’ On 'J 
tlie princes all laid siege to the capital w • 
Tlie niarqui!- of 'fsin falling ill, H""' 
personal attendant of the earl of Ts’.aou. • 


Ykaii XXIX. 


DUKE HE. 


213 


tho ofllcor of divinntion, nnd ROt him to attribute 
tl»c marquis’s illness to his ilealiug with Ts'aou. 
“Duke Hwan of Ts'e,” rcprcsmlcd the. officer, 
“ a.sscmblcd the princes, ami establisheil States 
of diflorent surnames from his own [c./;., lling 
and ^Y■ei]; but your lordship now assembles 
them, and extiuRuishes States of your own 
surname; for Shuh Chin-toh, the first lord of 
Ts'aou was a son of king 'Wnu, and T'ang-shuh, 
our first lord, was a son of king Woo. Xot 
only is it not proper to assemble the princes and 
extinguish any of your own surname, but you 
made the •same promise to the earl of Ts'aou ns 
to the marquis of Wei, and you have not 
restored the c.arl as you did the marquis; 
— ^}'0U have not shown good faith. Their crime 


was the same, and their punishment is difler- 
ent ; — j'ou do not show an equal justice. It is 
by propriety that righteousness is carried out ; 
it is by good faith that propriety is maintained ; 
it is b}' equal justice that depravity is corrected. 
If your lordship let these three things go, in 
what position will you be placed?” Tiic marquis 
was pleased, and restored the earl of Ts'aou, 
wlio immediately joined the other princes at 
lien.’ 

[The Chuen has here an additional article : — 
'The marquis of Tsln formed three new columns 
of army to withstand the Tcih. Seun Limfoo 
had the command of that of the centre; Too 
Eeih of that of the right, and Seen Much of that 
of the left.’] 


Twmty-ninih year. 


^ s if 

±.a 0. 

5-.H S 3l5 ja «. 3l5 r: 

M ^ m I8.+ 


m ^ ■&. s w 

^.z Ri.iffl m MM m±^ 


XXIX. 1 

2 

3 


i 

S 


In the [duke’s] twenty-ninth year, in spring, Koh-loo of 
Keae came to Loo. 

The duke arrived from the siege of [the capital of] Heu. 

In summer, in the sixth month, [the duke] had a meet- 
ing with^an officer of the king, an officer of Tsin, an 
officer of Sung, an officer of Ts'e, an officer of Gh'in, 
an officer of Ts‘ae, and an officer of Ts'in, when they 
made a covenant in Teih-ts‘euen. 

In autumn, there was great fall a of hail. 

In winter, Koh-loo of Keae came [again] to Loo. 


214 


THE CH'UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK V. 


Par. 1. Keae was a small State held by one 
of the E or wild tribes of the east; — ^in the south 

of the pres. Kcaou Chow 

chow. Eoh-loo was the name of its ehief at 
this time. His coming to Loo would be equiva- 
lent to a court- visit but such visits were 

not interchanged by the princes of China with 
the barbarous chieftains, and therefore, we have 

simply ‘he came.’ The Chuen says: — 
‘ Eoh-loo of Eeae came to pay a court-visit to 
the duke, and camped in the country above 
Ch‘ang-ycn. The duke being absent at the 
meeting with the other princes, they sent him 


forage and rice ; — ^^vhich was proper.’ 

Par. 2. Eung and Euh both have before 


in Eung is 


Teih-ts'euen was 


near the capital, — 20 le north-east from the pres, 
dis. city of Loh-yang, dep. Ho-nan. The name 
was taken from that of a spring which formed a 
small lake. The Chuen says : — ‘ The duke had 
a meeting ■with king Hwuy’s son Hoo, Hoo Yen 
of Tsin, Eung-sun Eoo of Sung, Ewoh Ewei- 


foo of Ts‘e, Yuen T‘aou-t‘oo of Clr'in, and the 
earl of Ts'in’s son Yin, when they made a cove- 
nant at Teih-ts‘cuen ; — to renew and confirm 
the covenant at Tscen-t‘oo, and to consult about 
invading Cli'ing. The names of the ministers 
of the difft. States are not in the te.\t to con- 
demn them. According to rule, a minister of a 
State ought not to hold a meeting with a duke 
or a marquis, though he may do so with an earl, 
a viscount, or a baron.’ This decision of Tso^ho 
may be called in question. The view of Hoo 

Gan-kwoh and others, that the title ‘duke 

is omitted in the text to conceal the disgrace 
of the marquis meeting with his inferiors, is 
ridiculous. ' , x 

Par. 4. Tso-she says the bail amounted to a 
plague, or great calamity ; and that therefore we 
have a record of it. 

Par. 6. The Chuen says ‘ He came again, 
because he had not seen the duke the fo™®. 
time. He was received in the court, treated win 
ceremony, and feasted in an extraordinary wi^ 
Hearing a cow lowing, he said, ‘ She has 
three calves that have all been used as ^icti • 
Her voice says so.” On inquiry this was fou 
to be really the easel’ 


Thirtieth year. 


in ® *. A. ® 


I T 
IB.® 


^ 3E # ^ iB mm -S 

in ^ A.® ^ 

S ^ B T A s 

1 !.®. A 5 

msi % n. 

in m, 

air na JTT- -J?; H3 133 nm _L. -it -ar ^ ^ F5. 


<&r 


JE 


Wo 


^ w 1 4 wm MS t 


Viin XXX. 


in'KK lllv 


215 


M iW -R- 31 : 5S.m 33.*.f p f .E m.A 

• m«« n.* -"jf. .Ifo til mnf ir y>fr trf 


ipa p.|!i! ® «« i>A :tM iii.fi- » -t a ^ ^ 

T Jii 3iJ A JJ? SL & ^ m ^.i!l.4n ?51i 

-** ^ ^ » M .^1 la IaI* a « • * • 


I© is a 

T' 3!. SX. 

9 A m, 
mm 
mm. 

K iif- 

it 0. 

5 rs.il 

«fi- 

a s 

ii;^ 

JfJ.llS 

^■•tii. 

WfiE 

5 i* 

ZM, 


z.z B.zm^ a 

fsli W -A m =ff.f3- ^ ^.S; 

# it A ra f? fi- ^ Hii ^ ss 

fSr iil mm ® ^ |X :t: 5g filS 

=f- ^kJi s*i » ^ S'® S'.fiJ -i, ® 

3p: )3ll i».fi- iii.iR 3§.B.^ W. 
» * 25: A A I® a? « 15^ <a- se 1. 
:&■ <:.llt.ll!L.?»; 51 R5 

ip ? 2 ; ® 1 ® r# gf SIS ft ^ w T 

!Se.Sli A fO 3t # m Sp g-.si 

m^&Z f-.ES m :§ is Bii « Pi i&. 

J 2 . -»f * 4 - Jlli 11 ? F.^ W B •>/. SS. 


^ lii M i.ili ^ ^y2: m 

^ J3 M tr ii.'ffi ^ # m. 
m m 0 .tr 

■n ^ 


XXX. 1 It was the [duke’s] thirtieth year, the spring, the king’s 
first month. 

2 In summer, the Teih made an incursion into Ts‘e. 

3 In autumn, Wei put to death its great officer, Yuen 

Heuen, and duke [Wan’s] son, Hea. 

4 Ch‘ing, marquis of Wei, returned to W’'ei. 

5 A bodj’^ of men from Tsin and one from Ts‘in laid sieo-e 

to [the capital of] Ch'ing. ° 

6 A body of men from Keae made an incursion into 

Seaou. 

7 In i\*inter, the king [by] Heaven’s [gi’ace] sent his chief 

minister, the duke of Chow, to Loo, on a mission 
of friendlj’- inquiries. 

8 Duke [Ghwang’s] son, 8113^ went to the capital, and at 

the same time went to Tsin. 


216 - 


THE CH‘TJN TS'E-Vr, WITH THE TSO CHHEN. 


BOOK V. 


Par. 2. The Cbuen says: — ‘An officer of 
Tsin \T&s condncting an incursion into Cli'ing, 
to see whether that State could he attacked 
with advantage or not. The Teih took the op- 
portunity of Tsin’s being thus occupied with 
Ch'ing, and in the summer made an incursion 
into Ts‘e.’ Woo Ch'ing says : — ‘ In the winter of 
the duke’s 2Sth year, Tsin proceeded from the 
meeting at WSin to besiege Heu, and 3’et Heu 
did not submit. In the summer of the 29th 
year, at the covenant of Teih-tseuen, the mar- 
quis consulted about an incursion into Ch'ing, 
and yet Ch'ing showed no signs of fear. And 
now in the summer of this year, the Teili 
seized their opportunity, and made an incursion 
into Ts'e. It is plain that after the battle of 
Shing-puh and the meeting of Tseen-t'oo, the 
power of duke Wan as leader of the States 
went on ^dually to decay: — the state of 
things at this time might have led him to re- 
flection!’ 

Par. 3. Compare on p. 6 of the 28th j-ear. 
By Wm we must understand the marquis of 
Wei, who instigated the murder of Yuen, though 
it was committed before his entrance into the 
capital. We have in the Chuen : — ‘ The mar- 
quis of Tsin employed the ph3’sician Yen to 
poison the marquis of Wei, but King Yu bribed 
the physician to make the poison so weak 
that his master did not die of it. The duke [of 
Loo] ajter this interceded on his behalf, and 
presented the king and the marquis of Tsin each 
with 10 pairs of jade ornaments. Tiie king 
acceded to the duke’s intercession, andin autumn 
the marquis of Wei was released. He then 
bribed Chow Ch'uen and Yay Kin, saying, 
'If you can secure my restoration, I will 
make you my high ministers.” On this Chow 
and Yay killed Yuen Heuen, with Tsze-teih and 
Tsze-e. When the marquis was entering the 
ancestral temple to sacrifice to his predecessors, 
Chow and Yay were there in full dress to re- 
ceive their charge as ministers. Chow preceded, 
but when he came to the door, he tras taken ill' 
and died, upon wltich Kin declined the appoint- 
ment.’ 


Y- 


Notliing is said in the Chuen on the 


which in man 3 ’ editions is made to 
a par.agraph by itself. Two questions 


form 

h.avc ‘vexed’ the' critics greatly. 1st, Hen had 
been marquis of Wei for more than a year [see 
XXVni. 19, and the Chuen on it]; how is it 
that in the text he is simply called ‘duke’s son’ 
To meet this difficulty, Lcav Ch'nng 
1010-109") denies the truth of 
the statement, in the Chuen 

referred to. so that Ili*a had never been anythin"’ 
but^^ ; on which the K‘ang-ho editors re- 
mark that the truth of the Chuen is not to lie 
douhtwl. IIoo Gnn-kwoh thinks that though 
l ui-n Heuen had made lU-a marquis as the 
Chuen says, yet lU-.a had never accepted tlie dig- 
nity, and onlj’ Pdiisiderd himself ns holding the 
plncv of his luother, till he shotdd Ik‘ ]il>cr.'ited 
trum his c.'tpti\ity; and that consequently the 

^ ^ "I ‘he text i< the endorsement of hi* 
int<-gnt 3 '. \\ anu 1 urn f in the end «»f 


the Sung d3masty), holds that Hea had accepted 
the raarquisate from Yuen Heuen, and was as 
guilty as his minister, so that the text calls Mm 

merely to show tliat his twelve months' 

tenure of dignity was onlj; a usurpation. _TIie 
imperial editors, setting aside these thr^ vietrs 
approve of that of Too Yu, tvho admits that 
Hea had been made marquis by Yuen, but- 

tlunks that the title of ^ or ‘ruler* is not 

^ven to him, because he had not been |cecog- 
nized by the princes at any general meeting of 
the States ; and they then go on to set forth the 
usage of the classic in such cases as that of Hea 
and his brother more fully’’ than Too had don& 
2d, What significancy is there in the record 
of the death of Hea following that of Yuen, with 

the connecting between them ? Should the 
ruler thus follow his officer? Tlie text indi- 
cates that Hea had been the tool of Yuen, and 
was involved consequently in the same fate, 
blaou aplty refers to n. ii. 1, where the ruler pre- 
cedes the officers ’with the same between:— 


m 


«?L 


- 1=4 f-*-v -r a— • / - 

Par. 4. In XXVm. 11, the former retnrnot 

the marquis to his State is described by 
‘ ; here we have simply. Tlie reason of 


the difference in the language probably is, that 
in the former case the marquis had fled from 
Wei, and so left it as it were by his own act, 
while in the other he had been detained from it 
by the action of the marquis of Tsin, and against 
his own will. , 

Par. 6. The Chuen says : — ‘ In the 9th 
on Kcah-woo, the marquis of Tsin ° 

earl of Ts'in laid siege to Ch'ing, because of tnc 
want of courtesy which the earl of it had shown 
to the marquis in his wanderings [See the 
Chuen at the end of the 23d y’ear], and because 
he was with double-mindedness incliiimg to 
Ts‘ 00 . The army- of Tsin took a position at 
Han-ling, and that of Ts‘in one at Enn-nan. 
Yih Che-hoo said to the carl of Ch'ing ^ , 
State is in imminent peril. If yon send Chiiii 
Che-woo to see the earl of Ts'in, his 
sure to be withdrawn.” Tlie carl took tiio 
advice, but Chuli Che-woo declined the mission, 
saying, “ Wlien y’our servant was in the strengtn 
of his age, he was regarded as not equal to 
others ; and now he is old, and un.ablc to render 
any service." The carl said, “Hiat I was not 
able to employ you earlier, and now’ beg your 
help in my straits, I acknowledge to be my 
fault. But if Ch‘ing perish, you also will siiucr 
loss.” On this Che-woo agreed, and undertooh. 
the mission. . „ 

‘At night he was lot down from the 
by a rope; and when lie saw the e.-irl of 
he said, “WitliTsin and Ts'in both Iwieginp 
its cnpit.M. Cli'ing knows th.it it must peri*ii. 

If the ruin of Ch'ing w’crc to iK’iiefit your mrii- 
•-liip, I should not dare to speak to yiisi; ’ 
might well urge voitr oflieer* .and 'oMier* 


; 1 (III 

in 


rr.An XXXI. 


DUKE HE. 


217 


sudi !x c.isc. Blit you know the ilifiicuUy tlicrc 
•would Iw with sucli a distant bonier, another 
State intcrvcninir. Of what advantape is it to 
vou to di-stroy Ch*inp to benefit your neighbour? 
ilis advantage will l>c your di.-ailv.inlape. If 
you leave Cli'inp to be master and host here on 
tlie way to the cast, when your olllccrs go and 
come with their baggage, it can minister to 
their necessities: — and surely this will lie no 
injury to you. And moreover, yonr loniship 
was a benefactor to thejonner mir^uis of Tsin, 
and he iiromiswl you i/ir eitiis of Tscaou and 
Jliia; but in the morning ho cni.«sed the Ho, and 
in tiic evening he commenced building dejer.ces 
attainst jfnu : — this your loniship knows. But 
i'sin is" insatiable. Having made Ch'ing its 
Iwundaiy on the cast, it will go on to want to 
enlarge its bonier on the west. And how will 
it 1)0 able to do that e.xcept by taking territory 
from Ts'in? To diniinisli Ts'iii in onler to 
advantage Tsin;— this is a matter for your 
loniship to think .about.” 

‘1'lic carl of Ts'in was pleased with this 
speech, and made a covcnniit witii the iteoplc of 
Cli'ing. appointing Kc Tsze, Fung Sun, and 
Yang Sun to guard the territory, while lie liim- 
self rctumwl to Ts‘in. Tszc-fnn asked leave to 
pursue and smite liim, but the marquis of Tsin 
s.aid. “ No. But for his assistance 1 should not 
have arrived at my jiresent state. To get the 
benefit of a man’s lielp, and then to injure him, 
would show a want of lionevolcnco. To have 
erred in those with whom I was to co-operate 
sliows mv want of knowledge. To c.\chnngc 
tiic orderly army in tc!dd< tec came here for one 
of disorder would show a w.nnt of warlike skill. 
1 will withdniw.” And upon this he also left 
Cli’ing. 

‘Before this, Lan, a son of the carl of 
Cli'ing, had fleet from that State to Tsin. Fol> 
lowing the marquis of Tsin in the invasion of 
Ch'ing, he begged that he miglit not take any 
part in, or be present at, the siege. His request 
was granted, and he was sent to the eastern 
border of Tsin to wait for further orders. Sbih 


Keah-foo .and How Feuen-to now came to meet 
liini, and hail him ns Ids faliier’s successor, that 
by means of liini tliey might ask peace from 
Tsin; — and this was granted to tliem.’ 

It appears from tiic Clitten tliat tiic lords of 
Tsin and Ts’in were hotli witli llieir forces in 
Cli'ing. AVe must suppose, however, that they 
did not themselves command, and hence w‘o 

have J^, in the text. Too Yu 

says the ^ were ‘small men ' of in- 

ferior rank, but ^ need not bo so limited; 

and in fact wc know that Tszo-fan was in tlio 
army of Tsin, 

P.ar. C. Sl'aou appears before this in tho 
Chuen on III. .\ii, 3. It was a small Slate, a 
Foo-ptng of Sung, and has left its namo in tho 
pres. dis. of Siiaou, dep. Scu-chow 

Keang-soo. Chang Hcah supposes that the • 
visits of the chief of Kcao to Loo in the last 
year were somehow connected with the movo- 
ment in the text. 

Par. 7. Compare on I.ix.l. is hero 

‘the prime minister,’ as in IX, 2, 

The Chuen says; — ^At the entertainment to him, 
there were the piclkd roots of the sweet flag cut 
small, rice, millet, and the salt in the form of a 
tiger, all set forth. Yueh [tho prime minister’s 
name] declined .«»r// an entertainment, saying, ‘Tlio 
ruler of a State, whose civil talents make him 
illustrious, and whose military prowess makes him 
an object of dread, is feasted with such n com- 
plete array of provisions, to emblem his virtues. 
The five savours arc introduced, and viands of 
the flnest grains, with the salt in the shape of 
a tiger, to illustrate his services ; but I am not 
worthy of such a feast.’ 

Par. 8. Tlic Chuen says ; * Tung-mun Scang- 
cliung [SCO the Chuen on XNAT.©] was going 
with friendly inquiries to Cliow, when he took 
the occasion to pay a similar visit in tho first 
place to Tsin.’ 


Thirty-first year. 


218 


THE CII'UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


HI © JS T' ^.© B .0 'fs^ MM i 1 

#.# E3 # f 

la # 0 . 

juiv »_ii. ,t^ mt acG dtr •14' -i-h rn 


53 zra 

11 0 


^ I . 
■tfc.jiiE.iE H Ja 
T' ® # = ?« 
WiRt'S'^ 


I>«Cl fllu KSii « ■yn^ 'M- /MS y 4 » >*•■• <'<• '•^'t' ’. ; 

m^istn BMiM mM tfc.ra w.f.i i>x 
^iE.^SW®1"^Bnll.h#lg.f + 

m,^ 

«.iE m T' # 

» #.:s it: j£. 3 l 


3E z m 


'I - a IS vj- ;=ii 

A' X' B 

J: ® #.-ffc«i.tj 

-■& f^, 7 i S 2 s > 
iS BS :%, W It 2 

•tfc, h 

SPttH 
^ B.-tfc 
+ 


■Ifc.h 

0 


A 

•ifc.-tfc.'S^ ffl 

# 0.^ 

W#f 


XXXI. 1 In the [duke’s] thirty-first year, ■vve took the lands o 
. Tse-se. 

2 Duke [Clmang’s] son, Su)^ went to Tsin, ^ 

3 In summer, in the fourth month, [tlie duke] divined a 

fourth time for [the day of] the border sacrifice. 

4 The divination was adverse, and so the victim was let 


5 Still he offered the sacrifices to the three objects o 

Survey. 

6 It was autumn, the seventh month. 

7 In Avinter, duke [Chwang’s] eldest daughter — she or 1 e 

— came [to Loo], seeking for a wife [for her sonj. 

8 The Teih besieged [the capital of] AVei. ^ _ 

9 111 the twelfth month, Wei removed its capital to le* 

k‘ew. 


Pnr. 1. In III. xviii. 2 the characters 


denote simply ‘ west of the Tse,’ but here, 
and in VII. i. 8, x. 2, they must be the name of 
a certain district or tract of country, the exact 
position of which it is now impossible to define. 
As Tt>f> Yu says, Tso-sbc soys 

that it was a portio/i of the territory of Ts'aon, 
w'hieh the marquis of Tsin had apportioned to 
other Stnte.s in the duke’s 28tli year; and he 
fell* the fullowiu;' story about the acquisition 
of it:— ‘The dnko sent ’rpanR Wfin-chun" (o 
Tterirr hif {yoTtion; win, was passinit: a nijilit at 
Oh‘»inM-kwnn, the ik*oji1o «if which said t«i him, 
*‘Tmo, having recently secured the adhcrt-nce 


of th.' princes, «ill In- most kind to tho.'ic who . 

arc iie. 1 t respectful. If yon don’t make iniste, j that Loo took the opportunity 


you will not be in time to get any.” 
acted accordingly, and got for bis „jj„g 

territory of Ts'aou all the portion extenumg 
from T‘aou to the south and east ns fa * 
Tse.’ But this account of Loo s “‘'^'usition o^ 
Tso'se has been much questioned. 

K‘wang. Lew Clfang, and m««X,°y*^”’Tsin. 
carding the idea of its being a gift , _„„,i 
liold tliat tlic territory bad 
to Loo. had been taken from it lt>' q'licv 

that Loo now claimed and retook • • . p,j 

make a canon, that wlicrcvcr liOO is " 
ns ‘baking’ towns or land, niol no nn 
State to wliich tliev Itclongcd ts „ ng 

to understand that Loo was only 
own. Mnoti, according to his wont, • 
hold and decisive in hi.s view, arenhtg • 
ngniiKSt the alleged grant of clifli- 

tli.al 1.00 took the onnortHIlily of I® 


Year XXXI. 


DUKE HE. 


219 


ciiUies to .nttnck it anti deprive it of this terri- 
tory. Tliis is tlic proper explanation of tlje 
text. The ranon referred to is exploded by 
Vn.i.2. 

Par. 2. Tso-she says that Scnng-chung went 
to Tsin to render thanks ami aeknowledgoinent 
for the fields of Ts'aou. But Loo would think 
it ncccss.nry to communicate its acquisition of 
the territory to the leader of the States, though 
not indebted for it to his gift. 

Parr. 3— .I. The question of which border 
sacrifice is here spoken of has been much agi- 
tat^. ICung-yang, followed by Hoo Gan-kwoh 
and others, thinks it is the sacrifice at the win- 
ter solstice, the grand sacrifice to He.aven or 
God, which was proper only in the king, but 
the right to offer which had been granted, it is 
said, by king Ch'ing to the duke of Chow, the 
founder of the House of Loo. klaou and others 
think the sacrifice intended is that of the spring, 
' — the sacrifice to God, desiring a blessing on the 
grain. This is mentioned in the Chuen on 11. v. 
7; and I must believe it is that referred to here. 
We cannot suppose that duke He was still, in 
the 4th month, divining about the sacrifice 
which should have been offered, if offered by him 
at all, in the first. Tlie divining was to fix the 
daji on whiclt the sacrifice should be offered, 

which was restricted to one of the sin 
days in the month, the 1st of the 3 being deem- 
ed the luckiest. Kung-yaiig thinks that if the 
1st sm day of the 1st month was unlucky, then 
the 1st of the 2d was tried, and so on to the 8d 
montht but it is better to suppose that on this 
occasion the 8 sin days of the 3d month were ali 
dmned for and proved unlucky, so that a fourth 
divination was made for the Istsia day of the 4th 
month, as the sacrifice might be presented np to 
the time of the equinox. lilHien this also proved 
unfavourable, the sacrifice was put off for that 

year, and the victim was let go 

Tan Tsoo (p^ ^ ; of the 2d half of 
the 8th century) says, with regard to the spring 
sacrifice: — ‘Two victims were kept and fed; — 
one for the sacrifice to God, and one for that to 
How-tseil). If tile divinations in the three de- 
cades proved all unfavourable, the border sacri- 
fice was not offered. If the former bull died or 
met with any injury, tlie tortoise-shell was con- 
sulted about using the second in liis phacc. if 
the divination forb.ade such a substitution, or 
that second bull also died, the sacrifice was also 
in this case abandoned. Wlien this was done, 
tile tortoise-shell was again consulted about let- 
ting the victim, if it were alive, go; and it was 
let go or kept on, ns the reply was favourable or 
not.’ 

, — see the Shoo II. i. 7. Tlie TFony sacri- 
fice was offered by the emperor or king to all 
the famous hills and rivers of tiic country; and 
by princes of States to tliosc witliin their own 
territory. Wliat were the t/iree great natural 
objects sacrificed to in Loo is doubtful. Most 
critics, after Kung-yang, m.ake them — mount 
T‘ac, the Ho, and tlie sea. Too Tu makes them 
ccrt.ain stars, with the mountains of Loo and its 
rivers, — after Kiia Kwei and Full K‘cen. Ch'ing 
Heuen, considering that the Ho did not flow 
through Loo, substituted the Hwao for it in 
Kmig-yangs c.\planation. Tlie K‘ang-lie edi- 


tore, arguing from a passage in tlie Chow Le, 
Bk. XXII. 8-12, make the Wang sacrifices out 
to be something difibrent from those to the iiills 
and rivers. Kung-j'ang’s view, or rather Ch'ing 
Heuen*s modification of it, whicii Mnou adopts,- 
is to be preferred. 

The IT'ina// sacrifices were offbred at the same 
time as the border, and ancillary to tliem ; and 
might be disused when the greater sarrifice 
■was given up. Tlicy remain now in the sacri- 
fices to the heavenly bodies, the wind, and rain, 
which accompany the sacrifice of the winter 
solstice, and those to the mountains, seas, and 
rivers, offered at the summer. 

Tlie above remarks on these parr, have heon 
gathered and digested from many sources. 
Tso-she says on them: — ‘What is stated in all 
the paragraphs was contrary to rule. Accord- 
ing to rule, there was no consulting about a 
regular sacrifice; only the victim and tlie day 
were divined about. When the day had been 
fixed, the bull was called the victim; and when 
the victim was thus determined on, to go further 
divining about the sacrifice itself, was for the 
duke to show indifference io the anaent statutes, 
and disrespectful urgency to the tortoise-shell 
and the milfoil' This view is verj’ questionable. 

Par. 6. [To this the Chuen appends a note 
about Tsin : — ‘ In autumn, the marquis of Tsin 
hdd a review in Ts'ing-yuen (i.c. the plain of 
Ts'ing), and formed [all his troops into] five 
armies, [the better] to resist the Teih, Chaou 
Ts'uy bmng appointed to the chief command [of 
the two new armies.’] 

Par. 7. For here sec on XXV. 8. Tlie 
lady has been mentioned in XXVHI. 13. The 
son for whom she sought a wife was, no doubt, 
the ruling viscount of Ke, mentioned in XXVII. 
1, as coming to Loo, soon after his accession to 
tbe State. 

Parr. 8,9, We saw, in the 2d year of duke 
Min, wliatinjuiy the Teih tlien wrought to Wei. 
They obliged the removal of its principal city 
to Ts'oo-k'cw in the 2d year of duke H.e ; and 
we find them here necessitating nnotlier re- 
moval. Te-k‘ew was in K'ae Chow 
dep. Ta-ming. As preliminary to the Chuen, 
it may be mentioned that How-scang(^r 3 |^), 

the 6th of the sovereigns of Hea, was obliged to 
reside for a part of ids life in Te-k‘ew. The 
Chuen says: — ‘The marquis of Wei consulted 
the tortoise-shell about Te-k‘ew, and was told 
his House should dwell there for 300 years. 
Soon after, lie dreamt that K‘ang-shuli, [tlie 1st 
marqnis of Wei], said to him tliat Seang 
took away from him the supplies of his offer- 
ings. Tlie marqnis on tliis gave orders to 
sacrifice also to Seang ; but tiie officer Xing Woo 
objected, saying, “Spirits do not accept the 
sacrifices of those who are not of tlieir own 
line. Wliat are Ke and Tsfing [States of the 
line of Hea] doing? For long Seang has re- 
ceived no offerings here, — not owing to any 
fault of Wei. You should not interfere with 
the sacrifices prescribed by king Cii'ing and • 
the duke of Chow. Please withdraw the order 
about sacrificing to Seang.’ 

[The Cliucii appends liere:— -Sech Kc.a of 
Clring hated Kang-tszc Hea. and the marquis 
.tlso hated him. Hea therefore fled from the 
State to Ts‘oq.’] 


220 


THE CH‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK V. 


g B 


Thirty-second year. 


w 


a 


# A K I ± 


I n. m 


A a n 


CP 


i# S ;S: ft» ® ® , 

f ^ 0.#.;^ m =f ;S m m » ^ ® i i i 

*mww tti M-tk,A ?l.l' *Af 

.;2: A « j?D 


■■■- S-L 

A w + 


Jl&mji A ^ PI ^ iS^ ♦ A ^ 
MMj3mXZ ^.*1 ® * A ^ /S. 

•i* :([; S ^ S‘ 


ifc, 


* ^ s.Bff ±mz^&m^ 


ii aE » ;2 ® 55 « 


bR 


^ ^ 11 ;S:.S 0f.;^.0.^ S A ^ 


M. 


.ffi 


M.m m m zmm.‘M' 

" ffi.ii.H.S ® ^ 73f SB 61 
Z.,R ^MM 


¥ 

i 

0 » 


^61 

XXXII. 1 It was the [duke’s] thirty-second year, the sj)ring, th® 
king’s first month. .. , 

2 In summer, in the fourth month, on Ke-ch‘ow, Tseen, 

earl of Ch‘ing, died. ^ , 

3 A body of men from Wei made an incursion into [tne 

country of] the Teih. . , 

4 In autumn, an officer of Wei made a covenant wit i 

the Teih. 

5 In winter, in the twelfth month, on Ke-maou, Ch ung- 

urh, marquis of Tsin, died. 

Vnr. 1. [The Cliuon liorc introiliiccs n short 
note nboiit the relntions of Tsin niul Ts‘oo: — 

to 


rc- 


|ln tlio spring. Tow Chnnp of Ts'oo cninc 
Tsin nnd requested pence. Ynntt Cli‘oo-foo l_ 
tiinie.l the visit from Ts’oo. Tliis wns llie com- 
tii>-iicement of cjtnnmuic.-itio;is between Tsin 
nnd Ts‘ 00 .] 


Pnr. 2. For Ivtiiig-ynnp 
Furr. 3.1. The Teili, it nppcnr.s, Itnd 
Wei so much injury in tlic previous , _ 

the time of duke Min. Tlic Cliuen snjs. 
summer, svlicn there w.ns disorder nmonp 
Tcili, n body of men from Wei nindc n 


Ykak XXXIII. 


DUKE HE. 


221 


sion into tlioir country. The Teili hepped for 
pence, niid iti autumn an oflicer of Wei mndeu 
covenant with them.’ 

Par. Ti. Tiio jnnrquis of Tsin thus enjoyed 
the dipnity at wliieh lie arrived, after so innhy 
lianlsltips’and wnndorinps, only for nine years. 
He had several attributes of the hero about 
him. and we cannot but wish that ho had been 
permitted a lonper time in whiclt to exercise his 
Icndersiiip of tiie States. Confucius (Ana. XIV. 
xvi.) compares him unfavourably with llwan of 
Ts'e ; but his judRinent of the two men may be 
questioned. 

•'rho Chuen says: — ‘On Kilnp-shin, tlicy 
were cnnveyinp his coflin to place it in tfic tcm~ 
pic at K‘cuh-y"Jb when, ns it was Icavinp Kennp, 
there came a voice from it like the lowinff of 
an on,7ry bull. The diviner Yen made the great 
oflicefs do obeisance to the coffin, saying, “ Ilis 
lordship is charging ns about a great afTair. 
There will be an army of the west passing by us; 
we shall smite it, and obtain a great victory.” 

*Now KeTsze [see the Chuen on XXX, 5] 
had sent information from Ch‘ing to Ts'in, say- 
ing, “The people of Ch'ing have entrusted to 
my ciiarge the key of tlicir nortb gate. If an 
army come secretly upon it, the city may bo 
pot.* Duke Mull l_tlvo onri of Ts'in] eonsultcd 
Keen Shuh about the subject, and that ofilcer 
replied, 'That a distant place can be surprised 


by an army toiled icith a long march is what I have 
not learned. The strength of the men ivill be 
wearied out with toil, and the distant lord will be 
prepared for them does not the undertaking 
seem impracticable? Ch'ing is sure to know 
the doings of our army. Our soldiers, enduring 
the toil, and getting notiiing, will become dis- 
alTccted. And moreover, to whom can such a 
march of a thousand Ic be unknown ?” The 
earl, however, declined this counsel, called 
lor Mnng-ming [the son of Pih-le Ho], Se-k‘eili, 
and Pih-yih, and ordered them to collect an 
army outside the east gate. K'een Shuh wept 
over it, and said, “General Mttng, I see the 
army’s going forth, but I shall not see its entry 
again." The earl sent to say to him, “ What do you 
know, you ecnf enarian ? It w’ould take two hands 
to grasp the tree upon your grave [»'.«•, you 
ought to liavo died long ago] ” Keen Sliuh’s son 
also went in the c.vpcdition, and the old man 
escorted him, weeping and sn3’ing, “It will be at 
Henou that the men of Tsin will resist the 
nrmj’. At Hiinou there are two ridges. On the 
southern ridge is the grave of the sovereign 
Kaou of the Hea dynasty; the northern is 
where king Wfln took refuge from the wind and 
rain. You will die between them. There I 
will g.\ther your bones." Immediately after 
this the army of Ts'in marched to the east.’ 


Thirty-third year. 


222 


THE CITUX TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOK V. 


71^ I 


^ i f t i i>* if * 

^ ^ ^ fi S-* '18'S ^ t M ^ a # -t.A i ® 


S i ® - M,m ^ M m,w m ^ ® 

SS^S'#S 0 A ^ T m M rn.in M.M 

*•* ^ 'i®‘^ ^ H.^.Jg ^ e-® 

tor ■ Is^T B@ "S^ ;&/. ,ti. r— y >-«. «_*^ * Jf> 


M4K 


f 1 i‘f 

i i-f £ i-i ^ ^ ^-f Fi f- 

§*§<&■ ^ w M 0.A 1^, 

^ ^ i‘^-® 3t 5E.i5t ® # B5 ^ 

■? ^ Itl.fK ^ f 
i^.jsa a.-a .# 96 
0.^ iffl pfli n # f .$ 
H a K * r® 96 # 


1 i-S S t i S.s-» 

^ ^ ® 0.® Am ifn ,s, 


noiviv -WDoiiJ^ JL 

w !‘t ^ m.mi a.K fi 

V^« •rrm an «••••« .« S. .1 til. 


iiv ^*_Z. _. 'j^ fra -I’u 212;. v ) i!>^ti 

!| f: S g # ». « ts5 ^ m m n ft. ^• 

<; T- <:.ER.i^.3k.niJ iH' mM 53* 


Yujlu XXXIIl. 


DUKE HE. 


223 


^ © W.^M * -& -i, <a- f: - # 
Bn #• HI) w A ^ M MM 

Wp$ ^ B ^ ^ BM W ^ s.w.®.*.s m 

HM M ® Bn ^ ft S 

m ?i p ^ M.i T ^ f A *.f w m.m 


z 3^.^- ft ^ ± §3 jb. ii: fi.-i. m.m a 
w 'IS m ^.tB ■ 

•i.,K Bn « m ®(.K ^ Ste.3R M.m 70 ft ^ 

p lar.^ 5: m. 1 ^ 3)*: T- # « B •f'.^f- 

^ hm ± T.it.^ ® ^ s> ^ ti 

A ^ 5i ^ -a.-tii.js w #.# <: 

ft.-&.-th.ie ^ it 

ft ^ - <a- M T A 

7)' ^ j(a *.e m 


^,4n nft 

^ m m 

±.®. P 3| 
■T-arBS. 


H ^15 gX 


•!& 


# w.f- 
H.’A- .f. 
M SR Z, 
BiS 15 f! 
a -ill .11 

T 

m.k B. 
«#.# 
SS-f-P 

# ± S:. 

* 

A -a?.^ 
■?■ A Sli 
® «JS. 
E 

m 0.^ 

±¥,®r. 

A 

»SS®: 


Z 

P^. 


if«|5 1^ it ZMM «. 

A ^.P1 « 6 * 
SSi. A.;® irnm^^'^ 

mm.^M 

m @ 0.#;^ Aft 
^ s.^£ * m m p. 


m 

T 

Ji 

ft 

5: 

•ffi. 


% 

t£ 

•fr 

a 


ft 


^.S.;S.IE 

^ m ^ ©.A 

37 = A ^ ii it 

13. ^ A "tk.ifn ^ 
A A 

■M^.BM rffi 
g ^ ^ S SR 
^ A ft ^.13. 
f t tfc 
*.A 9^.m A 
ja is BT ft S 
ff ft t# 
•&,» 0.^. 
^ » 0.®:.:^ 
A 0.P fM g 
as « ^5: ft 7v 

am 


$13 

2^. 


B. 


m 


m 


BJ. 

m 

•tfc* 

:k 

P. 

Jl 


m 

m 


0*24 


^rxxS-avr-VrnH.ur,- ^ 

’- r* & f I' ® '^’ 


X.OQ'S^^* 


Vi/ 


>=5^J- ■ 

SSSffl- 


® E-1s W^ ■ „iutte 

'Q.vrali- _ _.f Ts*© seBi. ^ ■flieiasa 

•- "'rsB*s;f^?j5S3i‘- “-i 

s ani Ae Kean'S ^ ol 

- 0.. «*> ”' '* 

4 0“J^r’- . ..-,-,.nintoT£^- _ 


5 

6 
T 


On Ts'e- 

Tsvn- , _., incnrs^®^,^^ , Tsze'^^^'T* „ orinv? 

■ '■ »« «“ t.?‘ 

n "■"a,5s»“,''!?“ 0,1., •”*“•* 

trcGS b«e Aar one fto*" 

13 A Ur 

^ from “ ^=' fttSSi, tiwe 


.Tejur XXXIII. 


DUKE HE. 


225 


to him, he irns treated with the utmost ceremony, 
and also with sedulous attention. Tseng Wlln- 
chung said to the duke, “ Since the officer Kwoh 
administered its govt., Ts‘e has again showed 
all propriety towards vs. Your lordship should 
pay a visit to it. Your servant has heard that 
submission to those who are observant of pro- 
priety is the [siui?st] defence of the altars.’” 
Par. 3. After Tso-slie and Kuh-lcang 

have 6®- Hcaou was a dangerous defile, — ^in 

the pres. dis. of Yung-ning dep. 

Ho-nan. The Chuen says; — ‘[Seen] Chin of 
Yuen said to the marquis of Tsin, ‘‘[The earl of] 
Ts'in, contrary to the counsel of Keen Shuh, has, 
under the influence of greed, been imposing toil 
on his people ; — this is an opportiuiity given us by 
He.'ivcn. It should not be lost; our enemy 
should not be let go unassailed. Such diso- 
bedience to Heaven will be inauspicious ; — ve 
must attack the army of Ts'in.” Lwan Clie 
said, “We have not yet repaid the services 
rendered to our last lord by Ts'in, and if we 
now attack its army, this is to make him dead 
indeed!” Seen Chin replied, “Ts'in has shown 
no sympathy with us in our loss, but has attack- 
ed [two States of] our surname. It is Ts'in who 
has been unobservant of proprietj'; — what have 
we to do with [former] favours? I have heard 
that if yon let your enemy go a single day, 
you are preparing the misfortunes of several 
generations. In taking counsel for his posterity, 
con we be said to be treating our last ruler as 
dead?” 

‘The [new marquis] instdntly issued orders 
[for the expedition]. The Keang Jung were 
called into the field on the spur of the moment. 
The marquis [joined the army], wearing his son’s- 
garb of unbemmed mourning, stained with black, 
and also bis mourning scarf. Leang Hwang 
was his charioteer, and Lae Eeu lus spearman 
on the right. In summer, in the 4th month, on 
Sin-sze, he defeated the array of Tsin at Heaou, 
took [the commanders], Fih-le Milng-ming-she, 
Se-k‘elh Shuh, and Pih-yih Ping, prisoners, and 
brought them back with him to the capital, from 
which he proceeded in his dark-stained mourning 
garb to inter duke WSn, which thenceforth be- 
came the custom in Tsin. WSn Ying [duke 
Wan’s Tsin wife] interceded for the prisoners, 
saying, “In consequence of their stirring up 
enmity between you and him, [my father], the 
earl of Ts'in, will not be satisfied even if he 
should eat them. Why should you condescend 
to punish them? Why should you not send 
them back to be put to death in Tsin, to satisfy 
the wish of my lord there?” The marquis 
acceded to her advice. 

‘ Seen Cliin went to court, and asked about 
the Tsin prisoners. The marquis replied, ‘My 
father’s ividow requested it, aud Ih.ave let them 
go.” The officer in a rage said, ‘ Your warriors 
by their strength caught them in the field, 
and now they are let go for a woman’s brief 
word in the city. By such overthrow of the 
services of the army, and such prolongation of 
the resentment of our enemies, otir ruin wUl 
come at no distant day.” TFiVA tAis, without 
turning round, he spat on t7ie ground. 

‘The marquis sent Yang Ch'oo-foo to pursue 
after the liberatrd commanders; but when he got 


to the Ho, they were already on board a boat. 
Loosing the outside horse on the left of his cha- 
riot, he said he had the marquis’s order to pre- 
sent it to Milng-ming. Miing-ming bowed his 
head to the ground, and said, “Your prince’s 
kindness in not taking the blood of me his pris- 
oner to smear his drums [See Mencius, I. Pt. I., 
vii. 4], but liberating me to go and be killed in 
Tsin ; — this kindness, should my prince indeed 
execute me, I will not forget in death. If by 
your prince’s kindness I escape this fate, in 
tliree years I will thank him for liis gift.” 

. ‘The earl of Ts'in, in white mourning garments, 
was waiting for them in the borders of the capi- 
tal, and wept, looking in the direction where 
the army had been lost. “By my opposition to 
the counsel of Keen Shuh,” he said, “1 brought 
disgrace on yon, my generals. Mine has been 
the crime; and that I did not [before] dismiss 
MSng-ming [from such a service] was my fault. 
What fault are you chargeable with ? Twill not 
for one error shut out of view your great merits.' 

The last Book of the Shoo is said to have 
been made by the earl of Ts'in on occasion of 
this defeat ; — see the note on the name of that 
Book. The few sentences of the Chuen are 
much more to the point than all its paragraphs. 
The K‘ang-he editors have a long note, in 
which they disenss the question whether Tsin 
was justified in attacking Ts'in in Heaou, and 
conclude that it was so. The blame implied, as 

they fancy, in the ^ of they explain 

as kindly meant to hide the fact of the marquis 
of Tsin, in deepest mourning, and his father 
yet unburied, taking part in such an affair; but 
this is unnecessary. The marquis may have 
been near the defile, but all the arrangements 
were made by Seen Chin who was the actual 
commander in the affair. The Keang Jung, re- 
presented as descendants of Yaou’s chief minis- 
ter, came readily to the help of Tsin, because 
duke Hwuy bad kindly received and protected 
them, when they were driven out of their old 
seats by Tsin. 

Par. 5. Tso-she says the Teih ventured on 
this, ‘taking advantage of the mourning in 
Tsin.’ 

Parr. 6,7. Por Kung-yang has ; 

Knh-ffiang has The place must have 

been in Tse-ning Chow dep. Yen- 

chow. The Chuen says : — ‘ The duke invaded 
Cboo, and took Tsze-low, to repay the action at 
Shing-hing [see p. 3 of the 22d year]. The 
people of Choo did not make preparations to 
recavc an enemy ; and in autumu Seang-chnng 
again invaded it.’ 

Par. 8. Ke was 35 k south from the pres, 
dis. city of T‘ae-kuh dep. T'ae-yuen, . 

Sfaan-se. _ The Chuen says:— ‘The Teih in- 
vaded Tsin, and came as far as Ke, where; in 
the Sth month, on Mow-tsze, the marquis of 
Tsin defeated them, Keoh Kcueh capturing the 
viscount of the \\*hite Teih. Seen Chin said [to 
himself], “ [Xo better than] an ordinarv man, 

I vented my feeling on my ruler [Beferfing to 
his spitting before the marquis], and I was not 
punished; but dare I keep from punishinir mv- 
s^?” iri/A t/iis, he took off his helmet, entered 
the army of the Teih, and died. The Teih 


VOL V. 


20 


BOOK VI. DUKE "WAN. 


“B*7C”a f :A;* •%" 

i + A ® ^ 15 S J! .^. 


IS 


So T W.&€ T * S.3E 
?¥•#. EJfi B jE 

Siif ItS^ 

lifts 

sa is. 

=tf 


X 

^2t 


228 


THE CH'TO TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUE^^ 


BOOK TI- 


■If.* 

^ ZZiaB f 

M # m,}&M ^ f 

“ A m.w mM mmB.m ^m,M33, f.#.* 


;2 K » 11 a.® * * E SIS: IS I 

^./v ® ^ * 

» IE # -ffc.A # ■!& 

m iifi.-a.Ki B * » =f-M 0. 
K»AM*+^ei @ i5f#Jf 
* 0.^ H in a » ffi ^ ZMk. 
la A m ^ #;. A ja A « # ^ ■ 

mM.±mm^‘sm, 0.».^ 

A ^ ^.-t&.tii Z ^ -a.® ^ 


^ 0.S. 

j$^» 

^,ibM 


*n 


^.1 


j-j* 

jat 


A±. 


A ^ W ^ 'S ■ffii.'?^ 

^ Ai^11"*’®= ^ •- 


re :p ± 
14 » ^ # «.3E 0.m ¥ 0. 

P-ffi.# s s ® w ■© z.± ^ 

=g ^ 0.-tfi..!!^.3S A -16.=^ 

^ Si.® ^ 0 W. A 
^fJ: JL re 0.^ iE.-a. 
:.Bg X re 


PT Xfc 

IS WJ J4 
514.13.*. 


Si 


6ip 

Si 

ass 


sra 

^.3E.« 

E-ff 

#». 


?7g 

W pu 


pfs jm. 

wm 

taZ 


n 


®»3i£tSX 


¥W»1 


is^ 

2g. 

H 


<-.9F 

E*. 

M ik' 

K.;S. 


w 


Ef 


,w re jt ^ 

^ T i m A. 
H.F.A.0.®:-^P!. A 
ja i A *.®.7J # 

1 ^. 11 ,# re fi « 

it ^ h| <:.li *. S 

^ fr ft; A 18 re 

#-fa M, 0^.^-?® H. 

?6 0. -e. s.0.^ re 

I. 1 In the first year, in spring, in the king’s first month, the 
duke came to the [vacaut] seat. , 

2 In the second month, on Kvrei-hae, the sun "was eclipse^^ 

3 The king [bj] Heaven’s [grace] sent Shuh-fuh to be prese 

at the burial [of duke He]. , - j 

4 In summer, in the fourth month, in Ting-sze, v'e bun 

our ruler, duke He. 


Vein 1. 


I>rKK WAN, 


229 


o The king [hy] Heavens [grace] sent tlie earl of Mnou to 
confer on the duke (he svinbol [of investiturel 
0 The marquis of Tsin invaded Wei. 

7 Sliuh-.‘!nn Tih-shin went to the cnnifnl. 

8 A body of men from AVei invaded Tsin. 

9 In autumn, Kung-sun Gaou had a meeting with the marquis 

of Tsin in Ts'eih. 

10 In winter, in the tenth month, on Ting-we, Shang-shin 

heir-son of Ts‘oo, murdered his ruler, Kcun. ’ 

1 1 Kung-sun Gaou went to Ts*e. 


Tirtr. or run Cook.— ‘Duke W«n.’ 

l>ukc Wfin's iinnic was lling Ho was 

tlip son of iluko 11c by liis wife Shing Kcang 
a Oauglitcr of the Houso of Ts‘c. 
His ruTo lasted IS years, B, C. 725—008. His 
lionowry title Wtin denotes — ‘Gentle and 
kindly, loving the people ^ Q 

or, ‘Loyally truthful, and courteous 

His 1st yciir synchronized with the 2Cth of 
king Scang ( il3E)i the 2d of Scang 
of Tsin; the 7th of Ch'aou (j|^) of Ts'O} the 
9th of Ch'ing of Wei; the 10th of 

Chwnng (j|£) of Ts'ae; the 2d of Muh 
of Ch'ing; the 27th of Knng(^:^}of Ts'aou; 
the Cth of Kuug of Cb'in; the Hth of 
Hwan (ijjj) of Ke ; the 11th of Ch'ing of \ 
Sung; the 34th of Muh of Tsin; and the 4Gth 
of Ch'ing of Ts'oo. 

Piir. 1. Ereiything was auspicious at the 
accession of duke Wtln, and therefore we have 
the account of it in full, without anything to 
be 8(ud against the os in H. i. 1. 

Duke He indeed was not yet buried; but that 
circumstance was not allowed to intmere with 
the proclamation of the new rul^ and the young 
marquis’s reception of his ministers, on the 1st 
day of the new year. 

Par. 2. Before Q Kung-ynng has Too 
Yu, accepting T 80 -.she ’8 test, obserres that the 
is omitted through the corelessuess of the 

faistoiiographers. The eclipse took place on the 
26tb January B. C, 625. 

Par. 3, The prince of one State sent an 
oEScer to attend at the interment of the prince 
of another State; but in the Ch'un Ts'lw no 
record is made of the appearance of such envoys 
at Iioo. The record here is because the mission 
of Shuh-fnh was a special honour done to Loo 
by the king. The Chuen says that this Shuh- 
fuh was lustoriographer of the interior, and 
adds ‘ Kung-sun Gaou had heard that he was 
a master of physiognomy, and introduced his 


two sons to him, Shuh-fuh said, "Kuh will 

r^- The lower port 

of Kuh s face IS large; — he will have posterity 
in the State of Loo." ’ 

CTso-a’ic appends here:— 'Here there was an 
intercalary Sd month;— which was contrary to 
method of the former Icings in regu- 
lating (he seasons vns^-to make a commence- 
nicntot the pro;>cr beginning; to determine the 
correct beginning of the montlis from the com- 
mencement of the war to the end; and to reserve 
the orendus of days for the year’s end. By 
making the commencement at the proper bcgiii- 
ning, order was secured, and there was no cwor. 
By determining tlie commencements of tho 
months, tho people were preserved from error- 
by reserving tho overplus to tho end of the 
year, affairs proceeded in a natural way.] 

1 ar. 4. The Chuen here repeats the text 
without any addition, showing that the of 
the Chuen ot the end of Inst year belongs to 
tins place. The duke should havo been burled 
6 months after his death; but 6 had now 
elapsed, or 7, ff we count the intercalary month. 

"■P “ territory 

within the royal domain, assigned by some to 

the pres. dis. of E-yang ( jgr), dep. Ho-nna. 
Its lords were earls, descendante of Shuh-ch'ing 
one of the sous of king Wan; and 
wen^ oneaft^nother, in the service of the 
court. Tlie here conferred on the duke 
was doubtless the 'jade token,’ proper to his 
nmk as marquis;— see on the Shoo, ILi 7 
^mp. alsoni.L6. The mission of Sh^-sim 
Tm-shui was to express the duke’s acknow- 
ledgments for this token of the royal favour;— 

Tso-she soys-^jj ^ This Tih-shln was 

^andson of Yaw Shuh Ya, whose death is 
mentioned m ni,s3crii,3, and who was th« 
^^tor of the Shnh-sun clan. See the Chuen 

t *»• The Chuen says;- ‘In the last veara 
of duke Wan of Tsin, the princes of the States 
A*?® of them] to the court of Tsin - bnt 
djAe Ch'ing of Wm did not come: and he ’sent 

incursion into Ch'inu 
attaclnng also Meen-tsze and K'wane. At 
end of bis Ist year of mourning, , ■ ' . 

\‘>Jt States, and Tu. ■ 

When he had got to Nan-yang, Seen ‘ > 

to him, “You are imitating the 
V^], and wdl meet with cal^ity. 
ask your lordship to go to the * 


230 


THE CIPUN TS-EW, WITH THE. TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK YI. 


and I go ■with the army.” On this the mar- ( 
qnis paid a court-visit to the king in Waii, 
while Seen Tseu-keu and Sen Siiin prosecuted 
the invasion of Wei. On Sin-yew, tlie 1st day 
of the 5th month, their army laid siege to Ts‘eih. 
took it on Mow-seuh in the Gth month, when 
the officer Sun Gh'aou was taken prisoner.’ 

Par. 8. The Clmen says ; — ‘ The people of 
Wei sent to inform Ch‘in of their circumstance.<i. 
Duke Kung of Ch‘in said, “ Attack Tsin again. 

I will speak to the marqnis [in your behalf^.’ On 
this K'ung Tall of Wei led a force, and attacked 
Tsin. The superior man will say that this was 
the ancient method. The ancients passed from 
their own to take counsel with another State.* 
Par. 9. Ts'eih was the city of Wei, the caji- 
tnre of which is mentioned in the Chuen on par. 
6. It was 7 le north of the pres, city of K‘ae 

Chow Ta-ming. The Chuen 

says: — ‘In autumn, the marquis of Tsin was 
laying out the boundaries of the lands of Ts'eili, 
and there Kung-sim Gaou had an interview 
■with him.’ The K‘ang-he editors observe that 
this is the first instance in the text of the classic 
of great officers taking it on themsdves to have 
meetings "with t he pr inces. 

Par. 10. Por Kung and Kuh have 

The Chuen says: — “At an earlier period, the 
viscoimt of Ts‘oo, intending to declare Shang- 
shin his successor, consulted his chief minister 
Tsze-shang about it. Tsze-shang said, “Tour 
lordship is not yet old. You are also fond of 
inany [of your children]. Should you degrade 
him hereafter, he will make disorder. The suc- 
cession in Ts'oo has always been from among 
the younger sons. Morever, he has eyes [pro- 
jecting] l&e a wasp’s, and a wolf's voice ; — ^he 
is_ capable of anything. You ought not to raise 
him to that position.” The viscount did it 
however. But afterwards he ■wished to appoint 
his son Chih instead, and to degrade Shang- 
shin. Shang-shin heard of his intention, but 
was not sure of it. He therefore told bis tutor 
P‘wan Ts‘ung, and asked him how be could get 
certain information. Ts‘ung said, “ Give a feast 
to her of Keang [The ■viscount’s sister], and be- 
have disrespectfully to her.” The prince did 
so, when the lady became angry, and cried out, 
“You slave, it is with reason that the king 
wishes to kill you, and appoint Chib in your 
place.” Shang-shin told this to his tutor, say- 
ing, “The report is true.’ Ts‘ung then said, 

“ Are you able to serve Chih ? ” “ No.” “ Are 
you able to leave the State?” “No.” “Are 
you able to do the great thing? ” “ Yes.” 


‘ In winter, in the 10th month, Shang-sliiii, 
with the guards of Ills palace, held the king in 
siege. The king begged to have bear’s paws to 
cat before he died, which was refused him ; and 
on Ting-wc he strangled himself. The prince 
[immediately] gave him the title of Ling, but 
his eyes would not shut. He changed it to 
Ch’ing, and they shut. [Shang-shin] ^ok Ins 
place, [and is known as] king Muh. He gave 
the house where he had lived ns the eldest son 
to P‘wnn Ts'ung, made him grand-tutor, ana 
commander of the palace guards.’ 

Par. 11. The Chuen says:— ‘Muh-pih [Tlie 
hon. title and family place of Kung-sun GaouJ 
went to Ts'e on a mission of friendly inquiy at 
the commencement [of the duke’s rule] 
was right. On the accession of princes of 
their ministers should go everywhere on sue 
friendly missions, maintaining and cultiyati g 
old friendships, and forming external "1*“® 
of support. Attention to the services 
due to other States, in order to defend , 

altars, is the course of leal-heartednep, ^ 
faith, and humble complaisance. 
ness is the correct manifestation of virtue. ” . 
faith is the bond of virtue.^ Humble comp * 
ance is the foundation of virtue.’ 

[The Chuen turns here in conclusion to je 
affairs of Ts*in: — ‘After the battle of « » 

when the people of Tsin had returned tlie v 
tive generals to Ts‘in, his great 
others about him said to the earl, “ -t*”® . » 

was all the fault of Mang-niing; ypu P 
him to death." But the earl * 1,0 

owing to my fault. They are the words oitue 
ode of (the earl of) Juy of Chow [She, IH. 
Ode m. 13]:— 

‘ Great winds have a path ; — 5 - 

The covetous men try to subvert 

K he would bear my words, I would speak 

to him ; ' _ IB if I 

But I can [only] croon them over, 

were drunk. 

He ■will not employ the good, ... 

And on the contrary causes mo 
distress.’ 


It was by [my] covetousness. 


The ode is 


ap^^ble to me. It was my covetou^®J 
which brought the misfortune on him. , 
crime had he ?" Accordingly he again ^ 
[MKng-ming] in the conduct of the go 
ment.’] 


Second year. 


— ^ nr V rjrB 

z. # mTM 

E, •» » mm 


Vj:\n 11. 


DUKE WAN. 


231 


^ I ll=f 

:jx 


A* 

ss. 


ss 


m 

u 


#1 


W ^ .“I 

A. T ^fl3.J?. 

^U. 


ill 

tK 


— A. 


A* A 


/IM , 

W. 


II 


i^&l 


A. 

fit 


A 


^ lx 


■m 


i 


fit 


A 


<a-.i- T ii.^ ^ 5. fli msn m^m± 

la A a.^t a.-ffi a.^ ^ l 5E ii la •fe.^;;s.ffl! 

Hi- Ja # # ^ 3ffl I ®,4i!i * HI] ^.la 0. 

/V /rtr l.?r. An: m -33- -fc- ^ tl® ifil^ 5v7J sa 13 — 


— -Mr* 

jas 

i«" * 


i ■* ~1 I V.l l/V% r-M* f •*« « r* T*" ^•••'4 tr » M -■ ^ 

7^ fi.X S; rr ^ t.M ±.a.*.^. 5 A M Jg 
a.ia.i.^ a.np.is Jl 35i m 7^ # ^ 0 ?ip a ]|f 

^ if .a3c.T 11 m 

W id-.T^ IM' HJ3 ^ Rf ^ 11 ], m M M W-M 

5e ip -te.^.^.# js.* iMi.* &,mM 
““ ii:tiii^1^jafirr5EKSI a.*,® it m 
m fln sS.t: -S' * -t&.im S ife M 5:.® 
„ 7:f »#f-.HIl7:B.ffiRi;S»3Effe 

j.. .-t.fi.^ a.i# ste ± a.# ± M w ». 

■a.a Bn a.^7:#^M^* H.Aisja 

® B. pT ¥ R.ja # iw.ffe M^ffliaWSlWi^K 
ww M f a « 1 is.*.® -fg.ff s ^ ^ 
71: A ^.*..r!s i®.iB S.Si d# MM 0 .<a- W 

6 “f ^ ^..W SB ffl BS Ri ^ ® IK 

B.w II a RiB 0 .®..;^ mzm=:. 

#^^)®#75liJl^]a H.RS.Jg M, 

m A ^,a.A w * B,<a * « 


IW 

^ .1^ 
•aio!^ 


232 


THE CH'UN TSEW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VI. 


in 


I ® MA m m s m, 

a 

m MM M mM -ifc.fe-t&.w.-is ^P. 

® ■& 11.:^: •{&. J. * 

iS.® * z,m ^ ^ 

Z MM ^ iiS.fl m. MAn 

Jg = Ji # 0.* II ®t 0.11. 

X M.:?: mmm^X M. m 

*.i5 M -^M if 

M & m.® t?5 flff M.x mBM.m. 
m.X A * * S itM 

& m l.M iB * i- 
* ^A.X jit X mM M 
M‘& ^ fll X,M 

mm> fKABAZMMitM 

■ffi,.®c = 0.101.15:^.:?? A§C 

li -ffi. xm^Bm^ mM ^ 
Z^ ‘^M 


■tfi..M. 


±M> 


3TS^i 


•fi.0. 

Is 

II 

If 


?Lila 

M ^ 
JSsii# 


In the [duhe’s] second year, in spring, in the king’s secon 
month, on Keah-tsze, he marquis of Tsin and the army 
of Ts‘m fought a battle in P‘ang-ya, -when the army o 
Ts‘in was disgracefully defeated. r j i. 

On Ting-ch‘ow, [the duke] made the Spirit-tablet of duKe 
He. - . 

In the third month, on Yih-sze, [the duke] made a covenan 
with Ch‘oo-foo of Tsin. , 

In summer, in the sixth month, Kung-sun Gaou h^d a 
meeting with the duke of Sung, the marquis of On m, 
the earl of Ch‘ing, and Sze Hwoh of Tsin, when tliey 
made a covenant in Ch‘uy-lung. . j 

From the twelfth month [of the last year] it had notraine 
until the autumn [of this] in the seventh month. 

In the eighth month, on Ting-maou, there was the 

[sacrificial] business in the grand temple, L ^ 

tablet of] duke He was advanced [to the place of tlia 
duke Min]. 

In winter, a body of men from Tsin, one from Sung, 
from Ch‘in, and one from Ch‘ing invaded Tshn. 

Duke [Chwang’s] son, Suy, went to Ts‘c, with the i 
riage offerings [for the duke]. 


Yeah II. 


DUKE WAK. 


Par. 1. The site of P'ttng-ya (in Kung-ynng, 

^P) well.iisccrtainod. Probably it 

was in Ts‘in,— as Kung and Knh say. Accord- 
ing to Too, it should be found 60 /c to the 
north-cast of the pres. dis. city of Pih-shwuy 

7K)’ dept. T‘ung-cho\v, Shen-se. The 

Chuen says; — ‘ In the 2d year, in spring, MSng- 
ming She of Ts'in led an army against Tsin, to 
repay his defeat at Hisaou. In the 2d month, 
the marquis of Tsin went to meet him, Seen 
Tscu-keu commanding the army of the centre, 
with Ohaou Ts'uy as his assistant. Woo-te of 
Wang-kwan acted as charioteer, and Hoo Kuh- 
keu was spearman on the right. On Keah-tsze 
they fought in P'flng-ya, when the army of i 
Ts'in received a severe defeat; the men of Tsin 
calling it the army with which Ts‘in acknow- 
ledged their marquis’s gift [See Mnng-ming's 
language at the end of tlie Chuen on p. 3 of the 
S3d year of duke He]. At the battle of Hcaou, 
Lcang Hwaug had been charioteer, and Lae 
Keu the spearman on the right. On the day 
after it, dulse Scang had one of the prisoners 
bound, and ordered Lae Keu to kill him with a 
spear. The prisoner gave a shout, and Keu 
dropt the spear, on which Lang Shin took it up, 
killed iiim, and, taking his hfi ear, follou’cd the 
mai-qnis’s chariot, who made him the spearman 
on the right. 

‘At the battle of Ke, Seen Chin degraded Lang, 
and appointed Sub Keon-pih in his place. Lang 
was aiigrj’, and one of his friends said to him, 
‘•Why not die here?” He replied, “I have here 
no proper place to die in.” “Let me and yon do 
a difficult thing,” said the friend [Meaning 
that they shouhl kill the general]; but Lang 
replied, ‘* It is said in one of the histories of Chow, 

' 'I1ie brave who kills his superior shall have no 
place in the hall of Light.’ He who dies doing 
what is not righteous is not brave; he who dies 
in the public service is brave. By bravery I 
sought the place of spc.arman on the right; 1 am 
degraded as not being bravo; — it is my present 
place. If I should s.'iy that iny superior does not 
know me, and did that which would make my 
degradation right, I should only prove that he 
did know me. Wait a little, my friend.” 

‘At P'ilng-ya, when the army was marshalled 
for the battle, L.nng Shin, with his own followers, 
dashed into the army of Ts'in, .md died. The 
army of Tsin followed him, and gained a gre.u 
victory. The superiotr man will say that Lang 
Shin in this tvay proved himself a superior man. 
It is said in the ode [She, II. v. ode IV. 2]: — 

“ Let the superior man be angry. 

And disorder will be stopt ; ” 

and again [She, III. i. ode VII. 5] : — 

“The king rose in.njcstic in his wrath. 

And marslurlled his troops.” 

Wlicn Lang in his anger would not bo guilty of 
disorder, but went on to do good service in the 
army, he may be called a superior man. 

‘The earl of Ts'in, [notwithstanding this 
fresh defeat], still employed Mfliig-ming, who 
paid increased attention to the government of 
tlie State, and made great largesses to the peo- 
ple. Chaou Ch'ing fCh'ing is the hon. title of 
Chaou Ts‘uy] said to the officers of Tsin, “ The 
anny of Ts'in will lie here again, and wo must = 
get outofits w.ay. He who in his appruhen-ion ‘ 


increases his virtue cannot be matched. The 
ode says [She, Ill.i. ode 1. 6]: 

“Ever think of your ancestors, 
Cultivating your virtue,” 

It is in this wa^' that Milng-ming thinks. 
Thinking of his virtue, without remitting his 
efforts, can he be resisted ?”’ 

Par. 2. Tso says that this records the wrong 
time at which the t!)mg was done. Here belongs 
the greater part of the 3d par. in the Chuen at the 
end of He’s last }'ear. According to Maou, the 
practice of the Chow dynasty on the death of 
the prince of a State was this: — Ist, The spirit- 
tablets of the former princes were all taken 
from their shrines, and laid up for 5 months 
in the ‘grand apartment,’ during which time 
no sacrifices were offered to them. 2d, When 
the time at the end of those months came to 
place the tablet of the recently deceased prince 
by that of his grandfather, a procession was 
made with it to take the other tablets from their 
repository, and replace them in their shrines. 
The new tablet was placed in the shrine of the 
deceased’s grandfather, and a sacrifice was 
offered to them two. 8d, After this, the new 
tablet was carried back to the chamber where - 
tlie prince iiad died, where sacrifices were offered 
to it, while ail the others were left in their 
shrines, and sacriffeed to as usual [As the Chuen 

T ±’ iff T 

4th, At the conclusion of the mourning, the new 
tablet was taken to its proper shrine in the 
temple, and one of the older ones was removed ; 

— in the form and order prescribed. 

This account seems to be correct. Kung-ynng 
thinks that, after the burial, a tablet of the 
wood of the mulberry tree was made, and s.'icri- 
ffeed to in the chamber; and that, at the end of 
a year from the death, this was changed for a 
tablet made of the wood of the chestnut tree. 

If it were so, .’uid the 2d tablet be here spoken 
of, yet the time for making and setting it up 
had long gone by. 

Par. 3. The Chuen says: — ‘The people of 
Tsin, because the duke had not paid a court 
visit to their marquis, came to punish him. On 
this he went to Tsin ; and in summer, in the 4th 
nmnth. on ICe-szc, Yang Ch’oo-foo was commis- 
sioned to make a covenant witli him. This was 
done to disgrace the duke. I'hc words of the text 
‘iiindc a covenant will; Cli‘oo-foo of Tsin,’ in- 
dicate dissatisfaction with that individnal. The 
duke’s visit to Tsin is not rcconicd; — purposely, 
to keep it concealed.* The Chuen correctly gives 
the day Kc-szc in the 4th mouth, instc.ad of the 
Sd month of the text. 

Par. 4. Knh-lcang gives for and 
both Kung and Kuh give tor 

Ch’ny-lung was in the north cast of the pres, 
dis. of Yung-tsili, dcp. K’ac-fung. 

The Clmcn says: — ‘Tlie duke had not arrived 
[from Tsin]; and in the 4th month. 3Iuh-pih 
h.ad a meeting with the princc.s named, and Pro 
Hwoh. minister of Works in Tsin. at Ch*ny-lnng, 
with reference to TsinV punislinicnt of Wei. 
The marquis of CIrin bogged that Tsin would 
,nceoj>t tbe submission of Wei, .and off j seized 
K'tmg T.ah. in order to please Tsin.’ Tso- ■ 
interjects that Szc IJwoh is here mentioned 


voi, V. 


234 


TUE CII‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VL 


his name and surname, hecause of his ahility for 
his work. 

Par. 5. Cliaoii P‘rins-foi contrasts the wav 
in whieli so many months of drouirlit are here 
summarily mentioned witli the notices under 
duke He in V. ii. 5, iii. 4; — which see. 

Par. 6. Tlie ‘ great business ' here is what is 
called the ‘fortunate /c sacrifice’ in IV.ii.2, 
where its nature lias been sufiiciently explained. 
Here, ns tliere, it was performed 3 montlis before 
the proper time; and tliis coincidence might lead 
us to think that some new regulation afTccting 
the date^ of the service had been adopted in 
Hoo. Ihe stress of the paragraph, however, 
js in the conclusion, — the advancing the tablet 
of duke He into the place which had been for 
more than 30 years occupied bv that of his 
brother and predecessor, Jlin. This has given 
rise to numerous subtle and perplexing discus- 
sions. The account of it in the Chuen is the 
following;— -‘This was contrary’ to the order of 

sacrifice jj|j3. Too explains the phrase 

thus: “He was the elder brother, and they 
could not be placed as father and son; he had 
been the subject of Min, and his proper place 
was beneath him. But now his tablet was 
phic^ above Min’s ; — ^lienee the expression 

”j. On this, Hea-foo Puh-ke, who was 
then director of the ancestral temple, wished to 
honour duke He, and told what lie had seen, 

^ Spirit great, and the 

old Spirit small. To put the great one first, 
and the small one after it, is the natural order. 
And to advance him who was sage and worthy, 
is the act of intelligence. What is according to 
natur.-!! order and intelligence has a principle of 
reason in it.” But the superior man must con- 
sider the act to have been contrary to the 
propriety of the ceremony. In ceremonies 
everything must be in the proper natural order; 
mid sacrifice is the great busmess of the State. 
How can it be called propriety to go contrarj’ 
to the order of it? Tlie son may have been 
reverend and sage, but he does not take pre- 
cedence of tbe father, who has enjoved the 
sacrifice long. Thus it w.is that Yu did not 
take precedence of Kwfiii, nor T‘aug of Seeh 
of Puh-chueh. The emperor 
1 111 was the ancestor of the House of Sung, and 
king Le the ancestor of that of Cli'ing; and 
iiotwithstaiiding their bad character, they keep 
w the temples their superior position. Thus also 
m t ie Bmise-songs of Loo [She IV. u. Song 
IV.3Jwehave, 


three tliiugs which showed Tsnng Wfin-chung’s 
want of virtue, and three which showed his want 
of knowledge. His keeping Chen K‘in [Lew-Lea 
Hwiiy] in a low position ; liis removing the six 
gates ; and his making his concubines weave rush 
matsjfor sale : — these showed his want of virtue. 
His making vain structures [See Ann. V.xvii.]; 
his allowing a sacrifice contraiy to the proper 
order [The case in the text] ; and his sacrificing 
to thcYiieii-kew [A strange bird] : — these show- 
ed his want of knowledge.”’ 

The reader will probably think that this long 
note does not make the text plainer than it was 
before. — It was explained on IV. ii. 2, and on the 
19th cli.aiiter of the Doctrine of the Mean, that 
in the ancestral temple the shrines were ar- 
ranged in two rows, on either side of the slinne 
of the founder of the House. On one side were 
the shrines of fathers fronting the south. These 

were called di‘aou C^g). On the other side, 
fronting the north, were those of sons. Tli^ 
were (allied mvh (^). Of course the sons 

were fathers in their turn ; but the silualj®” ^ 
the row was determined bj' reckoning from tii 
founder. His grandson was the 1st cli‘aou, n s 
son the 1st and so on. But wlint was 
be done when brotliers followed one j 

the succession, as here in the case of abn a > 
He? Some critics say their tablets went aU * 
to the same shrine; but tliis is not the orfnofl • 
view, ’riiat holds that they were placed ]« 
as if thej' had been fntlier and son, and ' 
theory of the arrnngeineiit was 
Now when the tablet of Min got its place in 
temple, lie was a ch'aou. That of He ® *****.. 
have gone into the other row, opposite W » 
pushing out the muh wjiich was at the to^ 
But duke Wfin- wished his father to 
more honourable ch'aou place; and ^ . 
tablet was removed to the muh row, and we 
took its place at tbe bottom of the c/i‘nous. i 
director of the temple lent himself f®. * 

fringeiiient of the rule. He was in reality oi 
than Min; but Min liad taken 
him in tbe succession, as the son of m 
Chwnng’s wife, preferable to an elder broti 
who was only the son of a concubine. 

[Tso-she’s own remarks in the Chuen h Cg ^ 

-^- or • snnerior man ’ tliere. The other two 


‘In spring and in autumn, without delay. 
He presents his offerings without error. 
To the great and sovereign God, 

And to his great ancestor Uow-tseili;’ 

the .superior man thus in effect s.aying, “Hero 
IS the order of ceremony ; tbo’ How-tseili be 
near in rolatioiishij), % ot God lakes ibe pre- 
cwUnce in tbe sacrifice.” Another ode savs 
L5>hc, I . iii. ode XIV. 

“I will nsk for iiiy aunts, 

And then fur iny sister;” 

the EUivrior man thus saving-. “ 11 ore is the 
onlor <•! ceremony; tl,o* ilic »i.iter he the near- 

c. h nee of luT, Chnn'.:-nc -.aifl. •• I'Iutc were 1 


j or ‘superior man’ tliere. 

are to be take as the authors of the 
odes which are quoted, adduced by Tso-slic in 
confinnntion of his own view. The 
song of Loo was made after the time of du 'C 
He.] 

Par. 7. The Cliuen s.nys;— ‘In 
Tsen-kcu of Tsin, Kung-tszc Ch'ing of ® 
Yuen Sencu of Ch'in, and Kung-tszc " . 

s«ng. of Clihng, invaded Ts'in, "’b®" 

Wang and P-ilng-ya, and returned, .-'b®® J . 
of the expedition was to repay _Ts‘in fo 
coinpaign of I'*fing-va. The niinisiers are 
limned in ilie text,' [and they .arc only c.v 

^^], on ncooiint of duke Muh [of 'Js’i'O* 

of regard to the honour of Ts'in ; — ”” 'I'inl 

of tlie resjiect jiaid to virtue.’ [This 
leneo is merely 'IVo— hc’.s own erroneous c 
ci<m of tile ic.vi.] 


ysak ni. 


DUKE WAN. 


235 


Par. 8. The marriage of the duke with a 
daughter of Ts‘e is recorded iu IV. 2. The pre- 
senting the offerings of silk, denoted by 
was subsequent to the ceremonies of the engage- 
ment, and therefore I think, notwithstanding 
the protest of the K‘ang-he editors, that Too’s 
view is very likely, — that the engagement -had 
been made before the death of duke He, and 
that, as soon as the conclusion of the- mourning 


permitted, Witn proceeded to take the next 
step. Tlte Cliuen says : — ‘This visit to Ts‘e of 
Scang-chung was according to rule. When a 
prince comes to the rule of a State, he shows 
his affection for tlie States wliose princes are 
related to him by affinity, cultivates all relation- 
sMps by marriage, and takes a head wife, to 
attend to the grain -vessels of the temple. This 
is filial piety, and filial piety is the beginning 
of propriety.’ 


Third year. 


A,®. 

fl Kd T A K 


3^ 


So 


m 


M 


A.3E 

IE 


ir. 


a 

a. 


KM. 

KM 

mm 


m.m 1 l.f %MM H m ita s.© S a 
f®MM,tit.fs|A^i!A'(eifram± mM 
$ p f ? f « zwwT-'d!. 0 jsa 0. 

T ja # ® B tti.w.iis Zj lio = 

=^#051 

■fitcfe J A,Z M & E iS h.imM jX # 

s.flr fSAM t&.ia ro Sli. se c®. 


236 


THE CH-US TS-EH'. HTTH THE ISO CHCEX. 


BOOE TI. 


^ PI ^ 

^ T 5e. 3E W ^ 


. , , -- ^ 
iffi ^ J!ji -ffco-H ^ 


■%xni 


Mol 


III. 


& 

1 


yx ^ 


2g; 


ass 

B 


2fc. 

cr 


zx.^ T 


:2: 


/HI 


»fR 


IS 


* ^ 
:k 


-tfe.A 


B 


pR 


pg 


I 4il^ 


1 . 0 . 


2 

3 

4 

5 

6 


In the [duke’s] third year, in spring, in the king’s first 
month, Shuh-sun Tih-shin joined an otficer of Tsin, an 
ofiacer of Sung, an officer of Gh‘in, an officer of Wei, 
and an officer of Ch‘ing, in invading Shin, the people 
of v'hich dispersed. 

In summer, in the fifth month, king [He’s] son, Hoo, died. 

A hody of men fi’om Ts‘in iiivaded Tsin. 

In autumn, a body of men from Ts‘oo besieged Keang- 

It rained locusts in Sung. 

In winter, the duke went to Tsin; and in the twelfth 
month, on Ke-sze, he made a covenant with the mar- 
quis of Tsin. 

Yang Ch‘oo-foo of Tsin led a force, and invaded Ts‘oo, m 
order to relieve Keanar. 


Par. 1- Shin tths a small State, ^rhose lords 
TS'ere viscounts, •with the surname of the House 

of Cho'W} — ^rn the pres. dis. of Joo-yang 
^r), dep. Joo-niug, Ho-nan. Tso-she sajs 

that Ch-wang-shuh Chtrang is the 

hon. title given to Shuh-sun. Tih-shin] joined 
the armies of the States in this expedition, be- 
cause Shin had submitted to Ts‘oo,’ He adds, 

in explanation of the term that ‘the 

people’s flying and deserting their superior is 
indicated by that term, while their ruler’s 

fieang is expressed by 5^.’ The first meaning 


given to in the diet, is *a large body of 
water rushing away by a new channel.’ Such 
is the dispersion of the people fleeing from an 
enemy. 

[The Chuen appends: — ‘Tlie marquis of Wei 
went to Chun, to express his acknowledgments 
for the peace with Tsin,’— obtained by the medi- 
ation of Chdn:— see the Chuen on par. 4 of last 
year.] 

Pan 2. Tso-she says;— ‘In the 4th month, 
” . ancle, duke Wan 

the hoD. title given to Hoo) died. 


was sent therefore to duke W3Xn, as 

son, and condolences were returned to uno > 

if Hoo had been the prince of a State. 

Chuen says he was king Seang s uncle, he m - 

hare been a son of king He 
leang wrongly Identifies him with the Sh 
foh of 1. 3, who was not yet dead. _ 

Par. 3. The Chnen s.ays : — ‘ The earl of 
invaded Tsin, and burned his boafe 
had crossed the Ho. He then 
and Keaon; and as the troopsof T^ did not 
out against Wm, he crossed the Ho at -p- 
of Maon, collected the bodies iu Heaon [&w • 
xxxiii. 3]. raised motmds over them, 

returned to Tsin. In consequence or tn s 

pedition, he was acknowledged as *h®ir • 
by the Western Jnng, and continued to e p j 
MSng-ming. From this the superior m . 
cognizes the style of ruler that duke ■‘J; ^ 

Ts-in was; — what entire confidence 


death 


_ -wnat entire coiiuuc“‘-'- — - * 
in the men whom he employed, ana wni ‘ ^ 
single-heartedness he stood by them. J. 

nizes also the qualities of M 5 ng-ming, 
he was and able, from his anxietr to '• »„ 
thoughts mare profitably; and the -p. 

of Tszc-sang [Tlie Kung-sun Che, who first re 
commended Mang-ming]. well , j.;« 

and introducing tiie good to the - t ; 

prince. What is intimated in the ode [Sh , 
ode I. SJ, 

“She goes to gather the white southernwood, 
Uy the pends, by the pools; 

And then she employs it. 

In the business of our i>rincc, 

was found in duke Muh. Ayj''- *’ 

[She. III. iti. ixK- “VT. 4]. 


Vtxis IV. 


Dl'KK WAX. 


237 


•• Nomt UIU’ *I:iy or niv:lit. 

In till’ sorvUv of tlu* ono man,” 

vttTo oxi-mplifliil in Mflnp-niing. Ami tliose 
[Slic, 111.1. trtlo X.S], 

“ His connji’ls rcacli«l on to Ins ili’scomlnnt.*, 

Topvoliniiinm'ssnml strength to his posterl- 

were c-templillwl in Tsro-sang.’ 

Aec. to the Chuen, the carl of Ts’in himself 
was in this expeililion. Still the of 

the text .shows that ho only nccomiianleil if. and 
liint the rommanil washelil hy one of his minis* 
tors. The eonclusion of this e.N)icililion diws 
soein a more tilting occasion for the Spcccli of 
the earl ofTs’in which eonchnlcs the Shoo than 
tile defeat at lliiaou, to which it is commonly re- 
ferred. 

Tar. 4. Ke.ang,— see V. ii. -I. From the time 
of the meeting recordctl in that par., Kiiang, 
notwithstanding its proximity to Ts'oo, had 
rontiimcd to ndliorc to the northern States, and 
was now to sutfer the consequences from its 
powerful neighbour. Ts'oo was, no doubt, 
emboldened to recommence its aggressive move- 
ments by the long continued bosiilities between 
Tslii anil Ts’in. The Chuen says that, on this 
occasion, ‘ Seen I’uh of Tsin invaded Ts'oo in 
order to relieve Keang.’ 

l».ar. Ti. sec IT. v, 8. Tlic Chuen says 

that these 'locusts fell down and died.’ This 
seems to be Tso-she’s c.xiilanation of the to.\t 
that ‘ it rained locusts.' This would bo a prodigy, 
and not a calamity or ploguc, as Kuh-lCaug 
mahes out the visitation to have been. Sung 
was noted for such strange appearances; — sec 
V. xvi. 1. 

Far. G. The Chuen says: — 'They were ap- 
prehensive in Tsin that they had behaved 
uncourtconsly to the duke [In the matter of the 
covenant, par. 3 of last year], and asked him to 
make a new covenant. The duke went nccord- 
ingl}' to Tsin, and made a covenant with the 
marquis, who feasted him, and sang the ode 
bcginnpg, 


'* Abundant grows the aster-southern- 
wood " [She, II. iii.ode II.). 

Chwang-sliuh [Poe on par. I) descended the 
steps with the duke, that he might acknowledge 
[the honour done to him], saying, "My small 
State having received the orders of your great 
State, I dare not hut be most careful in iny 
observances. Vour lordshi]) has conferred on 
me a great honour, and nothing could exceed my 
linppinc>.s. The happiness of my small State is 
from the kindness i>f yonr great one.” The mar- 
quis ako ilescendcd the steps, and declined the 
acknowledgments [which the duke was going to 
make]. They then rc-nscended the steps, when 
the duke bowed twice, and sang the ode beginning 
*' Our admirable, amiable Sovereign ” (She, III. 
il. ode V).' 

Far. 7. The Chuen says : — ‘ In winter, Tsin re- 
presented the case of Keang to the court of Chow. 
In conscijucncr, Wang-shuh, the duke Hwan, and 
Yang Ch'oo-fuo of Tsin, invaded Ts'oo in order 
to relieve Keang. They attacked Fnng-shing, 
and having met with Tsze-choo, duke of Scih, 
they rcturnc.1.* This narrative of the Chuen is 
not clear. Tszc-choo was the commander of the 
expedition of Ts'oo against Keang. He retired 
liefurc the troops of Tsin, and then the reliev- 
ing force also withdrew, having accomplished 
its object very imperfectly. Kung and Kuh 
leave out the before The K'ang-lie 
editors enter here into a defence of the conduct 
of Tsin in this transaction, against the condemna- 
tion of Iloo Gnn-kwoh and other critics. Too Yu 
says that the duke Ilwaii in the Chuen was a 
son of duke Wlln, king’s son Hoo, whose death 
is recorded in the second par. If it ivas so, then 
the Wang-shuh ■^) in the Chuen hero 
must be taken ns n clan-name and not asa 
‘the king’s uncle.’ I have so translated the 
characters in the former Chuen, because the 
rciationship of Hoo seems to be determined by 
his being called both ‘king’s son,’ and king’s 
unde.’ 


Fourth year. 


mi 


A m. 


> o 


mri 


£t. T 


238 


THE ClI-UX TS-EW, WITH THE T50 CIIUEN. 


BOOK YI. 


h m.# ©©© 

f ^ ^ SI A II w *.* 

B S # « m.iL.*- #i&mn 


^ Bn ».W.4ii 0 
# BS iW # w #. 
tr.® ^ :iE.^-.#. 
^ s.^f. 


® ^ ^ "T" 'IS zr, 
F& * * S.?S ».ltt |fe.» 
E 5!(.^ S -fS 

0.<S- 

z mM 
g ^ m. 
ffi 


ea 


km.m 
M s 


«• 

B3 


z.^ ^:z 

s — I 


"f 

A w.^ m ^ 

si %.iB W. 

ja ^ 

e 

- - • ■ :SS 

n 


m- ^ _ 

=a pf ^4- 
nif W.Igt. 

A 

3r.A 


.a tin iiB 

-ai, 

^ Zk^ 

B.±^ 


B 

A 

I 


S Bff 


Eti 
V S 


A 

IM lii 


Z 

Z,^ 


5 =P. 

^iii E E 


- 0 . 


Hi 

mz 

E 


ZMA. 

±.n 

# 


•t&. 

iK 


4:. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 


In his fourth year, in spring, the duke arrived from Tsin. 
In summer, [the duke] met his wife Keang in Ts‘e. 

The Teih made an incursion into Ts‘e. 

In autumn, a body of men from Ts‘oo extinguislied Keang. 
The marquis of Tsin invaded Tsun. 

The marquis of Wei sent Xing Yu to Loo on a mission of 
friendly inquiries. 

In winter, in the eleventh month, on Jin-j'in, the wife [of 
duke Chwang], the lady Fung, died. 

instead of the re* 


Par. 1. [The Chnen appends here three short ; and from the phrase i 
not^: — ^Ist, ‘In sprinjr they retnmed K‘nnsr { , vsa t ^ tt — - nnd lH- 

T-ah from Tsin to Wei [See the Chnen on II. -if • S^lar one ig — comp. II. »«■ Oj ®““ 

SSfo^lttiSsS j a,H. to. «.s .f. 

ni^nis of Wei went to Tsin to make his i is some person of mean rank, who was c. P* • 
the restoration of K‘un§r i ed on this mission. Tlie Chnen S3« ‘ A «'?“ 
of Ts'aon went to Tsin to j minister did not fro to meet the 
about the contributions | was contrarv to rule.’ It is then added The 

Lto the marquis, as the leader of the States.!* 

Par. 9 'TK.;. i i- . .J . 


ed on this mission. Tlie Chnen sars : ‘ A 
: minister did not fro to meet the i“dv ; 

I was contrary to rule.’ It is then 
j superior man. knowinp from this 

W?.n’« ause i Keansr (so the lady was nf^orwams - •/ 

davph.I^ bnnping home to Loo tlie I would not bo trusted in Loo. mipiit 

Vo’ ai^unt Knnp-tsre man of noble rank acted at her 

^ui cowcyitl the mamacc cifts as related in I mMn mi^Ti mol ?ipr pAt hcr ^ 


iar. This par. has reference to duke 


Y? vn lY . 


UUKi; \VAS\ 


230 


\n It'J a- t'f Uw- « ‘Ttu-rc wj to tuti aytm'lU's, 

1 Ml *•?* a »un' v*"-'* ’ Um tin y fnlU-<l In tlivlr Kun'rniiu*nt. 

» *h*.'!v1vr in tin- y'.nt* . atnl “I **"• j 'riinnn-hnnt nil tin* S*.nU>« in nil tin* kinudnm, 

1:5 ’.i t>r.* l! tli.'.t »1i<' tlionl'l unl K* 5 Ih- I'X.nninnl. 1u‘ I'M-ro'nl mii'lilv-rniitin.’ 


t.> (i' alV>'^1l-1 tntlu* nn*tr--*< <*( lltc lintvnn* 


t i)i.iT<|ni» of l?tn nv.nim-itn tin* iiirnMon in 
! jvrf't,. It !• nlxtinl to ms*!: for nny otlior 


ti:<- tmnjtni i>. I • inn I'.nj oi t m « i in. -..i- ; , 5 ,^, j, to in<tii.nti.< ilu* i‘»koV vniplintic 

riT», o’, tin- •MU'* futnr.r.n' n» tin- mUin; iioUf.-. , of 1ii» i>i‘r>i«lviiri.’ in lifl!<tilitii.‘. 4 l 

Hot tin !,- ,-.-,n 1-,' I-.-* .InuM til,' l.Mly « I j'nr.i:. Tin' CInn n mivm— ‘N inj: Woo of 
,1s«-,’lili-t tin' IllStijMl*-. lv«1l*1«-.inv: "*'UM . 

flij'j'ly Ki till' Miltjivl of ^lU. 'Ilu- iluko i till' iliiko *«■«» fi-mtiiif: with liini, niiii Imil 1 I 10 
■«». s;i'in7‘'to n to T»*.- for hi' hriil,-. si' iluto • ” ili-avy lioji tho tU'w," (Sho. 11. ii. oik* X.) 
rhw.-,tip i« T-Ul to hav,- ,1niit- in in.X!il». 3 . ■ a»'1 tho •* llcl Ihmn" (Sho. 11. iii. ,«1<* 1). *nnif 

'1! itv tin- /A it t.-vi*t,M,.l. whilo h.-n- it i' ! »t’ ‘IW tx’t l>roto.'t npaitwl 

. , . ... . i th>'M' mil*', iinr iliil 111 ' mnko ninniiT with niiy 

wr.ntini: : hni wi- hniri' fouinl It w.-nitinj; In tin- I , , * 

! other. Ill,' ilnki' «*nt till* olllci'r of coinimini- 

,a„i."..i.vin, linn- than n mmim of other 

i:.'.ajih.. lien-, ther.-.on-. I iini't nsrv,-. n. tlio j ,,r;vntelv [tin* fi'iiMm of liis coiuluct]. Ho 
K*a.,a-lu' mUtor' <1... with Knh.|e,,nK ratlu-r ^ "iVwmml thnt tho tnnsicinns, in 

than with I-'.. I he ilok,.' went hlmn-lf to l*v , „rt. lmi.,K:nc.l to come to Iho 

to ttc-iti- hi' hreti*. o/. > two jiKi-e*. I*', innorly, when iirineos of States 

Hnt hniv liaie we yn in'te.ai! of Jifi klnjiV court to receive inslruc- 

a* in 111 a*s5'..Tf T'lnfhe ihw' not meet j thms ahowt their Kovernment, and the king 
thi» ifUO'ti'in. hm Too n-jH-.it* the expl.mation of | gratilled them witli m» cntcrtninincnt, then 
the term wim't, is Riven nniier V.sxv.:t. , the •Heavy lie* the dew’ was sung, the 

Knh-U-.ani; al'o n.Mnc," it. tint 1 do not set* how- 1 »"» of Heaven Wing the sun [There siwkcn 
it can lie ndmittiil in this i-a'i'. And there is ’ "0- H"’ l»tiin-es n-eeivinp his conmmnds, 

no ni>ce."iiy for it. Tiiv duke went to ‘IVe, and ; [''"the dew is iilllfted hy tiie sun]. When 
in Id' iinVaiience eonudeied the warriniie ; '>»'*.'■ I'n'* hatlled witli any niininsl wiiom tlic 
thetv. in'ie.i,l of c'nirtin-g iiis hri,k* to Inm. and ; king was angry, and weiv reporting their succcss- 


theiv going tlinmgli tin* ceremonies projKjr to 
the m-ea'ioii -, — as he iiuglit to liave done. In- 
stead of sinudy, w-e inigiit luive 
a*- in 11. ii, .15, II. rt «/.; but it is needless i» find 
cither pniisc or Idninc in tiie undssiun of the 

I’ar. :i. S.e V. xsx. Tiiese norllicrn hordes 


king was angry, ami wen* reporting their stieecss- 
fid seriiiH’s. the king gave tlicm n red bow with 
a hundred rcl arrows, ninl a black bow- with a 
thonsaiid nrrow-s, to show- how the feast was 
one of reeoinpense. Now- 1, an oflieer of a State, 
am here to per{>etuiitctheo1d friendshiphetween 
Wei 1111,1 Loo; and thungh his lordsliip conde- 
scends to iiestow them, iiow- dare 1 accept such 


d.aring 


r. . 1 . ?v.e \ . xsx. I ucse in rincrn norites j j-rand In.nours to liriiig on myself tijc charge of 
to have lK.*cim.c more and more restless and J Cimfueius has celcbratcil the virtue of 


j Xinj; Woo in Iho Ann., V.xx., and cspccinUy a 


i'ar.4. Hie Micf of Keang m the end of .*,„,,ui,ty thatcould not hccquallod.’ Tl.ccritics 

last year prove, of l.tt le value, i he Ohuen „re fond of finding in the narrative of the Cliuen 

s.-iys:-‘\\hen ls*oo extinguished Keang, the „„ illustration of that stupiditv. 

earl of IVm ww mourning an account of it; CidingFung 

removed from Ins proper bi>,l-chnmbcr ; and did u . f 

Cn injr being the title or cpitlict bv wldch 

not nttinr Ins tiililit to bo fiittv siironcl omnrr . - 


not allow his table to be fully sjircad : — going j 


slie was called after death. She iiad boon a con- 


beyond the regular bounds [of sorrow-]. One of , . .,T Ar , , 

.. .tv I culunc of duke Chw-aiig, and she is luciuioncd 

his great ofiiecrs remonstrated with him, but bo . r<i .. . • vt • - ^ - 

..vv, ,.-.. 1 . T *" Chncn;-ihnt m V.x.m. 5. and. the 2d 


his great ofiiecrs remonstrated with him, bin be 

said, “When a State witli w-liosc lonl 1 bad „ „ , , , nr •• a, , 

coveiiautcil is extinguished, although I could ‘o I' • «- On her son’s co^ig to. 

not save it, I dare not but feel compassion. *»« she of his nobility (-^ J[^ 

And 1 fear for myself.” -The superior man will ^ ), and she here appears as or 

say that the words of the o;le (t?he, Hl.i. Ode ’ ‘wife’ of duke Chw.mg. She was of the House 
^ : of .lin which had the surname of Fung. 


240 


THE CII‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VI. 


Fifth year. 


SE- 


5 .AA^g~ ■ ■ ■ 

f m WM m 


=i ^ 

O ^ 


m 


2 f i d ¥ S ^‘§ s M & 1 > A 
=i i ^‘4 t ^ A 

* q # Sff 

tiza 


f.« ja ifif s‘w t.s M’«.^^:i'[i 


„ 

^:.S 5 E 

## IE 

4 ^ |i„ 3 E 


R 7>o ^ 


-J f f ^ g » ss -S B..« 

<;> /wo % , ^ij 1^ ^ ^ ^ 


*'^5 

16. 

a 


USA 
8(5 SIS n 
MSi 0. 
^ ^ 
iu ^ 


w 

V. ] 


f f i-i ® ^ 

f f ? 5 a « 
i f „t i ^-S' ^ ®-A 

lEnSAi', 

^ Ic f: S‘ M # 

rfff ifff tE 1^ Y'l' 


P.5 

X m 3 E 

flE •l&.f 

jfe. ^ 

*. f. 

^ # 
A ■ -B- 

A m. 

[first month, 


2 Tn J tr- ^ the funeral of Ch‘ing Fiing.J 

the thi^l month, on »Sin-hae, we buried our duchess, 
Ch'ing Fung. 

3 The king sent the earl of Shaou to be present at the burial. 

4 In summer, Kung-sun Gaou went to Tdn. 

5 A body of men from Ts‘in entered Job. 

7 Tn Ts‘00 extinguished Luh. 

Hen ^diJd ^ month, on Keah-sliin, Yeli, baron of 

Par. 1. Comp. I.i.4, a,„i III ; On the - , 

lomii.T *>f thc«o pn« i-ape Uyi is e.Tp!.nincfl, ^ ^le mouth of tlic corp«e ( 0 A Viinjr 

wno thejinmo *>f eert.-iin jewels, 'Pu,, ,.-ii, «| . ■' ^ ""as tlickin/s mcs‘Oiivcr, mentionc-*! in tlie 

‘p' arl'i aii'l e.-m. •' . i • i ' '''•c®"'Ipns‘apo rcferretl m. n« well ns Ihto ; hut if 

/TsZIi I an U. could not bo the s.amc m.,n. '1 1..- ,ms.. n;;. r on 


Yr.AU VI. 


DUKE WAN. 


241 


this occasion was prohnhl.v a son of the former. 
On tliat passage, Too Yu says lliat Yung was the 

or chin-naino. Hero Fan Ning says that 

Yung Slinli was a great oflicer of the 1st rank 
in the service of Uie king, and tliat Yung was the 

name of his , or the territory from whicii 

ho derived liis revenue. Tliis is probably 
correct, but the name of the territory became 

the clan-name of the famil}’. The between 

and intimates, acc. to Kung and Kuh, 

that the two gifts were distinct, and that each 
sliould'li.ivc been conveyed bj’ its proper envoy, 
wiiilc here they were both entrusted to Yung 
Shull ; — contrary to rule. But this criticism is 
more than doubtful. The K‘aiig-hc editors, 
after a liost of critics, sec, in the omission of 


before ^ strong expression of the 

sage's coiulcmnation of the king in thus sanc- 
tioning the elcv.ttion of duke Chwang’s concu- 
bine to the rank of wife. This criticism is no 
more valuable than the former. 

Par. 2. Comp. III. xxii. 2. As the lady Fung 
was now regarded ns duke Chwang's wife, there 
is 110 difficulty with the terms of this paragraph. 
Hoo Gan-kwob, indeed, says that- this would 
involve a further departure from the rules of 
propriety, as there would be the spirit-tablets 
of two wives to go into duke Chwang’s temple- 
shrine. It is admitted that in the siirine of a 
king only the tablet of his proper queen could 
bo placed; but the tablets admissible into the 
shrines of great officers were not so limited: 
and what the rule was in regard to princes or 
States and their wires is not ascertained. See 
Maou K‘e-ling in loc. 

Par. 3. For Kuh-leang has 

The earl of Shaou was a minister of the king, 
who derived his revenue from Shaou, in the 


present dis. of Yuen-k'cuh ^)’ Kcang 

.Chow Shan-se. Tso-she says his 

mission was according to rule, as well as that 
of Yung Shuh, in par. 1 ; — an opinion vehement- 
ly disputed by many of the critics 

Far. 4. The Chuen says nothing about this 


mission. Kaou K'ang and other 

critics dwell with justice on the court Loo paid 
to Tsin, while no messenger went to Chow to 
acknowledge all the king’s favours. 

Par. 5. Joh was at tliis time a small State 
in the south-west of the pres. dis. of Neu-heang 

), dep. Nan-yang, Ho-nan. It was 


afterwards removed by 1’s‘oo farlher south, to 
the dis. of E-shing dep. Seang-yang, 

Iloo-pih. Sec the Chuen on V. xxv. 6. The 
Chuen here says : — ‘ Before this, Joh had revolt- 
ed from Ts'oo, and become an adherent of 
Ts‘in. Now it was inclining again to Ts'oo, 
and in the summer, a body of men froth Ts'in 
entered it.’ 

Par. G. Lull was a small State, — ^in the pres. 
Chow of Luh-gan yI'I'b’ Gan-hwuy. 

Its lords were Yens (^^), representatives of 
the ancient Kaon-yaou. The Chuen says: — 
‘The people of Luh had revolted from'Ts'oo, and 
joined the E of the east. In autumn, therefore, 
Ch‘ing Ta-sin and Chung-kwei, of Ts'oo led a 
force and extinguished Luh. In winter, Kung- 
tsze Sech of Ts'oo extinguished Lc'aou. When 
Tsang Wiin-chiing heard of the extinction of 
the two States, he said, “ Thus suddenly have 
ceased the sacrifices to Kaou-yaou T'ing-keen 
[Sec on the title of Bk. iii., Ft. II. of the Shoo) ! 
Alas that the virtue [of their lords] was not 
established, and that there was no help for the 
people 1” * 

Par. 7. This was duke He ; he was succeed- 
ed by his son, Seih-go ( [The Chuen 

appends here : — ' Yang Ch'oo-foo of Tsin had 
gone to Wei on a mission of friendly inquiries, 
and on bis return passed by Ning. Ying of Ning 
followed him, but returned when they had got 
to Wiln. His wife asked him [why he had left 
Yang Ch'oo-foo so soon], and lie replied, “Be- 
cause of his hard rigour. In the Shang Shoo 
[See the Shoo, V. iv. 17] it is said, 'For the 
reserved and retiring there is the rigorous 
rule; for the lofty and intelligent there is the 
mild rule.’ This officer is all for rigour ;-^he 
will probably not die a natural death. Heaven 
displays the virtue of rigour, yet not so as to 
disturb the seasons; — ^how much more should 
this be the case with men I Moreover, round a 
man of flowers without fruit resentments will 
collect. Coming into collision with men, and 
the object of many resentments, he will not be 
able to maintain himself. I was afraid I should 
not share in advantages he might secure, but- 
would be involved in his difficulties, and so I 
left him.”’ 

There is added an additional short notice: — 

*At this time, the officers of TsiOj Chaon Ch'ing 
[Chaou Ts'uy, general of the 1st arm 3 -], Lwan 
Ch'ing [Lwan Che, general of the 3d army], 
Hoh Pih [Seen Tseu-keu, general of the army of 
the centre], and K'ew Ke [Sen Shin, assistant- 
general of the 3d army], all died.’] 


Sirth year. 


VOL V. 


31 


242 


THE CH'UE TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK Yl. 


-fr 


jgz; 


> 


2 


Si 
0 


fe J? W.S m M <2f.in + 

%nM 

M ± 

n. & ^ 


^‘S‘S ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ M. =. HT 1^ w m ' 

a# ^ ^.± * -ffi..- 

J f ^ ^ W l-S-^ * ^ 1 - 


^ ;ta wnj 

WJ Si JW 

?f 8 #. 0 . ^ 


yo. &i <, c rr BE 7 PJ.BH t: 

m « # :Jfe ^M.fr 4 g S' 
A i w -a » it M g 


f .f § A ^ i ± $ * ffl:.^ :l.H.i M-f 

^ — H.i ^ M S: Tif ^ ^ ^ m. 


Ybau VI. 


DUKE 


24.‘3 


?EiS 
:7:Bg 


■feja 

P4 IE 


ft 


nim 

« W 


& 


■?-M fSjf.firi l!§;^ 5® :5t ilifc.-lfi.. 

« Ti ill -ffl.® 3J: m m # 

Jt di; '^.z ^ 

m M A # H.iin J J ^ mj 0l^5k 

fia -a K ^ $(;.W ^SB 
3i Jil fi i® S? ® ?i5: # 

m ^ 3^ 1 

ffl W ^ A ^ 

Bt Sa.'n ^ J3c 

gi js pt a.# w *. 

» MM 
nm:f^z ^ '«,+ .^i. 

ZM Aumn-M 


_ 

■?• ■^ '^ fiB fli 
BMM ± # 
ZM. 
mmnnium 
^ 0, 'it ^ 

IK,® ^.ffif 


^ A ^,® H. 
■& Z.S ^ Iffi 

mm. 

^ W S,3 W 


VI. 1 In tbe [duke’s] sixth j^ear, in spring, there was the burial 
of duke He of Heu. 

2 In summer, Ke-sun Hang-foo went to Ch‘in. 

3 In autumn, Ke-sun Hang-foo went to Tsin. 

4 In the eighth month, on Yih-hae, Hwan, marquis of Tsin, 

died. 

5 In winter, in the tenth month, duke [Chwang’s] son, Suy, 

went to Tsin, to [be present at] the burial of duke 
Seang of Tsin. 

6 Tsin put to death its great officer, Yang Ch‘oo-foo. 

7 Hoo Yih-koo of Tsin fled to the Teih. 

8 In the intercalary month, [the duke] did not inaugurate 

the month with the usual ceremonies, but still he ap- 
peared in the ancestral temple. 


Par. 1- [The Cliucn appends here: — ‘In the 
Gth year, in sprinfr, Tsin had a military review 
in E, and disbanded two of its [five] armies 
[See the Chnen after V. sx:d. 6. The de.ath of 
so many of its great ofScers, mentioned in the 
previous notice, rendered this disbandment ne- 
cessary]. TAe margin's appointed Hoo ITih-koo 
to the command of the 2d or army of the centre 
[In room of Seen Tseu-keu]. witli Chaou Tun as 
assistant commander. When Yang Cb'oo-foo 
came from Wfin [See the first Chuen at the end 
of last year], there was a second review at Tung, 
when these appointments were changed. Tang 


had been attached ns assistant to Ch‘ino'-ke 
[Chaou Ts'uy, the father of Tun. Ch'ing is’the 
non. title, and Ke is the design.ation]. and was 
therefore a partizan of the Chaou family. Con- 
sidering, moreover, the ability of Chaou Tun, 
he said that to employ so able a nwn would be 
advantageous to the State, On this account 
Tun was advanced above [Yih-koo], and now 

he, the officer Seuen was afterwards Tun’s 
honorary title), began to administer the govern- 


ment of the State. He appointed regular rules 
for tAe various departments oj business; adjusted 


BOOK VI. 


244 


THE TS‘E^Y, \nTIl THE TSO CIIEEN. 


the laws for the various decrees of cr? 
gulatcd all criminal and civil actions 
searched out runaways; ordered the 
tnent of securities and bonds; dealt vj 
ordinances that had fallen into foul d» 
restored to their original order the distil 
of rank; renewed according to their i 
pattern offices that had fallen into t 
brouglit out men whose path had been stfi 
and who were in obscurity. When hil^ 
completed his regulations, he delivered tluj 
the grand-asSistant, Yang, and the grand-mi^ 

Kiia T‘o, that they might have them cai 
into practice in the State of Tsin, as its reg 
laws.’] , . .. 

Par. 2. Too says tliat this Hilng-foo was t j 
grand-sonof Yew, who is first mentioned in III j 
XXV. 6, and who subsequently played a most iniL * 
portant part in the affairs of Loo. He was eithey ' 
his grandson, or great grandson ; — which of thqj 
two is uncertain. The Chueii says ‘Tsang W«n- u 
chung, looking at the good relations of Chfin 
and Wei, wished to seek the friendship of Cli'in 
[for Loo]. In summer, therefore, Ke AVttn [Wiln' 
was Hang-foo’s posthumous title; see Ana. V. 
xix.] went on a friendly mission to Ch‘in, raarry- 


,iinc: re- 
nt law; 
cinploy- 
ith old 
order; 
•lotions 
onnol 
'isnsc; 
Mined. 
> had 
,•111 to 
ister. 
Tied 
ular 


the three sons of Tsze-keu, Yen-seih, Chung- 
hang, and K‘een-hoo, were buried alive along 
with him. They were Jcnoion as the three good 
men of Ts‘in; and the people bewailed their 
fate in the strains of the ode called “ The Yel- 
low Birds (She, I. xi. VI.).” The superior man 
says, “ It was right that Muh of Ts'in should not 
be master of covenants [t.e., leader of the States] I 
In his death he threw away the lives of his peo- 
ple. When the ancient kings left the world, 
they yet left behind them a good example ; — 
would they ever have snatched' away from it its 
good men? The words of the ode (She, Ill.ili. 
ode A., d), 

‘ Men there are not. 

And the empire must go to ruin 
and misery,’ 

have reference to the want of good men. Wliat 
shall be said of this case when such men were 
taken away? The ancient kings, knowing that 
their life would not be long, largely established 
the sagely and wise [as princes and officers]; 
planted their instructions in ilie soil of the man- 
ners [of the people] ; instituted the several inodes 
of distinguishing rank and character ; published 
excellent lessons; made the standard tubes and 
measures; showed [the people] the exact amount 
of their contributions ; led them on by the rules 
of deportment; gave them the rules of their own 
example; declared to them the instructions and 
statutes [of their predecessors] ; taught them 
to guard [against what was evil] and obtain 
what was advantageous; employed for them the 
regular duties [of the several officers] ; and led 
them on by the rules of propriety ; — thus secur- 
ing that the earth should yield its proper in- 
crease, and that all Iwlow them might sufficient- 
ly depend on them. It was after they had 
dtiiie all this that t/iojr nnrient kings Went to 
their end. Siircmling sage kings have acted in 
the same way. !5ut now, granting that tlnkr 

had no Mieh e.vamph* to leave to his pos- 
terity, yet when In* iiroecvdwl to take away the 


good with him in his death, it would have bwa 
hard for him to be in the Iiighest place, no 
superior man might know from this hat T jn 
would not again march 

Alas for this prognostication of Tso-s , 

p«.pIo mill '!> premreil Worclnnd, 


■» nine to nnu lucm, .„„rcliine for 


it; the Analects. saysr-'When 

Sh... 


Se..,, 

•and tlie 


duke 

oung, 


tliat might .arise, to tlio 

ruler appointed. Chaou ASIltng ^ jip. 

designation of Chaou Tun] entd. L ^ 

point a„kn !»»■• “/SilnS 

what IS good, and is grown rpgij,j. 

marquis loved him; he is near *}*J’*|. .npoiiit- 
and Ts'in is our old fnend. Sth- 

ment of n good man, the State . . ,i„„, the 
ened. In serving the elder son t5 the 

natural order. In calling the Kipding 

State, we act a filial part. And l^y bnmmg 

anew the old ties of H»7/i wAicA 

our repose. Because of the ‘ rowm 

the State is threatened, /®.'^*Y,in^*nosscsfca of 
up ruler to its head, and with L g po 

these four ndvtintngcs. tliose difficult le ^ 

removed.” Kca Ke [Hoo Yih-^o] smd, ^ uw 
better plan will bo to appoint ^ ....-jHpr! 

Loh. Shin Yingenjoyed favours of two 

quises [Seethe Chuen to V.xxm. ], j.(,pogo 
lier son to be our ruler, the yjng 

under him.” Chaou Mttng f jn ho 
ninnn, l.» rnnk tang ™ y «■" ™ 


1, lier I'WIIIW - I 

harem; — what feeling pf two 

inspire? And she was ,tho favourite o^tim 

marquises; — therein 'vas lewdim.. . mnrfluis, 
over, though the son of our f crc.at 

was unable to find the n^loiig 

State, but wont out to a f ^"fiself far 

way off. His mother lewd, ijij.fpnj- 

wttUfmf mwicstv. Cli’in small a 


away, without majesty 

incapable of liclping mm,. K‘o 

therefor reposing under if regard to 

of Too ['J lic mother of Yung], out to 

our marquis just deceased, --t.nndmitof 

to K'eili of Pill rduko S: ang s mot rj^. « 
regard to the [Kh'dno^s show 1 1( 
the] Tcili, she yicldwl again in fat o 
making hcrsolt o«/y the jovp,; her son, 

these accounts our former rii i,p has 

and sent him to servo i» ^ Consider* 

been a minister of the j J",,; ,',cnr at band, 
ing that 'rs'in is a great sidering also 

able to nfforil imn motiier and tlio 

liow tlie rigliteousncs-s of his niot^^^ ^ 

love of Ills fntlier arc siiffit-iii . j j 

pie. will it not be riglit to enll inni to me 


Y>:ak VI I. 


DUKK WAX. 


245 


of llu' Stntc r” Af<or tills. I'm! i-ont Si-on Mco-h 
ami Sn- llwuy to Ts'in to lirinp tlic prince 
Ywni; to Tsin, wliilo Ki-a Ko sent also to call 
prinia- l.oli from (.'Irin. CU‘aou Mftnp. howcvo-r. 
canswl l.oh to W put to death [on the wny^ nt 

re.* Tor njlii Uunp-yang has 
I’nr. 5. The K‘nng-he cilitors make this info 
two paragraphs, the second beginning with 

Tso-she. however, eonsideretl the whole n« one. 
as is evident from his brief note, that ‘ Seang- 
chnng went to Tsin. to bury dnke Spang.' 

rntr. (!,7. The K‘ang-he editors give these 
jwragraphs ns one. but I think it is iHJtter to fol- 
low the arrangement of Knii-leang. Ho also 

has instead of ^;j'. The Chnen says: — 
‘Kca Ke resented Yang’s causing him to bo 
sniKirsctlcd in the command of the army of the 
centre [^'e the Chnen after p. 1] ; and knowing 
that he liad not friends to succour him in Tsiii, 
in the Ptli month, lie employed Sub Knh-kcii 

t Belonged to n branch of the Iloo family] to 
ill him. The language of the test, that ‘Tsin 
put to death its great oflicer;’ isbcc.ansu Yang 
had interfered with the ofliccs of others. In the 
1 1 th month, on 1’ ing-yin, Tsin put Suh K‘ocn-pih 
rKnh-keu] to death, on which Kea Ko fled to the 
Tcih. Chaou Mang [Called the oflicer Sonen ; see 
the Chnen after p. 1.] by mid h>/ employed Yu 
Peon, to escort Ins family to join him there. 
Xow at the grand review in E, Kea Kc had dis- 
graced Yu Peon, whoso people wished on this 
occasion to put all Ke's family to death in re- 
payment of that in^urj-. "But he said, “Xo. I 
liaVo heard that it is contained in an old book, 
that neither kindness nor wrong c,an be repaid 
in the persons of a man’s children; and that is 
a principle with leal-he.arted people. Sly mas- 
ter [Chaou Slang] is lichaving courteously to 
Kea Ke, and would it not be bad if I too£ ad- 
vantage of his favour to myself to avenge my 
private wrong? To depend on another's favom: 
[to do this] would not show bravery. In satis- 
. lying my own resentment, to increase the num- 
ber of my enemies [By ra.-iking Chaou Slang 
his foe] would not show knowledge. To injure 
the public service for my private ends would 
not show loyalty. If I let go these three quali- 
ties. wherewith should I do service to my mas- 
ter?” So he collected all the members of Kea 
Ke's family, his household stofl', and his treas- 


nivs. kil the protecting force in person, and 
conveyed them to tlie borders [of the Teih].’ 

It appears from the Chnen that the death of 
Yang Cli‘oo-foo was procured by IIoo Yih-koo: 
and it «.« difllcnlt to nceount for the language of 
the text which ascribes it to ‘Tsin,’ — to tlie act 
of the State, Tso-slic’s c.xplanation is altogether 
unsatisfactory. . In advising duke Scang to 
supersede the Ics.s able by the abler man, Yang 
had onlv done Ins duty ; and whether it were so 
or not, liis action .'ifl'ords no explanation of tlie 
ascription of this ileath to 1'sin. Kaon K'ang 
says the record of the fliglit of IIoo Yih-koo, 
imnuMliately after that of the death of Yang, 
sufllcicntly shows that ho was the murderer; 

but this docs not account for the 

^ Kung-yang relates that duke Sc.ang told Kea 
Ke that lie superseded him on the representation 
of Yang; and some, accepting tliis account, hold 
that by the ‘Tsin’ we arc to underst.and duke 
Scang. who was now deceased! I can suggest 
nothing myself ns a solution of the difBcnlty. 

Par. 8. Tso-she says; — ‘Xot fo inaugurate 
solemnly the first day of the intercalary month 
was an infringement of the proper mie. The 
intercalary month is intended to adjust tho 
seasons. T/ic obsen-miec o/ the seasons is neces- 
s.aiy for the iK’rforninncc of the labours of the 
year. It is those labours by wliich provision is 
made for the necessities o*f life. Herein then 
lies the caring for the lives of the people. Xot 
to inaugurate property the intercalary month 
was to set aside the regulation of the 'seasons; 
— what goveniment of the people could there be 
in such a c.nse?’ 

Tlie inauguration of the month intended 
seems to be tlie offering of a sheep, alluded to 
in Ana. HI. xvii. After this ceremony, the 
duke, it would appear, presented himself before 
the shrines of his ancestors, with what cere- 
monies we are not told; and tliis over, he 
proceeded to give audience to his officers. 
Jfaon K‘e-ling thinks that that audience and 
the attention to the government which it implied 
is what is here intended by ^ ; but 

I cannot think so. Tlie ^ infficates that the 

TOtemony wliich follows was less important 
than that which precedes it, which could not be 
s,aid of attention to the business of the govern- 
ment. ® 


Seventh year. 


A 
AT. 

US 

T A 
❖ A 


A gng 


246 


THE ClI-UX TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CIlUEiT. 


BOOK YI. 


-T- JK ^ @ * ff ® H . ^- A « rT. f ^ i f . 

H ^S.Bi A :s. Jg ® 0.# ^ ^ K ^ 5^ 

^.B5 ^ 5: « 1*? ®.A ll.H « * *. 

ft # P.0.A..ia- ZM flS t ^ i 

^ z^MZittm-&mmzM^ii l-f 

\tir . 11 . -*• ^ Jal -«- -5^ ^ ^ t^r _jl 1 >1- ^ rifc Jft- 


P :p ® tfn IF.* -fe.l'.-g Sfc ii- e®.* 

■Bftfc >1=1 — I tan .-srs .3L c/s. yftrr ct f . aiti =cJ- _!^ 


X :?: # # ^.± m Tf-.^ H. MM 

P ^5^ iS ^ S.M.W S.TJr «l ^ § 

^3:.*.*.:^ JL g Sif ^ # 3 

:R 3i.* f II gfe m :S -f- # M 

^mzm^Tn m.ioiM ^ g 36 ® 

m m, 

■^ 1 * *#4- rCfc r*r >1^ >1-;. L. Hm t*t-t 5T3 Jfe :si* rfl 


^ ,•* rr \rS: M >iR <ja= ZZ, 'jT 

3£ *.*|: I# SS -fe SB pft }t H &!Z^ Z.& 

•4rJ cr.'v > S «. _ « - » *9 .%» -t.#-* ntl ^JlL^ 


''* w: \'ii 


e S8e^^ « ifc-ro7 «nd 

7 jepen ijjg ^ 'o «oo, and one of Toc 

'"‘'> “dlerpri® “S'"*!- •nomi” tj® ’^'^tern'bo ,1 
‘‘'ey made f Md a ®“’ ‘ie dufe . 


book 


Tn'E T50 CllKEK. 
tq.TVT VriTll TUi. 

the gh-o tsx^n, 


^ , , V 5.6. 16' M 

noxr proce^^, Choo. - py guard of tro°P^, Muh Xing ^med in 

asainst repn-al- -^n^.leauglias - jr I ‘/n Tif the late inarqu‘fr . ^ S3yd*=> 

'■par. 3. &Tltrv of this duke’s the eldest sono/jj^ 

cetemony ^ ^ (.hTiig. ...eithnioo*. I place, in se^ S ^'jpaasion of 

=?2 toe, dnk. ?m in. d. «^'peP sen •» «“ Sd «, >« 

ilTc^ 6' SgJ ^S^anded to ara^»' j to «S.i end Jl 'to .aid » 

^ce the narrative - of ^ 

. T.nH Yu^^as 


Ybxr YU. 


DUKE WAN. 


249 


licart out of them; — ^this is a good plan in war. 
To drive out an invader as if we were pursuing 
fugitives;— this is a good rule of action.” He 
instructed the soldiers therefore to sharpen their 
weapons and feed their horses, to take a good 
meal on their beds, and, with all arrimgements 
for silence and secrecy, to start while it was yet 
dark. In this way, on Maou-tsze he defeated the 
army of Ts‘in at Hoo-ling, and pursued it to 
K‘oo-show. On Ke-ch‘ow, Seen Meeh fled to 
Ts'in, and Sze Hwuy followed him. 

‘ When Seen Meeh was sent on his mission to 
Ts*!!!, Seun Lin-foo had tried to stop him, saying, 
‘Tlxe [late marquis’s] wife and son are still here, 
and we are seelung a ruler abroad ; this scheme 
will not succeed. What do yon say to declining 
the mission on the plea of illness ? If you do 
not do BO, you will meet with calanuty. Get 
another special minister to go in your place; — 
why must you go ? Officers of the same depart- 
ment are comrades; I have been your comrade, 
and feel compelled to advise 3 ’ou thus with all 
my heart.” Meeh would notlisten to this, and the 
other sang to him the 3d stanza of the Pan ode 
'[She, ni.ii. Ode X.] Still he would not hear 
him. Wlien he became a fugitive, Seun Pih 
^iu'foo] escorted to him in Ts'in all his family, 
with his household stuff, and treasures, saying, 
“ It is because of our comradeship.” Sze Hwuy 
was in Ts'iu for 3 j'cars without seeing Sze Pilv 
[Seen Meeh]. One of his people said to him, 
“ You could become a fugitive with him from 
Tsin, and you cannot see him here I What is the 
reason of this?” Sze Ke [Ke was Hwuy’s 
designation] replied, “ I was in the same con- 
demnation witli him; it was not because 1 
deemed him righteous [that I followed him]; — 
why should 1 see him?” And up to the time of 
his return to Tsin, he did not see him.’ 

Par. 7. The Cbuen sa j’s : — ‘On this occasion, 
the duke sent word of the incursion to Tsin. 
Chaou Seuen sent a messenger, who, by means 

Kea Ke, asked Puug Shoo [riie chief minister 
of the Teih] about it, and reproved him. Fung 
Shoo asked Rea Ke which was tbe superior of 
the two, Chaou Ts'uj' or Chaou Tun. Kea Ke 
replied, “ Chaou Ts‘uy was the son of a winter’s 
day [To be cherished]; Chaou Tun is the sun of 
a summer’s [To be shrunk from].”’ 

Par. 8 . Hoo was in Ch'ing, — ^iu the north- 
west of the pres. dis. of Yueu-woo, dep. K‘ae- 
fung. Hxe Chuen says: — ‘In the 8 th month, 
the marquis of Ts'e, the duke of Snug, the mar- 
quis of Wei, the marquis of Ch'in, the carl of 
Ch‘ing, the baron of Heu, and the earl of Ts'aou, 
had a meeting ivith Ch'aou Tun of Tsin, when 
they made a covenant in Hoo; — ^having refer- 
ence to the accession of the new marquis of Tsin. 
The duke arrived afterwards, and therefore the 
text does not say with whom ho met. In all 
cases of anj’ of our dukes meeting with other 
princes, when it is not s.'iid who these were, it 
must be understood that the duke came late. 
The reason wlij* in such case the States arc not 
given is to conceal the duke’s want of diligence.’ 
The canon which Tso here laj-s down for the 
c.\planntion of the text has been exffied in ques- 
tion by Lew Ch‘.ing and Sun Kcoh. Most of 
tbe critics, bowover, accede to it. To me it 
seems verj* questionable. 

Par. 9. Too Yu accounts for the brevity of 
this par., whore only the name Seu is ^ven 
without any mention of the leader, on the sup- 


position that the historiographers recorded the 
notice as it was received from Sen, which was 
toO' barbarous a State to draw up an announce- 
ment of the kind in the proper form. Lew 
Ch‘ang, however, argues, from the statement in 
the Chnen on the next par., that Ken sent, on 
the invasion of Seu, to ask a covenant with Loo, 
and that the announcement came from it ; — which 
is much more likely, and sufficiently accounts 
for the brevity of the notice. 

Par. 10. Eung and Euh have for M- 
The Chuen says:— ‘Muh-pih [Kung-sun Gaou] 
had married a wife from Keu, called Tae Sze 
[Q in the text should probably be 
who bore to him WSn-pih. Her sister Shlng 
Sze bore him Hwuy-shuh. On the death of 
Tae Sze he made proposals for another wife 
from Keu, but the party concerned in Keu de- 
clined them on the ground that Shlng Ke was 
still alive, on which he made the proposal, on 
behalf of [his cousin] Seang-chung [Kung-tsze 
Sny].- This winter, when Seu invaded Keu, 
they sent from Keu to Loo, begging for a cove- 
nant, and Muh-pih went to Keu to superintend 
the making of it, and at the same time to meet 
the lady for j^any-chung. When he got to Yen- 
ling, having gone up on the wall of the city, [be 
saw her that] she was beautiful, and married 
her himself. Chung asked leave to attack Mm 
from the duke, who w.as about to give bis consent, 
when Shuh-chung Hwny-pih [A grandson (ff 
Kung-tsze Ya, who was murdered in Chwang’s 
82d year; a brother of Shuh-sun Tih-shin of I. 

7. From him came the Shuh-chung family] 
remonstrat^ saying, ‘‘ Yoiur servant has hearxi 
that hostilities xvithin the State produce rebellion, 
while hostilities from witliout are from enemies. 
In dealing with enemies, you have still to do ' 
with strangers; in dealing with rebels, j'ou are 
arrayed against yourself. Now a subject is go- 
ing to produce confusion, and your lordship does 
not Mnder him ; and when the thing goes on to 
lead to hostile attacks [from without], what can 
be said?" Tbe duke on this stopped Chung’s 
movement, and Hxvuy-pih reconciled the two 
officers, advising Chung to give up his claim to 
the lady, and Kung-snn Gaou to send her back 
to Keu, and that tliej- should again be brothers 
as before. They followed bis counsel.’ 

[The Chuen appends here: — ‘Eeoh Kcueh of 
Tsm said to Chaou Seuen, “ Years ago, Wei be- 
ing on bad terms with us, we took part of its 
territory [See the 1st 3 'ear, par. 7]. Now it is ou 
good terms with us, and we maj* restore the ter- 
ritory. Wlien a State revolts from us, if we do 
not punish it, how can we display our majesty? 
)Yhen it submits, if we do not de.'d kindly with 
it, how can we display our indulgence? With- 
out that majesty and indulgence, how can we 
display our virtue? And without virtue, how 
can we preside over the covenants [of the 
States] ? You .are our chief minister, the di- 
rector of all the princes; and if you do not 
make it j-our object to manifest such virtue, 
what will be the consequence? It is said in 
me of the Books of Hea for Yu; see the Slioo, 
n.u.7]. ‘ CauUon them wrth gentle words; cor- 
rwl them vvith the majesty of law ; stimulate 
them with the nine songs: — in order, that vour 
success may never suffer diminution.’ There are 
; tiie virtues seen in tbe nine servicci, all of 


Tor, V. 


250 


THE TS'E'W, THTH THE TSO CHEEK. 


BOOK VL 


■phich may be snng: and they are called the ! 
nine son^. There' are the she macazines and 
three businesses, phich are c:dled the nine ser- 
vices. Water, Sre. metal, POod, earth, and 
grain, are called the six magazines. The recti- 
ficatibn of the people’s virtue, the conveniences 
of life, and the securing abundant menus of sus- 
tentation, are called the three businesses. The | 


accomplishment of them Pith righteousness 
shows the possession of propriety. _ The^ want 
of this proprie^, leading to dissatisfacSon- is 
phat produces revolt. If the virtue of you- Sir, 
cannot be sung, who pill attracted by 7°^ 
Why not make those who are now on good 
terms pith you sing you?” Chaou Seuea ps* 
pleased with this coimseL’] 


Eighth year. 


If. 


WM 

%T 

-ta. 


jm. A* 
-f A f . 


I . 

T 3E 

^ .a. ^ m w 


% 


n 


M 


1 # i i'S ^ ® A a g S 

A AM..m mm. MM, a f ^ 


S m 

« -a.K 0 j !3 
l-SsiAS-S- 
S .1 ^ S 


mm.._ 

. Sc.wm 

^ ^ as 

js.att' 


m 

fi? 

?¥ 

tzi 

ca t 


^ ^ ® A 

I f f -i' 
0 ^ M P- 

Si # 

J^i ^ ® 

T” 


Ybar Vlll. 


DUKE wa:i. 


251 


% 


-ft 

S'i 

s 

i>! 


m. 

m- 

#. 


iik. 

ill) 


■JR 
^ % 

# 

ai. 


m 

la 

ni. 

1 

It 

Avas 


first 


2 

It 

Avas 


jli- B M 

•'b.. # ;® ifii §¥. 

M ^ M W ^ ta 


M. 

sn 

13 


5 


7 

s 


_ M Heaven’s [grace] died. 

In winter, intlietentlimonth,on Jin-woo, dulce[Cliwang’s] 
son, Suy, had a meeting with Chaou Tun of Tsin, 
when the}' made a covenant in Hang-yung. 

On Yili-ycw, duke [Chwang’s] son, Su}-, had a meeting 
Avith the Loh Jung, and made a covenant with them 
at Paou. 

Kung-sun Gaou left to go to the capital, but he retraced 
his steps before he got to it. On Ping-seuli he fled 
to Keu. 

There Avere locusts. 

The people of Sung put to death their great officer, the 
minister of War. The minister of Works of Sung 
came to Loo a fugitive. 


Par. 1. [The Chuen gives here the sequel of 
the narrative at the cud of last j-ear : — ‘In spring, 
the marquis of Tsin sent Heae Tang to restore 
to AVei the lands of K‘wang and Ts'cilj [See the 
Chuen on I. C]. He also surrendered the ter- 
ritory, with which duke TTon had invested his 
son-in-law, Ch‘e, from Shin to the border of 
Hoo-laou.3’ 

Par. 2. [The Chuen appends here; — ‘In 
summer, a body of men from Ts'in invaded Tsin, 
and took Woo^shing; — ^in return for the afiair 
at Hoo-ling.T 

Par. 3. Tso observes that this was king 
Scang. He was succeeded by his son Jin-shin 

K‘ing (1^ 3E^* 

Par. 4. Hang-yung was in Ch'iug, — near to 
Hoo, mentioned in p. S of last year. The Chuen 
says: — ‘A body of men from Tsin came to 
punish us on account of the covenant at Hoo [For 
which the duke arrived too late]. In winter, 
Seang-chung had a meeting with Chaou Tun, ' 
when they made a covenant in Hang-yung: — ^in 
satisfaction for [the duke’s negligrace in the 
matter of] the covenant at Hoo.’ 

Par. 5. For Kung-yung, and also Tso’s 

Chuen, have This tribe of the Jung 

had its seat in the pres. dep. of Ho-nau. 
Paou was in Ch'ing. It comd not be far 
from Hang-yung, for Tlh-yew was only the 3d 
day after Jin-woo, when Suy covenanted with 
Chaou Tun. Tso-she says that from that cove- 


nant Suy took occasion to go on, and made 
a covenant with the Jung of E-loh. They, it is 
supposed, had assembled with the intention of 
attacking Loo. Suy became aware of this, and 
took it upon liimself, without waiting for in- 
structions from the duke, to go on, and treat 
with them, inducing them to give up their 
purpose. Probably, tlie c.ase was so. Bat Tso 
goes on to s.ay that Suy is mentioned here as 

* dnke’s son,’ to indicate the excellence of his 
proceeding, while in other places the same 

* duke's son ’ must he held to indicate condem- 
nation! 

Par. 6. Kung-ying leaves out the ||q be- 

fore Tso-she s.ays:— *Mnh-pih proceeded 
to Chow to express the duke’s condolences on 
the king’s death; but before he got there, he 
lied to Keu, to follow the lady Sze, taking the 
offerings wliieh he carried with him.’ The lady 
! is the Sze mentioned in p. 9 of last year, whom 
i Gao n had been induced to send back to Keu. 

^ means that he stopt short in 

his way to the capital, retraced his steps so far, 
and -then went to Ken. Many of the critics 
understand the phrase as indicating that Gaou 
refused altogether to comply with the duke’s 
order for him to go to Chow;— a riew which 
the K*ang-he editors rightly condemn. 

Par. 7. Here, as elsewhere, Kung-yang has 

for See on H. v. S, ct al 


252 


THE Cn‘UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VI. 


Par. 8. The Clnien says: — ‘Tlie wife 
t=widow] of [duke] Seang of Sung was a sister 
of king Seang, and duke Ch'aou did not bchare 
to her [His own grand-mother] with propriety. 
She, therefore, by means of the members of the 
Tae clan [Embracing the Loh Yu, Hwa Yu-sze, 
mentioned in the Chuen on p.4 of last year, 
and others] got K‘ung Shuh, grandson of duke 
Seang, put to death, with Kung-sun Chung-lc, 
and the grand-minister of war, duke Ch'aou’s 
brother Gang, who were all partisans of duke 
Ch'aou. The minister of War died grasping his 
«eal of office in his hands ; and therefore his official 
dignity is mentioned in the text. The minister 
of Works, Tang E-choo, came a fugitive to Loo, 
having given up his seal to the keeper of the 
treasury, when he left Sung. The duke met 
him in the manner due to his office, and pro- 
cured the restoration of him and his followers. 


Tlio text also mentions him by Ids official 
dignity, honouring him in the same way.’ 

[The Chuen returns here to the affairs of 
Tsin:— ‘At the grand military review at E 
[See the Chuen at the beginning of the 6th 
year], the marquis had wished to raise Ee 
Ch‘ing-foo and Seen Too [to the command oi 
the 1st army], and to give faze Hwoh and L^ng 
Yih-urh the command of the 2d. Seen K ih 
said to 1dm, “ The services of Hoo and Chaou 
should not bo forgotten;” and the marqms 
followed the suggestion [in making the appoint- 
ments]. Seen K‘ih also subsequently took away 
from It'wae Tih the lands granted 
Kin-yin. In consequence of these things, tie 
Ch‘ing-foo, Seen Too, Sze Hwoh, Leang Vdi-nrn, 
and K‘ wae Tih, arranged to raise an insurrection 
[in the State.’] 


Ninth year. 

HIM ^ 


m 


m A 

2.*‘W 


- A ^ 
A ^ S J 

<&■ Am Am 

TARA 


* A 
A MB 

— > 


i ^ ^ ^ 


MS 

■ M 


Ysjls IX. 


DUKE WAN. 


253 


M ^ ^ II S‘S 

A ^ ^ ^ ^ ifeolil Al.f f 


#«• 


*iiig.iiiii.iip||| 

.« S • 5 f I f I X g * J,|; 

JS 0.® P ^ M I 


=fti « « f .§ 1 a 

n a ^ tft, j£. 

ijs 

ja # 


3g:. 

S 


1 


m 


m.-& )a # ii5 

T' a ^ B 


.... 11® ira 

:g -a.-fe 

» 0 . 

=1 

« # 


± 

R ® # 0 p. 
iiS.W ■& ® w 
■f 


A ^ 


Ml 

5:. 


,:4c ■& % 


t- • 

3E 

ife. 


ft 

!• 


IX. 


1 In tlie [duke’s] ninth year, in spring, the earl of Maou came 

to Loo, to ask for [a contribution of] money. 

2 The duke’s wife, the lady Keang, went to Ts‘e. 

3 In the second month, Shuh-sun Tih-shin went to the capital 

4 On Sin-ch*ow there was the burial of king S6ang. 

5 The people of Tsin put to death their great officer Seen Too. 

6 In the third month, the duke’s wife, the lady Keang, 

arrived from Ts‘e. 

7 The people of Tsin put to death their great officers, Sze 

Hwon and Ke Ch‘ing-foo. 

8 A body of men from Ts‘oo invaded Ch‘ing. Suy, duke 

rChwang’s] son, joined an officer of Tsin, an officer of 
Sung, an officer of Wei, and an officer of Heu, to relieve 
Ch'ing. 

9 In summer, the Teih made an incursion into Ts‘e. 

10 In autumn, in the eighth month, Seang, earl of Ts‘aou, 

died.^ 

11 In the ninth month, on Kwei-yew, there was an earthquake. 

12 In winter, the viscount of Ts‘oo sent Tseaou to Loo on a 

mission of friendly inquiries. 

13 An officer from Ts‘in came to present grave-clothes for 

duke He and Ch‘ing Fung. 

14 There was the burial of duke Kung of Ts'aou. 


{^Continuing tlie narrntlre at tbo end of last 
year, the Chuen proceeds: — ‘In spring, in the 
king’s first month, on Ke-yevr, [the conspirators] 
employed rnfiians to kill Seen K'fii. On Tih- 
yew the people of Tsin put to death Seen Too 
and Leang Yih-urh.’] 


Par.l. Theenrlofhlaon, — see on L 5. Comp, 
the -whole par. with I.iiL4. The ^ here and 

there seem to be two names for the same 
thing. Too says [Expanding the Chuen] that 
the money was sought to help in the cspwdi- 


.254 


THE CH‘UX TS‘EW, \Y1TII THE TSO CHUEN. BOOK Yl! 


ture for the king’s burial. Tliongh this wjis the 

beginning of a new year since the death of the 

text tioos not 
!»«songerMvas sent by the new 
^ing. The mission, Tso furtlier savs, was -con- 
tiwj to rule* and the earl's name was *^yeL* 
rar. 2. The lady Keang went to Ts‘c to visit 
her parents. This all the critics admit ; but as 
such 'lusits were regularly made, and matters of 
cust^ and routine are held not to be entered in 
the Ch un Ts-ew, they hazard various conjee- 
twes to account for tliis record; witli wliich the 
student need not be troubled. 

Parr. 3,4. These are treated in the Cliuen as 


not come up with the army of Ts‘oo. The 
text does not give the names of tlie ministers 
[of the several States] because of their dilatori* 
ness, — to punish their want of sincerity.’ 

; Par. 9. With Ts'oo pressing on them from 
the south, and the Teih, ever active and restless 
on the north, the States of the HUddle kingdom 
were in an evil case. 

[T'he Chuen gives here two additional notes 
about Ts‘ 00 — ‘In summer, Ts‘oo made an in- 
cursion into Ch'in, and reduced Hoo-k‘Sw;— 
because of its submission to Tsin.* 

*In autumn, Kung-tsze Choo of Ts'oo invaded 

*in )\rr i TT 


1 . as wm by the way of the eastern E. The troops 

one paragraph.— Chwang-sliuh was Tih- ^ .Ch‘in defeated him, and captured Kung-tsze 
shin’s posthumous title) went to Chow tn tiio ^“‘^ecss made Ch'in afraid, and it 

bunal of king Seang. Too snvs ti,of 54 . „„ li® peace with Ts‘ 00 .] 


cS^» f Seang. Too says that it was ac^ 
sueh^n for a minister to go to Chow on 

such an occasion; but it was not so.— The duke 
ought to have gone himself. 

ri,®' recorded is given in 


A. 1**1.** AS MM,J 

Par. 11. Too says: — *It is the way of the 
earth to he still; its moving was accounted 
strange, and therefore recorded.’ Jin Kung- 

f®® ^ says: — ‘For more than a 

is said to^have'occMred on^he S ySvIw*^ hundred years before this we have no record 
^ow Yih-yew was tbe lOtb of the 1st month of earthquake; but from this time to king 

ms year. H^e is a discrepanev between the there are four earthquakes recorded;— 

ft I 1.-.S •••■. m • : 


•.r^A «'**='-* epaucy oeiweeu tne 

mSiS^ ^ ^®^ ®“sy to 

record is remarkable as being 
the only mstance in which the return of a mar- 
^oness of Loo from a visit to her patem^ 
State IS ent^d. Fourteen times the leavin* of 


nature’s response to the prevailing confusion in 
the kingdom, the princes disobedient to the son 
of Heaven, and their officers disobedient to the 
princes.' 

Par. 12. For Knh-ieang has sSy. The 


^00 IS recorted; but only on this occadon is the /n. Jvnn-ieang uas 

solenm celebration of the return in the ancestral • — ‘ Tsze-yneh Tseaou came to us on 

temple mentioned. n mission of friendly inquiries, and carried his 

Par. 7. See the Chuen at the * ----- - 

year, and the beainninff of tiiic 


med when the punishment of criminals is 
poken of; as if the execution were with the 
consent of ^ the people. It does not, however 
always hold. Kuh-leang has many foUowers 


, only 

from Ts‘ 00 , we have the viscount of Ts‘ 00 . 
Ts ‘00 has now come into the category of the 
other States. Its progress in civilization and 
influence was acknowledged. 'm,D Tv'nnir-he 


uas many touowers in umuence was acknowledged. The I£‘ang-ne 
mnkmg that the implies that Chflnff-fon actors very uimecessarilv recount the various 
was invnlroii r 09 Tst . - . methods of the critics to a’ceount for the ‘CTm- 

^ ® ™ crime and its conse- mendntion’ wliich they think is indicated by 

quences by Sze Hwoh? hut. cn I thetitl& 

Par. 13. =grave-clothes, or the presen- 
tation of them for the use of the dead 

X Sudi gifts were 


^ Hwoh; but SO much stress need 
not b e laid on the term. Maou K'i-ling says, ^ 

= and next.’ 1 — “* 


Jl, Xiiv: lUlillV* xwvjni iiu* 

that to cuUivato it< friendly relations 
tates of the ‘ ^Middle kingdom.* 


Year X. 


DUKE WAN. 


257 . 


ill 0 


n m.M ii a ® m g.* 

m.-n «.>c w * ^.-b m e ip.e ?* § » 
mmm n.^M 3e re s ® 0 . 

55 ^ ^ mM * ffi.g 9 s f.l + 

m n II s ais ^ bm ^ ® ‘i'.i ® mm. 

® 0.^- * M p.^ ^ m T f z.m w 


IE Rt.# P, I* ® %.m Jh ^ ^ St 

ja * ;p Ti ,S It i ft I m^.3E 3E,^' 

1^.1® 0.15 0.-^=- M. 

ft :?: a mM m z h.m. 

m ^.M ^ -&.# I IL If IE.0.^ 
H ffl- T- ■& S M iS.?'.#^<a-.:^ = 'fa 

XIE.vS^.ft'K 

zms.-^.^ m mxMstww. 

❖.n.ft ftt s.ffl ® » 

iiiafte-T-si^ja mm a.®.® « 

^ ffi BB » wk ft.Sf ^ lEji 


1 In the [duke’s] tenth year, in spring, in the king’s third 

month, on Sin-maou, Tsang-sun Shin died. 

2 In summer, Ts'in invaded Tsin. 

3 Ts‘oo put to death its great officer. E-shin. 

4 From the first month, it did not rain till autumn in the 

seventh month. 


ISO 


tore t® "'ot^*A« 5"4tx^®^ 


vVsco 


ot Soo 


at 


into Viatto^ 

.tsiotv. rys^ao 


Itv 


vfftsW^' 


.ftch- 


aw 


it\tv6i?\oo^c 


'iw»s;roS??»*e ?»'i„fe\» 

rtfi -.liAtV ^ .!.« 

1.0 "■'>'^1 


:^o T»®^ "y, 4\\C cotfixa^ \ w - ^_-k !»“” 

-'tr 


-tv 


itvv»v«'^“Y^ost °\ “ B\to\A® 

■w’vt^ 3 avO'^S'®,yt„v.e io* 


yott 
t\vo 
W 


cotvW^^^i n\a^ fttva»|.^e tot\'® \ sUoni^*" . ^otxieo'- " ' „a s\J»"““' vvxtvt 

vva*\®}.,y„v,etvtto_^^tessea 


otv tYve \va coXiY'^^ ^^ve . Vft 

C\\vic«i *,Q fot ta® ''. slS: vtv ^ „n vflio » 

tcs?®’''® 


uvs «oopS:/„ tWcW VcA 


1 vfo-y 


coxvt^:5: 

8Vt»\A® 


t\^e 

Itv 


bis 

jftattd®' 

cbo®' 

4 'lb® 


U® 


oft 


oft 

ait®' 


tb® 

tb® 


led 

AttUe ^^ft» “*oaft4 

dfti^®. . „atV ®\ ite'8®®«...„..cb®° 


;0W* 


cc8?ofts‘“" ^^rvo^vft '"tnvftS^®’^- „„.ts, \ 7 tb® n{ l^e-TerBa®-®'' \cft' 

n®. »• ?.„tv.«.«o-?“Y^ \ -..o 'N 


0. C'?”'*’ 


01^®'® t^cls 

°\ ottVd V CSe® ° Xsc. * - “ -<'Vvlcb''®tLA. \ -„\slftB ® . . t„ttev ^ ,.„rvotc®* . vwc ..vtov-f 

6ft _ *r.n IftW ' 


doM^tM.^fSo 

diftS,.„ biftS ,„vf.be 


ftY>l>°^a;dft«®T -S'^® ^^telo"N"rotb®t Ct 

■fioft ,. 'YvftS; „ 'Tbt'.®'®® viwt “'®, avIoB’ ”'*'f 
to eft^'®’^ „A eo®'"? 4prvlo''’’4 -cap®^ tbn-^ ^ 

WSfrere ’«“'“oore»? "% 


„cn4'“'’”':i.«‘"“ 


Yft ‘“T al«®^^’ \ YJ®®” 

{Vfoo 

tob®®° 

to \ loy '" t^oft '-T- od® 

ltb^B \tbo Y»°^,,„.lll-^'"- 


. re It®' 

reA’ ft'*” ..vvatY'®'' \9 tb® 


offioo-rtoi *' ^.5> 


,t,re bft'^^f , .’ 


roNV®-®''"^ ^ avvtftTft^.trA 'ro?!!‘AvoT®'°' .,.„toft®,'* V^®. 


obs®' 


d'CV"^ tboft^ 

CY'‘^K • ■ 

dcft'Y' t\^c - 

167^5-^®^^' Sco°'^{icn ®®^’®'co'" 


TCpft^ 


ltd 


•to »fs;'r. 

cvtftft'^.^t. ol '■Y'° 


ftft^J^rftl® 


..jaeoftft'' „{ \t\ng Y'- ' .^cv Y^Y* ^jotapY'* ^o'Y"' \ ^Y'®, „* tb®® \.«i tY'®.„rei\\tl' i»tb® 

nccc8«o®,^ a; ft®,a b-,\ rat] 

•v'lVT^ t\oW ® - Voo vs *®!L\>\y ?■?*_ re «00 "5 \ '■ 


abt'ftY^ 
aot Yft- nTpb't 
YYftT'lAbot'Yc^ 


vtYt"%Tc 

iMt'd* 


W'''i.'2o«o>£ 


:»o”%;w;rS>- 


'I'bc 


flSCOVl 


Attbc 


tvrafttapy^^,^^Vit, 


ntftC* 


8®®^^fvbatpY®‘' 

►IteftY' Yta8 
^C«ft6-> ® 


atc«:t--,povf" 


'"&t.‘--.‘\,.oO- 

• faYt'"' ® 

tuttv* 


Yj:au XI, 


DUKE WAN. 


257 , 


Eleventh year. 


MM IfT +■ 

# + tt W f IS iif ^ 

g nXM Sf -It ■" 


» tp 


^MM 4 


*- 


© t ^ @ ^ w as 2 i -M 

M aii iJ ^ *.2 

4ii s® P4— 5] i4 St.it.'R ife.w # # B. 

BO /?? in: •v'. *** i£a ^ 55g »5ft ^ ^ *1^ “f* 

%m- 

J. ®3.# S 
# iP w ^ ft 

M M 

S A ft 

»•&.'» 


^ 

5E 4 S) ft ii ig 
S A^«S.5Cg>B;e^f§ife 
■"“ * W Siii PI® M n. 


# ^ ■&.■& m 4n.:§.<a- 

^ /a; ^ M K S 1 h 

MM min m.m ^ * 

0 $B.S P^ ^ f® S? i! ■« 
Aa6mB«ftm*#ii# 
36 SS ^ &.X ^ S ftE 

ts. A inMMM 
* « ^ fg ft 5.^ m + z, 

■t.t 

Z tiE.if.® I® z.^,» 


Bn 

.<i 


z. 

M 


Z 


Z 


Pi 

E? 


XL 1 In tlie [duke’s] eleventh year, in spring, the viscount of 
Ts‘oo invaded Keun. 

2 In summer, Shuh-chung P‘ang-sang had a meeting with 

Keoh Keueh of Tsin in Shing-k‘wang. 

3 In autumn, the earl of Ts‘aou paid a court-visit to Loo. 

4 Duke Chwang’s son, Suy, went to Sung. 

5 The Teih made an incursipn into Ts‘e. 

6 In winter, in the tenth month, on Keah-woo, Shuh-sim 

Tih-shin defeated the Teih in Keen. 


TOLT. 


33 


ISO 


boots - 


VI - 


T ' ST ' V ’ M\atiot 


«■;»''?! drf < A°-<s 


fledTS - ewti ’ ,,o 

^nvadea ^,avc 

\ tistea 4 o ^ 1 


SS *’ 


•pat. 


2 . 


BAtng 


» n 4 


o ' 'n “^'' So ^ oS ^^ "“S 

*''0 p ^«c4't"o ^\vuy-?o'V tiion oo^^ soo 

aoPv .% wV -^» cw ® .X 


^ ^vcst \ rotl^ct ^ "T TS - aT '-®’^ ic da^e »' 

Ic \ «»TvaaS'^®I _"\ aad ^ 

-??^. 2 ' V ‘ i « Si ^^ l ® e \®^^^. lrcsoa 5 0 ^^,,riv Yaa '' _ gaW -. 


^ ^'^VvtTi ia 


SttOS ^ t one « 

- -eat O' 


bavi '®^ 


fjsvn 


^ ttiv - l °'’’ 


ca ^: 


«" 0 » ‘■ ia * o ®” ..'» wo ; 


“■ i '« «»“»of aw " 5 r 

„\,Aect o^ "\ve ad^'csvov jv i a a „ \ . xn da-^iorj,' ..,«{! 


fl£S:>r^' 


1^0 ^^ a - cgs * ^® l '« o^vet a-^!iof tbe ^ vA^ose 


btotA'ei ^,, ovf - 


lat 


wntA«ife.sA^«f Cc tiatA > tcs, ta 

-Iso o'’?®\xsit''’^as oa^ ^^ave aa _,cbang \ giants a tba^y a s j^^jont 

ing Ao^^'®,oaT. r>^,viea Snag. 'rcnnsf8\ \ ^,‘^> ’ „nt\svdtta-F toaad^\\iie* 


Vo «- 


\gSi^“^o, “5s;, 'EST\ « tv« ‘''” 

is i^etO;r;; woy^'Jo 'd’vd 


Bat 

Sstet o «^^° toitiag°"^-^Ssagete \ geg days . 


bis 


bavmi 


\r ociii.3- _oAe \ ^°iIvv,G Cn«0‘ eatt „^,\c 


eidcst 


«« ?'” T'-o d - gif .,,.,,® tOj »- 


" oMd ' o *" 


.'1 


t \ iea »> 


Yrar. XIT. 


DUKK WAN. 


Bt ^T T W ^ € T 

^-LUh 

» + Bg. 

fill it jS "f S f S f 5 i 1 1 ?• 

fH ^ ffi ® z.=& ^ ® ;*: #x ia fS & 

S fi Jr ^ ^ fS 

S S*M ® ® i^iiojB. ^ 

w ‘> S ^ if ff ^ it. A 

I.IIMiff ff»if 2-s«s” 


250 


^ .-t— —I— n^» 

^2 J3* ^ ^ 

^ W ^ itt # j|f ^ 

# ± ^.:2:.T -fs 

•lil.m.!SF # S.-tfe 

JA' -> IM 'i.* /aa S5. 


JL/- -I- — r*» TV* 


/Ui 'W ^<7 l=f 

0.§F#^^ip3R 
^ ZM W ^..1. tit Z f # 

'1 1 ■^6 ^ *SBttW.H 

f ife « IS f® 5:. # T 7 # 

ffl.H.# $ ± w- r, _ 

75^® H#ja® 

« «'t i ^ 

m.® A ^ *£ 

W !§f5F 'fft -I® iSf; 'fsr ^ ^ * 

Hb ■% g.M 

0 Sf5 ^ Ei 

# 

S p ^ ^ ^ M ^ 


— r— JLL 

g 

IIW*.. /f7^ ^ JK .51 

1. if 1 ^ 
IS^.H. ? S. 


i M 

1' ffi $ ^ 


-y- 

tt* 

3K 


m 


M 

m 

w. 

m 


M 


Year XH. 


DUKE WAX. 


As to the meaning of the before 
there is no consent of the critics. Kung-ynng 
says tlie Indy is so termed bj' way of distinction. 

being duke AVJin’s full sister, but 

how the marks such distinction it is diffi- 
cult to perceive. I can make nothing of it. 

Par. 4. Ch‘aou w’as a small State, lying be- 
tween Woo Ts'oo. It has left its name 

in the pres. dis. of Ch'aou, dep. Leu-chow, Gau- 
hwuy. The Chnen says: — ‘On the death of 
Ta Sun-pill [Often mentioned before tliis in the 
Chuen as Ch'ing Ta-sin ; the son of Ch'ing T^i- 
shin, who was defeated at Shing-puh. The Ta 

( here, appearing as a surname I don’t un- 
derstand], chief minister of Ts'oo, Ch'ing Kea 
took his place. [At this time] the dlffit. Shoo 
States, revolted from Ts'oo; and in summer 
Tsze-k'ung (the above Ch'ing Kiia) seized P'ing, 
viscount of Shoo, and the viscount of Tsung, 
and went on to lay siege to Ch'aou.’ 

Par. 6. Tso observes that this was another 
c.a8e of a first court-visit to duke Wttn. Ke 

Pun ; Ming d}*n., 1st half of 16th cen- 

tury) says that since the seizure of duke Seuen 
of T'ttng by Sung in the 19th year of duke He, 
the State had adhered to Sung ; but that now, 
taking advantage of the troubles of Sung, it re- 
turned to its former preference for Loo. 

Par. 6. Kung-yang has for The 

Chuen says: — 'The earl of Ts'in sent Se-k'eih 
Shuh on this friendly mission, and to speak of his 
intention jto invade Tsin. Seang-chung (Kung- 
tsze Suy) declined to receive the jade symbol 
[which he had brought], saying, ‘ Your ruler, not 
forgetting the friendship between his father and 
us, has favoured Loo -with this mission, giving 
its altars the assurance of his protecting and 
soothing care, and signalizing the importance 
of this mission with tliis grand instrument; but 
my ruler ventures to decline receiving it." The 
other replied, “ This poor instrument is not 
worth your declining it.” Thrice, however, 
[Suy], as the host, refused it, and then the guest 
replied, “My ruler wishing to obtain the favour 
of the duke of Chow and [his son], the [first] 
duke of Loo, by his service of your prince, sent 
me, ivith this poor instrument of his fathers, 
to deliver it to you, the manager of this negotia- 
tion, to be' an auspicious symbol for the cou- 
firmation of our good agreement. It is to me 
the proof of my ruler’s commission to tie the 
bond of friendsliip between our two States. 
This is why I presume to deliver it to you.” 
S&ang-chuug smd, “Without superior men, can 
a ruler order his St.ate? Yours is no unculti- 
vated State.” He then sent Shuh away with 
rich presents.’ 

[So-k‘cili Shuh was one of the leaders of the 
army of Ts'in in the expedition which terminated 
so fatally at Ilcnou ;— see the Chuen at V. xxxiii. 


261 


3. His present mission was part of a scheme, 
on the part of Ts'in, to detach the States gener- 
ally from Tsin.] 

Par. 7. Ho-k'euh was in Tsin, — ^near the 
pres. dep. city of P'oo-chow (■.^ The 

Chuen says:—' Because of the afiair atLing-hoo 
(Vn. 6), this iviiiter, the earl of Ts'in invaded 
Tsin, and took Ke-ma. The troops of Tsin 
went out to meet him. Chaou Tun commanded 
the army of the middle, with Seun Lin-foo as 
assistant. Kcoh Keueh led the 1st army, with 
Yu Peen as assistant. Lwon Tun led the 3d 
army, with Seu Keali as assistant. Fan Woo- 
seuh was charioteer [to Chaou Tun]; and in 
this orfer they followed the army of Ts'in to 
Ho-kenh. Yu Peen said, “Tsin cannot remain 
here long. Let us merely show a strong front, 
with deep entrenchments, and await his move- 
ments.” Chaou Tun followed this counsel. 
The troops of Ts'in wished to fight, and the earl 
asked Sze Hwuy how a battle could be brought 
about. “ Chaou Tun,” said Hiniy, “ has recently 
brought out his adherent Yu Peen, and it must 
be he who has counselled this measure, in order 
to weary our army. [But] Tun has a cousin, 
named Ch'uen, a son-in-law of the [late] mar- 
quis. Being a favourite, and young, -he has 
not been employed in military affairs, but he is 
fond of showing his bravery and is excitable. 
He is angry, moreover, ait Yu Peeh’s being em- 
ployed as assistant-commander of the 1st army. 
If you send a small body of troops to fiout [the 
army of Tsin], a battle may be brought about.” 
On this the earl prayed to the Ho with a peiJi, 
about the battle [that would ensue]. 

‘In the 12th month, on Mow-woo, [a portion 
of] the army of Ts'in made a sudden attack on 
^in’s Ist army, [and retired], pursued by 
Chaou Ch'uen, without his being able to over- 
take it. When he returned, he said, in anger, 
“We took our provisions in our bags, and 
donned our armour, surely to look for our 
enemies. What are we waiting for that we do 
not strike the enemy when he comes?” His 
officers said, “We are waiting for an opportuni- 
ty.” “I do not know,” he replied, “their 
plans, but I will go forth alone;” and forth ho 
went with his followers. Chaou Seuen (Tun) 
said, “If Ts'in capture Ch'uen, it will capWea 
high minister. If its army return with such a 
wtory, what shall I have to show in return?” 

\\ ith this the whole army went forth to battle 
when there ensued a gentle encounter, and then 
both sides drew off. 

?®f!®“5er from the army of Ts'in came to 
that or Tsin at night with a warning challen{!e 
saymg,_‘'The soldiers of our two armies are not 
yet satisfied;— please let us see one another to- 
morrow. ’ TuPeensaidtoTun, “The messenger’s 
eyes kept moving about, and his words were 
incoherent; they are afraid of us, and wiU be 
going off. If we attack them at the Ho, we are 
sure to defe.-it them. Seu Sliin and Chaou Ch'uen 
[went and] cried out, at the gate of the entrench- 
ments “While the dead*” .and the wouS 
are n^ot gathered in, to abandon tliem is not kind. 
IkOt to wait for the stipulated time, but to attack 
W “ perilous position, is not 
br.avc. The design wais consequently .abandon- 
ed, and in the night tlie army of Ts'in witlidrew 


■B’ 


,oo^ 


ItlE 


^0 CTSC®-*- 


Jift 


tlO' 


k- w ' \ *.«* ■s*o"^'Si""’ 

ftAcw- \ -LOO 


atiotv - - j 


'jVic 
;« COW' 


Yat. P 


vAiiw-'" 


, .\sw«=“”-- 
™s\<!» i' 


Ls 


^ m 


"i. -rtt? f«^J. 


4t 


-T J;h -- V4‘'V i'v -H-.':i v.v 

:\V. •JS 'i ^v. Ti ^ ' 


I'Voin a, ’ '.'^oont of Cl '''"•"•oo, Soh „„ 

, sn o V''*' ''’“'"'u? ’““'•9U/S 

?''■<= >-00" Of •' '•'■in «H 

" fe'- ‘'>^d'S"”’’«''t s),ri„„ , in tie 

T/in a iDPnr to *°**se irojjf * 

« ,„.. ., , " ^'-■'- “i" ci w LT'“ 

“If;- r. ^ 


5 

G 


7 

6’ 


264 


THE CH‘UlSr TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


BOOH VI. 


and regrets [for the whole thing] will he of no 
avail.” The earl said, “If they prove false to 
their word, I swear by the waters of the Ho, 
that I will send your family back to Tsin.” On 
this, Sze Hwuy went with Show-yu. [As he 
was going], Jaou Chaou (an ofiicer of Ts'in) 
presented to him a whip, saying, “ Do not say 
that there are no men in Ts'in. [You get away], 
because my counsel has not at tlus time been fol- 
lowed,” When they had crossed tlie Ho, the men 
of Wei [received them] with a shout, and 
returned; -but Ts'in sent Hwuy’s family back to 
Tsin. Some [of his surname] who remained 
there took the surname of Lew.’] 

Far. S. Kuh-liiang has instead of 

1^^. The Chuen says * Duke Wan (Wan 

was it'eu-seu’s posthumous title) consulted the 
tortoisc-shcU about changing his capital to Yih. 
The officer [of divination] said, “ The removal 
will be advantageous to the -people, but not to 
their jruler.” The viscount said, “ If it be advant- 
ageous to the people, that will be advantageous 
to me. When Heaven produced the people, it 
a;^pQintcd for them rulers for their profit. 
Since the people are to get advantage [from 
the removal], 1 shall siiare in it.” His attend- 
ants said, “If your life may so be prolonged, 
why should you not decide not to remove?” 
He said, “My appointment is for the nourishing 
of the peoi»lo} my death sooner or later has a 
[fixed] time. If the people are to be benefited, 
let us remove, and nothing could bo more for- 
tunate,” The capital was accordingly removed 
to Yih; and in the 5th month [of this year, 5 
years after his accession], duke Wfln died. The 
superior man may say that ho knew [the secret 
of] life.’ 


Far. i. See X. 4, and H. 6, 

Par. 6. The te.xt here adopted is that of 
Kung-yang, Kuh-leang has ^ and tlie 
same is found in the CInien. Rung says : — ' By 
is meant the shrine-house of the [first] 
duke of Loo. That of the duke of Chow was 
called jiljjfj ; that of the duke of Loo [Pih- 
k'in, son of the duke of Chow], ; those 


of other dukes wore simply called Tlie 

name ||jh indicates that from generation 


to generation the spirit-tablet of Fih-k'in was 
not removed.’ While Kuh-Icang has and 

not •jlf*, he yet distinguishes between J^» 

the temple of the duke of Chow, and 
that of Pili-k‘in, agreeing so far with Kung- 
yang. And ^ and -g; are often inter- 
changed, especially in the phrases 


Perhaps Tso-sho was of the same 
opinion, for he simply says that ‘ the roof of the 
went to pieces, and the fact was re- 
corded, because of the'Want of reverent atten- 
tion [to the structure] which was implied i^t. 
Too Yu, however, explains the “ic ^ y»C 


Whosesoever the shrine-house was, the 
fact of its roof going to ruin showed great care- 
lessness on the part of the duke and his officers, 
— great carelessness where they might hnic 
been expected to be most careful. 

Parr. 6,8. In p, 6, Kung-yang wants the ^ 

after In p.8 both Kung and Ifuh omit 

the ^ before For Krnig 
Wiere Tali was is not ascertained. Fci 
Ch'ing,— 25 le cast of the pres. dis. city of Sin- 


i‘ing, dop. K*no-fung. 

The Chuen says; — ‘In winter, the duke won 
Tsin, paying n court visit, and rcncinng HW 

venant with the marquis. The 
ci had a meeting witli the duke at . . 
gged his mediation to make pcac? | 

he was returning, the carl of Ch'mg met 1 mu 
Fci, and begged from liim a similar semto. 
icduke nccomplisbcil the thing for then • 
1 C earl of Ch'ing and he feasted at I'ti, on 

ize-kea (an officer of Ch'mg) “"JJP A ojiiccr 
, (She, il. iii. ode VIL). Kc Wn (i^n offltor 
Loo) said, “Rfy ruler has iis sliarc 
d ho sang the Ssc tfuch (She, • Vk'OT 
i7,c-kca then sang the ftli led 

‘c (She, I.iv. odo X.), and Kc Wfin [ ' lyjj ^ 
th the ltli of the Ts'<ic «’« (She, n|i. «d‘ I 
1 C carl of Ch'ing then 
r. fi.iWo null ilif! flukc rctumcd the now. 


Fourteenth year. 

myh ft nMM 


Zu 


Si 
rnli 


3E+” 

M.B 

■:sr 


Year XIV. 


DUKE WAN. 


A # ^ ^ J.A $ -t; M ft. 

T ® § W #.« -t.^ ff ;^. 

* g.#. A <a- s ^ 

M.m « ® T ^ rs, 

A *®*| 3 . A » 

a T « 

S S tt :*. 


IlitiiliiiS.l-giiltf 

i|||||i.||illj|»-iK 

III Pi IfP *-«-S 

ft.® W er.#, ^ Hri ^ 


^:?: + 

5 gj.fr ±.flg m.tt.Eg 

^•3 %'3- w 


^ ^ ft ^ w ^ 


|i|fgg Sl-li, 11 III 

illi-ii, I'lsg If s'i'S 

l^llAi SS-ft g| Ilf 

t isi?. if- »i 


-{ft ® 5 « 


•» if .« 

M 7 jm« 


A #. 


i w 

^.A 

flg® 


S^iP 
1 :!c 


31 


266 

A 


THE CH‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VI. 


3® ss S' ^ JiS ^ ^ M 

±#.|f 

ZM ^ ® S 5; S* 

st.sts?B tsilfjlllf 

S.2.B H « 11.4.? f If 

»*«**• iia 

Si. 

# ro 


•f- ^ w- jgt ffi 

^ ffii il ».A4.* 


a 


MB 


±.^zMr^ li. 


taM 

IB ft 
^ 0 

JC 

-• X 


mB B 

5K ^ A 

Bn 

111. ■& 
m. t 

?15 7C. 

T- 


ZAti si 
« A 
5U.± 3^ # A 

l.*t J i f. 

^ ® B 5 IS.# 

lie 


^ 'ffi ™ ^ .u 

mm 0.#.^ 

H.® ZHiiA^ 
I?.# ^.Hi.!-. 


Bn it ® 1 
:fZ'^M 


XIV. 1 In his fourteenth year, in spring, in the king’s first month, 
the duke arrived from Tsin. , 

2 A body of men from Choo invaded our soiitliern > 

[and] Shull P‘ang-sang led a force, and invaded Olioo. 

3 In summer, in the fifth month, on Yih-hae, 1 ‘wan, ma 

quis of Ts‘e, died. . . , ,, 

4 In the sixth month, the duke had a meeting witfi^ 

T , n .1 t _!• rti.c:.. +Uf» iirinrntliS Ol 

duke 
AVci, 

^I s ao.., ....V. — w--- — — — ^ .... 

they made a covenant together in Sin-shmg. 

5 In autumn, in the seventh month, there was a co i , 

which entered the Northern Bushel. 

The duke arrived from the meeting. .. , 

Tile people of Tsin undertook to establish Isot! 
as viscount of Choo, but did not do so. , 

8 In the ninth month, on Keah'.shin, Kung-sun Oaou 
ttl '*C 

9 Shang-iin, a son of duke [Ilwan] of Ta*c, murdered ln.s 
ruler, i>lmy. 

10 TszC'gne of .Sung enme to Loo, a fngiiivc*. , 

11 In winter, the earl of Shen wm»t to 'l.'*‘e; and t «e jx op 

id* ’r,*i*** s<*ized him and ludd him pristincr. ^ 

1 ij *1 '!h* jn'ojih* *{'•'*»'■ [also] seized the s'*cond ilaughtii 
our hoii.'-f, v.'ho wa*. there, and held Iter pri^ouci. 


G 

7 


Year Xn^ 


DUKE WAN. 


267 


P.ir. 1. [The Chuen nppenils hero:— ‘This 
spring, kinglWng died. Yucli, duke of Oiow, 
nnd Wnng-sun Soo were contcnding^rhic1l should 
get tiic gorcrnnient into his hnnds; nnd therefore 
no intelligence of the event came ofllcially 
to Loo. The deaths of kings and princes of 
States which were not announced were not 
recorded, nnd the same rule obtained in regard 
to events prosperous or calamitous; — as a j 
method of reproving the want of reverence im- 
plied (In not making those eommunications].*] 
r.ar. 2. The Chuen says: — ‘On the death of 
duke Witn of Choo [See XIII. 3], the duke sent 
his condolences by an officer, who did not behave 
respectfully ; nnd abodyof troopsfrom Choo came 
to punish [the slight], nnd invaded our southern 
border. In consequence of this, Hwuy-pih in- 
vaded Choo.' Shull r‘ttng-snng is the same as 
the Slmh-chung P'fing-sang of XI. 2. 

Par. 8. This P‘wnn — duke Ch'nou — ^had made 
himself marquis of Ts'e, in the 28th year of 
duke He, by the murder of the son of his 
brother, duke Heaou. The Chuen says: — ‘A 
second daughter of one of our dukes was the 
wife of duke Ch'aou of Ts'e, and bore him Shay. 
She was not a favourite with him, however, and 
Shay was devoid of any dignity. Shang-jin, a 
son of duke [Hwnn], gave frequent largesses to 
the people, and collected about him many 
followers. V^icn he had exhausted his o^vn 
resources, lie borrowed from the duke and 
[various] officers [for the same, purpose]. In 
summer, in the 6ui month, duke Ch'aou died, 
and Shay succeeded him.’ 

Par. 4. Sin-slung was in Sung, — ^in the south- 
west of the pres. dis. of Shang-k'ew, dep. Kwei- 
till. Por the phrase ^ , see on III.xvi.4. 

The use of it here is favourable to the view of 
its meaning pven there by Tso-slie. Ho says 
here that this meeting and covenant were to 
celebrate the submission [to Tsin] of the States 
which had [for a time] followed Ts'oo, and to 
consult about Choo. 

[The Chuen appends here about Ts'e: — ‘In 
' autumn, in the 7th' month, on the night of Yih- 
maou, Shang-jin of Ts'e murdered Shay, and 
offered to yield the State to [his own elder 
brother], Yuen. Yuen said, “You have been 
seeking it for a long time. I can serve you; 
but you are not the man in whom to awaken 
' further dissatisfaction and resentment. 'Would 
you in that case spare me? ' Take you the 
marquisate.’] 

Par. 6. ‘ a comet.’ The 

meaning of is variously explained. K'ung 
Ying-tah says the comet is so called from the re- 
semblance of its motion to that of a broom (iMl 

Then as a broom 
sweeps away what is old to gpve place to some- 
thing new, a comet is supposed to presage 
changes. With regard to this comet, the Cliuen 
relates that Shnh-fuh, the historiographer of 
the Interior, of Chow, said, ‘In not more than 
7 years, the rulers of Sung, Ts'e, and Tsin -will 
all die amidst the disorder of their States.’ The 
‘Northern Bushel’ is Ursa Major. 

Par. 7. Por Kung has The Chuen 
. says ‘ The first wife of duke Wlln of Choo was 


a Kenng of Ts'e. who bore to him [K'woh-fseu, 
who became] duke Ting. His second wife was 
n Ke of Tsin, who bore to him Tscch-tszc. On 
his death, the people of Choo raised K'woh-tscu 
to his father’s place, and Tsuch-tsze fied to Tsin. 
Clinou Tun of Tsin* then undertook, with the 
armies of several of the States, — n force [in all] 
of 800 chariots, — to place him in the marquisate. 
But the people of Choo refused to receive him, 
saj’ing, “ IC'woh-tseu is the son of [Keang of] 
Ts'e, and the elder of the two.’’ Cliaou Sencu 
said, “ They have reason for their refusal ; and if 
we do not accept it^ our conduct will be of evil 
omen.’’ He accordingly returned to Tsin.’ 

The K‘ang-hc editors say that the concluding 
words of the par. — expres- 
sive of approbation, and the to® A of 

condemnation. We con see that if the under- 
taking were bad, then its abandonment was 
good and right; but the approbation is not in 
the characters, but in the fact. There is diffi- 
culty with the as according to the Chuen 

the forces of many States took port in the ex- 
pedition. To be sure they were all engaged in 
it in the interest and at the summons of Tsin ; 


nnd therefore I prefer to translate A here 

by ‘the people of Tsin,’ rather than by ‘an 
officer of Tsin,’ or ‘ a body of troops from Tsin.’ 

[The Chuen appends here two narratives. The 
1st continues that after par. 1 ‘The duke of 
Chow and Wnng-sun Soo being about to argue 
their difibrences before Tsin, the [new] king 
turned against Wang-sun Soo, and sent the 
minister Yin aud T'an K'e to explain the case of 
the duke of Chow. Chaou Seuen pacified the 
royal House, and brought the parties to their 
former reldtions.’ 

The 2d is about the affairs of Ts'oo: — ‘On 
the accession of king Ch wang [Son of king Muh], 
Tsze-k'ung and P'wan Ts'ung, intending to 
surprise the various Shoo States, appointed Kung- 
tsze Se'eh, and Tsze-e, to remain in charge [qf the 
govt.], whiletheythemselvesinvadedShoo-leaou. 
These two officers, however, made an insurrec- 
tion, proceeded to wall Ying, and employed a 
ruffian to kill Tsze-k'ung, who returned without 
succeeding in that attempt. In the 8th month, 
they carried off the viscount, intending to go to 
Shang-meib; but Ts'ih-le of Leu and Shuh-keun 
beguiled them [to Leu], and put them to death, — 
both Tow K'ib [Tsze-e], andKung-tsze Seeh. At 
an earlier time, Tow ll'ih had been a prisoner in 
Ts'in, which sent him, after the defeat at Heaou, 
back to Ts'oo, to ask for a settlement of its dif- 
ferences with that State. This was eflTected, 
but he did not get his wish (iu the shape of re- 
ward). Eung-tsze Seeh had sought the office 
of chief minister, but did not obtain it. These 
were the reasons why the two raised an insur- 
rection.*] 

E Par. 8. The Chuen says ‘ Wlien Muh-pih 
went to Keu], following the lady Sze [See the 
Auen on 'Vlli. 6], they in Loo made uis soil 
Wiln-pih [The Kuh in the Chuen on I. 3] head 
of tfe clan [in his room]. He begat two sons 
in Keu, and then he asked to be allowed 
to return to Loo, getting Wan-pih to make 
^tercession for him, Seang-chung fagreed to 
nis return] on condition that he should not 
appear m the court, which condition he ac- 


booK'^ 


Year XV. 


DYKE WAN. 


269 


m >Mm -tm 

m-f-M m 

W.@^ — Twfr A 

A « 4!t 1. - se s 

E = * 

J® *6 R.Kl A f Si:.«.^.1f 

#^B. 

« ifn m.a it.a.® ^ ^ s^m+ 

H AAWil HaW:<:S?-4<.T^e 

« Bn T a: ¥ s ia is.-t&. 

M H MM a:fc # s.-ta.-a.a « 0.^ <a-.^ ^ 

^ 0 W ;2:.ja ^S.IS « ^ ^ 

«=g53ta 

J A ± ? p S?^ a 0 . 3 ^ 3 i ^ 

^ ‘l.T 0 *. f .8 M mm M'm' S'l'li 

0 a ■!!■ #.i® in iSi A.St ^ iM # ^ ^ ffi 

ZMM « H - ja # 55. A -^.^. SE.# * 

f.ff JAf p.5.»SI® -ff 
' S 5#'^ 0 ^ illl S # ZM' Z *£ *• g 

® S $ S 3t tl # ;2: a. 

^ -i&.a -f- 1 ^.— ja MxMM ^ 

S' #‘i 0.:S.it.-f& ® A 
^ « 0 A ® SI 0.<a- A 

f > ® H 

A ?"^ja*'if 

ii:.fi;.S ::! fil :g: <: * 

« ^ ^.if.^.if .-a.-® m 0 A 


SI.0. 


'iSO 


A 


BOOTS- 


^70 


xv- 


Xioo 


caTT'® — ^Vve 

9, ® „ tVa^A s' 

r^\veVeT^oU. 

5 ^ ^nooT'i 


to 


t.oO 


tla® 


co 


oi 


g^tToacV 


\CoaS' 

aay *!: 


tVve ^^fp.beat®^’ 


,»t^. or^^sed-^ 


,wto -ras 4.v^e a rrc‘ae', 


8 ^"tsX5 '!?xX"!j:^XX" 


tV' 


cavae 


X'Xf JS“Xf v“o»^“- -.nto o«' ;>•'» 


^taa'^y 


on 


t\^e 


to 


hoo 


,tc 3 

Ai\\ 


sS\ 


o 


,wcr 


I 05??«»ti*°' W £i^S$4«2oiiy 
Sf “« eSu?,“« ^.^l^P^pao™ .,.. “• 


% K ^S*^‘ a 

' J? .B i §‘1.4 7' %#. 

h l‘S 


Y»*« XVI. 


DUKE WAX. 


9c.:!'!: Jit flS fiS.-f- X«Ja®Sf3K^W<a- + 

m M a iS ^ 9c >ffe ^ ^ » gg ^ 

If.f * f A.m.ll S S.|. M fiiii.i^ 69 A ? jp ml 

s.#,5i » * i 5c ^ M 3E 1 ^ S 

E ja ^ e g 1|..« ^ .3!C « ,1. ? $B ifet ij . 

;§: K -t se.5 ta g g ^K.# ^ -16..;^ .?. 9fe ffl R 


TO g A ^ S.* jlf‘^ 4 1 

^ i-i-^ m « ja A # 0.£.s 

fls A S a -a.^- ^ bt.-r 

^ ter rtM> nn tvi » .^k. 


/IV 'I - ^ ^ HU /VM 75ZJ »sig J Rb ^IXe 

1 ^ » g g.3;^M ^ ® Bg 'ft.Jt 

a S-aS.® W.# W.K «5.)t,|| ^ A 

S ffi ■* S S' '*'W = ^.ap 8i> 

g 0 * B.B mmm^mm 

^ R M‘B S ? 5!;.a.6®.^ S 

^ 2 S S; IS lB.9c 0.-^ in M 

li-lf‘l;Sfi Igwa;*.® 

^mmw mm 

;5 -n-.0.^ g A F.B, ffi.JiaffSffiw 
^ A ^ SE B ^ a JH 75 ‘e )# 


j^a ✓x»i=/u»i5»- '•-§ /<•' n-i yAia»v-^ l i pui ZFU "T— 

S It A ;t c®.^ ffi -K (l.a.ffl ffl ::p T MM, & 
II # S ® a.g.^ A #fe if' ^ #,A 

#®i® f A.ff 0.SSM AXA. S 

# a6.<& m 

-g.JL ffl ifn * -ti A.^S.W.M.^.fife S A. A 

=l‘gESAg.^ + #JSM3iWJ^»i f 


33 


274 


THE CHTO TSIW, WITH THE TSO CiHIJEN. 


BOOK VI 


Z, 


. ^ ^ -ft. 35c * P i 

m ^ M. e. s * 

Bii p # ip -tfc. # m A 

XVI. 1 In the [duke’s] sixteenth year, in spring, Ke-sun HSng- 
foo had a meeting with the marquis of Ts‘e in Yang* 
. kuh; but the marquis would not make a covenant 
with him. 


2 In 


*r AW** ******* • 

summer, in the fifth month, the duke for the fourth 

.! !• 1 . • t« 1 ?_ ATI the 


5 

6 


time did not give audience to his ministers on 
first day of the moon. 

In the sixth month, on Mow-shin, duke [Chwang s| son, 
Suy, and the marquis of Ts‘e, made a covenant in be* 

k‘ew. 1 TT n 

In autumn, in the eighth month, on Sin-we, [duke Jie®J 

wife, the lady Keang, died. 

[Thet^duke] pulled down the tower of Ts‘euen. 

A force from Ts‘oo, one from Ts'in, and one from 1 

extinguished Yung. r c a 

In winter, in the eleventh month, the people of bung 
murdered their ruler, Ch‘oo-k‘8w. 

Chung-yen '[ijl ; Sting dyn-s 
of 13th century) even finds in the 
timation that for 4 months on end the du e 
neglected all the affairs of the govt. 

Par. 3. For ^ Kung-yang has «« 


Par. 1, The Chuen says ; — ‘ In the Ist month 
of this year, [Loo] and Ts‘e agreed to beat 
peace, and the duke being ill, he sent Ke W#n to 
have a meeting trith the marquis of Ts*e iu 
Yang-kuh. _ Ke Wfin requested a covenant, but 
the marquis was unwilling to make one, and 
said, “Allow me to wait till your ruler is 
better." ’ It is to bo understood that the mar- 
quis of Ts*e did not believe that the duke was 
really ill; and many of the critics suppose that 
ttic illness was in some measure at least feigned. 
1 ang-kuh — see V. iii. 6. 

Par. 2. Tso says that this neglect of the 
duties of the Ist day of the moon was owing 

to the dnke's illness. Tlie phrase JjM is a 

pregnant one. _ Acc. to hlnou. the mvt day of 
the moon was inaugurated by the sacrifice of a 
sheep in the ancestral temple, after which the 
prince announced to his ancestors tiio arrival of 
tJie day, according to the calendar whicli he had 
received from tiic king, and asked their pennis- 
Sion to go on to tlie duties of the inontli. All 
this was called When these ccrc- 

Tnonie* were over, fi^iroceedcd to give audience 
to his itiinisters, and arrange, so far as could be 
dime, fo£tIie bu<iine^s of the month, and this was 
caUe.1 i.Y„n, ,i,e oj 

tiiontJi to ilip ,-(tIi thi. tiiiniuc's bad now Ijcen 
I'-.i nitJjitj'b.trgiil, I tlo not sw why we should 
i!<>t siisiplv riveive the n-a'iiii assigned for it 
'> If •••hr; l(!it the critiC" are n« imlfelicvlng 
111 t.’r iJtjfcr g jltn.i** ns thf rii.trtitiis of Tsv 
Ivs.i>-> Kmo;; ».,», if the imil-l.b- 

illiir**, it V tietliin: 
il'l f. 


Eub-leang has Se-k'ew was in 


Ts'e,— 

dis. of Tnng-o (M 


somewhere in the pres, 

JJ^), dep. T’ae-gan, 

The Chuen says that the covenant 
brought about by the duko’s sending 
chnng (Kung-tsze Suy) with bribes to tl 
quis of Ts‘e. tr.i.ng 

Parr. 4,6. This lady KSang was Sbing ^ 

the widow of duke He, and mot i 

of Wlln. Kung-yang s.ays that at 

TB‘cucn ’ was the name given to tlini * 
Lang by duko Chwang in his Slst vean ^ 
Chuen says : — ‘ There came out from JLnts, 

of Ts'cucn, and entered the capital, . i 
as manv ns there had been marquises w 


re iiau ocoii -- ui.intf, 

[Xo fewer than sovciitccnj; and .I" r,f,e 
iin-we in the 3th montl , 


kuitn^ cUwl on Sin- 


fluke! cnuswl the tower to be pinlc<i fio - , 

■ mu.st suppose that 


It- 

m . **• 


‘1 *»' X ?>,$ 


n>*i\ 


.. f'X* * 

f:.nr UH-n fvr.irilH 


this siorv wore true, we inuj»i ruri”-- ; . 
I)Cop!c !)e!i(?vcfl there wiw some *^"”***^^* „i thp 
tween the apnenmnee of the ffcrfK'nt-^ n 
de.ith of the iluclic*.*!, who fwrhftp* bve* 
palace <»f TM*cuen. . 

I’ftr* 6. Pfl wa' ft considerable Fifth?* 

I«n!» were vi-ccmnlJ*. with the Chow 
of Kc. It ban left its n.ame »« *'"• 
pal «ii«. of th- drji, Ch'ung-k’inc fTjt 


1. ^ 


t?,»* dfjkf’V Or'*', am! F»»*-4*h*n*'n. Of little i* kni>wn- 

.„f I, Itwaiig' t-.vo wa- ‘ - ' 


10 (' e.i«i ff'irii :be r’’'*' 


rhi:- 


BOOK VI. 


276. Ithe ch'un ts‘EW, with the tso chuen. 


•“‘la all the twelve books of the Ch‘un Ts'ew, 
there are 3 cases, in which the murder of the 
tmer is attributed to the people:~-lst, that in 
the text;. 2d, the murder of Shang*jin by the 
people of Ts‘e (p. 3 of the 18th year) ; and 3d, the 
inurder of MSh-chow by the people of Keu 
(lX.a3au, 7). There are 4 cases in which the 
murder of the ruler is attributed to the State: 
1st, the murder of Shoo-k‘e by Keu (9th p. of 
t^lSth year^; 2d, tliat of Chow-p*oo by Tsin 
(VlIX,xviii.2); 3d, that of Leaou by Woo (X 
1 ^ 1 . 2); and 4th, that of Pe by Seeh (XI.xiii. 

Kow of all these 7 cases, Tso’s canon can 
only be applied, with an appearance of justice, to 
Me first two, the murders of duke Ch‘aou of 
Sung, and Shang-jin of Ts'e. Then we have 
the murders of the three dukes Ling,-of Tsin, 
of Ts 00 , and of Clvin, who were all bad rulers 
TOe names of their murderers are fully given. 

Kung-tsze p| (x! 
X1U.2), Hea Ch'mg-shoo (^,x.7). How is 
jt that we have similar facts recorded with such 
diaeren(«s of manner ? The answer is that the 
sage made the Ch'un Ts'ew from what he found 

f.Tia 4>a . •_ ■ .. ... 


which might be abbreviated, but could not ^ 
added to. Now when ministers murdered their 
rulers or sons their fathers, there would be few 
that would announce the exact truth to friendly 
States ;“they would throw the crime on other, 
and generally on meaner parties. When the sage 
had carefully examined the historiographers of 
his State, and aU that he heard in the 72 other 
States through which .he travelled, if he wished 
to exhibit the real offender and execute him 
with his pencil, there was the difft. statement of 
the original communication ; if he wished to al- 
low the crime to rest on the parties on whom it 
[ was thrown, the real criroinm escaped from the 
j net. His plan was to leave it an open question 
i as to the true criminnls, and to write “ the State 
murdered — or “ the people of the State mur- 
dered ” — ; and thus, though he gave no names, 
the crime of rebellious ministers and ruffian sons 
did not escape.’ . 

This note sufficiently disposes of the canon oi 

Tso-she, and all other attempts to explain parti- 
cular characters of the text on the ‘ praise and 
blame’ principle. The editors’ mvn account of 
the matter has been sufficiently discussed in the 
prolegomena. 


Seventeenth year. 


itB 


S 1: 

Mjh 


»A.t= 


B. 


mm 

a*.A. 


ife A Tc.fM Vi?. 

R: A'- ti' 


i 


i’bjlr xvn. 


DUKE WAN. 


277 


a S p + ® Bn -i il V Sll %,Z 


% H.S.a.ii.P - # A «: '« T tJi: nM A # 

3 e'^-® m m. t -S ^.lE a MM #. 

A i w.:?: ^.Bn %mm:iL 

m mM 'iB.m,^ ^ wj ^ iB.^fe m m. 

j^s*aT&i8M* + 


i Aw ' 

i.f 

mf 


ifi,. 36 


6 0.#.^ 


/fc rP 


I# — A 


XVII. ] 


2 

3 


4 

o 

6 


^ ^ 

>i m'x^ m -i-.A + « 5E 

m s * ffii 0.® m stt ^.3: mM s 

m m 

W ‘ S/ ^ -S ira .M. fr* 

W MM 

M ^ r?ff g, 

ni^=Lm M mMM ^ n 

In the [duke’s] seventeenth year, in spring, an officer of 
Tsin, an officer of Wei, an officer of Gh‘in, and an 
officer of Gh‘mg, invaded Sung. 

In summer, in the fourth month, on Kwei-hae, we buried 
our duchess, Shing Keang. 

The marquis of Ts‘e invaded our western borders. In 
the sixth month, oh Kwei-we, the duke and the mar- 
quis of Ts*e made a covenant in Kuh. 

[Several] of the States had a meeting in Hoo. 

In autumn, the duke arrived from Kuh. 

Duke [Ghwang’s] son, Suy, went to Ts‘e. 


Par. 1. Tso-shesays: — ‘This spring, Seunliin- 
foo of Tsin, K‘nng Tah of Wei, Knng-snn Ning 
of Ch‘iu, and Shib Ts'oo of Ch‘ing, invaded Sung. 
[Comingl to pnnish it, they said, “Por vrhat 
cause did ye murder your ruler?” but yet they 
recognized duke WSn, and returned. The 
names of the ndnisters ate not given in the 
text, indicating that they failed in \rhat phey 
had undertaken].’ Too observes that from the 
time of duke Min, precedence is Mirays given 
in the accounts of meetings, &c., to Ch'in over 


Wm, while in this instance we hare:^^ A 

before mA- He supposes the reason to be 
that Enng-sm King was a minister of lower 
rank than E*nng Tah. 

Par. 2 . S ee on HI. xxxiL 2. Kung-yang g^res 
^ for Tso says the burial took place 
late, in consequence of the troubles of Loo with 
Ts'e. 


278 


THE CII'HS TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK YI. 


Par. 5. Rub. — see HI. vii. 4. Tso says : — 
‘llie marqiiis of Ts*e invaded our northern 
border. Seang-chung [bn behalf of duke YYan3 
begged a covenant, and in the 6th month, a 
covenant Avas made in Knh.’ The ‘ western ’ 
border of the text is the ‘northern’ in the 
Chuen. Ying-tah thinks the text is wrong, 
because Kuh lies north of Loo. 

Par. 4. The Chuen says: — ‘Tlie marqnis of 
Tsin had a grand review in Hwang-fbo, and 
proceeded to assemble the States again in Hoo: 
■“for the pamfication of Sung. The duke was 
not present at the meeting, because of the dif- 
ficiHties with Ts'e, The te.xt says [simply] “ the 
■'n^ous princes,” [without further specifying 
them], because they accomplished nothing. At 
this meeting, the marqnis of Tsin did not see 
the earl of Ch*ing, and concluded that he was 
[agam] mclining to Ts‘oo. Tsze-kea of Ch‘ing, 
[bemg aware of this], sent for the ctirrier of 
de^atch®, and gave him a letter, in whi«jh 
he laid the following statements before Chaou 
«nen; «_In tlm 3d year of my ruler, he called 
the maiqi^ of Ts'ae, and agre^ with him that 
they should serve your State. In the 9th month, 
the marqim came to our poor city on the wav 

^ere occupied 

S Seuam-X>, and 

“2^ able to go along-ftith him, but 
month, having sucegaiaed in diminig*. 

SaJnVc °^.^euen>t<he followed the 

m^uis that he might ^pear at vour court 

51'® “'^hage/^r Its affairs. In his 


- n year, UJ, Hwei-^ang, n$$isted ray ruler^s 
a, E, in persuading the mar< 


^ iQ persuading the marquis of 
nf from TsVw, and go to the conrt 

of jonr ruler. In his Uth year, in the 7th 


raomii, my ruler further appeared at vour court 

cii^ of Dhe submission of] 

marowU^2f**r'd'’‘^‘ nmuth, the 

111 \reut from our poor city to 

vonr^^"'' S?'®*'''®® '”'®''* fo present E at 
nc?^^l,n him^lf. That Ch'in and Ts-ae, 

inaacn<S'“^M"® 5® 

our considering onlv 

wo ‘ of your mlcr, how is it tha't 


WC do .'wur nucr, now is it that 

brontd,t 2* an impnt.ation as is 

m.anin5s our 


mirnnie ^.-1 accession, our 

anT^hl,. r*'' court-visit to duke Scang, 
ruler* ?PPO.'ired before your present 

uier. [iiis gon] E, and more than one of us. 


j his ministers, ha\*e l>een one after another to 

' Ke.nng. Ro other Skate has been mow assidco^ 

than ours in its service of Tsin. And now yea 
great State s.nys [to Clring]. "\pa do n.. 
satisfy iny wishes!*' There is ruin for our p ‘■ 
citv; we are at the last extremity. 

‘Tliore is a saving of the .ancient.^ 
for its lic.nd and fisiring for 
of the body left [not to fear for]." And 
is another, “The d«r driven 


IS anoiiier, ’ auu 

not choose the [best] place to take s • 
\STien ti smnU State seri-es a Isrgc d 
with kindly, it shows «»e 
if not dealt with kindly, it acts like ^ 
Tliat runs into danger in ds tiolMt hmiy' 
for how in its «Ygenc.^honld d 
choose where to run?^ *‘55*^]n the sa®e 

the commands to it without it. 

way only knows that there_is xnm 


way only knows that incre i- * 

We will raise all our PO<»r of sffidrsj 

at Yew, -just as .v^* ‘J,® 11 ^? in 


ou, lue uuwv^ - 

may command us. Onr [former] ® ^jn^fcin, 
his'second year, in the 6th . }„ Ks 1th 

acknowledged the court . becinw^®'? 

vear, in the 2d month, ou Jm*.t •j.fdt 
r • Jntn Ts'ae. lie 


vear, in the 2d montn, on .j. 

made an incursion into ^s^®v.A 
to] obtain terms of peace from ,v«t ve 

>. “ S» 'ff n?1 


...j . . ’”!„;%,nlt thst ve 

between sreat States, is d ^ VfvonrgKd 
— lersf 


must follow thmr violent 
State do not consider these th»^^^ |i jjv nf^ 
seek to evade the command ,-« ‘ onnsi 5f the 
ns (i.e., Ch'ba.'g woiild meet Tpn 
necessity were laid upon it)- , tr„ns Sch 
‘ [After the receipt of this .uies” 

of Tsin went and settled tlie „.in-l9d 
Ch'ingJJhbou Ch‘uen, and Ch*e, sp® 
duke iTiin, going there ns hostages. j^^gf 

Par. 5. mie'Chnen sat* 

notices: — ^“In autumn. Kan Ch'uh pf 
prised the Jung in Shin-sh‘Uy, whili 
drinking spirits, and defeated them. -ijest 
* In winter, in the 10th month. E. > 
son of the earl of Ch*ing, and Shih Ts t 


came hostages in Tsin.’] , _ 

P.ar. 6. The Chuen ‘ p^ts 

went to TsHj to express our acknowledgme * 
for tlie covenant at Kuh. Wlien he ’ 

he said, ‘ I heard the people of TsV [sa.' J 
will eat the wheat of Loo, but according to m 
view they will not be able to do so. The won - 
of the marquis of Ts*o are rude; and 
Wan-ebnng remarked that when a iwoplc s o 
is rude, he is sure to die.”’ 


Ei^hteenih 7/cai'. 

*1; 

W A n.# T* — A. 
3tw,A.«A^. 


Exn XVllI. 


nUKE NYAN. 


279 


^ ^ X ~i” 


1**1 Slit Siia'i 5 i' 3 fe.|. 

tS sill 11 Is-fJit 


Sa'I t‘»l4 

§ ii ^ 55 A f 1 g-a 

ii»s. 


g.s.re 

*01 

At 


l|J»rn • ■* ” -sr 


ill 5 I|| It 
t-IS S8II It 
Itt isfi i.s 


# ^ g * 1 . s 

f.ii±i¥ ^jfs 


-jw R 


ri 


0 ^ 

^ ^ s* ^‘T 
.H ^ A 


HP 


»>wo-Tl . - ' tT-t 

It li 


■§ 
ft w. 


m ra 
^li ¥ ^ 1 ‘S 


* 


m A ^.:i.H. 
® vgt :s U 
igf 

5 ^ ft, ft. A ^r 
l.iX 2 

•R Iji ^S * 
$n.# tfS ® ^ 
75 ^ ^il ^ M 


n h 


IS- Si llil-i- 

^§,l.l| 

^ A ^ ^ ^ 
'fs # m mM 


280 


THE CH‘U>r TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEH. 


BOOK YL 


® ^ 31 « m ;S.'^ ± -S 

■fa « ^ s m.^ ^ m <&-.® 

:t^n #.* mMM,m ^.z m m 

t^,Z 5C # K j| :Z wlm ^ # fil ^ ^ 

m mm m m mm m a mM.m 

w.m ^ ^t.j£> m wmm 0 . 0 . 


I ^ ^ ~, » »-■ "-5-^ -ij ’fciS % ^ 

^ flS a -tfc.fln T tl -» j5lia « s.n n s M J, 
# <& -.0 ^ ;$: M A ± ® « K-ffl.Ja f 

Z •?•.# a T S..^ »] ^ 15 # S S 


— -tjj.M ='B -c.^, -r,w Mm is,^ 5 
* ^ S ^ M W.® W ^ A 

? ^ i ^ ^ S P K « T ii. i?ff • 2- 
5 § # f . Jit » * 51 * ^ W 15 # . « ^ 

M.ft.S § 3i Bj Bf m.T ^ * ?e f 

^ + 35.5 ^ P «: mM n ZI^&A 35 .f 


21: i^*_L iS‘^‘ -2E*^ «“ ^ I /\ m 

$•* ^ S S S J ^ ^ 7C.^ « *Si its..® ^ 

A JK » 5t K.f 


S ® i: H * S 1$ -a.A S A -E 0.f 


15 


15* 


.M-S ^ S i i ^ ^ ^ - ’ 

S ^ # 2 S* @‘5 S ^ ^ >5" A k ^ 

f i 1 l-lfe ^ 0 :P A.^ * f 

ta. 

yJi 

:^'- 
'«] 


<«r ^ nj,^v ^ JSj £ii,yV,{t'J ^ 

-- ^ ^ ^ .S 

32 ^ rr.iit ja s # ji f# s g 
?5-i£-f. "? 5 g.t-.s # PA- ^ 


tbxb xvin. 


DUKE \7A5h. - 


28 


XYIIT. 


1 In his eighteenth year, in spring, in the king’s secon 

month, on Ting-ch^ow, the duke died, [in a chamber 
beneath [one] of his to'wers. 

2 Ying, earl of Ts'in, died. 

3 In summer, in the fifth month, on Mow-seuh, the peo 

pie of Ts‘e murdered their ruler, Shang-jin. 

4 In the sixth month, on K'v^ei-yew, Tre buried our ruler 

duke IVan. 

5 In autumn, duke [Gh^vang’s] son, Suy, and Shuh-su 

Tih'shin, went to Ts^e. 

6 In winter, in the tenth month, the [duke’s] son died. 

7 The [duke’s] wife, the lady Keang, vrent back to Ts‘e. 

8 -Ke-sun Hang-foo went to Ts‘e. 

9 Keu murdered its ruler, Shoo-k‘e. 


Par. 1. See on HI. xxxii. i, and V. jandii. 11. 
Kuh-leang says here that duhe Wiin did not die 
in the plare ■where he should have died; hut all 
the Chueu, and the critics also, are provokingly 
silent as to xrhat or where the place •was. Only 

in Koo Tung-knon’s ‘ Tables of the great matters 


in the Ch'nn Ts'ew 

— •)’ have "I found any- 
thing hearing on the subject. He says that the 
to'wer was that of Ts‘euen. meutioned in XVI. 5, 
—a tower in the palace of Ts'euen. It is there 
S!dd that the duke pulled the tower down, and 
Koo adds that he pulled do^vn the palace as 
well. Yet it happened that he died somehow 
where the tower had been, shoAving that the 
death foreshadowed by the serpents that is«u^ 
from under it was not that of Shinu Iveang.'but 
the duke's own death! The matter must be 
left in its obscurity. 

The Chnen says;— ‘In the spring, the mar- 
quis of TsHs. was preparine for the time when 
he should take the field [to attack Loo], wheu 
he fell ill. and his physician said that he would 
die before autumn. The duke he.atd of it. and 
consulted the tortoise-shell, saving. “Jlav hi-e 
death take phaoe before the time [nf his tiikin" 
the field]!" Hwuy-pih communicated the su^ 
ject inquired about to the shell. Ts'oo-k-ew 
the diviner, performed the operation, and said' 
“ The nmrquis of Ts-e will die before that time' 
though not of illness; and the duke .also fwili 
die] without hearing of tht nar^sis's ikath. 
There is evil also m store for him who com- 
municated the sublet to the shell." [According- 
the duke died on Tins:-<i«ow, in the 
month; " * ^ 


Par. 2, ThiswasdukeK‘ang(|^y;i^);and 

M earl of 


Sin in the Cla^si^yihrg^^^^ 

had been rapid, for it w.vs not till ifter rh-. 
battle of Shing-puh that its chiefs interehan^ 

r.ar. S. on XV1.7. Tne Chuca 

say5;-‘WheadukeEcfTs‘owas [onlvl duke', 
ren. he had a strife w-th the father* of 
Chua absut some fields in which he d;dr«; 

VOL r. 


get the better; and therefor^ when he became 
marqnis, he caused the grave of his opponent to 
he dug open, and the feet of the corpse to be 
ent off, while yet he employed Ch‘nh as Ms 
charioteer. And thongh he took to himself the 
wife of Yen Chih, he carried Chih with him as 
the third attendant in his chariot. 

‘ In summer, in the 5th month, the dnke hav- 
ing gone to the pool of Ship, these two men irere 
bathing in the pool, when Ch'uh struck the 
other with a tavig, and then said to him, when 
^ got “ Since yon allowed yonr wife to 

^ tjiken from yon without bdng angrv. how 
does a tap hketbat hurt von?” “How" is it” 
repUed Chih, “between me and him who was 
able to see his father's feet ent off without 
fwhng aggrieved.? ” The two men then consult- 
ed together, murdered duke E, and laid his hodv 
among the bamboos. They then returned [to 
I ,“.‘-^-1: calmly put down their cups [after 
i drinfang] and went aw.ay. The people of Ts‘e 
I H wan's son Yuen to bis brother’s 

‘I"«ctnmn,Seang- 
^ung and Cliwang-shuh went to Ts^e, [to con- 
gmulatc] duke Hwuy on account of his 
acwssion, and to express Loo's acknowledgment 
for the presence of an officer of Ts-e at duke 
ii un s bunal. Seang-dmng was charged with 
OTO of these duties, and Chwang-shtth*with the 

his^own^m-^^*^ together, each had 

m. own mi^ion. But tliev transacted o*her 
^smess m Ts-e. Tlie Chnen goes on._«S 
second wife nnrunk] of dike 

fif ° bccante] duke S^ueiT 

She was Uie duke s favourite, and privatelv naid 
Murtto S&ng-chung. to whom Sie 
the care of her sou's interests as he Sew nf 


: P'Siti-.n, a.id wiriiin- to^. 

; with Loo, grantcil h? fncndly terms 

■ foa who is here tr. u 

.h. «*4'£,d 


282 


THE CII'UN TS‘E)V, \riTH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VI. 


She ; and on his death, Goh, the elder of the 
two, though only a child, had been recognized 
as ' marquis and as the late marquis was now 
buried, he ought to appear here with his name 
and his title as ' marquis ‘ or ‘ ruler.’ Instead 
of dying a natural death, as we should conclude 
from the text, he was muMercd, as the Chuen 
immediately goes on to relate. The critics have 
a great deal to say in trying to account for the 
state of the record in the text; but it is of the 
same character as many others throughout the 
classic, from which we should do anything but 
know the truth about the things recorded, if 
we were entirely dependent on the sage for our 

information. The instances of in III. 

xxxii, 5, and |^, in IX. xxxi. 3, are some- 
what difit. from that before us, because in them 
the fathers of the young marquises had not yet 
been buried, and it was proper they should 
appear as ‘ sons’ only. 

The Chuen says: — ‘In winter, in the 10th 
month, [Seang-] chung hilled Goh and She, 
Md set up [Tseeh, who became] duke Seuen. 
The entry that ‘the [duke’s] son' died’ is to 
conceal the nature of the fact. Chung then, 
fas if] by the [young] ruler’s order, called 
Hwuy-pih [to come to him]. Hwuy-pih’s 
stew.ard, Kuiig-jen Woo-jin endeavoured to stop 
him, sayiiig that, if he entered [the palace], he 
was sure to die. Shuh-chung said, “If I die in 
obeying my ruler’s command, it is right 1 should 
do BO.’’ The steward answered, “Yes, if it be 
the ruler’s command; but if it bo not, why should 
you listen to it ?’’ Hwuj'-pih would not take 
this advice, but entered [the palace], where 
they killed him, and hid his body among the 
horses’ dung. His steward then carried his wife 
and children with him, and fled to Ts‘nc;bat 
the Shuh-chung family was afterwards restored.’ 

Par. 7. The Chuen says: — ‘This return of 
duke 'VYttn’s wife Kcang to Ts'o was a return 
for good. When she was about to go, she wept 
aloud. Passing through the market place, she 
cried out, “ O Heaven, Chung has done wickedly, 
killing the son of the wife, and setting up the 
son of a concubine!” All in the market wept, 
and the pcopic of Loo called her Gae Kcang 
(“ The sorrowful Kcang”).’ 

Par. 8. Kting-tsze Suy, Shuh-sun 'rih-shin, 
and Kc-sun llnng-fon wore confederates in the 
atrocious deeds which had been perpetrated, 
'riic former two had got a sort of sanction for 
tliem from tlie marquis of Ts‘c. as related in p. 5, 
and llftng-foo now went to tell him of their ac- 
compliiliment. 

Par. 9. Tile Chuen has a long narrntii-c on 
thi« iiaragrapli : — ‘Duke Kc of Ken had two 
son*. — I’nh tlie oldest, [and who should have 
sueo.'i'tled him], and l\e-t‘o; hnl through his 
love for Ke-t*o he degrad.sl I’uh. Ho :ilsa did 
lii.'uiy things iig..iii!st nil propriety in the State, 
and Poll, hy the help of th<- people, jiroeeeihsi to 
tnnnli r hlti’i. lie then gathensl all his ralimlile 
tr.'.v'iires tug.-jli.-r. .iiid e.im.- lUing with them 
to aii'l pri.-.-iinsl tJii in toduke S.-iie.i. 'Hie 
d'lk.- » ton'si.'o him a eity. “It 

m'i>! tegivi fi toluol to.d.ty;" liiit Ke W.'iOinad.’ 
t!.-' Iriicitt -r t'i ("tiiii.- »elel lii'il I;.-\o!ul the 
t- ft.-r*, "11.- lo’.i't get th-Tf to-»Hy.” 

‘I?!- <! it.' 1 lie' r< <>! till* r.-’i.Jiiet, ne.'l 
i.t "T K'.’ . tfi-gTA!!'! f.lit'T'-'-g'np'i.'r.with 


the following reply: — “A deceased great officer 
of our State, Tsang Witn-chung taught Hfing-foo 
rules to guide him in serving his ruler, and 
gives them the widest application, not 
darin^m let them slip from his mind. 'W’an- 
chung’s words were, ‘ When you see a man who 
observes the rules of propriety in his conduct 
to his ruler, behave to him as a dutiful son 
should do in nourishing his parents. When 
yon see a man who transgresses those rules to- 
W'ards his ruler, take him off as an eagle or a 
hawk pursues a small bird.’ The founder of our 
House the duke of Chow, in the Rules which he 
framed for Chow, said, ‘ By means of the model 
of conduct you can see a man’s virtue. His 
virtue is evidenced in his management ot af- 
fairs. Erom that management his merit can 
be measured. His services result in the sup- 
port of the people.’ In the Admonitory Instruc- 
tions which he made, [the duke of Chow] smd, 
‘ He who overthrows [the laws of conduct] is a 
villain; and he who conceals him is his har- 
bourer. He who filches money is a thief j he 
who steals the treasures of a State is a traitor. 
He who harbours the villain, and he who uses 
the treasures of the traitor, is guilty of the great- 
est crime. He must suffer the regular penalty, 
witliout forgiveness ; — sucli a case is not omitted 
in [the Book of] the nine Punishments.’ When 
Httng-foo viewed the whole action of Puh of 
Ken, lie saw nothing in him fit to be a model 
of conduct. Filial reverence and loyal faith are 
virtues of good conduct; theft and villainy, 
and harbouring [the thief] and [accepting the 
gifts of] the traitor, are vices of evil conduct. 
Now wlint was the pattern of filial reverence 
given by Puh of Keu ? — ^'I’he murder of his fa- 
ther and ruler. And his pattern of loyal faith 
was his stealing the treasures and jewels^ of the 
State. The man is a robber and a villain ; the 
things he brought with him are the signs of his 
treachery. 'J'o protect liim and accept his gifts 
would be to be a principal in harbouring him. If 
we, witli [the duke of Chow’s] lessons, should 
take such n blind course, tlie people would have 
no pattern ; and unable to take the incnsurenicnt 
of good themselves, they would be in the midst 
of vices of bad conduct. It was for these rea- 
sons that [Illlng-foo] sent Puh of Ken away. 

‘The ancient [emperor] Kaon-yang (i.^ ?. 
Cliucn-heiih) had eight descendants of ability 
[and virtue]: — ^'rs'aiig-shoo ; T‘uy-gnc; T'aoii 
yin; Ta-lin; Mang-liang; T‘ing-kecn; Chung- 
yung ; and Sbuli-tnii. I’licy were correct and 
sagely, of wide comprciiciision and deep, intelli- 
gent and consislont, generously good and sin- 
cere : — all under heaven called them the eight 
llnrmoiiics. 

* [The emperor] Knoti-sin fi. q. Kiih] had [al- 
so] eight doscendnntii of ability [and virtue] 
PiTi-fiiii ; Cliiing-k'.m, Sliiili-iiecn; Kc-ebung; 
Pill-boo; Cliiing-liuiing ; Slmli-p'nou ; and Kc- 
Ic. 'I'liey were leal and reverontinJ, re.siiectfiil 
and ndiiiiriible, nll-eonsidering and benevolent, 
kind and Imriiioiiioiis : — all under lieaven called 
tlH'in the I'iebt Worllile*. 

or tlie«i‘ n: nil'll fiifter] ages b-avo aeknowledg- 
•■*1 the e.xi-elli'ru-". and not let their name; fall to 
the KToiind. Hut ill tlie time of Vnoii, he wni not 
able to r.-ti-e tbi iii to olIii.T. When .‘^liuti, liow- 
ever. l>'«’aiiii' VaonV miniyter, be ratted the eight 
Ilarniotii"^ to ogic,., niel eni)il.>yed tlieiii to 
•njs riiiti !i<l till- d-;>artrii< nt of Ho- tnini»ter of 


YiUTi XYIII. 


DUKE W^VN. 


283 


the X^and. AU matters corincctod with it were 
thns TCRuiatcd, and cvcrytiiing was arranged ui 
its ntoner season 5""the earth was rednceti to 
onlcr, and the influences of heaven operated 
with cflect. He also raised tlte eight ^Y orthies 
to ofliec. and employed them to disseminate 
through the four quarters a hnowlcdgo of the 
duties belonging to the five relations of society. 
Pathers became ptst and mothers gentle; elder 
brothers kindly, and younger ones respectful; 
and sons became filial:— in the empire there was 
order, and bevond it submission. 

*n:c ancient emperor Hung [Hwang-te] had 
a descendant devoid of ability [and virtitol. 
He hid righteousness frotn himself, and was a 
villain at heart; he delighted in the practice 
of the worst vices ; he was shameless and vile, 
obstinate, stupid, and unfriendly, cultivating 
only the intimacy of such ns himself. All the 
people under heaven called him Chaos. 

‘ The emperor Shaou-haou n?rcceded Chuen- 
heuhi had a descendant devoid of ability [and 
virtue]. Ho sought to ovcrlhrow faith, and 
disowned loyalty. He delighted in evil speeches 
and tried to' make them attractive; he was at 
homewith slanderers, andcmploycd the perverse; 
he readily received calumnies, and souglitout 
men’s iniquities, to stigmatise what was sincere. 
iUl the people under heaven called him Monster. 

* rXhe emperor] Chucn-hculihad a descendant 
devoid of ability [and virtue]. He would receive 
no instruction;* he would acknowledge no good 
\rords. IVhen told, he was obstinate; when left 
alone, ho was stupid. He was an arrogant hater 
of intelligent virtue, seeking to confound the 
heavenly rules of society. All the people under 
heaven called him Block. 

•Of these three men [after] ages acknowledged 
the wickedness, and added to their evil names. 
But in the time of Taou, he was not able to put 
them away. 

‘[Tlie officer] Tsin*yun [In the time of 
Hwang-te] bad a descendant who was devoid 
of ability and virtue. He was greedy of eating 
and drinking, craving for money and property. 
Ever gratifying his lusts, and making a grand 
displaj*, he was insatiable, rapacious in his ex- 
actions, and accumulating stores of wealth. He 
had no idea of calculating where he should step, 
and made no exceptions in favour of the orpiian 
and the widow, felt no compassion for the poor 
and exhausted. AU the people under heaven 
likened him to the three other wicked ones, and 
colled him Glutton. 

* \Vlien Shun became Taou’s mimster, he re- 
ceived the nobles from the four quarters of the 
empire, and banished these four wicked ones, 
Chaos, Monster, Block, and Glutton, casting 
them out into the four distant regions, to meet 
the spite of the sprites and evil things. The 
consequence of this was, that, when Yaou died, 
aU under heaven, as if they had been one man, 
with common consent bore Shun to be emperor 
because he bad raised to office those sixteen 
helpers, and had put away the four wicked ones 
Therefore the Book of Yu, in enumeratino' the 
servicesof Shun, says, ‘He carcInUy set forth 
the beauty of the live cardinal duties, and they 
came to be universally observed mie Shoo It 
i. 2):’— none were disobedient to his instructions • 
‘being appointed to he General Eegnbitor, the 
affairs of e.ach department were arranged accord- 


ing to their proper seasons (ihkh );' — tlicro wns no 
neglect of any nfl’air; ‘having to receive the 
princes from the four quartern of the ciiipirc, 
they all were docilely submissive (ibid .):' — there 
were none wicked among them. Bhuii’e services 
were shown in the case of those 20 men. and he 
became emperor; and now, althongh Illiiig-foo 
has not ohtniiiccl one good man, lie has put .away 
one had one. He has a twentieth part of the 
merit of Shun ; and may he not, ])erlmps, cscapo 
the charge of having lieen disoh^ient?” ’ 

['riic above long and elaborate vindication of 
his conduct hy Kc-snn llflng-foo is wortiy of 
careful study in many respects. Tlio references 
to men and things in what wc may call tho 
ptmlustoric period were, no doubt, in accordance 
with traditions current at the time, though wo 
cannot accept them ns possessed of historic.al 
authority, more especially ns there is an anti- 
confucinn spirit in what is s.aid of Ynoii. 

Leaving this, it is remarkable that Kc-sun, in 
condemning Fuh of Kcu, and vindicating his 
own conduct in expelling Iiini from Loo, seems 
altogether unconscious of crimes in Loo nearly 
affecting himself, hardly less atrocious than those 
of which Fuh had been guilty. He liad allon-cd 
the murder of Goh and She hy Kung-tszc Suy: 
he had made no remonstrance on the murder by 
that statesman of their old colleague' Sliuh- 
chung Hwuy-pih. He connived in fact at these 
deeds, and was confederate with Suy in securing 
the usurpation by Seuen of the marqnisnte. His 
expulsion of the refugee from Kcu marks a 
new ora in the relations of the marquis of Loo 
and his ministers. From the time of Ke Yew 

^), the three great clans of Cbung-sun,. 

Shah-sun, and Ke-sun had ruled the State, but 
the semblance of supreme nutbority was still 
left with the marquis. From the beginning of 
Seuen’s rule, the government was carried on by 
the ministers with little regard to the wishes of 
the marqnis, and often in opporition to them. 

An inconsistency has been point^ out in the 
Chuen about Fuh of Keu. If he, as it is said, 
‘by the help of the people,' murdered his father, 
then he ought to have taken possession of the 
State, instead of fleeing to Loo. Ciuaoa K‘wang 

would obviate this difficulty by changing 

m 


^ . A ^ 0 

A ^ ^ But Ke-sun in his 

memorial charges the murder directly npon 
Fuh. If we Imd mote details of the state of 
things in Keu, the apparent inconsistency in 
Tso-she would probably disappear.] 

[There is appended a short narrative about 
the affairs of Sung:— ‘Tlie Woo clan in Sung 
lea on a son of duke Ch’aou. to support Seu the 
minister of Works, in making an insurrection. 
In the 12th month, the duke of Sung nut 
to deaUi his own brother Sen, and the son of 
duke Ch'aou. He also made the heads of 
clMs, descended from dukes Tae, Chwang 
and Hwan, attack the head of the Woo cliS 
coMt-house of Tsze^pih, minister of 
War, and then expelled the chiefs of the dans 
appointed Kung-sun Sze 
miiustp of Works; and on the death of Kung- 
tsze Chaou, he made Yoli Leu minister of Crime • 
—thus quieting [the minds of] the people.^ ’ 


BOOK YIL DUKE SEUEK. 


First year. 


Teas I- 


DUKE SEUEK. 


285 


^ s e e 2r»!^ A* R a BB +K K 53k 4M 


H'*' ^ M, T -fk 

. rS A So'^A* A 1^ 


m 


'BIJ 


^'ro * A l.Q |i A 5 § 

A S i‘l i S.i i'S i A I XiS 1 1 1‘ 
4‘1'§ ^ wis p 1 ® as m *p ffl *n A 

•g #. 

-If/ Hi ^ 
f}jt Hu ^•ica. 

^sis 

% 0- 

M MM 


tn It*, y I 


JgC 

la 


m 

7T»» 


w 

>TC» 


B. 

3- 


Z, 

3S1 

PT 


ii w.©: i6..B ^ <a- # 3E 

i.*.a w #.l s » f 1 

^ ^a-ppxwffl. 

S ^ 

S milKJCit 

■i.-'R 0 <a- 

S.-R Kl 
SS.Sf ^ ^ 

3- mm 
« mM M 
1«.I!S Ilf *. 

^,ZMW 


an 

0 

. aa 
B 


rfii 

-1- 

Jl- 

S;. 


A*i 

■tfi. 


m. 


I. 1 In Ms first year, in spring, in tlie kings first montli, the 
dnke came to the [vacant] seat. 

2 Duke [Ch'vrang’s] son, Suy, -went to Ts‘e, to meet the [duke’s] 

bride. 

3 In the third month, Suy arrived with the [duke’s] wife, the 

lady Keangj from Ts*e. 

4 In summer, Ke-sun Hang-foo went to Ts‘e. 

5 Tsin banished its great officer, Sen Keah-foo, to "Wei. 

6 The duke had a meeting with the marquis of Ts'e in P‘ing- 

chow. 

7 Duke [Chwang’s] son, Suy, went to Ts'e. 

8 In the sixth month, a body of men from Ts'e took the lands 

of Tse-se. 

9 In autumn, the viscount of Choo came to Loo on a court-visit. 

10 The viscount of Ts'oo and an officer of Ch'ing made an in- 

cursion into Gh'in, and went on to make one into Sun®-. 

11 Chaou Tun of Tsin led a force to relieve Gh'in. ° 

12 The duke of Sung, the marquis of Gh'in, the marquis of "Wei, 

and the earl of Ts'aou, joined the army of Tsin at Fei-lin, 
and invaded Ch'ing, 

13 In winter, Chaou Ch'uen of Tsin led a force, and made an 

incursion into Ts'ung, 

14 A body of men from Tsin and one from Sung invaded Ch'ing. 


286 


THE CHW TS*EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VII. 


Title oe the Book. — ^Duke Seuen’s rule 
lasted for 18 years, from B. C. 607 to 690. His 
name was Tseeli (:^), or, according to Sze- 

ma-ts‘een, Wei He was a son of duke 

Wan by his favourite concubine, King Ying 
honorary title Senen 

denotes — * Fond of asking, and universally in^ 


His first year synclironized with tlie fifth oi 


king K'wang Cg^g); the 13th of Ling(^^ 
of Tsin; th^st of Yuen, duke Hwuy of^e 
the 27th of Ch'ing of Wei; the 
4th of wan (^) of Ts‘ae; the 20th of Muh ol 
Ch'ing; the 10th of Wan, (^) of Ts'aou; the 
6thofLing(g)ofCh‘in; the 29th of Hwac 
of Ke; the 3d of Wan ( ^) of Sung; the Isl 
year of Taon, duke Kung (A ^ jg) ol 
Ts'in, and the 6th of Chwang of Ts‘oo. 

I' This record of Seuen’s accession is 
me same as that in 11- j- 1. His marqufsate and 
Hwan s were both the fruit of murder, and, ac- 
cording to the canon for such a case, we should 
not have the gj] See on IL i. l 


1 1 M, “rcumsrances, and hi! 
anxict} to make Ins lU-got position good by ar 
mllancc with the powerful House of Ts’e. Th( 
Chum on p. 5 of last year tolls us how Suy line 
obtained the sanction of Ts'e to the coup wind 
he contemplated in Loo; and though it ^ys no- 
thing on p. 8, It is understood that Han^foo, 

contract of marriage between the duke and 
n daughter of Ts‘e; and now no time was lost 
in the accomplishment of it On ^ sec 

I. ii. 6 ; and on the term g, see V. xxv. 3. But 
I do see how tlic canon about the appella- 
t^ion which is there given, can apply here. 
Maon s^-s, ‘In her father’s bouse the lady was 
c.'illed on the way to the State where she 
was to be married, she was called jjg; in that 


State flic was tailed ^ 

Tfo-fho says:—* Suy is here 
duke 6 f on,’--to do honour to the nilcPs'com' 
wifp • ’ ^ Suy,— to do honour to th< 

this.* I 'lo not cU>.>irly understani; 


this, 

-foo’s mis- 


a T- r ns the rhicr o 

- ‘ T.,! 1 * '** o{ llRng-f 

fny*;--‘in suRimcr Ke War 

c irntty to S^'tKlkeJ i’ 


where the criminal must remain 

1*; ^ # Ii S B iii:)’ 

affair at Ho-k'euh, Chaou Ch‘uen and Sen Keah* 
foo, who was then assistant-commander of the 
3a ami}', frustrated, as tlie Cliuen relates [VI. 
xii. 7] the design of Chaou Tun to attack the 
army of Ts'in while crossing the Ho. The 
crime had been allowed to slumber for nearly 
8 years, and is now visited on Sen Sliin, but not 
SS Ch*uen, the leader in the offence. 

The Chueu say’s: — ‘The people of Tsin, to 
punish him for his disobedience to orders, ban- 
T K‘eali-foo to Wei, and appointed [his 
son], Seu ICih, to his command. Seen Sin fled 
to Ts‘e.’ 

Par. 6. P‘ing-chow was in Ts'e, in the pres. 

dis. of Lae-woo ^), dep. T'ae-gan. Tso 

says the meeting was ‘ to establish the duke’s 
seat in Loo.’ 


Par. 7. Tso-she here calls Suy — ‘ Tung-mun 
Senng-chung,’ i. c,, Scang-chung who lived near 
the eastern gate, where becomes a sort 

of surname; and says he now went to Ts'e, ‘to 
express [the duke’s] acknowledgments for the 
settlement [of his position].* See on V. xxvi. 6. 

Par. 8. Tse-se Veen , — see V. xxxi. 1. It seems 
a strange action on the part of the marquis of 
Ts'e, after all the favours he had done to duke 
Seuen, now to proceed to appropriate part of 
lus territory. We must suppose tliat the bribe 
nmntioned in the Chuen on p. 4, Imd only been 
I offered and not paid, and that Ts'e lost no time 
in securing it (if these lands were the bribe), or 
at least an equivalent for it. The Chuen says: 
—‘These flelds were taken, because of the service 
in the establishment of the duke, in order to 
bribe Ts'e.' 

Par. 9. All through the times of dukes Ho 
and \i 6n, Choo and Loo had been in bad rela- 
tions. Perhaps the viscount of Choo came now 
to Loo, thinking the time was opportune for tlie 
nealing of their differences, in which, however, 
he was deceived ; — see below in the 10th year, 
"‘““y “■‘tics think he made his visit through 
fear of Ts'e. 

Par. 10. The Chuen soys: — ‘When the peo- 
ple of bung murdered duke Cli'aou (VI. xvi. 7), 
SGun Lin-foo of Tsin, with the armies of [several 
other] States, invaded Sung; but Sung and Tsin 
made pence (VI. xvii. 1; the CJiucn); and duke 
W On of Sung was subsequently admitted to a 
covenant with Tsin. [’Pstn], moreover, assembled 
the States at Hoo (VI. xv. 10), intending, in 
behalf of Loo, to punish Ts'e; but on tiint 
occasion ns well ns the otiicr, it took bribes and 
withdrew, [witiiout doing anytliing]. Duke 
Muh of Ch'ing [on this] said, “Tsin is not 
worth having to do witli and lie was tlicrcaftcr 
admitted to a covenant liy Ts’oo. Cn the death 
of duke Kung of Cli’in [In Wnn’s 12tli year], 
the people of Ts'oo did not behave courtcou<ly, 
and duke Ling of Cli'in obtained a covenant 
from Tsin. 'riio viscount of 'IV'oo, ftlierefon*], 
now nuade an incursion into Cli'in, and proccctlefl 
to make one into Sung.’ 

Par. 11. Tso says:— -‘To relieve Ch'in and 
Pung,’ 

^ Par. 12. For Kung-yang has Pfi* 
lin was in Ch’ing,— in the pres. dis. of Sin- 


Yt\R 1. 


DVKK SKUllN. 


287 


ch'inp. tlvp. K‘ne-funp. Tho Chuon rnys;— 
‘Tlu-y met at rol-lin to'SnvaiU' Clrlnp. but Wei 
Kva i'f TstKi came to its rvlief, n»ot tlio allies at 
rih-lin. anil twik lleae Ynnp of Tsin prisoner; 
on which the troops v'f Tsin nnurnwl to their 
own ytatc.' 

Par. i:i. In the Chuen on VI. .wit. 4, wo find 
Chaou CliHion poinp to Ch*inp ns a hostapo. 
He had not ivmaincd there lonp, a« the peace 
between Tsin and Ch'itip, patcbeil up by the let- 
ter of Ts7.o-kea of Ch'inp, had soon come to an 
end. 

Ts'unp was a smali State, ncknowlcdpinp the 
jurisdiction of Ts'in. Its territory nfuretime 

had been the State of Fung in the pres. 


j dis. of IIoo (5^^)* f^o-pan. Shen-se. Tho 
I Chuen says:-— ‘Tsiit wnntetl to ask peace from 
j Tf'in. when Chaou Cli'uen said. “ I will make 
an incursion into Ts'unp, and Ts'in, urgent in 
its behnif. is sure to po to its relief, when 1 can 
take the opportunity to ask for ]>eaco." He 
acted necordinply. but Ts'in would not make 
I*cace with Tsin.’ 

P.nr. 14, The Chuen s.ty.s ‘The people of 
Tsin invaditl Clt'inp, to repay the affair at I’ih- 
1 Hn [See on p. I'J]. At thi.s time the marquis 
1 of Tsin was giving way to ail e.'ttravnpance, and 
' Chaon Seuen, in whose h.ands the government 
was, offered repcalwl remonstrances witiioul ef- 
fect. In consequence of this, ['rsin] could not 
make itself strung against Ts'oo.* 


Scco7id year. 


-W* JU 4:^ i4J. 


ifiow . 


li. jc ^ . 


Z. 

:k m 


^ .S- t±l 


Mi 


m 


h 

1mT 

A. 

H 

A, 


tCoAIIK M, 

T T. 

A.g.li I# » At sBi:.® g S §-'M H 

S i i V i 5 1 5 -®'S 1 # 

ip III flip'? if 

t i i“l i’li S 1 1 i 

s R « • »nt,A si'S-l i.f I f I 


pi 

^ 1 ' 


}‘V V)' 

(v- P 

’i;-. ii; 

M }\'~' 


duke seue^. 


289 


Year II. 


. M 


la: 

is 

II. 1 


2 

3 


f .a f f .? g.g t i ii« 
a E S I=-.©.S ^ ^ ^ S ^ 
i X «g.t f.x f f 5 1. fff 

sififimiii i#i 

In the [duke’s] second year, in spring, in the king’s second 
month, on Jin-tsze, Hwa Yuen of Sung, at the bead of 
a force, and duke [Wan’s] son, Kwei-sang of Ch'ing, 
[also] at the head of a force, fought at Ta-keih, when 
the army of Sung was shamefully defeated, and Hwa 
Yuen was made prisoner. 

An army of Ts‘in invaded Tsin. 

In summer, a body of men from Tsin, one from Sung, one 
from Wei, and' one from Ch‘in, made an incursion into 


Ch‘ing. 

4 In autumn, in the ninth month, on Yih-ch*ow, Chaou Tun 

of Tsin murdered his ruler, £-kaou. 

5 In Annter, in the tenth month, on Yih-hae, the king [by] 

Heaven’s [grace] died. 


Pat. 1. Ta-kelli was in Sung,— at a bend in 
the west of the pres. Suy Chow dep. 

Kwei-tih. Some refer it to a place, not far 
from this, in the dis. of Hing-ling. The Chuen 
says: — ‘In the 2d month of this year, Kung- 
tsze Kwei-sSng of Ch‘ing received orders from 
Ts'oo to invade Sung. Hwa Tnen and Toh 
Len of Sung met him; and on Jin-tsze of the 
2d month they fought at Ta-heih. when the 
army of Sung received a disgraceful defeat, 
HwaYuen bangmadeprisoner, and Yoh Lenaap- 
tnr^ [Yoh Leu was probably put to death as well, 
for so only can we make a distinction between j 
and^^l. [ThearmyofCh‘ingaIsotookJ460 

chariots of war, 250 men, and the left ears .of 
100. K'wang Keaou engaged a man of ChHng, 
who jumped into a well, from which the other 
brought lum out with the end of his spear, — 
[only] to be captured by him. The superior 
man will say that K'wang Keaou transgressed 
the rule of war, and was disobedient to orders, 
deserving to be taken. What is <ui11ed the rule of 
war is to be having ever in the ears that in war 
there should be the display of boldness and 
intrepidity. To slay one’s enemy is boldness, 
and to show the utmost boldness is intrepi^ty ; 
and he who does otherwise deserves death. 

‘ When the battle was impending. Hwa Yuen 
slaughtered sheep to feed the soldiers, and did 
not pvc any to Yang Ctiin, his charioteer. 
Wlicn the battle came on. Chin said, “In the 
matter of the si)eep yesterday, yon were the 
master in the business of to-d.iy, I am the 
master.” \N ith this .he drove with hint into tlic 


army of Ch'ing, which caused the defeat. The 
superior man will say that Yang Chin did very 
wrong. For his private resentment he brought 
defeat on his State, and destruction on [many 
of] the people. No crime could deserve greater 
punishment. May we not regard the words of 
the ode, about “people without conscience 
(She, II. vii., ode I2L4),” as applicable to Yang 
Chin? He occasioned the death of many to 
gratify his own feeling. 

I ‘ ITie people of Sung ransomed Hwa Yuen from 
I Cb‘ing with 100 chariots of war and 400 piebald 
horses. When the half of them had been sent, 
he made his escape back to Sung; and when he 
arrived at the capital, he stood outside the gate, 
and announced himself before he entered. 
When he saw Shuh-tsang [Tlic designation of 
Yang Chin], he said to him, “ It was tlie horses 
that did so;" but the otlier replied, “It was not 
the horses; it w.as myself." Having given 
tins answer, he fled to Loo. 

‘Sung was repairing the wall of its capital, and 
Yuen had tlie superintendence of the work. 
As he was going a round of inspection, the 
builders saug, [as he passed], 

“ With goggle eyes and heDy vast. 

The buff-coats left, he’s back at last. 

The whiskers long, the whiskers long. 

Are here, but not the bnS-coats strong." 

i Yuen made [one of] them ride with him in -his 
carriage, and said to him, “Bulls still have 
j skins; rhinoceroses and wild hulls still are 
I many. The throwing away the buff-coats was 
not such a great thing.” The work-man said 


t 


Yea-ii hi. 


DUKE SEUEN. 


291 


was not to conceal. Chnou Scucn was a good 
great officer of old time:— in accordance with 
that law he accepted the charge of such wick* 
edness. Alas! if he had crossed the border, he 
would have escaped it.” 

‘ Seuen then sent Chaou Ch'uen to Chow to 
meet duke [Wan’s] son Hih-t‘un, whom he 
raised to the ninrq[nisate. On Jin-shin, Hih- 
t'nn presented himself in the temple of duke 
Woo [the first marquis of Tsin].’ 

The words of Confucius quoted above by 
Tso-she arc nowhere else to be found. Perhaps 
Tso had heard them from the sage, or they had 
been reported to him. Some even think that 
he put his own view here into the sage’s lips to 
give it more weight. Tun’s conduct in employ- 
ing the real murderer to go to Chow for duke 
Ling’s successor cannot be justified; but on the 
whole, the reader will probably conclude that he 
received hard measure, first from the historio- 
grapher of Tsin, and then from the sage as the 
compiler of the Ch*un Ts'ew. 

[The Chuen appends here a further narrative 
about the affairs of Tsin : — * At the time of the 
troubles occasioned by Le-ke [See the Chuen 
on V.iv.8, et at], an oafh was taken pn Tsin] 
that they would not maintain in the State any of 


the sons of tiieir marquises ; and from that time 
they had no famiUcs in It which were branches 
of the ruling house. AYhen duke Ch'ing P'ho 
abo\-e Hih-t‘un], however, succeeded to the 
State, he gave offices to the eldest sons b}* their 
wives of the high ministers, and assigned them 
lands, so that they should form the branch- 
families of his House. He gave offices also to 
the other sons of the ministers by tlic same 
mothers, and recognized them by that desig- 
nation [ns the Heads of their families]. Tiieir 
sons by concubines were made leaders of the 
duke’s columns [of chariots]. Thus Tsin came 
to have ducal families, other sons, and lead- 
ers of the duke’s columns. Cliaou Tun begged 
that piis half-brother] Kwoh might be made 
[Head of] their branch of the ducal families, 
saying, “He was the loved son of our ruler’s 
(duke Wan’s) daughter, and but for her I should 
have been a Tcih [See the Chuen at the com- 
mencement of V.xxiv.].” The duke granted 
his request. In winter. Tun declared himself 
head of the flags-men of the chariots, and caused 
Ee of Ping [The above Kwoh], to whom ha 
surrendered all his old adlierents, to be mnitn 
the great officer of their one among the ducal 
families.]’ 


Third year. 


30 OS. 

-XSO 

1 ^ s /> 1 t-$‘tS'i%-‘Sf S ie- 

itlfliistiii SiSi if i 

i t Ifli i^4-i iT.f 41 la? 

?-S llf^ •&.! f 'f S ^ IB: 1 5P 

gf 1 ^=#1 ^ S A T s-fi ^ 5 aw 

tl-lM-titll 

Si ^3 ^ ^ 'i* rji i?- 

® ^ ^’4: W- ^ ^>5£-^5 S’ 

^Jvw Til?, ^i* j 5 ^ ^ ^ 

^ S- A*& 

^ -;^ rZ. s'ri’ 1 ?= 


w: ^ -i: ff 

^ ^ B S 

lt?S§ 

iM-ti 


t 


't 

* 


-a. 


W ^ -X. ^ 

5 - 4 . 

^ s £ia 

4 s i- 

T”; ©1 -T# ® 5: 


'Vte -u" ^ X 2 *^ 

- i -k ^ ^ 

Ai^ 5 s iS ^ 

>f 3 i'^‘ ^ 1:5 X/ 

U ivTsttk^a V: ; 5d 

't= fi ^i.-r •‘- 

'"’ . ■i'* .i..*^" •’;: 


lAr 

fcts » 


TtT 

^ » 0 • 


t 


• {* ** N*- ^ ' ’'■“'* 


*% 

V . 

• ’-^ *-» ■ 


^S 3 C ^ 

S.ie! 

%# -t ^ S' 

yfi»» 

^ 5’ 

"W-St^ 'S. ^ ^ 

s S 4 te* 

I 

v 2 ^ • 

^ GTZ >jA ^ 

iri^®; .. 

^ ^ t-**'*'* - 

• ^ .v-vr*- r..‘-*.T- 

— I-WH^ <.«•• . 

• .1 . ^'.,-“':VCr-- 

* . ♦ s, ** ••'•■■^ • • *.. * r^' 

::-d. 

V"'^' 

r.‘_»r — »■ « 


*r*— » 

* ♦ \ 
^ ! 

. •.•.* - 

I*. 


•! ^ » 


.. • f. 


? 


/t ■/ 


DUKE SEUEN. 


293 


Ysj^u ni- 


2 Still [the duke] offered the sacrifices to the three objects 

of Survey. 

3 There was the burial of king KVang. ^ 

4 The viscount of Ts‘oo invaded the Jung of Luh-hwan. ^ 

5 In summer, a body of men from Ts^oo made an incursion 

into Gh‘ing. . 

6 In autumn, the Red Teih made an incursion into Ts‘e. 

7 An army of Sung laid siege to [the capital] of Ts‘aou. 

8 In winter, in the tenth month, on Ping-seuh, Lan, earl of 

Ch'ing, died. 

9 There was the burial of duke Muh of Chhng. 


Patr. 1,2. See on V. xxsi. 3—5. Tlie border 
sacrifice, here, however, was probably that at 
the winter-solstice to Heaven. Kuh-leang and 
other critics think that the characters,—^ 
P indicate that the bull had itself 
become ill, without receiving any external injury 


ea3's that the creature is here called and 
not or ‘victim,* because the day for the 


sacrifice had not yet been divined for. Tso-sbe 
says : — ‘Ihe giving up the border sacrifice, and 
yet offering those to the objects of Survey, were 
both contrary to rule. The latter were adjuncts 
of the former, and, if it were not offered, they 
might be omitted.’ He does not say how the 
giving up the border sacrifice in the dreum- 
stances mentioned in the text was ‘ contrary to 
rule.’ Maou thinks the fault was in giving it 
up so suddenly, without divining for another 
victim; but then he contends that the sacrifice 
was that offered at the be^nning of summer, 
like the one in V. xxxi. 

Par. 3. This burial must have been hurried 
on for some reason whieh we do not know. 
King K‘wang was succeeded by his brother, 

king Ting ^ ). 

(The Ghuen appends here : — ^ The marquis of 
Tsin invaded Ch'ing, and penetrated as far as 
Yen. Ch'ing then made peace with Tsin, and 
Sze Hwuy entered its capital, and made a cove- 
nant.] 

Par. 4. Tlie Jung of Luh-hwitn were a tribe 
of the Little Jung original seat 

laj' in the extreme west of the present Kan-sub; 
hut, as related under the 22dyear of duke He, they 
were removed by Ts'in and Tsin to B-ch'uen, — ^in 

t)» 


ed about the size and weight of the tripods. Mwan 
replied, “ [The strength of the kingdom] depends 
on the [sovereign's] virtue, and not on the 
tripods. Anciently, when Hea was distinguish- 
ed for its virtue, the distant regions sent pic- 
tures of the [remarkable] objects in them. 
Tlic nine pastors sent in the metal of their pro- 
vinces, and the tripods were cast, with repre- 
sentations on them of those objects. ^ All the 
objects were represented, and nnstructions were 
given] of the preparations to be made in refer- 
ence to them, so that the people might know 
the sprites and evil things. Thus the people, 
when they went among the rivers, morslies, 
hills, and forests, did not meet with the injuri- 
ous things, and the hill-sprites, monstrous things, 
and water-sprites, did not meet with them [to 
do them injury]. Hereby a harmony was se- 
cured between the high and the low, and all en- 
joyed the blessing of Heaven. "Wlien the virtue 
of K6eh was all-obscured, the tripods were trans- 
ferred to Sbang, for 600 years. Chow of 
Shang proved ernd and oppressive, and they 
were transferred to Chow. When the virtue is 
commendable and brilliant, the tripods, though 
they were small, would be heavy; when it gives 
place to its reverse, to darkness and disorder, 
though they were large, they wottid be light. 
Heaven blesses intelligent virtue; — on that its 
favour rests. King Ch'ing fixed the tripods 
in Keah-juh, and divined that the dynas- 
ty should extend through 80 reigns, over 
700 years. Though the virtue of Chow is 
decayed, the decree of Heaven is not yet 
changed. The weight of the tripods may not 
yet be inquired about.” ’ 

Par. 6. The reason of this incursion 


the north of the pres. dis. of Sung 

dcp. Ho-nan; which brought them within’ the 
reach of Ts'oo. They were also called the Tin 

Jung Por ^ Kung has ^ ; and 

both he and Kuh omit the ^ before 

The Chuen says s— The viscount of Ts'oom- 
vadod the Jung of Luli-hwfin, and then went 
on as far as the Loh, where he reviewed bis 
troops on the borders of Chow. King "nug sent 
yfnng-snn Mwan [See the former mention of him 
m the Chuen on V.xxxjii.1] to him with con- 
gratulations and presents, when the viscount ask- 


_ , - — was, 

says Tso-she, 'because Ch'ing had joined the 
party of Tsin.’ See the Chuen appended to 
par. 3. The utter mercenariuess of Ling of 
Tsin had alienated Ch'ing from it; but the 
earl seems to have hasted, on his death, a gain 
to join the side of the north against Ts'oo. 

appearance of the 
Ked Teih in the classic. They are supposed to 
have been so called, because they wore clothes 
of a red colour, as the White Tmh preferred 
white. There were many tribes of them,~the 
Loo-she (|^ Keah-she &c 

^ts were in the pres. dep. of Loo-gan 
Shan-se. 

Par. 7. The Chuen says ‘ Three years after 
the accession of duke Wfin of Snug, he put to 


.294 


BOOK Vll. 


THE CII*UK TS*E'W, WITH THE TSO CIIUEN. 


death bis full brother, Sen, and the son of duke 
Ch‘aoa, because of the schemes of the Head of 
the Woo clan about them. He then made the 
clans of Tae and Hwan attack Woo-she in the 
court-house of Tsze-pih, the minister of War, and 
drove out of the State the clans of Woo and 
Muh. ^ley [fled to Ts‘aou], and with an armt' 
from it invaded Sung. In autumn, an army of 
Sung laid siege to the capital of Ts'aou, in re- 
turn for the disorders occasioued by the officer 
Woo. 

Par. 8. Tlie Chuen says:—* In winter, duke 
Muh of Ch‘ing died. [His father], duke Wan, 

of mean position, wlio wn« 
called len K‘eih [As belonging to the House of 

that 

wnt and ^ve her a lun flower, saviusr “I nm 

“ decline his approaches, saving 
concubine, and should 1 ho 

SS' TS tV'.”” ” I •“'”»> s 

Deiic>e«. I will venture to prove it bv 
fw'l. 1 ^ ’*^ ®Srood, and she bore a son 

^ ‘ No^feSe 

nx rt- '' had had an intriniie w 5 n» 
the wife of fids unc o] Tsre fel 

*vi. 4 j, and he made some ruQians kill Tsto 

arc"S"x?feftr'» •« 


'AVitn also took a wife from the House of 
Keang, who bore him Sze; but he having gone 
to the court of Ts‘oo, was poisoned there, and 
died on his way back at Ych. 

‘ He also took a wife fixim the House of Soo, 
who bore him 'Hiia, and Yu-me. Yn-me died 
early ; and both his father and Seeh Kea hated 
Ilea, so that he was not appointed to succeed 
to the State. The duke tlicn drove out all his 
own and his predecessors’ sons, when Lan fled 
to Tsin, from which he attended duke Wftn in 
his invasion of Ch'ing [See the Chnen on V. 
XXX. 5]. Shih Kwei said, “ I have heard that 
when Ke and K*eih make a match, their descend- 
ants are sure to be numerous. The K*eihs aro 
lucky; — the great wife of llow-tseili was one. 
Now, the duke’s son Lan is the child of a K’eih. 
Heaven has perhaps opened the way for him. 
He must become our ruler, and Ins descendants 
will be numerous. Let ns take the lead in re- 
ceiving him, and we shall enjoy the greatest 
favour.” Accordingly, with K'ung Tscang- 
ts'oo and How Scuen-to, lie received Lan, and 
brought him to Ch'ing, when tho^' made a cove- 
nant with him in the grand temple, and had 
him appointed successor to the State; — thereby 
obtaining peace from Tsin. 

‘ Wien duke Muh was ill, ho said, “ WJien the 
lan die, I will die. It is by them I live." 
When they cut the hn, he died.’ 

Par. 9. Something must have hurried on this 
burial, but the critics cannot tell wliat. Eor 
P Kung-yang has 


Fourth year. 


Yeak IV. 


DUIvE SEUES. 


295 


^ Bn ©.1.^ m 'Cl\© R'J * # Tfi.^ SI.* 

^ is ^ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■" 


•m^ 

m 


^.A » Bn _ 
RiJ ± 0 
0 Y- 15 etc 


s 

Ik 


t 


A 

r- 

#. 

4 S- 

"tfe 


iA ^ m -Hi..! * « jiE 
m ^ 3 fe )f .•ai.rfe.i^ i 5 m m. 

* w m w m m ^ rni is ?&.<&■ 

ikm%.® fc.js ^ •? ^ 

^c.JlJ: *. 0 .-t: X ^Si=- 75 ■? B.B.-f- ^ Jil S 
- K ZM W 

SUM s fc IS R fe.*,tt.Bn tR SI.^ 
a A # ^ ^.75 Bn.T^ ^ 75 ::r: fl 
Alil^XM«aR,*S± se.if ^ 

0 .fl aE J- ^ ^ 0 .A a ®E ^ ^ ^ 

TP ©. 515 ,:^ *.A !if 

pT il i® J,.f K ^ Jil © S M Bn ^ R. 
jaEi^?Si 5 :* 5 :s*. ■^■iii.yiis.-f- 
A sP H M 

® H ^ * 

m ift * S. 7 A -ffl « 3 t Ifc. P 1 ' K :fe 
S $ ^'jl ft S ^ ^ Bn # 

Z m Bn « Bn R.M 

^ 3 E.© fi 0 Jt - ■ 

m ife 5:.si » ® 

it Jit A ft .#,■& Z 

S‘S i S ^ S 

g.f a ro ||.».« 2 P p I* jffi.in 

^•t!i.m#itk. Jit 

3 S S Y 
R f ^ T- il tS: 

$ I: ^• 1 X Jit ^ 3 S ft 

S"S f S Bn 

i f ^ S'lis f -S' ^ - -V. 

® 1 ^ M ■£ Y 5 ±.jjft © Jit * ^ jic 

itRW^.Sff SL 
^.») ¥ 


li-f 

Bn S.Y- 3 i 5 fj. 1 C 

^#^.^Jii IS. 


1 -fe.tl ■& ft, 

M«BnJS. 0 . T 

2 ft.# ^ m H 


Bn 

W. 


296 


THE CH'UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK m 


^ m m m ^ M w $ 

m #B„ « ^ X Won f 

*0 SB ^ B pjf.m m m s.m 3E M 

TV. 1 In liis fourth year, in spring, in the king’s first month, 
the duke and the marquis of Ts‘e [tried to] reconcile 
Keu and T‘an. The people of Keu were not willing [to 
be reconciled], and the duke invaded Keu and took 
Heang. 

2 Taou, earl of Ts‘in, died. 

3 In summer, in the sixth month, on Yih-yew, duke [Wan’s] 

son, Kwei-sang of Ch‘ing, murdered his ruler, E. 

4 The Red Teih made an incursion into Ts‘e. 

5 In autumn, the duke went to Ts‘e. 

6 The duke arrived from Ts‘e. 

7 In winter, the viscount of Ts‘oo invaded Ch‘ing. 


PfiT. 1. T'an -was a small State, of the same 
surname ns Keu [See, 2^] which has leftitsname 
in the dis. of T‘an-shing dep. E-chow. 

llcnng is, no doubt, that mentioned in I. ii. 2. 
Tso-she says that the duke acted wrongly, in 
now attacking Keu. ‘ States must be reconciled 


disorder to attempt to reconcile disorder, left no 
room for the [proper] regulation; and without 
such regulation, how could any rule of propriety 
be carried out?’ 

Par. 3. E was the eldest son of duke Muh, 
who died in the 10th month of the last year. 
He enjoyed his earldom, therefore, but a very 
short time. The Chuen says;—" A large turtle 
had been presented from Ts'oo to duke Ling of 
Clring. Kung-tsze Sung and Tsze-kea were 
going [soon after] to have an audience of the 
«luke, when Tsre-KUTig’s [The lvung>tsze Sung] 
forefinger iK'gan to move, lie showed it to Tszc- 
ki-a, saying. “On other occasions, when my 
finger has done this, 1 have been sure to taste 
[soon] «oim* eatraonlinary di«h.” When they 
rmcrial the palace, the cook was about to cut 
up the turtle, and tliey looked at each other, and 
latighe«l. 'Hk- duke [sa« it, and] asked the rea- 
f •'». y hh h 'fr/e-kfa told him. When the duke, 
b innwr, w.ns feaKiing the [other] great iillleers 
• n l5:i> turtle, ii,. tnvtitil Tf/e-kung. hut did not 
j-’ne him any, Tsre.ktnig wn» angrv, dippeii 
J.l. fi!:-, r into a di*h, ta-t. d the turtle, rnd 
'•fot f -It, wl.i.-h so enragi'.l the duke that he ! 
* ‘ *’!"'• 'ff'e-kung then rfiijiiiltesl I 

U! ti:, ir first killing the duke; 


w ith '1 k 

, ^ t » ! (.1, *• j,,, aniinil »» Inch jnu j 

t '.*<• ! ■' •• kr; *. Joy, yti'i s’lritik from 


f >-« m’,-h v: t<- »h,.njd %.,!» shrink- 
s...f ro’ 'n.- otSvr te.r--:.-.J ! 
- tfit' '!*f •-! t.‘ » ri:-.- » ’.•rr,-'-.»„-iiri«t ' 
I ■ 1.--''.', tt.f. t.ir, to j,-; ■ 

•-•k- ! t r • 'I . J ' 

? ; 4 * t',* • 'f 

J ■ »i« » S' •' !.« .'. fS: - v 

' t > J. ■» r 


prevent the deed, as it ought to have been]. 
The superior man may say that a man who is 
benevolent, but has not prowess, cannot carry 
out his benevolence. In cases of the murder of 
a prince, when he is mentioned [by name], tt 
indicates that he was without principle (^ ? )» 
and the mention of the name of the minister 
indicates his guilt. 

‘ The people of Ch‘ing avanted to raise Tsze- 
ISang [A son of duke Muh by a concubine] to be 
earl, but he declined the dignity, saying, “If 
is to be given to the avortliiest, I, K‘en-ts‘ih am 
not fit to receive it. If it is to be given accord- 
ing to natural order, my brotlier Keen is thc 
oldest." On this [Keen, known ns] duke Scang 
was appointed. He avished to drive aayny all the 
sons of duke Muh excepting Tszc-Ieang, who 
remonstrated against the proposed measure, 
saying, “The sons of Muh should all be nllo'vcd 
to remain, and tins is avhat I wish. If you b.niv 
ish them, then I acill go into banishment with 
the rest; — what should I do, [remaining here 
alone]?" On this the duke let them alone, ana 
they all became great officers.’ 

The K*nng-lic editors reject from their text 
all the remarks of his own, which Tso-shc has 
interjected in the above Cliucn, seeing in them 
only matter for question and condemnaUon. 
Kwci-sftng certainly was more blnmewortby for 
his share in the murder of his ruler than Clmpu 
Tun for liis part in the murder of Ling of 1 s*o. 

Par. 4. on p. C of last year. 

Parr. 5, 6. [Tlic Chnen gives here » 
narratU’c relating to Ts‘oo. • Uofore this, 1 szc- 
If-ang, the minister of War in Ts'oo. hud a 
born t*> bini, — Tsrc-yneli Tsl-.iou. [When] T sze- 
w3n [Tsre-lcang’s elder linttlu-r] [saw tbocliildj, 
be said • You must put him to death. He has 
the .apfioarance of a t<ear or n tiger, and the 
tu;ri- «'f tt wolf. If you do not kill liim, lie will 
f-a«»e till- extincti-m of our ,Ti)!i.gai*u fumily. 
'lion- !• tiic Mitiniofi saying, ‘A widf-like eiiild 
will l;s*e an nil beurt.' 'lid* l» a wolf, and 
be !*’ bro'iglit Up in yo'ir firnilr.' 
'Isr.-.l- «fg r>-J- *’te<! tbit to the gS'-st 

gri .'<•? wb'. -et.-d a!! bi* 

wl.-T, b-- -i, R*. •,» t.i li.r-, ji.d 1 f-: tf. e.'. 


Teati Y. 


DUKE SEUEN. 


297 


“ When Tseaou is entrusted -vrith the govt, do 
you quickly leave the State, so as to avoid the 
misfortunes he will occasion.” He then wept, 
and said, “If ghosts must be seeking for food, 
will not those of our Joh-gaou clan be fam- 
ished?” When Tsze-wiln, who was the chief 
minister of Ts'oo, died, the office was given 
to Tow Pan [Tsze-wan’s son, designated Tsze- 
vang]. Tsze-yueh was then minister of War, 
and Wei Kea minister of Works. The latter 
made a false charge against Tsze-yang and pro- 
cured his death, when Tsze-yueh was made 
Miinf minister, and Kea himself became minis- 
ter of War, but was hated by Tsze-yueh, who, 
with the help of all the branches of the Joh-gaou 
clan, imprisoned him— Pili-ying— in Leaou- 
yang, and put him to death. Tseaou then took up 
his quarters in Ching-yay, and threatened to at- 
tack the king, who offered to place the sous of his 
three predecessors (Wan, Ch'ing, and Muh) with 
liim as hostages. The other, however, would 
not receive them, and encamped with his army 
on the banks of the Chang. 

‘In autumn, in the 7th month, the ■x'iscount 
of Ts'oo and the Joh-gaou fought at Kaou-hoo. 
Pih-fun [Tseaou] shot an arrow at the king, 
which skirted the ciuved pole of his chariot, 
reached the frame of the drum in it, and hit the 
metal jingle. A second arrow skirted in the 
same way the curvature of the pole, and then 
pierced the bamboo screen above the wheel. The 
troops became frightened and retired. The 
king made it be circulated through the army, 
that when the former ruler, king Wan, subdu^ 
Seih, he had got three [great] arrows, two of 
which had been stolen by Pih-fun, but lind now 
been both discharged. He then made the drums 
be beaten again, and urged his men on, so that 
he [gained a complete victory, and] extinguish- 
ed the clan of Joh-gaou. 

‘ Before this, Joh-gaou [Joh-gaou was viscount 
of Ts'oo from B. C. 789 to 763] took to his harem 
a daughter ofthe House of Yun, who We to him 


Tow Pih-pe [See the Cliuen at the beginning of 
II. xiii.] but, on his father’s death, this son follow- 
ed his mother, and was brought up in Yun. He 
had an intrigue w’ith a daughter of the viscount 
of Yun, the fruit of which was a son, afterw’nrds 
styled Tsze-wan. Her mother caused the child 
to be thrown away in the [marsh of] Mung. 

I There a tigress suclued him. The thing was seen 
by the viscount of Yun, when hunting ; and when 
1 he returned home in terror, his wife told him the 
whole affair, on which he sent for the child and 
had it cared for. The people of Ts'oo call- 
ed suckling now, and a tiger they called woo-t'oo ; 
hence the child was named Now-woo-t‘oo [See 
his first appearance in the Chuen after in.xxx.2, 
w’here he is called T‘oo-woo-t‘oo instead of Now- 
woo-t‘oo], and his mother was married to Pih-pe. 
The child subsequently became the chief minister 
of Ts'oo, Tsze-wan. His grandson, K'ih-hwang, 
was minister of Eemonstrance, and was absent on 
a mission to Ts‘c [when the above rebellion took 
place]. He heard of it in Sung, on his way 
back, when his people said to him, “ You must 
not enter the State.” But he replied, “If I 
abandon the king’s commission, who will receive 
it? My ruler is Heaven;— can Heaven be 
fled from?” He accordingly returned to Ts'oo, 
reported the discharge of his mission, and then 
ddivered himself a prisoner to the minister of 
Crime. The king thought of Tsze-wan’s govt, 
of Ts'oo, and said, “ If I leave Tsze-wan without 
any posterity, how shall I encourage men to 
good?” He made K'ih-hwang return to his 
office, and changed his name to Sang.’ 

Par. 7. Tso-she says the reason of this in- 
vasion was that Ch'ing had not yet submitted, 
notwithstanding that Ts'oo had attacked it in 
the summer of last year. 


jFi/i/i year. 


mm . 


mm mo ta 

i ^ la 


i I f t-f * i S it fS 

i.tffi 


VOL V. 


38 


298 


THE CH‘UH TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VH. 


Y. 1 In his fifth year, in spring, the duke went to Ts‘e. 

2 In summer, the duke arrived from Ts‘e. 

3 In autumn, in the ninth month, Kaou Koo of Ts‘e came to 

meet [his bride], the duke’s second daughter. 

4 Shuh-sun Tih-shih died. 

5 In winter, Kaou Koo of Ts‘e and the duke’s second daughter 

came to Loo. ' 

6 A body of men from Ts‘oo invaded Ch‘ing. 


Par. 1. The Chuen says that, on this wait, 
Kaou Koo [A minister of Ts‘e] made the mar- 
quis of Ts‘e detain the duke, and ask him to 
give Koo his second daughter in marriage. 

Par. 2. The Chuen saj's that this entry shows 
how the duke ‘ exceeded,’ in the ceremony which 
is implied. What that ceremony was has been 
described on H. ii. 9. Now on this occasion the 
duke had been forcibly detained in Ts‘e, and 
obliged to consent to marry his daughter to a 
man of rank inferior to his own, compromising 
his own character and that of his ancestors. But 
should he therefore have refrained from the 
ceremony ‘proper,’ on his own safe return to 
his State? 

Par. 3. The Chuen says that Kaou Koo came 
himself to meet his bride, but that we have not 

the phrase the lady being mentioned 

by her designation, because the case was that of 
a minister meeting her for himself. Too calls 
attention to there being no further entry about 

her going to Ts'o because such 

only made when the daughters 
of Loo married princes of States. Tso-she does 

not have the before There can 

be no doubt ns to its meaning here. Comp. VI. 
X11.3; xiv.l2; xv. 11. 

. needlessly finds a reason for the 

any of Trh-sbin’s death not being given. Tih- 

shln is often mentioned as Cliwang-shuh 


Chwang being his posthumous epithet. 
He was succeeded by his son K‘eaou-joo 

given from the Sow-mwan giant whose 
death is mentioned in the Chuen on VL xi. 6), 
known as Seuen-pih 

Par. 5. The Chuen says:— ‘They came to 
Loo in winter, returning the horses:' which 
needs explanation. On the marriage of a lady 
to a great officer or a husband of higher rank, she 
was escorted to her home with a carriage and 
horses; — one or many. Three days after, the 
carriage was sent back, but the horses wem 
detained for 3 months, in case there should e 
need of them for the lady’s return to her parents, 
the experiment of marriage not proving satis- 
factory. If it did prove so, then they also were 
sent back by a messenger. Here the 
himself accompanies his wife on her visit to 
parents, and takes charge of the horses, to sno 
his satisfaction with her. Still the critics 
insist on the improprietj’’ of the lady s visit 
Loo; — ^it was too early for it, and the time ua 
not come. 'Then, again, it tvas contrary to ru 
for her on such an occasion to be accompani 
by her husband. , . . 

Par. C. The Chuen says: — ‘ On this ' 

Cli‘in and Ts'oo made peace, when Soun Lin- 
relieved Ch’iiig, and invaded Ch'in.’ 


Sixth year. 


A 


© © 31 

ifii 


© fll'i f-u 


^ K.tH 
m m ^ W: 
MM B.a 
Ml iK m 

t i’ i l .'Jlc 

EI.« 31,: tl 


|1AI © m © ffii 
m Til;.# -glM 
Ik. Sf- -lli 
•M! ?*c Vi 31 


I » U\ 


S fS 

U 0. 

fill 

DII 


rsAR vn. 


DUKE SEUEK. 


299 


Z.K 

VI. 1 


2 

3 

4 


- ».» jg * r?n S A * mM 

mm Z3Z 0.^ iti s mA& i 

In the [duke’s] sixth 3 "eav, in spring, Chaou Tun of Tsin 
and Sun Meen of Wei made an incursion into Ch‘in. 

It was summer, the fourth month. , 

In autumn, in the eighth month, there were locusts. 

It was winter, the tenth month. 


Par. 1. Sun Meen, — there ■vrns a clan ■with 
the surname Sun in Wei, descended from a son 
of duke Woo, ■who died B. C. 757, a little before 
the commencement of the period of the Ch'un 
Ts‘ew. Tso-she says here that the reason^ of 
this incursion by Tsin and Wei was Ch'in’s 
adherence to Ts'oo. The invasion of it by Seun 
Lin-foo the previous winter had failed to alter 
Chain’s policy. 

Kung*yang gives here in a long note an 
account of the murder of duke Ling of Tsin, 
substantially the same as that in Tso-she’s 
Chuen on ll. 4; and seems to think that the re- 
appearance of Chaou Tun in this par. is a sort 
of condoning him for his connection with the 
deed. 

Par. 2. See on I. -vi. 3. [The Chuen in- 
troduces two brief notices: — ‘In summer, king 
Ting sent Tsze-fnh to ask a queen for liim from 
Ts‘e.’ ‘In autumn, the Bed Teih invaded Tsin, 
when they besieged Hwae and Hing-k‘ew. Tlie 
marqnis of Tsin wished to invade their country 
[in return], but the officer Uwan of the middle 


column said to him, “Let [their chief first] 
make his people hate him [for liis incessant 
warfare], filling up the measure of his practices, 
and then he may be utterly destroyed. The 
language in one of the Books of Chow, — ‘Ex- 
terminate the great Yin (Shoo, V. ix. 4),’ is 
applicable to this kind of people."’] 

Par. 3. Seen. v. 8. 

Par. 4 [The Chuen appends here : — 1st, ‘ In 
winter, dnke Hwan of Shaou met the king’s 
bride in 'fs'e.* 2d, * A body of men from Ts'oo 
invaded Ch‘ing, took conditions of pence, and re- 
turned to Ts‘ 00 .’ 3d, ‘ Kung-tsze hlan-mwan of 
Ch'ing spoke to the king’s son Pih-leaou, [who 
was serving in Ch'ing], about his wish to become 
a high minister. Pih-leaou told nnotlier person, 
saying, “ The case of one who covets [a high 
position] ivithotit the proper virtue appears 
from the Chow Tih, and is li ke the diagram 

Pnng’s (==) becoming Le ( == ). [Mnn-mwnn] 
^vill not live beyond the time thereby indicated.’* 
After the interval of a year, the pcopio of 
Ch’ing put Man-rawan to death.’] 


Seventh year. 


Wf # 


is s © H # H.# ® 

fe 2 ^ 2 ^ S ® 35t,gS 

s. -fe.ja s it ^ " " - ■ ■ 

2 la H 5^ ^ ^ s.sis ^ 

tt * S3 H^.#t la ^ 


ISili m 
3KH ffi.-ffe 

m. 


lUl.-fa 

I 


THE CH‘U3f TS*EW, TOTH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK YH* 


300 

VII. 


1 In his seventh year, in spring, the marquis of VTei sent 

Sun Leang-foo to Loo, to make a covenant [with the 
duke]. 

2 In summer, the duke joined the marquis of Ts‘e in in- 

vading Lae. 

3 In autumn, the duke arrived from the invasion of Lae. 

4 There was great drought. 

5 In winter, the duke had. a meeting with the marquis of 

Tsin, the duke of Sung, the marquis of Wei, the earl 
of Gh‘ing, and the earl of Ts‘aou, in Hih-jang. 


Par. 1. The Clracn says that this mission of 
the officer Hwan [^0 "was tlie posthumous title 

of Sun Lcnng-foo] was the first intercourse 
between Wei and Boo since the duke's accession, 
and that the object was to consult about the 
duke’s attending a meeting to be nailed bj* Tsin. 
For these purposes a frienffiy mission of inquiry 

(Ij^) '"^otild have been sufficient; but it is to be 
understood that Wei was acting in the interest 
of Tsin, the new ruler of which wished to assert 
what he considered his daim to be the leader of 
the States. Duke Scuen had, since his accession, 
been a devoted adherent of Ts'e, and had stood 
aloof from Tsin; and now Wei required from 
him the engagement of a covenant, to dciir 
itself with 'rsin, should the duke after all not 
attend the meeting. 

Par. 2. Lao was a small State, held by 
Kvangs, with the title of viscount, — in the pros, 
dis. of Hwang ("gj dep. Tang-chow, Shan- 
tung. Tso-she here gives his c.anon regarding 
the use of and in the tase at least of 
military expeditions, s.aying that the-^ here im- 
plies that Lw had not been a party in planning 
the cxjKHlition: — ‘In all military expeditions, 
where Loo had previously acted in the planning 


of them, is used; where it had not done so, 
we have The K‘ang-he editors accept the 

canon with a slight reservation. 

Par. 4. See on V.xxi.S. Too observes hero 
tliat ‘the sacrifice for rain had had no effect, -or 
perhaps it had not been offered.’ [The Chuen 
appends: — ‘Tlie Bed Teili made an incmrsion 
into Tsin, and cut dotvn and carried off tho 
growing grain of Heang-yin*]. 

Par. 5. Hih-jang was in Tsin, — lO/c north- 
west from the pres. dis. of Ts'in-shwuy, dep. 
Tsih-chow, Shnn-se. 

Tlio Chuen says: — ‘Peace had been brought 
about between C5h‘ing and Tsin by means of tho 
counsels of Rung-tsze Sung, who therefore now 
attended the earl of Ch'ing, ns his assistant^ 
to this meeting. In winter, a covenant was 
made at Hih-jang, when the king’s uncle, the 
duke of Hwan, was present, to consult op tho 
case of discordant States. On the accession or 
the marquis of Tsin, [in the duke’s 2d year], 
the duke had not paid a court-visit to hhn, nor 
had he since sent any great officer to Tsin with 
friendly inquiries. Tlie people of Tsin thercforo 
now detained him at tlie meeting, and when tho 
TOvenant was made at Hwang-foo [i.q. Hih- 
jnng], he did not take part in it. He got 
to Loo, however, by means of bribes; and tho 
text docs not mention tlie covenant at Hili-jang. 
to conceal the duke’s disgrace in connection 
with it.’ 


Eighth year. 

Mo A* 


T- 


4-1# E. 

-r/”-— 


A 


m 

AJ 


4 A4 

fMoM 


4. 


jit:* 


Ykah 


JfJUKE SEUEK. 

I'l' 

«■ »lil“-lfl. 

'S‘ ^ 0‘^°J 

*IWri*ff|j|5siM 

i% r «ii iiff 


i!s. f ‘ S' s W. I # ‘ # ^ i.i‘ 

® It B# as 

^ ^ ^ ^ A #(: 

™ ^ I” •■« eighth «.'*li 

4 On °''™g Suylied at a®°" '” ‘'■“"lindT’’"?^’ 
un Jin-woo, the sacrifil ‘ *1'* “?• ^ ^ *®“P'e; 

I 

u "'^ p-o 


i 


302 


THE cn‘r:ir ts-ew. tvith the tso chuex. 


BOOK VII; 


Par. 1. Soe on T. 1, 2. The Chneu has here 
an entrv, which terminates very strangely, and 
wliich the K^ng-lie editors do not give, looldng 
on it, no doubt, as incredible: — ‘Tins spring, 
the White Teih made peace with Tsin, and in 
the summer they join^ it in an invasion of 
Ts*in. The people of Tsin caught a spy of Tsnn, 
and put him to death in Iveang. in the market 
place, but on the 6th day he came alive again!’ 
Par. 2. Hwang, — seell.xvii. 1. Kuh-leang 

seems to take in the sense of 

‘ reported the execution of his mission,’ which 
is evidently incorrect, 'flte meamng must bo 
that given in the translation. Prom the mention 
of Suy’s death in the next par., we must conclude 
that, when he got to Hwang, he felt himself too ill 
to proceed farther, and began to retrace Ins 
steps to Loo. The critics are hard upon him 
for doing so. Too says it was ‘ contrary to rule.’ 
for, having received his ruler’s commission, he 
should havegone on till he died, and arranged that 
his corpse should be carried to the capital of Ts'e ! 

Parr. 3, 4. Ch'uy was in Ts'e, — somewhere in 
the borders of the pres. dis. of Plng-vin 

Ft) ,dep. Yen-chow. The phrase ^ 

* there was a sacrifice.’ This is certain 
from the usage in the Ch'mt Ts‘ew; — comp. 
:k inVl.ii.6, and in X.xv.2. 

But what particular sacrifice is intended in the 
text is a matter of controversy, Ting-t.ah and 
many other critics think it was the Tie 

sacrifice; — see on V.viii. 4. Woo Ch'ing and 
others hold that it w.as merely the summer 
sea.sonal sacrifice. The discussion of this ques- 
tion is not important to the elucidation of the 
text. 

Tho sacrifice was offered on Sin-sze. and that 
same day the Kung-tsze Suy died at Clruv. 
^\e two events arc chroniclwl together, thongh 
it is not likely the news of Puy's death reached 
lioo before the offering of ibo sacrifice. It 
re.achetl it. howewr, before the following day, 
when the previous saenfiee was repeated ; — stc 
the tiote on the name of the 0th Hook in the 
4th part of the Phoo. Tltat rei>otition was com- 
paratively unimport.ant, and the news of Suv’s 
•hath slwtild have prcvcntctl it. Hence Tso- 
s!h> s.ays that it was “contrara- to mle,' .and we 
have the same decision reganling it, as from 
Coafuciiss himself, in the LcKc, 11., I’t.II.ii.aO. 

In p.4, i« the nanto for the pantomimic 
p.-rfowers at the sacrifice, llicre wen' civil 
pant.'mimi-s <S: and martial p,m!nmimes 

’ *1’*^ **^f*’^ /jj 'v*' u'cd to cover 
V l-'tti. Hero we are to think o:i1y of the 


'n-.- martial pant*->msmvs carricsi in Ihrir 


t » ir’ 


t: <- I ■-» 1 « r >.n'» d-ath 

V - T Jt m- s ..t f -it ? . V . ' tJ-.-charjct-rs 
>• f - f r--.-r *-f wV’.-h »,aa 


«-• ^ * 


rr-n Xt' 


of p. 2 gives place here, it will be seen, to 
which w.as only Suy’s designation as 

having been the second among his brothers 
It became the surname of his descendants ; and 
the simplest way of accounting for its employ- 
ment here is to suppose, with Maon, that duke 
^uen at once gave it to his deceaseil relative 

and minister as the clan-name of f'*®' 

self and lus posterity. 

Par. 5. Tills was duke Senen’s mother. 
Tliough only a concuhiue of duke Wiin, she 
appears here as his wife, — ^raised to that rank 

bv her son. Kuh and Rung have instead 

of making the ladj* thereby to have been 

of the House of Ts*oo, and not of that of Ts‘in. 

Par. 6. See on III. 6. This is the first ap- 
pearance of the white Teih in the Classic, see 
the Clmen at the coinmencenient of this year. 

Par. 7. is with Knng-j-ang 5^00- 
leaou was a small State, — in the pres. dis. of 
Leu-keang ( yT. )> ^op. Leu-chow, Gan- 
hwuy. Tlio other Shoo States wore near to it. 
Too Yu says erroneously that Shoo and Lcaou 
were two States. The Chuoii says: — ^“Ts'cc, 
1- because the various Shoo States had revolted 
from it, attacked Shoo-leaou and extinguished 
it. The viscount of Ts‘oo laid out anew its 
boundaries, ns far ns the banks of the Hwalh 
took a covenant from Woo and Yuch, and re- 
turned [to Ying].’ 

. Par. S. «=• * coinplctoly,’ as in Il.iii*!* 

i ’Tliereis an error in the text in the record of 
I this eclipse. It was total about half past 3 
I o’clock in the afternoon of Sept. 12, B. C. 

I thus corresponding to the 1st d.ay 
j tenth moon, which would on that year lie Kea i- 
j tsze(^^ tc.xt. Wang Taou snp- 

I poses that the in the text should bo 
and would cn.st out the transferring the 
from the next p.ar. to the head of this. 
But in that way we should have no entr.j in 
1 this year. under the sc.ason of nntninn;~wm 
j is contrary to the rule of the classic. i cn • j 

i we should read ^ ^ 

I simply paying— ‘It Tra« nutumn, tin* Tth >• 

j Then this par. will bepin whWi 

characters must In? rcmovi'd from p- 
S "Jh ""In'-''* would still lie in the tenth 

month, — the 2r.tJi d.a.v of It. 

[rise Churn appiauN lien*: — lyih J 
h.ail an illness which «n«olllc<l liis ndn'I. 

Keui-h hcenme chief minister of th- 
, Auiunin S-u K'di was diseharceti from Id* ' 

! and Cliafiu S^h was apj'ointe*! . 

j itiander of the JM arm.v.’j 
! I’arr, P.tO. Kurg and Kuh f<'‘r 
' ** a r''’’h"n“'*i* titfe iswi* 

T-.'.'.j W*;—g, gte.f <», ;i >#S— * V** 


i*«AR IX. 


Duke 

determined at tl>o dnv oi ‘’’d Do 

wterment of n ^en davs hnt' ® *euld be 
number of dL p®^®°« of ran^f®^'- At the 

Je attended^o obsen-r^‘ 

• -tso-sho 


^f‘^SnVSc7w^ *’5’h? V""®® 
f/nn-Pe oftmVj'eh f°okS5co T.’ ^n»® 

/>u>cnseof siioh ,, ? (‘'’^^'t'onnte v sov"' ®"* *'"> 
however of. ' ." ‘‘Hfv.’ 'j'i,„ t-r ®oheitoiis ,■„ 

terinont/tJiinkl;,-'^ nondenin the delav'^-’'^ editora, 
'™soacnsionod^.,n-nli Kunp A" »«o i,,.’ 

•hlitfeiieoin mni.!^ ^ *H "’“nt of siifll».} *' *’ it 

e'’en after tlm iiecossm.. *®"^ enroaiici 

West of the »^r V’as 4 /g ** ®”P before. 

to showtJ>-®''° sava tlJ 

taking. bo soasonabienoas 
Dar. 12. y. ®®® 0^ tbo under- 

•ft's-ssr I"™??/?;.®"? ""0 T.,-„ 

*■.«■< mi*:.”’' "f iuSfera 


304 


THE OH'UH TSW, WITH THE TSO CHCEN. 


BOOK VII. 


^ 15.© z ® ^ m * 

R «R « # H.M a 5ic 

H.li ® fE g 

?L ZZ' » 3E 4. 

0 e® ® ^.0 e® ii 

^ ^ « -a. • 1&.« I 

1^ » M g0.^T a ».ii R® 

?L - :?? ft 5C.*. » n -1g.?i5 

1 0 ^ ^.^.)^f ft mz Mg 

^AWZ H.- # » ^ mi®, 

f f ii # ^ * H.M W ZM. 

0 WiStMx M.M 4 

Ife K ® ZM ^ 75 # ® 


zz 


^® Bi 

M)H9. 


mz 

M» 


mi®. 

MW 

Z.M. 


$ 

75# 

jUi 


IX. 1 In his ninth year, in spring, in the king’s first month, the 
duke went to Ts‘e. 

2 The duke arrived from Ts'e. 

3 In summer, Chung-sun Meeh went to the capital. 

4 The marquis of Ts‘e invaded Lae. 

5 In autumn, [we] took Kin-mow. 

6 In the eighth month, the viscount of T‘ang died. 

7 In the ninth month, the marquis of Tsin, the duke of Sung, 

the marquis of Wei, the earl of Ch‘ing, and the earl of 
Ts'aou, had a meeting in Hoo. 

8 Seun Lin-foo of Tsin led the armies [of the above States], 

and invaded Ch‘in. 

9 On Sin-ye\v, Hih-t‘un, marquis of Tsin, died in Hoo. 

10 In winter, in the tenth month, on Kwei-yew, Ch‘ing, mar- 

quis of Wei, died. 

1 1 A body of men from Sung laid siege to [the capital ol^ 

TTing. 

12 Ihe viscount of Ts‘oo invaded Ch‘ing; [and] Kcoh Keiieh 

ql T sill led a force, and relieved it. 

13 Ch‘in put to death its great officer Sech Yay. 


r.Trr. 1, ?. nothing on tliejc 

tw '» I arr. l‘im Nirif.', Snn Kuli. nnil otiicr criiic^, 
r» !i!irk on iln- ihski-V tSimwitiK on one e'ldc tlio 
f.,r tii« niothcr, niwl K«ln? nwnv to 
I »v; J. n V,. iia»c tj,!,, , luring till hii 'ruJe 
t.." t.iiV.' ** a« t, ton ni!‘(:m>iI.-9o]i*iTvii'm-v 

Id l!,'.' 

irtffC .mn/'tti*! WH* tfii* E^rnn'I* 

in (Sx n^riu* irn’iir. er, 

• fv i' I'; It , \ , V, J VI. M! , Ii- w«, 

V ■ j-r-f.-.-fJ! .r K i.-v-.f..,, „j,.. ,1,.,,. ,.r 

VM. f f t ; jirjn.'I.- Im*;,, T^, in t) 

*'i- •. - "• ■, .n :• . VA. 

.AT 


Tlte Cliucn *ay8 : — ‘ In spring, the htfP 
sent to Loo iloinnnding front the tlnkc n 
of frir-ndly inrjuirie.s. In summer, [*','‘''^^'^”^•'1 
MftnglU-fn wont on such n mission to (niow, nn 
tlnr king, considering tli.at ho condiictod it 
Ing toiiio nilcs of projirioty, gnvo hint rioh !•'''*• 
T«si oh*,Tvi-9 tli.Tt tin* king's proviou' ini'O'in 

not inontintioil in tho tort, nsagontlocon'li’nin-a* 

ti-i!i of tlo- king's coniluot. 

I’ar. 4. I.ao,— •i’.,' p. ;i of I.T«t y.ar. 

Aiv. toT*.^! Yn. Kin-niow w.iv n . 
U-t'.ngifig to Olio of tlie I', or wiki trik- ’ *'• ** ^ 
I -10 th- of t!j“ pri-». <li*. of 

‘ v/r !’ >'•' > •*'• '* ’’ 

lt »n of II':nl•■;■Ar.;^ w}. • 


Tlsxr X. 


DUKE SEUEK. 


305 


make it out to be a to%vn of Clioo ^ 

Tso-sbe thinks the ‘took’ denotes 1 
ease with which the capture was made. 
More likely is the opinion of Wang K'ih 

that the tenn is a gentle one for ‘extin- 
guished,’ partially concealing the lawlessness of 
Loo. 

Par. 6. This was duke Cli'aou of 

T*ang. See on I. vii. 2 ; but in Yin’s time the 
lords of 'r‘5ng were marquises, 'llicy had now 
descended two steps, and were only viscounts. 

Parr. 7— 9. Hoo— see 111. xxiii. 10, eta/. Too,] 
in assigning the situation of Hoo, always says it ' 
belonged to Ch*ing. Kung-yang, however, here 
says it belonged to Tsin*, and the K‘ang-hc 
editors adduce thcBaniboo books, under the reign 
of king Ching-ting, to show that, though the 
place originally belonged to Ch‘ing, it ultimately 
hwame a possession of Tsin. At this time, how- 
ever, it still bdonged to Ch‘ing. 

The Chuen says: — ‘The meeting at Hoo was 
to punish discordant States. The marquis of 
Ch‘m did not attend it [See on p. 12 of last year}. 
and^unLin-fco, with the armies of the States, 
invaded Ch'in; but, on the death of the marquis 
of Tsiu at Hoo, he returned.’ 

Acc. to Too, there was no Sin-ySw day in the 
9th month. Kwei-yew in next par. was the 
16th of the 10th month; and Sin-yew therefore 
must have been the 6th. 

Par. 10. In tliis attack of T‘fing, Sung, says 
Tso-sbe, took advantage of the death of the 
viscount in the 8tb month. 

Par. 12. The Chuen says: — ‘The viscount 
of Ts‘oo, because of the affair at Le [BTiat affair 


this wn« is not known. Too finds it in connec- 
tion with the 2U Chuen at the end of the Gth 
year], invaded Ch‘ing, which was relieved by 
keoh Kcuch of Tsin. The carl of Ch‘ing defeatod 
an army of Ts‘oo at Lew-fan, to the joy of all 
the people. Tszc-lijang, however, wn,«i sad, and 
said. “This [victory] will prove a calamity to 
the State. «c shall die before voty long.’’ ’ 

Par. 13. The CImen says: — ^‘Duke Ling of 
Ch*in, with (liis two ministers] K*ung King and 
E liang-foo, all had an intrigue with Ilea Ko 
[A daughter of the House of Ch'ing, sumamed 
Ke, the widow of an officer of Cli‘in, surnamed 
I or designated Hea], and each of the three of 
them wore an article of her under clothing, 
with which they made game with one another 
in the court. Scch (Kung and Kuh have 

m ior Y'ny remonstrated with the duke, 

saying, ‘ When ruler and ministers thns proclaim 
their lewdness, the people have nothing good 
to imitate. The report of such .things is not 
good ; — let your lordship put that article away.” 
The duke said he would change his conduct, 
but he told the other two wlmt Sceh Yny had 
said; and when they asked leave to kill him, he 
did not forbid them. Yay thereon was killed. 
Confucius said, “ The words of the ode, (She. 
lH.ii.odeX.6), 

‘ llVhen the people have many perversities 
Do not you set up your own perversity 
before them,’ 

arc applicable to the case of Seeh Yay.’" 

This cannot be the decision of Confucius 
upon the fate of Seeh Yay, though we find it 

expanded in the Kca Yu Bk.XlX. 


Tenth year. 


306 


THE CH‘UH TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


book VH. 


WiM mmm^m mm mm 

=i^ JZ. Xfe 5fe? jZL fcn jW? iW:. ^ XV T^S- Hll -tJS ^ m M 


§'t ^Jc 

m iB.-tiio 

zmn 

I^L.firR ^ 

W\ lk 
:\tM. 

-if •pi'- 
<_ fii 

ViiM 

till ^ 

51! m • 
'll Jk 
fi^sy 


® 0 
ik :k Z/X. 

m.n.& m 

WiiR 01.?® 
^ f® @ J5- 
Bn 3t M 
sa.JS./^ Pc. 


Hff SR 

® ^T 

Z.tii. 
- B. 
■7-ta 
%' if)' 

■m.n 


WJ ^ ^ 

Z 0 MS- 

f Mi 

6 Ji. s. ff 

^ iii i^'f^ 


)K ^ 
0r iif? 

=rr « ^ (w, 

35 <: riff 

ns ^c ’,£ 

Z -:fi z. 


V 


Y*ir X 


DUKE SEUEX. 


307 


X. 1 In Ills tenth 3 'ear, in spring, the duke went to Ts‘e. The 
duke arrived from Ts*e, 

2 The people of Ts‘e restored to ns the lands of Tse-se. 

3 In summer, in the the fourth month, on Ping-.sliin, the sun 

was eclipsed. 

4 On Ke-sze, Yuen, marquis of Ts*e, died. 

5 The Head of the Ts'uj^ famih* of Ts‘e left the State, and fled 

to Wei. 

6 The duke went to Ts‘e. 

7 In the fifth month, the duke arrived from Ts‘e. 

8 On Kwei-sze, Hea Ch‘ing-shoo of Chin murdered his ruler, 

P‘ing-kwoh. 

9 In the sixth month, an army of Sung invaded T*ano-. 

10 Kung-sun Kwei-foo went to Ts‘e, to the burial of duke 

Hwuj* of Ts‘e. 

11 A body of men from Tsin, one from Sung, one from Wei 

and one from Ts‘aou, invaded Ghing. * 

12 In autumn, the king [by] Heaven's [grace] sent his youngest 

brother to Loo on a mission of friendly inquiri^. 

13 Kun^-sun Kwei-foo led a force to invade Ghoo, and took 

Yih. 

14 There were great floods. 

15 Ke-sun Hang-foo went to Ts‘e. 

16 In winter, Kung-sun Kwei-foo went to Ts‘e. 

17 The marquis of Ts‘e sent Kwoh Tso to Loo on a mission of 

friendly inquiries. 

18 There was famine. 

19 The viscount of Ts‘oo invaded Chfinw. 


This yas noir the 4th time that 
^ had repsured to the court of Ts‘e. 

Omen spring, the duke ^ent 

to Ts e; and the marquis of Ts«e,in consideration 
Of thesnbimssion and service of the dnke, re- 
6t^ the lands of Tse-se.' Those lands were 
V remembered, in the 

price vrhicli Loo paid 
V dnke's usurpation. 

Jtm. 3. This eclipse was visible at sunriscL 
FebrnW, B. C. 59S. KnT-^l^ 
the 1st day of tbe moon. 

Parr. 4,5. The Ts‘uy famfly or clan was one 
of the most powerful in Ts^e. It was descended 
from a son of one of the ancient princes of the 
State,-dnke Ting (“J* ajed B. C. 

1052. To that son the lands of Tsmy had been 
^signed, and Tshiy beisime the surname of his 
descendants. We have met with a Ts‘uy Taou 
who waspresent at thebattle of Shing-pnh.in the 
2Sth year of duke He. Tlie he.ad of the clan at 
this time was, acc. to Tso-slie, Ts'ny Choo (.g 

and it is to him the text refers. We find 
him (?) long after tins, in lX.xxv •> ?., -r - 
again, and murdering his rnl^. 


duke Kwny 

Ts e^ died. Ts'ny Choo had been a favourite 
with him; and [tlie ministers]. Kaon and Kwoh. 
being afraid ot Ts'uy’s exercising a pressnie 
upon them, drove liim out;— when he fled to 
^ language of the te.\t,— ' The Head of 
theTs'uy family,’ shows that he was not driven 
out for any fault of his ( ? ); moreover, the ^ 

Head of his clan, and not by his name. When 
a grea^ffi,^ of .nny State fled from it, or 
banished, the announcement of it ran— «Onr 

failed to maintain the charge of his mcIT’ 

^ to announce Ae 

met. bucii announcement was msiTp ...i 
States in tiie case of one w"m 

with the mission-jade and offerings of silk ft a. 

on missionsof friendly inquiries) to them-bS 

not in the case of other oScere.’ ’ 

The^n why we have ^ ^ 

ChnM^’ ^as really 

, need not be amviously soneht. Tso-sbnV 

canonaWitisinadmissibiejsoSnng"^^^^^ 

that n ,s to condemn the principle and fhe prac’ 
i tice m Ts’e of hereditary offices ( [fi- 


308 


THE CH'UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK m 


so is Kuli-leang’s, that it indicates that the 
clan, as vrell as the individual, was driven from 
the State. 

Parr, 6,7. ‘ The duke,’ says Tso-she, ‘ hurried 
away to Ts‘e, to be present at the earliest cere- 
monies to the deceased marquis.’ After this he 
paid no more visits to Ts‘e. ' 

Par. 8. Tlie Cliuen says: — ‘Duke Tiing of 
Cli^n, with K'ung King and E Hitng-foo, was 
drinking in the house of the Hea family [See 
the Chuen on the last par. of last year], when 
the duke said to Hfing-foo, “ Ch‘ing-shoo [The 
son of Hea Ee, and Head of the family, as his 
father was dead] is like you.” “ He is also like 
your lordship,” was the reply. Ch‘ing-shoo 
[overheard these remarks, and] was indignant 
at them; and when the duke was [trying to] 
escape [from the house] hy the stable, he shot, 
and killed him. Tlie two officers fled to Ts'oo.’ 
This is a case in which ‘ executed ’ would he a 

better rendering really of ^ than ‘ murdered.’ 

Par. 9. 'The siege of the capitiil of T'arig by 
Sung in the past year [p. 10] had, we may pre- 
. sume, been fruitless. Now, again, as the Chuen 
says, ‘ the people of T'fmg, relying upon Tsin, 
would not do service to Sung; and in the 6th 
month, an army of Sung invaded T'Sng.’ 

Par. 10. Kwei-foo was the son of Chung 
Suy, and of course was himself a Kung-sun, 
‘grandson’ of duke Chwang. Tlie burial of 
duke Hwny took place before the proper time. 
Hwuy Ching-hecn observes that when we con- 
sider liow the head of the Ts'uy clan was driven 
out of the Stale immediately after the duke’s 
death, how the burial was hastened, and how 
his son [s .styled marquis (p. 17) before the year 
was expired, there must have been troubles in 
Ts'e, of which we have not any record. 

Par. 11. The Chuen says;—* Ch'inghad made 
peace with T.s'oo [After the events related on 
p. 12 of Inst year]. The armies of these States, 
[iliorefore], invaded Ch‘ing, took from it terms 
of submission, and relumed.’ 

Par. 12. Kung-yang says that ‘the king’s 
youngest son ' here introduced was the reigning 


king’s full brother. His father therefore was 
kingK‘ing(^P^ 3E^‘ The prince’s descendants 
were dukes of Lew, and the Chuen here crils 
him ‘ duke K‘ang of Lew,’ adding that his visit 
was in return for that of MJlng Keen to the 
court, in p. 8 of last year. 

Par. IS. Till was a city of Choo, — ^in the 

pres. dis. of Tsow CgjJ I^), dep. Ten-diow. 

But in the Chuen on VI. xiii. 8 the capital^ of 
Choo appears removed to Yih; and the taking 
of Yih would be equivalent to extinguishing 
Choo, whicii, we know, was. not the case. On 
this account, the K‘ang-he editors incline to 

***” for 


adopt the' reading of Kung-yang, — of 


Par. 14. See 11. i. 5, tt ah 
Par. 15. Tso-she says: — ‘Ke Witn went on a 
friendly mission to Ts‘e, — ^for the 1st time, since 
the accession of the new marquis.’ 

Par. 16. Tso -she says : — ‘ In winter Tsz^ea 
(Kung-sun Kwei-foo’s designation) went to Ts e, 
with reference to our invasion of Choo.’ 

Par. 17. Tso-she saj’s: — ‘Kwoh Woo’s 
was the posthumous title of Kwoh Tso) mis- 
sion was in return for that of Ke Witn, in p. In- 
Par. 18. Sun Full defines the term ‘famine* 
as descriptive of the crops not coming to 
maturity, * the five kinds of grain not ripening 

Par. 19. Tlie Chuen says:— ‘The viscount 
of Ts'oo invaded Ch'ing [See the reason on 
p. 11]. Sze Hivuy of Tsm relieved it, ana 
drove the army of Ts'oo to the north of the i im 
Tsze-kea [The Kung-tsze Kwei-silng] died, and 
the people proceeded to punish the authow oi 
the disorder in which duke Yew died. 
broke open the coffin of Tsze-kea, and drove aii 
the branches of the family from the 5tn^ 
'Hicy changed the grave of duke Yew, and gave 
him the posthumous title of Ling.’ 


ilo '^1 


353; 

m 


m 

A 


m 

®! 


Eleventh year. 


n 


IE 


Yeah XI. 


310 


THE- CH'UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VII. 


In winter, in the tenth month, the people of Ts‘oo put to 
death Hea Ch‘ing-shoo of Ch‘in. 

On Ting-hae, the viscount of Ts‘6o entered [the capital of] 
Ch‘in. 

He restored Kung-sun Ning and E Hang-foo to Gh‘in. 

‘ King wan did indeed labour earnestly.' 

[K king wan did so, how much more ought 
we, who are of such inferior virtue I” ’ 
Tswan-han was in the territory of the Teih, 
but its site has not been more exactly deter- 
mined. 

Parr. B— 7. See IX. 13, and X.8, with the 
Chuen on them. The Chuen says here:-— 
mnter, the viscount of Ts'oo, because of tne 
deed perpetrated by the head of the Hea famiiy» 
invaded Ch‘in, publishing a notice to the peo- 
ple that they should make no movement, as ne 
wished to punish only the head of the Shaou-se 
name of the grand-father of 

Ch‘ing-shoo. His designation was Teze^ie?]- 
Forthwith he entered [the capital ofj Cli }«> 
and put to death Hea Ch‘ing-shoo, having W"* 


Par. 2. The Chuen says: — ‘This spring, the 
viscount of Ts'oo invaded Ch'ing [Because of 
the action in the Chuen on par. 12 of the 9th 
year], and advanced, as far as Leih. Tsze- 
leang (K'eu-tsih of the Chuen on IV. 3) said, 
“Tsin and Ts'oo make no effort to show kind- 
ness [to smaller States], but keep struggling 
for the superiority;— there is no reason why we 
should not take the side of the [first] comer. 
They have no faith; — why should we show good 
faith ?” Accordingly, Ch'ing accepted the de- 
mands of Ts'oo; and in summer, Ts'oo took a 
covenant in Shin-ling, when Ch'in and Ch'ing 
make their submission to it.’ 

Shin-ling was in Ch'in, — 40 fe to the north- 
west of the dep. city of Ch'in-chow, Ho-nan. 

Kuh has This was the 2d time at 

which the chief of Ts'oo presided over a meeting 
of other princes. The Ist time was in the 27th 
year of duke He. 

[The Chuen adds here; — ‘ Tsze-oh'ung, minis- 
ter of the Left, of Ts'oo, made an incursion into 
Sung, while the king (j.e., the viscount) waited 
at Yen. Wei Gae-leeh, the chief minister, 
undertook the walling of E, and appointed the 
border-warden to make the arrangements and 
calculations for the business. He then gave 
these to the superintendent of the work, who 
estimated the labour to be done, and the num- 
ber of days; pave out all the money that was 
necessary for it; adjusted the frames, and pro- 
vided the baskets and stampers, and other 
articles for raising the walls ; apportioned equal- 
ly their tasks, according to tlie distance of the 
labourers from the place ; marked out witli his 
feet tlic foundations; supplied the provisions; 
and determined the inspectors. The work was 
completed in 30 days, exactly in accordance 
witli tlic previous calculations.’] 

Par. 3. Notwithstanding the operations of 
Ts'e and Jam against Kcu in the duke's 4th 
year, that State, it would appear, continued to 
maintain a liostilo attitude, which led to the in- 
vasion in the text. 

Par. 4. We liave here probably the issue of 
the policy towards the Teih, recommended to 
the marqnis of Tsin in the Chuen appended 
r,*.-*' *^**'*C" '■'>'» here;—' Keoli Ch'ing 

[Kfoli Keucli] of Tsin sought for terms of 
p^^ace from the Teih ; and all the rest of their 
tntvs, King di‘tr«-j»etl and indign-int at the 
e(-r»»c.-> n-«iuin'<l from them by the Ketl Teili, 
made fulmd^'lon to Tsin. The meeting this 
autumn on the fK.“C.i«i<jn of their doing so. 
In rvgiirl to i*..e manjuis'e going to them, nil 
tb.- gtvTf. vtis'i.-.! to cMl (the ehief-s of] 

» I*" Tsin], bat Keolt Cli'ing snid, 

t. t-.f-Tr iJirn. )s n->: vifte.e, th- next best thing 
if fi r .}t;^ ,t di'. \Vil!in..Jt *nc!i I'Ul. 
n "’"- J ' f'-' ft'Ih-rvr.po of 

' 1*-. ‘'"est-r. 

Wdif ", w. Ij.. li fc 

.S SVl:*. ll tJ s t.'.J (M.-, IV. i [.U J X. 


r, fsn-ts'ss) 
> th...'a.* It 


tom in pieces by chariots [See the 1st Chum» 
appended to 11. xviii. 3] at the Leih gate, ne 
then proceeded to make Ch'in a district [oi 
Ts'oo]. 

‘At this time, the marquis of Ch'in 
Tsin; and Shnb of Shin had been sent [by t e 
viscount] to Ts'e. When Shuh returned, he 
reported the discharge of his mission, and witii^. 
drew, [without saying anything about the m* 
fairs of Ch'in]. The king sent to reprove nHn> 
saying, “ Hen Ch'ing-shoo acted very ’ 

murdering his ruler. With [the forces of my 
own and] other States I have punished an 
executed him. The princes of those States an 
the dukes of our districts have all congrotuiai 
me; what is the reason that you •ilo*’® 
fered no congr.atulation ?" “ May I still 
myself?” replied Shuh. “You may,” said t no 
king ; and Shuh continued, “ The crime o f t 
Ch'ing-shoo in murdering his ruler was grt » 
and you iierformcd a righteous deed in pimi • 
ing and executing him. But the people , 
saying, “ He led his ox tlirougli another nm 
field, and the ox was taken from Inm. 
he tlint so led his ox to trample on ano 
man’s field indeed committed an offence; 
when liis ox was taken from him, 
ment was too severe. The princes , 
you in this enterprise, saying it "^ns to puni. » 
criminal ; but now you have made ClVm ^'*9, , 
your districts, desiring its riches. Ion cane 
out the prince.s to punish an offender, and yo 
Arc eenuing them 


away after satisfying your 


covetousness ; — does not this seem inM’^oi’ey. 
The king replicil, “ Good 1 1 Imd not hcan! tm* 
view of the case ! Can 1 still give Cli’m back ? 

•! ^-*.1 SI...II 1 l.y« «n 4 T 1 <tnflCC 


“Tliat,” s.aid .Shull, ''will be an 10^''"'=' 
what wc small men call "Takhtg^a tiling fro 
one’s breast and giving it [back].” ’ 

•Tlir vi'count ncconlingly rc.storvd the . 1**0 
of Cti'ln; but from i-ach of Its villages Iw tw'k “ 
man. and carrietl tb.:m with him to 
be settled 

thtor. II«*n«wha 


carried tli.:m with inm to .. .. . 

d tb'TTi in a place wbl-h b*' railed if' *’ 
erjcc what the text *ay»,—''Tl.e sii-o'mt 


'£AR XII. 


DUKE SEUEN. 


311 


if Ta'oo etilercd Cli'in. and restored Kung-sun ^ 
Sing, and E HRng-foo,” is worded to show how 
the viscount observed the rules of propriety.’ 

Tlje viscount of Ts‘oo did right in not appro- 
priating Ch‘In to himself; but most western 
readers will form a very different judgment 
from Tso-she on his execution of Hen Gh‘ing- 
shoo and his restoration of the two villains, K’ung 


King and E Ilnng-f-oo. Here, ns elsewhere, 
Kung-ynng has for 

I [The Chiicn adds hero: — ‘After the affair at 
I liC [Sec on IX. 1*2], the earl of Ch'ing made his 
escape home, and [the viscount of] Ts'oo was 
not able subsequentV to obtain his aesirc. And 
though Cii'ing accepted a covenant [from Ts'oo] 
this year at Sl»in-Iing, it kept trying to slrctiglii- 
cn itself by doing service to Tsin.'] 


Ttvelfih year. 

MtW' 


if icoA.'t' ^ ^ 

# r-V 


A 


PI 


t 


a 


A. 

■ft ^ 

AM 

U =f 


M Sli, 

iW. 


li, 


M ^ 


w W 

m m 

li. 


If, 


A w S S S ^ i ® * 


o 


312 


THE CH‘UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VH. 


t A 1 s ^ i ^ ffi 

£ ii5if a.i?n m,p a is 


w.w ^ g.w m % #.T ± 

i'i'S i‘^ i 0.¥ W :ft i ^ 
lis-f S'S'fss^^f wA^if 


f r® |i f ‘S ? S * ^ * 

H S » A fe‘fe-1 S S S ^ M:^mw 

i i-f 4 5 S i S !f-^ W ;e iS: ^ a 
fttSiSi-ifff? fi.-{!i.^. A ■a.g.a 

^ "M ^ gS 4lj. 1?C Jit Jit 3-, 453 r?f{f a fW 


Ykjlr XII. 


DUKK SKIIKV. 


^ 1^, jffl. Ill] ^ S-to ^ JV- M to- 

0 1>^ ^ M S S S‘S ^ ^ l^i]5 

S S pr'4: S ^ -5 ^ ^ ffii S 0 fiifi ;tA 

lllllP:»^5-S8.iillli' 

ss Jt ^ # ff a- ^ fflfe S,'i£ SSWs3 


316 


THE CH*UX TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEK. 


BOOK TH. 


as 


z.mMM a it w m.n lit m w m.m 
n^-^mA s m m A.a f * 

IIJ A ^ » m # ^ 5R Z^MM 


XII. 1 

2 

3 


4 

5 


In the dnke’s twelfth Tear, in spring, there was the burial 
of duke Ling of Cfi'in. 

The viscount of Ts‘oo laid siege to [the capital of] Ch^ng. 
In summer, in the sixth month, on Yih-maou, Seiin Lin- 
foo of Tsin led a force, and fought with the viscount 
of Ts'oo at Peih, when the army of Tsin was dis- 
gracefully defeated. 

It was autumn, the seventh month. 

In winter, in the twelfth month, on Mow-vin. the viscount 
of Ts*oo extinguished Seaou. 

An officer of Tsin, one of Sung, one of lYei, and one of 
Ts‘aou, made a covenant together at Ts‘ing-k‘cw. 

An armj' of Sung invaded Ch‘in, [but] a body of men 
from AVei relieved it. 

nltars, so that I mar change my course, and 
serve your lonlship equally with the governors 
of the nine [nowj districts [which you have 
established], that will be your kindness, and it 
is my desire, but it is what 1 do not dare^ to 
hope for. 1 have presumed to disclose to you 
all my heart; your lordship will take your 
measures acconUngly.*’ 

‘His attendants urged the viscount not to 
grant [the earl’s request], urging that, havmg 
got the State, he ought not to forgive hun; but 
the king replied, *• Since the ruler of Clnng can 
humble Itimsclf thus, he must be able to soenro 
the faith of his people; how tstn 1 hope to obtain 
the State?” With tins he retired SO/r, tum 
• grantotl peace. P'wan Wang entered 
. and m.^de a covenant ; and Tsrc-lcang left it to 
I be a Itost.atie [with 'I'sw].’ , 

> Par. S. Peth was in Ctring,— C le to tltc cast 
of yicing Chow, dep. K_'ae-fnng. ^ 


Par. 1. Twenty-two months had elapsed since 
the death of duke Ling at the hands of Hea 
Clcing-shoo. We can hardly 8uppo.«e that his 
body bad been unburied all that time, Porbaps 
the rites of interment were now jwrformod in a 
more regular and solemn manner, the coffin 
being deposited in a new grave. 

Par. 2. Tlic Chnen at the end of last year 
was preparatory to tliis par., to supply the reason 
for the fre«h invasion of Chung by Ts’oo. We 
have here the following narnitive: — ‘In spring, 
the viscount of Ts*oo had held the capital 
of Ch’ing in siege for 17 days, wlicn the people 
divined whether it would be well for tliem to 
accept conditions of peace, but the answer was 
not favourable, llicy then divinetl wliether 
they should weep in' the grand temple, and 
bring forth their cliariols into tlio streets [i. e.. 
prol'.ably, to i>e re.idy for removing where Tsuio 
micht tlireet]; and tiic reply was favourable. 
The p<'<'plc. of tlie city tSu-n made a great weeping, 
ejtd the kecjvrs of the p.nrapets all crie»l aloud, 
ro that the abcoc.nt of Tsajii withdrew his men. 
tsU the ixi.vle ixuaired the w.all. lie then ad 


The I'hucn s.ays: — ^‘In summer, in the 
month, tlic armies of Tsin 


Ch'ing. Seun Lin-foo comm.nulotl the nw’y 
the centre [In place of Kcoh Kcueh], with 


txx\ 

f! ficinc, 

, v, itU hi* t;i 


e\p.- 

S’sl, and lead- 


a »h-.- p. 

“I’r.e-.rvnl 

f»'J 

• t.y 

He.wvn,'" said 

1: T 

“It. 

uM »i ■; rte 

vo;;r 

hol-hip, and 

tT' ’ 

M.".r 

aiiv, r. li'.i It 

; I. 

\ U- 

en di*eharc.d 


n J-.' til';. 

'U.,- e;h-< 


is al 

1 mine; p,'..l I 

«!»:> 

d t d. V 

• r- -I- 5 w. 

.',1! 1 

['■ -r t ■ 

ar 

K? 

■’ ! r •?:, ;■ 

■ a ■ av t > 

• . 

■ ath 

■ f th.' |v< 

t 's r 

‘"'-t: t‘ ■ 

: V 1 t y t! ■ 

■ 

■r. ' 1 

•! th. - . -a. 

i*. s 

If > ■; 


r • • 

1 , 

, t- e it » -‘i;.- 


• • 'i it, r .. 

■ -r, t * ^ 5- 

7i 

o.-;; 

!- l:i f-.- 


; , ' s ! 

. t . * s 

' • ’ 1 ' 

>' it 

• ’ 

1(‘ « -l i lit 


1 . 


army of 

the e ntre; Kitng i> >h and <.*h.'»'''jj Ch*nen. tlm»C 
of the !•: army; and S.un Show and t. (•„ion 
T-tic.c. th'-o of the thl. Han Keiieh « as m.-ir-hal 
of th,' h-''!. 

•When lla'V rea "li- d the Ho. they he 
had maih' |’, ace with *1 -*,>», ar.d 
!•.•• [Ijttan wa* ')’• j esthn;;; 

t • r.'te.rn. saym-, ” W-j nr, t‘« 
ffft': at vili N- t;- - r jw 


rd that 
llwan- 
tit!'] 
lat - f- r 


■■I- ■ 

i. . f. 


**?*•! 4 

•J’.,'' S;rv * 


► •..*> 


’ aV'; a tii 


DUKE SEt'ES. 


317 


Tkjlr XU. 


- ‘\S*oo-tsreofSuv(Srellvrnv) approved of Ibis . otid ntiack 

view, and said. “Accordins: to what I have ; pood rule of 

heard, mUitarventerprizes should I'c undcrtahcti ! ucr your .a 
nrt ftT\nnrM»mtV of T»r05CCUlinif 5 


and attach those that .are ullfully Mhul, j-' a 
war. Do you for the prc-'cnt or- 
anuy accordinply. and foUnw that 
ntasiut. There arc other Slate? that are weak 


and the statute? and rule? of Ms State, is not j ^ose that .ate mn'vnnTMso^ 

to be contended with: it is not ap.ainft such Tlie Choh ode (She. l\.i. [i».J Mil.) [alsoj 
an one that we conduct punitive expeditions. ; says, 

Xow when tlieamrv of Ts‘oo punished (.h'inp. ‘ , 

• * . . •*_ j V.1..V « 


Ohl powerful was the royjil army. 

.. *_«. ..1 •* . 


But he nourished it in olwdience toeircam- 
slancos. while the time was yet dark ; — 

the kinp’s object was to deal with the blind. 
£A{min3. in the Woo (She, IV. i. [ 1.3 IX.) it is 


there was anper bewuse of its double dcalinp. ^ 
and compassion when the carl humbled himself. ] 

When it revolted from him. [the viscount} in- 
vaded it. When it submitted, be forgave it:— 
his Mndness and justice were established. 

There was the justice of punishment in the at- j said, 
tack of revolt ; there was the kindness of virtue • t Irresistible was bis ardour/ 

i If you soothe [for a time] the weak, and bring 

' ■ ■ .It ardour pike 

course.’* 
“This 
Icadcr- 
its armies 


in the gentle dealing with submission, 
these things were shown. 


aiy ttad^ have not their several occupations i do not follow him. we cannot be said to have 
injuriously interfered with, and the footmen and ! prowess. If we are to lose our chief place 
chariot-men act ia hartnonv with one another; 1 among the States, the best thing we can do is to 
—showing how collision is ‘avoided in its order- \ die. Moreover, we matched out with our armies 
ingofaff^. ■ I in array; if. because the enemy is strong, we 

‘ [Furtber], when W^ Gaou became chief I refhu, we shall not be men. To begin with our 
mimster. he sdected the best statutes of Tsmo. 1 ruler's charge to a command in the army, and 
When the army is marching, the [footmen of 1 to end with not being a roan:— you all may play 
the3 tight keep on either side of the chariot, and • Ibot part, bnt ^ I will not do so.” Upon this 
those ^ the left go in quest or grass and rushes, j with [the portion of! the army of the centre 
The bearers of the standards of the c:oea keep . [under his commandl, he crossed the Ho. 
in advance, looking out anxiously that nothing | ‘ Chwaug-tszs of Che (Sean Show) said, “ This 

Occur for which there is not preparation. The • army is in great periL The case is that indi- 


mg of the army is i^dv for any emergracy, : of serrtce. It these be not cood. there will be 

Thus;beevU.’ When the commanders all observe 
rf ^ proi>er harmony, the rules are sood: if 

| ^ notL [fte 

with lutnsdf. idiosen from among relatives, j “lange of — — into indicatesj the separation, 

and of other surnames, chosen from the old ser- j of the host prodneinsr 


■t producing weakness: it is the stop- 
j ping up of a stream so as to form a marsh. The 
■ rules of service are turned into each one's takin'>' 
his own way. Hence the words. — the mire 
become not good:’— ^hqy are as it were dried 
up. The full stream is dried up; it is sto|pped 
and cannot have its course: — consequentlv e'^ 
must ensue. Lin [moreover} is the foj 
what dos not proceed. When a commander 
does — ' — . - ^ 


vants of the State. But oScre are given with 
daa respect to the necessary qualidcatians, and 
rewards are conferred according to the service 
p^ormei. while at the same time additional 
kindness is shown to the aged. Strangers re- 
cave gifts, and enjoy various exemptions. OS- 
cers and the common people have diSerest 
dsesshs to distinguish them. The noble have a 
deSned standard of honour; the mean have to 
comport themsdvre accormng to diSerent de- 
grees. Thus are the rules of propriety observed 
in Ts'oo. 

• b'ow why should we enter on a strnscle with 
a State wWch thus manifests Hnaness,' carries 
oa: justice, perfects its government, times 
Its nnderta'sings, follows its statutes, and ob- 
Nrves so admirably the rules of propiietv? 


greater- 

is the case we now'^ Lave. If we do me^ the 
enemy we ^ snre to be defeated; and the 
^amitv wOl be owing to Cne-tsze: Thoneh 
^honia now escape, vet. oa 'nis return to Tsfe, 
&reat Trill Awsxt ^ 


S18 


THE CH-UIf TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK vir. 


lost our subject State (Ch^ng): and if you lose 
that army, your offence will indeed be heavy; — 
you had better advance. If the affair do not 
prove successful, there \vill be others to share 
the blame. Will it not be better for you to 
bear the blame as one of six than to bear it 
alone?” 

'The whole army then crossed the Ho. The 
viscount of Ts'oo was halting, with his army look- 
ing northwards, at Yen. The governor of Shin 
commanded the centre; Tsze-bhung, the left; 
and Tsze-fan, the right. The viscount meant to 
water their horses at the Ho, and then return to 
Ts'oo. When he heard that the army of Tsin 
had crossed, he wanted to withdraw before it; 
but his favourite, Woo Ts'an, wished to fight. 
Shuh-sun Gaou, the chief minister of Ts'oo, did 
not wish fto fight], and said, "Last year we 
entered CMn. and this year we have entered 
Ch'ing; — it cannot be said that we have accom- 
plish^ nothing. If we fight and do not succeed, 
will the eating Ts'an’s flesh be sufficient to 
atone for the result?” Ts'an replied, “If the 
battle be gained, you will be proved to have 
been incapable of planning. K it be lost, my 
flesh will be in the army of Tsin, and you wiU 
not get it to eat.” 

'The chief minister then turned his chariot to 
the south, and ordered the great standard to be 
carried back. But Woo Ts'an said to the king, 
“Tsin’s chief minister is new, and cannot make 
his commands obeyed. His assistant commander. 
Seen Hwoh, is violent and headstrong, without 
any benevolence, and unwilling to'^obey the 
other's commands. The generals of the three 
armies would each take the chief controul, but 
not one of them can do so. In council there is 
no supreme Head ; whom can the multitudes 
follow? In this expedition Tsin cannot fhil to 
be defeated. Moreover, if your majesty flee 
before a subject of Tsin. what liecomes of the 
honour of our altars?” The king felt power- 
fully these representations, and told the chief 
minister to change the course of the chariots, 
and proceed northwards. He then halted at 
Kwan to await the army of Tsin, which was be- 
tween Gaou and K'aouJ 


‘ [In the meantime], Hwang Seuh of Clring 
came on a mission to the army of Tsin. saying, 
“ Cii'ing has submitte<i to Ts'oo only to preserve 
its .altars, and does not waver in its preference for 
your State. The army of Ts'oo is proud with re- 
victories, and weary with the length of its 
service. Nor does it m.akc preparations for an 
c;'.p:r,'tnf at. If you attack it, the army of Ch'inu 
wi-1 si-cf't’.d you ; and Ts'oo is sure to be defeated.” 
Cb'St»re said, “The defeat of Ts'oo, and the 
s-ea'.rtr.'.; the r.dl;fTeuce of Ch'ing, bith depend 
on t!i V .» -t'lsu. Wc nv!i«t agree to the cnvov'.s 
pr-jt I.eau Ww-nie (I.wan Shtvi), Ijow- 

evrf, ur.'^'d. Sin"*' th*- lime when Ts'd*^ suIhIuihI 
1 ur.,* [S'- Vl.xvi. C], it* ruler has let no day 
5 w a; training .in ! in«:r'ae!in“ hi* ri.'otde, 
»v.' !a.'. *.\h! the wi-lfare i* not ea»!ly 

! may ceme witho-jt a day'* 

: •u*: I ciuti'j'M .ar.-l a;i;-reh<"n- 
■*y l .1 i In th-amiv 


w f. ^ 

t' 


Y 

t- z V-V! 
* - K** T 

- V tf-A** 


a \\\\ 


^ , 1 


Ut I'-* 


'Vir*~ 


-y I vr.r. U- re* I- »ur- cf. 

Tr. •— <;.< ,, jfv, . 

l.-'t • JJ, 

•• *■ r- F* ... ,F.. J 


gaou and Fun-maou, who laboured in wooden 
carts and tattered hempen clothes to bring the 
hills and forests under cultivation. He made 
this proverb for them also, ‘ People’s weal de- 
pends ou diligence ; with diligence there is no 
want.’ His army cannot be said to be elated. 
A former great officer [of our State], Tsze-fan, 
said, * Wlieu au army has right on its side, it is 
strong; when the expedition is wrong, the army 
is weary and weak.’ In this case we cannot 
plead our virtue, but are bent on a quarrel with 
Ts'oo. "We are in the wroug, and Ts'oo is in 
the right ; — ^its army cannot he said to be weary 
and weak. Its ruler’s own chariots are divided 
into two bodies of 15 each. To each of thorn are 
attached 100 men, and au additional complement 
of 25 men. The body on the right is harnessed 
early, and kept on duty till mid-day, when that 
on the left takes its place till dusk. The officers 
in immediate attendance on the ruler keep 
watch by turns daring the night. Thus provis- 
ion is made against any surprise, and the aniiy 
cannot be said to be without preparaUon. 
Tsze-leang is the best man of Ch'ing and Szc- 
shuh [Pwan AYang] is highly honoured in 'I's oo. 
Sze-shuh entered [the capital of Ch'ing] and 
made a covenant ; and Tsze-leang is [a hostage] 
with Ts'oo. Ts'oo and Ch'ing are in friendly 
relations; and Ch'ing advises us to fight! H 
we conquer, it will come to us ; if we do not 
conquer, it will draw off. According ns I 
should divine, the counsel of Ch'ing is not to ho 
followed.” ^ . 

‘Chaou Hwoh and Chaon T'ung said, “''O 
have led our host thus far, seeking for the 
enemy. We have to conquer the cnem.v, ami 
recover our subject State; — -what more do wo 
wait for? We must follow Chc-tszc.’ 

‘Keof Che [Chwang-tsze; Semi Show] said, 
"Yuen [Chaou T'ung] and I’ing [Cliaou Kwoh 
arc partizans of our evil counsellor [Clie-tsze]. 
Chaou Cliwang-tsze [Chaou Sob] said, "Lwan 
Pih [Woo-tsze; Lwnn Shoo] has spoken well. 
Let him make his words good, and he will take 
the chief command in Tsin.” , 

‘[After these discordant counsels], tbo sun- 
administrator of Ts'oo wont to the army of •T®.'”' 
and said. ‘Our ruler, when young, met witii 
sorrowful borcavemont, and was not able to culti- 
vate the accomplishments of learning. l»“j 
has heard that his two prctlcccssors [tlic kings 
Cli'ing ami Muh] went backwards aiiu forwards 
by this p.'ith. His only aim lia.« Itccn to instruct 
and settle Ch'ing, w'ithout seeking to 
offence to Tsin. You, the oflicors of IsjU, 
should not remain hero long.” Ke of Suy (» ro 
Hwuy) replied, “Long ago king P'ing 
ch.vrge to our former ruler, the m:irciui.s ** *n, 
saying, ‘Along with Ch'ing sup|)ort_th<' ltou*eot 
C-how, nnd do not disreg.trd the king’s charge. 
Now Cli'ing i* showing no regard for it, and onr 
ruler sent n* to n^k it tiie n-.avon; «e do not 
l>Te*atne to inflict any di'grac' on you wli» h-avc 
in*'; ««. Let me ac’tcnuwl.'tlge tli.>r«od'-‘eoii*i''n 
of yowrrub'r in t!ii« (Tlic-t>re tlcn-ot 

thi* reply wa* fanning, an! sent f-’liaoii Kwoh 
to foil irr tljt* envoy with a ilifT’.-n'nt one, ‘.aying, 
‘•Oar pave you a wrong n-ply. ^ fuir 

ruler Feiit Id* ••Tv.vr.t* to remoie from t’b'ing 
iv-ry f riot of voiirpreit Ktate, ti-Iiio.; «» 
t.' t to at-.T t ;i -riy. We wit: 

«»'sy fr* n>. .any r •tnuiar.'!* t- u tv* on i:» ■* 


tbab xn. 


DUKE SEUEN, 


319 


‘Tlie -viscount of Ts'oo, however, sent pother 
message to asii for peace -with Tsin, which was 
agreed to on the part of Tsin; and a day was 
set for a covenant. 

‘ tin the meantime^, Hen Tih of Ts oo drop 
Yoh Pih, with Shell Shnh on the right of the 
chariot, to flout and provoke the army of Tsm. 
Hen Pih said, “1 have heard that when an 
army is flouted, the driver urges his chariot. 


with the flag shaking, close to the entrench- 

^ It I 


nients, and then returns.” Toh Pih said, “I 
have heard that the archer on the left ^charges 
a strong arrow, and then takes the reins, while 
the charioteer descends, dusts the horses, and 
adjusts the martingales, and then they return ” 
Shell Shuh'said, “1 have heard that the spearman 
on the right enters the enlrendiments, cuts off 
an ear, takes another nam prisoner, and returns.” 
Tliey all three did as they had heard, and -were 
returning, pursued hy the men of Tsin, who 
came after them like two horns, from the left, 
and the right. Toh Pih shot the horses on the 
left, and the men on the right, so that the pur- 
suers could not advance. Ue had hut one arrow 
left, w hen a stag rose up before the chariot, which 
he shot right in the hump. Paou Kwei of Tsin 
was right behind him, when he made Sheh 
Shnh take the stag, and present it to the pur- 


suer, saying, “ It is not the season of the year 


for such a thing, the time for presenting animals 
has not arrived, hut I venture to offer this to 
feast your followers.” Paou Kwei stopped the 
pursuit, saying, “ He on the left shoots well; he 
on the right speaks well; — they are superior 
men.” So they got off. Wei E {A son of Wei 
Ch'o w ; sec the Chuen on V. xxvii ., p. 4 and xxviii., 
p. 43 of Tsm had nskedt o he appointed among the 
ducal clans [See the Chuen at the end of the 
2d year], and been refused. In his resent- 
ment he wished to bring on the defeat of 
the army, and now asked [the coramander-in- 
chief] to allow him to flout the army [of Ts'oo'J. 
This was refused; hut Ids further request to be 
sent with a message to it was granted; so he 
went, challenged Ts‘oo to battle, and was re- 
turning. P'vrnn Tang of Te‘oo pursued him; 
but when E had got to the marsh of Yung, he 
saw six stags, and shot one of them. TTien 
round, he presented it to Tang, saying, 
* Amid the business of the army, your hunters 
wav have failed to supply you with fresh meat, 
^tl 1 venture to present this for your followers.” 
Un this S?huh-tnng gave orders to leave ofi- the 
pursuit. 


those two enrage Ts‘ 00 , and its army come 
suddenly upon us, we shall lose our array in no 
time. Our best plan is to make preparations 
[for a battle]. If Ts‘oo do not make an attempt 
upon ue, -we can remove our preparations, and 
make a covenant, without there being any injury 
to a g^od understanding. If it do make an at- 
tempt, being prepared for it, we shall not he 
defeated. Even in the case of an interview be- 
tween two princes, they take the precaution not 
to dispense with a guard of troops.” 

‘ Che-tsze [still] refused to agree to this pro- 
posal, and Sze Ke sent Kung Soh and Han 
Cli'uen to place 7 amhusliments in front of 
Gaon. By this means the Ist army was saved 
from the defeat [which ensued]. Chaou Ting- 
ts‘e sent a party to prepare boats at the Ho; and 
iu this way, though he shared in the defeat, he 
and his men were the first to cross the river. 

* When P'wan Tang had driven away Wei E, 
Chaou Chen came that same night to the army 
of Ts'oo; and having spread his mat outside the 
gate of the camp, he sent liis followers in. 
ITiete were the two bodies of the viscount’s own 
chariots, drawn up on the right and left. 
Those on the left had stood with the horses 
yoked from day-break till mid-day; and those on 
the left had then been similarly harnessed until 
sun-down. Hen Ten was charioteer to the king 
in the body on the right, with Yang Tew-ke as 
spearman; while P*tlug Ming performed the 
same duty on the left, with K'euli Tang as 
spearman. 

‘ On Yih-maou, the king at the head of tht 
chariots of the left, drove out to pursue Chaov 
Chen, who abandoned his chariot, and ran iutc 
a wood, pursued by K'euh Tang, who got hii 
buff-coat and lower garment. [Meanwhile] 
being afraid in the camp of Tsin tliat the tw( 
ofBcers would enrage the army of Ts‘oo, the^ 
had sent some large chariots to meet them 
P'lvan Tang, seeing at a distance the dust raises 
by titese, sent a horseman with all speed to tel 
the king that the army of Tsin was advancing 
The men of Ts‘ 00 , [on their side], were als 
afraid lest the king should enter the army 0 
Tsin. and issued from their camp in order 0 
battle. Sun Shuli said, “Let us advance. 1 
is better that we set upon them than let ther 
set upon us. The ode savs fShe, II. iiL od 
III., 4), 


* t Ua«u Clicn [a son of Cliaou Ch'uen] had 
V’ be niade a minister [in Tsin], and been 


‘Ten large war chariots 
Led the van — 


the object -svas to be beforehand with the enem' 
The ‘Art of War’ [also] says. ‘ Antieipate yoi 


Mmwl. Ue was angry, moreover, at the escape | enen>v. and vou take awnv his heart.’* Le't i 
.1., .!*^ floated the ; press on them.” iVccordingly he hurried on tl 

Tlic cMiriages dashed 


*'*^V*' ' begged to be allowed to go and pto- 
Tl«.s -was refused, but he was 
llowcl to go .and call Ts'oo to a covenant. 

be and Wei E Ivjih wont to the amir of 
•1 s VM t.u tlvetr <evet.\\ nnsVtons. 

Ke'di Ulvt»-ts?o [Kcob K-il 


'b>.'.-«Kr!od spir'ns are gone! 


press < 

army. Tlic eMuriages dashed alomr, and tl 
footmen seemed to fly and so tbey'fcll on tl 
army of Tsin. Uwan-tsro did not know win 
be was doing, but ordered the drums to i 

-u-i -1 . t V' out, “A reward 

in] .sud, ‘‘These 1 those who first recross tberiverr The atmv 1 
If we do not | the centre and the Jhl nrmv strunglcd for'tl 


320 


THE CH'UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VII. 


viscount sent T'nng Keaou and Ts'ae Kew-lceu 
Tfith a message to the marquis Hwuy of T*ang, 
saying, “All unworthy 1 am, and in my ambi- 
tious desires I have encountered a great enemy. 

I acknowledge my offence ; but if Ts‘oo do not 
conquer, it will be your lordship’s disgrace. I 
venture to depend on your powerful influence to 
complete the victory of my army.” WhUe 
sending this message, he ordered P‘wan 'rang, 
vdth 40 of the chariots of reserve, to follow the 
marqms of T‘ang, and to act on the left by fol- 
lowing the 1st army [of Tsin]. Keu Pih, 
(Keoh K‘ih) said, “ Shall we await- their onset ?” 
Ke of Suy replied, “The army of Ts'oo is in 
the flush of its might. If it now collect around 
us, we are sure to be destroyed. Our best plan 
is to gather in our troops, and retreat. We 
shall share the reproach of the other armies, but 
we shall save the lives of- the people.” He then 
placed his own troops in the rear of the retreating 
forces, and retired without being defeated. 

‘The king, seeing his own chariots of the 
right, wished to continue the pursuit in one of 
them; but K‘euh Tang stopped him, saying, 
“You began with this, and j’ou must end with 
this." From this time in Ts'oo tiie chariots of 
the left gut the precedence. 

‘ [In the flight], a chariot belonging to Tsin 
sank in a rut, and could not proceed. A man 
of 'I's'oo told its occupant to take out the frame 
for weapons. After this, it advanced a little, 
and then the horses wanted to turn. Tlie same 
man advised to take out the large flag-stufl', and 
lay it crosswise. When this was done, the 
carriage got out of the hole, when its occupant 
turned round and said to his helper, “ Wo are 
not so accustomed to fly as the soldiers of 3 'our 
gre-at State 1” 

‘ Chnou Ciien gave his two 1 )cst horses to assist 
his elder brother and his uncle, and was going 
back with the others, when he met the enemy, 
and was unable to escape them. He abandon^ 
liis chariot therefore, and ran into a wood. The 
great ofliccr Fung was driving past with ids two 
foils, ami [eatciiing sight of Clien], he told them 
tint to look round. Tliey did so, liowcver, and 
raid, •• 'I'lic old great ofliccr Chnou is behind ns.” 
lie was angry willi them, and made them dis- 
mount, ])ointing to a tree, ami saying, “ Let me 
lind your Ixidles there." lie then gave the reins 
to Chnou t’heii, who thus made his escnjic. 
The oilu-r. lu-xt day, found his sons' bodies at 
tbe sjwit wldeb be lind marked. 

‘ ileiitig !l(xi-l:e of 'IV<m> look Yiiig of Clic pri* 
fotier; and «hen [Ylng's fatlierj, Cliwnng-ts7.e j 
kr.i-x\ St, Ilf ri-i«rni><l to tlu- liatiK-flehl with the | 
!>--'.tSn-rs of his own elan. %Yoo.t>ze of CIroo I 
r.l nrtlng hi* eh.iriojii-r. and many I 
Ilf tlu- lid nnny foflouing him. When- • 
« nr Ii'- drew nut ail arrow, though it S'-t-mctl to 
I— -fir,-!!;;, h.- p*;n-fd it In tin- indn-r of \V«io- • 
1 *?-, till l! »- lut'-r v.-a« «ti-,;ry, and ‘aid. *• Are ' 
J'-'i i’ it li-i'iiii^ fur ymir ron 'f Ainl do v<ni 
gr !,-i- »,.-ir atfi.w.? Will n 1 ).- to 

tt - vidl.w‘ i,{ i!.(. 'I'liTi-,. niar-h';'' 
t t.w f /-l.r.' rvi'.-.i-l, "If I t 

< >■'» t 'I, 1 if ri.;.- t.» ri.'-ivtt iiiiof? 

1 t ' •! 1. t »■, . i-rr-i- il. 1 rani-: 

Jt, . .1 , s-ae;' 

1 ■ ■■ i-" • i !«. *1 ,1 J,, |l,. 

•' • Ill il.-'Kii/-!-..- 


of Tsin. When it was dusk, '‘the army of Ts'oo 
encamped in Peih, ivliile what remained of that 
of Tsin could not encamp anywhere, but kept 
crossing the Ho all the night, the noise of its 
movements never ceasing. 

‘On Ping-shin, the heavy waggons of Ts'oo 
were brought to Peih, and the viscount went on 
to Hang-yung. P'wan Tang said to him, ‘ Why 
should your lordship not signalize your triumph 
by making a mound, and collect in it the bodies 
of the Tsinites so as to form a grand monument ? 
I have heard that succeessful battles should be 
shown to posterity, so that the prowess of them 
may not be forgotten.” The viscount said, 
“You do not know what you are talking about. 
The character for ‘prowessj’ is formed by those 

for * to stay’ and ‘a spear’ and 

When king Woo had subdued Sbang, be made 
the ode, which says (She, IV. i. [i.] VIII.)i 

‘ He has called in shields and spears; 

He has returned to their cases bows and 
arrow's. 

I will seek true virtue, 

And display it throughout the great land, 
That as king 1 may indeed preserve our 
appointment.’ 


He also made the Woo(^^; She, IV. i. [«•] 
X.), of which the last stanza says, 

‘ So he firmly established his merit.' 

Tlie 3d stanza says (see She, IV. i. [Hi.] X. 
This is not now a part of the Woo song). 


‘ We wish to develope tbe purposes [of king 
Wlln], 

And go to seek the settlement of the king- 
dom.’ 


The 6th stanza says (She, IV. i. [iii.] IX.), 

‘ He gave repose to nil the States, ^ 

And there ensued several j'cnrs of plcntj'. 


’Thus military prowess is seen in the repres- 
sion of cruelty, the calling in of the weapons oi 
war, the preservation of the great appointment, 
tbe firm establishment of one’s merit, tlic pviiig 
repHse to tlie people, the harmonizing all [tno 
States], and tlic enlargement of tbe general 
wealtli; and king Woo took care by tliose stan- 
zas ihiii bis postcril}' slunild not forget tins. 
Now I have caused the bones of tlie soldiers ot 
two States to lie bleaeliing on the earth: — ^nn 
net of cniellt’; I displiij' inj* weapons of war 
to awe the States: — thus tinnhle to call them 
in. Cnii-l and not calling in the weapons ot 
war. how ran I preserve the great iipjMiintincnt . 
Ami while still the St:ite of T^in rrimiiii''. how 
r.aii I firmly esinlili-h my merit ? Tlirn* »»<* 
nianj’ things hy whirh 1 oppo'-c wh.it the p'siple 
•Ii-irr, ami how can tlii-y get rrjios-^ rroiii o'c? 
Wiilnnil tin- praelire nl' virtue, striving by f<>rre 
f*'r Miprrmaey among the Stale', how c-m i 
|>ri-«lnrr hariiiony among them}' I Imvr iinoe 
1113 gain from ih*' ji'-ril* ol «)fli»-r<, tin-l fotiii'l 

nil '.ih-ty ill tin-ir ili»i*rt!.-r« ; — III lliin:-’* “f’ 

my gt-ifi, h-ii Hint eiihirg- on-sit of tin- l'.‘ n- f-'* 
"l-aPtl l* l5l--re ill llo-lsl? Not litle ot til-' 
v.rtm— I..-I i!!-.'in,' to »-i:litnri pro>f.--' .•ti'e- h- * 
to ii---, — “l-'t Ini-- I loll Ai foiiiy )•.'!< fi'.’ • 
I.- t n- nii-.i.!} i.-a'm ti re a f--' tf- ’ 

Ij* i •' i' rr-.; ;'ri •'.< e- ,-i -r • i>:- 1 .-i-n •' ■’ 


Xll 


322 


THE CH'UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK YH. 


Thirteenih year. 

'Km 


^ ^ « R © 11 M.%& 

1^4 Jil fijf -Ifc.M •{fe.5r^ IE, ^ ^ t If 

if « it £ B M m S,0.^ 'It 0. 

mmmnm.z •s-aw + 

sft s ^ iffl ffi m. M mM AW. £. *.ro = 
-fi.®:.m Bn A W ZmZ'^. 


^ B.P zznm^ W ■t&At3£ 

XIII. 1 In the [duke’s] thirteenth year, in spring, an army of 
Ts‘e invaded Keu. 

2 In sunnner, the viscount of Ts‘oo invaded Sung. 

3 In autumn, there were locusts. 

4 In winter, Tsin put to death its ffreat officer. Seen 

Hwoh. 


Par. 1. Ivunp-yniif: lia# AVd herein- 

sto.itl tif Ki-u; liiit llio l.ittiT is no doubt the 
corrv-ct rcailinp;. Non boro in tiie Clinin Tsw 
li:i\o wo nny nocoiint ofliustiliiios l>ctwcon Ts'e 
nnd Wei, wiicn-ns from the 4lh year of duke 
Ffuon tborx- seems lu b.nvo l)cen a state of 
cbronic lio'tility l*etwwn Kcu on the one part, 
and L<«i anil Tsv on the otlior fSoo lY. 1;XI. 
r>j. Tsi'-she says tliat tlie reason for tlic invasion 
in tiie text wa*- in.'caiise Keu. dejvndinp on the 
l'r>it<vtit>n of T-iin, would not do service toTs*e. 

I'.ar. V. Tfa-''1ie says. — •'file viscount of Ts'oo 
in\.aiKd Suii}:. lKe,-iu«e it had endeavimred to 
rt h, \ v S a ,1!. J’l’.e stuvrior man may say that, 
in aeo-iuit of! tii- dv.nant of TsdUR-kw. 

i-.'i.-iit h.-;Xi' e-'.'-vj'. d [tiie di«aiiiiTObati'in 
i’: *.! ! _\ t!. - *oj'prv-< •!...) i.f t||,. imme of its 

f 

tV.r .itv" Ji-.* f'T 

V. .;■ 

I’-r « i;..'.! J... s-.!. 

»';• - - f .r 11 - 


and he had since eng:ngcd in other nefarious 
plotting. The Cliuen says: — ‘In niitiimn, U'o 
Red Tcih. at the invitation of Seen Ilwoli, in- 
vaded Tsin, and advanced ns far ns Ts'iii'i. In 
winter, Tsin, to avenge the defeat at reih and 
this advance of tlie Teih to Ts‘ing, laid tlie 
blame of hotli affairs on Swn Ilwoh, and I'Ut 
him to death, exterminating also all the hranchc-s 
of his clan. The superior man may say that 
the nia.xim, “When evil comes on a man, it lias 
licen lironglit on hy Itimself,” found an illus- 
tration in Seen Ilwoh.’ 

n’lie Cliuen appends hero: — ‘In ennsequeuee 
of the dvenant at Ts‘ing-k‘ew, T.“in scnl^ to 
demand from Wei an nrconnt tif its relieving 
Cli'iu. Tlie me:-''cngiT w<mld not go away, and 
said. ‘-If tile offence l>e not l.aid on some onv', 
my m!--i'ia will Ih> fidlowiti np by an army of 
atlaek.” K-niig Tah •.aid. *• If it will Iv of ad. 
vaiit.v;.- to !l:e St.ali-, |»!e.a*.' I.ay tlte Jd.am-'' e:t 
tr.". ’rii.- "r><*!nd t.f eriioiiMti.oc i!i:' lie' in ll ■' 
f.i ■: if ',! fr oi t:;.- p r' -d --I t?.e r; itevl ’el 
-•!: ■!: l.-a* i s’.'d gr.-lf S"l!e t" d<'r-'-'’d 
r. J?':dd:.-f .' tint r'.'tter 'j 


SEXJjen, 


BOOK m 


THE CH‘lI5r TS‘EVr, ^V liil THE TSO CHUEK, 

The marquis of Tsiu iuTaded Ch'ing. 

In auton, in the nintli month, the viscount of Ts‘oo 
laid siege to [the capital of] Suno*. 

There was ^e burial of duke Wan of Ts‘aou. 

In wmter, Ku^-sun Kwei-foo had a meeting with the 
marquis of Ts‘e at Kuh. 


in ««« nan mcnrred the resentment of Sang in 
“ sprmg, K'nng Tai. ilSng^iiioo [See the Chnen on VI. 

etran^ea himself, xrhich the people of Wei is the Woo-srei there], said, 

represented so as to satisfv Tsfa. and e^eane “ clear-sighted, but Sung is deaf, 

[further proceedin'^ fi-om q 4. t messenger to Tsm will suffer no harm, bnt 

jT SiSLe]. They I am s^ to meet -with my death.” The Kng 

< n 4 mng to the States, savins-, Song put you to death, I -will invade 

u^mlerhadahadminister.Tah.-whQhrousht ^ theu introduced [his son], to the 
rT-T-r-^- — ^ “ “‘•uuji;, fang, and -Went ou his joTimey 


— • .•.•iOXyr TTAIU OiUUSllI 

^ peer citv into coEMou -with the great State. 
The nnnister has suffered for his crime, and -we 
venture ta faform yon of if” But considerin<r 
K^ces winch Tat had performed in pacifvt 


Kig State!, thev mre his son Ti with it as if Sung were not a State. If we 

Cf the inmcms'i to 7 ^ "Jeath its measSjger, Ts‘00 is sure to in- 

ia bis ^ ^ contmue 11s, and Sang will perish. In either case 

J- ^ ia.ceris position [as a great oecer].’ to he a State.” Accordinslv, Shin 


death. When the -viscount 
of it, he shooh down his sleeves and rose 
nom his seat. His shoes were bronght to 
UCT -when he had reached the threshold of his 


6 d-*r-» ^ ^ 1 tne n.‘ang-he ^ -^nen ne had reached the threshold of his 

4 .. ^ cid uod the sage's approval of the ^ s^ord was bronght to him outside 

miwicn ir. the words of the text,— ‘the marams chamber; and his carriage 

of Tiim' ThanarcmicoadGctrft?,««r.^^ r^hed^ when he had got to the market- 
m p-a-oc. ard Place taped P‘oo-seu. In autumn, in the 9 th 

c- 7; right te Irid siege to the capital of Song.' 

determined by other m. viL -i. ef ci Knng- 

cccnderatiocs. ^ sim Kwei-foo,— 5eeonX.10. Wang Paon and 

The Chnen savs- t in <t— *r. ptb^ critics strongly condemn Kwei-foo as hav- 

— u., 3. 1C summer, the mo— t- in«T i-jscr. *-i.o « .mr . .. . j- 


1 cf 0—7 T, r^ze, he spoke with him about the affairs of 

1 o. v.......^.lTang Hwan- rejoicing [fa his own position there]- 


' - in •• i.n i-‘co T&v. 


^ ^ ^“Cn to be scheming asainst others. Bnt 
w„en one schemes against others, thev will 
Scheme against him; and when a -whole Stale 

— t _ _ . .... 


j.j. I — . . . _ i cn-e i» by ser.iiiag to it friendly nii*?i-n$ 

t~C S— r an-J 5'.-.— r'"' ofTerinr*. cn which there are 

-r-^. . firthir n-.-:- r-v-* 0/ ~’7 ' dr-.-d thfaei set forth fa the o-ert-rari. 

T*--. I- -jt V. th.-- prince p^h:!r.«.->!r t-j the court reft-he 
™'~'. •. . o- . ...I ' -■ :* rc- atrat 5rat..-j m •h',*r hiv r-'-rv-w*. t!;rn"he a'* 

♦ ^ f '’■i T''r.> ^ r-'-t-'-'d ar,y anno, and mahrs ei-ctsut 

. - , ~ *'•'•. ""'.'Ir f„ ..... ., — rr-<. nt'. i-ren h.-v-.n.-f whtt e'.’ti f 

■• ■ - - 5 .- o, .;■ ' - ’ ..t him. II- a-. I “<t f,- -ihcnr » 

%; r,. • f r C >.fa-:n.rri:n;n.sr.-r. If. ift.-rUir.:; 

^ J ^ ’ •-*• •- ' h-i. h * pr.-'.-nt r- -h rs-'r*. t: U t.-o 

■r-,... ., . . ’ a ' ;'v » »- J- 14 rr-r jo {.,. r-.'ir >■ — «?■- .y 


.Inic •»!> 


326 


THE CH'UE TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK m 


3E ^ mM % ® •!&.« M 7C ^ 

m gi * ® B5 w 


/pf Tii/c/s. ^ /K /nj in ;nj SI «J& 51S5 ^ ”*'br*E]. 

S -a.® ffl l^.;e ».# H.T ^.5ic.E « 2 
If M.*ti! MM 

AM^>z.M 1-1= uro 
K.ja ;e ^ W.^.#r A.W W =t ^ i® § 

g. p » ^ ^ w II ti.^ ^ m.n 

^ S S =t 0.0.:^ «■ mffi i ^ « f • 

^ R II.S: ^ ^ •&.» g 

A « 4 » 0 -Ifc.-tfe -tfc.EJI ^ ^ ftt i 

^ -f-.^.lt.S # tt :2.i5 
m W ^ SI.# * ^«c ^ -Ifc.A 0..^ 15 :fe. 
«^'«ASL«,«=&S 

m :«: g WJ # Th.a: m E ± W 

<&. I6.B5 -m^MZ :§.# 

31 0.P %fli MT^nm + -f- JBM fi 


I 


s 


®. s« if 1- ® ^ #.ft m f.f, 

^ Bff mM ZM &Mm^§3- 
± m3^±. JE.7^^m^ ai.;S3E##g 

S’ ^m± Mr-mm^z ■?• 0 . 1 ^ 1 ?. g> 
mwim z,wKT-^, 


m # A.-t&.SIf- Z 7C 3i.#.jf g 

<:.S K ^.7j- sE ^ -tfe a ja 3E 5B E.ffi 

0.«®. w 15 m.z. 


- . J1 M 5'l' W = a ^ § E 

A.-ai.-a.^- 0 . + #/ nj f - ^ nfe 

VC; ■I'.Vr t%t r-r- — 3»* trt - 5 ^ i^U'- Im 


if| m m 

Wli . — , , „ .- „ 

A H.s^ T® a iSj m,Z K 
^ -JS Si m.M Jjf ?? ■BT. A- Bff 0 . ia W.!k 


iil 7i W. ii.S.ili H 


?i?'ja ®f A. a.® 


Ykm: XV. 


DUKii sni:ux. 


327 


mBm Mr^w 

iS^. ^ MM 
« '#1 fi 
# -a.®® :A: m iffl 

;e a. m 
m ^ 0.® 

Hi 

T' ZTk^ 

+ » 


1!: SS it ft >1^ 
•far ft J^.Z 'a 
r- MM' fi -fft 
iSJli * D ) # 

m m m ft 

Ai * ?!f 
S BE tlf 
it B,m± 
Hii.it ja -fa 


ffi !• f ■ 1: 
li-.-i!i.^ m n 

jpi H.-ffl m ± 
ft ia Jt d:.f(!i 
4^ ffi m 
.-til lilf ^Z^ 

^.fi s- 3* m 
± j.if m-&.z 
•fa tif m m 
.tlf tt fi -T-.B 


/tn 

rii 


s 

fe 


IS 


XY. 1 In the [duke’s] fifteenth year, in spring, Kung-sun Kwei- 
foo had an interview with the viscount of 'JVoo in Sung. 

2 In summer, in the fiftli month, the people of Sung made 

peace with the people of Ts‘oo. 

3 In the sixth month, on Kwei-maou, an army of Tsin ex- 

tinguished the Loo tribe of the lied Tcih, and carried 
Ying-urh, viscount of Loo, back with it to Tsin. 

4 A body of men from Ts‘in invaded Tsin. 

5 The king’s son Chah put to death the earls of Sliaou 

and Maou. 

6 In autumn, there were locusts. 

7 Chung-sun Meeli had a meeting with Kaon Koo of Ts‘e in 

lYoo-low. 

8 For the first time an [additional] tithe was levied from 

the acre. 

9 In winter, the larvie of locusts were produced. 

10 There was famine. 


• 'll Uie end of the conclnd- 

Mg Cinicn of Inst year, tlint the duke was 
p e.nsed with the suggestion of Miing lleen tliat 
nf a friendly mission to the viscount 

is 00. Here we arc told how he proceeded 


aE > ' fe'tng made pence with Ts’oo. 

between States, onl 
® States are given, without tl 
oition of as here;— see X. vii, 1 ; XI.x.l 

But no stress is to be laid on the /I here 

the*£TO^^^r^^'® princes or ministers by 
■ treaty of peace was made. The use t 

^ely a variation of the usual style 

see the gloss of Ying-tah, in I 

sent P®ople o* 

hard tbiw ® announce to TsL 

t® proceed to their rdief. Pih- 
that ^'® •iricients had a 

reaJi, the whip was, it d 

reach the horse’s belly. Heaven is now” 


[the powerj to Ts'oo, nnd we cannot contend 
against it. Strong ns Tsin is, can it resist 
Heaven? Tlicrc nrc tlic common sayings, ‘Tlio 
mind must deternnne how high or how low it 
can go;’ * the rivers and meres receive [muclij 
filth;' ‘the hills nnd thickets hide noxious 
things;’ ‘ the finest gems have flaws ;’ ‘ princes of 
States must [nt times] take dirt in tlicir 
mouths.’ This is the way of Heaven; let your 
lordship wait [Tor another opportunity].” The 
marquis then desisted from his purpose, and 
sent Heae Yang to Sung, to advise [the dnkc] 
not to surrender to Ts'oo, sajing, “Tsin is 
1 raising all its forces, and they w^l [soon] be 
with you.” The people of Ch'ing took him pris- 
oner, and delivered him to Ts'oo, when the 
viscount oSbred him large bribes to induce him 
to convey h message of a contrary character. 
He refused at flrst, but finally agreed to do so. 
He was then mounted on a turreted carriage; 
and having called the attention of the people of 
Sung, he delivered the message ivith which the 
marquis had entrusted him. The viscount was 
■ going to put liim to death, and sent him a mes- 
sage, saying, “ Why did you thus violate the 
promise which you made to me? I do not 
break roy faith with you ;— it is you who have 


328 


THE CH‘UN TS*EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VH. 


cast [our agreetnentj away. Go quickly, and 
receive your punishment.” Heae Yang replied, 
“ I have heard that when a prince gives out his 
command, it is a righteous act which he dis- 
charges, and when a minister receives that com- 
mand, he is bound in fidelity to fulfil it. The 
faithful fulfilment of the righteous command is 
bcneficisd to the State, and he who lays his 
plans ,80 that that benefit shall be secured for 
the defence of the altars is the people’s friend. 
The righteous command does not admit of two 
fidelities ; fiddity does not recognize two com- 
mands. When your lordship tried to bribe me, 
you knew not the nature of a command. I 
came forth with the command which I had re- 
ceived; and though I die, it has not fallen to the 
ground. To die in fulfilling the command is 
my happiness ; — [it will be seen that] my prince 
had a faithful servant. 1 have been able to ac- 
complish my task; — ^though I die, what more 
should I seek for ?” [On hearing this reply], the 
viscount let him go to return [to Tsin]. 

‘ In summer, in the 5th month, the army of 
Ts'oo was about to withdraw from Sung, when 
Shin Se bowed with his head to the ground be- 


would 
le your 

majesty’s commission; and your majesty is 
breaking your word I” The king could not an- 
swer him. His charioteer, Shin Shuh-she, said, 
“ If you build houses here, and send half the 
army back to till the ground, Sung will receive 
your commands and submit to them.” [The 
king followed the counsel], and the people of 
Sung were afraid, and sent Hwa Yuen by night 
into the army of Ts’oo. He went up to the 
couch of Tszo-fan, and roused him, saying, “My 
master has sent mo to inform you of our distress. 
In the city we are exchanging our children and 
eating (liem, and splitting up their bones for 
fuel. Hotwithstanding, if yon require us to 
make a covenant with you under the walls, we 
will not do so, though our city should be utterly 
overthrown. ^Yitlldrnw from us 30 le, and 
then we will accept your commands.” Tsze-fan 
was afraid, made a covenant with Yuen, and in- 
formed the king, who retired 30 k, wlicn Sung 
and Ts’oo made pence, llwn Yuen renialning ns 
a hostage with Ts’oo. The words of their cove- 
nant were, ’’We [of Ts’oo] will not deceive you ; 
do not you doubt us.”’ 

Tar. 3. j3^;— sec on III. G. Wc 

ree fnmi this jvar. that the chiefs of the Loo 
triU.-s had the title of viscount. The Chuen 
relates The wife of Ying-urli, viscount of 
1.00. was an elder sister of diikc King of Tsin. 
Thf isowi r of the trilH> was in the hands of Fung 
Mwx>, who put this Indy to death, and Injured 
o!*,'' o! the vi«CMunt’s eyes. The maniuis of 
T»ln widl'tl to nii.tek the triln*. but the gre.at 
(.Hirer* all ndti'.sl ngniieit such an iiiidiTinking, 
tajiiig tlist } ling Sh'io |>*j<«i’(»r<l three extrnor- 
I'.K.j'.ry (fil.iwti. nt*. an l that 'JVin had Ih-ttcr 


1 ■- e ■ ;,•« I... I,. I,,,,, 

1* t’ St I'.f ll - , I* Iif;. f *.t.TitSi'''S ; • 
! i* jii.n t.-. i;r e.» Ju, 

t * 1 ■ •! (■;. 1-.; fi u-A fc! - 


took away the territory of the chief of Le; his 
fourth, that he dealt so cruelly with the eldest 
daughter of our State; and his fifth, that he in- 
jured the eye of his ruler. His reliance on his 
extraordinary endowments, to tlie neglect of all 
virtue, only increases his guilt. His successor 
will perhaps reverently addict himself to the 
cultivation of virtue and righteousness, so as to 
serve both Spirits and men, thereby streiigthen- 
ing his title to the country; — ;how will it be, u 
we should wait for such an one ? If we do not 
punish the present criminal, but say, ‘Let us 
wait for his successor,’ and then proceed to 
punish him, who may have reasons to allege 
why he should not be touched at all, will not 
onr course be unreasonable ? To rely on one s 
endowments and numbers is the way to rum;— 
Chow of Shang followed- it, and his utter nun 
was the consequence. When the seasons of 
heaven are reversed, we have calamities ; when 
the productions of the earth are reversed, we 
have prodigious things; when the virtuM of 
men are reversed, we have disorders. It is 
those disorders which give rise to the calamities 
and prodigious things, just as the character for 
correctness, when reversed, produces that for 

Jailure [See the ^ 3!: ^ 

Ch.642,"p, art. 1). All these 
things are predicable of the Teih.” 

‘The marquis of Tsin followed this counsel; 
and in the 6th raontli, on Kwei-maon, Seun 
Lin-foo defeated the J^d Teih at K’Suh-leang. 
On Sin-hae he extinguished Loo. Fung fenoo 
fled to Wei, the people of which sent him to 
Tsin, where he was put to death.’ 

Par. 4. There had been no hostilities between 
Ts’in and Tsin, since the invasion of Tsin men- 
tioned in the duke’s 2d year. We do not know 
what led to the invasion in tlie text, tliougii, from 
the Kwoh Yu, Bk. XIII. art. 1, we may suppose 
that Ts’in was jealous of Tsin’s acquisition of tno 
Loo-she. Tlie Cliuen says : — ’ In autumn, in tno 
7th month, duke Hwan of Ts’in invadra 
and halted with his army at Foo-slie. On Jm- 
woo, the marquis of Tsin led a body of troops 
and exercised them at Tsili, to secure 
nexation of the tcrritoiy of the Teih. -He tlicn 
restored the marquis of Le, and had got as Jar 
ns Loh on his return, when Wei Ko dcfcatcu 
the army of Ts'in at Foo-shc, taking prisoner 
Too liwuy, who wns [known ns] tlie strong 
roan of Ts’in. Before this, [Wei Ko’s father], 
Wei Woo-tszo lind n favourite concubine, wlio 
brought lihii no child. Wlion ho wns ill, "t* 
charged Ko that he should marry her to some 
one; but afterwards, wJicn lie bad become vep' 
ill, he told him that he must bury her alive in 
his grave. After Iiis fnilicr's (le.alli, j'O pro- 
vidcil her with a husband, saying. ‘•When my 
father was so very ill, his scn*cs were ilMonler- 
e<l;I will follow the charge lie gave when hi* 
niinil was right." At the liattle of roo-shc, he 
s.iw an oM man who was making ropes of gra'* 
in tho way of 'I’oo Ilwiiy, against winch the 
strong m.-in tript, so that he IVll ami l,ak*ai. 

Ill the night, Ko iln-.aiiit ib.-it thi- oM man •■'(‘I 
til him, “I am the fathi-r of th*' woman wleon 
yi'ft proti.li.il with a >"0 

Voll'iwi.l Mii“ I’tiarg.. wlin-b (oitr faibergaio y'<*l 
wl.rn in liis ^■■|l'll••l, I hn,- th>i» 

\< •I,'*' 


i-.t 


Yej^u XVI. 


DUKE SEUEN. 


329 


Par. 5. is simply = town of Ke ; but Kung-yang has 4 

■M, ‘the Idngs son, Chah.’ Why tlie charac- for and the place would thus be tlie Mow- 
ters'are so inverted it is difficult to say. What low which Ken took from Ke in the 4th year of 
the paragraph relates shows that the court of duke Yin, 

Chow must have been in as disorderly and law- , 

less a condition as the courts of the diffl. States. 


Chah was probably a brother of the reigning 
king. The Chuen says:— ‘ Wang-sun (i. e., A 
grandson of some former king) Soo had a con- 
tention with the chiefs of Shaou and Maou 
about the chief sway in the government, and 
made the king’s son Tsze-tseeh ffhe designation 
of Chah) put to death duke Tae of Shaou and 
Wei, earl of Maou. Afterwards, Seang of Shaou 
was appointed pn liis father’s place].’ 

Par. G. [The Chuen here relates : — 1st, ‘ The 
marquis of Tsin rewarded Hwan-tsze with the 
revenues of a thousand families with whieh 
the Teih ministers had been endowed, and he 
also rewarded SzePih [The Sze Cliing-tsze of the 
2d narrative appended to XII. 4] with the district 
of Kwa-yen, saying, “That I have got the terri- 
tory of the Teih is all o\ving to you. But for 
you, I should have lost Plh-she [Seun Lin-foo ; 
See the Chuen just referred to], Tang-sheh 
Chib, speaking of those rewards, said “The 
words in [one of] the Books of Chow (Shoo, 
V . is. 4), ‘ He employed the employable, and re- 
vered the reverend,’ are applicable to such a 
Msc as this. Sze Pih advised the employment of 
^‘™"E*hang Pih. The marquis confided in him, 
and followed his advice. This may be called a 
.‘intelligent virtue.’ The virtue bv 
wluch king Wan. raised the House of Chow dii 
R® ijeyond this. Hence the ode (She, lU.L 
ode 1.2) says, 


We do not know what the two 
ministers met about, and need not occupy our- 
selves with the conjectures of the critics. 

Par. 8. Tso-she say s : — ‘ Tins enactment was 
contrary to rule. The grain contributed by the 
people should not have exceeded the tithe from 
the system of mutual dependence [See Mencius, 
TTT- pt. I. iii. 6], having respect to the enlarge- 
ment of the people’s wealth.’ It would appear 
then, acc. to this view, that, besides the produce 
of every tenth acre, cultivated by the common 
labour of the farmers round it, and the property 
of the State, duke Senen now required another 
10th from the produce of the other 9 acres 
which every family cultivated for itself. And 
this is probably correct. Erom the Analects, 
XU.ix.3, we learn that, in Confucius’ time, two 
tenths of the produce of the land were levied 
by the State, and it is most likely that we have 
in the text the first imposition of the second of 
these. Knng and Knh, however, think that the 
text only speaks of the abandonment of the 
ancient system of the cultivation of the public 
tenth of the land by the common labour of the 
husbandmen in the dificrent plots around it, and 
the dividing it among them, and then requiring 
from each family a tenth of the produce of its 
allotment. The K‘ang-be editors merely say 
that Hoo Gan-kwoh maintains this view, while 
Choo He preferred that of Too Yu, founded on 
Tso-sbe’s remarks, without giving any opinion 
of their own. 


‘Vast were the gifts of Chow,’ 

Md thus it was that [king Wftn] could per- 
^tuatc Qus fortune]. It is impossible that he 
* 1 'vho follows this w.av.’” 

sent Chaou T‘ung to 
^ Toihatihecourt of Chow, 

wlu.re he behaved disrespectfully. Duke K‘ang 
fcfcl ’ I” tenyrars Shuh of Yuen 

meet with great 
from him.-?]®'"'™ ""‘ts a^ay 

Par. 7. Chung-sun MGeh is the Mann Heen- 
w,ti, whom we have met already!! Kaou 
whli w ^ tninistcr of Ts‘c, whose marriage 
the duke’s daughters is rel.ated in 

» year. Too say® that Woo-low was a 


Parr. 9,10. is the name for the locust 
in the grub or caterpillar state (^[^ Q 

Q ^ cannot understand the 

note of Tso-she on these paragraphs. He says: 
— 111 winter the larvos were produced, and there 
was famine. The language shows thankfulness 
for the luck.’ Acc. to ’I’oo. his idea is that 
those larva* were produced in the winter when 
they could not do much harm ; Wt the winter 
of Chow was only tlie natural autumn of the 
year. In the natural summer there had been a 
plague of locusts; and now towards the end of 
autumn came these caterpillars to devour what 
the locusts had left. There was no ‘ luck ’ to be 
thankful for, but terrible c.alamity, and famine 
was the consequence. 


Sulicenth year. 


l Y, 


330 


THE CI-HUN TS‘EW, AflTH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK m 


^ © W @ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

t J.| « 


za 

0 


ttti 

N 

ii 

B'MHaMM 

'i' ^ Sb ± 


^ »iiB» H ^ iVx i 

«2 « m nx *.±.^fi A.^ i pi.t 


;S 3l5 


3E-16.. 


ife.# 0 « # 
A 


^ >''» 


,. „ ^aA5±s^ 
A X # ip 3®, 5 ■f; J-f 


XVI 


•&Ji 3E i 

B>M 2: 

^ ^ 'S 

1 


ll> 

2 


JiS 

Jl •lfi..0.i<K.II ?.f . 

A 
0 


K # % « B # @ 
;<: A A.0. 


AW^ 

f.i i.ttS.^i 


ga 

S . 


dis. of Kc-tsih 


*-* !;;;;' 'T* fa 

A. 

In the [duke*s] sixteenth year, in spring, in 

first month, a body of men from Tsin extinguisiiecl 
the Keah and Lew-yu tribes of the Red Teib. 

2 In summer, the' archery-court of [king] Seuen at Ch ing- 

chow -was set on fire. 

3 In autumn, the duke’s eldest daughter, who had been 

married to [the viscount of] T‘an, returned to IjOO 
[divorced]. 

4 In winter, there was a verj^ plentiful year. 

‘ Be fearful and cautious, 

As if approaching a deep abj'ss, 

As if treading on thin icc,’ 

arc descriptive of a good man in a high 
When that is the case, there are no Pf®!’*® , 
the State trusting to luck. ‘ When _ 

many people trusting to luck,’ the , 

saying goes, ‘ that is unlucky for the S • 
niat is applicable to a time when there are 
good men.’” _ 

Par. 2. Kung-yang has for 
both Kung and Kuh have for Tso-sht 

says that in all accounts of fires, denotes 

^ »»* 


Par. I. The Kunh-she and tlic Lew-yu were, 
after the Loo-shc, the principal tribes of the Bed 
Teili ; the fonuer h.iving their site in the pres. 


dep. Kwang-p‘ing, 


Cliili-le, while tliat of the second, was in the dis. 
of T'nn-lGw (■}!£ ), dep. Loo-gnn, Shan-sc. 

Tlie Clinen mentions another tribe, — that of the 
I'oh-sliin, whicli appears to liavc been a branch 
of the Lew-yu. On the extinction of these 
trilw*, all tile territorj’ of the Red Tcih came 
into the i><i««os'i(in of Tsin. 

'Hi'- Cinn-n s.nys: — ‘In spring. Sre Ilwtiy of 
Triri 1<<1 n foriv. and extingni“ho<l the Keah 
tril- of the i:-d Tcih 


nml al-ii the trihes of I that the fire was c.iu«cd by men, and that 

’ • ' . ... 1. !a the same 

of 


r. 


-• Afn 

if 'Ir.'-; slj ii;;,, 'I'**,!,. 

< 'I »*.; 1 . •'ll ! , : 7'1 t!:it 

' t V '■ (? ■ ! I ! <;. :i i-.ii d.-t.'sp. 

; ! . ' :j 1- . if ti..- »>.';• • 

t • -• n ^ •; fi • 


. . , — 

ti"f..!-,I. Kiiru'.y.ing atnj, ' 
ib th 

l -i! U. 

»!t 


i< n.’i in til ' It 


r.-eently, 

.aning f>f I 


‘ith'-r *i;'ii!((e.itirin,'i< ni>’*' vin 


*.* » 


j I. " I r’-’-.d' 
^ '■if::;- ; tv t 


f 


]■! f' K- 


ti. 


ykab xvn. 


DUKE SEUEN. 


331 


taincd. Seuen vras a distinguislied king, and 
migM'weilkave left a court or pavilion at Ch‘ing- 
ciiow, called by his uaiuc. 

Par. 3. T'an,— seelV.l. "Wlien the duke’s 
daughter "was married to the earl of T'an, vve 
are not told. "What is related in the itli year 
shovrs that there were friendly relations between 
Loo and T'an; but Tso-she says that the lady’s 
coming back to Loo here was in consequence of 
her l^ing divorced, or scut away from Ts'an 

(hi 4)- 

[The Ghuen appends here; — ^Ist, ‘ In conse- 
quence of the troubles about [the earls of] 
Shaou and hlaou [See p.5 of last year], the 
royal House was again thrown into confusion. 
Wang Sun-^oo fled to Tsin, by which he was 
restored.’ 2d, ‘In winter, the marqius of Tsiii 
sent Sze Hwuy to pacify the royal House, when 
king Ting feasted him, duke Seang of Tuen di- 
recting the ceremonies. The meat was brought 
in cut on the platters. Woo-tsze (Sze Hwuy) 


privately asked the reason of this arrangement; 
and when tlie king heard that he did so, ho 
called him, and said, ‘Mr. Ke(^^ was Hwuy’s 
designation), have you not heard this ; — when 
the king feasts the princes, the animals are 
brought in, not cut up; but when he entertains 
thdr ministers, the meat is served entup on the 
platters. This is the rule of the royal House.” 
When Woo-tsze returned to Tsin, he examined 
all its statutes [affecting entertainments], to re- 
gulate correctly its various rules.’] 

Par. 4. The critics cannot be content with 
accepting this paragraph as the simple statement 
of a fact by way of contrast to the sufiering in 
the last quarter of the previous year; but cast 
about to find some moral reason for the record. 

See on H. iii. 10, where we have for ‘a 

good year.* Here we have ‘ a very 

good year.’ 


Seventeenili year. 

- 1 PI -t nM 

* i fel 1 

.^4 f. 


4-, 

< 2 ^ 


IMS 


m 

^ I't i ® t t.s ^ iH 


1 i i-s f. I'l S ^ ^ tt i i 

f i' A i'i'i'S i: ^ f i A « + 

I i til © i.i 1 1 i I: i 1 S t + 


THE CHTIN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEIf. 


BOOK TH. 


« =!■ ^.© ZM 

mMM.m % ^ 

■& B W U S. A 

9Az,mm.^K^ 
^.ja -e n a.m ^ 

0 <& f: g, ja ^ ^ ra ^ ^ 

S J® :?: 35 # M il*?S.3i5= H.®;$h 

® 'If ^ 

W m. t ^ ^.fir T- # a, 

H. jfL M' it.# Hf iff fi/ ® # 0. ffi.li.^ 

f:§ ISSfL**. 

# f ^ K ^ M ^ #c mr^m 

S.ii.^.ia#^lll.e 
= -t'J ^ w ® a 'W 0M,m % 

B, '?'.^*#0.0. 

&: ® 0 ^ 


* m. t ^ ^ :?? # a. 

H. jfL >)t it,# ,# iff fi/ ^ # 0. ffi.li.^ 

f:§ ISSfL**. 

# ^ ZM 

BZ n;2^|5g#.^ ;2.ii.^.ia # ^ ffi.e 

■‘^"S § f ‘S §-*f ^ W ® a 'W ^ 

B, ^'.^*#0.0. AMmBWikrn-^. 

&: W.%^- ® 0 ^ 

5 VII. 1 In the [duke’s] seventeenth year, in spring, in the king’s 
first month, on Kang-tsze, Seih-go, baron of Heu, 
died. 

2 On Ting-we, Shin, marquis of Ts‘ae, died. 

3 In summer there were the burials of duke Ch'aou of 

Heu, and of duke Wan of Ts'ae. 

4 In the sixth month, on Kwei-maou, the sun was eclipsed. 

5 On Ke-we, the duke had a meeting with the marquis of 

Tsin, the marquis of Wei, the earl of Ts'aou, and the 
viscount of Choo, when they made a covenant to- 
gether in Twan-taou. 

G In autumn, the duke arrived from the meeting. 

7 In winter, in the eleventh month, on Jin-woo, the 
duke’s younger brother, Shuh-heih, died. 


» .in ’' I j I }y^ '. !}!■ 1 * ‘.v sftor Kwi ••y.iuo’j, its-1 ' T'in h.ivirit’ Hi'rit Kr^jJi K*i!i t» roflKiri* if:'.- 

tfAi r; ... tijn n it. Tl.i* v.’a* f.i , r:.Tiri. ’ Tr'o to nttfij'! n m':' •{««;.', K’ln? 

> X K< .'■ • K.;. ('y\ yV ;, f f !’•..., '.iTi-mTitirs **'•* f.n.l lii-r J\, 


•r '.fy ,.. . i;.;. ,.t t!-... T kIjs ' • '*•* ‘""'tlifr r.n.J h^r r.'t'T:'nni» ij/jj; 

T’ , J1-- ft’ I , ; '■■■»• t— . 1 * • ♦ifst.'v ■ -• !»'» a «,-«r:ai.“ *'> tj;;** 

-y-Z ... i ’ ■ ■■ t!. j f- th-cnv-.v. -5-* ••='>' 

. . , . . . , iz * : li;.- }. t-.t!-- of K" !< K'.^i »' K« i"-’ 

•, '• .' ■ '■’■ •'•■' ft- -Mr;., -rr I ,r. r. 

>■— j’.?. i i-. 1 r. tc.-.!. {» -nos i!:Sf -f5 


- s 


lbab XVII. 


DUKE SEUEK. 


333 


returneillnmselffirsttoTsin.tnnltinpc Ewan lung- | 

leu wait behind till lie should have pmctlnng 
to report from Ts‘e, at»d charging liim not to 
bring him any word till he had got, some charge 
against it. On his arrival [at Kcang] he askim 
that Ts‘c might be invaded, which_ tiie marquis 
rcfvised. He then begged leave to invade it w ith 
his own adherents, which was also denied him. 

‘[By and by], tlie marquis of Ts'e sent Knou 
Eoo, Gan Joii, Ts'ac Chnou, and Knn-kwoh Von 
to the meeting which had been called; of whom 
Eaon Koo fled back to Ts'e from Lecn-yti. The 
meeting was held in summer at Twan-taou, 
when it was resolved to punish the disaffected; 
and a covenant was made at Kcuen-ts'oo, to 
which the officers of Ts'e were not admitted. 
The people of Tsin seized and held Gan Joh in 
Yay-wang ; Ts'ae Chaou in Y uen ; and San-kwoh 
Yen in YTttn. Enn-hwang of Mcaoti [This 
was a son of Tow Tseaou of Ts'oo, who had 
taken refnge in Tsin, after the events related 
in the Chnen after YU. iv. 6] was sent to have 
an interview with Gan Hwnn-tsze; and on 
his return, he said to the marquis of Tsin, 
“Wliat crime is the officer Gan chargcahlo 
with? Formerly, the States all served your 
predecessors, as if they could not be prompt I 
raongh in doing so. [Sow], they all s,iy that , 
the ministers of Tsin do not treat them with 
gwd fmth, and, therefore, their minds arc dis- | 
affected. The marquis of Ts'e was afraid he | 
wonla not be received courteously, and ^d not , 
come to the meeting, but sent four of his officers 
to attend it. Some of his attendants tried to stop 
his doing so, saying, ‘If your lordship does not 


On the force of the ‘together (pJV in 
account of this covenant, the critics seem to 
differ, .'ome holding that it indicates the ‘ com- 
mon' purpose of the States to punish Ts*o, 
others their common opposition to Ts'oo. Tho 
K*nng-hc editors would c.'ctcnd the rocnnlng to 
both tho.se objects. 

(The Cliuen appends here:— 1st, *In autumn, 
in the 8th month, tho army of Tsin returned.* 
2d, ‘ Fan Woo-tszc [S/e liwuy . At first he was 
invested with Suy and is thence call Sny 

Woo-tszo; afterwards ho received the city of 
Fan. which became tho surname of hi-s descend- 
ants] being about to withdraw from the public 
service on account of his ago, ho called to him 
piis son] \Yfin-lsze, and said, “ Sech [The son’s 
name], I have heard that they are few whose 
satisfaction or whose anger rests on its proper 
object, while with many the feeling passes to 
other objects. Tho ode (She, II. v. ode IV. 2) 
says, 

‘If the king were to be angry [with 
slanderers] 

The disorder would probably be quickly 
abated. 

If he were to show his joy [in the good], 
The disorder would probably quickly 
cease! 

Tims a superior man’s being either made pleased 
or angry leads to the stopping of disorder. If 
that be not stopt, it goes on to increase. Ter- 


mrc « Tt wesson- liups Kcoh-tszc wishes to bring the disorder he 

b s. At was on this account that Kaou-tszc is producing to an 


ran aivay at Leen-yn. The tiiree other officers, 
‘That will destroy the friendship 

?W return [than do that],’ On this account 

suffering. If 

we had received them well, it would have been 
Bnt encourage others to come to us. 

holdinn'ft wrong in seizing and 

pSvem m f tried to 

Eahi advantage can 

as to persisting in the wrong, so 

only ™ they came on? We 

for^iis 'rith an e.vcnse 

the SlaSv "t to frighten 

On this 'riio come to ns?” 

gently Min rie“ted Gan-tsze 

, and allowed him to get awav ’ 


an end by an invasion of Ts'e. 
H'he do not succeed in that, I am afraid he will 
increase the disorder. I will declare myself too 
old, and let him obtain his wish, which may 
perhaps lead to the dispersion [of the present 
evil]. Do you follow the other officers, and be 
careful of your conduct.” On this he asked 
liberty to retire on the ground of his age, and 
Keoh Heen-tsze became the cluef administrator 
of the government.*] 

Far. 7. Tso-she says that Shnh-heih was a 
full brother of the duke, and then he ^ves the 
following canon : — ‘ All the full brothers of the 
eldest son, while their father is alive, are called 
Kung-tsze (duke’s sons); and when he is dead, 
Kung-te (duke’s brothers). The appellation 
“ younger brother ” always denotes a full bro- 
ther of the ruling duke.’ 


Eighteenth year. 

-t E 


* 


•K 

f 


.+■ 


m 


^ 1 

3i,feA 


K s.<a ^ ^ 
z.^ ^ » 0 

WSfSdEjft 

&^scz% 
?< m PI =» g.« =^s,^ 

a ® #f- %m ei 

@ #.%• A ■& s ^ ^ 

wjn ^ -» MZ ffl. 

1± - ^ 

Z 5?.33i « 0. # <&■ tfo 

•&.= M.tR # ® Jf 

fi « iS « W,W W 
m iH ;S.0.® ^ m. m, 

tnMif-MM m 

m^mx± w» T 

5¥^^^n#J®. A= m 


U M.M It ^ 
A^w.«.0. 

ill in ® A 
^ m si.-t' 

^ ^ 
illjili.^.ft W 
Ji0;^ MM. 
e li! 115^51^ 

M m.m,^ 
X W.M m ^ 
m m.% ft. 
0 


IS ? 


XVIII. 1 In the [duke’s] eighteenth year, in spring, the marquis 
of Tsin and Tsang, heir-son of Wei, invaded Ts‘e. 

2 The duke invaded Ke. 

3 It was summer, the fourth month. 

4 In autumn, in the seventh month, an officer of Glioo 

murdered the viscount of Tsang in his capital. 

5 On Keah-seuh, Leu, viscount of Ts'oo, died. 

G Kun"-sun Kwei-foo went to Tsin. 

7 In winter, in the tenth month, on Jin-scuh, the duke 

died in the State-chamber. 

8 Kwei-foo was returning from Tsin; but when lie got to 

Sang, he fled to Ts‘c. 


Par. 1 . Tin: Cliiscn »ay.« : — ‘ Wlu'n tlie Invail- 
Ir.? ortr.tc* Iti'J rv'a<'lictl YunR-kuh, tlic m.iniuis 
cf TiV l;a-I a rjc.'tin^' vslth tl:o nianjui* of Tfin, 
a»hi-n tU<-y tns/K* a covenant In TiJntr. the fortm-r 
eiTv.-i?!.: that hi» »')?; Ki-an-H* »hiiulil po to T»5n 
a tm thU t!:>- artny of T»in return, 

r'l. er. S T**s-- an 1 Nati-kwoli Yvn n'.aile 

a;.‘ I ••■Y t jT.V-* I 

I! .. *1 th'-r-kt l!il« iovsii'-a of T«V | 

vn l — US •;• f J K>- *i K'lh, !■> t^TAlify llU ! 
r- » a.-a;-*! iv.s*. I'tttc Tl..' ' 


ctlitora arpne that it vns a ptihlic 

tilt* part of the niarquis of 'IVin to pimj'h * * 

bceau.'o its nuirquis lin<l kfpt away , f 

nuH;tltip at Twan-taou. Certainly the 

the jvjwer of Ts'oo was mainly owinp to » ’ 

ftantlinp aloof from Tsin as tlte chief anionp t *- 


norliiini States. 

Pisr. 3. n'l'*' app-r.-is 

»«nini< r, the duke ••■nt to t“ 

ef an army with iep to Int?.-! -Y • J 


Yeah XYUl. 


DUKE SEUEX. 


Par, 4. Kuli-lcnng has ^ for Acc. to * 

Tso-sho, is the character employed to 
denote the murder of the prince of n State hy 
some one of another State, just ns in* 
dicates that the perpetrator was one of the 
prince’s own. subjects. Tsang,--seo V.xlv.2. 
In V. xis. 4 wo have an account of a terrible 
outrage by the people of Choo on a former prince 
of Ts5lng. W aug TL*il\-kwan(y^/^^]) thinks 

that by in the text we should understand 

the^'^, * thevisconnt of Choo ;’but this seems 

inconsistent with the use of the character 

i!A. however, may denote— * a party of 
men from Choo.’ 

Par. 6. Here for the first lime we have the 
^tli of one of the viscounts of Ts’oo recorded. 
His burial, however, is not mentioned, and there 
would have been a difficulty in recording it, ns 
the deceased viscount must have then received 
me title which he claimed of ‘king.’ The 
thuen says;— ‘Inconsequence of the death of 
tong Chwnng, the army [The help of which Loo 
had asked] did not come forth. Afterwards 
^0 arailed itself of an afmy of Tsin [SeeVlII. 

m consequence of which Ts'oo had the 
mwting and covenant at Sbnli (VIII U. 10 ].’ 
rwn of this visit is given in the 

uen; Kuiig-suu Kwei-foo was a favoutUo 


with the duke, whose elevation was due’ to 
[Kwei-fbo’s father], Scanp-chung. ^Yisl»nR tO ^ 
remove the throe clans descended from duke 
Hwan, and thereby increase the power of the 
ducal ilonsc, he consulted with the duke, and 
went on a friendly mission to Tsin, hoping to 
accomplish his object by means of the jicoplc of 
Tsin.’ 

Par. 7. See on III. xxxii. 4. 

Par. 8. The Chuen says * In winter, on tho 
death of the duke, Ke Wfin-tszc [Kc-snn Ilfing- 
fbo] f.aid in the court, “It was Chung who made 
us kill the son of the proper wife, and set up the 
son of another, so as to lose the ^cat hcl|ier wo 
might have calculated on.” Seucn*shuh [Tsang 
Hcu; son of Tsang "Wfin-chung, or Tsang-sun 
Shin in lll.xxviii. G], was angry, and said, “Why 
did you not dc.al with him at the time? '^^’1Int 
oiTcncc is his son chargeable with? lint if you 
wish to send their clan away, allow me to do it." 
Accordingly he drove tho Tung-mun clan out of 
the State, 'rsze-kiia had then returned from 
Tsin as far ns to Slliig. He there cleared n 
space of ground, and raised a tent on it, whero 
he delivered the account of his mission to his 
assistant, [that it might be tr.an8mittcd to Loo]. 
Having done so, he took off his upper garment, 
hound his hair up with sackcloth, went to tho 
plnco for it and wept, gave three leaps, and left 
the tent. He then fled to Ts'e. Tlie style of tho 
paragraph, — Kwci*foo returned from Tsin," is 

commendatory of him.’ Pot Kung and Kuli 


have 


Tho place was in Loo. 


BOOK VnL DlKE gh-tkg. 


First vearl 


-t i M. 

M # 


— *%• 


M 


0 


m 

IE 

T 

m 


n 


Vi/ 


< 1 ^ 

g Iff 

-i&'o 'fio 

.-. ® ^.^.B B.-f& W ^ _, 

® ^ M g 

ffi ^ f? I!c.m i3 ^ g. 
A# H.ajg 
^ 36 S ^ ^ 1. 5* 
..¥.r. 3K j'j.^ a 1 £ f ' 
= M S^.Sff ^.s s 
=F- 

In his first year, in spring, in the king’s first < month, tlie 

duke came to the [vacant] seat. 1 

In the second month, on Sin-vcvr. %ve buried oar- ruler, du’ric 

.*• • • • 1 • 


X 

ti.S SM * © 

^ ^ W m.MM A 
K A w H.^ ^ 
^ ® ■& 
^ ^ It. 

m p 

® jij< 

=t tf %. 

I. 1 


/r 


beuen. 

Ti'.ere v.t.= no icc. 


In the third month, tjic A*v> and b’nfT-coat or -linance 
made. 

It; snTr.r'.'-r. T«a:;g-st:n Hc-ti and the marquis of^Tcni made a 
c in rhdh.-keih. | 

In r.utn.mn. ?'',•■ k;!’,2'~ annv r.-ri' di-rraf'-.-fid’v i -U.**. ■'•t-.-d h;' 

' • • { ''• ■ 

I • « • 


YEA.R 


duke 


337 


r.Trr-nir4 


MuhKeangCi 


^ i” f O"; “‘ 

teonl«t»tH««*>^>’'‘““'«“'™'“ \th»».m«!imaitok that ' 


“HU first year sync^'-'""’*^ 
king Ting 

iBiu -, tke m of K«ing of T s-e , jr^.. t 3 WconTributed 

of Muk ® 1 1 ^nr-horse Ind 3 oxen; a «•«» or 64 

mailed soldiers, and 72 footmen. P'® 
ordinance levied the contnbutmn of a »««», /«>« 


Jied tire people ia th® \™fas 


^U^st1^a?^yn’5:ro& Vrtk tke ink of stated 

a.6 Tins cE® i «» m ™a life ^ ll- 

Tsin; tlic fithtf K'ing (fc^;) of Ts'e; tire lOth \ text slronldbe “A l1?JS-uT;r 


Ts'ae; tire 15tlr of Seang of Chfing; the 
of Seuen (*#) ^s'aon; the 9th of 


Bth _ 

Wing (#) of Chfin; the 47th of Hrran of 
E.e-, the 21^ of "Wan of Sang; the 15th of Hwan 
(j|g) of Ts'in ; and the 1st of Shin, king Knng 

Par. 1. SeeonVI.i.l. 

Pat. 2. This interment seems to have been 
tegular;— five months after the duke’s death. 

Par. 3. The 2d month of the Chow year was 
t\ie 12lh montli of Hea’s,— the last month of 
the natural winter. The season must have been 
one of unusual warmth, which is the reason 
why we have the record. 

fTi\e Cliuen appends here;— ‘In the spring, 
the marquis of Tsin sent Kea of Hea [See the 
Cbucn introduced at VI. dii. 13 to make prace 
between the Jung and the king ; and duke Seang 
of SUen went to Tsin to express [theking’s^ ac- 
knowledgment of the service, Duke K'ang of 
Lew, however, wished to take advantage of the 
Jungs’ being thrown off their guard and to 
attack them. Shuh-fuh said to him, “You 
will be violating the covenant, artd doing de- 
spite to the^ great State; — you are sure to be 
defeated. To violate a covenant is inauspicious; 

^ do despite to tbe great State is unrighteous, 
bcitbor Spirits nor men will help you in such a 
^urso; and how can you expect to conquer?” 
Ine duke did not listen to the warning, but 
pweeded to invade tbe Maou Jung; and in the 
« wtonth, on Kwei-we, he received a great de- 
teat from tile Scu-woo tribe.’] 

1 ar. 4. Tso-sbc says that this ordinance was 
-bWu ^''® pmpcndmg] difficuilics 

*1^ nature of the ordinance he 
sajs notume. liia-n i.!. 


aS’ We ^nuot suppose that the ordinnuco 


in the text was so extreme and oppressive, 

Hoo Gan-kwoh, going on a Mnversation be- 
tween T‘ne-tsung of the T'ang dynasty and Ina 

minister Le Tsing 4^), thought that 
whereas a fc‘ew had formerly contributed 18 
footmen, which formed 1 kSah, the number was 
now increased to 26, the the whole 

teen thus sending into tlte field 100 men along 
with Us chariot. This view has been very 
generally followed; hut recently, Wan bze-ta 
of the period K‘ang-he, suggested 

the view that the ordinance had respect simply 
to the mailed soldiers of the chariot contributed 
by a teen, increasing their number from tliree,~ 
the charioteer, the archer on the left, and the 
spearman or lancer on the right — to four, and 
leaving the number of the footmen unchanged. 
Sometimes there were 4 men, however, in the 
chariot as we le.arn from the Chuen on the defeat 
of the Teih at Heen, in the 11th year of duke 
W6n; and this he thinks was made the rule at this 
time in prospect of hostilities with Ts'e. See 

aL-P-b- 


the I 


X* contemplated an in- 


i". t' e passed the ordinance 

r« tl «s means of aefencc. So 

, -> agreed; but even Mann ac 


Par. 5. Tsang-sun Heu, — see the Chuen on 
VII.xviii. 8 . Ch‘i\i-keih was in Tsin; but its 
situation has not heen more particularly de- 
termined. Tso-she says ; — ‘ [Loo] had heard that 
Ts'e was about to come forth with an army of 
Ts‘ 00 , and in summer made this covenant with 
Tsin.’ Chaou P'bng-fei supposes, what is very 
likely, that the confederation against Ts'e, of 
which we have the issue in par. 3 of next year 
■••as now agreed upon. ’ 

Par. 6 . 'pie Maod-jung (Kung and Knh 
have ^ had their site in the south-east 
of the pres. dis. of P‘ing-luh (2p Keae 

Chow, Shau-se. The defeat here sustained by 
the king’s troops is that mentioned in the Clmen 


Vr-vl— Maou ae- ^terpar.S. too Tu says it is «corH^ n^w 


338 


THE CH'UN TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VIH. 


Par. 7. [The Chuen relates here : — ‘ In prin- 
ter, Tsang Seuen-shuh [Tsang-sun Heu^ gave 
orders that the military levies should he made, 
the -walls all -well repaired, and the instruments 
of defence provided, saying, “Ts‘e and Ts'oo 
are in bonds of friendship, and -we have lately 
made a covenant with Tsin. Tsin and Ts'oo 


ate striving for the presidency of covenants. 
The army of Ts‘e is sure to come [against us] ; 
and though the people of Tsin invade Ts‘e, 
Ts'oo will go to its relief : — ^thus both Ts'oo and 
Ts'e will together attack us. "When we see our 
diflSculties and make preparation for them, they 
may he tesolved.” ’] 


Second year. 


339 


ft- 

®. 

» J9. 

iii 

® ft 

®. 


€ 


Ybar-II. duke CIWNG.. 

■ f |5 W @ ^ 

A.A.A,A.f. 

^ jLxK/k^^ 

. 11 * fts 

A. A. A. A. 

«.T ia.fr ifc.s a ffi ® ^ 0. 

It :§ mM «.®.- 

19 A m,^M ^ A.Il! Z,A -f-.T ® H » ^ 

ib.# # # 0.95 A.m m m> 

S.S A 0 .il.A m,:s &M m 

0 jf wi m m-m A.-a.^ zmm ^ js ® * « 

g -f if BJS.Z-Z in tr.n -i-.l^ Bff 9K 

# W ;s: A W I'J 0 m e i 9 S #■. w.ili. 

^»4 

^ ^ SIS ;<:.^ ^ mM stin mm, 
T.-f ^ '4» -feis # fit ^ ^ It.® S6.^. Ijg 
•i..^'gB2S:ss:.#a:s.ja M ft S.wJM re.^ 
zu^nzm ^tam j®^: 
99.# nr ^ssei 

0 ji 1®.® -fe ^ in It a "s gt. j- m tt.a. 

A ^ ± A; W ft « H fj -s- S 

1 H.K <:.?:. A ti a.ft ^ A «. -f® gt ft 

® ft -R « A ®. ^ m a ««: 

£ ja 0.® 9ZW »J ft ^ tt « 

^ W tt.9f «. i K ^ « ^c.-^ff .ft n 

ftJaa.WWinft 


a « ft Af M ft f ^ iiii It. A t. 

«l!.ft^£A.^AI^ ©PJfIftft. ® 


i® A 
Jt.ffi 
^>1S 

a®. 

± .§, 
MM 
m.K 

H0 
0 <:. 


Y£AK II. 


DUKE CIMNG. 


341 


MM My2! -b Z.X' 

# -iii.ig.^ ® ^ # MM If * m 5® 

# if I# # ^ * W W B.# ?# IS® if :S a fp 

fc=t lf:t? r1 rC .A-r* A-v« « =g l<» ^1% ■._& •»-> _i» ^ V 


» m & 


^ -s iz:f »~»i^ !-••» — ^=» rs^ 

A m B.M ikn.iii^mm.iS3im t.pS^ 

s.i fi m.H m if m0 « I'ft IK w i ± ± ^ 
P.75 m 5tt ^ i p.w -fe §, in « a.;^ 4 
« jh.-^ .i = S.s a.I 

S ^ S f S f i ® ^ f >1 f Si « t?ff 


-»i2 T?/V /7I /5C jw» • inc , ._ ^ 

m.z:£ m,m 

f ^ X 1 1-t f i S ^ 3E fl: ? 

T E a H ^ M <: I ^ h.#‘ 

:Sr. tJ HH W A- -nb, ^ ^ ^ ^ -tb ^ ^ Tt! 


-- fT * J4i JA R Ifur "TT? "n ►•v— %— r J!>a _*^a -.^2: 


r-*-# -1^ I — I IXV 

^ A Ifc.'n.A ^ |i?.]E, 

« W.'g « -J- « w ^ m 

fe'i'i S M i‘ 


* ITCi^iPVS 
•r:^ 


jjSR ?|V b>k 


0.5 iffi a a S 
^ & iSk :S:sS 5 

im ^ =H W •*« "65 =tBr -i. »L ^ •£? to 

££s p 


S5 H 

4Ui> B 


5 |•S■f •il-’i t i i*^# ‘i-i ro « 


:kM 

2 g f .a g:. 

S ill 


liniSSfXroi 


? I:-® '•t -a 


842 


THE CHTJK TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHHEH. 


BOOK VIH. 


*.© m * 

SEji *.* ^ St 1.^ ikM mmm 0./’. 

i ^ I S.ffi $n Si * mM E * * 

U WiMM S m z 
■fe.^ ?§: T s ® s » FM * 

ff ^ iB.ja # m. 
0.0.-f-W-t6..l4.0.i|5*^^ 
^ W # # RiJ 0.^. iU Z/JCM. 
m ^ A.* m. w 15 ^ ffi 

«i] ^.s s.* zmmzmB. 


w SAJa «: ^ 
A.® m mM 0 
St M ^ T 
ft ^ li ^ M. 


ja 0.AM s 
IS M i i?.ii a 
M.)t W. S <&• 
mas m^z9^, 

A 

1^-0® ^.la 

^.3? ;S J. 5|fe # 

a ft 3fe m,0. 

Si ^ in 
pj « iJiS.A 

mstm^» 


^.St 


g.*.H.0.T 
E 13 = Si # W. 
^ s M,-§ 

mmw 

« *.ii T^ m, 

^ — ’^.in ft 
(S' S H it A 
tiSjg.in A 3F 

^ t ^.=E 

■??! ?i:i liSl fiili ® 

H?x ^ at M ^ 

® ;<:.K.Rn M, 
JlS =^.i?n ^ m 
ZM ?f W .# 
la fi® jfl \:!f 'S 
m a ^.s.iii 
isi.m.Ti m T 
jH jj£ A iiff I?-. 
k/a ;3.^ 


"W ^ M 
z^ 
^• 
^ifc D- 
f.#5.0. 
«ii-e® 

ll'l. 

^ZB 
4<Pfli A 
^in -Ife.S 

ja 


# 0.^ §. 

^ ig {ii.3f Bff gj f 

•16,.# ft ^ SS -fS f 

M W.X ^ iji 

JS.ft 

fi ft =S.W.-ffi,.@ 
« S,Z ® ^ ff ft 
;e ja i:..® xtf' -fe -s 
@ E a 2E wiF (f ;2. 
•E.T 3f ?f ^.?.0. 
W W.f® ^ 3E ft £ 


asz: 


0.^ 

mz^ 

nS "56. 

■m.E ® 
± sr# 

M;^J li 

■16.# 

fl? 

-(■7 ?£ fllll 
;/J !S 
^ JZ.« 


^ A ja JL K ft # 

^.® * # » m -(6. 

Ji. ii ft i?.x3c.^' 
g® ft -(fc.MI.sf » ^ 
^ A 2Si a #■.# ^ 
hM A.ft.E if lit 

»j ^ ft i? i 
@ ^ A ^ t a 
^.a?i .R a 0.^' f 
ffli 0 I. 

fff iK ft '|i f{ ft I 
Vif.?if a *c /'.ft L'E 
& ffJ JZ ®e f? S'i I’l; 
& ZM gig ^ 1 ^>1 
ft 3E n.p; 


U- 


DUliE CH‘LSG. 


343 


T "(S iSi $ S 5!l>^ ^ © ifff IM.© ^ ^ ^ £‘”^ 

ii m 6ii) rnM^m » i ^ i ^ 5 @ f -S-f § ^ 

g.f f g.f f 

a ^ il m ® §®.g g « g f f 

1 = * -ffi.- II f! $ ® 0r ^ # g-S>$ S f S 

i i'i i ^ 1 4 ®.is 

zM « « 5£ 4.^ l-S':^'# S ?‘S'$ 3‘ 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ feU + g ® ?| lS‘m’^ 

^ 53 -S I « A :§ g f 1.^ f 1 i 


0.A a #c ^ 


#.3t 


~F* BS =#>■ 


W4 % ro * w s.| g * $ ^ ^ t>$ i 

•tfi..S ii I ^.® a.:s.® ^.-i.*.^.®.^ g.7C. 


i.i®.± H #F » ® la ^ w 

XTJ» r » - V .r- ll. /Si=. -U. yfiDl. v»». • -t-r. 


la# « 


#-tfc.a<a- 


16..* a S 5 ® €«:. '#5^.# ?i]ll-i.. 


II. 1 la tlie [dukes] second year, in spring, the marc^uis of Ts‘e 
invaded our northern border. 

2 In summer, in the fourth month, on Ping-seuh, Sun Leang- 

foo of Wei led a force, and fought rrith the army of Ts‘e 
at Sin-chuh, when the arraj*^ of TFei received a severe 
defeat. 

3 In the sixth month, on Kwei-yew, Ke-sun Hang-foo, Tsang- 

sun Heu, Shuh-sun K‘eaou-joo, and Kung-sun Ying-ts‘e, 
led a force, and joined Keoh K‘ih of Tsin, Sun Leang- 
foo of Wei, and the Kung-tsze Show of Ts‘aon, [after 
which] they fought with the marquis of Ts*e at Gan, 
when the army of Ts‘e received a severe defeat. 

4 In autumn, in the seventh month, the marquis of Ts‘e sent 

Kwoh Tso to the army [of the allies], which made a 
covenant with him on Ke-yew at Yuen-low. 

6 In th^ eighth month, on Jin-woo, Paou. duke of Sun o’, died. 

6 On Kang-yin, Suh, marquis of Wei. died. ° 

7 We took the lands of Wan-vanu. 

*' O 


344 - 


BOOK vm. 


THE CH'UN TS'EW, 'WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


8 


10 


In -winter, an army of Ts‘oo and an army of Ch'ing made 
an incursion into Wei. 

In the eleventh month, the duke had a meeting with the 
Kung-ts‘e Ying-ts‘e of Ts'oo in Shuh. 

On Ping-shin, the duke made a covenant in Shuh with an 
officer of Ts‘oo, an officer of Ts‘in, an officer of Sung, an 
officer of Gh‘in, an officer of Wei, an officer of Ch‘ing, 
an officer of Ts‘e, an officer of Ts‘aou, an officer of Choo, 
an officer of Seeh, and an officer of Tsang. 


Par. 1. The Chaen says : — ‘Intheoourse of this 
invasion, the mnrqnis of Ts‘e laid siege to Lnng, 
■when liis favonrite, Leu-p‘oo Tsew-kwei was 
made prisoner in attacking one of the gates. 
The marquis said, “Do not put him to death, 
and I will make a covenant ■with you, and not 
enter your borders.” The people of Lung did 
not listen to the request, hut put their prisoner 
to death, and dismembered him on the top of 
the wall. The marquis beat the drum himself, 
while his soldiers strove to mount the wall; and 
in three days Lung was taken. He then made 
an incursion southwards as far as Ch‘nou-k‘ew.’ 
Too observes that he cannot account for the 
silence of the text about this capture of Lung, 
and the subsequent incursion to Ch‘aou-k‘ew. 

Par. 2. Sin>chuh was in Wei,— 20fe south 


of the pres, district city of Wei ^®P' 

Ta-ming, Chih-le. The in the text has 

made some critics think that the battle was 
in^ consequence of an invasion of Ts'e by 
Wei, while its being fought in Wei looks as if it 
were in consequence of an invasion of that State 
by Ts‘c. Tlie K‘ang-he editors, observe that 
Sun Lcang-foo ■u-ns indeed marching to invade 
Ts‘c, when the army of tliat State, flushed with its 
successes in Loo, met him before ho had left 
bjs own State, and defeated him. As be had 
given occasion, bj’ his advance towards Ts‘e, 

however, to the action, the is used. 

^ The Cliuen says: — ‘The marquis of Wei sent 
Sun Le.aug-foo, Sbih Tseih, 'Ning Scang, and 
lli-ang K‘in, to lead an incursion intoTs'e. when 
they met ■\vith the anuy of that State. Siieh-tscili 
V i>.licd to retreat ; hut Sun-tsrc said, “ Ifo. Ilcre 
wo are witlj an nrn»y invading Ts‘e. If we retreat 
on nii-eting with its arn»y, wh.at shall bo said of 
our ruler? If wo know that we could not [cope 
with it], wo had l>etter not have come forth. 
Sifico wo have mot it. our best pl.an is to fight." 
In MinuncT, • • • • 


Sitih <'h‘ing-t»ro [Shih Tseih ; was his post- 
hum-.!-. tilh -3 faid. “'riso army i« d.’foat.d. If 
ji”,! dfi r. -i w.-.i* n little [for rt-infuroernt-ntO. I 
r.r:! ;• »,in u- entirvly dvdroyiM. If you 

I'"-- nl'. y<.-:r Jivsi, wh^* rvi'ort will-ycu h-axeto 
I'Hi- ftci f'-j» niter]" '111- other nuiutjsndcr* 
• oM t ;-ii.e •>.. n r.s.d he ciotimu-tl. rr.d- 

..r^ .» .. . , V,-.. p,,. .Ji,. 

U -- w,. If..,, j..,,. it vill 

• t' it. It - \»-.i r- tir--' with t!..- 

t.. . , . . ..... ..»j-... j 


By-and-hy the approacli of a great number of 
chariots was announced, and the army of Ts‘e 
stayed its advance, halting at Keuh-keu. 

‘Ik was Ghung-slmh Tu-he, comnjandant of 
Sin-chuh, who thus came to the relief of Sun 
Hwan-tsze, and secured his escape. In cons^ 
quence, the people of Wei would have rewards 
Yu-he with a city, but he refused it, and osKcd 
that he might be allowed to have his suspended 
instruments of music disposed incompletely 
Qike those of tlie prince of a State], and ®P* 
pear at court with the saddle-girth and bridle- 
trappings of a prince ; — which was granted to 
him. 

‘When Chnng-ne [Confucius] lieard of this, he 
said, “ Alas I it would have been - better to give 
him many cities. It is only peculiar articles of 
use, and names, which cannot be granted to other 
[than tliose to whom tliey belong] to them a 
ruler lias particularly to attend. It is by [the 
right use of] names that he secures tlie con- 
fidence [of the people] ; it is by that confidence 
that he preserves the articles [distinctive of 
ranks] ; it is in those articles that the ceremonial 
distinctions of rank are liid; those cercniomal 
distinctions are essential to the practice of 
righteousness; it is righteousness which con- 
tributes to tlio advantage [of the State]; and it 
is that advant.age which secures the quiet of the 
people. Attention to these things is the condi- 
tion of [good] government. If tliey be concedeu 
where they ought not to bo conceded, it is giv- 
ing away the government to the rccipiciifs. 
When the government thus perishes, the State 
will follow it ; — it is not possible to arrest that 
issue.”’ 

Par. 3. Too says that Gan was in Ts'e, and 
Kuh-lcnng says that it was 500 le from the capi- 
tal of that State. But so great a distance is ir- 
rcconcilcahle with the account wliicli we have 
in the Chuen of the immediate advance of tlie 
victors after the battle to Ying-k'cw. .Gan was 
probably tlic same place known prcvioii-ily ny 

the name of Loih-hca [C). — pro.s. 

dop. of Ts'e-nan. For Kung-yang 

. , 
i ’n.v ('linen .'ay.«;—‘ Sun Hw.an-t-re n tiirn.-u 
i to Sin-ebnh ; hn't instead .'f eiitorinc it, n” 

1 «n iiniin-h.-nely to ’r.<in to ^''•g ihea-^i'tanL-.-i't a 
I nrniv. ['At tle“ time]. 

’ •r.iii forn ‘inoHr 


Year II. 


DUKE CU‘ISG. 


345 


Sliing-puh [See theSStli year of duke He], where 
it triumphed through the wisdom of our duke 
and the cautious valour of his great officers, 
whose servant I am not fit to he.” He then re- 
quested a forceofSOOchariots, which was granted 
him. He himself commanded the army of the 
centre. Sze-seeh [Fan W5n-ts2e; see the 2d 
Chuen appended to VII. xvii. 5], as assistant, had 
the command of the 1st army, and Lwan-shoo 
commanded the 3d ; Han Keueh Heen-tsze ; 

see account of the hattle of Feih in the Chuen 
on VII. xii. 3] being marshal of the host. And 
thus they proceeded to the relief of Loo and Vfei. 

Tsang Seuen-shuh met the army and guided its 
march, while Ive "Wan-tsae [Ke-sun Hang-foo] 
joined it with the forces [of Loo]. 

‘When the army came to the territory of Wei, 

Han Heen-tsze being about to behead a man, 

Keoh Heen-tsze hurried in his chariot to save 
the culprit ; but liefore he arrived, the punishment 
was inflicted. Immediately he sent [the man’s 
head] all round the host, saying to his cliarioteer, 

“I will thus share the reproach of the deed.” 

The array followed that of Ts'C to Sin, and in 
the 6th month, on Jin-shin, it arrive<l at the foot 
of [mount] Mei-ke. There the marquis of Ts'e 
sent a challenge to fight, saying [to Keoh K‘ih], 

“You have condescended to come to my poor 
Stale with the army of your ruler; 1 will see ! came up to Han Keueh, 
you to-morrow morning with our poor levies.” ” * ’ - 
The other replied, “Tsin is the brother of Loo 
and Wei. They came and told our ruler that 
your groat State was venting its indignation, 
morning and evening, on their poor countries. 

He could not bear [to hear of their sufferings], 
and sent us. his ministers, to intercede for them 
with your great State, charging us that we should 
not remain wiih our host long in your territory. 

We can advance, but wc cannot retreat. You 
need not trouble yourself to send [any further] 
message.” The marquis said, *• W hat they grant 
us is what I desire. If they had not granted it, 

1 should have seen them all tlic same.' 


Chttug-how said, “The eyes and ears of the 
army ate on otur flag and drun>. It will advance 
or retire as our chariot does. While there is one 
man left to direct this chariot, we may achieve 
success. Why should you for your paiu cause 
the failure of our ruler’s great enterprize ? When 
one dons his armour and takes his weapons, it is 
to go in the way of death; you are not in pain to 
death ; — strive to combat with it.” With this, 
he held the reins with his left hand, and with 
the right took the drumstick, and beat the 
drum. Ilie trained horses urged on, unable to 
stop, followed by the army. The army of Ts‘e 
received a great defeat; [and the marquis] was 
pursued thrice all round [the hill of] Hwa-foo- 
choo. 

‘Han Heueh had dreamt, [the night before], 
that Tsze-yn, [liis father], said to him, “ Avoid 
both the left and the right [of the chariot].” In 
consequence of this, he drove in the middle 
place, and pursued the marquis of Ts‘e. Ping 
Hea said, “Shoot the driver; he is a superior 
man." The marquis said, “ Since you call him 
a superior man, it would be contrary' to rule to 
shoot Jiim.” He shot therefore the man on the 
left, who fell down below the chariot, and then 
the man on the right, who died in It. [Just then], 
Ive Woo-chang, who had lost his own chariot, 

and asked that be 
would t.akc him into his. He agreed to do 
so. hut with his elbow moved him away first 
from the left and then from the right, and 
made him stand bcltind himself. [Soon after], 
he bent forward and adjusted the body of the 
spearman who had been on the right, [which 
gave an opportunity to] Fung Ch‘ow-foo and 
the marquis to change places. Wlien the fugi- 
tives had nearly reached the spring of Hwa, one 
of the outside horses was cnugl\t by a tree, and 
stopped. Ch'ow-foo, [some time before], had been 
lying in a sleeping carriage, when a snake made 
its appearance beneath him, which he struck 
with his elbow. It bit him. and though he had 
the wound, he was now unable to 


‘Ivaon Koo of Ts'e entered the army of Tsin. I concealed 
and with a stone struck down a man. lie then ■ push the carriage on. and the pursuers came up. 
twk him. and. [leaving his own chariot], mount- i H.an Keneli went with a rope in itishand before 
o<l that of the prisoner, tietl a mulberry tree to it, the inarqnis’s horses, bowed twice with his head 

'• ground, and then presented to him a cup, 

of I S’c. ciying out, “ If any one wants valour, ■' with a /w/fi in if. saying. “ ^Iv ruler sent us to 
I wdl sell bun what 1 have left to spare.” 1 intcrcetle with you on behalf of Loo and Wei, 

•t)n Ivwoi-yew, l>otli the armies were drawn up i charging us not to allow our army to enter deep 

into your lordship's territory. Unfortunately, 
I found myself thrown among the soldiers, and 
could not avoid my present position. 1 w.as afraid, 
moreover, that if i fled away so as to escape from 
it, 1 should disgrace botll my own ruler and 
your lordsliip. And being now in the position 
of a soldier. I venture to tell you of niv want of 
.aliility, and to undertake the ofllcc*[i>f your 
charioteer}, so supplying your present nwl.” 
^ Ch'ow-foo then m.adc tlic tnarqnts descend from 
[At la'i], he said, “ 1 am in i the chariot, and go to the sjirint: of 11 wa to 
‘ ^ ' letch some water, when he was recvave<l into an 

attendant cluariot by Ch'ing Chow.fo<j, Y«on 
Fci being tlic siv'.trman on the right, and made 
!»;« cscaj>e. llan Keueh presented Ch-ow.foo 


in array at Han. Tlieclnirioteer of the marquis 
of Ts'C was I’hig ilea, with Fung Ch'ow-foo as 
spearman on tiie right. He.io Ch.iiig w.as chariot- 
eer to Keoh K'ili. with Ch'iug Kew-hwan as 
spearman on the right. The marquis s.nid, “Let 
me exterminate those, and then I will take niy 
breakfast.” With Ibis begalloped forwari wUli- 
out having his horses covcrvtl with mail. Keoh 
K'ih was wounded hy an arrow, till tite hhnjd 
rait down to his slmes. but he never let the sound 
of the drtuu cease 
pain." Cliang-how [Ueae Chang. was his 
dcMgttation] s-dd. “At the first encounter one 
anmw pierce<l my h.and. and .-vnoiher mv wrist. 


V»>1. 


M 


346 


THE CH'CX TS‘EW. \aTH THE TSO CHTEIC. 


BOOK VHI. 


shrink from the risk of death to secnre the 
escape of his ruler; — ^if I execute him. it vrill be 
inauspicious. I will forgive him as an encourage- 
ment to those who wish to serve th^ ruler.” 
Accordingly, he spared his life, and in the mean- 
time, the marquis, after his escape, thrice entered 
[the army of Tsin]. and thrice issued from it, 
looking for Ch*ow-f«io. Every time he hurried 
on at the head of his soldiers to stimulate those 
who wished to retire, and then he entered 
among the Teih men, who presented tlidr spears 
and their shields, covei ing him till he passed 
throngh them into the army of "Wa, which al- 
lowed him to make his escape. 

•The army then went tiirough the pass of 
Sen. the marqnis charging the commandants 
{of the ciliesj whom he saw to exert themselves 
to the utmost, as the army was defeated. [Some 
one] urged a woman to get ont of the way. hnt 
she said, '-Has the marqnis escaped?” Being 
told he had. she said. " Has the commander of 
the vanguard escaped Being told again that 
he also had escaped, she said. “Since the mar- 
qnis and my father have escaped, it does not 
matter so mucii;” and ran away. The nyirqnis 
considered that she was a woman of proprietv; 
and finding on inquiry that she was the wife of 
the superintendent of entrenchments, he gave 
him the city of Shih-lew. 

•The army of Tsin pnrsuetl that of Ts'e. en- 


- - [which Ts-e had taken] 

fr^ini Ke. and the territory [of Wei and Lod. 
which it had t.akcn]: and if tins would not 
satisfy thetn. to asev-rtain what thev wanted 
these hril.es; but the general 
o. 'I«;n refused [to grant pence for them], and 
reqn\ro<l that Ts'e shouM ileltvor up the danch- 
f®r Oi 1 ■un;;-shuh of tieanti as a liostace. and 
ntake tlic divisions of the fields in .nil ilTe State 
run from to wt.-st. Tlie messenger replied. 
••I he dae.gliter of T ung-shuh of Seaon is no 
other tii.an the morher of our ruler, (lur States 
are of t-i;nal rank, and she i» not inferior to the 
ne.tJ.or of the ruler of Tsin. If yon. in giving 
out your great conmjand-. to the States, s.av to 
th. e.i. 'Yon i;„:s; plwlgc the n.others [of ^oiir 
ni.-r-j vith tj» .a* the pris f of yonr good faith.’ 
«ha? «nl Iw th- ciiar.icter of such a conrse in 
Tv.r.i-.on to thec'..!iiiiiaudsefthe [fermerl kings? 
^r.-l m'lr.-oTi'r. i; i. to eomm.auil men not to be 
f..!.-.!. 'Hie .de i.She. 111 . ii. ode 11 ..'.) s,av.«:_ 


• r ■ r sue!’, fi-ial pi.>;v tt:’. 
'11;.. r\- will for ever bo 


cr. yoc 


) 

ce.ising. 

conferred blessing 


If VO 5 c-. :vrinr 1 the ether priiic * tolx! nnf.li.al. 
r . i u .! ts- c-.\u.iug tv:i..w. of vourrukr 
t I . -h-.t i« r.. t tirls-.-.u*? 

•i: - t ru -r Vu'.v*, .n la; jug .e;: th,; lor.nd- 


• Ivl.t i- fr...o j;. the 

o'c ^ 11. VI. : ■. s 

^ . r . -it 4",:- an! • 


Bnt now when yon would lay ont the fields of 
the other States, and say, ‘Their divisions must 
all run only from east to west.’ such an arrange- 
ment would be of advantage only to your war- 
chariots. There is no regard in it to the 
character of the ground: — ^is not this to disown 
the commands [and example] of the former 
kings? 

‘ To go against the former kings is to he un- 
righteous: — ^how can [the State which does so] 
be lord of covenants? Tsin is here in error. 
The kindly rule of the four [great] kings was 
seen in their establishment of virtue, and in 
their symp.athy with and furtherance of the 
common wshes of all tlie people. The pr«i- 
dency of the five leaders of the States was sig- 
nalize bytfaeirlaborionscheiishingof theStates, 
and leading them to obey the commands of the 
kings. Bnt now you se& to unite all the Spates 
for the gratification of your own limitless 
desires. The ode (She, IV.iii. ode 1T.4) says, 

‘ Mildly he spread the rules of his govern- 
ment abroad, . 

And all dignities became concentrated m 
him.’ 


Ton indeed have not that mildness, _ and yon 
throw away [from Tsin] those dignities; bot 
what harm can the [other] States receive front 
that? 

' If yon do not accede [to onr request for ^a«J. 
my ruler commissioned me to deliver this fa- 
ther message; — ^With the armies of your ruler 
you came to onr poor State, and witli our poor 
levies we gave largess to your followers. 
Throngh the terror inspired by your ruler, our 
troops were defeated and dispersed. If joa, 
Sir. will kindly extend your favour to the for- 
tunes of the State of Ts'c. and not destroy our 
altars, but allow the old friendship between vour 
State and ours to be continneil, then wc sb:m not 
grudge giving up the precious things of onr 
former rulers and the lands [which they liaa 
taken]. If yon will not grant us this, then we 
will coIlwM the fragments of our forces, and as * 
for another battle before the walls of our capstm* 
Should wc have the got>d fortune (to win u;, 
we will still olK^y your orders. Should we nc^ 
have that fortune,' we shall much more not tia 


but listen to your commands.'’ _ 

Loo and Wei strongly urged [Kei'h K’ihj. 
ing. "‘Tsv is angry with us. Those who na' 
dietl in battle are tlie manjuts’s rekatives an 
favourites. If you do not grant [his reques 
for pe:n'e]. his 'enmity to us will bo extreme. 
And what isin you l>e seeking for? iou 
cot the mi.-it precious things of his State, 
have also got onr territory, and are lelievi 
from our ilitliculties. Yonr glory is ^ 

U-tween Ts'e and Tsin, victory is the gnt^ .* 
Heaven; Tsi.i cannot be sure of it-' 
the general of Tsin r.crc».><i to grant peace, 
plying [to I'iii Mei-jinJ, “We broaeht oar ch-t- 
r: its b n‘, to make ii)tcn>'ss: >n for I.w 
W( i. ’1 li i; V o an' now funii^lu'd with an 
swer wlsfeh c-vrry lack to our mh r. r* 

fr‘-:n th - ki'aliiv*' o; v.iur rul<-r. W e i!.'re_ 
hing I 


i: 

< !: h g t! 


; is«!c!i l<i joisr ciiu.::'..*-r..i«. 
pr.o-..»lv.i tr\'ni the army to I-''” 


to 


t--'-*! th-' .ItJJi.e/'* 

I'vr. 4. OfVt; 

I *»■*< I •*'21 , 


■l-iw (K«l'--l-'sng hi% ^7' 1^-* 
-V fr m Si.-.- c.’.r::«l.ef I* '''• 


348 


THE CH‘UN TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VIII. 


shin got to Ch'ing, he sent his assistant in 
the mission back to Ts ‘00 mth the presents 
[he had received for Ts'e], and proceeded 
to go elsewhere n-ith Hea Ke. He had been 
minded to fly to Ts'e, bnt as its army had sus- 
tained the recent defeat, he said, “ I will not live 
in a State which is not victorious,” and fled to 
Tsin, where, by means of Keoh Che, he obtained 
an appointment, and was made commandant 
of Hing. Tsze-fan requested [the king of 
Ts ‘00 to present large offerings [to Tsin3, and 
get him dismissed from its service ; but the king 
said, “ He has gone in the way in which he had 
planned for himself ; but in the plans which he 
laid for my father he was loyal. Loyalty se- 
cures the stability of the altars, and may cover 
a multitude of offences. If he prove of advan- 
tage to it, moreover, would Tsin listen to our 
request, though it were made with large offer- 
ings ? _ If he do not prove of service, Tsin will 
cast him off, without onr having the trouble of 
seeking his dismissal.” ’ 

2d. ‘When the army returned to Tsin, Pan 
Wttn-tsze [Sze Seeh ; see the Chnen on p. 3} was 
the last [of the generals] to enter the csipital. 
Woo-tsze, [his father], said to him, “Have you 
not made me wait for you ?” He replied, “ The 
army has done good service, and the people are 
meeting it with joy. If I had entered first, I 
should have attracted to myself their eyes and 
cars, and received the fame which belongs to 
the commander-in-chief. On this account I did 
not dare [to enter sooner].” Woo-tsze said, “I 
know by this that he will keep out of danger.” 

‘ Keoh Pih had an interview with the duke, 
who said to him, “The victory was due to you.” 
He replied, “It was due to your lordship’s in- 
structions, and to the efforts of all your oflBcers. 
No peculiar merit belonged to me.” Fan Shuh 
[Fan Wttn-tszc] had an inter^'iew, and the duke 
complimented him in the same wav, when he 
replied, “I got my appointment through [Seun] 
Kiing[thccommnnderofthe 1 st army. SzeSeeh’s 
was only a temporary appointment], and the 
dispositions were made by K‘ih. No pccttliar 
merit belonged to me.” When Lwan Pili Imd an 
interview, the duke addressed him also in the 
same way, but he said, ‘It was Seeh who in- 
structed me, and the soldiers obeyed their or- 
ders. No peculiar merit belonged to me.’] 

r^r. 7. Sec on V. xxxi. 1. 'J'sin had insisted 
on Ts‘e « surrendering this territory to Loo; and 
Loo would seem to have now taken decisive 
measures to secure it. 

Parr. 6,0.10. The Chnen says ‘ Duke Fenen 
had sent to ask the friendship [and aid! of 
a»-oo [is-e tlie Cluun after Vll.xviii.3 and .'.l, 
but in consaiuence of Ids de.uh and ilial of 
king CIiwang, Lw and Ts'cj had not Ijccomc 
allied. hen duke Ch'ing succ-ee<lc-d to the 
. lat.* he ncivpted a covenant with Tsin, and 
iiint Stnti* m tiu* iuvn*>ic)n of fAl 

|1,.. sar.ie tin,. ], the iKOfie of Wei hiid llcglcCUd 

t.. *,nd .-.f.j t.. 'IV-oo. and I,r.d nUo ne- 

tvjn.J a followc.! it 

l,v I .?.«.(■), -uij;:, the chh-f minister, 
t. ti-refere. n,,. exjKditinn of* 

lar r-ft'.' « r.;r lie- rs!i< f „{ TtU-. Wh.-n he '• 

r-.V '* •' ore not equal I 

C. * uT, V '■| - ' ^ The I 


‘ Numerous was the array of officers, 

And by them king Wiln enjoyed repose.’ 

If even king Wttn emploj’ed a large force, much 
more must we do sol Moreover, our late ruler, 
duke Chwang, gave an order saying, “When 
our virtue is hot suflicient to reach to distant 
regions, onr best plan is to show kindness and 
compassion to our own people, and use them 
well.’ 

* On this, he instituted a grand census from 
house to house, remitted taxes, was kind to the 
old and widowed, gave help to the needy, and 
pardoned offenders. He then raised all tlio 
forces of the State. The king’s own troops also 
went. P*5ng Ming drove the king’s chariot, 
having duke King of Ts'ae on the left, and duke 
Ling of Heu on the right. These two princes 
were both young, and they were capped, not- 
withstanding, for the occasion. 

_ ‘In winter the army of Ts‘oo made an incur- 
sion into Wei, and then into our territory, 
where it encamped at Shuh. Tlie duke wished 
to send Tsang-snn [Seuen-shuh] to it, bnt ho 
declined, saying, “ [The army of] Ts ‘00 has come 
far, and been long on the way. It is sure to with- 
draw, and I do not dare to receive the fame of 
effecting such a service.” Ts‘oo then advanced 
to Yang-k‘eaou, and Milng-sun [Mitng Hcen-tszc, 
called also Chung-sun MeeliJ begged leave to go 
and bribe it [to retreat]. He took with him 100 
meuhnnlcs, lOOfemale embroiderers, and asmaiiy 
weavers, with [the duke’s son] Kung-httng, ns a 
hostage, and with them requested a covenant, 
when Ts ‘00 agreed to make pence. 

I In t-Via 114.1, ...~„4l. 41 J..1.. 


Kiing-tsze K‘eu-tsih of Ch'ing, and a great officer, 
ofTs'e, made a covenant at Shuh.’ 

Tso-sho adds: — ‘The names of the ministers 
of the different States arc not given in the text, 
because this was an imperfect covenant. _ It 
may be called so, because tlie^’ were at tins tlino 
afraid of Tsin, and made the covenant- with 
Ts ‘00 by stealth. The marquis of Ts'no and 
the baron of Heu arc not mentioned, 'tecnusc 
they had occupied the carriage of [the viscount 
of] Ts‘oo, and might be said to have lost tbeir 
rank. The superior man will say, “ Ilis riink i-s 
what a man must be careful of! When once the 
rulers of Ts‘nc and lieu lind failed to_ assort 
their rank, tliey were not mimbered with the 
princes of the States; — how innch greater would 
lie the consequence to men of inferior station . 
Wliat the ode (She, III, ii. ode V. 4) says, 

‘ Not being idle in their stations, 

Tliey secure the repose of the iieoplc, 

may Ik* ajipUed to a ease like this.” ’ 

Shiili w ns a jilace Iiclonging to Loo, — in tne 
west of the dis. of T'lie-giin, dcp. of the s.iuh* 
name. The K‘ang-hc editors observe that the 
before Jjii is the first tfni*5 
that any scion of the Ilnn«e of T»‘o<} is thn« 
d.-iigf!.->teil; that the pri-eed.-nee given to 'I s'i-o 
and T»‘in in p. 10 shnivs the jwiwer of the*'* 
Ftnli"*; nn<l tint Tso-ih.' i-. right in the 
which h'* for the ntjvf.ce of T»*tte 

Htu in the enumeration. 


Ykak hi. 


DUKE CIMXG. 


[The Chuen pivos here the two followhis: nar- 
ratives;— -Ist, ‘When the .arnij* of Ts‘oo re.-iehetl 
Sunp [on its return], Kunp-hiltiR [t^ce above 
in the last ChuenJ stole away front it, back to 
Loo. 'rsang Seuen-shuh said “Ilnnjt-foo, in 
thus shrinking from the discomfort of a few 
years, has had no repard to the welfare of the 
Sftate of Loo. llow shall the State deal with 
the case? Wlio will sustain the consequences? 
Hereafter, the people will have to suffer 
them. The State has been abandoned.” During 
this expedition, Tsin avoided Ts'oo through fear 
of the multitude of its army. The superior man 
will say, Numbers cannot be dispensed witli. 
Orcat ofBcers, Iiaviiig the authority in their 
hands, could overcome by numbers ; — ^Itow much 
more must an intelligent ruler who uses his 
nuraliers well do so! WTiat ‘ The great Declara- 
tion ’ (Shoo, III. i. Pt. ii. 6) says, about Shang's 
having millions of people, divided in he.art and 
Chow's having ten men united, illustrates the 
value of numbers (?) ] 

2d. ‘The marquis of Tsin sent Kung-soh [Szc 
Chwang-pih to Chow with the 

prisoners and spoils of Ts‘e, but the king would 
not see him, and made duke Seang of Shen decline 
[the offerings], s.iying, “ Wlicn any of the wild 
tribes, south, east, west or north, do not obey 
the king's commands, and by their dissoluteness 
and drunkenness are violating all the duties of 
society, the Kng gives command to attack them. 
Then when the spoils taken from them are 
presented, the king receives them in person, and 
rewards their punishers; — ^thus 'curbing the 


349 

disrespectful, and encouraging the meritorious. 
When Stnte.s. ruled by princes of the same 
surname with the royal House, or by princes of 
other surnames, arc doing despite to the king’s 
rules, he gives command to attack them. Then 
an announcement is made of thescivicc perform- 
ed, but no trophies of it arc presented: — [the 
king] in this way showing his respect for his 
relatives and friends, and preventing rude license 

f in the punishment]. Now my uncle [of Tsin], 
iaving obtaincil a victory over Ts‘o, yet has not 
sent any of his ministers commissioned by me 
to guartl UTid comfort the royal House. ’ The 
messenger whom he has sent to comfort me, the 
One man. is this Ivung-pili, whose oftice gives 
him no introduction to the royal House, which 
is contrary to the rules of the fonner kings. 
Though I wish to receive Knng-pih, yet I do 
not dare to disgrace my uncle by setting at 
naught the old statutes. And Ts'e is a State 
ruled by princes of another surname, descend- 
ants of the grand-tutor [of king Wiin]. Gr.mt- 
ing that its ruler rudely indulged his own 
desires so ns to excite the anger of my uncle, 
would it not have been sufficient to remonstrate 
with him, and instruct him?” 

‘To this speech Sze Chwang-pih could ma'ao 
no reply, and the king entrusted the entertaining 
of him to his three [principal] ministers. They 
treated him with the ceremonies due to the great 
officer of a president of the States, mmonneing 
his rttlcr's conquest of his enemies. — a degree 
lower than the ceremonies proper to a high 
minister. The king also gave him an entertain- 
ment, and presented him privately with gifts, 
making the director of the ceremonies s.ay to 
him, “This is contrary to rule. Do not m;d:e a 
record of it.”’] 


Tkv'd year. 

T. M 
immm 


^ ^ ^ ^ 
S 


mi 


H iL 


IE 

W<&- 


» m 


350 


THE CH'UH TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEH, BOOK VIII. 


1mM 


5 *j‘ 


• ‘r jt- ^ "T / 

||.tii.li5'|ff 

H fm f f S # 


f f f B ii: 

S |i ^ <: ^ 0 £k 

S-t ail -r: <:.iit.T: ts isi ?jj wj is 


Yr.A.n in. 


I)UKK CIMSG. 


351 


?f .© ?E.S' ^ © W © ■?■ -B- W 

^ - •- - 1 f $ /A S.r ■Hi.S. 


W-. 


ji 


gid. 

nm^z ^ § f 

a: S -a.il:!: •01 !if 5!; W 

W ^ S f 

M ■&.* lff:.3l. 

®W.A EAff 

/^ w w 

A.Sf 

T't-» 

w s ^ 

ja 

® 4h >? 

mml>^ 

33- UJ 04 
^ 04 04 . 


mAt., 

^0.* 


M'M 

SMllt 

B.ril-tii. 

K m m 

Z 

MM A 
^ B.Z 


IJ! . 

ilt 

^S. 


169. 

» 

#. 


3^ ± K Hfi..™ W 

3)c A T.-I4 m m 


E_ 

3gC 


ea >j 


jft. 


_.A.T 

f- T 'a- ± 'fl 

3i St jjfiii.^ic It 

a St ± !l^- 0.515 
±.T A ii ff IP#. 
3t A A.A.P JL 
» A.^J' §1 iii m 

A -h 0 m,z a. 
zrf z^nm 
miia ±mwm 

a A t ± 3t #, 

^,Z A mM- R 
T Hill 0 m A 
A,-&.^ A =.A 

a It T 1 -n ip#. 


/Jts^ 

1llJ 


R 

A. 

•f* 


*n. 

m 


TIP 


z 

lH 

M. 


Itn 

f‘ 


III. 1 In his third year, in spring, in tlie king’s first month, the 
duke joined the marquis of Tsin, tlie duke of Sung, t.lie 
marquis of AVei, and the earl of Ts‘uou, in invading 
Ch‘ing. 

2 On Sin-hae tiiere was the burial of duke Muh of AVci. 

3 In the second month, the duke arrived from the invasion 

of Ch‘ing. 

4 On Keah-tsze the new temple took fire, when -we wailed 

for it three days. 

5 On Yih-hae there was the burial of duke Wan of Sung. 

6 In summer, the duke went to Tsin. 

7 K*eu-tsih, duke [Muh’s] son, of Ch'ing led an army, and 

invaded Heu. 

8 The duke arrived from Tsin. 

9 In autumn, Shuh-sun K‘eaou-joo led an army, and laid 

siege to Keih. 

10 There was a grand sacrifice for rain. 

11 Keoh Iv‘ih of Tsin, and Sun Leang-foo of AA^ei, invaded the 

Tseang-kaou-j oo. 

12 In winter, jn the llth month, the marquis of Tsin sent 

Seun Kang to Loo on a friendly mission; and the mar- 
quis of Wei sent Suii Leang-foo on the same. 


S52 


■lo 


Yemi IV. 


DUKE CIWNG. 


353 


servant [of Tsin] it is thus I will repay you.” 
The king said, “Tsin is not to be contended 
■with.” He then treated Ying with exceeding 
courtesy, and sent him hack to Tsin.’] 

Par. 9. Tso observes tliat when Loo took or 
received from Ts‘e the lands of Wftn-yang, the 
city of Keih refused its submission, and in 
consequence Shuh-sun lv.*enou-joo now laid siege 
to it, and, we must suppose, took it. According 
to this, Keih was in the territory of Wttn-yang. 
It is referred to the pres. dis. of Pei-shing, dep. 
T‘ae-gan. 

Par. 10. See on II. v. 7. 

Par. 11. The tribe of Tscang-kaou-ioo is 
mentioned in the last Clinen on V. xxiii., where 
■we also learn that the surname of the chief was 
Kung-yang gives the name with a 

instead of and Kuh-lHang with a Tso- 
she says that the reason for the expedition was 
tliat the Tseang-kaou-joo were a remnant of 
the Red Teih. He adds, ‘ When it is said, “ The 
Tseang Kaou-joo dispersed,” we are to under- 
stand that the chief had lost his hold on the 
people.’ 

Parr. 12, 13. The Chuen says;— ‘In winter, 
in the 11th month, the marquis of Tsin sent 
Seun Kang to Loo on a friendly mission, and to 
renew the covenant [between Loo and Tsin] 

5 That made at Ch'ih-keih, in Ch'ing’s Ist year], 
.’he marquis of Wei [also] sent Sun Leang-foo 
on a similar mission, and to renew the covenant 
between Loo and Wei [That in the 7tlj year of 
duke Seuen]. Tiie duke consulted Tsang Seuen- 
shuh saying, ‘‘The station of Chung-hang Pih 
(Senn KSng) in Tsin is that of a minister of the 
3d degree, while Sun-tsz'e is in Wei its minister 
of the 1st degree. With which shall 1 covenant 
first ?” Seueii-shuh replied, “A minister of the 
1st degree in a second-rate State corresponds to 
one of tlic 2d degree inagreat State; its 2d degree 
corresponds to the great State’s 3d; and its 3d 
degree to the great State's great officers of tlic 
highest class. In a small State, the minister of 
the Ist degree corresponds to a great State’s of 


the lowest ; the 2d degree to the great State’s 
highest class of great officers, and the 3d degree 
to the second class. These arc the relations of 
high and low [ns concerns ministers and great 
officers], fixed hj' ancient rule. Kow Wei, as 
compared with Tsin, cannot be regarded ns a 
State of the 2d degree; and Tsin is lord of 
covenants: — give the precedence to it.” [Ac- 
cordingly], on Ping-tvoo a covenant was made 
tvith Tsin, and on Ting-we, with Wei ; — which 
was right’ 

Par. 14. [We have here three narratives ap- 
pended in the Chuen: — 1st. ‘In the 12th month, 
on Kcah-seuh, Tsin constituted six armies [See 
the Chuen nt the end of V. xxviii.]. Han Keneh, 
Chaou Kwoh, Kuug Soh, Han Ch‘uen. Seun 
Chuy, and Chnou Chen, were all made high 
ministers, — in reward for their services at Gan.’ 

2d. ‘Tlie marquis of Ts'epaid a court-visit to 
Tsin.- 'When he was about to deliver his symbol 
of jade, Keuh K.‘ih ran forward and said, ‘‘This 
visit is on account of the laughter of your lord- 
ship’s women, and the disgrace thereby inflicted 
[on me] [See the Chuen on VII.xvii.6]; our 
ruler dare not accept this ceremony.” \^ien 
the marquis of Tsin was feasting him of Ts‘e, 
the latter looked [stedfastly] at Han Keueh, 
who said, “Does your lordship know me?” 
“Your clothes are difibrent,” was the reply [See 
the account of the battle of Gan, p.3 of last 
, year]. Han Keueh ascended the steps with a 
, cup of spirits, and said, ‘I did not presume not 
■ to risk my life, in order that your lordships 
. might meet in this hall.’” 
i 3d. ‘When Seun Ying was [a prisoner] in 
i Ts‘oo, a merchant of Ch‘ing formed a plan to 
r couyey him out of it in a bag of clothes. The 
t plan was not carried out ; but w’hen Ts‘oo had 
! restored Ying, the merchant went to Tsin, where 
) Ying treated him ns well ns if he had really deli v- 
3 ered him. The nierchaiit said, ‘‘ 1 did nut do the 
1 service, and dare I receive this treatment ns if I 
3 had done it? I am but a small man, and must 
f not for my own advantage impose on a siqierior 
f man.” He then went to Ts‘e.’] 


Fourth year. 

CBS 


^0 iu 


l^o 


m 


Mo 


//IS 


MM il 


VOL V. 


•15 


If llfl ffll If 
ilBli lllf If 


tlje 

r ®«^it 
file ■ 


m.^ ¥' 


# 

'X /I • 


3 ,,, 'l/ed. ■■'■ °>oath, duko of 

4 / ''« <ari of ff ■'^'“-s/iiD T-'’^ ™'ssion 

7 /''<•■>•(. „.„‘;^“«>t fo Ts;n. ’ Tsano-, 


<7 ^ "ere ..,„ fo Tc.\ ^'^^n-vin ^ 

S /" ' f ‘-"■■-•al o/d , ’ 

„ -v. . '"n 

‘-•r. <, "‘-f. Kfr :' • r.-ft.r . "•■‘'■nv.l , / I -"‘•y>-, "J- ^hv oiJo 


Year V. 


DUKE GH'ING. 


355 


it. The State is large; its ministers are har- 
monious and it is near to us. The [other] 
States receive its orders. We may not yet 
cherish disaffection to it. The work of the 
historiographer Yih says, ‘If he be hot of our 
kin, he is sure to have a different mind.’ Al- 
though 'i's'oo be great, its ruler is not akin to 
us; — wiilhebe wiiiing'to love us?” On this, 
the duke desisted from his purpose.’ 

Par. 6. There were troubles, probably, in 
Ch'ing, which occasioned this hasty interment 
of duke Seang. 

Par. 8. Kung-ygng has Too thinks 

that the duke walled Yun, as a precautionary 
measure against Tsin, ha^nng it in mind to 
revolt from it. If this be a correct guess, then 
the Yun here must have been on tlie west 
of Loo, and a different place from the Yun 
in VI. xii. 8, which was fortified against any 
attempts of Keu from the east. But acc. 
to Too, on XI. X. 4 there was a Yun in the dis- 
trict of Wan-yang; and I agree with the K'ang- 
he editors in approving the view of Tae K‘e 

5 Sung dyn., towards the end of the 
12th cent.) that this was the city in the text, and 
that Loo now fortified it, simply to strengthen 
itself, without reference to Tsin. Tlie Chuen 
on p. 7 says that the duke had desisted from his 
purpose to brave that power. 

Par. 9. The Gliuen says; — ‘ In winter, in the 
4th month, Kung-sun Shin of Ch'ingled a force. 


and endeavoured to l.ay out the boundaries of 
the fields of Heu, [which Ch'ing had taken in 
its recent inroads]. The people of Heu defeat- 
ed him at Chcn-p‘e, when the earl of Ch-ing in- 
vaded that State [Ininsclf], and took the lands 
of Tseu-jin and Lmg-tun. Lwan-shoo of Tsin, 
in command of the army of the centre, with 
Seun Show, ns assistant-commander, and Sxc 
Seeh, assistant-coinmandcr of the 1st army, in 
order to relieve Hen, made an invasion of Cli'ing, 
and took Pan-chae. Tsze-fan of Ts‘oo then 
came to the relief of Ch'ing; and the carl of 
Ch'ing and the baron of Heu sued each other 
[before liiin], Hwang Seuh pleading the case 
I of the earl. Tsze-fan could not determine the 
matter in dispute, and said, “ If you two princes 
will go before my ruler, then he and some of his 
ministers will hear together what you want to 
prove, and tlie merits of your case can be kno^vn. 
If you will not do so, then 1 (Tsze-fan’s name 

was ^ij) do not feel myself able to ascertain 
the merits of it.” ’ 

The critics dwell on the incongruousness of 
the earl of Ch'ing’s being so styled, and of his 
engaging liimself in the invasion of Heu, before 
the year in wliieh liis father died was expired. 

[The Chuen adds here: — ‘In winter, Chaou 
Ying [A younger, or the youngest, brother of 
Ciiaou Tun, the great minister of Tsin in 
duke Wttn’s time] had an intrigue witli Cliaoii 
Chwang-ke (Cliwang-kc was the wife of Cliaou 
Soil, or Cluiou Chwang-tsze, the son of Chaou 
Tun).’] 


Fifth year. 

Ml- 


#1 


T 


liW 


• a H, 


Alia, a 

w, 

W 


tn 


m 


=f 


IE 

m 


356 


V. 


THE CH‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. BOOK VHI. 


f .+ f © ^ © zMMikM *.a m © 

S i'? # ■! s ^ - 0 - 

f ^ S-i i-# ^ t0 *5 ^'f.w t *n ^.± A 0. 

* *.* S ® ^ JM in *.* ^ s 


if Sf 


■a, 


a- 


|S| 

A 


-f- 

;2: 

ii. 


X W 


f[ © # * wte.^ » f . 

P4 ik -^M B.r> % 


^ w vv 

Sff J. 
B.W.» 

7C A 
^.i5« 
3iT' 


ja -(^.if 
t -fe i& 


IB g 


jal3i 
S.I^.A 


ITB. 

Jit # 

A, -f- 

0 . 


i^»3t o^j^ 

* Ut 0.^ 
!ta ;il.:* *. 
ittSfcUj 0. 
SB W 

a.^ Sif if. 
ii ill ^ a 
t st.-fs A 
f # ^ 0. 

^ 'S. ^ 

^ IPK w 

s $ 

■g.^ P9 
j| in 
gj l^ ^ ^ 

ii ®.:S; ;2: 


m ^MM. 
H.gtflf 
Bn Bn W. 0 - 


ASg 
0.^i 
isi iS 
m^x 
i=mjf> 


Bff a.’ 

j® ^ 

iH^- 
Bff iliS g 


1 In the [duke’s] fifth year, in spring, in the king’s first 

month, the third daughter fof duke Wan, who had been 
q married to the earl] of Ke, came back to Loo. 

2 Uiung-sun Meeh went to Sung. 

n summer, Shuh-sun K‘eaou-joo had a meeting with Seuh 

ShowofTsininKuh. 

4 [A part of] mount Leang fell do^^^l. 
o In autumn, there were great floods. 

In ''inter, in the eleventh month, on Ke-\'ew, the king [by] 
^ Heaven’s [grace] died. 

t In the twelftli month, on Kc-c]i‘ow, the duke had a meeting 
"i of Tsin, tlic marquis of Ts‘c, the duke 

of bung, tlie marquis of Wei, the earl of Cli'ing, 
the earl ^of Ts'aou, the viscount of Choo, and the 
eiu*i of Ke, when they made a covenant together m 
Cli'ung.laou. 


Tear V. 


DUKE Cn-TKG. 


357 


Pnr. 1. See on tlie 3(1 par. of last year. 
Comp, also VII. xvi. 3. vrliere wc have a similar 
record concerning another daughter of Loo. The 
could not be a daughter of 

duke Ch‘ing 'who was now only about 21 years 
old. Kor is it likely she was a d.aughter of duke 
Senen. for his eldost’daughter’s marriage appears 
4 years after this The remarks of Hoo Gan- 
kwoh on this passaee are, perhaps, worth 
translating:— ‘Tlie Ch‘un Ts‘ew is careful in 
recording the marriages and divorces of the 
daughters of Loo, betsiuse the relation of hus- 
band and wife is the greatest bond of sotdety. 
When a son is born, the parents wish to get 
him a wife, and for a daughter they wish to 
get a husband. Tins is characteristic of all 
parents; and if they cannot select a proper wife 
and a proper husband, then the lot of husband 
and wife is bitter, and occasion is given to 
lewdness and evil. The royal laws attach great 
importance to this matter; it lies at the root of 
the htunan relations ; and the Classic is careful 
in recording it, as a warning to future ages.’ 

[The Clmen continues the brief narrative at 
the end of last year:— ‘This spring, [Ting’s 
brothers^, he of Tuen (Chaou T‘ung), and he of 
Ping (Chaou Kwoh), banished him to Ts'e. He 
said to them, “While I am here, I can prevent 
the House of Lwan from rising [against us]; if 
1 be gone; you. my brothers, will have to be 
sorry [for your step]. Every body has what he 
can do, and what he cannot do. What harm 
will your -letting me alone do?" His brothers 
would not listen to him. 

‘Ting dreamt that Heaven sent [a Spirit] to say 
to Mm, “ Sacrifice to me, and 1 will bless you.” 
He sent and asked SzeChing-pih [SzeUh-^uh] 
about the dream, who smd he did not know its 
meaning. Afterwards, however, he [Probably 
Ching-pihJ told it to one of his followers, who 
said, “ Spirits bless the virtuous, and send ca- 
lami^ on the lewd. When one guilty of lewd- 
ness escapes without punishment, he is blessed. 
Is his banishment to be a consequence of the 
sacrifice?” The day after he sacrMced [to that 
Spirit], he went into exile.*] 

Par. 3. ‘This visit to Sung,’ says Tso-she, 
‘was the return for Hwa Tuen’s visit to Loo,’ 
in the spring of last year. It will be remem- 
bered that Chung-sun Meeh is often mentioned 
as Miing Heen-tsze. 

Par. 4. Kuh, — see HI. vu. 4. ItwasinTs'e. 


Pih-tsung a-«ked him what place he was of, 
and he replied, “Of Keang.” He then asked 
what was taking place there. “ ISIount Lcang 
has fallen.” said the man, “and [the marquis] is 
calling Pih-tsung to consult about what is to 
be done.” “ And what do you think should be 
done ?” pursu(Hi the officer. “ When a mountain 
becomes disintegrated, it falls down ; what can 
be done?” was the reply. “However, [each] 
State presides over [the sacrifices to] the hills 
and rivers in it; therefore when a mountain 
falls or a river becomes dry, the ruler in conse- 
quence docs nut have his table fully spread, 
does not appc.ir in full dress, rides in a carriage 
without any ornament, hushes all his music, 
lodges outside the city, makes the priest pre- 
pare ofierings, and the historiographer write a 
confession of his faults, and then docs sacrifice 
[to the hills and rivers]. This is what the- 
ruler has to do ; what else can he do, even with 
the advice of Pih-tsung?” Pih-tsung wished 
to introduce the man at court, but he refused. 
However, he told what he had heart from him, 
and gave counsel accordingly.’ 

[Ihc Chuen gives here two narratives: — ^Ist. 
‘Duke Ling of Heu accused the earl of Ch'ing 
in Ts‘oo [See the Chuen on p. 9 of last year]; 
and in the 6th month, duke Taou of Ch‘ing 
went to Ts‘oo to reply. He did not succeed, 
however, and the people of Ts'oo seized and held 
Hwang Seuh, and [duke Muh’s so^. Tsze-kwoh. 
On this account, when the earl of Chdng return- 
ed, he sent the Kung-tsze Ten to ask for peace 
■with Tsin. In autumn, in the 8th month, the 
earl of Ch‘ing and Chaou Kwoh of Tsin made a 
covenant at Ch‘uy-kcih.’ 2d, ‘ Wd-kwd, duke 
[Wan’s] son, of Sung, returned from being a 
hostage in Ts'oo. Hwa Tuen made a feast for 
him, when he asked [duke Eung] that he might 
leave Ms palace amid drums and clamour, and 
return to it in the same style, saying, “I will 
practise how to attack the Hwa family.” On 
this the dnke of Sung put Mm to death.’] 

Par. 6. TMs was king Ting (^^^^). Some- 
how tMs par. has got transposrt in the Chuen, 
and follows the next. No remark is made on it 
wMch is contrary to Tso-she’s practice, and has 
set Too Tu conjecturing that the par. is an in- 
terpolation. 

Par. 7. Ch‘nng-laou was in Ch'ing, — 3 2e 
north from the present dis. <aty of Pnng-k‘ew 


Tso-she says that Seun Show (Kung has _ 

instead of had gone to Ts'e to meet dep. E^e-ftmg. The Chuen says: 

i-nAo rP-nV.nV.i'c -o.-oi.:- .....inWi I — ‘In 'winter, the States PmenHanDai maao a 


the bride [Probably for Ms nder], and therefore 
Seuen-pih (K‘eaon-joo) [met him at Kuh] with 
a supply of provisions for Ms journey.’ 

Par. S. Mount Leang was in Tsin, — ^90 fc to 
the north-cast of the pres. dis. city of Han-sMng, 
dep. Se-gan, Shen-sc; — see on the Shoo, III.L 
Pt.i.4. The Chuen says: — ^‘When a part of 
mount Lcang fell, the marquis of Tsin sent 
couriers to call Pih-tsung to him. Pih-tsung 
met a waggon, which he told to get out of the 
way to make room for his fast carriage. The 
waggoner said, “ You will make more speed by 


In winter, the States [mentioned] a 

covenant together at Ch‘nng-laou; — on occasion 
of the submission [to Tsin] of Ch'ing. 'They 
were consulting about another meeting, when 
the duke of Sung made Hcang IVei-iin decline 
on his part, on account of the difficulties about 
Tsze-ling [The Wm-kwm in the 2d narrative 
after par. 5].’ 

OnpJ seemxrL4. It here much perplexes 
the critics. 


The famous Chung E interprets it 
of the parties thus meetine ■with one accord, 
wapmer saiu, “ You will make more speed by neglectful of the duties incumbent on them upon 
taking a short road than by waiting for me.” the king's death! 


358 


THE CH‘U2s TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VIH. 


Sixth year. 


^ st.sg ft J®.© 


ui^ pn yu IH W\Q 1=4 CJ i"**' 

ffi f f I- Bn f m m w.-re ^ m.-^ S $ 

M 3®.-? ^ * 75 :S:.0.SS 13 ^ 5$.!?.:^ 

z ^ s.« m.M Jt.® ^ ^ 3a 5 ± 

•3^.?I1 li? A @ #.l5t|i IK pT.B.-® I# 

M in.^.^l ^ s.fS ® SI *.ig. 1 

Amm^ Mm 

m.K w./'-.Sf h 1&M. 

± ?■. A.'^ S.W.® * ^.nit 3t 2 

Jv- m iJi: a ^ M' #.6ili i!i.?s BM AM $, 

;<: J|!4 i=- -(li.® Bff Bn fiili iff. nS -Ts-? 

igg.lS.Pc m % 31 : ES.'P m * -111. g 

mViiyAMm SSSii.TJM.A. ASS 

$ lA- ?j) *- f K in.Bn 3|1 ® {ff -Ul.^ ill S 

•T' ?{c T- a? <: W T- T' Am A B.Ht 


DUlvE C1W15G. 


359 


Ybak Y1. 


=■-£ MM K iK-t-i S 

l4i|®'S'lSil. 

# IR SR — iSi ® w 

^ "f- A ^ w.®c m 

pf B.iiB 4- fe M 

1 


^ #.a.? 


tB.aK 

WM 

m + 
n lit 
%.z 
m 
w-tn. 

ii ^ 
^.lU 

tiM 

^m, 

ZM 


VI. 


In his sixth j-ear, in spring, in the king’s first month, the 
duke arrived from the meeting [at Ch‘ung-laou]. 

2 In the second month, on Sin-sze, we set up a temple to 

[duke] Woo. 

3 We took Chuen. • 

4 Still Leang-foo of Wei led a force, and made an incursion 

into Sung, 

5 In summer, in the sixth month, the viscount of Choo came 

to Loo on a court-visit. 

6 Kung-sun Ying-ts'e went to Tsin. 

7 On Jin-shin, Pe, earl of Ch‘ing, died. 

8 In autumn, Cliung-sun Meeh and Shuh-sun IC‘eaou-joo 

led a force, and made an incursion into Sung. 

9 The Kung-tsze Ying-ts'e of Ts‘oo led a force, and invaded 

CVing. 

10 In winter, Ke-sun Hang-foo went to Tsin. 

11 Lwan Shoo of Tsin led a force and relieved Ch*ing. 


360 


THE CH'UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VIIL 


he walks rapidly, and does not rest in his place. 
We may well conclude that he will not live 
long.’] 

Par. 2. Tso-she appears to take as 

meaning ‘ a palace of victory^’ or ‘a temple of 
war.’ The Chuen is: — ‘In the 2d month, Ke 
WSn-tsze, on account of the victory at Gan, set 
up a ten)ple of War; — which was contrary to 
rule. [A State] dependent on others to save it 
in its distress cannot establish a character for 
prowess. Hie establishment of that must pro- 
ceed from itself, and not from others.’ Too 
compares this with the proposal, which the vis- 
count of Ts'oo rejected, after the battle of Feih, 
that he should rear a monument of his triumph. 
It is better, with most of the critics, to take 

in the sense of * duke Woo,* an 

earlier marquis of Loo, from 825 to 815, B. C., 
who had been distinguished for his military 
successes. They were flushed, no doubt, at this 
time, in Loo with the victory at Gan, and in 
the spirit of military enterprise, they resolved to 
add to the ancestral temple a shrine to this 
duke Woo, replacing in it his Spirit-tablet that 
had long been removed, thereafter to continue 
undisturbed. This temple or slirine-house be- 
came Loo’s 

Par. 3. Chuen was a small State, attached 
to Loo, referred by some to the north-east of 
the pres. dis. of T'an-shing dep. E- 

chow <i)r JH)- Loo now extinguished its 
sacriflees, and incorporated it with itself. Tso- 
slic thinks the brief record in the text intimates 
the case with which the thing was accomplished. 

Par. 4. Tlie Chuen says ‘ In the 3d month, 
Pih-tsung and Hca-yang Yueh of Tsin, Sun 
Lenng-foo and King Scang of Wei, an oflicer of 
Cli'ing, the Jung of E and Loh [See tlie Chuen 
after V.,\i,2], those of Loh-hwnn [See the Chuen 
after V.xxh,2] .and the Man-she, made an in- 
cursion into Sung, — because [the duke] had 
declined to attend the meeting [proposetl at 
Ch‘ung-lnou]. When their army was at K‘cen, 
the iH'ople of Wei were not maintaining nnv 
guard, and Ytieli wj>)ied to make a dasli upon 
its capital], saying. “Although we may not lie 
able to enter It, yet we sliail bring buck many 
prisoners, and our oflenee will not be de-emeil a 
mortal one.” I’ib-t&uiig, however, said, “ No. 
Wei is trusting Tsin ; and therefore, though our 
army is in the outskirts of the city, it has made 
tio pri'paratioiis against an attack* If we luiike 
a d-nOi upon it. we ahandon our goial faith. 
I bough we should take iii.ttiy prisoners, yet 
bating lost our faith, how eoidd 'IVin seek the 
lending of the States i" YueJ, j;nve up his 
puriyi-e. Wbfii the army reliirnetl. the ticoplc 
of \\ et matmi'\l their p.irnpi-tB.' 

Sims- the nature of the .Htn -k on Sung was 
ns b-re In ibe ('biieii, it i- not easy to 

ntid.fi’atid why the te\i Blioidd simply at- 
ttif'Ote it to Wei, Kor e.m we ari-imiil for the 
fy.'.n-*' ■ of Vu.-h ofi-iii to att.u-k Wei'. 

[ I 111* i Ij* n* Un* in;? narr;i« 

t’.»r 'r,!r.:~-Tbe i-.ple of T.in were 

e- ' u, b-.tvir.g [tl.-. ir ml at] old 

ft.-.l it..- .. 

; .--.j.j tt- sit.- of ih. iforunrl y,uu. 

' ’ 1: ' « . i» T-.!. ar. t fror.fiil. .i:-.! i; 


is near the salt marsh. There is profit in 
it for the people, and enjoyment for the 
ruler. Such a site is not to be lost.” [At this 
time] Han I-Ieen-tsze [Han Keuoh] commanded 
the new army of the centre, and was also liigh 
chamberlain. The marquis bowed to liim to 
follow liim, which he did to the court before the 
State chamber; and ns they stood tliero, the 
marquis asked his opinion on the subject. _ Hcen- 
tsze replied, “ At Seun-hca the soil is thin 
and the water shallow. The evil airs about it are 
easily developed. This will make tlie people 
miserable. In their misery they will become fee- 
ble and distressed ; and tlien we shall have swollen 
legs, and all the diseases generated by damp. The 
site there is not like that of Sin-t‘fien, where 
the soil is good and the water deep. It may 
be occupied without fear of disease. There 
are the Pun and the Kwei to carry away the 
evil airs ; and the people, moreover, are docile.^ It 
offersadvantagesfor ten generations. Mountains, 
marshes, forests, and salt-grounds are indeed 
most precious to a State; but when the country' 
is rich and fruitful, the people grow proud and 
lazy. Where a capital is near such precious 
places, the ruling House becomes poor; — such a 
site cannot be called enjoyable.” The marquis 
was pleased, and followed the suggestion. In 
summer, in the 4th montli, on Ting-ch‘ow, Tsin 
removed its capital to Sin-t‘cen.’] 

Parr. 6, 8. Kung-sun Ying-ts‘e was the son 
of Shuli-heih, whose death is mentioned in 'VII. 

xvii. 8. He was the grandson .^) of duke 
Wfin. Ho is known ns Tsze-shuh Shing-pih 
The Chuen says:— ‘Tszo- 
shuli Shing-pih went to Tsin, and got orders 
[for Loo] to invade Sung, In nutunin, 
Ifccn-tszc and Shuii-sun Scuen-pih made an 
incursion into Sung, according to tlio orders of 
Tsin.’ ^ , 

Par. 7. Too observes that in this death of the 
carl of Ch'ing — duke Tnou — we have the fiilnl- 
inent of Sze Ching-pih’s words in the Chuen 
after par. 1. 

Par, 9. Tso-she says, ‘ Tszc-ch'ung of Ts <» 
invaded Ch'ing, because Ch'ing was [nowj loi* 
lowing the party of Tsin.’ , , , 

j Par. 10. Tso says the object of tlii.s visit was 
I to congratulate Tsin on tlie transference ot 
■ capital. Chnou P'nng-fci, however, thinks n 
j was to tell Tsin of the suhinission of bm'k. | 


ixt year we find that State nguin con- 
with Tsin against Ts'oo. 


I p. 5 of next 
1 federate 

I’nr. 11. Kiing-yang ha.i 


^ instend of ; 

- 'Lwnn 


pr<>ee«le«l toitmkeaniiiciir.'ooiil - , 

relief of wliicli came the Kung-t.-rcii. Shin anil 
Shiiig. with the force- of Shin and Seib. wtil''ii 
look lip their {lositiiin at Sang-soy. Cliaoii 
T’uiig and Cliaou Kivnli »vi«iied to ri-k a l>atlle, 
and iH'gged Wno-t-re [f.«an Slio*t] to «I<) 

lie was atMjHt lo ne.-eili* to their reijiii -t, ulivn 

Clie Cliwung-ti-i'e jSciin ShneJ, Jan '\\.'*n-t*ze 
fSrc .Si-di], and llan II.-n-t*/(' flfan Ken.bJ 
reinon'lralf li, cieing, *'1)0 no!. \\e<‘nine t*> re- 
lieie Cil'ing, and a In n lb»iirniy of T'i'o'i ino»e<! 

frutn n*. ne eani.* on hiTf. Tims re b.l'e 
tranibfted lb'- .-'em. of onr nlta-L; .ml if 


YEAn VII. 


DUKE CH'ISG. 


361 


go on to attack the army of Ts‘ 00 , slwll enrage it, 
and be sure to lose any battle. Even should 
\re conquer, it will not be well. We came out 
with all our hosts; and should we defeat the 
forces of two districts of Ts‘ 00 , what glory will 
there be in the achievement? But should we 
not be able to do so, the disgrace will be extreme. 
Our best plan is to return.” Upon this, the 
army returned to Tsin. At this time nearly all 
the leaders of the army wished to fight, and some 
one said to Lwan Woo-tszc, “ The sages found 
the way to success in the agreement of their 
wishes and those of the multitude. Wliy not 
fnowj follow themultitude? Youarecommander- 
m-chief, and should decide according to the views 


of the people. Of your eleven assistant command- 
ers there arc only three who do not wish to fight; 
—those who wish to fight may be prononneed a 
great majority. One of the Books of the Shang- 
shoo (Shoo, V.iv.24^ says, ‘When three men 
obtain and interpret the indications and sjunbols, 
two fconsenling] are to be followed;* — the two 
being the majority.” Woo-tszesaid, ‘‘[To follow] 
the best is as good as to follow the multitude. 
The best are the lords of the multitude. Such 
are the three high ministers [who advise against 
fighting] ;— they may be called n majority. Am 
I not doing also what is proper in following 
them?** 


Seventh year. 


362 


THE CH*UE TS‘EW, ^nTH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VIII. 


m *. A m n.u 

& K.%.Z E W JR a.* a * a J * ± 0 . 

^ ^ f S S f • 

la.aJ.iB.-^ B.0.f . 
5c - «.# ^SMM E.0 m.m ® 

=^.a 0.® E ^ ^ ® ? 

m -t; mtliZR W.a ^ '/E. 

Hi » ^ ^ i M.a ib J. 5^ 

wnm ^ #15. 

w.m i# h.m.m m- a m 

# ^ ^.z 

• « .1 ife 1® ^.-T- '« It z,n -ifc.®. 
ia MM m.z,m m F z.^ nwm 
w.^ zmn0'Z3mmm.AM, 


ia in § in. 

AW a g. 
Ayr-m9 

* 0 . 


W ft -t-.^t a ^ ^ .3E ja w 


lib'll 

z ® 
m'X' 

±® 

z^m 

^.A 

mwi 

Z 

^Z 


#'|Hi. 

■c M 


M Z.A M nM.ZM &, 

«.* iti m W.^ JR ^ ®.0 

?i5.^ mtii'mzR sn.a- 0 in 

AM ^£zm^m&s.&.w-M 
mum- mm m.z.z- b.m. 

^ si! m,z & 

M f'F m m ^ z » ^ 3E w, m 

± ^.fS? m.it 3E 75 ft W. 

@.T- It ■g- Jit ffi a.iP It. 17 A 

VII. 1 III tlic [(hike’s] seventh yo.nrj in spring, in tlie kings iirst 
inoiitl), soiiiu iiulil mice ale the horns of the bull for the 
border .sacrifice. It wa-s changed, and another divined, 
for; but tlie mice aijain ate its horns, on which the 
bull -was let /'o. 

2 W(»o invaded T‘an. 

In .'iummer, in the fiftli montli, the earl of Ts'aou cnuic 
ti» Loo on a court-visit. 

4 'I here wns no hordcr s.'icrifice, but still we oflercd the 
Mierificf... to tlie three ohji’ets of Survey. 

't In autuuiM, the Kuiiit-t.-'/.e Yiiie-ts'c of fs'oo led a force 
and invaded flidu*:. ’flic duke joined the nuuvjuis fd 
‘f'-iii, tlie niar<jui> of 'IVS*. the fluke of .*^ung, the tnar* 


364 


THE CH'UN TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEH. 


BOOK vni. 


‘ When Tsze-fan ATislied to take Hea Ke to his 
harem, Woo-shin interfered to prevent him, 
through he afterwards married her himself, 
and left Ts'oo fSee the Chuen after p. 6 of the 
2d year]. In consequence of this, Tsze-fan also 
resented Woo-shin’s conduct; and when king 
Enng succeeded to his father, these two ministers 
put to death Tsze-yen, Tsze-tang, and Fuh-ke, 
commandant of Ts'ing, the kinsfolk of Woo-shin, 
destroying also their families. They put to death 
in the same way Hih-yaon, the son .of Seang- 
laon, and then divided the property of their 
victims among themsdves [and their friends]. 
Tsze-ch‘nng took the property of Tsze-yen, and 
made the commandant of Shin and the king’s 
son P‘e divide that of Tsze-tang, while Tsze-fan 
took all that had belonged to Hih-yaon and the 
commandant of Ts'ing. Woo-shin then sent 
them a letter from Tsin, saying, “Ton have 
served yonr ruler with slanderous malice and 
covetous greed, and have put to death many 
innocent persons. I will cause you to he weary 
with running about on service till you die.” 

‘After this, Woo-shin ohttdned leave from 
the marquis of Tsin to go on a mission to Woo, 
the viscount of which, Show-mung, was pleased 
with him. In this way he opened a communica- 
tion between Woo and Tsin. He went to Woo 


with a hundred choice chariotmen, and he left a 
fourth of them [This passage is obscure] with 
some archers and charioteers, who taught the 
men of Woo how to ride in chariots, and how 
to form the order of battle, leading them on to 
revolt from Ts'oo. He [also] left his son, Hoo- 
ynng, to beminister of Wooinits communications 
with other States. Woo then began to attack 
Ts‘oo, invading Ch'aou and Sen, to the rdief of 
which Tsze-ch'nng was obliged to hurry. After 
the meeting at Ma-hng, wlien Woo entered 
Chow-lae,Tsze-ch‘unghurried there fromCh'ing. 
Thus it was that he and Tsze-fan in_ one year 
flew about on seven different commissions. The 
tribes of the south and east which belonged to 
Ts ‘00 were all taken by Woo, which now began 
to have much communication with the superior 
States [of the north].’ 

Par. 8. See on n. v. 7, et al. 

Par. 9. This Sun Lin-foo was the son of Sun 
Iieang-foo, the chief minister of Wei. The city 
hdd by the family was Ts'eih, which Lin^o 
would appear to have snrrendered to Tsin. 
Chnen saj-s: — ‘Duke Ting of Wei hated Sun 
Iiin-foo, who left the State this winter, and fled 
to Tsin. The marqnis went to Tsin, which restor- 
ed Ts'eih to Wei.’ We shall find hereafter this 
lon-foo a great trouble to Wei. 


Ybui ^^II. 


DUKE CIMXG. 


3G.5 


^ W ± # ® iit* 

^.A a A.A.^.S So W 

© ^ M ^ flB ® ® ;fe 

W S ^ I.T fi « # -(fl ffi.f# a M ia -ffi, ® ja ff 
iSa^^jiE^TCiR 

f ^ ffl il; ?15 f , It -e Bn i.R-is ^ A 

^ ^ s.w m s •&• nt.rn 

&m M-mmi.mni&m, 

§ ^ ^ ffl ® ^ * m.^ w 


^ jnU tr la -i. 
IS 


a. 

m 


& 

& 

-1^ 

Jl- 

1 

k 

m 

a 

Wio 


a 

S. 


fA 


It- m iiii 
MWT 

nr SE 

rfci m 


U0.JS. 


““ 45r 


B,Z-^ 
^ TO A 

fS«^. 


.,@ i-t 
W # ffi 

KtW. 


■tii.^.se 

2 = # 
jt'Hi 
^ S A. 


jM ^.-Ifii.fjl ff.fc i't.'ft 

# 1^ ja iii.-ffi. ^ ^ ^ 
, A.S.®t Bn m ^ 


•ffi. ;^,^.= ®f ■0^ iSc 


-r > 


# ■fi, "(^ fJi.Bn Z Z 

:g # m.® m 


AW 

ff« 


^ a. ^zm^z 
m z Tl 


^.-f- 

* «, It — a Bn 3!: 
tf %J 0.m# M ^ 
■tfi..=eii li =. w IS ^ 
» « 5 ;2:. 
-ffl ?E 5le ii gg 

w •&. iS S.R ^ 0, 

wm m±mM^ 

is.^ A 5: * M ® 

PI 0. ffi.n IS 

^ # tT =.:p ^ «. 


4n 

Pl.lS. 


ISi- 


A a :S«.0.0.±. 


366 


THE CH'UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. BOOK VHI. 


M 0> 


B 


Ri] -ft A W =® S KJi.s ± 
^ # ZM 
:A.# — 

^ # UM # 35 


S- Ki^ 
VIII. 1 


^G. 


•tfc.^ . 

* A tJ 
A B ft 
S ft.H 


9 


3 

4 


8 

9 

10 

11 


mM ^ w 

a 

'(ft m ^ W ifc 

In the [duke’s] eighth year, in spring, the marquis of 
Tsin sent Han Ch‘uen to Loo, to speak about the 
lands of Wan-yang, which were [in consequence] 
restored to Ts‘e. 

Lwaii Shoo of Tsin led a force, and made an incursion 
into Ts‘ae. 

Kung-sun Ying-ts‘e went to Keu. 

The duke of Sung sent Hwa Yuen to Loo on a friendly 
mission. 

In summer, the duke of Sung sent Kung-sun Show to 
Loo, to present his marriage-ofiFerings. 

Tsin put to death its great officers, Chaou T‘ung and . 
Chaou Kwoh. ,/ 

In autumn, in the seventh month, the son of Heavp,ln 
sent the earl of Shaou to confer on the duke 
symbol [of investiture]. 4^ 

In winter, in the tenth month, on Kwei-maou,■5^M^lJe 
Yuan’s] third daughter, [who had been ins ]2«ie(l to 
the earl] of Ke, died. ** 

The marquis of Tsin sent Sze Seeh to Loo frien^^y 

mission. / 

Shuh-sun K‘eaou-joo joined Sze Seeh oft| — ^ rtfllcer 

of Ts‘e, and an officer of Choo, in in-}; ' TsiOj ^ 

An officer came from Wei, with ladies ^ ^ ^ 

accompany to her harem [the bridev 
Sung.] g 

pcdition nf'ainst Ta'c y? ® 
thun> to «s. Now yon pH 
rcquirinp ns to rostoro' 
fnitli in the iloinp wlint i 
nc.ss in the c.irryinp oul\ 
what tlic small States ho| 
thf.«e they cherish it. J, 
is not to be seen, anil yoC 
to be found, which of i‘ 
fp.nrate from you? 'J‘ 

IV. 4 ) says, I 


/ 


I 


state to 


Tar. 1 . After the battle of Gan, Tsin had re- 
quired Ts‘e to restore to Loo the lands of W 6 n- 
yans, and Ixw had taken pos.«es?ion of them, 
ns rvlate^l in p. 7 of 2 d year; but now, topmtify 
T*‘e, Tsin exerts its authority and oblipe,* Loo 
to r\ atnre tie* territory to it. Ulie Chnen says; — 
•On thii occa»li)n, Ke Wf.n-t?zc made a feast to 
ll.xn Ch‘ui-n on tin* way, ns 1 k< was leavinp, and 
then privately said to him, *• Vonr preat State, 
l y it* rji’;h!.’'>m d.-.-If ton«, maintains its cinhn to 
I r. li b- over c».(venan!s; and on this necnint the 
th.-r] States rle-rish It* f.-ivours and dn-ad Its 
1 sny tleiitphl of dii tfT.-ction. 

/.» t ) i’.- Ur di of Wifi.yan:., ih.-y w. T'- an oM 
l..!i iii'.n of t'-ir j.-r .‘'tv..-, nr. J aft.-r the ex- 


o««;ntco«‘"P 


' I arn not difTenml, } 
Hut you are ilouble in- 
It Uyon, Sir, whooh*el 
Thus chanpeaMe in yf 


jged 

,ead‘ff®o Tf'c. 0,. 

8 "^orders:"-,* «nd f"’’ 
• Tsifl' j" fidtk 

■"?? 


Year TOI. 


DUKE CH^ING. 


367 


Here in the space of 7 years, yon give ns [Wan- ! 
yang] and you take it avayj—vfhat greater ' 
changeahleness could there be? Tlie gentle- 
man [in the ode], by his changeableness, lost 
[the affections of] his wife; what must not the 
prince who assumes to be the leader of the 
States lose? He is to employ the influence of 
virtue; but when he changes about, how can he 
long rettdn [the attachment of] the States? 
The ode (She, III. ii. ode X. 1) says, 

‘ Your plans do not reach far, 

And therefore I strongly admonish you.’ 

Apprehensive lest Tsin, by the want of a far- 
reaching foresight, should lose the States, 1 
have ventured privatdy thus to speak to you.”’ 

Par. 2. In the Chuen on p. 11 of the 6th year 
we have the troops of Tsin making an incursion 
into Ts'ae, whicli was relieved by Ts‘oo, when 
Tsin withdrew from the field. Tsin now again 
attacks Ts'ae, and goes on to enter Ts’oo. llie 
Chuen says: — ‘Lwan tihoo of Tsin made an 
incursion into Ts'ae, and went on to an inroad 
into Ts‘oo, when he captured [the great officer], 
Shin Le. After the army ot Ts‘oo withdrew 

5 from Jaou-koh, in the 6th year], the troops of 
I'sin made an incursion into Shin, and captured 
its viscount, Tseih. This was through [Lwan 
Slioo’s] continuing to take the advice of Che, 
Pan, and Han. Tlic superior man will say, 
“He followed the wise and good, as on the 
course of a stream, and right it was {Tie should 
be so successful].” The ode (She, III.i. ode 
V. 3) says, 

‘ Our amiable, courteous prince 
Extensively used the [good] men.' 

[So did king Wan], seeing for the wise and 
good* and he who uses such is sure to accom- 
plish much.” 

‘During this expedition, the earl of Ch‘ing 
was going to join the army of Tsin, when he 
miacked the eastern gate of [the capital of] 
Heu, and got great spoil.” 

Par. 3. Tso-she says: — ‘Slivng-pih went to 
Ken. to meet his bride.’ The case is analogous 
to tliat of il)e Ivung-sim Tsze in V. v, 3. See 
the Chuen there. 

Par. •!. 


Ying [See the Chuen at the end of the 4th year, 
and after p. 1 of the 5th] slandered [his brothers] 
to the marquis of Tsin, saying, “ [The lords of] 
Yuen and Ping are intending to raise rebellion, 
and [the chiefs of] the Lwan and Keoh [clans] 
can attest the fact.” In the sixth month, [there- 
fore], Tsin put to death Chaou Thing and Chaou 
Kwoh. Woo [the son ot Chaou Soh] was brought 
up by [his mother Chwangh the lady Ke, in the 
ducal palace [and so escaped]; hut the marquis 
gave the lands [of the Chaou family] to K*e He. 
Han Keueh represented to Iiim, saying, “Thus, 
notwithstanding the services of Ch‘ing-ke [Chaon 
Tshiy] and the loyalty of Senen-mfing [Chaou 
Tun], they are left without any posterity ; — this 
is enough to make good servants of the State 
afraid. The good kings of the three dynasties 
preserved for several hundred years the dignity 
conferred hj- Heaven; — there were had kings 
among them, but through the wisdom and vir- 
tue of tlieir predecessors, they escaped [the ex- 
tinction of iheir sacrifices]. In one of the Books 
of Chow (Shoo, V.ix.4) it is said, “He did not 
dare to show any contempt to the widower and 
widows ; — ^it was thus that [king Wan] display- 
ed his virtue.” On this [the marquis] appointed, 
Woo [the representative of the Chaou family], 
and restored to him its lands. 

A diffbrent account of the disasters of the 
Chaou family and its narrow escape from ex- 
tinction is given by Sze-ina Ts'een; — see the 
Historical Records, Book XXXllL^The ‘His- 
tory of the various States,’ Book LVll., embel- 
lishes tlie story, and makes a tale of romantic 
interest out of it. 

Par. 7. For 


Tso-she would assign to here a 
more definite meaning than usual. He says the 
object of Hwa Yuen's visit to Loo was to ar- 
^nge about a marriage between the eldest , 
”,^^hter of duke Seuen and the duke of Sung j 

bly was — the object of the minister’s visit, but 
tlie alone gives no intimation of it. 

^**^'*‘- b* Tso-she 8.ays tliis proceeding was 
acconlmg to rule. Princes of States observed 
only two ceremonies preliminary to their mar- 


Mbut 


Enng and Kuh have ^ 

it seemsimpossibletoeslablish any distinction be- 
tween the meaning of those terms. They are both 
applied to a gift from a superior to an inferior 

Perlinps, as the 
K‘ang-he editors think, is more appropriate 

where the gift is one of favour, and where 
it is according to established conventions. The 
reader will observe the use of for the 

king, instead of '''’*'**^^* we have hitiierto 

found. Tso-she tells as that the carl of Shaou 
in the text was duke Hwan. As to the symbol 
sent to duke Ch‘ing. see on VI. L 5. In duke 
Wan's case, however, it w.vs sent at tlie proper 
1 time, immediately after he succeeded to his 
■ father. Here it comes ‘late.’ as Too Yu says 


j [Tlie Chuen adds hero: — ‘The m.'irqnis of 
I Tsin sent Woo-sliin. duke of Shin, on a mission 

I to Woo. Having aske-d leave to pass through 

nage the contract and the offerings or pre- ! Keu. ho was standing with duke K'eu-kCw ab — 
sents of silk. They did not themselves appear j the eity-nmat. and said to liim. Tlie wall is 
™ ^*^otiatious, Ixiiug subject to the general . a bad cvindition.” T'bo Tisrv,<,ni nf IvAn 
TOio that in.arriajros slioutd be made fav the pa- [ ” Keu is a poor 
rents. , r. I - - 


above 
is in 

The viscount of Ken rcplieil. 
State, lying among the wild 


'p 

kp ,7-r.- M'^^'buen says;— ‘Chai 
J'ccau^c of Uic banishme 


of 

Iheir Slate: — wbai State i< there which Ij.is 
not such men? It i« thu< th.vt there an? so 
aou Chwang- : many large States. Seme think [there msv Jx; 
■hiucnt of Chaou such dangers]: somckt things take their C'.virte. 


368 


THE CH‘UN TS^EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VIII. 


But a brave man keeps the leaves of his door ' 
shut; — ^how much more should a State do so! ’] 

Par. 8. See v. 1. Tso-she says the record of 
her death was made, because she had come back- 
from Ee. 

Parr. 9, 10. The Chuen says: — ‘On tliis 
occasion, Sze Seeh spoke about [Loo’s] invading 
T‘an, because it was rendering service to Woo. 
The duke offered him bribes, and begged that 
the expedition might be delayed. W&n-tsze [Sze 
Seeh], however, refused, saying, “My rmer’s 
command admits of no alteration. If I fail in 
my faith, I cannot stand [in Tsiu]. Gifts can- 
not be admitted among the ceremonies due to 
me. The business cannot be done to please both 


my ruler and you. If 3 'our lordship come after 
the other princes, my ruler will not be able to 
serve you [any more].” Seeh was about to 
return with the duke’s request to Tsin, when 
Ke-sun became afraid, and sent Scuen-pih with 
a force to join in the invasion of T'an.’ 

Par. 11. See on I. viL 1. The bride of the duke 
of Sung — ^known ns Kung Ke — was famous, it is 
said, for her worth; and tlie States contended 
for the privilege of sending their daughters to 
accompany her to the harem. The canon which 
Tso-she lays down, that such attendant ladies 
must be of the same surname as the bride, and 
not of a different surname, was broken down, 
we shall see, in her case. 


Ninth year. 

AA<a-i-AAJ!. 


S - SB IR.3® T #.3E 

mUMJE 


u i=! 


mm A:: M 


A.fd 


-rMF- rf wfi. T — c— 


^1 


^1 


W M 


m o 


S SB 


>i#o 


A 

A 

IRl 


ic 


I M M 

( im 

\ w ^ 


>c 

ul 

r 

ill 

Ik 


Yeak IX. 


DUKE CIMNG. 


369 


atK -»-. « jvi. guj aa; 

% wM 
^ ^ ^ W jig 

aw-? mAz 


•fft 

/iini 


^\PX A ^ ifj, ffiT ^ A 

il-f ^ 


^ Pt ? is: :r t»') 

i‘i‘ra l#*-^ 0 

pi lfg»«' 

is; ^ S ^ 5 P 


zg; 

A 


jiim.l i5£-Si S 
St# S' a^S'S-M-?E ^ 


■'■OL r. 


r^j. 

w 


fe 

- ■»• - — ■TT^ 


-.^ „. jam.s.HMg 
rofM m 

ii' 4 ' ^ ““‘~ 

S..^- H.^ 

2'$.'S f 5 -tfi..* r?ff 

5i'i- ^'f«•^f. t’ ii 

ill fill" “ ~ 

It!' Hi 

Sif. sg|s« I 


-•'- !>.- ^.. 1 . 

ZM ^ 

>«ls. •C-iJ' .J.. 


^ S 

-JTT 


#lli 
re T 

.Ao^. 


•I'S-. 

-- ■^ il 
Jf T.I 

f .i Ib 

5 B.ii |5 


'Tf ‘1 

:P 

: 5 fe 


Bx. 

^ 3 t-ffi,. 

if ^ 
^ 

■a.H.C 

1 

M M 


§•£ 


1 ‘ 3:5 


CXSJy © 

'TS 


S70 


THE CHUN IS'EW, WITH THB TSO CHUBS. 


BOOK VHI. 


# » 16 © 4® R Bn ^ <a- ^ ^ A 

W ffi « i: A ^ A.« R.f 
WE5c6i^ #BRS B#f 

WL.zmnm 


« B# w •# H ZM ^ 


ass 

m 


Z 


IX. 1 In the [duke’s] ninth year, in spring, in the king’s first 
month, the earl of Ke came to Loo, to meet the coffin of 
duke Wan’s third daughter, and took it back with him 
to Ke. 

2 The duke had a meeting with the marquis of Tsin, the 

marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the marquis of Wei, 
the earl of Oh‘ing, the earl of Ts‘aou, the viscount of 
Keu, and the earl of Ke, when they made a covenant 
together in P‘oo. 

3 The duke arrived from the meeting. 

4 In the second month, duke [Seueu’s] eldest daughter went 

to her home in Sung. 

5 In summer, Ke-sun Hang-foo went to Sung, to celebrate the 

completion of the above lady’s union with the duke of 
Sung. 

6 An officer came from Tsin with ladies of that State to go to 

the harem [of Sung], 

7 In autumn, in the seventh month, on Ping-tsze, Woo-yay, 

marquis of Ts’e, died. 

8 The people of Tsin seized and held the earl of Cli‘ing, and 

Lwan Shoo of Tsin led a force and invaded Ch'ing. 

9 In winter, in the eleventh month, there was the burial of 

duke K‘ing of Ts‘e. 

10 The Kung-tsze Ying-ts'e of Ts‘oo led a force and invaded 

Keu. On Kang-shin the people of Keu dispersed, and 
the troops of Ts‘oo entered Yiin. 

11 A body of men from Ts‘in and the white Teih invaded 

Tsin. 

12 A body of men from Ch‘ing laid siege to [the capital of] 

Heu. 

13 We walled Cluing-shing. 


Pnr. 1. rite Cliiioii *.iys:— 'The carl of Ke 
ca«u* tliui to nuvt the eonin, bccntise \rc liart 
R*V:t a Ijitn to ilo tct. Thf roi orcl [In 8 of l.vt 
year] that •* Sliuli Ke of K.- \* b«-au«c of 

Ithu n-Iatioii tliu fmly hntl su^t(ti^l^l ini Kf 
|h*. n** «nlof (h.-.arJV nK-.‘tit>^- Jo r rcninl. » i 

Un'AtjT*’ [th'* hml to] ; 

p^y, that K.- \vn« c..m|HlhiJ 
hj l/.»it.. lak.‘ th." ilivonv'l eoflin 

lo •n... K-.-.nv.hf .-litoM 

‘ -hu'* nn-fjost.- 

fi’ * It' 5 ' 


Par. 2. P*oo.— .BcoII.iii.2. Tlic ChtJcn says : 
—•* Ilee.Tiise of the re/ilorjition of the laiiii* o* 
WAn-yaiif: [See p. 1 of last year], all tlic State'* 
became ibi^aiTei’letl to 'IVin. 'I'be iwojilc of J i*i 


»in 


- iwtijib 

w-ere afrniil, an<l ealleil ,i iijcrtiiip ^nt P‘oo 
ri>new tlie euveiiniit of [A-e VII.*']. IW 

Wfio-iy/e k:iM to I'nti Wttn-tsn*. “Sinee yair 
virtue it not rtroiiir, of wimt H«e in the ftiewal 
of ctivfiiatin? ' 'llie otlier replie*!, *• Hy om' 
K.Mici- in viiciiiir:i'.;ini; ftlie States j, liv t,'e!ieri*“)p' 
ill onr troattiK-ul of iheiii, by firm utren^tb la 
« iUi.iatuliM" I’oiir eoftaii-* j. )*y npyalio',; to tJe* 
«iiteJ!i.;> ni ^J>!fi{•> to b:it<l (ouV aj;r«e))u at’j. 


Year IX. 


DUKE CH'IKG. 


• 371 


gently dealing witli those who submit, and by 
pmiisbing the disaffected, we exhibit an in- 
fluence only second to that of virtue.” At this 
meeting it was intended that Woo should for 
the first time meet [with the other States] ; but 
no ofiBcer from Woo came to it.’ 

Par. 4. The duke of Sung ought now to have 
sent a high minister to meet his bride. It is 
supposed that he sent an officer of inferior rank, 
and therefore we have the bare record of the 
bride’s going to Sung. 

[Tim Chuen adds here ; — ‘ The people of Ts'oo 
sought by bribes to recover the adherence of 
Ch‘ing, and tlic earl of Ch’ing had a meeting 
with the Kung-tsze Ch‘ing of Ts'oo in Tang.] 

Par. 5. The phrase here is difficult 

to translate. See on II. iii. 9, where the Chuen 
A the phrase equivalent to 
that in the text, Arhen the lady spoken of is 
a bride or young wife in Loo. After being 
ninrried three months, the 3'oung Avife Avas in- 
troduced into the ancestral temple, and appe.arcd 
before the parents of her husband, or their 
shrines ; and the marriage Ava.s then considered 
complete. This Avas the Boleinn xiroclamation 
that she Avas Me wi/e, and she could not after 
this be sent back to her parents, excepting 
* there were proper grounds for divorcing her. 

A message from her parents at this time Avas 
called It was the finishing and croAvning 
act of lier nuptials. 

The Omen saj’s; — ‘When Ke Wfin-tsze re- 
tAirned to Loo and reported the execution of his 
commission, the duke entertained him, and the 
nnmster sang the 5th stanza of tiie Han-yih (She, 
111. lit. ode VII.). Muh Kcnng Pl'lie bride’s 
mother, the Avidow of duke Seuenj then came 
out from lier chamber, and bowed tAA’ice to Mm, 
saying, “Tliis laborious journey you undertook 
mindful of our lute marquis, and of his son and 
neir, and of me, ins relict : — tliis Avas Avhat he 
even still Avould expect from you. Let me thank 
you tor your A'ery toilsome sendee." She then 
sang the last stanza of the Lnh-e (She, I. iii. 11.), 
and went in.’ ' ' 

Par. 0. Tso-she says this Avas according to 
rule. See on p, ll of hist year. 

says: — ‘In autumn, the 
an of (Si’ing went to Tsin, the people of which, 
D j'umsh him for his disaffection, and inclining 
in 'i Chuen after p. 4], seized him 

Slioo tlien inA'adcd Chlng, 
Tdi-kcucn to go and obtain peace. 
1 he people of Tsin, hoAvcver, put liiiii to death, 
vuieli w.ns contrary to rule during hoslUitics 
*****•'’ 6® come Iwtwceu the 
Sim'Pl 'IVoo made an incur- 

pi-i relieve Ch'ing.’ 

Ciiuen introduces here:— •'I'tio nm 
W l!.n( was 


us." The marquis made them loose his bonds, 
called him, and spoke comfortingly to him, 
liie man bowed tAvice before him, Avith his 
head to the ground, and the marquis asked him 
about his family. “ We arc musicians,” said he, 

‘‘ Can yon jilay ?” “Music,” said he, “Avas the 
profession of my father. Dared I learn any 
other?” Tlie marquis made a lute be giA-en to 
him, which he began to touch to an air of the 
south. Ho Avas then asked about the character 
of the king of Ts'oo, but lie sinsAvered that that 
Avas beyond the knoArlcdgc of a sniatl man like 
himself. Tlie marquis urging him, lie replied, 
“When he aa’us prince, iiis tutor and his guardian 
trained him ; and in tiic morning he Avas to be 
seen Avith Ying-ts‘e, and in the CA'ening Avith 
Tsili. I do not knoAv anytliing else about him.” 

‘The duke repeated this conA’crsation to Fan 
Wfin-tsze, AA’ho said, “Tliat prisoner of Ts'oo is 
a superior man. He told you of the office of his 
fatiier, showing that he is not ashamed of Ms 
origin. He played an air of bis country, shoAv- 
ing that be has not forgotten his old associations. 
He spoke of bis king Avlien he Avas prince, 
shoAving his oaa'u freedom from niercenariness. 
He mentioned tiic tAA'u ministers by name, doing 
honour to your lordship. His not being ashamed 
of his origin sIioaa-s the man’s virtue; his not 
forgetting Ids old associations, bis good faith ; 
ids freedom from mereenoriness, his loyalty; 
and his honouring your lordship, his intelligence. 
With virtue to undertake tlie management of 
nfiTnirs, good faitli to keep it, and loyalty to 
complete it, he is sure to be competent to the 
successful conduct of a great business. Why 
should not your lordship send him back to 
Ts'oo, and make 1dm unite Tsin and Ts'oo in 
bonds of peace?” The marquis foUoAved this 
counsel, treated Chung-e AA’ith great ceremony, 
and sent him back to Ts'oo to ask that there 
might be peace betAveen it and Tsin.’] 


introiluccs here: — •The marquis 
surveying the arsenal, when lie 


Par. 10. The Yun (Kting-yang has ) 
mentioned here is diift. from that in IV. 8; but 
it is probably the same ns that Avhicii appears 
in VI. xH 8, as being Availed by duke Wfiii. 
This Avas in the possession, — noAV of Keu, and 
noAvofLoo. The Chuen says : — ‘In Avinter, in 
the 11th month, 'J’sze-ch'nng of Ts'oo Avent on 
feom Chdn, and. inA-aded Ken. He laid siege to 
K'eu-k'eAv, the Avails of AA'hich AA-ere so badly 
built, that the people all dispersed, and fled to 
Keu, the troops of Ts'oo entering K'eu-k'eAv on 
Maou-shin. Tlie people of Keu made the 
Kung-tsze P'ing of Ts'oo a prisoner, and put 
him to death, notAvitlistanding that the enemy 
lagged them not to do so, and prondsed, if they 
Avould spare him, to restore tiieir cnptiA'cs. 
Tlie nrnij’ of Ts'oo then laid siege to the citj’ of 
Ken, Avhoso Avails Avere in the same condition as 
those of K’cu-k'cAv ; and on KiAng-shin tlie people 
dispersed. Ts'oo went on to enter Yun, for 
Keu had made no ptvpamtions against an 
cneinj'. A superior man will say, “To trust to 
one’s insignificance and make no preparations 
against danger is the greatest of offences; while 
to prepare bipforehand against Avhat mwa* not l»e 
foreseen is the greatest of excellences. Keu 


' I the CliAicn on Vll.ji]. j trusted to its insigidric,Ance, nnd did not repair 

.1 bbn s.Aying, ‘AYlio is that its aa-bUs, so that in the course of twelve davs. 

Till, O' Avearing a southern cjip?” ( Ts'oo snbtlncd its three chief cities. This ire- 

Ts'txi pri- j stilt Avns all from the want of i>rep.Aration-’ 
•.r, whom the people of Ch'ing delivered to i ’flic ode [It is now lost] s.aa's, 


372 


THE CH'UN TS‘E\V, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK vm. 


* Though you have silk and hemp, 

Do not throw avray your grass and rushes. 
Though your wife be a Ke or a Keang, 

Do not slight your sons of toil. 

All men 

Have their vicissitudes of want.’ 

Tills shows that preparation ought never to he 
intermitted.” 

Par. 11. In VII.viii.6, we found the TVliite 
Teih confederate with-Tsin against Ts‘in; here 
they are leagued with Ts*in against Tsin; — ‘be- 
cause,’ says Tso-she, ‘ of the general disaffection 
of the States to Tsin.’ 

Par. 12. The Chuen says; — *Tlie people of 
Ch'iug laid siege to Hen, to show Tsin that 
they were not urgent about their earl, [whom 
it was keeping a prisoner]. The plan proceeded • 


from Eung-sun Shin, who said, “If we send 
out a force to besiege Hen, and make ns if we 
would appoint another ruler, taking our time to 
send a messenger to Tsin, that State is sure to 
send back our ruler.” 

Par. 12. Too Yu, Maou, and others, think 
Chung-shing was the name of a cit}* of Loo, 
which is the most natural Interpretation of the 
phrase. Others think the meaning is that the 
duke now repaired the wall of the capital, or the 
walls of the cities generally. See on XI. vi. 6. 
All that 'I’so-she says is that the thing was done 
at the proper season. 

[The Chuen adds liere: — ‘In the 12th month, 
the viscount of Ts'oo sent the Kung-tsze Sliin 
to Tsin, in return for the mission of Chung-e, 
asking that the two States should cultivate 
; friendship and knit the bonds of peace.’] 


Tenth year. 


s.-lli -|-j 


3i*75 M 


<&■ 

mm 


o I ^ 
fitf ZlX 

■ t'l^ ^ P . 


m.M. 


- yXltt mK m J3L ^ It rd? 


rr ^ 

t# -f* t 


.JU V.V 


Ykak X. 


DUKK CIMSG. 


87S 


^ f: J: 

T' A * ^ 

in ffl -kA^ 

II. m a s- W 

;t pT.^^ 

KA i!L B.f 

® ® S IS 

mm-m m.m 


xai 3£ na w \i^ nn m n 

m %m 'MM ^ 

S m A Zy^ zm^% a: 

51. 0 ^j' Bff-SAH.T'^ jj.- 

.J- f-r~ 3*t». -Ml* *-T -ssr -tA ficO I 


an. 11 c-.iui I'-j 1 ® SR (-1 3= /St 

W ft Slff- A ^.•i..:^: ^ BM 
m W Mm. T Ja 5: 

III Ml^ -t- /=*- ^(n» nii — L« -sr* I- 


X. 1 In the [dukes] tenth year, in spring, MiU-pei, younger bro- 
ther of the marquis of ^Vei, led a force and made an 
incursion into Ch‘ing. 

2 In summer, in the fourth month, we divined a fifth time 

about the border sacrifice. The result was unfavourable, 
and we did not offer the sacrifice. 

3 In the fifth mon.th, the duke joined the marquis of Tsin, 

the marquis of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the marquis of 
Wei, and the earl of Ts'aou, in invading Ch‘ing. 

4 An officer came from Ts*e with ladies of that State to go to 

the harem [of Sung]. 

5 On Ping-woo, Now, marquis of Tsin, died. 

6 In autumn, in the seventh month, the duke went to Tsin. 

7 It was winter, the tenth month. 


[The Chnen introduces here: — ‘In the lOth 
in spring,^ the mnrquis of Tsin sent T'aou 
xei to Ts'o:^ in return for its mission of the 
grand-adniinistrator, Tsze-shang (See the Ghuen 
at the end of last year)’] 

rn says that this expedition of 

Hih-pei was undertaken bv command 

of rsin. 

“r. V.xsxi.3. There, howerer, 

.and in other passages, the idea of the sacrifice 
is abandoned after a 4th unfavourable divina- 
Hon, while here a 5th was attempted. Maou 
tiiinks that during the 8d month, which was 
♦{!« proper season for this sacrifice, the shell had 
consulted on the 3 sin days in it; 
lUo possible to divine twice in 

.1 before the equinox. W oo Ch‘ing 

consulted once in 
the last demde of the 2d month, thrice in the 3d 
sii^™ ’ *1?^ ®”“ “Sain in the 1st decade of the 
t pminarity which was very dis- 
Spirits. These difihring views 
Sroat scholars show how vague is the 
anti nfu "which can now be gleaned of tliis 
and other anrient practices. 

tsS“pnn ‘ 

Shfn rS ®f Chhng heard of the scheme of Shnh 

set ®” V«f - 12 of last year], he 

Sen. In summer, in the 


set up K‘wttn-wnn, Tsze-joo [The Kuug-tsze 
Pan] fleeing to Heu. Itwan Woo-tsze then said, 
“Since the people of Chfing have set up [an- 
other] earl, he whom we hold is but a common 
man. Of what use is it [to keep him] ? We 
had better invade Cli'ing, restore its ruler, and 
thereon seek for peace.” [At that time] the 
marquis of Tsin was ill, and the State raised 
his eldest son, Chow-p‘oo, to his place, and as- 
sembled the otiier States to invade Ch'ing. Tsze- 
hnn [A son of duke Muh] bribed [Tsin] with 
Uic bell [from the temple] of [duke] Seang. 
Tsze-jen [Another son of duke Muh] made a 
covenant with the States at Sew-tsih ; Tsze-sze 
[A 3d son of Muh] became a hostage [in Tsin] ; 
and the earl returned to Chdng.’ 

According to this Chuen, the marquis of Tsin 
in the text was not the re."!! marquis, but his 
son, whom, when upon his death-bed, he had 
caused to be declared marquis in his room. 
Many critics have been much stumbled by this 
account, and call Tso-she's statement in' ques- 
tion. TW K*ang-he editors reject it and say, 
‘Kot long after this expedition, the marquis of 
Tsin died. Because the text does not say that 

“he died when with the army f/^". 

to meet the exigency of the tesd, Tso-she in- 
troduced the account of his son’s being raised to 
j the" marquisate, while he was still alive. But 


4th Tnnnti. .1 " , ro summer, in tne tne marquisate, wmie He was still alive. But 

Hi, the people of Ch’ing killed Sou, and the lessons of the Ch'un Ts‘cw were intended 


THE CH'UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK vin. 


374 

for 10.000 ngos ; — could it have recognized the. 
succession of a son while the father was yet alive, 
giving hini his title? The former critics have 
all disputed this matter.’ ^laou, it may be ob- 
served, accepts Tso-she’s statement without 
question. 

Par. 4. Tso-she makes no remark on this 
paragraph. It is in contradiction of his canon 
at tlte end of the 8th year, that the ladies, the 
attendants of a bride to her harem, must not be 
of a different surname from herself. The ladies 
of Wei (VIlI.ll), and those of Tsin (IX. G), were 
all Kes like the daughter of Loo, but here are 
Eiiangs claiming to join her compnn 5 ’ ns well. 
Then the prince of a State was understood to 
be provided at once with nine partners, — ^the 
wife proper, and eight attendants; but in this 
case tiie duke of Sung was provided with twelve. 
There has been no end of speculation and dis- 
cussion on the text, without any satisfactory' 
conclusion. The thing may liave been ‘ contrary 
to rule,’ but the fact remains. There is no- 
thing in the text to indicate that the action of 
Ts‘e was not ns proper ns that of Wei and Tsin. 

Par. 5. The Chuen says; — ‘The marquis of 
Tsin saw in a dream a great demon with 
dishevelled hair reaching to the ground, which 
boat its breast, and leaped up, saying, “You 
have slain my descendants unrighteously, and 1 
have presented my request to Rod in conse- 
quence [This would be tlic Spirit of tlie founder 
of tlio Chaou clan].’’. It tlicn broke tlie great gate 
[of the palace], advanced to tlie gate of the State 
chamber, and entered. Tlie duke was afraid 
and went into a side-chamber, the door of which 
it also broke. Tlie duke then awoke, and called 
for the witch of Snng-t'ecii, who told him every- 
thing whicli he had dreamt. “What will be 
the issue?’’ asked tlie duke. “You will not 
taste the new wheat,” she replied. 

‘After this, the duke became very ill, and 
asked the services of a physician from Ts‘in, 
the earl of which sent the physician Hwan to 
do what he could for him. Before he came, 
the duke dreamt that his disease turned into 
two boys, who said, “That is a skilful piiysician; 
it is to be fearcil ho will hurt us; how shall we 
get out of his way?” Then one of them said. 
" If we take our place aliove the heart and be- 


low the throat, what can he do to us?” When 
the physician arrived, he said, “Nothing can be 
done for this disease. Its seat is above the heart 
and below the throat. If I assail it [with medi- 
cine], it will be of no use ; if I attempt to puncture 
it, it cannot bo reached. Nothing can bo done 
for it.” The duke said, “ Ho is a skilful phy- 
sician,” gave him largo gifts, and sent him back 
to Ts‘in. 

‘ In the sixth month, on Ping-woo, the mar- 
quis wished to taste the new wheat, and made 
the superintendent of his fields present some. 
While the baker was getting it ready, they call- 
ed the witch of Sang-t’cen, showed her the 
wheat, and put her to death. As the marquis 
was about to taste the wlieat, he felt it neces- 
sary to go to the privy, into which he fell, and 
so died. One of the servants that waited on 
him had dreamt in tlie morning that he carried 
the marquis on his back up to heaven. The 
same at mid-day carried him on his back o^ 
from the privy, and was afterwards buried 
alive with him!’ 

[The Chuen adds here : — ‘ Tlie earl of Cli'ing, 
punishing ^thoso who had set up other carls 
[in his place], on Maou-shin. put to death 
Shull Shin and piis brather] Shuh K‘in [Sec 
the Chuen on par. 12 of last year]. The su- 
perior man will say, “Loyalty, as a praise- 
worthy virtue, is still to be shown only to a 
proper object; — ^liow much less should it be 
shown where it ma}' not be deemed praise- 
worthy!”’] 

Par. C. The Chuen says, ‘ When the duke 
this autumn went to Tsin, they detained liini 
there, and made him attend the burial of the , 
marquis. At this time T'aou Fei had not ro- 
turned from Ts*oo [Sec the Chuen at the begin- 
ning of the year]. In winter there was the 
burial of duke King which was followed by the 
duke. No other prince of a State was present, 
and the historingrapliers of Loo, because of the 
disgrace connected with the thing, did not re- 
cord, but concc.aled it.’ 

Par. 7. Kung-ynng has not this par., anjl it 
may be doubted whether the editions of Kuh- 
Icang and Tso-she before the T'ang dynasty had 
it. See the note in loc,, in Twan Yuli-ts’iics 
‘Old Text of the Cli‘iin Ts'ew.’ 


Eleventh year. 


7k M 

■ 


.\ 7 . 


376 


THE CH‘UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK vni. 


3 In summer, Ke-sun Haiig-foo went to Tsin. 

4 In autumn, Shuh-sun K‘eaou-joo went to Ts‘e. 

5 It was -winter, the tenth month. 


Par. 1. The duke had thus been fully 8 
months in Tsin, — ^more than half a year away 
from his own State. The Chuen says: — ‘The 
people of Tsin, thinking that the duke had been 
inclining to the side of Ts'oo, detained him, till 
he requested that he might he permitted to 
make a covenant with Tsin, and then they sent 
him home.’ The duke had gone to Tsin, to offer 
his condolences on the death of duke King. 
They had charged him, we may suppose, with 
disaffection, and when he denied it, they wished 
to keep him a sort of prisoner, till they could 
learn from T'aou Eei, on his return from Ts'oo, 
whether their suspicions were well grounded or 
not. He seems, however, to have got away 
before that officer returned. 

Par. 2. Por or without the Kung- 

yang has Kcoh Ch'ow was a first cousin of 

Kcoh K'ih. ‘ He came to Loo,’ says the Chuen, 

* on a friendl}' mission, and to make [on the part 
of Tsin] the covenant [which the duke had re- 
quested.’ It then proceeds to the following strange 
and mclnnchol 3 ’ narrative; — ‘The mother of 
ISliing-pih [The Kung-sun Ying-ts‘e; see on VI. 
6] liad been withmit [the regular cerenionj- of] 
betrothal; and Muh Ivcang [Duke Seuen’s wife; 
sister-in-law, therefore, to this ladj*] said, “I 
will not acknowledge a concubine as mj* sister- 
in-law." After the birth of Shing-pih, his 
father [Shuh-heih of VII. xvii. 8] sent awaj- the 
mother, who was afterwards married to Kwan' 
Yu-he of 'I's'e. She bore him two children, and 
was then left a widow, when she came back with 
the children to Shing-pih. Hcgothishalf-brother 
njade a great officer [of Loo], and married his 
half-sister to Slie llcaou-shuh [A desocndaiit of 
duke llwuj* of Loo]. AYhen Kcoh Ch'ow came 
on his friendlj’ mission, ho apjilicd for a wife 
to Sliing-pih, who took tliis half-sister from 
Slie llcaou-shuh, and gave her to him. She 
said [to her husband]. •• Even birds and leasts 
do not consent to lose their mates; what do 
j'ou projwsc to do?" lie said, “I am not 
iildc to die for j-ou.” On this she went [to 
Tsin], where slie boro two children to Kcoh. 
After his death, they sent her back from Tsin 
to pier former htisb,and] She, who met lier at 
the llo, and drowned in it her two childn*n. 
She was angry, and .•■aiil to him, *• You could 
not protect me when 1 was j-our wife, .and let 
me go :»way fnnn y<m. and now you are not able 
to cheri-h another man's orpiians and liave 
hilled them;— what death do you e.Npect to 
dii'?" She then se ore tliat ihe would not live 
again with him.’ 

Par. ;i. Tro-sho .■•ays : — ‘ Ke Wf.n-tsre wont 
to 'IVui on a friendly nii«>'ii>n in return for tliat 
rf Ivei h C'h'ov ; ami t<i make a covenant [on 
thf j art tif '1 lit. rtftiad of iii- jiii*— 

»;r.n i< n-'t m; ntiiiitd in the text. l'. rhni>« a 
f'ocfst.i wr.'* no: m.ad.- aft* r all; or the m.ar- 
I i 'P-in ilid tiiit nia5;e it in j»-r"i>ii. •.,> ih.if 
tl r h'*ti r, r' «•! p*ir;'”-iv (■iiii::<-.1 

»■' S it. 

f'.. tl - of c5,n- 


descended from the kings] Hwuy and Seang, 
and he had a contention, moreover, about the 
chief place in the government with Pih-yu. 
Being worsted in this, he was angry and left 
the court, proceeding to Yang-fan. The king 
sent the viscount of Lew to bring him back 
from there, with whom [also] he made a cove- 
nant in Keuen, before he Would enter [the capi- 
tal], Three daj's afterwards, however, he again 
fled to Tsin.’] 

Par. 4. Tso-she says of this visit that 
‘ Seuen-pih went on a friendly mission to Ts‘e, 
to renew the former friendship between it and 
Loo.’ 

Par. 5. - [Here we have three narratives in 
the Chuen : — 1st, ‘ Kcoli Che [A grand-nephew 
of Keoli K'ih] had a contention with [the court 
of] Chow about the lands of How. The king 
commissioned duke K‘ang of Lew and duke 
Seang of Shen, to dispute the question with him 
in Tsin. He urged that W’fiii was an old grant 
made to his family, and he dared not allow [.my 
part oQ it to be lost. The viscounts of Lew and 
Shen said, ‘Pormerly, when Chow subdued 
Shang, it gave the various princes the territories 
wliicli tliej’ should gently rule. Soo Fun-sttng 
received Wdn, and was minister of Crime, and 
his territory’ and that of the carl of T*an extend- 
ed to the llo. One of his descendants afterwmrdB 
went among the Teih, and when he could do 
nothing among them, he fled to W ei [See V *^2]. 

‘ [Bj’ and bj’], King Seang rewarded duke ivati 
with the gift of Wfiii [See tlie Cliuen after V. 
xxT. 4.]. The families of Hoo and Yang were 
the first to occupy it. and then it came to 
If you examine its history', it was a eitj* held by 
an officer of the king ; — bow can Kiioli Cbe bo 
allowed to have it? The marquis of ’I’sni tlicn 
insisted that Kcoh Che should not presume to 
contend about the place [aii.v longer].’ 

2d, ‘ Hw.a Yuen of Sung was on **:*^”l® 
with Tsr.c-elinng, the ciiief minister [of P®. 
and also wiiii Lwnn Woo-tszc [of Tsin]. *' 
he lic.’ircl that tlic people of Ts'oo had 
tlic peace proposed by Tsin through T'aou roi, 
and had sent tliat officer back to give sncn 
port of Ills mission, lie went this winter, first to 
Ts’oo .and tlicn to Tsin, to cement tlie gooii un- 
derstanding of the two States.’ 

.•Jtl. ‘ Ts’in and Tsin. Imving made peacc\ 
proposed to liavc a meeting at Ling-boo. 1 J'O 
nianpiis of Tsin came first to tlie place, but tlie 
carl of Ts'in was then unwilling to ero.ss tlie 
llo. lie halted in Wiing-sbing, and iiiacle tlie 
hi-t<iriogr.apbcr Ko go and make a 
with the inarqui.-i *>r Tsin on the <-a*t ol ni- 
river. Ki-oh I b’iiw of T-iii [then went am.lj 
inaili- a euveiiant willi the ••.•irl on the ve»t of it. 
IV.n WSh-t-i-e .-aid. "Of wbal n.«e i- this r<>yc- 
naot ? 'I'wK pnrlie.s m.ake a nnenaiit I'l J 

their goiwl fnith. Hill a iiiwline logyther I' I 
IJr-t d. iir>Ti-lr:iti'>n of ih.at goo-l failli ; an'l •• 
till' tir»t "Ifp lx' not taki'ii I" it. i* it liki'M to 
|x- ,•% ill- TUX ,1 :i|'if*rw.iril- la-n tier iMil t* * 
K.'J.-iti. li'- I'ri'ki' Ike '>0 I" 

’•ith 


37S 


THE CH‘Uy TS^EW, ^^TH THE TSO CHUEX. 


BOOK YIII. 


5II. 1 In the [duke’s], twelfth year, in spring, the duke of Chow- 
left and fled to Tsin.'^ 

2 In summer, the duke had a meeting with the marquis of 

Tsin and the marquis of lYei in So-tsih. 

3 In autumn, a bod}’- of men from Tsin defeated the Teih 

at Keaou-kang. 

4 It was winter, the tenth month. 


Pat. 1. See the Chuen after par. 3 of last 
year. The duke of Chow fied to Tsin. accord- 
ing to that, in the last year. Tso-she supposes 
his flight is entered now. because it was not till 
this spring that it was connuunicated to Loo. 
He says: — * TIus spring, the king sent the news 
to Loo of the troubles connected with the duke 
of Cliow. ^ The text says that '■ he went out and 
fled to Tsin.” 2sow the words “ went out ” are 
not applied in the 0.186 of parties leaving Chow, 
but they are used here because the duke of 
Chow out-cast himself.’ 

Ts’..-she’s meaning is this : — A fugitive might 
go out from one State to another: but the wlmle 
kingdom belonged to Chow. The States were 
all Chow. An ofiicer might flee from one part 
of Chow to another, but he could not go out 
from Chow. It was proper in sucli a case to 
say simply — -“he fled to such and such a State;” 
—see X. xxvi. 1. In the text the proper stvle is 
deputed from, because the duke of Chow re- 
peated his flight, after the king liad recalled 
him, ‘ out-casting himself.’— After all, the canon 
may be called in question. 

Par. 2, Kung-ynng has for 

The place so denominated has not beeiT asw- 
tainod. The Chuen s.iys:— ‘Hwa Yuen of Sung 
h.iving succeeded in cementing the peace be- 
tw«n Tsin and Ts-oo [See the 2d Cliuen at the 
end of l.ist year], this summer, in the 5th month 
t'zc Sech of Tsin had a meeting with the Kun»'- 
tsze P'c of Is'oo, and lieu Yen. They made a 
covenant on Kwei-hae outside the wes't gate of 
[the c.ipital of] Sung, to the following effect:— 

” i s‘oo ^d Tsin shall not go to war with each 
S- have common likings and 

oi'hkings. 'Ihcy sliall together compassionate ! 
States tliat are in calamity and i>cril, and be 
l••.ldy to relieve such as are unfortunate. Tsin 
idi.ill attack any that would injure Ts'oo, and 
any that would injure Tsin. Their roads 
sliall ^ open to messeugers that wish to pass 
V ith their offerings from the one to the other. 

J iiey sli.ill take measures against the dis.iffectotl I 
riul puniMi iho50 vho ilo not appear in the roval 1 
court. iicKwer shall violate this covenant, ninv ! 
yie mtellmeut Spirits destroy Iiim. causing dj- 
icat to hi* armies, and a speedv end to hi« ' ' 

r. t-V.? ‘-nri ! ' 

• It..; n. Ill to 1“ III. to receive [the conditions 1 ' 

* ‘"‘'■-■ting in S,i-tsih.’ ^ 1 • 

. ^ ‘ *'--'^■•■"'">’•<■'1 .1 go<«l deal of I ! 


the Kung-ts25e P‘e of Ts'oo show that it must 
have taken place. They suppose, therefore, that 
the sage, condemning and disliking the treaty 
between those Powers, here used his pruning 
knife, and cut away the record of it. They say 
further that Lew Ch'ang denies the trutli of the 
Chnen’s account of the meeting at So-tsih, but 
they preserve that account themselves out of 
deference to the general authority of 'rso-she. 

Par. 3. The situation of Keaou-kang is, like 
that of So-tsih, nndetennined. The Chuen 
says: — ‘ A hodi- of the Teih took the opportuni- 
ty of [Tsin’s being occupied ivith tlie] covenant 
in Sling to make an inroad into it; but not hav- 
ing made preparations [against a surprise], they 
were defeated in the autumn at Keaon-kaiig.’ 

_ ["Ihe Chuen gives here the following narra- 
tive: — *Keoh Che of Tsin went to 'J’s'oo on a 
friendly mission, and on the part of Tsin to make 
a covenant. The viscount of Ts‘oo invited liim 
to an enterainment, when Tsze-fnn, who directed 
the ceremonies, had caused an apartment to be 
roade under ground, in which the instruments 
of music were suspended. H'licn Kcoh Che was 
ascending the hall, the bells struck up [the signal 
lor performance] underneath, which friglitened 
him so that he ran out. Tsze-fan said }o 
him, “ Tlie day is wearing late; niv ruler is wait- 
ing; be pleased. Sir, to enter." The guest 
replied, “ Your mlor, mindful of tlie friendship 
between our former princes, extends his favour 
to my poor self, treating me with great cere- 
mony, even to a complete band of music. If by 
the blessing of Heaven onr two rulers have an 
interview, what can take the place of this? I 
dare not receive [siicli an lionour].’’ Tsze-fan 
said, “If by tlie blessing of Heaven our two 
! rulers have an interview, they will liave notliing 
blit an arrow to give to each other; tliC 3 ' will 
not be using music. SIv ruler is waiting; bo 
pleased, .Sir, to enter.” The other said, “ If it be 
an arrow tliat they mutually oiler and decline, 
that will be the griiitestof evils ; — there will bo no 
blessing ill that. When good order prevails, the 
I princes. in tlieirintcrvals of loisurefrointlicking's 

j business, visit at one nnotlicrV courts. Then 
j there are the ceremonies of entertainment and 
I feasting; ilmjo of entertainment lieing a lesson 


!.• -1.: lit. 
; ii.-.. 
.1 

• i M . t 
. -I . . . 


roji'iiitiimi.-r.. Tlie tfxt 
In-iv. i-n T»in and 
- i: .ill. IV,' i.f il,,. J,-, . 
I'< Il . f. .N Iltti; nt 
* *} l Ml I i K-iftnv;; 

t •’ '!• t I i vkil.- 

• !■ r- . K. ’ ,1 


HIV- vcrv'lliuinv?* t 

kindness i*: seen in the arrangeiiients of llie 
j government. When lhebiisine«* of governniont 
( i« iverfeciivl by een-iiioiiie*. then the i-eople 
, enjtiy rv't. and tin- nflicvT- m-eive onl'Ts al>o'Jit 
* ilie bii-in’—i they Imve to in tlie mom- 

inc [only], and ntij in tlie riming [a« vi'lll. 
Is i* in till* ivny iltit llii* j)riiic>'« prmc tliesn- 
•ejvp* ihc prettos.'r* of tlieir p- ople. -Jlieref'trP 
- lb- O'!.- fSb-, I. i. r vn ( . •-■ly.. 


fKiR XIIL 


DUKE CIMNG. 


379 


‘That bold and ninrtial man^ 

Is shield and wall to his prince.’ 

But in a time of disorder, the princes arc full 
of corctous greed, indulge their ambitions de- 
sires without shrinking, and for a few feet of 
territory will destroy their people, taking their 
martial officers and using them to carry out 
their hearts’ purposes as arms and legs, ns claws | 
and teeth. Therefore the ode says (ibid., 
stanza 3), 

‘That bold and martial man 
Is the mind and heart of his prince.’ 

When throughout the kingdom right ways pre- 
TBit, the princes aro shields and walls to the 


people, and repress [the solflshnc.ss of] their 
own hearts; but in a lime of disonler, it is the 
reverse. Sow your words, Sir, speak the ways 
of disorder, which cannot be taken ns a pattern. 
But you are host here, and I will not iirosumo 
to disobey you.” lie entered accordingly. 

‘When Ills business was over, and he returned, 
he told wlint had occurred to i'an Wftn-tsze, 
who said, “ With such want of propriety, they 
arc sure to eat their words. Our death will be 
at no distant day.” In winter, the Knng-tszo 
P'c of Ts*oo went to Tsin on a friendly mission, 
and to make a covenant on the part of Ts‘oo. 
In the twelfth month, the marquis of Tsin 
covenanted with him in Ch'ih-kcib.’] 


Thirteenth year. 


i — p X ^ • p=p ft -‘O I 

® ^ 15 W s ^ 


Wl 


W B.L 


l>0 


I f # a 4 

W ^ JR itjp, 

V-V:» 

W 


m 


m 5 mM m 


“ •! Jifiilitssf i'f t-± 

A‘S i f -^r t i ^ « t: Ja i f S' 

I I'l & ?‘l ^ S i-l; ^ 

S IS 11 IP I il l-Sil 

ll5-Si-|Sgl|| ml 


H. 

§ 


380 


THE CH'TJH- TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK vni. 


/m\ 

❖ 


S.l t.i -B. # Ji: ^ ^ i i 

^ ^ ® = 'ttii If If ^ ffi s If-® 2 1 
® si; i.:4 4.#.^ f® S § j 8 M ? S'fe'ra 

^ S- A.^ « M.M JII.X s S ¥ S « 


fV| 


5J. M 61 W A H.* if « 3E 93 1 * 5® g.® g S 

W.tfe li.^.f ^ J 3 
^S.WA.^^in 2 l^.lf ^gnf ® 15 

^ 5: WMM ^ ^.M il *.^ M '2‘ 


jm 

•f£ ^ Jit T M.K S.i? a iU » 1 • 

#.hi wiMMM s 

s. A ^ 

-R ® « * ■& « J».^ ffi ® ^ W.».W 

* ^ It * 16 m,z mM a «.s « ^ i5 jg.ro f 
ja it 0.* ^.ffi mM^m m m n g- 
m mM m m a 

MWLMmw 

w =63 A.a as: ro !1.T' h * ^ ^ B* 

-i^ T3:r -*>* iE if-li -sMs -ua ItT ^ ^ 


fBAB xm. 


DUKE CH'ING. 


381 


H tr.lS •a.l' f H 3 M 2 
1.® ^ ^ <0 A f B.A A 

n s . 4. 

fin » =^.W fc.^- T- II 

m P Hi)- a M $n,H ® j|. 

s s.i z.^ ^ f- A -f- as 

a.^ 1: w ® ^mi. 

& <&.A # ffi # f f; ^ 
75r @t Kt A *c.A MM 

mMM a f .i« t 

^ « fitf ^ii.m m # 

p.fi S @ a$. ^ ^ % 

a Sil ^ ± m tin lU.A 

XIII. 1 In the [duke’s] thirteenth 
of Tsin sent Keoh E to 


lin^MT &W;Z, 

si.w ^ 

si:^w 0 .s« 
w <& Hi e® w ^ 
^ ^ ^ ei|i ^.T 

^ ^ ® fH j. 

iif Hi.H ^ ^0.® W 
«.Hi^^HiW# 
mmm 5 *.^ 

^ li.ji % ft 5:. 

Assa 

2?^ Hi 55!l.fi M 

^ X ® ^ 

year, in spring, the marquis 
Loo, to beg the assistance of 


an army. 

2 In the third month, the duke went to the capital. 

3 In summer, in the fifth month, the duke, going on from 

the capital, joined the marquis of Tsin, the marquis 
of Ts‘e, the duke of Sung, the marquis of Wei, the 
earl of Ts‘aou, an officer of Choo, and an officer of 
T‘§,ng, in invading Ts‘in. 

4 Loo, earl of Ts‘aou, died in the army. 

6 In autumn, in the seventh month, the duke arrived from 
the invasion of Ts‘in. 

6 In winter, there was the burial of duke Seuen of Ts‘aou. 


Par. 1. Tsin was now calling out the troops 
of the States which adhered to it for the inva- 
sion of TsHn, mentioned in the 3d par. It was 
^it therefore that it should use the phrase 

•sei. and ‘ beg the assistance of an army,’ 
us it had not the authority of the king in the 
expedition. The Chuen says : 
When Keoh E (The son of Keoh K‘ih) came 
®ot respectful in the execution 
w- V® Mfing Heen-tsze said, “This 

of 5 L®oo'V3 perisli i Propriety is the stem 
respectfulness is its fouuda- 
i,u' has not that foundation, and 

come to him by inheritance. 
“ ®^'urge to ask for [the assist- 
tuo an army, it must be for the defence o1 
and he carries himsell 
WhnFl, “'’^“''f^'ng away the charge of his ruler 
hat can happen to him but to perish [soon]?” 

ennWni i. ^nongli the duke now went to tlu 
wnv n« I hecause it lay in hii 

It wn»in ° to join the army of Tsin 

did iiJ’n . 'n^ocd, that the other prince: 

Wliev probably, part of Tsin’, 

the hcln on?- king’s sanction ant 

P of his troops to its enterprise agains 


Ts'in. Tlie Chuen says : — ‘ When the duke was 
going to the capital, Seuen-pih [Shuh-sun 
K‘eaou-joo], wishing to obtain gifts [from the 
king], begged to be sent on beforehand. The 
king, however, received him [only] with the 
ceremonies due to an envoy. Miing Heen-tsze 
[Ciiung-sun Meeh] came on in attendance [on 
the duke], and the king considered him to be 
the duke’s director for the visit, and gave him 
large presents. The duke and the other princes 
had an audience of the king, and then followed 
duke K’ang of Lew and duke Snh of Ch'ing, to 
j join the marquis of Tsin in the invasion of Ts'in. 
When the viscount of Ch'ing received the flesh 
of the sacrifice at the altar of the land, his 
manner was not respectful. The viscount of 
Lew said, “I have heard that men receive at 
birth the exact and correct principles of Heaven 
and Earth, and these are what is called their ap- 
pointed [nature]. There are the rules of action, 
propriety, righteousness, and demeanour, to esta- 
blish this nature. Men of ability nourish those 
rules so as to secure blessing, while those devoid 
of ability violate them so ns to bring on tbem- 
sclrcs cnlnmity. Therefore superior men dili- 
gently attend to the rules of propriety, and men 


382 


THE CH‘UN TS‘EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. BOOK VHI. 


in an inferior position do their best. In regard 
to the rules of propriety, there is nothing like 
using the greatest respectfulness. In doing 
one’s best, there is nothing like being earnestly 
sincere. Tljat respectfulness consists in nour- 
ishing one’s spirit; that earnestness, in keeping 
one’s duties in life. The great affairs of a State 
are sacrifice and war. At sacrifices [in the an- 
cestral temple], [the officers] receive the roasted 
flesh; in war they receive that offered at the 
altar of the land: — these are the great cere- 
monies in worshipping tlie Spirits. Now the 
viscount of Ch‘ing by his lazy rudeness has cast 
from him his proper nature; — may we suppose 
that he will not return from this expedition ?” ’ 
See an account of this visit of duke Ch'ing to 

the king’s court in the g| ^ ^ 

Art. 9. 

Par. 3. Kuh-leang, after ^ » ^***8 & 

1^ evidently an error. The 

Chuen says : — ‘In summer, the marquis of Tsin 
sent Seang of Leu [Known as Leu Seuen-tsze 

( S ^ ® 

appears in the Chuen on the battle of Feih] to 
declare tlie end of his friendly relations with 
Ts'in in the following terms : — “ In former times, 
our duke Been and your duke Muh were on 
terms of friendship, which they cultivated with 
all their migiit and with one mind, adding to it 
covenants and oaths, and cementing it by the 
affinities of marriage. When Heaven was af- 
flicting Tsin, our duke Wttn went to Ts‘e, and 
duke Hwuy went to Tsin. Wlien, througli our 
evil fate, duke liccn left the world, duke Muh 
was not unmindful of their old friendship, and 
assisted our duke liwuy, so that he presided 
over the sacrifices of Tsin [Sec the 2d Chuen at i 
tlie end of V. ix]. But he could not complete 
his great service to Tsin, and there ensued the 
battle of Han [See V. xv. 13]. Afterwards, 
liowcvcr, he repented of this, and secured the 
accession of our duke Whn ; — tliis was accom- 
plished for us by Sluh. 

“ Duke Wiln tlicn donned buff-coat and hel- 
met, traversed tlie plains and crossed the 
streams, taking his way througli the most 
dangerous defiles, and operated against the 
States of the east, hold by descendants of Yu, 
Ilea, Shang and Chow, till he brought them 
all with him to the court of Ts‘in ; — tliis surely 
was enough to repay the old kindness [of duke 
Mull]. And when the people of Ch’ing had 
licen angrily trouhling your borders, our duke 
Wftn Ictl the oilier States and Tsin, and laid 
siege to the capital of Cli'iiig. Then the great 
ollicers of Ts'iii, without consulting with our 
ruler, pre'iiiiied to make a covenant with Clring. 
The Mate* were indignant at such candncC, 
and wi>hed t>i ri'l; the lives of their men against 
'IV’iii. Duke Wfin. however, afraid of the 
c>)n»esn:e!uv', Kwllied .ind pacified them, so 
that the anny of Ts'in cfTectoil its return, witli- 
O'.it f uffi ring any injury. And thus wc rendered 
the grvat.-<t svrrice to your we*terii Slate. 

‘•'ihfoisgh «iur evil f.iti*, duke WCn [al-o] left 
t!i*- fc t-rld, arid your Muh »eni no iner*age of 
r 1 *: ! Couienming dnke Wan ns ih-ad, 

an 1 •V.diting t!;.' yr.aih of our duke Seang, 
hr niii!- ; f.uT tcrriicrj* cf IlCaou, violate*! and 
I’cVf't!! a!! ffienddiip vlth us, attackc*] oar 


city of Paou-shing, cruelly extinguished our Pe, 
[the capital of] Hwnh [See V,xxxiii. 1], scattered 
and dispersed our brethren, broke the covenants 
that were between us, and would have overthrown 
our State. Then our duke Seang was not un- 
mindful of the former service whicli Muh had 
rendered [to his father] ; but he was afraid lest 
our altars should be cast down, and there ensued 
the battle of Heaou [See V. xxxiii. 3]. 

“ [Our Seang], even after this, wished to seek 
the forgiveness of duke Muh, hut the duke 
would not listen to him. On the contrary he 
applied to Ts'oo [See the 2d Chuen after VI. 
MV. 7], planning against us. But through the 
influence which Heaven exerts on men’s minds, 
king Ch'ing lost his life [See VI.i.lO], and 
duke Muh did not succeed in carrying out his 
hostile intentions. 

“ When Muh and Seang left this world, K'ang 
and Ling succeeded to them. [Your^ duke 
K'ang was the son of a daughter of I’sin, but 
he still wished to uproot and ‘cut down our 
House, and to overturn our altars. He gave an 
army to a vile insect [Tlie Kung-tsze Yung of 
Tsin] to disturb our borders, in consequence^ of 
which we liad the engagement at Ling* boo [See 
Vl.vii.6]. 

“ Still persisting in his hostility, K'ang entered 
our Ho-k‘euh, invaded our Suh-ch'uen, cap- 
tured our Wang-kwan, dismembered our Ke-ma, 
in consequence of which we had the battle of 
Ho-k‘euh [See VI. xii. 7]. 

“Tliat the way eastward was tiius rendered 
impracticable to Ts'in was through duke K'ang’s 
ovm rejection of our friendship. When your 
lordship succeeded to him, our ruler, duke 
King, looked to the west with outstretched 
neck, saying, ‘Now, perhaps, Ts'in will have 
compassion on us 1’ But, unkindly, you would 
not respond to us with a covenant, and took 
advantage of our difficulties with the Teih. 
You entered our Ho-heuen, burned our Ke and 
Kaou, cut down and destroyed the labours of 
our husbandmen, and killed the people of our 
borders, so that wo had the gathering at Foo- 
she [See on VII. xv. 4]. Then you also were 
sorry for the long continuance of our iniseralile 
iiostilitics ; and wishing to obt.ain the blessing of 
the former rulers, Heen and Muh, you sent 
Pih-keu with your commands to our duke King, 
saying that you and we siiould be friendly to- 
gether, put away all evil feelings, and again 
cultivate the old kindlincs.s, thinking of the 
services that had formerly passed between oiir 
rulers. Before an oath in accordance with these 
words couid be taken, duke King left the world, 

and I here, and ciscwlicro in the 

speech, siiould be ^] went to liavc a meet- 
ing with yon at Lnig-lioo, when with an nn- 
Iinppy purpose you turnoil hack, and rejected 
the covenant and oath [Sec the last Cliiicn 
after XI. I'l. 

“The V liitc Teih and you are in the s.anie 
province [Viing Chow]. 'J'hoy arc your enemies, 
while lielwceii us and them tlieru have lK'<*n 
interninrrinpes. You sent your c<)nimntuls, 
S-vying tliat you and ve siiould invade the 
Tvih. I then dared not cunsidcr our nllinitifs 
with them, but, in awe of your majesty, 1 re- 
crlvcd the coiiim.md from your messenger. 
You, however, with n double heart, repre’ente*! 


Ykjir XIV. 


DUKK cu-ixo. 


UI^U CillllC illiu tin. 1 J *• > •„ II"- » 

Ts'in ni^a the three UinRs of T^‘o<^Ultl^ not with- jw ‘‘'.’V’ 


' princes 


friendship. If vouwill sliow n hind consiileriithm 1 on Iinc-inaon. the Knni:.t«n< I'nii [See on 
for tiiein, and.’in compassion for me, pmnt me a \ of ('li‘in}:, fcnmimrl fmm 'IVr.e, smipiit ity nipiii 
covenant, this is wlial I desire, 1 vill then j to enter the praml lempie, nnd when lie wns 
receive vonr wisiies, quiet nil tlic princes, nnd j not alilo to do so, itilh’d 'IV'e-yin nnd 'IV7e*yu 
retire-,— how should 1 dare to seek the confusion 1 [sons of duke Midi], He ilieii relnrneil, nnd 
[of strife]? If you will not bestow on us your I tmik up n position with his fnlhtwers in tho 
gn>at kindness, i nin n innn of plain speecli ; — 1 j nvirket place. (In Ke-‘'7e, 'I'sre-s/e [nnnthor 
cannot withdraw with the princes. I have pre- ! son of dnkc Mnh] led the peojde to the temple 


sullied to declare all my mind to your servants, 
th.il they may consider what it will be l)c.st to 
do.” 

‘Because duke 11 wan of Ts‘in, after tnnkinp 
the covenant of Linp-liuo with duke Le of 'IVin, 
proceeded to call on the 'I'eili and Ts‘oo, wish- 
in,;,' to persuade them to invade Tsiti, therefore 
the titates rendered their friendly aid to the 
latter. Lwan Shoo coininandcd Tsiii*s army 
of the centre, with Seuii Kanp under him; Sze 


nnd iiindo a covennnt with them, nnd iifterwnrds 
burned the market j»lni-e,kiUitipTsze.joo[l’rtn], 
[Ids brother] Ts/.e-nmnp, [his soti] Sun.i.liuh, 
nnd Crs7.e-ninnp*8 son], Sun-che.] 
l*nr. 4, For ||‘^| Tso-slie has The Chuen 
says: — ‘Tlie people of 'IV'aon aiipoltited tiio 
earl’s son, Foo-ts'oo, to take charpe [of tho 
capital], nnd another sott, Iliti-she, to incot tlio 
colHn of the earl. In ntitiitnn, Foo-ts'oo nut to 


city [to tho duke].’ 


Fourteenth year. 

WiE +! 

% Mi® , 0 ,® 

® ^ if in 1^ ^ T 


.SL 


384 


THE CH‘UH TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. BOOK VHI. 


A 2fe 

o 


■ -f 


iffi; 


ra ^ ^ W H. 

M ^ 5R fi ^ R 0 ■^ + 


'I' iy\ 

» ± pf ^ ^ 
Afi Iff A ^ 


j?n 

S A <: « ?L 
# A ^ 
W M S 55 

A tffj 1 

A.^S ^ J..S 

^ A A A 
fi,t ^ ^ 
■S A.^Di 
AhI^ ^ 
■?• pf ^ 

g A -a.n 
AJia 

Afj 

Si H i{i A 
^ ^ f:.^. 
A A.l: =?^. 
It W- H.+ 
SS 3^ S A. 
A W 


a 

Bff A 
H*.A 

r?ff ^ 


Bt.A. 


Bn S. 

n:. 


ISI 

A.# 

'f&m 


^ 

ail til.® 


S A 
Bff A 
iS-ffe. 

#.i^ 

5)5# 
g-?- 
^.H. 


b¥. 


¥ m M Bff -a.® 0 

« M 0.#.^ A m 

« -f- #|J.X SI 

* 0 . 3 : ja« .. 

# S # 4h 

# ^ bt #. 

?H ^ Bff w 
J. A ^ I^i^. j; ^ 

‘M- 

f f.^tr.®^ 
|£ A Bff it 
® ^ ^ ^ ^ 
M Z.Z.M?A 
A®S. 


i=-. 

A 

A 

A 

¥ 

iiH 

M 


m-M ‘^mmM 

¥m>&t:W.W. 
A & M,¥M M. 
-f-fi.H-A® 
Hi:.# Si 3$ # ^ 

XI\ . 1 III the [dukes] fourteenth year, in spring, iu the king’s 

iirst month, Choo, viseount of Kcu, died. 

2 In summer. Sun Lin-foo of Wei returned from Tsin to 
\Vei. 

In autiimrj, Shuli-sun K‘l*aou-ioo went to Ts‘e, to inect 
the [duke’s] bride. 

4 riic Kung-tsze lie of Ch‘ing led a force, and invaded 
Hon. 

•» In the nintlj inonth, K'oaou-joo arrived from T.s‘e with 
the [dukes] wife, tlic lady Keang. 

<> In v.'inter, in tin.* fentli ninnth. on Kanir-vin. T.<ang, mar- 
qui- of W.-i, dif-d. 


Yiun XV. 


DtJKE 011 * 1 X 0 . 


385 


Par. 1 . Wc have the floalh of the viscount of 
Kcu here recorded, hut there is no subsequent 
record of his burial} for which the following 
reason is assigned. — ^'J’lie honorary title, with 
the style of ‘diiho,’ is always given in mention- 
ing the burials of princes. Ilut the lords of 
Ken bad no honorary titles assi^cd them after 
death, the State not being sufllcicntly advanced 
in civilirntion to have adopted that custom. 
Hence their burials arc not recorded. — may 
be added here that burials of the lords of Ts‘oo 
and Woo arc not given in the Ch‘un Tsew, be- 
cause they had usurped the style of king. 

Par. 2. See the flight of Sun Lin-foo to Tsin 
in VII, 0. 

Tlie Chuen says:— ‘In spring, the marquis of 
VTei went to Tsin, where the marquis of Tsin 
insisted on introducing Sun Lin-foo to him; but 
he would not see him. In summer, when he 
rctnnud toWei, the marquis of Tsin sent Keoh 
Cii‘ow with Lin-foo, to procure him au interview 
there, 'fltc marquis wanted [still] to refuse, 
lait [his wife]. Ting Keang, said, " Do not. He 
is the heir of the ministers of your predecessors, 
tc\ons of your own House. The great State, 
moreover, makes intercession for him. If you 
do not grant Its request, you will perish. Al- 
tliouclv you Imto him, is it not better [to see 
pctirti? Be plcnsoA to endure the 
moTUflc.'vtion. Is it not proper to give repose 
to (hepcMiie. and deal leniently with a minister 
i [On this] the marquis 

uJhhn*'” restored [liis 


’ CV*',”'! • '^ninng the nncionts 

t -v-v r . > ^ P’**^*'*!’ nnd to judge of tiieir 
ii i.'iV' i- t”' fntnre]. Hence 

» *s.’l m theolo (SlU ll.vii. .^le t{), 

’SirA' rhineceros horn, 

another, they 

, * K" pinlp. •' 

All UfJi'.ng, tkenj.’ 


Now he conducts himself with pride } — is the 
way to bring on himself calamity.” ’ 

Par. 8, The duke was now' marrying a 
daughter of Ta'e. The proliminary steps have 
not been mentioned. Tso-she .s.ays tliat Scuen- 
pih now went to meet the lady, and Hint his 
elan-name is mentioned, to do honour to the 
duke’s commission. 

Par. 4. See on IV.O. The Chuen says: — 

* In the 8tli month, Tszc-lmn of Ch'ing invaded 
Hen, and was defeated. On Mow-sliin tlic carl 
himself again invaded it, and penetrated to the 
outer suburbs of its capital, when Heu made 
peace by [surrendering] the territory with which 
[Ch*ing] had endowed Shuh Shin.' 

Par. 6. Sec on VII. i, 8. The K‘ang-he edit- 
ors argue against Kuh-leang and other critics, 
who insist here that the duke ought to have 
met ills bride in person. Tso-she thinks that 
the minister is mentioned hero without his elan- 
name, in deference to the Indy, adding, ‘Tim 
superior mnn*wiU say, “ 'rho Ch‘un 'I’s'ew, in 
the apiteliations which it uses, is clear with an 
exquisite minuteness, distinct through obscurity, 
elegant by its gentle turns, and full without 
descending to be low*, condemning what is evil, 
and encouraging what is good ■, — who but the 
sage could have compiled it as it is ?" * 

Par. P>. The Chuen say St — ‘When tlte mar- 
quis of Wei was ill, Ito made K'ung Olt'lng-tsr.o 
and Ning Ilwity-taze appoint K'an, Itis son by 
King Szc, to be itis successor. Cin his deatii 
in winter, In tt>o lOllt tnontli, itis wife, tho lady 
Keang, after slio Itnil tlono lier weojtlttg amt 
lamentation, saw tlint IC'an wore no apitenrnneo 
of sadness. Rite would not so mneb ns drink, 
but sighed and said, “'rbis fellow will not only 
prove Ibo rnln of live State of Wei, Iml bo will 
! begin with uie, Ivl* fatlver’s rellet. Alas I lleay- 
I on is nfliveUng the State of Wei. nod J roviii! 
! not bring it about that Cloven j A brotber nf 
, K'an] sivovvbi preslile over IV" ivllivri<!" W lieij 
I live gn'al ollleerr Iveard Ibnl stve Ibvm ev|>n-»»<'d 
' herself, they were all lilU-<l with itr^'iot. Avier 
I Ibis Sun \Yftn-t'«/e would not venturi' to 
IvW nrtvele- of value lu live eoiulrl. but d> l'. »lt. <t 
i them nil lu Ts elb. ovvl cult vat.-.! e,...<l.i.-vvdy 
; the frlentMivp of live great otli. ef* vl I **"• 


Fift.'nUh iii'tir. 


My 

1-r 

“f 


ter 


V 


Xfiis 7.1)15. 


m. -Jh. ¥- 

it. fi-i. 

vMi 

V I 


w»ti. 

VI 


m (11. K. 


— , g . ■ I"* 


n. 

j 1 , a 

z. 

-^'U. f f 

y 1 - .1 * . 

LL. 

iiu <r- 

f!’ 

'>'i£ ‘fh 

> \ 

A i- 


386 


THE CH‘UN TS‘EW, AflTH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VHI. 


il,» JR, 


S S m.K rr ii.Si.n# M MM 3E ^ ifc.Bff * 
«1 A P.S.K 

a » ja S' m 0. 

P Wi P !l^- *1; MM ^ ^ OT.Jic M ± 


A S H.jfiJ ?fr 

w) Siv: fi- 0 L m f tr.^ IW fjil 

«g.{^ m i'ffi ©; Jh/fS?; ix .sffl.lff 

S 7 g ■? iJiii <iir ]!!i 

m S H.-T- f.’f Jp 11 a fln 

ifti fifn ifl.^. 

;.') «; ffl lit m I|I flir; 

yiiMi l-i in; JU U ^J- -4?< 7^ 


I /iiiij wr /n« 

K.W ^ 

PM f ? 

W- .^> ««• M Bi. 
1® ^9 ii-t V| ft 
•Ol.^ !I 9 - Hn 
ffi s.a; ■^' 

::p m T- 

fili i£ JfJ M 31 ; j&. 

•?-’. i$,M- 0 K n 


rBiR XY. 


DUKE GH-IK6. 


387 


© ft PI -I" Ih te H.ta * ISI 

1-I.^il i 7!^ ft ^ t K * f W.Cf f 

f ¥ ?S ^AU ^ 6i.5lf 0 ^ ±.^ MAf ^.alil.ft 

- • — “ •' ■ ■ ' ^ TO * * ifc 75 (SiS M 


- m. A 


iR ^ ^ 

H ®i0.A.^ fli «l ±>* MM.m ^ ffl fiff .,-. 
^a'lttiii®ja-£:::^7DA ^>f.is t4-.ft W.-&.S 

«»« ft - ft > - ft-. ■••i* Aiift’ifc « JtSi >■ > ■ » I ■■' < k V* k r* ^ -- W Xrf 7 


If 

T 


XV. 


^ w! n s # ^ m ffc.p m 
a St =& @ A. A ^ 4 s 

^"«ss,i,iia'i.tt 


✓ >k/|'U |ssq X ^ ■ ■ . K>J *^1—* ' ■ « —1— 

R -a.# A.I11 Z.^.ZM ft ^ _ ... 

^ tfii 31 3? Ril :& T' S ^ .0. f® 

K m '®.. M.lfi m R.-lll.Bn ^ 

±M ft H ^ ii, ® A iK' tl :t: 

^ 7C fln ft + ft « R # 

® tr ^ ® Z,^ ^ 0 Pi tr. A * SSc W BE 

/K' 

•t* /* .z. 

n.^ 0. i6) R.® ffi s w Hk 

1 In the [duke’s] fifteenth year, in sjjring, in the kings 

second montli, there "was the burial of duke iiug o 

Wei. ^ . ,. q 

2 In the third month, on Yih-sze, Chung lling- ^ e ^ . 

3 On KAvei"ch‘ow, the duke had a meeting ' I ^ 

ofTsin, the marquis of Wei, the earl of Gh*m^ h^ 
of Ts’aon, Ch’ing the heir-son ^ Sung oh Iso ot 
Ts'c, and an officer of Choo, when they mad<. -i ev \ unint 

together in Ts'eih. .l,N’Sivr">v 

4 The marquis ofTsin seized the earl of T^aou. ana u.uavs 

ed him at the capital. , 

5 The duke arrived ”,rKfi takolf kng, dUsl 

6 In summer, m the sixth monT*i.xhv ^ 

7 The viscount of Ts‘oo invaded I 

8 In autumn, in the mghth mouth, there u..s ,*.e t 

duke K-ung of Sung. 

9 Hix-a Yuen of 

Tsin he ret 
oScer Shan. 


388 


-skak rvi. 


duke CU‘1SG. 


389 


Yuen wlien Ytt Too said, “If the master of the Tso mmister of ^ynr, and Yoh^ E minister of 

SiKhtreturnjheissiiretosetahoatpun4shinB,nnd Cnme, thus quielmg ih^wplc. 

the cinn of H wan perish.” Yu Shih said, “ If Kung and ICuh give ^ ^ ij J 

the waster of the Right get to return, nUhough VC ^ 1 1 1 , 

shLd allow him to punish, he will certainly not 5nd ^ H :5 ji| ^ as dwtinct parn- 
daretodpso. His services, mwcover, have been « — .... 

manj’ and great, so that the people of the State 
are all with him. If he do not rctnm, I am afraid 
that the Hwans will not he allowed to maintain 
their sacrifices in Sung. Should ho sot about 


graphs, llie inte^ity of the whole of the para- 
graph, indeed, has been called in question. Tlic 
text says that Ilwa Yuen iiad lied to Tsin and 
that he returned to Sung from Tsin, whereas, 
acc. to the Chuen, he was brought back to Sung 
before he reached Tsin. The double occurrence 


punishing, there is [Heang] Scuh. It is only a .. 

small portion of the Hwans that will perish. , ^ 

rOn this! Yn Shih went himseif and stopped of TC’ /vC ^ times 


Uwa Yuen at the Ho. Yuen said that he must 
be allowed to punish, and when this was pant- 
ed, he returned, and made Hwa He and Kung- 
sun Sxe lead the people to attack the Tang 
fanuly, when they put to death Tsze-shan 
[Tang Tsih], "When it is said in the text that 
“Sung put to death its great officer Shan,” the 
style intimates that he was rebelling agidnst the 
ducal House of which he was a scion. 

‘[After thi^, Yu Shih, Heang 'Wei-jin, Lin 
Ghoo, Heang Tae, and Yu Foo, went out [from 
the capital] and halted near the Suy. Hwa 
Yuen sent to stop them, hut they refused to 
stop. In winter, in the 10th month, he went to 
them himseif, but returned with the like result. 
Yu Too said, “If we do not now [immediately] 
follow him, we shall not be able to enter [the 
capital] again. His glances were rapid and his 
words also;— his purposes towards us were 
hostile, ns if he would not receive us again. He 


in BO short a space, certainly look susxiicions. 
^ Mnou in loc. 

[The Clmcn adds here about Tsin; — ‘Tlio 
three Kcoh [Ch'ow, Che, and E] of Tsin injured 
Pili-tsung slandering him nnd procuring his 
death, and also that of Lwnn Fuh-ko, on which 
son Pill Chow-le fled to Ts'oo. Hnn 
Becn-tsze said, “Those Kcoh will not escape 
an evil end 1 Good men arc appointed for gov- 
ernment by Heaven nnd E.arth. If destroying 
in this way one and another of them he not 
sufficient to ruin those who do so, what [greater 
offence] is to be waited for?” 'Vniciicvcr Pih- 
tsnng went to court, his wife had been accus- 
tomed to say to him, “ Thieves arc angry with 
the master [they want to rob], nnd the people 
hate their superiors. You are fond of straight- 
forward speaking, but it wUl bring you into 
difficulties.”*] 

Cl! 


-•11 ■ L o — — Par. 10. Chung-le belonged to Ts'oo, — ^intho 

- J driving off rapidly.” They ascend- pres. dis. of Fung-yang, dcp. Fung-ynng, Gan- 

^ Tso, ‘was the first instance 

chariots, and of communication between the States of the 
hurried aft« him. Tlie waters of the Suy, north and Woo.* 

eat^^rf country, the Par. 11. Sheh,— see Analects, VH. xvili. The 

parapets Chuen says Duke Ling of Hen, dreading the 


. .. Kung- 

of Ts‘oo removed Hen’s chief city to Sheh.* 


Sixteenth year. 


388 


THE CH‘1IN TS'EW, W'ith THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK vin. 


10 In winter, in the eleT+ 

joined Sze Seeh of #~ 
Yuen of Sung, Sr^ 
Ts‘ew of Ch‘ing, 
meeting with Wo'^ 

11 Heu remoYed its caj^ 


Par, 2. This Chang T^g-ts'e was a 
person from the Knng-sun Ying-ts'e of Vj 
and other places. They were both duke’s g 
sons; but the latter was a grandson ofJh: 
Wfin, the former of duke Chwang. T 

in the text has occasioned the comn' 
endless and needless difficulty. The 
duke Chwang’s'son, Suy, appears in 
as the death of Chung Suy, from whic’. 
a plain inference that duke Seuen' 
him, on the news of his death, the 

clan-name of ; and here accord 

Ying-tsze is so sumamed. Euniai'C 
ever, thought that TIng-ts‘e v-pj 
to get the surname of Chung, 
the oldest 
£ung-sun 
the Chuen on 


K 

m 


mm 

i ® 


4 


m 


son of Su y; — the°c^y~f 
Kwei-foo of VJLLxuifW U \ 

I r\r% ^rTTia» _ • 


T 


II 


to: 


oT 


-fi:, 


m m 

y >» H 

IBo U 

K 


B ft S-f S @ 15 MM 


A JSfc ® W 116 ^ ^ 
f IS.ISfl ■¥■ *p ® Jlf ja IS ^ RS 

Tj^s" t'"f rcEC ■.li^ .Ilia - - _ 


JK®. 
® St 

liEK, 


1S.J 

15 @ 

WM 

•y-f! 


Tear SVI. 


DUKE C3‘IKG. 


391 


^ A>f 1 i i'f f i i E' 


a H.'J'H K tS P® S.-fe.# E g f'l 0. 

- :i ± i i s a ^ 1 !• 


/IIH» 


//s 1 Tnr ii»i» »'w -i-i >^u »•>♦ _jl— *>1?^ >i>j=.» 

J.W ^,B.3E il.a.^.^h g Bn f . 

0.-^ 0.B. 0.^& ^!i ^ ffi W W f- W ^ 

m 0.^ S ^ W $ ^ ^M9! W.^ 

H M it i Bn s 0.^ 

0*3^ -i^ -£s -f- ^ Mf. -fe* it ^ ‘S^ Q ^ IM “T* iit 


» m.ia 0.;&.M ^ a i.;«.#.^ s,» « s 
s ^ 'ffl » -f^ ^ ZM ^ ^ w,?e 0.K.K ®.ja 

7C.1 ^ S « ^ . 0 .S » W * S Bn ^ ^ it 

i j K # 0 .- 0 ,^ a K s» : 2 : n.^ 

>P My^ n^mw ZW MM w t*: 5i.S 1},X- »J 

-ffi..^ -R.S « « m.K 

l.K -g- Bn K T' Ifc.tr.Bn = i=- S 0.fe mM ^ IB. 
a Bii -4,.^.* ^ ^.a ^J$f6BnK±is5i5. 

s B.® WiM.MmT-z- m 

«# m.m. =§- m 

^ SSS z ycw wi m iii m m, 

■ter ® -fc ^ .(A *: « -on ^ ^ gjy 

p® ^ tR s.^ a 

-.£ 56 ® A itfc i fj. 

^‘1 ^ ® ® 1 * fl ^-1 ¥ ?'l.§f ^ ± H 


THE CH‘UH TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHHEN. 


BOOK VIII. 


392 

^mR ja « It.* z m h.tj m m 

^.0 ^ ffi ro =1^.# 5 0.#.75 M 

^ nM » :s? « »f*' a.t n,i^ 

:?: * a ® W.*.* « H.pT * M M' H.« # Vf. 
^ m «fc.^ i=- «r ® * ja <: ^ ^ ffi f # 

ja ^ M ^ w s Rit.^ » St.® .If « 


ars 
Si rnj S 


fl 

^10 ?i B.BS.W M M.'^t B * .li.« ^’W 1 

WB^AlfBAr^^ ^ ffij It JB B.’^.JS 


ss 


/ta ^ Si 


^ » «: *.0 * * ifc.= ^ Ji..i @ Tii g.# 

m m. li^.* m m b.t- @.# m.®.s 

W-M M w H.-f- *tja#*#ia5E®MB*. 

= 0 .$. '&.[k M IB 0 ; 5 : X -s ^ ^ 

0 s .1.^.® ja « # ^ # (P * A ^ 


«*• '>A fj ^ 


=m Ji 

s 


ss. 


v a _ _ , _ 

* f 0 ® ft H.¥ * Pi # M MA 

? S 3 : ^ ^'95 # %M ZM 

^ ^ f:.*!.:® Jti gs H -( 0 .^ Z,Sl M 

.1 ft m 0.^ mmw m,9- m B.-b 
g»f 0 . 5 ®#.^ s.fua ^ g jis * g § 
M.jf A 0 a A 

B.f: s f: B.ja mm^i&mz ■&.((? 0 k a » 

m M Z,ZM B. A «:.'t <: H.S.^ W.ip 

S'-? B%9 0.31.^ 0 sfe ft i.if # 

E f M t f.H ZrnMm m it 


? • .».■& ja = 0 ^s.it 

jl: s,.!!i ^at :p if -Hi. Ill ^ il.pT Vf- ^f- m 
5j ?C ipi si'i 11. PI *I =0 K r^.js <:.iffi.»r A 

<:.JU !i;t.t 5 ® ^.IW.lll.i!- i« ^ ai i It 


:u.vu XVI. 


nUKK CIMXG. 


303 


^ 1 W s -b 

^.Bii A :S: fl ».>3 '- 


S iJk ii.^. 
'Jimwm 

1 ^ ^ m.^ 

®.iin i;3t 
m ^ ■tii..R, 

■f z^^ w 


r 

\ 


fl 

5C.i{!>^ 


|y^ 7*1 -sst* »iLi .rS 

^ ^ ^ ix ® fiili.f A 

r® w n.prsip a.® bs ^ ® -a a 
® fi®.# 3l>] ii-.Kt i=- !i in S J- ^ 
H.S X S' 0 i dt S ® 
M ^ ^11 A ® # {|g.5E.ffi e® 

^ |g 0 ^ &■& 3E i| g 

Hi li 4n •# ^ ^. ■§■.<&■ 1? ■£ ^. 

ii.ii.iw.^.^ m m.T- It K S' 


_ _ /■; iiiw» 

if *1: 

f.lSEi, 
^ 0.^ 

1 5^.111. 
tK.T' 

^ /]^ ^ 


?s.« 

A m * Ifl.lS Ji.'ffl Rn e® 
2x.® iffi ^1 ®i,t?n sea ja 
m iti ^r.JBJ.'rfn ®F 

0 in K Vi ^.z #. 

±.« A & S.w « A 
^ la ^ -s- bt.sl. 

^>ZM a tr :?: Bn 


BBS. 


s& 


z z 


S'S 


^ lie S ® H ^.0.# M 
^ ^ 6® &.ii # -tfe..^, 

m m MM z 


Z,M 

S#. 

B.m 


^.z.& « ^ # 
m.m T' "F. m.pA.'a 
* ja ^ -a-. 


©-ff 

A0. 

A# 

A® 


VOL V. 


50 


394 

the CS‘VN TS'ptit 

Q M ^ 

Ta.^y^ .ra? ^ 

^ hV^ ff ~ 9f&'^‘ 

^Mm ?‘M‘W # I? I 

# h M‘X ? -2: # I 

s®ff ffssf- 

■■ ^ S #.# 'A 


Sr ® g 

ri ^ i»w 


g®il 
IfS* 

Sw'&m 

^•M f 

#.A m 

M^m 
^ ^ 


m 

.JL^ * 


t 


M . 

iS. 


s. 


I'^'l 


P? 
fir s;*?P 


■•*»J 

»n 

B. 

If 


iia. 

-S 


If 


i*ff ^ m ^ ^ ^ W 

t i‘ J f « -e I 

^ iff 
f tff i'f * 

^ ft X'S # 

S'S'm^SM'^ 

^ ^ m S-S ^ tr - 

^•M‘'i^ $'$ S 

■ea.X^ M 


«■« Pufce ',7 

*'-st montjr ;! ^?®'’«Ii year .• ^ 

2 r„ ''■"'> ■•oe. ’ “ '■“»>«<), ^■i;^ t’h ’" yrina in t) 

of t"”"’ ’■'’ f''e fouMh ® 

‘ Sf; . 


book VIII. 


i 


Taxn XVI. 


DUKE CH'IKG. 


395 


9 The duke arrived from the meeting. 

10 The duke went to join the viscount of Yin, the marquis 

of Tsin, Kwoh Tso of Ts‘e, and an officer of Choo; in 
invading Ch'ing. 

11 The earl of Ts‘aou returned from the capital. 

12 In the ninth month, the people of Tsin seized Ke-sun 

Hang-foo, and lodged him in T‘eaou-k‘ew. 

13 In winter, in the tenth month, on Yih-iiae, Shuh-sun 

K‘eaou-joo fled to Ts‘e. 

14 In the twelfth month, on Yih-ch‘ow, Ke-sun Hang-foo 

and Keoh Gh‘ow of Tsin made a covenant in Hoo. 

15 The duke arrived from the meeting. 

16 On Yih-yew we put to death the duke’s half-brother, 

Yen. 


Pat. 1. The critics bring all their powers of 
interpretation into the held to find the moral 
and political significance of this phtenoinenon in 
the State of Loo and of the kingdom generally ; 

— ^very needlessly. We have simply the record 
of a striking fact; — ^it had rained heavily, and 
immediately after came a severe frost, so that { 
the ice lay on and hun^ from the trees. Knng ^ 
and Kuh both explain the text by saying, 

Wn ^ rain, and the 

trees became all over ice.’ 

[The Cliuen adds here;— ‘In spring, the vis- 
count of Ts'oo sent the Kung-tsze Chfing from 
Woo-shing to seek for peace with Gh*ing by the 
offer of the lands of Joo-yin. [On this], Ch'ing 
revolted from Tsin, and Tszc-sze went to the 
viscount, and made a covenant in Woo-shing.’] 
Par. 2. Tso tells us this was duke Wan 
T'ang 10 years, and 
was succeeded by his son Yuen — duke 

Ch‘ing(J^^y 

Par* “PI'® Chnen says: — ^‘Tsze-han of 
Chlng invaded Sung, and was defeated at Choh- 
pe by Tscang Ts'oo and Yoh Ken. [The con- 
querors then] retired and halted at Poo-keu, 
'‘"here they were not on their guard. The men 
of Ch'ing fconsequentlj’] overthrew and defeated 
rhem at Clioli-Hng, taking both the leaders;— 
as Sung had been relying on its previous victory.’ 

Tlie above attack by Ch'ing on Sung -was 
probably at tbe instigation of Ts‘oo 'riic re- 
tr^ for it was not long in coming, for the 
Chuen adds;- ‘The marquis of Wei invaded 
Cli'mg, and advanced ns far ns Ming-ven;— in 
behalf of Tsin.’ * 

Par. 4. 'This eclipse, visible at noon, took 
place on the 1st May, B. C. 574. 

Par. 6. The Chuen says*. — The marquis of 
rsm wn.s going to invade Cli’ing. Fan W«n- 
tsre said, “To satisfy my desires, all the States 
woul.i revolt from Tsin, and then T-in might 
ro satisfiM [Wan-tsze s,iw great evils in Tsin 
* , ®‘‘* whicli lie Itioiighl could only be kept in 
ciicck by apprehensions from *it1«>ut, and ilieir 
removal was nocc**nry in bis view to the pro*, 
perity of the State], iVonl; Ch'tng revolt {mm it, 


the sorrow of Tsin will not have to be waited for 
long.” Lwan Woo-tsze said, “ Wo must not in my 
time lose the States. We must invade CU'ing." 
On this the armies were called out. Lwan Shoo 
commanded that of the centre, with Szc Scch as 
assistant ; Ivcoli E the 1st army, with Senn Yen 
as assistant; Han Keueh, the Sd; Ivcioh Cho 
acted as assistant-commander of tltc new army, 
Seun Ying remaining and keeping guard in 
Tsin. Keoh Cli'ow went to Wei, and then on 
to Ts*e, to nsk tlie assisiancc of their armies. 
Lwan Yin came to Loo to ask the aid of an 
army from it. Mfmg Hficn-tszc said, “ He will 
he victorious.” ’ 

Par. 6. Yen-ling was in Cli'ing. The nnmo 
remains in the dis. so called, in tiic dep. of K'no- 
fung. There had been n State of Yen, whloli 
was extingnished and incorporated with Ch'lng 
by duke Wtm. 

'riic Chuen says: — ‘On Mow-yin, the artnlos 
of Tsin commenced their wnreh; and Olt’ing, 
hearing of their approach, sent won! to 'I'h'oo, 
Yaou Kow-ui'h going with the measenger, Tim 
visconnt of Ts'oo marched to the rt'lief of (fli'lng. 
The rainistcr of War [Tsze-fan] eommanded the 
army of the cculre; the ehlv'l' mtolator fH'nso* 
ch*ung] commanded on the left, and Tsist'-ain, 
minister of the liight, on tin* vlghl. As Ihny 
passed by Shin, Tszi'-fan entered the i'lt.V. to 
sec Shin SUuii-she |>ee m; XV. 7]. and ashed 
him what he tluinglit «tt' the evpeilitUm. 'I'lm 
other replied, “ Virtuoun geodness, pnidnhioenls, 
religion, rlgiiioonsness, propriely, and (leoil tallltj 
all are the appllatut'S of uar. Vlrlnniix pnad- 
ness appears in t\\e exereise nV ldndnvt-»i puninh. 
ment in llie eorr.'etioi; nt wtiat (>• a tonti, tetiaion 
in the service of the Spillt'ii tl(dtlt'.ini*in''is jg 
the establishment of nhai l« tn’neii.‘ttdi iicojMi.^- 
ty in doing tidngs at tin' pt'M'i'i tnoem and iuu>d 
faith in iin> watchfnl l.i'i'ptna ot « vvt\ttdnH, 

; [When tlu•^e things etdainh tin' pi'tipt.' tl\o oj-d 
oil', and their \ivine is \ iot\.'ti alt tnottpe'nts 
are with advantaae, and aitan* <ni> tii.htit 
nnlervd} tin' scu'-ons aie tdl o xt,.) 

everyttilng ts pi'.'i'it.'t.in''i lisiooM.t putaU# t,.-' 
twet'n snpvibns an.t intuim*'; .,li ot.o.oot.ts 
ar«' tninh' wttttoal inpnb'-tit»n”ti’ opj -.i.iu .j,, 
"hati'wr tin' ntp'Sb'ts t* V.oii niil.'i t,,, 

, cveiy..n«' Vnv.v s bis duty tin-.,- n b ...tl pi 

• the o.b f^’.' i' i ' 


396 


^an jJa^r-^^Ieied bt ^»e oSckrsof 

.^ncampnjfJ'‘=es n^irshal ^ev3^ 

.^•gTisfaSi- 
S^arSfS^TIS' 

theTfeton- -*^^- then attack ^ ^ ^nre to 

^»^a-ira„^-.-.^«>h Cbe5?4,r® ge? 

Snr.»j' ** aoaffojvTs n.. 


“®‘OiB tf,o “ “ •^ow-n-i, ~‘ ■*■ snatl not "o 
[about tho*”®*®®°S®r- fto 

s“ '“^•^1^1“"'* S' 4BS^.;r I 

p. ■‘^ the oth month *1. ""ihl he of* . 

‘>5 an<i Iiearj or*. ■' ^^^^yorTsin I 

5^hr^"<*^ewi5h^®,gP^acb of / 

taajs* lf.»hf-®?*tte as if ^ should jgj I 


^cton- ■•• T-- .‘«an attani- ^ *« snre ft 
^aiirantaVes^^k^'P^ssafd r/45 5® shall net 
^o mini which shonld’n ?V°° “Mortis ns 

^.niarsbaii^*^ are old.-^j,-^ *®^®®ach other- 
/ tubes of ♦r.^* not in ' •hthv* nr m»«* * 

that It fc and thn-*- . olamonr 


;v S' tJ5T "S -ii?" 

I'-:!;..... • •^'•.-:.-J 1!. .”«•' 01;.,.';.:,:* '• 

* .:'..i . ’,•' ’■ ‘ f 'f .• ^'■’h';'\-i r ' *'^-'sr 

'*•<.•;» * -'.fo •- i, . ■''f:''.*_ 

Ji 1- ■‘-' to t-.., ' '••■^■^• si;i 

*•. ‘i ■' .," ' ,~*’ - r ' ,.' *"'•- 'T tr;.j‘" ■'■ "r!..,-, 

f. - * " “ r-.’. » . '’■ n;’ • *■•:••" h:. >•*,■'* 

"■* .»•.•■ i, ,..;• ”•'•••:; f!.. .■"•.‘•■- 

■ ■'-• I . ■ • ■•■'• '■' >; ri. .I"'-' '* 

'-■ T- J. 

' < ' t • » • ^ ' * t r .* .. 


•"“rsualled TritT"*? «»e arm^' r m forces 

ttj,;- ^at to the said, 

' “Th^ in Ciolr.Ie^^'!■W^ 

P«chto.r"f*®« to fafce^-^ of the cenSf^ 

■ ^fomtho o^^ot." ..j5® connsel.” 

.ic4!iS4?j£:5r»f-,s- 

»'■■■"• "“ “”s 'i«i u,o"s£: 


■''^ i:4'‘* •* 

i.--. ■•>' . 

" ■ . « . 


I ‘ 


i ■ .; 

■‘-.i 


1 • 


-■.-:i I 


" 1 : 


: » f- , . 


Yeak XYl. 


IH'Ki: CU-ISG. 


i ;:;ii;i^U.eni^.scnp.r,hrv.timc^nna.hcn.Uh 


In front «( his cnlrcnclimcmstlicns was nMoncli. Inm, ‘ lA‘f «« mnKt- insiv micr u.. .. • ' u . - 

nnd to avoid it tin- cimriols soparatcd, some i»fu-n lootcs round, niul has not his inmd Ojmu hla 
coin" to the left, and soinp to the rinht. IS of horses, lie ran W overtaken. Han Kcnch, 
roofKcoh ISlwaschnriotecrtotheTOnTqnis.nnd however, said, “1 oujilit mu n swouu time to 
Lwan K‘een was sneannau on the tiphl. V-Iinj; dlsiaracc the ruler of n State [See the account 
Min" drove kinp Kunji of Ts‘oo, with V‘wnn of the hattle of Gan u\ the Ud year]; and dc- 
Tane on the right. Shili Show drove duke fisted from the pur.«nit. . , , 

Ch*Hi" of Ch‘inff, with Tanp Ivo'v on the rigiit. ‘Kcoh Che [ihenj pursued the earl, and the 
Lwan” r\Voo-tizcl and Van [Wfin-tsjie]. with sKarman on liis nght, rnh llau-lioo. said to 
their clansmen, advanced on cither fide of the him, “ het some nmnerf pel liefore and intercept 
marquis, whose c.arriago sank in the slouph. him, and 1 will pot into his chariot from hehiml, 
Lw.an Shoo came to take him into his, hut lv‘ccn caplnro him, and descend.” Kcoh Che said, 
said “Hctirc, Shoo. You have the groat charge “ Uc who injures the ruler of .a State pets pun- 
from the State, and how can you take it on you ished and .also pave up the pnrsnit. Sliih 
[to abandon it for another j? Moreover, to Show [I'he carl’s clmriotccr: see .above] then 
encroach on the office of another is presumption ; raid, “ n was only hoenuse dtike E of lYoi would 
to abandon your own office is an act of disrespect; not take down his flap, that he was defeated at 
to leave your own panic is treachery. Here arc Yung [Sec on IV. ii. 7. The present passage 
three offences, which you mxist not incur/’ shows tlrnt wo should there read 


g fith these words] he dragged [the carriage of] 
® marquis out of the slough, 

‘ On Kwei-szo, Tang, [the son] of P'wan W nng 
and Yang Yeiv-ke had set buff'ccats and shot at 
them, their arrows going through seven at onra. 
[Tlie spectators] took [the proof of their skill 
and strength] to show it to the king, saying, 
“ Since you have two officers like those, you 
need not bo anxious about the battle.” The 
king, however, was angry, and said [to the 
archers], “You are a groat disgrace to the State. 
To-morrow mprning, your archery will be found 
tbe art that will cause your death.” 

*E of Lcn [Wei E] dreamt that he discharged 
an arrow at the moon, and hit it, but that, on 
retiring, he got into the mire. An interpreter 


Yung [Sec on IV. ii.7. The present passage 
Shows that wo should there read j^]” 

and he put the carl's flag into the quiver. T*im 
Kow [the siiearman] said to Shih Show, “ You 
arc by our ruler’s side. Our defeat is great. I 
am not so important as you. Oo you make your 
escape with the carl, and lot me remain here." 
And there ho died. 

‘The army ofTs'oo drew near to a dangerous 
pass, and Shuh-shnn Jen said to Yang Yew-ke, 
•‘Notwithstanding the king’s command, it being 
for the State, you must shoot.” Yew-ke shot 
two arrows, each of which killed its man. Shuh- 
shan Jen seized a man, and hurled him against 
the cross bar in front of his chariot which was 
broken by the force; and the army of Tsin, 
[seeing such archery and such strength], stop- 


told him, “ [Princes oQ snrntwne Ke urc 1 ped iis pursuit, having made a prisonet o! Pei, 
represented by tbe sun; those of other surnames, 1 a son of the viscount of Ts'oo. 


represented by tbe sun; those of other surnames, 
by tbe moon. Your dream must respect the 
king of Ts‘oo, — yon shall shoot and hit him; 
but the gettmg into the mire, as you retired, 
shows that you will also die," In the battle, 
accordingly, E shot king Kung in the eye. The 
king called for Yang Yew-ke, and gave him two 
arrows, that be might shoot Len E, [The first] 
hit Mm in the neck, so that he fell dead on liis 
quiver, and Yew-ke returned the other arrow, 
and reported tbe execnllou of his commission. 

‘Keoh Che three times met the viscount’s 
soldiers; and whenever he saw the viscount, he 
dismounted from his chariot, took off his helmet, 
aiid ran like the wind. Tim viscount sent Scang, 
minister of Works, to salute him, and present 
mni with a bow, saying, “In a time of so mneb 
business and excitement as tbe present, that 
man with the gaiters of red leather shows bira- 
seU a superior man. [&iy that] I am afraid 


‘ IfWan K‘ccn, seeing the flag of Tsze-eli*ung, 
made a request to tlie marquis, saying, "The 
people of Ts’oo say that flag is the signal flag of 
Tsze-ch’ung. That then is Tszc-ch'ung. Eor- 
merlr, when I was sent on a mission to Ts'oo, he 
asked me in what the valour of Tsin was seen. 
I told him it was seen in our love of orderly 
arrangement, and when he asked in what be- 
sides, I said, in our love of being leisurely. Now 
bis State and ours have engaged in battle, with- 
out any messenger having gone from us that 
is not what can be called orderly arrangement 
And if in the time of action I eat my words' 
that cannot be called acting Irisureiy. Allow 
me to send a drink to him." The m.arqui 3 
granted the request, and K’een then sent a 
messenger with a vessel of spirits to Tsze- 
ch’ung, and to say for him self; “Mv ruler 
through want of otlier officers, has employed me 
to be m attendance on him win fnv 


another state, following m.Wal^ t'o the wa„ mnVu,; in^o^srauence of 

by the powerful influence of your ruler find in Ts’oo — i - ^ 

myself among the buffcoats and bebnets. 1 do j then re^ed the ve^^el the 


“'Mengerm, ^ TSaiy 

-£»PS*5S„!^"S 

<!oot_ep » that nJl *? ^®speet the / 

side so as to L £ ‘*aj*iot» / 

''" hS ab' On tbe / 

tbe ‘‘liev&-?.'’'nnff 2!f®5 


on"!?"” &”H/""«snt‘”‘jf 

iinpA 4, 0/1 rn»| ^XViii t% ^ ®®®UrGs Y-I ’ 

'Phpt, — ^«»|(] n eon of j ca/uj “i’ie 

^vifi. Jcinn. ” ins JiGaw . "^’e.” -i,, J"onr ' 

r^nKr "^e dal’ni^'® ffrou„?®'^n 


'noasureg^^^'ngiag spfiTjniYj,-,, «5 ‘Appointed 
:!5‘ inwt'l^siaS'nn ats/^ 


I « n. J '^'>'''>* //«. "^f^/Tife, 

**vri«r.f„J';‘i"P,' as 'ra„s,„,J^i^^« / 

i'iSSSafSSs 


•'”'- i.*V, 


i^nnch on^^y> an? Ch'oS®®® "in'ch 

jnarqnig "®n-pJh, and n*® ®sst. rr* “’snjanago- 

®°*ini.' -isin, irio co®“®sd ^'e dSfc?.^"’i'ss 

,5'‘’''MoiS^'“«*™ii"ySio 

, ^p” -Xv. Dn ssnd biV^ '^i’"nis;,e?° end?' 

/ -i^^on tJin”*° s-'die bfo®?® “'"P^'esent 

I Sfeatiy ^p®f ®n p. of 7„®?“'^'an of [See 

?<?*• Conner ‘'■‘J-i’ine TS®^ W '® of 

/rronr nrf »rac „?°«- Is ■’’O" are 

,*'s place ,-®®®nt one? b?'"'’FPabio ij«nnso 

'°«i8hip A" “n assemM Xnf/tj., 3-ot7. ' ."^^nces? 

^«ee ,L” Chief fof w i'c had takoo 


Ykkt, XVI. 


399 


PUKE CIMSO. 


ed lih nrr.'inpemcnls for kccptnp jrunttV nnd 
vrcflt hJs w»y. Tlio nrmU'R of tho other Stntes 
halted on the west of Uh‘inp, and our hnny 
Imlied at l\ih-yn«jp, not dnrtnp to pass ihronph 
that State. Tszc-slnih Shinp*pih [^The Kunp-sun 
ying-ts‘ej sent Shuh-sun I’nou [brother of 
K'caou-joo] to ask a party from the army of Tsin 
to come and meet ns, saying lie wouU'l remain 
without eating, in the borders of Ch'ing, till it ar- 
rived, ^Yhcn the ]>nrly did come to meet ns, 
Shing-pih had been waiting for it 4 days without 
eating anytlnng; and then l>c gave footl to I’aou’s 
messenger [also], before lie ate himself. 'J’lic 
States then rcmovetl [with their forces] Clic- 
t'ijen. Cite Woo-tsrc (Seim Ying) was acting ns 
the assistant -commander of the 3d army ; and 
with it and some forces of tltc States, ho made an 
incursion into Clt'in, ns far n.s M ing-Inh. 'J'liencc 
he went on into Ts‘nc ; nnd iK'forc he returned, 
tlie.States liad removed to Ying-slinng. Tlterc, 
on Mow-woo, Tszc-lmn of Cii'ing attacked tliem 
in the night, and the leaders of tljc annies of 
Sung, Ts*e, nnd tVei all got separated from 
them.* 

Par. n. The Chuen says: — “The people of 
Ts'nou again begged Tsin [to return to tliem 
their carl]. The marquis said, “If Tsze-tsang 
return, 1 will send back your ruler.” Tsze- 
tsang did return [from Sung] [See on p. 4 of 
last year], and then tlic earl returned to Ts'non. 
Tsze-tsang surrendered [to his brother] his city 
and his office of minister, and did not leave [his 
house to onga^ in the public service].’ 

Par. 12. tVe njust understand that Kc-sun 
Hfing-foo was in attendance on the duke in tiie 
invasion. of Cli'ing. T'eaou-k'iiw was a city of 
Tsin, but its situation is not known. Kung- 
yang has J^. 

Tile Clincn says; — ‘Souen-pih [K‘caou-joo] 
sent word to Keoh ClVow, saying, “Ko and 
mang are in Loo what Lwan and Fan arc in 
Psin;— -by tliem is all tlic action of tlio govt. 
Qcterinined. Now they liavo consnited together, 
and say, “ The govt, of Tsin issues from many 
gates; Tsm is not to be followed. We bad bet- 
ter sorvc_ Ts'e or Ts'oo. [In any wise] we can 
only perish; we will not follow Tsin.’ If yon 
wisli^ to get your will in Loo, lot me ask you to 
uetajn Hang-foo, and put him to death. I will 
[Here] cut off Mijeh, and serve Tsin with an 
unwavering fidelity. When Loo does not waver 
tn its adherence to Tsin, the smaller States are 
sure to agree in their service. If you do not do 
as I request, when he returns, lie is sure to 
you.” In the 9th month, the people 
01 1 sin seized and held Ko W&n-tsze in T'oaou- 
k‘ew. 


returning [from the expedition' 
wait^ m Yn^ while he sent Tsze-shuh Shing 
pih to asfe Tsin to liberate Ke-sun. Keo! 
Ml ow said to him, “ If you will take off Chung 
sun Meeli. and we detain [here] Ke-suii Hang 
^ friendly with your Stat 

than witii our own ducal House." SUing-pi 
replied, ou must have heard all about K‘eaoi) 
If you take away Miieh and Hang-foo, i 
be a great casting away of Loo, and wi 
involve my ruler lu guilt [towards you'l. Bn 
U away, but bestow o 

riinw'*'^ favour as a blessing of the duke < 
To««’ [continue to] sen 

yours, then these two men are the ministers o 


whom Loo’s altars depend. Destroy them in the 
morning, nnd in the evening Loo is lost to you, 
for it lies near to the States that arc hostile to 
yon. If it be once lost to you nnd bcconio 
hostile, how can you remedy such nn issue?” 
Kikih Cli’ow urged, “ I will ask a city for you.” 
The other replied, “ I am hut nn ordinary un- 
derling of Loo; dare I seek to become great 
through your great State? I have received my 
ruler’s order to present to you this request. If 
I obtain it, your gift will bo great; what more 
should 1 seek for?” 

‘Fan Wan-tsze said toLwnn Woo-tsze, “Ke- 
sun has been minister to two marquises of Loo, 
yet his concuhiiics have never worn silk, nnd 
his horses have not fed on grain. If we believe 
tiic slnndcnius nnd bad, nnd cast away the loyal 
nnd good, how shall we appear to the States? 
'rszc-shuh Ylng-ts‘c iins discharged his ruler’s 
commission witliuut any sclfislincss. Ho consult- 
ed for ids State, without swerving from his 
purpose; consideration for himself did not make 
him forget Ids ruler. If wo deny his request, 
we shall be abandoning a good man. You ought 
to take mcasuves accordingly.” [On this], they 
ngrccil to pence with Loo, nnd liberated Ke-sun.’ 

Par. 13. On the liberation of Kc Wan-tsze, 
the scale turned against K’caou-joo. The Chuen 
says:— ‘In winter, in the 10th month, [the 
i people drove] away Slinh-sun K‘enon-joo, nnd 
I [the great officers] entered into a covenant 
regarding him. lie fled to Ts'o.' 

Par. 14. The Chuen says: — ‘In the 12th 
month, Kc-sun nnd Kcoh made a covenant in 
lloo. [Kc-sun] then returned to Loo, nnd put 
to death the duke’s half brother Yen [see on p, 
8]. [Loo subsequently] called Shuh-sun Paou 
from Ts’c, nnd made him the representative [of 
the Sliiih-sun family] ; — see in the 2d year of 
next Book.’ Hoo, — see Ill.xxiii. 10. 

Par. 15. pTlic Chuen gives here two narra- 
tives; — Ist, ‘Shing Mang-tsze [the mother 'of 
the marquis of Ts'e, a daughter of the House of 
Sung; the eldest daughter by a concubine] began 
an intrigue with K'eaou-joo, and gave him a 
position between tliat of Kaou and Kwoli. He 
said, liowevor, “1 roust not be cliarged with 
such an offence a second time,” and fled to Wet, 
where also bis position was between that of its 
ministers.’ 2d, ‘ Tlie marquis of Tsin sent Keoh 
Cho to CliDW to present tlie spoils of Ts'oo; and 
there, in talking with duke Seang of Shen, he 
frequently boasted of his services. The vis- 
count.of Shell said to the great officers of the 
court, “Ke of Wttn [Keoh Che; see the Chuen 
at tlie end of the lith yea^ will come to an 
evil end! His position is betow that of seven 
others, and he seeks to hide the merit of those 
above him. When resentments gather round a 
man, there is the root of all disorder. How can 
he who excites many resentments and prepares 
the steps of disorder continue in a high position ? 
One of the Books of Hiia [Shoo, HI. iii. 5) says, 

‘ Should resentment be waited for till it 
appears? 

It must be cared for before it is seen;’ 

showing how cautious we should be in small 
things, but now he publishes what must occa- 
sion resentment. Gan that end well?”’] 


Yexh XVU. 


DUKE CU'IXG. 


a.* W.^. 

3 L ® Bn ii.# H.a m ^ 

-fr- 4* yk4 Tftr 'iHi Jvf- i*tt «f: hr* tm iSftrr'rc jizl 


^.T> W ^ «I5.« ^ Bff i!5.^ M 

m nh m # ia.s.+ h 6 0.^. H i=- s ei « m 
P.Bn M MM 

MR^A -a.i^ ^ ^ ^ « fl. 

S 3 ifr M it.® ® 

^m + m s ^ ±.®] m m ^,a mmn^ 


MR^A 

^|515 + ® 
^ P^.— R 

S f 4 -^ 

ft fe ® "fe 


g If.- R ir).it.+ j 
ift- 
gftiS-fe ♦.S.ft. 
ft ^ 8?.^. $ ijfc ^ 


^ ^ ffi M M M ^ 
ft H ® @ S S 

m Bi.3« 


^ ro ft R. Bff iS. 

H.S, 

®tfi7 


# Hnl 

« w 
M z 


«.ft. © 

*I 

m 

® Bff 6i 

s 


if 

ft 0. 
iS m 

%z 


m-&. 0 

»« S: 

fP3S ^ 


iro SX 


i-? 

SBE YE. 

»<•» V a 


laj 

ft.a 


s =fet ®:.A mmz^ 

0.E.-ti ^.A ^ a 5t 
^li « MM m 'MMM, 

j® I' ^.iff m R 
R.¥..®j a *. M 
ft E !^ ■&• Bff ii. 
m. ^ A ?£ 

ft ^ Bff K 


t^al^ 


MMm MM 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

m R z, 
ft ft mM 

S‘I ® 

^ Z W'sfl'ft 
A a.^ p^ ft-. 
®MJi?Bff^ 
JSi E S ^ ft 

a ^ 

SiS 
^SS.AftjE 
#.-® ?R ®F Bff 

it! MMZm 

M B,Z, 

t— r t »_r 03 -rir- eorr * 


BM 


Mm m 

tIS: iif ii 

^ nn %? jli^ 
:M ^ M ^.rfo 


TOL V. 


61 


402 


THE CH‘UN TS'EW, \fITH THE TSO CHUEH. 


BOOK VHI. 


..M 0.1^ ft ^.r?n gfi » « 
^ «l.T' * m ^ 


^ > I 


m. a 


^.A A « H.ffi » ^ fSM m,A K &» ^ 


IJi H.It ^ <S^ mM H.M ^ Jf «I5 0.tfn ^ * Bn 

■ ^ ® iS.fl.® iK' ^ #t iff -ii. 

t: m s.* m.w h. 


z 0.s.» mu mm Am 

%Am^M,BM-mmmm±,AAm^s 

1 i f f S S‘® S‘ 

® A f .TO g Z,m ZMMM f i 

^ S-f S 1 s ® ii ■®'- A # # ^ # 

% 1 ?‘l-5 1^ S mMM m f 

' Wjt « Ull^ tUT —nr 3<tt. - ■ ■ frr* _-.r^ >=r ■ n-l^ /I— 


R.».= ^ ® ^.E 5 ® TO IK «. A « ff.f 
S ^ S -fs S. ft :$: #.» ^ <&■ 

^ ^ § M S ^ ^ # « Ift 

1 ^ f ® g = i ^ W f .f 

1 5 f -SAS 2 0.® JI5 ^.5E JS.W.# EWp 


ftA\ 

ai =n, 


.Bf Sg ^ TjT 


^ A W sl¥ -S C _ 

.. ^ ^ _ ^.fi -f :il H BM # s 

# <& A n fL.«i5 m m s.g 

0^ iffiia®»JE?95@ z.A A ^ Z.Z,:f 9 
A.w mmms^ m.& w ■& imMM\ 
g -a s ±.iL *.* ^ 5i¥ = z.B,m m m 

z mM mubifs^ w.^ s 5E ^ 


aro 

3tS8 


^ciflf. 


§ W g ^13.;ijt m ^ 

M l£ .iff i^g 0 ^ ®.r?n ili* 

X\ II, 1 In the [duke's] seventeenth year, Pih-kung Kwoh of 
Wei led a f; )rce. and made an incursion into Gh'ing. 
2 In summer, the duke joined the viscount of Ti in, tho 
vicoount of Sljen, the marquis of Tsin, tlic marqjiis 
ol 'ls‘c, tlie duke oi Sung, the marquis of Wei, the 


Ybjlr xvn. 


DUKE Cn‘ING. 


403 


earl of Ts‘aou, and an officer of r'aoo, in invading 
Ch‘ing. 

3 In the sixth month, on Yih-y’ew, they made a covenant 

together in Ko-ling. 

4 In autumn, the duke arrived from his meeting [with 

the other princes]. 

5 ICaou Woo-k‘ew of Ts‘e fled to Keu. 

6 In the ninth month, on Sin-ch‘ow, we offered the bor- 

der sacrifice, 

7 The marquis of Tsin sent Seun Ying to Loo to ask the 

assistance of an army. 

8 In winter, the duke joined the viscount of Shen, the 

marquis of Tsin, the duke of Sung, the marquis of 
Wei, the earl of Ts‘aou, an officer of Ts‘e, and an 
officer of Choo, in invading Ch‘ing. 

9 In the eleventh month, the duke arrived from the in- 

vasion of Ch‘ing. 

10 On Jin-shin, Kung-sun Ying-ts‘e died in Le-shin. 

1 1 111 the twelfth month, on Ting-sze, the sun was eclipsed. 

12 Keoh-tseu, viscount of Choo, died. 

13 Tsin put to death its great officers, KSoh E, KSoh 

Ch‘ow, and Keoh Che. 

14 The people of Ts‘oo extinguished Shoo-yung. 


Par.- 1. The Chuen says: — ‘This year, in 
spring, in the king’s 1st month, Tsze-szc of 
Ch'iug made an incursion into [the districts of] 
Hen and H^rah in Tsin, vrhen Pih-knng Kwoh 
of Wei, to rdieve Tsin, made an incursion into 
Ch'ing, as far as Kaou-she.' For Knng- 

yang has Pih-knng Kvroh is also known 
as Pih-knng £-tsze •^)- Too 

says he was a great-grandson of duke Ch'ing 
of Wd. Many of the crirics insist upon a canon 
here regarding the nse of that it is used 

instead of when the invasion was made by 

a State at the command of the larger one whose 
superiority it acknowledged. The canon is with- 
out foundation, and would only mystify the text. 

^ Par. 2. See on x>ar. 10 of last year. In VI. 
siv. 11, et at, we have ‘the earl of Shen;’ here ! 
Jriie viscount.’ The title had been reduced, ! 
The Chuen says: — ^“In summer, in the 6th 
month, K'wtin Wan, the eldest son of the carl 
of Ch'ing, and How How, became hostages 
inTs'oo,andthetwoK.ung-tsze8 ofTs'oo, Ch'ing 
and Yin, came to guard the territory of Ch'ing. 
The duke joined duke Woo of Yin, duke Seang 
of Shen, and [the forces of] other States, in 
invading Ch'ing, from He-t‘nng to K'enh-wei.’ 

[The Chuen introduces here: — ‘When Fan 
Wan-tsze returned from Yen-ling, he made the 
priest of his ancestral temple pray that he might 
die, saying, “Cur ruler is haughty and extrava- 
gant, and, by this victory over his enemies,Heaveh 
is increasing his disease. Troubles will soon arise. 
I.et him that loves me curse me, so that I may 


soon die, and not see those troubles ; — that will 
bo ray happiness.* In the 6fh month, on Mow- 
shin, Sze SSeh [Wttn-tszcJ died.’ Too says that 

he committed suicide ( ^ 

know on what authority.] 

Par. 3. Too says that Ko-ling was in tho 
west of Cli'ing Nothing more is known of it. 
The object of the covenant, acc. to Tso-she, was 
to renew that of Ts'eili in the past year. The 
parties to the covenant were of course the 
princes and ministers mentioned in the former 
par. The omission of tliem here is unimportant, 
though many critics dwell on it, as intended to 
conceal the part taken in the covenant by the 
representatives of the king. 

Par. 4. The duke returned so soon, the coali- 
tion having been foiled. The Chuen says:— 
I ‘’rsze-ch*ung of Ts‘oo relieved Ch'ing, and took 
; post with his army at Show-che, on which [the 
armies of] the States returned.’ 

Par. 6. The Chuen says: — ‘K‘ing K‘ih of 
T8‘e had an intrigue with Shing 3lSng-tszc [See 
the 1st Chuen after p. 14 of last year], and was 
carried through a street leading to the palace 
in a carriage along with a woman, himself dis- 
guised as a woman. Paou K‘een [A great- 
grand-son of Paou Shuh-ya of duke Hwan’s 
time] saw him, and told Kwoh Woo-tsze [Kwoh 
Tso], who sent for K‘ih, and spoke to him. 
K‘lh pn consequence] for a long time kept in 
bis bouse, but he informed the duchess that 
Kwoh-tsze had Iwcn reproving him, which en- 
raged her. When duke Ling went to join [the 
other prints], Kwoh-tsze attended him, wkile 
Kaou and Paou remained in charge of the capi- 
tal. When he was returning, before his arrival, 


THE CH-UX TS-EW, WITH THE TSO CHUE^s. 


BOOK YHI- 


ese officers kept the gates of the city shut, 
d made inqmsition for strangers {Vho might 


these 

and ^ - 

attempt to enter]. On rhis MSng-tsze accns^ 
them, saying that they had meant not to admit 
the dnke. hnt to apptoint duke K*ing's son. Keoh. 
in his room, and that Kwoh-tsre was privy to 
their design. In autumn, in the 7th month, on 
Jin-shin, [duke King] caused Paon K'een’s feet 
to be cnt off, and drove out Kaon Woo-k'ew. who 
fled to Ken. [His son], Kaon. Job held [their _ 
city of] Loo against the State: and the people j 
of'Ts'e called Paon Kwoh. ^'een's brother] • 
from Loo, and appointed him the Head of his 
family. 

‘Before this, Paon Kwoh had left the Paon 
family in Ts'e, and come to Loo, where he be- 
came* a servant to She Heaon-shnh pee the 
Chuen on XL 2]. She was consulting the tor- 
toise-shdl about a steward, and K'wang K‘eu- 
seu was indicated for the appointment- Xow 
the steward of the She family had a town of 100 
houses, which was assigned to K‘wang Ken-sen. 
He, however, declined the appointment in fa- 
vour of Paon Kwoh. and gave the town up to 
him. She Heaou-shuh said, “The divination 
gave a favourable response for you.'” K‘wang 
replied. “ And what could be a greater proof of 
its being favourable than my giving the office 
to a faithful, good man Paon Kwoh served 
the She family faithfully, and therefore the 
people of Ts‘e now chose him to be the repre- 
sentative ot the Paon family. Chnng-ne said, 
“Tlie wisdom of Paon Chwang-tsre (Paon K*een) 
was not eqnal to that of a sunflower. Though 
but a flower, it is able to protect its roots!’. — 
This certainly is not like one of Confucius’ re- 
marks; and the critics unanimously agree in 
protesting against the ascription of it to him. 

Par. 6. The 9th month of Cliow was the 7th 
of Hea, when there ought to have been no bor- 
der sacrifice. Hie use of M before is 
singular, and has given rise to mudi speci^tiou. 
Many critics, after Kimg-yang, would make a 
canon, tliat is always used to indicate dis- 
approbation of that to which it is applied 
^ ^ ^ ffl ■^5- Some, especiaUy 
I^w Ch'ang, think that it indicates the use of 
a human victim at this sacrifice, and the 
K‘.ang-he editors have needlessly given an 
clabomto refutation of that view. 2^Iaou thinks 
the text is defective. 

Parr. 7.S,9. Foiled in its previous expedition, 
Tfin makes another attempt, equally unsuccess- 
ful, to regain its authority over Clring. Tlie 
t'lmen says : — ‘ In winter, the States invaded 
Ch’ing; and in the 10th month, on Ksng-woo, 
thi-y laid sii-ge to it'* capital, liung-tszc Shin 
of Ts'oo came to its relief, and ttx>k' post, \rith 
l.if army, oa the .Too, on wliich [the forces of] 
the Stati-s vithdrew. 

I’-ar. 10. For Kung-y.mg h-v i||^, and 

Kul>l.V.ing IIS'. ^^^■.ere Le-«h?n wa* has . 

r. t ft*rertr.::i."d. Tiierc is aditlicnltyal'out j 
th-' d.'.y whi.'h c.imiot have b.va in the ‘ 

Ktti t:-.' :;!h r.f ll'i» \ ear. .tin-«!iin j» only two 
d'.jt n't. r Kir-.v!'. ), whe:.. .-.tvor.lir.c to the • 
U't Chot n. a;:;. . l.'.'.l tlu-csp-tal of ' 

in tj;,. J,...;. re-'ath. Caleu- 
fr.-r, '1 Ir- as the If. div of the ‘ 


12th month, we must condnde likewise that 
the 11th month contained no Jin-shin day. 
Tlie critics, since Kung and Knh and their earli- 
est editors, make Jin -shin to have been the 15th 
day of the 10th mouth; but this is # conflict 
with the ‘11th ’ month of the previous para^aph. 
Too says that ‘the day is wrong ( ^ 

meaning that either the or the ^ is 
wrong: — in the 11th month of this year thane 
were the days and 

and also and . .,.v. 

The Chnen says : — ‘Before this, Shing-pihC^® 
Knng-snn Ting-ts‘e) dreamt that he was cross- 
ing the Hwan, when some one gave him a 
gem and a fine pearl, which he ate. He then 
fell a-crying, and his tears turned to Z^ev^P gsjDS 
and fine pearls, till his breast was filled with 
them. After this he sang: — 

“ Crossing the waters of the Hwan, 

Tliey gave me a pearl and a gem. 

Home let me go ! Home let me ^ ! ^ 

My breast with pearls and gems is fiuL 

[U hen he awoke], he was afraid and ffid not 
venture to have the dream interpreted. Be- 
tuming [now] from Ching, on Jin-shin he ^ 
lived at Le-slbm, and had tlie dream interpret^ 
saying, “I was afraid it indicated my deat^ 
and did not venture to have it inteipmtM. 
Xow the multitude with me is great, and tne 
dream has followed me three years. _ It amnot 
hurt me to tell it.” He did so : and in the even- 
ing of that day he died.’ . , 

[The Chnen here returns to the affa^ Oi 
Ts*e in p. 5 ; — ‘ The marquis of Ts‘e sent Ts’^ 
Ch ‘00 [i?ee the Chnen on TII. x. 5.] as 
cer in command, with K‘ing Kih under him, to 
lead a force and besiege Loo. Kwoh Tso was 
then with the States at the siege of the_ c.apit-'u 
of Chflng. but leave was asked and obtained mr 
him to return to Ts‘e, on account of the difli- 
culties of the State. He then went to the army 
at Loo, and put K'ing K'ih.to death, revolung 
also from the marquis in [his own ci^ ofj 
The marquis made a covenant ivith him at Seu- 
kwan, and restored him. In the 12th iMntn, 
Loo surrendered, and the marquis sent J^on 
[Tso's son] Shing to inform Tsin of the 
having charged him to wait [for his furtherj 
onlcrs in Ts'insj.’] - , » 

P.ar. 11. This eclipse took place Ltli uc*-* 
B. C. 573, and was visible in Loo in the mom- 

Par. 12. This was dnke Ting. He h.nd been 
viscount of Choo for 40 yc.ars. As fm™ the i tn 
vear of Ch'ing we find the troops of Choo, 
engagctl in expeditions with other St.itcs, ai- 
w.iys letl by an officer or minister, we may p^ 
sui'ne tliat’KC-oh-tseu w.is too old to t.tke tn 
field in t'orson. . _ , 

P.ir. 13. Tbc amen sny.« ‘ I>uke Lc ^ 
T«in was extrav.ip.'int, and had many favoan.cs 
l.e-ide* the Ladies of his hareai. M hen he re- 
turned from Yen-line. l:e wi*!:*--.! to put oat ci 
thvir •itaati'n* all the priat ofiirers, and to »p- 
p-'int in tin :r nv'tn the in:li' ida.-.ls wno wrrv 
r.lw.tv» about hint. One of hi* farountes w.n 


Yvvn WII. 


Dl Ki; ni lNO. 


S.-a jiM.va* 

tJ;.' Ko.'V f.trvjily. rtf tJ..' Jn tii . 

oifivitf II.!'- f.V.litr; S-» IWi iSr*.- ihr- <*?«■..-!» 
r.{‘,>'T Vir*'!!!.";, t-f 5<nai wf-’i IVvam^ ■ 

Wm, Ir..".-: r ’.ii TSi KnvV r. !)r.=*l fr.l. !r ?-« r.V , 

A Otiril K« »•? ( i*5sJi . 
r.’ s foTtrii r Tif'!'*, Kr-'-t t'li'i'M' !:?'l l-.r.tl • 
Sfjnsrjx'i 1>'>1 nJ*> « ; 

;r>il sa 1 liiia. .".ivl If.ta ttilh 

h)» j-*:rrn?*. '•iff. S'.:' lo r-n'' i>f iJn- ' 

sbi"i* t'f tv ('-'.rttn.:.*. ^ • 

'[TJsf^v* lliTiv V, rv* n'.l I • f il-..-' K!* v1-.". ! 

.iai\|l.nsTi t'ht'.* tvl*.) ti j. aSnVtl'.i* f.^vUs.'S *«{ • 
vb ih vtli'j.i'.:' -rl b;SH. SlitTvby ’ 

loihf lb f» st o{ tJ)'' army «-f [Wh^-vj l.irati | 

S!:.» ili.ll 5ii>- attny r-f ’I’fjn kv*-}< : 

■wi'.liin sS« tM:«iu-l!v.!i".it*, Clu- 5ii»:‘tr-v! ■, 

SlitV nlunil'l k"*' for;!i anil fi.;ht wliirli ’ 

na llio bnul-i' «I Yni-lin;;.] llo v‘ini*il to i 

yiTocnn* »lvt',n\«»il {T»im i-'.Virc, noil ; 

till: »:'in vif tlii" 'Vi«C‘.‘Unl ot 'IV 'no }«liii !ia<l Kvn • 
takvn ptijonv-r]. toinforni tlf' •V.il;v.‘iy«tit;.*'My | 
TulvT wa'Tv.illy v-alUil totlnt Is.itjl,' (of Yvn-Imitj . 
by Ki'oli Clio, cn tlio trmuml tli.ii tlio vi'irrtt j 
amiio* hill nut arriti-tl, ami that tin: cmninamKTi ! 
of your ovtn vlilTl. .irovii • vcrv tiri*. all tln'To. llo | 
raiil. “ VTc aril »Mtv to W <li-fviti-d. ami I niU i 
then ral*t' Sun-chim- (A ?r»‘at*;n’."'ml“'n vif «l«k»' | 
Scan',; of Tfvn^ to iV,c nilc of Toin. ami f^ervo i 
your” The vluke tc«hl thi« to l.«an Shoo, who i 
falil, “lt\» the truth. If it were twit to, how j 
rlioulil he h.'vve Kvn f.'> roi’anllo'i of <l<Mih (In i 
tl'.e h.ittle], ami haw rvwivi'il a nte**."!};*' tnun 
the enemy;- Why rhonhl not your lonlMtip try 
the thhi}} hy remlinj; him on a tnU«lon to Chow, 
ntul esanvinins; hi» cotvlncl there?” [Aeconl* 
ttt"ly3< Kr")h Che went on a fricinlly mission to 
Chow, where Lwau Shoo hail sent worvl to Sun- 
clwiw to fee him. This wn« fpied out hy an 
a',!ent of the duV.e, who concluded that the whole 
cliarj;e aijalnst him wn» true, aud cherishcil 
Tcfentmcnt n^iust Keoh Clve. 

‘ Wlvcn the vluke was huntin", he would let hlf 
women shoot and drink first, and then make the 
preat officcw come after them. [Once], Keoh 
Che was bringing [to the duke] a boar [which 
he had shot], when Mftng-ehnnp, the chief of 
the cnnuchs, snatched it away, and was shot to 
death hy Kcoh Che in consequence, [irritating] 
the duke, [wlio] said, “ Kc-tszc despises me.” 

‘Wlven duke Lc wanted to take action against 
[thje great officers], Scu T'ung said to him, 
“You nsust begin with the three Keoh. Their 
clan is_ large, but they have many enemies, 
Itemoving so large a clan will relieve you of 
pressure, and your action will he easy against 
those who have so many enemies.” The dnkc 
approveti of this plan. The Keoh heard of it, 
and E proposed to attack the duke, saying, 
“Though we may die, he will be put in peril.” 
Keoh Che, however, said, “The things which set 
a man up are fidelity, wisdom, and valour. 
A faithftd man will not revolt against bis 
ruler; a wise man will not injure the people; 
a valiant man will not raise disorder. If we ■ 
lose those three qualities, who wiu. be with us? 
If hy our death we increase the number of onr 1 
enemies, of what nse will it he? Wlien a ruler 
puts a minister to death, what can tlie latter 
say to him? If we are really guilty, our death 
comes late ; if he put ns to death, being innocent, 
he will lose the people, and have no repose 
afterwards, however much he may wish it. Let 


M* »!tv.plv "r.it *’'>f fate. Wo have rvCcivnI 
e-uidinm-nt* fr.cu tmr ruh r, am! hy nvc.’in' v^f 
thvin havi* o<'!!t'-t"d n party ; hut w|mt ttfronve 
l»' t'.tv.vttf than if "with th.at p.irty wc 
»1 i *!:M ftrivi' his cinhr [fivr ourdo.i’tli]?" 

•On .tsn>wi«v, S.U T'utur ntvd K-y.ang Wno 
wi»l:.'il to h-.‘.d »''«ht humlroti inon-at-anns to 
Rtt.-.ok the lvJ-"h: hut Koaou of Ch‘nng*y*t 
K'.rvt^l h.vvv (to attempt thoir vloath] witliout 
M'sni! many fnlliiwors, and tin* nt.arqnls ?ent 
r* i-t’iiy w itit him to help him. Taking 
tlu ir •j.i.'vr< ami tv'-oVing up thoir skirls, they 
pt- tvmi'^l to have fm'.*' vH«j<utt' toR>-llier, fnnil 
Mint <m to w'hi'tv the thtw' Ki'oh were]. TlvcfQ 
h.id plaimvil to i.ake t'ouu'vl together in tho 
ati'hiTV h-vll, and thi'n* Keatm with hif spear 
kilh-i! kfU-pih (Ki'oh Klaml Ch'ing-shuhof K*oo 
(Ki.'h ('h'ow\ whiTv' they were sitting. Kc of 
W.'in s.ni<h "l.v't me flw from the tlanger," and 
r.m t.ff. Uraou. however, overptok his c.arringc, 
kiih d him with In'* s p<'nr, took his IkwIv and those 
of the tw 0 other*, and vsimstcl tivem in the court. 
In live nu-atHitue Sett T'ung with the mon*nt- 
nnns seir' d l.wnn Shoo anvi Chung-hnng Y'cii 
(S'un Ut"-n-t«re) in the court, and Kcaon asked 
tl-.at tiiey tui'^ht K‘ put to de.ntli, or sorrow 
would come to the marquis, 'nio marquis, 
however, s.aid. “1 have o-vimscd the corpses of 
thnx' miui?ters in one morning, and I c.annot 
Ivar to add juore to them.” Kcaou replied, 
“They will lie.ar to vleal with you. I have 
hc.'ird'ihal disorder occasioni'vl hy another State 
is Imstility, while that which takes its origin 
within the State is treason. Hostility is to bo 
met with virtue; treason with punishment. 
When you put [your enemy] to death without 
showing [any leniency], it cannot be said there 
1 is virtue in s ucli a course ; when your ministers 
i exercise a prv'ssurc on you. and you do not cut 
iliem oir. it cannot he said that there is punish- 
ment. 'riierc being neither virtue nor pnnish- 
ment, ho<lility and treason will come together. 
I l>eg to be .allowed to leave the State.” Ac- 
corvUngly ho fled to the Tcih. 

‘The duke then scut to the two officers that 
they were at liberty to go, s,aying, "I have pun- 
ished the Keoh, and they have suffered for 
their guilt. No disgrace is intended you. Re- 
sume your offices and places.” The two bowed 
twice with thoir heads to the ground, and re- 
plied. “Your lordship has punished the gnilty; 
and that you have further granted ns an escape 
from death, — this is your kindness. Till death 
wc shall not forget it,” They then went to 
their homes. 

‘The duke made Sen Thing a high minister; 
and [not long after], ho was rambling and en- 
joyiughiraseS in the neighbourhood of the family 
of Tsenng-lc, when Lwan Shoo and Chnng- 
hang Yen seized and kqit him prisoner. They 
called Szc K'.ae to Join them, hut he refused. 
They txilled Han Keueh, but he also refused, 
saying, “Pormcrly I was brought up in the 
Chaou family; and da ring t he slanders of MSng 
Ke [See the Chnen on Vni.6], I declined to nse 
my sword. There is a saying of the ancients, 
that “no one likes to preside at the slaying of 
an old ox;” how much less would one do so at 
the slaying of a mler! Ton, gentlemen, are 
not able to serve onr ruler; what nse could voa 
make of me?”’ 

l:h Tlie State of Shoo-ynng was near 
that of SUoo-leaon;— see on YILviu.7. The 


406 


THE CH‘UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK vm. 


Chuen says : — * The people of Shoo-yung, in 
consequence of the defeat of the army of Ts‘oo 
£at Yen-ling], led the people of Woo to besiege 
Oh‘aou, to attack Kea, and to besiege Le and 
Hwuy. Trusting in Woo, they made no pre- 
parations against Ts‘oo, and the Kung-tsze 
T‘oh-tsze surprised tiieir city, and extinguished 
their State.’ 


[The Chuen adds here: — ‘In the intercalary 
month, on Yih-maou, the last day of it, Lwan 
Shoo and Chung-liang Yen put to death Seu 
T'urg. The people were not for the [three 
Keoh], and Seu T‘ung had led on his ruler to 
commit disorder; and the text therefore says in 
both cases that “ Tsin put its great officers to 
death.’”] 


Eighteenth year. 

■ 

e » 'A 
A M 45. 


^ K te 


A. 
h.li 
A. Bi® 

a. 


H o 


Ib 


ria iE 


^ » WIT U± 


i 


A 


A 


A 


Tkau XVIII. 


DUKE CIWXG. 


407 


m ii © m ja ;& 

ti.ia -tb.-f- if 

:?: ^ m nt.ffl. J.-l!i.¥ S » 0. 

g!s .0 isi iiiiuWfiS® B# z- + 

Bii € SH fl *.± JIW. jy ;S: Bn giS A 
» 1 ^: ISS.ig. ^iiA.^.Bn^. 

W )t ^ ± fi f: ® 

fi 1. ja t l.A ^E, ^ 

«^.= p^ iii.fi •Si W.Bt.in 
3t H W 1f^. # ± ill ® -fe 


w 0 .^ m 

# Inr Bri ■?• 
S.ifc.M.-tfe 


m *kM Jlf JH- = 0 =. 
if ^ IE 

® m.^ #.+ > 9 . 
A m A,= 


Z.^± ^ @ ± B.M A M 

't 1 ® ± ^ 10 A #. 

-x^n^zm.'s m ^ ® tj’ 

5 !r> 5 g^**. ^ 

^ ^ 0 m » *■ iffi m 3|5 :«: a -I®. 


1. A « S0 
fi.ia A.^B. 

af 

B 3 S S' ^ 

»T> <li»>t:fA 


:T:|£#^fi a 


-ti.i .* 

iij 5 i 


7T> 

& 


fi 

m.m.m « 

Bn W A® 


± «l W ^ 
® mM &MM 
A a if H ^ 

1 ^ 0 it # #.Ir 


^ ^ ig.'® 

$ H ^^jse 
»-& e H.^jt 
0 .« 
-fa Bn M M 
^ ^ A.^ M 
«• « S.JP » 

fi 10 .^ It ^ 

A ® ^ ^ 

itE.P 


. „ ^ niP M 

^ 0 ZM. IB ii II ^.Sf ^ 

■■ iffl.fi fi#fi.H. -fe A * PI 

«StS: ' ■ 

® f.fi.g# fl. 

W.A ^ A « 

6 )f H S jE A.-^ 


*i!!.;2: A.I® 
fa •fe.=® A. 
gT'S ;0 
^ ife -fe 'ft 
0 


7^ 


^ A 

jTii “ “ 


fi A MM )St.Z 
mZT' 0 .fi HV, 
fa 

WcM ?f? e A # 
mBMZ ^.— 


M ffl ^.'HE # W 


#. 


K^iSf-ia.A® 
H * 


-S, 

?liR S | 6 I 
MfE 0 fi 


•tfii.Sil m fil Z M. I§A nr A ^ S. 
“■ # K A ^ •ft A A.i'i # ± 


® H • 01 '®. 
S-fe, SHiM 


408 


THE OHUH TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


BOOK VHI. 


T M + * -fe w ^ A © sa g 

515.® 0.+ Br.Jte Jl.-b t g g jg 
a m,M M ife — <a- Hi.» i f 
“ ^ f.T 515 f .g. 


a 


^ ^ j!»n ^ mM A.-? ®§ B$ 315 ^.s a« 
yJfM # ® ^ * If.*.® ■- " 

* ^ 5fe iS: W '■ 

Ji*/ -t» yi Birr 440. rtt/ vVE. 


4i±4 

a 


pj 


_ '->' ■f' 0 Wl m 

m ^ m ^ )!S. 

T « ® ii.® 

.:^^.i 7C 


5fe 

t* 

P.515 

A 


W 
-feK 
i?D® 
?|5 4®. 


JL^^. 
W J-f 


fin 

pR 

Si 


3to #. 

ikm 

15.0. 

w-ffe 

*.15 

mz 

A«. 


i^W 

^.'b' 

S£ 

S 

tfe 


®c 

>•? 


tl 


Silf 

^ ^ ‘jii 


XVin. 1 In the duke’s [eighteenth] year, in spring, in the kings 
first month, Tsin put to death its great officer, Seu 
T‘ung. 

2 On Kang-shin, Tsin murdered its ruler, Chow-p‘oo. 

3 Ts‘e put to death its great officer, Kwoh Tso. 

4 The duke went to Tsin. 

5 In summer, the viscount of Ts‘oo and the earl of Ch‘ing 

invaded Sung; [when] Yu Shih of Sung again en- 
tered P‘ang-shing. 

6 The duke arrived from Tsin. 

7 The marquis of Tsin sent Sze K‘ae to Loo on a mission 

of fviendl}’^ enquiries. 

8 In autumn, the earl of Ke paid a court-visit to Loo. 

9 In the eighth month, the viscount of Choo pnid a court- 

visit to Loo. 

10 W^’e enclosed the deer park. 

1 1 On Kc-ch‘ow, the duke died in the stntc-charnbcr. 

12 In winter, a l)ody of men from Ts‘oo and one from 

C!i‘ing made an incursion into Sung. 

1«» lie marquis of'IViji .sent S/.e Fang to ask the help of 
an annv. 


Yf-vi: XVin. 


DUKE CII‘IXG. 


409 


14 In winter, in the twelfth month, Chung-siin Mlieh had 
a meeting with the marquis of Tsin, the duke of Sung,, 
the marquis of AYei, the 'vdscount of Ohoo, and Tshiyi 
Oh*oo of Ts‘e, when they made a covenant together in 
lieu-ting. 

lo On Ting-we, we buried our ruler, duke Gh'ing. 

Tiir. 1. The death of Sen T'linjr, as related cases like the present. We have the 13th par. of 
in the last CUuen. to.)k place in t!»e 12th month, last year, and the first three paragraphs of this 
intercalary, of tl»e last year. It appears no\r, year, all oecnpieJ witlj exeentinns or murders 
acc, to Too, Iwause it was only now announced that cannot be judged of by tlie same standard, 
to Loo. Tsin followed llie calendar of Ilea, and yet the record of them is identical, 
instead of tliat of Chow. Par. 3. See the Chuen on par. 5 of last year. 

Par, 2. SeetheCIiuenonpar. loof lastyear. and that after par. 10. The Chuen says 5 Be- 
The Chuen here says: — • Ti»is spring, in the 1st cause of tlie troubles about K'ing [K’ih] in Ts*e, 
montli. on Kang-shin. Lwan t^-hon and Cluing- on Keah-sliin, tlie last day of ilie moon, the 
hang Yea made Olring Hwah mtinler duke marquis of Ts‘e made the judge 11 Aa Mean kill 
wlium they buried outside tlie east gate of Yih, Kwoh Tso with a spear, at an audience which 
witli a siugle carriage in aitcn.i:m:"e. They he ^ve liim in tlie inner palace, there being 
tlien sent Seun Ying and Sze Pang to the soldiers concealed in the palace of the mar- 
capital to meet Chow-tsze. and declared him chioness. The language of the text. “Ts‘e put to 
duke Le's successor. Chow-tsze was [only] 14 death its great officer Kwoh Tso." is because lie 
years old ; but when the great officers met him had paid no respect to his ruler s cliarge, and had 
in Tsring-yuen, lie said, “ At first, 1 iiad no wish taken it on hhnself to kill [K-ing K-ih]. and had 
to arrive *at this estate; and [now], thougii 1 j held Knh in rebellion. [At the same time], 
have arriveil at it. is it not to be ascribed to ' the marquis made the people of Ts-ing kill 
Heaven? When men seek a ruler, it is to have Kwoh SUing. Kwoh Joli [A younger brother 
one who sludl give out his orders. If, when of Siting] tlien fled to Loo, and Wang Tseaou to 
tlicy liave ctUed him to the head of the State, Lae. King Pung was made a great officer, and 
tltey do not follow liis orders, what use have Kfing Tso minister of Crime [Botli tlicse were 
they fur him? If yon mean to obey me, say sonsolKHh], After this the mai^nis recalleil 
so to-day ; if not, say so to-day. li" yon will Kwoh Job. and appointed him heir and repre- 
reverentiy follow your ruler, tlien the Spirits sentative of the Kwoh family ; — which was ac- 
will bless us,” TUev leplu'd, "It is yonv cording to role.’ 

servants’ desire. Wc dare not bat hearken [The Chuen continues here the narrative in 
to your commands,” He then made a covenant tliat on p. 2 : — ‘In the 2d month, on Yili-yew, on 
with tliein on Ivang-woo, and entered [tiie capi- the 1st day of the moon, duke Taou [Snn-cliow] 
tal], lodging in tlie house of Pih Tsze-t’ung. of Tsin took the place ofLe in the court, and for 
On Sin-sze he presented bimself in the temple the first time gave their charges to the various 
of [duke] Woo, and bnnisbed seven men, who officers. He b^towed [favours], remitted 
were unworliiy to be ministers. [burdensome requirements], and for^ve debts 

Chow-tsze liad a brotiier who was devoid of [due to the govt.]: he extended his kindness to 
intelligence, so that he conld not distinguisli * the solitary and to widows; he redressed the 
beans from wheat, and ctmseqiiently could not canse of officers who bad been dismissed from 
be made marquis.’ ' employment, and of those who had been kept 

Tile K'aiig-lie eilitors enter here again on the back; he deliveretl tlie newly and ^stressed; lie 
subject which tbev discussed on VL xvL 7. relieved the sufferers from calamity and niisfor- 
Tho munler of diike Le is ascribed to Tsin, ! tune; he laid prohibitions on dissolnteness and 
wliUe it was reillv the work of two of the great . wick^ness; he Iiglitene.1 t.-ixe.« : be dealt gently 
officers of the State. Kuh-leang thonglit the t with offenders: he eiiiployetl the people at the 
style of the record intimated that the ruler had | proper times. ende.avimriag not to interfere with 
been very bad. The generol view of the critics j the seasons. He appoinietl Wei Seing. Sze 
is. that the style of the entry does in a measure , Fang. Wei Keeh, and Cbaan Woo. to te high 
distribute tlie guilt of the muider among the ^ ministers; Seun Ivea. Seun llwuy. Lwan Yin, 
people, to whom Le was an object of abhorrence, j and Han Woo-ke. to be great officers «»ver the 
The editors denounce this attempt to screen the ; diSerent brandies of the ducal kiiulred. requir- 
deed of the two rascal ministers, and share their j ing them to te.icli tiic sons and younger brothers 
guilt among the people. The entry is given in 1 of the ministers tiie duties i>f reverence, ecoaoiny, 
conscqnence of the nature of the announcement j filial piety, and fr^uemal subniissiun. lie ap- 
from Tsin, where there w.vs now no inflexible his- I pointed Sze Uh-chuli f^ze Chinu-tsze] to be 
toriograplier like Tung iloo. who recorded the i grand-master, requiring hiir. to revise and revive 
guilt of Ch.aon Tun. The announcement must I the laws of Fan Wou-tsze: and Yeiv-hamr Seia 
• have concealed the real criminals by attrihuting ! to be minister of Works, requiring him to revi.<e 
the deed to other i>arlies ; bat the Chnw Ts-ew and revive tiie laws of S/e Wei. ' Kew of I'eea 
would not so cover the guilt, and ihereiore a! -.ri - 1 was princijvil charioteer. wUh all the head 
bated the deetl to the State itself, that sn enriosi- ’ grooms under liim. and was required to instruct 
ty might be excited, inquirj- made, and the true ; all the charioteers in the principles of ri^-hte- 
criaunals not escape from the net T It is imp-.is- j oasness. Scan Pin was princip,al snaarman on the 
siblo to lay down any -cano;!--,’ or offer any 1 right. withalltiieotherspe.armenunderhim and 
wtist.ictory exiilfluaiion of n-e phra<eo!ogy in ' wr«<rooi!ire<ltoin.«truc:tl«*«'stror.wmeu-«it-a'u:s 


voj_ V. 


sg 


410 


THE CH‘UN TS'EW, WITH THE TSO CHUEN. 


Yeah XVIH; 


in. the service at any time reqwireil of them. 
Ministers [Being generals] were not allowed a 
special charioteer, his duty being discharged by 
one of the ordinary officers. Iv‘e He was tran- 
quillizer of the army of the centre, with Yaiig- 
sheh Chill under him; Wei Keang was marshal, 
and Chang Laou was scout-master, Toh Ngoh- 
k‘ow was tranquillizer of the Ist army, with 
Tsih Yen as marshal, and was required to teach 
the soldiers and chariot-men to aid one another 
in obeying the commands which they received. 
Ch'ing Ch'ing was chief equerry, with the 
grooms of the six studs under him, whom he 
was required to instruct in the rules of propriety. 
The chiefs of all the six official departments 
were the objects of the people’s praise. Not 
one was unequal to the office to which he was 
raised; no one interfered with the duties of 
another’s department. Their dignities did not 
surpass their virtues. The assistant-command- 
ers did not trench on the authority of the 
generals, nor did their subordinates press upon 
them. No word of dissatisfaction or reviling 
was heard among the people, and thus the place 
of Tsin as the leader of the other States was 
restored.’] 

Parr. 4, 6. ‘The duke,’ says Tso-she, ‘went 
to Tsin, to appear at the court of thejiew ruler.’ 
Par. 5. P'ttng-shing was in the pres. dis. of 

T‘ung-shan iJj)’ Seu-cliow, Keang- 

800 . The Chuen says; — ‘In summer, in the 9fh 
month, the earl of Ch'ing made an incursion 
into Sung, and proceeded ns far as the outside 
of the Ts'aou gate. He then joined the viscount 
of Ts’oo who was invading Sung, and they took 
Chcaou-kcah. Tsze-sin of 'I's'oo and Hwang 
Shin of Clring made an incursion to Shing- 
knou, and took Yew-k*cw. 'i'hey then joined 
in attacking P‘ang-shing. in which they placed 
Yu Shill, Hijang Wei-jin, Lin Choo, Heang Tae. 
and Yu Poo [.See the Chuen on XV., pp. 8,9.]. left 
'300 chariots to guard the country, and returned. 
'J’lie text says that [Yu Shih] “again entered” 
[l’‘Rng-shing]. Now, in the case of parties 
who have left their State, when the State sends 
ami meets tliem [to bring them back], they are 
said “to enter it.” When they have the places 
winch they formerly held restored to them, they 
are said “to bo rc-dored again.” When they 
arc rc-instnted by tlic iiriiicc of another Slate, 
tliey are said “to ho restored.” When tlieir 
restoration is effected by violence, they are said 
‘■to enter again.” 

• I'fic pcopfo of Sung were afilicted by tlic.«c 
procceifiiigs, but Se Ts‘oo-won said, “Wfiy be 
alllicteil ? If the people <if Ts'oo find regarded 
tlio.se wicked men ns we <lo, [and dealt with 
tbein] so IIS to do IIS a favour, then we sboiifd 
have MTVed Ts'oo witfiniit daring to waver in 
onr adluTeiiec, 'riien that great State, in its 
insatiable ambition would have treated us as ;i 
bnnUT Ilf it.s own, and still been angry [tbai 
our S;aie wn-» not larger]. 'I'liis wnnid have 
b.-,-n _i. e.ni»e [for nllliciionf (Jr if in iiiiotlier 
it Ii.kI fi-eeivtsl ttui.se objects of onr detes- 
t.-itiun, niul niade tbcni help it in it.s tiiensiires. 
la ns to spy out the opji irtuiiiiies wliicli wi- 
U'igbt .sfloni it [to uitnek ii»]. this also would 
hive U-o Bi, .inii-ii itt. Hilt now, TsMo Ims 
rMlt.-l tb.'-f tre.lTor* ni tludr pririre, nitd np. 
{-•rii !ri tl'.-;' a pirt of o;ir fcriiiors. -o a« 
t- r*>*i**« Ti.f 


tween Tsin and Woo]; — it lias satisfied fhe 
traitors’ wishes, and will tliercby separate from 
itself its own adherents; it has poisoned tlie 
States against itself, and filled with apprehen- 
sion Woo and Tsin Our course becomes mucli 
easier. This should be no sorrow to us. And 
for what have we served Tsin? It will be sure 
to pity us.” ’ 

- Par. 7, The Chuen says : — ‘ When the duke 
arrived from Tsin, Pan Seuen-tsze (Sze Kae) 
came to Loo with friendly inquiries, and to ac- 
knowledge the duke’s visit to the court of Tsijb 
The superior man will say that in this Tsin 
behaved with propriety.’ 

Par. 8. The Chuen says:— ‘The earl of K‘e 
now came to congratulate the duke on the ac- 
complishment of his journey, and to ask about 
Tsin. 'J'he duke in consequence told him all 
about the [new] marquis. The earl on this 
went off quickly on a court- visit to^ Tsin,, and 
'begged an alliance of miirringe with it. 

[Tliere is a note here about Sung ; — ‘ In tn® 
7th month, Laoii Tso of Sung and Hwa He laid 
siege to P‘fing-shing, when tlie former died.’] 

I’ar. 9. Tso-she says this visit was made by 
duke Seuen of CIioo, on occasion of bis succeciL 
ing to tlie State, to have an interview with 
duke Ch'ing. 

J’ar. 10. Tso-she says this entry is made be- 
cause of the unseasonablencss of the proceeding. 

Par. 11. SeeVII.xviii. 7;eferf. ‘The record,! 
says 'I'so, ‘ shows that he died where lie should 
have done.’ 

Par. 12. 'J’he Chuen says; — ‘In the IHh 
month, Tsze-clmng of Ts'oo came to relievo 
P’iliig-shing, and invaded Sung. II wa Yncii of 
Sung went to Tsin to report the urgency of 
their distress. Hun Ileen-lsze was then Tsin’s 
chief minister, and said, “It we wish to win 
men, we must first be earnest in their behalf. 
To establish our leadership, and secure our 
strength, we must begin with Sting.” The mar- 
quis of Tsin then took post with an army at 
T’ae-kiih, to relieve Sung, and [liis generals] 
met with the army of Ts'oo in the valley ol 
Me-koli. It withdrew before them.’ 

Par. 13. Por Kiing has nie Chuen 

says: — ‘When Sze Fang asked for the help of 
an iirmy, Ko W#n-tsze asked Tsang Woo-clnnig 
what should be its minibcrs. Tsang relied, ‘'In 
the expedition against Cli'ing, Clic pib [Hciin 
Ying] came to us, tlio ns.sistant-commnmler of 
ilic 3d army. Now Clio Ke [Sze Pang, a son of 
Sze II wily] is in the same position. Send [be 
same miiiilior of trocqis whicb h’c did to the iti- 
vasiiin of (.'Iriiig. In .'■•oiviiign great Stale, we 
must not fail to observe the rank and title.s of 
its envoys, and to be very respectful.” Kc 
Wfin-t.<-ze followed this counsel.’ 

Par. 14. lieu-ting was probably in Sung; 
but its sitiiaiioii is not knoun. Tlie Cliiien 
s.ny.s; — ‘III lilt- 10 ( 1 , tnuiiili, Jlniig Heen-ti‘/c 
[,'Ieeli] joinei'l [the other cotiiiiiaiiders] in Ileii- 
tiii g, to consult about the relief of Snog. 'I’ho 
people of .Sung cicelined tlie pn*.seaee of ijic 
princes, and begged tlie serviee of their iirniies 
i« lK*»ii'ge I’‘AMg-sliiiig. Mflrig lli-en-lsre asked 
leave of the primes, and returned to Loo, to Iw 
present at tlie diike'.s bnrinl.” 

Par. lo. ‘Tliiii entry.’ snys Tco-sbe, ‘intinini‘'s 
that everytbing [nlxnif llw ile.atb, Inirial. nod 
1 nsinr.il nitd proper.'
