Mysticism in Heathendom and Christendom (Edvard Lehmann, 1910)
==========================================================
Lehmann's 1910 Mysticism in Heathendom and Christendom (English) — the comparative study of mystical experience across faiths. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

MYSTICISM

IN HEATHENDOM AND CHRISTENDOM


MYSTICISM

IN

HEATHENDOM AND CHRISTENDOM


Dr. E. LEHMANN

PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF BERLIN


TRANSLATED BY

G. M. G. HUNT


LONDON:

LUZAC & CO.

46 GREAT RUSSELL STREET, W.C.
1910


centra

. t ’ i i -v coco;

1! GAL

i . ; ;


it.

A a


, « . • o * a n

l)tu

s . ss.

. <i 4 %• o el

Call i'w,

J L&X,

* **« e«*« •*©


CONTENTS


*

?AGB

Introduction . i

I. Primitive Mysticism . . .14

II. Chinese Mysticism. . . 2 $

III. Indian Mysticism . . . .40

IV. Persian Mysticism, . . 56

V. Greek Mysticism . . . -15

VI. New Testament Christianity and

Mysticism . . ^ . * 98

VII. The Mysticism of the Greek Church . 116

VIII. The Mysticism of the^Rom^ Church . 135

IX. German Mysticism. . . .172

X. Luther's Mysticism . . * 205

XI. Quietistic Mysticism . . .220

XII. Outcrops and After-Effects . * 254


V


N D 1

mystYGt^m


IN HEATHENDOM AND CHRISTENDOM


♦

INTRODUCTION

If all that is mystical were mysticism, who then
could write a book about it ? If all that is
hidden and mysterious, all that is obscure in
human life, were to be included in the programme
— the paper-mills would be kept busy, and many
eyes grow dim before the book was read to the
end. For how little of the things belonging to
this life is really clear to us, how much is enveloped
in vague uncertainty and doubtful twilight. What
we are, and what will be the end of this world,
whence we come and whither we go — all these ques^
tions form part of that greatest, deepest mystery
known only to Him " which seeth in secret.”

If all that is mystical were mysticism, who then
could determine what we are to understand by
mysticism? That indefinable something always
and everywhere meets us, reminding us of the
existence of that which is beyond all human com-


2


MYSTICISM


prehension ; it is not a definite thing, not a fact
about which one can argue, nor is it an historical
phenomenon which can be traced step by step
throughout the course of ages.

Yet — we will venture to speak about mysticism,
and endeavour to find out what it comprehends.
We will attempt to show what has been its influ-
ence for good and for evil in the world. Long,
and possibly weary, the journey may be which we
propose to undertake. We shall have to dis-
entangle the twisted threads of mysticism as we
trace them 1 back into remote antiquity. Distant
lands and vanished ages we shall visit — but also
we shall discover how close mysticism is to us all,
how it may be seen among us to-day or to-morrow,
and appear like a new thing.

Patience must be our armour if we would under-
stand what mysticism says to us, for it is shy and
slow of speech, and expresses itself with difficulty.
And when it speaks to us we cannot always be sure
that we understand the meaning, or rightly appre-
hend the train of thought it follows. Down into
the depths and up into the heights we shall be led.
New-fashioned apparatus which might spare us
the trembling and the awe, mysticism knows
not, nor cares to know, for its doctrine — like
Goethe’s — is that “ trembling and awe are man's
best portion.”

We must also prepare ourselves to be very


INTRODUCTION


3


indulgent and long-suffering if we would enter
the society of mystics. Eccentric though they
be, we must bear with their follies and their pride,
their madness and their misery. Are they not
men like we are ? Perhaps better men than we
are ? Better in that they strive after the best.
How often has not the best dwelt among them,
and in them borne glorious fruit ? When the
world of thought was in progress of formation,
often enough the deepest philosophic truths have
come forth out of mysticism, and no matter to
what height philosophy has risen, mysticism has.
always kept closely to its side. Where heart
conquered mind, it was mysticism which led the
way with singing and dancing, weeping and dream-
ing ; happy as a child or in an agony of despair —
birth-pains of a new life about to appear.

In mysticism antiquity has perished ; out of
mysticism new times have been born. It has
destroyed faith and brought forth a new belief ;
it has bred tension, and a maimed thing is pro-
duced ; it has kindled and scorched, refreshed
and poisoned. It is like wine which invigorates,
but also excites and degrades. Somewhat after
this fashion has been the course of mysticism,
and we will now trace it from the time of ancient
heathendom up to the present day— or— -who will
dare to say that we have done with mysticism
because we are more enlightened ?


4


MYSTICISM


What, then, is mysticism ; or rather, what is a
mystic ? for it is easier to describe a person than
to define a thing. What constitutes a mystic ?
What does he do ? What has he to say to us ?

As regards the latter, not much.

For the true mystic is silent. Quietness is his
delight, and silence is his treasure. The Pytha-
gorean philosopher who tested his disciples in the
art of silence before admitting them into his circle,
wisely considered it more difficult to know how
to be silent than to know how to speak.. To the
monk-mystic, silence is a sacred duty ; it is his
pride and his power ; it raises him above the
babbling crowd, and the vow of silence has kept
many lips closed even in the last hour.

Doubtless he is very practical, then, this silent
man — a self-possessed person who does not talk
because he has better things to do ? No doubt
an energetic and thorough man of business, with
purse and feelings well under control ? Alas ! no.
Worldly ways and means do not interest our
mystic ; these do not induce him to silence. Little
he carries about with him, and little he cares about
practical things and deeds.

For what is the good of them ? The only thing
worth having is far above all human power, and all the
doings of the children of this world are far beneath
his exalted ambition. No, let the hands lie idle in
the lap, for the work of our hands availeth nothing.


INTRODUCTION


5


Then is it by thinking that man is to work
out his salvation, and is it depth of thought which
makes our mystic dumb, like the man who was so
engrossed in his circles and figures that he forgot
to save his life ? Yes, indeed, it is thought which
ties the mystic’s tongue ; — only his thoughts
are not like the thoughts the world thinks. He
does not trouble about what one should do or not
do, what ought to be and what not. He desires
not, like most people, to understand worldly things
in order to use them ; nor to understand human
nature that he may serve it. Worldly wisdom
has a practical purpose, or, if it be theoretical, its
object is still by a gradual process to apprehend
and recognise real facts.

At this suggestion, therefore, our silent friend
also shakes his head. One thing only occupies
him, one thought, one desire fills his whole being, —
to fathom what is beyond this world, to understand
what is incomprehensible, the highest, that thought
cannot reach, the deepest, that is below all things.
He wants to understand God, life, the spirit above
him and the spirit within him. Or rather : no, he
does not want to understand, for understanding
is a gradual, logical process, one thought leading
up to another until the problem is solved ; but how
could human understanding reach those highest,
sublimest heights ? Therefore the mystic does not;
really want to understand. His object is to take a


6 MYSTICISM

A

direct hold of, to grasp, to embrace, to live and to
breathe in those things which pass all knowledge.

And how can he do it ? Not, certainly, with his
ordinary five senses. But what if there were a
sixth ? What if in the deepest depth of the human
soul there lay dormant a mysterious power, which
could be quickened if only one went down deep
enough to rouse it ?

That is what the mystic believes. He believes
in the existence of a power for apprehending the
higher things, a power which not every one possesses,
but which can be acquired 'and stimulated by
extraordinary efforts — in short, he believes in a
mystic organ, which enables the devout or elect
person to grasp what the world cannot understand ;
a power of flight which exceeds that of any bird,
a capacity of soul which begins where reason and
reasonable grounds end.

That is why there is so much simplicity and so
much pride in the mystic. With the wisdom of the
world he cannot keep pace, but he knows better
things. Hence also so much egotism among these
pious men, for their own way they will go. Yet —
with all his egotism — the mystic’s one object is to
get away from self, to be in such close touch
with the highest, to be so filled with the thought of
the Godhead that he loses himself in it ; and — he
who is wholly filled with one idea, loses his identity.

The highest point, and peculiarly characteristic


INTRODUCTION


7


of mysticism, is reached, when the mystically moved
person is so entirely filled with this highest ideal
that he is absorbed by it. He feels that the God-
head dwells in him, and declares himself to be
God.

This oneness of the human soul with the Divine
Being is the conceit of mysticism, it is this that
makes mystical things into mysticism. It reveals
itself under many various forms, from the crude
“ being possessed ” to the purest " trance,” from
the curious religious ceremonies of savage peoples
to the noblest systems of philosophy.

What chiefly distinguishes mysticism is that the
ordinary religious person principally contemplates
the things which separate him from God, and com-
pares his own nothingness with God’s greatness, his
finiteness with God’s infinity, his sinfulness with
God’s holiness. In realising the immeasurable
distance, man remains fully and clearly conscious
of his own humanity, and looks upon his God as a
definite being quite apart from himself. But the
mystic does not believe in a definable God. To
him God is as indefinite as He is incomprehensible ;
invisible and infinite, therefore all - embracing.
No one can put a distinct line of demarcation
between the human and the divine ; therefore the
boundary can be crossed, therefore man can attain
to this unison with God.

The mystic knows no personal God. Personality


8


MYSTICISM


has limitations, therefore away with personality,
both in God and in man. With regard to God,
personality implies barriers, boundaries which must
be pulled down through meditation; with regard
to man, it implies a burden which must be got rid of.
Personalities stand opposite to one another, as I
to thee. The true mystic refuses to think of himself
as standing before his God as an I to a thou, but
rather as an I to a higher I. Or better — he wants
to be so absorbed, so made one with his God, that
there exists no longer either I or thou.

After this manner thinks the mystic ; but how
about his character and behaviour ? These vary
considerably, from venerable repose to wildest
enthusiasm. Amongst them there are sorcerers
and monks, poets and philosophers, respectable
citizens and hysterical women ; but one thing they
all have in common, namely, the desire to be in
that condition in which the highest may be reached.

Most of them are conscious of the limitation of
their actions, and concentrate all their efforts upon
the development of the mystic organ, the sixth
sense. Their supreme desire is therefore to pass
beyond the condition of soulish equilibrium which
is kept together by the five senses.

Away beyond the world of sense ; away, beyond,
outside of self ; this is their ambition. This
being outside of one’s self, the Greeks call extasis,
hence our word ecstasy.


INTRODUCTION


9


Ecstasy is excessive joy, but not a mere personal
joy. It is that condition in which one stands out
of, or is detached from, sensible things, in which the
earth vanishes away, in which the doors of sense
are closed and only the innermost soul is awake.
Or, again, it is that wild, rapturous delight in
which everything around is forgotten, and only
the yearning after the far-off, the unattainable,
remains.

Whatever its symptoms it always indicates an
unsound, feverish state of mind. Possibly it is a
form of disease which reveals itself in our human
nature not so much because we are so constituted
that such excesses must find expression now and
again, but rather even as trees need storms and
shakings to bring them to further growth — so
the human soul needs to be tugged and startled
out of balance, and even taken out of itself some-
times, when a step forward in growth is imminent.

Ecstatic rapture is one of these tugs. And
even when it partakes of frenzy, that is but the
purchase money which has to be paid. Mysticism
is a very important factor in the history of the
development of the human soul. It is a kind of
growing pain which attacks the young shoots,
but which passes away when the fresh, vigorous
life has gained the upper hand. Where this is not
the case, where human nature cannot extricate
itself from the meshes of mysticism, there it maims


10


MYSTICISM


and weakens and bows to the ground, as is seen
at the present moment everywhere in the East,
and even sometimes among us in the enlightened
West.

Mysticism can become a habit, because the
ecstatic conditions which produce mysticism can
obtain a habitual power over the senses. And
especially where ecstasy is the result of drinking —
as is so often the case in the East — man not only
becomes addicted to drink, but also to those vain
broodings which follow in the wake of intoxica-
tion. There are other, more vigorous means,
however, for bringing oneself into a state of
rapture : thus in India hashish and opium— every
people after its kind. We even hear of suffocating
and sweating baths, of frantic dances. When the
dervish has whirled round till he drops, when the
Ashantee negro has performed his wild war-dance,
wielding his club until he foams at the mouth
with mad excitement, they have, each in their own
way, gained that divine power which they sought.

But there is yet another kind of intoxication
which works admirably, although the process is
slower, and to which the mystic resorts preferably
when he wishes to get into a rapt condition. . This
is asceticism. Asceticism consists — as we know
from the penances prescribed by the Roman
Catholic Church— in penitential exercises and
chastisements imposed upon the penitent or upon


INTRODUCTION


ii


oneself for correction or punishment ; mortifica-
tions and hardships inflicted for the expiation
of some sin, to gain the forgiveness of the Church
or a heavenly reward. But this material object
and direct benefit was not the original idea of
penance. Let us take one of the commonest
penances, fasting, and trace it back to its oldest
form. We find that, although a chastisement to
the flesh, its original object was to inflame the
senses ; for the first phase of exhaustion is followed
by violent agitation and light-headedness which
produces visionary flights of the imagination.

We know also that the scourging and laceration
of their bodies, as practised by some ascetics,
produces a kind of frenzy, an ecstatic madness,
as, for instance, in the Cybele priests of Asia
Minor or in the flagellants of the Middle Ages.

Thus we see that at all times mystics have
resorted to asceticism for producing ecstasy.
Most often it is silent asceticism, which consists
in resigned inactivity. The Greek Athos-monk,
like the Indian Fakir, sits in his corner, fasting,
dumb, deaf to the outer world, staring incessantly
at his own body or at the tip of his nose, until his
senses and his reason become confused, until all
becomes inner vision and beatitude — until he is
consumed by self-hypnotism. It has often been
proved that mystic asceticism is a kind of hypnotic
stupefaction, and where mysticism does not come


12


MYSTICISM


under the influence of culture this method com-
pletely gains the upper hand. The surest way for
becoming one with the Godhead for these people
is through artificial sleep.

The lower the standpoint of mysticism, the
more such artifices are resorted to ; and where we
find mysticism among primitive peoples, it is
always preferably ascetic. Mysticism, however,
does not grow in perfection in the same proportion
as it throws off asceticism and ecstasy, but rather
in proportion as it gains in spirituality. Many a
wise man goes about as a fool, and many deep
thoughts can only find expression in clumsy out-
ward customs. Little by little, however, as the
internal light breaks through, these external forms
are modified. The increase of intelligence and
enlightenment, elevating human nature, clashes
with the old, crude customs, and seeks to transform
them. Thus ecstasy becomes enthusiasm, and
intoxication spiritual transport. Asceticism be-
comes moral renunciation and noble self-control.
Self-absorption changes into calm contemplation,
the giddy dance into flights of intellect, and mental
confusion becomes harmony and poesy. Through
all this mental activity, the personality of man
asserts itself, and claims its eternal right, by the
very same means by which formerly it tried to
ignore and nullify itself.

Now, since mysticism gives vitality to forms


INTRODUCTION


13


which originally opposed its progress, it practically
drives itself away, as the day the dawn. For this
is the true mission of mysticism, that it announces
the approach of dawn, and evil is the day which
is not preceded by this dawn. The tragedy of
mysticism — and it requires all human energy to
prevent its taking place — is that it may just
as easily degenerate into the dusk of evening,
enveloping the soul in impenetrable twilight.

We shall observe this transformation scene as
we watch the course of mysticism through the
ages.


X. PRIMITIVE MYSTICISM

The goodman of the house, Mytchyl of Kolym,
of the tribe of the Siberian Yakuts, is about
to offer a sacrifice in honour of Ulgon Bai, the
mightiest of the divinities, whom he wants to
propitiate. A great feast it is to be, for during
the last year the crops have been bad, many
horses have died, and several of his people have
suffered from an infectious disease. His eldest
son has been at death’s door, and two of his wives
have remained childless. Besides, it is now a long
time since he has celebrated a really good sacri-
ficial feast. The old family priest, the Shaman
Tusput, has warned him often enough, and told
him that he would suffer for it in the end, but —
a sacrifice is an expensive affair, and Tusput is
greedy. Now, however, Mytchyl has made up
his mind to do it in good form. Friends and
relatives come from all sides and assemble round
the “ Yurte,” i.e. the birchwood hut of their
wealthy neighbour, for they know that the feasting
will be plentiful, and they will get Ulgon Bai’s
blessing into the bargain.

*4


PRIMITIVE MYSTICISM


15


On the place selected for the sacrifice, the brand-
new Yurte has been raised among the birch trees.
For these Siberian tribesmen have no temple to
worship in. When they want to feast the gods
they must build a hut for them, in every respect
like the one they themselves inhabit — a hut like
the oldest formerly found in the pagan North,
with a smoke-hole in the middle of the xoof. This
hut is consecrated to serve as temple, by the
planting of a young birch tree in the centre, the
white stem of which represents the road to Ulgon’s
heaven. Steps are cut out in the stem, nine
steps in all ; for there are nine heavens, vaulting
one above another until Ulgon Bai’s heaven is
reached. Beyond that heaven there are still
higher realms of light, to which the human mind
cannot penetrate. High, high above, the Supreme
Being, Tengere Kaira Kan, sits on his throne.
From this Supreme Deity all the gods have pro-
ceeded, Ulgon Bai among them. One of the first
created beings was Erlik, the primeval creature,
who sinned and was cast out of heaven. He
descended and created the earth, and therefore
there is so much evil in the world. Yet the
children of men are not left fatherless in this
wicked world. The spirit-fathers watch over
them, those seventeen exalted Kans, who rule
over the various districts of the earth and protect
their descendants. Besides these, there are the


i6


MYSTICISM


light-fathers, who inhabit the third heaven, and
who also are friendly towards men.

Only the Shaman, however, can communicate
with these spirits, and, what is most important,
only he Who has intercourse with spirits can
have access to the deities. As in the Catholic
faith, the saints are the mediators between the
believers and their God, so amongst these heathen
the spirit-fathers bring the interests of humanity
— and that only through the priest — before the
higher deities. It requires more than human
agencies to bring the priest outside of himself ;
the fathers must enter into him and fill him with
superhuman strength. Therefore not every one
can become a Shaman. In certain privileged
families the office is hereditary, not because these
families are particularly deserving, or particularly
gifted, but because nature has endowed them
with one thing, the power of being seized with
convulsions at the right moment, a hereditary
disposition towards epilepsy. Physical affections
of this kind, cramps, convulsions, madness, frenzy,
have at all times filled the uncultured with a holy
dread ; he sees in these not only — as in all diseases
— devil’s sport, but he believes that higher, divine
powers are mixed up with it and " possess ” the
madman.

Natural tendency alone, however, is not suffi-
cient to entitle one to become a priest. Many


PRIMITIVE MYSTICISM


*7


exorcisms, incantations, and magical dances are
necessary before the scion of a thus encumbered
family can become a duly installed Shaman.
From his infancy he has to practise his tricks and
keep them up to the mark, just like any other
professional dancer. When once installed he is
ready for action at any time, and the power may
come upon him suddenly. The first symptom is
exhaustion, then he begins to tremble, yawn and
groan, as if suffering violent pains, when suddenly,
with fierce yells and rolling his eyes, he whirls
and leaps about, until he falls foaming and quiver-
ing to the ground. His senses and his limbs are
now quite numb, he can swallow knives, nails,
needles, anything within reach, without receiving
any harm, and afterwards throw them up again.
One can prick a needle deep into his flesh and
put a piece of red-hot iron in his mouth and
he will not feel it. This condition shows clearly
that the power of the fathers has entered into
him.

A Shaman of this description, Mytchyl had
bespoken for his feast. Phantastic and imposing
is the appearance of the Shaman, in his long,
flowing robe with iron images and charms dangling
from it. But the chief article of his get-up is a
large, flat drum of reindeer skin, which he carries
like a shield on his arm. This Shaman drum
is the symbol of the universe ; it is adorned with


i8


MYSTICISM


pictures representing the sun and the stars at the
top, in the middle trees, and in the lower division
men and animals. In this world in miniature
the spirits are to take their places inside the drum.
First the Shaman drums them together with the
dull heat of his rough drumstick, after which he
shuts them up inside the drum. The handle of
the drum is in the shape of a human figure, bearing
the disc of the drum between his extended arms
and legs. This little drum-man is the spirits’
“ host.” He welcomes them in the name of the
universe, and appoints to them their places inside
the drum.

This is the first act of the ceremony ; the fathers,
one after another, are drummed inside the drum.
The Shaman is alone in the Yurte, and answers
his own call with the voices of the spirits. At last
he is filled with the power (or the gas) required for
rising up into the heavens, but he must have a
mount. For this purpose a horse is held ready
waiting outside the Yurte. But the Shaman can
only make use of the soul of the horse. This he
fans or tickles out of him with a birch twig, and
pretends to tie it with a horsehair strap to a pole
in the Yurte. A terrible fate awaits the horse.
Outside in the lonely forest he will be flayed alive,
for he may not die either by blows or wounds.
The skin has to be ripped off without being
damaged or torn, and hung up in the wood as a


PRIMITIVE MYSTICISM


i9


symbol of the sacrifice ; the bones must be buried
unbroken, while the flesh is afterwards greedily
consumed at the sacrificial feast, whereby the
drum-man also receives his share. The partici-
pators in the ceremony thereby represent the
spirits who have come down to join in the feast.
This flocking together of the spirits is symbolised
by fluttering movements and rustling noises, to
imitate the sound of flying wings. Clothes also are
provided for the spirits, and an offering of juniper
is made to them. When all this is done, the high
Kan has to be called down, then the gods, and
lastly Ulgon Bai himself with his family. The
answer to each call comes with the words, a
Kam ai ! (Shaman, I come!). The drum is now
growing so heavy with all the spirits that have
been drummed into it, that the Shaman can
scarcely hold it. At this juncture it is important
that the door of the Yurte should be securely
locked, so that no good spirits can escape and no
evil ones enter.

Now the Shamanising, properly speaking, begins.
The spirit-fathers inside the drum emit a salutary
power which can be transmitted to men like an
electric or galvanic spark. The donor of the
sacrifice, with his household, are put under the
influence of this pow T er. They are all rubbed over
the back in order that all evil may disappear, and
they are then each in turn filled with the power of


20


MYSTICISM


the fathers, as the drum, with many wild gesticula-
tions, is pressed against their ear or bare chest.

The children and the timid have now to leave
the hut, for already the Shaman is getting beyond
himself. Furiously beating the drum, he leaps on
to the first notch" in the birch tree ; this signifies
that he has entered the first heaven, and by striking
with the drum on the ground he announces that
the shell of this heaven has been broken through,
expressing his infinite joy over this accomplish-
ment by dancing round the birch tree and the fire.
Then he mounts a saddle hanging on a rack in the
hut ; — and thus "seated on the horse’s soul he rides
towards the second, or storm-heaven. Every
time he conquers a new heaven he has to perform
some definite act. When in the third heaven,
he foretells the wind and the weather ; in the
moon -heaven he shoots a cuckoo; from the
creator’sheaven — the fifth — he brings downstrength
for women and children. With every conquest of
a new heaven his antics become more frantic. At
last — if he be a strong Shaman — he arrives unhurt
in the ninth heaven, where he calls upon Ulgon
himself to inquire whether the sacrifice, the horse,
has been accepted. Finally, after several more
hours of wild dancing and gesticulating, the Shaman
collapses. Black and blue in the face, foaming
at the mouth, his limbs quite rigid, he lies for some
time groaning and moaning on the ground. A


PRIMITIVE MYSTICISM


21


deep, solemn silence reigns in the hut- Suddenly
he rouses, leaps up, and now the merry part of the
feast begins, for the consolation of the frightened
spectators who have dutifully witnessed the whole
performance to the end.

This Shamanising is mysticism. Not because
the Shaman, in his ecstatic wildness, ascends from
heaven to heaven, for this he does only to gain
access to the gods, not to become one with them.
All these heavens and gods are promiscuously
brought together, they do not belong to the
original conception of Shamanism, and therefore
the Shaman cannot become identified with them.
They represent but the usual stages in the assembly
of the gods. Gnostic speculations of early Greek
times, primitive creatures, fallen angels, etc., have
been mixed up with this conception, and even the
name of Shaman is derived from the Indian
Buddhist ascetics ( Samano ) ; the old Finnish
name was Kam. The only genuine part of the
performance is the exorcism, which endows the
priest-sorcerer with magic power, converts the
drum into a witch’s cauldron, and the spirits into
a kind of charmed brew with which he heals and
exorcises. This is primitive mysticism, recognis-
able in that it makes the priest into a spirit-god,
solely by his ecstasy. So it has always been, and
so it is now. Radloff has seen it all with his own
eyes, and describes it in his work, A us Sibirien.


22


MYSTICISM


We find similar things among other savage or
half-civilised peoples. Always the same pompous
ceremony, even where it is only a healing cure.
In Africa, on the Loango coast, a black man lies
sick on his mat. The sick man is not kept quiet
as would be the case with us, but a fiendish noise-
of drums and rattles and bamboo guitars fills the
hut. In the background crouches the holy ganga,
the magician-doctor, who paints his skin with
glaring colours. By the door of the hut burns a
fire, and a flickering light in the distance announces
the approach of a torchlight procession. A
second ganga comes to the bed of the sick man.
Like real surgeons the two priests open their
cases, but the instruments they take out are tails
of animals and aromatics, fetish images and such-
like valuable matters.

The aromatics are thrown on the fire, and with
deafening shouts and singing the priests now
commence their incantations and to work their
spells. They whirl round, jump about, dance
and stamp, fume and rage, among the furniture,
without knocking anything over, without falling,
until at last both rush out of the door and disappear
in the darkness.

In solemn state they return ; they have captured
the spirits and are now themselves demons. One
of them sits down on a low stool, twisting and
turning himself and shaking his head as if he


PRIMITIVE MYSTICISM


23


would shake it off, until he becomes rigid ; deep
silence reigns around. Suddenly one hears,
coming as from a distance, a thin, piping voice ;
that is the voice of the spirit in the ganga asking
what they want of him. All answer in chorus,
and the sufferer’s complaint is fully described.
Before the answer can come, more dances and
antics have to be performed. The one ganga
leaps about wildly, the other, the one who is
sitting down, swinging his arms when the dancing
one throws his legs about. A third arrives, who
quickly paints himself, jumps on to the fire, and
whirls and dances round, as if he were a blazing
flame, or the fire-god himself. The other dancing
ganga ties charms all round his body, and whirls
and twists until he looks like one huge fetish.
Now at last all the gods are collected at the sick
man’s bedside, and give the important information
that his illness is caused by his having broken a
family fast, called quixilles — a diagnosis, however,
which a closer analysis proves to be false. The
same ceremonies have therefore again to be gone
through on the next day, and only after the chief
of the gangas is completely beyond himself, and
has been decked with a feather cap of towering
height, in which the god is supposed to be
seated, he declares that the illness is not due
to quixilles , but is caused by chimbinde. This is
worse, for it means that the ghost of a factory


24 MYSTICISM

man, lately dead, has got into the sick man’s
brain.

Thus far Bastian, who was an eye-witness of
the whole performance ( Deutsche Expedition an
dev Loango Kiiste, Jena, 1875). The same
thing is found everywhere throughout the world
where breeches are not worn, for, as is well
known in our days, civilisation begins with the
adoption of this most necessary article of clothing.
Yet even among the decently clothed in China,
Persia, and Turkey, these leaping and dancing
performances for drawing near to the gods are
exercised. They are the first step on the road of
mysticism, and often, alas ! too often, its devotees
fall back to this primitive stage, where they have
learnt to climb up to more elevated heights.

Stupefying with tobacco smoke is a sacred
usage among the American Indians. When the
Copenhagen University students sing in their
smoking song : Graviter fumando vir Jovis fit
sodalis, inter , vasta nubila requiescit talis — they
perhaps scarcely realise that there are people in
this world to whom these words are solemn earnest,
and who, through the blue tobacco clouds, com-
mune with the gods. Of course the narcotic
which the Indian draws from his pipe or his cigar
is a good deal stronger than that inhaled by a
modern smoker, and the Indian swallows the
smoke until it makes him giddy, and the con-


PRIMITIVE MYSTICISM


25


sequences are as serious as if he had had opium
instead of tobacco in his pipe. Intoxication by
smoking is well known among many nations.
The same negroes whose grotesque dancing feast
we have just considered, smoke hemp leaves —
which they call liamba — to prepare themselves
for the ceremony. And the Turks and other
Orientals find their highest state of ecstatic bliss
in hemp poison, hashish. The Brazilian medicine-
man treats his patients preferably with tobacco.
He smokes the tobacco and envelops his patient
in a cloud of smoke while he administers a kind
of massage, kneading him so vigorously that his
roars are heard all over the village — that is to
say, the roars of the doctor, not of the sick man.
For it is the doctor who is the suffering party at
these operations. The narcotic has brought him
into such a state of frenzy that he is like a wolf,
bear, and jaguar in one — quite beyond himself.
Moreover, from what we know of the primitive
art of healing, it is quite natural that the doctor
and not the patient should take the medicine.
The remedy is only intended to convoke the
supernatural forces, and the true medicine man
studies medicine in a most remarkable manner,
by taking poison — like the Pontic Monarch —
until no poison can do him any more harm. If
he is to practise he must be able to swallow poison
to an amount which would kill any ordinary


26


MYSTICISM


human, creature, in order to convey the impression
that humanity in him is dead, and that in his
intoxicated condition he can change into another
existence and become either a god or a demon
in human shape. (Examples of this are given in
Th. Achelis’s book — Die Extase. Berlin, 1902.)

And so mysticism always leads to the same end,
as long as religion occupies an animistic standpoint,
i.e. as long as it consists in regarding the spirits
of the departed, or the lower air-spirits, as their
gods. The method is as '"simple as the belief.
All that is evil is “ being possessed of evil spirits,”
and can only be cured by the casting out of the
spirits. Evil must be destroyed by evil, and he
who wants to fight with demons must first himself
become a demon. And this can only be done
by getting outside of self, by being beyond
oneself, as in madness or frenzy. Therefore the
question is to find means by which sense and
reason can thus be lost, and these are not far to
seek. The animistic person also never attains
beyond this stage of ecstasy. It is his ladder of
ascent into the heavenlies ; he knows no other,
and only in so far as his ascent is fraught with
pain and difficulty, be it for obtaining his dignity
of in the exercise of his profession, only in so far
can there be question of asceticism, or indeed of
any approach to a moral action. When culture
comes to such a people, these crude methods


PRIMITIVE MYSTICISM


27


suffice no longer. What is sacred becomes more
exalted ; the ghostly dances disappear, a circle
of divinities is conceived, and he who desires to
enter there, and himself become a god, is well
aware that he can neither smoke, nor dance, nor
sweat himself into it.


II. CHINESE MYSTICISM

Let vis next consider mysticism on the ancient
cultural soil of China.

In this land, where the temperament of the people
is absolutely opposed to anything of a mystical
nature, in the midst of a practical, intelligent,
industrious population, whose religion is morality,
mysticism made its appearance, fully matured
and self-conscious, about the same time that the
apostle of morality, Kong-tse, 1 systematised the
Chinese code of moral law. The " obscure sage,”
as Laotse was called, understood the art of living
in seclusion so thoroughly that we hardly know
anything about him, except that he was archivist
to one of the kings of the Choy dynasty, and at a
very high age was sent into exile. Before quitting
his fatherland, one of the governors on the western
frontier is said to have persuaded the celebrated
sage to write a book on the tenets of his philosophy.
This book, called Tao-te-King, is very ambiguous.
It may be said to be the first Chinese attempt
at systematic writing, and moreover of a highly
1 Better known to ns by the Latin name of Confucius,


CHINESE MYSTICISM


29


speculative character. But, in spite of the heavi-
ness of the form, one gets occasional glimpses of a
far-reaching, idealistic, and spiritual depth, which
has procured for the author the fame of a Chinese
Plato, and the book moreover breathes a purity
and gentleness of spirit which remind one of
Christian doctrines. -

All the properties of true mysticism slumber in
this ancient literary effusion. It would seem as if
here, in the Far East, the groundwork had been
laid for that which in the subsequent peregrina-
tions of mysticism should receive more solid form.
The three chords which mysticism always strikes,
namely, alienation from the world, the doing away
with personality and with self, reverberate here
also, and they sound — and this is the remarkable
part of it — perfectly Chinese, although constantly
clashing with the normal system of Confucian
doctrines, with all its practical and personal
activity. Kong-tse did not like Laotse, and could
not understand his teaching. He called him “ a
dragon soaring up to heaven,” and for his noble
principles he had only ridicule.

Yet — both were China’s sons, and both reverently
lived up to their sonship. The object of both was
the establishment of the truest form of state, the
wisest form of government, and as regards the
people to teach them their duty as subjects. But
the way taken by Laotse is as widely different


30


MYSTICISM


from that followed by Kong-tse as the flight of a
pigeon differs from that of a fowl. Up into the
highest heights he soars, and there cools his ardour
before coming down again to eat from the same
trough with the other inhabitants of the courtyard.
By speculative methods he arrives in the end at
the same moral conclusions for which Kong-tse,
with practical common sense, made straightway ;
but Laotse reaches the final goal a better man,
and would have made his people a better people
than it is now, if it .had not been the fate of the
Chinese that Kong-tse’s shoes fitted them better
than Laotse’s buskins.

The title alone, Tao-te-King, shows that in this
book heaven is sought before the earth is considered.
Tao, the first of the three words, means purely
grammatically only “ path ” ; but this " path ”
designates the absolute, the highest wisdom, the
Godhead, or by whatever name it be called — the
highest, as conceived by the mystic, is not so
easily adequately expressed. Perhaps it would be
safest to say that Tao means the ideal fundamental
principle, or the ideal fundamental object of exist-
ence. The speculative, therefore, is number one.
Second in importance is te, worldly morality, the
course of life. King means book, and the book
goes to prove how our life has been ordained by
the divine Tao, and how we have to live it accord-
ing to ideal and exalted principles. Religion is


CHINESE MYSTICISM


3i

not, as with Kong-tse, an appendix to morality,
but an important stipulation for moral conduct.

The only thing that is clearly and definitely
stated about Tao is that it is altogether indefinable,
indescribable, and inexpressible, a truly mystic
conception. If " Godhead ” be substituted for
Tao, we have to bear in mind that it is never a
personal God one has to think of. It is a principle,
abstract and inscrutable. “ Something exists ” —
so it says in the Tao-te-King (chapter 25) — " which
is incomprehensible, which is. perfect, and which
existed before heaven and earth were. It is
silent, and without shape ; it is the only thing
inviolable, without change or variableness. It
pervades all places. One might call it the mother
of all things. Its name I know not, but I call it
Tao. Were I to give it yet another name, I should
call it ' The Great' The laws of men are from the
earth, the laws of the earth are from heaven, the
laws of heaven are from Tao.”

Is this God or is it nature ? If nature, then at
all events a spiritualised nature, or the spirit of
nature after the manner of pantheistic belief.
Laotse is perfectly genuine in his mysticism,
although in reality a pantheist, as good as any, in
that he believes the deity to be a something which
is in all things. And to the Chinese mind, ac-
customed to worship “ heaven ” as the highest,
all-controlling will, this thought would not seem


32


MYSTICISM


unfamiliar. But Laotse emphatically rejects the
naturalistic view here implied, and makes his
Tao something more spiritual, therefore more
exalted, than the heaven of the State religion.

The manner in which Tao expresses itself varies
also considerably from the ordinary Chinese
methods. In this land of commanding and obey-
ing, where the upper classes order and the lower
cringingly submit, a sage appears, proclaiming
a condition of things in which there is neither
commanding nor obeying. He preaches a constitu-
tion of the world based on free will, a God who
will not be honoured for his own sake, a duty
that is to be performed for its own sake only.

Laotse seems to have come to this conclusion,
this forward step, by creating his world after the
pattern of nature. For the ruling force in the
realm of nature does not govern from lust of power,
but because all things of their own accord put
themselves in subjection under it. Therefore it
says in the Tao-te-Iiing, chapter 51 : “ All things
have come forth from Tao, and are nourished out
of its abundance. All things receive their form in
accordance with their nature, and are perfected
according to their capacity. Therefore all things
without exception are Tao, and praise its manifold
workings. But not as by compulsion, but as a
voluntary tribute. Tao then creates all things ; by
Tao they live, grow, mature, are maintained and


CHINESE MYSTICISM


33


protected. Tao creates all things, yet it does not
claim possession. Tao leads all things through all
the stages of- development, but makes no boast of
its doings. Tao brings all things to maturity,
yet exercises no control over them. This is its
mysterious activity.” The involuntariness of its
energy, the mystery of the course of life as reflected
in nature, and the protest of the natural institutions
against the institutions of this world, with their
exaction, their coercion, and their ostentation,
Laotse expresses in these ambiguous words :
“ Tao is inactive, yet nothing exists that Tao has
not created,” — which is as much as to say : All
that happens is involuntary, and involuntary all
things must be.

Yet even this conclusion is merely pantheistic.
The mysticism in the system only comes to light
when the question is asked : In what relation does
Tao stand to man ; or rather, in what relation does
man stand to Tao. The answer is briefly : We
must be like Tao ; we must make the law of Tao
our law, but this we can only do by being imbued
with Tao. Therefore morality, ie, forms the second
portion of the system. And the idea is that where
Tao is realised, te necessarily follows. Hence
man's first duty is to put his soul in order, that there
may be room in it for Tao ; to cleanse it from all
egotism, and the lusts, passions, self-will, avarice,
and love of power, resulting therefrom. When
3


34


MYSTICISM


all these are banished, then Tao can take immediate
possession. Then, morally, one has become part
of Tao. “ The wise man sets himself in the lowest
place, and is raised to the highest. He treats his
own- personality as if it were a stranger to him, yet
he does not lose sight of his purpose.” Is it not
so ? By pursuing neither a personal nor a private
motive, the object is attained. Learn of the
heavens and of the earth. Why is their existence
so long ? Because they exist not for themselves.
Learn of the water, which benefits all, yet claims
nothing for itself. Learn of the woman, for she
is quiet and gentle, and therefore easily rules man.
Like them, Tao is a silent power, and all men can
become Tao.

However universally human this philosophy
may appear, one feels oneself nevertheless on
Chinese territory when one begins to consider the
separate virtues which constitute te. There is no
question of a fervid or visionary absorption into
the 'divine power, nor, in the original code of
Taoism — later it may have been otherwise — of
ascetic self-restraint or ecstatic self-abandonment,
for ridding oneself of one's own individuality.
No, all the requirements bear the stamp of common
sense. The three cardinal virtues are goodness,
economy, and modesty. Eong-tse’s demands are of
a similar nature. Only these virtues have a deeper
meaning when Laotse exacts them. For in his


CHINESE MYSTICISM


35

doctrine about goodness the mystic goes so far that
he — like Christ — makes goodness the indisputable
standard for all our actions : evil must be overcome
by good, good must be returned for evil. " To him
who is good to me, I am good likewise ; to him who
is angry with me, I also am good ; so all will be
made good.” That this moral reflection is not
altogether Chinese, we see from Kong-tse’s mocking
comment : “ If I am to be good to the evil, where- .
with then shall I reward the good ? ” His maxim
is : ” Goodness for the good, justice for the evil.”

Modesty also is in Laotse’s doctrine more than
a rule of wordly wisdom. What he teaches is true
humility, always with the consciousness that be
who humbleth himself shall be exalted. He corm
prehends under modesty also that quiet reserve
by which one husbands one’s strength and prolongs
one’s life in proportion as the friction of this
mundane life is escaped from.

Here we get in a compressed form a foretaste of
the mystic’s life and conduct as seen wherever it is
found exempt from ecstasy and asceticism. This
craving for a life of peace and purity is the lovable
side of mysticism, and it is not by chance that it
showed itself at an early stage among the peace-
loving Chinese. Nor is it chance that yet another
characteristic feature of the mystic stood out
sharp and clear on Chinese ground, namely, the
despising of outward forms ; this, in China, where


MYSTICISM


36

form is sacred, and all life a ceremony f Laotse
knew of things more sacred than forms, and he
searched after another and a better life ; “ Not the
life one lives, but the life which lives.” Therefore
he broke with all outward show, and did away with
formality. But this, in the eyes of good Chinamen,
is shocking profanity, a sign of want of morals !
So it is that always the old shells must break if a
new shoot is to spring up ; but nowhere the break-
ing through has been done more boldly than here
in China, because the old shell was so very old, so
hard, so beautiful, and so graceful.

Nevertheless, true Chinaman as Laotse was, he
did not follow up his theories to the inevitable
consequence to which a self-absorbing and con-
templative life must lead, namely, that this life
must be lived individually . That thought is not
attractive to the Mongol mind, for the Mongols
are sociably inclined, and the Chinese in particular.
They are only members of the body of the State,
only "children of one large family. Therefore
Laotse’s moral teaching as well as Kong-tse’s
results in political ideals. Unity and the public
welfare is their final aim ; but it is not attained,
as in the theories of rationalism, by a voluntary
co-operation of enlightened men, or by fraternisa-
tion in the common pursuits of life. No, if Tao
is to come to full realisation among men, ' one
must stand at the head, 'one who knows the " way ”


CHINESE MYSTICISM 37

and can lead the people. Laotse imagines this
wise man to be a great sovereign, who knows how
to rule because he knows that he is in unison
with Tao. This sovereign is to rule with generosity
and without thought of self, like Tao ; of then-
own free will his subjects shall serve him, because
he lets the influence of Tao pass over them. For
where Tao is effectively present, all fit into their
proper places; even the animals then become
willingly submissive to the peace-loving ruler.
All things in this State are done without coercion,
war and sentence of death are done away with,
pure and generous customs will be seen among
the people, the ruler’s wisdom and example will
educate them up to these. But if his people are
to trust him implicitly, if they are to be satisfied
with t.heir lot, then, says Laotse, they must not
be too much enlightened in worldly matters.

And in this statement the mystic again betrays
himself. It is not the absolutist but the obscurant
who speaks. The gospel of ignorance has often
enough been preached by mystic lips. One thing
only is necessary, and that is the inner light,
which in China shines forth from above, radiates
from the person ,of the Emperor, in so far as he
is the son of heaven, and interprets the will of
heaven to the people — an old doctrine. Only
what in the State religion was a myth, and in
astrology a cult, becomes in the occult science of


38 MYSTICISM

Taoism an inner worth, philosophic piety and
morality. The highest comes from above but
at the same time from within, and the law which
all must obey is written in the heart.

This is Taoism. Nothing more beautiful has
ever been conceived on ancient heathen soil,
and therefore nothing is so sad as the fate of
Taoism.

Still — in its peculiar, sad way, Tao has prevailed.
It permeates the whole nation, it is practically
the vital strength of its existence. We see this
from the fact that Confucianism has during all
the past ages been tinged with Taoism. The divine
will moves like a mystic power among the worldly
institutions of State philosophy, and the inter-
cessors between heaven and earth which are
found in heathen mythology as well as in Christian
worship are the means by which the transition
from the ideal to the real is effected.

Side by side with true Taoism there runs a
.stream of lower order, which in China meets us
at every end and turn. Favoured or disfavoured
by time, Tao has degenerated into witchcraft,
into a magic power which is practised by pro-
fessional, wandering priests. From them one can
buy Tao for a trifle, and be filled with strength
which drives away toothache, ghosts, vermin, and
creditors. For this is the reverse side Of all
mysticism, that it makes God into a power, and


CHINESE MYSTICISM


39

life in God into an absorption of divine power.
Thus it practically becomes mesmerism. And
the inner life, the chief object to be attained,
becomes an outward show, quite as prominent
as the external life one is trying to subdue.
Liberty of thought thus degenerates into thought-
lessness, and unrestrained morality into wanton-
ness. — How often has this not been seen where
the motions of the human heart have been allowed
free course ? — and this has been the fate of Chinese
mysticism.

No garden gave it sheltering care, therefore it
now grows like a weed in the field.


III. INDIAN MYSTICISM


In India, where all things grow luxuriantly and
vigorously, the growth of mysticism has also
been most luxuriant and lasting. As far back as
research can reach, the germs of mysticism are
found everywhere ; and up to the present day it
still flourishes there, so much so that the people
returning home from India carry the seeds of it
back with them in their clothes. But as are the
people of India so also is their mysticism : a
mysticism of meditation and of renunciation. For
the Hindus, although our kinsmen in descent,
language, and disposition, have become ameditative,
passive, and resigned race. There have been times
when they were heroes ; there have been times
when they subjected the earth, and drew from it
the wealth of India. But there has also come a
time when these cultivators of the rich soil, in the
midst of their tropical wealth, sank into inactivity,
and — where the hand refused its service, specula-
tion became rife and mysticism flourished.

The mysticism of the Hindus did not originate
in philosophy, any more than their religion from

40


INDIAN MYSTICISM 41

the first was a philosophical religion. The be-
ginning was adoration, worship, and therein the
earliest elements of mysticism are to be found.
In his description of Brahman sacrifices, Oldenberg
(Rel. of the Veda, p. 326) goes fully into the matter
of the mystical virtues supposed to be contained
therein. The more important Hindu sacrifices
have at all times included the participation
of the food offered. This custom, which also
prevails among the Semitic races, has for these
latter been explained by Robertson Smith, as
expressive of a longing for union with the divinity,
a kind of fellowship, and eating and drinking
together in consolidation of the compact. This
view and these practices greatly furthered mysti-
cism among them, but this was not the train of
thought followed by the Hindus.

The offerings made to the old Hindu deities were
solely for the purpose of purchasing the good things
of this life, and only the crumbs falling from the
table of the god were the portion of man. But
these crumbs are of extraordinary weight, and
possess mysterious power. For that of which
the deity has partaken has, by reason of the divine
proximity, become filled with divine potency, and
the remnants of the feast are thus converted
into elements of a higher order. That these
rest are unsafe even to touch is a widespread
belief, and only the initiated or those ritually


42


MYSTICISM


qualified thereto can without risk partake thereof ;
for them indeed they possess great medicinal
virtue. Worthy to eat and drink of the offering
are the officiating priest and the " Sacrificer ”
or donor of the sacrifice, the person who pays for
it, together with his household. His wife partakes
of the sacrifice offered to the departed ancestors
in order that she may be blest with male issue, and
any of the family suffering from any lingering
disease also receive a morsel. When a candidate
for the priesthood is admitted into the house of
a Brahman, a small portion of the sacrificial food
is given to him, with the words : " May Agni” (the
god of fire and of the priesthood) ‘ ‘ give thee wisdom. ’ ’
Very telling also are the marriage customs. When
the bridegroom enters his house he divides the
sacrificial food with his bride, saying these words :
" With this food, the bond of life, the bright
and varied thread, the knots of which are truth,
I bind thy heart and thy spirit. Thy heart shall
be my heart and my heart shall be thy heart.
Food is the bond of life, with it I bind thee.” This
is sorcery, but it is also mysticism. The union* of
the young couple is symbolised by the joint-
participation of the mystical, i.e. the sacrificial
food, filled with the divine substance;

The same mystical efficacy must be attributed
to the libation, the drink-offering, Soma. This
also was a powerful curative, a life-elixir, and no


INDIAN MYSTICISM


43


doubt, originally, a draught of immortality, the
same as it has always been for the Persians. In
the Hindu sacrifice it served primarily as a bait
for the gods. But a glimmering of the original
idea of the Soma-offering is found in the fact that
the Brahman himself drinks of the Soma, doubt-
less in order that he may thereby be filled with
divine power. This power, however, could scarcely
be attributed to the Soma in its character as the
dregs of the cup of the gods, but must rather be
looked upon as a survival of its primitive magic
charm, which is believed to lift the Brahman by
intoxication into those divine realms whence he
draws his sanctity. Here we have then, in the
very midst of the highly developed Hindu ritual,
a bit of Shamanism, and we realise that the refined
Hindu is not too refined to indulge in some of the
crude negro or old Indian customs expressive of
the lowest form of mysticism, even if in their
sacrificial rites these occupy but a subordinate
place.

Thus there is in Hindu mysticism a background
— if not an immediately influential one — of sacra-
mental mysticism in the sacrifice, and of ritualistic
mysticism in the priesthood, but its real develop-
ment is found where ritual is superseded by
speculation. The life of the Hindu priest was
divided into two periods : from the completion of
his studies as scholar, to his service at the altar


44


MYSTICISM


as priest ; and from there to a life of seclusion and
religious meditation. What Rudyard Kipling tells
us of these hermit-priests living in forests, coin-
cides exactly with what Kalidasa describes in his
Sakuntala. Sometimes they live in companies,
i but more often in absolute solitude, the latter
years of their life being spent in strict self-denial
and heavy penances. Originally this was a device
for getting rid of the old people, but the decree
very soon passed into a link of the priestly Ordo
Salutis, and the old folks were not so weakened
with age that they did not take advantage of the
situation, and converted the compulsory period
of old age meditation into the recognised road to
salvation. Two roads were open to attain salvation :
the road of action (Karmamargd) , which they had
walked during their time of ministry at the altar,
and the road of knowledge ( jndnamarga ) which
they would now follow. And it was easy to see
that this latter was the higher one. Their whole
life long they had been the slaves of the gods.
For twenty years they had learned Veda-hymns
by heart, and for another thirty years they had
recited them. A thousand times they had brewed
the sacred drink and poured it on the altar
flames, had killed goats and antelopes, had
chanted and muttered and exorcised spirits ; and
yet — -as concerns their spiritual welfare — they were
no further than at the beginning of their career.


INDIAN MYSTICISM


45


After all, can these gods save me ? Indra, the
chief of the gods, who is always thirsty, always
quarrelsome, who is always doing foolish things,
and is, moreover, henpecked ? Vanina, the king
of justice, who is always on the watch, and punishes
us for sins we have never committed ? Usha, the
virgin queen of the morning, who goes about half-
naked in search of a lover ; and Rudra, the black-
blue devil, who pierces us with the arrow of death ?
East and west, gods everywhere, and all want to
be supreme. Always the one to whom the sac-
rifice is made has to be assured that he alone is
the mighty One, that he is the only One. Who
is the mighty One ; who is the only One ? There
can be but one. Or, more correctly, one only can
be the One : the spiritual element which animates
all the gods, that divine power which makes them
into gods, that magic power which gives them
their potency, the breath which has given them
life. That magic power is called Brahma ; it was
the name given to the mysterious power of prayer
which all the gods must yield to. Breath is called
Atman, and these two words, Brahma and Atman,
now became the name for the divine principle.

The way leading to this divinity, however, was
different to the one whereby the old gods were
approached. Since it was by thought alone that
he could be apprehended, it is clear that by
thought alone one can get access to him. Having


46


MYSTICISM


formed a conception of him in one’s own mind,
one possesses him for oneself alone ; and they only
who can so conceive or grasp him can hold com-
munion with him. Therefore the road of know-
ledge alone is of any avail. Every theologian has
learned to distinguish between theosophy and
mysticism : the theosophist, it is said, loses himself
in the conception of God, the mystic in his relation
towards God. How little this supposed difference
holds good we see in Hindu mysticism. For Hindu
mysticism recognises no other way for entering
into relation with God than that of losing oneself
in the conception of God ; as soon as God is fully
apprehended, the relation with God is also
established.

And with what spiritual energy these old Hindu
priests have penetrated into the mystery of the
Godhead, how deep has become their conception
of God since first they began to meditate upon it !
“ Deep ” is the Hindu meaning for spiritual ; and
spiritual is in the first place uncorporeal. Not an
atom of what we call material may be left in the
Brahman ; even his spirit must be active without
the help of bodily organs ; “he sees without eyes
and hears without ears, he speaks not in words, he
even thinks without thoughts and breathes without
drawing breath.” Notwithstanding this latter
subtle accomplishment, the Hindus call their god
Atman (which means breath), not only because this


INDIAN MYSTICISM


47


is the most uncorporeal designation they can fmd
for him, but also because, like the breath which is
the sign of life, or, according to the Hindu belief,
life itself, he animates all that lives and breathes,
even dead nature.

Being uncorporeal he is also free from all bodily
emotions, impressions, and conditions. “ He feels
neither sorrow, nor hunger, nor thirst, he can
neither change nor die, he is exempt from all evil.”
But as he so divests himself of his body he also puts
aside that of which the body should be the expres-
sion, his personality. “Personality” is, to the
Hindu mind, limitation, and in God there can be
no limitation. Further still, this diving into the
abstract is carried. In God there may not even
be consciousness, for he who is conscious of any-
thing, stands with his consciousness opposite to
this thing, but outside of the Godhead there is
nothing that can be placed over against it. It
stands to reason that no qualities can be attributed
to this God, for qualities necessarily imply parts
of a being, and the Deity has no parts. Therefore
also this being cannot be defined any closer ; one
cannot say it is so or so, the only thing one can
say is that it is neither so nor so (na iti na iti).

But by taking thus everything away from
Brahma, does he not himself become nothing ?
No, on the contrary, says the Hindu, he becomes
all in all. Just because in the widest sense of the


MYSTICISM


48

word he is everything, therefore nothing can be
said of him in detail. Because he is infinite we
cannot clothe him with any finite attributes. The
corporeal also is comprehended in him, although
he himself has nothing in common with corporeal
things. All things flow from him and all things
return to him ; he is the beginning and the end.
Nay, what is more, he is the only reality, the only
eternal existence. All that is material is perish-
able, he alone, the pure spirit, is imperishable ;
what we see with our eyes is vain and changeable,
he alone is unchangeable. And so on and on
the Hindu argues until we become dizzy. What
we call the realities of life, he calls shadows, vanity,
and deception [may a ) ; what we are often tempted
to call an illusion, an ideal, is for the Hindu the
only reality. And things only become real when
they are meditated upon as emanating from and
resting on their ideal. Emanating from it not as
by creation by a personal god, but coming forth
out of Brahma, immediately, as the spark springs
from the flame, as vapour rises up from the sea,
or as the rain drops down from the cloud.

Now, if all things emanate from Brahma, you and
I are also out of him ; if he is all, he is also you and
me ; if he is the breath of the universe, he is also
that which breathes and lives in you and in me.

This is the last thought in this chain of medita-
tion, and upon which all depends. This is the saving


INDIAN MYSTICISM


49


power. Canst thou think of thyself as a spark
springing from the celestial fire and sinking back
again into it ? Canst thou feel thyself as a drop
rising out of the heavenly ocean and falling back
again into its bosom ? Canst thou apply to thyself
the potent word, tat tvam asi, “ this is thou,” or
brahmo ’mi, “ I am Brahma,” then thou art blessed,
then thou art saved, freed from all finiteness, from
birth and death and new birth, for then thou hast
realised that thine own being is like Atman’s : sat-
cit-ananda, pure existence, thought, infinity.

That this solution can only be attained by the
way of meditation is clear enough. Insight is what
is needed, and Brahma, thus thought out, is medita-
tion. “ Even as a lump of salt is only a condensed
mass of savour, so this divine being is a condensed
mass of meditation.” Hence the philosophical
pride of the Hindu recluses. Crude knowledge, of
which ordinary people boast, is only a knowledge
of external things which at bottom is ignorance,
lack of knowledge. It is only like playing with
the outer shell, but the immortal kernel has never
been reached. With all one's knowledge one
rem ains subject to birth and death. Therefore
it is said : —


" Joyless indeed are these dim worlds.
Covered with darkness ;

There all are going to Death

Who are not enlightened by knowledge.


4


50


MYSTICISM


But who has grasped the Atman
Being conscious : * I am He t ’

Why should he cling to his body ?

What will he desire ? Whose favour win ? ”

And therefore the Brahman says to his pupil : —

"Nay, widely different and opposite
Is what is called ‘ Knowing ’ — ' Not Knowing ’

Look Naciketas striving hard for knowledge !

The crowd of sinful lusts cannot confound him.

But in Not Knowing’s gloomy depths are groping
Those fancying themselves wise men, great scholars ;
Thus always to and fro the fools are running
Like blind men led by leaders blind.”

Soon, however, it was realised that it could
not be done by means of ordinary meditation
alone. For that which has no attributes and
cannot be defined, how can it be comprehended
by meditation ; where has thought to start
from ? And again, if Atman is that which thinks
in me, how then can the thinking in me ever
obtain a sight of him ? No, it was now said, one
cannot think oneself into him, only by inspiration
from himself, by gracious revelation, can he be
apprehended.

" Not by reason can Atman be laid hold of.

Not by intellect and much knowledge of Scripture ;
Only they whom he elects can comprehend him,

To them Atman reveals himself.”

Or if not by direct revelation of Atman
himself, then by a sudden inspiration, dis-


INDIAN MYSTICISM


5i

closing his being without any gradual process of
thought : —

"Not by talking, not by thought,

Not by sight can he be grasped ;

‘ He is,’ by this word alone.

And in no other wise can he be reached.”

This new view threw the old “ meditation ”
methods into disrepute : —

"Blind are they who go about in ignorance.

But blinder still are they whose knowledge satisfies
them.”

Thus Indian logic, austere, inexorable, proved
its fallacy, and we see that what underlies it is,
after all, pure mysticism, whose object is to
grasp the incomprehensible, and believes that
man’s highest attainment is to become one with
the incomprehensible. Knowledge ends- with
the realisation that more than simple meditation
is required to bring about this union, namely, a
special grace, a special organ, a special state of
mind.

Where knowledge failed, art stepped in : the
art above all arts to which the Hindu applies him-
self most assiduously, the art of raising himself
above the life of this world by rapture, forgetting
himself in ecstasy, and producing this ecstasy by
penances, — the art which in India is known as
Yoga. In the word itself — from the same root


52


MYSTICISM


as the Latin word jungo, “ to unite ” — the mystical
union is expressed. He who practises Yoga
binds himself to the supernatural, he binds his
thoughts into that one collective sense which
will take him out of the finite. Yoga is still
practised by Hindu fakirs and by them brought
to a state of perfection which only too often
degenerates into jugglery, and leads us to believe
that, after all, the old self-restraining methods
merely aspired at a purely external control over
the body, its needs and desires. To the true
Yogin (he who practises Yoga), however, it was
not merely a question of subduing the body, but
rather of helping the spirit to triumph ; of raising
the human Atman into union with the divine
Atman. Fasting is an excellent means to this
end, for fasting chastens the body and inflames
the spirit. Celibacy follows as a natural out-
come, and strict solitude is a necessary stipulation,
for the perfect repose of the soul. The Yoga
practiser then preferably squats, huddled to-
gether, remaining immovable in the same posture,
staring at his own body, his navel or the tip of
his nose, until sense and reason become confused,
until the external sight becomes dim, until through
' this self-hypnotism the internal light is produced.
“ Breathing ” is also a favourite practice of these
ascetics : a very slow and well-controlled inhaling
and exhaling of the breath, by which — whether


INDIAN MYSTICISM


53


from carbonic acid poisoning of the blood or
from other causes- — a particularly speculative
state of mind is produced.

So, for instance, at the commencement of the
play, The Toy-Cart, we see the Brahmans sitting —

“ Cross-legged, with breath drawn in.

With snakes coiled round their knees,

Their senses subdued, freed from worldly thoughts.
Their eyes fixed, thinking only Brahma
Inself-forgetting.worship; Sambhoo the Goodguard thee.”

And in the same manner this highest state of
absorption is described at length in the Bhagavad-
Gita (vi. line n and foil. Max Muller’s transla-
tion) : —

" A devotee should constantly devote his self
to abstraction, remaining in a secret place, alone,
with his mind and self restrained, without ex-
pectations and without belongings. Fixing his
seat firmly in a clean place, not too high nor too
low, and covered over with a sheet of cloth, a
deerskin, and blades of Kusho-grass — and there
seated on that seat, fixing his mind exclusively
on one point, with the workings of the mind and
senses restrained, he should practise devotion
for purity and self. Holding his body, head, and
neck even and unmoved, remaining steady looking
at the tip of his own nose, and not looking about
in all directions, with a tranquil self, devoid of


54


MYSTICISM


fear and adhering to the rules of Brahma pupils,
he should restrain his mind and concentrate it
on me, and sit down engaged in devotion regarding
me as his final goal. Thus, constantly devoting
his self to abstraction, a devotee whose mind is
restrained attains that tranquillity which cul-
minates in final emancipation and assimilation
with me.”

So it was formerly and so it is still. This is
bliss ; this is salvation ; the Hindu knows no
other. Religions change and vanish in India.
Brahmanism gives way to Buddhism, Buddhism
in its turn is supplanted by the various Hindu
sects. Pantheism becomes Atheism, and Atheism,
Theism — yet in spite of all these changes Nirvana
always crops up as highest aim, Yoga always as
the only way to it. The deity is a concep-
tion which has to be apprehended : human
life is a barrier which has to be broken down :
union with God is highest rapture : penance, a
holy joy.

Foreign religions have free entrance in India,
but before they have taken proper root they
become enervated. Even harsh Islam grows
weak and mystical on Indian soil, and Christianity
is for the Hindu contained in the words which
in the Gospel according to St. John are put into
the mouth of Jesus, with that mystic touch so


INDIAN MYSTICISM


55


peculiar to its author : "I and the Father are
one ” ! Here the Hindu’s heart beats faster, for
is not this the old truth, which for thousands of
years has been claimed by all the religions of his
native land ?

“ Yes, truly,” the Saviour had to say those
words, we all must say the same if we would be
saved : “ God and I, we are one ! ”


IV. PERSIAN MYSTICISM


While the Hindu mortified his flesh and spun
the thread of his life in incessant meditation,
his nearest of kin on the other side of the Hindu-
kush moved in quite a different world of thought,
with quite a different view of life. The history
of the mighty Persian Empire gives most eloquent
proofs of the courage and the determination of
its people, of their military prowess, their practical
common sense, tlieir social stability. Avesta,
the sacred book of the Persians, speaks moreover
of their clear intellect, their earnestness in dis-
tinguishing between good and evil, between
purity and impurity, their unrelenting zeal in
subduing the evil and helping the good to conquer.

One would hardly suppose that among these
practical, intelligent people, with their clear
power of discernment, mysticism could ever have
found a fruitful soil. And yet the elements of
Shamanism can be detected in the old sacrificial
rites of the Parsee priests, and in their intoxicating
beverage, drunk in honour of the gods. The
Indian Soma is by the Magi called haoma, and the

56


PERSIAN MYSTICISM


57


hymn of praise, sung in its honour, sufficiently
proves its marvellous efficacy. Haoma’s virtue
increases as one sings its praises, and he who
lauds it is certain of victory. Haoma brings
health and prosperity in home and city. Other
inebriation comes with anger and heavily armed,
but inebriation through haoma brings light-
heartedness. And he who caresses haoma as
a little child will feel its exhilarating power.
“ I come to thee, haoma ; as thy friend and
singer I come, for Ormuz himself calls thy friends
and singers greater than the angels.”

Thus the priests drank salvation to themselves,
nor did the supreme ruler neglect the holy duties
of the cup, when on New Year’s Day, in royal state
and with the crown on his head, he pledged his
people in the cup, which on that occasion was
filled with wine. The people did not lag behind
in this matter either, for there was yet another
cup, called the Yima-cup, the same that the old
King Yima, the god of the golden age, had drunk
in the garden of the gods. This cup had gradually
become the people's drink, and its dregs were
found to possess the same magic efficacy, which
has always been attributed, before as well as after,
to the sparkling juice of the grape.

Whether the holy delirium they thus imbibed
was of a mystical nature, — as this highly excited
condition is generally supposed to be, — is difficult


58


MYSTICISM


to ascertain, but the popularity of this sacramental
and festive beverage certainly enables us better
to realise that even on Persian soil a mysticism
could be cultivated which centred in the cup,
and the adherents of which — like the old haoma
priests — approached their god as friends and
singers. Out of this singing and drinking mysti-
cism has come forth the beautiM Persian poetry
which to this day is sung by Eastern people, and,
what is more, re-echoes in our Western poetry
from the time that Goethe wrote his West-Eastern
Divan, and Riickert, with more learning and in
stricter imitation, put Persian songs on German
lips. Out of Indian mysticism evolved philosophy,
out of Persian mysticism, poetry. Such widely
different results were produced by the same force
in two so widely different nations. Both, however,
have brought their art to an" equally high degree
of perfection.

The floods of fate had to sweep mightily over
the Persian people ere, from the height of their
political greatness and fearless, open fight for the
good things of this life, they could sink down
into dreaming and poetical mysticism. Their
national independence, their ancestral faith, even
their language, had to be destroyed before their
minds had become receptive enough to be im-
pregnated with mysticism.

For mysticism, with its fermentative nature


PERSIAN MYSTICISM


59


and claire-obscure thinking, cannot flourish in the
world of freedom and in the fresh air of active
vitality. A certain amount of dull depression
must weigh down the soul before this timid thing
can manifest itself. Islam, strong, severe, re-
lentless, invaded the Persian dominions in the
eighth century. Here, if anywhere, its hold had
a depressing effect on the people, for curt and
stern and implicit are its demands. But the
austerity and marked simplicity of Mohammedan-
ism, which enabled it to make such rapid progress,
also meant that where it did strike root it never
penetrated very deeply into the ground. They
who accepted the belief had but to conform to its
tenets, make their confessions, say their prayers,
keep the fasts and the feasts — beyond this it
exacted nothing, because it had not much more
to offer. Deeper understanding and fuller know-
ledge the new converts had to find for themselves,
and if they were experts in the art of dissembling,
called Ketman — and what Asiatic Mussulman
is not ? — they could adhere to and carry about
with them, hidden under the new cloak, the whole
of their former equipment of thoughts, beliefs,
feelings, manners, and customs, and at home,
within their own four walls, discard the new cloak
altogether.

Under the dominion of Islam, the individual
life of the Persians developed into a strong


6o


MYSTICISM


network of roots which has become the basis upon
which the culture of the Eastern Caliphate —
although it goes by an Arabian name — has been
built ; from its politics, customs, and dress, to its
arts, science, and poetry, even to its religious
innovations. Among these latter we must make
special mention of that form of mysticism which
expresses itself in verse-making and drinking,
sometimes sublime, sometimes foolish, known as
Sufism.

Sufism, so called because the first adherents
of this sect, dressed in white wool (suf ) , came
originally from Arabia. The sober-minded
Semites never had much inclination towards
mysticism ; on the contrary, they are only too
conscious of the distance between God and man,
and of what is expected of man in order that
he may gain the approbation of the Most High.
Yet there have been among them excitable
and emotional natures, to whom the contem-
plative has been congenial, and there have been
people even in Arabia and Palestine to whom
the Mohammedan admonition to meditate on the
name of God has been a welcome excuse for a
speculative absorption and losing of self in re-
flecting upon the most Holy One.

In Persia, the growth and development of this
inner piety under the influence of' Islam was very
different. Here, a cultured, well-educated class


PERSIAN MYSTICISM


6x


of people reluctantly embraced Islam, and bowed
to its precepts with undisguised irony. Here it
came in contact with a cheerful, happy, pleasure-
loving people whose most sacred duty had been
from ancient times to get all the good they could
out of life, and had learned very intelligently
to enjoy life ; but it also struck upon a
beaten nation, whose cheerfulness was mingled
with sadness, nay, even with despair, and to
whom the pessimism of India was a dangerous
neighbour.

Sufism is made up of three chief factors — the
order of succession is immaterial — the monotheism
of the Koran, suppressed Persian cheerfulness,
and Indian asceticism and philosophy ; or rather,
let us say, it is not made up at all, it is an inde-
pendent whole, fed by these three factors, and
brought to maturity by them. It is, in fact, that
condition which underlies all mysticism and often
completely masters it, and which is known as
quietism. Quietism — a state of exquisite ex-
haustion, in which every limb is in complete
repose, in which thinking becomes brooding
absorption, while the soul revels in melancholy
sensuality — or senselessness — is the Oriental’s most
cherished experience, his paradise on earth.

The more he is weakened by the oppressiveness
of the climate, or languishes under arbitrary
administration, poverty, national disorder, or


62


MYSTICISM


individual disadvantages, the more comfort he
finds in roaming those nameless distances which
are untouched by earthly change, or in losing
himself in ecstatic self-abandonment — a con-
dition from which no external power can rouse
him.

And therefoi'e he drinks; drinks, regardless of
Koran and bastinado, drinks to-day like the
Persian poets of the Middle Ages drank before
him. " Drunkenness,” says Gobineau, “ is the
hereditary sin of the central Asiatic.” This vice,
which Mohammed fought against so zealously, all
the people succumb to. Priests as well as kings
spend their nights in drinking. Ladies of the
royal family as well as bazaar girls tumble on to
their carpets at midnight, totally drunk ; and
“ cold tea,” as arrak is delicately called, or even
European brandy, flows freely in the so-called
“ tea house.”

“ And yet they do not drink or go into these
excesses for the sake of making merry with their
friends, nor because of the exhilarating effects of
intoxication, nor for the love of the liquor itself,
for the Asiatic detests the taste of wine and brandy.
While drinking, he holds his handkerchief to his
nose, and makes faces as he swallows the drink
like medicine. He drinks because it is the quickest
way for getting into that condition when one no
longer tastes or feels, a condition of complete


PERSIAN MYSTICISM


63

stupefaction. That is the inducement ; for the
stupor of intoxication is the height of his
desire.” 1

On this soil of Oriental human nature, Sufism
must be seen to be understood. What outwardly
distinguishes this white community from the
orthodox Mussulman is their disregard of the
external forms and usages of Mohammedanism.
For the untutored all these formalities may be
quite fitting, but for those whose spirits have
been illumined from above, they are unworthy,
food for babes, and child’s play. To the mind
preparing to meet the Most High, dogmas and
moral teachings are worthless. All respect to
the prophet ! — he was a highly gifted man, and
possibly had interviews with the angel Gabriel,
but whether he correctly understood him is
another matter. His book — or part of it at any
rate — needs to be revised before it can be used
with perfect confidence.

The antipathy with which they regard the
official religion — necessarily only expressed in
whispers and in secret — curiously enough fills
these distant Asiatics with a great admiration
for Voltaire, of whom the Russians have told
them that he hated the Church and especially the
priesthood. They have read none of his writings,

1 A. de Gobineau, Les religions et les philosophies dans
I’Asie centrals, 2 nd ed., p. 68 and foil.


64


MYSTICISM


but it gives them immense satisfaction to know
that they have a great European sage on their
side . 1

All mysticism is antagonistic to the Church, or,
perhaps more correctly, despises all outward show
and ceremony. We have heard how the Hindu
Brahmans extolled the “ road of meditation ” at
the cost of the “ road of action,” and the mystics
of the Middle Ages and of modern Romanticism
tell us the same thing. The more outward
ceremonial there is in a religion, the more deter-
minately the mystic turns away from it, hence
it is that Roman Catholicism makes more mystics
than Protestantism, and this is also the reason
that Islam, the very essence of which is in outward
appearance, has produced the most luxuriant
mysticism. But mystics always act in semi-
secrecy. They take care not to break openly
with the State religion, for their soul desires peace,
and this they gladly purchase at the price of
seeming outward obedience. They are indifferent
to all external things, therefore they neglect or
observe them as occasion demands. “ What
need can there be for Gabriel’s interference where
direct divine light is the guide ? ” This idea
underlies all the scorn and ridicule lavished by
mystic poets on praying and kneeling, fasts and

1 A. de Gobineau, Trots ans en Asie, p. 323 and foil.
1859.


PERSIAN MYSTICISM


65


ablutions, Bible texts and rosaries ; and yet
some of those scoffers knew the Koran by heart,
and one has hardly ever heard of a Sufi being
turned out of a mosque.

Not in the Church would they meet one another,
but in their inner life. What they have in common,
what binds them together, are the inner joys and
sorrows between which the mystic soul is con-
tinually swayed. How is it that voluptuous
living always goes hand in hand with despair ?
Is it because sensual enjoyment is followed by
remorse, or because grief wants to drown itself
in pleasure ?

The latter was certainly the original design
in Sufism : it was the vanquished nation that
took to drinking. As we listen more attentively
to their songs of lamentation, we become aware
how by degrees the theme changes, and it is
the epicure who complains that his day of feast-
ing is so short. And this among a people whose
days were not by any means of short duration !
It is rather hard on the anti-alcohol statisticians
that some of the celebrities of Sufism were over
a hundred years old, that they even have on
record a man who reached the age of a hundred
and fifty. His complaint is surely of some
weight, where he sings : “For a few moments
longer I still hoped to indulge my desires, but,
alas ! my breath stopped. Alas ! at the table
5


66


MYSTICISM


of life, laden with goodly dishes, I sat down and
ate for a few short moments, and Fate spoke ;
it is enough.”

" Knowest thou, thou cage of bones,” it says
in another passage, “ that thy soul is a bird and
thy name a breath ? When the bird escapes
from the cage and shakes off its fetters, it will
not a second time become thy prey. Make use
of the hour, the world lasts but a moment.”

“ Many times after we are gone the roses will
bring forth buds, and the young green unfold
itself. Many a summer and winter and spring
will be, when we are dust and ashes.”

The philosophical basis of this pessimism in
the Persian poets is the same as that of the Hindu
philosophers, and probably borrowed from these
latter. What we call the world is not actually
existing, not even true. It is imagination, a
dream, a delusion. " All the tangible things
of this world are but the outcome of thine im-
agination,” it says. "They are as unreal as
the circle which thou seemest to see when whirl-
ing a stone round at the end of a string.” Life
is a sleep and a dream. “ Thou sleepest, and
what thou seest are dream-pictures. All that
thou seest proceeds from thine imagination.
When thou awakest on the resurrection morning,
then shalt thou understand that all was but a
delusion.”


PERSIAN MYSTICISM


67


Wliat, then, is true ? Where is reality ?

In God ; only in Him and in His paradise.

" Material things are the shadows of that other
world, and,” says Hafiz, " perhaps thy face is
a reflection of the divine light. Truly this is
so ; this is no delusion.” But we who only see
the reflected image and walk in shadows, can
say no more about this remote and hidden reality
than that it exists. “ Science hangs its head
and weeps. Never will it fathom the mystery
of life. Brood on it no longer, science cannot
think it out. It cannot get beyond vague words.”

. . . “ Intellect,” it says elsewhere, ” is as an
ass sticking in the mud.”

Is there no means of escape ? Can God be
nothing to us, because He is altogether incom-
prehensible ? Are we fettered to our delusions,
to our impotent intellect ? No, surely not !
The reflected image and the shadows teach us
that from God irradiates beauty and love. All
beauty must be a reflection of His being, all love
must be a longing for Him. Wilt thou be like
Him ? Then consider the beauty of this world. Wilt
thou see Him ? Then enj oy the world so thoroughly
that thou perceivest Him therein. Give thyself
up to thine ardent, longing desire, and it will
lead thee to Him. Love leads the thoughts up
to God ; whether it be an earthly or a heavenly
jove, it makes the heart susceptible to receive


68


MYSTICISM


God. And thus the devout Sufi finds the way,
finds life. “ He buries himself in contemplation,
and dives down into the sea of revelation.”
Therefore Church and priest and scripture are
superfluous to him. Safe on the Sultan’s breast
he needs neither messenger nor message.

One specially favourite designation the Sufi
has for his God. He calls him “ Friend,” or
“ The Beloved.” For his love is erotic and of
great tenderness. He sighs for his God, and sings
to Him, as the nightingale to the rose. Listening
and longing he spends the silent watches of the
night. Intoxicated by the perfume of the rose,
and allured by the song of the nightingale, he
receives in nature, among the beds and bushes
of the garden, a foretaste of that heavenly meeting
which will once take place. Nay, so fully can
he enjoy it here in anticipation, when he gives
himself up to his musings, so completely can
the scent of the roses overpower him, that he
becomes stupefied by it. “I intended, when
I came to the rosebush to gather roses in the
lappet of my cloak as a gift to my Friend, but
the perfume of the roses intoxicated me, and the
cloak slipped out of my hand.”

So fantastical is this amorousness — no wonder,
then, that it led to verse-making. So poetical
it is that it always craves for beauty, and withal
so God-seeking that all beauty is only beautiful


PERSIAN MYSTICISM


69

because it flows from God. In the object of his
earthly , affection he embraces his God, for the
kiss of his beloved and the face of his beloved
are to him but the reflection of the impending
joy and beauty of that divinely blessed meeting.

All he enjoys or suffers, he enjoys or suffers
for the sake of his Love. " Whoso lives his life
other than for the Beloved, he shall be rejected,
be he Adam himself.”

Death alone can bring perfect union. Therefore
to die is bliss. To him who loves truly, the cup
of death from the hand of the Beloved is a cup of
joy. The last word of the poet Jelaleddin Rumi
was : “ Death is the only vesture which separates
me from the object of my affection. For must
we not desire that light should be fused into light,
and that our unclothing should lead to our union
with the Beloved ? ”

Now, how is this blessed encounter effected ?
Its chief peculiarity is not the passion of the
devotion, but the complete self-surrender, the
emptying of self, which also is its consummation.
" Learn from the moth what love is ! It gives
up its life, is consumed by the flame of its love,
and yet no sound is heard.” This characteristic
illustration differs but little from that of the Hindu
spark, which falls back into the flame. For the
Persian idea, like that of the Hindu, is that man
without the power of choice evolves from God,


70


MYSTICISM


and also without power of choice returns to God.
This is philosophical as well as fanciful. It
teaches that the soul is a shadow which only
acquires reality when it is stripped of all indi-
viduality. Thus the human soul is everything
and nothing. " The world is man, and man is the
world ” ; the godhead takes the soul into itself
that it may lose itself in the godhead. All this
proves that the ordinary senses do not suffice, and
that intellect has to stand aside ashamed, if one
is to live that soulish life which leads to God.
Consciousness expands until it snaps ; the light
flames up so high that it goes out.

This condition is brought about by intoxication.
“ When the fire of the winehouse has consumed
the house of intellect, then there is room in man
for the godhead.” “ The world calls it foolishness,
but he who is wise knows better. The drunkard,
losing his way as he leaves the winehouse, be-
comes the object of mockery and derision. With
every step he falls in mud and dirt. The world
of fools laughs at it. Every one who has not
himself tasted the wine,' laughs at it. The
drunken man forgets all that belongs to the
world of sense, poverty and misery, sorrow and
remorse.” Hear what Hafiz says : “ The rose
has unfolded its petals, and the nightingale is in
a transport of delight. Now up and rejoice, ye
Sufis, if ye love wine ! See how the crystal goblet


PERSIAN MYSTICISM


71


breaks the stony wall of remorse ! Bring wine,
for in the royal abode of contentment there is no
difference between king and serf, between wise
and foolish. Once we all have to leave the house
which has two doors, what matter then whether
the ceiling be high or low ? ” Therefore the
Sufi spends his days in the winehouse ; there he
would wish to draw his last breath, there he would
be buried, and blessed is he whose body helps to
grow a vine, and out of whose dust a wine-jug
is moulded.

And is that the whole of their religion ? Oh
no. Only the highest, the perfect ones attain
to this. Straight and narrow is the path which
leads thither. Many steps and stages and
stations have to be gone through, and not all
who start can, keep up to the end. Once the
birds desired to fly up to where their King Simurg
was seated, high on the top of a mountain in the
centre of the world. They all met together,
and the hoopoe 1 was chosen to head the pro-
cession. Away they flew over the hills of the
earth, over dales and high mountain-ridges, but
by and by their numbers began to decrease,
and only thirty reached the highest summit.
In reward for their perseverance these thirty
were made one with Simurg, for si-murg means
thirty birds. They were merged into the infinite
1 Bird with large crest.


72 MYSTICISM

compassion of the Most High, for Simurg signifies
love.

Not all can keep up in the race, which is toil-
some and full of privations. It needs great
moral courage to rise to be a Sufi ; yet the per-
fected Sufi counts moral accomplishments of
little value, they are as child’s play to him.
In its moral precepts Sufism has something in
common with Christianity. Sufism recognises
the necessity of the chastisements and morti-
fications of the flesh which produce the ecstatic
condition he desires to attain. In this respect
he differs not from other fanatics, but to his
honour be it said that he looks upon these extrava-
gances as the lowest stage in his career. The
finished Sufi is recognisable by his supreme
morality, and this alone makes him fit for the
highest place. This morality, like any other, has
its precepts and its prohibitions, both, however,
growing from one common root, namely, that
state of passiveness which proceeds from self-
effacement, or at any rate that keeping under
of self which has to be cultivated if one would
attain the final goal, the entire losing of self.

Humility is a first necessity. There is a pretty
piece of poetry of Persikn origin, called “ The
Reward of Lowliness,” which tells of a drop of
water falling into the ocean and finally becoming
a beautiful pearl, as reward for its humility.


PERSIAN MYSTICISM


73


A drop in the ocean — a moth in the flame ; the
recognition of one’s own insignificance, coupled
with the desire for self-extinction ; this pantheistic
kind of humility can easily be distinguished
from Christian humility with its sevenfold promise
of reward. And yet how often, by a seemingly
slight shifting of the premises, Christianity has
mistaken the one for the other. We shall hear
more of this presently.

The practical virtues which emanate from
humble-mindedness : patience, contentment, liber-
ality ; and the self-evident vices : anger, envy,
pride, and deceitfulness, distinguish the wise
man from the fool, no matter whether he be
Persian, Hindu, Chinese, Greek, or Christian.
The cloak is always the same ; only when asking
the wise man why he wears it, the answer differs
according to the standpoint which he occupies.

The wise Sufi wears it because it suits the rest
of his equipment, but he wears it with a certain
amount of indifference. It is not the cloak
itself that matters to him. To him, as to the
Hindu, all moral virtues are but the first principles.
His ideal is to get beyond the touch of good and
evil. Persuaded that the divine power works
its will in him and guides his actions, who shall
dare to condemn anything he does ? He is
superhuman, and has to give account to no man.
“ Let not the soul which burns with divine light


74


MYSTICISM


be judged by the standard of other men ! If
his speech is foul, yet do not call him a sinner.
If he commits murder, yet do not draw thy sword.
For his sin is above all virtues.” Such is their
humility !

Out of this humble-mindedness grew what
they termed ” non-pride.” Whoso overcomes
himself has also overcome his duties— that is the
moral of their mysticism. He who has tasted the
sweetness of ecstasy, shall he trouble himself
about dry virtues ? He who by inspiration has
risen into oneness with the godhead, what has
he to do with men ? And when the cup of joy
has raised him above the world, what profit is
the world to him ?

Such are the conclusions which have made
Sufism into one of the ineffaceable powers of the
earth, but which at the same time have dragged it
down to the most impotent folly. It has made
poets and it has made drunkards. This, in short,
is its career. Any one now visiting the East,
will find only the drunkard. He thrives there, for
eastern despots know well how to value the power
which weakens the will. In his drunkenness the
Persian still mumbles the imperishable songs,
and as we listen to the muttered words we realise
that even in his misery he still dreams of “ the
Friend ” and the Rose.


V. GREEK MYSTICISM

Grecism, what was it ? “ Verstand und Mass ”
(Reason and Moderation), said Schiller, and for a
long time this was believed to be the case. Deep
down into the Greek earth we had to dig, and many
a learned prejudice had to be uprooted, before we
began to realise that the old Greeks were made of
flesh and blood, and not of marble and hexa-
meters. Their being flesh and blood like we are
has also taught us that the spiritual fermentation,
which we read of as existing in ancient Greece,
was not merely the discreet enthusiasm indulged
in by the poets of the classical type, but that in
after-Homeric times it pervaded the whole com-
munity, and developed into the same kind of
ecstatic frenzy as in Eastern lands.

With quiet dignity — be it said to his eternal
glory — the classical Greek kept his passions under
control, gave them form and shape. Hence the
“ reason and moderation” theory. Yet so deeply
had this fermentation entered into the Greek
blood, that gradually, as self-restraint was aban-
doned and the classical forms fell into decay, the

75


76


MYSTICISM


tendency towards mysticism increased, and has
never again relinquished its hold. Every decline in
the mental state of Greece marks a step deeper
down into mysticism ; and from the time that
Christianity became Grecianised, it sank so help-
lessly into mysticism, that the life of the Greek
Church and the theology of the Greek Church bears
henceforth the unmistakable impress of it.

And this is the more remarkable as the mystical
element was not originally Greek. The Dionysian
cult which introduced it cannot be explained on
Greek hypotheses. Erwin Rohde, who in his
Psyche reviews the whole process, shows how
the Bacchanalian rites were introduced into Greece
from the north, and started in Thrace, which is'
also the home of the Muses and the wild war-god
Ares. Like a raging pestilence the boisterous,
drunken procession swept over the land, with
dancing and singing, carrying all before it, also
that which resisted its progress. Foremost were
the women, as is usual where anything eccentric
takes place. With music of cymbals and flutes
they stormed onwards. Behind the vine leaves
of the Thyrsos-staff lurked the sharp-pointed
lance, licking blood when their frenzy had reached
its height. Ox or goat, whichever happened to be
at hand, — or sometimes even a boy, — was offered
as a sacrifice. In their wild fury they threw
themselves at the feet of their victim, tore it to


GREEK MYSTICISM


77


pieces, and greedily ate the warm flesh and drank
the warm blood. If the victim were a little child,
he fared no better.

What mean these old rites ? Were they
merely the outcome of the wild dance cults, or the
frenzy of drunkenness ? Or was there something
deeper underneath it all ? There is a myth
connected with the Dionysian rites which throws
some light on this subject. It is the story of
Zagreus, the “ horned child,” clearly a deity not
of Greek origin, of whom it is told that he was
the offspring of Zeus and his daughter Persephone,
and that he was destined to inherit his father’s
throne and thunderbolt. Hera, however, who
always kept a watchful eye on the natural children
of her consort, caused an insurrection of the
giants — Titans — against Zagreus. They stormed
his throne, tore his body to pieces, and devoured
it. Athene rescued his heart, and took it to
Zeus. Zeus gave it to Semele, who now brought
forth Zagreus anew, and this time he lived and
came to honour under the name of Dionysius.
In his anger, Zeus destroyed the Titans with his
thunderbolt. Their ashes were scattered over
the earth, and out of their dust men were made.
And that is why we are what we are.

The problem of the double nature in man
already found expression in the Creation legend
of the early Babylonian epos, in which we are told


MYSTICISM


78

that Marduk killed Tiamat, and that divine and
devils’ blood was mixed with the dust of which
men are made. And so it is here. Out of the
ashes of the Titans we have been formed, but the
divine child which they had devoured was con-
tained in their bodies, and became dust with
them. Therefore, although we are made out of
devils’ dust, there is divine blood also running
through our veins. This constitutes a Dionysian
power of which we are conscious in our best
moments, and which it is our duty to foster that
it may gain the mastery in us.

The wild Maenades fulfilled this duty in their
crude fashion. They made either an ox or a goat
into their god ; probably because the earliest
representation of the deity was in the form of
either of these two strong - breeding animals.
Sometimes they took a child, — the Zagreus child, —
and pricked it on their spears, afterwards eating its
flesh with cannibal appetite. When they had thus
eaten they were quite sure of having the Dionysian
power in them, and the oftener they partook of
this Bacchanalian food the surer they were that the
deity by transubstantiation would conquer in them.

This is mysticism, for it is “ God in man,” but
it is a peculiar kind of mysticism, which brings
the animal in man to the foreground. And
Greece stood not alone in this respect.

Often enough an primitive religions we meet


GREEK MYSTICISM


79


with this “ consuming of the deity.” The camel
sacrifices, as late as Mohammed’s time, speak of
it. Frantically they dance round and round the
animal until they lose their senses and believe it
to be their god ; then they devour the victim neck
and crop. This is the recipe acted upon in a
multitude of wild variations.

Such customs die out in a nation when a higher
moral life supplants primitive heathendom. To
the .elastic intellect of the Greeks, however, nothing
seemed too absurd but what some ideal side might
be found in it. If they were able to fashion a
beautiful Aphrodite out of the loathsome, obscene
goddesses dug up out of Greek soil, the Dionysian
errors could surely be utilised to some good purpose.

The underlying thought in the doctrine of the
Titanic descent of man is -pessimism. Now it is
not at all in accordance with the primitive nature
of the Greeks to take a gloomy view of things.
The sad or tragic utterances we occasionally meet
with in Homer’s works are rather an expression
of regret that the glorious life of man is so short,
and Solon boldly prays the gods to grant him not
sixty, but eighty years of life. But by degrees, as
their spirits became depressed, even the Hellenes
began to hang their heads.

Of Pythagoras it was said among the Greeks —
feeling there was something strange about his way
of thinking — that he had derived his wisdom from


8o


MYSTICISM


foreign lands. He preached as early as the middle
of the sixth century a doctrine of life based on very
gloomy considerations, and which in outward form
at any rate was often not unlike the Dionysian or —
as it is better known — the Orphean belief.

Just as Zagreus was born again as Dionysius, so,
according to Pythagoras, are we created in order
to be born again, and the wheel of births for the
transmigration of souls is thus kept in perpetual
motion. Again, as in Orphism it says that we are
composed of the conflicting Titanic and Dionysian
elements which are always at war within us, so
Pythagoras declares that the soul is united with
and buried in the body as a punishment ; that the
body is a prison-house into which the soul has been
cast because of its sins, and not until the soul has
freed itself from this outer covering can God lead
it up into the spiritual life of a higher world. The
same thing is taught a century later by Empedocles :
the soul is joined to the body to expiate former
shortcomings, and after death is either raised into
a higher sphere, or is thrown into the hell of Tar-
tarus, or, as a third alternative, is doomed to be
reincarcerated and to wander through various
animal and human forms. For the soul’s original
home is with God, where it existed in primitive
bliss, from whence, through sin, it has fallen to earth,
and to which height it must work itself up again.

Two means are provided to assist the soul in this


GREEK MYSTICISM


81


struggle. The one is sacramental consecration,
which consists in being admitted into the circle
of philosophy, or faith ; the other is purification
(katharsis), to which the devout person must
submit, and which even in the days of Pythagoras
included asceticism.

In all these matters the thoughts of the philo-
sophers correspond with the vagrant teachings
of Orphism. Only on one point the philosopher
carefully guards himself. He refrains from saying
that the human soul is divine, which the followers
of Dionysius boldly declared to be the case.
According to them, the souls were “ entheoi ” ; they
contained the divine, had exchanged souls with the
Godhead ; or further still : the human soul was
originally a “ daimon,” a being of divine nature.
Not only in the invisible choir of spirits had it
roamed, but the unborn souls wander visibly upon
the earth — and the ultimate end is salvation, re-
union with the Godhead.

So far the philosophers do not stretch the point.
Their “ ultimate end,” in olden times, was always
restricted within certain limitations. One cannot
become divine, they argued, but one can try to
become like the divinity. They hesitate to make
the great leap which would land them into pure
mysticism, but they would like to, if they dared ;
therefore they push their superlative as near to
the borderland as they can.

6


82


MYSTICISM


Even Plato could not entirely free himself from
the deep-rooted influence of Dionysianism. His
celestial idealism is, as a matter of fact, Orphism,
but in such high potency that it is difficult to reduce
it again to its simple, original form. Whether we
may call this high idealism of Plato mysticism,
is open to doubt. Fortunately there are things in
this world of such magnitude that they defy any
made-up system. Yet, when Plato draws near
to the fulfilment of his highest ideal, there certainly
is a trait of mysticism in him, which comes strik-
ingly near to the notions then prevailing in the
East. Perhaps it is the Arian blood in them which
causes all these great thinkers to think alike on
these sublimest matters, or perhaps it is an inner
logic leading all noble natures ultimately into the
one path, which has its starting-point in mysticism.

Plato, however, as a disciple of Socrates, should
not have been the man to bring mysticism to honour
in Greek philosophy. For if any man ever fully
realised how limited a creature man is, and of
how little avail it is to attempt to break through
these limitations, that man surely was Socrates.
Purely Greek is the thought which meets us over
and over again in the myths of ancient Greece —
that an insuperable gulf separates men from the
gods, and that the destiny of mortals is quite
distinct from the blissful existence of the gods.
The old Greek moral was : Wilt thou be happy.


GREEK MYSTICISM


83


remember thy finiteness. If in thy pridejthou
shouldst be tempted to aspire to more than be-
longs to thy finite state, the “ envy of the gods ”
will soon teach thee what thy proper place is.

Thus moderation became the Greek’s chief
virtue ; that wise self-control which ennobled their
art and stamped their culture as classical, in con-
tradistinction to what is known as primitive, and
expresses itself in ungoverned lusts and appetites.

Socrates brought this philosophical self-control
to perfection by carrying it into the sphere of
contemplation, and by teaching mankind to
respect the boundary line of human knowledge.
Humility of mind was introduced by Socrates,
„ even as humility of heart was preached by Christ.
But the Socratic “ know thyself ” contained more
than a warning to respect the limitations set to
human intellect. It contained a promise also,
that he who kept within the bounds of true
humanity would find in it a wealth of power and
strength, amply compensating him for not sharing
the blissful existence of. the gods, namely, the light
of conscience and the sacred calling to do right.

Greek realism and Greek idealism thus clearly
set forth the conception of man as an individual
personality, both in regard to his insignificance
and his dignity ; but Socrates never attempted
to seek any glory for man beyond his individuality
and his moral responsibility.


8 4


MYSTICISM


As the disciple of Socrates, Plato should have
kept a sober guard over this boundary line. It
is, however, with a suspicion of irony that he
carries the great virtue of moderation to the
extreme, when in his dialogue Phcedrus (p. 244)
he lets Socrates as an ironical representative of this
view — point out to a young man, that also in
love a certain degree of moderation should be
observed, and that we should never be carried
away by it. For then it would deteriorate into
madness, into what the Greeks called mania, which
is despicable. This principle is then worked out
to an absurdity, by concluding that : if I have the
choice of loving any one who loves me or another
who does not love me, it is advisable to prefer the
one who does not love me, because the im-
passioned has lost control over himself.

At this point, however, Plato suddenly swerves
round, and — like the poet Stesichorus, who first
composed an ode against Helena and then recalled
it — he now declared that there was one kind of
mania which is grand and praiseworthy, and
emanated from the gods. He even adds that the
best things come to us while we are in this trance,
which comes over us as a divine gift. For the
prophetess of Delphi and the priestess of Dodone
—when in a trance — have done much both for
the good of individuals and for the public welfare,
but little or nothing when in possession of their five


GREEK MYSTICISM 85

senses. To speak of the Sibyls and others who
through mantik or possession ( entheoi ) have done
good service to many by predicting the future —
were but waste of time and a useless enumeration
of facts known to all. One thing, however, is
well worth recalling, namely, that the ancients
who in ages past formed the words of speech,
did not look upon mania as a thing to despise or
to be ashamed of, for in that case they would not
have called the art of divination “ mantik,”
which word, according to Plato, is derived from
mania. It proves that the name-givers regarded
mania as a good thing when it emanated from
the gods. And Plato, while objecting to mantik
as the human art of soothsaying, agrees with
the ancients “ that divinely inspired mania is
vastly superior to human self-control.”

Plato could speak so because, besides what he
had learned from Socrates, he had also studied
Orphism ; he had to speak so because in him
was an inner longing for the highest, a longing
which could not be satisfied with the empiric
limitations of humanity. Therefore, when he
talks without restraint, without philosophically
weighing every word, but out of the fulness
of his heart, he says : “ the soul is immortal,”
and then he dilates upon the soul as being for the
greater part heaven-born and divinely fed, and this
accounts for what there is beautiful and good


86


MYSTICISM


and true In human nature. But there is always
the dual tendency, the striving upwards to the
gods, and the pulling downwards to the earth.
“ Nourish thy soul with the strength of wisdom,
of beauty, and of goodness,” says Plato, " that
thou mayest find the way to the celestial heights,
for there alone the soul shall find rest.” If the
soul is immortal, then it is divine. To the Greek
mind these two words mean the same. Once it
abode with the gods in perfect purity. Having
tasted of purity it always longs for it. And if
on earth our soul beholds beauty, or comes in
contact with goodness or wisdom, we are seized
with a longing after what once was ours, what
we now only vaguely remember as a dream of
long ago.

This is Platonic love. The highest expression
of love is love for the highest ; a longing for
what is eternal and perfect.

At Plato’s Sytnposion all speak of love ; but
love as conceived by Socrates is not satisfied
with earthly love. That is only the first stage.
We love an individual being, and good thoughts
arise in us because of this love, until, taught by
love, we discern beauty and goodness in all things
and all beings. Then we go a step farther in the
apprehension of the beautiful, until we learn to
esteem the beauty of the soul above that of the
body. Again love leads us on to a higher stage,


GREEK MYSTICISM 87

and we learn to appreciate the beauty of h um an
intercourse, and the beauty of wisdom fills us
with enthusiasm. Larger and wider becomes our
horizon ; more and more we learn in the school of
love. We understand what are the great connect-
ing links of life, and unlearn slavishly to limit
ourselves to the bidding of one human being.
We set out on the vast ocean of love, and in the
contemplation of its loveliness beautiful and
precious thoughts are born in us, thoughts of
wisdom and purity, and we become strong and
mighty in realising that there is only one know-
ledge worth knowing in this world, and that is
the knowledge of the beautiful.

When we have been led thus far into the realms
of love and approach its consummation, we sud-
denly become aware of a something which is
inexpressibly beautiful, the contemplation of
which compensates us for all the trouble we have
taken. This vision of beauty is infinite and im-
perishable ; it neither increases nor decreases ;
its beauty is always the same ; it has neither
countenance nor hands nor form ; neither thought
nor speech ; it is not bound to any place ; it
belongs not to any living being in heaven or
earth ; it is self-existing, eternally the same.

Hast thou once beheld that vision, then thou
wilt no longer crave for gold and raiment, and
the pleasures of youth which now enthral thee


88


MYSTICISM


until thou forgettest to eat and to drink. He
who has seen it, in its unalloyed purity and beauty,
not in flesh and blood or other vain disguise,
but in the excellence of the divine unity, thinkest
thou that he can lead an evil life ?

Thus the philosopher catches the bird which
the mystic has allowed to escape. The love of
youth is declared to be the mysterious yearning
of the soul after its divine origin and its former
blessed existence ; and in that condition of
enthusiastic ecstasy, it is possible for man to
think himself into the transcendent realms of
love, step by step encompassing higher and
more superlative perfections : the state, know-
ledge, God.

In so far as this thinking of oneself into ever
higher regions resembles the gradual stages of
mysticism, in so far Plato was a mystic. But
mysticism has for its object the attainment of
the intensest form of unconsciousness , while Plato
aspires at the highest form of consciousness.
Both conditions imply the being carried away
in mind beyond the reach of material surround-
ings, but Plato nowhere claims the loss of self-
control as a necessary element.

Plato never denies that man stands before an
inexpressible inconceivable problem, if he would
behold the invisible. “It is hard,” he says, in
one of his later writings, " to apprehend the All-


GREEK MYSTICISM 89

Father, and when apprehended, it is impossible
to interpret Him.” But this does not imply that
logic is done away with. Plato is saved from
sinking into mysticism not only by his philo-
sophical power of consciousness, but also by his
unwavering belief in the indissoluble personality
of the human ego. This conviction he expounds
in a variety of ways, and he holds to it so firmly
that even where he admits of mania he never con-
cedes to the doctrine of the dissolution of the
soul, an error into which the true mystic inevitably
falls. At the same time, in his belief that every
soul is a separate “ daimon,” he betrays himself
as an adept student of Orphism.

And in conclusion, we must allude to Plato’s
idea of that form of self-effacement which is
a part of all genuine mysticism, and is based on
the passing away of consciousness. We refer to
asceticism. Plato deals with this as he does with
ecstasy. He makes use of its good properties,
but the dross he throws away. He accepts the
necessity of purification, katharsis, for the cultiva-
tion of good thoughts ; and he acknowledges that
the flesh must be overcome ; but he is a Greek,
he loves beauty. The beauty of form and the
beauty of life must not suffer through our longing
for the delights of heaven. On the contrary, our
zeal, instead of consuming us, should rather nourish
us, make us strong, and in the same measure as it


go


MYSTICISM


brings us nearer to human excellence it should
bring us nearer to divine perfection.

In Plato, mysticism has found its match, a
thinker initiated in all the intricacies of mysticism,
a man who appropriates its wealth, but not at the
cost of his own individuality ; who rather uses its
power for the good of the soul. Plato puts the
mysticism of personality in the place of natural
mysticism — therein lies the difference between
West and East. He demands moral endeavour,
where the other exacts self-effacement.

Yet — we shall see how there is but one step
between Platonism and the ecstatic intuition of
mysticism ; a step which Plato knew how to
avoid, but which his followers took unwittingly,
and thus easily glided into mysticism. The
confusion thereby caused in Platonic doctrines
found expression in the philosophic sect of the
Neo-Platonists.

In considering the importance of Platonic
philosophy, we must bear in mind what it brought
forth, to what varying philosophical and religious
transformations it gave rise, and what was their
influence, not only on the philosophers of the time,
but also on the thinking portion of the populace.
And again, in trying to measure Plato’s strength
of mind, we have to consider to what a very small
extent his many disciples were capable of following
him in his exalted flights of thought. Strong in


GREEK MYSTICISM


91


the power of his own personality and his firm
belief in the rights of humanity, Plato was able
to combine into one grand unity all the various
elements of his philosophy, its logical, physical,
and moral principles, and even the things which
he derived from the popular religion and its
myths.

He managed to keep all these things well
balanced, because he kept each one within its
proper sphere, and gave it the room for action
which it deserved. The Neo-Platonists, however,
wanted to improve on his structure, extend the
horizon still farther, introduce still more vagaries
into his system of philosophy, be more logical
and more popular than Plato was, ascend still
higher and descend still lower than he. In this
endeavour they not only broke through the
boundaries of true Platonism, but they lost sight
of its centre of activity. Personality lost its
power the farther these adventurers advanced in
their philosophical speculations. For personality
could not breathe in the height to which they
carried it, and it sank into the inertness of demon
worship, to which at last they had to take refuge in
order to extricate themselves from their difficulties.

This is exemplified even in the noblest of them
all, in Plotinus (d. 276 a.d.), the finest figure among
the philosophers of the time of the Empire, and
Plato’s most conscientious follower. And because


92


MYSTICISM


he was one of the few of the Neo-Platonic school
who always aimed at the highest and despised
all that was base, we see in him most clearly
how the next step of Platonism had to lead into
mysticism.

The God of Plato was not good enough for
Plotinus, not spiritual enough because not tran-
scendental enough. This supreme Unity, which
is above all and in all, must be so highly exalted
above all intelligence that it can think no thoughts.
Plato said : “ It is hard to apprehend the All-
Father, and when apprehended it is impossible
to interpret Him ” ; but Plotinus is not satisfied
with this. He says it is impossible to apprehend
the Deity ; He is beyond all understanding. One
cannot say that He is a thinking being; He is
thought itself. That which can be thought or that
which can think is a composite being, it must have
parts. But God has no parts, neither quantity nor
quality, it is one indivisible Unity. Therefore
away with Plato’s definition of God as “ Highest
Intelligence.”

Nor is He to be described as the “ Supreme
Goodness,” for in goodness there is motion and
want — therefore division. One cannot say of this
absolute Unity that it has being or existence, for
all that exists has numerical quantity. With such
and similar mathematical and dialectical sophisms
Plotinus places his God beyond the reach of con-


GREEK MYSTICISM -


93


ception, and this had a harmful effect on Christian
theology. Platonism in this highest potency was
attractive to the mind as something exquisitely
sublime, and henceforth no theology was thought
complete unless it had some of this delectable fare
to offer.

Plato’s conception of the Deity, however, was
not ignored, it merely had another place assigned
to it. Plotinus called it nus, or “Pure Intelli-
gence,’’ and he attributed to this conception the
qualities which he denied to the Highest, namely,
being and action, thought and goodness. It
became the actual and practical God of mankind,
unless man had sunk so low that he had to be
content with the worship of the demons of -the
popular belief, and get on as best he could with
their assistance.

For the world is a kind of pyramid. At the top
is the inconceivable Unity, from which all exist-
ence emanates in ever - increasing multiplicity,
but in steadily decreasing value and reality.
The fundamental idea in Platonism is that highest
spirituality is truest reality. The lower we come
down to what we are accustomed to call the
realities of life, the less reality and the more
delusion and vanity we find. If man would
rise above the illusions of multiplicity, one way
only is open to him. He must fix his thoughts
on the supreme and only true reality, and in


94


MYSTICISM


purity of life and piety of soul, by constant medita-
tion upon the origin of all purity and goodness,
enter into the unity and peace of God.

This is the path of philosophy, and it leads
very near to the goal. For the goal of philosophy
is to obtain salvation by contemplation. Plotinus
explains in even clearer terms than Plato how
and why man must work out his salvation by
contemplation.

The nus which we have to rise up to is intelli-
gence itself, the highest intelligence, and our
intellect, the human nus, must endeavour to
comprehend and to share this. In what measure
we comprehend the Divine Intelligence, in that
measure we absorb it into our being and are made
partakers of its supreme qualities. Our own
intelligence becomes spiritualised, merged into
pure thought and pure goodness.

Yet this does not fully satisfy Plotinus. With
the Highest, the supreme Source of all things, he
desires fellowship. To the height of the supreme
Unity he would rise and be completely freed
from the confusion of multiplicity. Now, as this
supreme Unity is exalted far above all thought,
it is vain to attempt to reach up to it by our
apprehension. Philosophy fails us at this point —
or, more correctly, it can help us only to climb up
to the highest rung of the ladder, where intelli-
gence stops, and the sacred unconsciousness


GREEK MYSTICISM


95


begins in which multiplicity and diversity of
thought ends, and we become united with the
Unity.

In other words : we end in ecstasy, and this is
what the entire system of Plotinus led up to.
Plato’s God did not suffice, because Plato kept
his five senses together and endeavoured to teach
the people to do the same. But there is a craving
for mysticism in human nature, and a supreme,
mystical Deity had to be conceived. Meta-
physics and logic had to give way before the
longing of the soul, and finely spun consequences
were drawn out and built up to justify the claims
of an inrooted passion. , For there can be no
doubt about it that the condition aimed at by
Plotinus was mystical ecstasy. It possessed
all the unmistakable signs of it. It was the
direct, unmediated consciousness, as if by personal
contact of the presence of the Highest. Suddenly
the soul is suffused with light, which flows from
God. It does not impart any knowledge about
God ; one realises that He is, but not what He is.
It is a state of being outside of self, God-inspired,
capable of apprehending the workings of the
divine spirit in the soul, but it does not enable one
to describe what He is. When God thus sud-
denly reveals Himself to the soul, separateness
exists no longer, there is no more duality,
but only one, inseparable unity. The soul


MYSTICISM


g6

becomes one with itself and one with God. One
cannot now say that the soul apprehends God,
but rather that it becomes God. The soul is now
pure light, free from all earthly trammels, it
apprehends itself as God . 1

Plotinus teaches that the road which leads to
this condition consists in purification, moral
abstinence, utter indifference to earthly things,
strict self-examination. One cannot pursue this
ecstatic condition ; it overtakes one suddenly,
silently, in overpowering grace, as a reward for
trustful waiting and watching. Amclios, one of
the disciples of Plotinus, tells us in his diary what
the soul experiences at such times. " Like a dream
which trembles and dies away, at the approach of
dawn, so all the past and the present vanish.
Former consciousness passes away, and a new
consciousness awakens. I feel weak and empty
as one just recovering from an illness and finds his
memory gone. My travels, my studies, my plans
and ambitions; all are as nought. All strength has
been taken from me like a garment, and I feel
thrown back again to the first beginnings.”

In such open epilepsy Platonism results at last.
Greek mysticism has run its course. It has ended
as it began, in convulsions. In the course of its
career, however, it has been systematised by men

1 Zeller, Die Philosophie der Griechen, 2nd ed. iii.
2. S 5 i.


GREEK MYSTICISM


97


1

\

\

V


of noble intellect. Like an overwhelming power
forcing the human mind in one same direction, we
notice with surprise that this Greek system of
philosophy geometrically agrees with the thought-
structure of Hindu mysticism. The same problems
and the same results ; the same extravagant, specu-
lative conceptions : apprehending the incompre-
hensible; essential similarity between the divine
and the human spirit ; and finally, the consumma-
tion of bliss in the union of these two beyond the
portals of consciousness.

For a long time the Greek continued to show
himself in his demeanour a son of Hellenic culture.
Asceticism never had quite so strong a hold on him
as on the Hindu. He took care of his body, and
only prepared himself for his high aspirations by
abstaining from vulgar lusts and sensualities. But
this last link with ancient culture gradually
loosened also.

Porphyrias and Iamblicus, the former a disciple
of Plotinus, the latter a forerunner of Syrian piety,
declare war to the body and teach salvation through
a system of self-renunciation and mantik in which
the customs and usages of the East occupy so
large a place, that in the teachings of these sectarian
leaders one can hardly find any trace of the old
Greek spirit.


7


VI. NEW TESTAMENT CHRISTIANITY
AND MYSTICISM


While Greek mysticism was thus growing rank and
wild, a refining factor was at work, fostering that
inner life which could scarcely breathe in the atmo-
sphere of heathen mysticism. Christianity had
undertaken this task, not only with fresh youthful
vigour, but under quite new and intimate con-
ditions, and instituted a new kind of piety and a
new form of culture.

When Christianity was sufficiently crystallised
to be made into a doctrine, many were surprised
to find how much in it resembled the noblest
thoughts of heathenism. It was whispered among
the crowds opposed to Christianity that it was
merely an adaptation of Plato’s views, and that
even Christian teachers tried to give weight to their
assertions by pointing out similarities between
their teachings and the tenets of the great sage.

In our days one is not so easily taken in by these
apparent agreements ; on the contrary, we are
keenly alive to the fact that the chief character-
istics of Platonism and of Christianity are very

98


CHRISTIANITY AND MYSTICISM 99

widely apart. Yet there is a region in which the
two meet as on common ground. For, in the first
place, among all who seek the highest, there exists
of necessity a certain bond of fellowship ; and, in
the second place, Christianity, by its conscious and
deliberate breach with the narrow-mindedness of
latter-day Judaism, and by boldly proclaiming the
rights of mankind, appears in many points to agree
with the doctrines of the "humanities,” which
were the expression of the noblest thoughts of
decaying antiquity. Moreover, philosophy and
Christianity were at one in their desire to elevate
the people and their worship above the existing
polytheism and all the evils incumbent upon it.
But there was a marked difference between the two
methods employed. What philosophical heathen-
ism only whispered in the ears of the initiated,
Christianity proclaimed from the housetops. The
message which Christianity brought was not a
Freemason secret, nor a philosophical mystery,
it was a matter of vital moment for all, a matter of
salvation which concerned all mankind.

Underlying Platonic mysticism there existed
something which flavoured of evangelical truth.
With the Gospel this something came to light ; not
as a reflected thought, but as a living reality.
Plato had grasped something of the eternal re-
sponsibility of the human soul and of eternal
justice. These truths — gradually lost sight of


100


MYSTICISM


among the followers of Plato — came to light again
with Christianity, and this time they would not be
forgotten. They became the dominating power
of Christian life ; the individuality of man was a
foregone conclusion, for had not this truth been
melted and moulded in the forge of Judaism ?

To the Jews, strong in the consciousness
of their national exclusiveness, individuality,
although recognised, was of secondary import-
ance. They had to be schooled into the full
realisation that every man is personally respons-
ible before God. They could not fail to under-
stand this sooner or later, because with unwaver-
ing persistence they always thought of their
God as a person. They never made a graven
image of Him, but in thought they pictured Him
in human form, with such intensity, that when the
prophets had elevated their thoughts above this
human conception of the Deity, His Personality
remained irrevocably fixed in their minds. The
Jews had no temptation to fall either into pan-
theism or mysticism. The children of Israel
have ever been practical, energetic, calculating ;
sober-minded rather than fantastical. The Jew
believes in realities, God’s guidance of his fathers,
God's guidance of himself. All the fundamental
ideas of his religion are practical and real :
authority, justice, retribution. How sober are
the arguments of Job’s friends, those spokesmen


CHRISTIANITY AND . MYSTICISM ioi


of traditional Judaism. And Job himself, dis-
puting with them from the experience of suffering,
never for a moment loses his self-control.

“ God is in heaven and I am on the earth,”
marks the distance between God and man for
the devout Jew. No one can see God and live,
is the basis of genuine Judaism. The prophets
may have their ecstasies, their trances, their
high intuitions, but never do they merge into
the Godhead nor the Godhead into them. Schools
of prophets may go through the land dancing
and singing, but it is never a Dionysian pro-
cession. They neither eat their God nor become
gods.

The culminating point in the experience of
the believing Jew is the passion of faith. The will
becomes tenacious and strenuous, and this activity
of the will enhances the feeling of personal responsi-
bility, and gives to their faith and to the God in
whom they believe that harshness and relentless-
ness which characterises and disfigures later
Judaism. Gradually, as the Jews became imbued
with Greek culture, they also became tainted
with mysticism, but this mysticism shows to a
far greater extent the influence of the intellectual
life of the Hellenes than -the religious life of
the Jews.

Jesus steps forth from a background not of
mysticism, but of personal faith ; nay more —


MYSTICISM


102

judging by the Pharisees of His day — from -a
background of clearly defined religious indivi-
dualism. And what J esus brings is not mysticism;
but a personal faith, only it is of a higher nature
than the faith thus far held, it is not bound by
law or nationality ; it is freed from egotism,
superficiality, and sterility ; it is spiritualised,
intensified, humanised.

There is nothing either in the mind of Jesus
or in His zeal that can properly be called mysticism.
Often enough mystics have desired to stamp Him
as one of theirs. In His daily life they have
tried to find the unmistakable signs of mysticism.
Like the mystic He has His moments of spiritual
contemplation, a craving for solitude. He flees
from the multitude, goes into the wilderness to
fast, into the mountains to pray. He knows no
bodily wants when His mind is occupied ; He is
" troubled in spirit ” when He speaks with force
and decision.

Was Jesus an ecstatic ? asks a modern German
theologian , 1 and with much trouble he collects
evidence which will enable him to answer in the
affirmative.

Ina French criticism on this book of Holtzmann’s
the correctness of this- view is queried. In the

1 0 . Holtzmann, War Jesus Ekstatiker ? (Tubingen,
Mohr, 1903.) Reviewed by A. Loisy in the Revue Critique,
1903, No. 23.


CHRISTIANITY AND MYSTICISM 103

Jesus of the Bible, or at any rate of the first
three Gospels, there is nothing which warrants
it. We find therein nothing pathological, nothing
ecstatic in the true sense of the word ; nothing
of that clouding over or upsetting of the human
will. But we do find that exquisitely exalted
condition of soul with which all creative geniuses
and more especially religious enthusiasts are
acquainted.

In the conduct and the teaching of J esus traces
of mysticism are also declared to exist. For
Him blessedness is to be found in the inner life;
and He has little to say of things outward ; He
is silent about culture ; He wages war against
outward ceremonies and external piety, against
traditional obligations and authorities. In all
this He is like the mystic. The lowly and the
poor in spirit He calls blessed to the detriment
of the rich. The things that are hidden from
the wise are revealed unto babes. Quiet hearken-
ing is nearer to heaven than much serving. Piety
is to be measured by its intensity, not by its
works. And then He utters those words which
find an echo in the mystic’s mind : “ Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.” . . .
“ The kingdom of Go d r is within you.” . . .
“ Whosoever seeks to save his life shall lose it.”
The whole Sermon on the Mount, in fact, is as a
piece out of the programme of the mystic.


104


MYSTICISM


All this may sound like mysticism, and had
Christ said nothing beyond this, we should have
to assign Him a place among the mystics. But
He has said a great deal more and done a great
deal more, which is entirely outside the scope of
mysticism. Because two circles cross each other,
it does not necessarily follow that they merge
into one another. Doubtless there is a region
in which Gospel and mysticism meet. The
strikingly evangelical note in the works of Laotze,
of the Persian sages, of Plato, are sufficient proof
of this. But the question is : What is peculiarly
characteristic in each one of them, what are their
distinctive properties, and wherein they fall
short ? What, in fact, are their pretensions out-
side the pale of this common ground ?

Christianity has much to offer in this respect.
Its Gospel is a life of love ; not a life of rapturous
emotion, as in mystic circles ; still less does it
speak of the characteristic mystical aversion to
society. No, our life must be one of active,
untiring charity, of brotherly love, and constant
intercourse with our fellow-men, under all the
usual conditions of everyday life. It speaks
also of sin and of grace, of a warfare with the Evil
One as with a personaEenemy. Evil is a power
outside of us, attacking us and compelling us to
fight or to yield. It is not the lower nature in
man which can be conquered by the subjugation


CHRISTIANITY AND MYSTICISM 105


of one’s human nature. Sin is not synonymous
with " the flesh,” is not the blind, natural tendency
of sensual man ; it is a conscious violation of the
explicit commandments of God, or a turning
away from His redeeming grace. Redemption
is not a raising of self on to a higher plane, or into
a higher condition, but it is the forgiveness of sin,
a free, personal act of grace of the Judge of all
men. And then it speaks of faith, the divine
will-power, with its boldness, its confidence, and
its pride ; faith in the kingdom of God and in
the will of God ; the faith of a little child in the
Father’s love. Children of God, that is the only
relationship towards God which is recognised in
the Gospel. " The same Spirit bears witness
with our spirit ” — not that we are God, but —
“ that we are the children of God.”

All this is personal, intimate; it breathes free-
dom ; it is conscious discrimination, and therefore
not mysticism. The responsibilities and natural
conditions of life are not lost in rapture or specu-
lation. They remain in evidence. The difference
between good and evil, between God and man, between
spirit and nature, remains unalterably fixed. The
Gospel does not seek to level these differences,
but to annul their possible consequences, by
establishing a relationsfirp^that is, a fellowship
of goodness, a fellowship with God ; fellowship;
not union ; therein lies the essential difference


io6


MYSTICISM


between Christianity and mysticism. Fellow-
ship is not merely an internal act ; it also
takes account of the outer world, with all our
visible and tangible surroundings. Fellowship is
a matter of will ; it cannot be built on a founda-
tion of feeling alone, and still less on meditation.
Fellowship demands faith : faith in men, faith
in what is good, confidence in God. It lies in
the nature of mysticism that there should not be
room either for the outer world, or for the will,
or for faith. And it lies in the nature of Christi-
anity that there should be no room for the true
characteristics of mysticism. The clover leaf,
ccstacy, asceticism, intuition, cannot grow in
Christian soil. For these three factors imply
an ultimate union with God which can only be
attained by abstract thought, and generally at
the cost of one’s human nature. Although a
grand mysticism, such as that of Plato, falls short
of committing this latter mistake, and advocates
the ennobling of human nature instead of ignor-
ing it, yet the fundamental difference between
Platonism and Christianity remains the same,
for the Platonist thinks out his salvation, but the
Christian is saved by faith. And this is not only
Platonic as opposed tcHShristian, it is Greek as
opposed to Jewish, Arian as opposed to Semitic.

Moments of racial and cultural conflict neces-
sarily arose frequently after Christianity made


CHRISTIANITY AND MYSTICISM 107

its entrance into Europe, but gradually the
new religion gained the mastery over the in-
rooted notions of heathendom. In these conflicts
mysticism always played a part, and showed in
a peculiar manner, either when Christianity was
losing its hold, or when it had gained a firmer
footing again.

As long as the Christian Church abode in its
apostolic strength, personal faith was the highest
form of life, and the only expression of the re-
lationship towards God. There was no room for
real mysticism. Yet symptoms of its future
power began to appear, and became especially
perceptible when Christianity had taken root in
Greek soil. Ecstasy was the first malady which
attacked the Church, — as seen in the Church at
Corinth. Speaking in tongues and prophesying
were the sure symptoms' of a darkening of the
understanding, but they were religiously effective,
and highly esteemed among the believers.

Paul stands up manfully against this departure
from their first love. He realises what he has to
fight against. Paul, the man of faith, had been
tried in the furnace of faith. He had tasted of
rapture, he had felt the exalting influence of
ecstatic delight, but hejia^risen above it. What
happened to him on the way to Damascus is not
without its counterpart in other ecstatic con-
versions, which in point of time are nearer to us.


io8


MYSTICISM


The modern Jew, Ratisbonne, — if we may credit
Ills words, — was, after long resistance, by special
revelation, suddenly converted to Roman Catholi-
cism ; and he describes exactly the same ex-
periences as befel Paul, including the blindness.
Yet — let us bear in mind that Saul did not become
Paul because of the revelations he received, but
because of what those revelations contained.

One undoubtedly ecstatic experience Paul relates
in 2 Cor. xii. It has all the symptoms of mystical
rapture. He speaks of himself in the third person ;
he cannot tell whether he is in the body or out of
the body ; he feels himself caught up into a
higher sphere ; he hears unspeakable words which
no man can utter. But — what Christian strength
he brings back from this experience ! In the same
breath, as it were, come the words : " My grace
is sufficient for thee, for My strength is made
perfect in weakness.” Incomprehensible as they
may sound to those who have not themselves
had Christian experiences, they put the seal to all
his preaching about the unprofitableness of boast-
ing, and explain why he made it his special mission
to proclaim this truth.

And now his advice to the Church at Corinth :
Boast not of ecstasy I^Jfjpan speak both in pro-
phecy and in tongues, but of what profit are
these things compared with the power and the
inexhaustible riches of a life of charity ? Therein


CHRISTIANITY AND MYSTICISM 109

is truth, therein is health, therein is what is
greater than both faith and hope, and whatever
other virtue Christianity can bestow on us. And
in the light of this assurance, the sayings and
teachings of Paul, which often sound mystical,
are not real mysticism.

“ The deep things of God ” into which the
Spirit searcheth ; “ our life which is hid in God ” ;
“ what no eye hath seen and no ear heard, neither
hath entered into any man’s mind ” ; nature
groaning for redemption, and the Spirit making
intercession for us " with groanings which cannot
be uttered.”

These and many other of Paul's sayings reveal
touches of mysticism, and show decided mystical
fermentation. Christianity has succeeded in
leading him thus far away from the dryness of
Rabbinism, but he never lets go his common
sense. He would rather speak than groan ; he
wants to search out the hidden things ; he is not
~^“^fe'owned in the deep things of God, nor does he
mix up his own redemption with the redemption
of nature. He never loses sight of the personal
either in God or in himself. His is merely a richly
gifted nature, capable of realising that there are
depths which human understanding cannot fathom.

There is one expression oi* Paul’s, however,
which seems to imply actual mysticism, at any
rate it became the keynote of the mysticism


no


MYSTICISM


soon after springing up in the Greek Church. I
refer to those enthusiastic words in the Epistle
to the Galatians : " Nevertheless I live ; yet not
I, but Christ liveth in me ” (Gal. ii. 20); and he
declares in the same Epistle (i. 16) that it pleased
God “ to reveal His Son in me.” In our day
these words convey the idea of an ardent desire,
an earnest resolve to make Christ the basis of our
lives. But this is a modern interpretation; Paul
surely meant something much more realistic. In
this Epistle he compares his own experiences of
Christ with the companionship the other apostles
had with the " Master,” and he attributes the
same reality, or at all events the same authority,
to his personal revelations as to their historical
intercourse with Christ. And when he tells the
converts that Christ lives in him, this should also
be taken as a real thing. Something in Paul’s
psychology betrays his conviction that what
takes place in the heart of the believer is not
merely a psychical emotion or experience, boA-'"'"
that it is an actual spiritual growth ; he holds that
man can receive a new soul, and on this ground
he considers it no psychological impossibility that
Christ should dwell in man. But another question
is — and this we cannot answer — how far Paul
thought this indw ;ifl!fmg "of Christ could extend.

We are sure, however, that Paul, in the transport
of his assurance of faith, came perilously near to


CHRISTIANITY AND MYSTICISM hi

the borders of mysticism, and, as was the case
with Plato, one step,, farther would have landed
him into the forbidden region. The Greek Church
took this fatal step, and drifted ever farther away
on the dangerous path.

In another direction also the way for mysticism
was being prepared in the apostolic Church. In
the Gospel of John we find no violent emotion,
no psychological losing of self in ecstasy, but a
sublime depth of meditation on the Person of the
Godhead, and His revelations to men ; on the
incarnate Son of God, and on the divine element
in man. In all this the evangelist appears to have
a leaning towards Hellenic mysticism. " To know
God ” is the first and chief stipulation. Practical
" faith ” is raised on to a higher platform as
personal knowledge, or, at the least, an inner
perception. God is defined as a Spirit who has
to be worshipped “ in spirit and in truth.” And
finally God-incarnate declares Himself in the
: “ I and the Father are one.” These
of John reverberate through all the phases
of Christian mysticism, together with those of
Paul, " Christ lives in me.” The theoretical
condition of existence is taken from John, the
practical condition of life from Paul.

The unity here expressed' awes not refer only
to the oneness of the incarnate Word with the
Father ; it also expresses the fellowship of the


112


MYSTICISM


faithful with the Son of God : " That they all may
be one, as Thou, Father, art in Me and I in Thee,
that they also may be one in Us — I in them and
Thou in Me, that they may be made perfect in one.”
Unio mystica was the name given by the early
Church to this union of love as declared by John.
And no purer symbol of this mystical union can
be conceived than the Parable of the Vine. “ I
am the vine, ye are the branches. Abide in Me,
and I in you ; as the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself except it abide in the vine, no more can ye,
except ye abide in Me.”

In this train of thought great weight is neces-
sarily attached to the Incarnation, to the fact that
the Divine Majesty assumed human form, that
“ the Word became flesh and dwelt among us.”
While Paul pleads Christ’s death as the one
superlative event, John dwells on His birth. His
leaving the everlasting glory which He had with
the Father, to become man ; a sure guarantee
for the purpose He came to accomplish and Jlwr
truth of His teachings. John’s picture of Christ
sets forth the union of the divine and the human,
it is the link which unites God and man : “ Thou
in Me and I in Thee, that they also may be one in
Us.”

In order to givC^a Greek stamp to his medita-
tions, he introduces the word “ logos ” in the pro-
logue to his Gospel, and there only. Logos — in


CHRISTIANITY AND MYSTICISM 113

our Bible translated by “Word” — was the
expression used in the Jewish Greek Church to
define the Godhead which has become flesh.
And here we stand face to face with the semi-
Platonic reflection that it is not God Himself
who becomes man, but a consubstantial being,
a Mediator through whom the desired union is
accomplished. In saying this, however, we do
not wish to imply that the prologue to the Gospel
of John can be brought under the rubric of one
or other of the Platonic schools.

It would seem unavoidable to see in this Fourth
Gospel a strong tendency towards Hellenic
mysticism. “ Knowledge,” “ oneness,” “ spirit,”
“truth,” the ever - recurring words in Greek
devotion, have here been substituted for the
sober Christian expressions : faith, fellowship,
personality, conviction. Yes, this might be
said, and many have said it, and for the sake of
argument it has its worth, but in reality it is mis-
'tsk|ng the clothes for the man. With a little
deeply insight into mysticism, we easily discover
that the mysticism of this book lies in the expres-
sion of it, but not in the sense. For instance,
when, in chapter iv. 24, God is declared to be a
Spirit, this is merely in elucidation of His person-
ality, for in the immediately preceding verse He
is called “ Father,” and by this name He is known
throughout the Gospel, while the definition “Spirit”
8


MYSTICISM


1x4

occurs only seldom. Nor is there any reason
why the " oneness ” spoken of should be taken
in the literal, mystical sense of the word. John
nowhere asserts in his Gospel that the believer
must be swallowed up in God, or that God should
be absorbed in him. The Parable of the Vine
conveys the idea of intimacy, fellowship, not
identity. This unio mystica does not destroy
human nature, but elevates it ; it is nowhere
written that it should be at the cost of conscious-
ness or sound common sense.

And the same with the “ to know ” of John’s
Gospel. Inge strikingly remarks that in this
Gospel only the verb “ to know ” is used, but not
the noun gnosis, which latter at once leads us into
a sphere of Grecism. This " to know ” of the
Gospel is on a level with the word " to believe
they are words of equal value in their adaptation
to our intercourse with God. It would be mysti-
cism if faith were regarded as a step towards
knowledge, and knowledge again leading a st*p —
nearer to God, but only coming into effect beyond
the border-line of human consciousness.

In conclusion, the incarnation would be mysti-
cism if the Gospel did not persistently uphold its
historical character.^ Yet we are not to suppose
that it is niei'ely'^ymbolical or semi-real, as the
disclaimers of John would have us to believe.
No, " we have seen, we have touched ” ; real


CHRISTIANITY AND MYSTICISM 115

blood and water flowed out of His side. Notwith-
standing the mystical glamour which prevails in
this Fourth Gospel, there is a conscious and in-
tentional bringing into prominence of the historical
and real personality of Christ, which keeps it
totally free from ordinary mysticism. On the
other hand, we cannot ignore the fact that the
mysticism which soon sprang up and flourished
in the Eastern Church, was chiefly based — and
with a certain amount of right — upon this Gospel.
The speculative ring of the prologue and the wording
of the Gospel itself sufficiently account for the wide
use made of it in the fanciful theological mysti-
cism of the day, when a far deeper meaning was
put into the formula, “ I and the Father,” than
John would ever have sanctioned.

Through the abortive use of the Gospel words,
many heathen notions were rehabilitated with an
assumption of Christianity ; but in spite of this
misuse it was of incalculable importance for the
-growth of the early Christian Church, that by
me^s of it a link was formed with the Greek
world in which Christianity was slowly making
its way. The mystical language spoken in the
Church was familiar to the learned scholars of the
land, and thus the union between young Christi-
anity and staid Greek culturtr^silJ^ be accom-
plished.


VII. THE MYSTICISM OF THE
GREEK CHURCH

The transition from apostolic piety to theolo-
gical mysticism was foreshadowed even in Christ's
lifetime by the teachings of some learned Jews in
Alexandria, who endeavoured to reconcile Eastern
notions and Western thought, probably primarily
with the idea of establishing the right of existence
of Judaism in the Capital of Hellenic culture.
There, in modest retirement, lived the Jew Philo,
a musing scribe, to whom occasional flashes of
genius cannot be denied, but who possessed no
real literary talent, was superstitious and dilet-
tantish. Yet he was the man first to put into
words what, for centuries to come, was to fop*r-"“
the bulwark of the Neo-Platonic school. ^fVith
Moses in the one hand and Plato in the other,
he tried to make a bargain between the two by
deducing Platonic teaching from the writings of
Moses, and by converting law and revelation into
philosophy a6d^s&3nce. He did so by specula-
tion, and his speculation was mysticism. Not
that he betrayed the God of his fathers ; on the

xx6


MYSTICISM OF THE GREEK CHURCH 117

contrary, God was very real to him, as the God
revealed by Moses. Yet, to comprehend Him,
or explain Him, he resorted to Platonism. God
is that which abides for ever, the inexpressible,
the -unapproachable : “ Thou shalt see My back
parts, but My face shall not be seen.” Only in
silent contemplation can God be apprehended,
for we know of nothing whereby to compare Him.
If we are to know Him He must be within us. He
breathed the breath of life into us, and with it
something of His own nature, and He is the earnest
of the highest in us. The inspired person, in
whom God has verily breathed of His breath, can,
with full confidence, say that he is God. This
climax has to be prepared for by self-renunciation,
and by studying the divine in nature. Only to
the highest order of saints, to the “ souls born of
God,” it has been given to apprehend God without
the aid of external things ; they are thus exalted
above the help of symbols. But into this highest
"Sphere only those can be admitted who, through
punbx of life, have been found worthy. And
purity necessarily involves self-sacrifice. Purified
and energised, the human soul can ascend
the Mount of Contemplation ; there it loses con-
sciousness of self, for there it seegGod face to face.
There He is apprehended, notbyQ'je powers of
the intellect, but by direct intuition.

This mystical apprehension of God is based on


n8


MYSTICISM


the notion that all things ultimately flow back to
God, and the active factor in the Godhead, the
creative power by whom all things are, is the logos
(or pure intelligence). Philo, like Plato, and
afterwards the Neo-Platonists, made this logos
into an inferior deity, the one with whom man
has to do. Here again Philo detects a resem-
blance between Moses and Plato, for what Plato
calls the “ supreme idea,” Moses calls the “ angel
of the Lord,” and Philo, by describing him as
" God’s only beloved Son,” built a bridge which,
presently, was to be of much service in Christian
speculation.

Alexandria continued to be the city where most
of these things were reasoned out, and it is in-
teresting to note how persistently the Christian
thinkers, in their desire to find a bond between
science and revelation, chose the same path which
the Alexandrian Jew had trod.

Constantly the teachers of Christianity had to
guard against the attacks of the Gentiles, el rcT"
even more against the dangerous insinuatys-fis of
the still semi-Gentile' Christian sects. The old
defenders of the Christian faith have fought
honestly against all this open and secret heathen-
ism. By this time the r dogmas of Christianity
had so far /rfen tormulated, that not only the
teachers were keenly alive to the difference be-
tween their views and those of the Gentiles, but


MYSTICISM OF THE GREEK CHURCH 1x9

that the laity also realised what was expected of
them. The Fathers of the Church, Tertullian and
Irenaeus, stood firm as watchmen of the Western
Church, and the short formula called “ the
Apostles’ Creed ” — to which Irenaeus, in accordance
with the demands of those days, attributed
Apostolic sanction — became for all times, at any
rate in the Western Church, a stronghold against
the attempts of the Gentile world to efface or
defeat Christianity.

Protected by such clearly-marked boundaries,
and strong in the greater stability of its internal
arrangements, the Church began to take a kindlier
view of the cultural advantages the Gentile world
afforded, and even made use of them in building
up the edifice of Christianity. The world should
see that the Church was a well-organised, compact
body, and that its views were quite as intelligent,
only much deeper, than those of any heathen
system. This early attempt at Christian theology
- -\yas made in Alexandria by the first theological
face-lty of Christendom.

Clement of Alexandria was the man who took
the initiative, by planning a system of such magni-
tude as has hardly been equalled by any later
theologian. His intention was not only to
formulate the Christian faithf*^ to give an
exposition of the Christian verities which would
appeal also to the intellect and the moral require-


120


MYSTICISM


ments of the Gentiles, a system in which they
would find everything that mind and soul could
desire.

This edifice — fragmentary though it was as it
left the hands of Clement — clearly showed that
its foundation was Christ, that its beams and
stones were taken from the Bible, but it also
showed that its construction and the mortar which
bound the whole together were of Hellenic com-
position. Not only is Plato constantly referred
to as the great master of thought, on whose
authority Clement rests many of his statements,
but all that there is in it of a speculative nature,
all that is outside the practical philosophy of the
Bible, is very often a mere copy of Plato and other
heathen philosophers. And this was the more
fatal, as Clement, being wholly imbued with
Greek — i.e., late Greek — notions, held that specula-
tion was the only way by which God could be
approached, as being the highest function of the
human mind. Consequently it was necessary to -
create a form of religion based on speculation,
and to conceive a God who could only be laid hold
of and apprehended by speculation. But this
God was not the God of the Bible, and this
speculative piety was not Christianity ; it was
mysticism.

In his treatise Clement appears rather as a
gnostic or preacher of mysticism, than as an


MYSTICISM OF THE GREEK CHURCH 121


expounder of Christian truths. The word
gnosis, “knowledge,” — carefully avoided in the
Gospel of John, — is the basis of his system,
and descriptive of his philosophy. Gnosis, says
Clement, is more than faith. Faith is only a
crude knowledge of necessary truths for the con-
venience of people who have no time for thinking ;
but gnosis is philosophic faith.

It may seem strange to us, not only that he
places knowledge so far above faith, but that with
an evidently slight understanding of the character-
istic features of faith, he mistakes faith for an
inferior kind of knowledge. It reveals the Greek
tendencies in him, and it shows the imperfect
mental condition of the early Christian Church
as a whole.

But what are we to think of the first Christian
professor of theology, when he boldly declares
that if the well-instructed Christian (to whom he
applies the name of gnostic) should have to choose
between the knowledge of God and eternal sal-
vation, and if these two things which ought to
be inseparable could be conceived as detached,
he would, without hesitation, choose to know
God?

On such dry ground, and in such thin air,
Christianity was fated to work- vaults theology.
No wonder that the result was pooX But al-
though it was bad Christianity, there was good in


122


MYSTICISM


it. No one can deny to Clement a high-minded-
ness, a purity and spirituality, which enabled him
to draw the best out of Greek enthusiasm, and to
introduce into the Christian doctrine an element
worthy of it. For this highest apprehension or
knowledge of God elevates the soul above all
earthly lusts and desires, and fills it with an in-
dissoluble love towards God. This is the supreme
height of Platonism, but it is also mysticism, for
Clement describes this love as disinterested, as
that condition of blissful equanimity of mind in
which mysticism is in its element.

And, in conclusion, Clement’s theories are both
Platonic and mystical, in that he makes -purity
the way to knowledge. It is, therefore, not only
a matter of meditation, but it is also a question of
morality whether or no this sanctuary of appre-
hension can be entered ; and again, not mere
morality suffices, it must be Christian morality.
At this point we at last discover that there
is Christianity underlying his reasonings, for he
makes love, as well as purity, a necessary stipula-
tion. But only for the acquirement of knowledge,
gnosis. In our day, we, as Christians, should
reverse the statement, and say that we only give
place to knowledge in so far as it leads the way to
love.

Consistent with all this, God is conceived with
the usual heathen attributes of indiscriminate


MYSTICISM OF THE GREEK CHURCH 123

unity, unqualified oneness, and such-like vague
expressions, into which one so easily falls by
thinking away all that is substantial in our con-
ception of Him ; a vagueness, in fact, which
characterises the dreamy nature of the faith. As
a matter of course, Christ is declared to be the
logos, and what there is lacking in the conception
of God is made up in the logos, which thus becomes
the expressed consciousness of God, that part of
the Godhead by which the world was created,
and the only part of the Godhead with which
the world has to reckon.

To his contemporaries the writings of Clement
appeared the height of all Christianity and
Christian knowledge. How far short he fell from
the real height of Gospel Christianity we perceive
when comparing his theories with the Gospel of
John. Christianity, expressed in Greek form,
became Hellenism expressed in Christian form.
Origen, the great and worthy disciple of Clement,
while confirming and completing the system, is
so thoroughly Greek when he rises into the higher
speculative regions, that the Greek Church made
no difficulty in accepting all he taught.

Yet neither Origen not Clement were mystics
in the true sense of the, word ; their mysticism
was only mysticism in part. 'BiitCthey manu-
factured the apparatus used by the mystics of
later generations for making Greek mysticism


124


MYSTICISM


popular on Christian territory ; and the Christians
who adopted their practices had a valid excuse
for doing so, and were, to a certain extent, justified
in developing their theories.

While the Fathers were thus building up the
ecclesiastical system, Christian communities rose
up around them, and monasticism was taking root
and developing rapidly. The monks who sup-
planted the Greek ascetics vied with the heathen
sectaries in intellectual achievements. As a
matter of fact, all aimed at the same thing.
Children of Greece they all were, whether Gentile
or Christian, and their common object was to gain
immortality, or, perhaps more strictly correct,
they all wanted to make sure that their mortal
nature would be changed into an immortal one.
Far indeed the Greeks had wandered from their
original basis ! For the old belief was that a
limit was set to mortal man, a boundary that
could not be passed, an insuperable difference
fixed between man and those whom the^ called
the " immortals.” This belief had now "changed
into the ardent desire to bridge over the gulf and
to do away with all differences.

The popular “ Mystejies ” which formed the
religion of Jfehtf the known world of those days,
and promised salvation to the initiated, went hand
in hand with mysticism. They played the same


MYSTICISM OF THE GREEK CHURCH 125

tune in endless variations, but the theme was
always the raising of human nature into the
divine nature.

Christian mysticism, fitfully practised in deserts,
in solitary places, andnow alsoin monasteries, taught
that this ultimate goal could not be reached except
by Christ indwelling man. The " I live, yet not I,
but Christ liveth in me,” of the Epistle to the
Galatians, was now brought into practice in good
earnest ; or, perhaps more correctly, this saying
was robbed of its deep spiritual meaning, and
made into a material fact. " Christ must spiritu-
ally be born in each one of us,” Methodius declares,
about the year 300, and by the expression
“ spiritually ” ( noetos ) he means, by meditation.
Whoever thus receives Christ into himself is born
of Christ, and the Christ dwelling in him, passes
again, in thought, through all the phases of his
suffering. This agrees with what Origen had
declared, namely, that the enlightened Christian
had no need of the Crucified One, because the man
who is perfect bears within himself the Crucified
One and nis crucifixion.

And so we meet the same thing in all the stages
of the Church’s history on Greek, and, in our days
also, on Russian soil. “ Jhe Greek monks,” says
Harnack, ‘‘live to-day as they lived' a thousand
years ago, in silent contemplation and blissful
ignorance. They labour only in so far as it is an


126


MYSTICISM


absolute necessity for their sustenance, but to
this day the learned monk is a silent reproach
to the uncultured one, the one who avoids nature
to the one who loves it. Still the labouring
hermit feels his conscience reproach him as he
watches the brother who neither labours, nor
thinks, nor speaks, who waits in lonely contempla-
tion and self-torture until the divine light at last
illumines him ” ( Monchtum , p. 27). The shining
in of this divine light to which all aspire may be
described in the words of Methodius, as consisting
in being made ‘‘like God” ( homoiesis theo), the
same expression which the later Greek philosophers
used to describe the condition of highest bliss.

With this background much of what seems
unintelligible becomes clear, namely, how it was
possible that the Greek Church for so many
centuries could devote its best energies to disput-
ing about the dual nature of Christ ; how it was
possible that learned inquiries and clamorous
synods, Court intrigues and street riots, could be
swayed by such abstract questions as whether the
Son had the same nature as the Father, dtc. We
can now understand the triumph with which
Athanasius asserted that Christ in the fullest
sense of the word was “very God and very man.”
Such an one the Christ must be if He is to help
man to change his human nature and raise it on
to a higher level. God incarnate is the surety that


MYSTICISM OF THE GREEK CHURCH 127

God and man can meet, and that there can be
communion between them. As soon as one or
the other of Christ’s natures is contracted or
limited, it means that in that same measure man’s
eternal happiness becomes contracted or limited,
and his salvation incomplete. So thoroughly
Greek is Athanasius, that by salvation he under-
stands before all things salvation from death, and
by eternal happiness, immortality, and oneness
with God.

The ascetic monks understood his words to mean
that mysticism, as practised by them, would lead
to the desired end ; that “ receiving Christ ” meant
verily and truly being indwelt by the Godhead,
and that it was not a mere living in close communion
with God. They took the metaphysical statement
literally and practically, and, as the monks have
to a very large extent influenced the setting up
of the dogmas of the Church, the creed ascribed
to Athanasius has by them been amplified and
encumbered with the damnatory explanatory and
speculative clauses, and made into the clumsy
complex 1v which is our inheritance of the Church
of old.

The great difference between the theology of
East and West is that ip. the East growth takes
place by accumulation ; only in the West do we
find reconstruction. For there it is a starting
afresh, an inquiry into what underlies the traditions,


128


MYSTICISM


and all that one learns of the past is viewed in
the light of the present in which one lives. The
Greek Church rightly calls itself orthodox, for in
its exclusiveness it admits of no teaching that is
not traditional and webbed in speculation. The
only source of renovation which it could sanction
is in the worship of the Church. New rites and
ceremonies were constantly introduced, half -con-
cealed or manifest relics of heathendom taking
refuge under the sheltering roof of the Church.
And every time a Greek or Slavonic deity was
given entrance, one more was added to the multi-
tude of saints. Thus a mysticism grew up, in
substance as heathenish as the customs and super-
stitions of the people for whose benefit and blessing
it was practised.

The last product of the Eastern Church before
it sank entirely into self-absorbed contemplation
was this towering edifice of Greek learning, in which
all that later philosophy and early mysticism,
ritualism, and monkdom had concocted, was
gathered into one huge system, known as the
writings of Dionysius the Areopagite. <On this
curious compound of the sixth century, attributed
to the Areopagite,— but the real author of which
is unknown,— the philosophy of which is an almost
exact copy of the Neo-Platonic Proclus, Eastern
Catholicism has built its hierarchy. Through this
system— Greek from top to bottom— paganism.


MYSTICISM OF THE GREEK CHURCH 129

its mysteries, its pantheon, and philosophy were
smuggled into the Church.

The system was introduced also into the Western
Church, and created enthusiasm everywhere. The
Emperor Michael of Byzantium sent the book to
Lewis the Pious ; and Charles the Bald ordered it to
be translated into Latin by the cleverest man of
his reign. Roman Catholicism was by that time
established in all essential points, on principles
other than these Greek notions. Ecclesiastical
speculation had not yet made much way there,
and the Scholastics therefore welcomed the advent
of this magnificent exposition as a happy intro-
duction to those supernal regions.

The book has a great charm. It carries'~the
reader away into regions and heights which he
would otherwise have no chance of visiting. It
lifts him far above the world and all mundane
things, — throwing away as ballast all the realities
of life, — into ever higher, lighter, more ethereal
spheres. It leads him from the consideration of
plants and animals, to men, priests, monks, and
beyond them to saints and demons, angels and
archangels, until he reaches the triune Godhead,
and fin ally draws near to the Supreme Deity, the
God who is exalted above all Trinity and Unity.
Him he cannot approach in the ordinary way^in
which he can apprehend the things of tDis world,
nor can he find Him by threading his way through
9


130


MYSTICISM


the labyrinth of thought which leads to the
knowledge of God. No, this highest pinnacle of
bliss can only be reached by “ circular ” medita-
tion, in which the soul’s whole energy is con-
centrated on the Godhead, and loses itself in
contemplation.

This psychological analysis has its undoubted
merit. The mystical organ and the mystical
condition are very clearly described. Thought
and sense pass away, and with them all that can
be felt or perceived, all that is, and all that is not ;
and so, deprived of all sensibility ( agnostos ), the
soul ascends to the Unity which is exalted above
all essence and knowledge. This, indeed, is
dipping into the mystical obscurity of insensi-
bility, where all recognised differences vanish,
because the intellect is put aside ; there one be-
comes pnited with Him who is altogether incom-
prehensible, and through this union with the
incomprehensible the soul is made like unto God
(theoeides).

The God who is to be apprehended with such a
darkened understanding is necessarily indefinable,
and, as a specimen of the logic of the mystic who
has reached this highest pinnacle of speculation,
let us listen to what Dionysius has to tell us about
the essence of God. He is the super-eminent
existence, a unity above all unity, an incompre-
hensibleXintelligence, an unutterable word. By


MYSTICISM OF THE GREEK CHURCH 131

negativing all that is positive, and avoiding all
that is sensible, one attains at last to the chemically
pure Deity.

When " negative theology ” has thus risen
above the broad multiplicity of things to the
highest cause of all, and brought the soul silently
into mystical union with the inexpressible, then
“ affirmative theology ” comes down to meet
multiplicity. Then the Nameless One becomes all-
comprehending. He is the sun and the stars,
fire and water, He is all that is. Out of this
Divine essence all beings proceed. Even as it
unfolds at once into a Divine Trinity, so in ever-
increasing multiplicity it flows down to the earth,
and the way downwards as well as upwards is the
same, through celestial and terrestial hierarchies,
through the hosts of angels, through episcopate
and priesthood, down to the men and animals of
this world. And so Platonic is this system that
we recognise in it at once Plato’s favourite idea,
that all that is good and beautiful is only good and
beautiful because it is a part of the Divine nature.

Whai> Plato says of the Divine Eros, of the
passionate longing to catch a glimpse of that
transcendent beauty, became the theme of a
hymn re-echoing throughout all Neo-Platonism,
and singing of a love-chain which connects heaven
and earth. In the same way the ^Areopagite
speaks of erotic links which, as the agents of


132


MYSTICISM


divine Providence, come down to mankind, and
as the soul’s ardent longing and devoted love
ascend back to God.

All this forms one beautiful harmonious whole
supported by mystic energy, and in order that
the harmony may not be broken by showing the
rude reverse side of life, evil is conveniently dis-
posed of after the manner of the Neo-Platonic
school, already hinted at by Philo, but more fully
unfolded by Proclus, who declared that : Evil is
not an independent agent ; in itself it is nothing,
it is a want, a lack, an omission, a shortcoming in
character and life, will and power ; failings which
are all remedied in proportion as one draws life
and strength from the divine source.

In other words, the heathen aspect of the system
of the universe had conquered all along the line
in Christianity, and had been sanctioned and
sanctified by the Church. Heaven was now so
full with pantheism, trinity, and pantheon, that
there was scarcely room for the Heavenly Father
of the Gospel. The high dignitaries of the hier-
archy trampled on the brotherly love commended
in the Gospel ; the great account between good
and evil was closed, and the only evil that re-
mained was human insufficiency, the lack in
man of the higher nature, and this the Church
could easily make good by means of sanctification
and sacraments.


MYSTICISM OF THE GREEK CHURCH 133

This dazzling book was presented to the Caro-
linean ruler with the message that it was the safe-
guard against all heresy, and throughout the
Middle Ages it has been the guiding star of the
teachers of Scholasticism, and of the heroes of
mysticism.

It needed the clear perception of a Luther to see
through the deceit. His keen intellect and broad
humour tore the fabric. " A pack of lies and
fables,” he says in his Table- Talk, and when he
speaks more guardedly, and in Latin, he exclaims :
“As to what Dionysius says about angels in his
Celestial Hierarchy , — a book which has worried
many inquiring and superstitious folk, — I ask with
what authority and on what grounds does he
make his assertions ? May it not altogether be a
chimera, which, when investigated, vanishes like
a vision of the night ?

“ And with his mystical theology, so greatly
eulogised by ignorant theologians, he also gives
great offence. There is more Platonism than
Christianity in it, and my advice to Christians
is : have nothing to do with it ! ”

This is the protest of Christianity against the
paganism of Scholasticism. This is the Reformer’s
historical view of the source to which Christian
speculation must be traced. In Luther, evan-
gelical theology has a strong ally tigainst the
efforts of Protestantism to destroy its own cause


134


MYSTICISM


by theological metaphysics, the component parts
of which, properly considered, are "unconscious
adaptations of heathenism. Yet Luther himself
was not free from mysticism, and an apt and
eager student of the art. But he knew — and this
is the gist of the matter — how T to distinguish
heathenism from Christianity, and he felt the
difference keenly, even in his own moments of
mystical rapture.


VIII. THE MYSTICISM OF THE
ROMAN CHURCH


It was not merely through his own sagacity that
Luther so easily disposed of the philosophical
tissue woven by the Areopagite, but this famous
system had already in the course of centuries been
undermined in the Christian Church by the very
men who had always upheld it with traditional
scruple. For these men belonged to the Roman
Church which had grown up on the soil of the
Roman Empire. We have to bear this in mind to
understand why the Church, when it was trans-
planted from East to West, became imbued with new
strength and vitality . It inherited from the Roman
Empire three things, namely, discipline and esprit
de corps, the fundamental principle on which the
Roman S^ate was built ; strict obedience, the basis
of Roman law ; and personal morality, which made
Stoicism, the ideal of Roman philosophy, respected
by most and realised by the best.

Many other things also the Church took over
from the Roman State, such as vestments, ritual,
saints, and superstitions, but the essential differ-


136


MYSTICISM


ence between Greek and Roman Christianity did
not lie in any of these.

The Roman citizens who became Christians
brought along with them their Roman spirit, just
as the Greek Christians brought their Hellenism.
The Romans made Christianity into a practical
affair, just as the Greeks had made it a matter of
theoretical contemplation. Philosophical dogmas
were pushed into the background to make room
for a moral and juridical regulation of Christian
life. The learned, finely spun-out arguments about
the Trinity and the double nature of Christ
were looked upon as exhausted ; other questions,
more closely connected with everyday life,
were now at the order, such as : What is my
Christian duty ? What is my guilt ? What
punishment have I deserved ? Where can I
find forgiveness ?

Now at last Christianity was once more what
it was in the old apostolic days : a matter of
personal worth, of personal salvation; now at
last sin and grace were again looked at in a Christian
light. And therefore the Church on Rom^n ground
was not primarily an institution for initiation
into mysteries, and for receiving immortal life,
but rather the place where the law was read and
forgiveness obtained. Thus the Church became —
more thaiy. the Greeks had ever made it— a real
community, in which individuals were received


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 137

and cared for, punished or rewarded, — and led
into the way of salvation.

Repentance and correction was the first task the
Roman Church set itself to perform in its members,
and the priests, hardened by self-discipline, became
very different men from the dreaming monks of
the East. But these different priests had also
different duties. God’s forgiveness can only be
imparted through channels ; grace can only be
obtained through visible means of grace, and
these are in the hands of priests. The Church was
made the repository and the distributor of the
sacraments, and as the Church grew in power so
the sacraments grew in efficacy.

As an outward institution of salvation the Roman
Church was put in order by the Popes Leo and
Gregory, but its inner life was created by Si!.
Augustine. While the former carefully organised
and methodised the worship and ritual of the
Church, and laid down the law for all Church
matters, Augustine, through strong inner experi-
ences, had already discovered that the law within
the hea^t is the law of the life to be lived within
these mighty walls. While the former were
fretting and worrying about many external things,
he only minded the one thing that is needful.
God and my soul is what I have to understand.
That and nothing else. Looking into^his soul, he
sees sin ; looking up to God, he finds grace. And


138


MYSTICISM


through him these two words again received the old
significance they had for Paul, but which had been
lost in the argumentative theories of the Greek
Church. For both Paul and Augustine were men
who had lived and suffered, sinned and sorrowed,
before they found pardon and peace. They spoke
from personal experience, they knew what was
wrong and what human nature required. The
grace which St. Augustine preached is, therefore,
before all things the grace of forgiveness {gratia
remissionis). But for a Christian it is not enough
that his sins be forgiven him. Faith, to him, is
something positive, a life in God, and where
Augustine describes this — and this he does most
often in his personal Confessions — there is in his
language a romanticism and an enthusiasm which
spring from this deep, purely personal source.
He speaks of a heart that is disquiet until it finds
rest in God ; of the inspiration of love which
elevates the soul to God. In this inspiratio
caritatis he finds the true life and energising power
of faith, all that man needs. Where this inspired
love governs the heart, man has faith, he is justified,
he is redeemed ; he needs no external aid, and the
grace with which God meets the ardent desire of
his heart is no longer only the grace of forgiveness,
it is the grace of inspiration {gratia inspirations).

With this 1 - new qualification of faith a new
mysticism has been created ; not the mysticism of


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 139


contemplation, but the mysticism of love. The
relationship towards God has suddenly become
practical and intimate ; it has been transformed
into the “-passion of intimacy,” as Soren Kirkegaard
calls it. The relation between God and men has
now become absolute. We must be “ rooted and
grounded in love ” if we would call ourselves
Christians, in caritate radicatus. We must be
wholly God’s if we would be saved ; we must
find ourselves again in Him, the only One out of
whom flows all the multiplicity of the world. It
is not : love God, and then love all things ; but
love God, and only esteem the things of this world
in so far as God is reflected in them. For He is
the only reality, the only true and really existing
One. Therefore to live and exist truly one must
have part with Him, depend on Him, rejoice in
Him. He is, so to speak, a capital on which one
must draw to be kept alive.

This rejoicing in God ( fruitio Dei), which con-
stitutes the true and eternal life, is only allotted
to us at rare moments of losing ourselves in God.
Then for a, short space the longing for God, which
is implanted in human nature, the hunger for
that real life, is satisfied. Then we experience
in all its fulness the grace of inspiration, of being
filled with the love of God, which no man can give
himself ; then we realise that sin is tb|; absence
of God’s presence, God’s love, and God’s reality.


140


MYSTICISM


Of his inner experiences of this relationship
with God, Augustine tells us in his Confessions,
the most celebrated autobiography and the first
psychological self-portraiture in the literature of
antiquity. And these experiences were not con-
fined to the internal struggles of his youth, nor to
the tears and the joy of his conversion, which so
many Christians have taken for their pattern, and
which became the fashion among the mystics of
following ages ; but when he describes the last day
he spent with his mother he also speaks of a mystical
rapture, and a soaring up into spiritual heights.

One evening, whenhe with his mother had reached
Ostia after a long and tiring journey, they were
standing alone together, leaning against a window
which overlooked gardens and stream. “ Thus
alone, we lost ourselves in sweet communion, and,
turning our thoughts away from the past, we
looked into that which lay before us, and asked
ourselves, in the presence of truth, what the ever-
lasting life of the saints would be like, that which
no eye hath seen, no ear heard, and that hath
not entered into any man’s mind. Thirsting we
opened our hearts to drink of the water of life from
the spring which is in Thee, that we, our thirst
quenched according to our power, might be able
to meditate upon so sublime a subj ect. And when
our conversation had led us to the conclusion, that
even the highest sensual enjoyment which, with


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 141

all its splendour, yet remains corporeal, could give
us no conception of the loveliness and glory of that
future life, much less be compared with it, we were
suddenly seized with a yet stronger desire, and rose
in spirit step by step into the heavenlies, from
where sun and moon and stars shine down upon the
earth ; and ever higher we ascended in our inner
consciousness, meditating upon Thy works, dis-
cussing and admiring them, and so we reached the
spirit world, and this also we surpassed, and rose
up to the region of inexhaustible fulness, where
Thou leadest Israel into the paths of truth, and
where the wisdom is found from whence all things
proceed, the things which now are, which were, and
shall be.

“ And thus we spoke : When in one’s body the
storm of the flesh is silenced, when the voices of
land and sea and air are hushed, and the canopy
of heaven is silent ; when the soul is mute within
itself, and forgetting self rises above itself ; when
the dreams and fancies of the imagination are
silent ; when every tongue and every sense and
all that is^ perishable in one is silent . . . and
when then the Creator speaks, not through any
of these, but speaks Himself directly, and we thus
hear His voice, not from any man’s lips, and not
from the lips of angels; not in thunder and darkness,
and not in unintelligible parables, but hear Him,
whom we adore in these things, HinyMf alone apart


142


MYSTICISM


from them all, even as we have risen above them,
and in rapturous flights of thought have reached
the eternal wisdom which is highly exalted above
all ; if then this condition could be a lasting one,
and all other thoughts and imaginings of a different
nature could be banished for ever, and the beholder
were thus carried away, consumed, swallowed up
in joy, tasting of eternal bliss, and the soul’s
yearning satisfied, would not this be the moment
to which those words apply : ‘ Enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord ’ ? ”

All this ought to be Christian logic ; it is one of
the'greatest teachers of the Church who thus speaks
from the zenith of his life’s experience. And yet,
notwithstanding he introduces so many Bible words
and expressions, there is in all this not a single
thought or idea which could have taken shape
without the cement of Platonism. Here are two
pious souls ascending step by step through all the
regions of creation until they reach the place where
the souls are at home ; higher still, to where they
touch the Eternal Truth, the essence of all being.
There, with awakened senses, they experience a
felicity far excelling all sensual joy, and they have
a foretaste of that blessed vision which will be
vouchsafed to those in whom all things are silenced
and God alone speaks.

If this r last link in the chain were missing, one
might virtually take this sketch as descriptive of


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 143

the ecstatic condition of the Neo-Platonist. How
could it be otherwise ? Augustine’s speculative
doctrine of the deity was in all essentials the
same as that of the Neo-Platonic school. He even
admits that “ they knew quite well where they
had to get to, only they did not know the way.”
For the way is Christ. Therefore, when Augustine
wants to describe what he experienced in this
mystical vision, he must, so to speak, talk Greek.
And this gives no offence; for in this Christian
hero, Platonic philosophy and Christian faith and
feeling have been harmoniously blended together.
Augustine, although he borrowed much, knew what
profit to make of the foreign material. A mistake
which Protestantism often commits is to believe
that Christianity can only be kept pure by not
accepting any of the popular notions of the time.
This is not so. Christianity rather preserves its
purity by filling the prevailing ideas with its own
vitality. Augustine realised this, but the Fathers
of the Church who thought they followed in his
footsteps understood it differently, and the mysti-
cism with which Christian theology crowned its
system became, during the succeeding six or seven
hundred years, more an excrescence of the old
theories which Augustine had amalgamated into
his system, than a deeper entering into the new
views which he had exhibited. They fell headlong
back into Greek systems, and^srcn*a mighty


144


MYSTICISM


intellect like John Scotus Erigena was in reality
only able to reproduce Dionysius the Areopagite.

The principal interests and strength of the
Roman Church, however, did not lie in this specu-
lative region. To apprehend God mystically was
the much-valued privilege of the priesthood, but
not a power in their hands. There was another
kind of mysticism that gave them this authorita-
tive power. To this they devoted all their energy,
and developed it to a high state of perfection.
This was sacramental mysticism.

The Catholic priests, who have always been
fond of comparing themselves to shepherds, have
had very much the same experience as their
colleagues, the shepherds in the field. They think
they are the leaders of the flock, but the sheep
know better, and the shepherd, with his crook and
call, has in the end to accommodate himself to the
pasture which the flock has selected by paths
of their own choosing. Although Augustine, in
his spiritual and personal Christianity, stood
infinitely higher than Gregory the Great, with
his masses and saints, his purgatory, penances,
and sacraments, yet Gregory was “ the shepherd,”
the man who, in effect, settled the internal arrange-
ments of the Church. For he had the sheep on
his side ; he knew the kind of pasture they liked.
Cherished customs of Romish heathendom were

y*>

by him admiTc^C into the Church, and in spite of


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 145

all the wisdom, the discretion, the philosophy-
exhibited by the teachers who, after him, endea-
voured to make theology into a field of specu-
lative thought, the insensitive will of the laity
prevailed. Their superstitions and sensuality,
their love for the corporeal and the miraculous,
showed the masters of Scholasticism in which
direction their work lay, and provided them
with the material for building up their system.
The formulae were still those of Augustine, but
the methods became more and more those of
Gregory. In this light we understand why the
sacraments were made so much of by the teachers
of the Scholastic school, and why they spent all
their reasoning powers in trying to explain their
meaning and importance, although Augustine had
suggested very different matter for thought.

To the Churchmen of the Middle Ages, the
sacraments were more than holy acts and ele-
ments ; in their eyes the sacraments formed a
separate province in the constitution of the uni-
verse, over which the Church was set to rule.
This view jvas based on mysticism, the mysticism
which the Church long ago had borrowed from
Plato, but which, in course of time, had been
re-baptized and re-inaugurated so many times,
that it required sharp eyes to detect its heathen
derivation. Universalia sunt realia, “ Generality
is reality,” they said. Hegel anX-^us followers
xo


146


MYSTICISM


said : “ The Ideal is the real,” which comes very
much to the same thing. Words and conceptions
which to us symbolise existing things ; creations
of the imagination to express the things which
our bodily senses perceive, — are to them the true
realities themselves, from which the things which
we call real have proceeded ; and consequently
the realities of this world are merely the reflected
image in which the supremest reality chooses to
manifest itself. These ideas and reflections are
for the Church, as for Plato, the one sound and solid
principle from which all material things derive
their right of being, and the world its claim to
the citizenship of heaven. The verities of faith
are, therefore, not a something which Christian
men happen to believe in ; no, they reasoned
thus : All men believe something ; therefore
faith is common property, therefore a reality,
therefore an incontestable truth. The Church,
our home on earth, is but a reflection of the heavenly
Jerusalem, where glory dwells, and where is the
fountain of grace. And that the Church is called
catholic, i.e. “ universal ” — “ common,” is, accord-
ing to this logic, a further guarantee of its being
the true Church ; it is real, because it is universal.

And the Church is indispensable, because it
forms the link between the two kingdoms, the
Kingdom of Grace above, and the Kingdom of
Nature belu^ST Of Nature they knew about as


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 147

much as Aristotle knew of it. The physical
theories of the Greek sage were fitted into the
Platonic Church system, because he represented
nature as forming one harmonious whole, held
together by a conscious power, which betrays a
highest cause and a highest purpose. For this
reason, the Aristotelian theory of nature received
a place in the great edifice which reached up into
the heavens, and became a ladder, leading up
step by step into the kingdom of Grace : from
the visible into the invisible ; from the perishable
into the imperishable.

What the theory of ideas had been for Plato,
the kingdom of Grace became for Scholasticism.
Grace, i.e. divine vitality, eternal life, the power
of immortality and final salvation, that is the
power which supports the world. It is the promise
of the real life, and where nature is receptive of
grace, its life is no longer a merely perishable
existence.

With his flesh and blood, man belongs to the
kingdom of nature. If he would conquer death,
and in this life overcome the perishable nature
in which Ire has been born, he must have recourse
to grace, i.e. the Church, for she is the dispenser
of the means of grace. She baptizes with water
and anoints with oil ; she provides the salt
and the light ; she consecrates the bread and
pours out the wine ; she blesses ihjftrpahd imposes


148


MYSTICISM


penalties for shortcomings ; she casts out the
devil out of our human flesh, and raises marriage
above the bonds of lower nature ; she also anoints
the feet of the believer before he starts on his last
journey, in order that he may find his true home.
In these sacraments and sacramental acts, with
their palpable materialism and their priestly
blessing, the kingdom of nature and the kingdom
of grace meet. They spiritualise nature and
materialise the divine efficacy. This is the unto
mystica which the people need, for it is a mystery
which leads to something, to eternal salvation,
and it is accessible to all. And the more the
Church became consolidated as a Church, the
more she learned to value the power which the
people’s craving for salvation had placed into her
hands. By virtue of the sacraments, she is arbiter
of life and death, she has the monopoly of the
fountain of life : “ Outside the Church, no hope
of salvation.”

-Special prominence is given to the sacrament
of the Lord’s Supper. In the great doctrinal dis-
putes of the Carolinian days, its significance was
discussed in one way and another, and the inter-
pretation which gave the widest range to mysticism
and made holy things into palpable magic, carried
the day. This magical efficacy was smuggled
in under the spiritual form of the Augustinian
doctrine, ast u5S£iftstance, in the celebrated treatise


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 149

on the Last Supper, by Paschasius Radbertus
(831). He says quite complaisantly : “ The sacra-
ment is the spiritual food of faith ; to eat the
flesh of Christ, is to abide in Him. Faith has to
do with the invisible, therefore the eye of faith
looks beyond the visible, and only beholds the
divine which is behind.” These carefully chosen
words contain a good deal of ancient Greek
heathenism, and here we have to do, not only
with Dionysius the Areopagite, but with Dionysius
the Wine-god. Not only the soul, but the body
also feeds on the sacrament ; our flesh, as well as
our spirit, is thereby made fit for immortality
and incorruption. The Greeks cherished this
idea, because immortality was the aim and object
of their religion, and the Lord’s Supper became
for them one continuous incarnation, a perpetual
repetition of Christ’s becoming man, and this
was all they wished for, for to them it was a
pledge that even as the divine could put on
human flesh, so our flesh can put on immortality.
By partaking of the body of Christ, He becomes _
incarnate in me, and by mystical union I become
a partaker of the divine nature, and possess in
my own flesh and blood the power of immortal
life. The Greek notions about " the body of
Christ ” were doubtless of a somewhat vague
and fanciful character ; but the Fathers of the
Western Church were men whoF desired to be


150


MYSTICISM


clear and explicit, and to keep to realities. There-
fore a Paschasius Radbertus — whose doctrine on
the Lord’s Supper was accepted as orthodox —
emphatically declares that the body of Christ,
as partaken of in the Lord’s Supper, is in very
deed that which was born of the Virgin Mary,
and that as the host is being blessed a change
takes place, by which the bread is verily made
into the body of Christ, but, he says : the portion
of the bread which is perceptible to our bodily
senses, remains unchanged.

Such things could be said and believed in the
Middle Ages, even by the most faithful sons of
the Church, because it represented something
definite to their minds. The idea was based on
Platonic logic, which says : the essence and reality
of things is from above ; the invisible is the real,
that which thou seest is not real. Consequently
in that what the senses perceive a divine reality
may be present, capable of assuming for a fleeting
moment the properties of the visible thing ; the
divine body and the divine blood can take the
form of bread and wine. ^

It was natural and necessary that this kind of
logic should be overthrown before sacramental
mysticism could be done away with, — and the
transformation took place in the very heart of
Scholastic philosophy. The Nominalists (as the
followers of r tha, new school were called), whose


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 151

notions about names, ideas, and conceptions were
about the same as ours are, have helped quite
as much as a Savonarola and a Huss to prepare
the way for the Reformation. Luther was a
declared disciple of the Nominalist Occam, and
as he, for himself, refused to have anything to do
with Platonic philosophy, he also succeeded in
talcing away from the sacraments their material
mysticism. In his earliest writings the idea of
Christ’s corporeal presence in the sacrament of the
Lord’s Supper was forced to the background , The
sacramental words make the sacrament. In them
the whole Gospel is contained : “ forgiveness,

life, salvation,” and if from the extreme left of
the Reformation movement those much more
pronounced radical views had not been advanced,
in which Luther scented the rebellious spirit of
the Anabaptists, he would probably have abided
by his original view. But Karlstadt’s exaggerated
exposition of the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper
irritated Luther, and from that time he mis-
trusted every symbolical interpretation, even
Zwingli’s much more guarded one. More and
more boldly he insists on the actual words of the
Bible, and Christ’s corporeal presence in the
sacrament, and many times it would seem as if
his views are but a reflection of the Roman inter-
pretation.

The mysticism of visible signs anchauracles ran


152


MYSTICISM


into paganism, and remained pagan, as far as
the Roman Church was concerned. Yet, in this
same Church there grew up, simultaneously,
something which was true Christian mysticism,
an inner life, lived in Christ, and in which Christ
lived. This also had its root in Augustine. For
his mysticism was not merely a state of ecstatic
transport which carried him beyond the stars ;
his ardent desire was that the living Christ should
dwell in him. Augustine introduced the great
and new thought which the Fathers of the Eastern
Church knew only vaguely or not at all, namely,
that living in Christ is a personal matter. The
Greek monks, like the Greek theologians, saw in
Christ from first to last the Trinitarian figure
about whose place in the Godhead there was
much dispute, but to whom nevertheless they
all assigned a place, some of them an exclusive
one in the Godhead. Before their speculative
zeal the historical facts fell into the back-
ground. The feelings with which a modern
Christian regards his Saviour, feelings of
personal devotion and gratitude, and of the
responsibility laid upon him, these were r fonnerly
not much thought of ; all that mattered was
whether he was God enough to impart godliness,
and man enough for men through him to be made
partakers thereof.

For Augustine the meeting of the soul with God


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 153

was -a much simpler matter. To him it was
communion in the enthusiasm of love, and Greek
Christian mysticism was therefore necessarily
discarded by him. But this by no means implies
that Christ was discarded. It was only that
Augustine looked at him with different eyes, and
felt for him something else than the selfish hunger
for immortal life. He saw the humanness in the
life of J esus, and realised that this also was precious
to mankind, in the first place because God Himself
had humbled Himself therein. “ I believe that
God became man for us, to be to us an example
of humility and to show us what God’s love is.
And this helps us to realise and to hold fast in our
hearts that the self-abasement in which it pleased
God to be born of a woman, and allowed Himself to
be scorned and rejected and put to death by men,
is the best remedy for our puffed-up pride. He
was crucified — now it depends on thee to take His
poverty upon thyself ; far from thee He lived, but
in poverty He comes nigh unto thee.”

When Augustine speaks in terms like these, not
as arguing for a theological problem but out of the
fulness of His heart, he produces an image of Christ
similar to Paul’s conception of Him, an image
which in the course of the intervening centuries
of Apostolic Christianity had been lost. When
Paul sums up his exhortation in the words : “ Let
the same mind be in you which was alstf in Christ


154


MYSTICISM


Jesus,” he refers to Christ's great humility, to
His taking the form of a servant, to His being
obedient even unto death, in order to bring home
to us what was the mind of Christ ; and Augustine
does practically the same. His definition of
Christianity is that it is a state of mind to which
only a Christian can attain. And what state of
mind is it which distinguishes the Christian from
the heathen man ? That he believes in that
which Paul lived and preached : that strength is
made perfect in weakness ; that what the world
despises is acceptable with God ; that humiliation
and scorn and suffering are the conditions for the
reward, and that nothing can be gained until one
has learned to despise worldly greatness, power,
and honour. This is Christianity, for so Christ was,
and this the Church has never quite forgotten,
even in its most miserable and confused state.

In other words, this is historical Christianity,
based on the historical figure of Christ and the
divine power dwelling in him showing forth in his
life and suffering. But this simple exposition of
Christ by no means exhausts all that Augustine
had to say about him, for he corroborates, without
disputing them, many of the existing notions of
the Church. And it does not express all that the
Church thought of Christ in the time immediately
following Augustine. The Church did not form
its conception^ of Christ in the light of the new


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 155

truths which Augustine had revealed, yet, he had ,
spoken the word, and it but waited the right
moment to come to fruition.

This moment came with the Crusades, and with
the apostle of the time of the Crusades, Bernard of
Clairvaux. This adventurous going out into the
world, this cultural struggle with the Saracens,
this strange confusion of Christian ideals and
Byzantine politics, were all necessary to make the
people understand and realise who Christ really
was. It was necessary for them personally to
visit the country where Christ himself had walked,
they had to fight and bleed before Jerusalem,
kneel at the tomb of Jesus, tread in his footsteps
on the road to Calvary, before they earnestly and
truly believed and understood what it meant :
Christ has lived and Christ has died.

Only through these strong, emotional experi-
ences Christ became for the Church an historical
fact. The personality of Christ in his human
life and suffering, faintly sketched by Augustine
and only apprehended by the few, now stood out
in vivid colours and became the property of all.
And what they did not see with their own eyes
they learned from Bernard of Clairvaux. He
depicted the sufferings of Christ in language
intelligible to all ; his life on earth, his poverty
and his passion they thus realised, and, in realising
these, they realised his divinity St? Bernard


MYSTICISM


156

thus created a Christ -mysticism of which Augustine
can have had but the faintest notion, and which
now became the groundwork of all Western piety
throughout the Roman Church : “To have part
in Christ thou must have part in His suffering. For
suffering is the essence of His being ; by putting
on His sufferings thou hast won Christ, thou hast
put on Christ.” Such was the practical, personal
interpretation of the words : “ Christ liveth in
me ” ; the words which the mysticism of the
Greek Church had made into a matter of specula-
tion. In both Churches mysticism ensued ; in
both it led to renunciation, asceticism, ecstasy.
Yet the two were as far apart as the East is from
the West, and the difference lay particularly in
their interpretation of these very words which
were the starting-point of both. The Athos monk
emptied himself of self that he might receive in
himself the divine power of the incarnate Son
of God, almost as if he were being infused with
some natural power. The mystic of the Western
Church, on the other hand, wanted union with
Christ, because he desired to be one with Him in
His human life. He desired to follow after Him
in His humiliation, not by emptying himself of his
personality, but rather by raising and confirming
his personality on a new moral basis. This is
active and ethical, as against passive and physical
Christian '•mysticism. Active although in passive


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 157

form, in the highest activity of suffering. For
they aspired at living over again the whole passion
of Christ, and they were not satisfied until they
had crucified the flesh, that they might also be
exalted with Him. This exaltation could be won
here on earth. To him who follows Christ in His
poverty, who wearies himself in exercises and
deeds of penitence, is vouchsafed even here on
earth a moment’s blissful tarrying in communion
with the Saviour ; a joy reserved for those who
have watched with Him to the end. The penitent
may kiss the feet of Jesus, the man of action may
kiss His hands, but to His faithful ones He grants
the third kiss, the kiss on the mouth of the bride-
groom, the sweet, the stolen kiss, the copula
spiritualis which is the heavenly reflection of the
earthly marriage vow. “ There is a place,” says
St. Bernard, " where God may be seen as He who
abideth for ever : a place where He is neither
teacher nor judge, but bridegroom ; a place which
is to me (whatever it be to others) as the bridal
chamber which I am called to enter. But, alas !
rare are those moments and of short duration.”

This is real mysticism, because it is erotic. The
same sentimental longing which we noticed in
Persian mysticism now appears in Christianity
also, and we find the chaste monk revelling in the
Song of Solomon,, which has been liberally in-
cluded in the Holy Scriptures. St. Bernard's


158


MYSTICISM


masterful interpretation of the Canticles, the
most original and best known of his writings, has ,
become the pattern of a peculiar kind of mysticism
which indulges in kisses and embraces far exceed-
ing the limitations of Christian mysticism both
in the Roman and the Protestant Churches.
But just as the first falling in love of young people
is a sign that they feel themselves no longer
children but self-conscious persons, so the mysti-
cism of St. Bernard is, as it were, the religious
awakening of the individual, producing a most
refreshing effect after all the vagueness and im-
personality of former systems, and all the general-
ising properties of ancient Catholic mysticism.

This was the same subjective Christianity of
which Augustine had struck the chord, but now
it was transplanted into the life of the individual,
in the fervour of a first passion in the youthful,
impulsive desire for freedom.

How unaffected in the midst of the formal
Latin of the Church sounds the avowal : For
me at least — what others think I know not (“ Mihi
quidem, nam de aliis nescio ”) ! Yet St. Bernard
possessed more than subjectiveness and feeling,
just as he did not confine himself to the historical
Christ. But so slowly grows the soul of the
human race, so tenacious are the threads of history
which bind it, that the new theory promulgated
by the greatest genius of the time of the Crusades


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 159

got no further than the start. The fellow-suffer-
ing with Christ which he preached was in reality
only a suffering in thought. With all his practical
Christianity St. Bernard, when he reveals his
innermost mind, is always a contemplative man,
and his mysticism, well considered, flows out
in intellectualism. His ardent love is, after all,
only a means to reach the highest knowledge,
needing the help of dialectics even where it far
exceeds the limits of reason. Therefore the histori-
cal Christ is not enough for him. Just as the
spiritual meaning of the Scriptures is infinitely
beyond the sense of the actual words, so there
is a spiritual Christ (the " Word ” which was
in the beginnning) of whom the historical Jesus
is but the reflected image, and who is the aim
and object of mystical speculation and contempla-
tion. In this manner Greek philosophy triumphs
over the exalted views of St. Bernard as it did
over those of St. Augustine, Greek ideas and
mannerisms appear again under the new form
of religion, and St. Bernard’s mysticism, notwith-
standing its great girth, was easily made to fit
into the system of Scholasticism, and presently
became the peculiar type of speculation indulged
in by the master-minds of the time, and of
which we find specimens in the writings of Peter
Lombard and Thomas Aquinas.

This amalgamation of mysticism, and'Scholasti-


i6o


MYSTICISM


cism was the easier accomplished as the pious and
learned contemporary of St. Bernard, Hugo a St,
Victor, experienced the same mystical emotions
as the great Abbot of Clairvaux, and applied
them to his Scholastic system. Hugo’s mysticism
is the scientific counterpart of that of St. Bernard.
Possibly the young scholar, who wrote his first
treatise during his novitiate in the German con-
vent at Hamersleben (1x15), put into words
thoughts which he had gathered from St. Bernard’s
practical piety and applied to his own way of
thinking. At any rate these two, starting from
the same point, have produced a totally different
result. St. Bernard converted living faith into
practice, and he possessed the power of describing
what took place in his innermost mind. Hugo,
in whom also stirred the living faith, set to work
to analyse it, with all the keen perception of an
analytical philosopher.

The theory about the three stages of the con-
dition of the mind, cogitatio, meditafio ," and contcm-
platio , — which formed such an important factor
in the mysticism of following ages, — although
first promulgated by Hugo, is his most famous but
not his best deed. It is, as a matter of fact, the
practical scheme for expressing the psychological
experiences which everymystic has topass through. 1

1 Cogitatio is the conception of things through the
senses : mefntaUo <is the searching into the hidden mean


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 161


More ingenious than this theory was Hugo’s
psychological definition of faith. He realised
what in their zeal was overlooked by the great
teachers in the Christian Church who after him
and under his influence built up their systems,
that in faith two things have to be specially noted.
The one is cognitio, recognition (knowledge), that
which is apprehended by faith ; and the other is
affectus, the condition of the believing soul. He
pointed out and emphasised that real faith belongs
to this latter condition, that it lies in the direction
of the heart, while the apprehending of God is
concerned with the will — “ the more intense the
affections, the more genuine and precious the
faith.” The meritum of faith lies in the direction
of the will, in the turning away from the world to
God, and the giving up of oneself to holy things.
Therefore the Lord says to the woman of Canaan,
who had little knowledge but great confidence :
” Woman, great is thy faith.” In this affectus
lies the germ of Luther’s “ confidence ” and
Schleiermacher’s " emotion,” and the searching

ing of the tjiing conceived ; contemplatio is the insight
which is thus obtained of the essence of things. Hugo
popularised this theory by comparing it to three eyes:
the eye of the flesh, the eye of the intellect, and the
eye of the spirit. In the man who lives in sin the third
eye is blinded, but to him] in whom the Spirit of God
dwells this eye is opened, and he sees heavenly tilings face
to face. ,»


162


MYSTICISM


into these psychological conditions has decidedly
been one of the chief preparations for the Evan-
gelical definition of what is Christianity. At first
the seed did not bear much fruit ; it was well nigh
ground to powder in the great mill of Scholasticism.
Hugo was eagerly admitted among the Fathers
of the Church, but his analyses were only used
as they fitted into their systems.

One can easily understand why these learned
gentlemen made way for mysticism. It was for
them the Mount of Transfiguration, where one
might make tabernacles and tarry a while when
weary of life. They did practically the same as
the Hindu priests ; they went as far as the division
of the ways, where the “ road of action ” and “ the
road of knowledge ” separate. The more a religion
makes redemption dependent upon the fulfilment of
duties — be they the duties of the priest at the altar,
or of the layman in secular life — the greater will
become the impetus to take refuge in self-absorption
and contemplation. And when once a taste has
been acquired for this higher accomplishment, one
is apt to look down with scorn or compassion upon
the man who still follows the road of action. The
Hindus and the Persian Sufis held that there was
a wide gulf fixed between this higher and lower
kind of piety. But the Catholic Church formed
one brotherhood, and their doctrine was one
system. r A bridge must therefore be laid between


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 163

the higher and the lower order, for even the s mall est
gift of the Church contains a spark of the Divine
light. An amulet as' well as deep meditation
ensures this quiet rest of soul, and the grace which
the sacraments impart is for priests and laity alike.
But the priest has the advantage of being nearer
to the source of light and life ; he can dispense
with many things which remain an imperative
duty for the laity. By his penitential acts as
monk he has performed more than ordinary lay
duty, therefore he has a higher claim to the coveted
“ rest,” and the art of contemplation which he
understands gives him alone an entrance into the
immediate joy of the Lord.

Scholasticism, then, is not only a doctrine teach-
ing in what manner the gifts of grace are trans-
mitted from the one to the many, from God to His
creatures, but it also points out how the elect can
fin d the way to God. And once again we are
amazed at the large percentage of Platonism there
is in the Roman Church, for the steps leading into
the Holy of Holies have the same three gradations
as in the Platonic scale of ascent: purification,
illumination, and union.

These three steps have been Christianised by
St. Bernard ; he who ascends by them becomes
one with Christ. The participation in the suffer-
ings of Christ retains its appointed place as a
necessary link in the order of redemption ; it is


164


MYSTICISM


the katharsis, the being purified from all that
separates man from God, and which formerly was
effected by the sacrament of penitence. To believe
in Christ is the highest enlightenment, the imita-
tion of His life, the surest guide, the contemplative
losing of self in the mystery of His incarnation,
the deepest initiation into communion with God.
And, finally, the result of this communion is the
love of Christ, union with Him and eternal life.

The Scholastics, however, aspired at more than
mere union with Christ. In the triune God Him-
self the soul desired to be absorbed, to be made one
with God the Father Himself ; this only makes its
existence a true reality. Up to this point they
reasoned just like the Hindus and the Greeks, but
Scholasticism went a step farther. For it is not
enough to be made one with God through appre-
hension, as the Greeks thought. Thomas Aquinas
still adhered to that idea, but Duns Scotus, who con-
sidered the question from a more natural point of
view, went farther than he. Absorption in God by
apprehension, he says, can only be enjoyed by the
few who are endowed with the highest spiritual
gifts, and even by them only for a moment. If
this union is really to be the object of human
endeavour, and if it is to give lasting peace, it has
to enter deeper into the soul. Then it requires the
giving up of the will also. Only by giving up one’s
own will absolutely to the will of God, in order that


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 165

God's will may be accomplished in man, this
merging of the soul in God can be completed. To
this man can attain. It is wholly and entirely
within his reach. It can even become a condition
in which he permanently lives. And with this,
Scholastic mysticism leaves the seclusion of the
closet and steps forth into practical life ; is, in fact,
a' harbinger of the coming Reformation. But long
before this thought had assumed form and shape
through much study and diligent inquiry, devout
men in active life had lived it, it had made Christian
heroes and heroines whose names are recorded in
the annals of mysticism.

A friar, wishing to prove the pride of Francis of
Assisi, asked him why all the people looked up to
him, listened to him, and wanted to obey him.
And Francis answered : desirest thou to know why
they come to me, why all the world follows after
me ? I know, for the omniscient God has revealed
it to me, He whose eyes are on the good and on
the evil in all the earth. It is because His holy
eyes have found nowhere a greater and more
utterly depraved sinner than I am. Because in
the whole world no more miserable creature could
be found in whom to accomplish the great miracle
that He intended to work. That is why He has
chosen me to put to shame the great, and the noble,
and mighty, the world of beauty and of^ wisdom.

And so the message which Christianity had


i66


MYSTICISM


come to preach, that “ all worth is worthless,”
had been delivered. The ideal, sketched by
St. Augustine, to which St. Bernard had given
colouring, had received life, had become a man
of flesh and bone ; barefooted he went by Italy’s
dusty highways, and all flocked round to see, to
hear, to follow after him. The great and the
noble and the strong, all that the world holds in
esteem, had ceased to be of value ; all is as naught
to him, and riches may not even be mentioned.
As for beauty and wisdom, the ideals of Greek
philosophy, he disposes of them also. Even
Biblical knowledge and priestly authority shrivel
into nothing before this man, in whom the Gospel
had become alive, and who obeyed the Church to
the uttermost. Once a brother asked him if he
might possess a Psalter. St. Francis replied :
" Man can learn nothing but what he already
knows. If to-day thou gettest a Psalter, to-
morrow thou wilt want a Breviary, and thou wilt
end by sitting in thy chair like any other prelate
and saying, ‘ Hand me my Breviary.’ ”

There only remains the one thing that js needful :
to become like Christ, to bear his sufferings, to lead
his life of privation. If Christianity consisted in
this literal and exaggerated imitation of Christ’s
life on earth, Francis of Assisi certainly carried it out
to the extreme, and there would have been no need
for any further" development of Christian virtue.


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 167

Protestant Christianity set up another ideal, and
tried to reach the goal by another way. But how
could she ever have attained it, and who would
have listened to her if in the Franciscan methods
the Christian ideal of the Middle Ages had not been
carried out to the uttermost and — found wanting ?

The Spanish and Italian mendicant Orders had
converted St. Bernard’s thinking into willing , and
this exerting of the will and the constant con-
centration of the mind upon the will remained for
centuries a characteristic feature of the practical
mysticism south of the Alps and Pyrenees. In
the Franciscan form of devotion there were still
traces of that holy longing which marks St.
Bernard’s love of Christ, and which is not only
erotic, but full of actual pain and hunger to
become one with Christ by the complete giving
up of one’s own self. This pathological state of
mind breathes in the obscure and incoherent
effusions of the Franciscan poet, Jacopone d& Todi :
“ Amor, amor, Gesu desideroso ! ”

Love! Love! lovely Jesus!

Lovell will die
Embracing thee.

Sweet Love, Jesus my Bridegroom,

Love, Love, Jesus, thou Holy One,

Give me thyself, transform me into thyself;
Think, that I am in rapture.

That I have lost myself,

Jesus my hope,

Come, sleep in love ! *

*


1


i68


MYSTICISM


In the writings of St. Francis himself there is
nothing of this sickly effusiveness ; yet he also
experienced for a moment this highest form of
rapture in the rock cave of Monte Alverno, where,
as the legend says, when in an ecstasy of prayer
he received the marks of the wounds of the Lord
upon his own person and became as Christ. Un-
speakable joy thrilled him, to make room a moment
later for the stinging pain of the wounds. When
the trance was past he saw on his person what
had happened. His union with Christ was now
complete. Both in body and in soul he now bore
the likeness of the Crucified One.

In the hands of Francis of Assisi all things became
facts. Even as his Jesus-mysticism is completed
in his own flesh and blood, so the pantheism which
lurks in all mysticism became in him such a lively
consciousness of God’s presence in nature, that he
looked . upon every creature, every animal and
every plant, and even upon inanimate nature, as
his familiar friend and brother. To him they are
all God’s children, and he sees God’s glory in them.
According to the legend, he tamed wolves as easily
as the wild pigeons which flew into his lap, and
it is not at all impossible to believe that, in defiance
of the papal scorn, he actually did preach to
the swine as the Holy Father is alleged to have
commanded him to do.

Before 'leaving Mount St. Alverno, where he


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 169

spent such happy days and the most wonderful
moments of his life, he bade farewell to all that grew
and lived there — as did Sakuntala when she left
the gazelles and mango trees of her solitudes.
For all he has a parting word of greeting, for the
trees and the flowers, the falcon — the “ brother
falcon ” — which every morning at dawn flew into
his cave to warn him that the hour of prayer had
come. Even to the rock he speaks as to a friend :
“ Farewell, thou mountain of the Lord, thou holy
mount where it has pleased God to dwell, farewell,
Monte Alverno ! God the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost bless thee, abide in peace; we shall
meet no more.”

The intensity of his love of nature is most
powerfully expressed in his “ Hymn to the Sun,”
composed by St. Francis towards the close of his
life in a sudden burst of inspiration. He sings
God’s praise for brother sun and sister moon, for
mother earth and sister water and brother fire.
For each of these his relatives he has a word :
sister water is useful and humble, precious and
chaste ; while brother fire is beautiful and merry,
strong ancl bold. But, before all, he thanks God
for the sun, which by its brightness and majesty
testifies to God’s glory.

Here he touches the same chord which vibrates
in Christ’s words when He speaks of the lilies
of the field and the birds of tlje airs But for


170


MYSTICISM


St. Francis all creatures exist not merely for our
reflection and consideration ; he includes them all
in his intense, large-hearted Christian love, which
places his love of nature almost on a level with the
modern conception of it in its most comprehensive
form. And for this reason it is but natural that
this hymn should be revived in our day to express
our latest mood. Renan calls it the finest psalm
in existence, and Anatole France put it into
French verse. And, however strange it may
appear that the “ Hymn of Praise ” of Francis of
Assisi should lend words to the lyre of Darwinism,
yet there surely is a bond of union in the enthusiasm
of the two. In both, relationship with nature is
felt. For the modern mind this feeling is based
on his knowledge of nature, on his insight into
the organic connection of the world, and what he
lacks in penetration he supplements by his theory
about the unity and all-comprehensiveness of
nature, a theory which has its root in Spinoza and
natural pantheism. For St. Francis this relation-
ship with nature was the natural bond of all
created things in God ; a fraternisation of all
reasonable and unreasonable creatures of God’s
hand. The idea of God underlying this conception,
and which St. Francis, the practical, never clearly
defined, distinctly reminds one of the all-embracing,
all-quickening God of natural mysticism, the
inheritance*©! the, Scholasticism of the Areopagite ;


MYSTICISM OF THE ROMAN CHURCH 171

and so the pantheistic root is not lacking here
either. It was quite in accordance with the piety
emanating from St. Francis that the Scholastic
Orders of mendicant friars — and especially the
Dominicans — should give pantheistic mysticism
such an important place in their system, and it
seems but natural that the German Dominican
Order, after freeing itself from the old system,
plunged into a Christian mysticism which was
permeated with pantheism.


IX. GERMAN MYSTICISM

Among the many letters received by St. Bernard
from far and near in the course of his stirring
career, there is one which must have touched him
very especially. It is from the noble lady Hilde-
garda, a nun in the convent of Rupertsberg, near
Bingen. St. Bernard, being a man who went deep
down to the root of things, must have read be-
tween the lines of the letter, written in bad Latin,
what was the cause of Hildegarda’s trouble. It
is difficult to translate this epistle in modern
language, nor can one quite get over this difficulty
by leaving out some of the passages which defy
translation. It runs somewhat as follows : " It
has been revealed to me in spirit, Reverend Father,
to address myself to thee ; for special grace has
been given thee to discern between the power of
God and the sinful foolishness of the flesh : to
thee who, in thy burning love for the Son of God,
canst induce men to fight in the Christian army,
under the banner of the Cross against the abomina-
tion of tyranny. To thee I must confess that I
am bound in spirit concerning a vision which I

17a


GERMAN MYSTICISM


173


have seen in my innermost mind but not with
my bodily eyes. I, most miserable creature, —
and doubly miserable because I am a woman, —
have from my childhood had great and wonderful
visions, of things which I cannot put into words,
except the Spirit of God gives the words into my
mouth wherewith to express them. Kind and
gentle Father, in thy goodness listen to me, thine
unworthy handmaid, who has never known peace
from her youth upward. From the experience
of thine own piety and wisdom I beseech thee
to understand me in thy spirit as the Holy Ghost
shall teach thee. I can discern the inner meaning
of the contents of the Psalter and of the Gospels
and of the other books of the Bible. They are
made clear to me in my visions ; my heart is
stirred and my spirit burns within me like a flame
of fire, and I read the depth of the inner meaning,
but I cannot read it in my own language, for I
cannot read German. This much I can read
in the simplicity of my heart without cavilling
of words, because I am unlearned and have not
been taught in any school. But internally, in
my soul I have been taught, and from my soul
I speak to thee, never doubting that thou wilt
comfort me of thy wisdom and piety concerning
the many disputes and differences which I am
told there are in the world. . . . Two years ago
I saw thee in a vision, gazing up ^ into the sun ;


174


MYSTICISM


fearless and bold. And I wept and blushed
because I was afraid.

“ Good and gentle Father, take pity on me ; pray
for me, for I am troubled concerning this vision,
whether I ought to tell what I heard and saw.
Often when I feel very miserable at the time that
these revelations come to me, I have to lie down
on my bed, because they take such hold of me
that I cannot move. Therefore I now come to
thee in my sore need, for I am easily shaken as
a reed in the wind ; my human nature is crushed
within me, as it were in an oil-mill, for it is of the
seed of Adam, and I am a wanderer in a strange
world among the deceits of the devil. But now
I have pulled myself together and flee to thee.
And I say : thou also art easily bent and shaken,
but thou hast the strength to straighten thyself
again like a tree, and thou canst raise not only thy-
self but others also, to see salvation. Thou art as
an eagle which looks into the sun. By the purity
of the Father and of the Word, which is wonderful ;
by the gentle dew of the heart’s desire, i.e. the Spirit
of truth ; by the sacred notes which ring throughout
all creation, and by the Word itself fry which the
world was made ; by the Majesty of the Father,
Who of His infinite might sent down the Word
into the womb of the Virgin, of whom He
was made man, as honey is contained in wax,
by these_ I entreat thee not to remain cold and


GERMAN MYSTICISM


' 175


deaf to my supplications, but that thou wilt
take my words to heart, and, when thou art
in the spirit, beseech God for me, for He inclines
His ear to thee. Farewell, fare thou well in
thy soul, be strong in God in the fight !
Amen.”

The woman who pours out her soul in these
passionate, incoherent phrases is one of those
complex natures, strong and yet sickly, in whom
the mystical notion of participating in the suffer-
ings of Christ becomes a living reality. For, on
German soil also, this was to be accomplished,
and here women led the way. So we see that
occasionally there is use for women. When the
men have come to a deadlock in their learning,
and their inner experiences have grown hard in
the clutches of their Latin systems, then life
seeks out the women, that they may live it.
Mysticism found its women on the Rhine and the
Scheldt. They transformed mysticism from an
affair of the mind into an affair of the heart, into
a well bubbling over with emotion, such as is
only found in Germanic races, and preferably in
their women. To the nuns of Germany and
Flanders belongs the undisputed honour of having
been the first to concencrate all their attention,
their whole being, upon the love of Christ, — for
long before St. Francis this movement had com-
menced, — and they opened a chapter in the history


176 MYSTICISM

of the Church, in which the Germanic nations
were the leaders.

One other fact has to be mentioned about the
Rhineland and Flemish nuns, with whom German
mysticism originated, namely, that in our days
they would probably all have been shut up in a
lunatic asylum, or at least looked upon as demented.
Even Hildegarda, with all her self-possession, has,
as her letter tells us, her moments of mental
aberration. When a trance seizes her she has to
lie in bed and cannot speak or move. In the
Middle Ages such attacks were not treated medi-
cinally. The person thus afflicted was said to be
“ possessed,” whether of the spirit of God or of
the devil remained to be proved. Most often the
judgment wavered towards leniency, as the history
of the lives of the saints abundantly proves. The
indulgence shown to these hysterical women may
have been due to the fact that their visions and
prophecies were often a power in the hands of the
Church, or that they were under the patronage of
influential religious systems or sects. Certain it
is that the “ possessed ” were more often crowned
as saints than burnt as witches. And this was
to the advantage of the Church. The Catholic
Church realised that it was wise to give full play
to religious enthusiasm, even when it verged on
madness, and with amazing forbearance she often
allowed the billows of pious frenzy to rise and


GERMAN MYSTICISM


1 77


break furiously against the ship of the Church,
being well aware that the straight course is not
always the best course, and that it would be
possible, when weeding out the tares, to pluck up
the wheat also.

If it was spiritual life which stirred in Hilde-
garda of Bingen, and Mechthilda of Magdeburg,
in Elisabeth of Schdnau, and Maria of- Ognis, and
all the rest of that sisterhood, it certainly was
not life lived on straight lines. But all this took
place in times when there was room for strong
emotions, and in countries renowned for their piety.
The Rhine districts, as well as Flanders, were in
those days (twelfth and thirteenth centuries) so
surfeited with nunneries that those regions were
looked upon by the religious connoisseurs as Edens
of bliss, Paradises of sanctity from which nothing
but good could be expected.

This was fortunate for a little girl, Christine
of St. Troud. Her historical renown commenced
with her being carried into the church on a bier,
and apparently dead. While the masses for the
dead were being read, the child suddenly arose,
and, swift a!s the wind, clambered up into the
rafters of the building, where she balanced her-
self to the consternation of all present, and would
not come down until the priest adjured her by
the sacrament to do so. From that time forward
Christine was always to be found qn higji places,
12


178


MYSTICISM


in the tops of trees or on mountain heights, on
church towers and house roofs, and if any one
attempted to hind her, she tore the bonds away.
When a fit of frenzy overtook her, she would whirl
round and round with such incredible rapidity
that nothing of her could be distinguished, and
when quiet again she would burst forth into
wonderful singing, but the words of her song
no one could interpret. It was whispered that
she was a witch, but as she was otherwise good
and tractable, and — fortunately for herself — in
her moods of ecstatic rapture invoked Christ and
not the devil, they let her be, until one day they
dipped her into the holy water and kept her there
so long that she was nearly drowned. This cured
her both of her whirling and climbing, and she lived
as a respectable nun to her seventy-fourth year.

In the ranks of mystical women Christine
figured rather as a natural curiosity than as a
saint, and Maria of Ognis was not behind her
in this respect. Her nervous abnormality took
the form of inexhaustible physical strength.
She was impervious to cold ; in the severest frost
she could sleep comfortably on the flagstones of
the church. The gift of weeping she possessed
above all other women. She could weep floods of
tears, so that her long tresses and the ground on
which she lay were soaked. But the effect on her
was invigorating. Besides these strange physical


GERMAN MYSTICISM


179


phenomena, we notice peculiar moral traits in
her. Anything sinful or unclean put her into a
passion of disgust. Once passing through a street
in which there were houses of pleasure, she was
ready to tear the skin off the soles of her feet
because she had stepped in so unclean a place.
Compassion she felt so strongly that it became
physical suffering to her. When she nursed the
sick she felt their pains in her own body. Her
sympathy went deeper still. If she was in one
of her ecstasies, and they were generally very deep,
— once she was for thirty-five days without food,
and the only words she uttered were : “ I desire
the body of the Lord,” — she could only be roused
from her state of stupor by being told that a
sick person needed her. Then she would tear
herself out of her trance, sometimes with such force
that she vomited blood.

A similar kind of exaggerated sensitiveness
characterised Margareta of Ypern ; she was so
great a man-hater that even the neighbourhood
of a boy was painful to her — the negative result
of a passionate affection, which was satisfied
when she chose Christ for her bridegroom. She
revelled in His beauty, and when she had partaken
of the sacrament she preserved the taste of the
host for a fortnight.

When Mechthilda of Magdeburg, the most noted
of all these women, and a highly^ gifted lady of


i8o


MYSTICISM


noble birth, took to the religious life and retired
from the world, she said : " I gazed on my dead
body ; it was heavily armed, and oppressed my
soul with great physical power.” To escape
eternal death she thought she had to slay her
body. Therefore she looked round for weapons
wherewith to defend her soul, and found the
pains and sufferings of Jesus Christ. “ With
these I defended my soul.” The power
which stimulated her she called " Love.”
Mechthilda is the first of these women who was
mistress of the art which even a Hildegarda never
mastered ; she could read and write her mother
tongue, and so accomplished was she. in this respect
that a man of high intellectual standing a hundred
years later could write of her book that it was
written in the most delightful German, and was
the most touching love-story he had ever read in
the German language.

“ Love, thou hast taken from me worldly honour
and riches,” writes Mechthilda in looking .back
upon her life. “ Would I had never known thee,
for thou hast persecuted me, captured_me, bound
me and wounded me so deeply that I shall never
recover of my hurt.” But to God she at last
yielded herself unreservedly, after much futile
struggling. “ Gentle God, what didst Thou see
in me ? Thou knowest that I am a poor creature :
should net these things be given to the wise ? ”


GERMAN MYSTICISM 181

Then the Lord was angry with her : “ Art thou
not mine? tell me.” — “Yes, Lord, that is my
desire. — “ Shall I then not do with thee as it
pleases me ? ” — " Yes, Beloved, even if it kill me.”

Well might Mechthilda tremble, with the fear
of the prophet Jeremias, at the work to which
she was called. She, like he, had to announce the
destruction of J erusalem. Her name is recorded,
together with the names of Hildegarda and Elisa-
beth of Schonau, of Catherine of Siena and Bridget,
among the women who in sorrow and grief of heart
prophesied against the Church, and predicted her
tragic fall unless she altered her ways. Here
again the women were at their post and did the
right thing. They were not of the clergy, and
could not enter into the many subterfuges with
which the latter tried to cover up their many
shortcomings ; it was much the same then as it
is now, the women got the better of the men.
So little passive were they in their mysticism that
they made of it a fruitless fight for a moral ideal.
This ideal Mechthilda found in her fanatical love
for Jesus. She became one with Him by “ placing
the desire bf her heart in His divine heart.” . . .
“ He, thy life, died for love of thee ; let thy love
for Him be so strong that thou canst die for Him.
Then thou shalt burn for ever as a living spark in
the fire of the Everlasting Majesty.” How closely
she touches here upon the Hindu notion of the


182


MYSTICISM


spark which, sinks back into the fire of the God-
head, yet what a difference ! There the swallowing
up of man into the impersonal universe ; here
the heart’s longing desire to rest in God’s love.
When she thinks of God she sees him as he appears
to her in her trances, an effulgent light ; and so she
calls her book " The Effulgence of Divine Light.”

Above the personal God is the impersonal
Godhead. The way to Him leads through the
humiliation of Christ, and the barrier can only
be crossed by ecstatic rapture. There the inner
sight which is given to the pious soul sees the
eternal light, which is the spring and fountain
from which all things flow. “ The true blessing
of God is as a stream in which the holy Trinity
moves, and by which the soul lives.” Thus the
loving, musing women end in the same way as the
speculative men who summarised their philosophy
in a conception of God, which was pantheistic in
its nature, and by which they entered into a rela-
tionship with God which made them equal to God.

The strong emotional experiences of the women
of the age were not the only effects of mysticism
in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 'They were
but as the violent vibrations of the compass needle,
when the air is charged with electricity. Truly
those times were pregnant with mysticism, and
the life led behind the convent walls communicated
itself in wider circles to the laity. The lay societies


GERMAN MYSTICISM 183

and brotherhoods arising, partly in connection
with the monastic orders, and partly as civil
counterparts of these, were generally deeply
tinged with mysticism, and this was particularly
the case with the society of the so-called “ Friends
of God,” which originated in Alsace. The name
alone shows that their aim was intimacy. The
name “ friend ” used in such circles suggests not
only sectarianism, but also mysticism. Did not
the Persian Sufi address the deity preferably as
“ the Friend,” and what intensity of meaning has
not John’s Gospel given to the word “friend,”
where it says : “I call you not servants, but
friends ” !

To this mystical society belonged the worthy
citizen Rulman Mersvin of Strassburg, whose
house was a place of refuge for many “ Friends of
God.” His book, The Nine Rocks, places him in
the ranks of the mystical writers, beginning with
the author of the Persian poem, the “ Flight of
the Birds ” (see page 71), and stretching as far
as John Bunyan and his Pilgrim’s Progress. They
all describe the various stages which the soul has
to pass through, and the increasingly difficult
obstacles which have to be surmounted before
it can attain to perfection and meet with God.

In Southern Europe the Waldenses were the
chief supporters of lay mysticism ; in the Nether-
lands we find it in the remarkable brotherhood


184


MYSTICISM


called the ' ' Brotherhood of Common Life.” To their
first head, Gerhard de Groot (d. 1384), they owe the
two words which characterise the spiritual direc-
tion of common life. The one is the Socratic :
" True knowledge is to know nothing.” The
other is the word he spoke on his death-bed:
" Behold, I am called of the Lord ; St. Augustine
and St. Bernard knock at the door.”

The fact that in the Catholic Church lay piety
tended to mysticism is not surprising, considering
that clerical piety inclined in the same direction,
only in the latter case it was founded on Scholasti-
cism, and fenced round by Church and Hierarchy.
Where these three factors are absent, the mysticism
that is left is not a miserable remnant, but the
real jewel. Hitherto only a reflection of its
radiance had fallen on the laity, while the clergy
had the exclusive enjoyment of its full brilliancy.
But now laymen were determined also to have
their share; there was to be a wider circulation
of the benefits which religion offered ; and so here,
towards the close of the Middle Ages, was repeated
what took place in India when the military class
exacted the right of practising asceticism, or when
in the middle ages of the Indian Empire the lower
castes also pressed forward and insisted on par-
ticipating in the benefits springing from sacerdotal
piety. The revolutionary tendency of this move-
ment was most ^perceptible in the society called


GERMAN MYSTICISM


185


“ The Brothers and Sisters of the Free Spirit,”
which burst not only the ecclesiastical but also the
moral bounds, and ended in pantheistic fanaticism.

Other really pious Christian sects became
permeated with the same spirit of democracy.
Mysticism became a general practice, whereas
formerly it could only be indulged in under the
auspices of the Church. The short duration
and sad fate of these societies, however, proves
effectually that Church organisation is not a
superfluous element, at any rate not where mysti-
cism is concerned, and that mysticism does not
contain the elements for drawing people lastingly
together. How good it would have been if these
sympathetic friendly societies had become the
basis of a Protestant lay-brotherhood, which in
the place of the monastic orders could have per-
petuated the goodly inheritance of monastic life,
namely, self-renunciation, quietness of mind,
charity. When the Reformation came, the day of
all these societies was over, and no need was felt
for again calling into existence anything that
flavoured of monasticism.

Yet that generation of compassionate, self-
denying, meditative people formed the back-
ground from which presently should step forth
the three great Masters, the coryphei of German
mysticism: Master Eckhart {d. 1327), Henry
Suso (d. 1361), and John Tauler {d. 1361). In


i86


MYSTICISM


them the frait ripened which could hardly have
come to maturity if it had not been nourished
by the lives of thousands of pious souls ; and to
them it was permitted to finish the work, which
assuredly would not have been the case if they
had not been backed up by all those thousands.

Scarce seventy years ago Martensen taught that
Eckhart was the greatest of the three, the “ Patri-
arch of German Speculation ” ; the “ Master of
the whole School,” “ the one in whom mysticism
is seen in striking originality.” All this he is
no longer to us. Father Denifle has satisfactorily
proved that Eckhart’s speculation was taken
directly from the writings of Thomas of Aquinas,
that it shows no breach with Scholasticism, but
rather is carried on, on perfectly correct scholastic
lines, more especially noticeable in Eckhart’s
Latin works. But for all that, it is not surprising
that Martensen should single him out and extol
him as the greatest of the three masters. For
Eckhart' — like the celebrated Bishop himself —
was of a speculative turn of mind, to whom the
philosophy in mysticism appealed most strongly.
On this point, however, the German ihystic had
but little scope for originality, considering that
so many others had already been exhaustively
at work in this field before him.

The seventeen pages of quotations from Eck-
hart’s sermons which form the groundwork of


GERMAN MYSTICISM 187

Martensen's biography of him, still rank, in spite
of what Preger and Denifle may say, as one of
the finest expositions of this mystic’s train of
thought. From this we learn to what extent
the lecturer of Cologne, who has always been
looked upon as a pillar of the Church, was panthe-
istic in his views, and how closely he followed in
the footsteps of the Areopagite and Erigena, so
that his theology, compared with the teachings of
St. Bernard and St. Victor, might almost be called
a retrogression. God is before all things the
pure essence of being. His most exalted name
is the I am ; He is the indiscriminate, the infinite,
the “negation of finiteness.” Here we certainly
touch the beginning of German philosophy, for
Hegel’s philosophical nonsense about the negation
of the negative had already been expressed by
Eckhart. No wonder that Hegel was enthusiastic
about him. Sometimes he calls God a Being,
sometimes he says that He is not that, but that
He is — can any one grasp it ? — “ disnaturalised
Nature ” ! revealing itself as “ Naturalised Nature ’’
in the Trinity, the three Persons in which the
Godhead comprehends and reveals itself. This
is bad Platonism, after the manner of the Areopa-
gite, and would be innocent and amusing enough
if it did not entail the consequence that God is not
good, that I need not be grateful to God for His

love because He only acts by internal compulsion ;

* «


i88


MYSTICISM


that God loves nothing outside of Himself, and
that all His love is absorbed in Himself ; that
God can no more do without us than we can do
without Him, and so on. From such puerile
Christian principles, pure natural mysticism is
deduced : All creatures aim at becoming like
God. If God were not in all things there would
be no operative power, no desire in nature ... if
a man were thirsty, he would not drink unless
there was a divine element in what he drank.
And so we go on until we reach the unity of God
and the soul, which the Persians — and the Hindu
mystics in our day — express by the symbol of the sun
and the mirror, and which means that man is born
of God, and God in man. . . . “ It is the Father’s
nature to beget the Son, and it is the Son’s nature
to be born, and that I should be born in Him ; like-
wise it is the Spirit’s nature that I should be con-
sumed in Him, and be transformed into pure love.”
God has become man, that I might become God.
God has died that I might die unto the world and
all that is therein.

All the same, Eckhart would probably not have
been accused of heresy if all that he "taught had
been taken directly from St. Thomas. As it was,
he would scarcely have escaped the stake had any
other but the Order of the Dominican friars sat
in judgment upon him. The remarkable part of
his teaching is that this pantheistic fatalism, which


GERMAN MYSTICISM 189

for the orthodox Fathers of the Church was merely
intellectual recreation, was for Eckhart a matter
of vital importance and practical reality. For if
it be true that God is so near to us that He is in the
water that we drink, why then all this circumlocution
when we want to draw near to God ? What need
is there of Church ceremonies ? Why should
penances and sacraments be the only way by which
the Church can approach God ? In other words,
is the gulf between the kingdom of grace and the
kingdom of nature — which Scholasticism preached
and on which the Church trades — really as great
as is maintained ? Or, indeed, is there any gulf
at all ? If God is in all things, then grace is every-
where in nature ; what need, then, of priestly
mediation and sacramental apparatus ? Such was
the startling conclusion which Eckhart sprang upon
the Church, however guardedly he expressed it,
and when it came to the ears of the authorities the
lecturer was called to account, and made to recall
his words. He had drawn the same conclusion
which Hindus and Persians had drawn before him :
why walk any longer on the road of action, after
we have found the way of apprehension ? What
further need of message or messenger when I can
safely rest on the Sultan’s breast ?

Yet another conclusion Eckhart drew from his
speculative theology. If the essence of God's
being is constantly to be the subject of crur medita-


190


MYSTICISM


tion, why not also the essence of our own being'?
If with God all is internal, why should with men all
be external. Why external deeds, external con-
fession, external .sanctification ? Here Eckhart
becomes evangelical and positive in his teaching.
In considering man’s duty he lays the full stress
on the inner habitus of men, on his abiding condition,
his " Seelengrund,” as he calls it. It is there that the
new Adam must be born ; there we must realise what
we are. The question is not what one does, but
what one is. Here is a specimen of his way of
thinking : —

"We should not think so much of what we do
as of what we are. If we be good and wise, our
works also will be well and wisely done. If thou
art righteous, thy deeds also will be righteous.
Thy deeds do not sanctify thee, but thou must
sanctify thy deeds. However good thy deeds may
be, if thou be not good, thy good deeds will profit
thee nothing. If thou be holy, thy holiness will
sanctify all thy doings, thine eating and thy
drinking, thy sleeping and thy waking. Therefore
strive diligently to be good ; it matters not whether
thy deeds be many or few, all that m£tters is the
motive from which they proceed.”

Words like these were the precursors of the
Reformation, and they were spoken in such
plain German, and with such power and simplicity,
that they could, be understood and remembered'.


GERMAN MYSTICISM


191

And so much impression did they make, that
although two hundred years elapsed before
Luther’s voice was heard, yet they were not
forgotten, and the people who knew no better
thought they were the words of Luther himself.

The minnesinger, Henry Suso of Constance, who
sang of the love of Jesus, had sat under Eckhart’s
pulpit. What he there received as thought he con-
verted into feeling, into a life of self-surrender which
was no less full of suffering, no less full of intense
longing, than the life of Francis of Assisi had been,
but there was not the same heroic love for his
neighbour, nor the same consecration to the service
of humanity. He was of a highly nervous tempera-
ment which he inherited from his mother, whom he
so deeply venerated that he renounced his noble
ancestral name and adopted hers, Suso (Seuse).
He fell into a state of religious amorousness, the
chief object of which was Jesus, but sometimes
he included the Madonna also. His life was a
direct result of the fanatical system of self-renuncia-
tion introduced by Hildegarda and Mechthilda,
and his meditations were a deeper acceptation of
the doctrines of Eckhart. At the age of eighteen
Suso decided whom he would serve, and also saw
clearly that the walls of the lusts of the flesh
which separated him from his Beloved had to
be pulled down with might and main. It was not
enough to wear the hair shirt and the iron chain,


MYSTICISM


192

no, he must have an under-garment with pointed
nails driven into it, and at night the nails vied
with the vermin in tormenting him and keeping
him awake. In order not to be inhospitable
towards these nocturnal tormentors, he had his
hands bound to his sides, or wore gloves fitted
with brass nails. Day and night he bore on his
bare back a cross with protruding iron nails, the
points of which ran into his flesh. For ten years
he thus fought to keep under the natural man,
until his body was one mass of sores and wounds,
and he was utterly emaciated and unnerved. Then
at last he gave way. With all these horrible
penitential exercises Suso wished to show that
his devotion to Christ was absolute. Love must
conquer in him; his young, fiery heart could
not subsist without love. One day the thought
came to him that he must make upon himself a
visible and lasting sign of his blessed union with
Jesus, He seized a style, and with it scratched
the name of Jesus into the flesh near to his heart.
The blood oozed out of the deep incisions, and
with joy he contemplated the scarlet stream of
love, and counted the suffering as naifght. Thus
bleeding, he left his cell and went into the chancel,
and kneeling before the crucifix : " Lord, I pray
Thee,” he said, " to press Thyself ever deeper into
my heart, that Thy holy name may be branded in
me so that Thou canst never more depart from me.”


GERMAN MYSTICISM


193


Thus he made a sort of compact with him to
whom he had consecrated all the love of his youth.
And this sacrifice of suffering was not made in vain.
His words breathe an intimacy of love which
lend them a persuasive charm greater than that
of Eckhart, especially where he speaks his own
thoughts and not merely interprets those of his
master. He learned by his own experience, and
showed in his own actions that the way to wisdom
does not lie in philosophic reasonings, but in living.
He believed not in any knowledge of God that
was not gained by following after Christ in his
human life. And in this Suso differed from Eck-
hart, as is evident from his protesting on this
very point against the " Freethinkers.” He will
have nothing to do with their pantheistic doctrines,
whereas Eckhart in many points agrees with
them. The Freethinkers even appealed to the
lector of Cologne when they were brought before
the council, and in this appeal they were justified.
It proves that the dictates of the mind may lead
to anywhere, but not so the dictates of the heart.
These latter Suso followed in his self-imposed
martyrdom,,, which to us appears so strange. To
him this was the way of self-examination, of
proving the spirits, and for his theology the crucible
in which the metaphysical relation to God was
evaporated and only the personal intimacy re-
mained behind. Therefore where his reasoning is
13 ’ a


194 MYSTICISM

*

genuine,— and it is so in the " Book of Wisdom,” —
there is in this conception of the highest a personal
element and a positive fulness, which Eckhart never
reached. To Suso’s mind Wisdom was not an
abstract philosophical truth, but the noble maiden
beloved of the Jewish sage, “whom he delighted
in from his youth, whom he would bring home as
his bride, because he loved her. The wisdom which
in the beginning of time was with God the Creator,
and rejoiced always before him.” Words like
these from the Book of Wisdom and the Proverbs
of Solomon had roused Suso’s love for Wisdom.
Wisdom became his beloved, “ the eternal Word
which is in the bosom of the Father, on whom the
Father’s eye delights to rest in the love of the
Holy Ghost.” I am the seat of love ; my eyes
are pure, my mouth is sweet, and my form beauti-
ful, wonderfully clothed in fine raiment, delicately
decked with the colours of living flowers. The
angels love to gaze upon me. Blessed is he who,
led by my hand, shall join in the sweet delights of
the joyful dance in the kingdom of heaven. One
word from my sweet lips is better than the song
of angels, than the music of the harp. I sway
hither and thither to the rhythm of the dance
music ; in me is nothing that displeases, in me
all desire of heart and soul is satisfied.”

This Greco- Jewish genius of Wisdom, with whom
Suso is in love, was in the early Christian Church


GERMAN MYSTICISM


195


identified with Christ, and Suso admits that only
to the uninitiated, to those who halve yet to be
attracted and brought in, Wisdom presents herself
in this womanly form. But he who has been won,
who is initiated, knows that Wisdom is Christ, as
Paul said that he desired to know nothing " but
Christ and him crucified. ’ ’ The sufferings of Christ,
this is true wisdom ; when one has personally
experienced what it is to be one with Christ in his
sufferings, one knows all that is worth knowing, and
there is nothing besides that men need learn to
know.

Therefore, to obtain Wisdom we must walk in the
path in which Christ walked : only by my sufferings,
he said, the world can be redeemed, only thus can
I prove my love and soften the stony hearts of men.
Fear not then to follow after me in my sufferings.
To him in whom God dwells, suffering is made easy.
But by suffering — and here is the point at which
the Catholic Church diverges — men cannot earn
salvation. Well considered, suffering has only the
psychological merit of preparing the soul for the
higher life, by subjugating the flesh and crushing
one’s self will. Then follows that condition which
is essential, a condition of readiness and resignation,
in which man with entire self-surrender sinks his
own littleness in the-greatness of the atonement of
Christ. This is the salvation from all times dear to
mysticism, but now proclaimed to the world as the

«


196


MYSTICISM


secret of Christian life, and publicly preached as
the duty and the right of the laity, in clear and
intelligible words. Suso speaks of being unclothed
— clothed upon — and overclothed : unclothed of
all creature attributes, clothed upon with Christ,
and overclothed in the Godhead. “To become as
nothing is the delight of the truly resigned man ;
the putting off of self is the putting on of truth.”
And yet one other word, which puts the stamp of
mysticism upon the whole : “ The wholly resigned
man sees in the light (of grace) the presence of the
all-pervading Divine Being in himself .” 1 This kind
of language has saved Suso from being forgotten,
and has made him to this day a power both in
Catholic and Protestant Christendom in Germany.
Well known also is his play upon words : “ When
love is with love, love knows not how loved love is,
but when love parts from love then love knows how
loved love is.” Here Suso is in his element ; of the
pain of love and the love of pain he has spoken
and sung as no man has done after him, until
Werther appeared and Heine wrote his sonnets.
His idea of piety may be summarised in the four
words, intimacy, purity, entirety, consummation.
The external picture, however, which Suso presents
to our view places him at a greater distance from us.
We think of him as the martyred cross-bearer and
Virgin-worshipper, singing his love-songs before her
1 Preger, ii. p, 402.


GERMAN MYSTICISM


197


image, as does the “ foolish lover ” under his lady’s
window ; and the Protestant tenor of his thoughts
is often lost sight of in the Catholic setting which
colours his language.

In the third of the three great masters. Dr. John
Tauler (1300-61), German mysticism gained what
it was in want of, a practical man, who, although
monk, priest, and poet, yet possessed none of the
attributes of the monk-professor, like Eckhart, or
the monk -poet, like Suso. Tauler was an un-
daunted preacher and pastor, and experienced
many vicissitudes in consequence. In 1324 Ludwig
of Bavaria quarrelled with the Pope John xxil. ;
the Emperor deposed the Pope, and the Pope
deposed the Emperor, excommunicated him, and
put his lands under the papal ban. The respect
for the papal interdict was not great in those days,
and the Dominicans of Strassburg, at whose college
Tauler was lector, went on reading masses for
several years without taking any notice of the pro-
hibition. When in the end they sided with the
Pope, the Emperor drove them out of the city, and
it appears that on this occasion Tauler with
several othefs fled to Basel, where he soon became
the centre and mainstay of the faithful flock and
the other fugitives who had taken shelter in this
city. Afterwards he returned to Strassburg, and
ministered to the needs of the people according
to his own light and conviction, and not according


iq8


MYSTICISM


to any clerical or imperial dictate. He suffered
much for truth’s sake, but these persecutions only
confirmed him in the way of truth, and he helped
others to walk in the same path.

He found the truth after he had been admitted
into the Society of the “ Friends of God ” at Basel.
It is told as a fact — but it may be only a legend —
that a “ Friend of God ” from the Oberland sud-
denly appeared before Tauler, God having called
him three times to go and convert to the true light
the already celebrated preacher. In Basel Tauler
worked side by side with Henry of Nordlingen, and
this remarkable man, the friend of all mystics,
gathered friends of God from far and near round
Tauler and himself. He also took his friend into
other religious circles of the same persuasion ; for
instance, he introduced him to the nun Margaret of
Ebner. In Strassburg Tauler became the father
confessor of Rulman Mersvin, and pastor to the
whole Society of the “ Friends of God,” who used
to hold their meetings at the house of this highly
respected citizen. Thus he had the joy of minis-
tering and being ministered to, and he devoted his
energies to binding the individual members of the
society into a small community based on pure and
deep convictions, and of which he was the leading
power.

His sermons are very different from those of
either Eckhart.or Suso. They are neither philo-


GERMAN MYSTICISM


199


sophical expositions nor spiritual effusions, but
merely personal addresses, whether they contain
fatherly advice or severe reproof. He preached
with tremendous power. Margaret of Ebner
declared that his fiery words had set the world
aflame. And his words must indeed have been
burning and scorching, judging from the manner
in which he attacked his contemporaries, inveigh-
ing against the wickedness of the clergy as well as of
the laity, and taking no account of their virtues.
In their deeds of piety he sees only “ an ostentatious
show,” based on love of self and vanity, and lead-
ing to nowhere ; God will have none of these.
He does not mince matters, but stigmatises all
Catholic righteousness as pure Pharisaism, as hostile
to true Christianity as the Pharisees were to Christ.
We may be sure that the Pharisees of Basel and
Strassburg, after listening to such sentiments, did
not strew roses on Tauler’s path. Nor did this
bold preacher spare the monastic state to which
he once himself belonged : “ Had I known when
I still was my father’s son, what now I know, I
would have lived of his inheritance and not as a
mendicant. 1 *’ If he had not become a priest — he
says elsewhere — he would not have scorned to be
a shoemaker, making good shoes. " And if a man
has wife and child to keep, and his trade is to make
shoes, and he be a God-fearing man, let him stick to
his last and support his wife and children. And


200


MYSTICISM


if other poor- people leave the village to try and
earn their living in a more exalted field of labour,
it may happen that they who stay at home fare
infinitely better in simply following their calling,
than those very clever people who neglect the
business to which they were born. I know of one,
a friend of the Most High God, who for more than
forty years has been a farmer, and still is. Once he
asked of the Lord whether he should give it up and
enter the Church. And the Lord answered him :
No, eat thy bread in the sweat of thy brow, and
thereby honour me.”

His practical common sense guided Tauler in
the choice of the articles of his belief. In this he
was no inventive genius. He based his theories
on Eckhart, and does not hesitate to borrow freely
from Suso, Mechthilda, and others. But, being a
practical man, he had learnt by experience what to
treasure and what to reject. Children, he says, ask
not for great and high things, be simple-minded,
be content to learn to know yourselves in your
mind and your nature, and inquire not into the
mysteries of God, of His flowing out and flowing in,
of what is and what is not, and of the spark sinking
into nothingness. For Jesus has said : “It is
not for you to know the mysteries of God. ’ ’ There-
fore we must hold fast to the true, entire, and
simple faith that there is one God, in three Persons,
and that in Him is no multiplicity, but unity.


GERMAN MYSTICISM


201


Tauler, the same as all the divines of Eckhart’s
school, exhorts his hearers to examine them-
selves, to look into their souls, " for in our soul
we bear the image of God, there God dwells,
there God delights to see Himself.” The
privilege of man above all created beings is that,
while nature can but reflect the Divine Image, the
image of God in man is part of God Himself, and
man’s life work is to be conformed more and
more to that image. When speaking of these
things, Tauler is always careful not to let his
definitions suggest pantheism. He preserves to
the best of his ability the personal character of
God and of men. Even when in spite of his own
warning he indulges in reveries about the silence,
the solitariness, the unfathomableness, and the
inertness of God, he knows but too well that as
Father, i.e. as the revealed God, as a Divine Per-
sonality, God is before all things, life, and activity,
and will ; the power by which all things are
sustained, renewed, and invigorated. And he
also knows that man cannot of himself implant
into his soul the Divine Image, nor conform himself
to it. He knows that the fall of man stands between
man and his better self. This stands out as one
of the cardinal points in Tauler’s theology, and
also that this obstacle was done away with on
Golgotha, and that only through Christ and by
grace man can be saved and become himself


202


MYSTICISM


again. To this positively Christian doctrine
Tauler faithfully adheres, and he administers it
in pure, evangelical form. This dogmatism also
leads him to look upon life as a practical school.
Grace gives us the will and the energy to work,
for "It is God who fulfils in us both to will and
to do." And thus in newness of life man goes
forth in the strength of his original liberty, with
the full use of all his faculties. For “ we are
created and called to great things ” ; therefore we
must make room for God in our hearts, that we
may have strength to perform the same.

With Tauler, mysticism was turned towards
ordinary human life ; and this had a remarkably
beneficial effect, especially when comparing it
with the effects produced by the mysticism of
his contemporary, Suso.

In other places also Christian mysticism was
bearing practical fruit, in the form of sound
advice and the fostering of good, common-sense
ideals. Thomas a Kempis, with his celebrated
book. The Imitation of Christ, coming about a
century after Tauler, speaks to the same effect,
but in a gentler, softer voice, without 1 ' any of the
clamorous polemics and the clenched-figt method
of the reformer Tauler. This edifying work —
after the Bible the widest-read book in Christen-
dom — originated a lay mysticism which has
become the favourite type in Catholicism, reaping


GERMAN MYSTICISM


203


everywhere the most beautiful and healthiest
results, and also finding a wide entrance in the
Protestant world.

To live a life of inner quietness and peace ;
listening to the voice of God, ever mindful of
Christ’s great meekness in single-hearted purity
and in the perfect liberty of perfect resignation —
is what Thomas a Kempis urges upon Christian
men ; and who shall deny the desirability and
the profitableness of a Christianity which brings
into prominence the “ four things which bring
much peace ” : x. Seek rather to please another
than thyself ; 2. Desire rather to have little than
much ; 3. Choose rather the lowest than the

highest room ; 4. Pray always that God's will
may be fulfilled in thee and by thee ?

Tauler’s manly call to “ great things ” we
seek in vain in Thomas a Kempis. He prefers
to dwell on the patient and the quietly abiding
side of Christian life, and this best suits the de-
mands of Catholicism. But the feeling of one’s
own unworthiness is not only a fruit of Christian
morality, it is also a fruit of mysticism, the same
here as ift Persia, where meekness, patience,
moderation, and self-sacrifice are the basis of
the moral code of Sufism. We have seen what
has been the fate of this law in practical life in
Persia, how easily it could be evaded, and how
quickly the people degenerate^ into doing the


204


MYSTICISM


very opposite. It has been of infinite benefit
for Christian mysticism that its ideals were bound
up in Christ, and required the following in his
footsteps. Thus it obtained an absolute and
lasting stability which neither the egotism nor the
contempt of men could belittle or exaggerate, as
has been the case with all mysticism not built on
this foundation.


X. LUTHER’S MYSTICISM

In 15x6 Martin Luther published a little book, the
manuscript of which had accidentally fallen into his
hands. It had moved him so much that he began
by making extracts out of it for the edification of
his friends, and afterwards published it in book
form. As there was no title to it, he called it the
Theologia Germanica, by which name it is still
known. After two years a second edition was
needed, and the preface which the young Witten-
berg professor wrote for the first edition was
retained for the second, although in the meantime
the professor had become a Reformer. The preface
is to the following effect : —

This noble little book, though poor in words of
human wisdom, is all the richer and the more
precious in its expression of piety and godly
wisdom. I glory in my ignorance that, apart from
the Bible and St. Augustine, I have never come
across a book from which I have learned so much
about God, Christ, man, and all things. And
though the learned theologians of Wittenberg
scoff at it, we will yet take this new thing to heart,

sos ,


206


MYSTICISM


for nothing like it has ever been revealed before,
nay, to be correct, it has been revealed before,
but God, in his anger over our sins, considered us
not worthy to hear and to understand the “ good
news.”

Thus warmly, in the earlier days of his spiritual
awakening, could Luther speak of this book, which
after all is only a simple manual of devotion, after
the mannner of late-German mysticism. In those
days mysticism, in the form given to it by Tauler,
was for Luther the essence of theological wisdom.
Of course mysticism in one form and another had
always been familiar to him, for he was a theo-
logian, brought up in the school of Scholasticism,
and in the beginning of his university career he even
had recourse to the philosophy of the Areopagite
to explain the meaning of David’s "Praise of the
silent ,” and such-like passages. He knew as well as
any mystic of the school of St. Bernard or Thomas
a Kempis that there is a knowledge of God which
can only be found in perfect peace and quietness
of mind, or as it were in a trance or ecstasy. When
afterwards he came to condemn this kind of
mysticism, he could add his expertus- loquor ; he
could speak as a man of experience.

Tauler’s mysticism, however, he never con-
demned; it -had been his comfort and strength
during the time of his terrible internal struggle,
and it expressed what was raging in his own bosom.


LUTHER’S MYSTICISM


207


For, in the case of Luther, the new light which was
revealed by him was not the result of his own or
other people’s meditations, it was a life experience
for which he had staked his own personality. He
staked all, not only heart and soul and mind, but
also his life ; all, that he might obtain “ the grace
of God that bringeth salvation.” He carried out
Catholicism into its furthest consequences in his
own body. He would fulfil the will of God to the
last iota. And so it happened to him, as it happens
in fairy tales and sometimes in real life, that he
who stakes all, gains the kingdom. The young
monk, who had wagered life and health on God’s
righteousness, did not destroy himself, but he
destroyed the interpretation of God’s righteousness
which was the life of Catholicism, and with which
for centuries the people had been disciplined and
their souls tortured. Suddenly as by a revelation
he saw that the righteousness of God declared in
the gospel is not harshness, but mercy, and that it
cannot be gained by penances, but by faith alone,
as it is written : “ The righteous shall live by faith.”
Together with the Latin tongue, Roman law had
slipped into f^he Church to interpret God’s character
and man’s relation towards God. How much had
not Luther to suffer before he could find behind the
hard cold word justitia the mercy of God of which
the prophets of Judaism had spoken, and which was
the burden of Paul’s preaching. Now, looking at


208


MYSTICISM


it from the Greek point of view, and knowing the
Hebrew underlying it, he realised the meaning of
Rom. i. 17, where it says that the righteousness
of God is revealed in the Gospel. Suddenly this
word, which formerly had meant to him utter
condemnation, now became an overwhelming
blessing ; he realised that law and gospel were not
synonymous, but that by the “ glad tidings ” the
condemnation of the law was done away with.
Can one blame Luther that henceforth he clung to
the words of the Gospel and to the letter of the
Bible, and by it tested his own faith, and the faith
of all Christian people, seeing what a help they had
been to him in fighting against the traditions,
interpretations, and systems which had oppressed
and bound his soul ?

The new conception of God, as the Heavenly
Father of the Gospel, ledat once toanewrelationship
to God, the childlike faith of the Gospel, the fearless
trust of the child in his Father. The cardinal truth
brought out in the Reformation, that faith is “ con-
fidence ” (fiducia), had a twofold development :
trust in God — not fear of God ; trust in God —
therefore not trust in self, i.e. not confidence that
one can work out one’s own salvation. As long
as a man believes that he can be saved by works
he does not believe in God, and needs neither God
nor Saviour. No, God desires man wholly, and
man needs God wholly ; for of himself he can do


LUTHER’S MYSTICISM


209


nothing. To live life, we should say in modern
language, means to rely implicitly on the sustaining
force of life. Life is eternal ; we either have it or
we have it not. It is not a patchwork that we
can piece together as time and opportunity permit,
even if we gave up all our time and all our oppor-
tunities to it.

And Luther’s language is not so very different
from ours. The equation, justification vivificatio
(justification is making alive), expresses that
a new principle of life, a new vitality, animates
and fills the believer, that is, the man who puts his
trust in God. In this light we understand those
words of Luther’s which have also been quoted
by the eminent American psychologist, William
James, in his Commentary on Galatians, chapter
iii. : God is the God of the sorrowing, the
poor, the miserable, the oppressed, the despairing,
the altogether worthless. On them God can
exercise His great natural power, which is to exalt
the humble, to feed the hungry, to give sight to
the blind, to comfort the poor and the needy, to
pardon the sinner, to raise the dead, and bring
salvation to^ them that are without hope. For
He is an omnipotent Creator, He can make alive
from the dead, and call that which is not as though
it were. Self-conceit and self-righteousness are
the monsters which stand in the way of the accom-
plishment of this work of God. For it is not His


210


MYSTICISM


will that any should sin or be unclean or miserable
or condemned, but that all should be justified
and made holy. Therefore our Lord God is
bound to take up the strong and mighty hammer of
the law, to grind to powder this monster, with
all the things in which it trusts, presumption,
wisdom, holiness, righteousness, and power, that
these may all be as naught, and man may learn
at last through loss and misfortune, and realise
in his innermost soul that he is really lost and
condemned.

When a man has been thus frightened and
cast down to the ground by the word of the law,
then it is no easy matter for him to stand up and
to say : Moses and his law has long enough vexed
and troubled, afflicted and distressed me, it is
now time for grace to do its work in me, and to
listen to what the Lord Christ has to say to me,
in whose lips grace is poured (Ps. xlv. 3), and
who speaks therefore more eloquently than Moses,
who is slow of speech and of a slow tongue (Ex.
iv. 10). Now it is time for me to look not to
Mount Sinai which burns with fire, but to Mount
Moriah, the city of the living God, wherein is his
Temple, and his Mercy-seat, which is Christ, the
King of Righteousness and Peace. There will
I listen to what the Lord shall say unto me ;
for there " He speaks peace to his people.”

“ It seems hard and vexatious to us that a man,


LUTHER’S MYSTICISM


2ir


after having been sorely tried in spirit, should
only have to turn away from Moses and the law, and
take hold of Christ by the word of grace. For
man’s heart is a foolish and deceitful thing. After
fighting so hard, and torturing our conscience
with the law, we do not care to accept the gospel
of Christ wherein is the free gift of pardon and
forgiveness of sins. We rather prefer to seek
out some further bonds and restrictions to equalise
matters, and argue in this way : If it be God’s
will to prolong my life, I promise to lead a better
life, I will do this and the other, I will go into a
convent, live in chastity, drink only water, eat
only bread, go barefooted, and so on. If a man
does these things and not at the same time does
something else, i.e. throw over Moses and his
commandments and leave these to the fearless,
the hard, and the stiff-necked, and in his misery
and distress does not clutch hold of the Lord
Christ, who suffered and was crucified and died
for him, then it is all up with his salvation, then
he is doomed to despair and eternal punishment.”

These strong centripetal words James refers to
with the jnore pleasure because in a Christian
form they typify the kind of conversion which
he himself considers the only really religious form
of it. Conversion is a total transformation in
which the principle of life is changed (or for the
first time found). The converted person no


212


MYSTICISM


longer seeks the centre of gravity of his life in his
own self, but places it in the life-giving power to
whom he has been converted. In the noblest
form of conversion, this emptying of self creates
not only a feeling of relief and freedom, but also
of enlargement and of renewed activity. Con-
version brings gladness and energy and sympathy,
and the desire to make others glad and to be
actively employed for them.

To Luther conversion means all. this, and it
shows him wherein lies the difference between
religion and morality. Morality as the way to ent er
into relationship with God has lost its meaning,
but it has recovered its meaning as the natural
guide of human life, and as such it now occupies
its proper place in the life that is consecrated
to God. Duty is not a service we render to God,
or a thing by which we Can merit anything from
God. It is merely the natural obligation which
the free man owes to himself and to his neighbour,
and it is therefore the fulfilment of God’s will.
When a man once realises God’s fatherly love,
he will also understand what brotherly love is.
He who is a citizen of the kingdom -of heaven,
also fulfils his duty as citizen of the earth. On
this ground Luther is unwearying in his exhorta-
tions to activity. Take up your work cheerfully,
he says in his Manual of Morning Devotions, in
whatever sphere^ of action your work may lie,


LUTHER’S MYSTICISM


213


even if it be that of the maid who sweeps the room.
Do it with all your strength and all your might,
and let your heart rejoice that it is God’s pleasure
and God’s intention that you should render Him
such profitable service, instead of inflicting upon
yourself the profitless hardships of monasticism.
Should not our heart leap for joy and gladness
when going forth to our labour or when doing the
things that we are commanded to do ? Should
we not say in our hearts “ surely this is better
than all sham sanctity, better than fasting and
praying on our knees ? For we have the sure
witness in God’s Word that this is according to
His will, but of the other not a word has been
told us ” (Larger Catechism, 3, iv. Comm.).

It is a grievous mistake (which is often made)
to think that the great Reformer, by preaching
“salvation through faitl? alone,” called the people
away from their work. Ritualistic and penitential
exercises, and all works done as a means whereby
to secure sanctification and salvation, he emphatic-
ally rejects, but the performance of the ordinary
work and duties of daily life he strongly upholds,
and indeed he is the first, since apostolic days,,
to raise these again to their full value, perhaps
even giving them a higher value than the apostles
ever did, in their connection with Christian
life.

Now what have all these reflections of Luther

#


214


MYSTICISM


to do with mysticism ? Albrecht Ritschl and
his school say : very little indeed. In his zeal to
represent Luther’s theology in its purest form
and in strongest contrast to Catholicism — and
perhaps also influenced by his personal antipathy
to mysticism — Ritschl . made out that Luther’s
connection with the mysticism of the Middle
Ages was of very slight importance. " He found
the gospel quite independently of mysticism,”
he says, “ and it was only during the time previous
to his classical period that he was fully taken up
with mystical notions.” Quite true ! but it is
also a fact that long after his first appearance as
reformer, Luther still felt his connection with
mysticism very strongly. The wording of his
preface (1618) proves this. There the young
Reformer claims that the things for which he is
now upbraided are the Very same things which
the old mystics preached. And how highly he
speaks of Tauler !

There is yet a closer association between Luther
and ancient mysticism beyond the mere fact of his
finding there the same chord struck which vibrated
in his own bosom. The first ray of hope which
fell into his soul, and led his thoughts into another
channel, had been, as it were, a voice from ancient
mystic days. What might not have become of
the Augustinian friar in his internal struggle, in
the convent of Erfurt, if the Provincial of his


LUTHER’S MYSTICISM


2x5


Order, John Staupitz, had not taken him by the
hand, and showed him, to the best of his know-
ledge, what Christianity was. This knowledge of
Staupitz, however, was mysticism, and he was
no mere amateur on the subj ect. He was a learned
and cultured scholar, and his theological works
were a direct continuation of Eckhart's and
Tauler’s mysticism. Through him Luther was
drawn into a kind of speculative piety, which he
helped his master to consolidate.

It cannot be denied that the type of faith
which Luther created was foreshadowed by the
“ resignation ” ( gelassenheit ) of mysticism. For
“ gelassenheit ” was understood to mean the
absolute giving up of personal motives, the com-
plete surrender of self to God’s will, and the
becoming merely a recipient of divine grace.
This was the psychological framework in which
" the justification by faith ” was set ; and this
is not a creation of German mysticism alone, but
of all mysticism, as sure as all mystics, heathen
and Christian alike, agreed in rejecting the road
of “ deeds,” be they ritualistic or moral deeds,
for bringing about this relationship with God.
But at this point ends Luther’s connection with
the mystics ; for he rejects not only what they
rejected, the road of “ deeds,” but also that what
they created, the road of “ apprehension.” And
even with regard to the first, the rejection of


2x6


MYSTICISM


*' deeds,” he set to work far more earnestly than
the mystics had done. For these had always
kept a small reserve of “ deeds ” for use on the
way to salvation, namely, “purification,” which
must take place before the heart could open to
meet God and become one with him ; the kind
of purification which as a rule implied suffering,
and which led Suso into a condition of asceticism
far more severe than the strictest monastic regu-
lations would ever have sanctioned.

This working-of-oneself-up through suffering
into a state of resignation, this moral-pathological
method of preparation, Luther rejected emphatic-
ally. The deeds which God requires of man
are something quite different from this fighting
to enter into relationship with God.

The inner way created by mysticism for attain-
ing to this relationship, *the road of apprehension,
of contemplation, Luther scorned as much as he
did the road of external deeds. His “ confidence ”
had nothing in common with contemplative re-
ligion, and just as he exploded the divine attribute
on which Catholicism lived, i.e. justice, so he also
shattered the divine image set up by Scholasticism,
i.e. the intellectual definition of God, whether
representing God as comprehensible or incompre-
hensible.

“ Speculatively they define God by certain
comparisons, as an existing centre of a non-existing


LUTHER’S MYSTICISM


217


circle. But these are mathematical and physical
problems which we can leave to other professors.
For we want a theological definition, that is to say,
not a definition of the Divine Being which is incom-
prehensible, but a definition of his will and affection,
of what pleases him and what does not. It is the
interest of religion to have a God on whose help
we may rely in time of trouble, and who will
further us in all that is good. We cannot know the
least thing of ourselves, yet in the devil’s name we
try to climb up and with our intellect to grasp God
in his Majesty, and to speculate upon what he is
. . . Turk and Jew and Pope all say : I believe
in God, the Creator of heaven and earth, and they
all seek by a different way to find God in heaven,
and find Him not,f or He will not be found except
in Christ .” 1

Arguing in this manner, not much remains
of the imaginary God and the imaginary rela-
tionship to God, which has been the life of
mysticism ; still less of the unconscious God
and the unconscious relationship towards God, the
pagan-mystical origin of which is easily recognised.
Together with intelligence and ecstasy, asceticism
also vanishes, that last remnant of the mystic
inheritance cherished by the mystics of all ages.
All that remains is the inner life in God and the

1 Schultz, “Luther’s Dogmatische Aussagen uber Gott”
( Zeitschvift fur Kirchengeschichte, p. 79 and foil. 1881).


2l8


MYSTICISM


inner way to God, those deep things of life which
have always been the final goal of all mysticism.
Both these Luther saw revealed in Christ : He is
the image of the Father, and He is the way. And
therewith he set aside mysticism, for God is a
Personality, and the way to Him is by a Person.
Beyond this we know nothing of God, and by no
other way can we go to Him.

With this, mysticism has found its accomplish-
ment, for it has attained what it sought : an ex-
pression for the essence of God coinciding with
divine life and the exclusive object of all life. And
so there is no further need for mysticism, for the
definition of God’s being, and the union between
God and man for which mysticism laboured, and
for which it longed with all the passion and pain of
human intelligence, has been accomplished in the
direct confidence in which man now may approach
the Authorand Finisher of his faith. Thisis theonly
unio mystica, which we can know and live. In its
original, i.e. in its pagan form, mystical union is a
process of dissolution in which finally the work of
God and of man is swallowed up, as may be
abundantly proved from the history^of heathen
mystics. Christian mysticism has not led to this
dissolution, because it had undertaken the great
and arduous task of converting the heathen in-
heritance into personal property. In this none
have succeeded so well as Luther. He practically


LUTHER’S MYSTICISM


219


settled the momentous question, and in his
maturer days he studied the mystics, not because
their writings breathed the traditional mysticism,
but because they contained the germ which was to
cause it to explode.


XL QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM

Thus in one corner of the world at any rate
people’s minds were at rest, and their thoughts,
no longer strained to the farthest possible stretch
of human capability, could now with the greater
confidence and cheerfulness turn themselves to the
more natural duties of everyday life. The calm
after the storm had a beneficial effect on Lutheran-
ism, but its evil results were there also. In their
satisfaction that the great question of salvation
was now finally settled, people took their ease and
became deaf and practically dead to those higher
impulses which originally had set the problem in
motion. The psychical fermentation, the mental
strain, the fervour, characteristics -of mystically
tuned natures, were in Lutheranism supplanted
by sound, practical, common-sense doctrines, so
that even the intensity and poetic tendencies of
Luther’s early effusions — mementoes of his own
mental struggle — became rare and unusual guests
in his Church. And where they did perchance
appear they never throve.

The dreamer and poet, John Scheffler, once a

' r 220


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 221

noted Imperial Court physician, but better known
under his assumed name of Angelus Silesius, had
to experience how little room there was for a mystic
in the Lutheranism of the seventeenth century.
He broke with the Lutherans and was easily re-
captured by the Catholics. They showed much
tolerance for a son who in striking epigrams could
express pregnant truths, like the following : —

“I know that without me God could not be,

Were I extinct, He would be non-existing also.”

and again : —

“I am as great as God, He is as small as I am.

He is not above me, nor I below Him.

God’s son am I, I sit at His right hand,

His spirit. His flesh. His blood I partake of.”

Such experimental effusions Catholicism, when
in a kindly mood, could allow to pass as the innocent
pastime of a Court physicjan, but not so Pro-
testantism. For in the Protestant religion such
sentiments would have to be made into a dogma,
and as such they would be a direct contradiction
of the Creed.

For the same reason they could not leave in
peace that good cobbler who indulged in visions,
and who, bending over his task, meditated upon the
origin of God and upon the condition of man before
the Fall. Fortunately for himself this dreamer.
Master Jacob Boehme, was able to prove to the
satisfaction of the clerical gentlemen at Dresden


222


MYSTICISM


that his doctrines were not contrary to orthodox
religion. In fact, he rather surpassed the Church
in abstruse combinations, and fenced with Trinity
and Incarnation as skilfully as any speculative
theologian. He wanted to give his ideas a
realistic character, and resorted to natural pan-
theism, which became both his strength and his
weakness, and has always remained a peculiar
feature of his teachings.

It seems strange that there should be resusci-
tated in the brain of this simple shoemaker a way
of thinking which had been dead for a thousand
years ; a way of thinking which had flourished in
the days of the Gnostics and the Neo-Platonic
School ; the idea that nature is contained in God,
and consequently that human nature is filled with
God. In this kind of speculative argumentation
Master Jacob was quite as much at home as any
Dionysius, and he inspired the philosophers and
theologians of Romanticism again with it. They
found in him the pantheism and the poetry which
they required: "As a man’s spirit rules his body
and all its motions, in fact fills the whole man, so
the Holy Ghost fills all nature. He is the heart of
nature, and governs the good qualities in all
things.” “ Man is made out of nature, out of the
stars and the elements ; but God the Creator is in
them all, as the sap is in the tree.” There is a
thoroughly pagan sound in all this, and even when


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 223

Boehme speaks of the Father as the fountain-
spring of all force, and of all forces fitting into
one another and being as one force, it remains
doubtful whether these sentiments can pass for
sound Christianity. Boehme’s mysticism was an
unmistakable falling back into natural mysticism,
even where he speaks from personal experience :
“ How near to us is God in nature ! ” and when he
gives up his will to God, he does it that God may
illumine him even as the sun illumines the world.

This plantlike receptiveness is the characteristic
feature of Boehme’s piety. When he describes the
intercourse of the children of God with one another,
his definition does not rise above that of the life of
flowers. “ Like as the various flowers stand in the
ground and grow side by side, not upbraiding one
another about colour, scent, or taste, but letting
earth and sun, rain and vfind, heat and cold, do
what they like with them, all simply growing, each
according to his own disposition — so it is also with
the children of God.”

In mystical effusions of this kind it is difficult
to tell whether it is the Chinese Laotse, the Persian
Saadi, or Hafiz, or a Christian who speaks, nor can
we trace in it any development of Luther’s views
on the subject of natural mysticism. What would
have been Luther’s opinion of Boehme’s Aurora,
one wonders ? Probably he would have said
that this time “ Die Frau Hulda ” — as he often


224


MYSTICISM


calls Naturalism — had put on the cloak of Christi-
anity to delude a simple cobbler into seeking God
where only nature is to be found.

In the Catholic Church mysticism met with a
better fate. Never had Christian mysticism entered
more deeply into the human soul, never had its
hold upon the people been so strong, never had
its impression upon culture been deeper than
in the mysticism of the Catholic Church in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and it soon
found its way back again into Protestantism also.
It spread with infectious rapidity, overstepped
the boundaries, found an entrance into the Re-
formed party, and finally penetrated the stronghold
of Lutheranism. The religion of the seventeenth
century, expressing itself in external rule and
internal enthusiasm, is permeated with mysticism,
and the innovations introduced in the Eastern and
Western Churches are all tainted with it. There-
fore not only the internal histories of Spain,
Italy, and France, but also the histories of
the Protestant movements, Pietists, Moravian
Brethren, and Quakers, form a link in the history
of mysticism.

The mysticism of those days does not yield much
fruit for the philosophic mind. It does not in-
quire into the nature of God or of the Word, but
is rather a practical form of piety, putting new
life into the Catholic faith, and strengthening it


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 225

#

for the impending battle with Protestantism.
What gave colouring to that period were the
political experiences which mysticism passed
through during the time of the anti-Reform move-
ment. Yet it bore fruit of a quieter nature also,
for at that time was born that peculiar kind of
psychical apprehension, which was the outcome
of deep self-examination.

And this quiet, introspective form of piety might
well bear abundant fruit, for it was hatched in the
hothouse of the convent. “ Go into thy closet, and
close the door," this was and became more and more
the Catholic way of approaching God, and it also
produced a hitherto unknown depth of soul.
For the life lived behind the convent walls was
so intense and so intimate that all the church
offered to the outside world was either ignored
or lightly esteemed by the initiated. The pity
was that no one conceived the idea of posting
up outside the door of the church what thoughts
were maturing within the convent walls. No
one ventured to propose the abolishment of
certain dogmas and ceremonials, although all
knew that the external apparatus could quite
well be dispensed with. But the revolutionary
powers, silently fostered by mysticism, never
became really strong enough to explode into a
reformation. They were held close in the grip
of the church, just as in the human body disease

15


226


MYSTICISM


is kept under control until it revolts and kills the
body.

Agitation was not the object in view, it was
rest that was wanted before all things. “ And
thou shatt find rest for thy soul ” was the second
maxim in the evangel of mysticism. Therefore
it was known as Quietistic. For this reason also
it appealed to the individual, but had nothing
to offer to assemblies. Its solace and its wisdom
was communicated from soul to soul, but it did
not teach men how to be useful to their fellow-men.
Selfishness runs to seed in the garden of con-
templation, and because mysticism is naturally
egotistical, always fixing the attention on self
even where it seeks self-effacement, it can never
lead to any lasting good.

And yet — who would accuse of egotism that
splendid, self-sacrificing, lovable woman to whose
life and meditations the mystic productions of
two centuries may be traced back ? Santa Teresa
de Jesu is not only the greatest saint of Spain,
but the greatest saint of mysticism in general.
Katharine of Siena, with whom she vies for the
pre-eminence -among the female coryphees of the
Catholic church, possibly surpasses Teresa in
strength of character and in charity, as also in
historical importance for the ecclesiastical life
of her generation. On the whole, she ought
perhaps to be regarded as the greater of the two,


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 22 7

but in profundity of soul she cannot be compared
with Teresa. In the latter, mysticism was not
only motive power, but personal intuition. In
her power of perception lies Teresa’s superiority.
She is not satisfied, like the German nuns, to inter-
pret in emotion what the men of their time created
in thought. No, the thoughts thought by men
obtain perspective and vitality by passing through
this woman’s brain. She speaks much about the
watering of the garden ; she herself abundantly
watered the garden of mysticism. All that was
dry and wooden in the systems of men becomes
fresh and verdant under her influence. One of
the books from which she drew her knowledge
bore the significant title of Abcdarium tertium
(Francis of Osuna was the writer). What Teresa
wrote, however, was not an A B C, but one of the
maturest and richest works of the time. She set
at liberty the thoughts wrapped up in scholastic
coverings and fettered by Latin phraseology.
She spoke the language of individuality in good
Spanish; she wrote the best prose of the day,
and her Spanish is still looked upon as classical.

St. Teresa is often depicted as a hectic enthusiast
in supersensuous-sensuous ecstasy. Her histori-
cal portrait, however, which is in the possession
of the Carmelite nuns at Valladolid, shows her
as an energetic woman. The full, quiet, large-
featured face, enframed in the nun’s hood, reveals


228


MYSTICISM


noble descent and beauty. The weary eyelids
and somewhat flabby cheeks speak of the glowing
ashes of the convent life. The mouth, however,
is still fresh and firm, expressive of great power
of will and warm feeling.

She was of noble Old-Castilian birth, accustomed
from her infancy to be honoured and obeyed.
She divided her enthusiastic devotion between
the Virgin and the romances of chivalry. The
knights of romance took form in the person of
her cousin, but her father interfered, and she was
sent to a convent. It was much later, after her
recovery from a serious illness, that she resolved
to take the veil, and, in opposition to her father’s
will, she carried out her resolution. Her confessor,
Vicentius Varenius, a Dominican mystic, led her
step by step into the mysteries of mysticism, by
giving her to read such bqpks as Osuna’s A bcdarium,
and a " Tract on Prayer and Meditation ” by the
excellent Spanish mystic writer, Peter of Alcantara.
She studied these until her soul was ablaze with
holy firfe, and in a vision she saw herself as the
betrothed of Christ. Shortly after this experience
she became personally acquainted with Alcantara,
and made him her father-confessor.

At this tune, she was also fighting for stricter
conventual discipline among the nuns. Her desire
was to establish a more austere Order, which she
eventually accomplished, and with her bare-


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 229

footed companions she shamed the noble daintily-
shoed, luxurious Carmelite ladies, who, hpwever,
had their revenge.

She was expelled and persecuted, until finally
Philip 11. — in his relation to her a tolerant and
beneficent man — came to her assistance, and
obtained for her the papal sanction for the re-
organisation of her Order as a distinct association.

From her convent cell, where she enjoyed rest
and peace of mind and gave herself up more and
more to ascetic exercises, she watched with keen
interest the events of the outer world. Her lot
was cast in the palmy days of Spain. In thought
she followed her brothers on their perilous expedi-
tions to the New World, and in their campaigns
against the enemies of Spain. Her letters abound
in intelligent remarks and sound advice. She is
a practical administrator, and she admonishes
her younger relatives, not. only to lead honourable
lives, but also to take a practical hold of life, and
to invest their money wisely. Teresa was influenced
by the indomitable will-power which at that time
prevailed in Spain. Everywhere, in state and
army, in civil and ecclesiastical life, an energy and
purpose of will were seen, very similar to what
we now see in Prussia. Ignatius de Loyola, the
founder of the Jesuit Order, built his institution
on this will-power ; Teresa, his junior by twenty
years (she lived from 1515-82), made it into a


230


MYSTICISM


philosophy which, like Loyola’s system, has pre-
served its power till now, or, perhaps more correctly,
she founded her mysticism on a psychology which
had the will for its centre.

There is among the fortifications of this world
an "inner castle” {el castillo interior), the human
soul, a stronghold of purest crystal. This strong-
hold has seven chambers, and the first we come to
is the chamber of apprehension ; this is the outer
court of the soul. Behind it is the chamber of the
passions, and this is full of turmoil and strife. The
third is the chamber of the fear of God ; here the
passions are overcome. After that comes the
chamber of rest, then that of union, and finally
the closet of rapture. The innermost room in the
very centre of the stronghold of the soul is the
secret chamber where the mystical espousals with
the Triune God take place.

Of all the gardens of the earth there is one which
man has to tend and water constantly : this is the
garden of the soul. At first one must draw the
water with one’s own hands from the fountain
of spiritual life : this is done by the -prayer of
observation. Looking into self we behold our
sinfulness ; looking outside of self we behold
Christ’s sufferings. But he who would improve
his garden cannot rest satisfied with drawing the
water from the main spring with his own hands.
He makes channels to convey it, so that it may


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 231

freely flow over and overflow the beds and borders
of the soul’s pleasure-ground. This is represented
by the prayer of collected, thought or quietness
{oracion de quietud). The mind is no longer pre-
occupied, for the human will is completely merged
into the divine will, has become one with it. The
external powers of the soul, however, are still
active : reason and imagination are still exposed to
the influence of the outer world, but the internal
peace of mind continues, even when outwardly our
thoughts are engaged in intellectual work (prayers,
literary occupations, and such like) . When the soul
has been raised to join in the prayer of union, then
we leave all human toil and labour behind. Then
God Himself waters the garden of our hearts ; then
the water rises and flows through innumerable
channels, and not a spot remains dry. Thus not
only the will but the intellect also is made one with
God, and only memory and imagination are still
free. The higher functions of the soul are gently
slumbering on the bosom of Divine love, and only
in a certain kind of mental activity, in wandering
thoughts and devotional exercises, man’s indi-
viduality asserts itself.

But this last function stops also in the prayer of
ecstasy ( oracion del arrohamiento) , for therein all
the powers of the soul are enchained ; the soul is
altogether passive, paralysed in ecstatic delight.
Now the garden of the soul is not merely watered,


232


MYSTICISM


but suddenly drenched by showers of Divine Grace,
and the soul thus strengthened in its innermost
parts reaches its highest possible flight. The body
also is uplifted for a few short moments of super-
lative bliss, for no longer than half an hour this
rapturous condition can last. Bathed in tears one
wakes up from this trance. A gentle languor
continues for some time, the kind of languor
which we notice on Teresa’s face in her picture.

The recognition of the inner life of the soul, as
described here, is a forerunner of modem psycho-
logy. Teresa has a masterly way of keeping
separate the various actions of the soul, and of
observing their effects in the various orisons. This
same self - examination underlies the Confes-
sions of Augustine, but Teresa carries and
develops it further. Teresa’s autobiography is
one of the chief authorities upon which religious
sentiment is based, and her self-analysis is well on
the way to becoming actual psychology. The fact
that all the other functions of the soul are sub-
servient to the will is not her own discovery, for
this kind of contemplative religion was founded
by Duns Scotus (see p. 164). But the becoming
one with God through the will, which for him was
still scholastic school-wisdom, is for Teresa the
one all-absorbing ideal. She interprets love by
will, “ An arrow shot by the will.” To become
one with God in love means to her to be one with


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 233

God in will, that is, to let God’s will implicitly
govern the human will. And with this theory
mysticism has become eminently practical ; the
old method of apprehending God is thrown over-
board ; Teresa will have none of the learned
theology of Scholasticism. In her womanly wisdom
she opposes this enemy as resolutely as does
Luther in his manly intelligence.

This psychological investigation leads to yet
further results. The constant dissecting and
scrutinising of the impulses of the heart, the
looking beyond and the discarding of the visible
functions of the soul, not only made theological
knowledge superfluous, but practically did away
with the necessity for any visible expression of
piety and religious observances. All this is very
necessary for children, and perhaps for the laity in
general, but they who ajre truly initiated know
that there is only one way in which we can enter -
into profitable relationship with God, and that is
by prayer.- Not the prayer with rosary and
formulas, and set, audible words, but the prayer
that is prayed in silence ; the prayer of contempla-
tion, of concentration, of union, of ecstatic rapture
as set forth in the ascending scale. It is the
sublimest form of prayer, for it is not supplication
or entreaty for any worldly goods, scarcely a
prayer for internal joy and happiness, which used
to be the object of prayer. It is a spiritual


234


MYSTICISM


condition in which one would abide, a state of
contemplation, a hovering in spirit over the deep
things of the soul, and a beholding and recognising
of the image of God which is hidden in these
innermost recesses. The beat of the wings which
carry the soul to this highest flight of contempla-
tive ecstasy, and the soul's labour which prepares
the way for this contemplation, is called meditation.
“ Meditation labours and sows ; contemplation
reaps and rests.” For more than a hundred
years this scrutinising of one’s own soul was the
highest ambition of pious folk ; they sacrificed all
else to it, and doubtless much strength of soul was
thus gained. First of all, it made them deserv-
ing in their own eyes, and by and by also in other
people’s eyes, until this sort of piety became the
fashion, and ended in|hypocrisy and dissimulation.

And that was a pity, for the original idea was
good. Teresa’s thoughts, in the simple form given
to them by her friend, Juan de la Cruz, are almost
Protestant ; it is as if all the pagan elements had
been eliminated, and nothing but pure Christianity
was left. Union with God did not mean union in
a pantheistic sense, but rather a transformation
of the soul through love, leading up to a condition
of perfect acquiescence to the will of God. The
preparation for this union lies not in understanding,
testing, proving or speculating on the essence of
God’s being, but in purity of mind and in love.


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 235

Asceticism is only practised in a spiritual sense,
in suppressing the natural gift of inquiry, and
admitting into the soul nothing but unquestioning
faith. The mind is exclusively engaged in con-
templating the life, the passion and the death
of Jesus. All else is as non-existing. By this
complete surrender of the will and of all moral and
spiritual joys and aspirations, the soul receives
salvation ; nothing — not even the most special
gift of grace — is counted of any value. And the
person whose soul has thus been liberated is also
exempt from all religious practices, from image-
worship and pilgrimages and churchgoing — all
which apparatus is only intended for beginners.
Even the worship of saints shrivels into nothing.

The thoughts of these mystics, considered merely
as theories, are right, and expressive of progress
and reformatory energy,# but when we look at
their lives the picture presents an altogether
different aspect. The aim of mysticism — and
before which everything has to give way — is and
always has been quiescence and emptiness of soul,
darkened consciousness, and the suspension of
natural understanding. All this eventually ends
in conventual practices and the technics of the
confessional, which two things are supposed to
bring peace. Even where faith is defined as
will, although superior as a theory, it only- sinks
the soul all the more easily into a state of quies-


236


MYSTICISM


cence, because the will is not exerted. Therefore
Duns Scotus, the originator of the doctrine of
the will, is also practically the founder of Quietism ;
the man who scientifically investigated the Augus-
tinian doctrine for the repose of the soul — donee
requiescat in te.

And this indiscriminate repose of the soul was
greatly encouraged by the ruling forces of the
age, namely, Absolutism and Jesuitism, of which
Quietism is the religious counterpart. The evangel
of passivity, the doctrine of perfect indifference,
fitted admirably into the scheme of the authorities.
But the power thus evoked concealed more than
its promotors suspected. During one historical
moment the existence of the Catholic Church,
as it then was, hung in the balance, and if the
threatened catastrophe had taken place, the
Church would probably' never have attained its
present form ; but Jesuitism was on the watch,
and, making use of the bigotry of an all-powerful
court, warded off the fatal step.

We refer to the drama enacted in Italy during
the reign of Louis xxv. of France, and in which
the Spaniard Michael de Molinos was the chief
actor. He visited Rome in 1670. A young
doctor of divinity of noble birth, rich and independ-
ent, shrewd and clever, of pleasing manners and
appearance, he soon gained access into the best
circles of the papal city. Even the heads of the


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 237

Jesuit party and the highest dignitaries of the
Church honoured him with their confidence and
accepted his spiritual advice. Molinos’ Guida
spirituals (1673), a little book of some two hundred
pages, gives us a very fair idea of the kind of piety
he introduced in Rome ; it was downright Spanish
mysticism, arguments taken from St. Teresa
and Juan de la Cruz, cooked up by a brilliantly
talented man at a propitious moment, and offered
in delectable form ; fascinating sometimes by
its lucidity, sometimes by its witty paradoxes.
His delicately traced psychological theories were
formulated by the spiritual heads of the Church
into a new method of confession which gave an
entirely new character to the cure of souls and
the way of salvation. “ Wouldst thou that the
omnipotent King should enter into thy soul,
thou must sei to it that thy heart be pure, inno-
cent, quiet and free, unoccupied and empty,
silent and meek ; innocent of sins and short-
comings, free from fear, emptied of all thought,
silent and meek under trials and temptations.”
“ In this condition, in which the soul is concen-
trated upon self and in its deepest sanctuary
hides the image of God ; in this loving surrender
of self, in which the soul esteems as naught all
that is outside of God’s will, we hear the voice of
God, and converse with Him as if nothing else
existed in all the world.” The intelligent world


238


MYSTICISM


of Italy, which just, then was getting heartily
tired of " good works ” and of “ saints,” as was
the case in Germany at the time of the Reforma-
tion, gladly and eagerly took to this direct method
of approaching God, and the lower classes hailed
it as a means of escape from purgatory.

What could even a Sergeri avail against the
heresy of Molinos ? Sergeri, the famous Jesuit
preacher, who even in his lifetime was venerated
as a saint throughout Italy ? The church bells
might ring in towns and villages at Sergeri’s
approach, but Molinos was beyond his reach, for,
as yet, the Jesuits of Rome had found nothing
irregular in him. Of little use it was that the
Neapolitan cardinal, Carracioli, laid before the
Holy Office an elaborate treatise against the
heresy of “ passive praydr,” which was now
making thousands of, converts in South Italy
also. Molinos still enjoyed the popular favour,
and he had a staunch friend in Pope Innocent xi.,
who, as Cardinal Benedict Odescalchi, had already
been favourably disposed towards Spanish mysti-
cism. In the first year after the accession of this
Pope, the fame of Molinos became world-renowned.
He was then an inmate of the Vatican, and soon
regular pilgrimages were organised by priests
and prelates from all Catholic lands, to receive
his personal instruction on the doctrine of " the
.pure faith,” and the psychology of the confes-


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM


239


sional. There can be little doubt about it that
Innocent — who openly favoured Protestant notions,
who in the contest between the Jesuits and the
semi-reformed Jansenists sided with the latter,
and also in his dispute with Louis xiv. was sup-
ported by that party — saw in the doctrines of
Molinos a chance of ridding himself from the
yoke, or at any rate of easing the burden, which
the Jesuits laid upon the Pope by their unrelenting
watch and guardianship of the papal office. The
very marked favour in which Molinos was held at
the court of Pope Innocent xi. can hardly be
explained in any other manner, than by assuming
that the Pope wanted to use this new kind of
piety to give Catholicism a form which eventually
would have made Jesuitism a superfluous factor,
and would have ddne away with many meaning-
less and wearisome formalities in the ritual of
the church. This desirable reform could easily
have been accomplished in the seventeenth
century, especially at the time of the friendly
encounter of a highly gifted director of souls, and
a rational Pope. But the propitious moment
was allowed to slip by, and is only remembered
as a historical event in which the Jesuits gained
a signal victory.

The court of Louis xiv. was at that time
the very heart of the life of France and of the
world at large, watched over by the Jesuits as


240


MYSTICISM


assiduously as they once guarded the papal court,
and therefore the centre from whence all the
intrigues proceeded. The king’s personal dislike
of the Pope, with whom he had quarrelled over the
revenues of vacant bishoprics, and who moreover
was on friendly terms with the heretical Jansenists,
was turned to good account by his confessor, P&re
la Chaise, and the clever manoeuvring of other
Jesuits at the court, in counteracting the prevailing
liberal tendencies which threatened the life of
the Society of Jesus.

The king, physically weak, tortured by fear
of death and qualms of conscience, became an
easy tool in the hands of the clergy ; he listened
to their counsel, and firmly believed that by giving
the death-stroke to papal liberalism he would
serve his own interests and gain God’S pleasure,
just as he previously thought of pleasing God
by the severe measures he adopted against the
Huguenots and Jansenists. And the blow fell
on Molinos, who now, had to learn how short was
the distance between the Capitol and the Tarpeian
rock. The Pope was not powerful enough to resist
the demands of the French ambassador for the
institution of a strict examination of Molinos.
The demand was naturally strongly seconded
by the Jesuits, and the result was that Molinos,
deserted by all who but a short time ago had
loved and honoured him, was required publicly


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 241

to abjure his doctrines. The French ambassador
himself had once been one of his intimate friends.

This abjuration took place with great pomp
and ceremony on the 3rd September 1687, in the
Church of St. Peter at Rome. The people who
formerly crowded round to hear him, and strewed
his path with palm branches, now cried for him
to be crucified, and would have dragged him
straightway to his death, if the papal guard had
not stood round to defend him. Molinos was
condemned to close imprisonment, taken to the-
Dominican monastery of San Pedro Montorio,
and left to a fate over which a thick veil has been
drawn. In 1697 it was announced that he had
died, probably poisoned, conveniently cleared
out of • the way at a moment when his release
was thought' by the? French ecclesiastics to be a
dangerous possibility. A*nd so the threatening
thunder-cloud passed by— and nothing came of
a reform through the instrumentality of mysticism.

The second drama of mysticism in which Louis
xiv. and his court took part, and which was put
upon the scenes^ by the unfortunate Madame
Guy on (1648-1717), also ended in a mere emo-
tional experience. Ill-health, conventual discipline,
hatred of her relations, a forced marriage, and
priest-ridden slander, had led her to the adoption
of religious views which had originated in Switzer-
land, and in which she found strength and comfort
16


1


242


MYSTICISM


in all the trials and vicissitudes of her eventful
life. Switzerland boasted at that time much
spiritual life. A young and noble lady, Madame
de Chantal, assisted by her confessor, Francis de
Sales, had there instituted in 1610 a cloisteral rule,
which in theory seemed a continuation of St.
Teresa’s mysticism, but in practice was a hysterical
blunder which the Spanish nun would never have
countenanced. One hardly knows which is the
more despicable of the two ; the woman, a widow
twenty-six years old, who disfigures herself to avoid
being forced into a second marriage, and, forget-
ting her motherhood, tramples on her son, who in
a desperate effort to prevent her from entering
the cloister throws himself in front of his mother
before the convent door ; — or the priest who
persuades her that the renforse and doubt to
which she presently becomes a prey are but the
natural consequences she has to pay, the birth-
pangs of Mary which she must bear in order that
her Redeemer may be brought forth.

By such crafty reasonings Francis de Sales
succeeds in distorting the mind of this richly
endowed woman, and the fermentation of her soul,

r -

which without his interference would probably have
led Madame de Chantal away from the sancti-
moniousness of good works, and back to her
children and her home, became clarified into an
elixir, henceforth used by the Catholic Church as


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 243

a potent narcotic administered for the pacifica-
tion of the troubled conscience. This narcotic is
known as V amour desinteresse. Doubtless there
is a noble motive underlying this “ disinterested
love/’ for its object is the conquest of self, but it
is easy to recognise the dangers which lurk behind
such self-effacing devotion, the danger of egoism
and the danger of the erotic. Whether in this
condition of absolute surrender of soul one enjoys
one’s own or God’s presence, certain it is that the
path is not a straight one, and inevitably leads to
sensuality, the very thing one has been trying to
overcome. The pious souls, thus confused, could
not find the natural way out of the difficulty, the
way which Protestantism took ; the way in which
God appears as Father, and all mankind as brethren;
the way in which loVe becomes the pure affection
of children for their Father, and of brothers and
sisters mutually ; the love which frees the con-
science because it bids it to follow the dictates of its
inner consciousness ; the love which overcomes self
because it inspires other thoughts than those con-
nected with one’s own personality. Because this
way could not be found, an artificial byway had
to be invented, and a disinterested affection was
manufactured which consisted in taking no in-
terest in anything. The Quietism of Madame de
Chantal ended in the indiscriminate ignoring of
human nature, still surviving in the doctrines of


244


MYSTICISM


the Jesuits. In sad contrast to the Greek sculptor
who prayed that his statue might become alive,
she prays — and, curiously, both make use of the
same imagery — that man might be as a statue, as
cold, immovable, devoid of feeling, will, and
thought as a statue in its niche.

“ If the statue in its recess could speak, and we
were to ask it : Why standest thou there ? it
would answer : My lord and master has put me
here. Why dost thou not move ? Because it is my
lord and master’s will that I should be immovable.
Of what use art thou here ? Of what profit is it
to thee to stand like this ? I do not exist for any
profit I may derive from it, but merely that I may
serve the master’s purpose and obey his will. But
thou canst not see him ! No, it would answer,
but he sees me, and it is his pleasure to know that
I stand in the place wfyere he has put me. But
wouldst thou not like to possess the power of
moving, and to be able to draw nearer to him ?
No, not without he wished it. Hast thou then no
desires ? No, for I stand where my lord and
master has placed me ; his pleasure in me is the
only thing that satisfies my soul.”

This view of life — if it may be called by so
exalted a name — was the one adopted by Madame
de la Mothe-Guyon. Hers was a nature which
rejoiced in affliction and gloried in physical pain,
otherwise one would think that she might have


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM


245


been satisfied with her share of sorrow, in having
a wicked mother-in-law, a disagreeable husband,
and a Jesuitical brother, without adding to it the
" refreshment ” of having periodically a sound
tooth extracted, leaving the decayed ones un-
touched ; also enjoying the pleasure, every time
she sealed a letter, of letting the hot wax drop on
to her fingers, and when nursing the sick being
guilty of the abominable perversity of eating of
their vomit. She boldly declared that for the
ove of Christ she was consumed with longing for
suffering. Suddenly she was seized with a dislike
for all creatures, all that was outside her love of
Christ became repulsive to her. The cross which
hitherto she had borne with resignation now was
her joy and her delight. So greatly had this poor
soul been tortured with grief, that she made
her grief into a joy. Yet there is none of that
repulsive coldness in her which characterised
Madame de Chantal. It does not enter into her
mind to desert her children, in fact it was her one
consolation to take refuge with them when the
world rejected her. With gentle patience she bore
the subtle tortures and the malicious aspersions
inflicted upon her by the priests when in her
widowhood she devoted herself to a religious
life, and when, before retiring from the world, she
had given away all her property in charities.
Then with her own hands she nursed the sick.


MYSTICISM


246

and bound up their wounds ; even the day came
when she, who had once commanded one of the
largest fortunes in France, had to beg Madame
de la Chetardier for some articles of underclothing
as she was quite destitute. And another day
came when she — who had been the confidante of
Madame de Maintenon, and who had set the fashion
in Paris of a certain kind of piety — was lying sick
and lonely in her cell, a prey to the persecutions
and torments of the relentless Bishop Bossuet,
who brutally attempted to draw confessions from
her in her weak state. All this she meekly bore.

And because she possessed this Christian strength,
there is in the mysticism of Madame Guyon a
delicacy of feeling which neither Madame de
Chantal nor Francis de Sales attained to, although
their ideas were practically the same. As a matter
of fact, Madame Guyon mistrusts all visionary and
ecstatic conditions. In a vision, she says, one sees
neither God nor Christ, but only an angel of light,
a reflection of Christ, as the rainbow reflects the
sun. Ecstasy she explains as spiritual sensuality,
in which the devil by sweet experiences seeks to
mislead the soul and draw it away irom Christ.
Even holy enthusiasm, which is a force of attrac-
tion from God Himself, is for her a condition of
incompleteness, because the soul remains chained
to self ; that is, it is occupied with itself, although
all the time trying to escape from self. However


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 247

much people may admire this sublime condition, it
is imperfect, and shows that there is something
lacking in human nature.

Therefore — and now one would expect some-
thing sensible, for all this rightly interpreted
totally upsets the programme of mysticism, but
alas! the conclusion is Quietism — therefore: self
must be given up entirely. True enthusiasm and
perfect ecstasy are consummated in total negation ;
the soul, empied of all its attributes, and having no
will and no desire apart from God, glides into the
Godhead, the only place where it is at home.

In this manner Madame de Guyon also reaches
the point of annihilation. Yet — like St. Teresa —
she imparts a kind of beauty and poetry to this sad,
retrogressive journey of the soul. In her first,
admirable book,>£es torrents, she describes how
God, her spiritual guide, like a trusted steersman,
pilots her safely through the floods and torrents
of life and the many currents to which the soul is
exposed, until she reaches the sea ; and the sea is
God. A far wider circulation, however, had her
" Short Guide to Prayer,” published in 1688 under
the title of Moyen court et tres facile de faire
oraison. This book made her fortune, for like
wildfire it spread through the whole, of France,
and instructed pious folk in a few simple words
about the new road to salvation ; a Guida spirituale,
which soon became the catechism of the mundane


MYSTICISM


248

world. But this book was also her misfortune, for
therein her heresies were printed black on white.
In 1688, after suffering much from calumny and
priestcraft, she was suddenly set free at the
instance of Madame de Maintenon, and soon after
gained this lady over to her views. The royal
mistress was by no means a person without heart
or intellect. With interest she followed the
religious currents of the day, and she spent her
last days in the Convent of St. Cyr, where she
founded a celebrated infant asylum. Her cell
became the audience chamber for clerics of all
denominations, with whom she sometimes con-
versed for hours at a time.

Madame Guyon became her favourite, and the
Moyen court had the honour of finding a place
in Madame de Maintenon’s pocket. The authoress
was admitted at court,,; she gave lectures in
Madame’s cabinet, and she propagated her
doctrines in the Convent of St. Cyr by holding
conferences and instituting highly spiritual
exercises. Thus she spent four happy years, and
seemed to have found her right place, appreciated
by the women where the men had betrayed and
misjudged her. She had found her vocation as
woman, and her many trials and troubles stood
her in good stead.

Once again she fell under the suspicion of the
clergy. The mighty Bishop of Meaux, the prelate


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 249

Bossuet, much elated by the recent victory of
the French Church in Rome at Molinos’ trial
and conviction, suddenly became alarmed at the
popularity of Madame de Maintenon’s protegee.
The dispute, however, which started with the
discussion of Madame Guy on’s principles, embraced
considerably more than the writings of this un-
fortunate lady, who, after recalling many of her
theories and being acquitted of heresy, was accused
of immorality, caused much scandal, fell into
disfavour at court, was twice imprisoned in the
Bastille, and ended her days at her, son’s house in
a small town near Blois. The controversies con-
nected with her trial are of minor importance
compared with the fierce dispute which ensued
between the two chief dignitaries of the Church
in France, the “ Eagle of Meaux ” and the " Swan
of Cambray,” Bossuet and Fenelon.

Both had been called upon to give their verdict
in the case of Madame Guyon. The two prelates
could easily have agreed in condemning certain of
her theories (which she eventually recalled), but
upon the point of the mysticism underlying these
it was not so easy for them to be of one mind,
Fenelon, whose gentle, emotional soul and poetic
refinement manifests itself in all his writings and
is reflected in the literature influenced by him,
had from an early period followed with keen
interest the chances of the life of inner contempla-


250


MYSTICISM


tion, revived by Madame Guy on, and it was far
from him to wish that this revival should be
nipped in the bud. Bossuet, on the other hand,
recognising mysticism only in its scholastic and
ecclesiastical form, wrote a violent treatise against
Madame Guyon, Instruction sur les -etats de
I’oraison, 1707. Fenelon, who in the meantime
had become Archbishop of Cambray, refused not
only to put his " imprimatur ” under this, but
wrote a counter-article which added greatly to
aggravate the hostile feelings between the two
churchmen. In his article, Explication des
Maximcs des Saints, Fenelon speaks in a very
conciliatory manner about French Quietism.

M. Matter, the historian of French mysticism,
is to a certain extent right to be indignant that
Madame Guyon should always be blamed and
Fenelon admired, whil<^ all the time it was the
ideas of Madame Guyon which the great author
developed, and which had made him into a mystic.
Yet there is a distinct difference in their views.
The southern intensity and womanly impetuosity
of Madame Guyon’s views, partly the result of
temperament and partly due to the ^influence of
Spanish mysticism, was in Fenelon converted into
a calm collectedness. He understood how to
prepare French wine without any Spanish ad-
mixtures, and he saw the practical possibility of
the principle. He realised that the disinterested


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 251

love, which in Quietism leads to barren waste,
contains something which might be made profitable
to Christian life, by giving a slightly different
meaning to the word amour than the one attached
to it by the nuns. The nuns founded their re-
lationship to God on erotic love, the amorousness
which they had struggled to conquer in their
natural bodies. But Fenelon was not of an
amorous nature ; he was rather a highly moral
and philosophical personality. Therefore the
philosopher in him queries: Who is this God who
should be loved in this manner ? And the moralist
in him answers: He is “goodness” ( I’idee du bien).
To love disinterestedly, then, is the same as to
give oneself up to goodness (or good works), and
consequently this affection may be defined as the
highest ethical condition man can attain to. As we
love God for His own sake, so we love goodness for
goodness’ sake ; and therewith an ethical stand-
point has been reached where one is not influenced
either by hope of reward or fear of punishment,
in other words, the standpoint at which personality
comes to its due. And so, ever since .the days of
Fdnelon, disinterested charity is preferably spoken
of, implying that it is not so much a question
of love in the general sense, but rather of Christian
love expressing itself in works of charity. In this
theory, at once philosophical and Christian,
Fenelon gave to the pet ideas of the Quietists


252


MYSTICISM


an application which at once made them popular
not only among the Catholics, to whom the same
idea under the form given to it by the Quietist
nuns had been repulsive, but also — and this is the
more remarkable fact — in the philosophical world. ■
No less a man than Leibniz, the great German
philosopher and statesman, declared that dis-
interested love in the form given to it by F6nelon
was incontestably the ideal of true humanity and
true Christianity.

Leibniz, who as philosopher sought to strike a
compact betwen the religious and the humane, and
as statesman endeavoured to reconcile the various
parties in the church, found in this suggestion
of Fenelon’s a form of piety in which all could
be agreed. " I believe,” he writes, " that it
was the intention of Monseighor the Archbishop
of Cambray to lift up the soul to the true love of
God, and to bring it into that condition of repose
which necessarily follows where this love is enjoyed,
at the same time r ej ecting the illusions of false peace
in God ; and I think that nothing further need be
preached but this true love towards God ” (Frag-
ments, pp. 174-175). “ This divine loye,” he says
(p. 173), “ stands immeasurably high above all
earthly affection. For all that is worthy of our
love in creation is a part of our own joy and
happiness, while our joy in God is not a fart of our
happiness but our complete happiness. It is the


QUIETISTIC MYSTICISM 253

source of all happiness, the only joy which is not
harmful in its consequences, the only joy which
is truly and absolutely good, and which can cause
neither remorse nor doubt.” This disinterested
love implies for Leibniz also the correct relation-
ship towards God and the correct relationship
towards man ; it is true piety and true morality,
for only where egoism has been effectually con-
quered can there be question of true morality.
And so love becomes the basis of society and the
principle of the law. In this connection Leibniz
defines the administration of justice as “ Charity
regulated by wisdom ” (la chariti reglee suivant la
sagesse), as a social principle having the public
welfare in view, which can only be carried out by
keeping in mind the general interest and not the
interest of the individual.

Thus the great thinker formulated the funda-
mental idea of the mysticism of the seventeenth
century .which had originated in the desperate
struggle of individual souls to rise above self. Out
of unprofitable self-effacement he formed a prin-
ciple of profitable, energetic social intercourse,
which became the pulsating power of the age of
Rationalism.


XII. OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS


In conclusion, we would briefly pass in review the
variegated crowd of mystical forms and thoughts
which have stirred cultured Europe since the
classical days of mysticism.

Roman Catholicism still bears practically the
stamp which it received in the seventeenth
century. Both the piety of the laity and the
practices of the Jesuits are tainted with mysticism ;
prayers and hymns, images and legends, carry
the impress of it, that is, in r so far as medieval
notions can be kept aliye in a civilisation which
will no longer tolerate asceticism, absolutism of
the Church, and theology as only scientific know-
ledge. These are things, says the Catholic, which
demand an intimacy of life of which bare Protest-
antism has no conception. We cultivate in our
cloister gardens a flower which cannot thrive
with you ; we have dug up the treasure which
the fool had left buried in the ground.

More prominent than with us is the dominion
of mysticism in the east of Europe, where the
glaring pictures in the churches, the visionary


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 255

monks, and the vast multitudes of patient, passive
people all silently bear witness to the power
exercised by a religion which controls the masses
without words, without thoughts, without deeds,
except those prescribed by the rites and discipline
of the Church. And yet the power of mysticism
is not greatest in the “ Orthodox ” churches.

It is in the Russian sects that mysticism is yet
seen in its primitive force. The close church
atmosphere fostered the hectic epidemic which
broke out here as elsewhere. The names of
these sects show their spirit : “ Shakers,” “ The
Silent Ones,” “ They who find rest in this life,”
“ Not — ours ” (for they are God’s). The best
known are the “ Duchoborzer,” — “Spirit Fighters,”
— also children of the seventeenth century, a
sect which gained entrance in Russia in the reign
of Peter the Great. They^iave the “ inner light ”
which teaches them all that is necessary for salva-
tion ; teaches them also to dispense with church
and mass, and to reject the sign of the cross and
the sacraments ; to refuse military service and
the taking of the oath — a truly dangerous element
in the Church and the army of Russia. Therefore
these sectarians were dispatched to the Crimea ;
there, however, they were too comfortable, and
nowadays they reside somewhere in Trans-Caucasia.

The “ Stundists,” evangelically minded pietists,
called into existence not long ago by the peasant


256


MYSTICISM


Michael Ratrischnyj, will also shortly have to
be banished. For they likewise abuse the sacra-
ments, or call them mere symbols ; but the worst
feature in their belief is that they firmly hold
that all men are equal, that all have equal rights,
that there ought to be neither money nor com-
merce in the world. These folks are not wholly
unfamiliar to us, although we may not know
them by their sectarian name. We have all
heard of the long-bearded farmer, a peasant
with the title of count and bearing a poet’s name,
who endorses all these views, and has besides
very peculiar ideas about marriage. One cannot
really understand Tolstoi unless one knows some-
thing of the mysticism of the Russian people
and their communistic ideals.

Looking westward, we discover the glow of
mysticism even behind r England ’ s foggy horizon.
The people there are not so sober-minded as
Continentals are apt to think. Mingled with
the prose of life, with its matter-of-factness, and
its business, there is a ring of softer notes, and
sometimes of stronger voices, which speak another
language than that known in the Parliament or
on the Exchange, another language even than is
heard in the Sunday’s sermon in the Cathedral.

"We are such stuff

As dreams are made of, and our little life

Is rounded with a sleep ! ”


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 257

If the finest and healthiest of all poets could
lay such words on the lips of Englishmen, what
might not be expected of the blind Puritan singer
whose Paradise Lost is more beautiful than his
Paradise Regained, and whose most beautiful
poem is about the night of blindness, his own
experience, and the light that breaks through
the darkness.

And what a world of darkness and of light
there was in the mind of the tinker who, out of
his own humble pilgrimage through life, created
the book which after the Bible is the most read
of all English books, the friend of all simple be-
lievers, and the admiration of critics and scholars.
Do not Macaulay, the English academician, and
Taine, the French scholar, vie with one another
in singing the praisesxjf John’s Banyan’s “ Pilgrim’s
Progress,” because it describes so clearly and
vividly, so earnestly yet so pleasantly, the inner
experiences of the soul as well as the outer con-
ditions of life? Yet, after all, it was only in-
. tended for a book of devotion, -written in mystic
style, noting the various stages on the road of
life, until the journey’s end is reached and the
days of sorrow are ended ; until the weary wanderer,
who has lived a life of faith, enters the Promised
Land, which he has longed for with a greater
longing than they who wait for the morning.
With Bunyan all is personal, all is realistic, every
*7


258


MYSTICISM


word-picture is clear and plain, every conception
palpable. Yet in him stirred the old vague
longing, and he had to go through all the phases
of intuition and ecstasy, in fact through the whole
process of spiritual darkness, before he learned
to see the world in the light of actuality.

Then there is also the divinely inspired tanner,
George Fox, — it would seem that spiritual mysteries
have often been entrusted to simple craftsmen, —
who one day made himself a suit of leather, in
order that in this practical attire he might preach
with the greater independence the holy mysteries
which had been revealed to him. Carlyle fitly
says that the making of this suit of leather was
one of the most remarkable incidents in modern
history. Truly the Quakers and their mysticism
are a modern curiosity, although their small ex-
ternal peculiarities, their sombre garb and shovel
hat, are gradually being discarded. The inner man
gives them plenty to do ; for in no sect the
internal sensations are made so much of as among
these peace-loving Anglo-Saxons, who in our days,
as in the days of old, are the untiring advocates
of honesty, piety, and charity ; these first idealists
of equality and human right, who ''address all
people as " thou,” and take off their hat to no
one. These first promulgators of universal peace
were never sought by any Indian’s arrow, for they
brought their red brethren goodwill and com-


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 259

mercial benefits instead of discord ; no modern
projectiles ever struck them down, except when
they exposed themselves to shot and shell in
ministering to the needs of others suffering from
the horrors of war. All this is good Christi-
anity, and the kind of Christianity that is not
fruitless. There was a time when American
liberty was held to be the pattern of the rights
of humanity, as they were proclaimed through-
out France in the eighteenth century. There
still exist a prison-administration and a prison-
supervision, which owe their being to the Phila-
delphian Brotherhood and the saint of prison
life, Elizabeth Fry .

The books of the Quakers reveal pure, clear
mysticism : inner light and inner peace, God’s
voice in man and ’in all things with which men
come in contact ; no get teachers and no set
doctrine, and Christ in the first place an inner
experience. No external rites or prescribed
prayers — only waiting in silent expectancy for
the voice of the Holy Ghost to find utterance.
Such is their worship. Then some one is suddenly
moved to speak by the Holy Spirit ; prophetic
utterances, accompanied by violent shaking, follow,
and from this latter sign they have derived their
name. In some of the American branches this
quaking has degenerated into ecstatic leaping
and jumping. The " inner light ” compels them


26 o


MYSTICISM


to read their Bible assiduously, and in silence
they meditate upon what they have read.
This is the reason that their religion, although
in its mystical principles in no way distinguish-
able from any other (not even pagan) mysti-
cism, has yet remained Christian. Possibly their
rationalism, which kept them in touch with the
inner side of Christianity and with the spirit of
Christ, is the cause that their Christianity is so
inward and intimate, and that they walk in the
spirit of Christ to the shame of many other Chris-
tians. The smallness of their numbers, on the
other hand, may prove that the basis on which
they founded their Christendom is not rich enough
to support a popular Christianity.

Since the age of Puritanism and Quakerism,
mysticism has run like an undercurrent among
the English populace, while the upper classes have
bowed before the laws of reason and utilitarianism.
But the old craving has never been entirely
killed. With the entrance of Romanticism
in England the springs of mysticism burst open
afresh ; it mildly flows through Wordsworth’ s
poems, it rushes wildly through Carlyle’s . Puritanical
and pantheistic idealism, and wakes a somewhat
feebler echo in Emerson on the other side of the
Atlantic. Even Tennyson, with all his clearness, is
somewhat of an ecstatic when in genuine mystic
fashion he challenges his poetic genius to reveal


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 261


itself. Robert Browning and Charles Kingsley, in
short, most of the popular English authors, have
drawn from the mystic well, or have it bubbling
in themselves.

All these men, on the surface so different from
one another, have this one thing in common, that
they all desire to see the “ infinite in things finite,”
and consecrate their life to the finding of it. For,
as Samuel Johnson, the forerunner of idealism,
said, in the materialistic age which preceded this
period, " people have lost their soul out of their
body, and now run hither and thither in search of
it.” Now these men saw — and especially the
poets among them saw — the infinite reflected in
nature, and man as the central figure in nature,
the symbol of the meeting between nature and
spirit.

“ T3e sense sublime

Of something far more deeply interfused,

Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,

And the round ocean, and the living air.

And the blue sky, and in the mind of man;

A motion and a spirit, that impels

All thinking things, all objects of all thoughts.

And rolls through all things.”

r\

This is not only Wordsworth’s sentiment, but it
expresses the feeling of a host of English poets,
philosophers, and theologians, their minds bearing
the impress of intuition, and having been fertilised
by pantheism ; from W illiam Law, the Platonist of


262


MYSTICISM


the eighteenth century, down to such modern men
as Francis Newman, with his Phases of Faith.
In all we notice the same desire which we met
with in Fenelon and Leibniz, the desire to make
the divine fit in with the demands of reason and
morality. The Quakers, in their rational explicit
way, made out that the " inner light ” is the same
as reason and conscience. The Romantic School,
however, explains these ideas psychologically, and
amplifies them into a general theory. In Julius
Hare’s celebrated work, The Victory of Faith
(1839), the English counterpart of Schleiermacher’s
Reden, a depth of soul is attributed to man, in
which mind and heart and will in original unity
are inseparably present. This primitive force is
faith, the faith which raises heart and will and
mind from the visible to the invisible ; the power
in man by which the spiritual world can exercise
its influence over man, and therefore the only
faith by which man can live. This same idea
Newman expresses in his Phases of Faith, and
Emerson fingers lovingly on the contemplation
of this inner nature, and finds in it not only the
unity of man’s being, but also man’s 'unity with
God. In the innermost depths of the human
soul, he says, lies the soul of the universe, the
wisdom of silence, the essence of beauty in which
all worldly things are contained in their due
proportions: "the Everlasting Existence.” And


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 263

as he contemplates external nature he reads with
keen, kindly perception the book of nature,
written in the secret language of God, and finds
God himself in all the beautiful things of nature.
In the j oy of this discovery he forgets to see what
is ugly or to notice the evil. To him God in-
dwelling nature means the prevalence of good
in the world, and God taking up his abode in man
means man doing what is good. This is an
idyllic nature — mysticism in temperate sunshine,
and a moral optimism which sounds like music
without discords.

His friend Carlyle declares the unity of the
world with the thunder of Sinai, and reveals the
inner being of nature by volcanic eruptions. To
him the firm earth on which we tread (and who
trod it firmer than* Carlyle !) and the stars we see
and the worlds we imagine — the whole universe,
in fact, is but a garment in which God clothes
Himself ; God, who is invisible in Himself, but made
visible in this vesture. Nevertheless, He is real in
His invisibleness, so real that He is the only reality.
Therefore the world is before all things spirit ;
before all things infinity, before all things justice —
completely controlled by these qualities, existing
through them alone, without them mere show
and shadow. The worth of all things is in the
ideal ; all reality is in the ideal ; only through the
ideal the visible assumes reality ; it would lose


264


MYSTICISM


all its value, would dissolve into nothing if the
ideal were absent. And as this Divine Presence
dwells in nature, so it also dwells in man. Is
there any clearer manifestation of the Divinity to
our eyes and to our heart than in our neighbour ?
“ Bending before men is a reverence done to this
Revelation in the Flesh.” We are the wonder
above all wonders, the great, unfathomable
mystery of God. We cannot understand it, nor
can we argue about it, but we can, if we will, feel
and experience that it is verily true.

All this we read in the “ Philosophy of Clothes,”
in that marvellous book Sartor Resartus (1835),
in which Spinoza’s pantheism and German
Romanticism, Puritan earnestness, and English
matter-of-factness meet — mysticism in every word
and behind every outbreak of eloquence. And
yet the more Carlyle thinks about it, the more
this transparent perception becomes a clear dis-
cernment of the moral reality of which this God-
filled, God-inspired nature consists. The great
spirit of the world is just, that was the message
of the prophets, of Calvin and also of Fichte. All
great men have said it, all noble men have ex-
perienced it ; it is the voice of wisdom in the
history of man ; the voice of nature in man. He
who defies this reality must run aground against
it, — all have done so sooner or later, — for this law
is immutable as the law of phyiscal nature itself.


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 265

Therefore, obey the law of reality, for it is the
law of God and the law of nature. Be true and '
just and natural ; do thy work honestly and
without presumption, do it with all thy might ;
be brave, be earnest, be just and merciful ; think
not of thyself, but think of others ; give thyself to
the society in which thou movest, and to the cause
for which thou workest, and thou shalt bring forth
out of this poor earth blessings abundantly, as
many as can be attained here below. Such is
" the gospel of labour ” which Carlyle preached,
and this exhortation to practical activity, justice,
and self-sacrifice is the basis of the mysticism of
the nineteenth century. Through Carlyle, with
his materialistic demands, mysticism has taken
root in English soil, and that in a century which,
like Carlyle himself, began with the dreams of
the Romantic School a«d ended in the Realism
of labour and common interest.

But where in the Lutheran church is the heritage
of mysticism to be found ? Pietism and the
German Romantic School are the heritage. For
some time it seemed as if the Lutheran church
had been disinherited and had retained no vestige
of mysticism, although, through Luther, relation-
ship could certainly be claimed. He himself, with
advancing years, had broken off the connection,
and he rejoiced in having done so when he saw


266


MYSTICISM


where mysticism had led the Anabaptists, the
stepbrothers of the Reformation. The Baptists,
and particularly the “ prophets of Zwickau,”
who styled themselves the genuine and consistent
Reformers, in spite of their radical notions still
practised mysticism in the old Catholic fashion,
with ecstasy and the prophetic “ being possessed,”
with hatred against the Church and hostile feelings
towards the State, with Socialism and Theocracy,
and the strange coupling together of liberty in
the Holy Ghost and slavery under sectarian views
and duties, as it is found everywhere in mystic
communities. The still more objectionable coup-
ling of moral freedom with the slavery of sin,
was not absent in this Baptist form of mysticism
either, and there sin had its own reward, for
the wages of sin is death. The Baptist move-
ment never grew to be a. historical power, but
its after - effects are still perceptible now and
again, not so much in the Lutheran but rather
in the Reformed Church.

In the Reformed Church the Baptist spirit
could more easily find shelter ; for, in the Re-
formed party, there also lurked theocracy and the
doctrine of penances and discipline. Old Testa-
ment inspirations and a Jewish scrupulousness in
the fulfilment of the law. The harshness and
dryness which prevailed among the followers of
Calvin and Zwingli opened the door to mysticism.


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 267

The reaction of feeling set in sooner there, and the
mistake of Calvinism was that it gave so little
room to individual piety, that less even than in the
Catholic church the inner, personal life was cared
for. Moreover, it had no poetry to offer beyond
what could be culled from the Old Testament
writings. The Lutherans were dry enough, but
they had at least their Luther and Paul Gerhardt.

To Ritschl belongs the credit of having shown
Lutheran Pietism as a genuine offspring of the
Reformed Church, where it fed on the mysticism
which, with true Catholic and Anabaptistic birth-
marks, went about among the Zwinglians and
Calvinists, both in Germany and in the Nether-
lands. Holland was a fruitful soil for that kind
of excitement. There monastic piety always went
about clad in the ‘old mystical traditions of the
Middle Ages. There tf^ memory still survived
of the great Dutch mystic, Jan van Ruisbroek
(b. 1294), whose speculative pantheism, as con-
tained in his Dutch writings, was accessible to
all, and whose contemplative piety survived in
the “ Brotherhood of Common Life.” The old
seed sprang up again with renewed vigour, and
in Theodor Brakel the unveiled semi- or wholly
Catholic tenor of the mysticism of the seventeenth
century in Holland is very perceptible. He
taught that true happiness consists in the union
of the soul with God and Christ ; that the only


a68


MYSTICISM


really spiritual attitude of the soul is the being
espoused to the perfect Spirit ; the soul thus
being filled and satiated with God. His com-
patriot, Herman Witsius, suggested that the
sanctuary of the “ Celestial Academy ” could not
be entered by hearing, nor by the intellect, nor by
faith, but only by seeing and tasting God. For
therein lies God’s great goodness, that He teaches
His beloved by experience, by taking them apart
into His secret place. His tabernacle. In this con-
viction people began to sing the old melody over
again, the melody which resounds in the Song of
Solomon and the Shulamite. The Pietists took up
the strain, and sang it unceasingly to prove the
Biblical right of their erotic love of God.

But they proved the mystical rather than
the Biblical origin of their ]5iety. In this one
respect, in their erotic lqye of Jesus, Pietists and
Moravian Brethren alike greedily absorb the
mystic heritage. In other things the Pietists are
not at all mystically disposed. Their conception
of God is not pantheistic or speculative ; nor can
their piety be called ecstatic, any more than their
morality, in many respects puerile p.nd super-
ficial, bears an ascetic character. Pietism settled
down comfortably both in Church and State, and
never overstepped the boundaries of social life.
On the contrary, none obeyed Luther’s injunctions :
“ to live and to labour in that state of life to which


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 269

he had been called,” more scrupulously than those
industrious, kind-hearted people who served their
God with plane and saw, rejoicing in the fact that
Jesus himself had been a carpenter and Paul a
tentmaker. Untiring philanthropists they were,
who established schools, orphanages, and dis-
pensaries with as much vigour as they printed
Bibles and sent out missionaries. These pietistic
ancestors laid the foundation of the ideal social
virtues afterwards embodied in the Rationalists.
The Humanists and pedagogues of the eighteenth
century merely reasoned out what the Pietists
had conceived by faith.

This pietistic faith, however, became fanatical
as it came nearer to the point — so sadly neglected
by Orthodoxy — namely, the point of perfect
resignation and self-sacrifice. There was a hunger-
ing and thirsting which Reason could not satisfy ;
they therefore refreshed themselves at the living
source of Lutheranism, even though they had to
search it out from under the dry leaves. They
went back to the old wells ; they read St. Ber-
nard’s exposition of the Song of Solomon and
Suso’s Book of Wisdom, and drew fresh water
from the nearest spring, the New Catholic mysti-
cism of Molinos and Francis de Sales. They did
not go quite as far as the " disinterested love ”
theory of Madame Chantal and Madame Guyon ;
they were too practical and energetic for that.


270


MYSTICISM


Yet, in their active workaday life and in their
observance of holy days, there is an undercurrent
of Quietism, which made their souls passively
expectant.

The love which they learned from the mystics
was not disinterested, like that of Madame Guyon
and Fenelon. The struggle against the erotic and
the egotistical in their resignation to God, intro-
duced by Madame Guyon, and carried further by
Fenelon, found no place in German Pietism. But
there is over it all an atmosphere of trembling and
languishing, of feeling and tasting, a wail of amorous
affection and an unveiled longing, which was carried
to perfection by the Moravian Brotherhood, who
in their inner life and their social arrangements
are more mystical than the Pietists. All this
leaven of mysticism flows through Zinzendorf’s
sacred hymns. r

But the purer form of Pietism also breathes
the spirit of mysticism, and that this also is
a product of the seventeenth century becomes
evident when we analyse the devotional writings
and hymns of the best Pietistic authors. Let us
take the most beautiful of them all, the Dane
Brorson, whose spiritual songs are the groundwork
of all the Christian piety of the North, and are
sung every Sunday in the churches of Schleswig,
Denmark, and Norway, and we cannot fail to see
the connection.


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 271

The characteristic feature of this poetry is its
strong, subjective strain, the constant circling
round the feelings of the soul. The movement is
the same as in the days of St. Teresa, a gradual
climbing up from the soul’s complete emptiness
of God to the perfect enjoyment of God’s presence.
However biblically Brorson discourses on sin 'and
grace, in his comprehension of the poles of Christian
life, there is something of these contrasts : empti-
ness and fulness, distance and nearness, which
were the chief points in St. Augustine’s mysticism.
Thirst and dryness of soul, cold and darkness are
the negative pole of his experience. This is the
siccitas with which mysticism always works ; the
" barrenness ” of the soul until it is touched by
God. This sterility expresses God’s anger ; man
feels himself lost ir* his sinfulness, rejected, aban-
doned. Longing and sighing, urging and weeping
are the signs which mark this period. But com-
fort is near, for, by the persistent feeling of want and
emptiness, the soul is being prepared for the fulness
of grace. This grace, which in the first place is the
forgiveness of sins, comes as a sudden revelation, as
a breaking through the clouds, of warmth and light,
as a refreshing stream, as a fertilising influence.
Then the hour of gladness has come, then the
victory is won, and suddenly the struggle is at an
end. It comes of itself, for it is grace ; but it
only comes where the emptiness is felt to its full


272


MYSTICISM


extent. It comes in the way of God’s law of
salvation, as the rose came forth and the seed
bore fruit when the world was void and empty ;
but it also comes as a kind of psychological
necessity. From emptiness springs fulness ;
when the heart is most troubled, the harp of
joy is being tuned that it may have the truer
sound.

This condition of expectancy, which is the point
of gravitation in his psychology, Brorson has no-
where entered into more deeply than in his beau-
tiful poem, " Wait, 0 wait, and keep silence, O
my soul ! ” This poem, the first verse of which
sounds like the refrain of all mysticism, is the
northern and Protestant counterpart of St.
Teresa’s description of the watering of the soul’s
garden. Brorson’s symbol ofe the soul forsaken
of God is not Spanish barrenness and dryness
of soil, but the gloomy northern winter. Not
masoned waterworks and artificial makeshifts,
but the gradually approaching northern spring-
time, represents to him the process the soul has
to pass through before the blessing comes. There,
the zeal of Catholic hands, watering the garden
until the moisture comes of its own accord, ending
in showers of heavenly blessing ; here, in Brorson’s
poem, only silent expectation and passive re-
ceptiveness : “ Only in waiting thy summer is
sure.”


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 273

Constant expectation, constant drawing nearer ;
always step by step, such is the desired attitude.
All that happens to the soul has its prototype in
nature ; all is done for the soul, not by the soul.
And when Brorson refers to the “ anguish of
dryness,” he does not set to work with watering-
cans and augers, he does not dig canals to convey
the water of life, he only knows of one remedy,
the remedy that comes without our aid, when the
hour of grace has struck —

“Come, heavenly shower, refresh the earth,

And make it a valley where the lilies grow/'

Therefore ultimately and intrinsically Brorson
is Protestant ; and whatever may be said against
Pietism, that it is Catholic and mystical, Reformed
or Anabaptistic, on% thing is certain, namely, that
it was a revival of Lutheran Christianity, that it
saved the life of Lutheranism when it was ready to
die, and vitalised its spiritual and social energies
into being more what they were in Luther’s days
than in the days of even his immediate successors —
although possibly the life thus revived was lived
with paler cheeks and more sombre mien than
Luther’s life? and early Lutherdom ever was.


Rationalism was not the death of mysticism,
as many people imagine. The roots of Pietism
18


274


MYSTICISM


had struck too deeply, and mysticism is too closely
interwoven with human inclinations to make
it possible for it to disappear altogether from
the ken of religion. Moreover, the enlightened,
rationalistic views were, especially at first, confined
to the upper classes and the scholars, and did not
penetrate to the masses. When in simple folk the
intellect was roused, they did very much the same
as did the parents of Jung Stilling, they read the
works of John Arndt and Thomas a Kernpis, and
even those of Jacob Boehme and Fenelon, and
were edified by them. They drew from the wells
of mysticism the inner light which the higher
and enlightened circles drew from the intellect,
and set up as new lamps.

Yet how easy and gentle could be the transition
of mysticism into Rationalism, even within the
sacred precincts of scientific culture, we have
already had occasion to notice in the case of
Leibniz and Fenelon, but a more violent and
more direct breaking through of the mystic vein
took place in the mind of a man who occupied a
high position in the physical-mathematical world
of his day, and whose moral strength and refine-
ment placed him on a line with the noblest
intellects of the period. We refer to the Swedish
seer, Emmanuel Swedenborg. The " Traume eines
Geistersehers ” (Dreams of a Visionary), as Kant
styled Swedenborg's ideas, are not merely a


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 275


product of northern phantasy, such as to this day
leads excitable minds into all kind of mystical
extravagances, nor was Swedenborg in the first
instance a clairvoyant and spiritualist. His was
rather an all-embracing mind, who set himself the
enormous task of building up a system of nature
which, after the manner of the Areopagite, was to
encompass and bring into natural harmony the
spiritual and the material scopes of the world. He
did not set to work ignorantly and amateurishly,
like a Boehme had done, but with all the means of
science at his disposal he built up a ladder, with
naturally graduating and mutually corresponding
steps, landing one ultimately into the world of
spirits with whom man can hold intercourse even
in mortal life. This latter adjunct was the
mysticism in Swedenborg. The boundaries of
knowledge set by hi% contemporary Kant, he
either did not know or ignored. The way to
God also he made direct, plain to the Christian
mind, because the invisible is incorporated in
Christ, and, existing in Him alone, is accessible to
the receptive mind as an historical fact.

The distinctive principle of Swedenborg’s theo-
logy, however, — that the spiritual is only visible
in the corporeal, the divine only comprehensible in
the human, — is a foreboding of the Romantic
School. Swedenborg is not a Romanticist, nor
a Rationalist, properly speaking. Both these


MYSTICISM


276

schools looked upon him as eccentric, but his
influence was not as great as that of that other
eccentric, his contemporary, Jean Jacques Rousseau,
who also stood midway between Romanticism and
Rationalism ; Rousseau brought the forces of
Rationalism to bear upon Romanticism, and his
ideas are therefore to this day of universal signifi-
cance for the spiritual life of Europe. Sweden-
borg’s influence was the influence of a sectarian
— only sectarians have followed him.


With the Romantic School, mysticism once more
found a wide entrance among the upper classes of
society, and took hold of the ruling spirits of the
time. The sentiments and poetry of this period
were so obviously akin to mysticism that no
one could pretend not to be aware of the rela-
tionship. In the literary effusions of the writers
of Romanticism we at once recognise the direc-
tion their minds have taken. The writings of the
old mystics are again consulted. Hegel studies
Master Eckhart, and Schelling goes into ecstasies
over Jacob Boehme, while Novalis is absorbed in
Heinrich Suso. The translation of the Sp anish
mystics, already attempted by the Pietistic School,
is resumed. Students invigorate themselves with
the mysticism of the East. India’s wisdom
attracts Friedrich Schlegel, and he transplants


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 277

the mystical didactic poem, Bhagavadgita, into
European soil. Riickert translates Persian mystics,
and the theologian Tholuck writes the first German
book about Sufism.

The influence of mysticism in the Romantic
School is also very personal and individual. This
form of it still survives in the lay piety of the
Roman Catholics, the Moravian Brethren, and the
Puritans. To some it is a reminiscence of their
childhood, recalling old associations, to others it
comes in riper years in the form of a strong and
mighty friend. Sometimes the poets of that
period look back with longing to the mystic
charm of the Catholic church, bewailing a treasure
that is lost. This is reflected in Schiller’s works,
although the poet himself loses none of his Kantian
clearness.

He makes his Mortifner into the convert, but
the enthusiasm with which the newly converted
discourses upon the power and the beauty of the
Roman worship, is not merely poetic fancy ;
Schiller must have felt the overpowering influence
of it himself.

“ What w8re my feelings, then, as I approach’d

The threshold of the churches, and -within,

Heard heav’nly music floating in the air :

While from the walls and high-wrought roofs there
stream’d

Crowds of celestial forms in endless train —

When the Most High, Most Glorious, pervaded


278


MYSTICISM


My captivated sense in real presence !

And when I saw the great and godlike visions,

The Salutation, the Nativity,

The Holy Mother, and the Trinity’s
Descent, the luminous Transfiguration :

And last the holy Pontiff, clad in all
The glory of his office, bless the people !

O ! What is all the pomp of gold and jewels
With which the kings of earth adorn themselves !

He is alone surrounded by the Godhead ;

His mansion is in truth an' heav’nly kingdom,

For not of earthly moulding are these forms ! ”

{Mary Stuart, Act 1, Scene vi. T. Mellish’s
Standard Translation.)

What Mortimer experienced is the same as what
Wackenroder describes in his Kunstliebendem
Klosterbruder , but here given in the form of a
personal confession which gives a deep insight
into the poet’s heart : —

" The glorious temple, the Purging, swaying
masses of people, the splendid preparations, all
this entranced me. A feeling of great solemnity
came over me, and although I had no coherent
thoughts I felt strangely moved as if something
extraordinary was about to happen to me. Sud-
denly there was a great hush, and above it rose
the mighty sound of music, like a gust of wind
blowing over our heads. My heart beat more
quickly, a longing possessed me for something
great and exalted that I might embrace it. . . .
And as the music thus enveloped my soul and
flowed through all my veins I lifted up my eyes


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 279

and gazed round . . . and the whole temple
seemed to be alive, for the music had intoxicated
me. Just then it stopped. A priest approached
the high altar, raised the host, and showed it to
the assembled people. . . . All sank on their
knees, and a secret, wonderful power drew me
also irresistibly down to the ground. I could not
have remained standing, however much I might
have wished to do so, and as I knelt, with head
bent low, and my heart full to bursting, an inexplic-
able power again made me look up. As I gazed it
appeared to me as if all those bent forms were
praying to the Heavenly Father for the salvation
of my soul, as if all those hundreds assembled
there were sending up their supplications for the
lost one in their midst, and their silent devotion
irresistibly drew Hie towards their belief. . . . My
eye fell on the altar an^l a picture of Christ on the
cross, looking at me with inexpressible sadness ;
the mighty pillars of the temple, rising as it were
in adoration, seemed like the apostles and saints
gazing down on me, from the height of their
capitals . . . while the immense dome of the
Cathedral, curving over the whole assembly, was
like the all-encompassing vault of heaven, bringing
blessings on me and my pious resolutions.” 1

In Stollberg and ZachariasWerner the reform from

1 Phantasien fiber die Kunst, published by L. Heck, 2nd
ed. 1814, pp. 151-153.


28 o


MYSTICISM


fancifulness back to reality was effected. The
latter carried his romantic enthusiasm into the
glowing ardour of a Redemptorist monk ; Stollberg,
whose Pietistic notions had brought him into the
Catholic Church, preserved in his poetic effusions
the quiet gravity of the Pietists under the more
agreeable forms of Roman Catholicism. For
Brentano, who owed his personal conversion to
Stollberg, it was not necesary to make an outward
act of joining the Church of Rome, for he had been
born in that belief. In Ida Hahn-Hahn we have
an example of the romantic conversion, which
many women of that age followed, or would have
liked to imitate. “ There is a wave of Catholicism
passing over the world,” says the wise historian
Geijer, observing the phenomenon from his study
at Upsala. No one, however, ht that time fully
realised the service wlpch Romanticism was
rendering to the Roman Church. Wherever Roman
Catholicism existed it was being illumined and
energised by Romanticism. The classical example
of this is Chateaubriand’s " Genie du Christianisme,”
a book teeming with mysticism and mysteries, and
re-establishing over all these mysterious theories
the authority of the ancient Church. Even the
latent Catholicism of England was roused to f ull
activity in the practical Romanticist Newman,
Romanticism has amply repaid the Catholic
Church for all it borrowed from her.


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 281


Not only the Catholic Church, but also Protestant
mysticism supplied the Romanticists with plenty
of good material. The life of Thomas Carlyle
shows how a descendant of the old Puritan School,
awakened to a new life through the philosophy and
poetry of Romanticism, turns again to the mysti-
cism of his early youth and makes it the basis of
his belief. And how much of Moravian mysticism
there is in all German poetry ! Through Frl. v.
Klettenherg this mystic vein touched Goethe in his
youth, and had for a time a beneficial influence
over his heart and mind. The " Bekenntnisse
einer schonen Seele ” is the monument to his
acquaintance with a sister of the Moravian Brother-
hood, whose influence over Goethe cannot be too
highly esteemed.

Novalis, a genuine mystic of the German School
of Romanticism, generally gives the impression
of being a Roman Catholic. But he also had in his
youth been overshadowed by Herrnhutism, and
his father was a strict Pietist. On the young
poet the spirit of the Moravian Brethren had
a depressing effect, and ever after he thought
of them with dislike. Yet in this atmosphere
germs ripened which afterwards blossomed out
in his poetry.

It is well to observe, however, that love-sick
notes are struck but seldom in the hymns of
Novalis. As a writer of hymns he has rather


282


MYSTICISM


resuscitated the intimate tone of Paul Gerhard’s
than of Zinzendorf’s mysticism.

The most powerful representative of mysticism
in the age of the Romantic School was the theo-
logian Schlciermacher. His boyhood had been
spent in the school of the Moravian Brotherhood
at Barby, and the religious impressions there
received influenced his university career at Halle
and his whole after life. His Reden (“ Discourses
on Religion”), written about ten years after he
came to Halle, have the edifying ring of a sermon
of the Moravian Brotherhood, but they contain a
great deal more of it than the mere ring.

Was it a mere accident that a shoemaker’s
apprentice belonging to the Moravian Brother-
hood one day was sent to the lady de Kriidener’s
house to measure her for a pair of boots ? Who
can say what might have been the result of the
“ Holy Alliance ” if this impulsive lady had not
been struck by the inner joy illumining the face of
this young shoemaker ? From that time forward,
feeding on Moravian piety, she acquired that
unique, impressive tone of mystical intimacy
which proved irresistible to the highest in the
illustrious company assembled at the Vie nn a
Congress. Through her influence religion became
a strong, co-operative factor in that political circle,
and we are told that it was she who wrote the
momentous words, "The Holy Alliance ” over the


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 283

document that for fifteen years was to govern the
fate of Europe.

This was not a chance alliance of worldly and
spiritual elements ; from all eternity outward
pressure and inward longing go side by side.
Mysticism has always flourished under the oppres-
sion of tyranny, and it has been rightly said that
the despotism of the small German States and the
oppression of the Napoleonic rule largely aided in
leading excitable folks into tearful and quaking
fits of religion, into sentimental versemaking and
fantastic ways of thinking, while under freer con-
ditions the same people might by their energetic
efforts have helped to improve the world.

The sultry air of the “ Alliance ” period still
affects the Protestantism of the fifties of last
century. The inactive self-satisfaction and the
languid resignation intermixed with worldly-
mindedness, which characterises the religion of
that decade, embittered men like Feuerbach and
Soren Kierkegaard against official Christianity.
Albrecht Ritschl also realised that the disease from
which the Lutheran church suffered was mysticism
and Romanticism. The speculative notions of
theologians, and their dislike of cultural progress,
which he zealously set himself to fight against,
may be looked upon as the dregs of the mystic-
romantic fermentation ; but the revival of arts
and sciences and new religious energy soon brought


284


MYSTICISM


this gloomy period to a close. What we have to
fight against in the present day is the semi-Catholi-
cism into which — thanks to the Romantic School —
Lutheranism has degenerated, namely, clerically :
scholastic speculation and religious traditionalism ;
and in lay piety : belief in miracles and faith-
healing. Romanticism has followed the regular
mode of mysticism. It began by invigorating the
mind, and ended by weakening it ; and the weak-
ened mind, like the weakened body, loses the power
of mobility.

Looking back upon those energetic days of the
Romanticists, we marvel, however, at the wide
range of their ideas, the healthiness of their views,
their superiority over the mystical communities
from which they drew their nourishment, which
were Pietism, Moravian Brotherhood, Catholicism.
The Romantic School, however, aimed at other
things than the sectarians, whose object was to
produce a set of people made after a certain mould,
or than the church, the basis of whose sovereign
rule was the realm of nature. Early Romanticism
was a very near relative of the Rationalistic
School. We see this in Leibniz, who endeavoured
to gather all things together into one unity : faith
and knowledge, God and the world, spirit and
nature, the religious and the mundane. To
accomplish this, Rationalism gave a new inter-
pretation to the Bible, and narrowed down Chris-


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 285

tianity ; Leibniz wanted to fit religion into the
frame of the ideas he had formed. The Roman-
ticists also aimed at the restoration of this unity,
but their methods were just the opposite. They
enlarged their views of life in order that the
infinite might be encompassed by them. They
made nature into a higher, the human soul into a
deeper thing — for are not both indwelt by the
Divine Spirit ? That there exists a something
outside of our world which gives it meaning and
existence, in this they all agreed. Had not Kant
said long ago that behind the visible things of this
world there was a something which no human
understanding could grasp ?

Goethe also bases his conception of the world on
this ununderstandable something, but his poetic
soul cannot rest satisfied in contemplating an alto-
gether unfathomable reality. He tries at least
poetically to conceive the basis of our existence,
and sees in the phenomena of the world symbols
of the real life. All nature is a message from the
great unknown —

“ Nature's impenetrable agencies.

Are they not thronging on thy heart and brain.
Unseen yet visible to mortal ken,

Around thee weaving their mysterious reign ?

"Visible invisibility” is the mystic twilight;
through the visible the invisible speaks to us.
All that is transitory is but symbolic ; the


a86


MYSTICISM


world, which time’s whizzing loom unceasingly
weaves, is the life-garment of the Deity. We
see only the coloured reflection, not the sun itself ;
its light reflected in the rainbow is as much as our
eyes can bear. Thus all visible things are a kind
of symbolic language in which God speaks to us,
and which it is our business to understand. It
is our own fault if we do not understand it : —

“ Unlocked the realm of spirits lies ; —

Thy sense is shut, thy heart is dead ! ”

But when heart and sense awaken, then we can
read the problem. The world truly remains a
secret, but it becomes an “ open secret,” and as
the universe reveals its signs to Faust, he sees it
unfolding itself to his view as the one all-encom-
passing unity : —

C

“ How all things live and work, and, ever blending,
Weave one vast whole £rom Being's ample range !
How powers celestial, rising and descending,

Their golden buckets ceaseless interchange I
Their flight on rapture-breathing pinions winging,

From heaven to earth their genial influence bringing.
Through the wide whole their chimes melodious
ringing.”

The things which Goethe was satisfied to see
reflected in symbols, the next generation, the
Romantic School, wanted to see, to know, to feel
directly. All aim at this. To Jacobi , faith is a
direct knowing of God; and Fichte , writing his
Anweisung zum seligen Leben > — a book which


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 287

from beginning to end breathes mysticism, —
borrows Goethe’s idea where he says that God
truly exists in and for Himself, hidden behind all
the symbols of the universe, and that we can
only by intuition know of His existence behind
this veil of earthly things which always hides
Him from our eyes. But — he goes on to say
— rise up to the standpoint of religion, and all
coverings fall away. The world with its life-
less principle vanishes, and the Godhead Himself
takes up His abode in thee. He comes in His
original form, the form of life, the form of thine
own life which thou must live. In the life and
the love and the deeds of the regenerate man,
God reveals Himself no longer veiled or disguised,
but in His own, direct, strong vitality, and the
question, “ What* is God ? ” which a vague,
shadowy conception of God could not reply to, is
now answered thus : He is that which shines out of
the person inspired by Him and consecrated to Him.

Tauler could speak in a similar manner, but
Novalis excels even Fichte in palpable mysti-
cism : “ We touch heaven when we lay hands on
a human body. Where is God to be found if
not in human flesh and blood ? ” Carlyle has it
from Novalis.

It is always oneness, and the direct apprehension
of this oneness, which the soul desires. God in
the world of nature, God in ourselves; and in


288


MYSTICISM


Hegel’s philosophy the transcendental climax is
reached in the thought that religion is man’s
consciousness of the absolute spirit within him,
which has found its most perfect expression in
the words of Jesus : " I and the Father are one.”
This is the thought to which faith leads through
symbols and visible things, but greater than this
faith with its pictures and representations is the
direct philosophical apprehension, when the think-
ing mind rises to the abode of absolute conscious-
ness, high above all finite things, and thus itself
becomes infinite consciousness.

To us this language sounds unfamiliar and
foreign, as if it emanated from Indian or Platonic
philosophers, for they indeed said very much the
same thing. Yet we reap the benefit of the
extravagant notions our fathers indulged in.
For out of these Romantic speculations has been
born the consciousness of the Infinite which now
appears so natural to us. The world of human
thought has become enlarged and widened by all
this transcendentalism, all this soaring into the
ethereal blues. Natural science has not been
our only guide to these heights. And God has
become enlarged for us, and our life is enlarged,
because we have learned to apprehend the Infinite.

Besides all this, we owe it to the Romantic
School that it has brought us in closer touch with
nature. The word “ nature ” resounds like a


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 289

canticle throughout this school of thought. It
resounds in its poetry, its science, its philosophy.
All its scholars have studied nature, and have
returned the richer for it. Although maybe in
strange fantastic ways, yet they investigated
nature ; dreamily perhaps, yet they lived nature.
Nature revealed its beauty to them, until they
saw it in everything. They felt the powers of
nature pulsating through their innermost being,
and they realised that in nature the highest
power reveals itself. Or perhaps : the power of
the Most High. For where the true scholar of
the Romantic School elevates himself to God
and is not content with the Divinity of nature,
he nevertheless sees God reflected in nature, or
he considers nature as a symbol of Divinity.
This was Stollberg’s experience when he adored
“beautiful, divine nature.” Thus all of this
school have more or less looked upon nature.

The most precious inheritance of those days is
that craving for inward life which it produced.
While philosophers speculated themselves into
gods, and poets melted into nature, and thus each
in their own way accomplished the mystic union
they craved for, a third way to God was found,
the way of devotion and self-surrender. This
way also was mystically taught, it had been trod
for ages ; and when Schleier'macher at the beginning
of the nineteenth century gave his “ Discourses

19


290


MYSTICISM


on Religion,” he not only spoke from personal
conviction, and led on by the current of the times,
but also betrayed his early bringing up among the
Moravian Brethren, who had initiated him into the
old mystic doctrines. These he now offered to the
highly educated who despised religion, dished up
with all the poetical refinement and philosophical
delicacy which culture could supply.

Schleiermacher made an emotional state of
mind the basis of belief. In the deepest depth
of the human heart, where consciousness is not
clearly defined, and where there is no real activity,
but from whence proceed aspirations and dreams,
pious longings and impulses, there the soul meets
God, is satiated with God. Not with one simple
faculty of the soul, but with our whole, inner-
most being, do we come before God. For God
himself fills the whole universe. All the forces

n

and phenomena of the universe are expressive
of Him. To grasp this with all the power of our
soul, and to make this the fundamental principle
of our life, that is religion.

And it is also mysticism, but this mysticism con-
tains the elements of true religion. In this dawn of
consciousness, the universe and nature and human
personality stand out in their full magnitude.
The personal is the chief point on which all
depends, for only in so far as I am sensible of
God’s presence, in that measure God exists for


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 291

me. Though I believed all things, did all things,
knew all things, and did not feel God’s presence
within me, all my religion would profit me nothing.
Schleiermacher brought the glad tidings that
religion is a personal matter and not a general
thing which one had but to join to share its
benefits, as was taught by the Catholic Church,
believed by the Orthodox Protestants, and
preached by the Rationalistic critical and specu-
lative philosophers of the time. The Romantic
School had discovered the worth of individualism,
and Schleiermacher assigned it its proper place
in religion. The vague, semi-conscious state
which in his earlier writings he allots to individual-
ism, gives place in riper years to the clear and
certain assurance of individual faith. There must
be not only entire conviction but entire self-
surrender, the feeling of absolute dependence. Our
absolute dependence on God is our salvation.
What profit is it to know that God is absolutely
good, as long as it does not affect our relation to
God?

This again is one of the theories which mysticism
has bequeathed to mankind, and in Schleier-
macher’s *“ absolute dependence” there are still
remnants to be found of the “ amour desinteresse ”
of the seventeenth century. This accounts for
it being somewhat passive, and, as it may be
said of Schleiermacher’s early definition of re-


293


MYSTICISM


ligion that it" has not enough clear consciousness,
so one may justly protest against his “absolute
dependence” theory, that — like everything that
is tainted with mysticism — there is too little
energetic vitality about it.

This objection was raised by many who, no less
than Schleiermacher, were of opinion that religion
was a personal matter; that subjectiveness 'is
the real thing ; that faith is intimacy, the passion
of intimacy ; that Christianity is absolute self-
surrender, a leap into the depths of the unknown.
By none, however, this was so eagerly and so
sharply accentuated as by the Danish philosopher,
Soren Kierkegaard. He set to work with great
earnestness and skill to cut away all the wrappings
in which faith had been bound up to protect it
from defilement, but which werenall the time eat-
ing away its vitality : speculations and aesthetics,
theories and traditions, clerical, social, and indivi-
dual beliefs. For there is but one faith, and it
must be personal ; and there is but one truth, and it
must be apprehended personally.

This is the last word and essence of all mysticism,
proclaimed throughout the ages with no uncertain
sound ; now no longer clothed in mystic coverings,
but boldly preached as the simple, human truth :
it is thou whom it concerns.

There is a little Eastern poem about a young


OUTCROPS AND AFTER-EFFECTS 293


man who in the night goes to visit his beloved,
and when he knocks at her door and she asks
who knocks, he answers : “It is I ! ” — But the
door is not opened. Then he goes out into the
solitude of night, and when he returns and knocks
a second time, and she asks who is there, he
answers : “ It is thou ! ” Then she lets him in.

This, in a few words, is the history of mysticism.
Yet not the whole of its history, for there is a
sequel : —

A thousand years later a lonely wanderer
knocked at the door of the Deity, and on being
asked who he was, he answered, as he had been
taught : “It is thou ! ” — But the door was not
opened to him. Then he went out into the
world and laboured hard and served his neighbour.
And when he returned to the door of heaven,
and knocked and was asked who he was, he
answered : "It is I ! ’’—and the door was opened.

For God has now revealed Himself differently.
He will not that his faithful be one with Him,
but that they, abiding in the fear of God, retain
their individuality.


Printed by

Morrison & Oibu Limited

Edinburgh


i


,r',, .. ^


vr


r


t'


Central Archaeological Library,

NEW DELHI.


Author— tehnaoin, £


JYlysHc/sm /* Hc/xtUe-
