Materialism and Empirio-Criticism
Vladimir Lenin (David Kvitko, trans.) (1927)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Vladimir Lenin's 'Materializm i empiriokrititsizm' (1909) in David Kvitko's English translation (New York: International Publishers, 1927), 'translated from the Russian' under the editorial supervision of Alexander Trachtenberg. Scan via Internet Archive. Scan artifacts trimmed from beginning and end. This 1927 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

MATERIALISM
AND
EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


CRITICAL NOTES CONCERNING
A REACTIONARY PHILOSOPHY


a


NEW YORK
INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS


Copyright, 1927, by
INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS CO., Inc.


Printed in the U. 8. A.


Composed and printed. by union labor


This volume is translated from the Russian by
Davip KvitKo


and published under the editorial supervision of


ALEXANDER TRACHTENBERG


CONTENTS


AutnHor’s PREFACE TO THE First EpitIon
AutHor’s PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION .


INTRODUCTION


How Certain Marxists 1n 1908 anp Certain IpDEALISTS IN 1710 REFUTED
MATERIALISM . .


CHAPTER ONE


THe THEorY oF KNOWLEDGE oF Empirio-CriTIcIsM AND OF DIALECTIC
Materiatism I.


Sensations and Complexes of Sensations
“The Discovery of the World Elements”
Essential Co-ordination and “Naive Realism”
Did Nature Exist Prior to Man? .

Does Man Think With the Help of the Brain?
Concerning the Solipsism of Mach and Avenarius


O50 8 8. e


ait lal) ad


CHAPTER TWO


Tue THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE OF Empirio-CRITICISM AND OF DIALECTIC


Materiatism II. + Z : é : : ; .
1. The “Thing-in-Itself,” or V. Chernov Refutes Engels
2. On “Transcendence” or Bazarov “Corrects” Engels .
8. Feuerbach and Dietzgen on the “Thing-in-Itself”
4. Does Objective Truth Exist? :
5. Absolute and Relative Truth, or on the Welecticiats of Engels
Discovered by Bogdanov x
6. The Criterion of Practice in the Theory of Knowlodge


CHAPTER THREE


Tur Tueory oF KNOWLEDGE OF Emprrio-CRITICISM AND OF DIALECTIC
Materiatism III.


1. What is Matter? What is Experience? ,

2. Plekhanov’s Error Concerning the ah Wieperionee

3. Causality and Necessity in Nature . : ;

4. The “Principle of Economy of Ab and ‘the Question of
“World Unity” . F 4 Z ° : 2

5. Space and Time . : ; é A 5

6.


Freedom and Necessity . i , : A 5 ‘ ;
vii


viii CONTENTS


a  —_ ———


CHAPTER FOUR


Tue Puitosopuic IpEaists AS ASSOCIATES AND Successors oF Empirio-
CRITICISTS . ‘ ‘ ; : 4 : : \ E :


1. The Criticism of Kantianism from the Left and from the Right

2. How the “Empirio- Symbolist” Yushkevich Ridiculed the
“Empirio-Criticist” Chernov .

3. The Immanentists as Associates of Mach snd Avvennitins ‘ :

4. In What Direction Is Empirio-Criticism Developing? F :

5. Bogdanov’s Empirio-Monism

6. The “Theory of Symbols” (or of Hieroglyphs) 2 a the Cricien
of Helmholtz : : 5

7. About the Twofold Cress: of Didbviag ; 3 é

8. How Could Dietzgen Please the Reactionary Philostphere? 2 :


CHAPTER FIVE


Tue Latest REVOLUTION in NaTuRAL SCIENCE AND PuiLosopuic IDEALISM


1. The Crisis in Modern Physics . : ;
2. “Matter Has Disappeared” . 5
3. Is Motion Without Matter Concetvable?
4. Two Tendencies in Modern Physics and English Seiriaban!
5. Two Tendencies in Modern Physics and German Idealism
6. Two Tendencies in Modern Physics and French Fideism .
7. A Russian “Idealist-Physicist” ? ? ct .
8. The Essence and Significance of Idealisne Physics ; : ;
CHAPTER SIX
Empirio-Criticism AND HistortcaL MATERIALISM . ‘ :


1, The Excursion of the German Empirio-Criticists Into the Domain
of Social Science

2. How Bogdanov Corrects and “Develops” Marx . *

3. On Suvorov’s “Foundations of Social Philosophy” j 4 :

4. “Parties” in Philosophy and Blockheads in Sones acl ‘ 5

5. Ernst Haeckel and Ernst Mach : 4 R 2 :


ConcLusion . 5 - ; 4 : ‘ - 5 - ;
ADDENDA


From Wuat Ancte Din CuernysHEvskKy APPROACH THE CRITICISM OF
KANTIANISM ? 5 : . ; 5

Ten Questions Pur To THE : Lactomen : A : :

On Diatectics . A : : 4 : 3 : x 5


APPENDIX


Diacectic MATERIALISM AND THE PuHiLosopHy oF DEAD REACTION,
by V. Nevsky .


318


329


MATERIALISM
AND
EMPIRIO- CRITICISM


AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


A HOST of writers, who desire to be Marxists, have launched a
veritable onslaught against the philosophy of Marxism. In less
than half a year four books, devoted chiefly and almost exclusively
to attacks on dialectic materialism, have made their appearance.
To those belong first and foremost Outlines of (it would have been
more proper to say “against”) Marxian Philosophy, St. Petersburg,
1908 (in Russian), a collective work by Bazarov, Bogdanov,
Lunacharsky, Berman, Helfond, Yushkevich and Suvorov; Yushke-
vich’s book, Materialism and Critical Realism (in Russian) ; Ber-
man’s Dialectics from the Standpoint of the Modern Theory of
Knowledge (in Russian) ; Valentinov’s The Philosophical Founda-
tion of Marxism (in Russian). It is hardly possible that all these
people should be innocent of the fact that scores of times Marx
and Engels termed their philosophy dialectic materialism. Yet all
these people, who, despite the sharp differences between their po-
litical views, are united in their common hostility toward dialectic
materialism, pretend that they are Marxists in philosophy! Engels’
dialectics is “mysticism,” says Berman. Engels’ views became “anti-
quated,” remarks Bazarov in passing as if it were a self-evident
fact. Materialism is proved to have been refuted by our brave
warriors who proudly cite in support the “modern theory of knowl-
edge,” the “most recent philosophy” (or “most recent positivism”) ,
the “philosophy of modern natural science” or even the “philosophy
of natural science of the twentieth century.” Leaning upon all
these supposedly most recent doctrines, our annihilators of dialectic:
materialism go so far as to speak openly in favour of fideism * (in:
the case of Lunacharsky it is most outspoken, but in this he does not
stand alone by any means!). Yet they lose all courage and esteem
for their own convictions when it comes to an explicit statement
regarding their relations toward Marx and Engels. In fact—we
have a total renunciation of dialectic materialism, of Marxism; in
words—we have infinite evasions, attempts to beat about the bush,
to shield their retreat, to make some materialist their target instead


1 Fideism is a doctrine which puts faith in place of knowledge, or which
generally attributes preponderant significance to faith,


2 AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


of the philosophy of materialism, a determined refusal to analyse
directly the numerous materialist declarations of Marx and Engels.
This is really “mutiny on one’s knees” as it was justly characterised
by one Marxist. This is typical philosophic revisionism, for only
the revisionists gained notoriety by their deviations from the funda-
mental views of Marxism, and by their fear or inability to “settle
accounts” with those abandoned views explicitly, determinedly and
clearly. On the other hand, when orthodox Marxists took issue
with some antiquated views of Marx (for instance, Mehring on
some historical questions), it was done with such preciseness and
thoroughness that no one ever found any ambiguities in it.

As for the rest, there is in the Outlines (op. cit.) one phrase
(Lunacharsky’s) resembling the truth: “Perhaps we [that is ob-
viously all the collaborators of the Outlines] stray, but we are
seekers” (p. 161). That the first half of this sentence contains an
absolute, and the second, a relative truth, I shall endeavour to
show in detail in the present book. At the moment I shall only note
that if our philosophers would not have spoken in the name of
Marxism, but in the name of a few “seeking” Marxists, they would
have manifested more esteem toward themselves and toward
Marxism.

As far as I am concerned, I, too, am a “seeker” in philosophy.
The task which I have set for myself in this book is simply to find
out what is the trouble with those who under the guise of Marxism
are offering something baffling, confusing and reactionary.

September, 1908.


AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


THE present edition, with the exception of some corrections, does
not differ from the previous one. I hope that it will prove useful,
notwithstanding the polemics against the Russian “Machians,” as an
aid to the study of Marxian philosophy and dialectic materialism as
well as to the understanding of the philosophic conclusions of the
latest discoveries in natural science. As for Bogdanov’s latest works,
which I have had no opportunity to examine, the appended article by
V. I. Nevsky gives the necessary information. Comrade Nevsky,
working, not only as a propagandist, but as a worker in a party
school, had ample opportunity to convince himself that under the
guise of “proletarian culture” Bogdanov is introducing bourgeois
end reactionary views.


September 2, 1920.


INTRODUCTION


HOW CERTAIN “MARXISTS” IN 1908 AND CERTAIN
IDEALISTS IN 1710 REFUTED MATERIALISM


ONE who has the slightest acquaintance with philosophical litera-
ture must be aware of the fact that there is hardly one contemporary
professor of philosophy—and theology as well—who is not directly
or indirectly engaged in overthrowing materialism. A thousand
times has materialism been disproved, yet for the thousand and
first time they are still continuing to overthrow it. All our revision-
ists are engaged in disproving materialism, pretending that they are
refuting only the materialist Plekhanov, but not the materialist
Engels, not the materialist Feuerbach, nor the materialist views of
Dietzgen. In addition they pretend to refute materialism from the
standpoint of “recent” and “modern” positivism, natural science,
etc.

Without adducing quotations from these books which one could
produce by the hundreds at will, I shall refer only to those proofs
by which materialism is being combated by Bazarov, Bogdanov,
Yushkevich, Valentinov, Chernov? and other Machians. I shall use
this term (Machian) as a synonym for the term “empirio-criticist”
because it is brief and simple and already enjoys the rights of citi-
zenship in Russian literature. That Ernst Mach is the most popular
representative of empirio-criticism is universally acknowledged in
philosophic literature.? As to Bogdanov’s and Yushkevich’s devia-
tions from “pure” Machism, it will later be shown that they are of
secondary importance.

The materialists, we are told, avow something unthinkable and
unknowable—“things-in-themselves,”—matter “outside of experi-
ence” and beyond our cognition. They relapse into actual mys-
ticism, admitting the existence of something transcending the

1V. Chernov: Philosophical and Sociological Studies, Moscow, 1907 (in
Russian). The author is as ardent an adherent of Avenarius and aa enemy of
dialectic materialism as Bazarov et al.


2 Cf. Dr. Richard Hénigswald: Ueber die Lehre Humes von der Realitat der
Aussendinge, Berlin, 1904, p. 26.


6 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


boundaries of “experience” and cognition. Asserting that when
matter acts upon our sense organs, it produces sensations, the
materialists regard as the ultimate principle the “unknown,” noth-
ingness; for they themselves declare our perceptions supposedly to
be the only source of knowledge. The materialists fall into
“Kantianism” (e.g., Plekhanov, by recognising the existence of
“things-in-themselves,”—that is of things outside of our conscious-
ness); they “duplicate” the world and profess “dualism,” for,
besides the appearance, the materialists hold that there is the thing-
in-itself; beyond the immediate sense data they supposedly postulate
something else, some fetish, an idol, an absolute, the source of
metaphysics, the double of religion (“the holy matter,” as Bazarov
says).

Such are the proofs of the Machians against materialism repeated
by the aforementioned writers in many ways.

In order to determine whether these proofs are new, and whether
they are really directed against only one Russian materialist who
“fell into Kantianism,” we shall adduce some detailed quotations
from the works of George Berkeley, an old idealist. This historical
inquiry is the more necessary in our introductory remarks since we
shall have to refer more than once to Berkeley and his tendency in
philosophy, for the Machians have wrongly represented the relation-
ship of Mach to Berkeley and to the latter’s philosophic position.

The work of Bishop George Berkeley, published in 1710 under
the title, Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge?
begins with the following argument: “It is evident to anyone who
takes a survey of the objects of human knowledge, that they are
either ideas actually imprinted on the senses; or else such as are
perceived by attending to the passions and operations of the mind;
or, lastly, ideas formed by help of memory and imagination. . . .
By sight I have the ideas of light and colours, with their several
degrees and variations. By touch I perceive hard and soft, heat
and cold, motion and resistance. . . . Smelling furnishes me with
odours; the palate with tastes; and hearing conveys sounds. .. .
And as several of these are observed to accompany each other, they
come to be marked by one name, and so to be reputed as one thing.
Thus, for example, a certain colour, taste, smell, figure and con-
sistence having been observed to go together, are accounted one
distinct thing, signified by the name apple; other collections of


8 Vol. I, § 1, edited by A. C. Fraser, Oxford, 1871.


HOW MATERIALISM WAS REFUTED 7


ideas constitute a stone, a tree, a book, and the like sensible
things .. .”

Such is the content of the first paragraph of Berkeley’s work.
Let us not forget that Berkeley takes as the ultimate forms of his
philosophy the principles “hard, soft, heat and cold, colours, tastes,
odours,” etc. For Berkeley things are “collections of ideas,” desig-
nating by this expression the aforesaid qualities or sensations, and
not abstract thoughts.

Besides those “ideas or objects of knowledge,” according to
Berkeley, there exists something that perceives them—“mind,
spirit, soul or myself” (§2). It is self-evident, the philosopher
concludes, that “ideas” cannot exist outside of the mind
that perceives them. In order to convince ourselves of the truth
of this statement, let us take the meaning of the word
“exist.” “The table I write on, I say exists, that is, I see and
feel it; and if I were out of my study I should say it existed
—meaning thereby that if I was in my study I might per-
ceive.” That is what Berkeley says in § 3 of his work, and right
there he begins to discuss the question with people whom he calls
materialists (§§18, 19 ff). “I cannot conceive”—says he—“how it
is possible to speak of the absolute existence of things without their
relation to the fact that somebody perceives them. To exist means
to be perceived” (their esse is percipi, § 3; this saying is frequently
quoted in philosophic textbooks). “It is indeed an opinion
strangely prevailing amongst men, that houses, mountains, rivers,
and in a word all sensible objects, have an existence, natural or
real, distinct from their being perceived by the understanding”
(§ 4). This principle is a “manifest contradiction,” says Berkeley.
“For, what are the aforementioned objects but the things we per-
zeive by sense? and what do we perceive besides our own ideas or
sensations? and is it not plainly repugnant that any one of these,
or any combination of them, should exist unperceived?” (§ 4).

The expression, “collection of ideas,” Berkeley now changes for
what (according to him) is the identical expression, “combination
of sensations,” accusing the materialists of the “absurd” tendency
to go still further, of seeking the source of this “complex,”—this
“combination of sensations.” In §5 the materialists are accused of
trifling with an abstraction, for to separate sensation from an object,
according to Berkeley, is an empty abstraction. “In truth [accord-
ing to Fraser this sentence is omitted in the second edition] the


8 MATERIALISM AND. EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


object and the sensation are the same thing, and cannot therefore
be abstracted from each other. But, say you, though the ideas them-
selves do not exist without the mind, yet there may be things like
them, whereof they are copies or resemblances, which things exist
without the mind in an unthinking substance. I answer, an idea
can be like nothing but an idea; a colour or figure can be like noth-
ing but another colour or figure....I ask whether those
supposed originals or external things, of which our ideas are
the pictures or representations, be themselves perceivable or no?
If they are, then they are ideas and we have gained our point;
but if you say they are not, I appeal to anyone whether it be
sense to assert a colour is like something which is invisible;
hard or soft, like something which is intangible; and so of the
rest” (§ 8).

As the reader sees Bazarov’s “arguments” against Plekhanov con-
cerning the problem of whether things can exist apart from their
action on us, he will realise that they do not differ in the least from
Berkeley’s arguments against the materialists whom he does not
mention by name. Berkeley considers the notion of the existence
of “matter or corporeal substance” (§ 9) as “contradictory,” hold-
ing that it is not worth the time exposing its “absurdity.” He says:
“But, because the tenet of the existence of Matter seems to have
taken so deep a root in the minds of philosophers, and draws after
it so many ill consequences, I choose rather to be thought prolix
and tedious than omit anything that might conduce to the full dis-
covery and extirpation of that prejudice” (§ 9).

We shall soon see what Berkeley means by the expression “ill
consequences.” Let us first complete his theoretical demonstrations
against the materialists. Denying the “absolute” existence of ob-
jects, that is the existence of things outside human knowledge,
Berkeley expounds the views of his enemies in such a way as if they
recognised the “thing-in-itself.” In § 24 he says that this notion,
which he refutes, recognises (emphasising the following words)
“The absolute existence of sensible objects in themselves, or without
the mind” (pp. 167-8). Here are two fundamental philosophic
principles, depicted with such uprightness, clarity and precision,
that they distinguish the classic philosophers from the inventors
of “new” systems. By materialism is meant recognition of “objects
in themselves,” or “without the mind”; ideas and sensations are
copies or images of those objects. The opposite doctrine (ideal-


:
HOW MATERIALISM WAS REFUTED 9
a a ac tg a ps


ism) claims that objects do not exist “without the mind”; objects
are “combinations of sensations.”

This was written in 1710, fourteen years before the birth of
Immanuel Kant; yet our Machians, supposedly on the basis
of “modern” philosophy, made the discovery that the recognition of
“objects in themselves” is the result of the contagion or perversion of
materialism by Kantianism! The “new” discoveries of the Machians
are clearly products of their astounding ignorance of the history of
basic philosophic tendencies.

Their “new” thought consists in this; that the concepts of “mat-
ter” or “substance” are remnants of the old uncritical views. Mach
and Avenarius, don’t you see, have given the impetus to philosophi-
cal reflection, have deepened the analysis and eliminated the “abso-
lutes,” the “unchangeable entities,” etc. If you wish to check such
assertions with the original sources, compare them with Berkeley,
and you will see that they reduce themselves to shallow pretence.
Berkeley says very definitely that matter is a nonentity (§ 68),
that matter is nothing (§ 80). “You may,” thus Berkeley ridicules
the materialists, “if so it shall seem good, use the word ‘Matter’ in
the same sense as other men use ‘nothing’” (ibid., pp. 196-7). At
the beginning, says Berkeley, it was believed that colours, odours,
“really exist,” but subsequently such views were renounced, and it
was granted that they only exist depending on our sensations. But
this removal of the old erroneous conceptions was not completed;
the remainder is the idea of “substratum or substance that is a plain
repugnancy” (p. 195), which was finally revealed by Bishop
Berkeley in 1710! In 1908 there were still such triflers who seri-
ously believed Avenarius, Petzoldt, Mach et al., according to whom
only “recent positivism” and “recent natural science” could succeed
in removing these “metaphysical” conceptions.

These same triflers (amongst them Bogdanov) assure us that
it was the new philosophy that corrected the much refuted error
of the materialists concerning the “reduplication of the world”—
concerning the “reflections” in the human mind of things existing
without the mind. A mass of sentimental stuff has been written
about this “reduplication” by the above-named authors. Due to
forgetfulness, or ignorance, they overlooked the fact that these new
discoveries had already been discovered in 1710.

“Our knowledge of these hath been very much obscured and con-
founded, and we have been led into very dangerous errors, by


{


10 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


i


supposing a twofold existence of the objects of sense—the one
intelligible or in the mind, the other real and without the mind”
(§ 86). And Berkeley ridicules such “absurd” notions, which admit
the possibility of thinking the unthinkable! The source of the
absurdity—‘“follows from our supposing a difference between
things and ideas . . . and depends on the supposition of external
objects” (§ 87). The same source—discovered by Berkeley in 1710
and again by Bogdanov in 1908—produces faith in fetishes and
idols. “The existence of Matter, or bodies unperceived, has not only
been the main support of Atheists and Fatalists, but on the same
principle doth Idolatry likewise in all its various forms depend”
(§ 94).

Here we reach those “repugnant” conclusions derived from the
“absurd” teaching of the existence of the external world which com-
pelled Bishop Berkeley not only theoretically to repudiate the doc-
trine, but passionately to persecute its adherents as enemies. “For,
as we have shewn, the doctrine of Matter or corporeal substance
to have been the main pillar and support of Scepticism, so likewise
upon the same foundation have been raised all the impious schemes
of Atheism and Irreligion. . . . How great a friend material substance
has been to Atheists in all ages were needless to relate. All their .
monstrous systems have so visible and necessary a dependence on
it that, when this corner-stone is once removed, the whole fabric
cannot choose but fall to the ground, insomuch that it is no longer
worth while to bestow a particular consideration on the absurdities
of every wretched sect of Atheists” (§ 92).

“Matter being once expelled out of nature drags with it so many
sceptical and impious notions, such an incredible number of dis-
putes and puzzling questions [““The principle of economy of
thought,” discovered by Mach in the ’70’s of the last century!
Philosophy as reflection of the world according to the “principle of
minimum effort”—by Avenarius in 1876!] which have been thorns
in the sides of divines as well as philosophers, and made much fruit-
less work for mankind, that if the arguments we have produced
against it are not found equal to demonstration (as to me they evi-
dently seem), yet I am sure all friends to knowledge, peace, and
religion have reason to wish they were” (§ 96).

Frankly and plainly did Bishop Berkeley argue! In our time,
however, these very thoughts—of withdrawing “matter” from phi-
losophy for reasons of “economy”—are expressed in a form more


‘HOW MATERIALISM WAS REFUTED 11


cunning and baffling, disguised by the use of “new” terminology.
This is done in order that these thoughts should be regarded by
“naive” people as the most modern philosophy!

But frankness about the tendencies of his philosophy was not the
only object of Berkeley; he also endeavoured to cover its idealistic
nakedness and to present it devoid of absurdities and acceptable
to “common sense.” Instinctively defending himself against the
accusations of what is nowadays called subjective idealism and
solipsism, he says “that by the principles premised we are not
deprived of any one thing in nature” (§ 34). “There is a rerum
natura and the distinction between realities and chimeras retains
its full force; but then they both equally exist in the mind” (§ 34).
“TJ do not argue against the existence of any one thing that we can
apprehend either by sense or reflection. That the things I see with
my eyes and touch with my hands do exist, really exist, I make
not the least question. The only thing whose existence we deny
is that which philosophers call Matter or corporeal substance. And
in doing this there is no damage done to the rest of mankind, who, I
dare say, will never miss it. The Atheist indeed will want the
colour of an empty name to support his impiety” (§ 35).

This thought is made still clearer in § 37, where Berkeley defends
his philosophy against the accusation of destroying corporeal sub-
stances: “If the word substance be taken in the vulgar sense—for
a combination of sensible qualities, such as extension, solidity,
weight and the like—this we cannot be accused of taking away:
but if it be taken in a philosophic sense—for the support of acci-
dents or qualities without the mind—then indeed I acknowledge
that we take it away, if one may be said to take away that which
never had any existence, not even in the imagination.”

Fraser, the English philosopher and idealist, an adherent of
Berkeleianism, who edited Berkeley’s works, having supplied them
with his own annotations, designates Berkeley’s doctrine by the
term “Natural Realism” (ibid. p. x). This amusing terminology
must by all means be noted, for it tells the tale of Berkeley’s
intention to pose as a realist. In our further exposition we will
from time to time meet with the “recent positivists,” who employ
the same stratagem or guile. Berkeley does not deny the existence
of real objects! Berkeley does not go against the opinions of hu-
manity! Berkeley denies “only” the teachings of the philosophers,
their theory of knowledge, the teaching which takes as a starting


12 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


point the recognition of the external world and the reflection thereof
in the human mind. Berkeley does not deny natural science which
has always adhered (mostly unconsciously) to the materialist the-
ory of knowledge! “We may, from the experience * [Berkeley—phi-
losophy of “pure experience”] we have had of the train and succes-
sion of ideas in our minds . . . often make well-grounded predic-
tions concerning the ideas we shall be affected with pursuant to a
great train of actions, and be enabled to pass a right judgment of
what would have appeared to us, in case we were placed in circum-
stances very different from those we are in at present. Herein con-
sists the knowledge of nature, which [listen to this!] may preserve
its use and certainty very consistently with what hath been said”
(§ 59).

Let us regard the external world, or nature as “a combination
of sensations” which is caused in our mind by the divinity. Admit
this and give up searching for the “ground” of these sensations out-
side of the mind and man, and I will recognize within the framework
of the idealist theory of knowledge all of natural science, the appli-
cation and certainty of its inferences. It is exactly this framework
that I need for my conclusions for the sake of “peace and religion.”
Such is Berkeley’s idea. It correctly expresses the essence and
social significance of idealist philosophy, and we will encounter it
later, when we come to speak of the relation of Machism to natural
science.

Let us now consider another “recent” discovery that was bor-
rowed from Bishop Berkeley by the recent positivist and critical
realist, P. Yushkevich. This discovery is called “empirio-sym-
bolism.” “Berkeley,” says Fraser, “thus reverts to his favourite
theory of a Universal Natural Symbolism” (p. 190). If these
words were not mentioned in the edition of 1871, one would suspect
the English philosopher and fideist, Fraser, of plagiarising the
works of both the modern mathematician and physicist H. Poincaré
and the Russian “Marxist” Yushkevich!

As for Berkeley’s theory, which threw Fraser into rapture, it is
expounded in the following words: “The connexion of ideas [do
not forget that for Berkeley ideas and objects are identical] does
not imply the relation of cause and effect, but only of a mark or
sign with the thing signified” (§ 65). “Hence, it is evident that


4In his preface Fraser insists that both Berkeley and Locke “appeal exclu-
sively to experience as their final test” (p. 117).


HOW MATERIALISM WAS REFUTED 13


a eeSeeeeeeeeeeeSSSSSSSSSSSSSMMMSsssSssesssssesesese


those things which, under the notion of a cause co-operating or con-
curring in the production of effects, are altogether inexplicable, and
run us into great absurdities, may be very naturally explained . . .
when they are considered only as marks or signs for our informa-
tion” (§ 66). Of course, in the opinion of Berkeley and Fraser,
no other than the divinity informs us by means of these “empirio-
symbols.” The epistemological significance of symbolism in
Berkeley’s theory consists in this, that one must change the
“doctrine” which pretends “to explain things by corporeal causes”
(§ 66). é

In the question of causality there are before us two philosophic
tendencies, one of which “pretends to explain things by corporeal
causes.” It is clear that it is connected with the “absurd doctrinaire
matter,” refuted by Bishop Berkeley. The other theory reduces
the “notion of causality” to the notion of “mark or sign” which
serves for “our information” (supplied by God). We shall meet
these two tendencies in a twentieth-century garb when we analyse
the relationship of both Machism and dialectic materialism to this
question.

Furthermore, it ought to be remarked that on the question of
reality Berkeley, refusing to recognise the existence of things out-
side the mind, tries to find a criterion in order to distinguish
between the real and the fictitious. In § 36 he says that those “ideas”
which are called out by the human mind “at pleasure” “are faint,
weak, and unsteady in respect of others they perceive by sense—
which, being impressed upon them according to certain rules and
laws of nature, speak themselves about the effects of a mind more
powerful and wise than human spirits. These latter are said to
have more reality in them than the former:—by which is meant
that they are more affecting, orderly, and distinct, and that they
are not fictions of the mind perceiving them... .” Elsewhere
($ 84) Berkeley tries to connect the idea of reality with the simul-
taneous perception of the very same sensations by many people.
For instance, how shall we answer the question, raised by the legend
in which we are told, that the transformation of water into wine
is real. “If at the table all who were present should see, and
smell, and taste, and drink wine, and find the effects of it, with
me there could be no doubt of its reality”; and Fraser remarks:
“The simultaneous consciousness of, or participation in, the ‘same’
sense—ideas, by different persons, as distinguished from the purely


14 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


individual or personal consciousness of imaginary objects and emo-
tions, is here referred to a test of the reality of the former.”

It is evident that Berkeley’s subjective idealism is not to be
interpreted as if he ignored the distinction between individual and
collective perception. On the contrary, on the basis of this dis-
tinction he attempts to construct the criterion of reality. Inferring
“ideas” from the divinity’s effects upon human mind, Berkeley thus
comes near to objective idealism: the world is not my idea, but it
becomes the product of a supreme spiritual cause that creates the
“laws of nature,” and laws for distinguishing “more real” ideas
from those less real.

In another work of his, The Three Dialogues between Hylas and
Philonous (1713), where he endeavours to present his views in a
specially popular form, he thus states the difference between his
doctrines and those of the materialists:

“T assert as well as you [materialists] that, since we are affected
from without, we must allow powers to be without, in a being dis-
tinct from ourselves. But then we differ as to the kind of this
powerful being. I will have it to be Spirit, you Matter, or I know
not what (I may add, you, too, know not what) third nature”...
(Vol. I, p. 335).

Fraser comments: “This is the gist of the whole question. Ac-
cording to the Materialists, sensible phenomena are due to MA-
TERIAL SUBSTANCE, or to some unknown ‘third nature’; accord-
ing to Berkeley, to Rational Will; according to Hume and the
Positivists, their origin is absolutely unknown, and we can only
generalise them inductively, through custom, as facts.”

The English Berkeleian, Fraser, from his consistent idealist
viewpoint, recognises the same fundamental divisions in philosophy
which were distinguished with such great lucidity by the materialist
Engels. In his work, Ludwig Feuerbach, Engels divides philos-
ophers into “two great camps”—materialists and idealists. Engels,
who considered more closely than Fraser the well developed and va-
ried content of both types of theories, sees this fundamental distinc-
tion between them: that while to the materialists nature is primary
and spirit secondary, to the idealists the reverse is the case. Between
these two schools of thought Engels places the adherents of Hume
and Kant who deny the possibility of knowing the world, or at least
of fully knowing it, and he terms them agnostics. In his Ludwig
Feuerbach Engels applies this term only to the adherents of Hume


Cy


HOW MATERIALISM WAS REFUTED 15


——— a ee


(the very same people whom Fraser names agnostics, and who
prefer to call themselves “positivists”). But in his article on
“Historical Materialism,” Engels speaks directly of the standpoint of
“the Neo-Kantian agnostic,” regarding Neo-Kantianism also as a
variety of agnosticism.®

We cannot stop here to consider this remarkably correct and pro-
found argument of Engels—an argument which is impudently
ignored by the Machians. We shall discuss this fact at length later
on. Now we shall confine ourselves to the task of calling attention
to the Marxian terminology and to this meeting of extremes—the
views of a consistent materialist and a consistent idealist upon the
fundamental philosophic issues. To elucidate these tendencies
(with which we shall constantly have to deal in our further exposi-
tion) let us briefly note the views of the outstanding philosophers
of the eighteenth century, who had taken a path other than
Berkeley’s.

These are Hume’s arguments: “It seems evident, that men are
carried, by a natural instinct or prepossession, to repose faith in
their senses; and that, without any reasoning, or even almost before
the use of reason, we always suppose an external universe, which
depends not on our perception, but would exist, though we and
every sensible creature were absent or annihilated. Even the animal
creations are governed by a like opinion, and preserve this belief
of external objects, in all their thoughts, designs and actions. .. .
But this universal and primary opinion of all men is soon destroyed
by the slightest philosophy, which teaches us, that nothing can ever
be present to the mind but an image or perception, and that the
senses are only inlets, through which these images are conveyed,
without being able to produce any immediate intercourse between
the mind and the object. The table, which we see, seems to dimin-
ish, as we remove farther from it: but the real table, which exists
independent of us, suffers no alteration: it was, therefore, nothing
but its image, which was present to the mind. These are the obvious
dictates of reason; and no man, who reflects, ever doubted, that
the existences, which we consider, when we say, this house and that
tree, are nothing but perceptions in the mind. . . . By what argu-
ments can it be proved, that the perceptions of the mind must be
caused by external objects, entirely different from them, though


5 Friedrich Engels: Historical Materialism, Labor News Co., New York,
1902; published as an introduction to his Socialism, Utopian and Scientific.


16 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


ns


resembling them (if that be possible) and could not arise either
from the energy of the mind itself, or from the suggestion of some
invisible and unknown spirit, or from some other cause still more
unknown to us? . . . How shall the question be determined? By
experience surely; as all other questions of a like nature. But
here experience is, and must be entirely silent. The mind has
never anything present to it but the perceptions, and cannot possibly
reach any experience of their connexion with objects. This suppo-
sition of such a connexion is, therefore, without any foundation in
reasoning. To have recourse to the veracity of the supreme Being,
in order to prove the veracity of our senses, is surely making a very
unexpected circuit. . . . If the external world be once called in
question, we shall be at a loss to find arguments, by which we may
prove the existence of that Being or any of his attributes.” °

He says the same thing in his Treatise of Human Nature:* “There
is only a single existence, which I shall call indifferently objects or
perceptions.” By scepticism Hume means the refusal to explain
sensations as the effects of objects, spirit, etc., a refusal, on the
one hand, to reduce perceptions to the external world, and on the
other, to the divinity or to an unknown spirit. And the author of
the introduction to the French translation of Hume, F. Pillon—a
philosopher related to Mach’s school (as we shall see below)—is
right in saying that for Hume the subject and the object are reduced
to “groups of various perceptions,” to “elements of consciousness,
to impressions, ideas, etc.”; that the only concern should be with
the “groupings and combinations of these elements.” * Huxley, the
English Humean, who coined the well-aimed and correct term “ag-
nosticism,” in his Hume also emphasises the fact that the agnostic,
regarding “sensations” as the “primary and irreducible states of
consciousness,” is not consistent in his reply to the question how the
origin of sensations is to be explained, whether by the effect of
the objects on man or by the creative power of the mind. “Realism
and idealism are equally probable hypotheses.” ® Hume does not
go further than sensations. “Thus the colours red and blue, and
the odour of a rose, are simple impressions. . . . But a red rose


6 David Hume: An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, Essays and
Treatises, London, 1882, Vol. II, pp. 151-153.

7 Part IV, Sect. II, p. 491, London, 1882.

8 Psychologie de Hume. Traité de la nature humaine, etc. Trad. par Ch,
Renouvier et Pillon, Paris, 1878, Introduction, p. x.

® Thomas Huxley: Hume, London, 1879, p. 74.


SS
HOW MATERIALISM WAS REFUTED 17


gives us a complex impression, capable of resolution into the simple
impressions of red colour, rose scent, and numerous others” (pp.
64-65). Hume admits both a “materialist position” and an “idealist
position” (p. 82) ; the “collection of perceptions” may be generated
by the Fichtean “ego” or may be a “signification and even a sym-
bol” of “something real.” This is how Huxley interprets Hume.

The materialist and leading spirit of the Encyclopedists, Diderot,
gives the following opinion on Berkeley: “Those philosophers are
termed idealists who, conscious only of their own existence and
of a succession of external sensations, do not admit anything else.
An extravagant system which should to my thinking have been
the offspring of blindness itself. And yet, to the disgrace of the
human mind and philosophy this system though the most absurd,
is the most difficult to combat.”?° And Diderot who came very
close to the view of contemporary materialism (that arguments and
syllogisms alone would not suffice to refute idealism, and that
it is not a question of theoretical argument), shows the similarity
of the propositions of both the idealist Berkeley and Condillac, of
the sensationalist school. In his opinion, Condillac should have
disproved Berkeley in order to avoid such absurd conclusions of
regarding sensations as the only source of our knowledge.

In the Dialogue of D’Alembert and Diderot, Diderot thus states
his philosophic position: “Suppose a pianoforte be endowed with
the faculty of sensation and memory, tell me would it not of its own
accord repeat those airs which you have played on its keyboard?
We are instruments endowed with the faculties of sensation and
memory. Our senses are keys upon which surrounding nature
strikes and which strike upon themselves. This is all, according
to my opinion, that occurs in the piano which is organised like you
and myself.” D’Alembert retorts that such an instrument would
have to possess the faculty of finding food for itself and of repro-
ducing little pianos. Undoubtedly, contends Diderot, and offers
the egg as an example. “This is what refutes all the teachings
of theology and all the churches on the globe. What is this egg?


A mass that has no senses until the embryo is introduced thither,


and when, this embryo is introduced, what is it then? An unper-
ceiving mass, for in its turn, this embryo is only an inert and rude
liquid. How is this mass reorganised, how does it begin to feel


10 Qeuvres complétes de Diderot, ed. par J. Assezat, Paris, 1875, Vol. I, p.
304.


LL


18 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


and to live? By means of heat. And what produces heat? Motion.
. . . The living being that is hatched from the egg is endowed with
all your sensations, and performs all your operations. Would you
say with Descartes that this is a simple imitating machine? Little
children will laugh at you, and the philosopher will contend that
if this be a machine then you, too, are a machine. If you admit
that the difference between these animals and you consists only in
their organisation, you will prove that your judgment is sound,
and you will be right. But from this will follow the inference that
refutes you; namely, that from matter organised in a certain way,
followed by the action of another bit of inert matter, and conse-
quently from heat and motion—the faculties of sensation, life,
memory, consciousness, emotion, and reflection are generated.”
“One of the two,” continues Diderot, “either you must admit some
‘hidden element’ in the egg, that penetrates in an unknown way at
the moment of a certain stage of development, an element about
which it is unknown whether it takes up space, whether it is material
or whether it is created for the occasion—a position which contra-
dicts common sense, and. leads to inconsistencies and absurdities;
or we must make a simple supposition which explains everything,
namely, that the faculty of sensation is the general property of
matter, or a product of its organisation.”

To the reply of D’Alembert that such supposition implies a qual-
ity which is in its essence incompatible with matter, Diderot re-
torts: “And how do you know that the faculty of sensation is
essentially incompatible with Matter, so long as you know neither
the essence of things in general, nor the essence of Matter, nor
the essence of sensation? Do you understand the nature of motion
any better, its existence in a body, its transmission from one body
to another?”

D’Alembert: “Without knowing nature, or sensation, or Matter,
I see, however, that the faculty of sensation is a simple quality,
single, indivisible, and incompatible with the subject and sub-
stratum, which is divisible.”

Diderot: “Metaphysico-theological nonsense! What, don’t you
see that all qualities of Matter, all its forms that are accessible to
us, are in their essence indivisible? There cannot be a larger or
a smaller degree of impenetrability. There may be half of a
round body, but there is no half of roundness. . . . Be a physicist
and admit the produced character of the given effect when you see


eS a


HOW MATERIALISM WAS REFUTED 19


how it is produced, though you may not be able to explain the rela-
tion between the cause and effect. Be logical and do not place instead
of the cause, which exists and explains everything, another cause
which is impossible to comprehend, and whose connection with
the effect is still more difficult to grasp, and which arouses an
infinite number of difficulties, without solving even one of them.”

D’Alembert: “And if I will take this cause as a starting point?”

Diderot: “There is in the Universe one substance only, both in
man and in animal. A hand-organ from wood, man from flesh.
A pinefinch from flesh, and a musician from flesh who is differently
organised; but one and the other are of the same origin, of the
same formation, have the same functions and the same goal.”

D’Alembert: “And in what way is there a similarity of sounds
between your two pianofortes?”

Diderot: “. . . An instrument endowed with the faculty of sensa-
tion, or an animal which learned by experience that after a certain
sound certain consequences follow outside it; that other feeling
instruments, similar to it, or other animals, draw closer or go
farther, who demand, or offer, cause a wound or caress;—and all
these consequences are thus associated with certain sounds in its
memory and in the memory of other animals. Mark you that in
human transactions there is nothing beside sounds and actions.
And to appreciate the power of my system, note again, that it is sub-
ject to the same insurmountable difficulty which Berkeley set
up against the existence of bodies. There was a moment of in-
sanity when the feeling piano imagined that it is the only existing
piano in the world, and that the whole harmony of the universe re-
sided in it.” **

This was written in 1769. And with this we shall conclude our
brief historic inquiry. We shall more than once meet “the insane
piano” and the harmony of the world ensuing within man when
we analyse “recent positivism.” Now we shall limit ourselves to
one conclusion: the “recent” Machians did not adduce even one
argument which had not been put forth by Bishop Berkeley.

As a curiosity let us note that one of these Machians, Valentinov,
vaguely feeling the falsity of his position, tried to “blot out traces”
of his affinity to Berkeley; he did this in a very amusing way. On
page 150 of his book we read: “We ask those, who when speaking of
Mach, point to Berkeley, which Berkeley do they mean? Do they


11 Jbid, Vol. Il, pp. 114-118.


20 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


mean the Berkeley who considers himself [Valentinov wishes to
say who is considered] a solipsist; or the Berkeley who insists upon
the immediate presence and providence of the deity? Generally
speaking [?], do they mean Berkeley, the philosophising bishop,
who vehemently attacks atheism, or Berkeley, the thoughtful
analyser? With Berkeley, the solipsist, and preacher of religious
metaphysics, Mach really had nothing in common.” Valentinov
confuses things, unable to account for the reason of his defence of
the “thoughtful analyser” and idealist Berkeley against the mate-
trialist Diderot. Diderot clearly draws the line of demarcation
between the fundamental philosophical tendencies. Valentinov con-
fuses them, and while doing it, he consoles us in a ludicrous way.
“We do not consider the ‘kinship’ of Mach with the idealist views
of Berkeley as a philosophic crime,” he says, “even if it were to
exist” (p. 149). To confound two irreconcilable fundamental di-
visions in philosophy—really, what “crime” is there? But the
whole wisdom of Mach and Avenarius can only be reduced to such
confusion, We shall now turn to the analysis of this great wisdom.


CHAPTER ONE


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE OF EMPIRIO-CRITICISM
AND OF DIALECTIC MATERIALISM I


1. Sensations and Complexes of Sensations


Tue fundamental tenets of the theory of knowledge of Mach
and Avenarius are expounded with frankness, simplicity and
clearness only in their early philosophic works. To these works we
shall now turn. As to the corrections and emendations which were
afterwards effected by these writers, we shall take them up later on.

“The problem of science,” Mach wrote in 1872, “can be split
into three parts:

“1. The determination of the connection of presentations. This
is psychology.

“2, The discovery of the laws of the connection of sensations
(perceptions). This is physics.

“3 The clear establishment of the laws of the connection of sen-
sations and presentations. This is psycho-physics.” *

This is clear enough.

The object of physics is the relation between sensations, and not
between things or bodies, the images of which are our sensations.
And in 1883, in his Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwickelung, Mach re-
peats the very same notion: “Sensations are not “symbols of things.’
The ‘thing’ is rather the mental symbol of the complex of sensations
which is in a state of relative equilibrium. Not the things (bodies)
but colours, sounds, pressures, spaces, times (what we usually
call sensations), are the actual elements of the world.” ?

About this word “elements,” the fruit of twelve years of “reflec-
tion,” we shall speak further. At present let us note that Mach is
explicit in his statement that things or bodies are complexes of
sensations, and that his position is the opposite of that which holds
that sensations are “symbols” of things (it would be more correct


1Ernst Mach: History and Root of the Principle of the Conservation of


Energy, London, 1911, p. 91. va &
2Ernst Mach: Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwickelung historisch-kritisch


dargestellt, 3 Auflage, Leipzig, 1897, P. 473.


—


: 4


22 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


to say images or reflections of things). The latter theory is philo.
sophic materialism. For instance, Friedrich Engels—the well-
known collaborator of Marx and the co-founder of Marxism—con-
stantly and exclusively speaks in his works of things and their
mental images or reflections (Gedanken, Abbilder). It is obvious
that these mental images arise only from sensations. It would seem
that the position of “philosophic Marxism” ought to be known to
everyone who speaks of it, especially to one who in the name of
this philosophy writes about it. But because of the great confusion
which our Machians have brought with them, it is very urgent to
repeat things which are generally known. We turn to the first
paragraph of Anti-Diihring and we read: “the things and their
mental reflection . . .”*; or to the first paragraph of the philo-
sophic part which reads thus: “But how are these subjective prin-
ciples derived? [The question here is about the fundamental
principles of all knowledge]. From thought itself? No. These
forms can never be created by thought nor derived from it but only
from the external world. . . . Principles are not the starting points
of investigation [as it is with Diihring who wishes to be a material-
ist, but who cannot consistently carry out materialism] but the
conclusion of it; they are not to be applied to nature and history
but are derived from them. Nature and Humanity are not steered
by principles, but principles are, on the other hand, only correct
insofar as they correspond to nature and history. That is just
the materialistic conception of matter, and the opposite, that of
Dihring is the idealistic conception. It turns things upside down
and constructs a real world out of the world of thought” (p. 55).
Engels, to repeat, applies this “sole materialistic view” everywhere
and without exception, relentlessly attacking Diihring for the least
deviation from materialism to idealism. Those who will pay the
slightest attention in reading Ludwig Feuerbach and Anti-Diihring
will find scores of examples in which Engels speaks of things and
their reflection in the human brain, in our consciousness, reason,
etc. Engels does not say that sensations or ideas are “symbols” of
things, for a consistent materialist ought to use the term image,
picture, or reflection instead of “symbol,” as we shall prove when
we come to consider the question. The argument here, however, is


8 Friedrich Engels: Socialism, Utopian and Scientific, Chicago, 1907 [part of
the author’s larger work, Herrn Eugen Diihring’s Umwilzung der Wissenschaft,
usually referred to as Anti-Diihring—Ed.]


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 23


not at all about this or that formulation of materialism, but about
the opposition of materialism to idealism, about the difference of
two trends of thought in philosophy, that is, whether we are to pro-
ceed from things to sensations and thought, or from sensations and
thought to things? Engels sides with the first—materialism; Mach,
with the second,—idealism. No tricks, no sophistry (with which
we shall often meet in his later works), will obscure the clear
and undisputed fact that Ernst Mach’s doctrine of things as com-
plexes of sensations, is subjective idealism and a tedious repetition
of Berkeleianism. If with Mach, bodies are to be reduced to
“complexes of sensations,” or with Berkeley, to “combinations of
sensations,” then from this it inevitably follows that the “world is
my idea.” Starting with such a supposition it is impossible to
arrive at the existence of other selves except myself—and this is the
purest solipsism. Much as Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt and the
others renounced solipsism, they were unable to get rid of it with-
out falling prey to logical contradiction. To make this funda-
mental element of the philosophy of Machism still clearer, we shall
adduce a few more citations from Mach’s works. Here is a sample
from the Analysis of Sensations:

“We see an object having a point S. If we touch S, that is, bring
it into connection with our body, we receive a prick. We can see 5,
without feeling the prick. But as soon as we feel the prick we find
S on the skin. The visible point, therefore, is a permanent nucleus,
to which the prick is annexed, according to circumstances, as some-
thing accidental. From the frequency of analogous occurrences we
ultimately accustom ourselves to regard all properties of bodies as
‘effects’ proceeding from permanent nuclei and conveyed to the ego
through the medium of the body; which effects we call sensa-
tions. 4°...“

In other words: people “accustom” themselves to materialism, to
consider sensations as the result of the effect of bodies, things, or
nature on our sense-organs. This harmful—for the philo-
_ sophic idealists—“habit,” acquired by mankind and natural science,
is not at all to the liking of Mach, and he tries to break it. “By this
operation, however, these nuclei are deprived of their entire sensory
content and converted into a bare abstract symbol.” An old song,
most honorable Professor! This is a literal repetition of Berkeley
who said that matter is a bare abstract symbol. It is obviously Ernst


4The Analysis of Sensations, Chicago, 1914, p. 12.


24 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


Mach who is laid bare, for since he does not recognise the “sensory
content” to be an objective reality, existing independently of us, then
the sensory content remains a “bare abstract” self, an italicised
and capitalised Self similar to “the insane pianoforte, which
imagined that it was the sole existing thing in this world.” If the
“sensory content” of our sensations is not the outer world, then
nothing exists save the bare self that indulges in empty philosophic
trifling. A stupid and fruitless occupation! “The assertion, then,
is correct that the world consists only of our sensations. In which
case we have knowledge only of sensations, and the assumption of
the nuclei referred to, or of a reciprocal action between them, from
which sensations proceed, turns out to be quite idle and superflu-
ous. Such a view can only fit in with a half-hearted realism or a
half-hearted philosophical criticism.” (Ibid.)

We cited the sixth paragraph of the “anti-metaphysical utterance”
of Mach in full. It is an absolute plagiarism from Berkeley.
There is not a trace here of genuine thought, unless we are to regard
the expression, “we perceive our perception” as original. From
this it may be inferred that the “world consists of my sensations.”
The word “our,” used by Mach, instead of “my” is illegitimately
employed by him. By this word alone Mach betrays that “half-
heartedness” of which he accuses others. For if the “assertion” of
the existence of the outer world is an “idle” speculation, if the
statement about the independent existence of the needle and of the
interaction between my body and its point is “idle and superfluous,”
then the “assertion” of the existence of other selves is still more
idle and superfluous. That means that only J exist, and our fellow
men as well as the outer world come under the category of idle
“nuclei.” Holding such a doctrine one ought not speak about “our”
sensations; but as Mach does speak about them, it only betrays his
own half-hearted method. It proves that his philosophy is a jum-
ble of idle and shallow words in which he himself does not believe.

The following is a good example of Mach’s confusion. In § 6 of
Chapter II of the Analysis of Sensations we read: “If I can imagine
that, while I am having sensations, I myself or someone else could
observe my brain with all the necessary physical and chemical
appliances, it would then be possible to ascertain with what proc-
esses of the organism sensations of a particular kind are connected”
(p. 242).

Well. then, does it mean that our sensations are connected with


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 25


a particular kind of processes which take place in the organism in
general, and in our brain in particular? Mach very definitely ad-
mits this to be the case (it would be quite a task not to admit it
from the standpoint of natural science!). But is this not the very
same “assertion” about the very same “nuclei and their interaction”
which our philosopher declared to be idle and superfluous? We
are told that bodies are complexes of sensations; to go further
than that, to regard sensations as a product of the effect of bodies
upon our sense-organs is, in Mach’s opinion, metaphysics, an idle
and superfluous assertion, etc.,—an opinion similar to Berkeley’s.
But the brain is a body, you will say. Yes, that means that the
brain also is no more than a complex of sensations. And that
means that with the help of the complexes of sensations I (and I
am also nothing else than a complex of sensations) perceive the
complex of sensations. What a wonderful philosophy! At first to
recognise sensations “as the real world elements” and on this to
build an “original” Berkeleianism, and then secretly to import
opposite views that sensations are connected in the organism with
particular kinds of processes. Are not these “processes” connected
with the exchange of matter between the “organism” and the ex-
ternal world? Could this exchange occur, if the sensations of the
organism did not present an objectively correct picture of this ex-
ternal world?

Mach does not ask himself such embarrassing questions. He
jumbles together fragments of Berkeleianism with views of natural
science that instinctively adhere to the materialist theory of knowl-
edge. . . . In the same paragraph Mach writes: “Tt is sometimes
even asked whether inorganic ‘matter’ has sensation ...” Does
ihis mean that there is no question about organic matter having
sensation? Does it mean that sensation is not something primary
but that it is one of the properties of matter? Oh! yes,—Mach
leaves out all the absurdities of Berkeleianism! “The question is
natural enough, if we start from the generally current physical
conception which represents matter as the immediately and un-
doubtedly experienced reality out of which everything, inorganic
and organic, is constructed.” Let us keep in mind Mach’s valuable
admission that the habitual and widely spread physical notions
regard matter as an immediate reality, of which reality only one
variety (organic matter) possesses the well defined property of
sensation. “For sensation must either arise suddenly somewhere


26 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


or other in this structure, or else have been present in the founda-
tion-stones from the beginning. From our point of view the
question is merely a perversion. Matter is for us not what is
primarily given. What is primarily given is, rather, the elements
which, when standing to one another in a certain known relation
are called sensations.”

What is primarily given, then, is sensation, though in organic
matter it is “connected” only with a particular kind of process!
By making such an absurd statement, it seems as if Mach condemns
materialism (“the generally current physical conception”) because
ihe question as to why and how sensation “arises” has not been de-
cided! This is a sample of the “refutation” of materialism by the
fideists and their sycophants. Can any philosophy “solve” ques-
tions if there has not been collected a sufficient umount of data for
its solution? Does not Mach himself say in the very same para-
graph, “As long as this problem [i.e., what is the lower limit of
sensation in the organic world?] has not been solved in even a
single special case, no decision of the question is possible”?

The difference between materialism and Machism in this par-
ticular question is thus reduced to the following. Materialism in
full agreement with natural science, takes matter as the prius, re-
garding consciousness, reason and sensation as derivative, because
in a well expressed form it is connected only with the higher forms
of matter (organic matter). It becomes possible, therefore, to as-
sume the existence of a property similar to sensation “in the founda-
tion-stones of the structure of matter itself.”” Such, for example, is
the supposition of the well-known German naturalist Ernst Haeckel,
the English biologist Lloyd Morgan and others, not to speak of
Diderot’s conjecture, mentioned above. Machism clings to the
opposite, idealistic viewpoint, which at once leads to an incon-
gruity since, in the first place, sensation is taken as the primary
entity in spite of the fact that it is connected with particular kinds
of processes (in matter organised in a particular way); and, in the
second place, the hypothesis that bodies are complexes of sensa-
tions is here destroyed by the assumption of the existence of other
living beings and, in general, of other “complexes” besides the
given great Self.

The word “element,” which many a naive person accepts (as we
shall later see) as a new discovery, in reality only obscures the ques-
tion by a meaningless and misleading term which has not the least


Ss


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 27


bearing upon the solution of the problem. This term is misleading
because there still remains so much to investigate, so much to find
out about how matter, devoid of sensation, is related to matter
which, though composed of the same atoms (or electrons), is yet
endowed with a definite faculty of sensation. Materialism, by put-
ting clearly the problem, gives impetus to continual experimenta-
tion thus making possible its solution. Machism, one variety of
muddled idealism, by means of the trifling word “element,” en-
tangles this problem and sidetracks it.

In the last philosophic work of Mach there is one place that
clearly betrays this idealistic trick. In his Erkenninis und Irrtum
we read: “While there is no difficulty in constructing any physical
element out of sensation, which is a psychical element, it is impos-
sible to imagine how we could compose a psychical experience out
of elements that are current in modern physics, out of mass and
motion, rigid elements that are only convenient for this special
science.” ®

Engels speaks very definitely about the rigidity of the views of
many modern naturalists and about their metaphysical (in the
Marxian sense, anti-dialectical) conceptions. We shall see how
Mach failed in this particular point either because he was not able
to grasp it, or because he was ignorant of the relationship of rela-
tivism to dialectics. But for the present we shall not concern our-
selves with it. It is important for us to note here the definiteness
with which Mach’s idealism comes to the fore in spite of the con-
fused, supposedly new terminology. Now we have the assurance
that there will be no difficulty in building up physical elements out
of sensations, that is from psychical elements! Such constructions
are, indeed, not difficult, for they are purely verbal constructions,
empty scholasticisms which leave a loophole for fideism. No won-
der, then, that after this discovery Mach dedicates his works to the
immanentist school, no wonder that the followers of that school,
the adherents of the most reactionary philosophic idealism, embrace

-Mach’s theory. The “recent positivism” of Ernst Mach arrived only
two hundred years too late. Berkeley gave numerous proofs that
out of sensations, out of “psychical elements,” one can “build”
nothing but solipsism! We have already learned something about
the materialism, with which Mach contrasts his own views without
naming the enemy frankly and explicitly, from the examples of


5 E. Mach: Erkenntnis und Irrtum, 2 Auflage, p. pe


28 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM 3


Diderot. The doctrine consists not in the derivation of sensation
from the movement of matter or in the identification of sensation
with the movement of matter, but in the recognition that sensa-
tion is one of the properties of matter in motion. On this particular
question Engels held Diderot’s views. Engels opposed the “vulgar”
materialists, Vogt, Biichner and Moleschott because they assumed
that thought is secreted by the brain as bile is secreted by the liver,
holding that in this matter, they were confused. But Mach who
contrasts his views with those of the materialists, ignores, of course,
all the great materialists—Diderot, Feuerbach, Marx and Engels—
just as all other official professors of the official philosophy do.

To characterise the prime and fundamental conception of Ave-
narius let us take his first independent philosophic work.® Bog-
danov in his Empirio-Monism (Book 1, 2nd ed., 1905, p. 12, note)
says that “in the development of Mach’s views, the starting point
was philosophical idealism, while the realistic tinge is characteristic
of Avenarius from the very start.” Bogdanov said this for he took
Mach at his word;? but in vain, for his assertion is diametrically
opposed to the truth. On the contrary, the idealistic view of
Avenarius is so prominent in his work of 1876, that he was himself
compelled to admit it in 1891. In the Introduction to Der Mensch-
liche Weltbegriff Avenarius says: “He who read my first systematic .
work, Philosophie, etc., must surely have presumed that I would
attempt to treat the questions of the Kritik der reinen Erfahrung
from the idealist standpoint,” * but “the sterility of idealism” com-
pelled me to “doubt the correctness of my previous attitude”
(Ibid., p. x). This starting point of Avenarius is universally ac-
knowledged in philosophic literature. Of the French writers I shall
refer to Couwelaert who says that in the Prolegomena the philosophi-
cal standpoint of Avenarius is that of “monistic idealism.” ® Of the
German writers I shall name Rudolph Willy, Avenarius’ disciple,
who says that “Avenarius—in his youth, especially in his work of
1876—was totally under the influence of the so-called epistemologi-
cal idealism.” 1°


6 Philosophie als Denken der Welt gemass dem Princip der kleinsten Kraft-
masses, (Prolegomena zu einer Kritik der reinen Erfahrung, 1876).

7 Cf. Analysis of Sensation, p. 362.

8 Der menschliche Weltbegriff, 1891, Introduction, p. xi.
: re Van Couwelaert: L’empiriocriticisme in “Revue neoscholastique,” 1907,

eb., p.. 51;

10 Rudolph Willy: Gegen die Schulweisheit, Eine Kritik der Philosophie,
Miinchen, 1905, p. 172.


cae


—


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 29


It would be ridiculous to deny idealism in Avenarius’ Prolego-
mena, when it openly states that “only sensation can be thought of
as existing” (pp. 10 and 65 of the second German edition). That
is how Avenarius himself presents the content of § 116 of his work.
“We admitted,” he says, “that the existing (das Seiende) is a sub-
stance endowed with sensation; the substance falls off . . . [“‘it is
more economical,” as you see, “there is less effort” in thinking that
there is no “substance” and that there exists no external world! |
there remains sensation; we must then regard what exists as sensa-
tion through and through.”

Sensation, then, exists without “substance,” thought without
brain! Are there really such philosophers who are capable of de-
fending this brainless philosophy? Yes, there are! And Professor
Richard Avenarius is one of them. We must pause for a while on
the argument advanced in defence of this philosophy, difficult as it
is for a normal person to take it seriously. Here in §§ 89 and 90 of
the same work is Avenarius’ argument: “. . . The position that mo-
tion causes sensation is based on illusory experience alone. This
experience, the separate act of which is perception, consists in the
supposed fact that sensation arises in a certain kind of substance
(brain) as a result of the transferred motion (excitation) and with
the help of other material conditions (e. g., blood). However, re-
gardless of the fact that this generation was never in itself observed,
an empirical proof is at least necessary to show that sensation which
is assumed to be caused in a certain substance by the transferred
motion, did not already exist in the substance in one way or an-
other; so that the appearance of sensation should not be interpreted
in any other way but as a creating act on the part of the transferred
action. Thus only by the proof that where we have now a sensation
there was none before, not even a minimal one, is it possible to
ascertain the fact which, denoting as it does some act of crea-
tion, contradicts the rest of experience and radically changes our
conception of nature. But it is impossible to obtain such proof
through any experience; on the contrary, the notion of a state of
substance which, previously deprived of sensation, now begins to
perceive, is no more than a hypothesis. And such hypothesis only
complicates and obscures our knowledge instead of simplifying and
clarifying it.

“Should the experience, which assumes that a transmitted motion
is capable of causing sensation in a substance that begins to perceive


30 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


Pees ae SS


from this moment on, prove itself illusory upon more intimate
acquaintance, then there would still remain sufficient material in the
content of the experience to ascertain at least the relative origin of
sensation from conditions of motion. It might appear that the
amount of sensation, which was latent or minimal, or which did not
appear to our consciousness before, now, due to the transmitted
motion, frees itself, becomes more intense, or becomes known.
However, even this bit of the remaining content of experience is no
more than illusory. Were we even in the position of ideal ob-
servers who could trace the outgoing motion from the moving
substance A which, transmitted through a series of intermediate
centres, reaches the substance B which is endowed with sensation,
we would at best find that sensation in substance B developed
simultaneously with the reception of the incoming motion, but
we would not find that this occurred as a consequence of the
motion.”

We have purposely quoted this refutation of materialism by
Avenarius in full, in order that the reader might see with what
sophistry “recent” empirio-critical philosophy operates. We shall
compare the argument of the idealist Berkeley with the materialist
argument of Bogdanov, as a kind of punishment for the latter’s be-
trayal of materialism!

In bygone days, nine years ago, when Bogdanov was still partly
“a naturo-historical materialist” (that is, an adherent of the material-
ist theory of knowledge, which the preponderant majority of con-
temporary naturalists instinctively hold), when he was only partly
confused by the befuddled Ostwald, he wrote: “From ancient times
to the present, the classification of the facts of consciousness into
three categories has still held true for descriptive psychology,
namely, the domain of sensations and ideas, the domain of emotion


and the domain of excitations . . . To the first category belong the
images of phenomena of the outer or inner world, that are taken by
themselves in consciousness. . . . Such an image is called a “sensa-


tion” if it is directly caused by the intermediation of the sense-organ
with its corresponding external phenomenon.” * And a little farther:
“Sensation . . . arises in consciousness as a result of a certain ex-
ternal impulse transmitted by the external sense-organs” (p. 222).
Or “sensation is the foundation of mental life; it is the immediate


11 A. Bogdanov: The Basic Elements of the Historical Outlook on Nature,
St. Petersburg, 1899, p. 216 (in Russian).


—r ee a


ba Tle


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 31


connection with the outer world” (p. 240). “In the process of sen-
sation the transformation of energy of external excitation into a
fact of consciousness takes place at each step” (p. 133). And even
in 1905 when, due to the benevolent assistance of Ostwald and
Mach, Bogdanov abandoned the materialist viewpoint for the
idealist, he still wrote (because of impaired memory!) in his
Empirio-Monism: “As is well known, the energy of external excita-
tion is transformed at the nerve endings into a ‘telegraphic’ form
of the nervous current, as yet insufficiently elaborated yet devoid
of mysticism. This energy reaches the neurones that are located in
the so-called ‘lower’ centres—ganglial, spinal, subcortical, etc.”
(Book 1, 2nd ed., 1905, p. 118).

For every scientist, who is not led astray by professorial philoso-
phy, as well as for every materialist, sensation is nothing but a di-
rect connection of the mind with the external world; it is the trans-
formation of energy of external excitation into a mental state. This
transformation has been observed by each of us a million times.
The sophistry of idealist philosophy consists in that it takes sensa-
tion not as a connection of the mind with the outer world but as a
screen, as a wall which separates the mind from the outer world; in
that it is taken not as an image corresponding to the perception of
the external phenomenon but as the “only entity.” Avenarius ac-
cepted the slightly changed form of this old sophistry which had
already been worn thin by Bishop Berkeley. As we do not know all
the conditions of the constantly observed connection of sensation
with matter organised in a certain way, we recognise sensation alone
as existing. The argument of Avenarius may he reduced to this.

To be done with the characterisation of the fundamental idealist
assumptions of empirio-criticism, we shall take the testimony of the
English and French representatives of this philosophic tendency.
Mach explicitly says of Karl Pearson, the Englishman, that he
agrees with his epistemological views. “Reference may first be
made to the expositions of Karl Pearson which agree with my own,


save in terminology.” +2 Pearson in turn agrees with Mach.*? For


Pearson “real things” are “sense impressions.” He declares the
recognition of things outside the boundaries of sense-impressions
to be metaphysics. Knowing neither Feuerbach, nor Marx and
Engels, Pearson fights materialism with great determination; his


12 Die Mechanik, etc., p. ix.
18 Karl Pearson: The Grammar of Science, 2nd ed., London, 1900, p. 326.


32 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


arguments do not differ from those that were illustrated above.
But to Pearson the desire to appear as a materialist is foreign—
this is a specialty of the Russian Machians. He is incautious to
such an extent . . . that without inventing “new” names for his
philosophy, he simply considers his views as well as those of Mach
as “idealist” (ibid, p. 326). His theoretic genealogy he directly
traces to Berkeley and Hume. The philosophy of Pearson, as we
shall see time and again, excels that of Mach in integrity and
thoughtfulness.

With the French physicists, especially Pierre Duhem and Henri
Poincaré, Mach expresses his solidarity. We shall treat the con-
fused and inconsistent philosophic doctrines of these writers in
the chapter on new physics. Here we shall note only that for
Poincaré things are “groups of sensations” *® and that a similar
view is held by Duhem.*®

We shall see now how Mach and Avenarius, having admitted the
idealist character of their original views, corrected them in their
subsequent works.


2. “The Discovery of the World Elements”


It is under such a title that Friedrich Adler, an instructor at
the University of Ziirich, probably the only German author who
was anxious to supplement Marx with Machism, wrote about Mach.”
We must give the naive instructor his due, and admit that with his
naiveté he rendered a service to Machism, that did more harm than
good. The question was put by him point-blank,—did Mach
really “discover the world-elements”? If he did, only backward
and ignorant people could henceforth remain materialists. Or
does this discovery signify Mach’s return to the old philosophic
errors?

We saw that Mach in 1872 and Avenarius in 1876 held a purely
idealist view; for them reality meant sensation. In 1883 The
Science of Mechanics appeared, and in the preface to the first edi-
tion Mach refers to Avenarius’ Prolegomena, greeting the ideas that


14 Analysis of Sensation, p: 4; cf. Intr. to Erkenntnis und Irrtum, 2 ed.

15 Henri Poincaré: The Value of Science, New York, 1907.

16 P, Duhem: La theorie physique son objet et sa structure, pp. 6, 10, 1906.
17 Friedrich W. Adler: Die Entdeckung der Weltelemente (Zu E. Machs


70 Geburtstag, Der Kampf, 1908,-No. 5, tr. in The International Socialist Re-
view, 1908, No. 10).


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 33


were “closely related” to his own. Here are the arguments in de-
fence of these elements: “All physical knowledge can only mentally
represent and. anticipate compounds of those elements we call sen-
sations. It is concerned with the connection of these elements.
Such an element, say the heat of a body A, is connected not only
with other elements, say with such whose aggregate makes up the
flame B, but also with the aggregate of certain elements of our
body, say, with the aggregate of the elements of nerve N. The con-
nection of A and B is a problem of physics, that of A and N, a
problem of physiology. Neither is alone existent; both exist at
once. Only provisionally can we neglect either. Processes, thus,
that in appearance are purely mechanical, are, in addition to their
evident mechanical features, always physiological.” ** We see the
same in the Analysis of Sensations: “. . . Wherever the reader finds
the terms ‘sensation,’ ‘sensation-complex,’ used alongside of or in-
stead of the expressions ‘elements,’ ‘complex of elements,’ it must be
borne in mind that it is only in the connection and relation in ques-
tion, only in their functional dependence that the elements are
sensations (namely, the relations A, B, C to K, L, M, that is ‘com-
plexes which we have called the world of matter,’ we find as parts,
not only our own body, K, L,M... but also the bodies of other
persons or animals.) In another functional relation they are at
the same time physical objects.’® A color is a physical object
as soon as we consider its dependence, for instance, upon its lu-
minous source, upon other colours, upon temperatures, upon spaces
and so forth. When we consider, however, its dependence upon the
retina (the elements K, L,M. . .), it is a psychological object, a
sensation” (ibid, p. 17).

The discovery of the world elements, then amounts to this:

(1) That the existing is declared to be sensation.

(2) That the sensations are called elements.

(3) That elements are divided into physical and. psychical; the
latter is that which depends upon the human nerves and upon the
human organism in general; the former does not depend upon it.

(4) That the relations of physical and psychical elements are
declared not to exist separately from each other, but only together.

(5) That it is possible only for a moment to divert one’s atten-


tion from one or the other relation.


18 Science of Mechanics, p. 507.
19 Analysis of Sensations, p. 16.


34 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


(6) That the “new” theory is declared to be free from “one-
sidedness.” ?°

To be sure, there is no one-sidedness about it. It is, however, the
most disconnected mess of contradictory philosophic conceptions.
Once you start with sensation you cannot rid your idealism of the
vestiges of a one-sided theory by the use of the term “element”
alone. You are only complicating matters, and in a cowardly man-
ner, running away from your own theory. In words you are elimi-
nating the contrast between the physical and psychical,?* between
materialism (which takes matter as its prius) and idealism (which
takes mind, consciousness, sensation as the prius); in acts you at
once secretly restore this contrast and retreat from your original po-
sition. For, if elements are sensations, you may not even for a mo-
ment accept the existence of the elements without their dependence
on our nervous system and on our consciousness. But once you
admit such physical objects independently of our nervous system
and our sensations—objects that cause sensations only by acting
upon my retina—you are disgracefully abandoning your “one-
sided” idealism and are accepting “one-sided” materialism! If
colour is a sensation dependent upon the retina (as natural science
compels you to admit!), then the light rays falling on the retina
produce the sensation of colour. That means that independent of
us and our consciousness there exists the vibration of matter, of ether
waves of a certain length and certain velocity which, acting’ upon
the retina, produce in us the sensation of one colour or another.
That is how natural science regards it. The various sensations of
one colour or another are explained by science in terms of various
lengths of light waves existing outside of the human retina and
independently of man. Such is the view of materialism; that mat-
ter, acting on our sense-organs, produces sensation. Sensation de-
pends upon the brain, nerves, retina, etc., upon matter organised in
a certain way. The existence of matter does not depend upon sensa-
tion. Matter is of primary nature. Sensation, thought, conscious-
ness are the highest products of matter organised in a certain way.
This is the doctrine of materialism, in general, and of Marx and


20Mach says in the Analysis of Sensation: “Usually, these elements are
called sensations. But as vestiges of a one-sided theory inhere in that term,
we prefer to speak simply of elements, as we have already done” (p. 22).

21“The antithesis between the ego and the world, between sensation (ap-


pearance) and thing, then vanishes, and we have simply to deal with the con-
nection of the elements.” (Jbid., p. 14.)


teat.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 35


Engels, in particular. Mach and Avenarius smuggled in materialism
by the term “element” which thus supposedly rids their theory of
the one-sidedness of subjective idealism, leaves room for the de-
pendence of the psychical on the retina, the nerves and so forth, as
well as for the independence of the physical from the human
organism. The stratagem with the term “element” is the most
contemptible sophistry, for reading Mach and Avenarius, the ma-
terialist would immediately ask the question: “what are the ele-
ments?” It is, indeed, very childish to think that the invention of
a new word will do away with the chief philosophic alignments. If
“elements” are sensations, as all empirio criticists (Mach, Avenarius,
Petzoldt and others) maintain,”? their philosophy then is idealism
which in vain tends to cover the nakedness of its solipsism by a garb
of “objective terminology.” If “elements” are not sensations, then
no thought whatsoever can be attached to the “new” term, and they
are parading with a mere bagatelle.

Take Petzoldt for instance, since his is the last word of empirio-
criticism, as it is characterised by B. Lessevich, the outsanding
Russian empirio-criticist.2* Having defined elements as sensation,
he says in the second volume of the work cited: “One must be on
his guard not to take the term ‘sensation’ in the statement that
‘sensations are world elements,’ as indicating only something sub-
jective and therefore something ethereal which thus transforms the
ordinary picture of the world into an illusion.” **

One usually speaks of matters which are most urgent to him!
Petzoldt feels that the world “evaporates” (verfliichtigt sich)
or becomes illusory, if the world-elements are regarded as sensa-
tions. And the good natured Petzoldt imagines that he helps mat-
ters by the clause, “that we must not take sensation as something
subjective!” Is this not ridiculous sophistry! Can the situation
be changed by “taking” sensation as sensation or by trying to
stretch the meaning of the word? Would the fact that sensations
are connected in us with a normally functioning nervous system
vanish, merely because of such a change of words! Does the outer
world exist independently of our perception? If you wish to evade

22 Joseph Petzoldt: Einfiihrung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung,
p. 113: “Elements are termed sensations in the ordinary sense of simple per-


ceptions (Wahrnehmungen), irreducible to anything else.” ; ;
28 B. Lessevich: What is Scientific [read: fashionable, professorial, eclectic]


Philosophy? St. Petersburg, 1891, pp. 229 and 247.
24 Petzoldt, op. cit., Bd. II, 1904, p. 329,


36 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


the situation other than by tricks, if you seriously wish to be “on
your guard” against subjectivism and solipsism, then you must
above all be wary of fundamental idealist assumptions; then you
must change your idealist approach and go from the outer world
to sensations instead of vice versa. But this is not sufficient; you
must also throw overboard the empty ambiguity of the term “ele-
ment” and simply say that colour is the result of the action of a
physical object on the retina which is the same as saying that
sensation is a result of the action of matter on our sense-organs.

Let us now take Avenarius. As to the question of the “elements,”
his last work 2° appears to be the most valid and important for the
apprehension of his philosophy. The author, by the way, here gives
a very “illuminating” table (Vol. XVIII, p. 410) the main part of
which we reproduce here:

“Elements, complexes of elements:

“I, Things or appertaining to things . . . corporeal things.

“{IJ. Thoughts or appertaining to thoughts (Gedankenhaftes)

. . . incorporeal things, recollections and phantasies.”

Compare with this what Mach says after all his comments on the
“elements”: 7° “Bodies do not produce sensations, but complexes of
elements (complexes of sensations) make up bodies.” Here you
have the “discovery of the world-elements,” that transcends the one-
sidedness of idealism and materialism! At the beginning we were
assured that the “elements” were something new, both physical and
psychical at the same time, and then a little correction was secretly
made; instead of the rude materialist differentiation of matter
(bodies and things) and mind (sensations, recollections, phan-
tasms) we are presented with the doctrine of the “most recent posi-
tivism” about elements corporeal and mental. Very little did
Adler (Fritz) gain from “the discovery of the world-elements!”

In reply to Plekhanov, Bogdanov wrote in 1906: “. . . I cannot
call myself a Machian in philosophy. In the general philosophic
conception I borrowed from Mach only one thing—the notion of
neutrality of the elements of experience in relation to the physical
and psychical, and of dependence of these characteristics upon the
connection of experience.” 2” This is as if a religious man were to

25 Bemerkungen zum Begriff des Gegenstandes der Psychologie, Viertel-
a ostees fiir wissenschafiliche Philosophie, Vol. XVII (1894) and XIX


28 Analysis of Sensation, p. 29.
27 Empirio-Monism, Bk. III, St. Petersburg, 1906, p. xli.


ye Te


eorek dle


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 37


say—“I cannot consider myself an adherent of religion, for I have
borrowed from it only one thing—the belief in God.” This “one
thing” which Bogdanov took from Mach is the chief error of
Machism, the fundamental incorrectness of the entire philosophy.
The deviations of Bogdanov from empirio-criticism, to which Bog-
danov himself attributes so much weight, are really of secondary
importance and do not pass the boundaries of detailed, private,
individual differences between the empirio-criticists who are ap-
proved by Mach and who approve Mach (more of this later).
Therefore, when Bogdanov showed irritation at being confused
with Mach, he betrayed his failure to comprehend what it is which
radically distinguishes materialism from what is common to Bog-
danov and the rest of the Machians. It is of no importance in what
manner Machism was developed, corrected or corrupted by Bog-
danov. It is of importance how he deserted the materialist doctrine
and hence condemned himself to inevitable confusion and idealist
aberrations. In 1899, as we saw, Bogdanov held a correct posi-
tion when he wrote: “The image of the man before me, which is
given to me by sight, is a sensation.” ?* Bogdanov made no effort
to offer a criticism of his previous position. He blindly placed faith
in Mach and began to repeat after him that the “elements” of experi-
ence are “neutral” in their relation to the physical and psychical.
“As was established by recent positivist philosophy the elements
of psychic experience,” wrote Bogdanov in Book I of his Empirio-
Monism (2nd ed., p. 90), “are similar to the elements of experience
in general, for they are identical with the elements of physical ex-
perience.” Or in 1906 (Bk. III, p. xx): “As far as idealism is
concerned, must it be spoken of only upon the basis of the recogni-
tion of identity between the elements of physical experience and the
elements or elementary sensations of psychical experience, when
this is simply an indubitable fact?”

Here is the actual source of Bogdanov’s philosophic inferences,
a source which he shares with the rest of the Machians. One may
and ought to speak of idealism if he regards sensations as identical
with “the elements of physical experience” (that is the physical,
external world, matter), for this is nothing else but Berkeleianism.
There is not a trace here of the latest or positivist philosophy or of
the “indubitable fact.” It is merely the very old idealist sophistry.
And were one to ask Bogdanov how he could prove the “indubitable


28 The Fundamental Elements, etc., p. 216; Cf. with the above quotations.


eS


38 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


fact” that sensations are identical with the physical, he would hear
no other response save the eternal idealist song: “I perceive only
my perception; the evidence of self-consciousness” (die Aussage
des Selbstbewusstseins) ,2° or; “in our experience [which testifies
that “we are perceiving subjects”] sensation is given to us with
more certainty than is substance,” (ibid., p. 55) and so forth, and
so on. As an “indubitable fact” Bogdanov, following Mach,
accepted a reactionary philosophic subterfuge, for in truth not
one fact was or could be cited which would refute the view
which holds that sensation is a reflection of the outer world—a
view which was held by Bogdanov in 1899 and which is still
held by contemporary science. The physicist Mach, in his
idealist wanderings, strayed into a path different from that of
“modern natural science.” Concerning this important circumstance
which was overlooked by Mach, we shall have a good deal to say
afterwards.

One of the circumstances (besides the influence of Ostwald) which
induced Bogdanov to leap from the natural materialism of science
to the muddled idealism of Mach, was the teaching of Avenarius
about dependent and independent series of experience. Bogdanov
himself thus relates it in Book I of his Empirio-Monism: “Insofar
as the data of experience are dependent upon the state of the given
nervous system, they form the psychical realm of the given person;
insofar, however, as the data of experience are taken independently
of such a relation, we have before us the physical realm. Avenarius
therefore characterises these two realms of experience as being con-
stituted by dependent series and independent series of experience”
(p. 18).

The trouble is that the doctrine of “independent series” is a sur-
reptitious importation of materialism, which from the standpoint
of a philosophy that maintains that bodies are complexes of sensa-
tions, that sensations are “identical” with physical “elements” is
illegitimate, arbitrary, and eclectic. For having recognised that
the source of light and light waves exist independently of men
and their consciousness, that colour depends upon the action of
these waves on the retina, as a matter of course they took the posi-
tion of materialism and thus completely destroyed the “indubitable
facts” of idealism with all “the complexes of sensations,” elements
and similar nonsense, discovered by recent positivism.


“9 Avenarius: Prolegomena, 2nd German ed., p. 56.


—


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 39


The trouble is that Bogdanov (together with the rest of the Rus-
sian Machians) took no pains to make a thorough study of the ideal-
ist views originally held by Mach and Avenarius, and so get to the
roots of their fundamental ideas. He, therefore, failed to see that
their subsequent attempts to surreptitiously smuggle in materialism
were illegitimate and eclectic. Yet just as much as the idealist views
originally held by Mach and Avenarius are generally acknowledged
in philosophic literature, so is it universally accepted that their
subsequent empirio-criticism tended to incline towards materialism.
Couwelaert, the French writer quoted above, sees “monistic ideal-
ism” in Avenarius’ Prolegomena; in Der Kritik der reinen Erfahr-
ung (1888-90), he sees “absolute realism,” and in Der menschliche
Weltbegriff (1892), an attempt “to explain” the change of posi-
tion. We call attention to the fact that the term “realism” is here
employed in a sense contrary to idealism. Following Engels,
I will use the term “materialism” in this sense, accounting it as the
only correct one, especially since the term “realism” has been
usurped by positivists and other muddleheads who vacillate be-
tween materialism and idealism. For the present it will suffice to
note that Couwelaert had the established fact in view that in the
Prolegomena (1876) “sensation” for Avenarius, is the only entity,
while “substance”—according to the principle of “the economy of
thought”!—is eliminated; and in Der Kritik der reinen Erfahrung
the physical is taken as the domain of independent series, while the
psychical and, consequently, sensations, as the domain of dependent
series.

Avenarius’ disciple, Rudolph Willy, likewise admits that Ave-
narius who was a “full-fledged” idealist in 1876, subsequently
“reconciled” (Ausgleich) “naive realism” (the above cited work)
with this teaching. Naive realism is the instinctive materialist view-
point held by humanity which accepts the existence of the outer
world independently of the mind.

Oscar Ewald, the author of the book on Avenarius *’ says that
this philosophy combines the contradictory idealist and realist (he
should have said “materialist”) elements (not in Mach’s sense but
in the sense of popular usage). For example: “The absolute (con-
sideration) would perpetuate naive realism, the relative would de-
clare exclusive idealism as constant.” Avenarius calls the “abso-


30 Oscar Ewald: Richard Avenarius als Begriinder des Empiriokriticismus,
Berlin, 1905, p. 66.


40 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


lute consideration” that which corresponds to Mach’s connection
of “elements” outside of the body.

But of considerable interest to us in this respect is the opinion of
Wundt, who himself holds (as the majority of the above-mentioned
writers) the confused idealist viewpoint. Wundt, more than others,
devoted himself to an analysis of empirio-criticism. P. Yushke-
vich speaks thus about Wundt’s conclusion: “It is interesting that
Wundt considers empirio-criticism as the most scientific form of
the latest type of materialism,” ** that is, of the type of materialism
which sees in the spiritual the function of corporeal processes
(and which we wish to add) stands—according to Wundt—
between Spinozism and absolute materialism. (“Ueber naiven und
kritischen Realismus” in Philosophische Studien, Bk. XIII, 1898,
p- 334.)

It is true that Wundt’s opinion is very interesting. But it is still
more “interesting” to learn what Mr. Yushkevich’s attitude is toward
Wundt’s philosophy. This is a typical instance of the relation our
Machians bear to such works. The hero of Gogol, Petrushka, found
it interesting that words could be constructed of letters.?2 Yush-
kevich read Wundt and found it “interesting” that Avenarius was
accused by Wundt of materialism. If Wundt is wrong, why not
refute him? If he is right why not admit that the position of ma-
terialism is contrary to that of empirio-criticism? Yushkevich finds
what the idealist Wundt says “interesting,” but this Machian regards
it as a vain effort to go to the root of the matter (probably in ac-
cordance with the principle of “the economy of thought” . . .).

The point is, that having informed the reader that Wundt had
accused Avenarius of materialism, Yushkevich failed to inform him
that Wundt regards some aspects of empirio-criticism as material-
ism and others as idealism, and holds that the connection between
the two is an artificial product. By this Yushkevich misrepresented
the issue. Either this gentleman does not at all understand what
he reads, or he was prompted by a base desire to be praised by
Wundt, as if to say “you see, the official professors regard us not
as muddleheads but as materialists.”

The above-mentioned article by Wundt is a voluminous book

81 Materialism and Critical Realism, St. Petersburg, 1908, p. 15.

82.A character in Gogol’s novel, Dead Souls. Petrushka liked the very
process of reading printed matter, without getting the meaning of what he


read. He read indiscriminately—a grammar book, a chemistry book, a prayer
book, or a novel. He always marveled how words were formed from letters.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 41


(more than 300 pages) which is primarily devoted to a detailed
analysis of the immanentist school, as well as to an analysis of
empirio-criticism. Why did Wundt connect these two schools?
Because he considers them to be in close relationship; and this
opinion, shared by Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt and the followers of
the immanentist school is, as we shall see later, perfectly correct.
Wundt explains in the first part of this article that by “immanent-
ists” are meant idealists, subjectivists and adherents of fideism.
This, too, as we shall see later, is a perfectly correct opinion which,
however, is expressed with a superfluous ballast of professorial
erudition, with superfluous subtleties and clauses that can be ex-
plained by the fact that Wundt himself is both an idealist and deist.
He reproaches the adherents of the immanentist school not because
they hold fast to idealist and fideist views, but because they arrive
at these great principles in a circuitous way. The second and third
part of the article is devoted by Wundt to empirio-criticism. There
he quite definitely shows that the very important theoretical prin-
ciple of empirio-criticism—the interpretation of “experience” and
the “essential co-ordination,” of which we shall speak later—is, in
his opinion, similar to that of the immanentists. (Die empirio-
kritische in Uebereinstimmung mit der immanenten Philosophie
annimmt, p. 382). The other theoretical principles of Avenarius
are borrowed from materialism. Regarded as a whole empirio-
criticism is a “variegated mixture” (bunte Mischung, ibid., p. 57),
in which the “component elements are not well fused together”
(p. 56).

In the jumble of materialist bits of the Avenarius-Mach mixture,
Wundt singles out chiefly the teaching of the former about “inde-
pendent vital series.” He says that if you start from the “system
C” (that is how Avenarius, being a great hand at an erudite play of
terms, names the human brain or the nervous system in general)
and if the mental is for you a function of the brain, then this
“system C” is a “metaphysical substance and your doctrine is ma-
terialism” (ibid., p. 64). Many idealists and agnostics (Kantians
and Humeans included) call the materialists metaphysicians, be-
cause to them the materialists’ recognition of the existence of the
outer world independently of human mind is equivalent to tran-
scending the boundaries of possible experience. Concerning the in-
correctness of this terminology we shall speak later when we come
to the question. Here it is important to note that the recognition of


42 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


the “independent” series by Avenarius (and also by Mach, who ex-
pressed the same idea in different words), is according to the gen-
eral admission of philosophers of various tendencies, an appropria-
tion from materialism. If you start with the presupposition that
everything existing is sensation or that bodies are complexes of
sensations, you cannot, without destroying your ultimate principles,
all “your” philosophy, come to the conclusion that the physical
exists independently of us, and that sensation is a function of mat-
ter organised in a certain way. Mach and Avenarius in their
philosophy combine idealist assumptions with individual materialist
inferences just because this theory is an instance of that “eclectic
hodge-podge” of which Engels speaks with contempt.** They did
not deserve better treatment.

In the last philosophic work of Mach, Erkenninis und Irrtum,
this eclecticism is especially prominent. We have already seen
that Mach there declared: “There is no difficulty in constructing any
physical element out of sensation, i.e., out of psychical elements”;
and in the same book we read: “The dependencies outside of U
[Umgrenzung, that is, “the spatial boundary of our body,” p. 8]
is the subject matter of physics in the broad sense of the term” (p.
323). “To obtain those dependencies in a pure state it is necessary
as much as possible to eliminate the influence of the observer, that
is, those elements that lie within U.” He set out to construct
physical elements from psychical elements, and yet ends up with
the result that physical elements lie beyond the boundary of psychi-
cal elements, “which are within our body!” What a remarkable
philosophy this is!

Another example: “An ideal (vollkomenes) gas, an ideal liquid,
an ideal elastic body—do not exist; the physicist knows that his
fiction only approximates the facts and deliberately simplifies
them; he is aware of the divergence which cannot be eliminated”
(p. 418).


38 In the introduction to his Ludwig Feuerbach. These words of Engels
refer to the German professorial philosophy in general. The followers of
Mach, anxious to be Marxians yet unable to grasp the meaning and content
of this thought of Engels, sometimes hide themselves beyond this miserable
excuse: “Engels did not know Mach as yet.” (Fritz Adler.) On what is this
opinion based? On the fact that Engels does not quote Mach and Avenarius?
There are no other grounds, and this ground is good for nothing, for Engels
does not call any of the eclectics by name. It is hardly likely that Engels did
not know Avenarius, who had been editing a quarterly of “scientific” philoso-
phy from 1876 on.


eae


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 43


What divergence (Abweichung) is meant here? The divergence
of what from what? Thoughts (physical theory) from facts? And
what are thoughts and ideas? Ideas are “marks of sensations”
(p. 9). And what are facts? Facts are “complexes of sensations.”
Well, then, that means that the divergence of the marks of sensa-
tions from the complexes of sensations cannot be eliminated.

What does all this mean? It means that when Mach forgets his
own theory, and, begins with the various physical problems, he
plainly speaks as a materialist without idealist twists. All “the
complexes of sensations” and the entire stock of Berkeleian wisdom
quickly vanish. The theory of the physicists proves to be a re-
flection of bodies, liquids, gases existing without and independently
of us. This reflection is, of course, approximate, but to call this
approximation or simplification “wilful” is erroneous. Sensation,
in actuality is regarded by Mach just as it is regarded by the whole
of natural science (when it is not “purified” by the disciples of
Berkeley and Hume) as an image of the outer world. Mach’s own
theory is subjective idealism, and when a moment of objectivity is
required, he unceremoniously adopts in his arguments the con-
tary principles of the materialist theory of knowledge. Eduard
Hartmann, the consistent idealist and reactionary in philosophy,
whose sympathy was enlisted by the Machians in their controversy
with the materialists, is not far from the truth when he says that
the philosophic position of Mach is a “mixture of naive realism
and absolute illusionism.” ** The doctrine that bodies are com-
plexes of sensations, etc., is absolute illusionism, solipsism; for, ac-
cording to this doctrine, the world is nothing but my illusion. The
arguments of Mach which have been discussed here, together with
many others in his fragmentary discourses, express the point of view
of so-called “naive realism,”—the theory of knowledge that has been
unconsciously and instinctively taken over by the scientists from
the materialists.

Avenarius and those professors who trod in his footsteps, attempt
to cover this hodge-podge by the theory of “essential co-ordination.”
We shall soon proceed with the examination of it, but we must first
complete the alleged accusation of Avenarius in materialism.
Yushkevich, to whom Wundt’s opinion seemed so _ interesting,
although he was unable to comprehend it, was not sufficiently inter-


34 Eduard von Hartmann: Die Weltanschauung der modernen Physik, Leip-
zig, 1902. p. 219.


44, MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


ested himself or perhaps not sufficiently benevolent as to inform
the reader how Avenarius’ most devoted disciples and successors
reacted against this accusation. This is extremely necessary in
order to clarify matters, especially if we are interested in the
question of the relation of materialism, Marxian philosophy, to
the philosophy of empirio-criticism. And if Machism will prove
to be a mixture of materialism and idealism, then it will be im-
portant to learn whither this current flowed after the official
idealists began to discountenance it because of its concessions to
materialism.

Wundt, by the way, was answered by two of the most orthodox
disciples of Avenarius, Petzoldt and Carstanjen. Petzoldt, with
proud indignation, rejected the accusation of being a materialist,
something which is considered a stigma upon a German Pro-
fessor, and referred (what do you think?) to Avenarius’ Prolego-
mena, as the place where the concept of substance had supposedly
been annihilated! Indeed, a convenient theory when one can refer to
it as both a purely idealist work and an arbitrary admission of mate-
rialist assumptions! “Avenarius’ Kritik der reinen Erfahrung, to be
sure, does not contradict materialism,” wrote Petzoldt, “but neither
does it contradict the opposite spiritualist doctrine.” °° What an
excellent defence! This is exactly what Engels meant by “miserable
eclectic hodge-podge.” Bogdanov, who refuses to call himself a
Machian and who wishes to be considered a Marxist (in philos-
ophy), follows Petzoldt. He asserts “that empirio-criticism is con-
cerned neither with materialism nor with spiritualism, nor with any
metaphysics in general,” ** that “truth . . . does not lie in the
‘golden mean’ between the conflicting tendencies [of materialism
and spiritualism], but lies outside of both.” *’ That which appeared
to Bogdanov as truth is in fact confusion, a vagrant flitting between
materialism and idealism.

Carstanjen, replying to Wundt, said that he absolutely rejects
this “foisting of a materialist element upon the doctrine of pure
experience.” °° “Empirio-criticism is scepticism in relation to the
content of the concepts.” There is a grain of truth in this over-


85 J. Petzoldt: Einfiihrung, etc., Vol. I, pp. 351-2.

36 Empirio-Monism, Bk. I, 2nd ed., p. 21.

37 [bid., p. 93.

88 Fr, Carstanjen: “Der Empiriocriticismus, zugleich eine Erwiderung auf
Wundts Aufsatze,” Vierteljahrsschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Philosophie, 1898,
pp. 73 and 74,


—


ns


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 45


emphasis upon the neutrality of Machism; the corrections of Mach


and Avenarius of their original rendering of idealism can be
reduced to admissions of partial concessions to materialism. In-
stead of the consistent standpoint of Berkeley—“the outer world is
my sensation”—we sometimes get the Humean standpoint—“I re-
ject even the question as to whether or not there is anything beyond
my sensation.” This admission of agnosticism inevitably condemns
one to vacillation between materialism and idealism.


3. Essential Co-ordination and “Naive Realism”?


The doctrine of essential co-ordination is laid down by Avenarius
in Der menschliche Weltbegriff and later in Die Bemerkungen. In
the latter, Avenarius emphasises that the exposition differs some-
what from both the Kritik and Der menschliche Weltbegriff, yet
the essence is the same.*® Now the essence of this doctrine is the
principle of “continual co-ordination ( i. e., the correlative connec-
tion) of the self and environment” (§ 146). “To use a philosophic
expression,” he says, “one can say ‘self’ and ‘not self?! We always
find ‘this’ and ‘the other,’ our self and environment, ‘together’
(immer ein Zusammengefundenes). No full description of the ex-
perienced (des forgefundenen) can reflect the environment with-
out implying the existence of a self (ohne ein ich), whose environ-
ment it is, at least of the self that describes the experienced (§ 146).
The self is called the central term of co-ordination; the environment,
the counter term (Gegenglied).” *°

Avenarius claims that by this doctrine he recognises the full
validity of so-called naive realism, that is, the ordinary unphilo-
sophical, naive view of the plain man who does not concern himself
with the question whether he himself exists or whether the environ-
ment and the external world exist. Expressing his agreement with
Avenarius, Mach also tries to appear as the defender of “naive
realism” (Analysis, etc., p. 51). The Russian Machians, without
exception, relied upon Mach and Avenarius to the extent of believ-
ing that this was really a defence of “‘naive realism.” The self is
acknowledged; so is the environment. What more is to be ex-
pected?

To decide with whom the highest degree of naiveté rests, we


89 Bemerkungen, 1894, § 29.
40 Der menschliche Weltbegriff, pp. 82-3 ff.


46 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM ~


shall commence with a somewhat distant subject. Here is a popular
dialogue between a philosopher and a reader:

“Reader: The existence of a system of things is prerequisite to
the existence of anything else; from it consciousness will be in-
ferred.

“Author: Now you are speaking in the spirit of professional phi-
losophers . . . and not according to human understanding and
actual consciousness. . . . Tell me, and think well before you an-
swer me, can you behold an object within yourself or outside of
yourself, independently of your consciousness of the thing?

“Reader: Upon sufficient reflection, I agree with you.

“Author: Now you are speaking from your heart. You must not
then attempt to escape from yourself, and to apprehend more than
you are able to, namely, consciousness and the thing, the thing and
consciousness; or to be more exact do not try to intuit either of the
two separately, but only the fusion of the two, the absolute sub-
jective-objective and objective-subjective as distinct from either one
in isolation.”

Here is the whole essence of empirio-critical essential co-ordina-
tion, the latest defence of “naive realism” by recent positivism!
The idea of “continual” co-ordination is here stated very explicitly
as if it were a defence of the habitual human conception, and not
its philosophical perversion on the part of “the professional philos-
ophers.” This dialogue, as it happens to be, was taken from the
works of a classical representative of subjective idealism, Johann
Gottlieb Fichte. It was published in 1801.

There is nothing in the teachings of Mach and Avenarius besides
a paraphrasing of subjective idealism. The assumption that they
rose above materialism and idealism, that they eliminated the con-
flicting views, started from things and proceeded to consciousness,
or vice versa—is an empty pretence of a renovated Fichteanism.
Fichte also imagined that he “inseparably” connected the “ego” and
the “environment,” the mind and the thing; that he “solved” the
problem by the assertion that a person cannot escape from him-
self. In other words, the Berkeleian argument is repeated: I only
perceive my perceptions, I have no right to assume “objects in
themselves” outside of my perception. The different ways of ex-


41 Johann Gottlieb Fichte: Sonneklarer Bericht an das grossere Publicum


liber das eigentliche Wesen der neusten Philosophie. Werke, Berlin, 1845, Vol.
TH, pp. 399-400.


ee


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 47


pression—by Berkeley in 1710, by Fichte in 1801, or by Avenarius
in 1892-4—do not in the least change the fundamental philosophic
position of subjective idealism. “The world is my sensation”;
the “non-ego”’ is “postulated” (is created, produced) by our “ego”;
the thing is inseparably connected with consciousness; the con-
tinual co-ordination of our ego and the environment is the empirio-
critical principle of co-ordination;—this is the same old trashy
stock-in-trade of subjective idealism under a newly painted sign-
board.

The reference to the “naive realism,” which is being defended
by such a philosophy, is sophistry of a very cheap kind. The
“naive realism” of any healthy person, who is not an inmate of
an insane asylum, or in the school of the idealist philosophers,
consists in this, that he believes reality, the environment and the
things in it, to exist independently of his perception,—independently
of his conception of himself, in particular, and of his fellow men,
in general. This same experience (not in the Machian sense, but
in the common sense use of the word) which caused in us the in-
vincible conviction that there exist independently of us other selves
and not mere complexes of my perceptions of high, short, yellow
and hard, this very same experience is responsible for our convic-
tion that things, reality and environment exist independently of us.
Our sensation, our consciousness is only a representation of the
outer world. But it is obvious that although a representation can-
not exist without someone for whom it is a representation, the
represented thing exists independently of the one for whom it is a
representation. The “naive” belief of mankind is consciously taken
by materialism as the basis of its theory of knowledge.

Does the characterisation made above of the “essential co-ordina-
tion” result from a materialist prejudice against Machism? Not
at all. Specialists in philosophy, who cannot be accused of partial-
ity towards materialism,—nay, who have nothing but hatred for it
and who adhere to one system of idealism or another, agree that
the essential co-ordination of Avenarius and his followers is an ex-
pression of subjective idealism. Wundt, for instance, whose “inter-
esting” opinion was not understood by Yushkevich, explicitly states
that the theory of Avenarius according to which it is impossible to
describe fully the “given” or the “found” without dragging in a
self, or an observer is a “confusion of the content of real experience
with the argument about it.” Wundt says that the laws and con-


48 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


cepts of natural science are the result of abstractions from its ob-
servation. “And such abstractions are possible because of the
alleged necessity of taking into account the experiencing individual
in every content of experience. This necessity, held by the empirio-
critical philosophy in agreement with the adherents of the im-
manence school, is in reality an empirically groundless assumption
arising from a confusion of the content of the real experience with
a discussion about it” (loc. cit. p. 332). The adherents of the
“immanence school” (Schuppe, Rehmke, Leclair, Schubert-Soldern) ,
who have themselves voiced their hearty sympathy with Avenarius
take as their starting point exactly this same idea of “inseparable”
connection between subject and object. And Wundt, before
analysing Avenarius, gave detailed proof that the immanentist phi-
losophy was only a “modification” of Berkeleianism, that much as
the adherents of the immanentist school deny their kinship to
Berkeley, verbal differences ought not to conceal from us the
“deeper content of their philosophic teaching,” as Berkeleianism
or Fichteanism.**

The English writer, Norman Smith, in analysing Avenarius’
Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung, states this criticism with even
more determination and straightforwardness.

“Most readers of Avenarius’ Menschliche Weltbegriff will prob-
ably agree that, however convincing as criticism, it is tantalisingly
illusive in its positive teaching. So long as we seek to interpret his
theory of experience in the form in which it is avowedly presented,
namely, as genuinely realistic, it eludes all clear comprehension:
its whole meaning seems to be exhausted in negation of the sub-
jectivism which it overthrows. It is only when we translate Ave-
narius’ technical terms into more familiar language that we dis-
cover where the real source of the mystification lies. Avenarius
has diverted attention from the defects of his position by directing
his main attack against the very weakness which is fatal to his
own theory.*®

“Throughout the whole discussion the vagueness of the term
experience stands him in good stead. Sometimes it means experi-
encing and at other times the experienced, the latter meaning em-

42 Loc. cit., §C: “The philosophy of immanence and the idealism of Berke-


ley,” pp. 373 and 375; Cf. pp. 336 and 407. “Concerning the inevitability of
solipsism from this standpoint” p. 381.


*8 Norman Smith: “Avenarius’ Philosophy of Pure Experience.” Mind
XV, 1906, pp. 27-28. P » Mind, Vol.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 5 49


phasised when the nature of the self is in question. These two
meanings of the term experience practically coincide with his
important distinction between the absolute and the relative stand-
points [I examined above the meaning of this distinction for Ave-
narius|and these two points of view are not in his philosophy really
reconciled. For when he allows as legitimate the demand that
experience be ideally completed in thought [the full description
of the environment is completed ideally in thought about the ob-
serving self] he makes an admission which he cannot successfully
combine with his assertion that nothing exists save in relation to
the self. The ideal completion of given reality which results from
the analysis of material bodies into elements which no human senses
can apprehend [concerning the material elements discovered by
natural science, the atoms, electrons, etc., and not the fictitious ele-
ments invented by Mach and Avenarius] or from following the
earth back to a time when no human being existed upon it, is,
strictly, not a completion of experience but only of what is ex-
perienced. It completes only one of the two aspects which Ave-
narius has asserted to be inseparable. It leads us not only to what
has not been experienced but to what can never by any possibility
be experienced by beings like ourselves. But here again the am-
biguities of the term experience come to Avenarius’ rescue. He
argues that thought is as genuine a form of experience as sense-
perception, and so in the end falls back on the time-worn argument
of subjective idealism, that thought and reality are inseparable,
because reality can only be conceived in thought, and thought in-
volves the presence of the thinker. Not, therefore, any original and
profound re-establishment of realism, but only the restatement in its
crudest form of the familiar position of subjective idealism is the
final outcome of Avenarius’ positive speculation.” **

The mystification of Avenarius who repeats fully Fichte’s mis-
take is here excellently disclosed. The supposed elimination of
the opposition between materialism (Smith erroneously uses the

term realism) and idealism by means of the term “experience”
| proved at once to be a myth as soon as we proceeded to the analysis
of concrete problems. Such is the problem of the existence of the
earth prior to the appearance of man and any perceiving being.
Here we will note that not only Smith, an opponent of his theory,
but Schuppe, an adherent of the immanence school, who warmly


44 Op. cit., p. 29.


50 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


a r


greeted the appearance of Der menschliche Weltbegriff as the con-
firmation of naive realism, unmasks Avenarius and his fictitious
“realism.” 4° Schuppe fully agrees with the mystification of ma-
terialism which Avenarius presented under the name of “realism.”
“Such ‘realism,’ ” he wrote to Avenarius, “I have always claimed
with as much right as yourself, hochverehrter Herr Kollege, for it
was insinuated against me, that I, an adherent of the immanence
school, was a subjective idealist... . My conception of thought . . .
is in full agreement with your Kritik der reinen Erfahrung, hoch-
verehrter Kollege’” (ibid., p. 384). “But the self [das Ich, the
abstract, Fichtean self-consciousness, a thought separated from the
brain] gives two terms of the system of co-ordination, namely, con-
nection and continuity. Hence, what you desired to eliminate you
assume by implication” (p. 388). So Schuppe wrote to Avenarius.
It is difficult to say who unmasks Avenarius, the mystifier, more
sharply—Smith by his determinate and clear refutation, or Schuppe
by his exalted review of Avenarius’ concluding work. Wil-
helm Schuppe’s kiss in philosophy is no better than the kiss of
Peter Struve or Menshikov in politics.**

Ewald, who praises Mach for his firm stand against materialism,
speaks in a similar manner about the essential co-ordination: “If
we declare the correlation of the central term and the counter term
as an epistemological necessity from which there can be no retreat,
then in whatever loud and large letters the word ‘empirio-criticism’
may be written on the signboard, it signifies only the espousal of a
view that does not differ in the least from absolute idealism. [The
term is incorrect; he should have said subjective idealism, for Hegel’s
absolute idealism is reconciled with the existence of the earth, na-
ture, and physical universe independent of man, since nature is
assumed as the ‘otherness’ of the absolute idea.] On the other
hand, if we do not adhere strictly to this co-ordination and give the
counter terms their independence, then all the familiar metaphysical

45 Cf. Schuppe’s letter to Avenarius in Vierteljahrsschrift fiir wissenschaft-
liche Philosophie, Vol. XVII, 1893, pp. 365-388.

46 Struve, P. B. (born 1870), originally a Marxian theoretician and author
of the Manifesto of the Russian Social-Democratic Labor Party, issued after its
first congress in 1898, he later renounced his Marxism and gradually swung
from liberalism to reaction and from 1925 has been editing an emigré mon-
archist paper in Paris; Menshikov, M. O. (born 1859), a well-known writer,
aud one of the editors of the semi-official Novoye Vremia, a reactionary daily


published in St. Petersburg during the Tsarist régime. Menshikov’s name is
synonymous with the most reactionary type of old Russian journalism.—Ed.


te Ba teel t ————


ee,


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 51


possibilities at once arise, especially on the side of transcendental
realism” (loc. cit., pp. 56-57).

_ By metaphysics and transcendental realism, Friedlander, who is
disguised under the name of Ewald, means materialism. Defending
one of the varieties of idealism, he is in full agreement with the
disciples of Mach and Kant that materialism is metaphysics—“from
the beginning to the end a very wild metaphysics” (p. 134).

On the question of the “transcendence” and the view that ma-
terialism is metaphysics he is the associate of Bazarov and of all
our Machians. It is important here to note how the shallow pseudo-
erudite pretence to transcend idealism and materialism disappears,
—important to note how the question is put without hope of recon-
ciliation. “To give independence to the counter terms” means (to
translate the pretentious language of Avenarius into common. par-
lance) to regard nature and the external world as independent of
human consciousness and sensation. Such a view is materialism.
To build a theory of knowledge on the hypothesis of the inseparable
connection of the object and human sensation [i. e., on “complexes
of sensation” as being identical with bodies or “world elements” that
are both mental and physical, or “co-ordination” and so forth] is to
play into the hands of idealism. Such is the simple and inevitable
truth which one can easily detect, if he looks for it beneath the tissue
of sham philosophy which, due to the quasi-erudite terminology of
Avenarius, Ewald, Schuppe and others, only complicates and ob-
scures matters, thus making the public at large shun philosophy.

“The reconciliation” of Avenarius’ theory with “naive realism”
led even his disciples to doubt it in the end. Willy, for example,
said that the usual assertion that Avenarius embraced naive realism
should “be taken cum grano salis.” “As a dogma, naive realism
would be nothing but the belief in the thing-in-itself existing out-
side of us independently of our powers of sense-perception.” Alea Fr
other words, the only theory of knowledge that is really created by
an actual and not fictitious agreement with “naive realism” is, ac-
cording to Willy, materialism. Willy, of course, rejects materialism.
But he is forced to admit that Avenarius sometimes restores the
unity of “experience,” the unity of “self” and environment, in Der
menschliche Weltbegriff by means of “a series of complicated and
extremely artificial and arbitrary conceptions” (p. 171). Der
menschliche W eltbegriff, being a reaction against the original ideal-


47R. Willy: Gegen die Schulweisheit, p. 170.


52 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


ist view of Avenarius, “is characteristic of the reconciliation between
naive realism of common sense and the theoretico-cognitive idealism
of academic philosophy. That such a reconciliation will result in
restoring the organic unity of basic experience [Willy calls it
Grunderfahrung, that is, a basic experience—another new word! ],
I cannot assert” (p. 170).

What a valuable admission! The “experience” of Avenarius has
failed to reconcile idealism with materialism. Willy seemingly
repudiates the academic philosophy of experience, in order to
put in its place a philosophy of “basic” experience which is con-
fusion thrice confounded... .


4. Did Nature Exist Prior to Man?


We have already seen that this question appears to be a crucial
one for the philosophy of Mach and Avenarius. Natural science
positively asserts that the earth once existed in a state in which no
man or any other living creature existed or could have existed.
Inasmuch as organic matter is a later appearance, a result of a
long evolution, it follows that there could have been no perceiving
matter, no “complexes of sensations,” no self which is “inseparably”
connected with the environment, as Avenarius would like to have it.
Hence, matter is primary, and mind, consciousness, sensation are
products of a very high development. Such is the materialist
theory of knowledge, which natural science instinctively holds.

The question arises whether the outstanding representatives of
empirio-criticism take note of this contradiction between their
theory and natural science. They do take note and ask them-
selves by what arguments they can remove this contradiction. Three
attitudes to this question are of particular interest to materialism,
that of Avenarius himself and those of his disciples, Petzoldt and
Willy.

Avenarius tries to eliminate the contradiction with natural science
by means of the theory of the “potential” central term in the co-
ordination. As we already know, co-ordination is the “inseparable”
connection of the self and the environment. To remove the obvious
absurdity of this theory the concept of the “potential” central term
is introduced. For instance, what should be done with the hypothe-
sis of man’s development from the embryo? Does the environment
(the “counterpart of the term’) exist, if the “central term” is


I


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 53


the embryo? The embryonic system C—Avenarius contends—is
the “potential central term in relation to the future individual en-
vironment” (Bemerkungen, p. 140). The potential central term is
never equal to zero, not only when there are no parents but also
when there are only the “integral parts of the environment” capable
of becoming parents (p. 141).

The co-ordination then is continual. It is essential for the em-
pirio-criticist to assert this in order to save the fundamentals of his
philosophy—sensations and their complexes. Even when there is
no human being, the central term is not equal to zero; it only be-
comes the potential central term! It is surprising that there still
are people who can take a philosopher seriously who produces such
arguments. Even Wundt, who asserted that he is no enemy of meta.
physics (that is, fideism), was compelled to admit “the obscure
mystification of the term experience” by the application of the
word “potential” which destroys whatever co-ordination there is
(loc. cit., p. 379).

Indeed, can one take co-ordination seriously when its continuity
consists in one of its members being potential?

Is this not mysticism? Does this not lead to fideism? If it is
possible to think of the potential central term in relation to a future
environment, why not think of it in relation to the past environment,
that is, after man’s death? You will contend that Avenarius did
not make this inference from his theory. Well, even this is not to
the credit of his fallacious and reactionary theory, for it becomes
thereby more cowardly. In 1894 Avenarius did not tell the whole
tale, or perhaps feared to speak or even think about it consistently.
Schubert-Soldern, however, referred to this theory in 1896 for
theological purposes; in 1906 he won the approval of Mach, who
said that Schubert-Soldern followed a direction which was “in
close proximity to Machism” (p. 4). Engels had a perfect right
to attack Diihring, the open atheist, for leaving loopholes for
fideism in his philosophy. He had several times justly accused
the materialist Diihring for his drawing of theological inferences
at least in the seventies. And still there now are people who wish
to be considered Marxists and yet carry to the masses a philos-
ophy which is very near fideism! “It would seem,” Avenarius
wrote in Bemerkungen, “that from the empirio-critical standpoint
natural science has no right to make queries about such periods of
our present environment which precede the existence of man in


54 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


time” (p. 144). Avenarius goes on to say that “he who asks
questions about it cannot avoid imaginatively projecting himself
there in space and time [sich ‘hinzudenken’]; what the natural
scientist wants to know (though he is not clearly aware of it) is
essentially this: How is the earth and the universe to be determined
prior to the appearance of living beings or men? Only by im-
agining oneself in the réle of a spectator, just as one follows the
history of another planet or solar system from the basis of our
earth, with the help of perfected instruments.”

An object cannot exist independently of our mind. “We shall
always imaginatively project ourselves as reason endeavouring
to apprehend the object.”

This theory of the necessity of “projecting” the human mind into
any object and into nature prior to the emergence of man, is laid
down by me in the first paragraph, in the words of the “recent
positivist” Avenarius, and in the second, in the words of the sub-
jective idealist Fichte.*® The sophistry of this theory is so mani-
fest that one feels uneasy in analysing it. Now then, if we “project”
ourselves, our presence will be imaginary,—but yet the existence
of the earth prior to the emergence of man is real. To be sure, a
man could not be an actual observer of the earth which was in a
molten state, and to “imagine” his being present there is obscur-
antism. It is the same as if I were to prove the existence of hell
by the argument, that I could “project” myself there as an observer.
The “reconciliation” of empirio-criticism with natural science may
be reduced to this: Avenarius agrees to “project” something, the
possibility of which is excluded by natural science. No man who
has the least education, and is healthy, can doubt that the earth
existed when there could be no life, no sensation or “central term.”
Hence, the whole theory of Mach and Avenarius, from which it
follows that the earth is a complex of sensations (“bodies are com-
plexes of sensations”) or “complexes of elements in which the
mental and physical are similar,” or “the counter part of the system
in which the central term cannot be equal to zero,” is philosophic
obscurantism, a reduction of subjective idealism to absurdity.

Petzoldt, having seen the absurdity of the position into which
Avenarius fell, felt ashamed. In his Einfiihrung in die Philoso-
phie der reinen Erfahrung (Vol. Il) he devotes a whole paragraph


48 J. G. Fichte: Recension des Aenesidemus, Simtliche W erke, 1794, Vol. I,
p. 19,


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 55
AL RSAE AREA ah 3 Dh YA Rk A, TS TE lee EE NET EE


($65) to the problem of the reality of periods of the earth ante-
dating the existence of man.

“In the teaching of Avenarius,” says Petzoldt, “the self plays a
réle different from that in Schuppe [note that Petzoldt had openly
and repeatedly declared: ‘Our philosophy is founded on three per-
sons—Avenarius, Mach, and Schuppe’] yet it is a réle of determin-
ing importance for his theory.” Petzoldt was evidently influenced
by the fact that Schuppe had unmasked Avenarius by saying that
everything was grounded on the self; and Petzoldt wishes to cor-
rect himself. “Avenarius once said,” Petzoldt continues, “that
we can think of a place where no human foot as yet has trodden,
but in order to think about it, it is necessary that that be present
which we designate by the term ‘self’ whose thought it becomes.” *

Petzoldt replies: “The epistemologically important question con-
sists in, not whether we could think of such a place, but whether we
have a right to think of it as existing, or having existed, independ-
ently of any individual reflection.”

That is right! People can think and “project” all kinds of helle
and devils—Lunacharsky even “projected” (to use a mild expres-
sion) a religious conception—but the purpose of the theory of
knowledge is to show the unreal, fantastic and reactionary charac-
ter of such figments of the imagination.

“, . . That the system C [brain] is necessary for reflection, is
obvious for both the philosophy of Avenarius and that which is
defended by me... .”

It is not true; Avenarius’ theory of 1876 is a theory of mind
without brain. And in the theory of 1892-4, as we shall see imme-
diately, there is an element of idealist absurdity.

“. . . But is this system C made the condition of existence of,
say, the Secondary period of the earth?” And Petzoldt, presenting
the argument of Avenarius already cited, on the aim of science
and on the possibility of “projecting” the spectator replies: “No,
we wish to know whether we have a right to imagine the existence
of the earth at that remote epoch in the same way as I would
‘imagine it having existed yesterday or a while ago. Or must the
existence of the earth be really conditioned (as Willy claimed)
by our right to assume that at a certain time together with the
earth there existed at least some system C, be it even on the lowest


49 Vierteljahrsschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Philosophie, Vol. XVIII, 1894,
p. 146.


———————


56 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


stage of its development?” (About this idea of Willy we shall
speak presently.) :

“Avenarius evades Willy’s queer inference by means of the argu-
ment that the person who put the question could not divorce himself
from his thought (that is, imagine himself absent) otherwise he
could not avoid projecting himself imaginatively into the situation."
But then Avenarius makes the individual self of the person, who
makes queries about such a self, the condition, not of a mere act
of thought about the inhabitable earth, but of our right to think
about the existence of the earth at that time.

“It would be easy to avoid these misleading paths, if we would
not ascribe such importance to the self. The only thing the theory
of knowledge demands, taking into consideration the various con-
ceptions of the remote in both space and time, is that it be plausible
and uniquely determined; the rest is the affair of special sciences”
(Vol. II, p. 325).

Petzoldt converted the principle of causality into that of unique
determination and introduced into his theory, as we shall see be-
low, the apriority of such principle. This means that Petzoldt
saves himself from Avenarius’ subjective idealism and solipsism
(in the professorial jargon, he attributes an exaggerated importance
to the self) with the help of the Kantian ideas. The absence of the
objective element in the doctrine of Avenarius, the impossibility of
reconciling it with the demands of natural science which declares
the earth (object) to have existed long before the appearance of
living beings (subject), compelled Petzoldt to resort to causality
(unique determination). The earth existed, says Petzoldt, for its
existence prior to the appearance of man is causally bound up
with the present existence of the earth. But in the first place,
where does the notion of causality come from? A priori, says
Petzoldt. In the second place are not those conceptions of hell,
devils and Lunacharsky’s “projections” also bound by causality?
In the third place, the theory “of the complexes of sensation” at
any rate proves itself to be destroyed by Petzoldt. Petzoldt could
not do away with the contradiction which he found in Avenarius,
and entangled himself even more, for there could be only one solu-
tion—the recognition of the theory that the outer world reflected
by us exists independently of our mind. Only such a materialist
solution is really compatible with natural science, and only such a


50 Der menschliche Weltbegriff, p. 130.


—


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 57


conception eliminates the idealist solution of the principle of
causality of Petzoldt and Mach, about which we shall speak sepa-
rately.

The third empirio-criticist, R. Willy, for the first time in 1896
took up the question of this difficulty in Avenarius’ philosophy, in
an article entitled “Der Empiriokriticismus als einzig wissenschaft-
licher Standpunkt.” What about the existence of the world prior
to man? asks Willy; ** and answers after Avenarius, “We project
ourselves into the past.” But then he goes on to say that by
experience one must not understand the experience of man only.
“We must regard as our primitive fellow-men, the entire realm of
living beings—be it the most insignificant worm—since we consider
the life of those beings in connection with experience at large”
(pp. 73-4). The earth then, prior to the appearance of man, was
the “experience” of a worm which functioned as the “central term,”
in order to save the “co-ordination” of Avenarius and his philos-
ophy! No wonder that Petzoldt tried to shield himself against an
argument that is not only the height of absurdity (an idea of the
earth is here attributed to the worm, as if it at all corresponded with
the theories of the geologists! ), but which is not even of substantial
help to our philosopher, for the earth existed not only prior to the
descent of man but prior to any living being in general!

Willy again argued the problem in 1905; there was no mention
of the worm this time.*? Nor did Petzoldt’s “principle of unique
determination” satisfy Willy, who saw in it only a “logical formal-
ism.” The problem of the existence of a world prior to man, says
the author, in his own Petzoldtian way, leads us “again to the
things-in-themselves of common sense” (that is, to materialism—
what a terrible thing, indeed!). What is meant by millions of
years without life? “Is not time a thing-in-itself?” Of course,
not! (More about this later on in our discussion of the Machians.)
And that means that objects outside of men are only impressions,
bits of phantasy spun out of their heads with the help of a few
fragments which men find about them. And why not? Must a
philosopher fear the stream of life? I say to myself, “Drop this
philosophising about systems, utilise the moment, that moment
which you experience and which alone brings happiness” (p. 178).

Here it is! Either materialism or solipsism! Despite the high-


51 Vierteljahrsschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Philosophie, Vol. XX, 1896, p. 72.
52R. Willy: Gegen die Schulweisheit, pp. 173-8.


58 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


sounding phrases, this is the position Willy reaches in analysing
the question of the existence of nature before the emergence of man.

To summarise: We have beheld three empirio-critical prophets
who with the sweat of their brows laboured to reconcile their phi-
losophy with the natural sciences, to mend the broken parts of
solipsism. Avenarius repeated Fichte’s argument and changed the
real world into an imaginary one. Petzoldt left Fichtean idealism
and came closer to Kantian idealism. Willy, having failed with
the “worm,” was ready to give up the question and against his
own will blabbed out the truth: “Either materialism or solipsism,
or the recognition of nothing else but the present moment.”

Now we must show the reader how this problem was understood
and treated by the Machians of our own country. Here is Bazarov
in his Outlines “of” Marxian Philosophy (p. 11):

“It remains for us now, under the guidance of our true vade
mecum [Plekhanov is meant here], to descend into the last and
the most horrible sphere of the solipsist hell, into that sphere where,
as Plekhanov assures us, each kind of subjective idealism is threat-
ened by the necessity of representing the world in the forms beheld
by contemplative ichthyosauruses and archepteryxes. ‘Let us men-
tally project ourselves,’ writes Plekhanov, ‘into the Secondary epoch
when there existed on the earth only the remote ancestors of men.
The question as to what was the status of space, time and causality
then arises. Whose subjective forms were they at that time? Were
they the subjective forms of the ichthyosauruses? And whose mind
framed the laws of nature? The mind of the archepteryx? To these
queries the Kantian philosophy can give no answer. And it must
be rejected as incompatible with modern science.’ ”

Here Bazarov breaks the quotation from Plekhanov before a
very important passage, namely: “Idealism says that without subject
there is no object. The history of the earth shows that the object
existed long before the subject came into existence, long before
the appearance of organisms which possessed a perceptible grade
of consciousness. . . . The history of evolution manifests the truth
of materialism.”

Now we are continuing the quotation from Bazarov: “... But
does Plekhanov’s thing-in-itself offer any solution? Remember
that according to Plekhanov, too, we can have no notion as to the
essence of things; we know only their phenomena, the results of


53 Ludwig Feuerbach, p. 117.


——


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 59


their actions on our sense-organs. Besides this action they cannot
be represented." What sense-organs existed during the epoch
of the ichthyosauruses? Evidently, only the sense-organs of the ich-
thyosauruses and their like. Only the conceptions of the ichthyo-
sauruses were actual, the real manifestations of things-in-themselves.
Hence also, according to Plekhanov, the paleontologist, if he desires
to remain on ‘real’ ground, must write the history of the Secondary
epoch in the light of the ichthyosaurus’ contemplations. And conse-
quently, in this respect we can make no more headway than could
solipsism.” :

Such is the complete argument (the reader must pardon the
lengthy quotation—we could not help it) of a Machian, an argument
which is a first-class model of confusion.

Bazarov imagines that Plekhanov gave himself away. If the
thing-in-itself, besides its action on our sense-organ, has no aspect
of its own, it means that in the Secondary epoch it did not exist
except as the “aspect” of the ichthyosaurus’ sense-organ. And
this is the argument of a materialist. If an “aspect” is the
result of the action of the thing-in-itself of the sense-organs, does it
therefore mean that things do not exist independently of any organs?

Let us imagine, however, that Bazarov was unable to grasp Ple-
khanov’s words (improbable as such assumption is), that they ap-
peared obscure to him. Even then are we justified in asking whether
Bazarov is showing off his tricks against Plekhanov (whom the
Machians honor as the only representative of materialism), or
whether he is trying to clear up the problem as regards materialism?
If Plekhanov seemed obscure or contradictory, why did not Bazarov
take other materialists? Is it because he did not know others? But
ignorance is no argument.

If Bazarov does not know that the fundamental principle of
materialism is the recognition of the external world, and the exist-
ence of things outside our mind and independent of it, then we
have before us a case of extreme ignorance. We shall have to
remind the reader of Berkeley, who in 1710 criticised the materialists
for their recognition of “objects in themselves,” existing independ-
ently of our mind and yet which are reflected by our mind. Of
course everyone has a right to side against materialism with Berke-
ley or anyone else, but no one has a right to speak about the ma-


54 [udwig Feuerbach, p. 112.


60 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


terialists and distort or ignore the fundamental principles of their
teaching. To do so is to commit an inexcusable blunder.

Is Plekhanov right when he says that for idealism there is no
object without a subject; that for materialism the object exists inde-
pendently of the subject, and that an object reflects itself more or
less correctly in the perceiver’s mind? If he is wrong then, as a
man who claims to respect Marxism, Bazarov should have pointed
out Plekhanov’s mistake, and then ignored him in the problem of
materialism and the state of nature before the appearance of man;
he should have taken Marx, Engels, Feuerbach into account. But
if Plekhanov happens to be right about the question, or if Bazarov
is unable to find out his error, then the latter’s attempt to confuse
things in the reader’s mind concerning the most elementary con-
ception of materialism and its distinction from idealism, is a literary
indecency. As for those Marxians who are interested in the ques-
tion, we shall bring, as testimony, aside from the words uttered by
Plekhanov, Feuerbach, who, as is known (perhaps, not to Bazarov?),
was a materialist and whose influence on Marx and Engels led
them from the idealism of Hegel to their materialist philosophy.
In his rejoinder to R. Haym, Feuerbach wrote: “Nature, which
is not an object for us or our mind, is for speculative phi-
losophy or at least for idealism, the Kantian thing-in-itself
[we shall speak in detail later on about the confusion of our
Machians of the Kantian thing-in-itself and the materialist thing-in-
itself], an abstraction without reality, but it is also this very same
nature that causes idealism’s bankruptcy. Natural science neces-
sarily shows us, at least in its present state, that there was a
time when conditions were not fit for the existence of man, when
nature, the earth, was not yet the object of the human eye and
mind, when, consequently, nature was absolutely devoid of any
trace of a human being. Idealism may retort that this state of
nature is a state of which you think. Certainly, but from this it
does not follow that this very state of nature never existed. Socrates
and Plato do not exist for me now, for now I can only think of
them; yet it does not follow that Socrates and Plato did not exist
in their time outside of my mind.” °°

This is how Feuerbach discussed materialism and idealism as


55 Ludwig Feuerbach, Sémmtliche Werke, Stuttgart, 1903, Vol. VII, p. 510;
or Karl Griin: Feuerbach in seinem Briefwechsel und Nachlass, sowie in seine?
Philosophischen Characterentwickelung, Leipzig, 1874, pp. 423-435.


—————————


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 61


they bore on the question as to whether nature existed prior to the
appearance of man. Avenarius’ sophistry (in “projecting the
observer”) was refuted by Feuerbach though the latter did not
know “recent positivism.” He was fully aware, however, of the
old idealist sophistry. But Bazarov said nothing new; he has
merely repeated this idealist sophistry: “If Ihad been there [at a
time before the existence of man] I would have seen the world
so-and-so” (Quitlines, p. 29). In other words, only if I make the
admission (that man could be the observer of an epoch at which
he did not exist),—one absurd and contradictory to natural science,
can I make the ends of my philosophy meet.

From this, one may infer the extent of Bazarov’s knowledge of
the subject and his literary manners. He does not even mention
the “difficulty” with which Avenarius, Petzoldt and Willy grappled;
he made such a blunder, that the logical result of his treatment
of the subject was that there is no difference between materialism
and solipsism. This he offered for the reader’s enlightenment!
Idealism is here represented as “realism” and materialism is de-
scribed as denying the existence of things outside of their effects
on the sense-organs! Well, either Feuerbach did not know the
elementary difference between materialism and idealism, or Bazarov
et al. formulated the truisms of philosophy in an entirely novel
way.

Or take Valentinov. Look at this philosopher, naturally enthusi-
astic about Bazarov. (1) “Berkeley is the father of the correlative
theory concerning the experience of the subject and object” (p.
148). But this is not Berkeley’s idealism at all! This is a “pro-
jected analysis.” (2) “The fundamental principles are formu-
lated by Avenarius in the most realistic way outside of the forms [!]
of its usual idealist interpretation” (p. 148). The mystification,
evidently, ensnares the infants! (3) “Avenarius’ conceptions of
the starting point of knowledge is that each individual finds himself
in a certain environment, otherwise the individual and the environ-
ment are given as connected and undivided [!] terms of one and
the same co-ordination” (p. 148). Excellent! This is not idealism,
oh, no! for Valentinov and Bazarov rose. above materialism and
idealism; this “inseparability” of object and subject is the most
“realistic conception.” (4) “Is the reverse assertion correct, that
there is no counterpart of the term to which there would be no
corresponding central term—the individual? Certainly not {!].


62 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


een. —


. .. In the Archaic epoch, the woods were green . . . yet there
was no man” (p. 148). That means that it is possible to separate
the “inseparable”! Is it not “clear enough”? (5) “Yet from
ithe standpoint of the theory of knowledge, the problem of the
object in itself is absurd” (p. 148). What a question! When
there were no perceiving organisms, the objects were nevertheless
“complexes of elements,” identical with sensations! (6) “The
immanence school in the persons of Schubert-Soldern and Schuppe
presented these thoughts [!] in an unsatisfactory form and fell
into the solipsistic impasse” (p. 149). In “these thoughts” there
is no solipsism, and empirio-criticism did not, of course, repeat
the reactionary theories of the immanentist school, who lie when
they declare themselves to be in accord with Avenarius!

This, gentlemen of the Machian school, is not philosophy; it is
a jumble of words!


5. Does Man Think With the Help of the Brain?


Bazarov emphatically answers this question in the affirmative.
He writes: “If to Plekhanov’s thesis ‘that mind is an inner [Baza-
rov?] state of matter,’ a more satisfactory qualification be added,
namely, ‘that each mental process is a-function of the cerebral
process,’ then neither Mach nor Avenarius would object to it” (Out-
lines, p. 29).

For a mouse there is no stronger beast than a cat. For the
Russian Machians there is no stronger materialist than Plekhanov.
Was Plekhanov really the only one, or the first one, to defend the
materialist thesis that mind is the inner function of matter? And
if Bazarov did not like Plekhanov’s formulation of materialism,
why did he take cognizance of Plekhanov and not of Engels or
Feuerbach? Simply because the Machians are afraid to admit
the truth. They are fighting materialism, yet they pretend that
they are only fighting Plekhanov. This is an unprincipled and
cowardly stratagem.

Let us proceed, however, with empirio-criticism. Avenarius
“would not dispute” the statement that “thought is a function of
the brain,” says Bazarov. These words are absolutely untrue.
Avenarius not only objects to the materialist thesis, but he even
invents a whole “theory” in order to refute this thesis. “Our brain,”
says Avenarius in Der menschliche Weltbegriff, “is not the locus or


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 63
a Y


residue, or creator of thought; it is not its instrument, or organ, or
carrier or substratum” (p. 76,—sympathetically quoted by Mach
in the Analysis of Sensations, p. 28). “Thought is not an indweller,
or master, or half, or an aspect of anything; neither is it the
product or even the physiological function or state of the brain in
general” (ibid). And no less emphatically does Avenarius express
himself in his Bemerkungen: “Presentations are not functions
(physiological, or mental, or psycho-physical) of the brain” (op.
cit., p. 419). Sensations are not “psychical functions of the brain”
(§ 116). .

According to Avenarius, then, the brain is not the organ of
thought, and thought is not the function of the brain. Take Engels
and you will immediately meet with views exactly contrary to those
—views that are frankly materialistic. “Consciousness and thought,”
says Engels in Anti-Diihring, “are products of the brain of man”
(p. 56, English edition). This idea is often repeated in that work.
In Ludwig Feuerbach we have the following exposition of Feuer-
bach’s and Engels’ views: “. ..The material, perceptual uni
verse, to which we ourselves belong, is the only reality, and . . .
our consciousness and thought, however supernatural they may seem,
are only evidences of a material bodily organ, the brain. Matter
is not a product of mind, but mind itself is only the highest prod-
uct of matter. This is, of course, pure materialism” (p. 64). (Cf.
p. 53) on the reflection of nature processes in the “thinking brain.”

Avenarius rejects this materialist viewpoint saying that “the think-
ing brain” is a “fetish of natural science” (Der menschliche Welt-
begriff, p. 70). Hence, Avenarius has no illusions concerning his
absolute disagreement with natural science. He admits, as Mach
and all the adherents of the immanentist school do, that natural
science unconsciously upholds the materialist view. He admits and
openly declares that he absolutely disagrees with the “prevailing
psychology” (Bemerkungen, p. 150). The prevailing psychology
is guilty of an inadmissible “introjection”—a new term invented
by our philosopher, which means the inherence of thought in the
brain, or of sensations in us. These two words (in uns), says
Avenarius, express the fundamental proposition which empirio-
criticism disputes. “This locating of the visible, etc., in man is
what we call introjection” (p. 153, § 45).

This introjection rejects “on principle” the “natural conception
of reality,” substituting the expression “in me” instead of the


64 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM ~


expression “before me” (vor mir, p. 154), making “of one com-
ponent part of the (real) environment an integral part of the
(ideal) mind” (ibid). “Out of the amechanical [a new word in
place of ‘mental’] which manifests itself freely and clearly in
experience, introjection makes something which hides itself mys-
teriously in the central nervous system” (ibid).

Here we have the same mystification which we encountered in
the famous defence of “naive realism” by the empirio-criticists and
the adherents of the immanentist school. Avenarius is acting here
on the advice of Turgeniev’s rascal, to denounce mainly those vices
which one recognises in himself. Avenarius pretends that he is
combating idealism: See how ordinary philosophic idealism is in-
ferred from introjection, how, he says, the outer world is converted
into sensation, into representation and so forth, while I defend
“naive realism,” and recognise everything experienced as equally
real, both “self”? and environment, without locating the outer world
in the brain of man.

The sophistry here is the same as that which we observed in the
case of his celebrated co-ordination. Distracting the reader’s atten-
tion by his attacks on realism, Avenarius defends this same ideal-
ism, albeit with a somewhat changed phraseology: thought is not
a function of the brain; the brain is not the organ of thought;
sensations are not functions of the nervous system! oh, no,
sensations are “elements,” psychical in one connection and physical
in another—(though the elements are “identical”). Through the
use of an ambiguous and pretentious terminology, ostensibly ex-
pressing a new “theory,” Avenarius circled about for a while but
ultimately gravitated to his fundamental idealist position.

And if our Russian Machians (Bogdanov and the others) have
not noticed the “mystification” and have seen a refutation of ideal-
ism in what is really a “new” defence of it, then let us recall at
least that in the analysis of empirio-criticism given by those who are
experts in philosophy, we meet a sober estimation of Avenarius’
trend of ideas, in which its real character is exposed once its pre-
tentious terminology is eliminated.

Bogdanov wrote as follows in 1903 °°:

“Richard Avenarius gave us a well drawn and most complete
philosophic picture of the development of the dualistic conceptions


56 “Authoritative Thinking,” The Psychology of Society (a collective work,
in Russian), p. 119 ff.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 65


of mind and body. The gist of his ‘doctrine of introjection’ is that
we observe directly only physical bodies, and are acquainted only
by hypothetical inference with the experiences of others, that is to
say, we know the mind of another person only through indirect
reasoning. . . . The hypothesis is complicated by the assumption
that the experiences of the other person occurring in his body, are
lodged (are introjected) in his organism. Such an hypothesis is
not only superfluous but gives rise in addition to numerous con-
tradictions. Avenarius gave an account of these contradictions in
a systematic fashion, thus revealing a series of successive historical
stages in the development of dualism and of philosophical idealism;
but here, we need not follow him. ‘Introjection serves as an expla-
nation of the dualism of mind and body.’ ”

Bogdanov, believing that the doctrine of “introjection” was aimed
at idealism, was caught on the hook of the “professorial” philos-
ophy. He accepted on faith the estimation of introjection given by
Avenarius himself, and failed to notice the sting it contained for
materialism. Introjection denies that thought is a function of the
brain, that sensations are functions of the central nervous system
of man; it denies therefore the simplest truths of physiology in
order to defeat materialism. ‘“Dualism” is here refuted idealistically
(in spite of Avenarius’ apparent ire against idealism), for sensation
and thought prove to be not secondary phenomena, not derivative
from matter, but primary entities. Dualism is refuted by Avenarius
much in the same manner as the existence of the object without the
subject is refuted. It is the same idealist “refutation” of the possi-
bility of the existence of matter without thought, of the existence
of an external world independent of our sensations; the absurd
denial of the fact—that the visual image of the tree is a function of
the retina, the nerves and the brain—was necessary for Avenarius
in order to confirm his theory of the “inseparable” connection of
both self and tree, subject and environment in an “all-inclusive”
experience.

The doctrine of introjection is a confusion which necessarily
gives rise to idealistic absurdities and contradicts the viewpoint of
natural science which holds that thought is the function of the
brain, that perceptions, that is, the images of the external world,
are effects of external objects on our sense-organs. The materialist
elimination of “the dualism of mind and body” (materialistic
monism) consists in this, that the existence of the mind is shown


66 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


—


to be dependent upon that of the body, in that mind is declared to
be secondary, a function of the brain, or a reflection of the outer
world. The idealist elimination of the “dualism of body and
mind” (idealistic monism) consists in an attempt to show that
mind is not a function of the body, that mind is primary, that the
“environment” and “self” exist in an inseparable connection in the
same “complex of elements.” Apart from these two diametrically
opposed methods of elimination of “the dualism of body and mind,”
there can be no third method unless it be eclecticism,—an illogical
confusion of materialism and idealism. And this confusion in
Avenarius appears to Bogdanov and the rest “to be a truth which
transcends both materialism and idealism.”

Professional philosophers, however, are not as naive and credu-
lous as are the Russian Machians. True, each one of these’ expert
gentlemen, generally full fledged professors, defends “his” own pet
system of refutation against materialism or, at least, of “reconcilia-
tion” of materialism and idealism. But in discussing an opponent
they reveal without any ceremony the incompatible elements of
materialism and idealism in what is heralded as the “latest” and
most “original” system. And although a few young intellectuals
were enmeshed in Avenarius’ net, the old bird, Wundt, however, was
not enticed by such bait. Wundt, the idealist, very impolitely un-
masked the buffoon Avenarius, giving him credit en passant for the
antimaterialistic tendency of the doctrine of introjection.

“If empirio-criticism,” Wundt wrote, “reproaches vulgar ma-
terialism because by means of such expressions as the brain ‘has’
a thought, or ‘produces’ reason, it expresses a relation which cannot
be stated on grounds of actual observation [evidently Wundt accepts
as a matter of course the assumption that a person thinks without
the help of the brain!] . . . this reproach, of course, has good
ground” (loc. cit. pp. 47-48).

Indeed, the idealists will always proceed against materialism
hand in hand with the half-hearted compromisers, Avenarius and
Mach! It is only to be regretted, Wundt goes on to say, that this
theory of introjection “does not stand in any relation to the doc-
trine of the independent vital series, is only artificially tacked on to
it” (p. 365).

“Introjection,” says Ewald, “is no more than a fiction of empirio-
criticism, which serves to shield its fallacies” (loc. cit. p. 44).
“We here observe a peculiar contradiction. On the one hand the


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 67


elimination of the doctrine of introjection and the restoration of
the natural conception of reality would restore it to life. On the
other hand, by means of the notion of essential co-ordination,
empirio-criticism leads to a purely idealistic theory concerning the
absolute correlation of the counter term and the central term. Thus
Avenarius’ thought runs in a vicious circle. He started out to do
battle against idealism but capitulated before it on the very eve of
the first skirmish. He set out to liberate the realm of objects from
the yoke of the subject, but ended in tying it again to the subject.
What he actually destroys in his criticism, is only a caricature of
idealism, and not the genuine expression of its theory of knowledge”
(loc. cit. pp. 64-5).

“Tn the frequently quoted statement by Avenarius,” Norman Smith
says, “that the brain is not the seat, organ or supporter, of thought,
he rejects the only terms which we possess for defining their con-
nection” (loc. cit. p. 30).

No wonder then that the theory of introjection, approved by
Wundt, gained the sympathy of James Ward, the outspoken spir-
itualist,°” who waged a systematic war against “naturalism and
agnosticism,” and especially against Huxley (not because he was
not outspoken and explicit in his materialism, which was Engels’
reproach against him, but because under his agnosticism, mate-
rialism was concealed).

Let us note that Karl Pearson, the English Machian, without dodg-
ing the philosophic issues involved, and recognising neither intro-
jection, co-ordination, nor “the discovery of the world-elements,”
arrives at the inevitable conclusion of Machism, namely, purely
subjective idealism. Pearson knows of no “elements”; “sense-
impressions” is his first and last word. He has no doubt that
man thinks with the help of the brain. And the contradiction be-
tween this thesis (which alone is in conformity with science) and
the starting point of his philosophy remained open and clear to all.
Pearson tries hard to combat the view that matter exists independ-
ently of our sense-perceptions.°®

Repeating all of Berkeley’s arguments, Pearson declares that
matter is a nonentity. But when he comes to speak of the relation
of the mind to the brain, he is straightforward, as, for instance, in


57 James Ward: Naturalism and Agnosticism, London, 1906, Vol. Il, pp. 171,


172.
58 Karl Pearson: The Grammar of Science, London, 1900, Ch. VII.


cE


68 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


the following: “From will and consciousness associated with mate-
rial machinery we can infer nothing whatever as to will and con-
sciousness without that machinery” (ibid. p. 58). He lays down the
following thesis as a summary of the corresponding part of his
investigation: “Consciousness has no meaning beyond nervous
systems akin to our own; it is illogical to assert that all matter
is conscious [but it is logical to assert that matter contains a
property of reflection which is in its essence akin to sensation],
still more that consciousness or will can exist outside matter”
(ibid. p. 75).

Pearson commits here a terrible blunder! Matter is nothing but
groups of sense-perceptions. This is his thesis, his philosophy.
This means that sensation or thought is primary; matter, secondary.
But consciousness without matter cannot exist, surely, at least not
without a nervous system. So that, mind and sensation now prove
to be secondary. Water on the earth, the earth on the whale, and
the whale on the water. Mach’s “elements,” Avenarius’ “co-ordina-
tion” and “introjection” do not in the least mitigate the difficulty;
they only obscure matters with erudite chatter.

The specially invented terminology of Avenarius (about which
a word or two will suffice) may be considered as an instance of
such chatter. Among the numerous terms which he has coined will
be found such words as “notal,” “secural,” “fidential,” etc. Our
Russian Machians omit a good deal of this professorial jargon,
apparently ashamed of it, and but rarely throw into the reader’s
face even such terms as “existential,” etc. And if naive people
do take these words for a special kind of bio-mechanics, the German
philosophers, themselves lovers of such “wise” words, laugh at
Avenarius. To say “notal” (notus means “known”), or to say
that this or the other thing is known to me, is absolutely the same,
says Wundt in the paragraph entitled “Scholastischer Character
der empiriokritischer System.” Indeed, it is the purest and most
obscure scholasticism. Willy, one of the most faithful disciples of
Avenarius, had the courage to confess it. “Avenarius dreamt of
bio-mechanics,” says he, “but an understanding of the life of the
brain can only be reached through actual discoveries, not through
the way in which Avenarius attempted to do it. Avenarius’
bio-mechanics is not grounded on any new observation; its char-
acteristic feature is a purely arbitrary construction of concepts;
and those constructions are such that they are not even of the nature


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 69


of hypotheses which open up new vistas. They are mere stereotyped
speculations which obstruct the distant landscape from view as
would a wall.” °°

The Russian Machians will soon appear in the guise of lovers of
fashion who still bedeck themselves with a hat which has long since
been discarded by the bourgeois philosophers of Europe.


6. Concerning the Solipsism of Mach and Avenarius


We have seen that the starting point and the fundamental postu-
late of the empirio-critical philosophy is subjective idealism. The
world is my sensation; this fundamental postulate is obscured—the
word “element” to the contrary notwithstanding—by the theories of
“independent series,” “co-ordination,” and “introjection.” The
absurdity of this philosophy consists in that it leads to solipsism,
to the recognition of the sole existence of a solitary philosophising
individual. Still our Russian Machians assure the reader that the
“accusation” against Mach “of idealism and even of solipsism” is
itself “extreme subjectivism.” So says Bogdanov in the introduction
to the Analysis of Sensations (p. xi), and the rest of the Machians
repeat it in many ways.

Having revealed the method by which Mach and Avenarius shield
themselves from solipsism, we need add only one thing. The “ex-
treme subjectivism” of the assertions made about Mach may be laid
entirely at Bogdanov’s door, for in philosophical literature, writers
of various tendencies have long since discovered the chief sin of
Machism in spite of all its covering. We shall confine ourselves to
those opinions which reveal the “subjective” ignorance of our
Machians. It is significant that nearly all professional philosophers
sympathise with one brand or another of philosophical idealism.
In their eyes, as distinct from the Marxians, idealism is no reproach
at all; they merely put on record Mach’s philosophically confused
trend of thought, opposing his system of idealism with another,
one that seems to them more consistent.

Ewald says in his book which treats of Avenarius’ teaching:
“The creator of empirio-criticism wittingly or unwittingly commits
himself to solipsism” (loc. cit., pp. 61-62).

59R. Willy: Gegen die Schulweisheit, p. 169. Of course the pedantic
Petzoldt will not make such admissions. He with the self-satisfaction of a
philistine still chews on the cud of Avenarius’ “Biological” scholasticism (Vol.


IL, Ch, II).


70 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


Hans Kleinpeter, a disciple of Mach, who emphasises his solidar-
ity with him in the preface to Erkenntnis und Irrtum, says: “Mach
can be taken as an example of one who combines theoretico-
epistemological idealism with the demands of natural science [for
the eclectics everything can be ‘combined’]. The latter can very
well be deduced from solipsism, without stopping there.” ©

Lucka, in analysing Mach’s Analysis of Sensations, says: “Apart
from sundry misunderstandings, Mach stands on the basis of pure
idealism. It is inconceivable how Mach can deny that he is a
Berkeleian (Kantstudien, 1903, Vol. III, pp. 416-17).

W. Jerusalem, one of the most reactionary of Kantians, with whom
Mach expresses agreement in that same preface (“a closer kin-
ship of thought” had existed between them, Mach confesses [p. x],
than he had suspected before he wrote Erkenntnis und Irrtum,
1906), says: “Consistent phenomenalism leads to solipsism” (and
therefore we have to borrow something from Kant! ) .*1

H6nigswald says that “the alternative for both the immanentists
and the empirio-criticists is either solipsism or metaphysics of the
type represented by Fichte, Schelling, or Hegel.” °

The English physicist Oliver Lodge in his book denouncing the
materialist Haeckel, drops a remark, in passing, about “solipsists
like Pearson and Mach” as if their solipsism were a well-established
fact.®*

Nature, the organ of English natural science, pronounced,
through the lips of the geometrician Dixon, a very definite sentence
on Pearson, the follower of Mach. It is worth quoting, not for its
novelty but for the reason that the Russian Machians have naively
accepted the philosophical blunder of Mach as “the philosophy of
natural science”:

“The foundation of the whole book is the proposition that since
we cannot directly apprehend anything but sense-perceptions,
therefore the things we commonly speak of as objective, or external
to ourselves, and their variations, are nothing but groups of sense-
impressions and sequences of such groups. But Professor Pearson
admits the existence of other consciousness than his own, not only
by implication in addressing his book to them, but explicitly in

80 Archiv fiir systematische Philosophie, 1900, Vol. VI, p. 87.

®1 Der Kritische Idealismus und die reine Logik, 1905, p. 26.


®2 Ueber die Lehre Humes von der Realitét der Aussendinge, 1904, p. 68.
83 Life and Matter, 1907, p. 7.


64 Bogdanov: Preface to Analysis of Sensations, p. xii ff.


ee


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 71
ne LS ETE ALES eI LETTS ily Ee


many passages.” Regarding the existence of another man’s con-
sciousness Pearson infers by analogy, observing the moving bodies
of other people. Since consciousness of another man is real, then
his existence outside of myself is inferred. “Of course it would be
impossible thus to refute a consistent idealist, who maintained that
not only external things but all other consciousness were unreal and
existed only in his imagination; but to recognise the reality of other
consciousnesses is to recognise the reality of the means by which
we become aware of them, which, as Professor Pearson explicitly
states, is the external aspect of men’s bodies.” The way out of the
difficulty is to recognise the “hypothesis” that to our sense-impres-
sions there corresponds an objective reality. This hypothesis satis-
factorily explains our sense impressions. “Indeed,” Dixon continues,
“T cannot seriously doubt that Professor Pearson himself believes
in them as much as anyone else. Only, if he were to acknowledge
it explicitly, he would have to rewrite almost every page of the
Grammar of Science.” ®

Mockery!—that is the scientists’ response to the idealist philos-
ophy over which Mach waxed so enthusiastic.

And, finally, here is the opinion of the German physicist, Boltz-
mann. (The Machians will perhaps say, as Friedrich Adler did,
that he is a physicist of the old school. But we are concerned here
not with the theories of physics but with a fundamental philosophi-
cal problem.) Boltzmann wrote against those who “had become
enthusiastic over the new epistemological dogmas”:

“In general, distrust of the conceptions which we have derived
trom direct immediate sense-perception, has led to an extreme view
which is the direct opposite of the previous naive belief. Only
sense perceptions are given us, it is said, and we have no right,
therefore, to make a step beyond that. Yet if these people were
consistent, they would have to ask themselves another question:
Do we experience our perceptions of yesterday? Immediately we
are ‘given’ only one perception or only one thought, namely, the
one which is in our mind at the present moment. To be consistent
one would have to deny not only the existence of other people, out-
side of one’s self, but also the existence of all presentations of the
past we have ever had.” °


65 Nature, July 21, 1892, pp. 268-69.
66 Ludwig Boltzmann: Populare Schriften, Leipzig, 1905, p. 132, Cf. pp. 168,


177, 187 ff.


G2 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


29 66


This physicist rightly treats the so-called “recent” “phenomen-
alist” view of Mach and his companions as a revival of an old
absurdity of subjective idealism.

Nay, those are stricken by “subjective” blindness, who have not
“noticed” that solipsism is the fundamental error of Mach.


CHAPTER TWO


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE OF EMPIRIO-CRITICISM
AND OF DIALECTIC MATERIALISM II


1. The “Thing-in-Itself,” or V. Chernov Refutes Engels


So extensively did our Machians deal with the “thing-in-itself”
that were we to collect all their writings, we would have heaps of
printed matter. The “thing-in-itself” is a veritable béte noir of
Bogdanov, Valentinov, Bazarov, Chernov, Berman and Yushkevich.
There is no abuse which the “thing-in-itself” is spared, no ridicule
which is not showered upon it. And against whom do they wage
war because of this luckless “thing-in-itself’? Here begins a division
of philosophers of Russian Machism into political parties. All
Machians, desirous to be Marxians, combat Plekhanov’s “thing-in-
itself,” accusing him of straying and succumbing to Kantianism and
forsaking Engels. (The first accusation we shall take up in the
fourth chapter; the second accusation will be the topic of our
present discourse.) Victor Chernov, a populist, and a sworn
enemy of Marxism, in his defence of the “thing-in-itself” openly
attacks Engels.

It is a shame to confess, yet it would be a sin to conceal, that this
open enmity toward Marxism makes of Chernov a more principled
literary opponent than are our comrades in politics and opponents
in philosophy. For only a guilty conscience (plus inadequate
knowledge of materialism?) could have been responsible for the
fact that the Machians, who are desirous of being Marxians, back-
slided from Engels, ignored Feuerbach and idled away their time on
Plekhanov. This cavilling at Engels’ disciple is nothing but a
trifling, boring, petty quarrel, and a cowardly mancuvre to avoid
the direct treatment of the teacher’s views. And as the task of these
cursory remarks is to disclose the reactionary character of Mach-
ism and the correctness of the materialism of Marx and Engels, we
shall not bother about the Machians (who wished to be Marxians),
trifling with Plekhanov, but shall turn directly to Engels, who was
refuted by the empirio-criticist, Mr. Chernov.

In his Philosophical and Sociological Studies (a collection of

73


74, MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


articles written, with the exception of a few, before 1900) the article,
“Marxism and Transcendental Philosophy” begins with an attempt
to contrast Marx with Engels and levels accusations of “naive-dog-
matic materialism,” of “the crudest materialist dogmatism” against
the latter (pp. 29, 32). Mr. Chernov declares as a “sufficient”
proof of his contention, Engels’ discussion of the Kantian thing-in-
itself and of the philosophic trend of Hume. We will begin
with this discussion.

In his Ludwig Feuerbach, Engels declares the chief philosophic
alignments to be materialism and idealism. Materialism regards
nature as primary, and spirit as secondary; being is first, and think-
ing, second. Idealism holds the contrary view. This fundamental
difference between the “two great camps,” into which the philos-
ophies of “various schools” of idealism and materialism are divided,
Engels regards as the cornerstone of philosophy, accusing those
who give another interpretation to idealism and materialism, of
“confusion.”

“The great fundamental question of all philosophies, especially
of those which regard themselves as new, is connected with the rela-
tion between thought and existence, between spirit and nature.”
Having divided the philosophers into “two great camps,” Engels
shows that “the question of the relationship of thinking and being
has another side. In what relation do our thoughts with regard to
the world surrounding us stand to this world itself? Is our
thought in a position to recognise the real world? Can we, in our
ideas and notions of the real world, produce a correct reflection of
the reality?” +

“This question is answered affirmatively by the great majority of
philosophers,” says Engels, including not only the materialists but
even the most consistent idealists, as, e. g., the absolute idealist
Hegel who considered the real world to be the realisation of the
“absolute idea” which has existed prior to the world and whose
expression the human spirit could recognise in the real world.

“In addition there is still another class of philosophers, those
who dispute the possibility of a perception of the universe or at


1 Ludwig Feuerbach, p. 59; V. Chernov translates the word “Spiegelbild”
literally zerkalnoye otrazheniye (“reflection in a mirror”), accusing Plekhanov
of presenting the theory of Engels in a very weakened form; he supposedly is
speaking in Russian of an Abbild, not of a Spiegelbild. This is the merest
cavil. Spiegelbild (“reflection in a mirror”) in German is also used in the
sense of Abbild (“copy,” “portrait”).


—


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 15
ean ee


least of an exhaustive perception. To them belong, among the
moderns, Hume and Kant, and they have played a very distin-
guished role in the evolution of philosophy” (ibid, p. 60).

Mr. Chernov, citing these words of Engels, seems to be very
anxious to engage in a controversy. To the word “Kant” he makes
the following annotation: “In 1888 it was very strange to term such
philosophers as Kant and especially Hume as ‘modern.’ At that
time it was more natural to hear the mention of such names as
H. Cohen, Lange, Riehl, Laas, Liebmann, Hering, etc. But ‘mod-
ern’ philosophy was evidently not a strong point of Engels” (op.
cit., p. 33, note 2).

Mr. Chernov is true to himself. In both economic and philosophi-
cal questions he reminds us of Voroshilov,? Turgeniev’s hero, who
annihilates the ignorant Kautsky and the ignorant Engels * by mere
reference to “scholarly” names! The only trouble is that all these
authorities mentioned by Chernov are the very Neo-Kantians of
whom Engels speaks on the same page of his Feuerbach as theoreti-
cal reactionaries, who were endeavoring to revive the corpse of the
long since refuted doctrines of Kant and Hume. The brave
Chernov did not understand that Engels intended to refute by his
argument those very same muddled but authoritative (for Machism)
professors.

Having pointed out that it was Hegel who had already presented
the “decisive” arguments against Hume and Kant, and that the
“additions made by Feuerbach were more ingenious than deep,”
Engels continues:

“The most destructive refutation of this as of all other fixed
philosophic ideas is actual result, namely, experiment and industry.
If we can prove the correctness of our idea of an actual occurrence
by experiencing it ourselves and producing it from its constituent
elements, and using it for our own purposes into the bargain, the
Kantian phrase Ding an Sich (thing-in-itself) ceases to have any
meaning. The chemical substances which go to form the bodies of
plants and animals remained just such a thing-in-itself until or-
ganic chemistry undertook to show them one after the other, where-
upon the thing-in-itself became a thing-for-us, as the colouring


2A character in Turgeniev’s novel Smoke. Voroshilov liked to display his
erudition by mentioning the latest achievements of science, although he was


completely ignorant of it—Kd.
3V. Ilyin (N. Lenin), The Agrarian Problem, St. Petersburg, 1908, Part J,


p. 195 (in Russian).


76 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


i


matter in the roots of madder, alizarine, which we no longer allow
to grow in the roots of the madder in the field, but make much
more cheaply and simply from coal tar” (loc. cit., pp. 60-61).

Mr. Chernov, presenting this argument, loses patience and com-
pletely annihilates poor Engels. This is what he says: “No Neo-
Kantian will be surprised that from coal tar we can make alizarine
more cheaply and simply. But if together with alizarine it is pos-
sible to produce the refutation of the ‘thing-in-itself? it would in-
deed prove to be a wonderful and unheard-of discovery—and not
only for the Neo-Kantians alone. Engels, apparently, having
learned that, according to Kant, the ‘thing-in-itself,? was not know-
able, directly converted the proposition and came to the conclusion
that everything unknown was the thing-in-itself” (loc. cit., p. 33).

Mr. Machian, there must be a limit to your lying! Before the
eyes of the public you are distorting the very quotation of Engels
which you are attempting to “tear to pieces” without even having
grasped the question under discussion!

In the first place, it is not true that Engels “produces a refutation
of the ‘thing-in-itself.’” Engels said explicitly and clearly that he
was refuting the Kantian “incomprehensible” (or unknowable)
thing-in-itself. Mr. Chernov, therefore, confuses Engels’ material-
istic conception concerning the existence of things independent of
our mind. In the second place, if the Kantian theorem reads that
the thing-in-itself is unknowable, the “converse” proposition would
read “the unknowable is the thing-in-itself.” Mr. Chernov changed
the unknowable into the unknown, without realizing that by such
a substitution he had again blundered or lied about the materialistic
views entertained by Engels!

So bewildered was Mr. Chernov by those reactionaries of the
official philosophy whom he had taken as his guides, that he picked
a quarrel with Engels, without having comprehended in the least
what the meaning of the quotation was which he presented. Let
vs explain to the representative of Machism what all this means.

Engels states very definitely that he is answering both Hume and
Kant, yet there is no mention at all in Hume about the “unknow-
able thing-in-itself.””. What is there then in common between these
two philosophers? It is this. Both distinguish between “appear-
ance” and that which appears, between perception and the per-
ceived, between the “thing-for-us” and the “thing-in-itself.” Hume
does not want to hear about the “thing-in-itself.” He regards the


ee


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 77


very thought of it as illegitimate, considering it, as all later Hume-
ans and Kantians do, as “metaphysics.” Kant does recognise the
existence of the “thing-in-itself” but declares it to be “unknowable,”
absolutely different from the phenomenon, belonging to quite a dif-
ferent plane of “other-sidedness,” inaccessible to knowledge, yet
revealed to faith.

What is the kernel of Engels’ objections? Yesterday we did not
know that coal tar contained alizarine; to-day we learned that it
did. The question is, did coal tar contain alizarine yesterday? Of
course it did. To doubt it is to make game of the science of to-day.
And if it did, three important epistemological inferences follow
from it:

(1) Things exist independently of our consciousness, inde-
pendently of our sensations, for it is beyond doubt that alizarine
existed in coal tar yesterday too; and it is also beyond doubt that
yesterday we knew nothing at all about it and had no sensations
an ete

(2) There is absolutely no difference between the phenomenon
and the thing-in-itself, and there can be none. The difference is
only between what is already known and what is not yet known.
And the philosophic fiction which holds that a clear-cut distinction
can be drawn, between one and the other—that the thing-in-itself
is on “the other side” of the phenomenon (Kant), is the veriest
nonsense together with the notion that we must cut ourselves off
by a philosophic partition from the question concerning those
aspects of existence which are as yet unknown (in one part or an-
other) but which nevertheless exist. (Hume.)

(3) In the theory of knowledge, as in other branches of science,
we must think dialectically, that is, we must not regard our knowl-
edge as ready made and unchangeable, but must determine how
from ignorance knowledge is gradually built up, and how incom-
plete, inexact knowledge becomes more complete and more exact.

Once we accept this natural conception of how human knowledge
gradually develops from ignorance, we shall find millions of in-
stances of it at hand as simple as the discovery of alizarine in coal
tar. By encountering millions of facts, not only in the history of
science and technology, but in our everyday life, we become aware
of how things-in-themselves are transformed into things-for-us,
through the intermediation of those of our sense-organs which are
subjected to bombardment by emanations from external objects.


78 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


We reach a full stop in this process of transformation when due to
the presence of one obstacle or another, the action of the external
object upon our sense-organs is discontinued and we witness the
apparent disappearance of the “thing-in-itself.” The sole and in-
evitable inference from all this, an inference which all of us draw
in practical life and which lies at the basis of a “practical” theory
of knowledge, is materialism. Its fundamental belief is that out-
side of us and independently of us, there exist objects, things, and
bodies; that our perceptions are images of the outer world. The
converse theorem of Mach (bodies are complexes of sensations) is
nothing but sheer idealistic foolishness. Chernov manifested by
fis “analysis” of Engels his qualities of a Voroshilov; a simple
instance from Engels seemed to him “queer and naive!” He re-
gards as genuine philosophy only the pretentiously erudite fiction,
already examined by us, unable as he is to distinguish between the
professorial eclectic theory of knowledge and the consistent ma-
terialistic one.

It is both impossible and unnecessary to analyse the other argu-
ments of Chernov; they are merely expressions of elaborate fool-
ishness (as, for example, the assertion, that for the materialists an
atom is a thing-in-itself). We shall note only the argument which
is relevant to our discussion—one in which some one was confused
in regards to Marx’s supposed difference from Engels. The ques-
tion at issue is the second thesis of Marx’s gloss on Feuerbach and
Plekhanov’s translation of the word Diesseitigkeit.

Here is the second thesis: “The question if objective truth is pos-
sible to human thought is not a theoretical, but a practical, question.
In practice man must prove the truth, that is, the reality and force
and the “this-sidedness” (Diesseitigkeit) of his thought. The dis-
pute as to the reality or unreality of thought which is separated
from practice is a purely scholastic question” (F euerbach, p. 130).

In Plekhanov’s translation instead of “to prove the this-sidedness
of his thought” (a literal translation), there is written “to prove
that thought does not stop at this side of phenomena.” And Cher-
nov thunders: “The contradiction between Marx and Engels is elimi-
nated very simply. . . . Marx, like Engels, asserted the knowable-
ness of things-in-themselves and the ‘other-sidedness’ of mind” (loc.
cit., note 34).

We have to deal here with a Voroshilov, who with each phrase
involves us in infinite confusion! It is ignorance, Mr. Victor Cher-


Sal i a te eal ell


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 49


nov,—simply ignorance,—not to know that ail materialists stand for
the knowableness of things-in-themselves. It is either ignorance,
Mr. Victor Chernov, or positive indecency to jump over the very
first phrase of the thesis, without realising that “objective truth”
(gegenstdndliche Wahrheit) means nothing else than the existence
of objects (things-in-themselves) which are truly reflected by the
mind. It is illiteracy, Mr. Victor Chernov, to assert that from
Plekhanov’s exposition (Plekhanov gave an exposition, not a literal
translation of the text) there results, as it were, a defense by Marx
of the other-sidedness of thought. Only followers of Hume and
Kant admit the validity of human understanding for “this side
of phenomena.” But for all materialists (including those of the sev-
enteenth century, whom Bishop Berkeley combated—see Preface),
“phenomena” are “things-for-us” or copies of the “objects-in-them-
selves.” Of course, the free exposition of Plekhanov is not obliga-
tory upon those who wish to know Marx himself, but it is obliga-
tory to try to understand what it was that Marx actually meant,
and not to show off one’s skill in the manner of a Voroshilov.

It is interesting to note that while among those who call them-
selves socialists, there is an unwillingness or inability to carefully
ponder over the “theses” of Marx, bourgeois writers, expert in
philosophy, sometimes manifest more conscientiousness. I know
of one such writer who carefully examined the philosophy of Feuer-


bach and, in connection with it, the theses of Marx. The writer is


Albert Levy, who devoted the third chapter of the second part of
his book on Feuerbach to an examination of the influence of Feuer-
bach on Marx. Without going into the question of the correctness
of Levy’s interpretation of Feuerbach, or of his criticism of Marx
offered from the ordinary bourgeois viewpoint, we shall only pre-
sent his judgment on the philosophic content of the famous “theses”
of Marx.® Regarding the first thesis Levy says: “Marx recognises


4 Albert Levy: La philosophie de Feuerbach et son influence sur la littera-
ture allemande, Paris, 1904, pp. 249-338; pp. 290-298.

5 The eleven theses of Karl Marx are published in Engels’ Ludwig Feuer-
bach. They were written in 1845-6, when, according to Engels, “our knowl-
edge of economic history was incomplete. . . . These are notes hurriedly scrib-
bled for later elaboration, not in the least degree prepared for the press,
but invaluable as the first written form, in which is planted the genial germ
of the new philosophy.” (Author’s Preface to Ludwig Feuerbach, p. 35.)

A photographic reproduction of the “Theses” in Marx’s own handwriting
and an editorial revision of the text as heretofore published is reprinted in
Marx-Engels Archiv, Vol. I, pp. 222-230, published by the Marx-Engels Insti-
tute, Moscow, under the editorship of D. Riazanov.—Ed.


80 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


i


together with the preceding materialists and Feuerbach that to our
conceptions of things there correspond real and distinct objects


outside us... .”


As the reader sees, it is quite clear to Albert Levy that not
only the basic position of Marxism but the basic position of every
kind of materialism, of all “preceding materialism” is the recog-
nition of real objects outside us, to which our conceptions “cor-
respond.” The truism, which holds good for all materialism in
general, is unknown only to the Russian Machians. Levy continues:

“On the other hand, Marx expresses regret that materialism had
left it to idealism to appreciate the importance of the active powers
[i. e., human practice]. These active powers, in Marx’s opinion,
must be wrested from the hands of idealism in order to integrate
them into the materialist system; but it is understood that these
powers must be given that real and sensible character, which ideal-
ism cannot grant them. Thus, Marx’s idea is this: Just as to our
conceptions there correspond real objects outside us, so to our phe-
nomenal activity there corresponds a real activity outside us, an ac-
tivity of things. In this sense humanity participates in the absolute,
not only through theoretical cognition but also through practical ac-
tivity; thus all human activity acquires a dignity and nobility which
permits it to advance hand in hand with theory. Revolutionary
activity henceforth acquires a metaphysical significance. .. .”

Albert Levy is a professor, and a well-behaved professor must
inveigh against the materialists as “metaphysicians.” For the ideal-
ist professors of the Humean and Kantian variety, every kind of
materialism is “metaphysics,” because it posits beyond appearance
a reality independent of us. Levy is, therefore, essentially right
when he says that in Marx’s opinion to the “phenomenal activity”
of humanity there corresponds “an activity of things,” that human
practice has not only a phenomenal (in the Humean and Kantian
sense) but an objectively real significance. The criterion of prac-
tice—as we shall show in greater detail in § 6 of this chapter—has
an absolutely different meaning for Mach and Marx. “Humanity
partakes of the absolute” means that human thinking reflects abso-
lute truth (see below, § 5); the practice of humanity, which verifies
the truth of our conceptions, establishes that which corresponds to
absolute truth in them. Levy continues:

“Having reached this point, Marx naturally runs up against the
objection of the critics. He has admitted the existence of things-in-


Paver tee ee ge


ee ae


_ THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 81


themselves, in relation to which our theory appears to be their
human translation. He cannot avoid the usual objection: What is
your guarantee of the fidelity of the translation? What is the evi-
dence that the human mind yields objective truth? Marx replies
to this objection in his second thesis” (loc. cit., p. 291). The reader
sees that Levy does not doubt for a moment that Marx recognised
the existence of things-in-themselves!


2. On “Transcendence” or Bazarov “Corrects” Engels


If the Russian Machians, who desire to be Marxians, evaded one
of the most explicit and emphatic statements of Engels, they “cor-
rected” another statement of his in the manner of Chernov. Tedi-
ous and difficult as is the task of correcting these perversions and
mutilations in turn, yet he who wishes to speak of the Russian
Machians cannot rid himself of it.

Here is Bazarov’s mutilation of Engels. In the article, Historical
Materialism, Engels writes the following about the English agnos-
tics (philosophers of Hume’s trend of thought): “. . . Our agnostic
admits that all our knowledge is based upon the information im-
parted to us by our senses” (loc. cit., p. 12).

Let us note for the benefit of our Machians that the agnostic also
takes his point of departure from sensations and recognises no
other source of knowledge. For the information of the adherents
of “recent positivism,” be it said that an agnostic is a pure
“positivist.”

“But, he [the agnostic] adds, how do we know that our senses
give us correct representations of the objects which we perceive
through them? And he proceeds to inform us that, whenever he
speaks of objects or their qualities, he does in reality not mean
these objects and qualities, of which he cannot know anything for
certain, but merely the impressionus which they have produced on
his senses. . .” (p. 12).

What two lines of philosophic thought does Engels contrast here?
One line holds that perceptions give us correct impressions of
things, that we directly know objects themselves, that the outer world
acts on our sense-organs. This is materialism—a doctrine with
which the agnostic does not agree. In what then does the essence
of the agnostic’s reasoning consist? In this, that he does not go
further than perceptions, that he stops on this side of phenomena,


82 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM |


refusing to admit the “certainty” of our knowledge beyond the boun-
daries of sense-perception. About the things-in-themselves, we
know nothing; this proposition which the materialists denied and
which Berkeley supported, is also upheld by the agnostic. In short,
this means that the materialist affirms both the existence and knowl-
edge of things-in-themselves while the agnostic admits neither the
thought concerning the existence of things-in-themselves, nor the
possibility of knowing about them.

The question is, in what way does the position of the agnostic
as presented by Engels, differ from that of Mach? In the “new”
word “element”? But it is sheer childishness to believe that a
“new” terminology can change a fundamental philosophic align-
ment, that sensations, when called “elements,” cease to be sensa-
tions! Or does the difference lie in the “novel” conception that the
very same elements in one relation constitute physical elements and
in another, psychical elements? Does not the agnostic, as Engels
represents him, also put “impressions” in place of “things-in-them-
selves”? That means that to all intents and purposes the agnostic,
too, differentiates between physical and psychical “impressions”!
Here, also, the difference is exclusively one of nomenclature; when
Mach says that “objects are complexes of sensations,” then he is a
Berkeleian; when Mach “corrects” himself, and adds that “ele
ments” (sensations) can be physical in one relation and mental in
another, then he is an agnostic, a Humean. Mach does not for-
swear either of these two fundamental divisions in philosophy,
and only the extremest naiveté can take this muddlehead at his
word and believe that he actually “transcended” materialism and
idealism.

Engels deliberately makes no mention of names in his exposition,
criticising instead of single representatives, the whole Humean tradi-
tion (professional philosophers like to regard systems as original
in which petty changes have been made in the terminology or argu-
ment of preceding systems), the fundamental philosophy of Hume.
Engels criticises not the particular expression of the doctrine but
its essential argument. He examines the principal differences
which separate materialism from all followers of Hume, and his
criticism therefore includes Mill, Huxley and Mach. It makes no
difference whether we say- with Mill that matter is the permanent
possibility of sensations, or with Ernst Mach that matter is a more or
less constant complex of “elements”—sensations; we remain within


.


——e,


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 83
AR RRR 6 nV i dba 2 ong lteter pr eet i
the bounds of agnosticism or Humism. These two standpoints or
rather these two formulations are both covered by Engels’ exposi-
tion of agnosticism. The agnostic does not go beyond his sensa-
tions, and asserts that he cannot know anything for certain about
their source, their origin, etc. And if Mach attributes such great
significance to his disagreement with Mill in the minor details of
this particular question, he lends additional point to Engels’ apt
characterisation of professors as Flohknacker. Yes, gentlemen,
having introduced petty corrections and altered your terminology
instead of openly abandoning your half-hearted position, you have
but crushed a flea!

And how does Engels (at the beginning of the article Engels
explicitly and emphatically contrasts his materialism with agnos-
ticism) refute their arguments?

“Now, this line of reasoning seems undoubtedly hard to beat by
mere argumentation. But before there was argumentation there
was action. Im Anfang war die Tat.6 And human action had
solved the difficulty long before human ingenuity invented it. The
proof of the pudding is in the eating. From the moment we turn
these objects to our own use, according to the qualities we perceive
in them, we put to an infallible test the correctness or otherwise
of our sense-perceptions. If these perceptions have been wrong,
then our estimate of the use to which an object can be turned
must also be wrong, and our attempt must fail. But if we suc-
ceed in accomplishing our aim, if we find that the object does
agree with our idea of it, and does answer the purpose we intended
it for, then that is positive proof that our perceptions of it and
of its qualities, so far, agree with reality outside ourselves” (loc.
cit., p. 12). .

The materialist theory then, the theory of reflection of objects by
our mind, is here presented with perfect clearness: things exist out-
side of us. Our perceptions and representations are their images.
The verification of these images, the distinction of true and false
images, is given by practice. But let us listen further, what Engels

has to say about the matter (Bazarov ceases to cite Engels or Ple-
khanov, for he deems it unnecessary to settle accounts with Engels


himself ) :


6 Goethe, Faust, Part I. Goethe changes the Bible’s saying, “In the begin-
ning was the Word” (St. John, 1i.) to “In the beginning was the Deed,” which
was in consonance with his dynamic philosophy—£d.


84 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


“And whenever we find ourselves face to face with a failure,
then we are generally not long in making out the cause that made
us fail; we find that the perception upon which we acted was
either incomplete and superficial, or combined with the results of
other perceptions in a way not warranted by them—what we call
defective reasoning. So long as we take care to train and to use
our senses properly, and to keep our action within the limits pre-
scribed by perceptions properly made and properly used, so long
we shall find that the result of our action proves the conformity
of our perceptions with the objective nature of the things per-
ceived. Not in one single instance, so far, have we been led to
the conclusion that our sense-perceptions, scientifically controlled,
induce in our minds ideas respecting the outer world that are,
by their very nature, at variance with reality, or that there is an
inherent incompatibility between the outer world and our sense-
perceptions of it. But then come the Neo-Kantian agnostics and
say:” (p. 12).

We shall leave for some other time the presentation of the argu-
ments of the Neo-Kantians. Let us remark here that anyone who
was in the least acquainted with the matter, or who had simply paid
attention to what he read, could not have failed to understand that
Engels was propounding here the same materialism with which the
Machians always and everywhere do battle. Now witness the man-
ner in which Bazarov misrepresented Engels:

“Engels,” writes Bazarov of the quotation which was partly ad-
duced by us, “really comes out here against the Kantian idealism.
. - -” It is not true. Bazarov confuses matters. In the part which he
quoted, and which we also quoted in full, there is not a syllable
uttered against either Kantianism or idealism. If Bazarov had
really read through the whole article by Engels, he would have seen
that of Neo-Kantianism, and of Kant’s whole line of thought,
Engels speaks only in the sentence which we did not completely cite.
And had Bazarov paid more attention to reading that part which
he himself quotes, then he would have seen that in the arguments of
the agnostic—refuted there by Engels—there was not a trace of
either the idealistic or Kantian philosophy. Idealism begins only
when the philosopher says that objects are my sensations; Kantian-
ism begins when the philosopher says that the thing exists in itself,
but is unknowable. Bazarov confuses Kantianism with Humism;
and he confuses them because, being a half-Berkeleian, half-Humean


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 85


of the Machian sect, he does not comprehend—as will further be
shown—the difference between the Humean opposition to Kantian-
ism and the materialists’ opposition to it.

“But, alas!” continues Bazarov, “Engels’ argument is directed as
much against Plekhanov’s philosophy as it is against the Kantian
one. In the school of Plekhanov—Orthodox, as Bogdanov has al-
ready remarked, there is a fatal misunderstanding about the nature
of consciousness. To Plekhanov, as to all idealists, it seems that
everything experienced, or cognised, is ‘subjective,’ that if experi-
ence is made the starting point it leads directly to solipsism since
real existence can be found only beyond the boundaries immediately
experienced . . .” (Joc. cit.).

This is totally in the spirit of Chernov and his assurances that
Liebknecht was a true Russian populist! If Plekhanov is an idealist
who deviated from Engels, then why are not you, Bazarov, who
supposedly are an adherent of Engels, a materialist? This is noth-
ing but wretched mystification. By means of the Machian ex-
pression, “immediately experienced,” you are beginning to confuse
the difference between agnosticism, idealism and materialism.
Don’t you understand that such expressions as the “immediately
experienced,” or the “factually experienced,” betray the confusion
of both the Machians and the immanentists, that it is a masquerade,
in which the agnostic (and sometimes, as in Mach’s case, the idealist
too) puts on the cloak of a materialist? For the materialist the
outer world, the image of which is our sensation, is “factually
given.” For the idealist sensation is “factually given,” while the
outer world is declared to be a “complex of sensations.” For the
agnostic also sensation is the “immediately experienced,” but
the agnostic does not go on to either the materialist recognition of
the outer world’s reality, or to the idealist recognition of the world
as my sensation. Therefore your statement, that “the real existence,
according to Plekhanov, can be found only beyond the boundaries
of the immediately experienced,” is utterly fallacious, and follows
only from your Machian position. Although you have a perfect

‘right to adopt whatever position you choose, even including that
of Mach, you have no right whatsoever to misrepresent Engels
once you speak of him. ifort

From Engels’ own expression it is obvious that for the materialist
the real existence lies beyond the “sense-perceptions,” impressions
and representations of man; for the agnostic it is impossible to go


86 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


beyond those perceptions. Having taken Mach, Avenarius and
Schuppe at their word that what is “immediately” (or factually)
experienced, “connects” the perceiving self with the perceived en-
vironment through the famous doctrine of “essential” co-ordination,
Bazarov wishes to ascribe this fallacy to Engels!

“. .. The above quoted citation from Engels,” Bazarov goes
on to say, “looks as if it were specially written by him in a very
popular and accessible form, in order to clarify this idealist mis-
understanding. . . .”

Not in vain did Bazarov attend Avenarius’ school! He continues
his mystification, under the pretence of a struggle with idealism
(of which Engels does not speak), in order to smuggle in the ideal-
ist notion of “co-ordination.” Not so bad, Comrade Bazarov!

“. .. The agnostic asks, how do we know that our subjective
perceptions give us a correct impression of objects?”

You muddle things, Comrade Bazarov! Engels himself certainly
does not say it and does not even ascribe to his enemy, the agnostic,
such an absurd expression as “subjective” perceptions. There are
no other perceptions, besides human ones, for we have been speak-
ing from the human point of view and not from the devil’s point of
view. You are again trying to make a Machian of Engels, trying
to make it appear that the agnostic regards perceptions, or, to be
more exact, sensations, as subjective (which the agnostic does not
say!), and that we, together with Avenarius, have “co-ordinated”
the object into an inseparable connection with the subject! Not so
bad, Comrade Bazarov!

“ . . . But what do you term ‘correct’? asks Engels. The correct
is that which is confirmed by our practice. Hence, inasmuch as our
sense-perceptions are confirmed by experience, they are not ‘sub-
jective,’ that is, they are not voluntary, or illusory, but correct and
real as such... .”

You are confusing matters again, Comrade Bazarov! You have
altered the question concerning the existence of things outside
our sensations, perceptions, representations, for the question re-
garding the criterion of correctness of our representations of “these
same” objects. You are obscuring the first question with considera-
tions relevant to the second. But Engels says explicitly and clearly
that what distinguishes him from the agnostic is not only the lat-
ter’s uncertainty as to whether our representations are “correct,”
but rather the agnostic’s doubt as to whether we may speak of the


—_—__-: eee.
THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 87


objects themselves, as to whether we may have “certain” knowledge
of their existence. Why did Bazarov resort to this illegitimate
change? In order to obscure and confound the basic question of
materialism (and of Engels’ position as a materialist) as regards
the existence of things outside our mind, which, by acting on our
sense-organs, give rise to sensations. It is impossible to be a
materialist without answering this question in the affirmative; but
one can be a materialist and still differ on the question as to what
constitutes the criterion of correctness of our sense-perceptions.

Bazarov confuses matters still more when he attributes to Engels
the absurd and ignorant expression, in the dispute with the agnos-
tic, that our sense-perceptions are confirmed by “experience.”
Engels did not use and could not have used this word, for he was
well aware that the idealist Berkeley, the agnostic Hume and. the
materialist Diderot all had recourse to experience.

“, . . Between the limits in which we have to deal with objects
in practical life, the representations of the object and its properties
coincide with the reality existing outside of us. ‘To coincide’ is
somewhat different than being merely an ‘hieroglyphic.’ To coin-
cide means that, in the given limits, the sense-perception is the
external existing reality . . .” (Bazarov: loc. cit.).

All’s well that ends well. Engels has been prepared @ la Mach,
fried and served with a Machian dressing. Let the most respectable
cook take care lest he himself choke over the dish!

“Sense-perception is the reality existing outside of us!” But this
is just the fundamental fallacy which we have seen constitutes the
blunder and falsity of Machism, and which was responsible for the
remaining absurdities of that system, and which helps to explain
why Mach and Avenarius have been embraced by the most rabid
reactionaries and priests together with the followers of the im-
manentist school. No matter how circuitous Bazarov was in his
approach, no matter how diplomatic he was in evading ticklish ques-
tions, he nevertheless gave himself away at the end, and displayed
his Machian character! To say that “sense-perception is the exist-
ing reality outside of us,” is to return to Hume or even to Berkeley
whose modern protagonists have hidden themselves in the mist of
“co-ordination.” It is either the fraud of the idealist or the subter-
fuge of the agnostic, Comrade Bazarov, for sense-perception is not
the reality existing outside of us, it is only the image of that reality.
You are cavilling at the ambiguous connotation of the Russian word


88 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM |


sovpadat (coincide). Do you wish to compel the unsophisticated
reader to believe that “to coincide” means “to be the same” and not
“to correspond”? This is to misrepresent Engels a la Mach, by
perverting the sense of the quotation.

Take the German original and you will find there the words
stimmen mit, which mean to correspond, “to voice with”; the latter
translation is literal, for Stimme means voice. The words “stimmen
mit” cannot mean “to coincide” in the sense of being one and the
same thing. And even for the reader who does not know the Ger-
man language but who reads with the least bit of attention, it is
perfectly clear that Engels, throughout his presentation, treats the
expression “sense-perception” as the image (Abbild) of the reality
existing outside of us. He will see that the word “coincide” ought
to be used in Russian exclusively in the sense of “correspondence”
or “concurrence.” To attribute to Engels the thought that “sense-
perception is the existing reality,” is such a gem of misinterpretation
and perversion, such a flagrant attempt to palm off agnosticism and
idealism as materialism, that one must readily grant that Bazarov
has broken the record!

How can sane people, who still have sound judgment and a re-
liable memory, utter the statement that “sense-perception [it mat-
ters not how qualified] is the reality existing outside of us”? The
earth is a reality existing outside of us.. It cannot “coincide” (in
the sense of being the same) with our sense-perception, or exist in
an inseparable co-ordination with it, or be at bottom a “complex
of elements” identical with sensation in one of its aspects, for the
earth existed at a time when there was no human being, no sense-
organs, no matter organised in the complex form with which the
property of sensation is associated.

It is clear that in order to cover up the idealist folly of such an
assertion, the sham theories of “co-ordination,” “introjection,” and
of the newly discovered “world elements,” were invented. Bazarov’s
formulation, which escaped him so unexpectedly and inadvertently,
is excellent in that it reveals just that monstrous absurdity, which
otherwise it would have been necessary to unearth from heaps of
pseudo-erudite detail.

You deserve commendation, Comrade Bazarov! We shall erect a
monument to you during your lifetime. On one side of it we shall
inscribe your pronunciamento, and on the other, “To the Russian
Machian, who did Machism to death among the Russian Marxists”!


re


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 89


We shall speak separately of the two points which were touched
upon by Bazarov in the above-mentioned citation—the difference
between the criteria of practice for agnostics (Machians included)
and for materialists, and the difference between the theory of re-
flection and the theory of symbols.. Now we shall continue to
quote from Bazarov a little further.

‘“* . . And what is to be found beyond those boundaries? Of
this Engels does not say a word. He does not manifest the desire
anywhere to perform that ‘transcendence,’ that transcendental flight
from the perceptually given world, which lies at the foundation of
Plekhanov’s theory of knowledge. . . .” —

What does he mean by “those” boundaries? Does he mean the
boundaries of the “co-ordination” of Mach and Avenarius which
inseparably connects the ego and the environment, the subject and
object? The very question which Bazarov puts is devoid of sense.
Had he asked the question in an intelligible way, he would under-
stand that the outer world lies “beyond the boundaries” of the
sensations, perceptions and representations of men. But the word
“transcendence” betrays Bazarov more and more. It is a specific
Kantian and Humean “stratagem” to erect an absolute boundary
between the phenomenon and the thing-in-itself. To go beyond the
phenomenon to the object existing outside of perception, or, if you
will, to transcend the limits of our sensation, etc., is an instance of
“transcendence,” says Kant; and this “transcendence” (or tran-
scendental flight), let us admit, is not a matter for knowledge but
of faith. Hume contends that such transcendence is completely in-
admissible. And the Kantians, like the Humeans, call the material-
ists transcendental realists, “metaphysicians,” for illegitimately
transcending the limits of the given region of experience in order
to get at one absolutely different from it. In the works of the
contemporary professors of philosophy, who follow in the path of
the Kantian and Humean reactionary philosophy, you will encounter
(to take at least the names enumerated by Voroshilov-Chernov) in-
numerable repetitions of accusations against the materialists for
being “metaphysicians” and “transcendentalists.” Bazarov adopts
both the word and the thought from the reactionary professors and
boastfully parades this piece of profound criticism in the name of
“recent positivism”! As a matter of fact the very idea of “tran-
scendentalism,” that is the absolute separation between appearance
and the thing-in-itself, is a fallacious idea given currency by the


90 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM ~


agnostics (Humeans and Kantians included) and idealists them-
selves. We have already explained it in the example taken from
Engels about alizarine, and we will shortly elaborate upon the
words of Feuerbach and Joseph Dietzgen. But let us first get
through with Bazarov’s misrepresentation of Engels:

“. ..In one place in his Anti-Diihring, Engels says that the
existence of anything outside of the realm of sense-perception is
an offene Frage, for whose answer we have no data.”

Bazarov repeats this argument after the German Machian, Fried-
rich Adler. This last example is perhaps even worse than the cele-
brated identification of “sense-perception” with “external reality.”
In his Anti-Diihring Engels says:

“The unity of the universe does not lie in the bare fact of its
existence, although its existence is a presumption of its unity, since
it must first exist before it can be a unit. Existence beyond the
bounds of our horizon is an open question (offene Frage). The
real unity of the universe lies in its materiality, and this is estab-
lished, not by a couple of juggling phrases but by means of a long
and difficult development of philosophy and natural science.” 7

Look at the new dish which our cook has prepared for us,
Engels is speaking here of the possibility of something existing be-
yond the bounds of our horizon, the existence of men on Mars,
for instance. It is clear that such existence is indeed an open ques-
tion. And Bazarov, not presenting the full quotation, apparently
with malice and aforethought, interprets Engels as if the offene
Frage relates to the question of “bare existence beyond the per-
ceptual world.” This is the height of absurdity, for Engels is here
being taxed with the views of those professors of philosophy whom
Bazarov accepts without any questioning and whom Dietzgen justly
called the “graduated flunkeys” of the priesthood or fideism. In-
deed, fideism does assert that there exists something “beyond the
world of perception.” The materialists in agreement with natural
science decidedly oppose such assertion. The position which
mediates between the two is held by those professors, followers of
Kant, Hume or Mach, “who have found the truth outside the poles
of both materialism and idealism” and who “make peace,” for
this in an “open question.” Had Engels said anything similar to
this, it would be positively disgraceful to call oneself a Marxist.

But enough! The half page of quotation from Bazarov is so full


* Landmarks of Scientific Socialism, p. 66.


—— ome ¢


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 91


of blunders that we are compelled to limit ourselves to what has
already been said about it, without foliowing further the aberrations
of the Machian point of view.


3. Feuerbach and Dietzgen on the “Thing-in-Itself”


To reveal the absurdity of the assertions made by the Machians
to the effect that the materialists, Marx and Engels, denied the
existence of the “thing-in-itself” and the possibility of its cognition,
or that they admitted the existence of an absolute line of division
between the phenomenon and the thing-in-itself, we shall adduce a
few quotations from Feuerbach. The trouble with our Machians
arose from the fact that they began to parrot the words of the
reactionary philosophers on dialectic materialism without either
acquainting themselves with dialectics or with materialism.

“Modern philosophical spiritualism,” says Feuerbach, “which
calls itself idealism reproaches materialism with the following de-
structive (in its own eyes) stricture: Materialism is dogmatism; it
starts from the world of perception as if from an undisputed, ob-
jective truth, and considers it as a world-in-itself existing outside of
us, while in reality the world is only a product of the spirit.” ®

This seems sufficiently clear. The world-in-itself is a world that
exists outside of us. The materialism of Feuerbach, as well as the
materialism of the seventeenth century, which was attacked by
Bishop Berkeley, consisted in the recognition of the existence of
objects-in-themselves external to the human mind. The an sich
(in itself) of Feuerbach is absolutely opposed to the an sich of
Kant. (Let us recall the excerpt from Feuerbach, where he says
that for Kant the Ding an sich is an “abstraction without reality.”)
For Feuerbach the Ding an sich is an abstraction of a reality, that
is, of an external intelligible world, which does not differ from
the world of “phenomena.”

Feuerbach shows very ingeniously and clearly how ridiculous it
is to postulate a “transcendence” between the world of phenomena
and the world-in-itself, an abyss created by the priests and adopted
by the professors of philosophy. Here is one of his analyses:

“Of course the products of phantasy, too, are the products of
nature, for the power of phantasy, like other human powers, is in
the. last analysis, both in its basis and in its origin a force of


8 Simmtliche Werke, 1866, Vol. X, p. 185.


92 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


nature. Nevertheless a human being is a creature who is distin-
guished from the sun, moon and stars, from stones, animals and
vegetables, in a word, from those creatures (Wesen) which he
designates by one general name, ‘nature.’ Consequently, his
images or perceptions of the sun, moon and stars and other
creatures of nature (Naturwesen), although products of nature,
are yet distinct from those objects in nature of which they are
the perceptions.” ® ;

The objects of our presentations are distinguished from our
presentations themselves; the thing-in-itself is distinguished from
the thing for us, for the latter is only a part, or only one aspect,
of the former, just as man himself is only a fragment of nature
which reflects itself in his presentations.

“|. . My taste-nerve is just as much a product of nature as
salt is, but from this it does not follow that the taste of salt, as
such, would be its independently existing objective property, that
the salt which appears only as an object of sensation would be such
in itself, or that the sensation of salt on the tongue would be the
property of salt when we only think of it without tasting it... .”
And several pages previous: “A saline taste is the subjective ex-
pression of an objective property of salt” (ibid., p. 514).

Sensation is the result of the action of an objectively existing
shing-in-itself upon our sense-organs. Such is the theory of Feuer-
bach. Sensation is a subjective image of an objective world, a world
an und fiir sich.

“ ... Although man is a creature of nature (Naturwesen),
like the sun, stars, vegetables, animals, and rocks, nevertheless he
is distinguished from nature. Nature in the head and heart of
man is distinguished from nature outside of the human head and
heart. . . . The human body is the only object in which, according
to the admission of the idealists themselves, the fact of the ‘identity
between object and subject’ is realised; for the human body is that
object whose equality and unity with my own inner being stands
beyond any possible doubt. . . . But is not one man for the other,
even the most intimate, an object of phantasy, an object of repre-
sentation? Does not each man comprehend the other in his own
way, in his own sense [in und nach seinem Sinne]? ... And if
between man and man, and betweer mind and mind, there is a
difference which it is impossible to ignore, how much greater must


29 Werke, Stuttgart, 1903, Vol. VIII, p. 516.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 93


a a PN Ee OEP eT


the difference be between an unthinking, unhuman, dissimilar (to
us) being in itself [Wesen an sich] and the same being as we
think of it, perceive it and apprehend it?” (zcbid., p. 518).

Every mysterious, subtle and insidious difference between the
appearance and the thing-in-itself is an absolute philosophic fallacy.
In fact each one of us has observed innumerable times the simple
and palpable transformation of the “thing-in-itself” into the “thing-
for-us.” This transformation is cognition. The “teaching” of
Machism that since we know only sensations, we cannot know of
the existence of something beyond sensations, is an old sophism of
the idealist and agnostic philosophy presented in a new dressing.

Joseph Dietzgen is a dialectical materialist. We shall show be-
low that his method of expression is often inexact, that often it is
not devoid of confusion, a fact which is seized upon by various
unwise people (Eugene Dietzgen amongst them) and, of course,
by our Machians; yet either they were unable or unwilling to de-
termine the dominant trend of his thought, and to disengage clearly
his basic materialism from the elements foreign to it.

“If we wish,” says Dietzgen, “to regard the world in the light of
the thing-in-itself, we shall easily see that the world ‘itself? and the
world as it appears, the world of phenomena, differ only in the
same way in which the whole differs from its component parts.” 1°
“A phenomenon is no more and no less different from the thing
which produces it than the stretch of a twenty-mile road is different
from the road itself” (p. 83). There is not, nor can there be any
difference in principle; there can be no “transcendence,” or “in-
nate disagreement.” But there is, to be sure, a difference involved
in the transition from the bounds of sense-perceptions to the ex-
istence of things outside of us.

“We learn by experience that each experience is only a part of
that which, in the words of Kant, surpasses all experience. . . . In
the sense of the cognition conscious of its own nature, each particle,
be it of dust or of stone or of wood, is incomprehensible as to its
whole extent, each particle being an inexhaustible material for the
human faculty of cognition, consequently something which surpasses
all experience” (Philosophical Essays, p. 284).

To write, “in the words of Kant,” to accept for purposes of
popularisation the erroneous, baffling terminology of Kant, means


10 Joseph Dietzgen: The Positive Outcome of Philosophy, Chicago, 1906, p.
75; Cf. some of the Philosophical Essays, Chicago, 1908, p. 284.


94, MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


that Dietzgen recognised the transcendental existence of something
“beyond experience.” This is a good example of what the Machians
will fasten upon in order to justify their change from materialism
to agnosticism. You see, they say, we do not wish to go beyond
the “bounds of experience,” for us “sense-perception is the reality
external to us.”

’ objects Dietzgen to such philosophy, “sepa-
rates unscientifically the absolute truth from the relative truth. It
makes of the phenomenal thing and of the ‘thing-in-itself,’ that is, of
the phenomenon and truth, two categories which differ completely
from each other and are not contained in one united category”
(p. 285). We may now judge of the enlightenment and ingenuity
of the Russian Machian, Bogdanov, who does not wish to call him-
self a Machian but wishes to be considered a Marxist in philosophy.

“The golden mean between panpsychism and panmaterialism 1%
has been taken by the materialists of the more critical shade. They
have rejected the notion of the absolute unknowableness of the thing-
in-itself, but at the same time regard it as being radically different
from the ‘phenomenon’ and, therefore, only dimly discernible in it;
it is taken to be transempirical in content [that is, probably, as
far as the “elements” are concerned which are not as such elements
of experience], but yet lying within the bounds of what has been
called the forms of experience, i. e., time, space and causality. Such
is approximately the standpoint of the French materialists of the
eighteenth century and of the newer philosophers, Engels and his
Russian follower, Beltov” [Plekhanov—Ed.].

This is a complete blunder. (1) The materialists of the seven-
teenth century, with whom Berkeley argues, hold that “objects-in-
themselves” are unconditionally knowable, for our representations
and ideas are only copies or reflections of those objects which exist
“outside of the mind” (see Preface). (2) Feuerbach, and Dietzgen
after him, decidedly oppose the radical separation introduced be-
tween the thing-in-itself and its phenomenon, and Engels, too, with
his brief example of the transformation of the “thing-in-itself” into
the “thing-for-us,” attacks this position. (3) And, finally, to main-
tain that the materialists regard things-in-themselves as “only dimly
discernible in the phenomena,” is mere folly, as we have seen
from Engels’ refutation of the agnostic. The reason for Bogdanov’s
perversion of materialism is his misunderstanding of the relation


“Morbid mysticism,’


"1 Empirio-Monism, Bk. II, p. 40, 1907.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 95


of absolute truth to relative truth (about which we shall speak
later). As far as the “transempirical” thing-in-itself and “elements
of experience” are concerned, they represent intrusions of what
we have already seen to be Machian blunders. To “poll-parrot”
the reactionary professors on the absurdity of materialism, to dis-
avow Engels in 1907, to attempt to palm Engels off as an agnostic—
that is the sum and substance of the philosophy of “recent posi-
tivism,” upheld by the Russian Machians!


4. Does Objective Truth. Exist?


Says Bogdanov: “As I understand it, Marxism represents the de-
nial of the unconditional objectivity of any truth whatsoever, the
denial that there is any such thing as a purely eternal truth.” }?
What is meant by “unconditional objectivity”? “Eternal truth” is
“an objective truth in the absolute meaning of the word,” says
Bogdanov, agreeing to recognise the existence of “objective truth
only within the limits of a certain epoch.”

Two questions are here confused: (1) Is there such a thing as
objective truth, that is, can there be in human representation a
given content whose truth does not depend upon the existence of
either a subject, a human being, or on humanity in general? (2)
And if objective truth does exist, can a human conception, which
gives expression to it, express it as a whole, at one time, uncondi-
tionally, absolutely, or only approximately, relatively? The sec-
ond question revolves around the correlation of absolute and rel-
ative truth.

As far as the second question is concerned, Bogdanov’s answer 1s
clear, open and definite. He denies completely the possibility of
acquiring absolute truth and accuses Engels of eclecticism for mak-
ing an opposite sort of admission. We shall speak later on about
Bogdanov’s discovery of eclecticism in Engels. Here we shall
pause on the first question which Bogdanov very obscurely also
answers in the negative, for although it is possible to deny
the element of the relative principle in one human notion or another,
without denying the existence of objective truth, yet it is impossible
to deny the existence of absolute truth without denying the existence
of objective truth. “ .. . There is no criterion of objective truth,”
writes Bogdanov a little further (p. ix), “in Beltov’s [Plekhanov’s]


12 Empirio-Monism, Bk. III, pp. iv, v.


en)


96 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


sense of the word; the truth is an ideological form, an organising
form of human experience. . . .”

This has nothing to do with “in the sense of Beltov,” for the
question here is about one of the fundamental philosophic problems
and not at all about Beltov; nor has it to do with the criterion of
truth which we must treat separately and not confound with the
question as to whether objective truth exists. Bogdanov’s negative
answer to the latter question is clear: If truth is only an ideological
form, it means that there cannot exist any truth independently of
the subject, or of humanity, for as we both agree, we do not know
any other ideology, besides a human one. And still clearer is his
negative answer to the second half of his question: If truth is a
form of human experience, it means that there cannot be any truth
which would not depend upon humanity; there cannot be any. ob-
jective truth.

The denial of objective truth by Bogdanov is agnosticism and
subjectivism. The absurdity of this denial is evident when we con-
sider the example of the scientific-historical truth quoted above,
Natural science does not leave any room for doubt about the truth
of its assertion that the earth existed before the appearance of
man. From the viewpoint of the materialistic theory of knowledge
it is quite consistent to hold that what is reflected exists in inde-
pendence from what does the reflecting.. In fact the doctrine of
the independence of the outer world from consciousness is the funda-
mental proposition of materialism. The assertion of science that
the earth existed before the appearance of man is an objective
truth. This position is incompatible with the philosophy of the
Machians, and with their doctrine of truth. For, if truth is an
organising form of human experience, then any assertion about
the existence of the earth without the experience of men cannot
be true.

But this is not sufficient. If truth is only an organising form of
human experience, then the teaching, say, of Catholicism may be
considered as truth. For there is not the least doubt that Catholi-
cism is an “organising form of human experience.” Bogdanov
himself senses the fallacy of this startling theory, and it is rather
interesting to watch how he attempts to extricate himself from the
mire into which he has fallen.

“The basis of objectivity,” we read in Book I of Empirio-Monism,
“must rest in the sphere of collective experience. We term those


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 97


data of experience objective which have the same meaning for us
and for others. Not only must we base our activity upon them,
if we desire to avoid contradiction, but other people must do
likewise, in order not to arrive at a contradiction. The objective
character of the physical world consists in that it exists not for
each one personally, but for all [it is not true! it exists independ-
ently of ‘all’], and therefore has a certain meaning which is the
same for everybody. The objectivity of the physical order is its
general meaning” (p. 25). “The objectivity of physical bodies
which we encounter in our experience is established on the basis of
the mutual verification and agreement of various people. In gen-
eral, the physical world is a socially agreed, socially-harmonised, or
in a word, a socially-organised experience” (p. 36).

We do not have to repeat that this idealistic definition of ob-
jectivity is essentially untrue, that the physical world exists inde-
pendently of humanity and of human experience, and that the
physical world existed at a time when no “sociability” and no “or-
ganisation” of human experience was possible.

We shall stop to point out the falsity of the Machian philosophy
from still another angle. Objectivity is so defined that it embraces
religious doctrines, which undoubtedly possess a “universal mean-
ing.” But let us continue with Bogdanov: “We remind the reader
once more that objective experience is not at all social experience.
. . . Social experience is by no means organised as a social whole,
and always contains various contradictions, so that some parts of it
do not agree with the others. House goblins and wood-demons
can exist in the domain of social experience of a given people or a
given group of people as, for example, the peasantry; but in so-
cially-organised or objective experience they are not included, for
they do not harmonise with the rest of collective experience or fit
into its organised forms as, for example, its category of causal
connection” (p. 45).

Of course it is very kind of Bogdanov “not to include” the social
experience of ghosts and goblins into objective experience. But
this well-meant “correction,” which is in the spirit of anti-fideism,
does not really “correct” the fundamental error of Bogdanov’s
whole position. His definition of objectivity and of the physical
world absolutely breaks down because the doctrines of religion
have a “general meaning,” more widespread than those of science;
the majority of mankind, let us remember, still clings to religion.


98 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


Catholicism is “socially organised, harmonised, and agreed upon”
because of its centuries of historic development; and it can easily
be “tied up” with the category of “causal connection,” for religions
did not originate without cause, they did not come into existence
by accident and are still popular with the masses at the present
time; and even our professors of philosophy quite “legitimately”
adjust themselves to them. If this experience, which undoubtedly
has a “universal meaning” and undoubtedly is socially organised,
does not “harmonise” with the “experience” of science, it is because
there is a fundamental difference between one and the other which
Bogdanov eradicates when he rejects the notion of absolute truth.
And though Bogdanov tries to “correct” himself by saying that
fideism or clericalism does not harmonise with science, nevertheless,
his denial of objective truth “harmonises” completely with fideism.
Modern fideism does not reject science—Oh! no, it only rejects
the “exaggerated claims” of science, especially its claim to objective
truth. If objective truth exists (as the materialists contend), if
natural science, reflecting the outer world in human “experience,”
is alone capable of giving us objective truth, then every kind of
fideism is absolutely false. But if there is no objective truth, if
truth (including scientific truth) is only the organised form of
human experience, then a way is left open for the fundamental
postulate of clericalism; a door is opened for it, and a place cleared
to house the “organising forms” of the religious experience.

The question is, should this denial of objective truth be attributed
directly to Bogdanov, who refuses to call himself a Machian, or is it
a consequence of the fundamental teachings of Mach and Avenarius?
It is clear that the latter is the case. If only sensation exists (Ave-
narius, in 1876), if bodies are complexes of sensations (Mach, in
the Analysis of Sensations), then it is obvious that we are con-
fronted with a philosophical subjectivism, which inevitably leads
to the denial of objective truth. And if sensations are called “ele-
ments,” which in one aspect are physical and in another psychical,
then, as we have seen, the starting point of empirio-criticism be-
comes only entangled but not rejected. Avenarius and Mach recog-
nise sensations as the source of our cognition. They hold the
viewpoint of empiricism (all cognition from experience) or sensa-
tionalism (all cognition from sensations). This viewpoint leads to
the reassertion of the fundamental opposition between idealism and
materialism; it does not eliminate that opposition, no matter in


te


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 99


Sr


what “new” verbal attire (“elements”) it might be clothed. The
solipsist, that is, the subjective idealist, and the materialist may
recognise sensations as the source of our cognition. Both Berkeley
and Diderot started from Locke. The first proposition of the theory
of knowledge is that the sole source of our cognition is sensation.
Having recognised the first proposition, Mach confuses the second
important proposition, concerning the objective reality which is
given to man in his sensations,—an objective reality which is the
source of his sensations. Starting from sensations, it is theoretically
possible to follow the line of subjectivism which leads to solipsism
(“bodies are complexes or combinations of sensations”), or to
follow the line of objectivism which leads to materialism (sensa-
tions are images of objects in the external world). The first view-
point gives us agnosticism, and if we push it a little further, sub-
jective idealism—for which there cannot be any objective truth.
The second viewpoint, gives us materialism, for which the recog-
nition of the objective truth is essential. This old philosophic ques-
tion, out of which these two irreconcilable tendencies grow, is not
solved by Mach; it is not eliminated or overcome by him, but is
rather entangled through his juggling with the word “element,” etc.
The denial of objective truth by Bogdanov is an inevitable conse-
quence of Machism, and not a deviation from it.

Engels, in his Ludwig Feuerbach, calls Hume and Kant philos-
ophers “who dispute the possibility of knowing the world or at
least of acquiring a thorough knowledge of it.” Engels lays stress
on that which Hume and Kant hold in common, not on that which
divides them. He shows there that “the decisive arguments for the
refutation of this [Humean and Kantian] view were already ad-
vanced by Hegel.” In connection with this, it is noteworthy that
Hegel regarded materialism as “‘a consistent system of empiricism.”
He wrote: “Generally speaking, empiricism finds the truth in the
outward world; and even if it allow a supersensible world, it holds
knowledge of that world to be impossible and would restrict us
to the province of sensation. This doctrine when systematically
carried out produces what has been latterly termed materialism.
Materialism of this stamp looks upon matter, qua matter as the
genuine objective world.” **

All knowledge is derived from experience, from sensation, from


18 Hegel: Enzyclopddie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse,
Werke, 1843, Vol. IV, p. 83; Cf. p. 122.


100 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


perception; this is true. But the question remains, is the source of
perception, objective reality? If you answer affirmatively, then
you are a materialist. If not then you inevitably come to sub-
jectivism, or agnosticism, irrespective of whether you deny the
knowledge of the thing-in-itself, or the objectivity of time, space,
causality (Kant), or whether you reject the idea of the thing-in-
itself (Hume). The inconsistency of your empiricism, of your
philosophy of experience, will lie in the fact that you are denying
the objective content of experience, the objective truth of empirical
knowledge.

Those who follow the line of Kant and Hume (Mach and Ave-
narius included, since they are not pure Berkeleians) call us ma-
terialists, “metaphysicians,” because we recognise the objective
reality which is given us in experience, because we recognise an
objective and independent source of our sensations. We material-
ists, after Engels, term the Kantians and Humeans, agnostics, be-
cause they deny the objective reality of the source of our sensations,
Agnostic is a Greek word: a “no,” gnosis “knowledge.” The ag-
nostic says I do not know whether there is an objective reality
which reflects and is reflected by our sensations; I declare it im-
possible to know. (Cf. citation above from Engels’ in which the
position of the agnostic is presented.) Hence the denial of ob-
jective truth by the agnostic, and the tolerance—a bourgeois, philis-
tine, cowardly tolerance—of the dogmas of house goblins and wood-
demons, Catholic saints and the like. Mach and Avenarius, pre-
tentiously employing a “new” terminology, advancing a supposedly
“new” viewpoint, in fact repeat the agnostic’s position in a confus-
ing way. On the one hand bodies are complexes of sensation (pure
subjectivism, pure Berkeleianism) ; on the other hand, if we christen
our sensation “elements,” it becomes possible to think of their
existence independently of our sense-organs!

The Machians like to recite this theme. They like to say that
they are philosophers who absolutely trust the evidence of their
sense-organs, that they account the world as it actually seems to
us, full of sounds, colours, etc., while the materialists, as it were,
regard the world as dead, without sound or colour, distinct in its
nature from what it seems to us, and so on. In such wise, does
Petzoldt hold forth in his Einfiihrung in die Philosophie, etc., and
in his Das Weltproblem vom positivistischen Stand punkte aus (1907).
Victor Chernov, enthusiastic over the “new” idea, apes Petzoldt.


SS


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 101


But in truth the Machians are subjectivists and agnostics, for they
do not sufficiently trust the evidence of our sense-organs and are
inconsistent in their sensationalism. They do not recognise ob-
jective reality as the source of our sensations. They do not see in
sensations the true copy of this objective reality, thus coming
into direct contradiction with natural science and opening the door
to fideism. On the other hand, for the materialist the world is
richer, livelier, more varied than it actually seems, for with each
scientific step taken in advance, new parts of it are discovered. To
the materialist, sensations are images of the ultimate and only
objective reality, ultimate not in the sense that it is already ex-
plored to the end, but in that there is not and cannot be any other
besides it. This viewpoint irrevocably closes the door, not only
to all sorts of fideism, but also to that professorial scholasticism
which, without regarding objective reality as the source of our
sensations, “infers” the existence of the objective, by means of
such sham verbal constructions, as “unique determination,” “the
socially-organised,” so that it is finally reduced to a position in
which it is unable to separate objective truth from the belief in
wood and house spirits.

The Machians contemptuously shrug their shoulders at the “anti-
quated” views of the “dogmatic” materialists who still cling to
the conception of matter which has been supposedly refuted by
> We will speak separately
of the new theories of physics, concerning the nature of matter.
It is unpardonable to confound, as the Machians do, the teaching
of this or the other construction of matter with the epistemological
category, to confound the problem of the new properties of the new
species of matter (electrons, for instance) with the old problem
of the theory of knowledge, with the problem concerning the sources
of our cognition—or the existence of objective truth, etc. Mach
“discovered the world elements,” we are told: red, green, hard,
soft, loud, long, etc. We ask whether or not objective reality is
assumed as given us, when we see red or perceive hard. This hoary
philosophic question is confused by Mach. If one holds that it is
not given, then he is relapsing together with Mach, into subjectivism
and agnosticism and into the arms of the immanentist school, who
are really philosophic Menshikovs. If one holds that it is given,
then a certain philosophic doctrine necessarily follows. Such a
doctrine has long since been worked out, namely, materialism. Mat:


“recent” science and “recent positivism.’


102 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


ter is a philosophic category which refers to the objective reality
given to man in his sensations,—a reality which is copied, photo-
graphed, and reflected by our sensations, but which exists inde-
pendently of them. To say that such a doctrine can become anti-
quated, is childish prattle and merely a senseless repetition of the
arguments of the fashionable reactionary philosophy. When could
the struggle between materialism and idealism have become anti-
quated during the two thousand years of the development of philos-
ophy? Recall the conflicts which have been waged over the following
issues: the tradition of Plato or the tradition of Democritus; the
struggle between religion and science; the denial of objective truth
and its assertion: the struggle between those who believed in super
sensible knowledge and their adversaries.

The acceptance or rejection of the notion of matter presents a
problem concerning the confidence of man in the evidence of his
sense-organs, a problem which bears on the question of the source
of our cognition, one which has been asked, answered and debated
from the very inception of philosophy, one which can be elaborated
in thousands of ways by professorial circus-clowns, but which can
no more become obsolete than the question as to whether the source
of human cognition is sight, hearing and smell. To regard our
sensations as copies of the external world, is to admit an objective
truth, that is, to hold a materialistic point of view. To illustrate
this, I will adduce a quotation from Feuerbach and from two text-
books of philosophy, in order that the reader may judge the ele-
mentary nature of this question.

“How vulgar it is,” wrote Feuerbach, “to refuse to acknowledge
that sensation is the gospel, the dispensation of the objective
saviour.” ** As you see, a strange, queer terminology, but a per-
fectly clear philosophic line: sensation reveals the objective truth
to us. “My sensation is subjective, but its foundations or grounds
are objective” (zbid., p. 195). Compare the quotation where Feuer-
bach says that materialism regards the perceptual world as the
ultimate objective truth.

“Sensationalism,” we read in Frank’s Dictionary, “is a doctrine
which infers all our ideas from the experience of perceptions,
reducing knowledge to sensation. There is subjective sensationalism
[scepticism and Berkeleianism], moral sensualism [Epicureanism],


14 Feuerbach: Sdémmtliche Werke, 1866, Vol. X, p. 194,
15 Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques, Paris, 1875.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 103


and objective sensationalism. Objective sensationalism is material-
ism, for matter or bodies are, in the opinion of the materialists,
the sole objects which can affect our senses (aiteindre nos sens).”

“If sensationalism,” says Schwegler,’® “asserts that truth or being
can be known exclusively by means of the senses, the only thing
that remains [the question concerns the philosophy at the end of
the eighteenth century in France] is to formulate objectively this
proposition: ‘Only the perceptual exists; there is no other being
save material being.’ This is the thesis of materialism.”

These truisms, which have found their way even into the text-
books, have been forgotten by our Machians.


5. Absolute and Relative Truth, or on
the Eclecticism of Engels Discovered by Bogdanov


Bogdanov made this discovery in 1906 announcing it in the
preface of Book III of his Empirio-Monism. “Engels in Anti-
Diihring,” writes Bogdanov, “expresses himself almost in the same
sense which I characterised as ‘the relativity of truth’ (p. v), that
is, in the sense of the denial of eternal truth, the denial of the
absolute objectivity of whatever truth there is... . Engels mis-
takenly wavers in his views when he ironically recognises certain
wretched eternal truths (p. viii). . . . Only inconsistency can ac-
count for Engels’ eclectic reservations in this connection . . a aes
ix). Let us cite one instance of Bogdanov’s refutation of Engels’
eclecticism. “Napoleon died on May 5, 1821,” says Engels, in
Anti-Diihring, in the chapter, “Eternal Truths,” where he treats of
the platitudes which one must encounter in pretending to find
eternal truths in historical sciences. Bogdanov thus answers Engels:
“What ‘truth’ is it? And what is there ‘eternal’ about it? The
constancy of the one-to-one correspondence between a point-instant
of time and the death of Napoleon has no longer any real signifi-
cance for our generation, it cannot serve as the starting point for
any activity, and it leads nowhere” (p. ix). And on p. viii: “Can
you call Plattheiten Wahrheiten? Are platitudes truths? The truth
is a vital organising form of experience; it leads us somewhere in
our activity and gives us a prop in the struggle of life.”

It is sufficiently clear from these two quotations, that instead of


16 Dr. Albert Schwegler: Geschichte der Philosophie im Unriss, 15 ed., p.
194,


104 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


refuting Engels, Bogdanov is really beating air. If you are not
in a position to maintain that the proposition, “Napoleon died on
May 5, 1821,” is false, then you are practically acknowledging
that it is true. If you do not assert that it can be refuted in the
future, then you are acknowledging this truth to be eternal. But
to present such phrases as that the truth is a “vital organising form
of experience” as an answer is to offer a jumble of words as phi-
losophy. Was the earth evolved in the manner taught by the
science of geology, or was the earth created in seven days? Is it
really possible to dodge the question by phrases of “vital” (what
does it mean?) truth which “leads” somewhere? Is it true that
the knowledge of the earth’s history and the history of humanity
“have no real significance”? But this is only a trifle by the means
of which Bogdanov covers his retreat. Having taken it upon him-
self to prove that the admission of eternal truths by Engels is
eclecticism, it is no more than a transparent dodge to settle the
question verbally and leave unrefuted the fact that Napoleon really
died on May 5, 1821. To think that this truth can possibly be
refuted in the future is absurd.

The example taken by Engels is elementary, and anybody can
present scores of such truths (as e. g., the other instance of Engels,
that Paris is in France), which are eternal and absolute, and which
only insane people can doubt. Why does Engels speak of “plati-
tudes”? Because he ridicules and refutes the dogmatic, metaphysical
materialist, Diihring, who could not apply dialectics to the question
of the relation between absolute and relative truth. To be a ma-
terialist is to acknowledge objective truth revealed by our sense-
organs. To acknowledge as objective truth, a truth independent of
man and mankind, is to recognise in one way or another, absolute
truth. Now, this “one way or another” separates the metaphysical
materialist Diihring from the dialectical materialist Engels.
Diihring juggled with the words “last, final, eternal truth” in dis-
cussing the most complicated questions of science, and especially
in discussing history. Of course, there are eternal truths, says
Engels, but it is unwise to use “high-sounding” words (gewaltige
Worte) for small matters. To further materialism, we must drop
the vulgar play upon the expression “eternal truth”; we must
know how to put, and solve dialectically, the question of the corre-
lation between absolute and relative truths. This was the source of
the struggle between Dihring and Engels which took place thirty


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 105


years ago. And Bogdanov, who manages “not to have noticed”
Engels’ explanation of the problem of absolute and relative truth
given in the same chapter, and who accuses Engels of “eclecticism”
for his admission of a proposition which is a truism for every sort
of materialism, once more reveals his complete ignorance of ma-
terialism and dialectics.

“We now come to the question,” Engels writes in Anti-Diihring,
in the chapter mentioned, “as to what product, if any, of human
knowledge can especially have ‘sovereign validity’ and ‘unrestricted
claims to truth’ ” (loc. cit., p. 118). Engels thus solves the prob-
lem: .

“The sovereignty of thought is realised in a number of highly
unsovereign men capable of thinking; the knowledge which has
unlimited pretensions to truth is realised in a number of relative
blunders; neither the one nor the other can be fully realised except
through an endless eternity of human existence.

“We have here again the same contradiction as above between
the necessary, as an absolute, conceived characteristic of human
thought, and its reality in the very limited thinking single indi-
vidual, a contradiction which can only be solved in the endless
progression of the human race, that is, endless as far as we are
concerned. In this sense human thought is just as sovereign as
not ... and its possibility of knowledge just as unlimited as
limited. It is sovereign and unlimited as regards its nature, its
significance, its possibilities, its historical end; it is not sovereign
and limited with respect to individual expression and its actuality
at any particular time.’’ It is just the same with eternal truths”
(p. 119).

This discussion is very important for the question of relativism,
or the principle of the relativity of our knowledge which is empha-
sised by all Machians. The Machians insist that they are relativists,
but the Russian Machians, repeating those words after the Germans,
are afraid to, or cannot, put clearly and directly the question con-
cerning the relation of relativism to dialectics. For Bogdanov (as
for all the Machians) the recognition of the relativity of our
knowledge excludes the least admission of absolute truth. For

17 Cf. V. Chernov: loc. cit., p. 64 f. The Machian Chernov occupies entirely
the position of Bogdanov who does not wish to be regarded as a Machian.
The difference is that Bogdanov tries to cover up his disagreement with


Engels, to present it as an accident, etc., while Chernov feels that it is a ques-
tion of a struggle against both materialism and dialectics.


106 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


Engels absolute truth is made up of relative truths. Bogdanov
is a relativist; Engels is a dialectician. Here is another no less
important discussion of Engels from the same chapter of Anti-
Diihring:

“Truth and error, like all such mutually antagonistic concepts,
have only an absolute reality under very limited conditions, as we
have seen, and as even Herr Diihring should know by a slight ac-
quaintance with the first elements of dialectics, which show the
insufficiency of all polar antagonisms. As soon as we bring the
antagonisms of truth and error out of this limited field it becomes
relative and is not serviceable for new scientific statements. If we
should seek to establish its reality beyond those limits we are at
once confronted by a dilemma, both poles of the antagonism come
into conflict with their opposite; truth becomes error and error
becomes truth” (ibid. p. 125). There follows the example of
Boyle’s law (that the volume of gas is inversely proportional to its
pressure). . . . The “particle of truth” contained in that law is only
absolute truth within certain limits. The law is proven to be a
truth “only approximately.”

Human reason then in its nature is capable of yielding and does
yield the absolute truth which is composed of the sum-total of rela-
tive truths. Each step in the development of science adds new
fragments of truth, and from this the absolute truth is constituted,
but the limits of the truth of each scientific statement are relative,
now expanding, now shrinking with the growth of science. “Abso-
lute truth,” says Dietzgen in his Excursions, “can be seen, heard,
smelt, touched and, of course, also known; but it cannot be resolved
into pure knowledge, it is not pure mind . . -(p. 281). How can
a picture ‘conform’ with its model? Approximately it can. What
picture worth the name does not agree approximately with its ob-
ject? Every portrait is more or less of a likeness. But to be
altogether alike, quite the same as the original—what a monstrous
idea!

“We can only know nature and her parts relatively, since even a
part, though only a relation of nature, possesses again the char-
acteristics of the Absolute, the nature of the All-Existence which
cannot be exhausted by knowledge.

“How, then, do we know that behind the phenomena of Nature,
behind the relative truths, there is a universal, unlimited, absolute
nature which does not reveal itself completely to man?


eee


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 107


Whence that knowledge? It is innate; it is given us with conscious-
ness” (p. 283).

This last phrase is one of Joseph Dietzgen’s inexact expressions,
which led Marx, in one of his letters to Kugelmann, to make note of
the confusion in Dietzgen’s views. Only by seizing upon these in-
correct and unessential phrases can one speak of a special philos-
ophy of Dietzgen which is supposedly different from dialectical
materialism. But Dietzgen corrects himself on the same page:
“When I say that the consciousness of the endless, absolute truth is
innate in us, is the one and only knowledge a priori, I am
confirmed in my statement also by the experience of this innate
consciousness.”

From all these statements of Engels and Dietzgen it is obvious
that as far as dialectical materialism is concerned there does not
exist a fixed immutable boundary between relative and absolute
truth. Bogdanov did not grasp this at all, as is evident from the
fact that he could bring himself to write the following: “Old-
fashioned materialism sets itself up as the absolute objective knowl-
edge of the essence of things [Bogdanov’s italics] but this is incom-
patible with the historical conditioning features of any particular
ideology.” 1®

From the standpoint of modern materialism, or Marxism, the
relative limits of our approximation to the cognition of the objec-
tive, absolute truth are historically conditioned; but the existence
of this truth is unconditioned, as well as the fact that we are con-
tinually approaching it. The general outlines of a picture are
historically conditioned, but it is unconditionally true that this
picture reflects an objectively existing model. Historically condi-
tioned are the circumstances under which we made progress in our
knowledge of the essence of things. For example, the discovery of
alizarine in coal tar was historically conditioned, or the discovery
of the electronic structure of the atom was historically conditioned;
but it is unconditionally true that every such discovery is a step
forward to “absolute objective knowledge.” In a word, every
ideology is historically conditioned, but it is unconditionally true
that to every scientific theory (as distinct from religion), there
corresponds an objective truth, something absolutely so in nature.
You will say that this distinction between relative and absolute
truth is indefinite. And I will reply that it is sufficiently indefinite


18 Empirio-Monism, Bk. Il, p. iv.


108 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


to prevent science from becoming dogmatic, in the bad sense of the
word, from becoming dead, frozen, ossified; but it is at the same
time sufficiently “definite” to preclude us from espousing any brand
of fideism or agnosticism, from embracing the sophistry and philo-
sophical idealism of the followers of Hume and Kant. Here is a
boundary which you have not noticed, and not having noticed it,
you have fallen into the mire of reactionary philosophy. It is the
boundary between dialectical materialism and relativism.

We are relativists, declare Mach, Avenarius and Petzoldt. We
are relativists, Mr. Chernov, and a few Russian Machians who wish
to be Marxians, echo after them. In this, Mr. Chernov and my
Machian comrades, lies your error. To make relativism the basis
of the theory of knowledge is inevitably to condemn oneself to
absolute scepticism, agnosticism and sophistry, or subjectivism.
Relativism as the basis of the theory of knowledge is not only a
recognition of the relativity of our cognition, but is tantamount to
the denial of the existence of an objective limit or goal independent
of humanity to which our cognition approaches. From the point of
view of mere relativism one can justify any sophistry, one can even
regard the statement “Napoleon died on May 5, 1821,” as condi-
tioned; one can declare things to be true for the “convenience” of
an individual or humanity, as well as recognise scientific ideology
to be “convenient” in one respect and religious ideology to be
very “convenient” in another, etc.

Dialectics, as Hegel explained it, includes an “element” of rela-
tivism, of negation and scepticism, but it is not thereby reduced to
relativism. The materialist dialectics of Marx and Engels certainly
does contain relativism, but it is not reduced to it, that is, it recog-
nises the relativity of all our knowledge, not in the sense of the
denial of objective truth, but in the sense of the historical conditions
which determine the degrees of our knowledge as it approaches this
truth.

Bogdanov writes in italics: “Consistent Marxism does not admit
such dogmatism and such static expressions” as eternal truths.*®
This is a blunder. If the world is an eternally moving and develop-
ing material mass (as the Marxians assume) which reflects a pro-
gressive human consciousness, what has all this to do with the.
notion of the “static”? The question at issue here is not one con-
cerning the intrinsic essence of things, nor of the intrinsic nature


19 Empirio-Monism, Bk. III, p. ix.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 109


of consciousness, but of the correspondence between the conscious-
ness which reflects nature, and the nature which is reflected by con-
sciousness. In this question, and in this question alone, the term
“dogmatism” has a special, characteristic philosophic flavor; it is
the favourite word which the idealists and the agnostics hurl against
the materialists, as we have already seen from the example of the
very “old” materialist, Feuerbach. The objections that are raised
from the standpoint of the prominent “recent positivists” against
materialism are as old as they are trashy!


6. The Criterion of Practice in the Theory of Knowledge


We have seen that Marx, in 1845, and Engels, in 1888 and 1891,
introduced the criterion of practice into the theory of knowledge of
materialism. To ask outside the realm of practice whether “the
objective truth corresponds to human reason” is scholasticism, says
Marx in his second thesis on Feuerbach. The best refutation of
Kantian and Humean agnosticism as well as of other philosophic
whims (Schrullen) is practice, repeats Engels. “The success of
our actions proves the correspondence (Uebereinstimmung) of our
perception with the objective nature of the objects perceived,” he
answers the agnostics.

Compare with this the argument of Mach regarding the criterion
of practice:

“A common and popular way of thinking and speaking is to con-
trast ‘appearance’ with ‘reality.’ A pencil held in front of us in
the air is seen by us as straight; dip it into the water, and we see
it crooked. In the latter case we say that the pencil appears
crooked, but is in reality straight. But what justifies us in declaring
one fact rather than another to, be the reality, and degrading the
other to the level of appearance? In both cases we have to do
with facts which present us with different combinations of the
elements, combinations which in the two cases are differently con-
ditioned. Precisely because of its environment the pencil dipped
in water is optically crooked; but it is tactually and metrically
straight. An image in a concave or flat mirror is only visible,
whereas under other and ordinary circumstances a tangible body
as well corresponds to the visible image. A bright surface is
brighter beside a dark surface than beside one brighter than itself.
To be sure, our expectation is deceived when, not paying sufficient


110 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


attention to the conditions, and substituting for one another different
cases of the combination, we fall into the natural error of expecting
what we are accustomed to, although the case may be an unusual
one. The facts are not to blame for that. In these cases, to speak
of “appearance” may have a practical meaning, but cannot have a
scientific meaning. Similarly, the question which is often asked,
whether the world is real or whether we merely dream it, is devoid
of all scientific meaning. Even the wildest dream is a fact as much
as any other.” ?°

It is true that not only is the wildest dream a fact, but the wildest
philosophy as well. There can be no doubt about it after our
acquaintance with the philosophy of Ernst Mach. As the last
sophist, he confounds scientific-historical, psychological investiga-
tions of human errors, all kinds of “wild dreams” of humanity,
such as faith in spooks, with the epistemological differentiation of
truthful and “wild.” It is as if an economist would say that the
theory of Senior, that the whole surplus value of the capitalist is
given to him at the “last hour” of the worker’s labour-time, and the
theory of Marx are both a fact; and from the point of view of sci-
ence there is no sense in the question as to which theory expresses
objective truth and which the prejudice of the bourgeoisie and the
corruption of its professors.

The tanner, Joseph Dietzgen, saw in the scientific, that is, ma-
terialist theory of knowledge a “universal weapon against religious
belief,” and yet for Professor Ernst Mach, the difference between
the materialist and the subjective-idealist theories of knowledge “is
devoid of all scientific meaning.” That science is impartial in the
clash of materialism, idealism and religion, is a favourite idea not
only of Mach, but of all modern bourgeois professors, who are, to
quote Dietzgen, “graduated flunkeys using their sham idealism to
keep the people in ignorance” (Joc. cit., p. 130).

It is sham professorial idealism when the criterion of practice,
which makes a distinction between illusion and actuality, is taken
by Mach out of the realm of science, out of the theory of knowledge.

Human practice proves the correctness of the materialist theory
of knowledge, said Marx and Engels, declaring as “scholastic” and
“philosophic legerdemain,” all attempts to solve fundamental
epistemological questions which ignore practice. For Mach prac-
tice is one thing, and the theory of knowledge another. “Cognition,”


20 Analysis of Sensations, p. 10.


‘.


hl et Se


- F


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 111


says Mach, in his last work, Erkenntnis und Irrtum, “is a biolog-
ically useful mental experience. Only success can separate knowl-
edge from error (p. 116). . . . Understanding is a physical work-
ing hypothesis” (p. 183). Our Russian Machians, who wish to be
Marxians, accept with a peculiar naiveté such phrases of Mach
as proof that he borders very closely on Marxism. But Mach bor-
ders on Marxism as closely as Bismarck bordered on the labour
movement or Bishop Yevlogy 24 on democracy. With Mach, such
assumptions stand side by side with his idealist theory of knowledge,
but do not preponderantly determine the choice of a fundamental
tendency or theory in epistemology. Knowledge may be biolog-
ically useful, useful in human practice, in the preservation of the
species, but it is useful only when it reflects an objective truth,
independent of man. For a materialist, the “success” of human
practice proves the correspondence of our representations to the


objective nature of the things we perceive. Fora solipsist, “success”
is restricted to what is needed only in practice, and can be dis-
severed from the theory of knowledge. To include the criterion of
practice as the basis of the theory of knowledge is inevitably to come
to materialism, says the Marxian. Practice has a materialistic ref-
erence, says Mach, but the theory of practice is a different article.

“Now in practice,” Mach writes in the Analysis of Sensations,
“we can as little do without the Ego-presentation when we act, as
we can do without the presentation of a body when we grasp at a
thing. Physiologically we remain egoists and materialists, just as
we always see the sun rise again. But theoretically this way of
looking at the matter cannot be maintained” (p. 357).

Egoism is beside the point here, for egoism is not an epistemolog-
ical category. The question of the rising of the sun is also beside
the point, for in practice, which serves us as a criterion in the theory
of knowledge, we must include also the practice of astronomical
observations, discoveries, etc. There remains only Mach’s valuable
admission that men in their practice are totally and exclusively
guided by a materialist theory of knowledge; the attempt to over-
look it “theoretically” is characteristic of the scholastic erudition
and sham idealist endeavours of Mach.

That these attempts to eliminate practice, in order to make room


21 Bishop Yevlogy (Vassiliyi Georgievsky, born 1868) was Bishop of Kholm
and Liublin, Rector of the Kholm Theological Seminary, member of the Second
Duma,—an extreme reactionary and monarchist leader.—Ed.


a


for agnosticism and idealism, on the grounds that practice is irrele-
vant to epistemology, are by no means new, can be seen in the fol-
lowing example from the history of German classical philosophy.
Midway between Kant and Fichte stands Schulze (in the history of
philosophy, the so-called Schulze-Aenesidemus). He openly de-
fends the sceptical alignment in philosophy, considering himself a
follower of Hume (and of the ancients, Pyrrho and Sextus). He
decidedly rejects the thing-in-itself and the possibility of objective
knowledge, and insists that we should not go beyond “experience,”
beyond sensations, while he foresees the following objection from
the other camp. He says: “Since a sceptic, by participating in
affairs of life, recognises as indubitable the reality of objective
things, behaves accordingly and admits the criterion of truth, his
own behaviour is the best and most obvious refutation of his scep-
ticism.” 22 “Such proofs,” Schulze objects angrily, “are only valid
for the mob; my scepticism does not touch upon practical life, but
remains within the domain of philosophy” (p. 255). But the sub-
jective idealist Fichte, too, hopes to find room within the domain of
idealism for that “realism which is inevitable for all of us and
even for the most determined idealist when it comes to practice,—
that realism which assumes that objects exist absolutely independent
of us and outside of us.” ?°

The recent positivism of Mach has not gone very far from Schulze
and Fichte! Let us note as a curiosity that for Bazarov also in this
question, no one exists save Plekhanov—for him, too, there is no
stronger beast than a cat. Bazarov ridicules the “salto-vitale”
philosophy of Plekhanov (Quilines, p. 69), who really made the
absurd remark, that “belief” in the existence of the outer world
is an inevitable “salto-vitale” (vital leap) in philosophy.2* The
word “belief,” though put in quotation marks (after Hume), dis-
closes a confusion of terms in Plekhanov. There can be no question
about it. But what has the problem particularly to do with Ple-
khanov? Why has not Bazarov taken another materialist, let us
say, Feuerbach? Is it because he does not know him? But igno-
rance is no argument. Feuerbach also, like Marx and Engels,
make an inadmissible “leap” (from the viewpoint of Schulze,


112 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM —


22G. E. Schulze: Aenesidemus oder iiber die Fundamente der von Prof.
Reinhold in Jena gelieferten Elementarphilosophie, 1792, p. 253.

23 Werke, Vol. I, p. 455.

24 Ludwig Feuerbach, Plekhanov’s notes to the Russian translation, Geneva,
1905, p. 111 (in Russian).


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 113


Fichte and Mach) to practice, in the fundamental problems of epis-
temology. Criticising idealism, Feuerbach presents its essence in
the following significant quotation from Fichte which demolishes
Machism. “You assume,” writes Fichte, “that things are real, that
they exist outside of you only because you see them, hear them and
touch them. But vision, touch and hearing are only sensations
. . . You perceive, not the objects, but your perceptions.” 2° And
Feuerbach replies: “A human being is not an abstract ego; he is
either a man or a woman. The question, whether the world is per-
ception, can be compared to the question, whether a human being is
my perception, or our relations in practical life prove the con-
trary? The fundamental error of idealism is that it asks and
answers the question about objectivity and subjectivity, about the
reality or unreality of the world only from the theoretical view-
point” (ibid, p. 189). Feuerbach absorbs the sum-total of human
practice into the theory of knowledge. He says: “Of course, ideal-
ists also recognise the reality of the I and Thou in practical life.
For the idealists this viewpoint is good only for life and not for
speculation. But a speculation which contradicts life, which sets
in place of the standpoint of truth the standpoint of death, which
separates the soul from the body, is a false and dead speculation
[p. 192]. Before perceiving we breathe; we cannot exist without
air, food and drink.”

“Does this mean that we must deal with questions of food and
drink in examining the problem of the ideality or reality of the
world?’ exclaims the indignant idealist. How base! What an
offence to good manners to scold a refined, scientific materialism
from the chair of philosophy and theology, only to practise the
crudest sort of it at the table” (p. 196). And Feuerbach exclaims,
to make subjective perception equivalent to the objective world “is
to identify pollution with childbirth” (p. 198).

The remark is not a polite one, but it hits the mark of those
philosophers who teach that sense-perception is the reality existing
outside of us.

From the standpoint of life, practice ought to be the first and
fundamental criterion of the theory of knowledge. It inevitably
leads to materialism, brushing aside the infinite inventions of pro-
fessorial scholasticism. Of course, we must not forget that the
criterion of practice, in the nature of things, neither confirms nor


25 Feuerbach: Werke, Vol. X, p. 185.


...
1


ie EEE ENE EIENEIE IESE
114 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM 4
nc een nE I nnESSRIRAISRSIRESSERRINRI IES SAINI a u


refutes completely any human presentation. This criterion is suf-
ficiently indefinite not to allow human knowledge to become “abso-
lute,” and at the same time sufficiently definite to wage a bitter
struggle with all varieties of idealism and agnosticism. If that
which our practice confirms, is the sole, ultimate and objective
truth, then it follows that the sole path to this truth is the road of
science which stands by the materialist creed. For instance, Bog-
danov agrees to recognise Marx’s theory of the circulation of capi-
tal as an objective truth only for “our time,” regarding as “dog-
matism” the designation of this theory as an “historically objective”
truth.2° This again is a blunder. No future circumstances can
change the correspondence of this theory with the fact, for the
simple reason that such a truth is as eternal as that Napoleon died
on May 5, 1821. But inasmuch as practice, i. e., the development
of capitalist countries in the last few decades, actually proves
the objective truth of the whole social and economic theory of
Marx in general, and not only some of its specific formulations,
it is obvious that to speak here of the “dogmatism”of the Marxists,
is to make an inexcusable concession to bourgeois economy. The
sole inference from the proposition upheld by Marxists, that the
theory of Marx is the objective truth, is this: Following in the di-
rection of the Marxian theory, we shall draw nearer and nearer
to the objective truth (without exhausting it); following another
path, we shall arrive at confusion and falsehood.


28 Empirio-Monism, Bk. III, p. vii.


CHAPTER THREE


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE OF EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND
DIALECTIC MATERIALISM III


1. What Is Matter? What Is Experience?


THE idealists and agnostics, including the Machians, ply the
materialists with the first question; the materialists ply the Mach-
ians with the second. We shall attempt to examine both.

Regarding matter, Avenarius says the following: “Within the
neutral complete ‘experience’ there is nothing ‘physical,’ nothing
which can in the metaphysical sense be called ‘matter,’ for ‘matter’
is only an abstraction; it would be a result of the combination of
counter terms abstracted by some central term. As in ‘essential co-
ordination,’ that is in ‘complete experience,’ the counter term is
inconceivable without the central term, so, in the absolute meta-
physical conception, ‘matter’ is a perfect absurdity.” +

One thing is obvious from this prattle: Avenarius designates the
physical or matter by the terms “absolute” and “metaphysics,” for,
according to his theory of essential co-ordination (or in the new
way, “complete experience”), the counter term is inseparable from
the central term, the environment, from the self; the non-self (as
Fichte said) is inseparable from the self. That this theory is a
travesty of subjective idealism we have already shown elsewhere.
The nature of Avenarius’ attacks upon “matter” is quite manifest;
the idealist denies the physical to be independent of the mental
and, therefore, rejects the conception elaborated by philosophy for
such an entity. That matter is “physical” (that is, the most familiar
and immediately given, whose existence no one save the inmates of
the insane asylums doubts) is not denied by Avenarius; he only
insists upon the acceptance of “his” theory of the continual co-
ordination of the environment and the Self.

Mach expresses this thought in a simpler way, without philo-


1 Bemerkungen, § 119, p. 234.
115


116 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM |


sophic legerdemain: “What we call matter is a combination of the
elements or sensations according to certain laws.” Mach thinks
that by making such an assertion he produces a “radical change” in
the customary analysis. In truth this is the very same old subjec-
tive idealism over again, the nudity of which is concealed under
the word “element.”

And lastly, Pearson, the English Machian, who strenuously con-
tends against materialism, says: “Now there can be no scientific
objection to our classifying certain more or less permanent groups
of sense-impressions together and terming them matter, to do so
indeed leads us very near to John Stuart Mill’s definition of matter
as a ‘permanent possibility of sensation,’ but this definition of mat-
ter then leads us entirely away from matter as the thing, which
moves.” ® Here there is not even the fig-leaf of “elements,” and
the idealist offers his hand to the agnostic.

As the reader sees all the arguments of the founders of empirio-
criticism turn totally and exclusively within the limits of the very
old epistemological question of the relation of thinking to being,
of the psychical to the physical. It requires the extreme naiveté
of the Russian Machians to find anything here which is related to
“recent science,” or “recent positivism.” All the philosophers
mentioned here, directly or indirectly, swerve from the fundamental
philosophic alignment of materialism (from being to thinking,
from matter to sensation) to the contrary idealist alignment. Their
denial of matter is the old solution of the epistemological difficulty,
which contests the existence of an external, objective source of our
sensations and of a reality which corresponds to them. And the
converse, disputed by the idealists and agnostics, is expressed in the
following definitions: Matter is that which, acting upon our sense-
organs, produces sensation; matter is the objective reality, given to
us in sensation, and so forth.

Bogdanov, pretending to argue only with Beltov, while ignoring
Engels, is indignant at such definitions, which, as you see, “prove
”? 4 of the “formula” (our “Marxist” forgets
to add “of Engels”) that matter is primary, and spirit secondary,
for one fundamental tendency in philosophy and that for the other,
the reverse is the case. All the Russian Machians exultantly repeat


to be simple repetitions


2 Analysis of Sensations, p. 331.
8 The Grammar of Science, London, 1900, p. 249.
4 Empirio-Monism, Bk. III, p. xvi.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 117


the “refutation” of Bogdanov! But some reflection upon the subject
should show these people that it is impossible to give any other
definition of these two conceptions in epistemology, aside from
reference and emphasis upon what is taken as the prius. Now, what
is meant by giving a “definition”? It means first of all to sub-
sume a given concept under another, a more inclusive one. For
example, when I express the proposition “An ass is an animal,” I
am subsuming the concept “ass” under a more inclusive concept.
The question then is, are there any wider concepts, with which the
theory of knowledge could operate, than those of “being” and
“thinking,” “matter” and “sensation,” “physical” and “psychical”?
No, there are not. These are the limits, the widest possible con-
cepts, and farther than these (omitting the possible changes in
nomenclature) the theory of knowledge can not go. Only charla-
tanism or poor mentality can demand “definitions” of these two
“sets” of the widest concepts which would not be a “mere repeti-
tion”: one or the other must be taken as the prius. Take the three
arguments concerning matter which have been given. To what can
they be reduced? To this, that these philosophers go from “the
mental” or “self” to the physical or environment, from the “central”
term to the “counter” term, from sensation to matter, or from sense-
impression to matter. Can Avenarius, Mach and Pearson essen-
tially give any other “definition” of their fundemental conceptions,
except by reiterating the direction of their philosophic alignment?
Can they in a different, specific way define what the self is, what
sensation is, or sense-perception? It suffices only to put the ques-
tion clearly, in order to understand the absurdity of the Machian
demand that the materialists give a definition of matter which will
not express once more the assumption that matter, nature, being,
the physical, is the primary entity, and spirit, consciousness, sensa-
tion, mind, is the secondary entity.

The genius of Marx and Engels expressed itself in that they
despised the pseudo-erudite play upon new words, wise terms, cun-
ning “isms.” They simply and explicitly said that there was a
materialist and idealist division in philosophy, and between them
there are various shades of agnosticism. The desire to find a “new”
viewpoint in philosophy betrays the same poverty of spirit, as the
desire to create a “new” theory of value, or a “new” theory of
rent.

Carstanjen, a disciple of Avenarius, informs us that his teacher


118 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM |


thus expressed himself in a private conversation: “I do not know
either physical or psychical, but. only a third ‘entity’”! To the
remark of one writer, that the concept of this third is not given by
Avenarius, Petzoldt replied: “We know why he was not able to
present such a concept. There is no counter concept for the third
entity. (Gegenbegriff of the correlative concept). . . . The ques-
tion as to what the third entity is, is not logically put.”*® Petzoldt
understands that it is impossible to define the last concept. But he
does not understand that the reference to the “third entity” is mere
trickery, for every one of us knows what is physical and what is
psychical; but we do not at present know what that “third” is.
Although in fact he declares the self to be the primary entity (cen-
tral term), and nature (environment) to be the secondary entity
(counter term), Avenarius wipes out his tracks with this verbal
trickery.

Of course, the contradistinction between matter and mind has
an absolute significance only between the boundaries of a very
limited region—in this case exclusively within the limits of the
fundamental epistemological problem of what was to be considered
primary and what secondary. Beyond these bounds the relativity
of the contradistinction is unquestionable.

Let us see what application the word “experience” has found in
empirio-critical philosophy. The first paragraph of Kritik der
reinen Erfahrung contains the following “assumption”: Any part of
our environment stands in a relation to human individuals, such
that it appears, as if they would declare of their experience that
“this and that I learn by way of experience, this and the other is
experience, or follows from experience, or depends upon experi-
ence” (p. 1). Thus experience is defined in terms of the same con-
cepts “self” and “environment” while the “doctrine” of their “con-
tinuity” is put aside for the time being. Further: “The synthetic
concept of pure experience [i. e., experience as such] is a declara-
tion, in whose composition only the parts of environment serve as
assumption” (p. 3). If we grant that the environment exists inde-
pendently of “declarations” and “utterances” of man, then it is pos-
sible to interpret experience in a materialist way! “The analytical
conception of pure experience, of just such declaration to which
nothing was added, which was not in its turn experience and which,
consequently, is nothing but experience” (p. 5). In other words,


5 Einfiihrung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung, Vol. II, p. 329.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 119


experience is experience. Yet there are people who take this quasi-
erudite prattle for true wisdom!

It is essential to add that Avenarius in the second volume of the
Kritik der reinen Erfahrung regards “experience” as a “special
case” of the psychical; that he divides experience into “thing-values”
(sachhafte Werte) and “mental-values” (gedankenhafte Werte) ;
that “experience in the broad sense” includes the latter; that “com-
plete experience” is identified with essential co-ordination (Bemer-
kungen, etc.). In short, we ask for whatever we wish. “Experi-
ence” covers both the materialist and idealist alignments in philos-
ophy, thus sanctifying the confusion between them. Still, though
’ nevertheless the
representatives of these various conflicting tendencies themselves
all point to Avenarius’ abuse of this concept. “What pure experi-
ence is,” Riehl writes, “remains undetermined with Avenarius, and


our Machians trustingly accept “pure experience,’


his statement that ‘pure experience is such experience to which
nothing is given which was not in its turn experience,’ involves a
vicious circle.”*® Pure experience for Avenarius, writes Wundt,
may mean now a phantasy, now a statement of the nature of an
“object.” 7 Avenarius stretches the concept of experience to cover
almost everything (p. 382). “On the exact definition of the terms
‘experience’ and ‘pure experience,” writes Couwelaert, “depends
the whole meaning of this philosophy. Avenarius nowhere gives an
exact definition.” ® “The vagueness of the term ‘experience’ stands
him in good stead, and so at the end Avenarius falls back on the
time-worn argument of subjective idealism,” says Norman Smith.°

“I solemnly declare that the inner sense, the soul of my philos-
ophy consists in this that a human being possesses nothing save
experience; a human being comes to everything only through experi-
ence... .’ What an outspoken philosopher of pure experience
he is, indeed! The author of these words is no other than the sub-
jective idealist Fichte.*° The history of philosophy tells us that
the interpretation of what the concept of experience means divided
the classical materialists and idealists. At present the professorial
philosophy of all shades conceals its reactionary tendencies under
a mask of well sounding phrases about “experience.” All followers

6 Systematische Philosophie, p. 102.

7 Philosophische Studien, Vol. XIII, pp. 92-93.

8 Revue neo-scholastique, 1907, p. 61.


® Mind, Vol. XV, p. 29.
10 Sonnenklarer Bericht, etc., p. 15.


ee


120 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM _


of the immanentist school have recourse to experience. In the
preface to the second edition of his Erkenntnis und Irrtum, Mach
praises a book of Professor Jerusalem in which we read: “The
acceptance of the divine prime being does not contradict any ex-
perience.” **

We can only be sorry for those people who believe Avenarius,
et al.,—who believe that by means of the word “experience” we
are able to overcome the “obsolete” distinction between materialism
and idealism. If Valentinov and Yushkevich accuse Bogdanov, who
drew back somewhat from pure Machism, of abusing the word
“experience,” they betray their ignorance. Bogdanov is “not
guilty” on that score; he humbly took over the whole muddle from
Mach and Avenarius. When Bogdanov says, “consciousness and
immediate psychical experience are identical concepts . - - eS
matter is “not experience” but “the unknown which causes the
known,” 1* he interprets experience in an idealist manner. And
he is, of course, neither the first ** nor the last to build toy systems
of idealism on the word “experience.” When he retorts upon the
reactionary philosophers, that the attempts to transcend the boun-
daries of experience lead only to “empty abstractions and contra-
dictory images, all elements of which have been taken from experi-
ience” (Vol. I, p. 48), he opposes the empty abstractions of human
consciousness with something which exists outside of man and in-
dependently of his consciousness, thereby interpreting experience in
a materialist way.

It is the same with Mach who, taking idealism as the starting
point (bodies are complexes of sensations or “elements”) often be-
comes confused himself by assuming a materialist interpretation of
the word “experience.” He says:

“Not to ‘philosophise out of ourselves,’ but to take our concepts
from experience.” Here experience is distinguished from “philoso-
phising out of oneself,” is interpreted as something objective, given
to us from the outside, that is, is interpreted materialistically. An-
other example:


11 Jerusalem: Der kritische Idealismus und die reine Logik, p. 222.

12 Empirio-Monism, Bk. II, p. 53.

18 Empirio-Monism, Bx. III, p. viii.

14Tn England Belfort Bax has been thus holding forth for a long time. The
French reviewer of his book, The Roots of Reality, bitingly remarks: “ ‘Since
experience is only another word for consciousness,’ be then an open idealist!”
Renue de philosophie, 1907, p. 399.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 121


“Everything which we observe in nature imprints itself uncom-
prehended and unanalysed in our precepts and ideas, which, then,
in their turn, mimic the processes of nature in their most general’
and most striking features. In these accumulated experiences we
possess a treasure-store which is ever close at hand. . . .” ®

Nature is here taken as primary, sensation and experience as
derivative. Had Mach consistently clung to such a view of the fun-
damental problems of epistemology, he would have freed humanity
from many foolish idealistic “complexes.” The third example:
“The close connection of thought and experience creates modern
science. Experience brings forth thought. It is further elaborated
and is again compared with experience.” *® Mach’s special
“philosophy” is here thrown overboard, and the author instinctively
accepts the customary viewpoint of the scientists whose approach to
experience is materialistic. The outcome is this: The word “ex-
perience” on which the Machian grounds his system has long since
served to shield idealistic systems, and now serves Avenarius and
the others in their eclectic voyages from the idealist position to
the materialist position and back. The various “definitions” of this
concept express only those two fundamental divisions in philosophy
which Engels so brilliantly characterised.


2. Plekhanov’s Error Concerning the Concept “Experience”


On pages x and xi of his preface to L. Feuerbach, Plekhanov
says:

“One German writer remarks that for empirio-criticism, experi-
ence is only a subject of investigation, and not a means of knowl-
edge. If this be so, then the distinction between empirio-criticism
and materialism becomes devoid of any sense, and the discussion of
the question as to whether or not empirio-criticism is called upon to
change materialism, seems to be shallow and idle.”

This is a complete muddle.

Carstanjen, one of the most “orthodox” followers of Avenarius,
says in his article on empirio-criticism (as a reply to Wundt), that
for the Kritik der reinen Erfahrung, experience is not a means of
knowledge, but a subject of investigation.’ And yet for Plekhanov

15 The Science of Mechanics, Chicago, 1902, p. 28.


16 Erkenntnis und Irrtum, p. 197.
17 Vierteljahrsschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Philosophie, Jahrg. 22, 1898,


p. 45.


122 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM _ .
prema aie a maerarenntats ba RIED SPS as SESE
the distinction between Carstanjen’s views and materialism is de-
void of sense! ,

Carstanjen renders literally the conception of Avenarius, who in
his Bemerkungen absolutely contrasts his conception of experience
as that which is given us, that which we find (das Vorgefundene),
with the conception of experience as a “means of knowledge” in
the “sense of the dominating, essentially metaphysical theories of
knowledge” (loc. cit., p. 401).

Petzoldt, following Avenarius in his Einfihrung in die Philoso-
phie, etc., says the same (Vol. I, p. 117). Yet, according to Ple-
khanov, the distinction between the views of Carstanjen, Avenarius,
and Petzoldt on one hand, and that of materialism on the other, is
devoid of sense! Either Plekhanov has not read Carstanjen and
the others to the end, or he has taken his reference to “one German
writer” fifth hand.

What does this statement, uncomprehended by Plekhanov, con-
cerning the views of the most outstanding empirio-criticists mean?
Carstanjen wishes to say that Avenarius, in his Kritik der reinen
Erfahrung, takes experience as the subject of investigation, that is
to say, every form of “human expression.” Avenarius does not in-
quire, says Carstanjen (loc. cit., p. 50), whether these expressions
are real, or whether they relate to ghosts; he merely arranges,
systematises, formally classifies the various forms of human ex-
pression, the physical as well as the mental (p. 53), without going
into the essence of the question. Carstanjen is absolutely right in
characterising this viewpoint as “predominantly sceptical” (p.
213). In this article, by the way, Carstanjen defends his dear
teacher from the scandalous (from the point of view of a German
professor) accusation of materialism, levelled against him by
Wundt. Pray, what sort of materialists are we! Such is the sense
of Carstanjen’s objections.

If we speak of “experience” we do not speak of it in the usual
sense, which leads or could lead to materialism, but in the sense of
our investigation of everything that men “express” as experience.
Carstanjen and Avenarius consider experience as a means of cogni-
tion, as materialistic (this is, perhaps, rather ordinary, but never-
theless untrue, as we have seen from the example of Fichte).
Avenarius cuts himself free from the “prevailing metaphysics,”
which persists in regarding the brain as the organ of thought while
ignoring the theories of introjection and co-ordination. Under


_——_————


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 123


ee eee eee eee eee


the given or found (das Vorgefundene), Avenarius understands the
continuity of the self and environment, which leads him to a con-
fused idealist interpretation of “experience.”

The materialistic as well as the idealistic, Humean and Kantian
tendencies may very well be concealed, as we see, under the word
“experience”; but neither the definition of experience as the subject
of investigation ** nor its definition as a means of cognition, decides
matters definitely. Carstanjen’s remarks about Wundt especially
have no relation whatsoever to the question of the distinction be-
tween empirio-criticism and materialism.

As a curiosity, let us note that Bogdanov and Valentinov, respond-
ing to Plekhanov on this point, do not display any more knowledge
of the subject. Bogdanov declares: “It is not quite clear; it is the
task of empirio-criticists to analyse this formulation of experience
and it remains for them to accept or reject its conditions” (Vol. III,
p. xi). A very convenient position, indeed! It turns out that he is
not a Machian and is not therefore obliged to find out in what sense
a certain Avenarius or Carstanjen speaks of experience! Bogdanov
desires to make use of Machism (and also of the Machian confusion
regarding “experience’”), but he does not wish to be responsible
for it.

The “pure” empirio-criticist, Valentinov, copied Plekhanov’s re-
mark and publicly disclosed the fact, that Plekhanov did not name
the writer and did not explain the matter (Joc. cit., pp. 108-109).
And at the same time he himself did not offer even a word about
the essence of the question, although he claims to have read Ple-
khanov’s remark “three times or more.” He evidently did not under-
stand anything about it. These Machians!


3. Causality and Necessity in Nature


The question of causality is peculiarly important in defining the
fundamental philosophic alignment of this or the other latest “ism.”
We should, therefore, spend a little more time on it. We shall
begin with an exposition of the views of the materialist theory of
knowledge on this particular point. The views of Feuerbach are


18 Plekhanov perhaps thought that Carstanjen had said, “an object of knowl-
edge, independent of knowledge,” and not an “object of investigation”? This
would indeed be materialism. But neither Carstanjen, nor anybody else con-
nected with empirio-criticism, said or would say any such thing.


124 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


expounded with exceptional clarity in his above mentioned answer
to R. Haym. ‘

“For Feuerbach ‘nature and human reason,’ says Haym, “differ
completely, and between them there opens an abyss which it is im-
possible to span either from one side or from the other.. Haym
grounds this reproach on § 48 of The Essence of Religion, where
it is said that ‘nature may be conceived only through nature itself,
that its necessity is neither human nor logical, neither metaphysical
nor mathematical, that nature alone is a kind of being to which
it is impossible to apply any human measure. Although we do
compare its phenomena with similar human phenomena, we apply
this measure, in orGer to make the human expression and conception
themselves conceivable to us. For instance, we are compelled to
apply such expressions, as “order, purpose, law” because of our
language.’ What does it mean? Do I mean to say by this that in
nature there is no order, to say, for example, that after autumn
summer may follow, after spring, winter, after winter, autumn?
Do I mean to say that there is no purpose in nature, to say that
between the lungs and air, for example, or between light and the eye,
between sound and the ear there is no concordance? Do I mean
to say that there is no order in nature, to say that the earth may move
now in an ellipse, now in a circle, and move around the sun, at one
period in a year, at another—in a quarter of an hour? What
an absurdity! What then did I intend to say in this passage? Noth-
ing more than to make a distinction between that which belongs to
nature and that which belongs to man; in this passage I do not say
that there is nothing actually corresponding in nature to our words
and conceptions of order, purpose, and law. Only the identity of
thought and being is denied; only the notion that order, etc., exists
exactly in nature as in the head or heart of man. Order, purpose,
law are no more than words, by which man translates the actions
of nature into his language, in order that he may understand them.
These words are not devoid of sense or of objective content, never-
theless, it is necessary to distinguish the original from the transla-
tion. Order, purpose, law express in the human sense something
arbitrary.

“From the contingency of natural order, from the inherency of
purpose and law in nature, theism directly infers their arbitrary
origin,—infers the existence of a being different from nature and
one which brings order, purpose and law into a nature which is it-


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 125


eee


self chaotic and without any determination. The ‘reason’ of the
theists . . . is a reason which is contradictory to nature, absolutely
devoid of an understanding of the substance of nature. The reason
of the theists breaks nature into two beings—one, material; the
other, formal or spiritual.” 1°

As we see, Feuerbach recognises the objectivity of natural law,
of causality, reflected only approximately by human conceptions
of order, law and so forth. The recognition of the objectivity of
natural law is with Feuerbach, inseparably connected with the
recognition of the objective reality of the outer world of objects,
bodies, things, reflected by our mind. The views of Feuerbach
are consistently materialistic. All other views, or rather, all
the other philosophical conceptions of causality, which deny
the objectivity of law, causality, and necessity in nature, Feuer-
bach justly regards as a tendency to fideism. For it is clear
indeed that the subjective interpretations according to which
natural causality, uniformity and necessity are inferred, not from
the outer objective world, but from mind, reason, and logic, not
only separates human reason from nature, not only opposes the
first with the second, but makes nature a part of reason, instead
of making reason a small part of nature. The subjectivist inter-
pretation of causality is philosophical idealism (varieties of which
are the theories of causality of Hume and Kant), which is more
or less diluted fideism. The recognition of the fact of natural
order and the approximate reflection of that order in the mind of
man is materialism.

Engels, on the question of causality, did not contrast his material-
ist view with other tendencies. He had no need to do this since on the
fundamental question of the objectivity of nature he very definitely
separated himself from all agnostics. But whoever reads his philo-
sophic works with attention must clearly see that Engels does not
admit a shadow of a doubt about the objective existence of law,
order, causality and necessity in nature. We shall confine ourselves
to a few examples. In the first paragraph of Anti-Diihring Engels
says: “In order to study these individual phenomena we are obliged
to take them out of their natural or social connection, and examine
each of them by itself according to its own form and its particular
origin and development” (p. 41). That this natural connection, a
connection between natural phenomena, exists objectively, is obvi-


19 Werke, 1903, Vol. VII, pp. 519-520.


— ae
126 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


ous. Engels emphasises especially the dialectic view of cause and
effect:

“Cause and effect are concepts which can only realise themselves
in relation to a particular case. However, when we come to examine
the separate case in its general relation to the world at large they
come together and dissolve themselves in face of the working out
of the universal problem, for, here, cause and effect exchange
places; what was at one time and place effect, becomes cause and
vice versa” (p. 43). Hence the human conception of cause and
effect always somewhat simplifies the objective connection of
phenomena of nature reflecting it only approximately, arti-
ficially isolating one side or the other of the same world process.
If we find that the laws of reason correspond to the laws of nature,
says Engels, then this becomes quite conceivable; that is, if we take
into account that reason and consciousness are “products of the
human brain and man himself is the product of nature.” Of course,
the products of the human brain, in the last analysis, being them-
selves products of nature, do not contradict other natural rela-
tions, but correspond with them. There is no doubt that there exists
a natural, objective relation between phenomena of the world.
Engels always speaks of the “laws of nature,” of the “necessity of
nature,” without finding it necessary to explain the generally known
position of materialism.

In Feuerbach we also read that “the universal laws of motion—of
the outer world as well as of the thought of man—are two sets of
laws which are identical as far as matter is concerned but which
differ as regards expression, in so far as the mind of man can em-
ploy them consciously, while, in nature and, up to now, in human
history, for the most part they accomplish themselves, unconsciously
in the form of external necessity, through an endless succession of
apparent accidents” (pp. 95-96). And Engels accuses natural
philosophy of changing “the unknown yet actual connections”
(phenomena of nature) into “ideal and phantastic connections.”
The recognition of the objective character of the laws of nature,
of casuality and of necessity is very clear in Engels’, as in the em-
phasis on the relative character of our own, that is human, approxi-
mate reflection of the facts of law expressed in these and other
conceptions.

Passing to Dietzgen, we must first of all note one of the numerous
perversions of the question on the part of our Machians. One of


’
“Ss
~
a
=


re,


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 127


_—_—_OoOoOoOOOO


the authors of Outlines, Mr. Helfond, tells us: “The chief point of
Dietzgen’s doctrine may be summarised in the following proposi-
tions: “The causal dependence which we ascribe to things in reality
are not contained in the things themselves’” (p. 248). This is all
nonsense on the part of Mr. Helfond, whose own views are a mix-
ture of materialism and agnosticism. He has falsified Dietzgen’s
meaning. Of course, we can find plenty of confusion and errors
in Dietzgen, which gladden the hearts of the Machians and which
make all materialists regard Dietzgen as an inconsistent philos-
opher. Yet to attribute the direct denial of the materialist view of
causality to him—only Helfond and the Russian Machians are
capable of doing such a thing.

“Objective science,” says Dietzgen in his Positive Outcome of
Philosophy, “differs from it (the subjective understanding) in that
such a science penetrates to the causes of its objects not by faith
or introspective speculation, but by experience and induction, not
a priori, but a posteriort. Natural science looks for causes not out-
side or back of nature’s phenomena, but within or by means of
them” (p. 109). “Causes are, in the last instance, not noticed and
furnished by means of sight, hearing, feeling, not by means of the
sense perceptions. They are rather supplied by the faculty of
thought, but are produced by it in connection with sense percep-
tions and their material objects. This raw material gives the
objective existence to the causes produced by the mind. Just as we
demand that a truth should be the truth about some objective
phenomenon, so we also demand that a cause should be real, that it
should be the cause of some objective effect” (p. 113). The “cause
of the thing is its relation” (p. 114).

From this it is obvious that Mr. Helfond made a false statement.
The doctrine of materialism expounded by Dietzgen recognises that
“the causal nexus” is contained in the “things themselves.” For
the proper Machian mixture it was necessary that Mr. Helfond
confuse the materialist and the idealist positions on the nature of
causality. Let us proceed with an analysis of this latter position.

We find a clear declaration of the starting point of Avenarius’ phi-
losophy concerning this question in his first work, Philosophie, ete.
In § 81 we read: “Without perceiving (without knowing in experi-
ence) force as causing motion, we do not perceive the necessity of
any motion. ... All we do perceive is that which follows one
after the other.” We have before us the Humean standpoint in its


128 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


clearest aspect: sensation, experience does not tell us anything about
necessity. A philosopher who asserts (on the principle of “the
economy of thought”) that only sensation exists can not come to
any other conclusion. “Inasmuch as the conception of causality
demands force and necessity or constraint, as integral parts for
defining the effect, to this extent they fall together. . . (§ 82). Ne-
cessity remains as the degree of probability of expectation of the
effects” (§ 83). This is quite definitely a subjective interpretation
of causality. And to remain consistent to some extent, it is impos-
sible to come to any other conclusion without recognising objective
reality as the source of our sensations.

Taking Mach, we find this in a special chapter on “Causality and
Explanation.” *° “The Humean critique (conception of causality)
remains in force.” Kant and Hume solve the problems of causality
differently (Mach does not take other philosophers into considera-
tion!), “we prefer” Hume’s solution. “Besides logical necessity,
there is no other necessity, no physical necessity, for example.”
This is exactly the point of view which was so unflinchingly com-
bated by Feuerbach. Mach does not even dream of denying his
kinship with Hume. Only the Russian Machians could bring them-
selves to the point of proclaiming a “connection” between the
agnosticism of Hume and the materialism of Marx and Engels. In
Die Mechanik, etc., we read: “In nature there is neither cause nor
effect (p. 474). I have said many a time that all forms of the law
of causality follow from subjective endeavours; there is no necessity
for nature to correspond to them” (p. 495).

We must note here that with remarkable naiveté our Russian
Machians change the question from the fundamental difference be-
tween the materialist and idealist arguments concerning causality,
to the question of this or that formulation of the law. They follow
the German empirio-critical professors, in believing that to say
“functional correlation,” the discovery of “recent positivism,” is to
free us from the “fetishism” of such expressions as “necessity,”
“law” and the like. Of course, this is absurd, and Wundt had a
perfect right to ridicule such change of words (Philosophische
Studien, pp. 383, 388) which does not change things in the least.
Mach himself speaks of “all forms” of the law of causality, and in
Erkenntnis und Irrtum (p. 278), utters the self-evident statement
that the conception of function can express the “dependence of ele-


20 Die Prinzipien der Warmelehre, 2d ed., 1900, pp. 432-439.


i th bbe te


———a-


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 129


ments” with more exactness only when the possibility is reached of
expressing the results of investigation in the measurable quantities.
Even in a science like chemistry, this is attained only in part. In
the opinion of our Machians, confident in the discoveries of the
professors, Feuerbach—not to speak of Engels—did not know that
the concepts, “order,” “law, etc.,” can be expressed under certain
conditions as a mathematically definite functional correlation!

The really important epistemologic question which divides the
philosophic schools is not concerning the degree of exactness of our
description of causal connections attained nor whether these de-
scriptions can be expressed in exact mathematical formule, but
whether the source of our cognition of these connections is natural
objective law, or the properties of our reason, its innate faculties
of knowing certain a priori truths, and so forth. This is what di-
vides the materialists, Feuerbach, Marx and Engels, from the agnos-
tics—Humeans—Avenarius and Mach. In some parts of his works,
Mach, whom it would be sinful to accuse of consistency, often “for-
gets” about his agreement with Hume and his subjective theory of
causality, and argues “simply” as a scientist, from an instinctively
materialist viewpoint. For instance, in his Die Mechanik, ete.
(French tr.), we read: “Nature teaches us to find uniformity in its
phenomena” (p. 182). But if we find uniformity in natural
phenomena, does it mean that uniformity exists objectively outside
our mind? He answers the question in the negative. On the ques-
tion of the uniformity of nature Mach speaks thus: “The power that
prompts us to complement facts, observed only partially by thought,
is the power of association. It is enforced by repetition. It then
seems to us a power which does not depend merely upon our voli-
tion and upon individual facts, but a power which directs thoughts
and facts, which keeps them in correspondence with each other as a
law of their connection. That we consider ourselves capable of
making predictions by the help of such laws only proves [!]
the presence of sufficient uniformity in our environment but not
at all the necessity of success of our predictions.” ( W armelehre,
p- 383.)

This means that we may and ought to look for necessity some-
where else than in the uniformity of our environment, or of nature!
Where to look for uniformity is the secret of the idealist philosophy
which is afraid to recognise that the cognitive capacity of man can
reflect the uniformity of nature. In Erkenninis und Irrtum, Mach


—————
130 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


even defines a law of nature as a “limitation of expectancy” (Second
Edition, p. 450 ff). Solipsism comes into its own after all.

Let us examine the position of other writers of the same philo-
sophical school. Karl Pearson expresses himself with characteristic
precision:

“The laws of science are products of the human mind rather than
factors of the external world. Those, whether poets or materialists,
who do homage to nature as the sovereign of man, too often forget
that the order and complexity they admire are at least as much a
product of man’s perceptive and reasoning faculties as are their
own memories and thoughts. .. . The complexity of nature is con-
ditioned by our perceptive faculty; the comprehensive character of
natural law is due to the ingenuity of the human mind. Here, in
the human powers of perception and reason, lie the mystery and the
grandeur of nature and its laws. . . . Man is the creator of the
law of nature. . . . There is more meaning in the statement that
man gives laws to nature than in its converse that nature gives laws
to man. . . . In this sense of the word, a sense unfortunately far
too common to-day, natural law could exist before it was recognised
by men.” 7+

The fourth chapter, which is devoted to the question of causality
(§ 11), contains the following: “The necessity lies in the world of
conception, and is only unconsciously and illogically transferred to
the world of perception.” It is noteworthy that for Pearson per-
ceptions or sense-impressions are the reality existing outside of us.
“In the uniformity with which sequences of perceptions are repeated
(the routine of perceptions) there is also no inherent necessity, but
it is a necessary condition for the existence of thinking beings that
there should be a routine in the perceptions. The necessity thus lies
in the nature of the thinking being and not in the perceptions them-
selves; thus it is conceivably a product of the perceptive faculty”
(p. 139).

Our Machian, with whom Mach “himself” expresses his solidarity,
thus arrives safely at purely Kantian idealism. Man dictates laws
to nature and not vice versa! It is not important to repeat after
Kant the doctrine of apriorism—which does not define the idealist
tendency as such, but only a special formulation of it—but it is
important that reason, mind, consciousness is here primary, and
nature secondary. Reason is not only a large part of nature, not


21 The Grammar of Science, pp. 86, 87.


ee


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 131


only one of its highest products, the reflection of its processes, but
more—nature is part of a “reason” which stretches itself from ordi-
nary, simple human reason known to all of us, into “stupendous”
(as Dietzgen says), mysterious, divine reason. The Kantian-
Machian formula, that “man gives nature its laws,” is a formula
of fideism. If our Machians stare wide-eyed when Engels says
that the fundamental characteristic of materialism is the ac-
ceptance of nature and not spirit as the prius, it shows only to
what extent they are incapable of distinguishing real and funda-
mental philosophic tendencies from professorial erudition and
“wise” words.

Petzoldt, who analysed and developed Avenarius. in his two-
volumed work may serve as a good example of reactionary scholas-
ticism. “Until now,” says he, “one hundred and fifty years after
Hume, substance and causality still paralyse the daring of rea-
son.” 22 Of course, most daring are the solipsists who discover sen-
sation without organic matter, thought without brain, nature without
objective law! “And the formulation of causality, necessity, or the
necessity in nature, contains something unclear and mystical” —the
idea of “fetishism” and “anthropomorphism” (pp. 32, 34). Ah!
the poor mystics—Feuerbach, Marx and Engels! All the time they
have been speaking of necessity in nature and have even called the
adherents of Hume’s trend of thought, theoretical reactionaries!
Petzoldt is superior to all “anthropomorphism.” He has discovered
the great law of “unique determination” which eliminates every
obscurity, every trace of “fetishism”; for example, the parallelo-
gram of forces (p. 35). This cannot be “proven”; it must be recog-
nised as a “fact of experience.” It cannot be assumed in advance
that a body to which equal force has been imparted from different
sides will move. “We cannot admit such indetermination and chaos
in nature; we must demand from it exactness and law.” Well, well!
From nature we demand conformity to law! The bourgeoisie de-
mands a reactionary outlook from its professors. “Our reason de-
mands precision from nature and nature always conforms to this
demand; we shall even see that in a certain sense it is compelled
to conform to it” (p. 36).

Why, at an impulsion in the direction of AB, does the body move
toward C and not toward D or E, etc.? “Why does nature not
choose one of the countless other directions?” (p. 37). Because


22 Kinfiihrung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung, Vol. I, p. 31.


132 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


then there would be no “unique determination,” and the great em-
pirical discovery by Joseph Petzoldt demands it.


D


E


Such is the trash with which the empirio-criticists fill scores of
pages! “. . . We have remarked more than once that our posi-
tion draws its strength not from the sum-total of separate experi-
ments, but rather on the contrary, from our demand on nature that
it hold recognition (seine Geltung). Indeed, even before it became
law it had already become for us a principle with which to approach
reality, in other words, a postulate. It had power, so to speak,
@ priori, independent of every separate experiment. At first, it was
not proper to the philosophy of pure experience to preach
a priori truths, thus apparently returning to the most barren meta-
physics. But our apriorism is only logical and psychological, and
not metaphysical” (p. 40). Of course, if we call apriorism logical,
then the reactionary flavor of the idea disappears and it is elevated
to the most “modern positivism”!

There cannot be any unique determination in psychical phe-
nomena, Petzoldt teaches us; the réle of imagination, the significance
of great inventions, etc., create exceptions, and the law of nature
or the law of spirit does not tolerate “any exceptions” (p. 65).
Here we have before us a pure metaphysician—one who has not
even the slightest conception of the relative difference between the
contingent and the necessary.

We are then referred to the motivation of historical events or to
the development of character in poetical works. “If we will pay
attention we shall see the absence of unique determination. There
is not one historical event and not one drama in which we could
not imagine the participants acting differently than they do under
given psychical conditions” (p. 73). “Unique determination in the
psychical domain is not only absent, but we also have a right to de-


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDG 133


mand its absence from reality. Our teaching is thus raised to the
rank of a postulate . . . that is the necessary condition of any pre-
ceding experience, logical apriorism” (Petzoldt’s italics, p. 76).

Petzoldt continues to operate with this logical apriorism in both
volumes of his Einfiihrung, etc., and in the booklet issued in 1906.”*
This is the second example of a noted empirio-criticist, who imper-
ceptibly slips into Kantianism and preaches the most reactionary
doctrine under a somewhat altered appearance. And this fact is not
at all fortuitous, for in the very foundation of the teachings of
Mach and Avenarius on causality, there is hidden an idealist fraud
in spite of high-sounding phrases about “positivism” in which it is
wrapped up. The difference between the Humean and the Kantian
theories of causality is a secondary distinction amongst the agnos-
tics, who agree on the denial of the objectivity of natural law—
thus condemning themselves inevitably to further idealist conse-
quences. Rudolph Willy, a more “conscientious” empirio-criticist
than Petzoldt, who is ashamed of his kinship to the immanentists, re-
jects, for example, the whole theory of “unique determination” as
an expression of nothing more than “logical formalism.” But does
Willy improve his position by renouncing Petzoldt? Not at all,
for he renounces Kantian agnosticism in the interest of Humean
agnosticism. “We have known,” he writes, “since the time of Hume,
that ‘necessity’ is a purely logical characteristic (Merkmal) not a
transcendental, or as I would rather say, and have already said, a
purely verbal characteristic.” (R. Willy: Gegen die Schulweisheit,
1905, p. 91; cf. pp. 173, 175.)

The agnostic calls our materialist view of necessity “transcend-
ental,” for from the point of view of Kantian and Humean “school
wisdom,” which Willy does not reject, but only purifies, every
recognition of objective reality which is given us in experience is
an illegal “transcendence.” We find one of the French writers of
the philosophical tendency which we are analysing, Henri Poin-
caré, constantly straying on the same path of agnosticism. He is a
great physicist but a poor philosopher, whose errors Yushkevich
proclaimed, of course, as the last word of recent positivism. This
was carried so far that another “ism” arose—‘empirio-symbolism.”
For Poincaré (of whose views we shall speak in the chapter on


23 J. Petzoldt: Das Weltproblem vom positivistischen Standpunkte aus, Leip-
zig, 1905, p. 130: “And from ithe empirical standpoint there can be a logical
apriority; causality is logical apriority applied to what is constantly experi-
enced in our environment.”


134 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


“New Physics”), the laws of nature are symbols, conditioning limits
which man creates for the sake of “convenience.” “The only true
objective reality is the inner harmony of the world,” while by
“objective,” Poincaré means that which is uniquely determined by
the majority of men or by all.** That is to say, he destroys objective
truth, as all the Machians do, through a purely subjective interpre-
tation of law. On the question of whether or not there is “har-
mony” outside us, he categorically declares “undoubtedly no.” It
is perfectly obvious, therefore, that the new terms do not in the
least change the traditional philosophic alignment of agnosticism,
for the essence of Poincaré’s “original” theory reduces itself to the
denial (though he is by no means consistent) of objective reality
and the objectivity of natural law. It is, therefore, perfectly nat-
ural as distinct from the Russian Machians who accept new formu-
lations of old errors for new discoveries, that the German Kantians
greeted such notions as an expression of a fundamental philosophic
reversal to their own views.—i. e., to agnosticism. “The French
mathematician Henri Poincaré, “so we read in the work of the
Kantian Philip Frank, “defends the doctrine that many of the most
general postulates of science (the law of conservation of energy,
etc.), of which it is so often difficult to say whether they are of
‘empirical or of a priori origin, in fact belong neither to one nor the
other, but are purely conditional postulates dependent upon the
human factor. . . . Thus the Kantian rejoices that the new Natur-
philosophie unexpectedly renews the fundamental thought of criti-
cal idealism, namely, that experience merely fills in the frame which
man brings with him into the world... .” (Annalen der Natur-
philosophie, 1907, Vol.VI, pp. 443, 447.)

We give this example to show the reader the degree of naiveté
which characterises our Yushkeviches who take a certain theory of
symbolism for the pure coin of novelty, when even superficially
informed philosophers admit plainly and directly that those who
have followed Poincaré have gone over to the standpoint of critical
idealism! For the substance of this point of view does not neces-
sarily lie in the repetition of the specific expressions of Kant, but
in the recognition of the fundamental idea, common to both Hume
and Kant—the denial of the objectivity of natural law and the de-
duction of various “conditions of experience,” principles, postulates
and hypotheses from the subject and not from nature. Engels was


4 Henri Poincaré, The Value of Science, New York, 1907, pp. 13, 14.


o.


3


See


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 135


tight when he said that it is not important to which one of the nu-
merous schools of idealism or materialism a philosopher belongs,
but rather whether nature, the outer world, moving matter be taken
as the prius, or spirit, reason, mind.

Another peculiar characteristic of Machism on this question, in
contrast to the other philosophic standpoints, is given by the learned
Kantian Lucka.2® On the question of causality, “Mach agrees with
Hume. . . . P. Volkmann infers the necessity of thinking from the
necessity of the processes of nature—a standpoint that recognises
in contradistinction to Mach and in agreement with Kant the neces-
sity, not in thinking, but in the processes of nature” (p. 424).

Volkmann, a physicist who wrote much on epistemological ques-
tions, tends to materialism, as do the great majority of the natural
scientists, but to a materialism which is inconsistent, shamefaced
and obscure. To recognise necessity in nature and to derive there-
from the necessity of thought, is materialism. To infer necessity,
causality, law, etc., from reason, is idealism. The only inaccuracy
in the citation adduced is the attribution to Mach of the complete
denial of any necessity. We have already learned that this is not
the case either for Mach, or for the whole empirio-critical school
which, having once left materialism, inevitably succumbs to ideal-
ism.

It remains for us to say a few words especially about the Rus-
sian Machians. They desire to be Marxians; they have all “read”
Engels’ definite separation of materialism from the philosophy of
Hume; they could not have failed to learn, either from Mach or
anybody else acquainted with his philosophy, that both Mach and
Avenarius follow the Humean lead; and all try to avoid mention-
ing Humism and materialism in discussing the question of causality!
Utter confusion holds sway here. We shall give several examples.
Mr. Yushkevich preaches a “new” empirio-symbolism. The “sensa-
tions of blue, hard, etc.—these so-called data of pure experience”
together with the “creations of pure reason such as a chimera or
chess play”—all this is “empirio-symbolism” (Outlines, p. 179).
“Cognition is empirio-symbolic, and developing, it gives empirio-
symbols of a greater degree of symbolisation. . . . These empirio-
symbols are . . . the so-called laws of nature. . . . The so-called true
reality, existence in itself, is that infinite [a very learned man is


25 BE. Lucka: “Das Erkenntnissproblem und Machs Analyse der Empfindun-
gen,” in Kantstudien, Vol. VII, p. 409.


eee


136 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


this Mr. Yushkevich] limit of the system of symbols to which all
our knowledge is striving” (p. 188). “The stream of experience . . .
which lies at the foundation of our knowledge is . . . irra-
tional . . . illogical . . .” (pp. 187, 194). Energy is “just as little
a thing or substance as time, space, mass and the other fundamental
conceptions of natural science; energy is a constant, an “empirio-
symbol,’ that gratifies for a time, like other empirio-symbols,
the great human need in introducing reason, and Logos, into the
irrational stream of what is experienced” (p. 209).

We behold a subjective idealist in the costume of a clown, which
has been made up of loud and variegated bits of fashionable
terminology,—for whom the external world-nature and its laws—are
symbols of our mind. The stream of experience is devoid of
reason, order and law; it is our reason that introduces order. The
celestial bodies are symbols of human cognition, and so is the earth.
If science teaches us that the earth existed long before man and
organic matter evolved, this is nothing but an invention! The order
of the motion of the planets is a product of our knowledge. And
feeling that human reason is being transformed by such philosophy
into the very author and creator of nature, Mr. Yushkevich puts
Logos on the same plane with reason; Logos, that is reason in
abstract, not reason, but Reason, not the function of the human
brain, but something existing prior to the emergence of the brain,
something divine. The last word of “recent positivism” is the old
formulation of fideism which was revealed by Feuerbach.

Let us take Bogdanov. In 1899, when he was still partly a ma-
terialist and had only begun to stray, under the influence of a very
great chemist and very confused philosopher—Wilhelm Ostwald—
he wrote: “The general law of the causal relation of phenomena is
the last and best product of human cognition; it is the universal
law, the highest of those laws which, to express it in the words of a
philosopher, human reason attributes to nature.” 7°

God knows from what sources Bogdanov took this reference; but
the fact is that the “expression” of a philosopher, which is repeated
in good faith by a “Marxist,” belongs to Kant. What an unpleasant
occurrence! It is even more unpleasant that it cannot be ex-
plained even by the “mere” influence of Ostwald.

In 1904, having already abandoned both naturo-historical ma-
terialism and Ostwald, Bogdanov wrote: “ . . . Modern positivism


26 Fundamental Elements, etc.. p. 41.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 137


regards the law of causality only as a means of connecting phe-
nomena into an uninterrupted series, solely through forms of co-
ordinated experiences.” *7 Bogdanov either did not know or would
not admit that this modern positivism is agnosticism which denies
the objective necessity of nature that existed before the
emergence of “knowledge” and man. He took what is called “mod-
ern positivism” from the German professors on faith. And finally,
in 1905, having gone through all the previous stages, the stage of
empirio-criticism as well, and already well-advanced in the stage
of “empirio-monism,” Bogdanov wrote: “Laws do not at all belong
to the domain of experience . . . they are not given in it, but are
created by reason as a means of organising experience, in order to
fuse it harmoniously into a complete whole.” ?* “Laws are ab-
stractions of knowledge; and physical laws possess physical proper-
ties just as little as psychological laws possess psychical properties”
(ibid).

That is, the law that winter follows autumn, is not given us in
experience, but is created by reason as a means of organisation,
harmony and connection. How is this done, Comrade Bogdanov?

“Empirio-Monism is possible only because knowledge harmonises
experience, eliminating infinite contradictions, creating universal
organising forms, changing the primeval chaotic world of elements
into a derivative orderly world of relations” (p. 57). This is not
true. The idea, that knowledge can “create” forms and change the
primeval chaos into order, is an idealist notion. The world is a uni-
form world of matter in motion, and our cognition, being the
highest product of nature, is in a position only to reflect this law.

The outcome is that our Machians, blindly following the “modern”
professors, either repeat the mistakes of Kantian and Humean
agnosticism on the problem of causality, without noticing its abso-
lute contradiction with Marxism, that is materialism, or they roll
down an inclined plane toward idealism.


4. The “Principle of Economy of Thought” and the
Question of “World Unity”


“The principle of least resistance,” which was made the basis
of the theory of knowledge by Mach, Avenarius and others, un:


27 From The Psychology of Society (in Russian), p. 207.
28 Empirio-Monism, Bk, I, p. 40.


138 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


doubtedly represents the Marxian “tendency in epistemology.” So
Bazarov declares on page 69 of Outlines.

There is “economy” in Marx; there is “economy” in Mach. Is
it true that there is even a shadow of resemblance between them,
and “without doubt” at that?

Avenarius’ Philosophie, etc., applies this principle, as we have
seen, in such a way that in the name of “economy of thought” only
sensation is declared to exist. Causality and “substance” (a word
which the professors like to employ for the sake of “importance,” in-
stead of the clearer and more exact word “matter”) are “elimi-
nated” in the name of the same economy; that is, we get sensation
without matter, and thought without brain. This absurdity is really
an attempt to serve subjective idealism with a new dressing. In
philosophical literature the subjective character of this fundamental
work, especially as regards the question of the famous “economy of
thought,” has generally been recognised. That our Machians did
not notice the subjective idealism under the “new” banner, is a
choice item in the world of curiosities.

Mach, in the Analysis of Sensations, refers to his work of 1872
regarding this question. And this latter work, as we have seen,
contains the characteristic doctrines of pure subjectivism, which
reduces the world to sensations. Thus the two fundamental works
which introduce this famous “principle” into philosophy, represent
idealism. Now, what is the question at issue? It is this. The
principle of economy of thought, if made a basis of the theory of
knowledge, cannot lead to anything else than idealism. That it is
more “economical” to “think,” that only I and my sensations exist
—is beyond dispute, once we have introduced such an absurd prin-
ciple into epistemology.

Is it “more economical” to “think” of the atom as indivisible or
as composed of positive and negative electrons? Is it “more eco-
nomical” to think of the Russian bourgeois revolution as having
been conducted by the liberals or against them? It is sufficient
only to put the question, in order to see the absurdity of sub-
jectivism in applying the category of “the economy of thought.”
Humean thought is “economical” only when it correctly reflects the
objective truth. Practice, experiment and industry will serve as
the criterion of this correctness. Only by denying objective reality,
that is, by denying the foundations of Marxism, can one seriously
speak of the economy of thought in the theory of knowledge.


i a an a


ge a


ee ee


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 139


Consulting the latest works of Mach, we shall see an interpreta-
tion of the famous principle which is at the same time its complete
denial. For instance, in the Die Prinzipien der Wirmelehre, Mach
returns to his favourite idea of “economy of nature” (p. 366).
And there he adds that we take care of our economy not for the
sake of the economy (pp. 366, 391) but that “the purpose of
scientific economy is a fuller and more quiescent . . . picture
of the world” (p. 366). If this is the case, then the “principle of
thought,” as far as the very heart of the question is concerned, is
banished not only from the very foundation of epistemology but
from the domain of epistemology in general. To say that the
purpose of science is to give a true picture of the world (quiescence
is beside the point here), is to repeat the materialist position. To
say this is to recognise the objective reality of the world in relation
to our knowledge, the objective reality of the model in relation
to its picture. In characterising such a relation, “economy of
thought” is merely a clumsy and pretentious phrase for the
word “correctness.” Mach is confused here as usual, and the
Machians behold this confusion enraptured! In Erkenntnis und
Irrtum we read the following in the chapter “Illustrations of the
Metheds of Investigation”: “The definition of science as the
simplest and completest description given by Kirchhoff (in 1874),
the economical representation of the factual (given by Mach in
1872), ‘the concordance of thinking and being, and the concordance
of the processes of thought with one another’ (given by Grassmann
in 1844.)—all these express with some variations one and the same
thought.”

Is this not an example of confusion? The principle of the “econ-
omy of thought,” from which Mach, in 1872, inferred the existence
of sensations alone (a viewpoint which he himself had to acknowl-
edge as idealistic), is compared with the purely materialist expres-
sion of the mathematician Grassmann that there is a necessary
correspondence between thought and things—is actually compared
with Kirchhoff’s definition of science as concise description (of an


- objective reality in whose existence Kirchhoff himself does not


doubt) !

Such an application of the principle of “economy of thought” is
merely an instance of Mach’s peculiar philosophic peregrinations.
And if all the peculiarities and lapses are eliminated, then the
idealist character of the “economy of thought” becomes unques-


pr


140 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


tionable. For example, the Kantian Honigswald, in discussing the
philosophy of Mach, greets his “principle of economy” as an ap-
proach to the “Kantian world of thought.” *® In truth, if we do not
recognise objective reality, and hold that it is given to us in sensa-
tions, then from where would the “principle of economy of
thought be derived, if not from the subject”? Sensations, to be
sure, do not contain any “economy” in themselves. Therefore, sen-
sations give us something which they themselves do not contain!
This means that the “principle of economy” is not taken from
experience (sensation), but precedes all experience and, like a
category of Kant, constitutes its logical condition. Hénigswald
quotes the following from Analysis of Sensations: “From the facts
of our bodily and spiritual stability we can infer the stability and
the uniqueness of the processes of nature as regards both determi-
nation and direction” (p. 352). Indeed, the subjective-idealistic
character of such a position, as well as the kinship of Mach to
Petzoldt, who has gone so far as to admit apriorism, is beyond any
shadow of doubt.

The idealist Wundt, with an eye on “the principle of the economy
of thought,” characterised Mach as “Kant turned inside out.” *°
With Kant it is the a priori and experience, with Mach it is experi-
ence and the a priori, for the principle of the economy of thought
is with Mach essentially apriorism (p. 130). The principle of
connection is either between things, as the “objective law of nature
[and this Mach decidedly rejects], or it is the subjective principle
of description” (p. 130). The principle of economy with Mach
is subjective and “kommt wie aus der Pistole geschossen”—into
this world, God knows from where—as a teleological principle
which may have a diversity of meanings (p. 131). Those who
are expert in philosophic terminology, as you see, are not as gul-
lible as our Machians, who are ready to take any one at his word
who assures them that the “new” term eliminates the opposition
between subjectivism and objectivism, between idealism and
materialism.

And finally we shall refer to the English philosopher, James
Ward, who without any pretence calls himself a spiritualistic monist.
He does not dispute with Mach, but on the contrary, utilises the
whole Machian tendency in physics for his struggle with material-


29 Zur Kritik der Machschen Philosophie, Berlin, 1903, p. 27.
30 Systematische Philosophie, Leipzig, 1907, p. 128.


;
s
3
s,


ee ep ae


a -


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 141


ism. And he definitely declares that in Mach “the criterion of sim-
plicity is mainly subjective and not objective.” *

That the principle of the economy of thought, as the basis of
epistemology, pleased the German Kantians and English spiritual-
ists, will not seem strange after the above-said. That people, de-
sirous of being Marxists should link together the political economy
of the materialist Marx with the epistemological economy of Mach
is simply comical.

It would not be out of place here to say a few words about
“world unity.” Mr. Yushkevich exemplifies very clearly—for the
thousandth time perhaps—the abysmal blunder which our Machians
commit in discussing this question. Engels, in his Anti-Dihring,
thus replies to Diihring who had deduced the unity of the world
from the unity of reason: “The real unity of the world consists in
its materiality, and this is established, not by a pair of juggling
phrases, but by a long and difficult development of philosophy and
science” (p. 66). Mr. Yushkevich cites this and retorts: “First of
all it is not clear what is meant by the assertion that the unity of
the world consists in its being material.”

Is it not lovely? This person publicly prattles about the phi-
losophy of Marxism, and then declares that the most elementary
propositions of materialism are “not clear” to him! Engels, in the
example from Diihring, showed that a somewhat consistent phi-
losophy can infer the unity of the world either from reason—in
which case it is helpless before spiritualism and theism and in-
evitably leads to phrase-juggling—or from the objective reality,
which exists outside of us, is studied by the natural sciences and
which in the theory of knowledge has long gone under the name of
matter. To speak seriously to a person to whom such a thing is
“not clear,” is useless, for Yushkevich himself is “not clear” with
the deliberate intention of slyly evading the clear materialist posi-
tion of Engels. He repeats Diihring’s babble about “the cardinal
postulate of the principle of unique determination and its relation-
ship to being,” * about postulates of which “it would not be correct
to say that they are inferred from experience, since scientific ex-
perience is only possible due to the fact that the postulates them-
selves are the basis of investigation” (ibid). This is nothing but
confusion, for if this person had the slightest esteem for the printed


81 Naturalism and Agnosticism, 3d ed., p. 82.
82 Yushkevich: loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 51.


eed


142 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


word he would detect the idealist character in general, and the
Kantian character in particular of the idea that there can be postu-
lates which are not taken from experience and without which ex-
perience is impossible. A jumble of words taken from various
books and strung together with the glaring errors of the materialist
Dietzgen—that is the “philosophy” of Mr. Yushkevich and others
of his ilk.

Let us examine the arguments on the unity of the world, as ex-
pounded by our serious empirio-criticist, Joseph Petzoldt. Para-
graph 29, Vol. II, of his Einfiihrung, is termed: “The Tendency to
Uniformity in the Domain of Epistemology. The Postulate of the
Unique Determination of Everything that Occurs.” And here are
some samples of his arguments: “ . . . Only in unity is that natural
end reached, further than which no reflection can go and in which
reason, if it takes into consideration all the facts of the given do-
main, can reach quiescence . . . (p. 79). It is beyond doubt that
nature does not altogether correspond to the demand for unity, but
it is also beyond doubt that in many cases, as our investigations
show, it does satisfy the demand for quiescence and we must sup-
pose that, in all probability, nature will satisfy this demand in
the future, too. Therefore it will be more correct to characterise
the mental state as a tendency toward a state of stability than as a
tendency toward unity. . . . The principle of the state of stability
goes farther and deeper. . . . Haeckel’s proposition to put the king-
dom of the protista alongside of the vegetable and animal kingdom,
is inadequate, for it creates two new difficulties in place of the
previous one: formerly the boundary between the vegetables and
animals was doubtful; now it becomes also impossible to distinguish
the protista from vegetables and animals. . . . Evidently such a
situation is not final. Such an ambiguity of concepts must in one
way or another be eliminated through the agreement of specialists
and by the decision of a majority of votes, even if there are no
other means” (p. 81).

Have we not had enough of it? It is evident that the empirio-
criticist Petzoldt is by no means better than Diihring. But we must
be just even to an opponent. Petzoldt has sufficient scientific in-
tegrity to reject materialism unflinchingly in all of his works. He
does not humiliate himself to the extent of simulating materialism
and declaring the most elementary distinction between the funda-
mental philosophic tendencies “unclear.”


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 143


5. Space and Time


Having recognised the existence of objective reality, that is, of
moving matter, independently of our mind, materialism must also
inevitably recognise the objective reality of space and time,—dis-
tinct, first of all, from Kantianism which, in this question, takes
sides with idealism, and regards time and space, not as objective
realities, but as forms of human understanding. The radical differ-
ence between the two fundamental philosophic doctrines on this
question is recognised very clearly by the writers of various
tendencies, even by those who are only partially consistent thinkers.
Let us begin with the materialists.

“Space and time,” says Feuerbach, “are not simple forms of phe-
nomena but essential conditions [Wesenbedingungen] . . . of exist-
ence.” ® Regarding the world which we perceive by means of
sensations as objective reality, Feuerbach naturally also rejects the
phenomenalist (as Mach would dub it) or the agnostic (as Engels
puts it) conception of space and time. Just as things or bodies
are not mere appearances, not complexes of sensations, but objec-
tive realities which act on our senses, so space and time are not
mere forms of appearances, but objectively real forms of being.
There is nothing in the world but matter in motion, and matter
cannot move save in space and time. Human conceptions of space
and time are relative, but on the basis of these relative conceptions
we arrive at absolute truth. These relative conceptions in their
development follow the line of absolute truth and continually
approach it. The mutability of human ideas in regard to space
and time no more refutes the objective reality of either than the
mutability of scientific knowledge concerning the structure and
forms of matter in motion refutes the objective reality of the outer
world.

Engels, unmasking the inconsistent and muddled materialist
Diihring, finds him speaking of the change in the conception of
time (which is a real problem for some philosophers of importance)
—and evading a direct answer to the question whether or not space
and time are real or ideal. Are our relative conceptions of
space and time approximations to real forms of being? Or are
these only products of the developing, organising and harmonising
human mind? This and this only is the fundamental problem of


83 Werke, Vol. Il, p. 332.


144 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM —


the theory of knowledge on which the fundamental philosophic
schools divide. Says Engels in Anti-Diihring: “We have nothing
to do with the transformation which goes on in the brain of Herr
Diihring. We are not speaking of a concept of time, but of
actual time, of which Herr Diihring cannot so easily dispose [that
is, by the use of such phrases as the mutability of our conceptions]”
(p. 77).

It would seem that this is sufficiently clear for even the Yush-
keviches to grasp the heart of the question! Engels contrasts
Diihring’s position with the one generally accepted as obvious by
every materialist, namely, that time is objectively real, saying that
one cannot rid himself of the necessity of directly affirming or 4
denying this proposition merely by arguing about our ideas of
space and time. The point is not that Engels belittles the need and
scientific significance of investigations of change and of the de-
velopment of our conceptions of space and time, but he denies that
with considerations such as these we consistently solve the epis-
temological problem of the source and significance of human
knowledge in general. A somewhat intelligent philosophic idealist
—and Engels, in speaking of the idealists, has in mind the great
consistent idealists of classic philosophy—would easily admit the
natural development of our conceptions of space and time. He
would not cease to be an idealist in thinking, for example, that our
naturally developed ideas of space and time approach some abso-
lute idea or other, etc. It is impossible to hold consistently a
point of view in philosophy which is inimical to fideism and ideal-
ism, if we do not definitely and straightforwardly recognise that our
conceptions of time and space as they develop reflect the objectively
existing real time and space; that they approach, as our ideas do in
general, objective truth.

“The fundamental forms of all being,” Engels teaches Diihring,

“are space and time; being outside of time is just as much of an
absurdity as being outside of space.”

Why does Engels, in the first half of the quotation, almost literally
repeat Feuerbach, and in the second, recall the struggle in which
Feuerbach was the successful leader against the great absurdities
of theism? Because Diihring, as can be seen from the same chapter
in Engels, cannot make the ends of his philosophy meet without
referring either to the “final cause” of the world, or to the “efficient
cause” (another expression for “God,” says Engels). Diihring,


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 145


desirous of being a materialist and an atheist no less than our
Machians desire to be Marxians, cannot consistently adhere to the
point of view which would undermine the idealist and fideist ab-
surdity. Not recognising, at least not clearly and_ straightfor-
wardly (for he strayed from this question and muddled it), the
objective reality of space and time, Diihring inevitably rolls down
the inclined plane to “final causes” and “efficient causes,” for he
deprives himself of the objective criterion which prevents one from
going beyond the bounds of time and space. If time and space
are only man’s ideas and have been created by him, he has a right
to go beyond their bounds just as the bourgeois professors have a
right to receive their salaries from reactionary governments for
defending the validity of this transcendence, for directly or in-
directly defending the medieval “absurdity.” Engels showed
Diihring that the denial of the objective reality of space and time
is theoretically philosophic confusion, and practically a capitula-
tion to or helplessness before fideism.

What does “recent positivism” teach us on this subject? Mach
writes the following: “Space and time are well-ordered systems of
series of sensations.” * This is a palpable confusion, inevitably re-
sulting from the doctrine that bodies are complexes of sensations.
According to Mach it is not man with his sensations that exists in
space and time, but space and time which exist in man which de-
pend upon him and are generated by him. He feels that he is
relapsing into idealism and “resists,” by offering a number of
excuses and burying the question in long disquisitions (especially in
Erkenninis und Irrtum) on the mutability and relativity of our
conceptions of space and time. But this does not and cannot save
him, for one can really overcome the idealist position on this ques-
tion only by recognising the objective reality of space and time.
But Mach does not wish to do this at all. He constructs his epis-
temological theory of space and time on the principle of relativism
alone. Such construction, in the very nature of the case, cannot
but lead to subjective idealism; this we have made clear in speaking
of absolute and relative truth.

Opposing the idealist inferences which inevitably follow from his
theses, Mach argues against Kant, insisting on the empirical origin
of our concepts of space.** But if, as Mach teaches, objective


34 Die Mechanik, etc., 3d German ed., p. 498.
85 Erkenntnis und Irrtum, pp. 350, 385.


146 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


. reality is not given us in experience, then such a retort to Kant
does not in the least destroy the general position of agnosti-
cism either in Kant or in Mach. If our conception of space is taken
from experience and is not a reflection of objective reality
outside of us, then the theory of Mach remains idealistic. The
existence of nature in time which is measured in millions of years
prior to the appearance of man, shows how absurd this idealist
theory is.

“In the physiological relation,” writes Mach, “time and space
are sensations of orientation which together with sense perceptions
determine the release (Auslésung) of biologically purposeful re-
actions of adaptation. In the physical relation, space and time are
interdependences of physical elements” (ibid., p. 434).

The relativist Mach confines himself to an examination of the
concept of time in its various aspects! And he trifles with it just
as Diihring does. If elements are “sensations” then the dependence
of physical elements upon each other could not have existed either
independently of man or before the emergence of organic matter.
If the sensations of time and space can give man a biological
orientation, it is only in virtue of the fact that these sensations
reflect the objective reality outside of man. Man would never have
adapted himself to his environment, if his sensations had not given
him an objective representation of it. The doctrine of space and
time is inseparably connected with the solution of the fundamental
question of the theory of knowledge: are our sensations copies of
bodies and things, or are bodies complexes of our sensations?
Mach vacillates between both positions.

In modern physics, he says, Newton’s views of absolute space and
time prevail (pp. 442-444). These views seem senseless, says
Mach, without even paying his respects to the materialists and
their theory of knowledge. But in practice, he claims, this view
was harmless and was therefore not criticised for a long time
(p. 442).

This naive remark about the harmlessness of the materialist
view betrays Mach. In the first place, it is not true that the
idealists did not criticise this view for a “long time.” Mach
simply ignores the struggle between the idealist and materialist
theories of knowledge on this question; he evades the exposition
of these views. In the second place, by recognising “the harmless-
ness” of the materialist views which he opposes, Mach recognises


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE | 147


their correctness; for if they were incorrect how could their effects
be harmless for a period of centuries? What became of the criterion
of practice with which Mach attempted to flirt? The materialist
view of the objectivity of space and time is harmless only because
natural science does not transcend the bounds of space and time,
or the material world, leaving this occupation to the professors of
reactionary philosophy. Such “harmlessness” is the equivalent of
correctness.

Mach’s idealist view of space and time is “harmful” because it
opens the door to fideism and tempts Mach himself to draw re-
actionary conclusions. In 1872, for instance, he wrote that it is
not necessary to conceive of chemical elements in three-dimensional
space.** To do this would be “to impose upon ourselves unneces-
sary restriction. There is no more necessity to think of what is
merely a product of thought spatially, that is to say, with the rela-
tion of visible and tangible, than there is to think of these things
in a definite position in the scale of tones” (p. 51). “Perhaps
the reason why hitherto people have not succeeded in establishing
a satisfactory theory of electricity, is because they wished to explain
electrical phenomena by means of molecular events in a space of
three dimensions” (p. 54).

The argument from the standpoint of the straightforward and
unmuddled Machism, which was openly defended by Mach in 1872,
is indisputable: if molecules, atoms, in a word, chemical elements
cannot be perceived, they are “only mental things” (das bloss
gedachte). And if time and space have no objective reality, then
it is obvious that we must not think of the molecules as occupying
any space. Let physics and chemistry “limit themselves” to three-
dimensional space in which matter moves; for the explanation of
electricity, however, we may seek its elements in a space which is
not three-dimensional!

That our Machians make an attempt to get around this Machian
absurdity, though Mach himself repeats it in 1906,” is evident,
for unless they did, they would have to put the question point
blank concerning idealist and materialist views of space, without
any evasion or effort to “reconcile” these contrary positions. As a
matter of fact, in the ’seventies when Mach was not yet known, and
when he met with refusals from “orthodox physicists” who would


386 Conservation of Energy, p. 53 ff.
387 Erkenntnis und Irrtum, p. 418.


148 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM ~


not publish his articles, one of the chiefs of the immanentist school,
Anton Von Leclair,®* took this argument of Mach as a complete
renunciation of materialism and as a confession of idealism! For at
that time Leclair had not yet invented, or borrowed from Schuppe,
Schubert-Soldern or Rehmke, the “new” sobriquet of “immanentist,”
but called himself critical idealist. This outspoken defender of
theism who openly preached the doctrine in his philosophic works,
immediately declared Mach a great philosopher, a “revolutionary
in the best sense of the word” (p. 252), and he was absolutely right.
The discussions of Mach show that he abandoned science for
theism. Science both in 1872 and in 1906 was seeking and dis-
covering—at least it was feeling its way—the atom of electricity,—
the electron in three-dimensional space. Natural science does not
doubt that the substance under investigation exists in three-dimen-
sional space, and, hence, that its particles also, though they are so
small that we cannot see them, nevertheless must exist in the same
three-dimensional space. Since 1872, in three decades of stupen-
dous success in investigating the structure of matter, the materialist
view of space and time has remained “harmless,” i. e., compatible,
as heretofore, with natural science. The contrary view of Mach
et al. was a “harmful” capitulation of the position of science to
theism.

In his Science of Mechanics, Mach defends the mathematicians
who are studying the problems of imaginary space of N dimensions,
against those who are accusing them of drawing “monstrous”
conclusions from their investigations. The defence is undoubtedly


just, but look at the epistemological position which Mach takes in.


his defence. The most recent mathematical study, says Mach, asks
a very important and useful question about N dimensions, im-
aginary space, but “in actuality” there remains only space of three
dimensions. Many theologians, therefore, who feel uneasy as to
where hell should be placed, as well as the spiritualists, desire to
make use of the fourth dimension.

Mach refuses the company of the theologians and the spiritualists
—very good! But how does he separate himself from them in his
theory of knowledge? With the argument that only three-dimen-
sional space is real! But what sort of defence against the the-
ologians and their kind is the previous denial of the objectivity of


88 Anton Von Leclair: Der Realismus der modernen Naturwissenschaft im
Lichte der von Berkeley und Kant angebahnten Erkenntniskritik. 1879.


att


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 149


space and time? You surreptitiously borrow from the materialists
when you wish to separate yourself from the spiritualists. For
the materialists, recognising the actual world, i. e., matter, which
is perceived by us as the objective reality, have a right to
infer that no spectral human phantasm is real for any purpose
whatsoever, so long as it is beyond time and space. But the
Machians, although combating materialism and denying the ob-
jective existence of the world, secretly introduce it in their strug-
gle with idealism, a doctrine which is consistent and fearless to
the end. If in the relativistic conception of space and time there
is nothing except the relative, if there is no objective reality
independent of mankind, why should the majority of man-
kind not have a right to entertain conceptions of beings out-
side of space and time? If Mach has a right to seek atoms of
electricity, or atoms in general, outside of three-dimensional space,
then why should the majority of mankind not have a right to seek
atoms or the foundations of morals outside of three-demensional
space?

“There has never yet been an accoucheur who has helped a de-
livery by means of the fourth dimension,” says Mach.

Indeed, an excellent argument but only for those for whom the
criterion of practice is a confirmation of the objective truth and
reality of our perceptual world. If our sensation give us an
objectively true copy of the world existing outside of us, then the
validity of the argument based upon the accoucheur and upon hu-
man practice holds good. But if so Machism, as a philosophic doc-
trine, is of no use at all.

“J do not anticipate,” he continues, referring to his work of
1872, “that any one will defend ghost-stories (die Kosten einer
spuckgeschichte bestreiten) with the help of what I have said and
written on this question.”

So you did not anticipate the statement that Napoleon did not
die on May 5, 1821. You did not anticipate that Machism will be
used in the service of ghost-stories when it has already served and
still continues to serve the immanentist school.

But not only the immanentist school, as we shall see below.
Philosophic idealism itself is only a thinly disguised ghost-story.
Look at the French and English representatives of empirio-criticism,
so much less pretentious than the German representatives of this
philosophic school. Poincaré says that the concepts of time and


3 .
150 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM —
ec ee ESRD SSIES


space are relative and that, consequently (for non-materialists it is
indeed “consequently”) nature does not give them to us but we,
finding them convenient, give them to nature. Does this not justify
the exultation of the German Kantians? Does this not confirm
Engels’ statement that a consistent philosophic doctrine should
take either nature or human reason as primary?

The views of Karl Pearson are quite definite. He says: “Of
time as of space we cannot assert a real existence; it is not in things
but in our mode of perceiving them” (Joc. cit., p. 184). This is
idealism, pure and simple. “Like space, it appears to us as one
of the plans on which that great sorting-machine, the human per-
ceptive faculty, arranges its material” (zbid). Pearson’s conclu-
sion, usually expounded in clear and precise propositions, is this:
“Space and time are not realities of the phenomenal world, but
the modes under which we perceive things. They are not infinitely
large nor infinitely divisible, but are essentially limited by the
contents of our perception” (p. 191).

This conscientious and honest enemy of materialism, with whom,
to repeat, Mach often expresses his complete solidarity and who in
turn outspokenly expresses his solidarity with Mach, does not in-
vent a special label for his philosophy. Without the slightest
evasion, he mentions the classic names of Hume and Kant, to whom
he traces his philosophic genealogy (p. 192)!

And if in Russia, naive people can be found who believe that
Machism gave a “new” interpretation of space and time, then at
least in relevant English literature, scientists, on the one hand, and
idealists, on the other, at once took a definite position toward
Pearson. For example, here is the opinion of Lloyd Morgan, the
biologist: “Physics as such accepts the phenomenal world as ex-
ternal to, and for its purposes independent of, the mind of the
investigator. He [Professor Pearson] is forced to go to a position
which is largely idealistic. . . 2° Physics, as a science, is wise, I
take it, in dealing with space and time in frankly objective terms,
and I think the biologist may still discuss the distribution of
organisms of space and the geologist their distribution in time,
without pausing to remind their readers that after all they are only
dealing with sense-impressions and stored sense-impressions and
certain forms of perceptions. .. . All this may be true enough,
but it is out of place either in physics or biology” (p. 304). Lloyd


39 Natural Science, 1892, Vol. I, p. 300.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 151


Morgan is the representative of that agnosticism which Engels calls
“shamefaced materialism,” and however “irreconcilable” the di-
vergent tendencies of such a philosophy are, nevertheless it holds
that it is impossible to reconcile Pearson’s views with science.
With Pearson “at first the mind is in space, and afterwards, space
in the mind,” says another critic‘? “There can be no doubt,”
remarked a defender of Pearson, “that the doctrine as to the
nature of space and time which is associated with the name of
Kant is the most important addition which has been made to
the idealistic theory of human knowledge since the days of
Bishop Berkeley, and it is one of the noteworthy features of the
Grammar of Science that here, perhaps for the first time in the
writings of English men of science, we find at once a full recogni-
tion of the general truth of Kant’s doctrine, a short but clear
exposition of it... .” 4

Thus in England, neither for the Machians themselves, nor for
their naturalistic adversaries, nor for their adherents among the
expert in philosophy is there any shadow of doubt concerning the
idealist character of Mach’s views on the subject of space and
time. Only a few Russian writers, desirous of being Marxists, “have
not noticed” it. “Many of Engels’ single views,’ Bazarov writes in
the Outlines (p. 67), “as for example, his conception of ‘pure’ time
and space, are now antiquated.”

Yes, indeed! The views of the materialist Engels have become
antiquated, but the views of the idealist Pearson and the muddled
idealist Mach are modern! The most curious thing about it is that
Bazarov does not even doubt that Engels’ views of space and time,
which turn upon the question of their objective reality, belong to
those “single views” which he regards as antiquated in contra-
distinction to Engels’ “starting point.” Here is an example of that
miserable hodge-podge to which Engels had already referred when
he spoke of the German philosophy of the eighties. To contrast
the “starting point” of the materialist doctrine of Marx and Engels
with any of their “single views” of the objectivity of space and
time, is as absurd as to contrast the “starting point” of the theory
of Marx with his “single view” of surplus value. To separate the
doctrine of Engels of the objectivity of time and space, from his
doctrine of the transformation of “things-in-themselves” into


40]. M. Bentley: Philosophical Review, 1897, Vol. VI, p. 523.
41R, J. Ryle: Natural Science, August, 1892, p, 454.


152 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


“things-for-us,” to separate it from his views of objective and
absolute truth, i. e., of an objective reality experienced. through
perception, to separate it from his recognition of objectivity of the
laws of nature, causality and necessity,—is to reduce an entire
philosophy into one of its single fragments. Bazarov became con-
fused, as did all the Machians, about the mutability of human con-
ceptions as regards space and time. He confused their exclusively
relative character with the absolute truth that man and nature exist
only in space and time.

He fails to see that the non-spatial and non-temporal beings
which are invented by the clergy and are given credence by the
ignorant fancy of the downtrodden masses, are products of a dis-
eased mind, artful deceptions of philosophical idealism,—bad prod-
ucts of a bad social order. The scientific doctrine of the structure
of substance, the chemical composition of food, and the electron
may become antiquated with time; but the truth that man is unable
to subsist on thoughts and beget children by platonic love alone
can never become antiquated! And a philosophy which denies the
objectivity of time and space is just as absurd, just as essentially
foul and false as one which denies these several truths. The
cunning of the idealists and the agnostics is on the whole as hypo-
critical as the sermons on platonic love by the Pharisees!

To illustrate the distinction between the relativity of our ideas
of time and space and the absolute truth that everything must exist
in space and time, I shall adduce a characteristic quotation from a
very old and very pure “empirio-criticist,” namely, the Humean,
Schulze-Aenesidemus, who wrote in 1792:

“If we infer ‘things outside of us’ from the presentations within
us, then space and time would prove to be something real, actually
existing independently of us, for we can think of bodies only in
existing space and of changes only in existing time” (p. 100).

Exactly so! Rejecting materialism and the least concession to it,
this follower of Hume in 1792 describes the relation between the
question of space and time and the question of an objectively exist-
ing reality just as Engels describes it in 1894 (the last preface to
Anti-Diihring is dated May 23, 1894). This does not mean that in
the course of time our conceptions of space and time do not change,
that new material is not added in this evolution, material to which
both Voroshilov-Chernov and Voroshilov-Valentinov point in order
to refute Engels. That means that the relations of materialism and


se.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 153


agnosticism can not change, despite the “new” names with which our
Machians like to parade. Bogdanov contributes nothing but “new”
names to the old philosophy of idealism and agnosticism. When
he repeats the arguments of Hering and Mach concerning the dif-
ference between physiological and geometric space, or between per-
ceptual and conceptual space,‘? he merely repeats Dihring’s mis-
take. One question arises as to how, with the help of various sense
organs, does man perceive space, and how, through the processes of
historical development we arrive at abstract ideas of space. An-
other question arises as to whether these percepts and concepts cor-
respond to an objective reality existing independently of mankind.
Bogdanov does not “notice” this last question (although it is the
only philosophic one at issue) under the mass of detailed investiga-
tions with which it is overlaid. He can not, therefore, clearly con-
trast the materialism of Engels with the confusion of Mach.

Time and space are “forms of social agreement of the experiences
of different people” (ibid., p. 34); their objectivity is their “uni-
versality of meaning.”

This is an absolute falsehood. Religion also has a universal
meaning, for it expresses the social agreement of experience of the
majority of mankind. But the teaching of religion, for example,
concerning the past of our earth and the creation of the world does
not correspond with the objective reality. That the earth existed
before any “sociability,” before man, before organic matter, that
it has existed for a certain time, and in a certain space—to this
teaching, though it is as relative at every step in the evolution of
science as is each step in the evolution of religion, there does cor-
respond an objective reality. For Bogdanov it would appear that
the various forms of space and time adapt themselves to human
experience and cognitive capacity. In fact just the reverse is true:
our “experience” and our cognitions adapt themselves more and
more to objective space and time, continually reflecting them with
greater and greater accuracy.


6. Freedom and Necessity


On pages 140 and 141 of the Outlines, Lunacharsky cites from
Anti-Diihring Engels’ argument on the question of freedom and
necessity, and agrees with his “remarkably precise and well-aimed”


42 Empirio-Monism, Bk. I, p. 26.


154 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM —


characterisation of the problem on the corresponding “wonderful
page” of that work.* ’

There is, indeed, much that is “remarkable” in it. But it is even
still more “remarkable” that neither Lunacharsky nor the other set
of Machians, who desire to be Marxists, “have noticed” the epis-
temological significance of Engels’ discussion of freedom and


necessity. Of course they read and copied it, but they did not |


understand what they were doing.

Engels says: “Hegel was the first man to give a proper explana-
tion of the relation of freedom and necessity. In his eyes freedom
is the recognition of necessity. ‘Necessity is blind only in so far
as it is not understood.’ Freedom does not consist in an imaginary
independence of natural laws but in a knowledge of these laws and
in the possibility thence derived of applying them intelligently to
given ends. This is true both as regards nature and as regards
those forces which control the spiritual and physical existence of
man himself—two classes of laws which we can distinguish as an
abstraction, but cannot separate in reality. Freedom of the will
consists in nothing but the ability to come to a decision when one
is in possession of a knowledge of the facts. The freer the judg-
ment of a man then in relation to a given subject of discussion, the
more necessary is it that he arrive at a positive decision. . . . Free-
dom, therefore, consists in a mastery over ourselves and external
nature founded upon the knowledge of the necessities of nature.” “*
Let us examine the epistemologic propositions upon which this argu-
ment is based.

First, Engels recognises, at the very beginning of his discourse,
the laws of nature, the laws of external nature, and the necessity of
nature,—all that which Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt, et al., declared
to be “metaphysics.” If Lunacharsky had pondered over Engels’
“wonderful” argument, he would have seen the fundamental differ-
ence between the materialist theory of knowledge and that of agnos-
ticism and idealism, which deny the uniformity of nature, declaring
it to be only “logical,” etc., etc.

Second, Engels does not engage in sham “definitions” of free-
dom and necessity, those scholastic definitions which more than any-


43 Lunacharsky says: “ . a remarkable page of religious economics. I


say this at the risk of provoking a smile from the irreligious reader.” What-
ever your good intentions may or may not have been, Comrade Lunacharsky,
your playing with religion provokes not smiles but disgust.

44 Anti-Diihring, pp. 147-148.


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 155


thing else engage the attention of the reactionary philosophers, as
Avenarius, for example, and his pupil Bogdanov. Engels starts
with the knowledge and volition of man—on one side, and the neces-
sity of nature on the other—and instead of giving definitions, merely
says that the necessity of nature is primary, and that of human
volition and consciousness, secondary. The latter must operate in
conformity with the former. Engels considers this to be so obvious
that he does not waste words over it. Only the Russian Machians
complain of Engels’ general definition of materialism that nature
is the priws and consciousness the derived (remember Bogdanov’s
“perplexity” at that!). And yet at the same time they find one of
Engels’ partial applications of this general and fundamental defini-
tions “remarkably well-aimed!”

Third, Engels does not doubt the existence of “blind necessity.”
He recognises the existence of a necessity which is not known to
man. This is obvious in the passage which we have quoted. Yet
from the standpoint of the Machians it follows that man cannot
know of the existence of that which he has no knowledge of. To
have knowledge of the existence of “unknown necessity”—is this
not “mysticism,” “metaphysics,” recognition of “fetishes” and
“idols”—is it not the “Kantian unknowable thing-in-itself”? Had
the Machians given the matter a little more thought, they would
not have failed to notice the complete similarity of Engels’ argu-
ment concerning knowledge of the objectivity of nature and the
transformation of things-in-themselves into things-for-us, on the one
hand, and his argument concerning blind necessity, on the other.
The development of consciousness in each individual and the de-
velopment of the collective knowledge of humanity at large shows
us at each step the transformation of the unknown “thing-in-itself”
into the known “thing-for-us,” the transformation of blind, un-
known necessity, “necessity-in-itself,” into “necessity known to us.”
Epistemologically there is no difference between one transformation
and the other, for their basic viewpoint is materialistic, 7. e., the
recognition of the objective reality of the external world and of the
laws of nature. The world and its laws are absolutely knowable to
man, but they can never be completely known. We do not know
natural necessity in the phenomena of the weather, and to that ex-
tent we are slaves of the weather. Nevertheless without knowledge
of this necessity, we know that it exists. Whence this knowledge?
Whence the knowledge that things exist outside of knowledge


156 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM —


and independent of it? Only from the historical develop-
ment of our knowledge in the course of which every man has
earned millions of times that his ignorance gives way to knowl-
edge when an object acts on his sense-organs and vice versa: that
knowledge becomes ignorance when the possibility of such action
is eliminated.

Fourth, in the above-mentioned argument Engels palpably applies
the “salto-vitale” method in philosophy, that is, he makes a leap
from theory to practice. None of those learnedly stupid professors
of philosophy, in whose footsteps our Machians follow, ever permit
themselves to make leaps which are unbecoming to representatives
of “pure science.” For them the theory of knowledge is one thing,
for which they must invent some cunning “definition,” and practice
another. For Engels the whole of human practice is part of the
theory of knowledge thus giving an objective criterion of truth.
Until we acquire knowledge of the laws of nature, which exist
and act independently of our mind, we are slaves of “blind
necessity.” When we acquire knowledge of laws which act—as
Marx repeated a thousand times—independently of our volition
and our consciousness, we acquire mastery of nature. The
domination over nature, which manifests itself in human practice,
is a result of an accurate objective “reflection” within the mind
of man, of the phenomena of nature, and is proof that this “re-
flection” within the bounds of practice expresses an objective,
absolute, and eternal truth.

What is the upshot of this discussion? Each step of Engels’
argument, literally each phrase, each proposition, is constructed
wholly on the basic theory of knowledge of dialectic materialism,
of propositions which stand out in contrast with the absurdity of
Mach, who regards bodies as complexes of sensations or “elements”
and for whom perceptions and reality are identical. Without any
feeling of shame, the Machians give vent—in the manner of Berman
—to vulgar remarks about dialectical materialism. They take all
their philosophy from an eclectic mess of porridge and treat the
reader to it. They take a little from agnosticism, a little from
idealism and a little from Mach, combine them with a little from the
dialectical materialism of Marx, and call this mixture an improve-
ment upon Marxism. They imagine that if Mach, Avenarius, Pet-
zoldt, et al., whom they consider authorities, had not the slightest
conception of how Hegel and Marx solved the question of freedom


ST


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 157
REE AOS lee FBT tt BET Ny i A Rha


and necessity, it was sheerly through accident. They simply failed
to read through a page here and there. They do not know that in
reality these “authorities” were and still are ignoramuses, in regard
to the real progress of philosophy in the nineteenth century; they
do not seem to be aware that their “authorities” are simply philo-
sophical obscurantists.

Here is the argument of one such obscurantist, namely, the pro-
fessor of philosophy at the University of Vienna, Ernst Mach: “The
truth of the position of determinism or indeterminism cannot defi-
nitely be established. Only a completed science or a science which
would prove to be impossible could determine this question. It is a
question of the presuppositions which we bring to the exami-
nation of things, depending upon whether or not we ascribe to
former successes or failures of investigations a more or less sub-
jective weight. But at the moment of investigation each thinker is
of necessity a theoretical determinist.” *°

Is not this careful separation of pure theory from practice—ob-
scurantism, especially since determinism is confined to the do-
main of “investigation,” while in the domain of morality, social ac-
tivity, and all other fields which exclude “investigation,” the ques-
tion is left to a “subjective estimate”? In my workroom, says the
pedant, I am a determinist. But that the philosopher should think
of the whole, should embrace both theory and practice under a de-
terministic Weltanschauung, that is altogether out of the question.
Mach utters banalities because theoretically he is not at all clear on
the question of freedom and necessity. “. . . Each new discovery
discloses the limitations of our knowledge, reveals the remainder
of the functional dependencies which were not noticed before . . .”
(p. 283).

Is this “remainder” the “thing-in-itself” into which our knowl-
edge penetrates deeper and deeper? Not at all: “Thus the one who
in theory defends extreme determinism, must in practice remain an
indeterminist . . .” (p. 283). Well, here they shared things peace-
fully—theory to the professors, practice to the theologians! Or in
theory, objectivism, “shamefaced” materialism, in practice the “sub-
jective method in sociology”.** No wonder that the Russian ideolo-

45 Erkenntnis und Irrtum, pp. 282-283.

46 Mach in The Science of Mechanics says: “Our religious opinions are


always our own private affairs as long as we do not obtrude them upon
others and do not apply them to things which come under the jurisdiction of


a different tribunsi” (p. 464).


158 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM 7
gists of Philistinism, from Lessevich to Chernov, voiced their sym-
pathy with this vulgar philosophy. And it is a sad fact that people
who wish to be Marxists are led into this fallacy, bashfully hiding
the more conspicuous follies of Mach.

But on the question of freedom of the will, confusion and partial
agnosticism are not sufficient for Mach; he goes much further. “Our
sensation of hunger,” we read in The Science of Mechanics, “is not
so essentially different from the tendency of sulphuric acid for zinc,
and our will is not so greatly different from the pressure of the
stone as it appears. . . . Thus we feel ourselves nearer nature [that
is, if we hold such a view] without it being necessary that we should
resolve ourselves into a nebulous and mystical mass of molecules,
or make nature a haunt of hobgoblins” (ibid.). Thus we have no
need of materialism (“nebulous atoms” or electrons, the recognition
of the objectivity of the world), we have no need even of an idealism
which would recognise the world as “the otherness” of spirit; but
the possibility of an idealism which recognizes the world as will
is granted by them. We do not only refuse to deal with materialism
but also with the idealism of “a” Hegel, yet we do not mind stoop-
ing to flirt with an idealism in the spirit of Schopenhauer! Our
Machians, who put on an innocent air when even mention is made
of the kinship of Mach to philosophic idealism, prefer here also to
keep silent about this delicate question. Yet it is hard to meet an
exposition of the views of Mach in philosophic literature which
does not mention his inclinations towards the Willensmetaphysik,
that is, towards a voluntaristic idealism. Baumann *’ points this
out, and Kleinpeter, the Machian, does not in his rejoinder take
exception to this point, but declares that Mach is, of course, “nearer
to Kant and Berkeley than to the prevailing metaphysical empiri-
cism in science,” (i. e., instinctive materialism, ibid., Vol. 6, p. 87).
Becher,** too, points to this, remarking that if Mach in certain
places adopts a voluntaristic metaphysics, and in others renounces
it, it shows the looseness of his terminology. In fact Mach’s kinship
to the metaphysics of voluntarism is beyond doubt. Even Lucka *°
admits the admixture of this metaphysics of idealism with “phe-


47 Archiv fiir systematische Philosophie, Il, Vol. 5, p. 63, the article “On the
Philosophical Views of Mach.”


48 Erich Becher: “The Philosophical Views of Mach” in the Philosophical
Review, 1905, Vol. XIV, 5, 1905, pp. 536, 546, 547, 548.


49E,. Lucka: “Das Erkenntnisproblem und Machs Analyse der Empfin-
dungen,” Kantstudien, 1903, Vol. VIII, p. 400.


a,


THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 159


nomenalism,” or agnosticism. Wundt °° also points it out. That
Mach is a phenomenalist who is “not a stranger to voluntaristic
idealism” is attested in Ueberweg-Heinze’s textbook of the history
of modern philosophy.**

In short, the eclecticism of Mach and his pronounced bent to-
wards idealism is clear to everyone, save the Russian Machians.


50 Systematische Philosophie, 1907, p. 131.
51 Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie, Berlin, 1903, 9th ed., Vol. IV,
p. 250.


CHAPTER FOUR


THE PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS AS ASSOCIATES AND SUCCESSORS
OF EMPIRIO-CRITICISTS


We have been examining empirio-criticism as such. We must
now examine it in its historical development, in its connection and
correlation with other philosophic tendencies. First comes the
question of the relation of Mach and Avenarius to Kant.


1. The Criticism of Kantianism from the Left
and from the Right


Both Mach and Avenarius came to the fore in the seventies when,
in German professorial circles, the fashionable slogan “Back to
Kant” had been proclaimed. In their philosophic development both
founders of empirio-criticism took their starting point from Kant.
“His [Kant’s] critical idealism was, I recognise with the greatest
gratitude, the starting point of all my critical thought; but it was
impossible for me to retain my allegiance to it. I very soon began
to gravitate again towards the views of Berkeley, which are con-
tained, in a more or less latent form, in Kant’s writings. By study-
ing the physiology of the senses, and by reading Herbart, I then
arrived at views akin to those of Hume, though at that time I was
still unacquainted with Hume himself. To this very day I cannot
help regarding Berkeley and Hume as far more logically consistent
thinkers than Kant.” +

As we see, Mach very definitely acknowledges that, having begun
with Kant, he soon followed Berkeley and Hume. Let us turn to
Avenarius.

In the preface to his Prolegomena, etc. (1876), Avenarius re-
marks that the words Kritik der reinen Erfahrung indicate both his
relation to Kant’s Kritik der reinen Vernunft and his “antagonistic
attitude” towards him (p. iv). In what does his antagonism to Kant
consist? Kant, in Avenarius’ opinion, had not sufficiently “purged
experience.” This “purging” of experience engages Avenarius’ at-


1 Analysis of Sensations, p. 367.


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 161


a


tention in his Prolegomena (§ 56, p. 72ff). Of what does Ave-
narius “purge” the Kantian doctrine? In the first place, of aprior-
ism. He says: “The question as to whether we should eliminate
from experience the a priori conceptions of reason on the grounds
that they are superfluous, and instead start with pure experience is,
as far as I know, put here for the first time.” We have seen that
Avenarius has already “purged” Kantianism of the recognition of
necessity and causality.

Secondly, he purges Kantianism of its admission of substance
(§ 95) i. e. of the thing-in-itself, which, in Avenarius’ opinion, “is
not given in the stuff of actual experience but is imported into it
by reflection.”

We shall soon see that Avenarius’ confession of his philosophic
point of departure is in full accord with that of Mach and differs
only in the pretentiousness of its presentation. But we must first
note that Avenarius is telling an untruth that in 1876, for the
first time, he put the question of “purging experience,” that is, of
clearing the Kantian doctrine of its apriorism and its recognition of
the thing-in-itself. In fact, the development of German classic
philosophy after Kant resulted in a criticism of Kantianism which
is exactly in the same direction which Avenarius himself took.
This tendency in German classic philosophy is represented by
Schulze-Aenesidemus, an adherent of Humean agnosticism, and
Fichte, an adherent of Berkeleianism. In 1792 Schulze-Aeneside-
mus criticised Kant for the recognition of apriorism (Joc. cit., pp.
56, 141 ff) and the existence of the thing-in-itself. We sceptics or
adherents of Hume, said Schulze, entirely deny the existence of the
thing-in-itself, supposedly lying beyond “the bounds of all possible
experience” (p. 57). We deny objective knowledge (p. 25), and
we deny that space and time exist outside of us (p. 100); we deny
the presence of necessity in our experience (p. 112), of causality,
force, etc. (p. 113). We ought not attribute to these conceptions
any “reality outside of our representations” (p. 114). Kant “dog-
matically” proves the presence of apriority, by saying that “if we

cannot think any differently than we do there are, therefore, a priori
laws of thought.” “This method of reasoning,” Schulze insists,
“was utilised in philosophy long ago, to prove the objective nature
of that which lies beyond our conceptions” (p. 141). So arguing
we may attribute causality to the thing-in-itself (p. 142). “Experi-
ence never tells us (wir erfahren niemals) that the action of objects


—_ ———


en EEE ESERIES Ieee Sn aEEISaR ETE esa TL
162 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM
i


produce impressions within us,” and Kant did not in the least prove
that “the something which lies beyond our reason must be regarded
as the thing-in-itself as distinct from our sensation or feeling (Ge-
miit). Sensations may be thought of as the sole basis of our
knowledge” (p. 265). The Kantian critique of pure reason “bases
its argument on the proposition that every cognition begins with the
action of objective things on our nature [Gemiit], but it subse-
quently calls into question the veracity of this proposition” and the
reality of its subject (p. 266). Kant in no way refutes Berkeley
(pp. 268-272).

It is evident from this that Schultze rejects the doctrine of Kant—
rejects the “dogmatic” assertion that we experience objective reality,
that our presentations are caused by the action of independently
existing objects upon our sense-organs—and therefore regards the
thing-in-itself as an inconsistent concession to materialism. The
agnostic Schulze reproaches the agnostic Kant for the latter’s recog-
nition of the thing-in-itself,—a recognition which is incompatible
with agnosticism and ultimately leads to materialism. In the same
fashion, but much more vigorously, Kant is criticised by the sub-
jective idealist, Fichte, who maintains that Kant’s recognition of
the thing-in-itself as independent of the self is tantamount to “real-
ism” 2 and that Kant makes no clear distinction between “realism”
and “idealism.” Fichte sees the most incongruous inconsistency in
the admission on the part of Kant and his followers that the thing-in-
itself is the “basis of objective reality” (p. 480) for this leads to a
contradiction within “critical idealism.” “With you it seems,” says
Fichte of the realist commentators upon Kant, “that the earth rests
on the whale, and the-whale rests on the earth. Your thing-in-itself,
which is only thought, in turn acts on the Self” (p. 483).

Avenarius had made a great mistake in imagining that he “purged
experience” of Kant’s thing-in-itself and apriorism “for the first
time” and that he gave rise to a “new” movement in philosophy.
In reality he merely followed along the old lines of Hume, Berkeley,
Schulze-Aenesidemus and Fichte. Avenarius imagines that he has
“purified experience” in general. In reality he has only purged
Kantianism of agnosticism. He does not combat the agnosticism of
Kant (agnosticism is a denial of objective reality of that which is
given in sensation), but he strives to attain a purer agnosticism,
making all efforts to eliminate Kant’s inconsistent recognition of a


2 Werke, Vol. I, p. 483.


‘
3
a
;
3
o
7


——
PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 163


thing-in-itself, which is unknowable, nowmenal and otherworldly;
contesting the existence even of an a priori necessity and causality,
which Kant held was given to us by our understanding and not de-
rived from objective reality. He attacks Kant not from the left, as
the materialists do, but from the right in the manner of the sceptics
and idealists. Avenarius imagines that he is making progress,
when in reality he is only returning to the program of the old criti-
cal attack upon Kant. Kuno Fischer, speaking of Schulze-Aeneside-
mus, well characterised his standpoint in the following words:
“The Critique of Pure Reason with pure reason [apriorism] left out,
is scepticism. The Critique of Pure Reason, with the thing-in-itself
left out, is Berkeleian idealism.” ®

We now approach one of the most curious episodes of Machism,
that is, the campaign of the Russian Machians against Engels and
Marx. The latest discovery by Bogdanov, Yushkevich and Valen-
tinov, which they so loudly proclaim, is of Plekhanov’s “luckless
attempt to reconcile Engels with Kant, the compromise being the
barely knowable thing-in-itself” (Outlines, p. 67ff). This discovery
of our Machians leads to unheard-of blunders, and betrays a failure
to understand Kant and to grasp the sense of the entire devel-
opment of German classic philosophy.

The principal feature of the philosophy of Kant is an attempted
reconciliation of materialism and idealism, a compromise between
the claims of both, a fusion of heterogeneous and contrary philo-
sophic tendencies into one system. When Kant admits that some-
thing outside of us—a thing-in-itself—corresponds to our percep-
tions he seems to be a materialist. When he, however, declares this
thing-in-itself to be unknowable, transcendent, “trans-intelligible’—
he appears to be an idealist. Regarding experience as the only
source of our knowledge, Kant seems to be turning toward sensa-
tionalism and by way of sensationalism, under certain special con-
ditions, toward materialism. Recognising the apriority of space,
time, and causality, etc., Kant seems to be turning towards idealism.
Consistent materialists, and consistent idealists, as well as the
“pure” agnostics and Humeans, criticise him for this inconsistency.
The materialists accuse him of idealism. They refute the idealistic
features of his system, prove the possibility of knowledge, the this-
sidedness of the thing-in-itself, the absence of a radical difference
between the thing-in-itself and the phenomenon, and insist upon the


8 Die Geschichte der newer Philosophie, 1869, Vol. V, p. 115.


=) Sa


a Te ee
164 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM
age ee


need of deducing causality and similar concepts not from the a priori
laws of reason, but from objective reality. The idealists and the ag-
nostics object to Kant’s “thing-in-itself” as being a concession to ma-
terialism, “realism” or naive realism. The agnostics reject not only
the thing-in-itself but apriorism as well; while the idealists demand
a consistent deduction from pure thought not only of the @ priori
forms of understanding, but of the world as a whole (which is done
by stretching the human understanding until it becomes the “ab-
stract Self,” or “absolute Idea” or “universal Will,” etc.). And
here our Machians without being “aware” that they had taken as
their teachers men who had criticised Kant from the viewpoint of
scepticism and idealism, begin to tear their clothes and to cover
their heads with ashes, catching sight of strange people who criticised
Kant from a diametrically opposed point of view, who rejected every
bit of agnosticism, scepticism, and idealism in his system, who proved
that the thing-in-itself is objectively real, absolutely knowable, that
it is not otherworldly and does no¢ differ essentially from “appear-
ance,” that the thing-in-itself manifests itself as an “appearance” at
each step in the development of the individual and collective con-
sciousness of man—catching sight of such people, they begin to
shout: “Help! Help! Here is an illicit product of materialism
and Kantianism!”

When I read the assurances of the Machians to the effect that
they are more consistent and definite than the obsolete materialists
in their criticism of Kant, it seems to me as if a Purishkevich * had
stepped into our company and shouted, that he criticises the Con-
stitutional-Democrats ® more consistently and definitely than do the
Marxians. No question about it, Mr. Purishkevich, politically con-
sistent people always can and will criticise the Constitutional-
Democrats from diametrically opposed points of view, but one
must not forget, however, that you criticised them for being too
democratic, and we criticised them for not being democratic enough!
The Machians criticise Kant for being too much of a materialist


4 Purishkevich, V. M. (born 1870). An extreme reactionary leader and
Jew-baiter; member of the Duma. His name was a synonym for blackest
reaction during the Tsarist régime—Ed.

5 A political party of liberals, formed after the Revolution of 1905, whose
aim was to establish a constitutional régime in Russia and whose outstanding
leader was Prof. Paul Milyukov. The remaining erstwhile leaders of this
party are in the main political emigrés engaged in hostile campaigns against
the Russian Revolution and the Soviet Government.—Ed.


pen < J 5 a 2 = I pie .
PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 165


and we criticise him for not being more of a materialist. The
Machians criticise Kant from the right; we, from the left.

The Humean, Schulze, and the subjective idealist, Fichte, may
be taken as examples of “critics of the right” in the history of
classic German philosophy. As we have already seen, they try
to eliminate the “realistic” elements in Kantianism. Just as Kant
himself was criticised by Schulze and F ichte, so are the German
Neo-Kantians of the second half of the nineteenth century criticised
hy Humean empirio-criticists and subjective idealists — im-
manentists. The same tendency which Hume and Berkeley ex-
pressed, appears beneath a somewhat verbally repatched garb.
Mach and Avenarius reproach Kant not because his treatment of the
thing-in-itself is not sufficiently realistic and materialistic, but be-
cause he has admitted its existence altogether. Kant is reproached
not for his refusal to derive causality and necessity from objective
reality, but because he admits the presence of causality and neces-
sity excepting perhaps “logical” necessity. The immanentists are at
one with the empirio-criticists in criticising Kant from the stand-
points of Hume and Berkeley. For instance, Leclair in 1879, in
the work in which he praised Mach as a remarkable philosopher,
reproached Kant for his “inconsistency and connivance with real-
ism,” which expressed itself in the conception of the thing-in-itself,


—this “nominal residuum of vulgar realism.” ¢


Leclair speaks of materialism as “vulgar realism,” in an attempt
to make his criticism stronger. “According to our opinion,” writes
Leclair, “all those parts of the Kantian theory which tend towards
vulgar realism should be eliminated from idealism as being an in-
consistent and bastard (Zwittenhaft) product” (p. 41). “The in-
consistencies and contradictions” in the teaching of Kant arise from
a “mixture (Verquickung) of idealistic criticism and the irresolv-
able remnants of realistic dogmatism” (p. 170). By realistic dog-
matism Leclair also means materialism.

Johannes Rehmke, another follower of the immanence school, re-
proached Kant because he barred himself from Berkeley with the
realistic remnant of the thing-in-itself." “The philosophical activity
of Kant bore essentially a polemical character: through the thing-
in-itself he directed his philosophy against German rationalism


6 Der Realismus der modernen Naturalismus, p. 9.
7 Johannes Rehmke: Die Welt als Wahrnehmung und Begriff, Berlin, 1880,
p. 9.


Eee ee ee
166 - MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


[that is, against the old theism of the eighteenth century], and
through pure reason against English empiricism” (p. 25). “I would
compare the Kantian thing-in-itself with a movable trap placed over
a ditch: the thing looks very innocent and secure, but by stepping
upon it, you immediately fall into the abyss of the world-in-itself”
(p. 27). That is why Kant is not liked by the immanentist asso-
ciates of Mach and Avenarius. He borders in some respects upon
the “abyss” of materialism!

And here are examples of the attack on Kant from the left.
Feuerbach reproaches Kant not for his “realism” but for his ideal-
ism, characterising his system, as an “idealism erected on the basis
of empiricism.” ®

Here is another important remark of Feuerbach on Kant: “Kant
says that if we regard—as we ought—the objects of our percep-
tions as mere phenomena, we thereby admit that at the bottom of
phenomena there are things-in-themselves. Although we do not
know their inner construction, we know their phenomena—the man-
ner in which those unknown somethings, affect our senses. Hence,
our reason, in admitting the existence of phenomena, also admits
the existence of things-in-themselves; and thus we can say that to
postulate the existence of entities which are at the bottom of
phenomena, which are the cause of sense impressions, is not only
permissible but necessary. .. .”

Having selected a passage in Kant where the thing-in-itself is
regarded as a mental concept, a psychological essence and not a
real thing, Feuerbach directs all his criticism at it. “Therefore,”
he says, “the objects of perception, the objects of experience are for
the understanding only phenomena, not truth... .” The mental
impression, as you see, does not represent actual objects for the
understanding! The Kantian philosophy is a hopeless confusion
between subject and object, essence and existence, thinking and
being. The “essence” of anything is given to the understanding, its
existence to perception. But existence without essence, the existence
of phenomena without objective reality, “is a mere phenomenon,
it is a perceptual object; while essence without existence is a purely
conceptual essence, a noumenon. We can and ought to think of
them, but they lack existence and objectivity,—at least for us.
They are things-in-themselves, true things, but they are not real
things. . . . What a contradiction, to separate truth from reality,


8 Werke, Vol. I, p. 296.


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 167


reality from truth!” ® Feuerbach criticises Kant not for his recog-
nition of the thing-in-itself, but because he does not recognise its
actuality, its objective reality, because he regards it as a mere
thought, a mental concept, not as a kind of entity which can be
predicated upon anything that is real, actual and existing. Feuer-
bach attacks Kant for his deviation from materialism.

“The Kantian philosophy is contradictory,” Feuerbach wrote to
Bolin on March 26, 1858, “it inevitably leads either to Fichtean
idealism or to sensationalism.” The first alternative “belongs to
the past,” the second to “the present and future.”*° We have
already seen that Feuerbach defends objective sensationalism, i. e.,
materialism. The new turn from Kant to agnosticism and idealism,
to Hume and Berkeley, is undoubtedly reactionary, even from the
viewpoint of Feuerbach. And his ardent adherent, Albrecht Rau,
who inherited the merits of Feuerbach together with those of his
master’s faults which were later rectified by Marx and Engels, criti-
cises Kant wholely in the spirit of his teacher:

“The philosophy of Kant is a profound ambiguity; it is both
materialism and idealism, and the key to its essence lies in its dual
nature. As a materialist or an empiricist, Kant cannot help recog-
nising the existence of things outside of us; but as an idealist he
cannot rid himself of the prejudice that the soul is something totally
different from sensible things. There are real things, and the human
mind which apprehends those things. How does the mind approach
things totally different from itself? This is how Kant evades the
difficulty: the mind possesses certain a@ priori cognitive forms, in
virtue of which things must appear as they do. Hence, the fact
that we understand things as we do, is due to our own creative
power, for the mind which lives in us is part of a divine mind, and
just as God created the world out of nothing, so the human mind
creates out of certain things, something which they themselves do
not possess. Thus Kant guarantees to real things their existence as
‘things-in-themselves.’ The soul is a necessary prerequisite for Kant,
for immortality is to him a moral precept. The ‘thing-in-itself,’
gentlemen [says Rau, to the Neo-Kantians in general and the mud-
dle-headed Lange in particular, who falsified the History of Ma-
terialism] is what separates the idealism of Kant from the idealism
of Berkeley, it spans the gap between materialism and idealism.


9 Werke, Vol. Il, p. 303.
10 Griin: loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 49.


168 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


Such is my criticism of the Kantian philosophy and let those who
can reject this criticism. For the materialist the distinction of
a priori knowledge from the ‘thing-in-itself” is absolutely superflu-
ous; nowhere does he break connections in nature, nowhere
does he regard matter and mind as basically different things;
he regards them only as different sides of the same thing
and therefore has no need of the stratagem of making them ap-
proach one another.” **

Engels himself, as we have seen, criticised Kant for his agnos-
ticism but not for his inconsistent agnosticism. Lafargue, the dis-
ciple of Engels, in 1900 argued thus against the Kantians, amongst
whom at that time was Charles Rappoport:

“ . , At the beginning of the nineteenth century our bourgeoisie,
having completed its task of revolutionary destruction, began to
refute the philosophy of Voltaire. Catholicism, which Chateau-
briand painted in romantic colours, again became fashionable, and
Sebastian Mercier finally imported the idealism of Kant to dispatch
the materialism of the Encyclopedists, whose outstanding pro-
tagonists had been guillotined by Robespierre.

“At the end of the nineteenth century, which will go down in his-
tory as the ‘bourgeois century,’ the intellectuals attempted to crush
the materialism of Marx and Engels with the aid of the philosophy
of Kant. This reactionary movement started in Germany. I do not
mean to offend our socialist integralistes who would like to ascribe
all honor to Malon, the founder of their school. But Malon himself
is in reality a graduate of the school of Hochberg, Bernstein and
the other disciples of Diihring who began to reform Marxism in
Zurich. [Lafargue is speaking of the well-known ideological move-
ment in German socialism in the latter seventies.| We must also
expect Jaurés, Fournier and our other intellectuals to present us
with Kant when they shall have become familiar with his termi-
nology. . . . Rappoport is mistaken when he assures us that for
Marx ‘idea and reality are fundamentally identical.’ First of all we
never employ such metaphysical phraseology. The idea is as real
as the object, of which it is the reflection in the brain. . . . To
amuse the comrades who are acquainting themselves with the bour-
geois philosophy, I shall expound the substance of this famous prob-
lem which obsesses spiritualistic minds.


11 Albrecht Rau: Ludwig Feuerbach’s Philosophie, die Naturforschung und
die philosophische Kritik der Gegenwart, Leipzig, 1882, pp. 87-89.


/
wry . s 3


igs


—


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 169


“The working-man who thrives on sausage and receives five
francs a day knows very well that his employer who robs him lives
on pork; that the employer is a thief and that sausage is delicious
and nourishing to the body. Not at all, says the bourgeois sophist,
regardless of whether he is called Pearson, Hume or Kant. The
opinion of the worker is his personal, his subjective opinion; he
might very well maintain with the same right that his employer is
his benefactor and that sausage consists of chopped leather, for he
is unable to know the thing-in-itself. . . .

“The question is not well put, and its difficulty lies in this... .
To know the object, the individual must first discover whether his
senses deceive him or not. . . . But the chemists, however, go still
further,—they penetrate into the heart of objects, analyse them, de-
compose them into their elements, and then perform the reverse
procedure, of recomposing the body from its elements. And from
the moment that man is able to produce things from these elements
for his own use, he may, as Engels says, assert that he knows things-
in-themselves. The Christian God, if he existed and created the
world, could do no more.” 7?

We have permitted ourselves to quote this long passage in
order to show how Lafargue understands Engels and how he
criticises Kant from the left—criticises not those aspects of Kantian-
ism which are different from the philosophy of Hume but those
which are common to both Kant and Hume; not for his admission
of the thing-in-itself, but for his inadequate materialistic account
of it.

And lastly Kautsky, in his Ethics, also criticises Kant from a
viewpoint contrary to that of Hume and Berkeley. “My organs of
vision have only the function of making me conscious of this differ-
ence in a certain form, that of colour. . . . That I see green, red
and white, has its ground in my organs of sight. But that the green
is different from red, testifies to something that lies outside of me,
to a real difference between the things. . . . But the relations and
distinctions of the things themselves, which are shown to me by
means of the individual space and time concepts . . . are real rela-
tions and distinctions of the external world, which are not condi-
tioned by the nature of my faculty of knowledge. . . . Thus if the
doctrine of Kant about the ideality of time and space were true,


12 Paul Lafargue: “Le materialisme de Marx et Vidéalisme de Kant,” Le
Socialiste, February 25, 1900.


170 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM 3


we could know absolutely nothing about the world outside of us, not
even that it existed.” **

Thus the whole school of Feuerbach, Marx and Engels turns from
Kant to the extreme left, and completely rejects all kinds of ideal-
ism and agnosticism. But our Machians follow the reactionary
trend in philosophy, follow Mach and Avenarius who criticise Kant
from the standpoints of Hume and Berkeley. Of course, to espouse
a reactionary ideology is within the sacred rights of every citizen
and, especially, of every intellectual. But when people, who have
severed their relations with the fundamental tenets of the Marxian
philosophy, begin to dodge, confuse, evade and go so far as to as-
sure us that they “too” are Marxians in philosophy, that they are
“almost” in agreement with Marx and have only “supplemented”
him,—such a spectacle is far from agreeable.


2. How the “Empirio-Symbolist” Yushkevich Ridiculed the
“Empirio-Criticist” Chernov


“Tt is ludicrous,” writes Mr. Yushkevich, “to see how out of the
agnostic, Comtean and Spencerian positivist, Mikhailovsky, Mr.
Chernov wishes to make a precursor of Mach and Avenarius” (loc.
cit., p. 73).

Ludicrous, above all, is the stupendous ignorance of Mr. Yush-
kevich. Like all Voroshilovs, he conceals his ignorance with a dis-
play of erudite names and words. This citation is from a passage
which is supposed to elucidate the relation of Machism to Marxism.
And having taken it upon himself to treat of the subject, Mr. Yush-
kevich does not know that for Engels, as for every materialist, both
the adherents of the Humean tendency and the adherents of the
Kantian tendency, are equally agnostic. Therefore, to contrast
agnosticism with Machism in general, when Mach acknowledges
himself to be an adherent of Hume, is to be a philosophic ig-
noramus. The phrase “agnostic positivism” is also absurd, for the
adherents of Hume call themselves positivists. Mr. Yushkevich
who has taken Petzoldt as his teacher, must have known that Pet-
zoldt directly links up empirio-criticism with positivism. And
finally, the mere mention of the names of Auguste Comte and Her-
bert Spencer is absurd, for Marxism does not reject that which distin-


18 Karl Kautsky: Ethics and the Materialist Conception of History, Chicago,
1907, p. 44.


4


is Sas
sg


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 171


guishes one positivist from another, but that which they both have
in common, that which makes a philosopher a positivist, instead
of a materialist.

This entire jumble of words was necessary to Voroshilov in order
to abash the reader, to stun him with the sound of words, to divert his
attention from the essence of the matter and direct it to trifles. And
the essence of the matter consists in a radical disparity between ma-
terialism and the broad movement of positivism, which includes as
its representatives—Comte, Spencer, Mikhailovsky, and a host of
other Neo-Kantians, together with Mach and Avenarius. The heart
of the matter had been fully and definitely expressed by Engels in


his Feuerbach, where he puts all the Kantians and Humeans of the


eighties, in the same camp as the wretched eclectics, Flohknacker,
etc. To whom this characterisation could apply—of this our Voro-
shilovs could not think. And as they are incapable of doing any
thinking, we shall here adduce a comparison that will shed some
light on the subject. As a matter of fact Engels, speaking in 1888
and 1891 of the Kantians and Humeans in general, does not men-
tion any names. The only reference made in his book is that of the
relation of Starcke to Feuerbach. “Starcke takes great pains to de-
fend Feuerbach against the attacks and doctrines of those college
instructors who plume themselves nowadays in Germany upon
being philosophers. It is true that this is a matter of importance
to those people who take an interest in the degenerate progeny
of German classic philosophy; to Starcke himself this might
appear necessary. We spare the reader this, however” (Feuerbach,
p. 79).

Engels wished to “spare the reader,” that is to spare the social-
democrats from making the acquaintance of the degenerate prattlers
who call themselves philosophers. Now, who are the representa-
tives of the “degenerate progeny”?

We open Starcke’s book *+ and there we find constant references
to the adherents of Hume and Kant. Starcke excludes Feuerbach
from the two movements ushered in by these men. Starcke quotes
Riehl, Windelband and Lange (pp. 3, 18-19, 127).

We open Avenarius’ Der menschliche Weltbegriff, and we read
the following on page 120 of the first edition: “The final result of
our analysis is based upon the concurrence—though not in absolute
accordance with the differences between the several points of view


14C. N. Starcke: Ludwig Feuerbach, Stuttgart, 1885.


172 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


__with the conclusions which other investigators have reached, for
example, Laas, Mach, Riehl, Wundt, and also Schopenhauer.”

Whom did our Voroshilov-Yushkevich ridicule?

Avenarius does not at all doubt that in principle he is akin not
in respect to detail but in respect to the “final result” of empirio-
criticism—to the Kantians, Riehl and Laas, and the idealist Wundt.
Mach is mentioned together with the two Kantians. Indeed, do they
not make one company, since Riehl and Laas play at being Kan-
tians although they are followers of Hume, while Mach and Ave-
narius play at being followers of Hume although they are Berkelei-
ans?

Is it to be wondered at, then, that Engels wished to “spare” the
German workers from intimate acquaintance with the company of
“flea-crushing” academicians? Engels spares the German workers
but the Voroshilovs do not spare the Russian reader.

It should be noted that an eclectic combination of Kant and
Hume, or Hume and Berkeley, is possible, so to speak, in various
proportions, due emphasis being placed now upon one element of
the mixture, and now upon another. We have seen that only one
Machian, Mr. Kleinpeter, openly admits that he and Mach are
solipsists—consistent Berkeleians. But on the contrary, the
Humean tendency of Mach and Avenarius is emphasised by many
of their disciples and adherents: Petzoldt, Willy, Pearson, the Rus-
sian empirio-criticist Lessevich, the Frenchman Delacroix*® and
others. We shall here cite as an example an important scientist,
who in philosophy also connects Hume with Berkeley, but who ac-
centuates the materialist elements of such an admixture. He is
Huxley, the famous English naturalist, who coined the term “agnos-
tic” and whom Engels undoubtedly has in mind, more than anyone
else, when he speaks of English agnosticism. Such types of agnos-
tics were in 1891 called by Engels “shamefaced materialists.” James
Ward, the English spiritualist, in his book, Naturalism and Agnos-
ticism, in which he chiefly attacks the “scientific leader of agnos-
ticism,” Huxley (Vol. II, p. 31), confirms Engels’ estimate when
he says: “In Huxley’s case indeed the leaning towards the primacy
of the physical side [“series of elements” with Mach] is often so
pronounced that it can hardly be called parallelism at all. In spite


15 Henri Delacroix: Bibliothéque du congréss international de la philosophie,
David Hume et la philosophie critique, Vol. IV. The author refers to the ad-
herents of Hume, Avenarius and the adherents of the immanentist school in
Germany, and Renouvier and his School (neo-criticists) in France.


heh Cie en


em


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 173


of his vehement repudiation of the title materialist as an affront
to his untarnished agnosticism, I know of few recent writers who on
occasion better deserve the title.” *®

And Ward quotes a passage from Huxley to confirm his opinion.
“Any one who is acquainted with the history of science will admit,
that its progress has, in all ages, meant, and now more than ever
means, the extension of the province of what we call matter and
causation and the concomitant gradual banishment from all regions
of human thought of what we call spirit and spontaneity.” Or: “It
is in itself of little moment whether we express the phenomena of
matter in terms of spirit, or the phenomena of spirit in terms of
matter—each statement has a certain relative truth. But with a view
to the progress of science, the materialistic terminology is in every
way to be preferred. For it connects thought with the other
phenomena of the universe . . . whereas, the alternative, or spirit-
ualistic terminology is utterly barren, and leads to nothing but ob-
scurity and confusion of ideas. Thus there can be little doubt, that
the further science advances, the more extensively and consistently
will all the phenomena of Nature be represented by materialistic
formule and symbols” (pp. 17-19).

That is how the “shamefaced materialist” Huxley argued, re-
fusing to accept materialism which he regards as “metaphysics,” for
it illegitimately goes beyond “groups of sensations.” And the same
Huxley wrote: “If I were obliged to choose between absolute ma-
terialism and absolute idealism I should feel compelled to accept
the latter alternative [p. 216]. . . . Our one certainty is the exist-
ence of the mental world” (p. 219).

The philosophy of Huxley is also a mixture of Hume and Berk-
eley, as is the philosophy of Mach: but in Huxley’s case the Ber-
keleian passages are rare, and agnosticism is the fig-leaf of
materialism. With Mach the “colouring” of the mixture is a dif-
ferent one and the same spiritualist, Ward, bitterly fighting Huxley,
eood-naturedly pats the shoulder of Avenarius and Mach.


3. The Immanentists as Associates of Mach and Avenarius


In speaking of empirio-criticism we can not avoid reference to
the philosophers of the so-called immanentist school, the chief rep-
resentatives of which are Schuppe, Leclair, Rehmke, and Schubert:


16 James Ward: Naturalism and Agnosticism, London, 1899, p. 31.


174 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


Soldern. It is essential, therefore, to examine the relation of em-
pirio-criticism to the philosophy of immanence especially as
preached by the last-named.

In 1902 Mach wrote the following in the introduction to the
fourth edition of the Analysis of Sensations:

“To-day I see that a host of positivistic philosophers, critical em-
piricists, adherents of the philosophy of immanence, and certain
isolated scientists as well, have all, without any knowledge of one
another’s work, entered upon paths which, in spite of all their in-
dividual differences, converge almost towards one point” (p. 13).
Here we must first note Mach’s truthful statement that very few
naturalists belong to the adherents of the supposedly “new” (in
truth very old) school of the Humean-Berkeleian philosophy. Sec-
ondly, Mach’s view of this “new” philosophy, as a broad movement,
in which the philosophers of the immanentist school are on a par
with the empirio-criticists and the positivists, is important. “Thus
there opens one common movement.” 1" “My position, moreover,
borders closely on that of the representatives of the philosophy of
immanence. . . . This is especially true in the case of Schuppe with
whose writings I became acquainted in 1902; his Outline of the
Theory of Knowledge and Logic, a work which is packed with
thought and which can be read without a special dictionary, struck
a particularly sympathetic chord in me” (ibid., p. 46). Schubert-
Soldern also “struck a sympathetic chord” in Mach, and to Wil-
helm Schuppe he dedicates his last and conclusive philosophic
work, Erkenntnis und Irrtum.

Avenarius, another founder of empirio-criticism, wrote in 1894
that he is “rejoiced” and “encouraged” by the sympathy of Schuppe
with empirio-criticism, and that the differences between him and
Schuppe “exist, perhaps, only temporarily.” *® And, finally, Pet-
zoldt, whose teaching Lessevich regards as the last word in empirio-
criticism, openly acclaims the trio—Schuppe, Mach and Avenarius—
as the leaders of the “new” movement.’® On this point Petzoldt is
definitely opposed to Willy,?° perhaps the most outstanding of those
Machians who felt ashamed of such a kinship as Schuppe’s and
tried to shield himself against him, for which he was reprimanded

17 Analysis, etc., p. 4, preface to the Russian edition.

18 Vierteljahrsschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Philosophie, 1894, 18 Jahrg. p. 29.

19 Finfiihrung in der Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung, 1904, Vol. I, p. 295;


Die Weltproblem, 1906, pp. v and 146,
20 Finfithrung, etc., Vol. I, p. 321.


—_—a


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 17%


by his dear teacher, Avenarius. Avenarius wrote the aforemen-
tioned words about Schuppe in his note to Willy’s article against
Schuppe, adding that the criticism of Willy “was put more strongly
than it should have been.” ?*

Having acquainted ourselves with the empirio-criticists’ estimate
of the representatives of the doctrine of immanence, we shall pro-
ceed with the latter’s estimate of the empirio-criticists. We have
already spoken of Leclair’s opinion of 1879. Schubert-Soldern in
1882 expresses his partial agreement “with the older Fichte” (that
is, the distinguished representative of subjective idealism, Johann
Gottlieb Fichte, whose son was as philosophically inept, as the son
of Joseph Dietzgen), and “with Schuppe, Leclair, Avenarius and
partly Rehmke,” while Mach is cited with special pleasure as being
opposed to “naturo-historical metaphysics” ?8—an expression which
the reactionary instructors and professors in Germany apply to
naturo-historical materialism. In 1893 after the issue of Avenarius’
Menschliche Weltbegriff, Schuppe greeted this work in an open let-
ter to Avenarius as the “confirmation of naive realism” defended
by Schuppe himself. “My conception of the understanding,”
Schuppe wrote, “is in agreement with your pure experience.” 7°
Then in 1896, Schubert-Soldern gave an account of the “methodo-
logical tendency in philosophy” on which he “leans,” one which is
derived from Berkeley and Hume and which has descended through
Lange (“the beginnings of our movement in Germany date from
Lange”) and then through Laas, Schuppe, et al., Avenarius and
Mach; through the Neo-Kantians, Riehl and Renouvier, the French-
man, etc.2# And finally in the preface to the platform, printed in
the first issue of the special philosophic organ of the followers of
the immanentist school, together with the declaration of war on
materialism and with the expression of sympathy to Renouvier, we
read: “Even in the camp of the naturalists, there have already been
raised voices of individuals in protest against the self-esteem of
their colleagues in persisting in the unphilosophic spirit which has
penetrated the natural sciences. Such, for example, is Mach. .. .


21 Vierteljahrsschrift fir wissenschaftliche Philcsophie, 1894, p. 29; Willy’s
article against Schuppe is also contained therein.

22 Dr. Richard von Schubert-Soldern: Ueber Transcendenz des Objects und
Subjects, 1882, p. 37, § 5; Cf. his Grundlagen einer Erkenntnistheorie, 1884,
De 3:

28 Vierteljahrsschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Philosophie, 17 Jrg. 1893, p. 384.
24 Schubert-Soldern: Das menschliche Gliick und die sociale Frage, 1896,


pp. v-vi.


176 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


Fresh forces have gathered into motion from all sides and have set
to work in order to destroy the blind faith in the infallibility of
the natural sciences, have begun to search for new paths in the
depths of the mysterious, to search for deeper insights into the
realm of truth.” 7°

A word must be said about Renouvier. He is the head of the in-
fluential school of the so-called neo-criticists in France. His theo-
retical philosophy is a combination of the phenomenalism of Hume
and the apriorism of Kant. The thing-in-itself is absolutely re-
jected. The connection of phenomena, order and law are declared
to be a priori; law is written in capital letters and is taken as the
basis of religion. The Catholic priests exult over this philos-
ophy. Willy, the Machian, indignantly calls Renouvier the “sec-
ond apostle Paul,” “an obscurantist of the higher school,” the
“casuistic preacher of freedom of will.” 2° The co-thinkers of the
immanentists in France warmly greeted the philosophy of Mach.
When his Science of Mechanics was translated into French, the organ
of the Neo-Criticists—L’ Année Philosophique—edited by Pillon,
the collaborator and disciple of Renouvier, wrote: “It is useless to
speak of the extent to which, in its criticism of substance, object,
thing-in-itself, the positive science of Mach is at one with neo-
critical idealism” (Vol. XV, p. 179).

As for the Russian Machians, they are ashamed of their kinship
with the representatives of the philosophy of immanence. It is im-
possible, of course, to expect anything else of people who uncon-
sciously follow the direction of Struve, Menshikov, et al. Only
Bazarov calls “certain representatives of the immanentist school”
“realists.” 27 Bogdanov briefly declares that “the immanentist
school is only an intermediate form between Kantianism and em-
pirio-criticism,” an interpretation that is quite wrong.?* Chernov
writes: “Generally speaking, the immanentists approach positivism
in only one aspect of their theory, in the other aspects they go far
beyond it.”?° Valentinov says that the “immanentists wrapped
up these (Machian) thoughts in a useless form and fell into the


25 Zeitschrift fir immanente Philosophie, Berlin, 1896, Vol. I, pp. 6, 9.

26 Gegen die Schulweisheit, p. 129.

27 “Realists in modern philosophy—some representatives of the immanentist
school, who derive their origin from Kantianism, the school of Mach-Avenarius
and other movements akin to them find that there are no grounds whatsoever
to reject the starting point of naive realism” (Outlines, p. 26).

28 Empirio-Monism, Book III, p. xii.

29 Philosophical and Sociological Studies, p. 37 (in Russian).


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS Va


solipsistic impasse” (op cit., p. 149). As you see nothing lacks there
—here is realism and solipsism in one swoop. Our Machians are
simply afraid to state the truth about them openly and frankly.

The truth of the matter is that the adherents of that school are the


most sworn reactionaries, open preachers of theism, unadulterated


in their obscurantism. There is not one of them who would not
undertake to defend religion in the field of epistemology, or come
forward with an apology for one kind or another of medizvalism.
Leclair, in 1879, defends his philosophy as satisfying “all the needs
of a religiously inclined person.” *° Rehmke in 1880 dedicated his
Theory of Knowledge to the Protestant pastor, Biedermann, and
closes his book with a sermon not on God as supernatural, but on
God as a “real conception” (is this why Bazarov ranged “certain”
followers of the philosophy of immanence amongst the “realists” ?),
while the “objectification of this real conception is posited and
solved by practical life,” while Biedermann’s Christian Dogmatism
is declared to be the standard of “scientific theology.” *t Schuppe
insists that though the immanentists deny transcendentalism, yet the
concept of transcendentalism does not necessarily include God and
immortality.2? In his Ethics he defends the “connection of the moral
law ... with one’s metaphysical outlook,” and condemns as a
“senseless phrase,” separation of the church from the state.°* Schu-
bert-Soldern in his Foundations of the Theory of Knowledge de-
duces both the pre-existence of the self and its after-existence in re-
lation to the body, thus defending the immortality of the soul (p.
82). In Die sociale Frage he defends, in opposition to Bebel, suf-
frage based on class privilege together with other “social reforms,”
and says that the “social-democrats ignore the fact that without the
divine gift—of misfortune—there would be no happiness” (p. 330),
and at this point laments the fact that “materialism dominates” (p.
242) ; that “he who in our time believes in the hereafter, or even in
its possibility, is considered a fool” (ibid.).

And these German Menshikovs, obscurantists of no lesser calibre
than Renouvier, live peacefully side by side with the empirio-
criticjsts. Their theoretical kinship is incontestable. There is no
more of Kantianism in the philosophy of immanence than in that of

30 Der Realismus, etc., p. 73.

31 Rehmke: Die Welt als Wahrnehmung und Begriff, Berlin, 1880, p. 312.


82 Zeitschrift fiir immanente Philosophie, Vol. II, p. 52. ;
88 Wilhelm Schuppe: Grundziige der Ethik und Rechtsphilosophie, Breslau,


1881, pp. 181, 325.


178 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


Petzoldt or Pearson. We have seen that they look upon themselves
as disciples of Hume and Berkeley, an opinion which is generally
entertained in philosophic literature. To illustrate what the epis-
temological assumptions of the associates of Mach and Avenarius
are, we shall quote from some of the works of immanentists.

In 1879 Leclair had not as yet invented the name “immanent,”
which signifies “empirical,” and which is Just as deceiving a label
to conceal corruption as are the labels and slogans of the European
bourgeois parties. In his first work, Leclair frankly and explicitly
calls himself a “critical idealist. Kant is there criticised, as we
have already seen, for his concessions to materialism, and Leclair
there definitely points out the path he himself has taken from Kant
to Fichte and Berkeley. Leclair fights against materialism in gen-
eral and against the leanings toward materialism displayed by the
majority of scientists. So do Schuppe, Schubert-Soldern and
Rehmke.

He says: “Let us return to the standpoint of critical idealism, let
us not attribute any transcendental existence to the processes of
nature or to nature as a whole [that is an existence beyond human
consciousness]. The aggregate of bodies and the subject’s own
body, in so far as he sees and feels it together with its changes, will
then appear as the immediate presentation of spatially connected
co-existences and successions in time, and the whole explanation of
nature will reduce itself to stating the laws of these co-existences
and successions” (p. 21).

Back to Kant! said the reactionary-Neo-Kantians. Back to Fichte
and Berkeley! is what the demand of the reactionary immanentists
can be reduced to. _For Leclair, existence and the “complex of
sensations” are identical (p. 38); these properties which act on
our sense-organs are indicated by him with the letter M, those acting
on other natural objects, with the letter N (pp. 150 ff). He speaks
of nature as the “phenomenon of the consciousness not of a single
person, but of mankind” (p. 55). If we take into consideration the
fact that Leclair issued his book in Prague, the very same city
where Mach was professor of physics, and that Leclair gladly cites
only Die Erhaltung der Arbeit of Mach which appeared in 1872, an
inevitable question arises: ought we not regard the adherent of fide-
ism and the open idealist, Leclair, as the actual sponsor of the
“original” philosophy of Mach?

84 Der Realismus, etc., pp. 11, 21, 206 ff.


—:


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 179


As for Schuppe, who, according to Leclair,®> reached “similar re-
sults,” he, as we have seen, pretends to defend “naive realism”; and
in the Open Letter to Avenarius he complains of the “established
perversion of my [Schuppe’s] theory of knowledge into subjective
idealism.” The substance of the crude guile, which is called by
Schuppe the defence of realism, is sufficiently obvious from his re-
joinder to Wundt, who without hesitation had classified the im-
manentists with the Fichteans and the subjective idealists.**

“In my case,” Schuppe retorts to Wundt, “the proposition that
‘existence is consciousness’ implies that consciousness without the
external world is inconceivable; that, consequently, the latter be-
longs to the former and presupposes the absolute connection (Zu-
sammengehorigkeit) of both, a fact which has been noted and ex-
plained by me many times; in this connection both constitute the
unitary, and primeval whole of existence.” ®”

One must be extremely naive not to notice the unadulterated sub-
jective idealism in such “realism”! Just think of it, the external
world “belongs to consciousness” and is in absolute connection with
it! Indeed, the poor professor was slandered when he was classi-
fied with the subjective idealists. Such philosophy fully coincides
with the “essential co-ordination” of Avenarius; no attempted justifi-
cations and protests on the part of Chernov and Valentinov can sepa-
rate them; both philosophies are destined to find their way into the
museum of the reactionary exhibits manufactured by the German
professordom. As a curiosity testifying to Valentinov’s limitations,
note that he calls Schuppe a solipsist (it is obvious, that Schuppe
insists just as strenuously that he is not a solipsist, and has written
special articles on this subject, as have Mach, Petzoldt, et al.), and
is highly pleased with Bazarov’s article in the Outlines! I should
like to translate into German the following utterance of Bazarov’s,
“The reality existing outside of us is sense-perception,” and forward
it to some reasonable follower of the immanentist school. He would
embrace Bazarov just as heartily as the Schuppes, Leclairs and
Schubert-Solderns have embraced Mach and Avenarius. For the
utterance of Bazarov is the alpha and omega of the doctrines of the
immanentist school.


85 Beitrage zu einer monistischen Erkenntnistheorie, Breslau, 1882, p. 10.
36 Philosophische Studien, loc. cit., pp. 386, 397, 407.
37 Wilhelm Schuppe: “Die immanente Philosophie und Wilhelm Wundt,”


Zeitschrift fiir immanente Philosophie, Vol. Il, p. 195.


«


180 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM —


Here is, finally, Schubert-Soldern: “The materialism of natural
science,” the “metaphysics” implicit in the recognition of the objec-
tivity of the external world, is the chief enemy of this philosopher.**
“Natural science abstracts from all relations of consciousness” (p.
52)—this is its chief defect (for it is the substance of materialism)
—“since the individual cannot escape from his sensations and, hence,
from a state of consciousness” (pp. 33, 34). Of course, Schubert-
Soldern admitted in 1896, “My viewpoint is epistemological solip-
sism,” *® but it is neither “metaphysical” nor “practical.” “What
we experience immediately is a sensation or a complex of constantly
changing sensations.” *°

“Marx accepted the material process of production,” says Schu-
bert-Soldern, “as the cause of inner processes and motivations in the
same way (and just as falsely) as natural science accepts the gen-
eral [to humanity] external world as the cause of the individual
inner world.” 4 About the connection of the historical materialism
of Marx with natural, historical and philosophical materialism in
general, Mach’s associate has no doubt at all.


2


“Many, perhaps even the majority, will be of the opinion that
from the standpoint of epistemological solipsism no metaphysics is
possible at all, that metaphysics is really transcendental. Upon
more thorough reflection I cannot hold this opinion. Here are my
proofs. . . . The immediate foundation of experience is a spiritual
(solipsist) connection, the central point of which is the Self (the
individual realm of presentations) with its body. The rest of the
world is inconceivable without this Self, and this Self is inconceiv-
able without the rest of the world; therefore it follows that with the
destruction of the individual Self the world would be destroyed.
But this is impossible. Were the world destroyed there would re-
main no place for the individual Self, for the latter can be sepa-
rated from the world only logically, but not in time and space.
Therefore my individual Self must inevitably exist after my death
also, since the entire world cannot be annihilated with it at the same
time” (ibid., p. xxiii).

“Essential co-ordination,” “complexes of sensation” and the rest


38 Die Grundlage der Wissenschaftstheorie, 1884, p. 31, Ch. Il; Die Meta-
physik der Naturwissenschaft. -

39 Sociale Frage, p. x.

40 Ueber Transcendenz des Objects und Subjects, p. 73.

41 Sociale Frage, p. xviii.


a
» ¥


‘


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 181
a ie


of the Machian effusion stand those who have need of them in good


‘stead!


“. . . What represents ‘the beyond’ from the point of view of
solipsism? It is the possibility of a future experience [ibid |. .° 2,
Of course, spiritualism, for example, has not proven the existence of
a hereafter, but neither can the materialism of natural science be
advanced against spiritualism, for this materialism, as we have seen,
is only one side of the world process [ ‘essential co-ordination’ |
within an all embracing spiritual connection” (p. xxiv).

All this is said in the same philosophic introduction to the Sociale
Frage (1896), in which Schubert-Soldern expresses his constant
agreement with Mach and Avenarius. Only in the case of the Rus-
sian Machians does Machism serve exclusively for intellectual prat-
tle, but in its own country its réle as a flunkey to theism is openly
proclaimed!


4. In What Direction Is Empirio-Criticism Developing?


Let us cast a glance at the development of Machism subsequent
to Mach and Avenarius. It has been shown that their philosophy
is a mass of contradictory and disconnected epistemologic proposi-
tions. Now we must seek the direction in which this philosophy
is developing; this will help us to decide certain “debatable” issues
by referring to certain “undebatable” historical facts. Indeed, in
discussing the eclecticism and incoherence of the philosophic point
of departure of this school, varying interpretations and sterile argu-
ments concerning detail are inevitable. But empirio-criticism, like
every ideological movement, is a living thing, which grows and
develops, and the fact of its growth in one direction or another,
can help us to solve better than long discourses, the basic question
as to what the real essence of this philosophy is. We usually judge
a person not from the way he thinks or speaks of himself but from
the way he behaves. We must judge philosophers, too, not by the
labels they bear (“positivism,” “pure experience,” “monism,” or
“empirio-monism,” “naturalism,” etc.), but according to their an-
swers to the fundamental questions, who their associates are, what
they generally teach and what they have imparted to their disciples
and followers.

It is the last question especially which interests us now. Their
most essential doctrines were already laid down by Mach and


182 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM |


Avenarius about twenty years ago. During that time the question
had to be answered as to how “the leaders” were to be understood
by those who wanted to understand them, and whom they themselves
(at least Mach who outlived his colleague) considered as successors
and followers. To be exact, let us take those who regard them-
selves as disciples, or adherents, of Mach and Avenarius, and whom
Mach himself recognises as such. We shall thus get a picture of
empirio-criticism as a philosophic movement, and not as a mere
collection of literary cases.

In the introduction to the Russian edition of the Analysis of
Sensations Mach recommends Hans Cornelius as a “young investi-
gator” who has taken “if not the same position as Mach, then at
least one bordering closely upon it” (p. 4). In the text of the
Analysis of Sensations Mach once again “with pleasure points to the
works” of Cornelius and others “who have propounded the essence
of Avenarius’ ideas and who have developed them still further”
(p. 40). In Cornelius’ Einleitung in die Philosophie, we see that
its author also expresses his intentions of following in the footsteps
of Mach and Avenarius (pp. viii, 32). We have before us then
a disciple who has been acknowledged as such by his teacher.
This disciple also begins with the elements of sensation (pp. 17,
42), and categorically declares that he has confined himself to
experience (p. vi), and calls his views “consistent or epistemological
empiricism” (p. 335). He definitely condemns the “one-sidedness”
of idealism and the “dogmatism” of both the idealists and material-
ists (p. 129); he energetically denies (p. 123) that from his phi-
losophy there necessarily follows the “misunderstanding” that the
world exists in the mind of man, and flirts with naive realism no
less dexterously than do Avenarius, Schuppe or Bazarov (“the
visual as well as everything else given in perception has its locus
where we find it, that is to say, where the naive mind, untouched
by a false philosophy, localises it,” p. 125), and yet, the disciple,
recognised by his teacher, arrives at immortality and God. Ma-
terialism, shouts this police officer in a professorial chair,—this
disciple of “recent positivism,’—materialism converts man into an
automaton. “There is no question that together with the disappear-
ance of the belief in freedom of the will, moral validity and re-
sponsibility for our deeds also disappears; materialism leaves no
room for the idea of the continuity of life after death” (p. 116).
The final note of the book is that education (of the youth duped


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 183


by this man of science) is necessary not so much for a life of
activity as “primarily to implant veneration (Ehrfurcht) —not for
the temporal values of the transitory tradition, but for the im-
perishable values of duty and beauty, for the divine in us and
beyond us” (p. 358).

Compare with this Bogdanov’s assertion that “there is no room
and there cannot be any room” for the ideas of God, freedom of
the will and immortality of the soul in the philosophy of Mach,
since the latter denies the “thing-in-itself.” 42 And Mach in the
same book (p. 293) declares that “there is no Machian philosophy”
and recommends not only the immanentists but Cornelius as
well, as the ones who have revealed the essence of Avenarius’
ideas. In the first place, Bogdanov himself is not acquainted with
the development of the “Machian philosophy”—does not know
that it not only nestles under the wing of theism but actually em-
braces it. In the second place, Bogdanov does not know the his-
tory of philosophy, for to tie up the denial of these ideas with
a denial of the thing-in-itself, is to mock at the history of philos-
ophy. Would Bogdanov deny that consistent adherents of Hume,
who have rejected the thing-in-itself, still leave room for those
ideas? Has he never heard of the subjective idealists who re-
ject the thing-in-itself and yet leave room for these ideas?
“There can be no room” whatsoever for these ideas—indeed—but
in a philosophy which denies that perception constitutes the sole
reality, which teaches that the world is matter in motion; that the
external world, with which we are so familiar, is the only ob-
jective reality;—indeed—in the philosophy of materialism! It
is precisely because of this that materialism is combated by the
immanentists who have received the recommendation of Mach and
his disciple Cornelius, as well as by the entire professorial
philosophy.

Our Machians begin to reject Cornelius only when this indecency
is pointed out to them. Rejections of this kind are worth very little.
Friedrich Adler, evidently not having been warned beforehand,
recommends the same Cornelius in the socialist journal Der Kampf
(1908, No. 5, p. 235), and writes that “this work is easy to read
and deserves high recommendation.” Through the medium of
Machism, philosophic reactionaries and preachers of theism ere
imported as teachers of the workers.


42 Analysis of Sensations, p. xii.


184 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


Petzoldt detects Cornelius’ falsehood without having been told
about it; but his method of attack is a masterpiece. Here is what
he says: “The assertion that the world is idea [as those idealists
whom we combat (!) assert] has sense only when one wishes to
say that it is the idea of the one who makes the assertion or of all
those who make such assertion, when it implies that the world
depends for its existence exclusively upon the thinking of that
individual or of those individuals: when it means that the world
exists insofar as some person thinks about it, and that the world
does not exist when that person does not think about it. We,
on the contrary, make the world depend, not on the thinking of
a separate individual or individuals, or even better and clearer,
not upon the act of thinking, not upon actual thinking, but
upon thinking in general and upon exclusively logical thinking
at that. The idealist confuses one with the other, and as re-
sult we get the agnostic ‘semi-solipsism’ which we see in Cor-
nelius.” *°

Stolypin denied the existence of black cabinets! ** Petzoldt totally
destroyed the idealists; but it is surprising that this destruction of
idealism turns out to be advice as to how to conceal their idealism
in as cunning a manner as possible. To say that the world depends
upon man’s reason is to pervert idealism, but to say that the
world depends upon reason in general, is the “most recent” posi-
tivism, is critical realism, is—in a word,—thoroughgoing bourgeois
charlatanism! If Cornelius is an agnostic semi-solipsist, then Pet-
zoldt is a solipsistic semi-agnostic. Gentlemen, you are crushing
fleas!

Let us proceed. In the second edition of his Erkenntnis und
Irrtum, Mach says that “systematic exposition of my views, to
the essence of which I can subscribe, is given by Professor Dr.
Hans Kleinpeter.” ** We are taking Hans as exhibit number two.
This professor is a certified propagator of Machism; he has

43 Hinfihrung, etc., Vol. II, p. 317.

44 Stolypin, P. A. (1862-1911). Prime Minister of Russia from 1907 to 1911;
mainstay of reaction and most hated of Tsarist officials; notorious for his fiend-
ish persecution of the revolutionary movement; dissolved the Second Duma in
1907 and changed the Constitution which limited to some extent the powers
of the Tsar; assassinated in Kiev in 1911; “Black Cabinet” (Cabinet noir),


an office created in France during the reign of Louis XV, where letters of


suspected persons were opened and read by officials before being forwarded
to their destination.—Ed.


*° Die Erkenntnistheorie der Naturforschung der Gegenwart, Leipzig, 1905.


Se


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 185


a


penned a number of articles on the views of Mach in special
philosophic journals in German and English, has translated works
recommended by Mach who has written introductions to them—
in short, he is the right-hand man of the “teacher.” Here are his
views:

“All my (outer and inner) experience, all my reason and my
endeavours are given to me as a psychical process, as a part of my
mind (p. 18). . . . That which we call physical is a construction
out of psychic elements (p. 144)... . Subjective conviction and
not objective certainty (Gewissheit) is the only goal which can be
attained by any science” [p. 9; the emphasis is Kleinpeter’s. He
adds the following remark: “This was practically said by Kant in
the Kritik der Praktischen Vernunft”]. . . . The positing of other
minds is one which can never be confirmed by experience (p. 43).
- » » Ido not know . . . whether there exist other selves in general
outside of myself” (p. 43). §5 is entitled: “On the Spontaneity
of Consciousness.” In the case of the animal-automaton changes
in representations occur in a purely mechanical way. It is the
same with us when we have reveries. “In spontaneity lies the
essential quality of normal consciousness. It is a property which
those automata lack. To explain the spontaneity of personality
mechanically or automatically would be, to say the least, very
difficult. Every person can make a distinction between himself
and his states of consciousness; he can control them, can make them
focal or marginal, can analyse and compare them, etc. All this is
a fact of (immediate) experience. Our Self is essentially different
from the sum-total of all psychical states and cannot be compared
with the mere sum. Sugar consists of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen;
if we attribute a soul to it, then by analogy it would have to possess
the faculty of spontaneously directing the movement of the particles
of hydrogen, oxygen and carbon” (pp. 29-30). § 4 of the follow-
ing chapter is headed: “The act of Consciousness is a Volitional
Act (Willenshandlung).” . . . “We must regard as a well-estab-
lished fact the division of all psychical experience into two basic
groups: those of spontaneous acts and those of necessary acts. To
the first belong the impressions of the external world (p. 47)... .
That it is possible to advance many theories about the same set of
facts, is so well known among physicists that it becomes clearly
inadmissible to hold the hypothesis that there can be an absolute
theory of knowledge. And this fact is bound up with the volitional


186 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


character of our reason, implying in turn that our volition is not
compelled by external circumstances” (p. 50).

Judge now of Bogdanov’s brave pronouncement that “there is
no room in Mach’s philosophy for the freedom of the will,” when
Mach himself recommends such a person as Kleinpeter! We have
already seen that the latter conceals neither his own idealism nor
Mach’s. In 1898-9 Kleinpeter wrote: “Hertz discloses as subjective
a view on the nature of our conception as Mach. . . . If Mach and
Hertz [with what justice Kleinpeter here invokes the famous
physicist we shall soon see] deserve credit, from the point of view
of idealism, for having emphasised the subjective origin and con-
nection of all our concepts and not only of certain individual ones,
then from the standpoint of empiricism they deserve no less credit,
for having acknowledged that only experience can solve the problem,
for example, of the truth of ideas, independently of their being
entertained in our mind.” *® In 1900 he wrote: “In spite of the
fact that Mach differs from Kant and Berkeley, they appeal to him
more than the metaphysical empiricism prevailing in natural
science.” (That is materialism; the professor does not wish to call
the devil by name.) In 1903 he wrote: “The starting point of
Berkeley and Mach is irrefutable. . . . Mach completed what Kant
began.” 47

In the introduction to the Russian edition of Analysis of Sen-
sations, Mach says that Ziehen “follows him, if not exactly, at
least very closely.” We see from the introduction of Professor
Ziehen’s book,*® that he refers to Mach, Avenarius, Schuppe, and
so forth. Here again is a case of a disciple asknowledged by the
teacher. The “modern” theory of Ziehen is that only the “common
populace” can suppose that “real objects are the cause of our sensa-
tions” (p. 3), and that for the “foundation of the theory of knowl-
edge there can be no other proposition, than the words of Berkeley:
“external objects do not exist in themselves but in our minds”
(p. 5). “We experience sensations and ideas. Both are mental.
Non-mental is a word devoid of meaning” (p. 100). The laws of
nature are relations not of material bodies but of “reduced sensa-
tions” (p. 104). In this expression the whole originality of
Ziehen’s Berkeleianism consists. Petzoldt rejected Ziehen as an


46 Archiv fiir systematische Philosophie, 1898-99; Vol. V, pp. 167-170.
47 Kantstudien, 1903, Vol. VIII, pp. 274, 314.
48 Psycho-Physiologische Erkenntnistheorie, Jena, 1898.


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 187


idealist as far back as 1904 in the second volume of his Ein-
fithrung, etc. (pp. 298-301). In 1906 he put Cornelius, Kleinpeter,
Ziehen and Verworn on the list of idealists or psychical monists.*®
In the case of all these professors, as you see, there is a gross
“misunderstanding” in their interpretations of the “views of Mach
and Avenarius” (ibid.).

Poor Mach and Avenarius! Not only are they slandered by their
enemies for being idealists and, to use Bogdanov’s own expression,
accused of being “even solipsists,” but their very friends, disciples,
adherents, expert professors also mistake them for idealists. If
empirio-criticism develops into idealism, that does not at all estab-
lish the basic falsehood of its confused Berkeleian hypothesis. Oh,
no! that is only an insignificant “misunderstanding” in the Noz-
driov °°-Petzoldt sense of the word.

The most amusing of all is that Petzoldt, the guardian of empirio-
critical purity and innocence, first “supplemented” Mach and Ave-
narius with a “logical @ priori” and then connected them with
Wilhelm Schuppe, the propounder of fideism.

Had Petzoldt known the English adherents of Mach, the list of
those Machians who relapsed into idealism (because of the “mis-
understanding”) would have been greatly increased. We have al-
ready cited as an unadulterated idealist, Karl Pearson, who is
praised by Mach. Here are the opinions of two “slanderers” who
assert the same thing: “The teaching of Professor Pearson is a mere
echo of the truly great teaching of Berkeley.” *' “That Mr. Pearson
is an idealist in the full sense of the word, there can be no doubt.” °?
We would have to consider Clifford, the English idealist, whom
Mach regards as “bordering very closely” upon his philosophy °°
as a teacher rather than as a disciple of Mach, for the philosophic
works of Clifford appeared in the seventies. The “misunderstand-
ing” is due here to Mach himself, who in 1901 “failed to notice”
any idealism in Clifford’s doctrine that the world is constituted of
“mind-stuff,” that it is a “social object,” a “highly organised

49 Das Weltproblem, etc., p. 137, note.

50 A character in Gogol’s novel Dead Souls. An unusual liar, rogue and
intriguer; he was frequently beaten for cheating, but never took matters to


heart; to blackmail even a friend was an ordinary thing for him, and he “bore
no grudge against that person.”—Ed.

51 Howard Knox: Mind, 1897, Vol. VI, p. 205.

52 Rodier: Revue philosophique, 1888, II, Vol. 26, p. 200.

88 Analysis of Sensations, p. 8.


188 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


experience,” etc.°* In order to characterise the charlatanism of
the German Machians it is sufficient to note that Kleinpeter, in
1905, introduces this idealist into the ranks of the founders of the
“epistemology of modern natural science”!

On page 356 of the Analysis of Sensation Mach mentions the
American philosopher, Paul Carus, who “tends” toward both
Buddhism and Machism. Carus, who regards himself as an “ad-
herent and personal friend” of Mach, edits in Chicago the Monist,
devoted to philosophy, and The Open Court, a small journal dedi-
cated to the propagation of religion. “The object of The Open
Court is to establish religion on the basis of Science, and in connec-
tion therewith it will present the Monistic philosophy. The founder
of this journal believes this will furnish a religion which embraces
all that is true and good in religion.” °°

Mach is a permanent contributor to The Monist, and_ publishes
his latest views in it. Carus corrects Mach “a little” from the
Kantian viewpoint, declaring that Mach “ig an idealist or, as I
would say, a subjectivist. . . . There are, no doubt, differences be-
tween Mach’s views and mine, yet I at once recognised in him a
kindred spirit.” °° Our monism, says Carus, “is not materialistic,
not spiritualistic, not agnostic; it merely means consistency . . - it
takes experience as its basis and employs as method the systematic
forms of the relations of experience” (evidently a plagiarism from
Empirio-Monism of Bogdanov!). Carus’ slogan is not agnosticism,
but positive science, not mysticism, but clear thinking, not super-
naturalism, not materialism but a monistic aspect of the world, not
a dogma, but religion, not creed, but faith. And to fulfil this
slogan Carus preaches a “new theology, theonomy, as being a gen-
eral science in contrast to the old theology which was based upon
erratic notions, guesses, and prophetic dreams.” °' We ought to
remark that Kleinpeter in his book on the epistemological founda-
tions of modern science, cited above, recommends Carus together
with Ostwald, Avenarius and the immanentists (pp. 151-2). When
Haeckel issued his programme for a union of the monists, Carus
opposed him on the ground that, first, Haeckel vainly attempts

54W. K. Clifford: Lectures and Essays, 3d ed., London, 1901, Vol. II,
pp. 55, 58, 65, 69: “I am for Berkeley against Spencer”, p. 58: “The object is a
series of changes in my mind, and not something outside of it” (p. 52).

55 The Open Court, 1887, Vol. I, p. 15.


56 The Monist, Chicago, Vol. XVI, p. 332.
57 Jbid., Vol. XI, p. 27.


7
be
%


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 189


to refute apriorism which is “consistent with scientific philosophy”;
second, that Ernst Haeckel’s doctrine of determinism “excludes the
possibility of the freedom of the will”; third, that Haeckel is mis-
taken “in emphasising the one-sided view of the naturalist against
the traditional conservatism of the churches. He therefore appears
as an enemy to the existing churches instead of rejoicing at their
higher development through a new and truer interpretation of their
dogmas.” ** Carus himself admits that “I appear reactionary to
many freethinkers who blame me for not joining their chorus in
denouncing all religion as superstition” (p. 355).

It is evident that we have before us a leader of a company of
American literary sharpers who are engaged in drugging the people
with religious opium. Mach and Kleinpeter have also become
members of the company, by virtue of a little “misunderstanding.”


5. Bogdanov’s Empirio-Monism


“So far as I am aware there is only one empirio-monist in
philosophic literature—a certain Bogdanov,” writes Bogdanov of
himself. “Since I know him very well, I can certify that his
views fully accord with the sacred formula of the primacy of the
natural over the mental. He regards all existence as a con-
tinuous chain of development, the lower links of which are lost in
the chaos of primal elements while the higher links, known to us,
represent the experience of men [Bogdanov’s italics]—which is
compounded of a highly developed psychical and a still more
highly developed physical, experience. This experience and the
knowledge of itself which it generates corresponds to what we
usually call spirit.” ®

The “sacred” formula Boganov here ridicules is the well-known
proposition of Engels which Bogdanov, however, diplomatically
evades! He does not differ from Engels, Oh, no!

But let us see how Bogdanov himself summarises this famous
“empirio-monism” and “substitution.” The physical realm is called
the “experience of men” and it is declared as “higher” in the chain
of development than the psychical. But this is a crying absurdity,
and it is the kind of an absurdity which is characteristic of the
typical idealist philosophy. It is rather amusing that Bogdanov


58 The Monist, Vol. XVI, p. 122.
59 Empirio-Monism, Book III, p. xii.


190 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


attempts to subsume such a “system” under materialism as if to
say: In my case, too, nature is primary and spirit secondary. If
Engels’ definition is applied in such a way, Hegel will also become
a materialist, for in his case, too, psychical experience (under the
name of absolute idea) is prior to the physical realm, to nature,
and to human knowledge which through natural means discovers
the “absolute idea” at the basis of the whole process. Not one
idealist would deny the primacy of nature in this sense, for it is no
genuine primacy, since here nature is not directly taken as the
immediate data, is not taken as the actual starting point of epis-
temology. Nature in this sense is taken as a product, as an end-
term in a long process of abstractions from “psychical” elements.
It is immaterial what these abstractions are termed, whether “abso-
lute Idea,” “the great Self,” “the world Will,” etc. These terms
distinguish the different varieties of idealism, and there are a great
number of those varieties. But the substance of idealism can be
reduced to this: the mental is taken as the starting-point; from it
external nature is inferred or constructed; and in short order the
individual consciousness is deduced from nature. This primal
“mental” is always in the last analysis a lifeless abstraction which
conceals a diluted theology. For instance, everybody knows what
a human idea is, but an idea prior to the existence of man, an idea
independent of man, an idea in abstraction, an absolute idea,—is a
theological fiction of the idealist Hegel. Everybody is familiar
with human sensation, but sensation independent of man, sensation
existing before man—is nonsense, a lifeless abstraction, an idealist
equivocation. Precisely such an equivocation is performed by Bog-
danov, when he creates the following ladder:

(1) The chaos of “elements” [we know that the term “element”
implies nothing else save some form of human conception] ;

(2) The psychical experience of men;

(3) The physical experience of men;

(4) “Knowledge which emerges from it.”

There are no sensations (human) without man. That means
that the first rung of the ladder is a dead idealist abstraction. Es-
sentially, there are before us not the usual and familiar human
sensations, but fictitious sensations, belonging to no one, sensations
in general—divine sensations—as human ideas usually become,
when once separated from man and man’s brain, as for example in
the case of Hegel.


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 191
$$ ee


The first rung is thus counted out.

The second rung is also to be counted out, for no individual
knows the psychical before the physical (and the second rung is
higher than the third in Bogdanov’s); nor does natural science
know it. The physical realm existed before the psychical, for the
latter is the highest product of the most highly developed forms of
organic matter. Bogdanov’s second rung is also a dead abstraction,
for it implies thought without brain, human reason separated from
man.

Only when we throw overboard the first. two rungs can we obtain
the world picture which truly corresponds to natural science and
materialism. Namely, (1) the physical realm exists independently
of human consciousness and existed long before the emergence of
man, long before any “human experience”; (2) the psychical, con-
sciousness, etc., is the highest product of highly developed matter,
is a function of that complicated bit of matter which is called the
human brain.

“The realm of substitution,” writes Bogdanov, “coincides with
the realm of physical phenomena; for the psychical phenomena we
need substitute nothing, for they are immediately given complexes”
(p. xxxix).

This is idealism, for the psychical, that is, consciousness, percep-
tion, sensation, etc., is taken as the immediate and the physical is
inferred from it, and then placed in its stead. The world is the non-
ego, created by the ego, said Fichte. The world is absolute Idea,
said Hegel. The world is Will, said Schopenhauer. The world is
conception and perception, said the immanentist, Rehmke. Being
is consciousness, said the immanentist, Schuppe. The psychical is
a substitution of the physical, says Bogdanov. One must be blind
not to perceive the same idealist form beneath the cloak of these
various phrasings.

“Let us ask ourselves the question,” writes Bogdanov in Book J
of Empirio-Monism (pp. 128-29): “What is a living being, for in-
stance, man?” And he answers: “Man is primarily a certain com
plex of immediate experience.” Mark you, “primarily”! “Then,
in the further development of experience, man becomes both for
himself and for others, a physical body amidst other physical
bodies.”

This is a whole “complex” of absurdities, useful only to prepare
for the deduction of the immortality of the soul or the existence of


192 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM _


God, etc. Man is primarily a complex of immediate experiences
and in the course of his further development becomes a physical
body! That means that there are “immediate experiences” inde-
pendently of the physical body, existing prior to the physical body.
It is a pity that this magnificent philosophy has not yet found ac-
ceptance in our theological seminaries, where such theoretical
service would be highly appreciated.

“ | We admitted that physical nature itself is derived [Bog-
danov’s italics] from complexes of immediate characters or ele-
ments (in which psychical co-ordination is included) ; that it is the
yeflection of complexes that are analogous to them,—complexes of
the most complicated type (in the socially-organised experience of
living beings)” (p. 146).

A philosophy which teaches that physical nature is derivative, is
a clerical philosophy—pure and simple. And its character is not
altered in the least even though Bogdanov hiraself spurns all kinds
of religion. Diihring was also an atheist; he even proposed to pro-
hibit religion in his “socialised” order. Nevertheless Engels was
absolutely right when he proved that Diihring’s “system” could not
make ends meet without religion. The same is true of Bogdanov
with the essential difference that the quoted passage is not an occa-
sional inconsistency but is the essence of his “empirio-monism” and
all its “substitution.” If nature is derivative then it is self-evident
that it can be derived only from something that is greater, richer,
broader, mightier than nature, from something that already exists,
for in order for nature to be “derived” from it, it has to exist apart
from it. It means that something exists outside of nature, which
produces nature. In plain language this is what is meant by God.
The idealists continually try to substitute a different name, to make
it more abstract, more nebulous, and at the same time, to make it
appear more plausible, to bring it nearer to the “psychical,” to
present it as an “immediate complex,” as something immediately
experienced which requires no evidence. The absolute idea, the
universal spirit, the world will, “the general substitution” of the
psychical for the physical, are different formulations of the same
idea. Everybody knows that the idea, spirit, will, and the psychical,
in general, is the function of a normally operating human brain.
It is the specific task of science to investigate the connection. To
separate this function from specific structure, organised in a certain
way, to convert this function into a universal, general abstraction,


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 193


nn ——


to substitute this abstraction for the whole of physical nature,—is
the delusion of an idealism which secretly scorns science.

Materialism says that the “socially organised experience of the
living” is derived from physical nature, is a product of long de-
velopment, is the result of a gradual evolution from a state of
physical nature in which there were no such things—nor could there

- very well be—as sociability or organisation, or experience, or living
beings. Idealism says that physical nature is derived from the ex-
perience of living beings, and in saying this, idealism gives nature
at least the same status as God, if not altogether subordinating it to
God. For God himself, according to this theory, is surely derived
from the socially organised experience of the living. Turn the
philosophy of Bogdanov about as you please, yet you will get noth-
ing but a reactionary muddle.

Bogdanov thinks that to speak of the social organisation of ex-
perience is “cognitive socialism” (III, p. xxxiv). This is insane
twaddle. If socialism is thus argued, then the Jesuits are ardent
adherents of “cognitive socialism,” for the starting-point of their
epistemology is divinity as the supreme form of “socially organised
experience.” And it is beyond doubt that Catholicism is a “socially
organised experience”; but it reflects not the objective truth,—to
which science is faithful but which Bogdanov betrays—but the ex-
ploitation of the ignorance of the masses by certain social classes.
But why speak of the Jesuits! The “cognitive socialism” of Bog-
danov can be wholly found in the doctrine of immanence of which
Mach is so fond. Leclair regards nature as the consciousness of
“mankind,” © but not of the individual man. The bourgeois
philosophers will give us such Fichtean cognitive socialism to our
heart’s content. Schuppe also emphasises das gattungsmassige Mo-
ment des Bewusstseins,®** that is, the generating element of con-
sciousness. To think that idealism vanishes by substituting the con-
sciousness of mankind for the consciousness of the individual or the
experience of “the socially organised” for the experience of one
person, is to assume that capitalism will vanish by the substitution
of one capitalist for another in a joint stock-company.

Our Russian Machians, Yushkevich and Valentinov, repeat after
the materialist Rakhmetov that Bogdanov is an idealist (after hav-


60 Der Realismus, etc., p. 59.
61 Cf. Vierteljahrsschrift fir Wissenschaftliche Philosophie, Vol. XVII, pp.
379-80.


194 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


ing abused Rakhmetov so brutally). But they could not think from
where this idealism is derived. For them it appears that Bogdanov
is an individual phenomenon, an accident, something sui generis.
This is not true. Bogdanov may personally think that he has in-
vented an “original” system, but it is sufficient to compare it with
the effusions of the aforementioned disciples of Mach to realise the
falsity of such a claim. The difference between Bogdanov and
Cornelius is much less than that between Cornelius and Carus.
The difference between Bogdanov and Carus is less (in the essen-
tial outlines of their philosophical systems, to be sure, and not in
the consciousness of the reactionary implications of that system)
than that between Carus and Ziehen and so on. Bogdanov is only
one of the manifestations of that “socially organised experience”
which bears witness to the growth of Machism into idealism. Bog-
danov (we here speak exclusively of Bogdanov as a philosopher)
could not be born into God’s world, if in the doctrines of his teacher
Mach there were not the “elements” of Berkeleianism. And I can-
not imagine a more “terrible revenge” upon Bogdanov than to have
his Empirio-Monism translated, say, into German and presented for
review to Leclair, Schubert-Soldern, Cornelius, Kleinpeter, Carus
and Pillon (the French collaborator and disciple of Renouvier).
The compliments of the associates and followers of Mach extended
to this new “substitution” would have been much more significant
than their argument.

It would hardly be correct to regard the philosophy of Bogdanov
as a completed and solidified system. In a span of nine years, from
1899 to 1908, Bogdanov has gone through four stages in his philo-
sophic peregrinations.. At the beginning he was a “naturo-histori-
cal” materialist (7. e., still half unconsciously and instinctively true
to the spirit of science). His Fundamental Elements of the His-
torical Outlook on Nature (in Russian) bears traces of that stage.
During the second stage, the later nineties, he was an adherent of
the fashionable “energetics” of Ostwald,—a muddled agnosticism,
with leanings towards idealism. From Ostwald (on the title page of
Ostwald’s Lectures on the Philosophy of Nature we find that the
book is “dedicated to Mach”), Bogdanov went over to Mach, ac-
cepting the fundamental hypotheses of subjective idealism, incon-
sistent and muddled as it is, together with the entire philosophy of
Mach. The fourth stage is an attempt to eliminate some of the
contradictions of Mach, and to create a semblance of objective ideal-


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 195


ism. “The theory of general substitution” shows that Bogdanov has
revolved almost in a semi-circle, beginning with his original base.
Is this stage of Bogdanov’s philosophy more remote from dialectic
materialism than the previous ones? If Bogdanov remains in one
place, then he is surely more remote from it. If he keeps moving in
the same curve as he has done those nine years, then he is closer to
materialism. He needs only to make one serious step in order to
turn again to materialism—he needs but make a clean sweep of his
“universal substitution.” This universal substitution has intertwined
into one Chinese queue all the transgressions of half-baked idealism,
all the weaknesses of consistent subjective idealism, just as the “ab-
solute Idea” of Hegel (si licet parva componere magnis!—if it is per-
missible to compare the great with the small) combined all the
contradictions of Kantian idealism and all the weaknesses of Fich-
teanism. It remained for Feuerbach to make only one serious step
in order to reach materialism, namely to throw completely over-
board the absolute Idea, this Hegelian “substitution of the psychical
for the physical.” Feuerbach cut off the Chinese braid of absolute
idealism—and took nature without any “substitutions” as the basis.

We shall see later to what lengths the Chinese queue of Machian
idealism will grow.


6. The “Theory of Symbols” (or of Hieroglyphs)
and the Criticism of Helmholtz


In order to complete what has been said above about the idealists,
as associates of and successors to empirio-criticism, it is in keeping
here to note the character of the Machian criticism of certain philo-
sophic propositions touched upon in our literature. For instance,
our Machians, who desire to be Marxians, gladly cavil at the “sym-
bolic representations” of Plekhanov, a theory, according to which
the sensations and perceptions of man are not the copy of real
things and nature’s processes, not their image, but only arbitrary
signs and symbols of them. Bazarov ridicules this symbolic (or
hieroglyphic) materialism, and he is justified in so doing provided
he reject it for a non-symbolic materialism. But Bazarov here
again resorts to a trick; he smuggles in a renunciation of material-
ism in general under the guise of a criticism of “symbolic represen-
tation.” Engels speaks neither of symbols nor hieroglyphs, but of
copies, photographs, images, mirror-reflections of things. Instead


196 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


of pointing out Plekhanov’s error in deviating from Engels’ formu-
lation of materialism, Bazarov obscures the truth of Engels’ views
for the readers, by making a fuss over Plekhanov’s error.

To elucidate both Plekhanov’s error and Bazarov’s confusion we
shall cite Helmholtz, an important representative of the “symbol
theory” (calling a symbol a hieroglyph, does not change its mean-
ing), and see how he was roundly criticised by both the materialists,
and idealists including the Machians.

Helmholtz, a star of the first magnitude in science, in philosophy
was as inconsistent as most contemporary scientists are to-day. He
gravitated toward Kantianism, but even in this he was inconsistent.
Here are some passages from his Treatise on Physiological Optics ®
on the correspondence of ideas with objects: “Thus far the sensa-
tions have been described as being simply symbols for the relations
in the external world” (p. 18). This is agnosticism, but further on
we read the following: “Our apperceptions and ideas are effects
wrought on our nervous system and our consciousness by the ob-
jects that are thus apprehended and conceived” (p. 19). This is
materialism, but that Helmholtz, judging by his further discussion,
makes no clear distinction between the relation of absolute and
relative truth, is quite evident. For instance, he says: “In my
opinion, therefore, there can be no possible sense in speaking of
any other truth of our ideas except of a practical truth. Our ideas
of things cannot be anything but symbols, natural signs for things
which we learn how to use in order to regulate our movements and
actions. Having learned correctly how to read those symbols, we
are enabled by their help to adjust our actions so as to bring about
the desired result . . 2’ (p. 19). This is not correct. Helmholtz is
slipping towards subjectivism, towards a denial of objective reality
and objective truth. And he arrives at a flagrant untruth when he
ends the sentence with the words: “An idea and the thing of which
it is an idea evidently belong to two entirely different worlds.”
Only the Kantians thus separate idea and reality, mind and nature.
However, a little further we read: “In the next place as to the
properties of objects in the external world, a little reflection reveals
that all properties attributable to them may be said to be simply
effects exerted by them either on our senses or on other natural ob-
jects” (p. 20). Here again Helmholtz reverts to the materialist
viewpoint. He is an inconsistent Kantian, now recognising the


62 Edited by J. P. C. Southal, Vol. III, Optical Society of America, 1924.


7 cyeeniill


“> Takead


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 197


a priori laws of reason, now tending toward the “transcendental
reality” of space and time (i. e., the materialistic conception of
them), now inferring human sensations from external objects, which
act on our sense-organs, and now declaring sensations to be only
symbols, certain arbitrary signs torn from the “quite different”
world of signified things.®*

This is how Helmholtz expressed himself in the speech of 1878
on “The Facts of Perception” (“an important occurrence in the
realistic camp,” as Leclair characterised it): “Our sensations are
but effects wrought by external causes on our organs, and the cir-
cumstance of how such effects would manifest themselves, depends,
of course, very essentially upon the character of the apparatus on
which these effects are wrought. Inasmuch as the quality of our
sensation gives us evidence of the properties of the external cause
by which this sensation is produced, the sensation can be regarded
as its sign [Zeichen], but not as its image. Since a certain resem-
blance with the resembled object is demanded from an image... .
While from a sign no resemblance is demanded with that of which
it is a sign... .”°* If sensations are not images of things but
only signs or symbols, which have “no resemblance” to them, then
the materialist starting point of Helmholtz is completely under-
mined; the existence of external objects becomes doubtful, for signs
or symbols quite possibly indicate imaginary objects, and every-
body is familiar with instances of such signs or symbols. Helm-
holtz, following Kant, attempts to draw what appears to be an abso-
lute boundary between the “phenomenon” and the “thing-in-itself.”
He is very much prejudiced against straightforward, clear, and open
materialism. But a little further he says: “I do not see how we
could refute the system of the most extreme subjective idealism
which would choose to regard life as a dream. We could declare it
highly improbable and unsatisfactory, I myself would most strenu-
ously object to it, yet it is possible to infer it consistently. . . .
The realistic hypothesis, on the contrary, trusts the evidence [Aus-
sage] of common self-observation according to which the changes
of perception that follow certain actions do not have any psychical
connection with the preceding impulse of volition. This hypothesis
believes in the existence, independent of our ideas, of everything


68 Cf. Victor Heyfelder: Ueber den Begriff der Erfahrung bei Helmholiz,


Berlin, 1881.
64 Vortrage und Reden, 1884, Vol. II, p. 226.


Ee


198 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


that is ascertained by our everyday perception to be part of the
material world outside of us” (pp. 238-39). “Undoubtedly, the
realistic hypothesis is the simplest hypothesis imaginable; it has
been tested and verified in very broad domains of application; it
is accurately determined in its integral parts and, therefore, it is
in the highest degree useful and fruitful, as a ground of action”
(ibid.) The agnosticism of Helmholtz, too, resembles “shame-
faced materialism,” but with a characteristic Kantian failing, which
distinguishes it from the characteristic Berkeleian failings of
Huxley.

Albrecht Rau, the follower of Feuerbach, therefore very defi-
nitely criticises Helmholtz’s theory of symbols as an inconsistent
deviation from “realism.” The basic view of Helmholtz, says Rau,
is a realistic hypothesis according to which “we understand the
objective properties of things” with the help of our senses.®> The
theory of symbols cannot be reconciled with such a whole-hearted
materialism, for it involves distrust in perception, a reluctance to
place faith in the evidences of our sense-organs. It is beyond
doubt that an image cannot absolutely resemble the model, but one
thing is the image, another thing is the symbol, the conventional
sign. The image must of necessity presuppose an objective reality
which “is reflected.” “A conventional sign” and symbol are con-
cepts which bear an absolutely unnecessary trace of agnosticism.
Rau, therefore, is perfectly right in saying that by the theory of
symbols, Helmholtz pays tribute to Kantianism. “If Helmholtz,”
says Rau, “had remained true to his realist conception, if he had
consistently adhered to the principle that the properties of bodies
express relations of bodies amongst themselves and their relations
to us, then he probably would not have needed the theory of sym-
bols; he could then say, briefly and clearly ‘sensations which are
produced in us by objects are reflections of the substance of those
objects’ ” (ibid., p. 320).

Thus is Helmholtz criticised by a materialist. He rejects hiero-
glyphic or symbolic materialism or the partial materialism of
Helmholtz in the name of the consistent materialism of Feuerbach.

The idealist Leclair (the representative of the immanentists dear
to Mach’s heart and head) also accuses Helmholtz of inconsistency,
of hesitation between materialism and spiritualism.® But the


66 Albrecht Rau: Empfinden und Denken, Giessen, 1896, p. 304,
66 Der Realismus, etc., p. 154.


| PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 199
ais Ess of BD leet es lea haa le a olin eee IN ee eae aR rota
theory of symbols is criticised by Leclair not because it lacks traces
of materialism but because it suffers from an abundance of such
traces. Says Leclair: “Helmholtz assumes that perception gives us
sufficient support for our knowledge of succession in time and for
our knowledge of the identity or difference of transcendental causes.
This is sufficient, in Helmholtz’s opinion, to warrant the assumption
of uniformity in the realm of the transcendental” (that is in the
domain of the objectively real, p. 33). And Leclair denounces this
“dogmatic prejudice of Helmholtz.” “The Berkeleian God,” he
exclaims, “in the réle of the hypothetical cause of the uniformity
of ideas in our mind is just as capable of satisfying our need of
causal explanation, as is the world of external objects” (p. 34) .|
“A consistent application ofthe theory of symbols : . . is impos-
sible without a generous admixture of vulgar realism” (that is,
materialism, p. 35).

That is how a “critical idealist,” in 1879, tore into Helmholtz for
his materialism. After the lapse of twenty years Kleinpeter, the
disciple of Mach, who, we will remember, was highly praised by
his teacher, thus refutes the “antiquated” Helmholtz by means of
the “modern” philosophy of Mach, in his article on the “Funda-
mental Views of Mach and Hertz on Physics.” ®? Let us leave
Hertz (who was just as inconsistent as Helmholtz) for a while, and
examine Kleinpeter’s comparison of Mach and Helmholtz. Having
quoted a series of passages from the works of both writers and
accentuated certain statements of Mach, that bodies are mental sym-
bols for complexes of sensations, etc., Kleinpeter says:

“If we follow Helmholtz’s trend of thought, we shall find the fol-
lowing fundamental propositions:

“J. There are objects of the external world.

“2. The change of these objects is inconceivable without the
action of some cause, which is taken as real.

“3. ‘Cause, according to the original meaning of the word, is
that which remains unchanged, as remaining or existing behind the


_ changing phenomena, namely, substance and the law of its action,


force.’ [The quotation is by Kleinpeter from Helmholliz. |

“4. It is possible to infer all the phenomena from the causes in a
logically strict and uniquely determined mode.

“5. The attainment of that end is equivalent to the possession of


87 Archiv fiir Philosophie; II Systematische Philosophie, 1899, Vol. V, pp.
163-64.


200 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


objective truth, the acquisition of which is thus recognised as con-
ceivable” (p. 163). 2

Roused by these propositions, by their contradictions and by the
introduction of unsolved problems, Kleinpeter remarks that Helm-
holtz is not strictly consistent in his views, sometimes employing
“a manner of speech, which is suggestive of the purely logical views.
of Mach in regard to such concepts as matter, force, causality, etc.”

“It is not dificult to find the source of our dissatisfaction with
Helmholtz, if we recollect the clear and exact words of Mach.
The erroneous interpretation of the concepts ‘mass,’ ‘force,’ etc.,
is the basic sin of Helmholtz’s argument. These concepts are only
our ideas, products of our fancy and do not hold of a reality, exist-
ing beyond our reason. We are not at all in a position to know
these so-called realities. From the observation of our sense-im-
pressions we are generally not in a position, on account of their
imperfection, to make a uniquely determined inference. We can
never assert, for instance, that upon reading a certain scale we will
obtain a determinate number; it is always possible, within certain
limits, to select an infinite number of readings which will be per-
fectly compatible with the facts of observation. And to have knowl-
edge of something real, lying outside of us,—that is impossible.
Let us suppose that it were possible and that we could know reality;
we would then have no right to apply the laws of logic to it, for
the laws of logic are our laws and are applicable only to our con-
ceptions, to our mental products [Kleinpeter’s emphasis]. Between
facts there is no logical connection, only mere succession; to utter
apodictic assertions of them is unreasonable. Since, therefore, it is
incorrect to say that one fact is a cause of another, the whole deduc-
tion of Helmholtz and the conceptions based upon it fall to the
ground. And finally, the attainment of objective truth, existing in-
dependently of the subject, is impossible, not only because of the
nature of our sense-organs, but because being men (als Menschen)
we can have generally no notion as to what exists independently of
us” (p. 164).

As the reader sees, our disciple of Mach, repeating the favorite
words of his teacher and the words of Bogdanov, who does not con-
sider himself a Machian, refutes the whole philosophy of Helm-
holtz, refutes it from the idealist viewpoint. The theory of symbols
is not emphasised by the idealist who regards it as unimportant, as
a merely casual deviation from materialism. And Helmholtz is


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 201


taken by Kleinpeter as the representative of the “traditional views

of physics, entertained by the majority of physicists” (p. 160).
The upshot of the discussion is this: Plekhanov committed an

obvious error in his exposition of materialism; Bazarov blundered

completely in confusing materialism with idealism, in contrasting

the “theory of symbols” or “symbolic materialism” with the idealis-

tic nonsense, that “sense” perception is the “reality existing outside
29


us.” From Helmholtz, the Kantian, as from Kant himself, the ma-
terialists broke away to the left, and the Machians to the right.


7. About the Twofold Criticism of Diihring


Let us note another characteristic trait in the incredible perver-
sion of materialism by the Machians. Valentinov wishes to discredit
Marxians by comparing them to Biichner who supposedly has much
in common with Plekhanov, although Engels marked himself off
from Biichner. Bogdanov, on the other hand, treats this question
as if he were called upon to defend the “materialism of the natural-
ists,’ which “is usually spoken of with certain contempt.” ** Both
Valentinov and Bogdanov are terribly confused in this matter. Marx
and Engels always “spoke contemptuously” of bad socialists,
having in mind the doctrines of correct scientific socialism which
reflected no fickle departure from socialist to bourgeois views.
Marx and Engels always condemned the vulgar, anti-dialectic ma-
terialism, but they condemned it from the standpoint of a higher,
more advanced dialectic materialism, and not at all from the view-
point of Humism or Berkeleianism. Marx, Engels and Dietzgen
spoke of vulgar materialists, taking account of them in order to
correct their errors. Of the Humeans and Berkeleians they did not
speak and of Mach and Avenarius they would not have spoken,
having satisfied themselves with one contemptuous remark in the
general direction of their movement. Therefore, the constant grins
and grimaces of our Machians regarding Holbach, Biichner and
others, signify nothing but an attempt to throw sand into the eyes
of the public, to cover up the fundamental deviation of Machism
from the basic tenets of materialism as such, and to avoid taking
an outspoken and clear position with regard to Engels.

It is hardly possible to express oneself more clearly on the French
materialism of the eighteenth century and on Biichner, Vogt and


68 Empirio-Monism, Bk. III, p. x.


ee
202 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


oe


Moleschott, than Engels does at the end of Chapter II of his Feuer-
bach. It is impossible to misunderstand Engels, unless one is in-
tent upon perverting him. “Marx and myself are materialists,”
says Engels, explaining the basic distinction between all schools of
materialism and idealism. And Engels reproaches Feuerbach for
his lack of courage and his fickleness, in rejecting materialism
somewhere on general grounds, because of the absurdities of a par-
ticular school of materialism. Feuerbach “had no right to confuse
the teaching of the vulgarised peddlers [Biichner, Moleschott and
others] with materialism in general” (p. 69). Only those who have
heen corrupted through the reading and unquestioned acceptance of
the doctrines of the German reactionary philosophers, could have
misunderstood the nature of Engels’ reproach against Feuerbach.
Engels says very clearly that Biichner and the others did not over-
come the limitations of their teachers, the materialists of the
eighteenth century. For this alone, Engels takes Biichner, et al., to
task; not for their materialism, as the ignorant assume, but because
they did not promote materialism; that “they did not hitherto think
of promoting the theory” of materialism.

For this alone Engels takes Biichner, and the others, to
task, and points out the three fundamental “limitations” of the
French materialism of the eighteenth century, from which Marx
and Engels freed themselves, but from which Biichner and his asso-
ciates have not. The first limitation lay in the fact that the views
of the old materialists were too “mechanical” in the sense that they
believed in “the exclusive application of mechanics to processes
which are of chemical and organic nature” (p. 66). We shall see
in the next chapter how the misapprehension of these words of
Engels led some people to lapse into idealism because of the
teaching of the new physics. Engels does not reject purely mechani-
cal materialism on the grounds attributed to him by physicists of
“recent” idealistic (Machian) tendency. The second limitation can
be found in the metaphysical views of the old materialists, that is,
the “anti-dialectical tendency of their philosophy.” This limitation
is shared by Biichner, ef al., together with our Machians who were
unable, as we have seen, to understand Engels’ application of dia-
lectics to epistemology (e. g., concerning absolute and relative
truth). The third limitation lies in the preservation of a social
idealism “from above,” in questions of social character and can be
traced to a misapprehension of historical materialism.


—
PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 203


Having pointed out and explained these limitations clearly and
exhaustively, Engels adds that they (Biichner and the others) “did
not by any means escape the limitations of the doctrine.”

Only because of these three deficiencies, and exclusively within
their limits, does Engels refute the eighteenth century materialism
and the doctrines of Biichner! On the other questions, which
bear the character of truisms, there is no difference, despite the
perversions of the Machians, nor can there be any, between
Marx and Engels on the one side, and the rest of the materialists
on the other. Only the Russian Machians. brought confusion into
this perfectly clear question since it is quite evident that for
their western-European teachers and co-thinkers, there is a funda-
mental disagreement between the general views of Mach and
his coherts and the basic doctrines of the materialists. Our
Machians had first to confuse the question in order to pave the
way for a break with Marxism and a desertion to the camp of
bourgeois philosophy under the guise of a minor correction of
Marxism!

Take Diihring. It is hard to imagine anybody more contemptu-
ous of him than Engels. Still simultaneously with Engels, Leclair
criticises the same Diihring, and praises the “revolutionary philos-
ophy” of Mach. For Leclair, Diihring is the “extreme left’ of a
materialism, which “without evasion declares sensation as well as
the phenomena of consciousness and reason in general to be the
secretion, function, highest flower, aggregate effect, etc., of the liv-
ing organism.” °°

Does Engels criticise Diihring for this? No. In this respect
he fully agrees with Diihring as with every other materialist. He
criticises Diihring from an opposite point of view, namely, for his in-
consistent materialism, for his idealist idiosyncrasies, which left a
loophole for theism.

“Nature itself works in the creature, which has presentations, as
well as outside of him; works to produce uniformly connected im-
pressions and to create necessary knowledge about the arrangement
_ of things.” Leclair quotes these words of Diihring, attacking in a
rage such materialism as “crudest metaphysics,” as “delusion,” etc.,
etc. (pp. 160-162).

Does Engels criticise Diihring for this? No. He mocked at all
bombast, but in regards to the recognition of the objectivity of na-


69 Der Realismus, etc., 1879, pp. 23-24.


204, MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM ~


ture, reflected by mind, Engels fully agrees with Diihring as with
every other materialist.

“Reason is the highest aspect of the rest of reality... . The
foundation stone of philosophy lies in the distinction and inde-
pendence of the material world from the groups of mental phe-
nomena which emerge in this world and which perceive it.” Leclair
quotes these words of Diihring together with a series of his attacks
on Kant, etc., and accuses Diihring on this account of “metaphysics”
(pp. 218-222), of subscribing to a “metaphysical dogma,” ete.

Does Engels criticise Diihring for this? No. That the world
exists independently of the mind and that any deviation from this
view on the part of Kantians, Humeans, Berkeleians and so forth
is false, Engels is in complete accord with Duhring as with all other
materialists. Had Engels seen from what side Leclair, together with
Mach, passed criticism upon Dihring, he would have called those
philosophic reactionaries by even more contemptuous names than
he did Diihring. For Leclair, Dihring was the incarnation of ob-
noxious realism and materialism.”° Schuppe, the teacher and asso-
ciate of Mach, in 1878 accused Diihring of “dream realism”
(Traumrealismus) ,“1 in revenge for the word Traumidealismus,
which Diihring hurled at all the idealists. For Engels on the con-
trary, Diihring was not a sufficiently consistent and explicit ma-
terialist.

Marx, together with Engels and Dietzgen, entered the philosophic
arena when materialism reigned in advanced intellectual circles in
general, and in workers’ circles in particular. It is, therefore,
quite natural that they gave attention not to reaffirming well-estab-
lished principles but_to the serious elaboration of materialism in
theory and its application to history, that is, to the completion of
the edifice at the top. It is quite natural that they limited themselves
in the domain of epistemology to correcting Feuerbach’s errors, and
to ridiculing the vulgarities of the materialist Diihring, to the
criticism of Biichner’s errors (see Dietzgen), to emphasis upon

_that which the popular (amongst workers) writers especially lacked,
namely, the dialectical approach. Marx, Engels, and Dietzgen did
not pay much attention to the truisms of materialism, which the vul-
garising peddlers repeated in many editions. They tried to see to it
that those truisms should not become vulgarised, should not become


70 Beitrige zu einer monistischen Erkenntnistheories, 1882, p. 45.
71 Dr. Wilhelm Schuppe: Erkenntnistheoretische Logik, Bonn, 1878, p. 56.


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 205


over-simplified, should not lead to stagnation (“materialism at the
bottom, idealism at the top”), should not lead materialists to throw
away the valuable kernel of the idealist system—the Hegelian dia-
lectics—that gem which the Biichners and the Diihrings (together
with Leclair, Mach, Avenarius and others) could not discern in the
rubbish of absolute idealism.

By keeping in mind the historical background in which the
philosophic works of Engels and Dietzgen were written, one can
clearly see why they fenced themselves off from the vulgar ma-
terialists instead of joining forces with them. Marx and Engels
also fenced themselves off from the vulgarization of the funda-
mental demands of political democracy, rather than defend them.

Only the disciples of the philosophic reactionaries could “fail to
notice” this circumstance, and could present matters to their readers
in such a light as to make it appear that Marx and Engels did
not understand what it means to be a materialist.


8. How Could Dietzgen Please the Reactionary Philosophers?


The previously cited example from Helfond already contains an
answer to this question, and we shall not examine the numerous
instances in which Dietzgen receives similar treatment at the hands
of our Machians. It is more expedient to quote from Dietzgen
himself in order to show his weak points.

“Thinking is a function of the brain,” says Dietzgen in The Posi-
tive Outcome of Philosophy. “My desk as a picture in my mind is
identical with my idea of it. But my desk outside of my brain is a
separate object and distinct from my idea” (p. 62). These very
clear materialistic propositions Dietzgen, however, completes thus:
““We distinguish between the object of sense perception and its
mental image. Nevertheless the intangible idea is also material
and real (p. 63)... . The function of the brain is no more a
‘pure’ process than the function of the eye, the scent of a flower, the
heat of a stove, or the touch of a table” (p. 64). Here is an obvious
untruth. That thought and matter are “real,”—that they exist, is
true. But to call thought material is to make an erroneous step,
is to confuse materialism and idealism. But in truth it is only an
inexact expression of Dietzgen’s, who elsewhere speaks quite cor-
rectly. ‘Consciousness and matter have this in common, that they
exist. .. . Thinking is a physical process and it cannot exist or


206 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


ieee nT nnn ee


produce anything without materials any more than any other proc-

ess of labor. My thought requires some material which can be
thought of. This material is furnished by the phenomena of nature
and life. . . . Matter is the boundary, beyond which the mind can-
not pass. Mind is a product of matter, but matter is more than a
product of mind .. .” (p. 74). The Machians refrain from ana-
lysing these materialistic arguments advanced by the materialist
Dietzgen! They prefer to cavil at his inexact phrases and confused
passages. For example, he says that scientists can be “idealists out-
side of their specialty” (p. 124). As to why he believes this, the
Machians are silent. But on page 122 Dietzgen recognises the “posi-
tive side of modern idealism” and the “inadequacy of materialism”
(p. 123), at which the Machians should rejoice. The source of the
incorrect expression of Dietzgen lies in the statement that “the dis-
tinction between matter and mind is relative but not absolute” (p.
123). This is true, but from this follows not the inadequacy of
materialism as such but the inadequacy of metaphysical, anti-dia-
lectical materialism.

“Truth, profane or scientific, is not based upon personalities. It
is based on external objects; it is objective. . . . We call ourselves
materialists. . . . Those thinkers are philosophic materialists who put
the real world at the beginning, at the head of their investigation,
and the idea or spirit as the sequel and outcome, as the product,
while their opponents follow the opposite method.” The Mach-
ians ignore this recognition of objective truth and the repetition of
Engels’ definition of materialism. But when Dietzgen says: “We
would be equally right in calling ourselves idealists, inasmuch as
our system is based upon the final results of philosophy, upon the
scientific investigation of ideas, upon the clear insight won by us
into the nature of the mind” (ibid., p. 141), it is not difficult to
cavil at this incorrect phrasing in order to refute materialism. In
truth, the verbal expression, in Dietzgen’s case, is more inexact
than is his basic thought which can be reduced to this, that the tra-
ditional materialism can not investigate ideas scientifically without
the help of historical materialism.

Here is Dietzgen’s argument against traditional materialism:
“Materialism is, like Political Economy, a scientific result. Just as
we distinguish between modern and utopian socialism, so do we
also distinguish between modern and eighteenth century materialism.


72 Philosophical Essays, pp. 136-140.


ce EE: ENOL TEE ES SS Oe ttt a oe ie ee


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 207


With the latter we have only this in common, that we assume matter
as the premise, as the cause of the idea” (p. 220). This word
“only” is very characteristic! It includes all the epistemological
grounds of materialism as distinct from agnosticism, Machism and
idealism. But Dietzgen’s efforts are here directed to marking him-
self off from vulgar materialism.

Yet a little further another incorrect expression crops up again:
“The conception of matter must be given a more comprehensive
meaning. To it belong all the phenomena of reality including our
power of thinking” (p. 222). This muddle confuses materialism
and idealism under the pretence of “broadening” the first. To cavil
at such “broadening” is to forget the basis of Dietzgen’s philosophy,
the recognition of matter as the prius, as the “limit of spirit.” And
a few lines further down, Dietzgen corrects himself, saying that
“the whole governs the part, and cosmic matter the mind. It is in
this sense that we may regard the material world as the supreme
being, as the cause of all causes, as the creator of heaven and earth”
(p. 222). That the conception of “matter” must also include
“thoughts,” as Dietzgen repeats in the Excursions, is a confusion, for
once such an inclusion is made, the epistemological distinction be
tween mind and matter, materialism and idealism, has no meaning,
a distinction which Dietzgen himself insists upon. That this dis-
tinction must not be stretched, or exaggerated, or regarded as meta-
physically absolute, is beyond dispute, and in emphasising this lies
the great merit of Dietzgen’s dialectical materialism. The limits of
the absolute necessity and the absolute truth of such relative dis-
tinctions are precisely the limits which define the direction of our
knowledge-getting processes. It would be a great mistake to operate
beyond these limits with the contrast of matter and mind, physical
and psychical, or with any other absolute contradistinction.

Dietzgen, as distinguished from Engels, expresses his thoughts
unclearly and vaguely. But putting aside the shortcomings of the
exposition and the frequent mistakes, he successfully defends the
“materialistic theory of knowledge and dialectical materialism.”
“The materialist theory of knowledge amounts, then, to this state-
ment, that the human organ of cognition radiates no metaphysical
light, but is a piece of Nature which pictures other pieces of Na-
ture” (p. 309). “Our faculty of cognition is not a supernatural
source of truth, but a mirror-like instrument which reflects the


things of the world, or Nature” (p. 331). Our thoughtful Mach-


SS ee


208 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


jans ignore an analysis of the individual propositions of Dietz-
gen’s materialist theory of knowledge, but cavil at his vagueness
and confusion and deviations from his basic position. Dietzgen
pleases the reactionary philosophers just because he commits blun-
ders. Wherever there is a blunder, we are sure to find the Mach-
ians! This is obvious enough.

Marx wrote Kugelmann on December 5, 1868: “Tt is long since
Dietzgen sent me his manuscript [The Nature of Human Brain-
Work], which, despite some confusion of ideas and too frequent
repetitions, contains many excellent thoughts, and which as a prod-
uct of the independent thinking of a worker, is worthy of admira-
tion.’ Valentinov cites this review and it does not enter his mind
to ask himself what Marx regards as Dietzgen’s confusion. Was it
Dietzgen’s approach to Mach, or that which separates him from
Mach. Mr. Valentinov does not ask himself this question, for he
reads Dietzgen and Marx’s letters like Gogol’s hero, Petrushka, read
words. It is not difficult to find an answer to this question: Marx
often termed his viewpoint dialectical materialism, and Engels’
Anti-Diihring which Marx read through before publication, ex-
pounds precisely this viewpoint. From this it should be clear even
to the Valentinovs that Dietzgen’s confusion lay only in his devia-
tion from a consistent application of dialectics, from a consistent
materialism. This is made quite evident, particularly in Anti-Diihr-
ing.

Had Valentinov and his associates no suspicion that Marx would
pick out as confused only those elements in Dietzgen in which he
approaches Mach, who went from Kant not toward materialism but
towards Berkeley and Hume? Or perhaps the materialist Marx
regarded Dietzgen’s materialist theory of knowledge as confused
and approved his deviations from materialism? Perhaps Marx
approved of what Anti-Diihring, written with his collaboration, dis-
approves?

Whom are our Machians, masquerading as Marxians, trying to
dupe in telling the world that “their” Mach approved of Dietzgen?
Have they no suspicion that Mach approved of him only because of
the presence of those very elements for which Marx dubbed him a
muddlehead?

Taking Dietzgen as a whole, he does not deserve to be very much
censured. He is nine-tenths materialist and never made any pre-
tentions to originality or boasted a special philosophy distinct from


a —


PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISTS 209


materialism. He spoke of Marx many times, and invariably as the
head of the movement. (In 1873, on page 82 of his Philosophical
Essays, and in 1876, on page 173, he stresses the fact that Marx
and Engels “possessed the necessary philosophic training.” In
1886, on page 265, he speaks of Marx and Engels “renowned as
founders of the movement”). Dietzgen was a Marxian, and a poor
service, indeed, has his son, Eugene Dietzgen, rendered him. And
alas! the same is true for Comrade P. Dauge, too, who invented
“natur-monism,” “Dietzgenism,” etc. “Dietzgenism” as distinct
from dialectic materialism is rank confusion, a step backward to-
ward reactionary philosophy, an attempt to create a tendency, not
out of the really great things in Joseph Dietzgen (that worker-
philosopher, who developed dialectic materialism in his own way,
which is great enough) but out of his weak points. I will confine
myself to two examples of how Comrade Dauge and Eugene Dietz-
gen are slipping down the sharp decline to reactionary philosophy!

Dauge writes in the second edition of the Aquisit (p. 273):
“Even bourgeois criticism, points out the connection of Dietzgen’s
philosophy with empirio-criticism and the thought of the im-
manentist school,” and further: “especially that of Leclair.”

That Dauge values and esteems Dietzgen is beyond doubt. But
it is also beyond doubt that he puts him to shame by citing without
protest the opinion of a bourgeois scribbler, who makes the sworn
enemy of theism akin to the professors, akin to the “graduated
flunkeys” of the bourgeoisie, and especially to that downright res
actionary and open preacher of theism, Leclair. It is possible that
Dauge repeated somebody’s opinion on the followers of the im-
manentist school and Leclair, Dauge himself not being familiar
with the writings of these reactionaries. But let this serve him as
a warning: the road from Marx—through the peculiar deviations of
Dietzgen—to Mach and the followers of the immanentist school is
the road leading into the mire. The approach not only to Leclair
but even to Mach distinguishes Dietzgen, the muddlehead, from
Dietzgen, the materialist.

I shall defend Dietzgen against Dauge. I assert that Dietzgen
did not deserve the disgrace of being classed with Leclair. And
I call as witness the most authoritative person on such a question:
as reactionary a philosopher, theist and “immanentist” as Leclair
is himself, namely, Schubert-Soldern. In 1896 he wrote: “The
social-democrats willingly follow Hegel with more or less (usually


210 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


less) right, but they materialise Hegel’s philosophy. Compare
Dietzgen in this respect. With Dietzgen the absolute becomes the
universe,—the universe—the thing-in-itself, the absolute Subject,
whose predicates are particular phenomena. That Dietzgen was con-
verting pure abstractions into concrete processes, he was not, of
course, aware of any more than Hegel was himself. . . . Hegel,
Darwin, Haeckel, and naturo-historical materialism are combined in
Dietzgen.” 7? Schubert-Soldern more keenly discerns philosophic
shades and tendencies than does Mach himself who praises every-
body including Jerusalem.

Eugene Dietzgen was so naive as to complain to the German
public that the “narrow” Russian materialists had done violence to
the thought of Joseph Dietzgen. He translated into German Plek-
hanov’s and Dauge’s articles on Joseph Dietzgen.* The poor
naturmonist’s complaint fell on his own head. Franz Mehring, who
understands something of the philosophy of Marxism, wrote in his
review that Plekhanov was essentially right as against Dauge.”®
That Dietzgen, where he deviated from Marx and Engels, got into
a scrape, is for Mehring beyond doubt. Eugene Dietzgen replied
to Mehring in a long, snivelling note, in which he said that Dietzgen
might be of service “in the reconciliation” of the “contending ortho-
dox and revisionist comrades.” 7°

Another warning, Comrade Dauge: The road from Marx to
“Dietzgenism” and “Machism” is a road into the mire, not merely
for persons like Jones, Smith, etc., but for a whole movement.

And do not cry out, you Machians, that I resort to “authorities” ;
your clamour against the argument from authority is only a screen
to conceal the fact that you substitute for the socialist authorities
Marx, Engels, Lafargue, Mehring, Kautsky, the bourgeois authori-
ties (Mach, Petzoldt, Avenarius and the immanentists). It would
have been much better if you had not raised the question of “authori-
ties” and “authoritarianism”!

73 Die Sociale Frage, p. xxxiil.

74 Joseph Dietzgen: Erkenntnis und Warheit, Stuttgart, 1908, Supplements,


75 Die Neue Zeit, 1908, No. 38, p. 432.
76 Die Neue Zeit, No. 44, p. 652.


CHAPTER FIVE


THE LATEST REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE
AND PHILOSOPHIC IDEALISM


A YEAR ago in Die Neue Zeit (1907, No. 52), there appeared an
article by Joseph Diner-Dénes: “Der Marxismus und die neueste
Revolution in der Naturwissenschaft.” The defect of this article is
that its author ignored the epistemologic consequences of “recent”
physics, a problem in which we are especially interested at pres-
ent. But it is precisely this defect that renders the viewpoint and
conclusions of the author interesting to us. Joseph Diner-Dénes,
like the present writer, holds the viewpoint of those “rank and file
Marxians” of whom our Machians speak with such grand contempt.
For instance, Yushkevich writes that “ordinarily an average, rank-
and-file Marxian calls himself a dialectic materialist” (p. 1 of his
book). And now such a rank-and-file Marxian, in the person of
Diner-Dénes, directly compares the latest discoveries in science,
especially in physics (x-rays, Becquerel rays, radium, etc.) with
Engels’ Anti-Diihring. To what conclusion did this comparison
lead him? “In the various domains of natural science,” writes
Diner-Dénes, “new scientific acquisitions have been made, and all
of them confirm the proposition which Engels particularly stresses,
namely, that in nature, there are no irreconcilable contradictions,
no fixed lines of demarcation and distinction,” and that if certain
contradictions and distinctions are discovered, then their immobility
and absoluteness are read into nature by us alone. For instance,
it was discovered that light and electricity are only manifestations
of one and the same force of nature. Each day it becomes more
probable that chemical affinity may be reduced to electrical proc-


esses. The apparently indestructible and the unanalysable elements


of chemistry, whose number continued to grow, as if to deride the

notion of a world-unity, is proven to be destructible and analysable.

The scientists have succeeded in converting the element of radium

into that of helium. “Just as all the forces of nature have been

reduced to one force, so also may the various kinds of nature’s

substances be reduced to one substance.” Having cited the opinion
211


212 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


of one of the writers who regards the atom as a condensation of
ether, the author exclaims: “What a brilliant confirmation of Engels’
remark ‘that motion is a form of material being.’ All the phe-
nomena of nature are the result of various kinds of motion, and
the differences between them lies in the fact that we, as men, per-
ceive this motion in different forms. . . . Matter is exactly as
Engels characterised it. Nature, like history, is subject to the
dialectic laws of motion.”

On the other hand, you cannot read anything by or about the
Machians without encountering allusions to the new physics which,
it is believed, has supposedly refuted materialism, etc. How these
references are substantiated is another question; but the connection
of recent physics, or rather of a certain school of recent physics,
with Machism and other varieties of modern idealistic philosophy,
is beyond doubt. To analyse Machism and to ignore this connec-
tion—as Plekhanov did—is to fail to take the spirit of dialectic
materialism seriously, that is, to sacrifice Engels’ entire method for
the sake of this or that single letter of his. Engels says explicitly
that “with each epoch-making discovery in the department of natural
science (‘not to speak of the history of mankind’), it (materialism)
has been obliged to change its form” (Feuerbach, p. 65). Hence,
the revision of “form” in Engels’ materialism, the revision of his
naturo-philosophic views is to be considered not as “revisionism”
in the ordinary sense, but, on the contrary, as the kind of “re-
visionism” which is an integral part of Marxism. We criticise the
Machians not for such revision but for their purely “revisionist”
method—a method which consists in undermining the substance of
materialism, under the pretext of criticising its form. We criticise
them for adopting the presuppositions of the reactionary bourgeois
philosophy without the slightest attempt to take account directly,
frankly and definitely of such essential and significant assertions of
Engels on this question, as, for example, the following: “ . . .Mat-
ter without motion is unthinkable.” +

It must be clear that in analysing the question regarding the con-
nection between one school of recent physicists and the revival of
idealism, we are far from the thought of even slightly treating the
special doctrines of physics. We are exclusively interested in the
epistemological conclusions which follow from certain definite posi-
tions and quite generally known discoveries. These epistemological


1 Anti-Diihring, p. 86.


ee


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 213


inferences seem so directly involved in the subject matter, that
many a physicist has already treated them. And what is more,
amongst the physicists themselves there are already various tenden-
cies, and certain schools are being formed on this ground. Our
object, then, is to propound clearly the divergent views of these
tendencies and examine their relation to the fundamental align-
ments in philosophy.


1. The Crisis in Modern Physics


Henri Poincaré, the famous French physicist, says in his book?
that there are “symptoms of a serious crisis” in physics, and de-
votes a special chapter to it (Chap. VIII). This crisis is not con-
fined to the proposition that the “grand revolutionist, radium” has
undermined the principle of the conservation of energy. “Other
sciences are equally in danger” (p. 96). For instance, the prin-
ciple of Lavoisier, or the principle of conservation of mass, has
been undermined by the electron theory of matter. According to
this theory the atoms are composed of very minute particles, charged
with positive or negative electricity, called electrons and “are im-
mersed in a medium which we call ether.” The experiments of the
physicists offer material for the calculation of the velocity of the
electrons and the measurement of their mass (or the relation of
their mass to their electrical charge). The velocity of this motion
proves to be comparable with the velocity of light (300,000 kilo-
metres per second), in fact, amounts to one-third of the latter’s
speed. In the presence of such conditions we must take into ac-
count the two aspects of the mass of the electron according to the
necessity of overcoming the inertia of (1) the electron itself and
(2) the ether. The first mass will be the real or mechanical mass
of the electron, the second will be the “electrodynamic mass which
represents the inertia of ether.” And here the first mass proves to
be equal to zero. The entire mass of electrons, or, at least, of
the negative electrons, proves to be in its origin, totally and exclu-
sively electrodynamic. Mass disappears. The foundations of me-
chanics are undermined. The principle of Newton, the equality
of action and reaction, go by the board.

We have before us the “ruins” of the old principles of physics,
“a general destruction of principles.” It is true, he corrects him-


2The Value of Science, Science Press, New York, 1907, p. 96.


214 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


self, saying that all the exceptions to the principles belong to the
realm of infinitesimal quantities; that it is possible that we are still
ignorant of other infinitesimals which would counteract the destruc-
tive effects of the old principles. And besides, radium is still very
tare. But at any rate we have reached a “stage of doubt.” We
‘have already made the acquaintance of the author’s epistemologic
inferences from this “stage of doubt.” “It is not nature which gives,
or dictates, to us the ideas of space and time, but we give them to
nature; whatever is not thought, is the purest zero.” These are
idealist inferences. The destruction of the fundamental principles
shows—such is the trend of Poincaré’s thought—that these principles
are not copies, not reflections of nature, not pictures of something
external in relation to man’s mind, but products of this mind.
Poincaré does not develop those inferences consistently, does not
take an interest in the essentially philosophic side of the question.
Abel Rey, the French writer on philosophic problems, treats this
question in details True, the author himself is a positivist, that
is, a muddlehead and a half-Machian, but in this case it is even
better, for he cannot be suspected of the desire to “slander” the
idol of our Machians. Rey cannot be trusted when the question is
an exact definition of philosophic concepts and particularly of ma-
terialism, for Rey too is a professor, and as such is imbued with a
feeling of contempt for the materialists. (His ignorance of the
epistemology of materialism is extreme.) That this “man of science”
should be unaware of the existence of a certain Marx or Engels is out
of the question. Yet Rey consulted carefully and conscientiously the
extremely abundant literature on the question, not only in French,
but in English and German as well (Ostwald’s and Mach’s works
especially). We shall often avail ourselves of his references.
The attention of philosophers in general, says the author, and
particularly of those who, for one reason or another, wish to criti-
cise science in general, is now directed to physics. “In discussing
the limits and validity of physical knowledge, it is, in fact, the
legitimacy of positive science, the possibility of knowledge of the
object, that is discussed” (pp. i-ii). From the “crisis of modern
physics” we hasten to draw sceptical conclusions (p. 14). Now, in
what does this crisis consist? During the first two-thirds of the
nineteenth century the physicists had agreed on fundamental con-


8 Abel Rey: La théorie physique chez les physiciens contemporains, Paris,
1907.


ee >


¥
é


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 215
pS oe EES ADS SED A ET AE SRE OU ECD a eee TEE


cepts. “They believed in a purely mechanical explanation of na-
ture; they assumed that physics is nothing but a complication of
mechanics, namely, molecular mechanics. They did not differ unless
it was as to the procedure employed to reduce the physical to the
mechanical, as to the details of the mechanism [p. 16]... . At
present it seems that the spectacle which the physico-chemical
sciences offer us, is completely changed. Extreme disagreements
have replaced the former unity, and those disagreements are not
infrequent, not in details, but in the leading and fundamental ideas.
Even if the statement that each scientist has his peculiar tendencies
were an exaggeration, we must admit, however, that like art, science,
too, especially physics, has numerous schools, whose views are
often far removed from one another and sometimes even violently
opposed... .

“From this one may judge the far-reaching significance of what
is called the crisis in modern physics and the extent of its scope.

“Until the middle of the nineteenth century, traditional physics
had been convinced that a mere extension of the familiar methods
of physics would suffice to account for the metaphysics of matter.
This physics ascribed to its theories an ontological significance.
And these theories were wholly mechanistic. The traditional
‘mechanism’ [Rey employs this word in the special sense of a
system of views, which reduces physics to mechanics] thus claimed
over and above the results of experience, a real knowledge of the
material world. This was not an hypothetical account of experience
—it was a dogma” (p. 16).

We must here interrupt the honourable “positivist.” It is clear
that he is referring to the materialistic philosophy of traditional
physics, without wishing to call the devil (materialism) by name.
To a Humean, materialism is metaphysics, dogma, a transcendence
of the limits of experience. Without knowing what materialism
really is, the Humean Rey can have no notion of dialectics, and of
the distinction between dialectic materialism and metaphysical ma-
terialism, as formulated by Engels. The correlation, therefore, be-


tween absolute and relative truth, for example, is absolutely unclear


to Rey.

“The critical observations directed against the traditional mecha-
nism, which were expressed in the second half of the nineteenth
century, weakened the position of the ontological reality of mecha-
nism. On the basis of these criticisms a philosophic conception of


216 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


physics which became almost traditional with philosophy at the
end of the nineteenth century, established itself. Science was noth-
ing but a symbolic formula, a method of denotation (repérage),
and as the methods of denotation vary according to schools, the
conclusion was soon reached that only that could be denoted which
was previously designed by man as capable of denotation. Science
became a work of art for dilettantes, a work of art for the utilitarians
—an attitude which implies the negation of the possibility of
science. Science, as a pure ‘artifact,’ as mere utilitarian technique,
had no right, without perverting the sense of the words, to call itself
science. To say that science can be nothing, save such an artifice,
is to disavow science in the proper sense of the word.

“The rejection of traditional mechanism, or, to be more precise,
the criticism to which it was subjected, involved this proposition:
science itself is in a critical position. From the impossibility of
adhering to a pure and simple traditional mechanism it was con-
cluded that science was impossible” (p. 17). And the author poses
the question: “Is the actual crisis of physics a temporary and
external incident in the evolution of science, or is it science itself
which has taken a sudden turn and abandoned the path it has fol-
lowed hitherto? [p. 18].

“If these sciences, which historically have been emancipators,
suffer a crisis which reduces them to nothing save valuable, tech-
nically useful recipes; if they are stripped of their entire signifi-
cance, then from the standpoint of natural knowledge the result
must be a complete overthrow of the methods of logical and his-
torical analysis of ideas. Physics loses then all educational value;
the positive spirit which it represents now becomes false and dan-
gerous.” Science is able to offer no true knowledge save practical
recipes. “The cognition of the real must be sought by other means.
. . . We must take another road, and turn to subjective intuition,
to the mystical sense of reality, in a word, to the mysterious, to
what we had thought had been given its death-blow by science”
(p. 19).

As a positivist the author considers such a view to be wrong and
the crisis of physics only temporary. We shall see how Rey vindi-
cates Mach, Poincaré and the others from such aspersions. At
present we limit ourselves to stating the fact of the “crisis” and its
significance. From the last words of Rey it is quite clear, who the
reactionary elements were who availed themselves of this crisis


[
*)


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 217


and made it still more acute. In the preface to his work, Rey
directly says that “the fideist and anti-intellectualist movement of
the last years of the nineteenth century seek support in the general
spirit of modern physics” (p. 2). In France those are termed
fideists who rely more upon faith than upon reason. By anti-
intellectualism is meant the doctrine which denies the claims or
pretensions of reason. Hence, in its philosophic aspect, the sub-
stance of the “crisis of modern physics” arises from the fact that
the old physics regarded its theories as “a real presentation of the
material world,” that is, as a reflection of. objective reality. The
new movement in physics sees in scientific theory only symbols,
signs, and prescriptions for practice; it denies the existence of ob-
jective reality independent of our consciousness and reflected in it.
Had Rey adhered to a correct philosophic terminology, he would
have said: the materialistic theory of knowledge, which had been
instinctively accepted by traditional physics, was changed for an
idealistic and agnostic one, and fideism availed itself of this, de-
spite the efforts of the idealists and agnostics.

But Rey does not present this change, which constitutes the cri-
sis, as if all modern physicists stand opposed to traditional physics.
Nay, he shows that according to their epistemologic tendencies the
modern physicists are divided into three schools: energetic or
conceptualist (from the word concept which means pure idea) ;
mechanistic or neo-mechanistic, to which the preponderant majority
of physicists adhere; and intermediate between the two, the critical
school. To the first belong Mach and Duhem; to the third, Henri
Poincaré; to the second, Kirchhoff, Helmholtz, Thomson (Lord
Kelvin) , Maxwell—among the old; Larmor and Lorentz—among the
more recent. What the difference between the two basic alignments
is (for the third is not really an independent position but inter-
mediate between the other two) may be judged from the following
words of Rey:

“Traditional mechanism constructed a system of the material
world. In its doctrine of the structure of matter, it resorted to
the conception of ‘elements which were qualitatively homogeneous
and identical,’ elements which had to be regarded as ‘immutable
and impenetrable,’ etc. Physics ‘constructed a real edifice with real
material and real cement.’ The physicist thought he knew the
material elements, their operating causes, the ways in which they
worked, and the real laws of their action [pp. 33-39]... . This


218 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


outlook has been changed mainly in that the ontological validity
of the theory is now abandoned and the phenomenological part
stressed instead. The conceptual view has to deal with ‘pure ab-
stractions.’ It searches for a purely abstract theory which elimi-
nates, as much as possible, the hypothesis of matter. . . . The no-
tion of energy becomes the fundamental structure of recent physics,
and therefore conceptualist physics may in most cases be called
with Mach, energetics” (p. 46).

Rey’s confusion of energetics and Machism is incorrect, of course,
just as is his assurance that despite the sharp disagreement with
the conceptualists, the neo-mechanistic school approaches the phe-
nomenalist view of physics (p. 48). The “new” terminology of
Rey does not clarify, but obscures matters; still we were not able
to avoid it in order to convey to the reader the “positivist’s” view
of the crisis in physics. The substance of the question at issue
between the “new” and the old school is the same, as the reader
can convince himself, as that revealed in the above quoted criticism
of Helmholtz by Kleinpeter. In presenting the views of various
physicists, Rey reflects all the indefiniteness and vacillation of
their philosophic attitudes in his exposition. The essence of the
crisis of modern physics consists in the destruction of the old laws
and basic principles, in the rejection of an objective reality existing
outside of mind, that is, in the change from materialism to idealism
and agnosticism. ‘Matter has disappeared”—that is how the funda-
mental and typical embarrassment in the several questions which
created this crisis may be characterised. We shall pause upon this
embarrassment.


2. “Matter Has Disappeared”


The literal expression, “matter has disappeared,” may be found
in the description given by the recent physicists of the latest dis-
coveries, as, for instance, in Houllevigue’s book, L’evolution des
sciences. “The atom dematerialises, matter disappears.” * To see
how easily the fundamental philosophic implications are drawn by
the Machians, let us take Valentinov. He writes: “The statement
that the scientific explanation of the world receives a firm founda-


4. Houllevigue: L’evolution des sciences, Paris, 1908, pp. 63, 87, 88; Cf.


his article: “Les idées des physiciens sur la matiere, in Année psychologique,
1908


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 219


tion only in materialism is nothing but a fiction, and an absurd
fiction at that” (p. 67). As the destroyer of this absurd fiction
they point to the well-known Italian physicist, Augusto Righi, who
says that the theory of electrons “is not so much a theory of elec-
tricity, as of matter; the new system merely puts electricity in the
place of matter.”5 Having quoted these words (p. 64), Mr.
Valentinov exclaims: “Why did Righi allow himself to offend holy
matter? Because he is perhaps a solipsist, or an idealist, a bour-
geois criticist, or a certain empirio-monist or even something worse
than that?”

This remark, which seems to Valentinov to be fatal to the ma-
terialists, discloses his virgin innocence of what the real question
of materialism is. What is the real connection between idealism
and the “disappearance of matter” ?—this Mr. Valentinov does not
understand at all. And this “disappearance of matter,” which he
repeats after the modern physicists, has no relation to the episte-
mologic distinction of materialism and idealism. To throw light
upon it, let us take one of the clearest and most consistent Machians,
Karl Pearson. He conceives the physical realm to be constituted
of groups of sense impressions. He illustrates “our conceptual
model of the physical universe” in the following diagrammatic
manner, making it plain that the relation of size is not taken into
consideration by the diagram: °


o4e o%4 ote ate,
me, og:


Fe s
: 4 é Segiige? *agtlas® x
state af ®%, a aps H Sone! Foye? ASS. od
ee eee ee oss SS
"4S ‘e Seg Bagi Rage Pagano” =P
‘Emer-UniTs Prime Atom «© CHEMICAL ATOM MOLECULE (<4) PARTICLE (-v) Booby.


To simplify his diagram, Pearson eliminates the question of the
correlation of ether and electricity or positive and negative electrons.
But this is not important. What is important is that according to
Pearson’s idealistic viewpoint, “bodies” are sense-perceptions;
whereupon the constitution of these bodies of particles, and particles
of molecules and so forth, concerns the changes in the model of the
physical world, and not at all the question whether bodies are
symbols of perception, or perceptions the images of bodies. Ma-


5 Augusto Righi: Die moderne Theorie der physikalischen Erscheinungen,


Leipzig, 1905, p. 131.
6 Grammar of Science, p. 282.


220 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM |


terialism and idealism are distinguished by their respective solution
of the problem concerning the source of our knowledge and the
relation of knowledge (or the “psychical” at large) to the physical
realm; and the question of the structure of matter, of atoms and
electrons is something that concerns only “this physical world.”
When the physicists say “matter disappears,” they mean by this
that, until the present the natural sciences had reduced their meas-
urements of the physical realm to three ultimate concepts: matter,
electricity and ether; and that now only the last two remain, for
they have finally succeeded in reducing matter to electricity. The
atom is explained as being the simulacrum of the infinitely small
solar system within which the negative electrons move around the
positive electron with a definite (and immeasurably immense)
velocity. Instead of scores of elements they consequently have
succeeded in reducing the physical realm to two or three elements
(insofar as the positive and negative electron constitute “two kinds
of essentially distinct matter,” as the physicist Pellat says (loc. cit.,
pp. 294-295). Hence the natural sciences lead to the “unity of
matter” (ibid.);7 this is the real meaning of the disappearance of
matter, of its change into electricity, etc., which baffles so many
people. ‘Matter disappears”’—means that matter in the form of
the limit which we have known up to now vanishes, as our knowl-
edge penetrates deeper; those properties of matter which before
seemed absolute, immutable, and primary (impenetrability, inertia,
mass, etc.) disappear, and now become relative, belonging only
to certain states of matter. For the sole “property” of matter—
with the recognition of which materialism is vitally connected—is
the property of being objective reality, of existing outside of our
cognition.

The error of Machism in general, and the Machian new physics
in particular, is that the foundation of materialism is ignored,
together with the distinction between metaphysical materialism and
dialectic materialism. The recognition of immutable elements, “of
the immutable substance of things,” is not materialism, but is meta-


7Cf. Oliver Lodge: Electrons, London, 1906. “The electrical theory of
matter,” the recognition of electricity as the “fundamental substance,” is “an
approximate accomplishment of that to what the philosophers strove always,
that is, the unity of matter”; Cf. Righi: Ueber die Struktur der Materie, Leip-
zig, 1908; I. I. Thomson: The Corpuscular Theory of Matter, Londoi,19075


P. Langevin: “La physique des electrons” in the Revue generale des sci
1905, pp. 256-7. iences,


——


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 221


physical, anti-dialectical, materialism. Dietzgen, therefore, stresses
the point that the “subject-matter of every science is endless,” that
not only the infinite but the “smallest atom” as well, is incommensur-
able, unknowable to the end, inexhaustible.® Engels, therefore,
adduced his example regarding the discovery of alizarine in coal
tar and criticised mechanistic materialism. To put the question
from the only correct, that is, the dialectico-materialistic standpoint,
we must ask: do electrons, ether, etc., exist as objective realities
outside of the human mind? The scientists must answer this ques-
tion without hesitation and the answer must be an affirmative one,
for they recognise without hesitation the existence of nature prior
to man and organic matter. Thus is the question decided on the
side of materialism, for the idea of matter, as we already stated,
epistemologically means nothing new, besides some objective reality
existing independently of the human mind and reflected by it.
But dialectical materialism insists on the approximate, relative
character of every scientific proposition concerning the structure
of matter and its properties; on the absence of absolute boundaries
in nature; on the transformation of moving matter from one state
to another, which from an ordinary viewpoint appears evidently
irreconcilable, etc. Amazing as is the transformation of imponder-
able ether into ponderable matter, to the viewpoint of “common
sense,’ and conversely, as amazing as the absence of any other
kind of mass in the electron save electro-magnetic may appear to
it, together with the strange discovery that mechanical laws of
motion are limited to only one region of natural phenomena, while
the others conform to subtler laws of electro-magnetics and so forth
—yet all this for dialectic materialism is only another corroboration
of its truth. Recent physics fell into an idealist swamp mainly be-
cause the physicists did not know dialectics. They combated meta-
physical (in Engels’ sense of the word, and not in the positivist, or
Humean) materialism and its one-sided “mechanisation,” and by so
doing they not only threw the water out of the bath, but the child as


_ well. By denying the immutability of the elements and the properties


of matter known hitherto, they ended with the denial of matter, the
denial of the objective reality of the physical world. By denying
the absolute character of the most important and basic laws, they
ended in the denial of every objective law, in the declaration of the


. . on} 99 ¢
natural law as a mere conventionality, “a limit of expectancy,” “a


8 Philosophical Essays, p. 317.


222 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


logical necessity,” and so forth. By insisting on the approximate,
relative character of our knowledge, they ended in the denial of
the object existing independently of cognition, an object which is
reflected in knowledge with an approximate degree of truth. And
so forth, and so on without end.

Bogdanov’s discussions in 1899 about “the immutable essence of
things,” Valentinov’s and Yushkevich’s discussions about “sub-
stance”—these are fruits of the ignorance of dialectics. Only one
thing is, from Engels’ viewpoint, immutable—the reflection by the
human mind (when the human mind exists) of a world existing
and developing independently of the mind. No. other “immuta-
bility,” no other “essence” or “absolute substance,” in the sense in
which the idle official philosophy portrayed these, existed for Marx
and Engels. The “essence” of things or their “substance” is also
relative, it expresses only the degree of man’s power penetrating
into and knowing objects; and even if yesterday this penetration
did not go any further than the atom, and to-day, no further than
ihe electron and ether, then dialectic materialism insists on the
temporary, relative, approximate character of all these mile-
stones on the road of knowledge of nature, through the progressive
science of man. The electron is as inexhaustible as the atom, nature
is infinite, but it exists infinitely; and only this categorical, uncon-
ditional recognition of its existence beyond the consciousness and
sensation of man, distinguishes dialectic materialism from relativist
agnosticism and idealism.

Let us cite two examples of the way the new physics vacillates
unconsciously and instinctively between dialectic materialism,
which remains unknown to the bourgeois savants, and “phenomenal-
ism” with its inevitably subjectivist (and directly fideist) infer-
ences.

The same Augusto Righi, whom Valentinov was unable to ask
the question which interested him, the question about materialism,
writes in the preface to his book:

“What those electrons and electrical atoms properly are has
remained a mystery until now; but regardless of this it may, per-
haps, be the lot of the new theory to attain with time a philosophic
significance, in so far as it arrives at absolutely new hypotheses re-
garding the structure of ponderable matter and strives to reduce all
phenomena of the external world to one common origin.

“From the standpoint of the positive and utilitarian tendencies


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 223


of our time such privilege, is, if you please, not insignificant, and
the theory may be recognised before everything else as a convenient
means to introduce order and to compare facts, to serve as a guide
in the search for further phenomena. But if in former times they
had too much confidence in the faculties of human spirit and
thought which quite easily embraced the last causes of all things,
in our time, however, there is a tendency to fall into a contrary
error (loc, cit., p. 3).

Why does Righi separate himself from the positivist and _utili-
tarian tendencies? Because, not having obviously any definite
philosophic viewpoint, he instinctively clings to the reality of the
outer world and to the recognition of the new theory, not only
because it is “convenient” (Poincaré), not only because it is “em-
pirio-symbolic” (Yushkevich), not only for the reason that it “har-
monises” experience (Bogdanov), or whatever else the names of
similar subjectivist tricks may be, but because it is a further step
in the knowledge of objective reality. If this physicist were to
acquaint himself with dialectic materialism, his judgment of the
error of old metaphysical materialism, would, perhaps, become the
starting point of a correct philosophy. But the entire environment
in which these people live estranges them from Marx and Engels,
casts them into the arms of the vulgar official philosophy.

Nor is Rey himself any more familiar with dialectics. But he too
was compelled to state that amongst recent physicists there are those
who are regarded as the successors to the traditions of “mechanism”
(materialism). The path of “mechanism” follows not only Kirch-
hoff, Hertz, Boltzmann, Maxwell, Helmholtz and Lord Kelvin.
“Pure mechanists, and many more among those who represent the
last word in mechanism, as, e. g., those who follow Lorentz and
Larmor, formulate an electric theory of matter and arrive at the
denial of the constancy of mass, making it a function of motion.
All of them are mechanists, because they take real motion as their
starting point” (Rey’s emphasis, pp. 290-291). “...If, for example,

the recent hypotheses of Loreniz, Larmor and Langevin were con-
- firmed, in virtue of certain experimental concordance, and were
to attain a sufficiently stable basis for the systematisation of physics,
it is certain that the modern mechanical laws would depend upon
the laws of electro-magnetism; they would only form a special case
within well-determined limits. The constancy of mass and the
principle of inertia would hold good only for the average velocities


224 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM |


of bodies, taking the term ‘average’ in relation to our senses and the
phenomena which constitute our “general experience. A general
change of mechanics would become necessary, and hence, a general
change in physics as a systematic science.

“Would it signify the abandonment of mechanism? By no means.
The pure mechanistic tradition would continue to persevere, and
mechanism would follow its normal course of development” (p.
295).

“The electronic physics, which should be ranged amongst the
mechanist theories in view of its general spirit, tends to impose a
maximum systematisation upon physics. Its spirit is mechanistic
though the fundamental principles of physics are not furnished by
mechanics but by experimental data of electricity, because (1) it
employs material and figurative elements in order to represent the
physical properties and their laws; it expresses itself in terms of
perception.

“(2) If it does not consider physical phenomena as_par-
ticular cases of mechanical phenomena, it considers the me-
chanical phenomena as particular cases of physical phenomena.
The laws of mechanics are always in direct connection with the
physical laws; and mechanist notions remain of the same order as
the physico-chemical notions. In the traditional mechanism these
notions were copies of the relatively slow motions which, because
they alone had been directly observable, were taken as types of all
possible motions. New experiments showed that it was necessary
to extend our conception with regard to all possible motions. Tra-
ditional mechanics remains entirely intact, but it is applied only to
relatively slow motions. ... In relation to great velocities, the
laws are different. Matter is reduced to electrical particles, the
ultimate elements of the atom... .

“(3) Motion, as displacement in space, remains a uniquely typical
element in physical theory.

(4) And, finally, from the viewpoint of the general spirit of the
science of physics and its methods, this conception of the science of
physics, its methods, its theories and their relation to experience—
remains more than any other, absolutely identical with the views of
mechanism, and the theory of physics, which was ushered in with
the Renaissance” (pp. 46-47).

This long quotation from Rey is given because due to his con-
stant fear of “materialist metaphysics,” it would be impossible dif-


a


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 225


_ferently to expound his assertions. But though Rey, and the
physicists of whom he speaks, may renounce materialism, it is
nevertheless quite certain that traditional mechanics was a “copy”
of motions of moderate velocity, while recent physics is “a copy” of
motions of enormous velocity. The recognition of the theory as
a copy, as an approximate reflection of objective reality, is ma-
terialism. When Rey says that amongst the recent physicists there
“is a reaction against the conceptual [Machian] and energetics
school,” and when he regards the physicists of electron theory as
the representatives of this reaction (p. 46), a better corroboration
could not be desired of the fact, that the struggle is essentially
between the materialist and idealist tendencies. But we must not
forget that, besides the common prepossessions of all educated
philistinism against materialism, in the case of the most outstand-
ing theoreticians, it is combined with an absolute ignorance of
dialectics as well.


3. Is Motion Without Matter Conceivable?


The utilisation of the new physics by idealism and the tendency
to draw idealist conclusions therefrom, are the result not of the
discovery of new kinds of substance and force, matter and motion,
but of the attempt to conceive motion without matter. It is essen-
tially the futility of this attempt that our Machians fail to compre-
hend. They refused to take account of Engels’ proposition, that
“motion without matter is inconceivable.” Joseph Dietzgen in
1869 expressed this idea, as did Engels, in his Nature of Human
Brain Work; it is true not without his characteristically confused
attempts to “reconcile” materialism and idealism. Let us disregard
these attempts, which are sufficiently explained by the fact that
Dietzgen waged a polemic against the anti-dialectic materialism of
Biichner, and see what position Dietzgen took on the question
which interests us at present. He says: “They [idealists] like to
have the general without the individual, spirit without matter,

- force without substance, science without experience or material, the
absolute without the relative” (Joc. cit., p. 124).

Thus Dietzgen recognises the attempts to separate motion from
matter, force from substance, as idealism and puts it into the same
category as the separation of thought from the brain. “Liebig.”
he continues, “who is especially fond of straying from his inductive


226 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


i


science into the field of speculative thought, says in an idealist
sense: ‘Force cannot be seen’ [p. 125]. . . . The spiritualist or the
idealist believes in a spiritual force whose nature is ghostlike and
inexplicable [p. 126]. . . . The contradistinction between force
and matter is as old as that between idealism and materialism
[p. 127]. . . . True, there is no force without matter, no matter
without force. Forceless matter and matterless force are nonenti-
ties. If there are idealistic naturalists who believe in the existence
of immaterial forces then we say that to that extent they are not
naturalists . . . but spiritualists” (pp. 130-131).

From this we see that forty years ago there were also naturalists,
ready to recognise the possibility of motion without matter, and
that Dietzgen considered them to “that extent” spiritualists. What,
then, is the connection of idealism with the separation of matter
from motion, with the elimination of substance from force? Does
it not lie in the fact that it really is “more economical” to think of
motion without matter?

Let us imagine a consistent idealist who holds that the world is
his sensation, or idea. (If we take “nobody’s” sensation or idea,
only the variety of idealism will change, but not its substance.)
The idealist would not think of denying that the world is motion,
i. e., the movement of his thoughts, ideas, sensations. The question
“What is being moved?” the idealist will spurn and consider as
absurd. What really takes place, he would say, is this: My sensa-
tions change, my ideas come and go, and nothing more. Outside of
me there is nothing. “Jt moves’”—and that is all. It is hardly pos-
sible to conceive of a more “economical” way of thinking. And by
no proofs, or syllogisms, or definitions would it be possible to
refute the solipsist, if he consistently adhered to this view.

The basic distinction between the materialist and the idealist is
that the materialist takes sensation, perception, conception and, in
general, human consciousness as the copy of objective reality. The
world is the movement of this objective reality reflected in our
consciousness. To the movement of ideas, perceptions, etc., corre-
sponds the movement of matter outside of us. The notion of matter
expresses nothing but objective reality which is given us in sensa-
tion. Therefore to separate matter from motion would be the same
as separating thought from objective reality, the same as separating
sensation from the external world—in a word, would be equivalent
to joining the idealist camp._ This ruse of recognising motion with-


as


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 227
ae er eo er neti mas pg Ee,


out matter in order to deny more effectively materialism is only
possible because of the silence which is kept about the relation of
matter to thought. It would appear as if that relation did not
exist, but in reality it is smuggled in, remains unmentioned at the
very beginning of the argument, and subsequently crops up more
or less imperceptibly.

They tell us that matter has disappeared, and wish to draw epis-
temologic conclusions therefrom. “And has thought itself re-
mained?” we ask. If not, if with the disappearance of matter
thought has also disappeared, if with the disappearance of the brain
and nervous system our ideas and sensations, too, have vanished,
then it means that everything has disappeared. So does the argu-
ment together with whatever “thought’”—or thoughtlessness—there
is in it! If thought has remained, if you assume that with the dis-
appearance of matter, thought, idea, sensation, etc., do not dis-
appear, then you have secretly embraced the idealist viewpoint.
This happens to people who wish, for “economy’s sake,” to conceive
of motion without matter, for by implication, from the very fact
that they continue their discourse, they recognise the existence of
thought after the disappearance of matter. This means that a very
simple or a very complex system of idealism is taken as fundamen-
tal; very simple, if the position reduces to solipsism (I exist, and
the world is only my sensation) ; very complex, if instead of the
thought, idea and sensation of a living man, a dead abstraction is
posited, that is, no particular thought, no particular idea, no par-
ticular sensation, but thought in general (the Absolute Idea, the
Universal Will, etc.), sensation as an indeterminate “element,” the
“psychical” which replaces the whole of physical nature, etc., etc.
Amongst the varieties of idealism there may be thousands of peculiar
shades and kinds and it is always possible to add a thousand and
first shade. To the author of this thousand and first puppet system
(empirio-monism, for example) its difference from all the other
varieties will seem to be very momentous. From the point of view
of materialism, however, these distinctions are totally unimportant.


Important only is the point of departure. Important only is that


the attempt to conceive motion without matter, smuggles in thought
separate from matter—this is idealism.

Therefore, the English Machian, Karl Pearson, for example, the
clearest and most consistent Machian, inimical to verbal trickery,
directly begins the seventh chapter of his book, devoted to “matter,”


228 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


with the section which bears the name “All things move—but only
in conception.” “It is, therefore, for the sphere of perception, idle
to ask what moves and why it moves.” ®

Therefore, in the case of Bogdanov, his philosophic misfortunes
began earlier than his acquaintance with Mach. They began when
he took the great chemist, but poor philosopher, Ostwald at his
word, on the possibility of conceiving motion without matter.
To pause on this long past episode of Bogdanov’s philosophic
growth is in place here, especially since it is impossible to ignore
Ostwald’s “energetics” in speaking of the connection between ideal-
ism and certain tendencies in recent physics.

“We have already said,” wrote Bogdanov in 1899, “that the nine-
teenth century did not succeed in ultimately solving the problem as
to ‘the immutable essence of things.’ This essence under the name
of ‘matter’ plays an important réle even in the views of the foremost
thinkers of the century.” *°

We have already said that this represents nothing but confusion.
The recognition of the objective reality of the outer world, the
recognition of existence, outside of our mind, of eternally moving
and eternally changing matter, is here confused with the recognition
of the immutable essence of things. It is hardly possible that in
1899 Bogdanov did not include Marx and Engels in the number
of the “foremost thinkers.” But he obviously did not grasp their
dialectic materialism.

“ |. . In the processes of nature there are usually two factors
to be distinguished: matter and motion. It cannot be said, how-
ever, that the notion of matter is very clear. It is impossible to
give a satisfactory answer to the question of what matter is. It is
defined as the ‘cause of sensations’ or as ‘the permanent possibility
of sensation,’ but it is evident that matter is here confused with
motion... .”

It is evident that Bogdanov argues here incorrectly. It is not
enough that he confuses the materialist recognition of the objective
source of sensations (“cause of sensations” does not clearly enough
express this) with Mill’s agnostic definition of matter as the possi-
bility of sensation. But having just reached the question as to the
existence or non-existence of an objective source of our sensations,
instead of going further, he abandons it without further discussion


9 The Grammar of Science, p. 243.
10 Fundamental Elements of the Historical Outlook, p. 38 (in Russian).


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 229


and hastens to another question as to whether matter without motion
is possible or not. The idealist may regard the world as being
made up of the motion of our sensations (be it “socially organised”
or “harmonious” to the highest degree) ; the materialist regards the
world as motion of an objective source, of which our sensations
are the objective model. The metaphysical, that is, the anti-dialec-
tical, materialist may posit the existence of matter (be it “tem-
porary,” “prior to,” the “first impetus,” etc.) without motion. The
dialectic materialist, however, not only regards motion as the in-
separable property of matter but rejects even the simplified interpre-
tation of motion.

“ , . . Such a definition as ‘matter is that which moves’ would,
perhaps, prove the most exact; but this is as absurd as saying that
matter is the subject of the sentence, whose predicate moves. The
fact is, however, that men in the epoch of the beginnings of statics,
were wont to see something necessarily solid in the réle of the
subject—a certain object,—while the phenomenon of ‘motion,’ so
inconvenient from the outlook of statics, they agreed to tolerate
only as predicate, as one of the attributes of matter.”

This is something like Akimov’s accusation against the adherents
of Iskra,™ that in their programme they do not use the word “prole-
tariat” in the nominative case! Whether we say that “the world is
moving matter,” or “the world is material movement,” it will not
change the issue.

“ |. . But energy must have a vehicle! say those who believe
in matter. Why? asks Ostwald reasonably. Must nature neces-
sarily consist of subject and predicate?” (p. 39).

Ostwald’s answer, which pleased Bogdanov so much in 1899, is

11Jskra (Spark). The name of the underground central organ of the
Russian Social-Democratic Labor Party during its formative period. Founded
in 1900 and first published in Germany, it continued until the Second Congress
of the Party in 1903 to represent the revolutionary Marxian wing of the Party.
Lenin was the prime mover in the establishment and the conduct of the paper
during this period, and those following the policies of the paper assumed its
name. The early generation of Russian Marxists, among whom were found

many of the leaders of the 1917 Revolution, were brought up on the Iskra when
' it was under the ideological leadership of Lenin. After the split of the party
into two groups—Bolsheviks and Mensheviks—as a result of the decisions of
the 1903 Congress, Lenin withdrew from the editorial board and the paper
passed into the control of the Mensheviks, under the leadership of Plekhanov.


It ceased publication in Switzerland in 1905.
Akimov, V. P. (Makhnovetz). A Russian socialist and one of the represen-
- z ¥ . .
tatives of the so-called “economist” tendency which stressed the economic as


against the political struggles of the workers.—Ed.


230 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM ©


plain sophistry. “Must our hypotheses consist of electrons and
ether?” we could retort upon Ostwald. In reality, matter, as the
“subject” can only be eliminated by mind from “nature,” only
because thought as the “subject” (as the prius, as independent of
matter) is taken as the starting point in philosophy. Not the sub-
ject, but the objective source of sensation is eliminated and sensation
becomes the “subject,” that is, philosophy inevitably becomes Berke-
leian, no matter how “profoundly” the word “sensation” is weighted.
Ostwald attempted to escape this inevitable philosophic alternative
—nmaterialism or idealism—through the ambiguous use of the word
“energy,” but this attempt was precisely as futile as similar con-
trivances. If energy is motion, then you only shift the difficulty
from the subject to the predicate, you have only changed the ques-
tion from “Does matter move?” to “Is energy material?” Does this
transformation of energy outside of my consciousness take place
independently of man and mankind, or are these only ideas, sym-
bols, conventional marks, etc.? This attempt to avoid old epis-
temologic errors merely by a “new” terminology proves fatal to
the philosophy of “energetics.”

Here are examples of how Ostwald, the philosopher of energetics,
became muddled. In the preface to his book,’* he declares that
he would “consider it a great gain should the old problem of how
to connect the conceptions of matter and spirit” be simply and
naturally eliminated, should both concepts be subsumed under the
concept of “energy.” But this would not be a gain, but a loss,
because the question of whether epistemological investigation (Ost-
wald does not clearly see that he has asked an epistemological, and
not a chemical, question) is to be led in the materialist or idealist
direction, is not solved but confused by the arbitrary substitution
of the term “energy.” Of course, if we “subsume” under this
concept matter and spirit, then the verbal annihilation of the dis-
tinction is beyond doubt, but the absurdity of the notion of
“brownies and fairies” does not vanish simply because it is called
“energetics.” On page 394 of the Vorlesungen we read: “That all
outer phenomena can be presented as energy processes can most
simply be explained by the fact that the processes of our conscious-
ness themselves are energetical and they impose such a property
upon all outer experiences.” This is pure idealism: our thought


12 Wilhelm Ostwald: Vorlesungen iiber Naturphilosophie, 2nd ed., Leipzig,
2902, p. viii.


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 231


does not reflect the transformation of energy in the external world,
but the external world reflects a certain “property” of our con-
sciousness! The American philosopher, Hibben, pointing to this
and similar passages in Ostwald hit the mark in saying that Ostwald
“appears, moreover, in Kantian disguise—that the phenomena of
the external world become intelligible only through the fundamental
forms which thought imposes upon them.1® . . . It is obvious there-
fore that if the primary concept of energy is so defined as to em-
brace psychical phenomena, we have no longer the simple concept
of energy as understood and recognised in scientific circles or even
among the Energetiker themselves” (p. 330). The transformation
of energy is analysed by science itself as an objective process, inde-
’ pendent of the consciousness of man and the experience of mankind,
that is, in materialistic fashion. And Ostwald himself in a number
of instances probably in the majority of instances, means by energy
nothing but matter in motion.

Thereupon occurred a rare event! The disciple of Ostwald, be-
coming Mach’s disciple, began to reproach Ostwald not because of
inconsistency in inclining towards a materialistic interpretation of
energy, but because he lays himself open to such an interpretation
(energy sometimes is made the basis of the materialist view). The
materialists criticise Ostwald because he relapses into idealism,
because he attempts to reconcile materialism and idealism. Bog-
danov criticises Ostwald from the idealist viewpoint. In 1906 he
wrote: “ ... Hostile to atomism, but in the rest greatly akin to
the old materialism, Ostwald’s energetics at first enlisted my heart-
iest sympathy. But I soon noticed an important contradiction in his
Naturphilosophie. Often emphasising the purely methodological
significance of the conception of “energy,” in a great number of
instances he himself is not consistent in his own view. From a pure
symbol of correlations of facts of experience, energy is converted
into the substance of experience, into the material stuff of the
world...” 78

Energy is a pure symbol! After this Bogdanov can dispute as
much as he pleases with the “empirio-symbolist” Yushkevich, with
the “pure Machians,” with the empirio-criticists, etc. From the
standpoint of the materialists they will be regarded as disputes be-


13 Hibben: “The Theory of Energetics and its Philosophical Bearings, The


Monist, April, 1903, Vol. XIII, p. 329- ;
14 Empirio-Monism, Bk. III, pp. xvi-xvii.


232 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


tween two people, one of whom believes in a yellow devil, and the
other in a green one. The differerices between Bogdanov and the
Machians are not important, but what they share in common—is
very important. They are—an idealist interpretation of “experi-
ence” and “energy,” the denial of an objective reality through the
processes of adaptation to which human experience arises, and. the
denial that the sole scientific “methodology” and scientific “ener-
getics” consists in reflecting this objective reality.

“The material of the world is indifferent to it [Ostwald’s ener-
getics]. Both the old materialism and panpsychism are perfectly
compatible with it” (p. xvii). And Bogdanov changed from a
“muddled energetics” not to the materialist but the idealist camp.
“When energy is presented as substance then it is nothing else than
the old materialism minus the absolute atoms—materialism with a
correction in the sense of the continuity of the existent” (ibid.).
Yes, from the “old” materialism, that is, from the metaphysical
materialism of the naturalists, Bogdanov goes, not to dialectic ma-
terialism which in 1906 he understood as little as he did in 1899,
but to idealism and fideism; for against the “methodological” con-
ception of energy, against its interpretation as a “pure symbol of
correlation of the facts of experience,” not one enlightened repre-
sentative of modern theism, not one follower of the immanentist
school, not one “neo-criticist,” will object. Take Paul Carus, whose
acquaintance we have already made, and you will see that this
Machian criticises Ostwald in the manner of Bogdanov: “Material-
ism and energetics are in the same predicament.” +> “We are helped
very little by materialism when we are told that everything is mat-
ter, that bodies are matter, and that thoughts are merely a function
of matter, and Professor Ostwald’s energetics is not a whit better
when it tells us that matter is energy, and that the soul too is only
a factor of energy” (p. 533).

Ostwald’s energetics is a good example of how quickly the “new”
terminology becomes fashionable; and as quickly proves that a
slightly different mode of expression does not at all wipe out the
distinctions between fundamental philosophic questions and tenden-
cies. Through the use of the term “energetics” it is just as possible
to express both materialism and idealism (more or less consistently,
of course) as it is through the term “experience” and the like.
The physics of energetics has been the source of new idealist at-


15 The Monist, 1907, Vol. XVII, p. 536.


Zg re


1


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 233


tempts to conceive of motion without matter. It has seized upon
the occasion of the decomposition of those particles of matter which
have been hitherto accounted as impossible of decomposition, and
upon the discovery of the heretofore invisible forms of material
movement.


4. Two Tendencies in Modern Physics and English Spiritualism


In order to show concretely the philosophic battle which is being
waged in modern literature as a consequence of the several implica-
tions which follow from recent physics, we shall let the participants
in the “battle” speak for themselves, beginning with the English
combatants. The physicist, Arthur W. Riicker, defends one tendency
from the point of view of the natural sciences; the philosopher,
James Ward, another tendency, from the point of view of epis-
temology.

At the convention of the English naturalists at Glasgow in 1901,
Riicker, the president of the physics section, chose as the topic of
his inaugural address, the question concerning the validity of phys-
ical theory, concerning the doubts which have arisen as to the
existence of atoms and especially of the ether. The speaker re-
ferred to those who had taken up the problem, namely, to the
physicists Poincaré, Poynting (the English adherent of the sym-
bolists or Machians), the philosopher Ward, and to the celebrated
book of Haeckel’s and finally presented his own views.*®

“The question at issue is whether the hypotheses which are at
the base of the scientific theories, now most generally accepted, are
to be regarded as accurate descriptions of the constitution of the
universe around us, or merely as convenient fictions.” (No. 1345—
That is to say, in terms of the question at issue with Bogdanov,
Yushkevich and the others, whether or not physical theory is a copy
of objective reality, of moving matter, or whether it is only a
“methodology,” a “pure symbol,” a mere “form of the organisation
of experience.”) Riicker agrees that it may turn out that practically
there is no difference between both theories; the direction of a
river can be determined just as well by one who only examines the
blue streak on a map or diagram, as by one who knows that this


16 The British Association at Glasgow, 1901. Presidential address by Pro-
fessor A. W. Riicker in The Scientific American Supplement, 1901, Nos. 1345


and 1346.


234 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


streak represents a real river. Theory, from the standpoint of a
convenient fiction, may be regarded as an “aid to memory,” as
“a means for producing apparent order out of disorder by codifying
the observed facts and laws in accordance with an artificial system,
and thus arranging our knowledge under a comparatively small
number of heads.” We can confine ourselves to defining heat as a
form of motion or energy. “By using this phraseology, we exchange
a vivid conception of moving atoms for a colourless statement of
heat energy, the real nature of which we do not attempt to define.”
Fully recognising the possibility of great scientific achievements in
this. direction, Riicker “ventures to assert that the exposition of such
a system of tactics cannot be regarded as the last word of science
in the struggle for the truth. The questions still force themselves
upon us: Can we argue back from the phenomenon displayed by
matter to the constitution of matter itself; whether we have any
reason to believe that the sketch which science has already drawn
is to some extent a copy, and not a mere diagram of the truth?”

Analysing the problem of the structure of matter, Riicker takes
air as an example, saying that it consists of gases and that science
resolves “an elementary gas into a mixture of atoms and ether. . . .
There are those who cry ‘Halt’; molecules and atoms cannot be
directly perceived; they are mere conceptions, which have their
uses, but cannot be regarded as realities.”

Ricker meets this objection by referring to one of any number of
instances in the history of science: the rings of Saturn appear to
be continuous masses when observed through a telescope. The
mathematicians prove by calculation that this is impossible, and
spectral analysis corroborates the conclusions reached on the ground
of the calculations. Another objection: atoms and ether are en-
dowed with properties which our senses do not disclose as being
possessed by ordinary matter. Riicker answers this, also, by refer-
ring to such phenomena as the diffusion of gases and liquids. A
series of facts, observations and experiments prove that matter con-
sists of separate particles or grains. Whether these particles and
atoms are “mere fragments of matter” engulfed in the surrounding
ether, or whether they are parts of this medium in a particular state,
is so far an open question, and does not bear upon the theory of
whether atoms exist or not. There is no ground to deny a priori,
against the evidence of experience, that “quasi-material substances”
exist, which are different from ordinary matter (atoms and ether).


<


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 235


Particular errors are inevitable, but the bulk of scientific data
leaves no room for doubt about the existence of atoms and mole-
cules.

Riicker then points to the new experimental data on the structure
of atoms and corpuscles (electrons), which are charged with nega-
tive electricity, and notes the similarities in the various results of
calculating the size of molecules: the “first approximation” gives a
diameter of one millionth of a millimeter. Omitting his remarks
and criticism of neo-vitalism, we quote his conclusions:

“Those who belittle the ideas which have of late governed the ad-
vance of scientific theory, too often assume that there is no alternative
between the opposing assertions that atoms and the ether are mere fig-
ments of the scientific imagination, and that, on the other hand, a me-
chanical theory of the atoms and the ether, which is now confessedly
imperfect, would, if it could be perfected, give us a full and ade-
quate representation of the underlying realities. For my own part
I believe that there is a via media [loc. cit., No. 1346]....A
man peering into a darkened room may unclearly discern the ob-
jects, but if he does not stumble over the furniture and does not
walk into a looking glass as into a door, that means that he sees
correctly. We ought, therefore, neither to disregard the pretence to
penetrate deeper than the surface of nature, nor pretend that we
already fully unveiled the mystery of the world around us.

“Tt may be granted that we have not yet framed a consistent image
either of the nature of the atoms or of the ether in which they exist,
but I have tried to show that in spite of the tentative nature of
some of our theories, in spite of many outstanding difficulties, the
atomic theory unifies so many facts, simplifies so much that is com-
plicated, that we have a right to insist—at all events until an equally
intelligible rival hypothesis is produced—that the main structure of
our theory is true; that atoms are not merely aids to puzzled
mathematicians, but physical realities” (cbid.).

That is how Riicker ended his address. The reader sees that the
speaker does not indulge in epistemology, but, in the name of a
host of naturalists, he strongly stands up in defence of an instinc-
tive materialist standpoint. The substance of his position is this:
the theory of physics is a copy—becoming more exact in time—
of objective reality. The world is matter in motion, of which we
acquire more and more knowledge in the course of time. The in-
correctness of Riicker’s philosophy follows from the conditional


236 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM _


defence of the “mechanical” (why not electro-magnetic?) theory, of
ithe ether and his failure to understand the correlation between
relative and absolute truth. This physicist lacks knowledge of
dialectic materialism (we shall not here consider the environment
which causes the English professors to call themselves “asnostics’”’).

Let us see now how the spiritualist, James Ward, criticises this
philosophy:

“Naturalism is no science, and the mechanical theory of Nature,
the theory which serves as its foundation, is not science either. . . .
Nevertheless, though Naturalism and the natural sciences, the
Mechanical Theory of the Universe and mechanics as a science, are
logically distinct, yet the two are at first sight very similar, and
historically are very closely connected. Between the natural sciences
and philosophies of the idealist (or spiritualist) type there is in-
deed no danger of confusion, for all such philosophies necessarily
involve criticism of the epistemological assumptions which science
unconsciously makes. . . .”17 True! The natural sciences uncon-
sciously maintain that their teachings reflect the objective reality,
and only such a philosophy is reconcilable with the natural sciences!
«| | Not so with Naturalism, which is as innocent of any theory
of knowledge as science itself. In fact Naturalism, like Material-
ism, is only physics treated as metaphysics. . . . Naturalism is less
dogmatic than Materialism, no doubt, owing to its agnostic reserva-
tion as to the nature of ultimate reality; but it insists emphatically
on the priority of the material aspect of its Unknowable.”

The materialist treats physics as metaphysics! A familiar argu-
ment. By metaphysics is meant the recognition of objective reality
outside of man; the spiritualists agree with the Kantians and Hume-
ans in such reproaches against materialism. This is understood;
for unless the objective reality of things, bodies and objects, known
to everyone, be denied, it is impossible to clear the road for “real
conceptions” in the spirit of Rehmke!

“ | |. When the essentially philosophical question, how best to
systematise experience as a whole [a plagiarism from Bogdanov? ],
arises, the naturalist—as we have seen—contends that we must
begin from the physical side. Then only are the facts precise,
determinate and rigorously concatenated: every thought that ever
stirred the human heart ... . can, it holds, be traced to a perfectly
definite redistribution of matter and motion. . . . That propositions


17 James Ward: Naturalism and Agnosticism, 1906, Vol. I, p. 303.


4


e


J
~~
4


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 237


of such philosophic generality and scope are legitimate deductions
from physical science, few, if any, of our modern physicists are
bold enough directly to maintain. But many of them consider that
their science itself is attacked by those who seek to lay bare the
latent metaphysics, the physical realism, on which the Mechanical
Theory of the Universe rests. . . . The criticism of this theory in
the preceding lectures has been so regarded [by Riicker]. . . . In
point of fact my criticism [of this “metaphysics” hateful also to the
Machians] rests throughout on the expositions of a school of physi-
cists—if one might call them so—steadily increasing in number and
influence who reject entirely the almost medieval realism. . . .
This realism has remained so long unquestioned, that to challenge it
now seems to many to spell scientific anarchy. And yet it surely
verges on extravagance to suppose that men like Kirchhoff or Poin-
caré—to mention only two out of many distinguished names—who
do challenge it, are seeking ‘to invalidate the methods of science!’
. . . To distinguish them from the old school, whom we may fairly
term physical realists, we might call the new school physical sym-
bolists. The term is not very happy, but it may at least serve to
emphasise the one difference between the two which now specially
concerns us. The question at issue is very simple. Both schools
start, of course, from the same perceptual experiences; both employ
an abstract conceptual system, differing in detail but essentially the
same; both resort to the same methods of verification. But the one
believes that it is getting nearer to the ultimate reality and leaving
mere appearances behind it; the other believes that it is only sub-
stituting a generalised descriptive scheme that is intellectually
manageable, for the complexity of concrete facts. . . . On either
view the value of physics as systematic knowledge about things is
unaffected; its possibilities of future extension and of practical ap-
plication are in either case the same. But the speculative difference
between the two is immense, and in this respect the question which
is right becomes important . . .” (pp. 304-305).

The question, as put by this frank and consistent spiritualist, is
remarkably clear and to the point. Indeed, the difference between
the two schools in modern physics is only philosophic, only epis-
temologic. Indeed, the basic distinction is that one recognises the
“ultimate” (it ought to be called objective) reality to be reflected
by our theory, and the other denies it, considering theory only as a
systematisation of experience, a system of empirio-symbols, etc.


238 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


a a nn enn EEEEEE


Recent physics, having found new aspects of matter and new forms
of its motion, asks the old philosophic questions on the occasion of
the collapse of the old physical conceptions. And if the adherents
of “half-hearted” philosophic tendencies (“positivists,’ Humeans,
Machians) cannot put the controversial question distinctly, the out-
spoken idealist Ward, however, has completely unveiled the issue
in question.

“|, Sir A. W. Riicker devoted his Inaugural Address to a de-
fence of physical realism against the symbolic interpretations re-
cently advocated by Professors Poincaré and Poynting and by my-
self [pp. 305-306; and in other parts of his book Ward adds to this
list the names of Duhem, Pearson and Mach].1® . . . Riicker is con-
stantly talking of ‘mental pictures,’ while constantly protesting that
atoms and ether must be more than these. Such procedure prac.
tically amounts to saying: In this case I can form no other picture,
and therefore the reality must be like it. . . . He allows the abstract
possibility of a different mental picture. . . . Nay, he allows ‘the
tentative nature of some of our theories’; he admits ‘many outstand-
ing difficulties’! After all, then, he is only defending a working
hypothesis, and one, moreover, that has lost greatly in prestige in
the last half century. But if the atomic and other theories of
the constitution of matter are but working hypotheses, and
hypotheses strictly confined to physical phenomena, there is no
justification for a theory which maintains that mechanism is
fundamental everywhere and reduces the facts of life and mind
to epiphenomena—makes them, that is to say, a degree more
phenomenal, a degree less real than matter and motion. Such is
the mechanical theory of the universe. Save as he seems unwit-
tingly to countenance that, we have then no quarrel with Sir
Arthur Ricker” (pp. 314-315).

It is, of course, totally absurd that materialism should maintain
the “lesser” reality of consciousness or should necessarily adhere to
a “mechanistic” “world-picture” of matter in motion and not an
electro-magnetic, or even some immeasurably more complicated one.
But in a truly acrobatic manner, much more ably indeed than our
Machians (these muddled idealists), did the outspoken and straight-
forward idealist, Ward, discover the weak points in an “instinctive”
naturo-historical materialism, that is, its inability to explain the
correlation of relative and absolute truth. Ward resorts to sophis-


18 See Vol. IL, pp. 161, 63, 57, 75, 83, ete.


‘sof gitede


SNS


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 239


[sass e


try when he declares that since truth is relative, and approximate,
only “groping” towards the essence of things, it cannot reflect
reality! But the case for atoms as “working hypotheses” is very
clearly put by the spiritualist. Modern, cultural fideism (from
which Ward directly derives his spiritualism) has no desire to re-
gard the conceptions of natural science as anything more than
“working hypotheses.” We shall concede science to you naturalists,
provided you surrender epistemology and philosophy to us—such
are the terms of the concubinage under which the theologians and
professors in the “advanced” capitalist countries live. For the other
points in Ward’s epistemology, which betray the influence of “re-
cent” physics, we must refer to his determined struggle against
matter. What is matter? What is energy? asks Ward, mocking at
the plethora of hypotheses and the contradictions between them.
Is it an ether or ethers?—Or perhaps, some new “perfect liquid”
which is arbitrarily endowed with new and improbable qualities.
And Ward’s conclusion is: “We find nothing definite except move-
ment left. Heat is a mode of motion, elasticity is a mode of motion,
light and magnetism are modes of motion. Nay, mass itself is, in
the end, supposed to be but a mode of motion of a something that
is neither solid nor liquid nor gas, that is neither itself a body nor
an aggregate of bodies, that is not phenomenal and must not be
noumenal, a veritable ‘aperion’ on which we can impose our own
terms” (Vol. I, p. 140).

The spiritualist is true to himself, and separates motion from mat-
ter. The movement of natural bodies has turned out to be upon
analysis a movement of something which has not a constant mass,
into a movement of an unknown charge of an unknown electricity
in an unknown ether. The dialectics of this material transforma-
tion which takes place both in the laboratory and the factory, serves
in the eyes of the idealist (as in the eyes of the public at large, and
those of the Machians) not as a confirmation of the truth of material-
ist dialectics, but as evidence against materialism: “The mechanis-
tic theory, as a professed explanation of the world, receives its
death-blow from the progress of mechanical physics itself” (p.
143). The world is matter in motion, we reply, and the laws of its
motion are reflected in mechanics for movements of lesser velocity,
and in electro-magnetism—for movements of greater velocity. “Ex-
tended, solid, indestructible atoms have always been the stronghold
of materialistic views of the universe. But, unhappily for such


240 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


views, the hard, extended atom was not equal to the demands which
increasing knowledge made upon it” (p. 144). The destructibility
of the atom, its inexhaustibility, the mutability of all the forms of
matter and the variability of its motion, have been the stronghold of
dialectic materialism. All boundaries in nature are arbitrary, rela-
tive, moveable, and express the gradual approximation of our
reason toward the knowledge of matter. But this does not at all
prove that nature, matter itself, is a symbol,—a product of our
reason. The electron is to the atom as a dot in a book to the size
of a building 160 feet long, 80 feet broad, and 40 feet high; it
moves with a velocity of 270,000 kilometres per second, its mass is
a function of its velocity, it makes 500 trillion rotations in a second
—all this is much more complicated than the old mechanics, but
all this is, nevertheless, movement of matter in space and time.
Human reason has discovered many amazing things in nature and
will discover even more, thereby increasing its power over her.
But this does not mean that nature is the creation of our reason or
of abstract reason, of Ward’s God, or of Bogdanov’s “substitution,”
etc.

“Rigorously carried out as a theory of the real world, that ideal
lands us in nihilism: All changes are motions, for motions are
the only changes we can understand, and so what moves, to be
understood, must itself be motion [p. 166]... . As I have tried
to show, and as I believe, the very advance of physics is proving
the most effectual cure for this ignorant faith in matter and motion
as the inmost substance rather than the most abstract symbols of
the sum of existence. . . . We can never get to God through a mere
mechanism .. .” (p. 180).

Well, this is exactly after the manner of the Outlines of the
Philosophy of Marxism! You should now turn, Mr. Ward, to
Lunacharsky, Yushkevich, Bazarov and Bogdanov; though they are
more “shamefaced” than you, yet they preach the same doctrine.


5. Two Tendencies in Modern Physics and German Idealism


In 1896, with an air of unusual exultant triumph, the eminent
Kantian-idealist, Herman Cohen, came out with an introduction to
the fifth edition of the History of Materialism, falsified by Albert
Lange. “Theoretical idealism,” exclaimed Cohen (p. xxvi), “has
begun to shake the foundations of naturalistic materialism and will,


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 241


perhaps, soon destroy it. . . . Idealism permeates the new physics.
. . . Atomism must give up its place to dynamism. .. . The re-
markable turning point set in with a greater realisation of the
nature of the chemical problems of substance, enabling them to con-
quer the materialist views of matter. Just as Thales made the first
abstraction of matter and linked to it speculative reflections which
later developed into the notion of electrons, so the theory of elec-
tricity in turn was destined to cause the greatest revolution in the
concept of matter and, through the consequent transformation of
matter into force, led to the victory of idealism” (p. xxix).

Herman Cohen, in as clear and definite a manner as James Ward,
takes account of the basic philosophic tendencies, without losing
himself (as our Machians do) in petty differences between the vari-
ous kinds of energetic, symbolic, empirio-critical, empirio-monistic,
etc., idealisms. Cohen takes the basic philosophic tendency of that
school in physics which is now associated with the names of Mach,
Poincaré and others, and correctly regards it idealistic. “The trans-
formation of matter into force” appears to Cohen to be the chief
gain of idealism, just as it appeared to those “spiritualistic” scien-
tists—whom Dietzgen exposed in 1869. Electricity is declared to be
the scientific prop of idealism, for it has destroyed the old theory
of the structure of matter, broken up the atom into its elements,
discovered new forms of material movement, so unlike the old, so
totally beyond anything that had hitherto been investigated or
studied, so unusual and “miraculous,” that one could find justifica-
tion for giving an illegitimate interpretation of nature as imma-
terial (spiritual, mental, or psychical) motion. The limit of yes-
terday’s knowledge of the infinitely small particles of matter has
disappeared—hence, concludes the idealist, matter has disappeared
(and thought remains). Every physicist and every engineer knows
that electricity is (material) motion, but nobody can reasonably
explain what it is that is being moved; hence, concludes the idealist,
we can dupe the philosophically uneducated with the tempting

“economical” proposition: “Let us conceive of motion without
matter.”

Herman Cohen tries to enlist as his ally the famous physicist
Heinrich Hertz. Hertz is ours—he is a Kantian, he sometimes ad-
mits a priori reasoning, he says. Hertz is ours—he is a Machian,
contends the Machian, Kleinpeter, on the other hand, for in Hertz
we find “the same subjective view of conceptions, as we find in


242 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM |


Mach.” 1° This curious contention as to whom Hertz belongs is a
good example of how resolutely the idealists hunt for the minutest
error, the slightest vagueness in the expression of renowned nat-
uralists, in order to justify their renewed defence of fideism.
Indeed Hertz’s philosophic preface to his Mechanics *° reveals the
familiar views of the scientists, who have been intimidated by the
professorial howl against the “metaphysics” of materialism, but
shows nevertheless that Hertz was unable to overcome an instinc-
tive conviction in the reality of the external world. Kleinpeter him-
self recognises this; Kleinpeter, who on the one hand writes lying
popular booklets for masses of readers on the theory of knowl-
edge of the natural sciences, in which Mach is identified with Hertz,
while on the other hand, in special philosophic articles, he admits
that “Hertz, as distinguished from Mach and Pearson, still clings to
the prejudice that it is possible to explain all of physics in a
mechanistic way”; ?* that he still retains the conception of the thing-
in-itself and “the ordinary viewpoint of physicists,” that Hertz “still
adheres to the view of the existence of the world in itself.” 7

It is interesting to note Hertz’s own attitude toward the theory of
energetics. He writes: “If we ask ourselves the real reasons why
physics at the present time prefers to express itself in terms of
energy, our answer will be that in this way, it best avoids talking
about things of which it knows very little. . . . It is true that we
are now convinced that ponderable matter consists of atoms; and
we have definite notions of the magnitude of these atoms and of
their motions in certain cases. But the form of the atoms, their
connection, their motions in most cases—all these are entirely hid-
den from us. . . . So that although our conceptions of atoms is in
itself an important and interesting object for further investi-
gations, it is in no wise specially fit to serve as a known and secure
foundation for mathematical theories” (p. 21). Hertz, from further
study of ether, expects a clarification of the “essence of traditional
matter, its inertia and gravitational force” (Vol. I, p. 354).

It is evident from this that Hertz did not even conceive of the
possibility of a non-material aspect of energy. For philosophers,
energetics served as an excuse to substitute idealism for materialism.

19 Archiv fiir systematische Philosophie, 1898-99, Vol. V, p. 167.

20 Heinrich Hertz: Gesammelte Werke, Leipzig, Vol. III, pp. 1, 2, 49.


21 Kantstudien, 1903, Vol. VIII, p. 309.
22 The Monist, 1906, Vol XVI, No. 9, p. 164; the article about Mach’s


“monism.,”


—


gg nll
THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 243


The scientist looked upon energetics as a convenient method of ex-
pressing the laws of matter in motion at a time when physicists, if
the expression is permissible, had set out from the atom, but had
not yet reached the electron. This state of affairs has continued to
a great extent to the very present; one hypothesis is replaced by
another; nothing definite is known of the positive electron. But
three months ago (June 22, 1908), Jean Becquerel reported to the
French Academy of Science that he had succeeded in discovering
this “new component part of matter.” 2* Of course, the idealists
simply couldn’t miss the opportunity of making out “matter” to be
merely something sought for by the human mind, for then it would
really be no more than a “symbol.”

Edward von Hartmann, another German idealist of a more reac-
tionary tinge than Cohen, devoted a whole book to the cosmic out-
look of recent physics.2* We are, to be sure, not interested in the
special discussions of the author in defence of his peculiar variety
of idealism. Suffice it to say that this idealist states the facts sub-
stantially as they had been stated by Rey, Ward and Cohen.
“Modern physics has grown on a realistic basis,” says Hartmann,
“and only the Neo-Kantian and agnostic movement of our own time
has caused the final results of physics to be interpreted in an idealist
sense” (p. 218). Three epistemological systems, according to
Hartmann, lie at the basis of recent physics—hylo-kinetics (from
the Greek hyle-matter, and kinesis-motion, that is, the recognition
of physical phenomena through matter in motion), energetics, and
dynamism (the recognition of force without substance). It is to
be understood that the idealist Hartmann defends “dynamism,” and
infers from this that the laws of nature are an expression of the
“world-reason”; in a word, he “substitutes psychical for physical
nature. But he is forced to admit that hylo-kinetics has most physi-
cists on its side, that this system “is more frequently employed (p.
190), that its serious defect is the “materialism and atheism which
menace pure hylo-kinetics” (p. 189). The author quite justly re-
gards energetics an an intermediary system and calls it agnosticism

(p. 136). Of course, it is an “ally of pure dynamism, for it elimi-

nates substance” (pp. vi, 92), but Hartmann dislikes its agnosti-
cism, for he believes that it is a form of “anglomania,” incompatible
with the essential idealism of a Junker.


28 Comptes rendus der séances de l’Académie des Sciences, p. 1311.
24 Die Weltanschauung der modernen Physik, Leipzig, 1902.


244, MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


It is highly instructive to see how this irreconcilable partisan of
idealism (non-partisans in philosophy are just as hopelessly mud-
dleheaded as they are in politics) explains to the physicists what it
means to follow one epistemological tendency or another.

“A very insignificant proportion of those physicists who follow
this manner,” writes Hartmann of the idealist interpretations of the
latest results in physics, “wholly recognise the vast importance and
the complete consequences of such an interpretation. They have
failed to realize that physics has retained its independence so far
as its particular laws are concerned, just as the physicists, despite
their idealism, have retained their realistic postulates, e. g., the
existence of things-in-themselves, their real mutability in time, real
causality. . . . For only by granting these realistic postulates [i. e.,
the transcendental realistic interpretation of causality, time, three-
dimensional space], i. e., on the condition that nature, of whose laws
the physicists speak, coincides with the realm of things-in-them-
selves . . . can one speak at all of natural laws as distinct
from psychical laws. Only on the assumption that natural laws act
in a realm independent of the realm of our reason, can they serve
as an explanation of the fact that the logically necessary conse-
quences of our images prove to be images of the naturally and his-
torically necessary effects of the unknown which these images reflect
or symbolise in our consciousness” (pp. 218-219).

Hartmann rightly feels that the idealism of the new physics is
only a fashion and not a serious philosophic turning point from
natural-historical materialism. He correctly explains to the physi-
cists, therefore, that in order to transform their “fashion” into a
consistent, genuine idealism it is necessary to change radically
their doctrines of the objective reality of time, space, causality and
natural laws. We cannot regard atoms, electrons and ether alone
as mere symbols, as mere “working hypotheses,” it is essential to
declare time, space, the laws of nature and the whole of the outer
world “working hypotheses” as well. Either materialism, or a
universal substitution of the psychical for the physical—there is a
host of candidates “to mix the two drinks,” but nejther we nor
Bogdanov belong to that class.

Ludwig Boltzmann was among the foremost of the German physi-
cists who systematically combated the Machian tendency (he died in
1906). We have already pointed out that to the “fad of the new
epistemological dogmas” he contrasted the simple and clear reduc:


tay


yale


{


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 245


tion of Machism to solipsism (see Chap. I, §6). Boltzmann was,
of course, afraid to call himself a materialist and even made it
plain that he had nothing against the Divine Being.?®> But his theory
of knowledge is essentially materialistic, and as is recognised by
S. Giinther,?* the historian of natural sciences in the nineteenth
century, it is characteristic of the views of the majority of scientists.
“We infer,’ says Boltzmann, “the existence of all things solely
from the impressions which they make on our senses” (p. 29).
Theory is an “image” (or copy) of nature, of the external world
(p. 77). To those who maintain that matter. is only a complex of
sense-perceptions, Boltzmann points out that under such conditions
other people are only the sensations of the speaking person (p.
168). These “ideologists,” as Boltzmann sometimes calls the ideal-
ists, present us with a “subjective picture of the world” (p. 176).
The author prefers a “simpler, more objective picture of the uni-
verse.” “The idealist compares the judgment that ‘matter exists as
well as our sensations,’ with the child’s notion that a stone which
gets a beating experiences pain. The realist compares this judg-
ment according to which it is impossible to imagine the emergence
of the psychical out of the material or even out of the play of atoms,
with the opinion of an uneducated person who maintains that the
distance between the sun and the earth cannot amount to twenty
million miles, for he cannot conceive of it” (p. 186). Boltzmann
does not deny science’s ultimate ideal to present spirit and volition
as “complicated actions of parts of matter” (p. 396).

Boltzmann very often contested Ostwald’s energetics from the
standpoint of physics, proving that Ostwald can neither reject nor
eliminate the formula of kinetic energy (half of the mass multiplied
by the square of velocity) and that he turns in a vicious circle,
deducing energy from the mass (by accepting the formula of
kinetic energy) at the beginning, and afterwards defining mass as
energy (pp. 112, 139). On this occasion I recollect Bogdanov’s
exposition of Mach in the third book of Empirio-Monism. “In
science,” writes Bogdanov, referring to Mach’s Science of Me-


chanics, “in the equations of mechanics, the conception of mat-


ter is reduced to the projected coefficient of mass, whose magnitude,
upon an accurate analysis, proves to be a reciprocal of the accelera-


25 Ludwig Boltzmann: Populdre Schriften, Leipzig, 1905, p. 187. A
26 Siegmund Giinther: Geschichte der inorganischen Naturwissenschaften im


19 Jahrhundert, Berlin, 1901, pp. 941, 942.


246 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


tion of two physical complexes of bodies” (p. 146). Of course, if a_
certain body will be taken as the unit, then the motion (mechanical)
of other bodies can be expressed by the mere relation of accelera-
tion. But “bodies” (matter) do not at all disappear on account of
it, do not thereby cease to exist independently of our consciousness.
When the entire world will have been reduced to the movement of
electrons, it will be possible to eliminate the electrons from all
equations, because it will be assumed everywhere, and the correla-
tion of the groups or of aggregates of electrons will be reduced to
their mutual acceleration, if the forms of motion prove to be as
simple as those in mechanics.

Combating the “phenomenalist” physics of Mach and the others,
Boltzmann maintained that “those who propose to eliminate atomism
by means of differential equations, cannot see the wood for the trees
(p. 144). . . . If we do not wish to entertain any illusions about
the significance of the differential equations, . . . there can be no
doubt that this picture of the world (represented by differential
equations) must necessarily be in essence atomic, i. e., it will be a
summary description that in accordance with certain rules, large
quantities of objects situated in a three-dimensional manifold will
be conceived as changing in time. These things can, of course, be
similar or different, unchangeable or changeable” (p. 156). “It is
perfectly obvious that phenomenalist physics only cloaks itself in
differential equations,” said Boltzmann in his address at the Con-
gress of Scientists at Munich, “but in reality it likewise is derived
from atomic units [Einzelwesen]. And as we have to imagine
these units as possessing now one property, now another, for dif-
ferent groups of phenomena, there will soon be need of a simpler
and more homogeneous atomism [p. 223]. . .. The doctrine of
the electron has developed into an atomic theory for the complete
science cf electricity” (p. 357). The unity of nature is revealed in
the “astonishing and far-reaching analogies” between the differen-
tial equations, which hold for different domains of phenomena.
“By these same equations we can solve problems of hydro-dynamics
and express the theory of potentials. The theory of vortices in
liquids as well as the theory of friction in gases reveal the most as-
tonishing analogy to the theory of electro-magnetism, etc.” (p. 7).
Those who recognise “the theory of universal substitution,” cannot
escape the question: Who was able to “substitute” physical nature
so homogeneously?


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 247


As if in answer to those who are marking themselves off from the

“physics of the old school,” Bol i i i
physics of the old school,” Boltzmann relates in detail how certain
specialists in “physical chemistry,” have taken an epistemological
position contrary to Machism. In 1903 Vaubel, the author, of “one
of the best” works on the subject (according to Boltzmann), “takes
a definitely hostile attitude to the frequently praised phenomenalist
physics” (p. 381). “He tries to present a more concrete and plaus-
ible exposition of the nature of atoms and molecules and the forces
acting between and within them. The presentation is in conformity
with the most recent experiments in this domain [ions, electrons,
radium, Zeeman’s effects, etc.] The author adheres strictly to the
dualism of matter and energy,” having this in common, that they
are both different expressions of the law of the conservation of
energy. In relation to matter, the author again clings to a dualism
between ponderable matter and ether, yet regards the fatter in the
most rigorous sense, as material” (p. 381). In the second volume
of his works (on the theory of electricity) the author from “the
very beginning takes the view that the phenomena of electricity are
produced by interaction and motion of atomic entities, namely,
electrons” (p. 383).

Hence, as far as Germany is concerned, too, we have confirmed
what the spiritualist James Ward recognised to be true for. Eng-
land, namely, that the physicists of the realistic school systematise
facts and discoveries of the later years, no less successfully than do
the physicists of the symbolic school, and that the essential difference
between them consists “only” in different epistemological view-
points.”*

27 Boltzmann wishes to say that the author does not attempt to conceive
motion without matter. To speak of dualism here is ridiculous. Philosophic
monism and dualism consist respectively in a consistent and inconsistent
deduction of materialism or idealism.

28 The work of Erich Becher: Philosophische Voraussetzungen der exacten
Naturwissenschaften, Leipzig, 1907, with which I became acquainted only after
my book had been completed, confirms what has been said in this paragraph.
Standing closer to the epistemological point of view of Helmholtz and Boltz-
mann, that is, to a “shamefaced’ materialism which has not been thought
out to the end, the author dedicates his work to a defence and interpretation
of the fundamental assumptions of physics and chemistry. This defence is,
naturally, converted into a struggle with the fashionable Machian tendency
in philosophy toward which a reaction is growing continually (cf. p. 91 f.).
Becher correctly characterises this tendency as “subjectivistic positivism
(p. iii) and reduces the central point of the struggle with it to the proof of


the “hypothesis” of the external world (Chapters III-VII), to the proof of its
“existence independently of human perceptions (von Wahrgenommenwerden


248 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM |


6. Two Tendencies in Modern Physics and French Fideism


The idealist philosophy in France seized upon the vacillations of
the Machian physics with no less determination. We have already
seen how the neo-criticists reacted to Mach’s Science of Mechanics,
having from the start noted the idealist character of the roots of his
philosophy. The French Machian, Henri Poincaré, had still more
success in this respect. Thereupon, the most reactionary idealist
philosophers with definite fideistic tendencies immediately seized
upon his theory. Le Roy, the representative of this tendency, con-
tends that “the truths of science are purely conditional, are merely
symbolic. You are making absurd ‘metaphysical’ claims to the
effect that you have knowledge of objective validity. Be logical,
then, and agree with us that science has only a practical significance
in one domain of human activity and religion has no less a real
significance in another domain of activity. The ‘symbolic’ Mach-
ian science has no right to deny theology.” Poincaré felt ashamed
of these conclusions, and in his book, The Value of Science, he espe-
cially attacked them. But it is worthy to note what sort of an epis-
temological position he was compelled to take in order to rid him-
self of allies of Le Roy’s type. He writes: “He [Le Roy] regards
the intellect as incurably powerless, it is only able to give more
scope to other sources of knowledge, to the heart for instance, to
sentiment, to instinct or to faith [p. 113]. . . . I do not go so far


unabhdngige Existenz). ‘The denial of this “hypothesis” by the Machians
frequently leads them to solipsism (pp. 78-82 ff). Mach’s view that the only
subject matter of science appears to be “sensations and their complexes, and
not the external world” (p. 138), Becher calls “sensationalistic monism”
(Empfindungsmonismus) and classifies it with the number of “purely con-
scionalistic tendencies.” This clumsy and absurd term is based on the Latin
word “conscientia’—consciousness, and means nothing else than idealism (cf.
p. 156). In the last two chapters of the book Becher compares quite ade-
quately the old, mechanistic outlook with the “world picture” of the recent
electrical theory of matter (“the kinetico-elastic” with the “kinetico-electric”
conception of nature, as the author puts it). The latter conception, based on
the theory of electrons, is a step forward towards the knowledge of the
world unity in which the “elements of the material world are electric charges”
(Ladungen, p. 223). “Every purely kinetic conception of nature means noth-
ing save that there are a certain number of moving objects, be they called
electrons or something else; the state of motion of these objects in each
subsequent moment of time is defined quite legitimately by the position and
state of their motion in the- preceding moment of time” (225). The chief
defect of Becher’s book is his absolute ignorance of dialectical materialism.
This ignorance frequently leads him into confusion and absurdity, on which
it is impossible to pause here.


a a al a a
THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 249


as to say that scientific laws are purely conditional, merely symbolic.
. . . If, therefore, scientific ‘recipes’ have a value, as rules of action,
it is because we know they have succeeded, in general, at least. But
to know this is to know something; then why say that we can know
nothing” (p. 114)?

Poincaré resorts to the criterion of practice. But thereby he only
shifts the question without settling it, for this criterion may be in-
terpreted in a subjective and objective sense. Le Roy also recog-
nises this criterion for the science of commerce; he only denies
that it is adequate to serve as a criterion of objective truth. Such
a denial is for him sufficient to pave the way to a recognition of the
subjective truth of religion existing alongside of the subjective
truth (7. e., dependent upon man) of science. Poincaré under-
stood that the reference to practice as an argument against Le Roy
would not suffice, and he proceeds with the question of the objec-
tivity of science. “What is the measure of their objectivity? Well,
it is precisely the same as for our belief in external objects. These
latter are real in that the sensations they make us feel appear to
us as united to each other by I know not what indestructible cement
and not by the hazard of the day” (p. 139).

That the author of such a remark may be a great physicist is
very probable. But it is indisputable that only the Voroshilovs-
Yushkeviches can take him seriously as a philosopher.

Materialism is declared destroyed in the name of a “theory”
which at the first attack of fideism saves itself under the wing of
materialism! For the assumption that sensations are produced in
us by real objects and that “faith” in the objectivity of science is
equivalent to “faith” in the objective existence of the external ob-
jects, is the purest materialism.

« |. . It may be said, for instance, that ether is no less real


than any external body” (p. 139).
What a howl our Machians would have raised, had a materialist


said that! How many stale witticisms would have been passed re-
_ garding “ethereal materialism.” But the founder of recent empirio-
symbolism declares a few pages farther on that “what is not thought
is pure nothingness, since we can think only thought” (p. 142).
You are mistaken, M. Poincaré; the reception your works have
received proves that there are people who can give thought to
absurdity. To that class belongs the notorious muddlehead, Georges
Sorel, who maintains that the “first two parts” of Poincaré’s book


250 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM |


on the value of science have been written in the “spirit of Le
Roy” and that therefore the two philosophers can be “reconciled”
as follows: The attempt to establish the identity between science
and the world is an illusion; we must not ask the question whether
science can conceive nature or not, for the correspondence between
science and the mechanism created by us is quite sufficient.”

But if it suffices only to take account of Poincaré’s philosophy
and go on from there, it is quite imperative, however, to pause on
Rey’s works. We have already pointed out that the two basic
tendencies in modern physics, which Rey calls the “conceptual”
and “neo-mechanistic,” may be reduced to the distinction between
idealist and materialist epistemology. We shall see how the posi-
tivist Rey solves the problem in a manner different from the method
which the spiritualist Ward, and the idealists Cohen and Hartmann
followed, that is, not by seizing upon the philosophic mistakes of
the recent physics, and its deviation towards idealism, but by recti-
fying these errors, and by proving the illegitimacy of the idealist
(and fideist) inferences from recent physics.

There is to be found in all of Rey’s works recognition of the
fact that the recent “conceptualist” (Machian) theory of physics
has been seized upon by fideism (pp. 11, 17, 220, 362 ff), philo-
sophical idealism (p. 200), scepticism with its doubt concerning the
rights of reason and the rights of science (pp. 210, 220), subjec-
tivism (p. 311), etc. Therefore as the central problem of his works
Rey quite justly takes the “opinions of the physicists as to the
objective validity of physics” (p. 3). And what are the results of
this analysis?

We shall begin with the basic concept, that of experience. Rey
assures us that the subjective interpretation of Mach (let us for the
sake of simplicity and brevity take Mach as the representative of
the school which Rey terms conceptualist) is a total misunderstand-
ing of his true views. Among the “outstanding features of the
philosophy of the end of the nineteenth century” will be found an
“empiricism which, having grown subtler and richer in its various
shades, has finally led to fideism, to the supremacy of faith—which
was once upon a time the great weapon of scepticism against the
assertions of metaphysics. Did not this come about because of
the fact that little by little, by means of hardly perceptible shadings


29 Georges Sorel: Les préoccupations metaphysiques des physiciens mod-
ernes, 1907, pp. 77, 80, 81.


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 251


in the meanings of the words, they deviated from the real meaning
of ‘experience’? Indeed, experience, if taken in its conditions of
existence, in that experimental science which makes it more exact
and refined, leads us to necessity and to truth” (p. 398). It is
beyond doubt that Machism, in the broad sense of the word, is
nothing but a perversion, by means of imperceptible shadings, of
the real sense of the word “experience”! But does Rey, who ac-
cuses only the fideists of perversion, but not Mach himself, correct
this perversion? Here we have it: “Experience is by definition the
cognition of the object. In physical science this definition is more in
place than it is elsewhere. . . . Experience is that which our spirit
does not command, that which our desires, our volition, cannot
change, that which is given and which we do not make ourselves.
Experience is the object ‘in front of? [en face du] the subject”
(p. 314).

This is an example of the defence of Machism by Rey! How
ingeniously perspicacious was Engels, who characterised the recent
type of adherents of philosophic agnosticism and phenomenalism
by the expression “shamefaced materialists.” Rey, the positivist
and ardent phenomenalist, is a superb example of this type. If
experience means the “cognition of the object,” if “experience means
the object before the subject,” if experience means that “something
external exists and necessarily exists,” it evidently reduces itself to
materialism! Rey’s phenomenalism, his emphatic and ardent as-
sertion that nothing is given except sensations, his statement that
the objective is equivalent to what has a common significance, etc.,
etc.—all this is only a figleaf, an empty verbal shield of materialism,
since we are told that “the objective is that which is given us from
the outside, which is imposed upon us by experience; it is that
which we do not make but which is made independently of us and
which largely makes us” (p. 320). Rey, in defending “conceptual-
ism,” destroys it! The refutation of the idealist implications of
Machism has been reached only by interpreting Machism as a
“shamefaced materialism.” Having recognised the distinctions be-
tween various tendencies in modern physics, Rey labours hard to
do away with all distinctions allegedly in the interests of material-
ism. Of the school of neo-mechanism, for instance, Rey says that
it does not admit the “least doubt, the least uncertainty” as to the
objectivity of physics (p. 237): “Here [on the basis of the doc-
trines of this school] you feel far removed from all the circuitous


252 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM .


routes you were compelled to traverse from the point of view of
other conceptions of physics in order to arrive at the position of
this objectivity” (p. 237).

It is this “circuitous route” of Machism which Rey conceals, over
which he throws a veil in all of his expositions. The fundamental
characteristic of materialism lies in that it arises from the ob-
jectivity of science, from the recognition of objective reality, re-
flected by science, while idealism needs these “circuitous” methods
in order to “infer” the objectivity of nature, in one way or another,
from spirit or consciousness, from the “psychic.” “The neo-mecha-
nists, the prevailing school in physics, believe in the reality of the
external world” (p. 234). For this school, “theory wishes to be an
analogue [le decalque] of the object” (p. 235). True. And this
fundamental basis of the “neo-mechanist” school is nothing but the
foundation of the materialist theory of knowledge. No renuncia-
tion of materialism by Rey, no assurances that the neo-mechanists
are also phenomenalists, can mitigate this basic fact. The differ-
ence between the neo-mechanists (materialists, who are more or less
shamefaced) and the Machians is that the latter deviate more
strongly from this theory of knowledge, and inevitably succumb to
fideism.

Take the relation of Rey to Mach’s doctrines on causality and
necessity in nature. Only at first sight, Rey assures us, does it
appear that Mach is “approaching towards scepticism” and “sub-
jectivism” (p. 76); this “ambiguity” (p. 115) disappears if we
take the view of Mach as a whole. And Rey, taking it as a whole,
adduces a series of quotations from the Warmelehre and the Analysis
of Sensations, and pauses especially on the chapter devoted to
causality in the former book, but is cautious enough to refrain from
citing the most decisive remark of all, the declaration of Mach that
there is no physical necessity; but only a logical necessity! To
such a method of exposition we can only say that it is not an
interpretation of Mach, but an embellishment upon him; that it is
an obliteration of the differences between “neo-mechanism” and
Machism. Rey’s conclusion is that “Mach continues the analysis
and accepts the findings of Hume, Mill and all the other phe-
nomenalists, according to whom the causal relation has no sub-
stantiality but is only a mental habit. He accepts the fundamental
thesis of phenomenalism from which only one consequence follows
—that nothing exists save sensations. But Mach adds as a purely


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 253


objective modification that “science, analysing sensations, discovers
their permanent and common elements which, being abstractions,
have the same reality as the sensations themselves, for they are
taken from sensations by means of perceptual observation. And
these common and permanent elements such as energy and its
various forms, are the foundations for the systematisation of
physics” (loc. cit., p. 117).

This means that Mach accepts Hume’s subjective theory of
causality and interprets it in an objective sense! Rey evades the
task of defending Mach by referring to his inconsistency, and re-
ducing it to something like the following: In the “real” interpreta-
tion of experience, we are led to “necessity.” If experience is what
is given to us from the outside, and if the necessity of nature and
its laws are also given to man from the outside or from objectively
existing nature, then it is obvious that the difference between Mach-
ism and materialism vanishes. Rey defends Machism against “neo-
mechanism” in such a fashion that it capitulates along the entire
line to the latter. The word “phenomenalism” is retained and de-
fended but not the substance of the doctrine. Poincaré, for in-
stance, in the spirit of Mach, derives the laws of nature including
the tri-dimensionality of space; but this is done on grounds of “con-
venience.” But this does not at all leave any place for “indetermi-
nation,” Rey hastens to “correct” us. Nay, “convenient” here means
“adaptation to the object” (Rey’s italics, p. 196). Indeed, what
a superb differentiation between the two schools! What a “refuta-
tion” of materialism! . . . “If Poincaré’s theory logically separates
itself by an impassable gulf from the ontological interpretation of
mechanism [that is, from the doctrine that theory is a copy of the
object] . . . if it is to serve as a support for philosophic idealism,
then at least, on scientific grounds, it must be compatible with the
general evolution of classical ideas, with the tendency which regards
physics as objective knowledge, as objective as experience, that is,
as the sensations out of which experience is built up” (p. 200).

On the one hand, we must admit; on the other hand, we must
confess. On the one hand, an impassable gulf separates Poincaré
from neo-mechanism, although Poincaré stands in between Mach’s
conceptualism and neo-mechanism, so that it turns out that Mach
is not separated by an impassable gulf from neo-mechanism. On
the other hand, according to Rey himself who holds the viewpoint
of “mechanism,” Poincaré fully agrees with classical physics. On


254 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


the one hand, the theory of Poincaré is capable of serving as a
support to philosophic idealism; on the other hand, it is compatible
with the objective interpretation of the word “experience.” On the
one hand, these bad fideists perverted the meaning of experience
by the aid of expressions which imperceptibly deviated from the
correct view that “experience is the object”; on the other hand, the
objectivity of experience means. only that experience is sensation, a
statement with which both Berkeley and Fichte agree!

Rey blundered because he set himself the impossible task of
“reconciling” the opposition between the materialist and the idealist
schools in recent physics. He set out to subvert the materialism of
the neo-mechanist school, having already attempted to reduce the
views of physicists, who regard their theory as a copy of the object,
to phenomenalism.*°

Rey also attempts to tone down the idealism of the conceptualist
school by eliminating the most emphatic idealistic declarations of
its adherents and interpreting the rest from the point of view of a
shamefaced materialism. Rey’s estimate, for example, of the the-
oretical significance of the differential equations of Maxwell and
Hertz shows to what extent his repudiation of materialism is fraudu-
lent and fictitious. For the Machians the circumstance that these
physicists limit their theory to a system of equations, is a refutation


30 The “conciliator,” Rey, not only obscured the materialist statement of
the question at issue, but even left out the emphatic materialistic declarations
of the French physicists. He did not mention, for example, Alfred Cornu
(died in 1902). That physicist met the Ostwaldian “destruction or conquest
[Ueberwindung] of scientific materialism” with contemptuous remarks about
pretentious journalistic treatments of the question (cf. Révue générale des
sciences, 1895, pp. 1030-1). At the international congress of the physicists in
Paris in 1900, Cornu said: “ ... The more we conceive the phenomena of
nature, the more developed and precise becomes the brave Cartesian view of
the world-mechanism: in the physical world there is nothing save matter and
motion. The problem of the unity of the various physical forces . . . has again
been put into the foreground after the great discoveries made at the end of the
nineteenth century. The attention of our modern leaders of science, Faraday,
Maxwell, Hertz (to limit onlyself only to the famous physicists who have
passed away) was chiefly directed to defining nature more accurately and
to hypostasising the properties of imponderable matter, the vehicle of the
world-energy. . .. The return to Cartesian ideas is obvious” ... (Rapport
présentés au Congress International de Physique, 1900, §1, Vol. IV, p. 7).
Lucien Poincaré in his book La physique moderne (1906) justly remarks
that this Cartesian idea was taken up and developed by the Encyclopezdists of
the eighteenth century (p. 14). But neither this physicist, nor Cornu, knew
how the dialectical materialists, Marx and Engels, had purified the funda-
mental assumptions of materialism from the one-sided mechanistic materialism
of the eighteenth century.


}
ode —


of materialism—there are only equations, there is no matter, no
objective reality, only symbols. Boltzmann refutes this view, quite
aware of the fact that he is refuting phenomenalist physics. Rey
refutes this view in an intended defence of phenomenalism. He
says: “We cannot refuse to regard Maxwell and Hertz as ‘mechanists’
merely because they limited themselves to equations, similar to the
differential equations of Lagrange’s dynamics. The equations do
not prevent us, according to Maxwell and Hertz, from constructing
a mechanical theory of electricity out of real elements. On the con-
trary, the fact that we can represent electrical phenomena in a
theory whose form is identical with the general form of classical
mechanics, is proof of the possibility” (pp. 252-3). The indefinite.
ness of the present state of the problem will in a measure diminish
when the nature of these quantities which enter as elements in the
equations will have become more precise (p. 253). Failure to
investigate these and other forms of material motion is not taken
by Rey as a reason for denying the materiality of motion. “The
homogeneity of matter” is regarded (p. 262), not as a postulate,
but as a result of experience and evolution of science; “the
homogeneity of the object of physics” appears as the condition
of the possibility of measurement and mathematical calculation.

Here is Rey’s estimate of the criterion of practice in the theory
of knowledge: “Contrary to the postulates of scepticism, we have a
right to say that the practical validity of science is derived from its
theoretical validity” (p. 368). That this sceptical attitude is un-
equivocally accepted by Mach, Poincaré and their entire school—
of this Rey prefers not to speak. . . . “Theoretical and practical
validity are two inseparable and strictly parallel aspects of objective
validity. To say that a law of nature has practical validity . . .
is to say that it has an objective significance. . . . To act on an
object implies a modification of the object, implies a reaction upon
the part of the object which conforms to the expectations of pre-
dictions, which are contained in the proposition and in virtue of
which we acted on the object.

“Hence, these expectations or this anticipation contain elements
controlled by the object and our action. . . . In these diverse the-
ories there is thus an objective part” (p. 368). This is materialism
through and through! All other theories of knowledge, especially
Machism, deny the objective, deny that the criterion of practice does
not depend upon man and mankind.


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 255


256 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


The result is this: Although Rey did not approach the question
from the same angle as did Ward, Cohen and the others, he arrived
at the same results, namely, the recognition that at the basis of the
division between the two chief schools in modern physics lay the
difference between the materialistic and idealistic points of view.


7. A Russian “Idealist-Physicist’”


Due to certain deplorable conditions under which I have been
compelled to work, I have been almost unable to acquaint myself
with the Russian literature on the subject.** I will, therefore, confine
myself to an examination of a very important article * by the notori-
ous philosophic member of the “black-hundred,” Mr. Lopatin.
This “true-Russian” philosophic idealist is related to the contempo-
rary European idealists as, for example, the “Union of the Russian
People” ** is related to the western reactionary parties. Still more
instructive is it to see how similar homogeneous philosophic tenden-
cies manifest themselves in surroundings, quite different in their
general culture and mode of life. Lopatin’s article is, as the French
say, an éloge—a eulogy—to the Russian physicist Shishkin, who
died in 1906. Mr. Lopatin was impressed by the fact that this
educated man who took such an interest in Hertz and the new
physics in general was not only a right-wing Constitutional Demo-
crat, but a strong believer in, and adherent of, the philosophy of
Vladimir Soloviov, and so forth, and so on (p. 339). However, in
spite of his pre-eminent “inclination” towards an interest which
lies somewhere between the department of philosophy and the de-
partment of police, Mr. Lopatin has presented some material to-


81 When Lenin returned from Siberia to which he was sent for participating
in the revolutionary movement, he lived in exile in various parts of Europe.
Materialism and Empirio-Criticism was completed in London in 1908. In the
British Museum he could obtain the various German, English and French
sources. But there was no possibility of getting all the latest Russian litera-
ture on the subject. Lenin regretted this circumstance knowing that a work
by a Russian intended as a criticism of Russian writers would have some
shortcomings on that account.—Ed.

32“The Idealist-Physicist,” Problems of Philosophy and Psychology, Sept.-
QOct., 1907 (in Russian).

33 “True Russians,” “Union of the Russian People,” “Black Hundreds,” were
extreme reactionary and monarchist organizations, formed to combat the grow-
ing revolutionary movement. Although they had representation in the Duma,
they favored its abolition and the restoration of the absolute power of the
Tsar who was shorn of some of his prerogatives by the Revolution of 1905.—Ed.


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 257


wards the characterisation of the epistemologic views of the idealist-
physicist. He writes: “He was a real positivist in his tireless and
resolute criticism of the validity of the methods of scientific investi-
gation, and of both its customary assumptions and facts, in order
to discover the means and material for the construction of a complete
world view. In this respect Shishkin was the antipodes of many
of his contemporaries. In those articles of mine which have pre-
viously appeared in this periodical, I have often tried to reveal the
heterogeneous and frequently inconsistent elements out of which a
scientific view is built up. In it there enter established facts and
more or less brave generalisations, which have proved convenient at
the moment in one scientific domain or another, hypotheses and
purely auxiliary scientific fictions. And all this is elevated to the
high office of serving as incontrovertible objective truth, from whose
viewpoint all other ideas and all other beliefs of a philosophic and
religious nature must be judged and rejected in so far as they do not
conform to what these alleged truths express. Our extremely
talented thinker, the materialist Professor V. I. Vernadsky, has
shown with exemplary clarity how shallow and improper are these
pretences which claim to have demonstrated the scientific views of a
given historical epoch to be an immobile, dogmatic system ob-
ligatory for all. Whilst the wide circles of the reading public are
guilty of such a belief [Lopatin’s note: “For these circles a series
of popular books has been written, whose mission it is to serve as
a scientific catechism for definitely answering all questions. The
typical work is Force and Matter by Biichner, or Haeckel’s The
Riddle of the Universe], and with them also individual scientists of
special branches of natural science, it is even more strange that
the official philosophers themselves are guilty; for all their efforts
are directed to prove that they say nothing except what has already
been said before by the representatives of the several sciences, and
that they are merely expressing it in their own language.

“Shishkin had no dogmatic prejudices. He was an ardent cham-
pion of a mechanical explanation in the realm of natural phenomena,
but for him it was only a method of investigation.”

Well, well, these are quite familiar strains! “He did not at all
assume that the mechanical theory revealed the very essence of the
phenomena investigated; he saw in it only the most convenient and
fundamental productive method for unifying the sciences, and
serving as the instrument in the realisation of scientific aims. For


258 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


him, therefore, the mechanical conception of nature and the ma-
terialistic interpretation do not at all coincide. ...” Exactly as
in the case of the authors of the Outlines of the Marxian Philos-
ophy! “...On the contrary, he held that on questions of a
higher kind, the mechanical theory ought to take a very cautious
and conciliatory attitude.”

In the language of the Machians this is called “transcending the
obsolete and one-sided” distinction between materialism and ideal-
ism. “ .. . Questions of the origin and the end of things, of the
inner being of our spirit, of the freedom of the will or immortality
of the soul, etc., cannot, in the actual depths of their meaning, fall
within the purview of the mechanical theory—since as a method of
investigation, it is confined to the limits of natural applicability, to
the facts of physical experience only . . .” ( p. 342). The last two
lines are surely a plagiarism from Bogdanov’s Empirio-Monism.

“Light can be regarded,” wrote Shishkin in his article,** “as
substance, as motion, as electricity, as sensation.”

It is almost certain that Lopatin is right in linking Shishkin up
with the positivists and that he wholly belonged to the Machian
school of recent physics. Shishkin, in his lecture on light, states
in effect that the various methods of approach to the nature of light
constitute various methods of “organising experience” (according to


Bogdanov’s terminology), equally legitimate from different points


of view; or that they represent various “connections of elements”
(according to Mach’s terminology), and that the doctrines of the
physicists at any rate do not regard the theories of light as a copy
of objective reality. But Shishkin argued very badly. “Light can
be regarded as substance, as motion . . .” he says. But in nature
there is no substance without motion and no motion without sub-
stance. The first “distinction” of Shishkin’s is absurd. “As elec-
tricity. . . .” Electricity is motion of some sort of substance, hence,
here also is Shishkin wrong. The electro-magnetic theory of light
showed that light and electricity are forms of motion of one and the
same substance (ether). “As sensation . . .” he winds up. Sensa-
tion is the image of moving matter. Save through sensations, we
cannot know of the existence of forms of substance, or of forms of
motion; sensations are produced by the effect of matter in motion
upon our sense-organs. That is how natural science views it! The


84“Qn Psycho-Physical Phenomena from the Standpoint of the Mechanist
Theory,” Problems of Philosophy and Psychology, Bk. I, p. 127 (in Russian).


;
at —


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 259


sensation of red reflects ether vibrations whose frequency approxi-
mately amounts to 450 trillions per second. The sensation of blue
reflects ether vibrations whose frequency is approximately 620
trillions per second. ‘The vibrations of the ether exist inde-
pendently of our visual sensations. Our visual sensations de-
pend upon the effects of the vibrations of ether upon our organs
of vision. Our sensations reflect objective reality, something
which exists independently of humanity and human sensations.
That is how natural science views it! Shishkin’s lecture, aimed
against the materialists, is the cheapest sophistry.


8. The Essence and Significance of Idealistic Physics


We have seen that the epistemological questions raised by recent
physics have been discussed from various aspects, in English, German
and French literature. There can be no doubt that we have before
us a certain international ideological movement, which does not
depend upon one philosophic system or another as such, but which
is the result of certain general causes, lying outside of philosophy
proper. Examination undoubtedly reveals that Machism is “con-
nected” with modern physics, but reveals also at the same time that
the conception of this connection broadcasted by our Machians is
fundamentally incorrect. As in philosophy, so in physics, the
Machians slavishly follow the fashion, and are unable to give a
general survey and evaluation of the well-known contemporary
tendencies in physics from their own allegedly Marxian standpoint.

All the harangue about Mach’s philosophy being a “philosophy
of twentieth century natural science,” of “recent scientific posi-
tivism,” etc., (Bogdanov in the preface to Analysis of Sensations,
pp. iv, xii; cf. Yushkevich, Valentinov, et al.), is characterised by a
twofold misconception. In the first place, Machism is ideologically
connected with only one school of modern science. Secondly, and
this is the chief thing: not what separates Machism from all other
tendencies and puppet systems of idealist philosophy, but what it
has in common with idealism in general, is the element which con-
nects Machism with this school. It suffices merely to cast a glance
at the ideologic movement in question, as a whole, in order to grasp
the truth of this statement beyond the shadow of any doubt. Take
the physicists of this school, the German, Mach, the Frenchman,
Henri Poincaré, the Belgian, Duhem, the Englishman, Pearson. There


260 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


EEE EES Ea ED


is much in common among them; they have the same basis and the
same direction, as each of them justly acknowledges. But neither
the doctrine of empirio-criticism in general, nor Mach’s belief in the
“elements of the world,” in particular, enter into this common basis.
These views are quite foreign to the three latter physicists. The
“only” thing they have in common is—philosophical idealism to-
wards which they all, without exception, tend more or less con-
sciously, more or less definitely. Turn to the philosophers who
base their own doctrines upon this school of modern physics, who
try to lay its epistemological foundations and develop its implica-
tions, and you will here again see the immanentists, the disciples of
Mach, the French neo-criticists and idealists, the English spiritual-
ists, the Russian Lopatin, in addition to the sole empirio-monist
Bogdanov. They have only one thing in common, that is, all of
them espouse idealism, more or less consciously, more or less
definitely, be it with a rapid and eager shift towards its latent fide-
ism, be it with a personal aversion towards it (as in Bogdanov’s
case).

The basic idea of the school of recent physics which we have
analysed is either a denial or doubt of the objective reality given
to us in our sensation and reflected in our scientific theories. Here
this school departs from materialism (incorrectly named realism,
neo-mechanism, hylo-kinetism, none of which have been consciously
developed by the physicists), from the philosophy which as gen-
erally recognised, prevails among the physicists. It takes its point
of departure, then, as a school of “idealistic physics.”

To explain this queer term, it is necessary to recall one episode in
the history of recent philosophy and recent science. In 1866 Feuer-
bach attacked Johannes Miiller, the famous founder of modern
physiology, and ranked him with the “physiologic idealists.” 8° The
idealism of this physiologist consisted in the fact that while in-
vestigating the significance of the mechanism of our sense-organs
in their relation to sensations, showing, for instance, that the sensa-
tion of light is produced by a specific kind of energy affecting the
eye, he was inclined to conclude therefrom that our sensations were
not images of objective reality. Feuerbach very aptly characterised
this as a tendency towards “physiological idealism,” towards an
idealist interpretation of certain findings in physiology. The “con-
nection” between physiology and idealism, chiefly of the Kantian

85 Werke, Vol. X, p. 197.


ae
‘


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 261


kind, had for a long time been exploited by the reactionary phi-
losophy. Lange utilised these physiological data in the interests of
Kantian idealism in order to refute materialism. And among the
immanentists (whom Bogdanov incorrectly classifies as holding a
position in between Mach and Kant), Rehmke especially came out
in 1882 against the fictitious claims made by Kantianism regarding
the supposed confirmatory evidence of physiology.*® That a host
of eminent physiologists at that time betrayed inclinations towards
idealism and Kantianism, is as indisputable a fact as that a host
of eminent physicists to-day gravitate towards idealism. “Physical”
idealism, that is, the idealism of a certain school of physicists at
the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth century,
no more “refutes” materialism, no more establishes the connection
between idealism—or empirio-criticism—and natural science, than
did Lange and the “physiological” idealists. This deviation towards
reactionary philosophy, which was manifested on occasions, by one
school of scientists, in one branch of science, is a temporary re-
lapse, in a sickly period in the history of science,—is the effect
of growing pains brought on by a sharp crisis in old established
ideas.

The connection between modern “physical” idealism and the crisis
of modern physics, as we have already pointed out above, is gen-
erally acknowledged on all sides. “The sceptical arguments, di-
rected against modern physics,” writes Rey, having in mind not so
much the sceptics as the outspoken adherents of fideism, like
Brunetiére, “can be essentially reduced to the proverbial argument
of all sceptics—to the differences of opinion [amongst the physi-
cists].” But these differences “do not militate against the objectivity
of physics. In the history of physics as in any other history one
can distinguish great periods which are characterised by a certain
aspect and general form of its theories. . . . When a discovery is
made which affects all fields of physics, which establishes some
cardinal fact hitherto unknown or unappreciated, the entire aspect
of physics is changed; a new period commences. So it was after
Newton’s discovery, so it was after the discoveries of Joule-Meyer
and Carnot-Clausius. . . . The same result, apparently, has followed
upon the discovery of radio-activity. . . . The historian who can
observe events with the requisite aloofness, will without difficulty


36 Johannes Rehmke: Philosophie und Kantianismus, Eisenach, 1882, p.


15 ff.


262 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


discern a continuity of evolution where our contemporaries see
only conflicts, contradictions, and divisions into various schools. It
seems that the crisis which physics has recently experienced belongs
to the same category (despite the conclusions which have been
drawn from this crisis by philosophical criticism). This is a
typical crisis in its natural growth occasioned by great new dis-
coveries. It is almost certain that the crisis will lead to the modifi-
cation of physics; without it there could be no evolution and no
progress, but it certainly will not change the scientific spirit” (pp.
370-372) .

Rey, the conciliator, tries to unite all schools of modern physics
against fideism! This mistake is well meant, but it is a mistake
none the less, for the deviation of the school of Mach-Poincaré-
Pearson towards idealism (which is but a refined fideism) is beyond
dispute. And this objectivity of physics, which is at the basis of the
“scientific spirit,” and which Rey defends so ardently, as opposed
to the spirit of fideism, is nothing but a “shamefaced” formulation
of materialism. The basic materialistic spirit of physics, as of
the whole of modern science, will overcome all sorts of crises, pro-
vided the necessary change from metaphysical materialism to dia-
lectical materialism takes place.

Rey, the peacemaker, very often silently glides over the fact that
the crisis of modern physics lies in its deviation from a direct,
decisive and definite recognition of the objective validity of its
theories. But the facts are stronger than all his conciliatory efforts.
“The mathematicians,” writes Rey, “who are accustomed to deal
with a science in which the object, at least on the surface, is created
by the mind of the scientist or in which, at any rate, concrete appear-
ances are not admitted into investigations, have given expression
to an abstract conception of physics, and have tended to reduce it
to mathematics, by applying the general theory of mathematics to
physics. . . . All the experimenters have denounced the invasion
of the mathematical spirit into the methods of judging and under-
standing physics. And is it not due to this influence, which is
none the less powerful for being concealed, that the uncertainty,
the hesitation of thought regarding the objectivity of physics is to
be attributed, together with those circuitous ways by which ob-
jectivity is reached and the obstacles which are surmounted in order
to prove it... ?” (p. 227).

This is very well said. “Hesitation of thought” in the question


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 263


of the objectivity of physics—here lies the substance of fashionable
“Sdealistic physics.”

“|. . The abstract fictions of mathematics seem as if they
erected a screen between physical reality and the manner in which
the mathematicians understand this science. They vaguely feel the
objectivity of physics . . . they desire before anything else to be
objective when they engage in physics; they endeavour to lean upon
reality, but their old habits assert themselves. And so in the course
of recent scientific theory up to and including energetics—which
desired to construct the world with a fewer number of hypotheses
than the old mechanical physics, which was satisfied to copy the
perceptual world, and not to re-create it—we constantly have had to
deal with the theories of mathematicians. . . . The mathematicians
have done everything they could to save the objectivity of physics,
for without objectivity—they understand this very well—there can-
not be any talk about physics. . . . But the complexity of their
theories, their circuitous methods have left an uneasy feeling. They
are too artificial, too far-fetched, too fictitious; the experimenter
does not feel that instinctive confidence in them which is developed
through constant contact with physical reality. . . . This is what
all the physicists essentially claim, those who are primarily physi-
cists—and those who are exclusively physicists; this is what the
entire neo-mechanist school claims. . . . The crisis of physics has
been precipitated through the permeation of the mathematical spirit.
The progress of physics in the nineteenth century, on the one hand,
and the progress of mathematics on the other, led to the close
proximity of these two sciences. .. . Theoretical physics became
mathematical physics. ... Then began the period of formal
physics, that is, of mathematical physics, which became purely
mathematical, not as a branch of physics but as a branch of mathe-
matics. In this new phase the mathematician, accustomed to have
the conceptual (purely logical) elements constitute the sole subject
matter of his work, found himself cramped before the rough, ma-
terial elements which he found not sufficiently pliable for formal
analysis. He therefore could not avoid abstracting from them as
much as possible, was inclined to postulate them as absolutely im-
material as purely logical, or even to ignore them altogether. The
elements as real, objective data, 7. e., as physical elements, com-
pletely vanished. There remained only the formal relations which
are represented by differential equations. . . . If the mathematician


264, MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


be not deceived by his own constructive work, he will be able to
find the connections between theoretical physics and actual experi-
ence, but at first sight it seems to an untutored eye that the entire
thing is an arbitrary theoretical construction. . . . The concept, the
idea, replaces real elements everywhere. . . . Thus, in virtue of the
mathematical form, accepted by theoretical physics . . . the illness,
the crisis of physics and its apparent separation from objective facts,
are historically explained” (pp. 228-232).

Such is the first cause of “idealistic physics.” The reactionary
claims that have been put forward are really the consequences of
progress within science. The great success of science, its discovery
of the homogeneous and simple elements of matter, whose laws of
motion are subject to formule, caused matter to be forgotten by
the mathematicians. “Matter disappears,” only equations remain.
In a new stage of development and, as it were, in a new way, we
get the old Kantian idea: reason prescribes laws to nature. Herman
Cohen who rejoices, as we have seen, over the idealistic spirit of
recent physics, goes so far as to advocate the introduction of higher
mathematics into schools in order to implant in the high-school
students the spirit of idealism, which is in danger of being extin-
guished in our materialistic age.*” Of course this is a ridiculous
fancy of a reactionary and, except for the temporary infatuation
with idealism by a limited number of specialists, there really is
nothing to it, nor can there be anything to it. But what is highly
characteristic is how these drowning faiths clutch at a straw, and
with what cunning the representatives of the educated bourgeoisie
artificially attempt to sustain and find a place for fideism whose
hold on the lower strata of the masses is due to ignorance, back-
wardness, and to the absurd and wild contradictions of capitalist
society.

Another cause of “idealistic physics” is the principle of relativity,
the relativity of science, a principle which in a period of bank-
ruptcy of old theories, imposes itself with special force upon physi-
cists, and which, due to ignorance of dialectics, leads to idealism.

The question of the correlation between relativism and dialectics
is of the utmost importance in explaining the theoretical misfor-
tunes of Machism. Here is Rey, for instance, who, like the rest of
the European positivists, has no idea of Marxian dialectics at all.
He employs the word dialectics exclusively in the sense of idealist


37 A, Lange: Geschichte des Materialismus, 5th ed., 1896, p. xlix.


7


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 265


speculation. Feeling, therefore, that the new physics went astray
on the question of relativism, he helplessly flounders in an attempt
to distinguish between moderate and immoderate relativism. Of
course, “immoderate relativism borders on actual scepticism, in
theory if not in practice” (p. 215). But, as you see, in Poincaré
there is no “immoderate” relativism. One imagines that by adding
to the mess, a pinch of relativism weighed on an apothecary’s scale,
the position of Machism can be improved!

The only correct way of theoretically positing the question of
relativism, has been expressed by the dialectic materialism of Marx
and Engels. Ignorance of it must certainly lead from relativism to
idealism. Failure to understand this fact makes Mr. Berman’s
absurd book Dialectics from the Standpoint of The Modern The-
ory of Knowledge (in Russian) valueless. Mr. Berman repeated
the old absurdities about the dialectical philosophy which he com-
pletely failed to understand. We have already seen that all the
Machians, at each step, manifest similar ignorance of the theory of
knowledge.

All the old truths of physics, including those which were re-
garded as the most firmly established and incontestable, have proven
to be relative truths. This means that there is no such thing as
objective truth independent of humanity. Thus argue not only the
followers of Machism but all adherents of “idealistic physics” in
general. That absolute truth results from the sum-total of relative
iruths in the course of their development; that relative truths repre-
sent approximate reflections of an object which exists independent
of humanity; that these reflections continually approach the truth;
that in each scientific truth, irrespective of its relativity, there is an
element of absolute truth—all these propositions, obvious to any-
one who has reflected on Engels’ Anti-Diihring, remains for the
“modern” theory of knowledge a closed book with seven seals.

Such works as Duhem’s,*® or Stallo’s,®® which Mach especially
recommends, show very clearly that these “idealistic physicists”
ascribe most significance to the hypothesis of the relativity of our
sciences, and vacillate for the most part between idealism and
dialectical materialism. Both authors, who belong to different
periods, and who approach the question from different viewpoints
(Duhem’s specialty is physics, in which field he worked for twenty


88 P. Duhem: La theorie physique, son objet et sa structure, Paris, 1906.
39. B. Stallo: The Concepts and Theories of Modern Physics, London, 1882.


266 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


years; Stallo, an erstwhile ardent Hegelian, spurned his own book
on natural philosophy [published in 1848], which was conceived in
the old Hegelian spirit), combat the atomistic mechanistic concep-
tion of nature most energetically. They establish the limitations of
such a conception, maintain the impossibility of recognising it as
the limit of our knowledge, and point to the ossified and antiquated
doctrines of many writers who cling to this conception of physics.
This defect in the old materialism is undeniable; its failure to
appreciate the relativity of all scientific theories, its ignorance of
dialectics, its exaggeration of the mechanistic viewpoint—these were
Engels’ reproaches against the earlier materialists. But Engels,
unlike Stallo, was able to abandon the Hegelian idealism, and yet
retain the kernel of sound insight in Hegel’s dialectics. Engels
rejected the old metaphysical materialism for dialectical material-
ism, and not for a relativism, which plays into the hands of sub-
jectivism. ‘The mechanical theory,” says Stallo, “in common with
all metaphysical theories, hypostasises partial, ideal, and, it may be,
purely conventional groups of attributes, or single attributes, and
treats them as varieties of objective reality” (p. 150). This is quite
true, if you recognise the primary fact of objective reality and are
combating metaphysics as opposed to dialectics. Stallo does not
make this clear himself. He has no grasp of materialist dia-
lectics and therefore falls from relativism into subjectivism and
idealism.

The same with Duhem. At an enormous expenditure of labour,
in a series of interesting and valuable examples from the history
of physics (a type of study which one frequently encounters in
Mach), he proves that “each law of physics is temporary and rela-
tive because it is approximate” (p. 280). Well, he is trying to
force his way through an open door, reflects the Marxist while
reading the lengthy treatises on this subject. But the trouble with
Duhem, Stallo, Mach and Poincaré is that they do not see that the
door had already been opened by dialectical materialism. Hence
unable to give a correct expression to relativism, they relapse into
idealism. “The laws of physics, properly speaking, are neither
true nor false, but approximate,” writes Duhem (p. 272). In this
“but” there already lies the germ of an error. It also marks the
beginning of an attempt to eliminate the difference between a
scientific theory which approximately reflects the object i. e., ap-
proaches objective truth, and arbitrary, phantastic, and purely con-


THE REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE 267


ventional theories, as, for example, religious doctrines and the
systematised rules of chess.

This error goes so far with Duhem that he declares the question,
as to whether “material reality” corresponds to perception, to be
metaphysics (p. 10). Away with all questions about reality; our
ideas and hypotheses are mere signs, “arbitrary” (p. 27) construc-
tions, etc. There is only one step from this to idealism, to the
“physics of the believer,” which Pierre Duhem preaches in true
Kantian fashion (cf. Rey, p. 162; also p. 160). And the good-
natured Adler (Fritz), also a Machian claiming to be a Marxian,
had no keener “correction” to offer than this: Duhem eliminates
the notion of “realities, hidden beyond appearance, only as objects
of theory, but not as real objects.” *° This is the familiar criticism
of Kantianism made from the standpoint of Hume and Berkeley.

Of course, there can be no talk of Duhem’s being a conscious
Kantian. He merely vacillates, as does Mach, without knowing how
to support his relativism. At many points he comes very close to
dialectical materialism. He says that we know sound as “it exists
in relation to us but not as it exists in itself, that is, in bodies which
cause sound. This reality, of which our sensations disclose only
the external, superficial effects, affords the possibility of conceiving
a theory of acoustics. They tell us that where our perceptions
register the effects which we call sound, there really exists a rapid,
periodic, wave movement (p. 7). Bodies are not symbols of sensa-
tion, but sensations are symbols (rather images) of bodies. The de-
velopment of physics gives rise to a constant struggle between nature
which continually offers new material; as reason which continually
attempts to cognise it” (p. 32); nature is infinite and its smallest
particle, the electron, is infinite, and reason is engaged in an infinite
transformation of “things-in-themselves” into “things-for-us.” “The
struggle between reality and the laws of physics will last infinitely;
for each law which physics will formulate, sooner or later reality
will produce a rude refutation, in the form of an inexplicable fact;
but physics will continually modify, change, and qualify the refuted
law” (p. 290). This would be quite an adequate exposition of
dialectical materialism, if the author firmly clung to the conception
of a reality existing independent of humanity. “. . . The theory
of physics is not a purely artificial system, to-day convenient, to-
morrow worthless; it is a classification, becoming more and more


40 “Translator’s note” to the German translation of Duhem, Leipzig, 1908.


268 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM |


TN


natural, a reflection growing clearer and clearer, of those realities
which the experimental method cannot meet face to face” (p. 4A5).

Duhem, the Machian, in this last phrase flirts with Kantian ideal-
ism; it appears as if a path has been opened up for another method
besides an “experimental” one, as if we cannot directly, and immedi-
ately perceive “thing-in-themselves” face to face. But if the theory
of physics becomes more and more natural, then “nature” and
reality, “reflected” by this theory exists independently of our con-
sciousness—which is precisely the view of dialectic materialism.

In a word, the “physical” idealism of to-day, just as the “physio-
logical” idealism of yesterday merely signifies that one school of nat-
uralists in one branch of science have succumbed to reactionary
philosophy, without being able to rise directly and immediately
above metaphysical materialism and to arrive at dialectic material-


ism.** Modern physics has made and will continue to make this
step, but it reaches the only true method and the only true philosophy
of natural science, not directly but through zigzag progress, not
consciously but instinctively, not clearly aware of its “final goal,”
but continually drawing nearer to it, through groping, vacillating,
even retrogressive motion. Modern physics is in a state of confine-


41The famous chemist William Ramsay says: “I have been frequently
asked: ‘But is not electricity a vibration? How can wireless telegraphy be
explained by the passage of little particles or corpuscles?’ The answer is:
‘Electricity is a thing; it is these minute corpuscles, but when they have
any object, a wave, like a wave of light, spreads through the ether, and
this wave is used for wireless telegraphy!’” (William Ramsay: Essays,
Biographical and Chemical,’ London, 1908, p. 126). Having spoken about
the transformation of radium into helium, Ramsay remarks: “At least one
so-called element can no longer be regarded as ultimate matter, but it is
itself undergoing change into a simpler form of matter” (p. 160). “Now it
is almost certain that negative electricity is a particular form of matter; and
positive electricity is matter deprived of negative electricity—that is, minus
this electric matter” (p. 176). “Now what is electricity? It used to be
believed, formerly, that there were two kinds of electricity, one called positive
and the other negative. At that time it would not have been possible to
answer the question. But recent researches make it probable that what used
to be called negative electricity is really a substance. Indeed the relative
weight of its particles has been measured; each is about one seven-hundredth
of the mass of an atom of hydrogen. ... Atoms of electricity are named
‘electrons’” (p. 196). If our Machians, who write books and articles on
philosophical subjects, were capable of thinking they would understand that
the expression “matter has disappeared,” “matter has been reduced to elec-
tricity,” etc., is only a meaningless epistemological expression of the truth
that science has succeeded in discovering new forms of matter, new forms of
ee motion, and has succeeded in reducing the old and the familiar to
the new,


ie q
a


CHAPTER SIX
EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND HISTORICAL MATERIALISM


Tue Russian Machians, as has already been seen, are divided
into two camps: Mr. Chernov and the collaborators of the Russkoye
Bogatstvo! are genuine and consistent opponents of dialectical
materialism, both in philosophy and history. The other company of
Machians, in whom we are more interested, call themselves Marxists
and try in every way to assure their readers that Machism is com-
patible with the historical materialism of Marx and Engels. But
these assurances remain only assurances, for not one Machian,
desirous of being regarded as a Marxist, has made the slightest at-
tempt to expound, even in outline fashion, the actual tendencies
of the founders of empirio-criticism in the field of social science.
We shall briefly pause on this question, taking up at first the state-
ments of the German empirio-criticists, to be found in the relevant
literature, and then those of their Russian disciples.


1. The Excursion of the German Empirio-Criticists
into the Domain of Social Science


In 1895, when Avenarius was still alive, there appeared, in the
philosophic periodical edited by Avenarius, an article by his
disciple F. Blei, under the title “Die Metaphysik in der National-
Oekonomie.” * Since all the founders of empirio-criticism have
combated the “metaphysics” not only of explicit, conscious ma-
terialism, but of the natural sciences, which instinctively cling
to the viewpoint of the materialist theory of knowledge as well,
the disciple took it upon himself to wage war on the metaphysics
of political economy. This war has been directed against the


1A Russian monthly magazine, published at St. Petersburg from 1880 to
1914; organ of the radical intelligentsia of populist-socialist tendencies.—Ed.

2 Vierteljahrsschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Philosophie, 1895, Vol. XIX, pp.
378-90.


270


various schools of political economy, but at present we are in-
terested only in the character of the emvirio-critical argument
against the school of Marx and Engels.

“The purpose of the present investigation,” writes Blei, “is to
show that the whole of modern political economy operates with
metaphysical assumptions in its interpretation of the phenomena
of economic life; it ‘derives laws’ of economics from the ‘nature’
of its subject matter, and man appears here only as something
accidental in relation to such ‘laws’. ... With all its modern
theories political economy rests on metaphysical grounds, all its
theories are unbiological and, therefore, unscientific, thus having
no validity for knowledge. . . . The theoreticians do not know on
what ground they build their theories, and of what soil the fruits
of those theories are. They deem themselves realists who operate
without any assumptions, for they are supposedly engaged in
‘sober,’ ‘practical,’ ‘tangible’ [sinnfdllige] economic phenomena.
. . . And all of them have those native resemblances with many ten-
dencies in physiology, which are regarded as cognitive characteristics
of children (in our case the physiologists and economists) of com-
mon parentage (metaphysics and speculation). One school of econ-
omists analyses the ‘phenomena’ of ‘political economy’ [Avenarius
and his school put ordinary words in quotation marks as if to
imply that they, true philosophers, understand the essentially
‘metaphysical character’ of such a vulgar use of words, unrefined
by ‘epistemologic analysis’] without putting it into relation with
the behaviour revealed by the conduct of individuals: The physiolo-
gists dismiss the behaviour of the individual in their investigations
as being an ‘effect of the soul,’ while economists of that tendency
declare the behaviour of individuals to be negligible in relation to
the ‘immanent economic laws’ [pp. 378-379]. With Marx, the
theory progresses from these inferred processes to economic laws,
although the laws are supposed to have existed, in the primary
period of vital series, while the economic processes take place at

the final period. . . . Political economy was transformed by the
economists into a transcendental category, in which they discovered
such ‘laws’ as those of ‘capital’ and ‘labour,’ ‘rent,’ ‘wages’ and
‘profit. Man was transformed by them into a Platonic idea of
a ‘capitalist,’ or a ‘worker,’ etc. Socialism ascribed to the ‘capital-
ist’ the property of being ‘greedy for profit,’ liberalism ascribed
to the worker the property of being ‘pretentitous,’ and both laws


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 271


272 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


have been explained as sequences of the ‘law of action of capital’
[pp. 381-382].

“Marx came to the study of French socialism and political
economy with a socialist Welianschauung, and his purpose was to
provide a ‘theoretical foundation’ for it in order to ‘secure’ its
initial value.

Marx found in Ricardo the law of value . . . but the inferences
which the French socialists had drawn from Ricardo could not
satisfy Marx in his endeavour to ‘secure’ the initial value which
unequally distributed had given rise to differences in the state of
life——These inferences had already entered as a component part
into his conception of value as the aspect of ‘indignation against the
exploitation of the workers,’ etc. The inferences had been refuted
as ‘being formally untrue in an economic sense,’ for they are
simple ‘applications of morality to political economy.’ But what
is untrue in the formal economic sense, may be true in the his-
toric sense. If the moral consciousness of the mass declares a cer-
tain economic fact unjust, then it is proof that the fact has outlived
itself, that other economic facts have appeared, due to which this
fact becomes intolerable and incapable of being observed. Be-
hind the formal economic injustice a true economic content ‘may,
therefore, be latent’ (Engels in the preface to Poverty of Philos-
ophy).

“In this quotation,” Blei continues to cite from Engels, “the mid-
dle section [medialabschnitt] of the dependent series which interest
us here is taken away [‘abgehoben’—Avenarius’ technical term
for ‘having reached consciousness]. After the ‘recognition’ that
behind the ‘moral consciousness of injustice’ the ‘economic factor’
may be latent, comes the last section [Finalabschnitt: the theory of
Marx is the statement, the E-value, the vital difference which passes
through three stages, three divisions, the beginning, middle and
end, Initialabschnitt, Medialabschnitt, F inalabschnitt] . . . that is
‘the consciousness’ of that ‘economic factor.’ Or, in other words,
the task now is to ‘find again’ the initial value, that is, the Weltan-
schauung in the ‘economic facts’ for ‘securing’ this initial value. This
definite variation of the dependent series already contains the
Marxian metaphysics, regardless of whether what is ‘cognised’ ap-
pears or not in the final division (F inalabschnitt). ‘The socialist
conception’ as an independent E-value, the ‘absolute truth,’ is sub-
sequently grounded upon a ‘special’ theory of knowledge, by means


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 273


of the economic system of Marx and the materialist theory of
history. The ‘subjectively true’ in the Marxian doctrine, through
the conception of surplus value, finds its ‘objective truth’ in a theory
of knowledge of ‘economic categories.’—Hence, the securing of
initial values is completed and metaphysics is subjected to a
critique of knowledge by way of supplement” (pp. 383-6).

The reader is probably indignant that we have so long indulged
in this impossibly vulgar word jugglery, this quasi-erudite
buffoonery in the garb of Avenarius’ terminology. But wer den
Feind will verstehen, muss im Feindes’ Lande gehn. And the
philosophical journal of Avenarius is really hostile territory for
Marxists to venture into. And we invite the reader to overcome
for a while his justified aversion to the clowns of bourgeois
science and to analyse the arguments of the disciple and collabo-
rator of Avenarius.

Proof number one: Marx is a “metaphysician” who did not grasp
the epistemological “critique of ideas,” who did not elaborate the
general theory of knowledge and who surreptitiously introduced
materialism into his “special theory of knowledge.”

There is nothing original in this argument of Blei’s. We have
already seen hundreds of times that all the founders of empirio-
criticism and all the Russian Machians have accused materialism
of “metaphysics,” that is, they repeat the stereotyped arguments of
the Kantians, Humeans and idealists against materialistic “meta-
physics.”

Proof number two: Marxism is as “metaphysical” as natural
science (physiology). Nor is Blei “responsible” for this proof.
Rather are Mach and Avenarius, for they declared war against
“naturo-historical metaphysics,” dubbing the instinctively-material-
istic theory of knowledge with that name to which (according to
their own admission and the judgment of those who are even
slightly acquainted with the question) the prevailing majority of
naturalists adhere.

Proof number three: Marxism avers “personality” to be a negli-
gible quantity, an accident, subject to certain “immanent economic
laws”; it is characterised by an absence of analysis of the imme-
diately given. This proof repeats in toto the empirio-critical idea
of “essential co-ordination,” that nest of idealist duplicity in
Avenarius’ theory. Blei is absolutely right when he says that it is
impossible to find the slightest notion of this idealist confusion


eT


274 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


pT


in Marx and Engels, and that from the standpoint of such con-
fusion one must completely reject Marxism from the very beginning,
in its most fundamental philosophic assumption.

Proof number four: The theory of Marx is “unbiological,” is
innocent of “vital-differences” and of similar factitious biological
terms which constitute the “science” of the reactionary professor,
Avenarius. Blei’s argument is correct from the standpoint of
Machism, for the gulf which separates the theory of Marx from
the “biological” baubles of Avenarius is indeed immediately evi-
dent. We shall soon see how those Russian Machians, who are
so intent upon being considered Marxists, actually followed in the
footsteps of Blei.

Proof number five: Concerning the partiality of Marx’s theory
and his preconceived solution. The whole of empirio-criticism, and
not merely Blei’s brand of it, pretends to be impartial both in
philosophy and in social science; it adheres neither to socialism
nor to liberalism. Its task is not to make clear the fundamental
and irreconcilable differences between the philosophy of material-
ism and idealism, but to endeavour to rise above them. We have
traced this tendency of Machism in a whole series of problems
dealing with epistemology, and we ought not be surprised to en-
counter it in sociology.

Proof number six: The mockery at “objective” truth. Blei
sensed at once, and quite correctly, that historical materialism and
the entire economic doctrine of Marx thoroughly reflect the recog-
nition of objective truth. And Blei correctly expressed the drift
of the doctrines of Mach and Avenarius when, from the very start,
he refuted Marxism precisely because of its emphasis on the idea
of objective truth, when, at one stroke, he proclaimed that there
was really nothing behind the teaching of Marxism save the “sub-
jective” views of Marx.

And if our Machians renounce Blei (as they surely will), we
shall tell them: “You must not accuse the mirror if it shows a wry
face.” Blei is the mirror, which correctly reflects theefundamental
tendencies of empirio-criticism, and the possible renunciation of
the Machians would only bear witness to their noble intentions
and their absurd eclectic endeavours to connect Marx and Avenarius.

We shall proceed from Blei to Petzoldt. If the former is a
mere disciple, the latter, however, is declared to be “one of the
masters” by no less an outstanding empirio-criticist than Lessevich.


ee


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 275


er


If Blei directly raises the question of Marxism, then Petzoldt, who
does not condescend to take Marx or Engels into account, expounds
the positive views of empirio-criticism in sociology, thus offering
an opportunity to compare them with Marxism.

The second volume of Petzoldt’s Einfiihrung in die Philosophie
der reinen Erfahrung is entitled “Auf dem Wege zum Dauernden.”
The author assumes as the basis of his investigation the tendency
towards stability. “The final, stable state of humanity, in its main
features, can be revealed on its formal side. Thus we arrive at
ethics, esthetics and the formal theory of: knowledge” (p. iii).
“Human development bears its goal in itself”; it tends towards a
“perfect state of equilibrium” (p. 60). Evidence for this is
abundant and varied. For example, is it not true that many violent
radicals become “more sensible” with old age, that they reach a
stage of emotional equilibrium? True, such “premature stability”
(p. 62) is the property of a Philistine. But do not Philistines
comprise the “compact majority”? (p. 62).

The inference of our philosopher is this: “The fundamental goal
of all our reasoning and creative activity, is stability’ (p. 72).
An explanation follows: “Many cannot bear to see the picture
hanging crooked on the wall or the key lying obliquely on the
table. And such people are not necessarily pedants. They have a
feeling that something is not in order” (p. 72, Petzoldt’s italics).
In a word, the “tendency toward stability is a tendency toward the
ultimate, towards the final stage” (p. 73). All this is taken
from the fifth chapter of Volume II, entitled “Die Psychische
Tendenz zur Stabilitat.”” The proofs of this tendency are, indeed,
most weighty! For instance: “The endeavour to attain the topmost,
to reach the highest in the primeval, spatial sense, expresses itself
in those who like to climb mountains. They are not always
prompted by a desire to perceive the outlying landscape or by the
joy of physical exercise in climbing in free air and open sky,
but by the longing, deeply ingrained in every organic being, to
pursue the direction of activity once taken until the natural pur-
‘pose has been attained” (p. 73). Another instance: What sums
of money people pay to accumulate a complete collection of postage
stamps! “One is dazed upon looking at the price list of the dealer
in postage stamps. . . . And yet nothing can be more natural and
conceivable than this urge for stability” (p. 74).

Philosophically untutored people have no conception of the


‘


breadth of principles of stability or economy of thought. Petzoldt
develops in detail his “theory” for the benefit of the ignorant.
“Sympathy is an expression of the immediate need for a state of
equilibrium,” runs the thought of paragraph 28... . “Sympathy
is not a repetition, a duplication of the observed suffering, but a
suffering on account of this suffering. . . . The qualitative imme-
diacy of sympathy must be greatly emphasised. If we recognise it,
we admit that the welfare of others can just as genuinely and natu-
rally interest a man as his own welfare. Thus we reject every
utilitarian and eudemonistic foundation of morality. Human na-
ture, precisely because of its yearning for stability and rest, is
basically not evil, but is characterised by a readiness to help the
needy.

“The immediacy of sympathy is frequently manifested in imme-
diate help. In order to save another, people often throw themselves
into the water to lend a helping hand to the drowning one without
thinking of their action. The appearance of a person who struggles
with death is unbearable and compels the one, who offers help, to
forget his other duties, to jeopardise his own existence and that of
his nearest, in order to save the useless life of some degraded
drunkard; sympathy can, under certain circumstances, provoke
action which could not be justified from a moral viewpoint. . . .”

And hundreds and thousands of pages of empirio-critical philos-
ophy are filled with such impossible vulgarities.

Morality is inferred from the conception of “moral stability”
(the second section of Volume II, “Die Dauerbestande der Seele”;
chapter 1, “Vom Ethischen Dauerbestinde”). “The state of sta-
bility contains no conditions of change, not even in any of its
components. From this it follows, without any further argument,
that his state leaves no possibility for war” (p. 202). “Economic
and social equality follows from the idea of the final, stable state”
(p. 213). This “state of stability” does not follow from religion
but from “science.” The “majority” cannot realise it, as the so-
cialists suppose, nor can the power of the socialists “help humanity”
(p. 207); no, “free development” will lead to the ideal. Does
not the profit of capital, as a matter of fact, decrease? Do not
wages increase constantly? (p. 223). All the assertions regarding
“wage slavery” are not true (p. 229). The slaves used to be beaten
without their masters incurring any punishment; and now? Nay,
“moral progress” is indubitable; look at the university settlements


276 -MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 277


in England, at the Salvation Army (p. 230), at the German
“ethical societies.” In the name of “esthetic stability” (chapter II,
section 2) is “romanticism” rejected. And to romanticism belong
all tendencies which aim at unduly widening the ego, namely,
idealism, metaphysics, occultism, solipsism, egoism, and the “forc-
ing of majority rule on a minority by the majority” and the “social-
democratic idea as regards the organisation of labour by the state”
(pp. 240-241) .3

The sociological excursions of Blei, Petzoldt and Mach may be
reduced to the unlimited dulness of the Philistine, who in his self-
contentment retails the most vulgar rubbish under the cover of
“recent empirio-critical” systematisation and terminology. A pre-
tentious cloak of verbal legerdemain, a sham contrivance of syl-
logistics, a subtle scholasticism, in a word, just as in epistemology
so in sociology—the same reactionary content under the same
glaring labels.

Let us now consider the Russian Machians.


2. How Bogdanov Corrects and “Develops” Marx


In his article “The Development of Life in Nature and Society,” +
Bogdanov quotes a certain part of the preface to the Critique of
Political Economy, where the “greatest sociologist,” expounds
the fundamentals of historical materialism. Having quoted from
Marx, Bogdanov declares that the “old formulation of historical
monism, without ceasing to be true in the main, does not, however,
fully satisfy us” (p. 37). The author wishes, therefore, to make
certain corrections and to develop the theory, taking its foundations
as the starting point. The chief conclusion of the author is as
follows:

“We have shown that social forms belong to a more extensive
genus of biologic adaptation. But we have not thereby defined
the province of social forms; for in definition, not only the genus
must be established, but the species as well. . . . In their struggle


3Jn the same spirit Mach voices his sympathy with the bureaucratic so-
cialism of Popper and Menger who guarantee the “freedom of the individual,”
while in the doctrines of the social-democrats who, in his opinion do not
favourably compare with the others, he sees a “slavery, which is even more
universal and more depressing than it would be in a monarchical or oligarchical
state.” Cf. Erkenntnis und Irrtum, pp. 80-81.

4 Psychology of Society, p. 35 ff.


278 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


——_———


for existence men could not have associated unless they had been
endowed with consciousness: without consciousness there could
have been no communion. Therefore social life in all its manifesta-
tions is a consciously psychic life. . . . Sociability is inseparable
from consciousness. The social being and social consciousness in
the exact meaning of the words are identical” (p. 51, Bogdanov’s
italics).

That this inference has nothing to do with Marxism had already
been shown by Orthodox. But Bogdanov merely responded with
abuse, caviling at an error in the quotation—maintaining that in-
stead of being quoted “in the exact sense of the word” Orthodox
quoted him “in the full sense of the word.” The mistake was
obvious, and the author had a perfect right to correct it, but to
raise a noise on account of the “mutilation,” “substitution,” etc.,®
is simply to obscure the question at issue by wretched words.
Whatever “exact” sense Bogdanov could have given to the
words “social being” and “social consciousness,” it is beyond
doubt that the proposition we have quoted is not correct.
“Social being” and “social consciousness” are not identical,
just as being in general and consciousness in general are
not identical. From the position that men enter into social relations
as conscious beings, it does not by any means follow that “social
consciousness” is identical with “social being.” Entering into social
relations, people are not conscious of the kind of social relations
that are being formed, or according to what principles they are
developing; this in any complicated social order, especially in the
capitalist order. . . . For instance a peasant while selling grain
comes into “social relations” with the world producers of grain on
the world market, but he is not conscious of it, neither is he
conscious of the kind of social relations that are formed on the
basis of the exchange. Social consciousness reflects social being—
this is Marx’s teaching. The reflection may be a true, though ap-
proximate copy of the reflected, but to speak of their identity is
absurd. Consciousness in general reflects being—this is the general
position of all materialism. It is impossible not to see its direct
and inseparable connection with the position of historical ma-
terialism, that is, that social consciousness reflects social being.


5 Outlines of Philosophy, St. Petersburg, 1906, Preface and p. 183 (in


Russian).
6 Empirio-Monism, Book III, p. xliv.


~


_EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 279


i Bogdanov’s attempt to correct and develop Marxism in the
spirit of his fundamental ideas,” is but an obvious distortion
of these materialistic fundamental conceptions in the spirit of
idealism. It would be ridiculous to deny it. Let us recollect
Bazarov’s exposition of empirio-criticism (not of empirio-monism,
for this would be impossible, since between these “systems” there
is such a great, great difference!) ; “Sense-perception is the reality
existing outside of us.” This is open idealism, an open avowal
of the identity of consciousness and being. Let us further recol-
lect the formulations of Schuppe, the leader of the immanentist
school (who has just as much as Bazarov, et al., maintained that he
was not an idealist, and who, like Bogdanov, ascribed a special
“exact” meaning to his words) : “Being is consciousness.” Compare
with this the refutation of Marx’s historical materialism by the fol-
lower of the immanentist school, Schubert-Soldern: “Each material
process of production is always a phenomenon of consciousness in
relation to its observer. . . . In the epistemological relation not
the external process of production is the prius, but the subject or
subjects; in other words, the purely material process of produc-
tion does not lead us out of the invariable connection of con-
sciousness.” 7

Bogdanov may condemn the materialists as much as he pleases
for “mutilating his thoughts,” but no condemnation will change
the simple fact. The modification of Marx’s theory and the de-
velopment of Marx supposedly in the spirit of Marx by the empirio-
monist, Bogdanov, does not differ in the least from the refutation
of Marx by the idealist and epistemological solipsist, Schubert-
Soldern. Bogdanov assures us that he is not an idealist; Schubert-
Soldern assures us that he is a realist (Bazarov went so far as to
believe him). In our time it is impossible for a philosopher not
to declare himself a “realist” and an “enemy of idealism.” It
is about time you understood this, Machian gentlemen!

The followers of the immanentist school, the empirio-criticists
and the empirio-monists haggle about details, about the formula-
tions of idealism, while we reject from the very beginning all
the fundamental doctrines of philosophy, which this philosophic
trinity has in common. Let Bogdanov with the best intentions, and
accepting all the conclusions of Marx, preach the “identity” of so-
cial being and social consciousness; we will say: Bogdanov minus


7 See Das menschliche Gliick und die sociale Frage, pp. 293, 295, 296.


280 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


“empirio-monism” (rather minus Machism) is a Marxian. For
this theory of identity of social being and social consciousness is
a thoroughgoing absurdity, and certainly a reactionary theory.
If certain people reconcile it with Marxism, with the Marxian
tendency, we may recognise that these people in themselves are
better than their teachings, but we mav not justify the outrageous
theoretical distortion of Marxism.

Bogdanov reconciles his theory with the conclusions of Marx,
thereby sacrificing elementary consistency for its sake. Each sepa-
rate producer in the world economy is conscious that he introduces
a certain change into the technique of production, each owner
knows that he exchanges certain products for others, but these pro-
ducers and these owners are not aware that in doing this they
change social existence. The sum-total of these changes in all the
ramifications of the world economy not even seventy Marxes could
embrace. What could be obtained at most is that the regulation
of these changes would be discovered, that the objective logic of
these changes and their historic development would be shown in
its general outlines. It is objective, not in the sense that the
society of conscious beings, men, could exist and develop inde-
pendently of the existence of conscious beings (Bogdanov stresses
these trifles in his “theory”), but in the sense that social be-
ing is independent of the social consciousness of men. That you live
and keep house, beget children, manufacture and exchange prod-
ucts, all these comprise the objectively necessary chain of events
in social development, independently of our social consciousness,
which never fully embraces these facts. The highest task of hu-
manity is to comprehend the objective logic of the economic evolu-
tion (the evolution of social existence), to comprehend the most
general and fundamental features with the purposes of adapting
its social consciousness and the consciousness of the advanced classes
of all capitalist countries to it in clear, exact and critical fashion.

Bogdanov acknowledges all this. What does it mean? It
means that his theory of the “identity of social existence and social
consciousness” is actually thrown overboard by him, and remains
an empty trinket, as empty, dead and useless as the “theory of
universal substitution” or the teaching about “elements,” “intro-
jection” and the rest of the Machian confusion. But the “dead
seizes the living”; the dead scholastic trinket, against one’s will and
independently of Bogdanov’s consciousness, converts his philosophy


aa 14608 Oe ee os


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 281


into a serviceable tool of the Schubert-Solderns and other reaction-
aries who in a thousand ways and from hundreds of professorial
chairs disseminate this same lifeless doctrine as if it were alive,
with a view to suppressing the living. Bogdanov is a sworn enemy
of every sort of reaction in general and of bourgeois reaction in
particular, yet his “substitution” and his theory of “identity of
social existence and social consciousness” serve this reaction. This
is a sad fact, but a fact it is.

Materialism generally recognises the objectively real being
(matter) as existing independently of mind, sensation, experience,
etc. Historical materialism recognises social being as existing in-
dependently of the social consciousness of humanity. Consciousness
here and there is only an image of being, at best an approximately
true (adequate, ideally exact) image of it. You cannot eliminate
even one basic assumption, one substantial part of this philosophy
of Marxism (it is as if it were a solid block of steel) without
abandoning objective truth, without falling into the arms of the
bourgeois-reactionary falsehood.

Here are other examples of how the dead philosophy of idealism
seizes the living Marxian, Bogdanov.

In the article “What Is Idealism” (1901, p. 11 ff.), he says:
“We come to this conclusion: Where people agree in their judg:
ments of progress, and where they disagree, the basic criterion of
the idea of progress remains one and the same; namely, an in-
creasing fulness and harmony of conscious life. Such is the objec-
tive content of the concept of progress. . . . If we do now compare
the psychological character of the idea of progress with the pre-
viously explained biological idea [“biological progress is called an
increase in the sum total of life,” p. 14], then we will easily be
convinced that the former fully coincides with the latter and can
be deduced from it. . . . Because social life is reduced to the psychi-
‘eal life of the members of society, here, too, the content of the idea
of progress remains one and the same—the increasing fulness and
harmony of life; but we must add only the social life of men. And,
of course, the idea of social progress never had nor can have any
other content” (p. 16).

“We found... that idealism expresses the victory in the hu-
man soul of moods that are more social over those that are less
social, that a progressive ideal is a reflection of socially progres-
sive tendencies in the idealist psychology” (p. 32).


ee


282 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


en eee EE EE EIEEEIEEEE aE SSSESSSn nS


It goes without saying that there is not a grain of Marxism in
this whole play at biology and sociology. Both in Spencer and
Mikhailovsky we can find as many definitions as we please which
are no worse than these, and which define nothing but the “good
intention” of the author and show a complete lack of understand-
ing of what idealism and materialism are.

In the article “Social Selection” ® the author begins by refuting
the “eclectic socio-biological attempts of Lange, Ferri, Woltmann
and others,” and on page 15 we find the following conclusion of the
“inquiry”: “We can thus formulate the fundamental connection
between energetics and social selection:

“Every act of social selection is marked by an increase or de-
crease in the energy of that social complex to which it is related.
In the first case we have a positive, in the second—a negative selec-
tion.” (Author’s italics).

And such an impossible word jugglery is offered as Marxism!
Can one imagine anything more sterile, more dead or scholastic
than such a jumble of biological and energetical terms which says
nothing at all of the province of social science? There is not a
shadow of concrete economic inquiry, not a hint of Marx’s method,
the method of dialectics linked, with the doctrines of materialism,
but a simple network of definitions, and attempts to force the ready-
made conclusions of Marxism into them. “The rapid growth of
the productive forces of the capitalist society undoubtedly marks an
increase in the energy of the social whole.” The second half of
the phrase is, undoubtedly, a mere repetition of the first half,
expressed in meaningless terms which seem to make the statement
“more profound” but which actually do not in the least differ from
the eclectic biologico-sociological attempts of Lange, et al.! “But
the disharmonious character of this process leads to its being com-
pleted by a ‘crisis’ by the great loss of productive forces, by an
acute decrease of energy; the positive selection is changed for the
negative” (p. 18).

Does this not recall Lange? A biologico-energetic label is tacked
on to ready-made conclusions concerning crises, without offering
any concrete material whatsoever, without elucidating the nature
of crises. All this, to be sure, is done with the very best intentions,
because the author wishes to confirm and to widen the conclusions
of Marx, but in reality he is diluting them by an intolerably tedious

8 [’'mpirio-Monism, Bk. III, p. 1.


ee


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 283


—


and deadening scholasticism. The only “Marxism” in Bogdanov
lies in his repetition of previously established conclusions while all
his “new” ways of substantiating Marxism, his “social energetics”
(p. 34) and “social selection” are mere jumbles of words, a real
caricature of Marxism.

Bogdanov is not engaged in a Marxian inquiry at all, but in
bedizening the results previously attained by this inquiry, in the
ornamental phraseology of biology and energetics. The entire
attempt, from beginning to end, is useless, because there is no avail-
able application of the ideas of “selection,” “assimilation and dis-
similation” of energy, energetic balance, and so forth, in the
province of the social sciences. They are simply shallow phrases.
In reality no inquiry concerning social phenomena, no elucidation
of the method of social sciences can be given with the aid of these
ideas. Nothing is easier than to tack on the labels of “energetics”
or “biologico-sociology” to the phenomena, say, of crises, revolu-
tions, class struggles, etc., but there is nothing more sterile, more
scholastic and deadly than an occupation of this sort. It is not
important that Bogdanov wishes to reconcile all or “almost” all
of his results and conclusions with Marx (we have seen what “cor-
rection” he made in the question of the relation of social existence
to social consciousness). But it is important to realise that his
method of reconciliation—‘social energetics”—is thoroughly false
and does not differ in principle from the method of Lange.

“Mr. Lange,” Marx wrote to Kugelmann on June 27, 1870,
“praises me exceedingly . . . in order to pose as a great man. The
thing is that Mr. Lange has made a great discovery. All history
can be subsumed under a single great natural law. This natural
law consists of the phrase ‘struggle for existence’ (the expression
of Darwin in this usage becomes a shallow phrase) and the content
of this phrase embraces Malthus’ law of population, or rather
migration. Hence, instead of analysing this struggle for life, as it
historically manifested itself in various social forms, there remains
nothing to do but to transform each concrete struggle into the
phrase ‘struggle for existence,’ and this phrase into the Malthusian
phantasy as regards population. It must be granted that this is a
very convincing method . . . for a pampered, bombastic ignorance
and laziness of thought which poses at being scientific.” (Briefe
an Kugelmann, 1924, pp. 75-76.)

The basis of the Marxian criticism of Lange is not that Lange


284 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


tries to impose forcibly a special interpretation of Malthus’ doctrine
in the province of sociology, but that the application of biologic
ideas in general to the domain of social sciences can only result in a
meaningless phrase. Whether such a transference of categories is
undertaken with good intentions, or in order to emphasise false
sociological conclusions, does not make an empty phraseology any
less empty. And the “social energetics” of Bogdanov, his modifica-
tion of Marxism through the doctrine of social selection, exemplifies
that sort of phraseology.

Just as in epistemology Mach and Avenarius did not develop a
new idealism, but only overlaid the old idealist fallacies with pre-
tentious, terminologic nonsense (“elements,” “
tion.” “introjection,” etc.), so in sociology, even though it be in
sincere sympathy with the conclusions of Marxism, empirio-criticism
leads to the perversion of historical materialism through a preten-


essential co-ordina-


tious, shallow and verbose energetic and biologic phrase-mongery.

The historical peculiarity of the modern Russian Machism (or
rather the Machian pestilence which characterises a certain section
of social-democracy) can be traced to the following circumstance.
Feuerbach had been a “materialist at heart, and an idealist at the
surface”; the same to a certain extent is true of Biichner, Vogt, Mole-
schott and Dihring, with the essential difference that all these phi-
losophers were pygmies and miserable scribblers in comparison with
Feuerbach.

Marx and Engels had grown away from Feuerbach, and plucking
up courage in their struggle with the scribblers, naturally paid more
attention to developing the philosophy of materialism from the top
down, that is, they took their point of departure not from the basis
of the materialist epistemology but from the materialist conception
of history. Marx and Engels in their work emphasised dialectic
materialism rather than dialectic materialism. They insisted on
historical materialism rather than historical materialism. Our
Machians, who desire to be Marxians, approached Marxism in an
entirely different spirit from that regnant in the period of his-
toricism; they approached it at a time when bourgeois philosophy
had specialised particularly in epistemology and, adopting certain
component elements of dialectics in a one-sided and mutilated form
(relativism, for instance), had paid more attention to the defence
and restoration of idealism from the bottom up than from the
top down. At least positivism, in general, and Machism, in par-


=


NN NN SS
EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 285


ticular, have been continually engaged in a subtle falsification of
epistemology; have concealed their idealism under a counterfeit
materialistic terminology, and have paid comparatively little atten-
tion to the philosophy of history. Our Machians did not understand
Marxism, because they happened to approach it from the other side,
so to speak, and they adopted, or rather learned by heart, the eco-
nomical and historical theory of Marx, without having made its
fundamentals clear to themselves, that is, without having grasped
philosophical materialism. Bogdanov and the others should there-
fore be called Russian Biichners and Dihrings turned inside out.
They wanted to be materialists from above, but they were unable
to rid themselves of muddled idealism from below! “Above,” in
the case of Bogdanov, means his historical materialism, albeit
vulgarised and greatly affected by his idealism; “below” means
his idealism, disguised by counterfeit Marxian terms. “Socially
organised experience,” “collective labouring process”—these are
Marxian terms, but they are terms only, which conceal an idealist
philosophy that declares things to be complexes of “elements,” or
sensations; which regards the outer world as “experience,” or as
the “empirio-symbol” of humanity; and maintains that physical
nature is “derived” from the “psychical,” etc.

A subtle and continual falsification of Marxism, a crafty and
constant dissemination of anti-materialist doctrines disguised in a
Marxian garb—this is how modern revisionism must be character-
ised—in the field of political economy, in questions of tactics and in
philosophy as a whole, in both its epistemological and sociological


aspects.


3. On Suvorov’s “Foundations of Social Philosophy”


The Outlines, etc., which close with the above-mentioned article
by Comrade Suvorov, represents a bouquet with an unusually
strong effect because of the collective character of the book. When,
together with Bazarov, who says that, according to Engels, “sense-
perception is the reality existing outside of us,” we have Berman
who declares the dialectics of Marx and Engels to be mysticism,
and Lunacharsky who goes so far as to speak of religion, and
Yushkevich who introduces “Logos into the irrational stream of
experience,” and Bogdanov who calls the philosophy of Marxism,
idealism, and Helfond who purges Dietzgen’s philosophy—of its


286 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


materialism, and, lastly, Suvorov with the article “Foundations of
Social Philosophy,” then one begins to feel at once the “spirit”
of the new alignment. Quantity has passed into quality. The
“seekers” who have hitherto been searching individually and in
separate articles and books, have come out with an actual pro-
gramme. Individual differences of opinion are overlooked by the
very nature of the collective attack against the philosophy of Marx-
ism, and the reactionary traits of Machism as a movement become
manifest.

Suvorov’s article is still more interesting under these circum-
stances, for the author is neither an empirio-monist nor an empirio-
criticist, but merely a “realist.” He has been, therefore, drawn into
their company not by the philosophic peculiarities of Bazarov,
Yushkevich and Bogdanov, but by the common opposition against
dialectical materialism. A comparison between the sociological
doctrines of this “realist” and the doctrines of the empirio-monist
will help us to discover their common tendency.

Suvorov writes: “In the gradation of laws which regulate the
world process, the individual and complicated laws are reduced to
common and simple laws, and all of them are subject to the uni-
versal law of evolution—the law of the economy of forces. The
substance of this law is that the less expenditure there is in each
system of forces, the more adapted it is for conservation and de-
velopment; the greater its accumulation becomes and the more
effectively is that accumulation served by expenditure. The forms
of mobile stability, which have long since evoked the idea of ob-
jective expediency (the solar system, the cycle of earthly phe
nomena, the process of life), are produced and developed because
of the saving and accumulation of energy which belong to them
in virtue of their inner economy. The law of economy of forces
appears as a unifying and regulating principle of every develop-
ment—of the inorganic, biological and social” (p. 293, author’s
italics).

Our “positivists” and “realists” “cook” their “universal laws”
quite easily! It is only to be regretted that these laws are not a
whit better than those which Eugene Diihring “cooked up” quite
as easily and quickly. Suvorov’s “universal law” is just as shallow
a phrase as Diihring’s universal laws. Try to apply this law to
the first of the three domains which the author himself points out,
to inorganic evolution. You shall see that no “economy of forces,”


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 287


without the law of conservation and transformation of energy, can
mee be applied and that you will not succeed in applying them
s 99 °
ee nrely: And the author had already singled out the law of
conservation of energy” (p. 292) as a separate law.® What
remains, then, in addition to this law in the domain of
inorganic development? Where are the additional data, the
complications, the new discoveries, or the new facts which
give the author the right to change (“to perfect”) the law of
conservation and transformation of energy into a law of “economy
of forces”? There are no such facts or discoveries and Suvorov
has made no attempt to speak of them. In order to appear very
important, he permits his pen to glide over the paper and thereby
creates a new “universal law” of “real-monistic philosophy” (p.
292). Let the world know who we are! We are no worse than
Dihring!

Let us take the second field in which the development is supposed
to have taken place—the biological. Is the law of economy, or the
“Jaw” of distribution of forces, through the development of or-
ganisms, the struggle for existence and the mechanism of selection,
universally evidenced here? No trouble at all! The “meaning”
of the universal law can be interpreted by “real-monistic philosophy”
one way in one field, another way in another field. Here, for
example, it is interpreted as the development of higher organisms
out of lower. What does it matter if the universal law becomes a
shallow phrase because of such an interpretation, so long as the

rinciple of “monism” is respected? As for the third domain
Pp Pp Pp
(the social), the “universal law” can be interpreted in its third
meaning as the development of productive forces. That is why

9 It is characteristic that Suvorov considers the discovery of the law of con-
servation and transformation of energy as “establishing the basic principles
of energetics” (p. 292). Was our “realist,” who desires to be a Marxian,
unaware of the fact that the vulgar materialists, Biichner and his followers,
as well as the dialectical materialist, Engels, had already considered this
law as establishing the basic principles of materialism? Did our “realist”
reflect on the meaning of the difference? Indeed, he did not, he merely
adopted the fashion, and repeated Ostwald. That is all. And that is just
the trouble with those “realists” who yield to fashion, while Engels, for
instance, adopted a new term for energy and began to apply it in 1885


(Introduction to the 2nd ed. of Anti-Diihring) and in 1888 (Feuerbach),
but applied it together with the concepts of “force” and “motion”; in the
interim Engels was enabled to enrich his materialism, having adopted the
new terminology. The “realists” and other muddleheads, having seized upon
the new term, have overlooked the difference between materialism and


energetics.


288 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


it is a “universal law”; it can be made to express anything we
want.

“Although social science is still young, it already possesses both
a solid foundation and some definite generalisations; in the nine-
teenth century it attained its theoretical height, and this constitutes
the chief merit of Marx. He raised social science to the level of
social theory... .” Engels said that Marx transformed socialism
from a utopian doctrine into a scientific doctrine, but this is not
sufficient for Suvorov. It is more imposing, he believes, if we in-
troduce a distinction between science (was there a social science
before Marx?) and theory. It matters not if the distinction is
absurd!

“| Having established the law of social dynamics, due to
which the evolution of productive forces appears as the determining
principle of all economic and social development. But the develop-
ment of the productive forces corresponds to the growth of the
productivity of labour, to the relative reduction in expenditure and
to an increase in the accumulation of energy [see how productive
“real-monistic philosophy” is itself, a new foundation for Marxism
has been developed by means of energetics!] .. . this is the eco-
nomic principle. Thus into the foundations of social theory Marx
put the principle of the economy of forces. . . .”

This “thus” is truly without precedent! Because there can he
found in Marx the phrase political economy, let us therefore chew
on the word “economy,” and name the products of the mastication
“real-monistic philosophy”!

No, Marx did not put any principle of economy of forces into
the basis of his theory. These are trifles which have been invented
by people for whom the laurels of Eugene Diihring are still green.
To the notion of growth of productive forces Marx gave a perfectly
exact definition, having studied the concrete process of this growth.
And Suvorov invented a new word in order to signify the notion
which had been analysed by Marx. It turns out that the invention
is very unsatisfactory, for it only confuses matters. For what is
meant by the “economy of forces”? how can it be measured?
how can this conception be applied? what exact and definite
facts will fit into it?—these Suvorov did not explain, nor can
they be explained, for it is the rankest confusion. Let us pro-


ceed:


“ ... This law of social economy appears not only as_ the


we et ae


——


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 289


principle of the inner unity of social science [reader, do you under-
stand anything here?]| but the connecting link between social theory
and the universal theory of being” (p. 294).

Well, well, the “universal theory of being” is again discovered by
Suvorov after it had been discovered in various forms by the numer-
ous representatives of scholastic philosophy. We congratulate
the Russian Machians for their new “universal theory of being”!
Let us hope that their future collective work will be dedicated
entirely to the exposition and development of this great dis-
covery! ;

We can judge of the nature of the exposition of Marx’s theory
which our representative of realistic or real-monistic philosophy
gives from such an example as this: “In general the productive
forces of people form a genetic gradation [!] and consist of labour
energy, of harnessed elemental forces of nature, and of a nature
which has been modified by culture and the tools of labour, or
productive technique. . . . In relation to the process of labour
these forces fulfil a purely economic function; they save labour
energy and raise the productivity of its expenditure” (p. 298).
The productive forces fulfil economic functions in relation to the
process of labour! This is as if one were to say that the vital forces
fulfil a vital function in relation to the process of life. This is not
an exposition of Marx but a clogging up of the pure stream of his
thought with verbal litter.

It is impossible to tell all about the litter in Suvorov’s article.
“The socialisation of classes is expressed in the growth of its col-
lective power over men and their property [p. 313]... . The class
struggle is directed toward the establishment of forms of stability
between social forces [p. 322]... .” Social strife, hostility and
struggle are essentially negative, anti-social phenomena. “Social
progress, in its basic content, is a growth in sociability, in the
social relations between men [p. 328]... .” We could fill volumes
with collections of such platitudes, and the representatives of bour-
geois sociology actually do fill their volumes with these common-
places; but to hand this out as the philosophy of Marxism—that
is entirely too much! If the article of Suvorov were an attempt to
popularise Marxism, it would not be judged very severely; every-
one would recognise that the author's intentions were good but
his attempt was unsuccessful, and that would be the end of it.
But when a group of Machians present it to us under the title of


290 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


i


Foundations of Social Philosophy, when we see the same sort
of an “improvement” upon Marxism in the philosophic books of
Bogdanov, we must inevitably arrive at the conclusion that there
is ar. inseparable connection between reactionary epistemology and
a reactionary position in sociology.


4. “Parties” in Philosophy and Blockheads in Philosophy


It remains now to examine the question concerning the relation
of Machism to religion. But this broadens into the larger question,
as to whether there are in general “parties” in philosophy, and what
is the meaning of impartiality in philosophy?

During the whole of the preceding exposition, in each of the
problems touched upon in epistemology, in every philosophical
question set by recent physics, we have traced the struggle between
materialism and idealism. Behind the mass of new terminologic
contrivances, behind the litter of quasi-erudite scholasticism, we
have found, without exception, two principal alignments, two funda-
mental tendencies in the solution of philosophic problems—that is,
whether to take nature, matter, the physical, the outer world as
the prius or whether to start with consciousness, spirit, sensation
(experience in conformity with the popular terminology of our
time), the psychical, etc. This is the fundamental problem which
still divides philosophers into two great camps. The source of
thousands upon thousands of errors and colossal confusion in
this domain is precisely the fact that due to the arbitrary nature of
terms and definitions, due to scholastic trickery and verbal distinc-
tions, these two fundamental tendencies are overlooked. (Bog-
danov, for instance, refuses openly to admit his idealism, because
instead of the “metaphysical” notions of “nature” and “spirit,”
he has taken the “empirical,” the physical and psychical. A
mere change of terms! )

The genius of Marx and Engels lay in the fact, that during a
long period, for nearly half a century, they developed materialism
by advocating one fundamental tendency in philosophy. They did
not lose time in repeating solutions of epistemologic problems al-
ready solved, but consistently developed them, and showed how to
carry materialism into the domain of the social sciences, merci-
lessly brushing aside, as litter, nonsense, and pretentious word
jugglery, the countless attempts to “discover” a “new” alignment


f et
Sh hee Ae a) se le ee ae


ee


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 291


in philosophy, to invent a “new” tendency, etc. The verbal char-
acter of such attempts, the scholastic play upon new philosophic
“isms,” the obfuscation of the essence of the question by artificial
distinctions, the inability to comprehend and clearly present the
struggle of the two principal epistemologic tendencies—these were
the things which Marx and Engels fought throughout their entire
lifetime of activity.

We said, “for nearly half a century.” Indeed, as far back as
1843 when Marx had just, so to speak, become Marx, i. e., thé
founder of scientific socialism, the founder of modern materialism
(immeasurably richer in content and incomparably better grounded
than all previous forms of materialism), he had already drawn the
basic lines of division in philosophy with astounding clarity.
Karl Griin quotes a letter of October 30, 1843, to Feuerbach, in
which Marx invited Feuerbach to write an article in the Deutsch-
Franzdsische Jahrbiicher against Schelling. This Schelling, writes
Marx, is a shallow braggart with his pretence at embracing and
transcending all previous philosophic tendencies.

“To the French romanticists and mystics Schelling says that the
self represents the connection of philosophy and theology; to the
French materialists he says that the self is the connection of body
and ideas; to the French sceptics, that the self is the destroyer of
dogmatism.” #° That the “sceptics,” whether they are termed
Humeans or Kantians (or Machians in the twentieth century), ob-
ject to “dogmatism” and materialism and idealism, Marx realised
even at that time, and, without letting himself be drawn into one
of the thousands of miserable and petty systems, he was able, thanks
to Feuerbach, to take a materialist stand against idealism. Thirty
years later, in the afterword to the second edition of the first volume
of Capital, Marx clearly and completely contrasts his materialism
with Hegelian idealism, the most consistent and advanced representa-
tive of all idealisms. He contemptuously rejects Comteian “posi-
tivism” and declares the modern philosophers to be miserable
epigoni who imagine that they have destroyed Hegel, when in
reality they have reverted to the repetition of the pre-Hegelian er-
rors of Kant and Hume. Also in the letter to Kugelmann of June
27, 1870, Marx contemptuously treats Biichner, Lange, Dihring,


10 Karl Griin: Ludwig Feuerbach in seinem Briefwechsel und Nachlass,
sowie in seiner philosophischen Characterentwicklung, Leipzig, 1874, Vol. I,
p. 361.


292 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


Fechner, etc., for the reason that, being unable to understand
Hegelian dialectics, they despised it.**

And finally, take the separate remarks of Marx in Capital and
other works, and you shall see the same unchanged basic motive—
an insistence upon materialism and his contemptuous derision of
every obscurity, every confusion and every deviation towards
idealism. All the philosophic remarks of Marx revolve around
these two principal distinctions. In this “narrowness” and “one-
sidedness” from the viewpoint of professorial philosophy, lies
their defect. Indeed, the greatest service of Marx who contin-
ually advanced along a very definite philosophic road, consists
in this unwillingness to take account of the illegitimate products
of an attempted reconciliation between materialism and ideal-
ism.

Fully in the spirit of Marx and in close collaboration with him,
Engels in all his philosophic works briefly and clearly contrasts the
materialist and idealist alignments in all questions, without taking
seriously, either in 1878 or in 1888 or in 1891, the innumerable
endeavours to “transcend” the “one-sidedness” of materialism and
idealism, or proclaiming as a new tendency whatever “positivism,”
“realism” or other professorial charlatanism might have been cur-
rent. The struggle with Dihring was led by Engels wholly under
the slogan of a consistent pursuit of materialism. He accused the
materialist Diihring of a verbal obfuscation of the real issue, for
his phraseology, for his mode of argument which smacks of compro-
mise with and desertion to idealism. Either a materialism con-
sistent to the end, or the falsehood and confusion of idealism—that
is the alternative presented by every paragraph in Anti-Diihring;
only people whose minds have been corrupted by the reactionary
official philosophers can fail to notice it. And until 1894, when the
last preface had been written for the last time to the revised and
completed edition of Anti-Diihring, Engels, who had been con-
stantly following up recent philosophy and the recent developments
in science, continued with his old determination to insist on his lucid
and firm position, clearing away the litter of latter-day puppet
systems.

That Engels followed the developments of recent philosophy,


11 Of the positivist Beesly, Marx speaks as follows in the letter of De-
cember 13, 1870: “As a follower of Comte, he cannot help having crotchets.”
Compare with this Engel’s estimate of the positivists of Huxley’s type in 1891.


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 293


can be seen from his Feuerbach. In the preface of 1888, there is
mentioned even the occurrence of the renaissance of classic German
philosophy in England and Scandinavia. As far as the dominat-
ing tendencies of Neo-Kantianism and Humism, in Engels’ own
writings, there is nothing but utter contempt for them (both in the
preface and in the text of the book). It is quite obvious that Engels,
in noticing the repetition by the fashionable German and English
philosophers of the old pre-Hegelian errors of Kantianism and
Humism, expected a certain amount of good (in England and Scan-
dinavia) even from the change to Hegel. He expected that the great
idealist and dialectician would help philosophers to discover petty
idealist and metaphysical confusions.

Without going into an examination of the great number of nuances
of Neo-Kantianism in Germany and of Humism in England,
Engels at the very start refutes their fundamental digression from
materialism. He declares the entire tendency of these schools as
“scientifically a step backward.” And how does he characterise the
indubitably “positivistic”’ (from the viewpoint of the current ter-
minology) and indubitably “realistic” tendencies of those Neo-
Kantians and Humeans, amongst whom, for instance, it was impos-
sible not to recognise Huxley? That “positivism” and that “real-
ism,” which has been attracting the attention of the multitude of
muddleheads, Engels declared, to put it mildly, to be at best a
Philistine method to smuggle in the same materialism which they
continued to denounce and renounce publicly! It suffices to medi-
tate a little upon such an attitude toward Huxley, the outstanding
naturalist, and the incomparably more realistic realist and posi-
tivistic positivist than Mach, Avenarius, et al., in order to conceive
with what contempt Engels would have greeted the modern fad of
“recent positivism” or “recent realism,” etc., by a group of alleged
Marxians.

From the beginning to the end Marx and Engels were “partial”
in philosophy; in each and every “new” tendency they were able to
- discover deviations from materialism and an unwarranted indul-
gence in idealism and fideism. Therefore, Huxley was estimated
by them exclusively from the point of view of materialistic con-
sistency. Therefore they took Feuerbach to task for his failure to
pursue materialism to the end, for his renunciations of materialism
because of the errors of individual materialists, for his struggle
against religion in order to renew or construct a new religion, for


294, MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


his failure to rid himself of idealist phraseology while proclaiming
himself a materialist.

And whatever his individual mistakes may have been in his expo-
sition of dialectical materialism, Dietzgen esteemed and adopted
this greatest and most precious tradition from his teachers. Dietz-
gen committed many a sin in his clumsy deviations from material-
ism, but he never attempted to mark himself off from the principle,
never attempted to raise a “new” standard. In the decisive moment
he always declared firmly and categorically: “I am a materialist,
our philosophy is materialistic.” “Of all parties,” justly said our
Dietzgen, “the party of the ‘middle-roaders’ is most wretched.” “Just
as in politics,” says Dietzgen, “we see the nation dividing itself into
two camps . . . so in science it divides into two general divisions—
metaphysicians here and physicists or materialists there.* . . . The
intermediating movements and conciliating quacks with their dif-
ferent appellations—spiritualists, sensualists, realists, etc., etc.—are
carried away by the current. We are steering full steam ahead to
a definite and clear outline of things. Pure idealists** are those
who sound the retreat, and dialectic materialists must be the appella-
tion of all those who strive for the liberation of the human mind
from all metaphysical magic. In comparing the two parties to
solid and liquid matter we find pulpiness as the intermediary
stage.” 14

This is true. The “realists,” etc., including the “positivists,” the
Machians, etc., are all wretchedly pulpy, a contemptible party of
middle-roaders in philosophy, in every question confusing the ma-
terialist and idealist point of view. The attempt to escape these two
basic tendencies in philosophy is nothing but a “conciliatory
quackery.”

That the “scientific clericalism” of idealistic philosophy is
merely the threshold to a more outspoken clericalism; of this
Dietzgen had no doubt at all. “It is necessary to bear this in mind,
inasmuch as a scientific priesthood has arisen which is aiding and
abetting religious priestcraft [p. 128]. To destroy palpable super-


12 This is a sample of his inexactness of expression: instead of “idealists”
he said “metaphysicians.” Elsewhere Dietzgen himself contrasts the meta-
physicians with the dialecticians.

13 Note that Dietzgen corrected himself and explained more exactly to
what party the enemies of materialism belonged.


14 Philosophical Essays, pp. 214-216; cf. article “Social-democratic Philos-
ophy,” written in 1876.


w
:
5
a
2
:


A


rer Tee


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 295


stition would be an easy matter if dualist confusion were not on the
lookout for the gaps of science in order to lay there its eggs. Such
gaps are to be found especially in the field of epistemology.”

“The graduated flunkeys use their sham idealism to keep the
people in ignorance [p. 130, that is how Dietzgen looks upon pro-
fessors of philosophy]. As Lord God found his antipodes in the
devil so has the pious professor found his antagonist in the material-
ist [p. 130]. . . . The epistemology of materialism is the universal
weapon against religious belief [p. 132]. And not only is social-
ism opposed by the formal, the common religion of priestcraft, but
also by the most purified and sublime professional religion of hazy
idealists” (p. 135).

Rather than the “half-hearted” course of the free-thinking pro-
fessors, Dietzgen was ready to prefer “religious integrity” (p. 137),
for there at least is a system, there at least people are sincere, for
they do not separate theory from practice. For the professors,
“philosophy is not a science, but a safeguard against social-
democracy” (p. 186). “All those who call themselves philosophers,
professors, university lecturers, have, despite their pretensions to
free-thought, not yet freed themselves from superstition and mys-
ticism. . . . They must be regarded from the social-democratic
point of view, as a compact mass of uneducated reactionaries [p.
188]. . . . Now, in order to be able to follow the right way with-
out being misled by any religious or philosophical maze, it is neces-
sary to study the most mistaken of all mistaken ways, namely,
Philosophy” (p. 183).

Let us now look, from the point of view of “parties” in philos-
ophy, at Mach, Avenarius and their school. Oh, these gentlemen
brag about their impartiality, and if they have an antipode, then it
is one and only one—the materialist. Through all the writings of
all the Machians runs the stupid pretence to “rise above” material-
ism and idealism, to transcend this “obsolete” distinction, while in
fact all these gentlemen continuously deviate toward idealism, and
lead an incessant struggle against materialism. The cunning epis-
temological distinctions of an Avenarius are no more than profes-
sorial fictions, no more than an attempt to form a small philosophi-
cal sect of “his own”; in fact in the general environment of the
struggle of ideas and tendencies in modern society, the objective
réle of these epistemological contrivances is one and the same—to
clear the road to idealism and fideism, to be of service to them. It


296 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


is indeed not a mere accident that the English spiritualists, such as
Ward, and the French neo-criticists, who praise Mach for his attack
on materialism, and the German followers of the immanentist school,
all acclaim the petty school of empirio-criticists. Dietzgen’s expres-
sion “the graduated flunkeys of theism” best befits Mach, Ave-
narius and their school.1®

The misfortune of the Russian Machians, who wished to “recon-
cile” Machism with Marxism, arose from the fact that having put
their confidence in the reactionary professors of philosophy, they
consequently sank lower and lower. The methods which were em-
ployed in attempting to develop and modify Marx were not very in-
genious. Now it is Ostwald who is read through, who is taken at
his word, his doctrines repeated, and called Marxism. Now it is
Mach who is read through, who is taken at his word, his doctrines
repeated, and, in its turn called Marxism; and the same is true for
Poincaré. Not a single professor among those who are able to make
the most valuable contributions to the special domains of chemistry,
history, physics, can be trusted even so far as a single word when it
comes to philosophy. What is the reason for this? It is the same
as that which explains why not one professor of political economy,
who is able to make the most valuable contributions to the domain
of factual, special investigations, can be trusted even so far as a
single word. when it comes to the general theory of political econ-
omy. For political economy in modern society is just as partial a
science as is epistemology. Taken as a whole, the professors of
economics are nothing but scientific salesmen of the capitalist class,


15 Here is an example of how the widespread currents of reactionary bour-
geois philosophy makes use of Machism. The “latest fashion” in recent
American philosophy is “pragmatism” (from the Greek word “pragma”—
action; that is a philosophy of action.) The philosophical journals speak
more of pragmatism than of anything else. Pragmatism ridicules the meta-
physics of idealism and materialism, extols experience and only experience,
and recognises practice as the only criterion of truth. It points to the posi-
tivistic movement in general, and leans especially upon Ostwald, Mach,
Pearson, Poincaré, Duhem in their belief that science is not an “absolute
, copy of reality” and ... in a convenient manner deduces a god for practical
purposes, without any metaphysics, without leaving the grounds of experience
(cf. William James: Pragmatism. A new name for some old ways of thinking,
New York, 1907, pp. 57 and 106 specially). The difference between Machism
and pragmatism is as insignificant and subsidiary from the viewpoint of
materialism as is the distinction between empirio-criticism and empirio-
monism. Compare Bogdanov’s definition of truth with the pragmatist’s:
“Truth for a pragmatist becomes a class-name for all sorts of definite
working values in experience.” (ibid., p. 68).


F
a
ay
2


wt A


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 297


and the professors of philosophy are scientific salesmen of theology.
The task of the Marxians here and there is to be in a position to
grasp and elaborate those conquests which are made by these “sales-
men” (for instance, you will not be able to make even a single step
in your studies of new economic phenomena, without having re-
course to the works of these salesmen), and then to eliminate their
reactionary tendency, to pursue the Marxian tendency and to com-
bat the entire tendency of forces and classes hostile to us. And it is
because of the absence of this critical activity that our Machians
have been impotent, slavishly following the footsteps of the reac-
tionary official philosophers. “Perhaps we stray, but we are seek-
ers,” wrote Lunacharsky in the name of the authors of the Outlines,
etc. The trouble is that it is not you who are searching but it is you
who are being searched. It is not you who approach with your
Marxian (for you desire to be Marxists) viewpoint to each change
in the bourgeois-philosophical fashion, but it is this fashion which
approaches you; it imposes upon you new adulterations with an
idealistic tinge, to-day 4 la Ostwald, to-morrow a la Mach, the day
after a la Poincaré. These foolish “theoretical” contrivances (with
“energetics,” “elements,” “‘introjections,” etc.) in which you naively
believe, remain within the boundaries of a narrow little school. As
for the ideological and the social tendency of these contrivances, ;
however, they are immediately seized upon by the Wards, by the
neo-criticists, by the immanentists, by the Lopatins and the pragma-
tists, for their own purposes. The fad of empirio-criticism and
“idealistic physics” is passing as rapidly as the fad of Neo-Kantian-
ism and “physiological” idealism; and fideism takes its toll from
each fad, manipulating these contrivances in the interests of ideal-
ism in a thousand ways.
The relation of religion and natural science illustrates very well

the actual class utilisation of empirio-criticism on the part of the


99 6é


bourgeoisie.

Take the first question. Do you suppose that it is a mere accident,
if, in the collective work against the philosophy of Marxism, Luna-
charsky went so far as to speak of the “deification of the highest hu-
man potentialities” and “religious atheism”, etc.? *° If it is thought


16 Qutlines, etc., pp. 157, 159. In the Zagranichnaya Gazetta the same
author speaks of “scientific socialism in its religious significance” (No. 3,
p. 5) and in Obrazovaniye, 1908, No. 1, p. 164, he explicitly writes: “For a
long time a new religion has been maturing within me.


298 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


to be accidental it is only because-the Russian Machians did not
correctly inform the public of the whole Machian movement in
Europe and of the relation of this movement to religion. Not
only is there lacking in this respect anything resembling the atti-
tude of Marx, Engels, Dietzgen and even of Feuerbach, but the
reverse is the case. Beginning with Petzoldt’s declaration that “em-
pirio-criticism contradicts neither theism nor atheism,” 17 we have
Mach’s declaration that “religious opinion is a private affair”; the
explicit fideism or the explicit reactionary views of Cornelius, who
praises Mach and whom Mach praises in turn, and finally Carus
and all the immanentists. The neutrality of a philosopher in this
question is already a mark of servility to fideism, and Mach and
Avenarius cannot and do not rise above neutrality because of the
starting points of their epistemology.

If you deny that objective reality is given to us through sensation,
you have already surrendered your weapons to fideism, for you
have embraced agnosticism or subjectivism; it is exactly this that
fideism desires. If the perceived world is the only objective reality,
then the door is closed on any other “reality” or quasi-reality (re-
member how Bazarov believed in the “realism” of the immanentists,
who declared God to be a “real concept”). If the world is matter
in motion it can and must be infinitely studied in its infinitely com-
plicated and detailed manifestations and ramifications of this mo-
tion, of the motion of this matter; but beyond it, beyond the
“physical,” beyond the external world, with which everyone
is familiar, there can be nothing. Hostility toward materialism
is the order of the day in civilised and democratic Europe. All
this has been continued until the present. All this has been
concealed from the public by the Russian Machians who have not
even once attempted to compare the attacks on materialism by
Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt and the others, with the declarations
in favour of materialism by Feuerbach, Marx, Engels and
Dietzgen.

But this “concealment” of the illicit relation to fideism borne by
Mach and Avenarius will not help matters. The facts speak for
themselves. No efforts in the world will break these reactionary
professors away from the pillory down to which the kisses of Ward,
the neo-criticists, Schuppe, Schubert-Soldern, Leclair, the pragma-
tists and others have nailed them. The influence of these persons


17 Kinfiihrung, etc., p. 351.


3
;


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 299


as philosophers and professors, the popularity of their ideas in the
“cultured,” that is bourgeois, public, the special literature, created
by them is ten times wider and richer than the special little school
of Mach and Avenarius. The little school serves those who need it,
and it is exploited in full measure.

The shameful things to which Lunacharsky has succumbed are
not accidental but are the natural outcome of empirio-criticism, both
Russian and German. They cannot be defended by the “good in-
tentions” of the author, by a “special meaning” of his words; for if
they had an explicit and ordinary, that is, a directly fideistic sense,
we should not even talk to the author, for there cannot be a single
Marxist who would not regard such a declaration as revealing an
affinity between Anatole Lunacharsky and Peter Struve. If this
meaning does not yet exist (and it does not yet exist), it is exclu-
sively because we see the possibility of that “special” meaning and
fight while there is still ground for a comradely fight. What is dis-
graceful in Lunacharsky’s declarations is that he could connect them
with his “good” intentions. The evil of his “theory” is that it per-
mits such means and such conclusions in the realisation of good
intentions. The trouble is that “good” intentions remain, under the
best of circumstances, only the subjective affair of Tom, Dick and
Harry, while the social significance of similar statements is beyond
dispute, and no explanation and special reservation can help to
weaken them.

One must be blind not to see the ideological affinity between the
“deification of higher human potentialities” of Lunacharsky, and
Bogdanov’s “universal substitution” of the psychical for the physi-
cal. They are one and the same doctrine, expressed in one case
from the point of view of zsthetics, and in the other, from the point
of view of epistemology. The doctrine of “substitution” which
approaches the other views by implication, already deifies the
“hisher potentialities,” by separating the “psychical” from man
and substituting for the whole of physical nature the immensely en-
larged, abstract, deadly-divine “psychical in general.” And what
of the “Logos” of Yushkevich, which is introduced from above into
the “irrational stream of experience?”

Enmesh a single claw, and the bird is lost. Our Machians
have become enmeshed in idealism, in a diluted and subtle fideism.
They became entangled from the moment they took “sensation” not
as an image of the external world but as a special “element.” A


300 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


sensation in general, which belongs to no one, psychology in gen-
eral, spirit in general, volition in general—to relapse into pitfalls
like these is inevitable for those who do not recognise the ma-
terialist theory that the human mind reflects the objectively real
outer world.


5. Ernst Haeckel and Ernst Mach


Let us examine the relation of Machism as a philosophic move-
ment to the natural sciences. The whole of Machism, from
beginning to end, combats the “metaphysics” of the natural
sciences, designating by that name naturo-historical materialism,
that is, the instinctive, unconscious, and uncrystallised philosophic
convictions of the preponderant majority of scientists as to the
existence and objective reality of the external world which
is reflected by our mind. Our Machians shamefully pass by
this fact in silence, obscuring or confusing the inseparable con-
nection between the instinctive materialism of naturalists and
philosophical materialism as a tendency, a connection which has
been known long since and confirmed by Marx and Engels hun-
dreds of times.

Take Avenarius. In his first work, Philosophie als Denken der
Welt, etc., published in 1876, he combated the metaphysics of the
natural sciences (§§ 79, 114 ff), that is naturo-historical material-
ism, and as he himself recognised in 1891 (without having “cor-
rected” his views, however), he had opposed it from the’ standpoint
of theoretico-cognitive idealism.

Take Mach. From 1872, or even earlier, until 1906, he had in-
variably waged battle against the metaphysics of natural sciences.
He was conscientious enough to admit that an entire “host of
philosophers,” adherents of the philosophy of “immanence,” to-
gether with certain “isolated scientists as well” are in accord with
him.1® In 1906 Mach also honestly admitted that the “majority of
scientists adhere to materialism.” 1°

Take Petzoldt. In 1900 he proclaimed that the “natural sciences
are thoroughly imbued with metaphysics.” “Their notion of experi-
ence must still be purified.” *° We know that Avenarius and Pet-


18 Analysis of Sensations, p. xiii.
19 Erkenninis und Irrtum, 2nd ed., p. 4.
20 Finfiihrung in die Philosophie, etc., Vol. I, p. 343.


eee
EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 301
2 OPIS D A Sci ie RE SOME ALE SSE A Sik A RATES Rin


zoldt “purify” experience from every trace of recognition of the
objective reality given in sensation. In 1904 Petzoldt declared that
“the mechanical conception of the modern scientist is essentially no
better than the conception of the ancient Indians. It is immaterial
whether the world rests on the fabulous elephant or on molecules
and atoms, so long as we assume either of them to be real in an
epistemological sense, and not merely metaphorically” (Vol. II, p.
176). ;

Take Willy, the only one amongst the Machians decent enough
to be ashamed of his kinship with the immanentists. In 1905 he
declared: “The natural sciences, after all, are so presented in many
respects, that we must regard them as authorities from which we
must rid ourselves.” **

But this is thoroughgoing obscurantism and confounded reaction.
To maintain that the belief that atoms, molecules, and electrons
are approximately true reflections of real objective movement of
matter, is equivalent to the belief in an elephant upon which the
world rests! It was to be expected that this obscurantist, dressed in
the clownish garb of a fashionable positivism, would be gladly
hailed by the followers of the immanentist school. There is not
one adherent of that school who would not furiously attack the
“metaphysics” of the natural sciences, and the “materialism” of the
scientists precisely because of the recognition of the objective real-
ity of matter—the objective reality of time, space, the uniformity
of nature, etc., etc. Long before the new discoveries in physics
which gave rise to “idealistic physics,” Leclair, leaning upon Mach,
combated the “prevalent materialism which was the characteristic
feature of modern natural science”; ?? Schubert-Soldern fought
against the “metaphysics of natural sciences”; ** Rehmke battled
with naturo-historical “materialism,” the “metaphysics of the man-
in-the-street, etc., etc.” 74

The followers of the immanentist school quite legitimately de-
rived from the Machian notion of the “metaphysical character” of
naturo-historical materialism, their direct and outspoken fideist con-
clusions. If scientific theory does not describe objective reality but
consists only of metaphors, symbols, forms of human experience,


21 Gegen die Schulweisheit, p. 158.

22 The title of §6, Der Realismus, etc., 1879,

23 The title of Chapter II, Grundlage der Erkenntnistheorie, 1884.
24 Philosophie und Kantianismus, 1882, p. 17.


302 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


etc., then it is beyond dispute that humanity with no less right can
create for itself in another domain a “conception no less real than
that” of God.

The philosophy of Mach, the scientist, is to science, what the
kiss of Judas is to Christ. Mach betrays science into the hands of
fideism by ultimately deserting to the camp of idealism. Mach’s
renunciation of naturo-historical materialism is in every respect a
reactionary phenomenon; we saw this quite clearly in discussing
the struggle of the “idealist physicists” against the majority of
naturalists who adhere to the viewpoint of the old philosophy. We
shall see this still more clearly by comparing the famous naturalist
Ernst Haeckel with the famous philosopher (among the reactionary
Philistines) Ernst Mach.

The storm which The Riddle of the Universe caused in all civilised
countries showed quite clearly the partisan character of philosophy
in modern society on the one side, and the present social significance
of the struggle of materialism against idealism and agnosticism, on
the other. Hundreds of thousands of copies of the book were
printed. It was immediately translated into all languages and ap-
peared in special popular editions. All this showed quite clearly
that it had found its way to the masses, that there were masses of
readers whom Haeckel had at once won over to his side. The popu-
lar little book became a weapon in the class struggle. The pro-
fessors of philosophy and theology of all countries of the world
began to denounce and “annihilate” Haeckel. Lodge, the eminent
English physicist, took it upon himself to defend God against
Haeckel. Chwolson,-the Russian physicist, made a special trip to
Germany in order to publish an obscurantist booklet against Haeckel
and to assure the respectable Philistines that not all scientists are
adherents of naive realism.?> Countless theologians waged war on
Haeckel. There was no abuse which was not showered upon him
by the official professors of philosophy.”* It was a joy to see how
the eyes of those mummies, arid with the dry dust of a dead scholas-
ticism, began to gleam, and their cheeks became ruddy, perhaps for


25Q. D. Chwolson: Hegel, Haeckel, Kossuth und das zwélfte Gebot, 1906,
p. 80.

26 The book of Heinrich Schmidt Der Kampf iiber das Weltratsel, Bonn,
1900, gives a satisfactory picture of the campaign of the professors of phi-
losophy and theology which was launched against Haeckel. But this book
is out of date nowadays.


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 303


the first time in their lives, from the spiritual slaps which Haeckel
gave them. The priests of pure science and devotees of even the
most abstract theories, began to howl with fury, and in all this
howling of philosophical cranks (among whom were the idealist,
Paulsen, the immanentist, Rehmke, the Kantian, Adickes, and others
whose names God only knows) one basic motive was loudly heard:
Against the “metaphysics” of science; against “dogmatism”; against
the “exaggeration of the validity and significance of science”; against
“naturo-historical materialism.”” He is a materialist; down with
him, the materialist! He deceives the public in not calling him-
self a materialist! The fact that he did not call himself a material-
ist raised a special storm of fury in the breasts of the respectable
professors. And quite characteristic of the whole tragi-comedy 77
was the fact that Haeckel himself renounced materialism, and re-
jected the name. And what is more, far from rejecting religion as
a whole, he invented his own brand in the manner of Bulgakov’s
“atheistic faith” and Lunacharsky’s “religious atheism,” and de-
fended the union of religion with science in principle. What had
happened here? What “fatal misunderstanding” had caused this
great stir? :

The answer is that the philosophical naiveté of Haeckel, his lack
of definite partisan motives, his desire to take cognizance of the pre-
vailing Philistine prejudice against materialism, and his personal
conciliatory tone and statements on religion, all this helped make the
general spirit of his book still more prominent, and showed the
impossibility of uprooting naturo-historical materialism, and its
ultimate irreconcilability with the whole official philosophy and
theology. Personally Haeckel did not wish to sever relations with
the philistines, but the views he expounded with such an unshakable
naive conviction, could in no way be reconciled with any shade of
the prevailing idealism. All these shades of idealism from the
crude reactionary doctrines of a von Hartmann, to those of Pet-
zoldt, who deems himself the most progressive and outstanding of
the positivists and those of the empirio-criticist, Mach—all of them
agree that naturo-historical materialism is “metaphysics,” that the
recognition of objective reality, in accordance with the theories and


27 The tragic element arose in the assault on Haeckel in the spring of 1908.
After a series of anonymous letters addressing Haeckel with such salutations
as “dog,” “godless,” “monkey,” etc., some “true German” soul threw a stone


of rather an imposing size into Haeckel’s study at Jena.


304. MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


conclusions of science, is the most “naive realism,” etc. And it is
both cheeks of the “sacred” teachings of the whole official philoso-
phy and theology that each page of Haeckel slaps. This scientist,
who expresses the firmest (albeit uncrystallised) opinions, moods
and tendencies of the preponderant majority of naturalists at the end
of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth centuries, at
one stroke, easily and simply revealed what the official philosophy
tried to conceal. He showed that there is a base which becomes
wider and firmer and beneath whose weight all efforts of the
thousand and one little schools of idealism, positivism, real-
ism, empirio-criticism and other confusionism are smashed.
This base is naturo-historical materialism. The conviction of
the “naive realists’ (rather of all of humanity) that our
sensations are images of the objectively real external world, is a
conviction growing more and more established among the mass of
scientists.

Lost is the cause of the founders of new philosophic puppet
schools, and of new epistemological “isms”; lost forever and be-
yond hope of recovery. They may flounder with their “original”
puppet systems; they may try to engage the attention of a few
admirers by an interesting controversy as to who was the first to
exclaim, “Eh,”—the empirio-critical Bobchinsky or the empirio-
monistic Dobchinsky.2* They may even create an extensive “spe-
cialised” literature in the manner of the followers of the “immanent-
ist school.” But the evolutionary advance of science, regardless of
vacillations and hesitations, regardless of the unconscious nature of
the scientists’ materialism, notwithstanding yesterday’s fad of
“physiological idealism” or to-day’s fad of “physical idealism,”
completely brushes aside all puppet systems and contrivances, and
makes way again and again for the “metaphysics” of natwro-his-
torical materialism.

As an instance of the above, here is an illustration from Haeckel’s
Lebenswunder in which the author compares the monistic and dual-
istic theories of knowledge. We adduce the most interesting points
of the comparison: 7° ,


28 Bobchinsky and Dobchinsky, the stupid and petty characters in Gogol’s
comedy, The Inspector General, each claimed credit for being the first to
utter the sound “Eh” when they heard of the arrival of the pseudo-inspector
general.—Ed.

29 Die Lebenswunder, Stuttgart, 1904, Tables I and XVI.


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM


Monistic Epistemology


3. Knowledge is a physiolog-
ical process, with the brain for
its anatomical organ.

4. The part of the human
brain in which knowledge is ex-
clusively engendered is a definite
and limited part of the cortex,
the phronema.


5. The phronema is the most
perfect dynamo-machine whose
constituent parts, the phroneta,
are millions of physical cells.
Just as in any other organ of
the body, so also in this one, the
(spiritual) function of the given
part of the brain is a final result
of the functions of its constitu-
ent cells.


——


305


Dualistic Epistemology


3. Knowledge is not a physio-
logical, but a purely spiritual
process.

4. The part of the human
brain which seems to act as the
organ of knowledge is really
only the instrument which allows
the spiritual process to appear.


5. The phronema as the organ
of reason is not autonomous but,
together with its constituent
parts (phronetal cells), appears
only as mediator between the
non-material spirit and the outer
world. Human reason differs
absolutely from the reason of
higher animals and from the in-
stinct of lower animals.


We see from this typical quotation that Haeckel does not enter
into an analysis of strictly philosophical problems as such and
cannot contrast the materialistic and idealistic theories of knowl-
edge. He ridicules all idealistic philosophies, especially all con-
trivances of “special” schools from the point of view of science,
without admitting the possibility of any other theory of knowledge
besides that of naturo-historical materialism. He ridicules the
philosophers from the standpoint of a materialist, without being
aware that he himself holds the viewpoint of a materialist!

The impotent wrath of the philosophers against this powerful
materialism can easily be explained. We have quoted the opinion
of the “true Russian,” Lopatin. And here is the opinion of Mr.
Rudolph Willy, the most progressive of the “empirio-criticists,” who
is irreconcilably opposed to idealism (!). He refers to Haeckel’s
views as “‘a chaotic jumble of certain naturo-historical laws, as for
example, the law of conservation of energy, together with a series


NN ST :


306 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


of scholastic ®° traditions concerning the substance and the thing-
in-itself. . . .”

What disturbed this most respectable “modern positivist”? Well,
how could one help being disturbed when one appreciates that all
the great doctrines of Avenarius (Willy’s teacher)—that the brain
is not an organ of thought, that sensations are not images of the
external world, that matter (“substance”) or “the thing-in-itself”
is not an objective reality, etc.—are, from Haeckel’s standpoint, noth-
ing but idealist babble? Haeckel did not say it in these words be-
cause he did not engage in strict philosophy, and made no study
of “empirio-criticism” as such. But Willy could not help realising
that a hundred thousand readers of Haeckel meant a hundred thou-
sand expectorations into the face of Mach’s and Avenarius’ philos-
ophy. Willy wipes his face beforehand in the manner of Lopatin,
since essentially the proof which Lopatin and Willy present against
every kind of materialism in general, and naturo-historical ma-
terialism in particular, is exactly the same. In the eyes of Marxists,
the difference between Lopatin and Willy, Petzoldt, Mach, e¢ al.,
is no greater than the difference between the Protestant and Catholic
theologians.

The “war” against Haeckel proved that our interpretation of the
entire movement corresponds to objective reality, that is, it reflects
the class nature of modern society and the class character of its
ideological tendencies.

Here is another little example. Kleinpeter, the Machian, trans-
lated from English into German, a work by Karl Snyder quite
well known in America, entitled Das Weltbild der Modernen Natur-
wissenschaft (Leipzig, 1905). This work clearly and popularly ex-
pounds a whole series of recent discoveries in physics and other
branches of science. But it happened that the Machian, Kleinpeter,
supplemented the book with a preface in which he remarked that
Snyder’s epistemology was not “satisfactory” (p. v). Why so?
Merely because Snyder has no doubt that the world picture is a
picture of how matter moves and of how “matter thinks” (p. 228).
In The World Machine (London, 1907), Snyder says the following
(in an implied dedication to the memory of Democritus of Abdera,
who lived about 460-360 B. c.) : “Democritus has often been styled
the grandsire of materialism. It is a school of philosophy that is
a little out of fashion nowadays; yet it is worthy of note that


30 Gegen die Schulweisheit, p. 128.


— ee


EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND MATERIALISM 307


practically all of the modern advance in our ideas of this world has
been grounded upon his conceptions. Practically speaking, ma-
terialistic assumptions are simply unescapable in physical investi-
gations [p. 140].

“ ,.. If he likes, he may dream with good Bishop Berkeley
that it is all a dream. Yet comforting as may be the legerdemain
of an idealised idealism, there are still few among us who, whatever
they may think regarding the problem of the external world, doubt
that they themselves exist; and it needs no long pursuit of the will-
o’-the-wisps of the Ich and non-Ich to assure oneself that in an
unguarded moment we assume that we ourselves have a personality
and a being, we let in the whole procession of appearances which
come of the six gates of the senses. The nebular hypothesis, the
light-bearing ether, the atomic theory, and all their like, may be
but convenient ‘working hypotheses,’ but it is well to remember:
that, in the absence of negative proof, they stand on more or less
the same footing as the hypothesis that a being you call ‘you,’ Oh,
Indulgent Reader, scans these lines” (pp. 31-32).

Imagine the bitter fate of a Machian when his favourite, complex
and cunning constructions which reduce the categories of science to
mere working hypotheses, are regarded by the naturalists on both
sides of the ocean as a thoroughgoing absurdity! Is it to be won-
dered at that Rudolph Willy, in 1905, combats Democritus as if he
were an enemy still alive, thus confirming the partisan nature of
philosophy and giving himself away as concerns his real position
in this partisan struggle? He writes: “Of course, Democritus does
not understand that atoms and the void are only fictitious concepts
serving merely as instrumental aids (blosse Handlangerdienste)
and are accepted for reasons of expediency only so long as they
can be made use of. Democritus was not sufficiently enlightened to
understand it; but neither are our modern naturalists, with few ex-
ceptions, enlightened. The belief of Democritus is the belief of
our scientisis” (p. 57).

There is reason, indeed, for despair! The “empirio-criticists”
proved in a “novel way” that space and time are “working hypothe-
ses” and yet the naturalists deride this “Berkeleianism,” and follow
Haeckel. We are not idealists at all, the empirio-criticists cry; this
is calumny; we are only endeavouring (together with the idealists)
to refute the epistemological tendency of Democritus; we have been
trying to do it for more than 2,000 years, but all in vain! There


308 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM


remains nothing else for our leader Ernst Mach to do than to dedi-
cate his last work, the result of his life and his philosophy—
Erkenntnis und Irrtum—to Wilhelm Schuppe and to remark whin-
ingly in the text that the majority of scientists are materialists and
that “we also” sympathise with Haeckel ,. . and his “free-thought”
(p. 14).

Here he completely revealed himself as an ideologist of reaction-
ary philistinism who follows the obscurantist Schuppe and yet still
“sympathises” with the freethinking Haeckel. Such are all the
humanitarian Philistines in Europe with their freethinking sympa-
thies and their ideological slavery (both political and economic)
to the Schuppes.*t_ Non-partisanship in philosophy is only a con-
temptible cloak of servility to idealism and fideism.

Compare, in conclusion, Franz Mehring’s opinion of Haeckel.
Mehring not only wanted to be but actually was a Marxist. When
The Riddle of the Universe appeared, towards the end of 1899,
Mehring immediately showed that the “work by Haeckel, with its
weak and strong points, is very valuable in order to clarify certain
confused views in our party as to what historical materialism is, on
the one hand, and what historical materialism is, on the other.” *?
The trouble with Haeckel is that he had no conception at all of what
historical materialism is, thus giving rise to a great deal of con-
fusion as regards both politics and “monistic” religion, etc., etc.
“Haeckel is a materialist and a monist, not an historical but a
naturo-historical materialist” (ibid.).

Let Haeckel’s book be read by those who wish to convince them-
selves of the inability of naturo-historical materialism to tackle
social problems, who wish to get an idea of the extent to which it
is necessary to expand and modify naturo-historical materialism
before it can develop into historical materialism, before it can
serve as a really invincible weapon in the great struggle for the
liberation of mankind.

“But not only is it advisable to read Haeckel’s book for this
purpose. His exceptionally weak side is inseparably connected with


81 Plekhanov in his remark against Machism did not take pains so much
to refute Mach as to precipitate factional strife within Bolshevism. For this
petty and miserable manner of dispute in matters of fundamental theoretical


controversy, he was sufficiently punished by the two books of the Machian
Mensheviks.


82 Franz Mehring: “Die Weltratsel,” Neue Zeit, 1899-1900, p. 418.


(- Sie edie alia Bice,


CONCLUSION


Tue Marxian evaluates empirio-criticism from four points of
view.

First and foremost, it is necessary to compare the theoretical
foundations of this philosophy with those of dialectical materialism.
Such a comparison, to which the first three chapters were devoted
shows that along the whole line of epistemology there is a thorough-
going reactionary tendency which covers up the old errors of ideal-
ism and agnosticism with a new brand of trickery and new stock of
phrases and sophistical contrivances. Only a total ignorance of
what materialism in general is, and of the meaning of the dialectical
method of Marx and Engels, can account for any one’s speaking
of the “fusion” of empirio-criticism and Marxism.

Secondly, it is essential to determine the status of empirio-criti-
cism, a very small school of professional philosophers, towards the
other modern philosophic schools. Having started with Kant, both
Mach and Avenarius proceeded not towards materialism but back
again in the opposite direction towards Hume and Berkeley. Think-
ing that he had “purified experience” in general, Avenarius in fact
had only purified agnosticism of Kantianism. The whole school of
Mach and Avenarius tends more and more definitely toward ideal-
ism in close union with one of the most reactionary of idealistic
schools,—the philosophy of immanence.

Thirdly, we must take into consideration the indubitable connec-
tion between Machism and a certain school of thought which has
developed in one field of recent science. On the side of materialism
there is the large majority of scientists in general, as well as in that
special field, namely, of physics. The minority of modern physicists,
however, under the influence of the crisis in the old theories (due
to the great discoveries of recent years) and under the influence of
the crisis in the new physics (which clearly revealed the relativity
of our knowledge) because of their ignorance of dialectics fell from
relativism into idealism: Idealistic physics, which is in vogue now,
is just as reactionary and transitory as the fashionable idealistic
physiology of the recent past.

310


=


CONCLUSION 311
Pe er ON be Gk ne a


Fourthly, beyond the epistemological scholasticism of empirio-
criticism it is impossible not to discern clearly the partisan struggle
in philosophy, a struggle which ultimately expresses the tendencies
and ideology of classes hostile to one another in modern society.
Recent philosophy is as partisan as it was two thousand years ago.
The contending parties are in the main materialism and idealism,
although their nature may be concealed under a pseudo-erudite
phraseological charlatanry or beneath the guise of a stupid non-
partisanship. Idealism is merely a cunning and refined form of
fideism which, being fully armoured, has great organisations under
its control and invariably continues to influence the masses, taking
advantage of the least vacillation in philosophical thought. The
objective, class réle of empirio-criticism can be wholly reduced to
its servility to the fideists in their struggle against materialism in
general and against historical materialism in particular.


THE END


Pear


-


= “
yh fr <
a
- ops
.
a i
- Oe


Cad


Cenc . |
é ai LAA ae
PED py no egy fr fo AD
<— aoe yavhew nagh Seces efi papremff"
ae tee


ae ovticbiane hes Ciak
* Fifalen a ae A fez ee
ped Z 4. iy oe


Ayiaio para e  hpatnacer haut PAULRICO®


Pra Z ¥ ye ge es aon


3322 geeresine
31 ayia ge 2 (ott hike, 8g III, YpBB Past na hasan
py Vlpeyone mn Boe Site gaat SN Jeep pect


Facsimile of Ten Questions Put to the Lecturer, the original of which is
now in the possession of the V. I. Lenin Institute, Moscow. For translation
see p. 318,


ADDENDA


I. SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER FOUR § 1.


FROM WHAT ANGLE DID CHERNYSHEVSKY APPROACH THE
CRITICISM OF KANTIANISM?


In the first section of Chapter IV, we showed in detail that the
materialists had criticised Kant from a point of view diametrically
opposite to that from which Mach and Avenarius criticised him.
It would not be out of place to indicate, at least in brief, the
epistemological position of the great Russian Hegelian and material-
ist, N. G. Chernyshevsky.

Shortly after the criticism of Kant by Albrecht Rau, the Germar
disciple of Feuerbach, the great writer Chernyshevsky, also a dis:
ciple of Feuerbach, was the first Russian to set forth his relation to
Feuerbach and Kant. Chernyshevsky was an active figure in the
Russian literature of the fifties, as an adherent of Feuerbach, but
the censorship did not allow him even to mention Feuerbach’s name.
In 1888, in the completed introduction to the third edition of his
The Aésthetic Relations Between Art and Life (in Russian), Cherny-
shevsky attempted to allude directly to Feuerbach, but the censor-
ship, in 1888, allowed not even so much as this passing reference
to him! The introduction saw the light only in 1906.2 In this
introduction Chernyshevsky devotes half a page to a criticism of
Kant, and of those scientists who follow Kant in their philosophic
outlook.

Here is Chernyshevsky’s remarkable discourse of 1888:

“Those naturalists who deem themselves builders of all-embracing
theories really remain disciples, and usually weak ones at that,
of the ancient thinkers who had evolved certain metaphysical
methods, and generally of thinkers, whose systems have already
been destroyed to some extent by Schelling and altogether by Hegel.
It suffices to mention in passing that the majority of naturalists who
have attempted to build grand theories on the basis of laws of
activity of human thought, have repeated the metaphysical doctrine


1 Collected Works, Vol. X, Part Il, pp. 190-197.
315


eT


316 CHERNYSHEVSKY’S CRITICISM OF KANTIANISM
en le


of Kant on the subjectivity of our- knowledge. . . . [For the infor-
mation of the Russian Machians who confuse everything we add:
Chernyshevsky remains behind Engels in that his terminology shows
a confusion in failing to distinguish clearly the opposition between
materialism and idealism from the opposition between metaphysical
and dialectical thinking; but Chernyshevsky remains on Engels’
level in so far as he takes Kant to task, not for his realism but for
his agnosticism and subjectivism, not for his recognition of ‘things-
in-themselves,’ but for his inability to derive our knowledge from
this objective source.] ... On the basis of Kant’s words they
hold the view that the forms of our sense-perception do not resemble
the forms of real existence of objects . . . [For the information of
the Russian Machians who completely confuse matters we add:
The criticism of Kant by Chernyshevsky is directly contrary to that
made by Mach and Avenarius and the followers of the philosophy
of immanence, because for Chernyshevsky, as for every materialist,
the forms of our sense-perception resemble the forms of the real,
that is, the objectively existing objects.] . .. and that therefore
real existing objects in their real qualities, and actual correlations
are unknowable to us . .. [For the information of our Russian
Machians who muddle everything we add: For Chernyshevsky, as
for every materialist, objects, in Kant’s pretentious language, the
“things-in-themselves,” actually exist and are fully knowable to us
in their existence, in their qualities, and in their actual relations.]

. and if they were even knowable they could hardly be objects
of our reason, which transfers all the material of knowledge into
forms totally different from the forms of actual existence, so that
the very laws of reason would have only a subjective signifi-
cance . . . [For the information of the muddleheads, the Machians
—we add: For Chernyshevsky, as for every materialist, the laws of
reason have not merely a subjective significance, they reflect fully
the forms of actual existence of the objects which they resemble,
and do not differ from these forms.| . . . so that in reality there
would appear to be nothing which would seem to us to be a con-
nection of cause and effect, for there would be neither antecedent
nor subsequent, neither the whole nor parts, and so forth and so
on. ... [For the information of the Machian muddleheads we
add: For Chernyshevsky, as for every materialist, there is an ob-
jective causality or necessity in nature, there is an objective con-
nection between cause and effect.] . . . When naturalists will stop


CHERNYSHEVSKY’S CRITICISM OF KANTIANISM 317


uttering such metaphysical nonsense, they will be able to work out
(perhaps they are at it now) a system of concepts on the basis of
science, which will be more exact and complete than those which
were propounded by Feuerbach. . . . [For the information of the
muddled Machians we add: Chernyshevsky considers as metaphys-
ical confusion all deviations from materialism towards idealism and
agnosticism.] . . . And meanwhile the best exposition of scientific
ideas on so-called fundamental problems of the love of wisdom, has
been made by Feuerbach” (p. 196). By the fundamental questions
of the love of wisdom, Chernyshevsky means what in modern lan-
guage is known as the fundamental problems of epistemology or
the theory of knowledge. Chernyshevsky is the only great Russian
writer who, from the fifties until 1888, was able to remain on the
level of consistent materialism and to spurn the wretched confusion
of Neo-Kantians, positivists, Machians and other muddleheads. But
Chernyshevsky was unable, or, rather due to the backwardness of
Russian life, was not in a position to rise to the dialectical material-
ism of Marx and Engels.


II. TEN QUESTIONS PUT TO THE LECTURER *


(1) Does the lecturer acknowledge that the philosophy of Marx-
ism is dialectical materialism?

If not, why has he not analysed even one of Engels’ numerous
statements referring to it?

If he does acknowledge it, why do the Machians call their “revi-
sion” of dialectical materialism “philosophical Marxism”? (See the
collectively issued book of the Machians, p. 234.*)

(2) Does the lecturer acknowledge Engels’ fundamental division
of philosophical system into materialism and idealism? Does he
agree with Engels in considering the tendency of Hume in the new
philosophy to be steering a middle course between the two, and in
calling it “agnosticism” and declaring Kantianism to be a species
of agnosticism?


1The lecturer to whom the “Ten Questions” were addressed was A. Luna-
charsky, at present People’s Commissar for Education in the R. S. F. S. R.
In the autumn of 1908, Lunacharsky announced he would deliver a public
lecture at Geneva on a philosophic topic. As the reader will have learnt from
the present volume, Lunacharsky was an advocate of the philosophical tendency
of A. Bogdanov, from whom he was separated only by a minor shade of religious
difference. Lenin was just then engaged in his work on Materialism and
Empirio-Criticism, but considered it of importance to come out against Em-
pirio-Criticism even before the publication of his book. This was the more
necessary since the Mensheviks (Plekhanov) were making every effort to util-
ise the philosophical deviations of Bogdanov and Lunacharsky, both of whom
were members of the Bolshevik Central Committee, in the political struggle
with the Bolsheviks.

Lenin entrusted Comrade I. F. Dubrowinsky, a member of the editorial board
of the Bolshevik periodical Proletary (“The Proletarian”) with the task of
answering Lunacharsky’s speech, since Dubrowinsky shared Lenin’s views. It
was for this purpose that Lenin indited the above “Ten Questions.” After
Lunacharsky’s lecture, Dubrowinsky delivered a sharp attack upon the speaker,
which in turn brought forth a vehement reply from Bogdanov. The Geneva
colony of Russian Bolshevik exiles continued an active discussion of the ques-
tion, which resulted in clearing the air as to the essential point: The Bolsheviks
categorically renounced the philosophical speculations of certain leading party
members,

2 Lenin has in view The Outlines of the Philosophy of Marxism consisting
of the articles by Bazarov, Berman, Lunacharsky, Yushkevich, Bogdanov
Helfond, Suvorov, published in 1909.—Ed.

318


|


|


TEN QUESTIONS 319
ee a ae


(3) Does the lecturer acknowledge that at the roots of the theory
of knowledge of dialectical materialism there lies the recognition
of the objective world and its reflection by the human mind?

(4) Does the lecturer regard Engels’ argument concerning the
transformation of the “thing-in-itself” into the “thing-for-us” as
correct? (Feuerbach, pp. 15, 65) .3

(5) Does the lecturer regard Engels’ statement that “the real
unity of the world consists in its materiality” (Anti-Diihring, 1886,
p. 28, Part I, § 3, “Apriorism,” p. 31), as correct?

(6) Does the lecturer acknowledge Engels’ statement that “matter
without motion is as inconceivable as motion without matter”
(Anti-Diihring, p. 45, in § 6, “On Natur philosophie, Cosmogony,
Physics, and Chemistry,” p. 50) as correct?

(7) Does the lecturer acknowledge the concepts of causality,
necessity, natural law, etc., to be reflections in the human mind of
the laws of nature and of the external world? Or was Engelg
wrong in asserting this? (ibid., pp. 20-21 in § 3, “Apriorism,”
and pp. 103-104, in § 11, “On Freedom and Necessity”) .

(8) Does the lecturer know that Mach expressed his agreement
with Schuppe, the head of the immanentist school, and even dedi-
cated his last and most important philosophical work to him?
How does the lecturer explain this adherence of Mach to the frank
and avowedly idealistic philosophy of Schuppe, the defender of
clericalism and an outspoken reactionary in philosophy in
general?

(9) Why was the lecturer silent on the “adventure” of his recent
comrade (in The Outlines) and Menshevik, Yushkevich, who to-
day (after Rakhmetov) declared Bogdanov to be an idealist? Does

8 This passage again shows the immense importance which Lenin attached
to the characterisation of the Kantian epistemology as a sort of agnosticism.
Lenin would agree with Engels’ view of this question, as well as with his
view on the question of “reflection” (cf. also Question 7), a touchstone of the
Marxism of any student of philosophy. This must be particularly stressed,
since efforts have again been made in recent years to set up an alleged com-
munist philosophy along the lines of the Russian followers of Ernst Mach.
These very words of Engels, as well as the latter’s Theory of Reflection, of
which we are here speaking, have been “criticised” (by Lukacs and Korsch)
from an undisguised idealistic point of view, for the purpose of expounding
an allegedly communist philosophy as opposed to the epistemology of dialectiz
materialism. Their sympathetic agreement with the followers of Mach extends


even to details. Thus, Lukacs, for instance, likewise denies that Kant was an
agnostic, i. e., that Kant considered it impossible to attain knowledge of the


objective world.


III. ON DIALECTICS +


THE division of the One and the knowledge of its contradictory
parts (see the quotations from Philo on Heraclitus in the beginning
of Part III, “Lehre Vom Erkennen,” in Lassalle’s Die Philosophie
Heracleitos des Dunklen?), is the essence (one of the “essential”
aspects of being, its fundamental, if not the fundamental character-
istic) of dialectics. This is exactly how Hegel puts the question.
Aristotle ® in his Metaphysics is always grappling with it and con-


1“On Dialectics,” is a portion of the hitherto unpublished philosophical note-
books of Lenin, now in the Lenin Institute in Moscow, which contain a number
of notes and excerpts dealing with natural science and philosophy. This
fragment was presumably written some time between 1912 and 1914. It was
first published in the periodical The Bolshevik, Moscow, 1925, Nos. 5-6.

2The passage quoted is on page 400 of Ferdinand Lassalle’s Gesammelte
Reden und Schriften, ed. by Eduard Bernstein, 1920, and reads as follows:
“For the One is a whole consisting of two opposite poles, so that after it is
sundered the opposite parts may be recognised.”

Heraclitus (544-475 B. c.), also called the “Obscure,” flourished in the com-
mercial city of Ephesos in Asia Minor, and was one of the most prominent
dialecticians of ancient times. According to his conception, the process of
becoming is a constant transition from the finite to the infinite and vice versa;
process that is indissoluble and unending, and moving between extremes; it is
the unity of being and non-being, the essence of the universe. In this incon-
stancy of all things, in a ceaseless transformation of all being, Heraclitus
beheld the general law of the universe. All things are in flux; there is noth-
ing permanent, with the result that “we cannot step twice into the same
river” The world he conceived both as war and peace, summer and winter,
flux and time, satiation and hunger, etc. Opposition, the ruling principle of
the universe, is, according to Heraclitus, inherent in all things, with the result
that all of existence really constitutes a union of opposites.” “The All has its
origin in the One and the One in the All.”

8 Aristotle (384-322 B. c.) could not agree with the dialectic point of view
and waged a constant polemic against Heraclitus, whose philosophy appeared
so obscure for the very reason that its dialectic character was not altogether
understood. For Aristotle opposites are possible only in successive series and
as mutually exclusive of each other. A thing exists or it does not, a man is
living or dead, a thing cannot be one thing and at the same time another. In
no case can a thing be a union of opposites. Thus, Aristotle declares, against
Heraclitus, that the latter’s principle which declared “being and non-being to
be the same thing,” contradicted the law of contradiction. In another passage
he states that, according to the philosophy of Heraclitus, it is not so much
true that everything is, as that vpn is at all. Finally, he criticises Herac-

21


Se


322 ON DIALECTICS


tinually engages in a struggle with Heraclitus (respecting the ideas
of Heraclitus) .

The correctness of this aspect of the content of dialectics must
be tested by the history of science. This aspect of dialectics cus-
tomarily received very little attention (e. g., by Plekhanov): the
identity of opposites is taken as the sum-total of examples (for
example, “‘a seed,” and in Engels’, for example, “primitive com-
munism.” * But this is in the interest of popularisation and not as
the law of knowledge (and as the law of the objective world).


litus in the following terms: “Those who state that being and non-being can
exist simultaneously will be found rather to be declaring that everything is
at rest than that everything is in motion; for that into which something is evolv-
ing is not yet in existence, since everything is ultimately an attribute of any-
thing.” Aristotle means that, since Heraclitus would have everything both
be and not be, in other words, already contain both factors of the contradiction
within itself, whose union it constitutes, there is no possibility of motion from
one contradiction to the other.

£In his book, “On the Question of the Evolution of the Monistic Conception
of History” (in Russian) Plekhanov interprets two passages from Friedrich
Engels’ Anti-Diihring. One of the passages reads:

“Let us take a grain of barley. Millions of such kernels are ground, boiled
and brewed, and then consumed. But if such a barley-corn encounter the
conditions normal for its development, if it fall upon favorable soil, the influ-
ence of the heat and of moisture will effect a peculiar transformation in this
seed. It sprouts; the seed as such disappears, is negated, and in its place
appears the plant, the negation of the seed. But what is the normal life course
of the plant? It grows, blossoms, is fructified, and finally produces other
grains of barley, and, as soon as these have matured, the stalk withers and is
negated in its turn. But the result of this negation of the negation is again
the barley-grain with which we began, and not one grain merely, but an in-
crease ten or twenty or thirty fold.” (Anti-Dihring, p. 138.)

In the other passage, Engels cites Rousseau’s ideas as an example of a
dialectic mode of thought, and shows that according to Rousseau social evolu-
tion proceeds by means of antagonisms: “In the state of nature and savagery,
men were equal, and since Rousseau considers even language to have been a
distortion of the natural state, he is perfectly right in applying the equality
between animals of one type, as far as this equality may prevail, also to this
type of animal-men, recently classified by Haeckel, hypothetically, as Aladi,
i. e., “speechless.” But these equal animal-men possessed a quality not char-
acteristic of the other animals: perfectibility, the capacity of continuing their
evolution and this becomes the cause of inequality. Rousseau therefore re-
gards the beginnings of inequality as a forward step. But this progress had
its antagonisms: it was at the same time retrogression. ... Each new step
in advance of civilisation is simultaneously a new advance towards inequality.
All the institutions of society, which arise simultaneously with civilisation,
sooner or later serve purposes and ends opposite to their original ones. It is an
unquestionable fact, and furthermore, the basic law of our body politic, that
the people created monarchs in order to preserve and protect its own freedom
and not to destroy it.” And yet these princes necessarily become the oppres-
sors of the people and even carry their tyranny so far that the resulting in-


ON DIALECTICS 323


In mathematics: + and——. The differential and integral.

In mechanics: Action and reaction.

In physics: Positive and negative electricity.

In chemistry: The combination and dissociation of atoms.

In the social sciences: The class struggle.

The identity of opposites (more accurately, perhaps, their
“unity” although the difference between the expressions “iden-
tity” and “unity” is not very essential here. In a certain sense
both are correct *) is the recognition (discovery) of the mutually
exclusive and opposed tendencies in all the phenomena and proc-
esses of nature (including spirit and society). The condition of
the knowledge of all processes of the world as in “self-movement,”
in spontaneous development, conceived in its vital and living form,
is the knowledge of the unity of their opposites. Development is
“struggle” of opposites. Two fundamental (or is it the two pos-
sible? or is it two historically observed?) conceptions of develop-
ment (evolution) are: development as decrease and increase, as
repetition; and development as a unity of opposites (the division of
the One into mutually exclusive opposites and their reciprocal


correlation).
The first conception is dead, poor and dry; the second is
vital. It is only this second conception which offers the key to


equality, becoming intolerable, is again changed into its opposite, and becomes
once more the basis of equality: before the despot all are equal, i. e., equal to
zero. .. . And thus inequality again turns into equality, but not into the old
primitive equality of speechless primitive man, but into the higher equality of
the social contract.”

Plekhanov defends these two passages against the attacks of the subjective
sociologist N. Mikhailovsky.

5 The “unity” of opposites may also be regarded as an “identity” of opposites.
Lenin here explains when this is the case. It is wrong to interpret this identity
as signifying that the originally uniform, oppositionless phenomena first pro-
vide occasion for the gradual unfolding of opposites, which thereupon disap-
pear in the “synthesis.” As opposed to this view, Lenin again reinstates the
Heraclitean view to its rightful position, according to which each phenomenon
includes within itself the unity of the opposites (cf. the quotation in the second
footnote to this fragment), which are not recognisable as opposites, however,
until the phenomenon, as Heraclitus puts it, “has been sundered in twain,
i. e., when the opposites threaten to destroy the dialectic unity. Up to
this phase one might speak of an identity of opposites, “in a certain sense,” 80


long as one does not go so far as to consider oppositions to be lacking


altogether. ;
We must here specifically point out that Lenin here extends dialectics ex-


pressly to cover the field of nature and the study of nature, which is denied
by certain idealistically inclined “Marxists.”


ET
324 ON DIALECTICS


understanding the “self-movement” of everything in existence;
it alone offers the key to understanding “leaps,” to the “inter-
ruption of gradual succession,” to the “transformation into the
opposite,” to the destruction of the old and the appearance of the
new.

The unity (the coincidence, identity, resultant force) of opposites
is conditional, temporary, transitory, and relative. The struggle
of the mutually exclusive opposites is absolute, as movement and
evolution are.

N. B. The distinction between subjectivism (scepticism, sophis-
try, etc.) and dialectics among other things lies in this, that in
(“objective”) dialectics the distinction between the relative and
the absolute is itself relative. For objective dialectics the absolute
is also to be found in the relative. For subjectivism and sophistry
the relative is only relative and excludes the absolute.

On the first conception of movement, self-movement, its impelling
force, its source, and its motive still remain in the shadow (or that


source is transferred outside, becomes subject, etc.). On the second ©


conception, chief attention is directed precisely toward knowledge
of the source of “self”-movement.

Marx in his Capital at first analyses the simplest, the most ordi-
nary, fundamental and commonplace thing, a relation to be observed
billions of times in bourgeois commodity society: the exchange of
commodities. In that simple phenomenon (in that “cell” of the
bourgeois society) the analysis reveals all the contradictions (and
their embryo as well) of modern society. The subsequent exposition
shows the development (both, growth and movement) of these con-
tradictions and of that society in the sum total of its fundamental
parts, from beginning to end.

Such must also be the method of exposition (and of study as
well) of dialectics in general (for the dialectics of bourgeois so-
ciety is only a particular illustration for Marx of dialectics in
general)... . To begin with the simplest, most ordinary, and
commonplace notion, from any proposition you please: “The leaves
of the tree are green; John is a man; a poodle is a dog, etc. . . .”
Even here (as Hegel’s genius recognised) we have an instance of
dialectics: the particular is the general [cf. Aristotle’s Metaphysics,
translated by Schwegler, Vol. II, 8, 40, 3., Book IV, Chapters 8 and


9: “Denn natiirlich kann man nicht der Meinung sein, dass es ein


comull


_—~


ae


ON DIALECTICS 395


Haus (a house in general) gebe ausser den sichtbaren Hausern.°}
(For it is naturally impossible to think that there exists a house in
general over and above visible houses.)

Consequently opposites (the particular as opposed to the gen-
eral) are identical: the particular exists only in that connection
which leads to the general. The general exists only in the par-
ticular and through the particular. Every particular is (in one
way or another) a general. Every general is (a fragment, or an
aspect, or an essence of) a particular. Every general comprises
all particular objects merely approximately. Every particular is
an incomplete part of the general, and so forth, and so on. Every
particular is bound by thousands of threads and nuances with
other kinds of particulars (objects, phenomena, processes), etc.
There are found here already the elements, the germinal conception
of necessity of objective connection in nature, etc. The contingent
and the necessary, appearance and essence are already existent here.
For in saying, “John is a man, the poodle is a dog, this is a leaf of
a tree, etc.,”” we disregard a series of characteristics as contingent;
we separate the essential from the apparent, and put one in opposi-
tion to the other.

Thus in any expression one can (and must) reveal as in a cell
the embryo of all the elements of dialectics, showing thereby that
dialectics is in general the characteristic of all human knowledge.

And from its side, natural science shows us (and here again it
must be demonstrated in any simple instance) the objective nature
with the same qualities of the transformation of the particular into
the general, of the contingent into the necessary, transitions, nuances


© Hegel: Enzyklopadie der philosophischen Wissenschaften, 2nd ed., page
162:

“One’s first impression about the judgment is the independence of the two
extremes, the subject and the predicate. The former we take to be a thing
or characteristic in its own right, and the predicate, a general characteristic
outside of the subject and somewhere in our heads, which latter characteristic
is associated by us with the former, thus forming a judgment... . The ab-
stract proposition is expressible in the statement: the individual is the general
(universal). These are the features possessed by subject and predicate with
reference to each other, when the factors of the concept are taken in their
immediate connotation or in their first abstraction. . .. It shows a strange
want of observation in the logic-books, that in none of them is the fact stated
that in every judgment there is such a statement made, as, the individual is the
universal, or, still more definitely, the subject is the predicate (for instance,
God is absolute spirit). No doubt the notions of individuality, universality,
subject and predicate, are also quite different, but it remains none the less
true in general that every judgment is really a statement of identity.”


326 ON DIALECTICS


and the reciprocal connection of opposites. Dialectics is the theory
of knowledge (of Hegel and) of Marxism. It was exactly this
aspect of the matter (it is not a question here merely of the “aspect”
but of the essence of the matter) to which Plekhanov paid no atten-
tion, not to speak of other Marxists.

Knowledge appears in the form of a series of circles in Hegel
(see his Logik’) as well as in Paul Volkmann (see his Erkenntnis-
theoretische Grundziige der Naturwissenschaften*), the modern
“epistemologist” of natural science, the eclectic and enemy of Hegel-
ianism (which he did not understand).

Is chronology necessary? No!
These are the “circles” in philosophy:
Ancient: from Democritus to Plato and Heraclitus’ dia-


letics.
Renaissance: Descartes versus Gassendi (Spinoza?).
Modern: Holbach-Hegel through Berkeley, Hume, Kant,
Hegel-Feuerbach-Marx.


Hegel: Logik, Part Il, page 503:

“Tt therefore results that every step in the progress of continuous definition,
as it recedes from the indefinite beginning, constitutes also a reverse approach
to it, and that the two apparently different elements, namely, the reverse process
of affirming the beginning, and the advancing continuous definition of it ac-
tually coincide and are identical. The method which thus moves in a
circle .. .”

“By virtue of the above indicated character of the method, the science
constitutes a circle returning upon itself, at the beginning of which, at the
simple foundation, its conclusion is again met with, returning from the other
direction: furthermore, this circle is a circle of circles; for each individual
member, being an animated phase of the method, is the reflection-in-itself,
which, in returning to the initial stage, simultaneously constitutes the begin-
ning of a new member.”

®Paul Volkmann, Professor of Theoretical Physics at the University of
K6nigsberg in Prussia, the author of a number of epistemological works writ-
ten from the point of view of the physicist. In the work of Paul Volkmann
mentioned above, 2nd ed., Leipzig, 1910, in connection with Lenin’s “circular
motion of knowledge,” the following passages are to be considered:

“I should therefore wish to oppose to the external adaptation, (i.e., the adap-
tation of subject to object—Ed.) with which this observation is connected, an
internal adaptation. If external adaptation may be figuratively rendered by the
process of oscillation, the internal adaptation may be figuratively rendered by
the process of oscillation, the internal adaptation may be represented by the
process of circulation. It is in this sense that Liebig declares: ‘Progress is a
circular motion with an increasing radius,’ and it is in this sense that Liebig
draws a picture of a spiral and inscribes under it the words: ‘inclinita resur-
git. (Page 35.)

Furthermore, in another passage: “The process of knowledge is and always
will be an oscillating and asymptotic process. To the layman such a treat-


ee ence ee i ed
ON DIALECTICS 327
prt ae SDIALECTICS ) ae


Dialectics as a living, many-sided knowledge (with a continually
increasing number of aspects) with an infinite number of shadings
of every sort and approximations to reality (with a philosophical
system which out of these various shades and approximations de-
velops into a whole)—its content is immeasurably rich compared
with “metaphysical” materialism, whose fundamental trouble lies
in its inability to apply dialectics to the Bildertheorie (theories of
development), to the process and development of knowledge.

Philosophical idealism is nonsense only from the standpoint of
a crude, simple, and metaphysical materialism. On the contrary,
from the standpoint of dialectical materialism philosophical ideal-
ism is a one-sided, exaggerated, swollen development (Dietzgen) of
one of the characteristic aspects or limits of knowledge into a deified
absolute, into something dissevered from matter, from nature.
Idealism means clericalism. True! But philosophical idealism is
(more “correctly” expressed and in “addition” ) a road to clericalism
through one of the nuances of the infinitely complicated knowledge
(dialectical) of man.

The knowledge of man does not follow a straight line, but a
curved line which infinitely approaches a system of circles, the
spiral. Every fragment, every segment, every bit of this curved
line can be transformed (transformed one-sidedly) into an inde-
pendent, complete, straight line which, if one does not see the
wood for the trees, leads us directly into the mire, into clericalism
(which is strengthened by the class interests of the ruling class).
Rectilinearity and one-sidedness, stiffness and rigidity, subjectivism
and subjective blindness—these are the epistemological roots of
idealism. That clericalism (philosophical idealism) possesses
natural epistemological roots, is not unaccountable. It is not
groundless; it is undoubtedly a sterile flower, yet one growing on
the living tree of a prolific, true, powerful, omnipotent, objective,
and absolute human knowledge.


ment, based in the last analysis on a continuous merging of induction and
deduction, may appear to be a vicious circle. No doubt the advancing knowl-
edge of the natural sciences in many cases does move in a circle—yet the
sense of this statement inciudes the fact that each new cycle of cognition is
associated with a host of finer measurements and corrections.” (Page 359.)

In connection with Lenin’s designation of Volkmann as an eclectic it should
be remarked that Volkmann finally evolved into an out-and-out solipsist. He
is at present an associate-editor of the Annalen der Philosophie, published by
Hans Vaihinger, the “Als-Ob” philosopher, in which he advocates Fictional-
ism,” the latest tendency in the bankrupt system of bourgeois idealism.


APPENDIX


DIALECTIC MATERIALISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF
DEAD REACTION


By V. Nevsky


It would seem at present, when “the chief task before the working class is
to transform the world,” that to engage in a tedious repetition of well-estab-
lished theoretical truths is untimely. Indeed, there are so many practical
things to be done, there is such an urgent need for a determined and radical
change, that there is practically no time left for pleasant theoretical research
and work. However, the interests of that very cause, of that determined change
of the world, of which Marx speaks in his Eleventh Thesis on Feuerbach,
demand of all communists who are not indifferent to the success of the revo-
lution, to turn at least once in a while to these theoretical questions, long
since settled, and so far not refuted by anyone.

This necessity of indulging in seemingly abstract questions of philosophy,
even at a time of unprecedented struggle between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie, follows from the circumstance, that the reactionary disintegrating
classes: and their conscious and unconscious advocates and ideologists do not
at once capitulate before the new class and the new views and forms (in all
domains of life, including that of science).

Appearing to have become reconciled to the new order, those disintegrating
classes are really attempting to explode it from within. There are some
amongst them who are doing so and are fully aware of their deeds, who
join the new institutions and organizations under the pretext of learned,
experienced and “indispensable” specialists in order to betray the proletariat.
Others fully, though unconsciously, convinced that they serve the new cause,
drape their backward and reactionary views in a mantle of scientific forms,
thus infusing the consciousness of the struggling masses with the poison of
a decaying corpse.

It is hard to tell which method is more harmful to the working class: the
rude attempt of the raging bourgeois to penetrate into the enemy’s camp
under the guise of the most devoted adherent of the new order, or the un-
conscious attempt to prove to the masses that a reactionary ideology is the
best weapon in the hands of the proletariat in the struggle with its class
enemy.

Bogdanov and his followers who wax enthusiastic over the numerous “works”
of that prolific philosopher, belong to the category of those who are endeavour-
ing to assure the working class that the philosophy of a dead, decaying
reaction is the very last word of science.

Lenin was indeed correct in the concluding lines of his book (Materialism
and Empirio-Criticism) when he said the following:

“Beyond the epistemological scholasticism of empirio-criticism it is impos-
sible not to discern clearly the partisan struggle in philosophy, a struggle
which ultimately expresses the tendencies and ideology of classes hostile to
one another in modern society. Recent philosophy is as partisan as it was
‘two thousand years ago. The contending parties are in the main materialism

329


330 V. NEVSKY


and idealism, although their nature may be concealed under a pseudo-erudite
phraseological charlatanry or beneath the guise of a stupid non-partisanship”
(p. 311).

Such a philosophy of idealism, under cover of a set of new terms, is con-
tained in the thought of Bogdanov as well as in all his numerous “works”
which have appeared in his various books or are scattered through different
periodicals.

After his Basic Elements of the Historical Outlook on Nature, Epistemology
from the Historical Standpoint and the three well-known volumes of Empirio-
Monism, there appeared such unusual works as Tectology (or The Universal
Organisational Science, parts I and II); Science of Social Consciousness;
Brief Course of Ideological Science in Questions and Answers; Problems of
Socialism; collected articles, new and old, under the title New World; Social-
ism of Science (the scientific problems of the proletariat) ; The Philosophy of
Vital Experience; Popular Outlines; Materialism, Empirio-Criticism, Dialectic
Materialism, Empirio-Monism—the Science of the Future; Brief Course of
Political Economy, newly corrected and completed edition (tenth) by S. M.
Dvoilatzky with the collaboration of the author; The Primer of Political Econ-
omy (an Introduction to Political Economy, in questions and answers) ; articles
on various issues, pamphlets, and separate books which are not yet collected
by the author, e.g., articles in Proletarian Culture, Outlines of the Science of
Organisation, Nos. 7-12, articles on questions of proletarian poetry and others.
(All these titles are in Russian—Ed.)

We are certain that we have not fully exhausted the list of this prolific
writer, but fortunately there is no need to do so for our purposes. After
glancing over the chief works enumerated above it is quite sufficient to con-
vince oneself that we are here dealing with the very same idealist, whom we
have known before as the follower of Mach and Avenarius, as the critic of
the materialism of Marx and Engels. The only difference is that now, after
his works on empirio-monism, Comrade Bogdanov has begun to criticise Marx
more openly while his philosophy has become more deadly reactionary with
the course of time.

That this is really so, one will see after an analysis of that truly remarkable
book of Bogdanov’s The Philosophy of . . . Dead Reaction, we meant to say,
The Philosophy of Vital Experience.

How was the issue put in the dispute of 1905-1910 between the orthodox
disciples of Marx and Engels and their adversary, Bogdanov, the author of
Tectology? The same way as it had been put in its time by Marx and Engels
in their struggle with the bourgeois, idealist philosophers.

“The great foundation question of all, and especially of new, philosophies
is concerned with the relation between thinking and being,” says Engels.
“... As this question was answered one way or the other the philosophers
were divided into two great camps. The one party which placed the origin
of the spirit before that of nature, and therefore in the last instance accepted
creation in some form or other—and this creation is often, according to the
philosophers, Hegel for instance, still more odd and impossible than in Chris-
tianity—made up the camp of idealism. The others, who recognised nature
as the source, belonged to the various schools of materialism.” 1

“Idealism and materialism, originally not used in any other sense, are here
not employed in any other sense.” 2

How did Bogdanov answer the question before the great November Revolu-

1 Ludwig Feuerbach, p. 56.

2 Ibid., p. 58.


wt ead


DIALECTIC MATERIALISM 331
0 Ee RI ane RAE SE ST i IR ERNST IR al en at


tion? In Book I of his Empirio-Monism he thus defines the objectivity of the
world and of physical bodies: “The objective character of the physical
world consists in that it exists not for me personally but for all; it has,
in my opinion, the same significance for everybody as it has for myself.”
And further: In general, the physical world is that’ which is socially-
agreed-upon, socially harmonised, in a word, is that which is socially organised
experience.” #

The basis of the objectivity of the physical world of nature which, is accord-
ing to Engels, the foundation stone of all, is included in the domain of
collective experience.

That view was held by our philosopher at the time when his empirio-monistic
system was in the process of creation. What is at present his attitude toward
this issue? Has he renounced those views? Has he changed them? Not at
all, they remain the same. He says: “We regard reality, or the realm of
experiences, as the human collective practice in all its vital content, in the
sum-total of efforts and resistances which constitute this content.” 5

And just as the world picture reduced itself before to elements of sensation,
so now these very well known elements are posited as the foundation stone of
everything.

The outline drawn by him in Empirio-Monism is as follows: elements, the
psychic experience of men, the physical experience of men, and consciousness.
And in his Philosophy of Vital Experience this outline remains essentially the
same.

One finds here, too, the very same elements of experience, the same definition
of the objective, of the physical as the socially organised experience of men.
Here is his proof:

“The element of experience is a product of social effort embodied in knowl-
edge” (p. 217). “If my fellow men say: “Yes, we see and hear the same
as you do,’ that is, if my experience and their experience agree and are socially
organised, then one has to do with real objects, objective or physical phe-
nomena. If, on the other hand, they state that for them, that of which I
inquire does not exist, it becomes clear that my experience in this respect is
only ‘subjective,’ only psychical, an illusion or an hallucination” (p. 221,
italics mine—V. JNV.).

From these quotations it is evident, that Bogdanov clings to his previous
position, to purest idealism. For he obstinately maintains, now as before,
that the physical world is “socially organised experience,” that is, the experi-
ence of men, and, hence, there was not any physical world, since there was
not any “socially organised experience.” This is an absurdity which can only
be attained by an empirio-monist. For, holding the position that the physical
world is the “socially organised experience” of men, the empirio-monist must
answer the question, as to whose social experience the world can be referred
before men emerged.

The following quotation will clearly show, that the confusion introduced in
Bogdanov’s previous “works,” remains intact:

“An astronomer discovers a new comet, defines its position in space, its
orbit, size, form, composition, etc. Until he has made public this data, nobody
save himself, has any knowledge about it. The comet, consequently, belongs
only to his individual experience, but not to social experience. Yet the comet
had been found, defined, measured, investigated through scientific methods


8 Loc. cit., p. 25.
4 Jbid., p. 36.
8 Philosophy of Vital Experience, p. 214,


—_—_—————————————————————————
332 V. NEVSKY


a


which have been collectively worked out by men in order to organise their
experience. It means that it already entered into socially organised experience;
that it took its place in the series of objective, physical phenomena. Practi-
cally, it will express itself in the fact, that any other observer will find the
comet at such a place and in such a state as that in which the first had
discovered it” (p. 221, Bogdanov’s italics). ;

One can hardly believe that Bogdanov is unaware of the fact that he has
fallen into an idealistic hole by positing these elements and socially organised
experience, which are represented by the physical, objective world. He is
aware of it, because on p. 225 of his book he quotes the late Plekhanov’s reply
to this question, but by realising it, he falls into a still greater idealistic
absurdity.

“Physical experience,” says Bogdanov, “is somebody’s experience, namely,
the experience of all of humanity in its development. This is a world of a
strict, settled, elaborated uniformity of law, of definite, precise correlations;
it is a well-established world where all propositions of geometry, all formule
of mechanics, astronomy, physics, etc., are valid. . . . Is it possible to accept
this world, this system of experience, independently of mankind, is it possible
to say that it existed prior to it?” (p. 226).

How does Bogdanov answer this important question, of whether or not the
physical world existed prior to the existence of men, and particularly, of
whether bodies attracted each other according to the law of gravitation?

“Discard the ‘social practice’ of measurements, the establishment of standards
of measure and calculation, etc., and there will remain nothing of the law
of gravitation. Therefore, when we say that the law was valid prior to the
existence of men, it is not the same as saying independent of men” (pp. 226-
227, Bogdanov’s italics).

It is clear, that from such a standpoint neither matter exists, nor does the
world exist, which is the object of natural science, and in which we materialist
sinners live who recognise “holy matter” (of which another critic of material-
ism, Bazarov, has made game). It is also clear that from such a viewpoint
“matter is resistance to activity” (p. 55); or that matter is “nothing
else than resistance to collective labour efforts” (p. 89); that “the unfolding
panorama of work-experience is characterised as Nature” (p. 44); that “the
universe represents itself to us as the infinite stream of organising activity”
(p. 240), and that the world-picture is a continual series of forms of organisa-
tion of elements, of forms, which develop through struggle and interaction
without a beginning in the past and without an end in the future” (p. 241,
italics mine—V. N.). .

Hence, the issue is again reduced to elements, that is, to the “products of
social labour, embodied in knowledge!”

Thus, the whole substance of Bogdanov’s idealistic views is expounded in
these “popular outlines” of the Philosophy of Vital Experience. The material-
ism of the ancients, the materialism of the eighteenth century and the dialec-
tic materialism of Marx and Engels are here criticised from the point of
view of empirio-monism.

According to him the “fundamental conception of dialectics, of Marx as
well as of Hegel, has not been completely finished and clarified. And because
of this, the very application of the dialectic method becomes inexact and
blurred. There are elements of arbitrariness in its plan. Not only do the
bounds of dialectics remain undefined but even its very sense becomes per-
verted” (p. 189).


And this is because the founders of scientific socialism have not come to


a Ee SSS ZS at a
DIALECTIC MATERIALISM 333


the concept of “resistance to activity,” have not come to the notion of “organisa-
tional process,” for, says A. Bogdanov:

“In applying our methods we have from the very beginning defined dialectics
as follows: an organisational process which proceeds through struggle of con-
trary tendencies. Does this correspond with Marx’s conception? Not alto-
gether. = There the point at issue is development and not the organisational
process” (p. 189).

At last Bogdanov has found the proper language and frankly confessed
that he has gone further than Marx, has surpassed him, has developed his
doctrine further, and purged it of all errors and deviations.

; This purification of Marx’s doctrine of dialectic materialism of its errors,
is effected through Bogdanov’s creation of the system of Tectology (the Uni-
versal Organisational Science).

Now, what kind of a science is this which corrects the errors and deviations
of Marx? It is a science of construction, a science which “must scientifically
systematise the organisational experience of mankind.”

In the two parts of this Tectology (so far only two parts have appeared)
and, probably, in the “popular” exposition of the tectological views in
Proletarian Culture (in Russian), we unfortunately behold our old acquaint-
ances of Bogdanov’s philosophy: the complexes and the elements.

We learn that (1) “in all its activity (work and reflection), mankind
has for its object various complexes which consist of various elements,” ® that
(2), the concepts of complex and element are correlative concepts; that a
complex is what is decomposed into elements and elements are what consti-
tute the complex; that the concepts of resistance and activity, too, are correla-
tive concepts: that “resistance is the same activity (only taken from a different
angle) as contrasted with another activity,” and that since the universe is
nothing but a “continual series of forms of organisation of elements,” an
“infinite stream of organising activity,” therefore Tectology embraces the
material of all sciences. This is the “only science which not only must work
out directly its methods, but must investigate and unite them as well. It,
therefore, represents the completion of the cycle of sciences” (Tectology,
Part I, p. 38).

In what does the method of this curious science, which completes the cycle
of all sciences, consist?

“To enter the domain of Tectology proper, one must separate one’s self
from the concrete-physiological character of the elements, to substitute for
them indifferent symbols and express their connection through an abstract
scheme. This scheme we shall compare with others which were obtained in
a similar fashion, and thus work out tectological generalisations which yield
us conceptions of forms and types of organisation” (p. 39).

From a further analysis one sees that those tectological schemes are abstract;
schemes emptied of their content, but they are universal and they “are appli-
cable to an infinite variety of cases” (p. 48).

Indeed, farther on we see that there is no lack of those schemes with
Bogdanov, even though there is a lack of something else.

Since the principle of selection has an unlimited, far-reaching application in
human ‘theory and practice, its tectological character is manifested by it: the
mechanism of selection is universal. There is the conservative and progressive
selection; “the progressive selection changes the structure of the complexes”
(p. 64); “the conservative selection gravitates toward statical results of the


6 Tectology, Part I, p. 29.
7 Philosophy of Vital Experience, pp. 240-241.
tyne of stable eauilibria” (pv. 107). “Positive selection changes the structure


ad Word.


334 V. NEVSKY


of the complex in the direction of greater dissimilarity of elements and greater
complexity of inner correlation; negative selection changes the structure of
the complex in the direction of greater similarity of elements, less complexity
of their connection” (p. 108). In a word, selection is an elementary-universal
mechanism through which everything in the world can be explained—Dar-
winism, Malthusianism, the evolution of matter, and the primary impelling
reactions of protoplasm, and the methods of procuring gold, as well as of such
human organisations as sects and parties. Starting from this elementary-
universal mechanism of selection, Bogdanov deduces the laws of “ingression.”

First of all he gives the conception of the “valid connection.” ‘This is the
“form of our thinking on organisational combinations” (p. 114). But as this
valid connection between the complexes cannot always be established, there
is a necessity of intermediate complexes, that is, in ingression itself.

In what the laws of ingression consist, probably only Bogdanov knows.
But from the two parts of his Tectology the reader cannot extract anything
save bare, abstract meaningless notions. As for the rest, there is in the two
books, besides these notions, a great number of new terms which confuse the
exposition of the metaphysical system, already sufficiently obscure.

Bogdanov himself, who usually likes to protest against the barbarous termi-
nology of the bourgeois sciences, piles up scores of new terms. One will find
all kinds of names, and wonder where in the world he obtained them.
Here are copulation and conjugation (terms taken from Biology), ingression,
egression, digression, disingression and systematic differentiation, and all sorts
of combinations of these symbols, complexes and elements.

We are not engaged in a critical review of Bogdanov’s works. We are only
making a few remarks in view of the appearance of the book Materialism and
Empirio-Criticism. It is, therefore, impossible for us to expound in detail,
either the content of all the works of our philosopher, or his philosophy.

Our purpose is to illustrate by two or three references to his fundamental
propositions, that this philosophy, in its starting points, rests on the same
idealistic foundations, sensation-elements and complexes; on the denial of
matter, of the external world; on the negation of the tenets of every kind of
materialism and natural science, and on the denial that matter, and not
spirit, is the prius.

It would be easy to show in all of Bogdanov’s new works, how the idealistic
tenets are perniciously reflected in his philosophy; how they convert his postu-
lates into bare abstract-forms and lead to the proposition, that the physical
world is the socially organised experience; that matter is resistance to activi-
ty; that activity is resistance, and vice versa; that “disingression consists in
the mutual destruction of contrary directed activities” and so on and so forth.®

But this is neither the time nor place to pause upon it. It is interesting
only to note that Bogdanov presents this metaphysical nonsense to the workers
in a simpler form than that in the Tectology with its conjugation, ingression,
disingression and other terms and “laws” of ingression.

In the article “Science and the Working Class” (in Russian) he speaks of
the same general organisational science and the socialisation of science in
general.

Only God knows what this socialisation means. But the substance of it is
that we must immediately start the creation of that Tectology, or rather the
organisation of it, for that Tectology has long been in existence.

Starting from the correct proposition that the bourgeoisie gave to the
proletariat little of knowledge, a falsified science; that the class structure of


® Tectology, Part II, p. 14.


4
"
,


4
4
;


a


snes)
DIALECTIC MATERIALISM 335
ee


‘society reflects itself in the very scientific foundations of the bourgeois


scientists; that they create science in the bourgeois class society, Bogdanov
comes to the conclusion that the task of the working class is to build its own
proletarian science, to socialise it.

“The propagation of science,” he says, “amongst the masses proves to be
not merely its democratisation but its real socialisation.” ®

What that socialism of science means is not exactly stated, but it is evidently
the same Tectology, about which so much metaphysically obscure and shallow
stuff has been written.

The idea is that the “organising activity is always directed toward the
formation of some systems out of some parts and elements” (p. 79). As we
see, one cannot make a single step without these famous elements of Bogdanov.

“Now, what in general are these elements? What does man organise through
his efforts? What does nature organise through its evolutionary processes?
One characteristic may be applied in all cases—these or other activities or
resistances are organised. Investigating, we convince ourselves (1) that there
are only one and not two characteristics, (2) that it is universal, and that
there are no exceptions to it” (Ibid., p. 79).

This is a popular exposition of Bogdanov’s “scientific” views which deny the
existence of matter and substitute the notion of energy in place of Marx’s and
Engels’ notion of matter. “Matter is reduced to ‘energy,’ that is to action on
activity” (p. 80).

It would be fruitless to ask Bogdanov to what sort of action matter is re-
duced, or what this activity is. We shall hear nothing, save the fact, that
science has already decomposed the atoms, that activity is resistance, and
vice versa; that the light waves interfere according to certain laws; that
conjugation is a general fact; that the whole business is again reduced to the
elements of experience, to complexes, that is, to that metaphysical devil’s
spectre, which under the aspect of science destroys, or attempts to destroy,
in the reader the conviction that the physical world has existed independently
of those “elements” and “complexes”; the conviction that not those elements
and complexes are the prime, basic factors, but matter that which Bogdanov so
cordially dislikes and which according to him is nonexistent.

And as activities are organised, and as the “exact definition of organising
is such that this notion is proved to be universally applicable in all stages of
being and not only in the domain of life,” a very significant inference follows
therefrom:

“These same elements of the universe, which are so various and distant one
from the other, both quantitatively and qualitatively, can be subordinated to
the same organisational methods, to the organisational forms” (p. 91).

The mystery of science consists in the connection of the different incom-
mensurable series of phenomena. From this the possibility of prediction
follows, and as all elements of the universe can be subordinated to the very
same organisational methods, the riddle is solved. “The solution is the object
of universal organisational science” (p. 92). And if this is so, it is necessary
to acquaint the workers through these popular articles with the “tectological”
laws, as, for example, those cited above concerning positive and negative selec-
tion. It is this that Bogdanov deals with in his studies of organisational
sciences in the periodical Proletarian Culture.

Without pausing on all these “tectological laws,” we shall note that in these
popular articles Bogdanov teaches the workers that dialectic materialism is


unscientific and antiquated (p. 102).


9 Socialism of Science, p. 31 (in Russian).


336 V. NEVSKY


a Le


We believe that a sufficient number of quotations from Bogdanov have been
adduced (concerning the “elements,” “complexes,” “activities,” and “resist-
‘ances”) to prove that Bogdanov is repeating his old mistakes.

There is no need to pile up quotations from his other works. Their sub-
stance is the same. The reader will discover nothing new in them.

It is necessary to note, however, that Bogdanov attempts to prove that he has
been misunderstood by Plekhanov, Ilyin [Lenin], Orthodox [Liubov Axelrod],
and other followers of Marx who recognise the existence of matter, in so far
as they have attributed to his elements the same essential properties which
Mach, for example, attributed to his.1¢

But we regret to say that even now Bogdanov’s proofs are not convincing. Of
what do the above-mentioned adherents of Marx’s dialectic materialism speak?

Different as their expressions are, the substance of their dispute with
Bogdanov lies in that all of them ask Bogdanov, the empirio-monist, the same
question—What is the world’s foundation, matter or spirit? Of what do
your elements consist?

Bogdanov says on p. 140 (Joc. cit.) that Plekhanov, Ilyin and Orthodox
are mistaken in supposing that the elements of experience are nothing but
sensations.

This, don’t you see, is a crude conception. The elements in the case of
Mach and the empirio-criticists do possess a perceptual character, but their
perceptual world is regarded as the existing reality and not merely as sensation
and representations caused in us by the efficacy of “things-in-themselves.”
Bodies are perceptual and there are no others. Therefore the elements possess
the same perceptual character. A tree does really possess the qualities, green,
brown, grey, hardness, odour, etc., independently of whether or not we per-
ceive them, and only when the individual “perceives” it all, do those elements
become for him “sensations” (p. 141).

Many people, argues Bogdanov, are misled by the term experience, which
until now has been given an individualistic meaning.

But the point is, according to Bogdanov, that in whatever way experience
is interpreted, the physical world, these “bodies,” are nothing but the socially
organised experience of men. This means that where there is no socially
organised experience, there are no bodies, there is no physical, no external
world, and all discourse about the individual and socially organised experience,
about activity and resistance, is shallow evasion and idealist absurdity.

It goes without saying that there are many amusing “tectological laws” and
views in other books of Bogdanov also, but unfortunately these remarks have
gone further than the limits of mere remarks, and we must take leave of
the ingressions and the digressions, the “elements” and “complexes.” We
shall only add, that this universal “tectological’” seal is imprinted upon Bog-
danov’s Science of Social Consciousness, upon his Short Course of Political
Economy and even upon his Primer of Political Economy (all in Russian).

We cannot omit the following curious circumstance. There is not a word
mentioned, in any of the books, about production and the system of its
management during the dictatorship of the proletariat, just as there is not a
word mentioned about the dictatorship itself.

But then, these are not the only things about which Bogdanov keeps silent
in those works of his which appeared during the Dictatorship of the Proletariat.
But he says a great deal about the “philosophy of vital experience” or, to be
more correct, the philosophy of dead reaction.


10 The Philosophy of Vital Experience, pp. 140, 202, 224.


