The State and Revolution (Vladimir Lenin, 1917)
==========================================================
Lenin's theory of the state: the dictatorship of the proletariat and the withering away of the state. Vanguard Press edition, 1926. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/imperialismstate0000niko).

IMPERIALISM
- THE STATE AND
"REVOLUTION

(= = NIROLAL LENIN

m

wa

: oa

re
Seeman Ps aan,
What Shall Endure ? od

eee boy

Great roads the Romans built, that men miqht meet, one re

And walls to keep strong men apart- secure ; + ,

Now centuries have gone. and in defeat
The walls have fallen, but the roads endure.
Ethelyn Miller Hartwich

Imperialism

_—

The State and

Revolution

By N. LENIN

New York
VANGUARD PRESS

VANGUARD PRINTINGS

First—November, 1926
Second—March, 1927

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

SP 459

THE MAN (1870-1924):

Nikolai Lenin (Vladimir Ilyitch Ulianov), founder of
the Bolshevik Party and chief figure of the Russian
Revolution of November, 1917, was the son of a school
superintendent in Simbirsk, Russia. In 1895 Lenin or-
ganized the “Union for the Liberation of the Working
Class,” whereupon he was arrested, imprisoned for two
years, and then exiled to Siberia. His term of exile over,
he went abroad where, except for a short period during
the 1905 Revolution, he remained until 1917. During
these years he devoted himself to revolutionary activi-
ties, writing and publishing periodicals and books. It
was Lenin who, in 1903, caused the split in the Russian
Socialist Party into Bolsheviki and Mensheviki. In April,
1917, Lenin returned to Russia and began a vigorous
propaganda as head of the Bolshevik Party. His militant
leadership in the November fevolution and his astute
statesmanship in directing the Soviet government until
his death in 1924 are matters of common knowledge.

THE BOOKS:

IMPERIALISM (1916) was written while Lenin was in
exile in Switzerland. In this essay he examines the econ-
omic nature of imperialism, “the characteristic feature
of our era,’ which he calls “the eve of Socialist revolu-
tion.” He criticizes the opportunist Socialists as the be-
trayers of Socialism for their stand on the question of
annexations.

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION (1917) is a schol-
arly exposition of the teachings of Marx and Engels on
the State, and a criticism of the distortion of these teach-
ings by the opportunists. The writing of the book was
interrupted by the November Revolution, and Lenin was
forced to postpone the completion of it in order to de-
vote his time to active leadership. As he says in his
Afterword, “It is more pleasant and more useful to live
through the experience of a revolution than to write
about it.”

PREFACE

Tue booklet that we here present to our readers was written
at Zurich in the spring of 1916. In the working conditions
that were then imposed on us, I was naturally without a cer-
tain amount of English and French scientific literature and a
great deal of Russian literature. However, I made use of the
chief English work on Imperialism, J. A. Hobson’s book, with
all the care that it deserves.

This booklet was written under the censorship of autocracy.
Thus I was forced to confine myself strictly to a theoretical
analysis, mainly economic, of facts, and only to express the
small number of indispensable political observations with the
greatest caution, by way of allusions in that “sopian” lan-
guage—in that cursed “‘/Esopian” language—to which Tsarism
forced revolutionaries to have recourse, whenever they took up
their pens in order to undertake a “legal” work.*

Now that the days of liberty have come, it is hard to read
again these pages, mutilated by fear of the imperial censorship,
gripped and crushed in a vice of iron. Of how imperialism is
the eve of the Socialist revolution; of how social-Chauvinism
(Socialism in words, Chauvinism in deeds), is the betrayal of
Socialism, a complete crossing over to the side of the bour-
geoisie; of the manner in which the division of the working
class movement corresponds to the existing situation of Im-
perialism, I have had to speak in a slavish tongue, and to-day I
must direct the reader who is interested in these questions to
the collection of my articles published abroad from 1914 to
1917, and now in the press, entitled Against the Stream.

There is need, however, to point out the inadequacy in this
pamphlet of a passage at the end of Chapter IX, in which, in

* “7Bsopian” was the term applied to the allusive and round-about style
adopted in “‘egal’’ publications by revolutionaries in order to avoid words
which would attract the notice of the police. Thus, instead of ‘“Social-Demo-
_ crat” they wrote ‘‘consistent Marxist.”

Vv

vi PREFACE

order to show, in a guise acceptable to the censors, the cynical
trickery of the capitalists, as well as of the jingo Socialists
gone over to their service (and whom Kautsky opposes with
so much inconsistency) in the question of annexations; in or-
der to show with what cynicism they justify the annexations
of their capitalists, I was forced to put forward as an example
—Japan. The careful reader will easily substitute Russia for
Japan, and Finland, Poland, Esthonia, Khiva, Bokhara or other
countries peopled by non-Russians for Corea.

I would hope that this little book will help the reader to
understand the fundamental economic question, without the
study of which modern war and politics are unintelligible—to
be more precise, the question of the economic nature of Im-
perialism.

THE AUTHOR.
Petrograd, April 26th, 1917.

CONTENTS

IMPERIALISM
The Last Stage of Capitalism

Chapter Page
PREBACE TO UMCPERTALISM, 00s fi ee ee ee
Ree sdh 92 Pa) ee 6s ee se. ee 3

I. CONCENTRATION OF PRODUCTION AND Mo-
RN SUTRA a ie a
Il. Tue Banks anp Tuer New Roe. . ... 19

II. Frvance-CaPiraL AND FINANCIAL OLIGARCHY . 34
Peete EXPORT OF CAPITAL, = 6s 4-4 6 6 oe AF

V. THe Division oF THE WORLD AMONG CAPITAL-
TED GuRCOYE ENS Rae Ane sie 0 OS ae nN Oe

VI. Tue Division oF THE WORLD AMONG THE
TERMATELOMERSG 0 iiey tec tae wear Saco ae fe Hen 260

VII. Imperialism as A SPECIAL STAGE OF CAPITALISM 71

VIII. ParasivisM AND THE Decay OF CaPiITALIsM . 82
IX. Tue Critique of IMPERIALISM. . . . . . QI
X. THE Prace or IMpERiALisM IN History. . . 103

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

Marxist Teaching on the State and the Task of the
Proletariat in the Revolution

_ PREFACE TO THE STATE AND REVOLUTION. . . . . III

Beene Rass SOCIETY AND! THE STATE, «9. 6 3 oe EER

Il. Tue Experience oF 1848-51 . . . « « « 130 _

Vii

Vili CONTENTS

Chapter Page
Ill. THe ExperreNcE oF THE Paris COMMUNE OF

18702 MARKS SA NALYSIS' 6 °ls) resi) dent erst naeS

IV. SuppLeMENTARY EXPLANATIONS By ENGELS. . 163

V. THe Economic FouNDATION OF THE WITHER-
ING AWAY OF THE STATE ... . .« ~ 188

“NMI. THE VULGARIZATION OF Marx BY THE Oppor-
TUNIS TS: SN alee cease! Caleta

PAPTERWORD 6.) °c.) )¥'0,)7) 6¢) Je, 401 | 01), @fis'el) bee lop hm ee Sate eee
THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

Marxist Teaching on the State and the Task of the
Proletariat in the Revolution

nail
i Hat:
ees 5
SN Oe
4 vs

Se ee ee ee

Se on

an

PREFACE

THE question of the State is acquiring at the present a par-
ticular importance, both theoretical and practical.

The Imperialist war has greatly accelerated and intensified
the transformation of monopolist capitalism into State-
monopoly Capitalism. The monstrous oppression of the labor-
ing masses by the State—which is identifying itself more and
more intimately with the all-powerful capitalist combines—
is becoming ever more terrible. The foremost countries are
being converted—we speak here of their “‘rear”—into military
labor prisons for the workers.

The incredible miseries and horrors of the protracted war
are making the position of the masses unbearable and increas-
ing their indignation.

It is clear an international proletarian revolution is prepar-
ing.

The question, therefore, of its relations to the State is
acquiring a practical importance.

The accumulation of opportunist elements during the
decades of comparatively peaceful development has created
a predominance of Socialist Chauvinism in the official Socialist
parties of the whole world: Plekhanoff, Potresoff, Breshkov-
skaya, Rubanovitch, and, in a slightly concealed form, Tsere-
telli, Tchernoff and Co., in Russia; Scheidemann, Legien,
David and others in Germany; Renaudel, Guesde, Vander-
velde in France and Belgium; Hyndman and the Fabians in
England; and so on, and so on. Socialist in words, Chauvinist
in deeds, these “leaders of Socialism” distinguish themselves
by a base, servile adaptation to the interests not only of
“their” national bourgeoisie, but also of “their” State—for
plenty of smaller, weaker nationalities have long since been
exploited and enslaved by most of the so-called Great Powers.
The Imperialist war is just a scramble for more division and
‘re-partition of the same kind of booty.

IIt

112 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

The struggle for the emancipation of the laboring masses
from the oppression of the bourgeoisie in general, and the
Imperialist bourgeoisie in particular, cannot be separated from
a struggle against the opportunist superstitions concerning the
State.

We, first of all, survey the teachings of Marx and Engels
on the State, dwelling particularly fully on the forgotten
parts, and on those aspects of their teachings which the oppor-
tunists have distorted. We then analyze specially the chief
representative of these pervertors, Karl Kautsky (1889-1914),
who has suffered such a pitiful political bankruptcy during
the present war. Finally, we bring forward the most im-
portant results of the experiences of the Russian revolutions
of 1905, and particularly of 1917.

This last revolution is evidently completing at the present
time (beginning of August, 1917), the first stage of its de-
velopment; but in general the whole of this revolution can
only be looked upon as a link in the chain of Socialist prole-
tarian revolutions which will result from the imperialist war.

The question of the relation of a proletarian Socialist revo-
lution to the State is, therefore, not only of practical political
importance, but is an urgent need of the day, being concerned
with the elucidation for the masses of what they will have
to do for their liberation from the yoke of Capitalism in the
very near future.

THE AUTHOR.

August, 1917.

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

CHAPTER I
CLASS SOCIETY AND THE STATE

1. The State as the Product of the Irreconcilability of Class
Antagonisms.

Marx’s doctrines are now undergoing the same fate, which,
more than once in the course of history, has befallen the doc-
trines of other revolutionary thinkers and leaders of oppressed
classes struggling for emancipation. During the lifetime of
great revolutionaries, the oppressing classes have invariably
meted out to them relentless persecution, and received their
teaching with the most savage hostility, most furious hatred,
and a ruthless campaign of lies and slanders. After their
death, however, attempts are usually made to turn them into
harmless saints, canonizing them, as it were, and investing
their name with a certain halo by way of “consolation” to
the oppressed classes, and with the object of duping them;
while at the same time emasculating and vulgarizing the real
essence of their revolutionary theories and blunting their revo-
lutionary edge. At the present time the bourgeoisie and the
opportunists within the Labor Movement are co-operating in
this work of adulterating Marxism. ‘They omit, obliterate,
and distort the revolutionary side of its teaching, its revolu-
tionary soul, and push to the foreground and extol what is,
or seems, acceptable to the bourgeoisie. All the Socialist
Chauvinists are now “Marxists”—save the mark! And more
and more do German bourgeois professors, erstwhile specialists
in the demolition of Marx, speak now of the “‘National-
German” Marx, who forsooth, has educated the splendidly
_ organized working class for the present predatory war.

113

14, THE STATE: AND ( REVOLUTION

In these circumstances, when the distortion of Marxism is
so widespread, our first task is to resuscitate the real nature
of Marx’s teaching on the subject of the State. For this pur-
pose it will be necessary to quote copiously from the works
of Marx and Engels themselves. Of course, long extracts
will make our text cumbersome and will in no way add to
its lucidity; but we cannot possibly avoid them. All, or at
any rate, all the most essential passages in the works of Marx
and Engels on the subject of the State must be given as fully
as possible, in order that the reader may form an independent
and complete view of the ideas of the founders of scientific
Socialism and their development, and in order that their dis-
tortions by the present predominant Kautsky school may be
proved in black and white and rendered plain to all.

Let us begin with the most popular of Engels’ works, “The
Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State,” the
sixth edition of which was published in Stuttgart as far back
as 1894. Summarizing his historical analysis Engels says:

“The State in no way constitutes a force imposed on
Society from outside. Nor is the State ‘the reality of the
Moral Idea,’ ‘the image and reality of Reason’ as Hegel
asserted. The/State is the product of Society at a certain
stage of its development. The State is tantamount to an
acknowledgment that the given society has become en-
tangled in an insoluble contradiction with itself, that it
has broken up into irreconcilable antagonisms, of which
it is powerless to rid itself. And in order that these antago-
nisms, these classes with their opposing economic interests
may not devour one another and Society itself in their
sterile struggle, some force standing, seemingly, above
Society, becomes necessary so as to moderate the force of
their collisions and to keep them within the bounds of
‘order.’ And this force arising from Society, but placing
itself above it, which gradually separates itself from it—
this force is the State.’—-(Pages 117-118 of 6th German
Edition. )

Here, we have, expressed in all its clearness, the basic idea
of Marxism on the question of the historical role and mean-

Fa a i ai

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 115

ing of the State. The State is the product and the manifes-
tation of the irreconcilability of class antagonisms. When,
where and to what extent the State arises, depends directly
on when, where and to what extent the class antagonisms
of a given society cannot be objectively reconciled. And,
conversely, the existence of the State proves that the class
antagonisms are irreconcilable.

It is precisely on this most important and fundamental

- point that distortions of Marxism arise along two main lines.

On the one hand, the middle class (bourgeois) and particu-
larly the lower middle class (petty bourgeois), ideologists,
compelled by the pressure of indisputable historical facts to
recognize that the State only exists where there are class
antagonisms and class struggles, “‘correct” Marx in such a
way as to make it appear that the State is an organ for the
reconciliation of classes. According to Marx, the State can
neither arise nor maintain itself if a reconciliation of classes
is possible. But with the middle class and philistine pro-
fessors and publicists, the State (and this frequently on the
strength of benevolent references to Marx) becomes a media-
tor and conciliator of classes. According to Marx, the State
is the organ of class domination, the organ of oppression of
one class by another. Its aim is the creation of order which
legalizes and perpetuates this oppression by moderating the
collisions between the classes. But in the opinion of the lower
middle class politicians, the establishment of order is equiva-
lent to the reconciliation of classes, and not to the oppression

of one class by another. To moderate their collisions does’

not mean, according to them, to deprive the oppressed class
of certain definite means and methods in its struggle for
throwing off the yoke of the oppressors, but to conciliate it.

For instance, when, in the Revolution of 1917, the ques-
tion of the real meaning and role of the State arose, in all
its importance, as a practical question demanding immediate
action on a wide mass scale, all the Socialist-Revolutionaries
and Mensheviks rattled down, suddenly and without reserva-
tion, to the lower middle class theory of the “conciliation of
classes by the State.” Innumerable resolutions and articles
by publicists of both these parties were saturated through and

"

i

116 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

through with this purely middle class and philistine theory
of conciliation. ‘That the State is the organ of domination
of a definite class which cannot be reconciled to its social
antipodes—this the lower middle class democracy is never
able to understand. Their attitude towards the State is one
of the most telling proofs that our Socialist-Revolutionaries
and Mensheviks are not Socialists at all (which we, Bolshe-
viks, have always maintained), but only lower middle class
democrats with a phraseology very nearly Socialist.

On the other hand, the distortion of Marx by the Kautsky
school is far more subtle. “Theoretically,” there is no denial
that the State is the organ of class domination, or that the
class antagonisms are irreconcilable. But what is forgotten
or overlooked is this:—If the State is the product of the
irreconcilable character of class antagonisms, if it is a force
standing above society and “‘separating itself gradually from
it,” then it is clear that the liberation of the oppressed class
is impossible without a violent revolution, and without the
destruction of the machinery of State power, which has been
created by the governing class and in which this “separation”
is embodied. ‘This inference, theoretically quite self-evident,
was drawn by Marx, as we shall see later, with the greatest
precision from a‘concrete historical analysis of the problems
of Revolution. And it is exactly this inference which Kautsky
—we shall show this fully in our subsequent remarks—has
“forgotten” and distorted.

2. The Special Bodies of Armed Men, Prisons, Etc.
Engels continues: —

“As compared with the ancient gentilic (tribal or clan)
organization, the State is distinguished, first of all, by the

grouping of the subjects of the State according to territorial
divisions.”

Such a grouping seems “natural” to us, but it came after
a prolonged and costly struggle against the old form of tribal,
gentilic Society.

“The second distinguishing feature is the establishment
of a public power which is no longer identical with the

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 117

population and which is organized as an armed force.

“This distinct public power is necessary, because a self-

acting armed organization of the population has become
impossible with the break up of Society into classes. . . .

This public authority. exists in every State. It consists not

only of armed men, but also of material additions in the

shape of prisons and repressive institutions of all kinds

| which were unknown in the gentilic (clan) form of

Society.”

Engels develops the conception of that “force” which is ‘
termed the State—a force arising from Society, but placing
itself above it and becoming more and more divorced from
| it. What does this force consist of, in the main? It consists
of special bodies of armed men who have at their comfnand
prisons,-€tc. 2 Tee ON er
“We are justified in speaking of special bodies of armed men,
| because the public power peculiar to every State “is not iden-

tical” with the armed population, with its “self-acting armed

organization.” Like all revolutionary thinkers, Engels tries

to draw the attention of the class-conscious workers to that

very fact which to prevailing philistinism appears least of all

worthy of attention, most common and sanctified by solid,
| indeed, one might say, petrified prejudices. A standing army
_ and police are the chief instruments of force of the State
authority: but can it, then, be otherwise?

From the point of view of the vast majority of Europeans
at the end of the 19th century to whom Engels addressed
himself and who had neither lived through nor observed at
close quarters a single important revolution, this could not

. be otherwise. They could not understand what was meant
by this “‘self-acting armed organization of the population.”

To the question, whence arose the necessity for forming,

special bodies of armed men (police and standing or) ae

ing above Society and becomin divorced from it, the Wéstern
European and Russian philistines are inclined to answer with +
a few phrases, borrowed from Spencer, about the complexity
of social life, the differentiation of functions and so forth.

Such a reference seems “scientific” and effectively dulls the
senses of the average man, obscuring the most important and

118 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

basic fact, viz.: the break up of Society into irreconcilably
antagonistic classes. Without such a split the “‘self-acting
armed organization of the population” might have differed
from the primitive organization of a herd of monkeys merely
grasping sticks, or of primitive man, or races united in a
clan form of society, by its complexity, its high technique,
and so forth, but would still have been possible. It cannot,
however, exist now, because Society, in the period of civiliza-
tion, is broken up into antagonistic and, indeed, irreconcilably
antagonistic classes, the “‘self-acting” arming of which would
lead to armed struggles between them. The State is, there-
fore, formed, a special force is created in the form of special
bodies of armed men, and every revolution, in shattering the
State machinery, demonstrates to us how the governing class
aims at the restoration of the special bodies of armed men
at its service, and how the oppressed class tries to create a
new organization of a similar nature, capable of serving not
the exploiting, but the exploited class.

In the above discussion, Engels poses theoretically the very
same question which is presented to us in a practical, palpable
form, on a mass scale, by every great revolution, viz.: the
question of the relation between “‘special bodies of armed men”
and the “‘self-acting armed organization of the population.”
We shall see how this question is illustrated concretely by the
experience of the European and Russian revolutions.

But let us return to Engels.

He points out that sometimes (for instance, here and there
in North America) this public power is weak (he has in
mind here rare exceptions in capitalist society and parts of
North America in its pre-Imperialist days, where the free
colonist predominated), but that in general, it tends to be-
come stronger:—

“The above-mentioned public force increases with the
intensification of class antagonisms within the State, and
with the growth in size and population of the adjacent
States. One has but to glance at present-day Europe in
which the class struggle and rivalry in conquests have
screwed up that public force to such a pitch that it

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 119

threatens to swallow up the whole of Society and even the
State itself. .

This was written as far back as the beginning of the
*nineties of last century, Engels’ last Preface being dated June
16th, 1891. The turn towards Imperialism, in the shape both
of a complete domination of the trusts and of the all-powerful
large banks, and of a colonial policy on a grand scale and so
forth, had only just begun in France, and was even weaker
in North America and in Germany. Since then the “rivalry
in conquests” has made gigantic advances—especially as, by
the beginning of the second decade of the 2oth century, the
whole world had been finally divided up between these “rival
conquerors,” that is, between the great predatory Powers.
Military and naval armaments then grew to monstrous pro-
portions, and the predatory war of 1914-17 for the domina-
tion of the world by England or Germany, for the division
of the spoils, bids fair to bring about “the swallowing up”
of all the forces of society by the rapacious State power, and
lead to a complete catastrophe.

Already in 1891 Engels was able to point to “rivalry in
conquests” as one of the most important features of the
foreign policy of the Great Powers but in 1914-1917, when
this rivalry, many times intensified, had given birth to an
Imperialist war, the rascally Social-Chauvinists cover up their
defence of the policy of grab of “their” capitalist classes by
phrases about the “defence of the Fatherland,” or “the de-
fence of the Republic and the Revolution” and so on, and
so on!

3. The State as an Instrument of Exploitation of the
Oppressed Class.

For the maintenance of a special public force standing
above society, taxes and State loans are indispensable.

“Wielding public power and the right to exact taxes,
the officials [Engels writes] are raised as organs of society,
above society. The free voluntary respect enjoyed by the

4

1200 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

organs of the tribal (clan) society is no longer sufficient
for them, even could they win it.”

Special laws are enacted regarding the sanctity and the in-
violability of the officials. “The most insignificant police
servant” has more authority than the representative of the
clan, but even the head of a civilized State might well envy
the Elder of a clan in respect of the “spontaneous, unforced
regard on the part of society” enjoyed by that Elder.

Here is the question raised of the privileged position of —
the officials as organs of the State power, and the fundamental
problem that has to be answered is this: What.isit.that.places _
them above society? We shall see how this theoretical prob-
lém “was solved practically by the Paris Commune in 1871
and how it was slurred over in a reactionary manner in 1912
by Kautsky.

“Since the State arose out of the need of keeping in
check the antagonisms of classes; since at the same time
it arose as a vesult of the collisions of these classes, it is, as
a general rule, the State of the most powerful and economi-
cally predominant class, which by means of the State also
becomes the predominant class politically, thereby obtain-
ing new means for the oppression and exploitation of the
oppressed class.”

It was not only the ancient and feudal States which were
organs of exploitation of the slaves and serfs, but the

“modern representative State, too, is the means of exploita-
tion of wage labor by capital. By way of exceptions, how-
ever, there are periods when the warring classes attain such
an equilibrium of strength that the State power for a time
becomes, to an extent, independent of both classes and
appears as a mediator between them. . . .”

Such, for instance, were the absolute monarchies of the
17th and 18th centuries, the Bonapartism of the First and
Third Empires in France, and the Bismarck regime in Ger-
many.

THE STATE AND 'REVOLUTION 121

Such, we may add, is now the Kerensky Government in
Republican Russia after it has initiated the persecution of
the revolutionary proletariat, at a moment when the Soviets,
thanks to the leadership of the lower middle class democrats,
have already become impotent whilst the capitalist class is.
not yet strong enough to dissolve them.

“In a democratic Republic [Engels continues] wealth
uses its power indirectly, but so much the more effectively,
first, by means of direct bribery of officials [as in America];
second, by means of an alliance between the Government
and the Stock Exchange” [asin France and America].

At the present time, Imperialism and the domination of
the banks have reduced to a fine art both these methods ef
defending and practically asserting the omnipotence of wealth
in democratic Republics of all descriptions. If, for instamece,
in the very first months of the Russian Democratic Republic
—one might say during the honeymoon of the union of the
“Socialist”’-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks with the bour-
geoisie in the Coalition Ministry, M. Paltchinski obstructed
every measure of restraint against the capitalists and war-
profiteering, or the plunder of the public treasury by army
contractors; and if, after his resignation, M. Paltchinski (re-
placed, of course, by an exactly similar Paltchinski) was
“rewarded” by the capitalists with a “cushy” little job carry-
ing a salary of 120,000 roubles (£12,000) per annum, what
was this? Direct or indirect bribery? A league of the Gov-
ernment with the capitalist syndicates, or “only” friendly
relations? What is the precise role played by Tchernoff,
Tseretelli, Avksentieff and Skobeleff? Are they the “direct,”
or “only” the indirect allies of the millionaire thieves who

are plundering the public treasury? The omnipotence of

““wealth” is also more “secure” in a democratic republic, be-
cause it does not depend on the bad political form of capital-
ism. The democratic republic is the best possible political
form for capitalism, and, therefore, once capital has gained
control (through the Paltchinskis, Tchernoffs, Tseretellis and
Co.) of this very best form, it establishes its power so secure-
ly, so firmly that no change of persons, or institutions or

- parties, in the bourgeois republic can shake it.

122 THE STATE AND ‘REVOLUTION

We must also note that Engels quite definitely regards
universal suffrage as a means of capitalist domination. Uni-
versal suffrage, he says (summing up obviously the long ex-
perience of German Social-Democracy), is “an index of the
maturity of the working class; it cannot and never will, give
anything more in the present state.” The lower middle class
democrats such as our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Menshe-
viks and also their twin brothers, the Social-Chauvinists and
opportunists of Western Europe, all expect a “great deal”
from this universal suffrage. They themselves think and instil
into the minds of the people the wrong idea that universal
suffrage in the “present state” is really capable of expressing
the will of the majority of the laboring masses and of secur-
ing its realization.

Here we can only note this wrong idea, and point out that
this perfectly clear, exact and concrete statement by Engels
is distorted at every step in the propaganda and agitation of
the “official” (that is, opportunist) Socialist parties. A de-
tailed exposure of all the falseness of this idea, which Engels
simply brushes aside, is given in our further account of the
views of Marx and Engels on the ‘‘modern” State.

A general summary of his views is given by Engels in the
most popular of his works in the following words:—

“Thus, the State has not always existed. ‘There were
societies which did without it, which had no idea of the
State or of State power. At a given stage of economic
development which was necessarily bound up with the break
up of society into classes, the State became a necessity, as
a result of this division. We are now rapidly approaching —
a stage in the development of production, in which the
-existence of these classes is not only no longer necessary,
but is becoming a direct impediment to production. Classes
will vanish as inevitably as they inevitably arose in the past.
With the disappearance of classes the State, too, will inevi-
tably disappear. When organizing production anew on the
basis of a free and equal association of the producers,
Society will banish the whole State machine to a place
which will then be the most proper one for it—to the

rr

i
ae
x,

THE STATE- AND REVOLUTION 123

museum of antiquities side by side with the spinning-wheel
and the bronze axe.”

It is not often that we find this passage quoted in the
propagandist literature of contemporary Social-Democracy.
But even when we do come across it, it is generally quoted
as some sacred or ritual formula, that is, merely to show
official respect for Engels, without any attempt to gauge the
width and the depth of the revolutionary act pre-supposed
by this “banishment of the whole State machine to the
museum of antiquities.” And often one cannot even trace
the least comprehension of what Engels calls the State
machine.

4. The Withering Away of the State and Revolution by
Force.

Engels’ words regarding the “withering away” of the State
enjoy such a popularity, are so often quoted, and reveal so
clearly the essense of the common adulteration of Marxism
in an opportunist sense that we must examine them in detail.
Let us give the whole argument from which they are taken.

“The proletariat takes control of the State authority and,
first of all, converts the means of production into State
property. But by this very act it destroys itself, as a pro-
letariat, destroying at the same time all class differences
and class antagonisms, and with this, also, the State. Past
and present Society, which moved amidst class antagonisms,
had to have the State, that is, an organization of the ex-
ploiting class for the support of its external conditions of
production, therefore, in particular, for the forcible re-
tention of the exploited class in such conditions of oppres-
sion (such as slavery, serfdom, wage-labor), as are de-
termined by the given methods of production. The State
was the official representative of the whole of Society, its
embodiment in a visible corporation; but it was only in
so far as it was the State of that class which, in the given
epoch, alone represented the whole of society. In ancient

1244 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

times it was the State of the slave-owners—the only citizens
of the State; in the middle ages it was the State of the
feudal nobility: in our own times it is the State of the capi-
talists. When, ultimately, the State really becomes the
representative of the whole of society, it will make itself
superfluous. From the time when, together with class
domination and the struggle for individual existence, re-
sulting from the present anarchy in production, those con-
flicts and excesses which arise from this struggle will all
disappear—from that time there will, therefore, be no need
for the State. The first act of the State, in which it really
acts as the representative of the whole of Society, namely,
the assumption of control over the means of production on
behalf of society, is also its last independent act as a State.
The interference of the authority of the State with social
relations will then become superfluous in one field after
another, and finally will cease of itself. The authority of
the Government over persons will be replaced by the ad-
ministration of things and the direction of the processes
of production. The State will not be ‘abolished’; it will
wither away. It is from this point of view that we must
appraise the phrase, ‘a free popular State’-—a phrase which,
for a time, had a right to be employed as a purely propa-
ganda slogan, but which in the long run is scientifically
untenable. It is also from this point of view that we must
appraise the demand of the so-called anarchists that the
State ‘should be abolished overnight.’ ”—Herr Eugen Diihr-
ings Umwalzung der Wissenschaft, pp. 302-303, 3rd Ger-
man Edition.

Without fear of committing an error, it can be said that
the only point in this argument by Engels so singularly rich
in ideas, which has become an integral part of Socialist
thought among modern Socialist parties has been that, accord-
ing to Marx, the State “‘withers away” in contradiction to
the Anarchist teaching of the “abolition” of the State. To
emasculate Marxism in such a manner is simply to reduce
it to opportunism, for such an “interpretation” only leaves
the semi-articulate conception of a slow, even, continuous
change, free from leaps and storms, free from revolution. The

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 125

current popular conception, if one may say so, of the “with-
ering away” of the State undoubtedly means a quenching,
if not negation, of revolution. Yet, such an “interpretation”
is a most vulgar distortion of Marxism, advantageous only
to the capitalist classes and based theoretically on the neglect
of the most important conditions and considerations pointed
out in the very passage summarizing Engels’ ideas, which we
have just quoted in full.

In the first place, at the very outset of his argument, Engels
says that in assuming State power, the proletariat “by that
very act destroys the State as such.” It is not the custom
to reflect on what this really means. Generally, it is either
ignored altogether or it is considered as a piece of “Hegelian
weakness” on Engels’ part. As a matter of fact, however,
these words express succinctly the experience of one of the
greatest proletarian revolutions—the Paris Commune of 1871,
of which we shall speak in greater detail in its own place.
In reality, Engels speaks here of the destruction of the capi-
talist State by the proletarian revolution, while the words
about its withering away refer to the remains of a proletarian
State after the Socialist revolution. The capitalist State does
not wither away, according to Engels, but is destroyed by
the proletariat in the course of the revolution. Only the pro-
letarian State or semi-State withers away after the revolution.

Second, the State is a “particular power of suppression.”
This splendid and extremely profound definition of Engels is
given by him here with complete lucidity. It follows there-
from that the “particular power of suppression” of the pro-
letariat by the capitalist class of the-millions of workers by
a handful of tich, must be replaced by a “particular power
of suppression” of the capitalist class by the proletariat (the
dictatorship of the proletariat). It is just this that constitutes
the destruction of the State as such. It is just this that con-
stitutes the “‘act” of taking possession of the means of pro-
duction on behalf of Society. And it is obvious that such a
substitution of one (capitalist) “particular power” by another
(proletarian) ‘‘particular power” could in no way take place
in the form of a “‘withering away.”

__ Third, in using the term, “withering away,” Engels re-
fers quite clearly and definitely to the period after “the tak-

1246 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

ing over of the means of production by the State on behalf
of the whole of society,” that is, after the Socialist Revolu-
tion. We all know that the proletarian form of the “State”
is then an absolutely complete democracy. But it never enters
the head of any of the opportunists who shamelessly distort
Marx that Engels deals here with the withering away of the
democracy. At first sight this seems very strange. But it
will only be unintelligible to one who has not reflected on the
fact that democracy is also a State and that, consequently,
democracy will also disappear when the State disappears. Only
a revolution can “destroy” the capitalist State. The State in
general, that is, most complete democracy, can only wither
away.

Fourth, having formulated his famous proposition that “the
State withers away,” Engels at once explains concretely that
this proposition is directed equally against the opportunists
and the anarchists. In doing this, however, Engels draws, in
the first place, that deduction from his proposition, which is
directed against the opportunists.

One can wager that out of every ten thousand persons who
have read or heard of the “withering away” of the State,
9,990 do not know at all, or do not remember that Engels
did not direct his conclusions from this proposition against the
anarchists alone. And out of the remaining ten, nine do not
know the meaning of a “free popular State” nor the reason
why an attack on this watchword contains an attack on the
opportunists. This is how history is written! This is how a
great revolutionary doctrine is imperceptibly adulterated and
adapted to current philistinism! ‘The reference to the anar-
chists has been repeated thousands of times, has been vulgar-
ized in the crudest fashion possible until. it has acquired the
strength of a prejudice, whereas the reference to the oppor-
tunists has been hushed up and “‘forgotten.”

“A free popular State” was the demand and current watch-
word in the program of the German Social-Democrats of the
*seventies. ‘There is no political substance in this watchword
other than a pompous middle class circumlocution of the idea
of democracy. In so far as it pointed in “lawful” manner at
a democratic republic, Engels was prepared “for a time” to
justify it from a propaganda point of view. But this watch-

THe STATE AND<REVOLUTION 127

word was really opportunist, for it not only took an ex-
aggerated view of the attractiveness of bourgeois democracy,
but also implied a lack of understanding of the Socialist crit-
icism of the State in general. We are in favor of a demo-
cratic republic as the best form of the State for the prole-
tariat under capitalism, but we have no right to forget that
wage slavery is the lot of the people even in the most demo-
cratic middle class republic. Furthermore, every State is a
“particular power of suppression” of the oppressed class. Con-
sequently, no State is either “free” or “popular.” Marx and
Engels explained this repeatedly to their party comrades in the
*seventies.

Fifth, in the same work of Engels, from which everyone re-
members his argument on “withering away” of the State, there
is also a disquisition on the nature of a violent revolution;
and the historical appreciation of its role becomes, with Engels,
a veritable panegyric of a revolution by force. This, of course,
no one remembers. To talk or even to think of the im-
portance of this idea, is not considered respectable by our
modern Socialist parties, and in the daily propaganda and agi-
tation among the masses it plays no part whatever. Yet
it is indissolubly bound up with the “withering away” of the
State in one harmonious whole. Here is Engels’ argument:

“That force also plays another part in history (other
than that of a perpetuation of evil), namely a revolutionary
part; that, as Marx says, it is the midwife of every old
society when it is pregnant with a new one; that force is
the instrument and the means by which social movements
hack their way through and break up the dead and fos-
silized political forms—of all this not a word by Herr
Dihring. Duly, with sighs and groans, does he admit the
possibility that for the overthrow of the system of exploita-
tion force may, perhaps, be necessary, but most unfortunate
if you please, because all use of force, forsooth, demoralizes
its user! And this is said in face of the great moral and
intellectual advance which has been <he result of every vic-
torious revolution! And this is said in Germany where a
violent collision—which might perhaps be forced on the
people—should have, at the very least, this advantage that

128 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

it would destroy the spirit of subservience which has been
permeating the national mind ever since the degradation
and humiliation of the Thirty Years’ War. And this turbid,
flabby, impotent, parson’s mode of thinking dares offer it-
self for acceptance to the most revolutionary party history
has ever known!” (p. 193, 3rd German Edition.)

How can this eulogy of a revolution by force, which Engels
used to propound to the German Social-Democrats between
1878-94, that is, up to the very day of his death, be recon-
ciled with the theory of the “withering away” of the State,
and combined into one doctrine? Usually the two views are
combined by a process of eclecticism, by an unprincipled,
sophistic, arbitrary selection sometimes of passages here and
there (to oblige the powers that be)—and in ninety-nine
cases out of a hundred (if not more often), it is the idea of
the withering away of the State that is specially emphasized.
Dialectics is replaced by eclectics—this is the most usual, the
most widespread method used in the official Social-Democratic
literature of our day in respect of Marxist teachings. Such a
substitution is, of course, not new; one can see it even in the
history of classic Greek philosophy. In the process of camou-
flaging Marxism,as opportunism, the substitution of eclec-
ticism for dialectics is the best method of deceiving the masses.
It gives an illusory satisfaction. It seems to take into ac-
count all sides of the process, all the tendencies of develop-
ment, all the contradictory factors and so forth, whereas, in
reality, it offers no consistent revolutionary view of the

process of social development at all.
ee’ We have already said above and shall show more fully at a
later stage that the teaching of Marx and Engels regarding
the inevitability of a violent revolution refers to the capitalist
State. It cannot be replaced by the proletarian State (the
dictatorship of the proletariat) through mere “withering
away,” but, in accordance with the general rule, can only be
brought about by a violent revolution. The hymn of praise
sung in its honour by Engels and fully corresponding to the
repeated declarations of Marx (see the concluding passages of
the “Poverty of Philosophy” and the “Communist Mani-
festo,” with its proud and open declaration of the inevita-

:
|

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 129

bility of a violent revolution; also Marx’s “Criticism of the
Gotha Programme of 1875,” in which, thirty years after, he
mercilessly castigates its opportunist character)—this praise
is by no means a mere “impulse,” a mere declamation, or a
mere polemical sally. The necessity of systematically foster-
ing among the masses this and only this point of view about
violent revolution lies at the root of the whole of Marx’s and
Engels’ teaching, and it is just the neglect of such propaganda
and agitation both by the present predominant social-chauvin-
ists and the Kautskian schools that brings their betrayal of_it
into prominent relief.

The substitution of a proletarian for the capitalist State is

r,

impossible without a violent revolution, while the abolition go

of the proletarian State, that i is, of all States, is only possible
through “withering away.”

Marx and Engels gave a full and concrete illustration of
these views in their study of each revolutionary situation sep-
arately, by an analysis of the lessons of the experience of each
individual revolution. To this, undoubtedly the most im-
portant part of their work, we shall now pass.

C.HUACE TER ik b's
THE EXPERIENCE OF 1848-§1.
1.—The Eve of Revolution.

Tue first productions of mature Marxism—The Poverty
of Philosophy and The Communist Manifesto—date from
the very eve of the revolution of 1848. As a result of this
fact, we have in them, side by side with a statement of the
general principles of Marxism, a reflection, to a certain degree,
of the concrete revolutionary situation at that moment. Con-
sequently, it will possibly be more to the point to examine
what the authors of these works had written of the State
immediately before they drew conclusions from their expe-
rience of the years 1848-51.

“The working class,” wrote Marx in The Poverty of
Philosophy, ‘‘will, in the course of its development, replace
the old bourgeois society by a society which will exclude
classes and their antagonisms: there will no longer be
any political authority in the proper sense of the word,
since political authority is the official expression of the an-
tagonism of classes within bourgeois society.” (German
Edition, 1885, p. 182.)

It is instructive to compare, side by side with this general
statement of the idea of the disappearance of the State with
the disappearance of classes, the statement contained in The
Communist Manifesto, written by Marx and Engels a few
months later—to be precise, in November, 1847:

“Tracing the most general phases of the development of
the proletariat, we followed up the more or less hidden civil
war within existing society to the point at which it is trans-
formed into open revolution, and the proletariat establishes

130

.
i
,
:

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 131

its rule by means of the violent overthrow of the capitalist
class. . . . We have already seen that the first step in the
workers’ revolution is the transformation [literally “the
promotion”] of the proletariat into the ruling class, the
conquest of democracy. ... The proletariat will use its
political supremacy in order gradually to wrest the whole of
capital from the capitalist class, to centralize all the in-
struments of production in the hands of the State, ie., of
the proletariat organized as the ruling class, and to increase
as quickly as possible the total of productive forces.” (7th
German Edition, 1906, pp. 31-37.)

Here we have a formulation of one of the most remarkable
and most important ideas of Marxism on the subject of the
State—namely, the idea of “the dictatorship of the prole-
tariat” (as Marx and Engels began to write after the Paris
Commune) ; and also a definition of the State, in the highest
degree interesting, but nevertheless also belonging to the cate-
gory of forgotten thoughts of Marxism: “The State, that is,
the proletariat organized as the ruling class.”

This definition of the State, so far from having ever been
explained in the current propagandist and agitation literature
of the official Social-Democratic parties, has been deliberately
forgotten, as it is quite irreconcilable with reformism, strikes
straight at the heart of the common opportunist prejudices
and middle class illusions about the “peaceful development of
democracy.”

“The proletariat needs the State,” a phrase repeated by all
the opportunists, social-chauvinists and Kautskians, who as-
sure us that this is what Marx taught. They “forget” how-
ever, to add that, in the first place, the proletariat, according
to Marx, needs only a withering away State—a State that is so
constituted that it begins to wither away immediately, and
cannot but wither away; and, secondly, the workers “need” a
State, “that is, the proletariat organized as the ruling class.”

The State is a particular form of organization of force; it
is the organization of violence for the purpose of holding
down some class. What is the class which the proletariat must
hold down? It can only be, naturally, the exploiting class,
ie., the bourgeoisie. The toilers need the State only to over-

1332 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

come the resistance of the exploiters, and only the prole-
tariat can guide this suppression and bring it to fulfillment—
the proletariat, the only class revolutionary to the finish, the
only class which can unite all the toilers and the exploited in
the struggle against the capitalist class for its complete dis-
placement from power.

The exploiting classes need political supremacy in order to
maintain exploitation, ie., in the selfish interests of a tiny
minority, and against the vast majority of the community.
The exploited classes need political supremacy in order com-
pletely to abolish all exploitation, i.e., in the interests of the
enormous majority of the people, and against the tiny ma-
jority constituted by the slave-owners of modern times—the
landlords and the capitalists. ‘The lower middle class demo-
crats, these sham Socialists who have replaced the class-war
by dreams of harmony between classes, have imagined even
the transition to Socialism, in a dream, as it were—that is,
not in the form of the overthrow of the supremacy of the
exploiting class, but in the form of the peaceful submission
of the minority to the fully enlightened majority. This lower
middle class Utopia, indissolubly connected with the vision of
a State above classes, in practice led to the betrayal of the
interests of the toiling classes, as was shown, for example, in
the history of the revolutions of 1848 and 1871, and in that
of “Socialist”? participation in bourgeois ministries in England,
France, Italy and other countries, at the end of the r9th and
the beginning of the 2oth centuries.

Marx fought all his life against this lower middle class
Socialism—now re-born in Russia in the Menshevik and S.R.
parties. He carried his analysis of the class war logically, _
right up to the doctrine on political power and the State.

The overthrow of capitalist supremacy can be accomplished
only by the proletariat, as the particular class, which is being
prepared for this work, and is provided both with the oppor-
tunity and the power to perform it, by the economic condi-
tions of its existence. While the capitalist class breaks up and
dissolves the peasantry and all the lower middle classes, it
welds together, unites and organizes the town proletariat.
Only the proletariat—on account of its economic role in pro-
duction on a large scale—is capable of leading all the toiling

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 133

and exploited masses, who are exploited, oppressed, crushed by
the capitalists often more, not less, than the town proletariat,
but who are incapable of carrying on the struggle for free-
dom unaided.

The doctrine of the class war, as applied by Marx to the
question of the State and of the Socialist revolution, leads in-
evitably to the recognition of the political supremacy of the
proletariat, of its dictatorship, i.e., of an authority shared
with none else and relying directly upon the armed force of
the masses. The overthrow of the capitalist class is feasible
only by the transformation of the proletariat into the ruling
class, able to crush the inevitable and desperate resistance of
the bourgeoisie, and to organize, for the new settlement of
economic order, all the toiling and exploited masses.

The proletariat needs the State, the centralized organization
of force and violence, both for the purpose of crushing the
resistance of the exploiters and for the purpose of guiding the
great mass of the population—the peasantry, the lower middle
class, the semi-proletariat—in the work of economic Socialist
reconstruction.

By educating a workers’ party, Marxism educates also the
advance-guard of the proletariat, capable of assuming power
and of leading the whole community to Socialism, fit to direct
and organize the new order, to be the teacher, guide, leader
of all the toiling and exploited in the task of building up their
common life without capitalists and against capitalists. As
against this, the opportunism predominant at present breeds
in the Labor movement a class of representatives of the better-
paid workers, who lose touch with the rank and file, “‘get on”
fairly well under capitalism, and sell their birthright for a
‘mess of pottage, i.e., renounce their role of revolutionary
leaders of the people against the capitalist class.

“The State, ie., the proletariat organized as the ruling
-class’—this theory of Marx’s is indissolubly connected with
all his teaching concerning the revolutionary part to be played
in history by the proletariat. The fulfilment of this part is
proletarian dictatorship, the political supremacy of the pro-
letariat.

But, if the proletariat needs the State, as a particular form
of organization of force against the capitalist class, the ques-

134 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

tion almost spontaneously forces itself upon us: Is it thinkable
that such an organization can be created without a prelim-
inary breaking-up and destruction of the machinery of gov-
ernment created for its own use by the capitalist class? The
Communist Manifesto leads us straight to this conclusion,
and it is of this conclusion that Marx wrote when summing
up the practical results of the revolutionary experience gained
between 1848 and 1851.

2. The Results of Revolution.

On this question of the State with which we are concerned,
Marx sums up his conclusions from the revolutions of the
years 1848-51 in the following way (in his work The
Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte):

*‘Nevertheless, the revolution is thorough. It is still pass-
ing through its purgatory. It is doing its work systemat-
ically. By December 2nd, 1851 [the day of Louis Bona-
parte’s coup d’etat] it had fulfilled half of its programme;
now it is fulfilling the other half. First, it perfected par-—
liamentary power, in order to be able to overthrow it.
Now, when this has been accomplished it is drawing the
executive power through the perfecting process; it reduces
that power to its simplest terms, isolates it, sets it up
against itself as its own sole reproach—all in order to con-
centrate against it all the forces of destruction [the italics
are ours]. And when the revolution has completed this
second part of its preliminary work, Europe will rise to |
exclaim in triumph, ‘Well grubbed, old mole!’ . . . This ~
executive power with its enormous bureaucratic and mili-
tary organization, with its multiform and artificial machin-
ery of government, with its army of half a million officials,
side by side with a military force of another half million,
this frightful parasitic organism covering as with a net the
whole body of French society and blocking up all its pores,
had arisen in the period of absolute monarchy, at the time
of the fall of feudalism: a fall which this organism had
helped to hasten.”

Re ne

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 133;

The first French Revolution developed centralization “but
at the same time increased the scope, the attributes, the num-
ber of servants of the central government. Napoleon com-
pleted this government machinery.” The Legitimist and the
July monarchies “contributed nothing but a greater division
of labor.” . . . “Finally, the Parliamentary Republic found
itself compelled, in its struggle against the revolution, along
with its repressive measures, to increase the resources and the
centralization of the State. Every revolution brought this
machine to greater perfection instead of breaking it up [the
italics are ours]. The political parties, which alternately
struggled for supremacy, looked upon the capture of this
gigantic governmental structure as the principle spoils of
victory.” (Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, 1907
German edition, pp. 98-99.)

In this remarkable passage Marxism makes a great step for-
ward in comparison with the position of the Communist
Manifesto. There the question of the State is dealt with
still extremely in the abstract, and most general ideas and
expressions are employed. Here the question becomes con-
crete, and the conclusions are most precise, definite, practical:
all former revolutions helped to perfect the machinery of
government, whereas now we must shatter it, break it to
pieces.

This conclusion is the chief and fundamental point in the
Marxist theory of the State, yet it is exactly this fundamental
point which has been not merely completely “forgotten” by
the dominant official Social-Democratic parties, but absolutely
distorted (as we shall see later) by the foremost theoretician
of the Second International, K. Kautsky.

In the Communist Manifesto are set out the general les-
sons of history, which force us to see in the State the organ
of class domination, and bring us to the necessary conclusion
that the proletariat cannot overthrow the capitalist class
without, as a preliminary step, winning political power, with-
out obtaining political supremacy, without transforming the
State into the “proletariat organized as the ruling class”; and
that this proletarian State must begin to wither away imme-

diately after its victory, because in a community without.

1336 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

class antagonisms, the State is unnecessary and impossible.
At this stage the problem is not yet considered as to what
form, from the point of view of historical development, this
replacement of the capitalist State by the proletarian State is
to assume.

It is precisely this problem that is stated and solved by Marx
in 1852. True to his philosophy of dialectical materialism,
Marx takes as his basis the experience of the great revolu-
tionary years 1848-51. Here, as everywhere, his teaching is
the summing up of practical experience, illuminated by a
profound philosophical world-conception and a great knowl-
edge of history.

The problem of the State is put concretely: how in actual
fact, the capitalist State arose, that is, the government ma-
chine necessary for capitalist supremacy? What have been
its changes, what has been its evolution in the course of the
bourgeois revolutions and in the face of the spontaneous ris-
ings of the oppressed classes? What are the problems con-
fronting the proletariat in respect of this government ma-
chine?

The centralized power of the State, peculiar to capitalist
society, grew up in the period of the fall of feudalism. Two
institutions are especially characteristic of this machine:the
bureaucracy and the standing army. More than once, in the
threads which connect these institutions with the capitalist
class; and the experience of every worker illustrates this con-
nection with extraordinary clearness and impressiveness. ‘The
working class learns to recognize this connection by its own
bitter experience; that is why it so easily acquires, so firmly -
absorbs the idea of its inevitability—an idea which the lower _
middle class democrats either ignorantly and superficially
deny, or, still more superficially admit “in theory” forgetting
to draw the corresponding practical conclusions.

The bureaucracy and the standing army constitute a “‘par-
asite” on the body of capitalist society—a parasite born of
the internal struggles which tear that society asunder, but
essentially a parasite, “blocking up” the pores of existence.
The Kautskian opportunism prevalent at present amongst the
official Social-Democratic parties considers this view of the

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 137

State as @ parasitic organism to be the peculiar and exclusive
property of anarchism. Naturally, this distortion of Marxism
is extremely useful to those philistines who have brought
Socialism to the unheard-of disgrace of trying to justify and
gloss over an Imperialist war on the pretext of “defense of
the fatherland”; but none the less it is an absolute distortion.

The development, perfection, strengthening of the bureau-
cratic and military apparatus has been going on during all
those bourgeois revolutions of which Europe has seen so many
since the decay of feudalism.

In particular, the lower middle classes are attracted to the
side of the capitalists and to their allegiance, largely by
means of this very apparatus, which provides the upper sec-
tions of the peasantry, artisans and tradesmen with a number
of comparatively comfortable, quiet and respectable posts,
and thereby raises their holders above the general mass. Con-
sider what happened in Russia during the six months follow-
ing February 27 (March 12th), 1917. The government posts,
which hitherto had been given by preference to members of
the Black Hundreds, now became the booty of Cadets, Men-
sheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. Nobody really thought
of any serious reforms. They were to be put off “till the
Constituent Assembly,” which, in its turn, was gradually put
off until the end of the war! But there was no delay, no wait-
ing for a Constituent Assembly in the matter of dividing the
spoils, of capturing snug places like Ministries, Under-Secre-
taryships, Governor-Generalships, etc., etc.! The game of
permutations and combinations that went on in connection
with the composition of the Provisional Government was, in
reality, merely the expression of this division and re-division
of the spoils, as it was going on high and low, up and down
the country, in all departments of the central and local gov-
ernment. The concrete, practical result of the six months
between February 27th (March 12th) and August 27th
(September 9th), 1917, is beyond all dispute: reforms shelved,
distribution of the official places accomplished, and ‘“‘mistakes”
in the distribution corrected by a few re-shufflings. But the
longer the process of re-shuffling the posts goes on among the
various capitalist and middle class parties (among the Cadets,
S.R.’s and Mensheviks, if we take the case of Russia), the

1338 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

more clearly the oppressed classes, with the proletariat at their
head, begin to realize the irreconcilable opposition of their
interests to the whole of capitalist society. Hence arises the
necessity for the bourgeois parties, even for the most demo-
cratic and “revolutionary democratic” sections, to increase
their repressive measures against the revolutionary proletariat,
to strengthen the machinery of repression, that is, the power
of the State. Such a course of events compels the revolution
“to concentrate all the forces of destruction” against the
' State, and to regard the problem as one not of perfecting the
| machinery of the State, but of breaking up and annibilat-
i} mg it.
, It was not logical theorizing, but the practical course of
\events, the living experience of the years 1848-51, that pro-
duced such a statement of the problem. We can see to what
extent Marx held strictly to the solid ground of historical ex-
perience from the fact that, in 1852, he did not as yet deal
concretely with the question of what was to replace this
State machinery that had to be destroyed. Experience had
not as yet yielded material data sufficient for the solution of
such a problem: history placed it on the order of the day
later on, in 1871. In 1852 it could only be laid down, with
the accuracy that comes of scientific historical observation,
that the proletarian revolution had arrived at the stage when
it must consider the problem of “concentrating all the forces
of destruction” against the State, of “‘breaking” the govern-
mental machine.
Here the question may arise: is it correct to generalize the

experience, observation and conclusions of Marx, and to apply |

them to a wider scene of action than that of France during

three years (1848-51)? In the discussion of this point, let us
recall, first of all, a remark of Engels, and then proceed to
examine our facts.

“France,” wrote Engels in his introduction to the 3rd
Edition of the Eighteenth Brumaire, “France is a country
in which the historical struggle of classes, more than in any
other, was carried each time to a decisive conclusion. In
France were hammered into most definite shapes those
changing political forms within which that class struggle

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 139

went on, and through which its results found expression.
The centre of feudalism during the Middle Ages; the model
country, with the most centralized monarchy, based on
rigid ranks and orders after the Rennaissance, France shat-
tered feudalism during the Great Revolution, and founded
the undiluted supremacy of the middle class with such
classical clearness as was to be found in no other European
country. And the struggle of the revolting proletariat
against the capitalist tyranny is in its turn taking here an
acute form which is unknown elsewhere.” (Edition 1907,

P- 4-)

The last sentence is out of date, inasmuch as there has been’,
a lull in the revolutionary struggle of the French proletariat \,
since 1871; though, long as thus lull may be, it in no way |
excludes the possibility that, in the oncoming proletarian /
revolution, France may once more reveal itself as the tradi- f
tional home of the class war to a finish.

Let us, however, cast a general glance over the history of
the more advanced nations during the end of the roth and
beginning of the 2oth centuries. We shall see that the same
process has been going on more slowly, in more varied forms,
on a much wider field. On the one hand, there has been a
development of “parliamentary government”’ not only in the
republican countries (France, America, Switzerland), but also
in the monarchies (England, Germany to a certain extent,
Italy, the Scandinavian countries, etc.) On the other hand,
there has been the struggle for power of the various middle
and lower middle class parties distributing and re-distributing
the “plunder” of official appointments, the foundations of
capitalist society remaining all the while unchanged. Finally,
there has been the perfecting and strengthening of the “Ex-
ecutive” and of its bureaucratic and military apparatus. f

There can be no doubt that these are the general features
of the latest stage in the evolution of all capitalist States
generally. In the three years, 1848-51, France had shown in
a swift, sharp, concentrated form, all those processes of de-
velopment which are inherent in the whole capitalist world.

Imperialism in particular, the era of financial capital, the
era of gigantic capitalist monopolies, the era of the transfor-

fr

arenes"

140 THE STATE.AND REVOLUTION

mation of simple trust-capitalism into State trust-capitalism,
shows an unprecedented strengthening of the “State” and an
unheard of development of its bureaucratic and military ap-
paratus, side by side with the increase of oppression of the
proletariat, alike in the monarchical and the freest republican
countries.

World-history is undoubtedly leading up at the present
moment, on an incomparably larger scale than in 1852, to
the “concentration of all the forces” of the proletarian revolu-
tion for the purpose of “‘breaking up” the machinery of the

Leotate. ;
As to what the proletariat will put in its place, instructive
data on the subject were given us by the Paris Commune.

3. The Formulation of the Question by Marx in 1852.

In 1907 Mering published in the journal Newe Zeit (XXV.,
2, 164), extracts from a letter by Marx to Weidemeir dated
sth March, 1852. In this letter, inter alia, the following
remarkable dissertation is contained:

“As far as I am concerned, the honor does not belong
to me for either having discovered the existence of classes
in present society or of the struggle between the classes.
Bourgeois historians a long time before me expounded the
historical development of this class war and the bourgeois
economists the economical structure of classes. What I did,
was to prove the following: (1) That the existence of
classes is connected only with certain historical struggles
which are characteristic of the development of production.
(2) That class war indispensably leads to the dictatorship
of the proletariat. (3) That this dictatorship is only a
transition to the destruction of any classes and to society
without classes. . . .”

In these words Marx has succeeded in expressing with strik-
ing clearness, firstly, the fundamental differences between his
teachings and those of the leading and best thinkers of the
bourgeoisie, and secondly the meaning of his theory concern-
ing the State.

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 141

It is said, very often, that the main theme in the teachings °
of Marx is the class war, but this is not correct. And out of
this error, here and there, is obtained an opportunist mutila-
tion of Marxism, the falsification of it in the sense of accept-
ance for the bourgeoisie. The theory of class war was not
created by Marx, but by the bourgeoisie before Marx and is
for the bourgeoisie, generally speaking, acceptable.

The one who recognizes only the class war is not yet a
Marxist; that one may be found not to have freed himself
from the chains of bourgeois reasoning and politics. To
limit Marxist theory to the teaching of the class war means
to shorten Marxism—to mutilate it, to bring it down to.
something which is acceptable to the bourgeoisie. A Marxist
is one who extends the recognition of class war to the recogni- _
tion of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. In this is the main™
difference between a Marxist and an ordinary bourgeois. On
this grindstone it is necessary to test a real understanding
and recognition of Marxism. And it is not astonishing that
when the history of Europe put before the working class this
question, practically, not only all opportunists and reformists,
but all “Kautskians” (people who are wavering between
reformism and Marxism) turned out to be poor philistines
and petty bourgeois democrats, who denied the “Dictatorship
of the Proletariat.” A brochure by Kautsky—Dictatorship
of the Proletariat, published in August, 1918, i.e., long after
the first edition of this book, is an example of petty bourgeois
mutilation of Marxism and of mean renunciation of it in
practice, by hypocritical recognition of it in words (see my
brochure—Proletarian Revolution and Renegade Kautsky—
Moscow, 1918). The present opportunism in the person of its
main representative, late Marxist, K. Kautsky, comes wholly
under the aforesaid characteristic of bourgeois ideology, be-
cause this opportunism limits the domain of recognition of
class war within the domain of bourgeois relationship. (And
within this domain, not a single educated Liberal will refuse
to recognize “in principle” the class struggle.) Opportunism
does not lead the recognition of class war up to the main issue,
up to the period of crossing from capitalism to Communism,
up to the period of throwing off the bourgeoisie and a com-
plete abolition of same. In reality this period inevitably be-

142 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

comes a period of violent class fights and, therefore, the State
during this period inevitably must be a new democratic State
(for the proletariat and for the general poor) and a new
dictatorial State (against the bourgeoisie.) Further, the sub-
stance of the teachings of Marx about the State is assimilated
only by one who understands that the dictatorship of one
class is necessary not only for any class society generally, not
only for the proletariat which overthrows the bourgeoisie, but
for a whole historical period, which separates capitalism from
“society without classes,” from Communism. ‘The forms of
bourgeois States are exceedingly various, but their substance is
vethe same and in the last analysis inevitably the Dictatorship
f of the Bourgeoisie. The transition from capitalism to Com-
\, munism will certainly bring a great variety and abundance
\of political forms, but the substance will inevitably be:
» The Dictatorship of the Proletariat.

4

GHAPTER iit.

THE EXPERIENCE OF THE PARIS COMMUNE OF 1871:
MARX’S ANALYSIS.

1. In What Lay the Heroism of the Communards?

Ir is known that in the autumn of 1870, a few months
before the Commune, Marx warned the Paris workers, prov-
ing to them that an attempt to overthrow the government
would be the folly of despair. But when, in March, 1871, a
decisive battle was forced upon the workers and they ac-
cepted it, when the rising had become an accomplished fact,
Marx welcomed the proletarian revolution with the greatest
enthusiasm, in spite of unfavorable auguries. Marx did not
fall back upon an attitude of pedantic condemnation of an
“untimely” movement: unlike the all-too-famous Russian
renegade from Marxism, Plekhanoff, who, in November, 1905,
wrote in the sense of encouraging the workers’ and peasants’
struggle, but, after December, 1905, took up the liberal cry
of “You should not have resorted to arms.”

Marx, however, was not only enthusiastic about the hero-
ism of the Communards—“storming Heaven,” as he said.
In the mass revolutionary movement, although it did not at-
tain its objective, he saw a historic experiment of gigantic
importance, a certain advance of the world proletarian revolu-
tion, a practical step more important than hundreds of pro-
grammes and discussions. To analyze this experiment, to draw
from it lessons in tactics, to re-examine his theory in the new
light it afforded—such was the problem as it presented itself
to Marx. ‘The only “correction” which Marx thought it
necessary to make in the Communist Manifesto was made
by him on the basis of the revolutionary experience of the
Paris Communards.

The last preface to a new German edition of the Com-

143

\

‘
Sh Ns
x
aN

\

144 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

munist Manifesto signed by both its authors is dated June
24th, 1872. In this preface the authors, Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels, says that the programme of the Communist
Manifesto is now “‘in places out of date.”

“Especially,” they continue, “did the Commune demon-
strate that the ‘working class cannot simply seize the avail-
able ready machinery of the State and set it going for its
own ends.”

The words within the second inverted commas of this
passage are borrowed by its authors from Marx’s book on
The Civil War in France. One fundamental and principal
lesson of the Paris Commune, therefore, was considered by
Marx and Engels to be of such enormous importance that
they introduced it as a vital correction into the Communist
Manifesto.

It is most characteristic that it is precisely this correction
which has been distorted by the opportunists, and its mean-
ing, probably, is not clear to nine-tenths, if not ninety-nine
hundredths, of the readers of the Communist Manifesto.
We shall deal with it more fully further on, in a chapter de-
voted specially to distortions. It will be sufficient here to
remark that the’current, vulgar, “interpretation” of the fa-
mous formula of Marx here adduced consists in that Marx,
it is said, is here emphasizing the idea of gradual development,
in contradistinction to a sudden seizure of power, and so on.

As a matter of fact, exactly the reverse is the case. What
Marx says is that the working class must break up, shatter
the “‘available ready machinery of the State,” and not con-
fine itself merely to taking possession of it.

On April rath, 1871—that is, just at the time of the
Commune—Marx wrote to Kugelmann: :

“If you look at the last chapter of my Eighteenth Bru-
maire, you will see that I declare the next attempt of the
French Revolution to be: not merely to hand over, from
one set of hands to another, the bureaucratic and military
machine—as has occurred hitherto—but to shatter it
[Marx’s italic—the original is ‘zerbrechen’]; and it is this

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 145

that is the preliminary condition of any real people’s revo-
lution on the Continent. It is exactly this that constitutes
the attempt of our heroic Parisian comrades.” (Neue Zeit,
XX. 1, 1901-2, p. 709.)

In these words, “to shatter the bureaucratic and military
machinery of the State,” is to be found, tersely expressed, the
principal teaching of Marxism on the subject of the problems
concerning the State, facing the proletariat in a revolution.
And it is just this teaching which has not only been for-
gotten, but has also been completely distorted, by the pre-
vailing Kautskian “interpretation” of Marxism!

As for Marx’s reference to the Eighteenth Brumaire, we
have quoted the corresponding passage in full above.

It is interesting particularly to notice two points in the
passage quoted. First, he confines his conclusions to the
Continent. This was natural in 1871, when England was
still che pattern of a purely capitalist country, without a mili-
tary machine and, in large measure, without a bureaucracy.

Hence Marx excluded England, where a revolution, even a,
people’s revolution, could be imagined, and was then possible,
without the preliminary condition of the destruction “‘of the
available ready machinery of the State.”

To-day in 1917, in the epoch of the first great imperialist
war, this distinction of Marx’s becomes unreal, and England
and America, the greatest and last representatives of Anglo-
Saxon “‘liberty” in the sense of the absence of militarism and
bureaucracy, have to-day completely rolled down into the
dirty, bloody morass of military-bureaucratic institutions
common to all Europe, subordinating all else to themselves,
crushing all else under themselves. To-day, both in England
and in America, the “preliminary condition of any real peo-
ple’s revolution” is the break-up, the shattering of the “gen “
able*réady machinery of the State” (perfected in those coun- |
tries between 1914 and 1917, up to the “European,” general
imperialist standard).

Secondly, this extremely pregnant remark of Marx is worth
particular attention in that it states that the destruction of the
military and bureaucratic machinery of the State is “the pre-
liminary condition of any real people’s revolution.” This idea

a

a el

4 Pr

: f f nid \ ee
146, DHE STATE AND REVOLUTION

‘of a “people’s” revolution seems strange on Marx’s lips. And

the Russian*Plékhanovists and Mensheviks, those followers of
Struve who wish to be considered Marxists, might possibly
consider such an expression a slip of the tongue. They have
reduced Marxism to such a state of meagre “liberal” distortion
that nothing exists for them beyond the distinction between
capitalist and proletarian revolutions: and even that distinc-
tion becomes for them a lifeless doctrine.

If we take examples from the revolutions of the zoth
century, we shall, of course, have to recognize both the
Portuguese and the Turkish revolutions to be middle class.
Neither, however, is a “‘people’s” revolution, inasmuch as the
mass of the people, the enormous majority, does not make its
appearance actively, independently, with its own economic
and political demands, in either the one or the other. On the
other hand, the Russian middle class revolution of 1905-7,
although it presented no such “brilliant” successes as at times
fell to the lot of the Portuguese and Turkish revolutions,
was undoubtedly a “‘real people’s” revolution, since the masses
of the people, the majority, the lowest social “depths,” crushed
down by oppression and exploitation, rose up independently,
impressed on all the course of the revolution the stamp of
their demands, their attempts to build up a new order on their
own lines in place of the old shattered order.

On the Continent of Europe, in 1871, the proletariat did
not in a single country constitute the majority of the people.
A “people’s” revolution, actually sweeping the majority into
its current, could be such only if embracing both the prole-
tariat and the peasantry. Both classes then constituted the
“people.” Both classes are united by the circumstance that
the “military and bureaucratic machinery of the State” op-
presses, crushes, exploits them. T'o shatter this machinery, to
break it up—this is the true interest of the “people,” of its
majority—the workers, and most of the peasants—this is the
“preliminary condition” of a union of the poorest peasantry
with the proletarians: while, without such a union, democracy
is unstable and Socialist reconstruction is impossible. Towards
such a union, as is well known, the Paris Commune was mak-
ing its way: though it did not reach its goal, by reason of a
number of circumstances, internal and external.

Ser  —-

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 147

Consequently, when speaking of “‘a real people’s revolu-
tion,” Marx did not in the least forget the peculiar charac-
teristics of the lower middle classes (he spoke of them much
and often), and was very carefully taking into account the
actual relationship of classes in most of the Continental
European States in 1871. From another standpoint, also, he
laid it down that the “shattering” of the machinery of the
State is demanded by the interests both of the workers and
of the peasants, unites them, places before them the common

_ task of destroying the “parasite” and replacing it by some-

thing new.
By what exactly?

2. What Is to Replace the Machinery of the State?

In 1847, in the Communist Manifesto, Marx was as yet
only able to answer this question entirely in an abstract man-
ner, stating the problem rather than its solution. To replace
this machinery by “‘the proletariat organized as the ruling
class,” “by the conquest of democracy”—such was the an-
swer of the Communist Manifesto.

Refusing to plunge into Utopia, Marx waited for the ex-
perience of a mass movement to produce the answer to the
problem as to the exact forms which this organization of the
proletariat as the dominant class will assume and exactly in
what manner this organization will embody the most com-
plete, most consistent “conquest of democracy.” Marx sub-
jected the experiment of the Commune, although it was so
meagre, to a most minute analysis in his Civil War in France.
Let us bring before the reader the most important passages of
this work.

In the 19th century took place the development of “the
centralized State power, originating from the Middle Ages,
with its ubiquitous organs: a standing army, police, bureauc-
racy, clergy and judges.” With the development of class
antagonism between capital and labor, “the State assumed ~

- more and more the character of a public organization for the

oppression of Labor, that is, of a machine for class domina-
tion. After every revolution marking a certain advance in
the class struggle, the purely oppressive character of the power

1448 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

of the State became more and more apparent.” The State,
after the revolution of 1848-9 becomes “the national weapon
of capital in its war against Labor.” The Second Empire con-
solidates this.

“The Commune was the direct antithesis of the Empire.
It was a definite form ... of a Republic which was to
abolish, not only the monarchical form of class rule, but also
class rule itself.”

What was this “‘definite” form of the proletarian Socialist
Republic? What was the State it was beginning to create?

“The first decree of the Commune was the abolition of the
standing army and its replacement by the nation in arms.”
This demand now figures in the programme of every party
calling itself Socialist. But the value of these programmes is
best shown by the behavior of our Socialist-Revolutionaries
and Mensheviks, who refused to put their theories into prac-
tice even after the Revolution of March 12th, 1917!

“The Council of the Commune consisted of municipal
representatives elected by universal suffrage in the various
districts of Paris. ‘They were responsible and could be re-
called at any’time. The majority were, naturally, working
men or acknowledged representatives of the working class

>
eee

**. .. The police, until then merely an instrument of
the government, was immediately stripped of all its polit-
ical functions, and turned into the responsible and at any
time replaceable organ of the Commune. . .”

“|. . The same was applied to the officials of all other
branches of the administration. From the members of
the Council of the Commune down to the humblest
worker, everybody in the public services was paid at the
same rates as ordinary working men. All privileges and
representation allowances attached to the high offices of
the State disappeared along with the offices themselves .. .
Having got rid of the standing army and police, the ma-
terial weapons of the old government, the Commune turned
its attention, without delay, to breaking the weapons of

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 149

spiritual oppression, the power of the priests. . . . The
judicial functionaries lost their sham independence.

In future, they were to be elected openly and to be respon-
sible and revocable. . 3

And so the Commune would seem to have replaced the
broken machinery of the State, “only” by a fuller democracy:
the abolition of the standing army and the transformation of
all officials into elective and revocable agents of the Staté\, /
But, as a matter of fact this “only” represents a gigantic = V

placement of one type of institutions by others of a funda- ,
mentally different order. Here we see precisely a case of the’
“transformation of quantity into quality.” Democracy, car-
ried out with the fullest imaginable completeness and con-
sistency, is transformed from capitalist democracy into prole-
tarian democracy: from the State (that is, a special force for
the suppression of a particular class) to something which is
no longer really a form of the State.

It is still necessary to suppress the capitalist class and
crush its resistance. This was particularly necessary for the
Commune; and one of the reasons of its defeat was that it did ~~
not do this with sufficient determination. But the organ of,
suppression is now the majority of the population;-ard “not a
minority, as was always the case under slavery, serfdom and
wage-labor. And, 6ncethe majority of the nation ifself sup-
pressés its oppressors a “special” force for suppression is no
longer necessary. In this serisé the State begins to disappear
Instead of the special institutions of a privileged minority

- (privileged officials and chiefs of a standing army), the ma-
jority can itself directly fulfil all these functions; and the
more the discharge of the functions of the State devolves upon
the masses of the people, the less need is there for the existence
of the State itself. y

In this connection the special measures adopted by the
Commune and emphasized by Marx, are particularly note-
worthy: the abolition of all representative allowances, and
of all special salaries in the case of officials; and the lowering
of the payment of all servants of the State to the level of the
workmen’s wages. Here is shown, more clearly than any-

where else, the break—from a bourgeois democracy to a pro-

150 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

letarian democracy; from the democracy of the oppressors to
the democracy of the oppressed; from the domination of a
“special force” for the suppression of a given class to the
suppression of the oppressors by the whole force of the ma-
jority of the nation—the proletariat and the peasants. And
it is precisely on this most obvious point, perhaps, the most
important so far as the problem of the State is concerned, that
the teachings of Marx have been forgotten. It is entirely
neglected in all the innumerable popular commentaries. It
is not “‘proper” to speak about it as if it were a piece of old-
fashioned “‘naiveté”; just as the Christians, having attained
the position of a State religion “forget” the “naiveté” of
primitive Christianity, with its revolutionary democratic
spirit.

The lowering of the pay of the highest State officials seems
simply a naive, primitive demand of democracy. One of the
“founders” of the newest opportunism, the former Social-
Democrat, E. Bernstein, has more than once exercised his
talents in the repetition of the vulgar capitalist jeers at “prim-
itive” democracy. Like all opportunists, like the present fol-
lowers of Kautsky, he quite failed to understand that, first of
all, the transition from capitalism to Socialism is impossible
without “return,” in a measure, to “primitive” democracy.
How can we otherwise pass on to the discharge of all the
functions of :government by the majority of the population
and by every individual of the population. And, secondly,

,, he forgot that “primitive democracy” on the basis of capi-

talism and capitalist culture is not the same primitive democ-
racy as in pre-historic or pre-capitalist times. Capitalist
culture has created industry on a large scale in the shape of.
factories, railways, posts, telephones, and so forth: and on this
basis the great majority of functions of “the old State” have
become enormously simplified and reduced, in practice, to ‘very
simple operations such as registration, filing and checking.
Hence they will be quite within the reach of every literate
person, and it will be possible to perform them for the usual
“working man’s wage.” ‘This circumstance ought to and will
strip them of all their former glamour as “‘government,” and,
therefore, privileged service.

The control of all officials, without exception, by the un-

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION rst

reserved application of the principle of election and, at any
time, re-call; and the approximation of their salaries to the
“ordinary pay of the workers’—these are simple and “‘self-
evident” democratic measures, which harmonize completely
the interests of the workers and the majority of peasants;
and, at the same time, serve as a bridge leading from cap-
italism to Socialism. These measures refer to the State, that
is, to the purely political reconstruction of society; but, of
course, they only acquire their full meaning and importance
when accompanied by the “expropriation of the expropriators”
or at least by the preliminary steps towards it, that is, by the
passage from capitalist private ownership of the means of
production to social ownership.

“The Commune [wrote Marx] realized that ideal of all
bourgeois revolutions, cheap government, by eliminating
the two largest items of expenditure—the army and the
bureaucracy.”

From the peasantry, as from other sections of the lower
middle class, only an insignificant minority, “rise to the top,”
and “enter society,” make a career in a bourgeois sense, that
is, become transformed either into propertied members of the
upper middle class, or into secure and privileged officials. The
gteat majority of peasants in all capitalist countries where
the peasant class does exist (and the majority of capitalist
countries are of this kind) are oppressed by the government
and long for its overthrow, in the hope of a “cheap” govern-
ment. This hope can only be realized by the proletariat; and
by the fact of realizing it, the proletariat makes a step for-
ward at the same time towards the Socialist reconstruction of
the State.

3. The Destruction of Parliamentarism.

%,
%

“The Commune [wrote Marx] was to have been not a
parliamentary, but a working corporation, legislative and}
executive at one~and the samé time. © Instead of decidin;
once in three or six years which member of the ruling class

was to ‘represent’ and repress the people in Parliament, uni-

m2 THE)STATE AND REVOUUT TOR

versal suffrage was to serve the people, organized in com-
mwunes, as a means of securing the necessary workers, con-
trollers, clerks and so forth for its business in the same way
as individual suffrage serves any individual employer in

his.”

This remarkable criticism of parliamentarism in 1871 is also
one of those of Marx’s dicta which have been conveniently
“forgotten,” thanks to the prevalence of Socialist chauvinism
and opportunism. Ministers and professional politicians,
“practical” Socialists and traitors of the proletariat of to-day
have left all criticism of parliamentarism to the anarchists,
and, on this wonderfully intelligent ground, denounce all
criticism of parliamentarism as “anarchism.” It is indeed
not surprising that the proletariat of the most “advanced”
parliamentary countries, being disgusted with such “Socialists”
as Messrs. Scheidemann, David, Legien, Sembat, Renaudel,
Henderson, Vandervelde, Stauning, Branting, Bissolati and
Co., have been giving their sympathies more and more to
anarcho-syndicalism, in spite of the fact that it is but the
twin brother of opportunism.

But to Marx revolutionary dialectics was never the empty
fashionable phrase, the toy rattle, which Plekhanoff, Kautsky
and the others, have made of it. Marx knew how to castigate
anarchism pitilessly for its inability to make use of the “sty”
of capitalist parliamentarism when the situation is not revo-
lutionary, but at the same time he knew how to subject par-

iamentarism to a really revolutionary proletarian criticism.

To decide once every few years which member of the ruling
class is to repress and oppress the people through parliament—
this is the real essence of middle class parliamentarism, not
only in parliamentary and constitutional monarchies, but also
in the most democratic republics.

But if, in connection with the question of the State, parlia-
mentarism is to be regarded as one of its institutions, what,
from the point of view of those tasks which the proletariat
has to face in this field, is to be the way out of parliamen-
tarism? How can we do without it?

Again and again we must repeat: The teaching of Marx,
based on the study of the Commune, has been so completely

}

es

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 1353

forgotten that any criticism of parliamentarism other than
anarchist or reactionary is quite unintelligible to the “Social-
Democrats” (read—traitors to Socialism) of to-day.

The way out of parliamentarism is to be found, of course,
not in the abolition of the representative institutions and the
elective principle, but in the conversion of the representative
institutions from mere “talking shops” into working bodies:
“The Commune was to have been not a parliamentary insti-

tution, but a working corporation, legislative and executive at

one and the same time.”

“Not a parliamentary, but a working” institution—this is
directly aimed, as it were, at present-day parliamentarism and
at the parliamentary Social-Democratic ‘“‘lap-dogs.” Take
any parliamentary country, from America to Switzerland,
from France to England, Norway and so forth; the actual
work of the State is done behind the scenes and is carried
out by the departments, the chancelleries and the staffs. Par-
liament itself is given up to talk for the special purpose of
fooling the “common people.” This is so true that even in the
Russian Republic, in our middle class democratic republic,
parliamentarism has already revealed its real purpose, though
a real parliament has not yet come into existence. Such
heroes of putrid philistinism as the Skobeleffs and the Tsere-
tellis, Tchernoffs and Avksentieffs have managed to pollute
even the Soviets, after the model of the most despicable middle
class parliamentarism, by turning them into hollow talking
shops. In the Soviets the Right Honorable “Socialist”? Min-
isters are fooling the confiding peasants with phrases and
resolutions. In the government itself a sort of incessant
quadrille is going on in order that, on the one hand, as many
Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks as possible may get at
the “‘pie,” that is, the “cushy” jobs, and that, on the other
hand, the attention of the people may be occupied. All the
while the real “State” business is being done in the chancel-
leries and the departments.

Delo Naroda, the organ of the ruling party, the So-
cialist-Revolutionaries, recently admitted, in an_ editorial
article, with the incomparable candor of people of ‘good
society” in which “‘all” are engaged in. political prostitution,
that even in those Ministerial departments which belong to.

\

J i

\
}

134 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

the “Socialists” (pray, excuse the term) the whole official
apparatus remains essentially the same as of old, working as
before, and obstructing every revolutionary initiative without
let or hindrance. And indeed, even if we did not have this
admission, would not the actual history of the participation
of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks in the gov-
ernment prove this? It is only characteristic that, while in
Ministerial company with the Cadets, Messrs. Tchernoff, Rous-
sanoff, Zenzinoff and others of the Delo Naroda staff have
so completely lost all shame that they unblushingly pro-
claim, as if it were a mere bagatelle, that in “their” Min-
istries everything remains as of old. Revolutionary and dem-
ocratic phrases to gull the Simple Simons; bureaucracy and
red tape in the government departments for the “benefit” of
the capitalists—here you have the essence of the present “hon-
orable” coalition.

For the mercenary and corrupt parliamentarism of capitalist
society, the Commune substitutes institutions in which free-
dom of opinion and discussion does not become a mere de-
lusion, for the representatives must themselves work, must
themselves execute their own laws, must themselves verify
their results in actual practice, must themselves be directly
responsible to their electorate. Representative institutions
remain, but parliamentarism as a special system, as a division
of labor between the legislative and the executive functions.
as creating a privileged position for its deputies, no longer
exists. Without representative institutions we cannot imagine
a democracy, even a proletarian democracy; but we can and
must think of democracy without parliamentarism, if out
criticism of capitalist society is not mere empty words, if
to overthrow the supremacy of the capitalists is for us a seri-
ous and sincere aim, and not a mere “election cry” for catch-
ing working men’s votes—as it is with the Mensheviks anc
Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Scheidemanns, the Legiens, the
Sembats and the Vanderveldes.

It is most instructive to notice that, in speaking of th«
functions of what officials are still necessary both in the
Commune and in the proletarian democracy. Marx compare:
them with the workers of “any other employer,” that is, 01

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 155

the usual capitalist concern, with its workers, foremen and
clerks. There is no trace of Utopian thinking in Marx, in the
sense of inventing or imagining a “new” society. No, he
studies, as a scientific historical process, the birth of the new
society from the old, the forms of transition from the latter
to the former. He takes the actual experience of a mass pro-
letarian movement and tries to draw from it practical lessons.
He “learns” from the Commune as all great revolutionary
thinkers have not been afraid to learn from the experience
of great movements of the oppressed classes; never preaching
them pedantic “sermons” (such as Plekhanoff’s, ‘““They should
not have resorted to arms,” or Tseretelli’s “A class must know
where to limit itself.’’) ea. §
To destroy officialism immediately, everywhere, completely
_ —of this there can be no question. That is a utopia. But to /
break up at once the old bureaucratic machine and to start _/
immediately the construction of a new one, enabling us grad-
ually to abolish bureaucracy—this is not a utopia, it is the
experience of the Commune, it is the direct and necessary
task of the revolutionary proletariat. Capitalism simplifies
the functions of “‘the government.” It makes it possible to
throw off autocratic methods and to bring it all down to a
matter of the organization of the proletariat (as the ruling
class) hiring “‘workers and clerks” in the name of the whole
of society. We are not utopians, we do not indulge in—

“dreams” of how best to do away immediately with all man- /
agement, with all subordination: these are anarchist dreams |
based upon a want of understanding of the task of a prole- \

tarian dictatorship, They are foreign in their essence to
Marxism, and, as a matter of fact, they serve but to put off
the Socialist revolution “until human nature is different.”
No, we want the Socialist revolution with human nature as
it is now: human nature itself cannot do without subordina- /
tion, without control, without managers and clerks. a
But there must be submission to the armed vanguard of all
the exploited and laboring classes—to the proletariat. The
specific “‘bossing” methods of the State officials can and must
begin to be replaced—immediately, within twenty-four hours
—by the simple functions of managers and clerks—functions

136 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

which are now already quite within the capacity of the
average townsman and can well be performed for a working
man’s wage.

We must organize production on a iarge scale, starting
from what has already been done by capitalism. By owr-
selves, we workers, relying on our own experience as workers,
must create an unshakable and iron discipline supported by
the power of the armed workers; we must reduce the role
of the State officials to that of simply carrying out our in-
structions; they must be responsible, revocable, moderately
paid “managers and clerks” (of course, with technical knowl-
edge of all sorts, types and degrees). This is ovr proletarian
task. With this we can and must begin when we have accom-
plished the proletarian revolution. Such a beginning, on the
basis of large scale industry, will of itself lead to the gradual
decay of all bureaucracy, to the gradual creation of a new
order, an order without inverted commas, an order bearing
no similarity to wage slavery, an order in which the constant
simplification of the functions of inspection and registration
will admit of their being performed by each in turn, will
then become a habit, and will finally die out as special func-
tions of a special class.

A witty German Social-Democrat of the ’seventies of last
century called the postoffice an example of the Socialist sys-
tem. This is very true. At present the postoffice is a busi-
ness organized on the lines of a State capitalist monopoly.
Imperialism is gradually transforming all trusts into organi-
zations of a similar type. Above the “common” workers,
who are overloaded with work and yet starve, there stands
the same bourgeois bureaucracy. But the mechanism of social
management is here already to hand. We have but to over-
throw the capitalists, to crush with the iron hand of the
armed workers the resistance of these exploiters, to break the
bureaucratic machine of the modern State—and we -have
before us a highly technically-fashioned machine freed of its
parasites, which can quite well be set going by the united
workers themselves, hiring their own technical advisers, theit
own inspectors, their own clerks, and paying them all, as,
indeed, every “State” official, with the usual workers’ wage.
Here is a concrete task immediately practicable and realizable

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 157

as regards all trusts, which would rid the workers of exploi-
tation and which would make practical use of the experience
(especially in the task of the reconstruction of the State)
which the Commune has given us. To organize our whole
national economy like the postal system, but in such a way
that the technical experts, inspectors, clerks and indeed, all
persons employed, should receive no higher wage than the
working man, and the whole under the management of the
armed proletariat—this is our immediate aim. This is the
kind of State and the economic basis we need. This is what
will produce the destruction of parliamentarism, while retain-
ing representative institutions.- This is what will free the
laboring classes from the prostitution of these institutions by
the capitalist class.

4. The Organization of the Unity of the Nation.

“In the short sketch of national organization which the
Commune had had no time to develop, it was stated quite
clearly that the Commune was to become . . . the politi-
cal form of even the smallest village. . . . From these
Communes would be elected the ‘National’ Delegation at
Le SUMP ia

“The few but very important functions which would
still remain for a Central Government, were not to be
abolished—such a statement was a deliberate falsehood—
but were to be discharged by communal, that is, strictly
responsible agents. . . .”

“The unity of the nation was not to be destroyed, but,
on the contrary, organized by means of the communal
structure. The unity of the nation was to become a reality
by the destruction of the State; which claimed to be the
embodiment of that unity and yet desired to be indepen-
dent of, and superior to, the nation. In reality, this State
was but a parasitic excrescence on the body of the nation.

>

“The problem consisted in this: Whilst amputating the
purely repressive organs of the old government power, to
wrest its legitimate functions from an authority which
claims to be above society, and to hand them over to the
responsible servants of society.”

158 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

To what extent the opportunists of contemporary Social.
Democracy have failed to understand—or perhaps it woulk
be more true to say, did not want to understand—these word.
of Marx, is best shown by the book, as famous or infamou
as the work of Herostratus, of the renegade Bernstein—“Th
Fundamentals of Socialism and the Problems of Social.
Democracy.” It is just in connection with the above pas.
sage from Marx that Bernstein wrote saying that this pro.
gramme “‘in its political content displays, in all its essentia
features, the greatest similarity to the federalism of Proud
hon. . . In spite of all the other points of difference betweer
Marx and the ‘petty shopkeeper’ Proudhon [Bernstein place
the words ‘petty shopkeeper’ in inverted commas in order t
make them sound ironical], on these points their current
of thought resemble one another as closely as could be.” O:
course, Bernstein continues, the importance of the municipali
ties is growing, but “it seems to me doubtful whether th
first task of the democracy would be such a dissolutios
(“Auflésung”) of modern forms of the State, and such :
complete transformation (“Umwandlung”) of their organi
zation as is imagined by Marx and by Proudhon, that is, th
formation of a national assembly from delegates of the pro
vincial or district assemblies, which in their turn, woul
consist of delegates from the Communes, so that the whol
previous mode of national representation would vanish com
pletely.” (Bernstein, Fundamentals, pp. 134-136, Germat
Edition, 1899.)

It is really monstrous thus to confuse Marx’s views on th
‘destruction of the State as parasite” with the federalism o
Proudhon. But this is no accident, for it never occurs t
the opportunist that Marx is not speaking here at all o
federalism as opposed to Centralism, but of the destructios
of the capitalist machinery of government which exists in al
bourgeois countries. '

The opportunist cannot see further than the “‘municipali
ties” which he finds around him in a society of middle clas
philistinism and “reformist” stagnation. As for a proletarias
revolution, the opportunist has forgotten even how to imagin
it. It is amusing. But it is remarkable that this point o
Bernstein’s has not been disputed. Bernstein has been re

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 159

futed often enough especially by Plekhanoff in Russian litera-
ture, and by Kautsky in European, but neither made any
remark upon this perversion of Marx by Bernstein.

The opportunist has forgotten to such an extent how to
think in a revolutionary way and how to reflect on revolu-
tion, that he attributes “federalism” to Marx, mixing him
up with the founder of anarchism, Proudhon; and, although
they are anxious to be orthodox Marxists and to defend the
teaching of revolutionary Marxism, Kautsky, and Plekhanoff
are nevertheless silent on this point. Herein lies one of the
- roots of those banalities and platitudes about the difference
between Marxism and Anarchism, which are common to both
Kautskians and opportunists, and which we shall have to dis-
cuss later.

There is no trace of Federalism in Marx’s discussion of the
experience of the Commune, quoted above. Marx agrees with
Proudhon precisely on that point which has quite escaped
the opportunist Bernstein; while he differs from Proudhon _
just on the point where Bernstein sees their agreement. Marx
concurs with Proudhon in that they both stand for the
“demolition” of the contemporary machinery of government.
This common ground of Marxism with anarchism (both with
Proudhon and with Bakunin), neither the opportunists nor
the Kautskians wish to see, for on this point they have them-
selves diverged from Marxism.. Marx does differ both from
Proudhon and Bakunin on the point of federalism (not to
speak of the dictatorship of the proletariat). Federalism is
a direct fundamental outcome of the anarchist petty middle
class ideas. Marx is a centralist; and in the above cited quo-
tation of his speculations there is no-withdrawal from the
central position. Only people full of middle class “super-
stitious faith’’ in the State can mistake the destruction of the
bourgeois State for the destruction of centralism.

But will it not be centralism if the proletariat and poorest
peasantry take the power of the State into their own hands,
organize themselves quite freely into communes, and co-
ordinate the action of all the communes for the purpose of
striking at capital, for the purpose of crushing the resistance
of the capitalists, in order to accomplish the transference of
ptivate property in railways, factories, land, and so forth to

a

160 THE STATE AND’ REVOLUTION

the nation, to the whole of society? ‘Will that not be the
most consistent democratic centralism? And _ proletarian
centralism at that?

Bernstein simply cannot conceive the possibility of_ volun-
tary centralism, of a voluntary union of the communes into
a-nation, a~voluntary fusion of the proletarian communes in
the business of destroying capitalist supremacy and the capi-
talist machinery of government. Like all philistines, Bernstein
can imagine centralism only as something from above, to be
imposed and maintained solely by means of bureaucracy and
militarism.

Marx, as though he foresaw the possibility of the distortion
of his ideas, purposely emphasizes that the accusation against
the Commune that it desired to destroy the unity of the
nation, to do away with a central authority, was a deliberate
falsehood. He purposely uses the phrase “to. organize the

“unity” of-the-nation,”” so as to oppose the conscious, demo-

/ cratic, proletarian centralism to the capitalist, military, official

4

centralism.

But none so deaf as Shoe: who will not hear. And the
opportunists of modern Social-Democracy do not, on any
account, want to hear of the destruction of the State, of the
removal of the parasite.

5. The Destruction of the Parasite-State.

We have already quoted the words of Marx on this subject,
and must now supplement them.

“It is generally the fate of new creations of history
[wrote Marx], to be mistaken for any old and even de-
funct forms of social life to which the new institutions
may bear a sort of likeness. Thus, this new Commune,
which is breaking up (‘bricht’) the modern State, was
regarded as the resurrection of the medizval communes
. . . asa federation of small States (Montesquieu, the
Girondins) as an exaggerated form of the ancient struggle
against over-centralization. . . . The Communal con-
stitution would have restored to the social body all those
forces hitherto devoured by the parasitic excrescence called

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 161

‘the State,’ feeding upon society and hindering it from
moving forward freely. By this one act the regeneration
of France would have been advanced. . . .

“The Communal constitution would have brought the
rural producers under the intellectual leadership of the
chief towns of each district, and would have secured for
them there, in the persons of the town workers, the natural
representatives of their interests. The very existence of
the Commune would have involved, as a matter of course,
local self-government, but no longer as a balance to the
power of the State, which now becomes superfluous. . . .”

“The annihilation of the power of the State,” which was
a “parasitic excrescence,” its “amputation,” its “destruction”;
“the power of the State now becomes superfluous”—these are
the expressions used by Marx regarding the State when ap-
praising and analyzing the experience of the Commune.

All this was written a little less than half a century ago;
and now one has to excavate, as it were, in order to bring
uncorrupted Marxism to the knowledge of the masses. The
conclusions drawn from the observation of the last great revo-
lution, through which Marx lived, have been forgotten just
at the moment when the time has arrived for the next great
proletarian revolutions.

“The variety of interpretations to which the Commune’
has been subjected, and the multiplicity of interests which
found their expression in it, proves that it was a thoroughly
flexible political form, whereas all_previous forms of gov-
ernment have been, in their essence, repressive. Its true
secret was this. It was essentially the government of the
working class, the result of the struggle of the producing
against the appropriating class; it was the political form,
at last discovered, under which Labor could work out its
economic emancipation. . . .”

“Without this last condition the Communal constitution
would have been an impossibility and a delusion.”

The Utopians had busied themselves with the “discovery”
of the political forms under which the Socialist reconstruction

162 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

of society could take place. The Anarchists turned away
from the question of political forms of any kind. The oppor-
tunists of modern Social-Democracy have accepted the capi-
talist political forms of a parliamentary democratic State as
the limit which cannot be overstepped; they have broken their
foreheads praying before this idol, and they have denounced
as anarchism every attempt to destroy these forms.

Marx deduced from the whole history of Socialism and of
political struggle that the State was bound to disappear, and
that the transitional form of its disappearance (the transition
from the political State to the non-State) would be the “prole-
tariat organized as the ruling class.” But Marx did not under-
take the task of “discovering” the political “forms” of this
future stage. He limited himself to an exact observation of
French history, its analysis and the conclusion to which the
year 1851 had led, viz., that matters were moving towards
the destruction of the capitalist machinery of the State.

And when the mass revolutionary movement of the prole-
tariat burst forth, Marx, in spite of the failure of that move-
ment, in spite of its short life and its patent weakness, began
to study what political forms it had disclosed.

The Commune was the form “discovered at last” by the
proletarian revolution, under which the economic liberation
of Labor can proceed. The Commune was the first attempt
of a proletarian revolution to break up the bourgeois State,
and constitutes the political form, “discovered at last,” which
can and must take the place of the broken machine. We
shall see below that the Russian revolutions of 1905 and
1917, in different surroundings and under different circum-
stances, have been continuing the work of the Commune and
have been confirming Marx’s analysis of history.

CHAPTER Iv
SUPPLEMENTARY EXPLANATIONS BY ENGELS

Marx gave us the fundamentals on the subject of the meaning
of the Commune. Engels returned to the same question re-
peatedly, elucidating Marx’s analysis and conclusions, some-
times explaining so clearly and forcibly other sides of the
question that we must stop expressly to consider these ex-
planations.

1. The Housing Question.

Already in his work on the Housing Question (1872)
Engels took into account the experience of the Commune,
dwelling several times on the problems of the revolution in
relation to the State. It is interesting to note that in the
treatment of this concrete question we are shown clearly, on
the one hand, those features of the proletarian State which
resemble features of the present State—features which give
us ground for speaking of a State in both cases; and, on the
other hand, the features which differentiate them and mark
the transition to the destruction of the State.

“How can the housing problem be solved? In modern
society this question is solved, like every other social ques-
tion, by a gradual economic equalization of supply and
demand. This, however, is a kind of solution which itself
constantly creates the problem anew, that is, it gives no
solution. How the social revolution will solve this ques-
tion depends not only on circumstances of time and place,
but it is bound up with questions which go much further,
amongst which one of the most important is the abolition
of the distinction between town and country. As we are
not interested in utopian speculations on the structure of

163

164 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

future society, it would be more than a waste of time to
dwell upon this point. One thing is certain; even now
there are sufficient habitable buildings in the large towns
materially to relieve the real shortage of accommodation,
if sensible use were made of them. ‘This, of course, could
only be brought about by the expropriation of their present
possessors, and by settling in them the homeless workers
or the workers who are now living in overcrowded homes.
And as soon as the workers win political power, such a
measure, based on the best interests of society, will be as
easily carried out as all other expropriations and comman-
deerings by the modern State.” (German Edition, 1887,

Din22.,)

Here it is not the change in the form of the State which
is considered, but only the character of its activity. Expro-
priations and the occupation of houses take place by direction
even of the present State. The proletarian State, from the
formal point of view, will also “direct” she occupation of
houses and the expropriation of buildiags. But it is clear
that the old executive apparatus, the bureaucracy, connected
with the bourgeoisie, would simply be useless for the carrying
out of the orders of the proletarian State.

“Tt is necessary to state that the actual seizure of all the
means of labor and of all industry by the laboring masses
of the nation is the direct antithesis to the Proudhonist
‘buying out.’ Under the Proudhonist system the individual
worker becomes the owner of a house, of a smallholder’s
plot of land, of necessary tools. In the other case, however,
the ‘laboring people’ becomes the collective owner of houses,
factories and tools. The use of these houses, factories and
so forth will hardly be offered, at any rate, during the
transition period, to single individuals or to companies,
without covering the expenses. In the same way, the
abolition of the private ownership of land does not pre-
suppose the abolition of rent, but its handing over, although
in a different form, to the whole of society. The actual ap-
propriation of all the means of labor by the laboring masses

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION «65

does not exclude in any way, therefore, the preservation of
the right to rent or let.” (p. 69.)

In the next chapter we shall discuss the question touched
on here, namely, the economic reasons for the “withering
away” of the State. Engels expresses himself most cautiously
here, saying that the proletarian State will “hardly” allot
houses without pay, “‘at any rate, during the period of tran-
sition.” The letting of houses, belonging to the whole nation,
to separate families for rent presupposes the collection of this
rent, a certain amount of control, and some standard or other
to guide the allotment of the houses. All this demands a
certain form of State, but it does not at all involve a special
military and bureaucratic apparatus, with officials occupying
privileged positions. A transition to a state of affairs when
it will be possible to let houses without rent is bound up with
the complete “withering away” of the State.

Speaking of the conversion of the Blanquists after the Com-
mune, and under the influence of its experience, to the Marxist
point of view, Engels, it so happens, formulates it as

“The necessity for political action by the proletariat and
for proletarian dictatorship, as the transition towards the
abolition of classes and, together with them, of the State.
ap = Op g9:)

Those who are addicted to hair-splitting or bourgeois “ex-
terminators of Marxism” will perhaps see a contradiction
between this admission of the “abolition of the State” and
the repudiation of a formula like that of the anarchist, con-
tained in the quotation from the “Anti-Dihring,” given
above. It would not be surprising if the opportunists wrote
down Engels, too, as an “Anarchist” for the Socialist-Chau-
vinists are now more and more adopting the fashion of accus-
ing the Internationalists of anarchism.

That, together with the abolition of classes, the State will
also be abolished—this Marxism has always taught. The well-
known passage on the “withering away of the State” in the
_“Anti-Dihring” does not accuse the anarchists merely of
being in favor of the abolition of the State, but of spreading

166 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

the theory that it is possible to accomplish this “within
twenty-four hours.” In view of the complete distortion, by
the present predominating “Social-Democratic” doctrine con-
cerning the relation of Marxism to anarchism, of the question
of the abolition of the State, it will be particularly useful to
recall one particular controversy of Marx and Engels with
the anarchists.

2. The Dispute With the Anarchists.

This dispute occurred in 1873. Marx and Engels then
contributed articles against the Proudhonist “Autonomists”’
or “Anti-Authoritarians” to an Italian Socialist review, and
it was only in 1913 that these articles appeared in German in

the Neue Zeit.

“If the political struggle of the working class [wrote
Marx, ridiculing the anarchists for their repudiation of
political action] assumes a revolutionary form; if the work-
ers, in place of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, set up
their own revolutionary dictatorship, then they commit a
terrible crime and offer an insult to principle; because, for-
sooth, the workers in order to meet the miserable, gross
requirements of the moment, in order to crush the re-
sistance of the capitalist class, cause the State to assume
a revolutionary and transitional form, instead of laying
down their arms and abolishing the State.” (Neue Zeit,
1913-4, year 32, vol. I., p. 40.)

This alone is the kind of ‘‘abolition” of the State, against
which Marx protested, refuting the anarchists. He protested
not against the theory of the disappearance of the State when
classes disappear, or if its abolition when classes have been
abolished, but only against the proposition that the workers
should deny themselves the use of arms, the use of organized
force, that is, the use of the State, for the purpose of “break-
ing the resistance of the capitalist class.” Marx purposely
emphasizes, in order that the true sense of his contentions
against the anarchists might not be perverted, “the revolu-
tionary and transitional form” of the State necessary for the
proletariat. The proletariat only needs the State temporarily.

THE STATECAND REVOLUTION | 167

We do not at all disagree with the anarchists on the question
of the abolition of the State as a final aim. But we affirm
that, for the attainment of this aim, we must make tem-
porary use of the weapons and methods of the State against
the exploiters, just as the temporary dictatorship of the op-
pressed class is necessary for the annihilation of all classes.
Marx chooses the sharpest and clearest mode of stating the
position against the anarchists. Having cast off the yoke of
the capitalists, ought the workers “to lay down their arms,”
or should they use them against the capitalists in order to
break their resistance? And the systematic employment of
arms by one class against the other, what is that if not a
“transitional form of the State’?

Let every Social-Democrat ask himself whether that was
the way in which he examined the question of the State in his
discussion with the anarchists? Was that the way in which
the vast majority of the official Social-Democratic parties of
the Second International treated it?

Engels develops these same ideas in even greater detail and
more simply. He first of all ridicules the muddled ideas of
the Proudhonists, who called themselves ‘“Anti-Authoritar-
ians,” that is, they denied every form of authority, of sub-
ordination, of power. Take a factory, a railway, a vessel on
the open seas, said Engels; is it not clear that not one of these
complex technical concerns, based on the use of machines and
the ordered co-operation of many people, could function with-
out a certain amount of subordination and consequently, of
authority or power? “When I use these arguments,” writes
Engels, “against the most hopeless Anti-Authoritarians, they
can only give me the following answer, ‘Ah, that is true,
but the question is not of the authority we confer on our
delegates, but of a certain commission.’ These people think
that a thing can be altered by merely changing its name.”

Having shown in this way that authority and autonomy
are relative terms, that the sphere of their application varies
with the various phases of social development, that it is ab-
surd to regard them as absolute terms; after adding that the
domain. of the application of machinery and production of
a large scale is ever extending, Engels passes from a general
discussion of authority to the question of the State.

168 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

“If the Autonomists [he writes] merely meant to say
that the social organization of the future would admit
authority only within those limits which the conditions
of industry inevitably dictate, then it would be possible
to come to an understanding with them. But they are
blind in respect of all the facts which make authority neces-
sary, and they fight passionately against a mere word.

“Why do not the Anti-Authoritarians limit themselves
to shouting against the political authority, against the
State? All Socialists agree that the State, and together
with it, also political authority, will vanish as the result
of the future Socialist Revolution, ie., that public funec-
tions will lose their political character and will be trans-
formed into simple administrative functions, concerned
with social interests. But the Anti-Authoritarians demand
that the political State should be abolished at one blow,
even before those social relations which gave birth to the
State are themselves abolished. They demand that the first
act of the social revolution shall be the abolition of all
authority.

“These gentlemen, have they ever seen a revolution?
Revolution is undoubtedly the most authoritative thing
possible. Revolution is an act in which part of the popula-
tion forces its will on the other part by means of rifles,
bayonets, cannon, i.e., by most authoritative means. And
the conquering party is inevitably forced to maintain its
supremacy by means of that fear which its arms inspire in
the reactionaries. Had the Paris Commune not relied on
the authority of the armed people against the bourgeoisie,
would it have lasted longer than a single day? May we
not rather censure the Commune for not having made
sufficient use of this authority? And so, either the Anti-
Authoritarians themselves do not know what they are talk-
ing about, in which case they merely sow confusion; or
they do know what they are talking about, in which case
they are betraying the proletariat. In either case they
serve only the interests of reaction” (p. 39).

In this discussion questions are touched on, which must
be investigated in connection with the subject of the corre-

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 169

lation of politics and economics during the “withering away”
of the State. (The next chapter treats of this subject.)
Such are the problems of the transformation of the nature of
public functions, from political to simply administrative, and
of the “political State.” This last term, particularly liable
to cause misunderstanding, indicates the process of the “with-
ering away” of the State: the dying State, at certain stage
of its decay, can be called a non-political State. The most
remarkable point in our quotation from Engels’ work is again
the way he puts the position against the anarchists. Social-
Democrats, desiring to be disciples of Engels, have disputed
with the anarchists thousands of times since 1873, but they
have not disputed at all as Marxists can and should. The
anarchist idea of the abolition of the State is muddled and
non-revolutionary—that is how Engels put it. It is precisely
the revolution, in its rise and development, with its specific
problems in relation to violence, authority, power and the
State, that the anarchists do not wish to see. The usual criti-
cism of the anarchists by the modern Social-Democrats has
been reduced to the purest middle class triviality: ‘We, for-
sooth, recognize the State, whereas the anarchists do not.”
Naturally such trivialities cannot but repel any revolutionary
working men who think at all. Engels says something quite
different. He emphasizes that all Socialists recognize the
disappearance of the State as a result of the Socialist Revo-
lution. He then deals with the concrete question of the revo-
lution—that very question which, as a rule, the Social-Demo-
crats, because of their opportunism, evade, leaving it, so to
speak, exclusively for the anarchists “to work out.” And in
thus formulating the question Engels takes the bull by the
horns. Ought not the Commune to have made more use of
the revolutionary power of the State, that is, of the proletariat
armed and organized as the ruling class?

The modern predominating official Social-Democracy has
generally dismissed the concrete problems facing the prole-
tariat during the revolution, either by some inane philistine
jeers, or, at the best, by the evasive sophism—‘‘Wait and see.”
And the anarchists have thus gained the right to reproach such
Social-Democrats with betraying their mission of educating
the working class in revolution. Engels makes use of the

io THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

experience of the last proletarian revolution for the direct
purpose of drawing from it concrete conclusions as to what
and how the proletariat should do and act concerning both
banks and the State.

3. The Letter to Bebel.

One of the most remarkable, if not the most remarkable,
reasoning in the works of Marx and Engels on the State is
contained in the following passage in Engels’ letter to Bebel
on March x8th-28th, 1875. This letter, we may remark in
passing, was first published, so far as we know, by Bebel, in
the second volume of his memoirs (My Life), published in
1911, that is, thirty-six years after the writing and dispatch
of the letter.

Engels wrote to Bebel, criticizing that same draft of the
Gotha programme, which Marx criticized in his famous letter
to Bracke, and, referring particularly to the question of the
State, said:

“The Free People’s State has been transformed into a
Free State. According to the grammatical meaning of the
words, the Free State is one in which the State is free in
relation to its citizens, that is, a State with a despotic gov-
ernment. It would be well to throw overboard all this non-
sense about the State, especially after the Commune, which
was already no longer a State in the proper sense of the
word.

“The anarchists have too long been able to throw into
our teeth this ‘People’s State,’ although already, in Marx’s
works against Proudhon, and then in the Communist
Manifesto, it was stated quite plainly that with the intro-
duction of the Socialist order of society, the State will
dissolve of itself (“‘sich auflést”), and will disappear. As
the State is only a transitional institution which we are
obliged to use in the revolutionary struggle in order forcibly
to crush our opponents, it is a pure absurdity to speak of a
Free People’s State. During the period when the prole-
tariat still needs the State, it does not require it in the inter-
ests of freedom, but in the interests of crushing its antago-

THE STATE'AND REVOLUTION 171

nists; and when it becomes possible really to speak of free-
dom, then the State, as such, ceases to exist. We should,
therefore, suggest that everywhere the word State be re-
placed by ‘Gemeinwesen’ (Commonwealth), a fine old
German word, which corresponds to the French word ‘Com-

2 392

mune.” (p. 322, German Edition.)

One should bear in mind that this letter refers to the Party
programme which Marx criticized in his letter dated only a
few weeks later than the above (Marx’s letter of May sth,
1875), and that Engels was living at the time with Marx in
London. Consequently, when he says “we” Engels un-
doubtedly suggests to the leader of the German working class
party, both in his own and in Marx’s name, that the word
“State” should be struck out of their programme and ex-
changed for “Commonwealth.”

What a howl about “anarchism” would be raised by the
leaders of present-day “Marxism” adulterated to meet the
requirements of the opportunists, if such an alteration in
their programme were suggested to them. Let them howl.
The capitalist class will pat them on the back for it.

In the meantime, however, we shall go on with our work.
In revising the programme of our Party, Engels’ and Marx’s
advice must undoubtedly be taken into consideration in order
to come nearer to the truth, to re-establish Marxism, to purge
it from distortion, to direct the struggle for freedom of the
working class into the right channels. Among the Bolsheviks
there will certainly be none opposed to the advice of Engels
and Marx. Difficulties may, perhaps, crop up regarding ter-
minology. In German there are two words meaning “Com-
monwealth,” of which Engels used the one which does not
denote a single community, but the sum of all, a system of
communities. In Russian there is no such word, and perhaps
we may have to choose the French word “Commune,” al-
though this also has its drawbacks.*

“The Commune was no longer a State in the proper sense
of the word.” Here is Engels’ most important theoretical

*Tt will be seen that the English language possesses just the equivalent
of the German “Gemeinwesen,” which the Russian lacks. It is even prob-
we that the German term was suggested to Engels by the English word.—

‘rans.

172 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

proposition. After what has been said above, this statement
is quite intelligible. The Commune ceased to be a State in
so far as it had to repress, not the majority, but a minority,
of the population (the exploiters); it had broken the bour-
geois machinery of government, and, in the place of a
special repressive force, the whole population itself was com-
ing on the scene. All this is a departure from the State in its
‘proper sense. And had the Commune become consolidated,
the relics of the State would of themselves have “withered
away” within it; there would have been no need for the State
to “abolish” its institutions, they would have ceased to func-
tion in proportion as less and less was left for them to do.

“The Anarchists throw into our teeth the ‘People’s State.’ ”
In saying this, Engels has in mind especially Bakunin and his
attacks on the German Social-Democrats. Engels admits these
attacks to be justified in so far as the “People’s State” is as
senseless and as far removed from Socialism as the “Free Peo-
ple’s State.” Engels tries to alter the character of the con-
troversy of the German Social-Democrats with the anarchists,
to make it true to principle, and to clear it from opportunist
prejudice concerning the “State.” Alas! Engels’ letter has
been stowed away for thirty-six years. We shall see below
that, even after the publication of Engels’ letter, Kautsky still
obstinately continues to repeat those very mistakes against
which Engels gave his warning.

Bebel replied to Engels in a letter, dated September 21st,
1875, in which, amongst other things, he wrote that he
“fully agreed” with Engels’ criticism of the projected pro-
gramme, and that he had reproached Liebknecht for his readi-
ness to make concessions (Bebel’s Memoirs, German Edi-
tion, vol. II., p. 304). But if we take Bebel’s pamphlet, “Our
Aims,” we shall find there absolutely wrong views of the
State. “The State must be transformed from one based on
class supremacy to a people’s State.” (Unsere Ziele, 1886,
p- 14). This is printed in the ninth edition of Bebel’s pam-
phlet. Small wonder that such constantly repeated oppor-
tunist views of the State have been absorbed by the German
Social-Democracy, especially as the revolutionary interpreta-
tions by Engels were safely stowed away, and all the condi-
tions of life have been such as to wean them from revolution.

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 173

4. Criticism of the Draft of the Erfurt Programme.

In a discussion of the doctrines of Marxism regarding the
State, the criticism of the Erfurt Programme sent by Engels
to Kautsky on June 29th, 1891, and only published ten years
later in the Neue Zeit, cannot be passed over; for this criti-
cism is mainly concerned with the opportunist views of Social-
Democracy on the questions of State organization.

In passing we may note that Engels also raises an exceed-
ingly valuable point of economics, which shows how at-
tentively and thoughtfully he followed the various phases of
the latest developments of capitalism, and how he was able,
in consequence, to foresee to a certain extent the problems of
our own, the imperialist, epoch. Here is this point. Touch-
ing on the words used in the draft of the programme, “the
want of ordered plan” as characteristic of capitalism, Engels
writes:

“If we pass from joint stock companies to trusts, which
get hold of and monopolize whole branches of industry,
not only private production, but also the want of ordered
plan disappears.” (Neue Zeit, year 20, vol. I., 1901-2,

p- 8.)

Here we have what is most essential in the theoretical ap-
preciation of the latest phase of capitalism, that is imperialism,
viz., that capitalism becomes monopolistic capitalism. This
fact must be emphasized because the “‘reformist” middle class
view that monopolistic capitalism, whether private or State,
is no longer capitalism, but can already be termed “State
Socialism,” or something of that sort, is one of the most
widespread errors. The trusts, of course, have not given us,
and indeed, cannot give us, full and complete order and sys-
tem in production. But, however much of an ordered plan
they may yield, however closely capitalist magnates may esti-
mate in advance the required extent of production on a
national and even international scale, and, however, carefully
and systematically they may regulate it, we still remain
under capitalism—capitalism, it is true, in its latest phase, but
still, undoubtedly, capitalism. The nearness of such cap-

174 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

italism to Socialism should be, in the mouth of real repre-
sentatives of the proletariat, an argument for the nearness,
ease, feasibility and urgency of the Socialist revolution, and
not at all one for tolerating a repudiation of such a revolution,
or the attempts to make capitalism look attractive, in which
the reformists are habitually engaged.

But to return to the question of the State. Engels makes
here three valuable suggestions: in the first place, on the ques-
tion of a republic; secondly, on the connection between the
problems of nationalities and the form of the State; and
thirdly, on local self-government.

With regard to the question of a republic, Engels made this
point the gravamen of his criticism of the draft of the Erfurt
programme; and when we remember what an important part
the Erfurt programme has played in the International So-
cial-Democracy, how it became the model for: the whole of
the Second International, it may, without exaggeration, be
said that Engels criticized in this connection the opportunism
of the whole Second International. ‘The political demands
of the draft,” Engels writes, “are vitiated by a great fault.
They do not mention (Engels’ italics) what ought certainly to
have been said.”

And, later on, he makes it clear that the German constitu-
tion is but a copy of the reactionary constitution of 1850, that
the Reichstag is only, as Wilhelm Liebknecht put it, “the fig-
leaf of Absolutism,” and that to “wish to make all the means
of production public property” on the basis of a constitution
which has legalized the existence of petty States and the feder-
ation of petty German States, is an “obvious absurdity.”

“It is dangerous to touch on this subject,” Engels adds,
knowing full well that it was impossible for police reasons
to include in the programme a demand for a republic in
Germany. But Engels does not simply rest content with this
obvious consideration which satisfies “everybody.” He .con-
tinues:

“But the matter must, in one way or another, be pressed
forward. To what an extent this is essential is shown par-
ticularly just now by the way opportunism is gaining
ground in the Social-Democratic press. Fearing a renewal

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 175

of the anti-Socialist laws, or remembering some prema-
ture declarations made when those laws were in force,
some people desire now that the Party should recognize
the present legal order in Germany as sufficient for the
peaceful realization of all its demands.”

Engels brings out as of prime importance the fact that
German Social-Democracy was acting in fear of the renewal
of the Exceptional Laws, and, without hesitation, calls this
opportunism, declaring that just because of the absence of a
republic and freedom in Germany, the dreams of a “‘peace-
ful” path were quite absurd. Engels is sufficiently careful
not to tie his hands in advance. He admits that in republican
or very free countries “one can conceive” (only “conceive”! )
a peaceful development towards Socialism, but in Germany he
repeats:

“In Germany, where the Government is almost omnipo-
tent, and the Reichstag and all other representative bodies
have no real power, to proclaim anything of the sort, and
that without any need, is to take off the fig leaf from
absolutism and to screen its nakedness by one’s own body

The great majority of official leaders of German Social-
Democracy, who “stowed away” this advice, have indeed
proved the screen of absolutism.

“Such a policy can only, in the end, lead the party on to
a false road. General abstract political questions are
pushed to the foreground, and in this way all the imme-
diate concrete problems which arise automatically on the
order of the day at the first approach of important events,
during the first political crisis, are hidden from sight.
What else can result from this than that the party may
suddenly, at the first critical moment, prove helpless, that
on decisive questions confusion and division will arise
within the party because these questions had never been
discussed?

176 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

“This neglect of great fundamental considerations for
the sake of the momentary interests of the day, this chase
after momentary successes, and this race after them with-
out account of ultimate results, this sacrifice of the future
movement for the present, is, perhaps, the result of ‘honest’
motives, but is and remains, none the less, opportunism,
and ‘honest’ opportunism is, perhaps, more dangerous than
any other . . . If there is anything about which there
can be no doubt, it is that our party and the working class
can only gain supremacy under a political regime like a
democratic republic. ‘This latter is, indeed, the specific
form for the dictatorship of the proletariat, as has been
demonstrated by the great French Revolution. . . .”

Engels repeats herein a particularly emphatic form the
fundamental idea which, like a red thread, runs throughout
all Marx’s work, viz., that the Democratic Republic is the
nearest jumping-board to the dictatorship of the proletariat.
For such a republic, without in the least setting aside the
domination of capital, and, therefore, the oppression of the
masses and the class struggle, inevitably leads to such an
extension, intensification and development of that struggle
that, as soon as the chance arises for satisfying the funda-
mental interests of the oppressed masses, this chance is re+
alized inevitably and solely in the form of the dictatorship
of the proletariat, of the guidance of these masses by the pro-
letariat. These also have been, for the whole of the Second
International, “forgotten words” of Marxism, and their neg-
lect was demonstrated with particular vividness by the history
of the Menshevik party during the first half of the Russian
Revolution of 1917.

On the question of a Federal Republic, in connection with
the national composition of the population, Engels wrote:

“What ought to arise in the place of present-day Ger-
many (with its reactionary monarchist constitution and the
equally reactionary division into small States, a division
which perpetuates the peculiarities of ‘Prussianism’ instead
of submerging them in Germany as a single whole)? In
my opinion the proletariat can only make use of the form

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 177

of a one and indivisible republic. A federal republic is
still, as a whole, a necessity in the enormous territory of
the United States, but even so it is already becoming an
impediment in the Eastern States. It would be a progressive
step in England, where four nationalities live on the two
islands, and where, in spite of one Parliament, three systems
of legislation exist side by side. It has long since become
a hindrance in little Switzerland, and if there the Federal
Republic can still be tolerated, it is only because Switzer-
land is content with the role of an entirely passive mem-
ber of the European State system. For Germany, a fed-
eralization on the Swiss model would be an enormous step
backward. Two points differentiate a federated State from
a unitary State, viz., that each individual State within the
union has its own civil and criminal legislation, its own
particular judicial system; and then this: that, side by side
with the popular chamber, there is a chamber of repre-
sentatives from the States in which every Canton votes
as such, irrespective of its size.”

In Germany the Federated State is the transition to the
complete unitary State, and the “revolutions from above” of
1866 and 1870 must not be turned backwards, but must be
completed by a “movement from below.”

Engels not only shows no indifference to the question of
‘the form of the State, but, on the contrary, analyzes with
the greatest possible care the transitional forms in order to
establish, from the concrete historical peculiarities of each
separate case, from what and to what the given transitional
form is evolving.

Engels, like Marx, insists, from the point of view of the
proletariat and the proletarian revolution, on democratic cen-
tralism, on the one and indivisible republic. The Federal
Republic is considered by him to be either an exception and a
hindrance to development, or a transitional form between a
monarchy and a centralized republic, a “progressive step in
certain definite conditions.” And amongst these definite con-
ditions arises the problem of nationalities.

With Engels, as with Marx, in spite of their pitiless criti-
cism of the reactionary nature of the small States, often, in

178 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

certain concrete cases, hidden from the eye under the cloak
of the national question, there is nowhere a trace of any
desire to ignore the national question—a desire of which the
Dutch and Polish Marxists ate often guilty, as a result of
their most justifiable opposition to the narrow, middle class
nationalism of “their” little States.

Even in England, where the geographical conditions, the
common language, and the history of many centuries would
seem to have put an end to the national question of the
separate small divisions in England—even here Engels is cog-
nizant of the patent fact, that the national question has not
yet been overcome, and recognizes, in consequence, that the
establishment of a federal republic would be a “progressive”
step. Of course, there is no trace here of a renunciation of
criticism of the defects of the Federal Republic or of the
most determined propaganda and fight for a unitary and
democratically-centralized republic.

But Engels’ conception of a centralized democracy is not
of that bureaucratic order with which middle class ideologists
(including anarchists) identify it. Centralism does not, with
Engels, in the least exclude such wide local autonomy, which
combines a voluntary defence of the unity of the State by the
communes and districts with the absolute abolition of all
bureaucracy and all “ordering about” from above.

“And so we want a unitary republic [writes Engels,
setting out the programmatic views of Marxism on the
State] but not in the sense of the present French Republic,
which is neither more nor less than the Empire established
in 1798 without the Emperor. From 1792 to 1798 each
French department, each municipality, enjoyed complete
self-government, on the American model, and this is what
we, too, ought to have. How local self-government should
be organized and how it is possible to do without a bureauc-
racy has been demonstrated to us by America and the first
French Republic, and is still being demonstrated by Can-
ada, Australia and other British Dominions. Such a pro-
vincial and communal self-government is a far freer insti-
tution than, for instance, the Swiss Federation under which,
it is true, the Canton is very independent of the Bund

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 179

[that is, of the Federal State as a whole] but is also inde-
pendent of the district and the commune. The cantonal
governments appoint the district state-holders and prefects,
a feature which is quite absent in the English-speaking
countries, and which we, in our own country, must in the
future abolish as completely as the Prussian ‘Landrite,
Regierungsrate’” [that is, all officials appointed from
above].

In accordance with this, Engels suggests the following
wording for the clause in the programme regarding self-govern-
ment: ‘Complete self-government for the provinces, districts
and communes through officials elected by universal suffrage,
the abolition of all local and provincial authorities appointed
by the State.”

In the Pravda of May 28th, 1917, suppressed by the
Government of Kerensky and other “Socialist” Ministers, I
had already occasion to point out how in this connection (not
by any means in this alone), our sham Socialist representatives
of the sham-revolutionary sham-democracy, have scandalously
departed from democracy. Naturally people who have allied
themselves with the Imperialist capitalist class remained deaf
to this criticism.

It is particularly important to note that Engels, armed
with precise facts, disproves by a telling example the super-
stition very widespread, especially among the lower middle
class democracy, that a Federal Republic necessarily means a
larger amount of liberty than a centralized republic. This
is not true. The facts cited by Engels regarding the cen-
tralized French Republic of 1792-98 and Federal Switzerland
disprove this. The really democratic centralized republic
gave more liberty than the federal republic—in other words,
the greatest amount of local freedom known in history was
granted by a centralized republic, and not by a Federal Re-
public.

Insufficient attention has hitherto been paid to this fact,
as indeed, to the whole question of federal and centralized
republics and local self-government in our party literature and
agitation.

10 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

5. The Preface of 1891 to Marx’s “Civil War in
France.”

In his preface to the third edition of the Civil War in
France (this preface is dated March 18th, 1891, and was
originally published in the Neue Zeit) Engels, side by side
with many other interesting questions in connection with the
State, gives a remarkably striking résumé, of the lessons of
the Commune. ‘This résumé, confirmed by all the experience
of the period of twenty years separating the author from the
Commune, and directed particularly against the “superstitious
faith in the State” so widely diffused in Germany, can, quite
justly, be called the last word of Marxism on the question here
dealt with.

In France, Engels notes, the workers were armed after every
revolution. ‘“‘Consequently the first commandment for every
bourgeois at the head of the State was the disarmament of '
the workers. Accordingly, after every revolution won by the
workers, a new struggle arose which ended with their de-
Peete) Givi ss

This is a summing up of the experience of bourgeois revo-
lutions, which is as short as it is expressive. The essence of
the whole matter—also, by the way, of the question of the
State—viz., has the oppressed class arms? is here wonderfully
well expressed. It is just this essential thing which, more
than not, is ignored both by professors under the influence
of capitalist ideology and by the lower middle class democrats.
In the Russian Revolution of 1917 it was to the ““Menshevik,”
a so-called ‘‘Marxist,” Tseretelli, that the Cavaignac honor
fell of babbling out this secret of bourgeois revolutions. In
his “historic” speech of June 9th (22nd) Tseretelli blundered
_ out the decision of the bourgeoisie to disarm the Petrograd
workers—referring, of course, to this decision as his own, and
as a vital necessity for the State.

Tseretelli’s historic speech of June 9th (22nd) will cer-
tainly constitute for every historian of the revolution of 1917
one of the clearest illustrations of how the “bloc” of Socialist-
Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, led by Mr. Tseretelli, went
over to the side of the capitalist class against the revolutionary
proletariat.

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 18:

Another incidental remark of Engels’ also connected with
the question of the State dealt with religion. It is well known
that the German Social-Democracy, in proportion as it began
to decay and to become more and more opportunist, slid down
more and more frequently to the philistine misinterpretation
of the celebrated formula, that “religion is a private matter.”
That is, this formula was twisted to mean that even for the
party of the revolutionary proletariat the question of religion
Was a private matter. It was against this complete betrayal
of the revolutionary program of the proletariat that Engels
revolted. In 1891 he only saw the very feeble beginnings of
opportunism in his party, and, therefore, he expressed himself
on the subject most cautiously:

“Corresponding with the fact that in the Commune
there sat, almost without exception, only workmen or the
recognized representatives of the workers, its decisions were
distinguished by their resolute proletarian character. These
decisions either decreed such reforms as the republican bour-
geoisie had rejected only out of base cowardice, but which
formed a necessary foundation for the free activity of the
working class. Such, for instance, was the adoption of
the principle that in relation to the State religion is simply
a private matter. Or the Commune promulgated decrees
directly in the interests of the working class and, to a cer-
tain extent, inflicting deep wounds on the old body social.”

Engels deliberately emphasized the words “in relation to
the State,” not as a mere hint, but as a straight thrust at
German opportunism which had declared religion to be a
ptivate matter in relation to the party; thus lowering the
party of the revolutionary proletariat to the level of the most
superficial “freethinkers” of the middle class, ready to admit
a non-religious State, but renouncing all party struggle against
the religious opium which stupefies the people.

The future historian of the German Social-Democracy in-
vestigating the root causes of its shameful collapse in 1914
will find no little material of interest on this question, begin-
ning with the evasive declarations in the articles of the in-
tellectual leader of the party, Kautsky, opening the door wide

12 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

to opportunism, and ending with the attitude of the party
towards the ‘“‘Los-von-Kirche Bewegung” (the movement for
the disestablishment of the Church) in 1913.

But let us pass on to the manner in which, twenty years
after the Commune, Engels summed up its lessons for the
struggling proletariat.

Here are the lessons to which Engels attached prime im-
portance:

“Tt was just this oppressive power of the former central-
ized government, the army, the political police, the bureau-
cracy which Napoleon created in 1798, and which, from
that time onwards, every new government had taken over
as a desirable weapon for use against its opponents—it was
just this power which should have fallen throughout France
as it had fallen in Paris.

“The Commune was compelled to recognize from the
very first that the working class, having obtained supre-
macy, could no longer carry on the business of government
by means of the old machinery: that, in order that the
working class might not lose again its newly-won supre-
macy, it must, on the one hand, sweep aside the whole of
the old machine of oppression which had hitherto been used
against it, and on the other, secure itself against its own
deputies and officials by declaring them all, without excep-
tion, revocable at any time.”

Engels emphasizes again and again that not only in a
monarchy, but also in a democratic republic, the State re-
mains the State, that is, it retains its fundamental and char-~
acteristic feature, viz., the transformation of officials—‘the
servants of society”—and of its organs into the rulers of
society. y

“Against this inevitable feature of all systems of govern-
ment that have existed hitherto, viz., the transformation
of the State and its organs from servants into the lords of
society, the Commune used two unfailing remedies. First,
it appointed to all posts, administrative, legal, educational,
persons elected by universal suffrage; introducing at the

THE STATE AND’*REVOLUTION $183

same time the right of recalling those elected at any time
by the decision of their electors. Secondly, it paid all
officials, both high and low, only such pay as was received
by any other worker. The highest salary paid by the Com-
mune was 6,000 francs (about £240) .*

“Thus was created an effective barrier to place-hunting
and career-making, even apart from the imperative man-
dates of the deputies in representative institutions intro-
duced by the Commune over and above this.”

Engels touches here on the interesting boundary where a
consistent democracy is, on the one hand, transformed into
Socialism, and on the other, Socialism. For, in order to
destroy the State, it is necessary to convert the functions of
the public service into such simple operations of control
and bookkeeping as are within the reach of the vast majority
of the population, and, ultimately, of every single individual.
And, in order to do away completely with the political ad-
venturer, it must be made impossible for an “honorable,”
though unsalaried, sinecure in the public service to be used
as a jumping-off ground for a highly profitable post in a
bank or a joint stock company, as happens constantly in the
freest capitalist countries,

But Engels does not make the mistake made, for instance,
by some Marxists on the question of the right of a nation to
self-determination, viz., that, forsooth, this is impossible
under capitalism and will be unnecessary under Socialism.
Such an apparently clever, but really incorrect statement
might be repeated of any democratic institution, amongst
others, of the payment of moderate salaries to officials; for,
during the lifetime of capitalism a completely consistent
democracy is impossible, whilst under Socialism all political
democracy disappears.

This is a sophism, comparable to the old humorous prob-

* Nominally this means about 2,400 roubles per annum. According to the
present rates of exchange in Russia this would be equal to 6,000 roubles.
Those Bolsheviks are making quite an unpardonable error who are. propos-
ing a salary of 9,000 roubles for members of the Town Duma, for instance,
instead of suggesting a maximum salary of 6,000 roubles for the whole of
the State—a sum quite sufficient for anybody. [As a matter of fact, the
salaries of People’s Commissars after the Bolshevik Revolution were fixed

at 500 roubles per month. Since then, however, the value of the rouble has
still further decreased, so the salaries had to be raised.—Trans,].

184 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

lem of at what point a man will become bald if he loses his
hair one by one.

The development of democracy to its logical conclusion,
the investigation of the forms of this development, testing
them by practice, and so forth—all this is part of the objects
in the struggle for the Social Revolution. Taken separately,
no kind of democracy will yield Socialism. But in actual life
democracy will never be “taken by itself”; it will be “taken
together” with other things, it will exert its influence also on
economics, helping on its re-organization; it will be subjected,
in its turn, to the influence of economic development, and so
on. That is the dialectical process of actual living history.
Engels continues:

“This disruption (“Sprengung”) of the old machinery
of government and its replacement by a new and really
democratic one, is described in detail in the third part of
the Civil War. But it was necessary to dwell once more
in brief on this point, that is, on one or two features of
this replacement, because in Germany the superstitious
faith in the State has left the realm of philosophy and
passed into the general consciousness of the bourgeoisie and
even of many workers. According to the teaching of the
philosophers, the State is the ‘realization of Idea,’ or trans-
lated into theological language, the Kingdom of God on
earth; the State is the field in which is, or should be, re-
alized eternal Truth and Justice. And from this follows
a superstitious reverence for the State and for everything
appertaining to the State—a superstitious reverence which
takes root the more readily as people are accustomed, from.
their childhood, to think that the affairs and interests com-
mon to the whole of society cannot be carried out and
protected in any other way than in the one in existence—
that is, by means of the State and its well-paid officials.
People think they are making an extraordinarily big step
forward if they rid themselves of faith in a hereditary
monarchy and become partisans of a democratic republic.
Whereas, in reality, the State is nothing more than an ap-
paratus for the oppression of one class by another, in a
democratic republic, not a whit less than in a monarchy.

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 185

‘At best the State is an evil inherited by the proletariat after
coming out victorious in the struggle for class supremacy.
The victorious proletariat, just like the Commune, will be
obliged immediately to amputate the worst features of this
evil, until such time as a new generation, brought up under
new and free social conditions, will prove capable of throw-
ing on the dust-heap all the useless old rubbish of State

organization.”

Engels cautioned the Germans, in the event of the mon-
archy being replaced by a republic, not to forget the funda-
mentals of Socialism on the question of the State in general.
His warnings now read like a direct lesson to Messrs. Tsere-
telli and Tchernoff who revealed in their coalition tactics a
superstitious faith in, and respect towards, the State!

Two more points. (1) When Engels says that in a demo-
cratic republic, “not a whit less” than in a monarchy, the
State remains an “apparatus for the oppression of one class
by another,” this by no means signifies that the form of
oppression is a matter of indifference to the proletariat, as
some anarchists “teach.” A wider, more free and open form
of the class struggle and class oppression enormously assists
the proletariat in its struggle for the annihilation of all classes.
(2) Why only a new generation will be able completely to
scrap the ancient lumber of the State—this question is bound
up with the question of the supersession of democracy, to
which we now turn.

6. Engels on the Supersession of Democracy.

Engels had occasion to speak on this subject in connection
with the question of the “scientific” incorrectness of the term
“Social-Democrat.”

In the introduction to his edition of his articles of the
*seventies on various subjects, mainly on international ques-
tions (“Internationales aus dem Volkstaat”), dated January
3rd, 1894 (that is, a year and a half before his death), Engels
_ wrote that in all his articles he used the word “Communist,”
not ‘“Social-Democrat”; because at that time it was the
Proudhonists in France and the Lassalleans in Germany who
called themselves Social-Democrats.

136 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

“For Marx and for me [Engels continues] it was, there-
fore, quite impossible to use such an elastic term to describe
our particular point of view. At the present time things
are different, and this word (‘Social-Democrat’) may, per-
haps, pass muster, although it remains inexact (‘unpassend’
literally ‘unsuitable’) for a party whose economic pro-
gramme is not simply a general Socialist one, but definitely
Communist—for a party whose final political aim is the
supersession of the whole State and, therefore, also of
democracy. But the names of real (the italics are Engels’)
political parties never completely correspond with fact: the
party develops, the name remains.”

The dialectician Engels remains true to dialectics to the
last day of his life. Marx and I, he says, had a splendid,
scientific, exact name for the party, but there was no real
party, that is, no mass-proletarian party. Now, at the end of |
the roth century, there is a real party; but its name is scien-
tifically incorrect. Never mind, “it will pass muster,” only
let the party grow, only let not the scientific inexactness of
its name be hidden from it, and let it not hinder its develop-
ment in the right direction.

Perhaps, indeed, some humorist might comfort us Bol-
sheviks 4 la Engels: we have a real party, it is developing
splendidly; even such a meaningless and barbarous term as
“Bolshevik” “will pass muster,” although it expresses nothing
but the purely accidental fact that at the Brussels-London
Conference of 1903 we had a majority (Bolshinstvo). Per-
haps now, when the July and August persecutions of our
party by the republican and “revolutionary” middle class |
democracy have made the word “‘Bolshevik”’ such a universally
respected name; when, in addition, these persecutions have
signalized such a great historical step forward made by our)
party in its actual development, perhaps now even I should!
hesitate to repeat my April suggestion to change the name
of our Party. Perhaps I would propose a “compromise”? to:
our comrades, to call ourselves the Communist Party, but to
retain “Bolsheviks” in brackets* . .. But the question of!

* This was actually done after the November Revolution: The Bolshevik
ahd now officially styles itself: ‘(Communist Party of the Bolsheviks’’).—
rans. ;

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 187

the name of the party is incomparably less important than
the question of the relation of the revolutionary proletariat
to the State.

In the usual debates about the State the mistake is con-
stantly made against which Engels cautions us here, and
which we have indicated above. Namely, it is constantly
forgotten that the destruction of the State involves also the
destruction of democracy; that the “withering away” of the
State also means the “withering away” of democracy. At
first sight such a statement seems exceedingly strange and in-
comprehensible. Indeed, perhaps some one or other may begin
to fear lest we be expecting the advent of such an order of
society in which the principle of majority rule will not be
respected—for is not a democracy just the recognition of

this principle? —s

No, democracy is not identical with majority rule. No,
democracy is a State which recognizes the subjection of the
minority to the majority, that is, an organization for the

systematic use of violence by one class against the other, by,”

one part of the population against another.
We set ourselves, as our final aim, the task of the destruc-

tion of the State, that is, of every organized and systematic.

violence, every form of violence against man in general. We
do not expect the advent of an order of society in which the
principle of submission of the minority to the majority will
not be observed. But, striving for Socialism, we are con-
vinced that it will develop further into Communism, and,
side by side with this, there will vanish all need for force, for
the subjection of one man to another, of one section of society
to another, since people will grow accustomed to observing
the elementary conditions of social existence without force
and without subjection.

In order to emphasize. this element ee habit, Engels speaks
of a mew generation, “brought up under new ‘ghal free aecaal
conditions, which will prove capable of throwing on the dust-
heap all the useless old rubbish of State organization”—every
sort of State, including even the democratic republican State.

For the elucidation of this, we must examine the question
of the economic foundations of the withering away of the
State.

hr,

CHAPTER: Vis

THE ECONOMIC FOUNDATION OF THE “WITHERING AWAY
OF THE STATE.

A most detailed elucidation of this question is given by
Marx in his “Criticism of the Gotha Programme” (letter to
Bracke, May 15th, 1875, printed as late as 1891 in the Neue
Zeit, ix., 1). The polemical part of this remarkable work
consisting of a criticism of Lassalleanism has, so to speak,
overshadowed its positive part, namely the analysis of the con-
nection between the development of Communism and the
“withering away” of the State.

1. The Formulation of the Question by Marx.

From a superficial comparison of the letter of Marx to
Bracke (May 15th, 1875) with Engels’ letter to Bebel (March
28th, 1875), discussed above, it might appear that Marx was
much more of an upholder of the State than Engels, and that
the difference of opinion between them on the question of the
State is very considerable.

Engels suggests to Bebel that all the chatter about the State
should be thrown overboard; that the word “State” should be
eliminated from the programme and replaced by ““Common-
wealth”; Engels even declares that the Commune was really
no longer a State in the proper sense of the word. Whereas —
Marx even speaks of the “future State in Communist society,”
that is, apparently recognizing the necessity of a State even
under Communism.

But such a view would be fundamentally incorrect; and a
closer examination shows that Marx’s and Engels’ views on
the State and its decay were completely identical, and that
Marx’s expression quoted above refers merely to the decaying
State.

188

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 189

It is clear that there can be no question of defining the
exact moment of the future ““withering away”—the more so as
it must obviously be a prolonged process. The apparent differ-
ence between Marx and Engels is due to the different subjects
they dealt with, the different aims they were pursuing. Engels
set forth the problem in a plain, bold and large outline in
order to show Bebel all the absurdity of the current super-
stitions concerning State, shared to no small degree by Lassalle
himself. Marx only touches upon this question in passing,
being interested mainly in another subject—the evolution of
Communist society. The whole theory of Marx is an appli-
cation of the theory of evolution—in its most consistent,
complete, well-thought-out and fruitful form—to modern
Capitalism. Naturally, for Marx there arose the question of
the application of this theory both to the coming crash of
capitalism and to the future development of future Com-
munism.

On what foundation of facts can the future development
of future Communism be based? It can be based on the fact
that it has its origin in capitalism, that it develops historically
from capitalism, that it is the result of the action of social
forces to which capitalism has given birth: There is no
shadow of an attempt on Marx’s part to fabricate a utopia,
idly to guess that which cannot be known. Marx treats the
question of Communism in the same way as a naturalist would
treat the question of the development of, say a new biological
variety, if he knew that such and such was its origin, and
such and such is the direction in which it changes its form.

Marx, first of all, brushes aside the-confusion which is in-
troduced by the Gotha programme into the question of the
mutual relations of State and Society.

“Contemporary society [he writes] is capitalist society,
which exists in all civilized countries, freed, to a greater or
lesser extent, from admixture of medizvalism, more or less
varying in type according to the peculiar historical con-
ditions of development of each country, more or less fully
developed. The ‘contemporary State,’ on the contrary,
varies with every State boundary. In the Prusso-German
Empire it is quite a different thing from that in Switzer-

190 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

land; in England quite different from that in the United
States. The ‘contemporary State’ is, therefore a fiction.

“However, in spite of the motley variety of their forms,
the different forms of the State in the different civilized
countries have this in common—they are all based on con-
temporary bourgeois society, more or less capitalistically de-
veloped. They have, therefore, certain fundamental traits
in common. In this sense one can speak of the ‘contempo-
rary State’ in contradistinction to that future time when
its present root, namely, capitalist society, will have per-
ished. ;

“The question is then put thus: To what transformation
will the forms of government be subjected in Communist
society? In other words what social functions will there
remain, then, analogous to the present functions of the
State? This question can only be answered with the help
of the scientific method; and, however many thousands of
times the word ‘people’ is combined with the word ‘State,’
this will not bring us one iota nearer its solution. . . .”

Having thus ridiculed all the talk of a “People’s State”
Marx formulates the question and warns us, as it were, that
for a scientific answer to it one can only rely on firmly es-
tablished scientific facts.

The first fact that has been established with complete ex-
actness by the whole theory of evolution, indeed, by the whole
of science—a fact which the utopians forgot, however, and
which is now forgotten by the present opportunists, afraid of
the Socialist revolution—is that, historically, there must un-
doubtedly be a special stage or epoch of transition from capi-
talism to Communism.

2. The Transition from Capitalism to Communism.

“Between capitalist and Communist society [Marx con-
tinues], there lies a period of revolutionary transformation
from the former to the latter. A stage of political transi-
tion corresponds to this period, and the State during this
period can be no other than the revolutionary dictatorship
of the proletariat.”

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 191

This conclusion Marx bases on an analysis of the role
played by the proletariat in modern capitalist society, on the
facts of the development of this society and on the irrecon-
cilability of the antagonistic interests of the proletarian and
the capitalist class.

Earlier the question was put thus: To attain its emanci-
pation the proletariat must overthrow the capitalist class,
conquer political power and establish its own revolutionary
dictatorship. Now the question‘is put somewhat differently:
The transition from capitalist society developing towards
Communism to a Communist society, is impossible without
a period of “political transition,” and the State in this period
can only be the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat.

What, then, is the relation of this dictatorship to democ-
racy?

We saw that The Communist Manifesto simply places side
by side the two ideas: the “conversion of the proletariat
into the ruling class” and the “conquest of democracy.” On
the basis of all that has been said above, one can define more
exactly how democracy changes in the transition of capitalism
to Communism.

In capitalist society, under the conditions most favorable
to its development, we have a more or less complete democ-
racy in the form of a democratic republic. But this democ-
racy is always bound by the narrow framework of capitalist
exploitation, and consequently always remains, in reality, a
democracy only for the minority, only for the possessing
classes, only for the rich. Freedom in capitalist society al-
ways remains more or less the same as it was in the ancient
Greek republics, that is, freedom for the slave owners. The
modern wage- -slaves, i in virtue of the conditions of capitalist
exploitation, remain to such an extent crushed by want and
poverty that they “cannot be bothered with democracy,” have
“no time for politics”; that, in the ordinary peaceful course
of events, the majority of the population is debarred from
patticipating in public political life.

The accuracy of this statement is perhaps most clearly
proved by Germany, just because in this State constitutional
legality has lasted and remained stable for a remarkably long
 time—for nearly half a century (1871-1914) ; and the Social-

too ‘THE STATE AND: REVOLU TIO

Democracy during this time has been able, far better than
has been the case in other countries, to make use of “legality”
in order to organize into a political party a larger proportion
of the working class than has occurred anywhere else in the
world.

What, then, is this highest proportion of politically con-
scious and active wage-slaves that has so far been observed
in capitalist society? One million members of the Social-
Democratic Party out of fifteen millions of wage-workers!
Three millions industrially organized out of fifteen millions!

Democracy for an insignificant minority, democracy for the
rich—that is the democracy of capitalist society. If we look
more closely into the mechanism of capitalist democracy,
everywhere—in the so-called “petty” details of the suffrage
(the residential qualification, the exclusion of women, etc.),
in the technique of the representative institutions, in the |
actual obstacles to the right of meeting (public buildings are
not for the “poor”), in the purely capitalist organization of
the daily press, etc., etc.—on all sides we shall see restrictions
upon restrictions of democracy. These restrictions, exceptions,
exclusions, obstacles for the poor, seem slight—especially in
the eyes of one who has himself never known want, and has
never lived in close contact with the oppressed classes in their
hard life, and nine-tenths, if not ninety-nine hundredths, of
the bourgeois publicists and politicians are of this class! But
in their sum these restrictions exclude and thrust out the poor
from politics and from an active share in democracy. Marx
splendidly grasped the essence of capitalist democracy, when,
in his analysis of the experience of the Commune, he said that
the oppressed are allowed, once every few years to decide
which particular representatives of the oppressing class are
to represent and repress them in Parliament!

But from this capitalist democracy—inevitably narrow,
stealthily thrusting aside the poor, and therefore, to its core,
hypocritical and treacherous—progress does not march along
a simple, smooth and direct path to “greater and greater de-
mocracy,” as the Liberal professors and the lower middle class
opportunists would have us believe. No, progressive de-
velopment—that is, towards Communism—marches through
the dictatorship of the proletariat; and cannot do otherwise,

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 193

for there is no one else who can break the resistance of the
exploiting capitalists, and no other way of doing it.

And the dictatorship of the proletariat—that is, the or-
ganization of the advance-guard of the oppressed as the ruling
class, for the purpose of crushing the oppressors—cannot pro-
duce merely an expansion of democracy. Together with an
immense expansion of democracy—for the first time becom-
ing democracy for the poor, democracy for the people, and
not democracy for the rich folk—the dictatorship of the
proletariat will produce a series of restrictions of liberty in
the case of the oppressors, exploiters and capitalists. We
must crush them in order to free humanity from wage-
slavery; their resistance must be broken by force. It is clear
that where there is suppression there must also be violence,
and there cannot be liberty or democracy.

Engels expressed this splendidly in his letter to Bebel when
he said, as the reader will remember, that “‘the proletariat
needs the State, not in the interests of liberty, but for the
purpose of crushing its opponents; and, when one will be able
to speak of freedom, the State will have ceased to exist.”

Democracy for the vast majority of the nation, and the
suppression by force—that is, the exclusion from democracy
—of the exploiters and oppressors of the nation; this is the
modification of democracy which we shall see during the
transition from capitalism to Communism.

Only in Communist society, when the resistance of the
capitalists has finally been broken, when the capitalists h
disappeared, when there are no longer any classes (that is,
when there is no difference between the members of society
in respect of their social means of production) only th
“does the State disappear and one can speak of freedom.”
Only then will be possible and will be realized a really full
democracy, a democracy without any exceptions. And only
then will democracy itself begin to wither away in virtue of
the simple fact that, freed from capitalist slavery, from the
innumerable horrors, savagery, absurdities and infamies of
capitalist exploitation, people will gradually become accus-
tomed to the observation of the elementary rules of social
life, known for centuries, repeated for thousands of years in
all sermons. They will become accustomed to their observ-

v

194 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

ance without force, without constraint, without subjection,
without the special apparatus for compulsion which is called
the State.

The expression “the State withers away,” is very well
chosen, for it indicates the gradual and elemental nature of
the process. Only habit can, and undoubtedly will, have
such an effect: for we see around us millions of times how
readily people get accustomed to observe the necessary rules
of life in common, if there is no exploitation, if there is
nothing that causes indignation, that calls forth protest and
revolt and has to be suppressed.

Thus, in capitalist society, we have a democracy that is
curtailed, wretched, false; a democracy only for the rich, for
the minority. The dictatorship of the proletariat, the period
of transition to Communism, will, for the first time, produce
a democracy for the people, for the majority, side by side with
the necessary suppression of the minority constituted by the
exploiters. Communism alone is capable of giving a really
complete democracy, and the fuller it is the more quickly
will it become unnecessary and wither away of itself. In other
words, under capitalism we have a State in the proper sense of
the word: that is, a special instrument for the suppression of
one class by another, and of the majority by the minority at
that. Naturally, for the successful discharge of such a task
as the systematic suppression by the minority of exploiters of
the majority of exploited, the greatest ferocity and savagery
of suppression is required, and seas of blood are needed,
through which humanity has to direct its path, in a condi-

tion of slavery, serfdom and wage labor.

Again, during the fransition from capitalism to Commu-
nism, suppression is still necessary; but in this case it is sup-
pression of the minority of exploiters by the majority of ex-

“ ploited. A special instrument, a special machine for sup-

pression—that is, the “State’—is necessary, but this is now
a transitional State, no longer a State in the ordinary sense of
the term. For the suppression of the minority of exploiters,
by the majority of those who were but yesterday wage slaves,
is a matter comparatively so easy, simple and natural that it
will cost far less bloodshed than the suppression of the risings
of the slaves, serfs or wage laborers, and will cost the human

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 195

race far less. And it is compatible with the diffusion of
democracy over such an overwhelming majority of the nation
that the need for any special machinery for suppression will
gradually cease to exist. The exploiters are unable, of course,
to suppress the people without a most complex machine for
performing this duty; but the people can suppress the ex-
ploiters even with a very simple “machine”—almost without
any “machine” at all, without any special apparatus—by the
simple organization of the armed masses (such as the Councils
of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, we may remark, antici-
pating a little).

Finally, only under Communism will the State become quite
unnecessary, for there will be no one to suppress—“‘no one”
in the sense of a class, in the sense of a systematic struggle
with a definite section of the population. We are not utopians,“
and we do not in the least deny the possibility and inevitability
of excesses by individual persons, and equally the need to sup-
press such excesses. But, in the first place, for this no special
machine, no special instrument of repression is needed. This
will be done by the armed nation itself, as simply and as
readily as any crowd of civilized people, even in modern so-
ciety, parts a pair of combatants or does not allow a woman
to be outraged. And, secondly, we know that the fundamental
social cause of excesses which violate the rules of social life is
the exploitation of the masses, their want and their poverty.
With the removal of this chief cause, excesses will inevitably
begin to “wither away.” We do not know how quickly and
in what stages, but we know that they will be withering
away. With their withering away, the State will also wither
away. Marx, without plunging into Utopia, defined more
fully what can now be defined regarding this future epoch:
namely, the difference between the higher and lower phases
(degrees, stages) of Communist society.

3. The First Phase of Communist Society.

In the Criticism of the Gotha Programme, Marx dis-
proves in detail the Lassallean idea of the receipt by the
workers under Socialism of the “undiminished” or “full prod-
uct of their labor.” Marx shows that out of the whole of the

196 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

social labor of society, it will be necessary to deduct a reserve
fund, a fund for the expansion of industry, the replacement of
“worn-out” machinery, and so on; then, also, out of the col-
lective product a fund for the expenses of management, for
schools, hospitals, homes for the aged, and so forth.

Instead of the hazy, obscure, general phrase of Lassalle—
“the full product of his labor for the worker”—Marx gives a
sober estimate as to how exactly a Socialist society will have
to manage its affairs. Marx takes up a concrete analysis of
the conditions of life of a society in which there will be no
capitalism, and says: “We have to deal here” (analyzing the
programme of the Party), “not with a Communist society
which has developed on its own foundations, but with one
which has just issued actually from capitalist society, and
which, in consequence, in all respects—economic, moral and
intellectual—still bears the stamp of the old society, from the
womb of which it came.” And it is this Communist society
—a society which has just come into the world out of the
womb of capitalism, and which, in all respects, bears the
stamp of the old society—that Marx terms the first, or lower,
phase of Communist society.

The means of production are now no longer the private
property of individuals. The means of production belong to
the whole of society. Every member of society, performing
a certain part of socially-necessary labor, receives a certificate
from society that he has done such and such a quantity of
work. According to this certificate, he receives from the
public stores of articles of consumption a corresponding quan-
tity of products. After the deduction of that proportion of
labor which goes to the public fund, every worker, therefore,
receives from society as much as he has given it.

“Equality” seems to reign supreme. But when Lassalle,
having in view such a social order (generally called ‘‘Social-
ism,” but termed by Marx the first phase of Communism)
speaks of this as “just distribution,” and says that this is “the
equal right of each to an equal share of the products of
labor,” Lassalle is mistaken, and Marx explains his error.

“Equal right [says Marx], we indeed have here; but it is
still a ‘bourgeois right’ which, like every right, pre-supposes

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 197

inequality. Every ‘right’ is an application of the same
measure to different people who, as a matter of fact, are not
similar and are not equal to one another; and, therefore,
‘equal right’ is really a violation of equality, and an in-
justice. In effect, every man having done as much social
labor as every other, receives an equal share of the social
products (with the above-mentioned deductions). Not-
withstanding this, different people are not equal to one
another. One is strong, another is weak; one is married,
the other is not. One has more children, another has less,
and so on. :

“With equal labor [Marx concludes] and, therefore, with
an equal share in the public stock of articles of consump-
tion, one will, in reality, receive more than another, will
find himself richer, and so on.- To avoid all this, ‘rights,’
instead of being equal, should be unequal.”

The first phase of Communism, therefore, still cannot pro-
duce justice and equality; differences and unjust differences,
in wealth will still exist, but the exploitation of one man by
many, will have become impossible, because it will be impos-
sible to seize as private property the means of production, the
factories, machines, land, and soon. While tearing to tatters
Lassalle’s small bourgeois, confused phrase about “equality”
and “justice” in general, Marx at the same time shows the line
of development of Communist society, which is forced at first
to destroy only the “injustice” that the means of production
are in the hands of private individuals. It is not capable of
destroying at once the further injustice which is constituted
by the distribution of the articles of consumption according
to “work performed” (and not according to need).

The vulgar economists, including the bourgeois professors
(such as “our” Tugan-Baranowsky), constantly reproach the
Socialists with forgetting the inequality of mankind and with
“dreaming” of destroying this inequality. Such a reproach,
as we see, only proves the extreme ignorance of the bourgeois
ideologists.

Marx not only, with the greatest care, takes into account
the inevitable inequalities of men; he also takes cognizance of
the fact that the mere conversion of the means of production

f

198 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

into the common property of the whole of society—‘Social-
ism” in the generally accepted sense of the word—does not
remove the shortcomings of distribution and the inequality of
“bourgeois justice,” which continue to exist as long as the
products are divided according to the quantity of “work
performed.”

“But these defects [Marx continues] are unavoidable in
the first phase of Communist society, in the form in which
it comes forth, after the prolonged travail of birth, from
capitalist society. Justice can never be in advance of its
stage of economic development, and of the cultural de-
velopment of society conditioned by the latter.”

yarn

entirety, but only in part, only in proportion to the eco-
nomic transformation so far attained, that is, only in respect
of the means of production.” “Bourgeois law” recognizes them
as the private property of separate individuals. Socialism
converts them into common property, and to that extent, and
only to that extent, does “bourgeois law” die out. But it
continues to live as far as its other part is concerned, in the
capacity of regulator or adjuster dividing labor and allotting
the products amongst the members of society.

“He who does not work neither shall he eat”—this Socialist
principle is already realized. ‘For an equal quantity of labor
an equal quantity of products”—this Socialist principle is also
already realized. Nevertheless, this is not yet Communism,

y called Socialism) “bourgeois justice is not abolished in its |

and this does not abolish “‘bourgeois law,” which gives to

unequal individuals, in return for an unequal (in reality)
amount of work, an equal quantity of products.

This is a “defect,” says Marx, but it is unavoidable during
the first phase of Communism; for, if we are not to land in
Utopia, we cannot imagine that, having overthrown capi-
talism, people will at once learn to work for society without
any regulations by law; indeed, the abolition of capitalism
does not immediately lay the economic foundations for such
a change.

And there is no other standard yet than that of “bourgeois

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 199

law.” To this extent, therefore, a form of State is still neces-
sary, which, whilst maintaining the public ownership of the
means of production, preserves the equality of labor and
equality in the distribution of the products. The State is
withering away in so far as there are no longer any capitalists,
any classes, and, consequently, any class whatever to suppress.
But the State is not yet dead altogether, since there still re-
mains the protection of “bourgeois law,” which sanctifies
actual inequality. For the complete extinction of the State
complete Communism is necessary.

4. The Highest Phase of Communist Society.

Marx continues:

“In the highest phase of Communist society, after the
disappearance of the enslavement of man caused by his
subjection to the principle of division of labor; when, to-
gether with this, the opposition between brain and manual
work will have disappeared; when labor will have ceased
to be a mere means of supporting life and will itself have
become one of the first necessities of life; when with the
all-round development of the individual, the productive
forces, too, will have grown to maturity, and all the forces
of social wealth will be pouring an uninterrupted torrent—
only then will it be possible wholly to pass beyond the
narrow horizon of bourgeois laws, and only then will society —
be able to inscribe on its banner: ‘From each according to ~/
his ability; to each according to his needs.’ ” me
Only now can we appreciate the full justice of Engels’ ob-

servations when he mercilessly ridiculed all the absurdity of
combining the words “freedom” and “‘State.”” While the State
exists there can be no freedom. -When there is freedom fwieral
will be no State.

The economic basis for the complete withering away of the
State is that high stage of development of Communism when
the distinction between brain and manual work disappears;
consequently, when one of the principal sources of modern
social inequalities will have vanished—a source, moreover,
which it is impossible to remove immediately by the mere

200 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

conversion of the means of production into public property,
by the mere expropriation of the capitalists.

This expropriation will make it possible gigantically to de-
velop the forces of production. And seeing how incredibly,
even now, capitalism retards this development, how much
progress could be made even on the basis of modern technique
at the level it has reached, we have a right to say, with the
fullest confidence, that the expropriation of the capitalists
will result inevitably in a gigantic development of the pro-
ductive forces of human society. But how rapidly this de-
velopment will go forward, how soon it will reach the point
of breaking away from the division of labor, of the destruc-
tion of the antagonism between brain and manual work, of the
transformation of work into a “first necessity of life’—this
we do not and cannot know.

Consequently, we are right in speaking solely of the in-
evitable withering away of the State, emphasizing the pro- |
tracted nature of this process, and its dependence upon the
rapidity of development of the higher phase of Communism;
leaving quite open the question of lengths of time, or the con-
crete forms of this withering away, since material for the
solution of such questions is not available.

The State will be able to wither away completely when |
society has realized the formula: ‘From each according to his
ability; to each according to his needs”; that is when people
have become accustomed to observe the fundamental princi-
ples of social life, and their labor is so productive, that they
will voluntarily work according to their abilities. ‘The nar-
row horizon of bourgeois law,” which compels one to calcu-
late, with the pitilessness of a Shylock, whether one has not
worked half-an-hour more than another, whether one is not
getting less pay than another—this narrow horizon will then
be left behind. There will then be no need for any exact cal-
culation by society of the quantity of products to be dis-
tributed to each of its members; each will take freely ‘‘accord-
ing to his needs.”

From the capitalist point of view, it is easy to declare such
a social order “a pure Utopia,” and to sneer at the Socialists
for promising each the right to receive from society, without
any control of the labor of the individual citizens, any quan-

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 2or

tity of truffles, motor cars, pianos, and so forth. Even now,
most bourgeois “‘savants’” deliver themselves of such sneers,
but thereby they only display at once their ignorance and
their material interest in defending capitalism. Ignorance—
for it has never entered the head of any Socialist “to promise”
that the highest phase of Communism will actually arrive,
while the anticipation of the great Socialists that it will arrive,
assumes neither the present productive powers of labor, nor
the present unthinking “man in the street” capable of spoil-
ing, without reflection, the stores of social wealth and of
demanding the impossible. As long as the “highest” phase
of Communism has not arrived, the Socialists demand the
strictest control, by society and by the State, of the quantity
of labor and the quantity of consumption; only this control
must start with the expropriation of the capitalists, with the
control of the workers over the capitalists, and must be car-
ried out, not by a government of bureaucrats, but by a gov-
ernment of the armed workers.

The interested defence of capitalism by the capitalist ideolo-
gists (and their hangers-on like Tseretelli, Tchernoff & Co.)
consists just in that they substitute their disputes and discus-
sions about the far future for the essential, imperative ques-
tions of the day: the expropriation of the capitalists, the con-
version of all citizens into workers and employees of one huge
“syndicate’—the whole State—and the complete subordina-
tion of the whole of the ‘work of this syndicate to a really
democratic State—to the State consisting of the Councils of
Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. In reality, when a learned
professor, and in his train, some philistine, and in his wake,
Messrs. Tseretelli and Tchernoff, talk of unreasonable Utopias,
of the demagogic promises of the Bolsheviks, of the impossi-
bility of “bringing in” Socialism, it is the highest stage or
phase of Communism which they have in mind, and which no
one has not only promised, but ever even thought of trying
to “bring in,” because, in any case, it is altogether impossible
to “bring it in.”

And here we come to that question of the scientific dif-
ference between Socialism and Communism, upon which
Engels touched in his discussion cited above on the incorrect-
ness of the name “Social-Democrat.” The political difference

zo2 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

between the first, or lower, and the higher phase of Com-
munism will in time, no doubt, be tremendous; but it would
be ridiculous to emphasize it now, under capitalism, and only,
perhaps, some isolated anarchist could invest it with primary
importance—that is, if there are still people amongst the
anarchists who have learned nothing from the Plekanoff-like
conversion of the Kropotkins, the Graves, the Cornelisens,
and other “leading lights” of anarchism to Social-Chauvinism
or Anarcho-“Jusquauboutism” as one of the few anarchists
still preserving their honor (Gay) has expressed it.

But the scientific difference between Socialism and Com-
munism is clear. That which is generally called Socialism
is termed by Marx the first or lower phase of Communist
society. In so far as the means of production become public
property, the word Communism is also applicable here, pro-
viding that we do not forget that it is not full Communism.
The great importance of Marx’s explanation is this: that here,
too, he consistently applies materialist dialectics, the theory
of evolution, looking upon Communism as something which
evolves out of capitalism.

Instead of artificially elaborate and scholastic definitions
and profitless disquisitions on the meanings of words (“‘what
Socialism is,’ “what Communism is”), Marx gives us an
analysis of what may be called the stages in the economic
growth of Communism.

In its first phase or first stage Communism cannot as yet
be economically mature and quite free of all tradition and
of all taint of capitalism. Hence we see the interesting phe-
nomenon of the first phase of Communism retaining “the
narrow horizon of bourgeois law.” Bourgeois law, in respect
of the distribution of articles of consumption, presupposes”
inevitably the capitalist State, for law is nothing without the
organization for forcing people to obey it. Consequently, for
a certain time not only bourgeois law, but even the capitalist
State may remain under Communism without the capitalist
class.

This may appear to some a paradox, a piece of intellectual
subtlety of which Marxism is often accused by people who
would not put themselves out to study its extraordinarily pro-
found teachings. But, as a matter of fact, the Old surviving

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 203

in the New confronts us in life at every step in nature as well
as in Society. It is not Marx’s own sweet will which smug-
gled a scrap of bourgeois law into Communism; he simply
indicated what is economically and politically inevitable in a
society issuing from the womb of capitalism.

Democracy is of great importance in the working class
struggle for freedom against the capitalists. But democracy
is not a limit one may not overstep; it is merely one of the
stages in the course of development from feudalism to capi-
talism, and from capitalism to Communism.

Democracy implies equality. The immense significance of
the struggle of the proletariat for equality and the power of
attraction of such a battle-cry are obvious, if we but rightly
interpret it as meaning the annihilation of classes. But the
equality of democracy is formal equality—no more; and im-
mediately after the attainment of the equality of all members
of society in respect of the ownership of the means of produc-
tion, that is, of equality of labor and equality of wages, there
will inevitably arise before humanity the question of going
further from equality which is formal to equality which is
real, and of realizing in life the formula, “From each accord-
ing to his ability; to each according to his needs.” By what
stages, by means of what practical measures humanity will
proceed to this higher aim—this we do not and cannot know.
But it is important that one should realize how infinitely men-
dacious is the usual capitalist representation of Socialism as
something lifeless, petrified, fixed once for all. In reality, it
is only with Socialism that there will commence a rapid,
genuine, real mass. advance, in which first the majority and
then the whole of the population will take part—an advance
in all domains of social and individual life.

Democracy is a form of the State—one of the varieties of
the State, and, consequently, like every State, it stands as an
organized, systematic application of force against mankind.
That is its one aspect. But, on the other hand, it is the formal
recognition of the equality of all citizens, the equal right of
all to determine the structure and administration of the State.
Out of this formal recognition there arises, in its turn, a stage
in the development of democracy, when it first rallies the
proletariat as a revolutionary class against capitalism, and

bog THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

gives it an opportunity to crush, to break to atoms, to wipe
off the face of the earth the capitalist government machine
—even the republican variety: the standing army, police, and
bureaucracy. Second, it enables it to substitute for all this
a more democratic, but still a State machinery in the shape of
armed masses of the working class, which then become trans-
formed into a universal participation of the people in a militia.

Here “quantity passes into quality.” Such a degree of
democracy carries with it the abandonment of the framework
of capitalist society, and the beginning of its Socialist recon-
struction. If everyone really takes part in the administration
of the State, capitalism cannot retain its hold. As a matter
of fact, capitalism, as it develops, itself prepares the ground
for everyone to be able really to take part in the administra-
tion of the State.

We may class as part of this preparation of the ground the
universal literacy of the population, already realized in most
of the more progressive capitalist countries, then the educa-
tion and discipline inculcated upon millions of workers by the
huge, complex, and socialized apparatus of the post, railways,
big factories, large-scale commerce, banking and so on, and
so forth.

With such an economic groundwork it is quite possible,
immediately, within twenty-four hours, to pass to the over-
throw of the capitalists and bureaucrats, and to replace them,
in the control of production and distribution, in the business
of apportioning labor and products, by the armed workers,
or the people in arms. The question of control and bookkeep-
ing must not be confused with the question of the scientifi-
cally educated staff of engineers, agriculturists and so on.
These gentlemen work to-day owing allegiance to the capi-
talists: they will work even better to-morrow, owing it to
the armed workers. Bookkeeping and control—these are the
chief things necessary for the smooth and correct functioning
of the first phase of Communist society. All the citizens are
here transformed into the hired employees of the State, which
then is the armed workers. All the citizens become the em-
ployes and workers of one national State “syndicate.” It sim-
ply resolves itself into a question of all working to an equal

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 205

extent, of all carrying out regularly the measure of work
apportioned to them, and of all receiving equal pay.

The bookkeeping and control necessary for this have been
simplified by capitalism to the utmost, till they have become
the extraordinarily simple operations of watching, recording
and issuing receipts, within the reach of anybody who can
read and write and knows the first four arithmetical rules.*
When the majority of the citizens themselves begin every-
where to keep such accounts and maintain such control over
the capitalists, now converted into employees, and over the
intellectual gentry, who still retain capitalist habits, this con-
trol will, indeed, become universal, pervading, rational: it
will be ubiquitous, and there will be no way of escaping it.

The whole of society will have become one office and one
factory, with equal work and equal pay. But this “factory”
discipline, which the proletariat will extend to the whole of
society on the defeat of capitalism and the overthrow of the
exploiters, is by no means our ideal, and is far from our final
aim. It is but a foothold as we press on to the radical cleans-
ing of society from all the brutality and foulness of capitalist
exploitation: we leave it behind as we move on.

When all, or be it even only the greater part of society, have
learned how to govern the State, have taken this business into
their own hands, have established a control over the insignifi-
cant minority of capitalists, over the gentry with capitalist
leanings, and workers thoroughly demoralized by capitalism—
from this moment the need for any government begins to
vanish. The more complete the democracy, the nearer the
moment when it ceases to be necessary. The more democratic
the “State” consisting of armed workers, which is ‘‘no longer
really a State in the ordinary sense of the term,” the more
rapidly does every form of the State begin to decay. For
when all have learned to manage, and really do manage,
socialized production, when all really do keep account and
control ux the idlers, gentlefolk, swindlers and such like “‘guar-

* When most of the functions of the State are reduced to this bookkeep-
ing and control by the workers themselves, it ceases to be a “‘political’’ State.
Then “the public functions are converted from political into simple adminis-
trative functions” (cf. above, chap. iv. par. 2, on the dispute of Engels with
the anarchists). |

206 THE STATE AND) REVOLUTION

>

dians of capitalist traditions,” the escape from such general
registration and control will inevitably become so increasingly
difficult, so much the exception, and will probably be accom-
panied by such swift and severe punishment (for the armed
workers are very practical people, not sentimental intellect-
uals, and they will scarcely allow anyone to trifle with them),
that very soon the necessity of observing the simple, funda-
mental rules of any kind of social life will become a habit.
The door will then be wide open for the transition from the
first phase of Communist society to its second higher phase,

and along with it to the complete withering away of the
State.

CHAPTER Vi

THE VULGARIZATION OF MARX BY THE OPPORTUNISTS.

THE question of the relation of the State to the Social Revo-
lution, and of the Social Revolution to the State, like the
question of revolution generally, occupied very little the best
known theoreticians of the Second International (1889-
1914). But the most characteristic thing in that process of
the gradual growth of opportunism, which led to the col-
lapse of the Second International in 1914, is this, that even
when they actually came into contact with this question they
did their best to evade it or else passed it by unnoticed.

It may, in general, be said that the evasiveness on this ques-
tion of the relation of the proletarian revolution to the State,
an evasiveness which was both convenient to the opportunists
and bred and fed them—resulted in a distortion of Marxism
and in its complete vulgarization.

To characterize, if only in brief, this lamentable process,
let us take the best-known theoreticians of Marxism: Plek-
hanoff and Kautsky.

1. The Controversy Between Plekhanoff and the Anarchists.

Plekhanoff devoted a special pamphlet to the question of
the relation of Socialism to anarchism entitled Anarchism
and Socialism, published in German in 1894. He managed
somehow to treat this question without touching on the most
vital, controversial point, the essential point politically, in
the struggle with the anarchists: the relation of the revolu-
tion to the State, and the question of the State in general.
His pamphlet may be divided into two parts: one, historico-
literary, containing valuable material for the history of the
ideas of Stirner, Proudhon and others; the second, ignorant

207

208 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

and narrow-minded, containing a clumsy disquisition on the
theme “that an anarchist cannot be distinguished from a
bandit,’ an amusing combination of subjects and most char-
acteristic of the entire activity of Plekhanoff on the eve of
revolution and during the revolutionary period in Russia.
Indeed, in the years 1908 to 1917, Plekhanoff showed himself
to be half doctrinnaire and half philistine, walking politically
in the wake of the bourgeoisie.

We saw how Marx and Engels, in their polemics against
the anarchists, explained most thoroughly their views on the
relation of the revolution to the State. Engels, when editing
in 1891 Marx’s Criticism of the Gotha Programme, wrote
that “we”’—that is, Engels and Marx—‘‘were then in the
fiercest phase of our battle with Bakunin and his anarchists;
hardly two years had then passed since the Hague Congress
of the International” (the First). The anarchists had tried
to claim the Paris Commune as their “own,” as a confirma-
tion of their teachings, thus showing that they had not in
the least understood the lessons of the Commune or the
analysis of those lessons by Marx. Anarchism has given noth-
ing approaching a true solution of the concrete political prob-
lems: are we to break up the old State machine, and what
shall we put in its place?

But to speak of Anarchism and Socialism, leaving the
whole question of the State out of account and taking no
notice at all of the whole development of Marxism before
and after the Commune—that meant an inevitable fall into
the pit of opportunism. For that is just what opportunism
‘wants—to keep these two questions in abeyance. To secure
this is, in itself, a victory for opportunism.

2. Kautsky’s Controversy With the Opportunists.

Undoubtedly an immeasurably larger number of Kautsky’s
works have been translated into Russian than into any other
language. It is not without some justification that German
Social-Democrats make sometimes the joke that Kautsky is
more read in Russia than in Germany—and we may say, in
parentheses, that there is deeper historical significance in this
joke than those who first made it suspected. For in 1905

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 209

the Russian workers manifested an extraordinarily strong, an
unexampled demand for the best works, the best Social-
Democratic literature in the world, and translations and
editions of these works appeared in quantities unheard of in
other countries. Thereby with one sweep the immense ex-
perience of the neighboring, more advanced, country, was
transplanted on to the almost virgin soil of our proletarian
movement.

Besides his popularization of Marxism, Kautsky is particu-
larly well known in our country by his controversies with
the opportunists, with Bernstein at their head. But one fact
is almost unknown, which, however, cannot be passed over
if we are to apply ourselves to the task of investigating how
it was that Kautsky rolled down into the disgraceful morass
of confusion and defence of social chauvinism at the time
of greatest crisis in 1914-15. This fact is that before he
came forward against the best-known representatives of op-
portunism in France (Millerand, Jaurés), and Germany
(Bernstein), Kautsky had shown very great vacillation.

The Russian Marxist journal, The Dawn, which was
published at Stuttgart in rgo1-2, and advocated revolutionary
proletarian doctrines, had to call Kautsky to account, de-
nouncing his resolution at the Paris International Socialist
Congress of 1900 as a “‘piece of elastic,” because of its evasive,
temporizing and conciliatory attitude towards the opportun-
ists. Letters have been published from Kautsky’s pen in Ger-
many revealing no less hesitancy before he took the field
against Bernstein. Of immeasurably greater importance,
however, is the circumstance that, in-his very debates with
the opportunists, in his formulation of the question and his
method of treating it, we can-observe now that we are in-
vestigating the history of his latest betrayal of Marxism, his
systematic gravitation towards opportunism, and that pre-
cisely on this question of the State.

Let us take Kautsky’s first big work against opportunism:
Bernstein and the Social-Democratic Programme. Kautsky
refutes Bernstein in detail: but the characteristic thing about
it is this: Bernstein, in his famous, or infamous, Socialist
Fundamentals, accuses Marxism of Blanquism, an accusation

-since repeated thousands of times by the opportunists and

zto THE\STATE/ AND REVOLUTIGC®

liberals of Russia against the representatives of revolutionary
Marxism, the Bolsheviks. In this connection Bernstein dwells
particularly on Marx’s Civil War in France, and tries—as
we saw, quite unsuccessfully—to identify Marx’s view of the
lessons of the Commune with that of Proudhon. He also
pays particular attention to Marx’s conclusion, emphasized
by him in his preface of 1872 to the Communist Manifesto
to the effect that “the working class cannot simply lay hold
of the ready-made State machine, and set it going for its own
purposes.” The dictum pleased Bernstein so much that he
repeated it no less than three times in his book—interpreting
it in the most distorted opportunist sense. We have seen what
Marx means—that the working class must shatter, break up,
blow up (sprengen, explode, is the expression used by Engels)
the whole State machine; whereas according to Bernstein it
would appear as though Marx by these words warned the
working class against excessive revolutionary zeal when seizing
power.

One cannot imagine a more vulgar and discreditable per-
version of Marx’s ideas. How, then, did Kautsky act in his
detailed refutation of Bernsteinism?

He avoided the examination of the entire enormity of the
perversion of Marxism on this point. He cited the above-
quoted passage’ from Engels’ preface to Marx’s Civil War
in France, saying that, according to Marx, the working class
cannot simply take possession of the ready-made State ma-
chine, but, generally speaking, it can take possession of it—
and that is all. . . . As for the fact that Bernstein attributed
to Marx the direct opposite of the latter’s real views, and
that the real task of the proletarian revolution, as formulated
by Marx ever since 1852, was the shattering of the State
machine—not a word of all this is to be found in Kautsky.
The result was that the most important distinction between
Marxism and opportunism on the question of the proletarian
revolution was glossed over! ‘The solution of the: problem
of the proletarian dictatorship,” wrote Kautsky, “in opposi-
tion” to Bernstein, “we can safely leave to the future” (p.
172, German edition).

This is not a polemic against Bernstein, but really a con-
cession to him, a surrender of the position to opportunism:

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION arr

for at present the opportunists ask nothing better than “safely
to leave to the future” all the fundamental questions of the
proletarian revolution.

Marx and Engels, from 1852 to 1891—for forty years—
had taught the proletariat that it must break the State ma-
chine; but Kautsky, in 1899, confronted on this point with
the complete betrayal of Marxism by opportunists, fraudu-
lently substitutes the question as to the concrete forms of
the destruction of the State machine in the place of the more
general one about the necessity of destroying it, and then
saves himself behind the screen of the “indisputable’”—and
barren—truth, that concrete forms cannot be known in ad-
WARCEL (6 a!»

Between Marx and Kautsky, between their respective atti-
tudes to the problem before the proletarian party as to how
to prepare the working class for revolution, there is a wide
abyss.

Let us take the next, more mature, work by Kautsky, also
devoted, to a large extent, to a refutation of opportunist
errors. ‘This is his pamphlet on the Social Revolution. The
author chose here as his special theme the question of “the
proletarian revolution” and the “proletarian régime.” He
gave us here much valuable matter; but just this question of
the State was ignored. ‘Throughout the pamphlet the author
speaks of the conquest of the power of the State—and that is
all. That is to say, the question is so formulated as to con-
stitute a concession to opportunism, since the possibility of
the conquest of power is admitted without the destruction of
the State machine. The very thing which Marx, in 1872,
had declared to be out of date in the programme of the Com-
munist Manifesto is revived by Kautsky in 1902!

The pamphlet also contains a special paragraph on “the
forms and weapons of the social revolution.” Here he treats
of the general political strike, of the question of civil war,
and of “the instruments of force at the disposal of the modern
large States such as the bureaucracy and the Army”; but of
that which the Commune had already taught the workers,
not a syllable. Evidently Engels had issued no idle warning,
for the German Social-Democrats particularly, against “super-
stitious reverence” for the State.

212 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

Kautsky propounds the matter thus: the victorious prole-
tariat “will realize the democratic programme,” and he for-
mulates its clauses; but of what the year 1871 has taught us
about the middle class democracy being replaced by a prole-
tarian one—not a word. He disposes of the question by such
plausible banalities as: “It is obvious that we shall not attain
supremacy under the present order of things. Revolution it-
self presupposes a prolonged and far-reaching struggle which,
as it proceeds, will change our political and social structure.”

“Obvious” this undoubtedly is: as much as that horses eat
oats, or the Volga flows into the Caspian Sea. The only pity
is that he should use this empty and bombastic phrase “far-
reaching” to slur over the essential question for the revolution
proletariat as to wherein exactly lies this “far-reaching” nature
of its revolution in respect of the State and democracy, as
distinguished from the non-proletarian revolutions of the past.

Here is a most important point, by ignoring which Kautsky,
in point of fact, gives over the whole position to the oppor-
tunists, whilst declaring war against them in awe-inspiring
words, emphasizing the importance of the “idea of revolu-
tion”—how much is this “idea”? worth, if one is afraid to
propagate it among the workers?—or “revolutionary idealism
above all. . ,” declaring that the English workers represent
now little more than a lower middle class. . . .

“In a Socialist society [Kautsky writes] there can exist,
side by side, the most varied forms of industrial undertak-
ings—bureaucratic [??] trade unionist, co-operative, indi-
vidual.” ‘“There are for, instance, such enterprises as cannot
do without a bureaucratic [??] organization: such are the
railways. Here democratic organization might take the
following form: The workers elect delegates, who form
something in the nature of a parliament, and this parlia-
ment determines the conditions of work, and superintends -
the management of the bureaucratic apparatus. Other en-
terprises might be handed over to the workers’ unions,
which again could be organized on a co-operative basis.”

This view is erroneous, and represents a step backward by
comparison with the deductions of Marx and Engels in the
’seventies from the example of the Commune.

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 213

So far as this assumed necessity of “bureaucratic” organiza-
tion is concerned, there is no difference whatever between rail-
ways and any other form of big industry, any factory, great
commercial undertaking or extensive capitalist farm. The
conduct of all such enterprises requires the strictest discipline,
the nicest accuracy in the apportionment of the work, under
peril of damage to mechanism or product, or even the con-
fusion and stoppage of the whole business. In such enter-
prises the works will, of course, “choose delegates who will
form something in the nature of a parliament.”

But herein lies the crux: this “something in the nature of
a parliament” will not be a parliament in the middle class
sense. Kautsky’s ideas do not go beyond the boundaries of
middle class parliamentarism. ‘This something in the nature
of a parliament” will not merely “‘determine the conditions
of work, and superintend the management of the bureaucratic
apparatus,” as imagined by Kautsky. In a Socialist society,
this “something in the nature of a parliament,” consisting
of workers’ delegates, will determine the conditions of work,
and superintend the management of the “‘apparatus”—but this
apparatus will not be “bureaucratic.” ‘The workers, having
conquered political power, will break up the old bureaucratic
apparatus, they will shatter it from its foundations up, until
not one stone is left standing upon another; and the new
machine which they will fashion to take its place will be
found out of these same workers and employees themselves.
To guard against their transformation into bureaucrats, meas-
ures will be taken at once, which have been analyzed in detail
by Marx and Engels: (1) Not only will they be elected, but
they will be subject to recall at any time. (2) They will re-
ceive payment no higher than that of ordinary workers. (3)
There will be an immediate preparation for a state of things
when all shall fulfill the functions of control and superinten-
dence, so that all shall become ‘“‘bureaucrats” for a time, and
no one should, therefore, have the opportunity of becoming
“bureaucrats” at all.

Kautsky has not reflected at all on Marx’s words: ““The
Commune was not a parliamentary, but a working corpora-
tion, at one and the same time making the laws and executing
them.” He has not in the least understood the difference

214 THE STATE\AND:( REVOLUTION

between a middle class parliament combining democracy (not
for the people) with bureaucracy (against the people), and
proletarian democracy, which will take immediate steps to cut
bureaucracy down at the roots, and which will be able to
carry out measures to their logical conclusion, to the complete
destruction of bureaucracy, and the final establishment of
democracy for the people. Kautsky reveals here again the
same old “superstitious respect”? for the State, and “‘supersti-
tious faith” in bureaucracy.

Let us pass to the last and best of Kautsky’s works against
the opportunists, his pamphlet, The Road to Power, pub-
lished in 1909. This pamphlet constitutes a considerable step
in advance inasmuch as it does not treat of the revolutionary
programme in general (as in the book of 1899 against Bern-
stein), nor of the problems of a social revolution indepen-
dently of the time of its occurrence (as in the pamphlet, “The
Social Revolution,” of 1902), but of the concrete conditions
which compel us to recognize that the revolutionary era is
approaching.

The author distinctly points out the intensification of class
antagonisms in general and the growth of imperialism, which
plays a particularly important part in this connection. After
the “revolutionary period of 1789-1871” in Western Europe,
an analogous period begins for the East in 1905. A world
war is coming nearer with threatening rapidity. ‘““The prole-
tariat can no longer talk of a premature revolution.” “We
have entered upon a revolutionary period.” ‘The revolution-
ary era is beginning.”

These declarations are perfectly clear. The pamphlet offers
us a measure of comparison between the high promise of Ger-
man Social-Democracy before the imperialist war and the
depth of degradation to which it fell—carrying with it Kaut-
sky himself—when the war broke out. “The present situa-
tion,” Kautsky wrote in the pamphlet under review, “‘con-
tains this danger, that we, the German Social-Democracy,
may easily be considered more moderate than we are in
reality.” But when it came to the test, the German Social-
Democratic Party turned out even more moderate and oppor-
tunist than it had seemed. It is the more characteristic that,
side by side with such definite declarations regarding the revo-

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION a15

lutionary era already upon us, Kautsky, in the pamphlet which
he says himself is devoted to precisely the “political revolu-
tion,” again quite passes over the question of the State.

The sum total of these evasions of the subject, omissions
and shufflings inevitably led to that complete surrender to
opportunism of which we shall soon have to speak.

German Social-Democracy, as it were, in the person of
Kautsky, declared: I still uphold revolutionary views (1899) ;
I recognize, in particular, the inevitability of the social revo-
lution of the proletariat (1902); I recognize that a new revo-
lutionary era is upon us (1909); still I disavow that which
Marx said so early as 1852—if once the question is definitely
raised as to the tasks confronting a proletarian revolution in
respect to the State (1913).

It was precisely in this bald form that the question was
put in the debate with Pannekoek.

3. The Debate Between Kautsky and Pannekoek.

Pannekoek came out against Kautsky as one of the repre-
sentatives of the “Left Radical” group, which counted in its
ranks Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Radek, and others, which, while
upholding revolutionary tactics, was united in the conviction
that Kautsky was passing over to a “central” position, waver-
ing, without principle, between Marxism and opportunism.
The correctness of this view has been fully proved by the
war, when this “central” current of Kautskianism, wrongly
called Marxist, revealed itself in all its pitiful helplessness.

In an article touching on the question of the State, entitled
“Mass Action and Revolution” (‘Neue Zeit,” 1912, Xxx., 2),
Pannekoek characterized Kautsky’s position as an attitude of
“passive radicalism,” as “a theory of inactive expectancy.”
“Kautsky does not want to see the process of revolution”
(p. 616). In treating this subject, Pannekoek approached the
problem which interests us, of the tasks of a proletarian revo-
lution in relation to the State.

“The struggle of the proletariat [he wrote] is not merely
a struggle against the capitalist class to control the State,
but a struggle against the State. . . . The essence of a

216 THE STATE AND: REVOLUA low

proletarian revolution is the destruction of the organized
forces of the State, and their forcible suppression
(“ablésung’’) by the organized forces of the proletariat.
. . . Until the entire State organization is destroyed, the
struggle will not end. That is its aim. The organization
of the majority demonstrates its superiority by destroying
the organized force of the ruling minority” (p. 548).

Pannekoek did not expound his ideas very skilfully, but
the ideas are sufficiently clear; and it is interesting to note
how Kautsky combatted them. “Up till now,” he wrote, “the
difference between Social-Democrats and anarchists has con-
sisted in this: the first desired to conquer the State authority,
while the anarchists’ aim was to destroy it: Pannekoek
wants to do both” (p. 724). If Pannekoek’s exposition lacks
precision and concreteness—not to speak of other defects
which have no bearing on the present subject—Kautsky seized
on just that one point in Pannekoek’s article which is the
essence of the whole matter; and on this fundamental ques-
tion of principle Kautsky forsakes the Marxian position en-
tirely and surrenders himself without reserve to the oppor-
tunists. His definition of the difference betwen Social-Demo-
crats and anarchists is absolutely wrong; and Marxism is
finally vulgarized and distorted.

This is what the difference between the Marxists and anar-
chists is: (1) The Marxists aim at the complete destruction
of the State, but recognize that this aim is only attainable
after the extinction of classes by a Socialist revolution as the
result of the establishment of Socialism, leading to the wither-
ing away of the State. The anarchists, on the other hand,
want the complete destruction of the State within twenty-
four hours, and do not understand the conditions under which,
alone such a destruction can be carried out. (2) The Marxists
recognize that when once the proletariat has won political!
power it must utterly break up the old machinery of. the:
State, and substitute for it a new machinery of organized’
armed workers, after the type of the Commune. Anarchists:
on the other hand, while advocating the destruction of the:
State, have no clear idea as to what the proletariat will put
in its place and how it will use its revolutionary power; they

THE STATE AND-REVOLUTION 217

even deny that the revolutionary proletariat has any neces-
sity to make use of the State and to establish its revolutionary
dictatorship. (3) Marxists insist upon making use of the
modern State as a means of preparing the workers for revo-
lution; anarchists reject all this.

In this controversy it is Pannekoek, not Kautsky, who rep-
resents Marxism, seeing that it was Marx himself who taught
that the mere transference of the State machine into new
hands is no conquest of power at all: the proletariat must
smash up this apparatus and replace it by something altogether
new. Kautsky rats from Marxism to the opportunists, be-
cause, under his hands, this destruction of the State, which
is utterly repugnant to the opportunists, completely disap-
pears. Nothing remains but an opportunist loophole in his
interpretation of “‘conquest” as the gaining of a majority.

In order to cover up his distortion of Marxism, Kautsky
radiates erudition, offering as “quotations” from Marx him-
self. Marx wrote in 1850 of the necessity of “a decisive
centralization of force in the hands of the State”; and Kautsky
triumphantly asks: Does Pannekoek want to destroy ‘“Cen-
tralism”? This is nothing but a conjuring trick. It is the
same sort of thing as Bernstein’s identification of the views
of Marx and Proudhon on Federation versus Centralism..

Kautsky’s “quotation” is neither here nor there. The new
form of the State admits Centralism as much as the old; if
the workers voluntarily unify their armed forces, this will
be centralism: but it will be based on the complete destruc-
tion of centralized government apparatus—the army, police,
bureaucracy. Kautsky’s behavior is certainly not honest here;
the well-known dissertations of Marx and Engels on the Com-
mune are ignored in favor of a quotation which has no rele-
vance at all.

“Perhaps Pannekoek wants to destroy the State functions
of the officials? [Kautsky continues]. But we cannot do
without officials even in our party and trade union organi-
zations, much less in the State administration. For State
officials. our programme demands, not annihilation, but
election by the people. It is not a question as to the pre-
cise form which the administrative apparatus will take ir:

218 THE STATE AND REVOLUT IO

the future State, but as to whether our political struggle
destroys (literally: dissolves, ‘‘auflést’’) the State before we
have conquered it [Kautsky’s italic]. What Ministry with
its officials, could be destroyed? [Here follows an enumer-
ation of the Ministries of Education, Justice, Finance and
War]. No, not one of the present Ministries will be abol-
ished in our political struggles against the Government. , . .
I repeat, to avoid misunderstanding, it is not here a ques-
tion as to what form a victorious Social-Democracy will
give to the ‘future State,’ but as to how our opposition
changes the present State” (p. 725).

This is an obvious trick: Revolution was the question
Pannekoek raised. Both the title of his article and the pas-
sages quoted above clearly enough show that. But Kautsky
shifts and changes the point of view from one of revolution
to one of opportunism, when he jumps over to the question’
of “opposition.” According to him, we must for the present
confine ourselves to opposition; after we have won power we
can have a talk about other things. The revolution has van-
ished: that is precisely what the opportunists wanted.

Opposition and general political struggle is beside the point;
we are concerned with the revolution. And revolution is
when the administrative apparatus and the whole machinery
of government are destroyed, and a new proletarian power
of the armed workers has filled their place. :

Kautsky reveals a “superstitious respect” for the Ministries:
but why cannot they be replaced, say by committees of
specialists working under sovereign all-powerful councils of
workers’ and soldiers’ delegates? The essence of the matter
is not at all whether the Ministries shall remain or be turned |
into committees of specialists or any other kind of institution; |
all this is quite unimportant. The main thing is, whether
we are still to have the old machinery of government, satu-
rated through and through with routine and inertia, and
connected by thousands of threads with the capitalist class;
or shall it be broken up and replaced by something altogether!
new? ‘The essence of revolution is not that a new class shall
govern by means of the old governmental machinery, but that

THE.STATE AND REVOLUTION 219

it shall smash up this machinery and govern by means of a
new machine.

This is a fundamental idea of Marxism, which Kautsky
either conceals or has not understood at all. This question of
his about officials makes it plain how little he has understood
the lessons of the Commune or the teachings of Marx. “We
cannot do without officials even in our party and trade union
organization”—we cannot do without officials under “capital-
ism,” the domination of the middle class. The proletariat is
oppressed, the laboring masses are enslaved by capitalism;
democracy is narrowed, crushed, curtailed, mutilated by capi-
talism, wage-slavery, the poverty and misery of the masses.
It is precisely the conditions of life under capitalism which
are the cause, and there is no other, why the officials of our
political parties and trade unions are corrupt—or, rather,
have the tendency to become corrupt, to become bureaucrats,
that is, privileged persons detached from the masses, and
standing above them. "That is just the essence of bureaucracy,
and until the capitalists have been expropriated and the bour-
geoisie overthrown, nothing can prevent even workers’ officials
from being to some extent “‘bureaucratized.”

From what Kautsky says, one might think that a Socialism
with elected employees would still tolerate bureaucrats and
bureaucracy. That is the grand falsehood. Marx took the
example of the Commune to show that under Socialism the
workers’ employees will cease to be “bureaucrats” and “offi-
cials’”—specially when election is supplemented by the right
of immediate recall; still more, when their pay is brought
down to the level of the pay of the average worker; and still
more again, when parliamentary institutions are replaced by
“working bodies which both make“and apply the laws.”

All Kautsky’s arguments against Pannekoek, and particu-
larly his triumphant point that we cannot do without officials
even in our parties and trade unions, show nothing so much
as that Kautsky has adopted the old “arguments” of Bernstein
against Marxism itself. Bernstein’s renegade book, Socialist
Fundamentals, is an attack on “‘primitive’ democracy—
“doctrinnaite democracy” as he calls it—on imperative man-
dates, functionaries who receive no remuneration, impotent

zzo THE STATE AND REVOLUTIGRN

central representative bodies, and so on. British trade union
experience, as interpreted by the Webbs, is Bernstein’s proof
of how untenable “primitive democracy” is. Seventy odd
years of development “in absolute freedom” (p. 137, German
edition), have, forsooth, convinced the trade unions. that
primitive democracy is useless, and led them to replace it by
ordinary parliamentarism combined with bureaucracy.

But the “‘absolute freedom” in which the trade unions de-
veloped was in reality complete capitalist enslavement under
which—what more natural?—“one cannot do without” con-
cessions to the evil power of force and falsehood by which
the “lower” orders are excluded from the affairs of the
“higher” administration.

Under Socialism much of the primitive democracy will
inevitably be revived. For the first time in the history of
civilized nations, the mass of the population will rise, beyond
voting and elections, to a direct control of the every-day ad.
ministration of the affairs of the nation. Under Socialism,
all will take a turn in management, and will soon become
accustomed to the idea of no managers at all.

Marx’s wonderful critico-analytical mind perceived lind
the practical measures of the Commune contained that revo-
lutionary departure of which the opportunists are afraid, and
which they do not want to recognize, out of cowardice, out
of reluctance to break irrevocably with the bourgeoisie; and
which the anarchists do not want to perceive either through
haste or a general want of comprehension of the conditions
of great social transformations. “One must not even think
of such a thing as the break up of the old machinery of gov-
ernment, for how shall we do without ministries and without
officials?”’—thus argues the opportunist, saturated through
and through with philistinism, and in reality not merely
bereft of faith in revolution, in the creative power of revo-
lution, but actually in deadly fear of it (like our Social-
revolutionaries and Mensheviks). ‘One must only think of
the destruction of the old machinery of government: never
mind searching for concrete lessons in earlier proletarian revo-
lutionary movements, or analyzing by what and how to re-
place what has been destroyed”:—thus argues the anarchist:
that is, the best of the anarchists, not those who followed,

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 221

with Kropotkin and Co., in the train of the bourgeoisie; and
consequently, the tactics of the anarchist become the tactics
of despair instead of a revolutionary grappling with concrete
problems—ruthless, courageous and, at the same time, cogni-
zant of the conditions under which the masses progress.

Marx teaches us to avoid both classes of error. He teaches
us dauntless courage to destroy the old machinery of govern-
ment, and at the same time shows us how to put the question
concretely: The Commune was able, within a few weeks, to
start the building of a new proletarian State machinery by
introducing the measures indicated above to secure a wider
democracy, in which bureaucracy should be uprooted. Let
us learn revolutionary courage from the Communards. In
their practical measures we can see an indication of practical,
everyday and immediately possible measures: it is along such
a path that we shall arrive at the complete destruction of
bureaucracy.

It can be destroyed. When Socialism has shortened the
working day, raised the masses to a new life, created such
conditions for the majority of the population as to enable
everybody, without exception, to perform the functions of
government, then every form of the State will completely
wither away.

“To destroy the State [Kautsky wrote] can never be the
object of a general strike, but only to wring concessions
from the government on some particular question, or to
replace a hostile government by one willing to meet the
proletariat half way. . . . But never, under-no conditions,
can it [a proletarian victory over a hostile government]
lead to the destruction of the State. It can lead only to
a certain rearrangement (“Verschiebung’’) of forces within
the State. . . . The aim of our political struggle, then
remains as before, the conquest of power within the State
by the gaining of a majority in Parliament, and the con-
version of Parliament into the master of the government”

(pp. 726, 727, 732).

This is nothing but the most vulgar opportunism: a repu-
diation of revolution in deeds, whilst upholding it in words.

222 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION

| Kautsky’s imagination goes no further than a “government
willing to meet the proletariat half way”—further backwards
towards philistinism than we were in 1847, when the “Com-
munist Manifesto” proclaimed “the organizataion of the pro-
letariat as the ruling class.” Kautsky will have to realize his
beloved “unity” with the Scheidemanns, Plekhanoffs and Van-
derveldes: all the lot will agree to fight for a government
“meeting the proletariat half way.”

But we shall go forward to a break with these traitors to
Socialism. We are working for a complete destruction of
the old machinery of government, in such a way that the
armed workers themselves shall be the government, which
will be a very different thing. Kautsky may enjoy the pleas-
ant company of the Legiens, Davids, Plekhanoffs, Potressoffs,
Tseretellis and Tchernoffs, who are quite willing to work for
the “rearrangement of forces within the State . . . the gain-
ing of a majority in Parliament, and the supremacy of Parlia-
ment over the government.” A most worthy object, wholly
acceptable to the opportunists, in which everything remains
within the framework of a middle class parliamentary re-
public.

We, however, shall go forward to a break with the oppor-
tunists. And the whole of the class conscious proletariat
will be with us—not for a “rearrangement of forces,” bué
for the overthrow of the capitalist class, the destruction of
bourgeois parliamentarism, the building up of a democratic
republic after the type of the Commune or a republic of
Soviets (Councils) of workers’ and soldiers’ deputies—the
revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat.

Further to the “right” of Kautsky there are, in interna-
tional Socialism, such tendencies as the “Socialist Monthly”
(“Sozialistische Monatshefte”) in Germany (Legien, David,
Kolb and many others, including the Scandinavians, Stauning
and Branting); the followers of Jaurés and Vandervelde in
France and Belgium; Turati, Treves and other representatives
of the right-wing of the Italian party; the Fabians and “In-
dependents” (the Independent Labor Party, dependent, as a
matter of fact, always on the Liberals) in England; and simi-
lar sections. All these gentry, while playing a great, very

THE STATE AND-.REVOLUTION 223

often a predominant role, in parliamentary work and in the
journalism of the party, decisively reject the dictatorship of
the proletariat and carry out a policy of unconcealed oppor-
tunism. In the eyes of these gentry, the dictatorship of the
proletariat “contradicts” democracy! There is really nothing
seriously to distinguish them from lower middle class demo-
crats. ;

Taking these circumstances into consideration, we have a
right to conclude that the Second International, in the per-
sons of the overwhelming majority of its official representa-
tives, has completely sunk down into opportunism. The
experience of the Commune has been not only forgotten, but
distorted. So far from making vivid in the workers’ minds
the near approach of the time when they are to smash the old
machinery of the State and substitute a new one, thereby
making their political domination the foundation for a Social-
ist reconstruction of society, they have actually taught the
workers the direct opposite of this, and represented the “‘con-
quest of power” in a way that left thousands of loopholes to
opportunism.

It was a fateful thing to have confused and hushed up the
question of the relation of a proletarian revolution to the State
at a time when the States, with their swollen military appa-
ratus in a whirlwind of Imperialist rivalary, had become
monstrous beasts devouring the lives of millions of peoples,
in order to decide whether England or Germany—this or that
group of financial capitalists—should dominate the world.

END OF PART I,

i

yee

AFTERWORD

This little book was written in August and September,
1917. I had already drawn up the plan for the next, the
seventh chapter, on the experiences of the Russian Revolu-
tions of 1905 and 1917. But, apart from the title, I had
not succeeded in writing a single line of the chapter, being
prevented therefrom by a political crisis—the eve of the
November Revolution of 1917. Such a hindrance can only
be welcomed. However, this final part of the book devoted
to the lessons of the Russian Revolutions of 1905 and 1917,
will probably have to be put off for a long time. It is more
pleasant and more useful to live through the experience of a
revolution than to write about it.

—THE AUTHOR.
Petrograd,
(Nov. 30th) Dec. rath, 1917.

225

ie aay
eens

>

eh. 2ST SS
be et i ea
YA) oe a ;

Nt (Ze

\).

ad} } F
2 I!

. throu
land udto All the
thereof,

a ae fai ws

A Pay rena Atte GE

: He ae

us ‘itil i ie REA Ses a
ae vate ch eat i

az} bal ae Tae

rratssvqeeetasi by

: alts uae

i‘ i si

et OE tit

BUeCa ty

fie ALTER iNt
cee
a eens

ett i te
(ee!
EAS

ii ae segue Ha

caeany

nee Boba
ii i
ae Ae in ie Hea

DCTS Pana
Wi Pana

ies fe Baile ie
aoe yas
a ith

arte

na en

i He
a]
a

n

Us
aH
ray
iy
