Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (Vladimir Lenin, 1917)
==========================================================
Lenin's theory of imperialism as the highest stage of capitalism — finance capital, monopolies, and the partition of the world. Vanguard Press edition, 1926. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/imperialismstate0000niko).

IMPERIALISM 
- THE STATE AND 
"REVOLUTION 

(= = NIROLAL LENIN 

— 
m 

wa 

: oa 

re 
Seeman Ps aan, 
What Shall Endure ? od 

eee boy 

Great roads the Romans built, that men miqht meet, one re 

And walls to keep strong men apart- secure ; + , 

Now centuries have gone. and in defeat 
The walls have fallen, but the roads endure. 
Ethelyn Miller Hartwich 

Imperialism 

_— 

The State and 

Revolution 

By N. LENIN 

New York 
VANGUARD PRESS 

VANGUARD PRINTINGS 

First—November, 1926 
Second—March, 1927 

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

SP 459 

THE MAN (1870-1924): 

Nikolai Lenin (Vladimir Ilyitch Ulianov), founder of 
the Bolshevik Party and chief figure of the Russian 
Revolution of November, 1917, was the son of a school 
superintendent in Simbirsk, Russia. In 1895 Lenin or- 
ganized the “Union for the Liberation of the Working 
Class,” whereupon he was arrested, imprisoned for two 
years, and then exiled to Siberia. His term of exile over, 
he went abroad where, except for a short period during 
the 1905 Revolution, he remained until 1917. During 
these years he devoted himself to revolutionary activi- 
ties, writing and publishing periodicals and books. It 
was Lenin who, in 1903, caused the split in the Russian 
Socialist Party into Bolsheviki and Mensheviki. In April, 
1917, Lenin returned to Russia and began a vigorous 
propaganda as head of the Bolshevik Party. His militant 
leadership in the November fevolution and his astute 
statesmanship in directing the Soviet government until 
his death in 1924 are matters of common knowledge. 

THE BOOKS: 

IMPERIALISM (1916) was written while Lenin was in 
exile in Switzerland. In this essay he examines the econ- 
omic nature of imperialism, “the characteristic feature 
of our era,’ which he calls “the eve of Socialist revolu- 
tion.” He criticizes the opportunist Socialists as the be- 
trayers of Socialism for their stand on the question of 
annexations. 

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION (1917) is a schol- 
arly exposition of the teachings of Marx and Engels on 
the State, and a criticism of the distortion of these teach- 
ings by the opportunists. The writing of the book was 
interrupted by the November Revolution, and Lenin was 
forced to postpone the completion of it in order to de- 
vote his time to active leadership. As he says in his 
Afterword, “It is more pleasant and more useful to live 
through the experience of a revolution than to write 
about it.” 

PREFACE 

Tue booklet that we here present to our readers was written 
at Zurich in the spring of 1916. In the working conditions 
that were then imposed on us, I was naturally without a cer- 
tain amount of English and French scientific literature and a 
great deal of Russian literature. However, I made use of the 
chief English work on Imperialism, J. A. Hobson’s book, with 
all the care that it deserves. 

This booklet was written under the censorship of autocracy. 
Thus I was forced to confine myself strictly to a theoretical 
analysis, mainly economic, of facts, and only to express the 
small number of indispensable political observations with the 
greatest caution, by way of allusions in that “sopian” lan- 
guage—in that cursed “‘/Esopian” language—to which Tsarism 
forced revolutionaries to have recourse, whenever they took up 
their pens in order to undertake a “legal” work.* 

Now that the days of liberty have come, it is hard to read 
again these pages, mutilated by fear of the imperial censorship, 
gripped and crushed in a vice of iron. Of how imperialism is 
the eve of the Socialist revolution; of how social-Chauvinism 
(Socialism in words, Chauvinism in deeds), is the betrayal of 
Socialism, a complete crossing over to the side of the bour- 
geoisie; of the manner in which the division of the working 
class movement corresponds to the existing situation of Im- 
perialism, I have had to speak in a slavish tongue, and to-day I 
must direct the reader who is interested in these questions to 
the collection of my articles published abroad from 1914 to 
1917, and now in the press, entitled Against the Stream. 

There is need, however, to point out the inadequacy in this 
pamphlet of a passage at the end of Chapter IX, in which, in 

* “7Bsopian” was the term applied to the allusive and round-about style 
adopted in “‘egal’’ publications by revolutionaries in order to avoid words 
which would attract the notice of the police. Thus, instead of ‘“Social-Demo- 
_ crat” they wrote ‘‘consistent Marxist.” 

Vv 

vi PREFACE 

order to show, in a guise acceptable to the censors, the cynical 
trickery of the capitalists, as well as of the jingo Socialists 
gone over to their service (and whom Kautsky opposes with 
so much inconsistency) in the question of annexations; in or- 
der to show with what cynicism they justify the annexations 
of their capitalists, I was forced to put forward as an example 
—Japan. The careful reader will easily substitute Russia for 
Japan, and Finland, Poland, Esthonia, Khiva, Bokhara or other 
countries peopled by non-Russians for Corea. 

I would hope that this little book will help the reader to 
understand the fundamental economic question, without the 
study of which modern war and politics are unintelligible—to 
be more precise, the question of the economic nature of Im- 
perialism. 

THE AUTHOR. 
Petrograd, April 26th, 1917. 

CONTENTS 

IMPERIALISM 
The Last Stage of Capitalism 

Chapter Page 
PREBACE TO UMCPERTALISM, 00s fi ee ee ee 
Ree sdh 92 Pa) ee 6s ee se. ee 3 

I. CONCENTRATION OF PRODUCTION AND Mo- 
RN SUTRA a ie a 
Il. Tue Banks anp Tuer New Roe. . ... 19 

II. Frvance-CaPiraL AND FINANCIAL OLIGARCHY . 34 
Peete EXPORT OF CAPITAL, = 6s 4-4 6 6 oe AF 

V. THe Division oF THE WORLD AMONG CAPITAL- 
TED GuRCOYE ENS Rae Ane sie 0 OS ae nN Oe 

VI. Tue Division oF THE WORLD AMONG THE 
TERMATELOMERSG 0 iiey tec tae wear Saco ae fe Hen 260 

VII. Imperialism as A SPECIAL STAGE OF CAPITALISM 71 

VIII. ParasivisM AND THE Decay OF CaPiITALIsM . 82 
IX. Tue Critique of IMPERIALISM. . . . . . QI 
X. THE Prace or IMpERiALisM IN History. . . 103 

THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 

Marxist Teaching on the State and the Task of the 
Proletariat in the Revolution 

_ PREFACE TO THE STATE AND REVOLUTION. . . . . III 

Beene Rass SOCIETY AND! THE STATE, «9. 6 3 oe EER 

Il. Tue Experience oF 1848-51 . . . « « « 130 _ 

Vii 

Vili CONTENTS 

Chapter Page 
Ill. THe ExperreNcE oF THE Paris COMMUNE OF 

18702 MARKS SA NALYSIS' 6 °ls) resi) dent erst naeS 

IV. SuppLeMENTARY EXPLANATIONS By ENGELS. . 163 

V. THe Economic FouNDATION OF THE WITHER- 
ING AWAY OF THE STATE ... . .« ~ 188 

“NMI. THE VULGARIZATION OF Marx BY THE Oppor- 
TUNIS TS: SN alee cease! Caleta 

PAPTERWORD 6.) °c.) )¥'0,)7) 6¢) Je, 401 | 01), @fis'el) bee lop hm ee Sate eee 

IMPERIALISM: THE LAST STAGE 
OF CAPITALISM 

INTRODUCTORY 

Durinc the last ten or fifteen years, especially since the Span. 
ish-American War (1898) and the Anglo-Boer War (1899~ 
1902), the economic and political literature of the two hemi- 
spheres has studied more and more often the notion of imperial- 
ism as a characteristic feature of our era. In 1902 a book by 
the English economist, J. A. Hobson, Imperialism, was pub- 
lished in London and New York. This author, who adopts the 
point of view of social reform and pacifism, identical in the 
end with the present-day point of view of K. Kautsky, gives 
an excellent description of the chief economic and political 
characteristics of imperialism. 

In 1910, there appeared at Vienna the work of the Austrian 
Marxist, Rudolf Hilferding, Finance Capital. In spite of a 
mistake on the part of the author in the theory of money, and 
in spite of his tendency to conciliate Marxism and opportun- 
ism, this work is a very valuable attempt at a theoretical 
analysis, as its sub-title tells us, of “the latest phase of capital- 
ist development.” Indeed, what has been said of imperialism 
during the last few years, especially in a great many news- 
paper and review articles, what was said about it in the reso- 
lutions of the Socialist Congresses at Chemnitz and Basle 
(Autumn, 1912), has scarcely gone beyond the ideas put 
forward, or, more exactly, summed up by the two writers 
mentioned above. 

We are going to attempt to show, briefly and in the simplest 
way, the connection between and the reciprocal relations of 
the chief economic features of capitalism. We shall not pause 
on aspects of the question, other than economic, whatever 
their importance. 

ya Ha 

dada 

he ess Agi oe 
a aan sida rf 

IMPERIALISM 

CHAPTER I 
CONCENTRATION OF PRODUCTION AND MONOPOLY 

THe enormous development of industry and the extremely 
rapid concentration of production in ever larger enterprises 
constitute one of the most characteristic peculiarities of capi- 
talism. Modern industrial statistics give us complete and exact 
information on this evolution. 

In Germany, for example, for each 1,000 industrial enter- 
prises, the important ones, employing more than 50 salaried 
officials, numbered three in 1882; five in 1895; nine in 1907: 
and out of every 100 workmen there fell to their share at these 
same dates, 22, 30 and 37 respectively. Concentration of pro- 
duction, however, is much more intense than that of manual 
labor, since the work of the great enterprises is much more 
productive. This is shown to us by the figures available about 
steam engines and electric motors. If we consider what is 
called in Germany industry ‘in the wide meaning of the 
term,” that is, including commerce, transport, etc., we get 
the following picture. 

Big enterprises: —-30,588 out of a total of 3,265,623, that 
is to say, 9 per cent. These big enterprises employ 5,700,000 
workmen out of a total of 14,400,000, that is, 39.5 per cent.; 
they use 6,600,000 horse power out of a total of 8,800,000, 
that is, 75 per cent., and 1,200,000 kilowatts of electricity out 

_ of a total of 1,500,000, that is, 80 per cent. 

Less than a hundredth of the enterprises possess three- 

fourths of the steam and electric power of German industry. 
2,197,000 small enterprises (employing up to five workmen) 
constituting 91 per cent. of the total number, receive only 7 
per cent. of the driving power, electric and steam. A few 

6 IMPERIALISM 

tens of thousands of big enterprises are everything; millions 
of small ones are nothing. 

In 1907, there were in Germany 586 establishments employ- 
ing over a hundred workers. They held a tenth (1,380,000) 
of the manual labor, and almost a third (32 per cent.) of the 
driving power. Finance-capital afd the banks make this 
superiority of the biggest enterprises, as we shall see, still more 
crushing, in the most literal sense of the word, since millions 
of employers, small, average, and even great are in reality at- 
tached completely to some hundreds of millionaire financiers. 

In another advanced country of modern capitalism, the 
United States, concentration of production is still greater. 
Here statistics deal with industry in the narrow sense of the 
word, and group enterprises according to the size of their an- 
nual output. In 1904 there were in the United States, 1,900 
enterprises (out of 216,180, that is 0.9 per cent.) with an 
annual output valued at more than a million dollars. They 
employed 1,400,000 workers (out of 5,500,000, i.e., 25.6 per 
cent.), and their annual output was valued at $5,600,000,000 
(out of $14,800,000,000, i.e., 38 per cent.}. Five years later, 
in 1909, the corresponding figures were: | 

Big enterprises: 3,060 out of 268,491, i.€., 1.1 per cent; 

Employing: 2,000,000 workers out of 6,610,000, i.¢., 
30.5 per cent.; 

Producing: $9,000,000,000 out of $20,700,000,000, i.€.5 
43.8 per cent. 

Almost half of all the production of all the enterprises of 
the country was carried on by one-hundredth of those enter- 
prises. Also, these 3,000 giant enterprises include 258 branches 
of industry. From this it can be seen that concentration of 
production, at a certain stage, approaches very nearly to 
monopoly. For some tens of enterprises can easily act in con- 
cert, whilst on the other hand, the difficulty of competition 
and the tendency to monopoly arise precisely fro.a the im- 
portance of enterprises. This transformation of competition 
into monopoly is one of the most important—if not the most 
important—phenomena of modern capitalist economy, and we 
must pause a moment to consider it. But first we must clear 
up one possible misunderstanding. 

IMPERIALISM 7 

American statistics say: 3,000 giant enterprises and 250 
branches of industry, as if there were only a dozen of the 
biggest enterprises for each branch of industry. But it is not 
so. There are not big enterprises in every branch of industry; 
and, moreover, a very important characteristic of capitalism 
in its highest stage of development is the “combine,” that is 
to say, the grouping in a single enterprise of different branches 
of industry, which represent either the different stages in the 
working of a raw material (for example, the melting of iron 
ore, the making of steel, the manufacture of different steel 
articles), or which are auxiliary to one another (for example, 
the utilization of waste, or of secondary products, the manu- 
facture of packing, etc.). 

“Combination,” writes Hilferding, “levels out the fluctua- 
tions of trade and assures the combined enterprise of a more 
stable rate of profit. In the second place, it does away with 
trading. Thirdly, it gives opportunity for technical improve- 
ments, and consequently for new profits, which other enter- 
prises have not got. Finally, it strengthens the productive 

power of the combined enterprise compared with that of 
others, it increases its capacity for competition in periods of 
depression when the fall in prices of raw materials does not 
keep pace with the fall in price of manufactured articles.” 

The German bourgeois economist, Heymann, who has de- 
voted a work to the description of mixed, that is, combined, 
enterprises in the German iron industry, says: “Single enter- 
prises perish, crushed by the high price of raw material and the 
cheapness of manufactured articles.” We see the following 

“spectacle: “‘There remain, on the one hand, the great coal 
companies, producing some millions of tons yearly, strongly 
bound together in their syndicates, and on the other the great 

combined steel works, narrowly allied to the coal mines, and 
with their own steel syndicate. These great enterprises, pro- 
ducing 400,000 tons of steel per year, fabulous quantities of 
ore and of coal, enormous quantities of steel articles, employ- 

‘ing 10,000 workers quartered near the factories, sometimes 

(pwning their own ports and railroads, are typical of the Ger- 

‘man iron industry. And concentration continues. Enter- 
prises are becoming larger and larger. An ever-increasing 

number of enterprises, belonging to one or to several indus- 

8 IMPERIALISM 

tries, are joining together in giant combines, to which half a 
dozen Berlin banks serve as supports and guides. In the 
German mining industry, the truth of the teaching of Karl 
Marx on the concentration of capital is plainly shown. It is 
true that this concerns a country the industry of which is 
protected by tariffs and transport duties. The German mining 
industry is ripe for expropriation.” Such is the conclusion to 
which a conscientious bourgeois economist has been led. Let 
us remark that he seems to consider Germany to be an ex- 
ceptional case, in view of her system of protective tariffs. But 
this system has only hastened the concentration of industry 
and the formation of monopolies, combines, cartels and indus- 
trial syndicates. It is extremely important to realise that in 
a free trade country, in England, concentration also leads to 
monopoly, although a little later and perhaps in another form. 
The following is what Professor Herman Levy writes, in his 
work on Monopolies, Trusts and Combines, in which the latest 
data on British economic development are taken into account: 

“In Great Britain a tendency to monopoly is contained in 
the very size of undertakings and in their high technical de- 
velopment. On the one hand, concentration makes necessary 
the investment in an enterprise of enormous capital. And so 
new enterprises, having to conform to very considerable finan- 
cial requirements, are very difficult to launch. On the other 
hand—and this seems to be more important—every new enter- 
prise which aims at reaching the level of the giants of indus- 
try, which are created by concentration, must produce such 
a tremendous quantity of goods that their profitable sale is 
only possible if there is a great increase in demand. If this 
is not the case, the super-abundance of products will lower 
prices to a level which is unprofitable for the new factory, and 
also for the old manufacturing syndicates.” 

In England, monopolist factory syndicates, combines and 
trusts are established most frequently — unlike countries in 
which protective tariffs facilitate their appearance—when the 
number of competing enterprises is reduced “to some two 
dozen or so.” “The influence of concentration on the birth 
of monopolies in big industry here appears to us as clear as 
crystal.” 

Fifty years ago, when Marx was writing Capital, free com- 

IMPERIALISM 9 

petition appeared to most economists to be a natural law. The 
official economists tried to kill, by a conspiracy of silence, the 
works of Marx which showed, by means of a theoretical and 
historical analysis of capitalism, that free competition gives 
rise to the concentration of production, which, in turn, at a 
certain stage of development, leads to monopoly. Nowadays, 
monopoly has become a fact. The economists are piling up 
volumes to describe the diverse manifestations of monopoly, 
and are continuing to declare in chorus that “Marxism is re- 
futed.” But facts are obstinate things, as the proverb says, 
and, whether it suits or not, they must be reckoned with. The 
facts show that differences between capitalist countries, e.g., 
in the matter of protection or free trade, only give rise to 
insignificant variations in the form of monopolies or in the 
moment of their appearance; and that the birth of monopo- 
lies, as the result of the concentration of production, is a 
general and fundamental law of contemporary capitalist de- 
velopment. 

For Europe, the time when the new capitalism was defi- 
nitely substituted for the old can be established fairly pre- 
cisely: it is the beginning of the twentieth century. In one 
of the most recent publications on the formation of monopo- 
lies, we read: “Until 1860 a few isolated examples of capi- 
talist monopoly could be cited: in these could be discovered 
the beginnings of conditions that have now become custom- 
ary: but they all undoubtedly represent the prehistoric age 
of cartels. The real beginning of the monopoly system of 
the present day goes back at the earliest to 1860. The first 
important period of development of monopoly commenced 
with the international decline of industry from 1870 and 
lasted until just after 1890.” “If we examine the question 
from a Evropean point of view, the end of the development 
of free competition occurred in the decade 1860-1870. Then 
it was that England completed the construction of its capi- 
talist edifice in the old style. In Germany, this organization 
had entered on a decisive struggle with craftsmanship and 
with domestic industry, and had commenced to make for 
itself its own forms of existence.’ . 

“The great change commenced with the financial crash 
of 1873, or more exactly, with the ensuing depression, which. 

10 IMPERIALISM 

—after an interruption scarcely noticeable, in 1880 and the 
following years, and with a re-awakening, remarkably vigor- 
ous, but short-lived about 1889—filled twenty-two years of 
the economic history of Europe. During the short period of 
boom from 1889-1890, the system of cartels was widely used 
to take advantage of the favorable conditions. But this short- 
sighted policy raised prices even quicker and higher than if 
there had been no cartels, and nearly all these cartels perished 
ingloriously in the financial smash. Five years of bad trade 
and low prices followed, but a new spirit reigned in indus- 
try: the depression was not considered as something to be 
taken for granted: in it was seen no more than a phase before 
a new era of prosperity. 

“The movement of ‘cartels’ entered into its second phase: 
they have no longer transitory appearances. Cartels have be- 
come one of the basic principles of economic activity. One 
after another they win the realms of production, and first 
and foremost the working up of raw materials. At the be- 
ginning of 1890, the system of cartels had already acquired 
in the constitution of the coke syndicate—on the pattern of 
which was created the coal syndicate—a technique which it 
never surpassed. ‘The remarkable development of industry 
at the close of the ninetenth century and the crisis of 1900- 
1903, followed each other—in the mining and iron industries 
at least—entirely under the xgis of cartels. And if then it 
appeared something novel, it has now become evident to the 
social consciousness that important parts of economic activity 
are, as a general rule, no longer in the domain of free com- 
petition.” 

Thus, the principal stages in the history of monopolies are 
the following: 

I. 1860-1870, the highest, final stage of development of 
free competition: the beginnings of monopoly may just be 
discerned. 

2. After the crisis of 1873, a period of wide devalopindee 
of cartels, still unusual and transitory: they constitute a tran- 
sient phenomenon. 

3- The boom at the end of the nineteenth century and the 
crisis of 1900-1903. Cartels become one of the basic features 
of economic activity. Capitalism has become imperialist. 

IMPERIALISM II 

Cartels come to agreement on the conditions of sale, terms 
of payment, etc. They divide the markets amongst them- 
selves. They fix the quantity of products. They fix the 
prices. They divide the profits, etc. The number of cartels 
in Germany was estimated at about 250 in 1896: at 385 in 
1905, about 12,000 firms participating. But it is generally 
recognized that these figures are under-estimations. The data 
of German, 1907, statistics, which we have cited above, show 
that even 12,000 of the most important firms most certainly 
comprise more than a half of the mechanical power (steam 
and electricity) of the country. 

In the United States, the number of trusts grew in 1900 
to 185, in 1907 to 250. American statistics divide all enter- 
prises into three categories, according to whether they belong 
to individuals, to firms, or to corporations. These last pos- 
sessed in 1904, 23.6 per cent., and in 1909, 25.9 per cent. 
(i.e., more than a quarter) of the sum total of industrial con- 
cerns. They employed in 1904, 70.6 per cent. and in 1909, 
75-6 per cent. (i.e., more than three-quarters) of the total of 
wage-earners. Their production amounted at these two dates, 
respectively to $10,900,000,000, and to $16,300,000,000, i.e., 
to 73.7 per cent. and to 79 per cent. of the total amount of 
American production. 

Cartels and trusts comprise fairly often seven or eight- 
tenths of the total production of one branch of industry. 
The Rhine-Westphalian Coal Syndicate at its foundation in 
1893, had the disposal of 86.7 per cent. of the whole coal 
production of the area. In 1910, it already held 95.4 per 
cent. 2 
The monopoly so created assures enormous profits, and 
leads to the formation of combined units of production of a 
formidable magnitude. The famous American petrol trust, 
the Standard Oil Company, was founded in 1900: “Its capi- 
tal amounted to $150,000,000. It issued 100,000,000 ordi- 
nary shares and 106,000,00 preference shares. These latter 
earned successively from 1900 to 1907, the following divi- 
dends: 48, 48, 45, 44, 36, 40, 40, 40 per cent., ze., in all 
$341,000,000. From 1900 to 1907, the Standard Oil Com- 
pany realized $889,000,000 profits, of which $606,000,000 
_ were distributed in dividends, and the rest went to swell the 

12 IMPERIALISM 

reserve capital.” ‘In all the different enterprises of the steel 
trust (the United States Steel Corporation) of the United 
States, in 1907, there were employed no less than 210,180 
workmen and other employees. The most important firm of 
the German mining industry, the Mining Federation of Gel- 
senkirchen (Gelsenkirchner Bergwerksgesellschaft) employed, 
in 1908, 46,000 wage earners.” In 1902, the American 
steel trust produced 9,000,000 tons of steel in one year. Its 
production constituted in 1901, 66.3 per cent., and in 1903, 
56.1 per cent. of that of the whole of the United States. 
Its extraction of mineral ore grew from 43.3 per cent. to 46.3 
per cent. in the course of the same years. 

The report of the American government commission on 
trusts said: “Their superiority over their competitors finds 
its cause in the enormous dimensions of their enterprises 
and in their remarkable technical efficiency. Since its incep- 
tion, the tobacco trust has devoted all its efforts to the sub- 
stitution of mechanical for manual labor. With this end in 
view, it bought all the patents bearing on the preparation of 
tobacco and spent enormous sums. There were many patents 
of no use as they stood, which the engineers of the trust had 
to study and modify. At the end of 1906, two subsidiary 
companies were constituted solely to acquire patents. With, 
the same object in view, the trust built its machine shops, 
casting shops and repair shops. One of these establishments, 
that at Brooklyn, employs 300 workmen; there experiments 
are carried out on machines for making cigarettes, cheroots, 
smoking tobacco, tin sheets for packing, boxes, etc. Inven- 
tions are perfected there.” 

“Other trusts employ engineers specially charged with the 
continued development of technique (“developing engineers’’). 
They invent and experiment with technical improvements 
and new methods of production. The steel trust grants to its 
workmen and engineers high bonuses on all inventions suit- 
able for improving machinery or for lessening waste in pro- 
duction.” 

The improvement of machinery in big German industry, 
é.g., in the chemical industry, which has enormously developed 
during these last few decades, has been assured by the same 
means. In 1908, the concentration of production had caused 

IMPERIALISM 13 

to emerge in this industry two groups which tended to mo- 
nopoly. First, there were the “dual alliances” of two pairs 
of big factories, each having a capital of from 20 to 21 mil- 
lion marks: on the one hand, the former Meister factory at 
Holst and the Kassele factory at Frankfort-on-Main; and on 
the other hand the aniline and soda factory at Ludwigshafen 
and the former Bayer factory at Elberfeld. In 1905, one of 
these groups, and in 1908 the other one, each concluded a 
separate agreement with yet another factory; the result being 
two big industrial “triple alliances,” each provided with a 
capital of from 40 to 50 million marks. And these two 
triple groups are beginning to come close to one another, to 
make arrangements about prices, etc. (In June, 1916, the 
newspapers announced the establishment of a big trust em- 
bracing the whole of the German chemical industry.) 

Competition turns into monopoly. The result is an im- 
mense process of socialization of production. More especially 
does the process of technical invention and improvement be- 
come socialized. 

There is no longer the old type of free competition between 
factory managers, scattered and out of touch with one an- 
other, and producing for an unknown market. Concentration 
has arrived at such a point that it is becoming possible to 
make an approximate inventory of all sources of raw material 
(such as all the mineral deposits of a country, and even, as 
we shall see, of several countries or of the whole world). Not 
only is such an inventory made, but the sources are seized by 
gigantic monopolist alliances. An approximate inventory of 
markets is also made, and the trusts divide them up amongst 
themselves by contract. Skilled labor is monopolized, the best 
engineers are engaged; monopoly seizes the means of trans- 
port—trailways in America, shipping companies in Europe and 
America. Capitalism, in its imperialist phase, arrives at the 
threshold of the complete socialization of production. To 
some extent it causes the capitalists, whether they like it or 
no, to enter a new social order, which marks the transition 

_ from free competition to the socialization of production. Pro- 
_ duction becomes social, but appropriation remains private. 
The social means of production remain the private property 
of.a few. The framework of nominally free competition re- 

14 IMPERIALISM 

mains, and the yoke of a few monopolists on the rest of the 
population becomes a hundred times heavier, burdensome and 
intolerable. 

The German economist, Kestner, has devoted a work to the 
struggle between the cartels and the “private firms,” i.e., be- 
tween the cartels and the enterprises outside the cartels. He 
entitled his work: The Constraint to Organization, although 
what he should have said was “constraint to submission to 
associations of monopolists.” It is edifying to glance over this 
book, even if only for the list of the most modern and culti- 
vated means used by the monopolies to constrain the “organi- 
zation” of the recalcitrant enterprises. 

They are as follows: 

(1) Depriving of raw materials (“one of the most im» 
portant means of compelling adhesion to the cartel”) ; 

(2) Depriving of labor by the method of “alliances” (i.e., 
by agreements between the employers and workers to the 
effect that the latter will only accept work in trustified enter- 
Prises) ; 

(3) Depriving of local means of transport; 

(4) Closing of trade outlets; 

(5) Agreements with the buyers, to the effect that these 
latter will enter into commercial relations with the cartels. 
only. 

(6) The systematic lowering of prices to ruin competing 
enterprises not amalgamated with the monopolies. Millions 
are spent in order to sell all products for a certain time below 
their cost price (the price of benzine was thus lowered from. 
40 to 22 marks) ; 

(7) ‘Suppression of credits. 

(8) Boycott. 

We are now dealing no longer with competition between 
small and big industry, or between technically developed and 
backward enterprises. We see here the monopolies throttling 
those which do not submit to their yoke, to their dictation. 
The following is the way in which this process is reflected 
in the intelligence of a bourgeois economist: 

“Even in the purely economic sphere,” writes Kestner, “a 
certain displacement is being produced from commercial 

IMPERIALISM 15 

activity in the old sense of the word towards organization 
and speculation. The greatest success no longer goes to the 
merchant whose technical and commercial experience enables 
himn to best estimate the needs of the buyer, and to discover, 
to some extent, latent demand, but it goes to the speculative 
genius (?!) who knows how to estimate in advance or even 
only to sense the development of organization and the possi- 
bilities of a linking-up between individual enterprises and the 
banks.” 

Let us translate into ordinary human language. This means 
that the development of capitalism has arrived at such a stage 
that, although the production of goods continues to be re- 
garded as the basis of economic life, it has in reality fallen 
away, and the big profits go to the “genius” of financial 
manceuvres. Behind these combinations and these clever 
manipulators we see the socialization of production; but the 
immense progress thus attained by humanity only profits a 
small minority of speculators. We shall see later on how the 
reactionary, petty bourgeois critique of capitalist imperialism 
dreams ‘on this basis” of taking a step to the rear, of a re- 
turn to “free,” “peaceful” and “honest” competition. 

“The continued raising of prices,” says Kestner, “which re- 
sults from the formation of combines, has hitherto only been 
observed in relation to the most important means of produc- 
tion, such as coal, iron and potassium, and has never been 
remarked in relation to manufactured products. The conse- 
quent increase in profits has similarly only applied to the 
industries which produce means of production. This obser- 
vation yet has to be completed in the sense that industry 
operating with raw materials (not semi-finished goods) does 
not confine itself to obtaining big profits through the trusts 
to the detriment of industry using semi-manufactured mate- 
rials, but into the bargain it has acquired, with regard to this 
latter, a dominating position, which did not exist in the age 
of free competition.” 

The words which we have italicized show the essential 
feature; that which the bourgeois economists recognize so 
rarely and so unwillingly, that which the modern defenders 
of opportunism especially Kautsky, will not see, and will by 
no means mention. 

16 IMPERIALISM 

The dominating position of big capital and amount of pres- 
sure which it can bring to bear—this is the most typical fact 
in the “modern phase of capitalist development”; this is what 
must inevitably result, and does result, from the formation 
of all-powerful economic monopolies. 

Let us give one more example of the power of monopolies. 
It is particularly easy to form cartels and monopolies when 
it is possible to seize all the sources of raw materials, or at 
least the most important. It would be wrong, however, to 
think that monopolies do not arise in other industries in 
which it is impossible to conquer the sources of raw materials. 

The cement industry, for instance, can find its raw mate- 
rials everywhere. Yet in Germany it is strongly trustified. 
The factories have formed regional syndicates: Southern 
Rhine-Westphalian, etc. Prices are those of monopoly: 230 
to 280 marks a truckload (on a cost price of 180 marks). 
The enterprises give a dividend of from 12 per cent. to 16 
per cent.—and let us not forget that the “geniuses” of modern 
speculation know how to pocket big profits besides those that 
they draw by way of dividends. Now, in order to drive 
away competition from such a profitable industry, the monop- 
olists have recourse to sundry stratagems. For example, they 
spread disquieting rumors about the situation of their indus- 
try. They publish in their newspapers unsigned notices such 
as the following: “Investors, don’t place your capital in the 
cement industry!” They buy up private factories (those out- 
side the trusts) and pay them indemnities of 60, 80 to 150 
thousand marks. 

Everywhere monopoly clears its path without scruple as to 
the means used; beginning by the payment of a modest in- 
demnity, and even going so far as to use dynamite—in the 
American fashion—against a competitor. 

The statement that combines do away with crises is only 
a tale for the marines, used by bourgeois economists who set 
out to justify capitalism at all costs. On the contrary, when 
monopoly appears in certain branches of industry, it increases 
and intensifies the chaos proper to capitalist production as a 
whole. The disparity between the development of agriculture 
and that of industry, which is already a characteristic of 
capitalism, becomes increased. The privileged position of the 

IMPERIALISM 17 

most highly trustified industry (i.e., heavy industry, especially 
coal and iron) has the effect of bringing about, in other 
branches of production, “‘a still greater lack of concerted 
organization”—as it is called by Jeidels, who is the author 
of one of the best works on The Attitude of the Great Ger- 
man Banks to Industry.” 

“The more the economic system is developed,” writes Lief- 
mann, one of the most vigorous defenders of capitalism, “the 
more attention is given to risky enterprises or enterprises 
abroad, to those which need a great deal of time to develop, 
or finally to those which are only of local importance.” 

The increase of risk is connected in the long run with the 
prodigious increase of capital, which, as it were, overflows; 
flows abroad, etc., in one way or another. At the same time 
the extremely rapid rate of technical progress gives rise more 
and more to disturbances. of equilibrium, to disproportion, 
crisis and chaos in the various spheres of economic life. 

Liefmann is obliged to admit: “Very probably humanity 
may expect important technical revolutions in the near future. 
They will not fail to influence the national economic organi- 
zation.” Such are electricity and aviation. “As a general 
tule, speculation becomes greatly developed during times of 
radical economic change.” 

Crises of every kind—economic crises most frequently, but 
not only these—in turn increase very considerably the ten- 
dency to concentration of capital and to the formation of 
monopolies. In this connection the following reflections are 
quite edifying. ‘They are those of M. Jeidels on the crisis 
of 1900, which was, as we have already seen, the turning- 
point in the history of the monopolies: 

“The crisis of 1900 found, side by side with giant enter- 
prises in the principal branches of production, also many en- 
terprises with an organization which was out of date, accord- 
ing to prevailing ideas: they were ‘pure,’ that is to say, not 
combined: enterprises that the wave of a favorable set of 
economic circumstances had brought to the surface. The fall 
in prices and the lessening of demand drove these uncombined 
enterprises into a precarious position which did not affect the 
big enterprises at all, or only affected them for a very short 
time. This is why the crisis of 1900 called, much more than 

18 IMPERIALISM 

that of 1873 had done, for the concentration of production. 
The crisis of 1873 also had operated as a kind of selection of 
the soundest enterprises; but, given the level of technical de- 
velopment at that time, this selection could not lead the firms 
which came out of the crisis victorious, into a position of 
monopoly. It is just such a lasting monopoly, and in a very 
high degree, which belongs to the gigantic enterprises in the 
iron and electrical industries today; and this is due to their 
extremely complicated technical processes, to the completeness 
of their organization and the power of their capital. To a 
lesser extent, the machine-building industry and certain 
branches of engineering and transport are in the same posi- 
tion.” 

Monopoly: this is the last word in the “most recent phase 
of capitalist development.” But we shall only have a very 
insufficient, incomplete, and poor notion of the real power and 
role of present-day monopolies, if we do not take into con- 
sideration the part played by the banks. 

CHAPTER AI 
THE BANKS AND THEIR NEW ROLE 

Tue first and most fundamental function of banks is to serve 
as an intermediary in payment. In so doing they transform 
inactive capital into active capital, that is, into capital pro- 
ducing a profit; and, collecting all kinds of revenues, they put 
them at the disposal of the capitalists. 

In proportion as banking operations develop, and as they 
become concentrated in a small number of establishments, 
the banks become transformed, and instead of being modest 
go-betweens they become powerful monopolies dealing with 
almost all capital, and with almost all capitalists (and small 
proprietors); and similarly dealing with the biggest part of 
the means of production and of the sources of raw materials 
of a country or of several countries. The transformation of 
numerous little intermediary concerns into a handful of 
monopolists constitutes one of the essential elements of the 
change from capitalism to capitalist imperialism. And so 
we must begin by dwelling on this question. 

In 1907-08, the deposits of all the German private banks 
(joint stock companies), which handled a capital of more 
than a million marks, amounted to 7,000 million marks, while 
in 1912-1913 they amounted to 9,800 million marks. They 
had thus increased by 40 per cent. in five years. Let us add 
that, of the 2,800 million increase, 2,750 million was divided 
amongst 57 banks with a capital of more than 10 million 
marks. The distribution of the deposits between big and 
small banks was as follows: 

Percentage of the Total Deposits 

In_the big In the 48 other In 115 banks In the small 
Berlin banks with a with a capital banks with 

banks capital of more from 1 to 10 a capital less 

(9) than 10 millions millions than 1 million 
1907-08 .....0..:5,. \47 p.c. 32.5 p.c. 16.5 p.c. 4 p.c. 
1912-13, 2008.8 49 p.c. 36 pc. 12 pc. 3 p.c. 

19 

20 IMPERIALISM 

The small banks are being eliminated by the big banks, 
of which nine concentrate in their own hands almost half the 
total deposits. And we do not consider here many important 
details, for instance, the transformation of numerous small 
banks into dependents on the big ones. Of this we shall speak 
later on. 

At the end of 1913, Schulze-Gaevernitz valued the deposits 
in the nine big Berlin banks at 5,100 million marks, out of a 
sum total of 10,000 million marks. Taking into consideration 
not only the deposits, but also the capital of these banks, the 
same author wrote: “At the end of 1909, nine big Berlin 
banks, together with the establishments linked up with them, 
handled 11,300 million marks, that is, about 83 per cent. of 
the total banking capital of Germany. The Deutsche Bank, 
which, together with the banks under its control, handles 
nearly three milliards of marks, constituted with the Prussian 
State Railways the biggest and also the most decentralized 
accumulation of capital in the Old World.” 

We have emphasized the word “‘linked-up” as applied to 
certain banks, for it has relation to one of the most important 
characteristics of modern capitalist concentration. Big enter- 
prises, especially the banks, not only absorb small ones, but 
they attach or subordinate them to themselves. They cause 
them to enter into their groups, or their concerns (to use the 
technical term) by “participating” in their capital, by pur- 
chasing or exchanging shares, by controlling them through a 
system of credits. Professor Liefmann has devoted an im- 
portant work of about 500 pages to a description of modern 
companies of financial “participation.” He has, unfortunate- 
ly, added to these data theoretical reflections of a very poor 
quality. We obtain a better idea of the results, from the. 
point of view of the concentration of capital, which issue 
from the system of participation, in a book by the financier, 
Riesser, on the big German banks. But before examining 
these data, let us quote an example of the system of “‘par- 
ticipation.” 

The Deutsche Bank group is one of the most important, 
if not the most important, of such groups. In order to see 
at a glance the principal ties which bind together all the banks 
in this group, it is necessary to distinguish between partici- 

IMPERIALISM 21 

pations of the first, second and third degree, or what amounts 
to the same thing, between dependence (of the lesser estab- 
lishments on the Deutsche Bank) in the first, second and third 
degree. We then obtain the following table: 

Tue “DEUTSCHE BANK” PaRrTICIPATES: 

I II Il IV 
FOR AN 
CONSTANTLY] INDEFINITE | OCCASIONALLY] ALTOGETHER 
PERIOD (Total) 
Ist degree in in ey in 
17 banks 5 banks 8 banks 30 banks 
of which of which of which 
9 5 14 
2nd degree participate participate participate 
in 34 in 14 in 48 
others others others 
of which of which of which 
4 2 6 
3rd degree participate participate participate 
in7 in 2 in9 
others others others 

Included in the eight banks dependent in the first degree, 
there are three foreign banks: one Austrian and two Russian. 
Altogether, the Deutsche Bank group comprises, directly and 
indirectly, partially and totally, no less than 87 banks; and 
the sum total of capital—its own and others’-—which it han- 
dles varies between two and three milliard marks. 

It is obvious that a bank at the head of such a group, and 
entering into relation with a half dozen other groups, which 

yield little to it in magnitude, for big and profitable enter- 
prises such as State borrowings, is no longer a mere inter- 
mediary for payment of transactions, but has reached the stage 
of being an alliance of a small number of monopolizers. 

_ The following data, which we borrow in an abridged form 
from Riesser, will show how rapidly banking concentration 
was effected in Germany at the end of the 19th and the be- 

ginning of the 2oth centuries: 

22 IMPERIALISM 

Six big German banks had: 

Savings Participation Total 

In the Branches Bank and in other No. of 
years in Germany Exchange banks Establish- 

Offices (by shares) ments 

WB OS oc sosscccccerict 16 14 1 42 

1900.. feed We 40 8 80 

iD 1 Ee ea 104 276 63 450 

We thus see the rapid extension of the network of financial 
canals which cover the whole country, centralizing all capital 
and all sources of revenue, transforming hundreds of scat- 
tered economic enterprises into a national capitalist unity, 
then into an international capitalist unity. The decentraliza- 
tion that Schulze-Gaevernitz speaks of in the passage pre- 
viously quoted (this author being an exponent of bourgeois 
political economy), consists in the subordination to one single 
centre of an increasing number of enterprises which were for- 
merly autonomous or rather of a strictly local importance. 
In reality there is centralization, an increase in the importance 
and power of the monopolies. 

In the older capitalist countries this “banking network”’ is 
still more fine in mesh. In Britain (including Ireland), in 
1910, there were 7,151 branches of banks. Four big banks 
had each more than 400 of these (from 447 to 689); four 
had more than 200 branches; and eleven more than roo. 

In France, the three most important banks (the Crédit 
Lyonnais, the Comptoir Nationale d’Escompte and the Société 
Générale), extended their operations and their network of 
establishments in the following manner. 

NUMBER OF BRANCHES & OFFICES Capital Deposits 
belonging to (not belong- 
i. In Paris ii. In the the banks ing to them) 
Year provinces Total (millions fr.) in millions 
1870 17 47 64 200 427 
1890 66 192 258 265 1,245 
1909 196 1,033 1,229 f 887 4,363 

In order to give an idea of the business relations of a big 
modern bank, Riesser gives some figures on the number of 
letters that it dispatches and receives. The Disconto Gesell- 
schaft, one of the most important banks in Germany and in 
the world, the capital of which amounted to 300,000,000 
marks in 1914, had a correspondence the size of which is in- 
dicated by the following figures: 

IMPERIALISM 23 

Letters Letters 
received dispatched 
6,135 6,292 
85,800 87,513 
533,102 626,043 

In 1875 the Crédit Lyonnais (Paris) had 28,535 open ac- 
counts. In 1912 it had 633,539. 

These figures show, better than long explanations, how the 
oncentration of capital and the extension of business is radi- 
ally altering the importance which must be assigned to the 
yanks. Thanks to them, scattered capitalists are now form- 
ng a collective capitalist unity. In running the current ac- 
ount of a certain number of capitalists, the bank may seem 
o be undertaking only a technical process; but when these 
erations assume extensive proportions, the result is that a 
andful of monopolists control all the operations, both com- 
nercial and industrial, of capitalist society. They can, by 
neans of their banking connections, by means of knowing 
he state of current accounts, by means of knowing financial 
perations, first ascertain exactly the position of isolated capi- 
alists, then control them, act on them by restricting their 
redits or, on the contrary, by extending them; at length they 
an entirely determine their fate, deprive them of capital, or, 
n the other hand, permit them to increase their capital to 
normous ‘proportions, etc. 

We have just mentioned the 300,000,000 marks capital of 
he Disconto Gesellschaft, of Berlin. The increase of the capi- 
al of this bank to this high figure was one of* the incidents 
f the struggle for hegemony between two of the biggest 
erlin banks—the Disconto and the Deutsche Bank. 

In 1870, the Disconto, a new enterprise, only had a capital 
f 15,000,000 marks, while that of the Deutsche Bank was 
s much as 30,000,000. 

In 1908, the first had already amassed 200,000,000; while 
he second only had 170,000,000. In 1914, the Disconto 
rised its capital to 250,000,000 and the Deutsche Bank, by 
bsorbing a very important bank, the Union of Schaffhausen, 
uised its capital to 300,000,000. This struggle for the upper 
and between the two banks, naturally, goes on side by side 
ith a series of agreements between them which become more 
nd more frequent and lasting. 

24 IMPERIALISM 

This development of banking leads specialists in the study 
of banking questions, who view economic questions from a 
standpoint which in no way goes beyond the bounds of moder- 
ate and careful poner reformism—to the following con- 
clusions: 

“The other banks aa follow this example,” wrote the Ger- 
man review, Bank, on the subject of the raising of the capital 
of the Disconto Gesellschaft to 300,000,000 marks—“‘and the 
three hundred financiers who to-day govern Germany econom- 
ically, will. gradually be reduced to fifty, twenty-five, or less 
still. It cannot be expected that this move to concentration 
will be confined to banking. The close relations between cer- 
tain banks involves the bringing together of the manufactur- 
ing combines whom they support. . . . One fine morning 
we shall wake up in surprise to see nothing but trusts before 
our eyes, and to find ourselves faced with the necessity of 
substituting State monopolies for private monopolies. How- 
ever, we shall have nothing to reproach ourselves for, except- 
ing for having allowed things to follow their own course, 
gently hastened by the use of stocks and shares.” 

This is a very good example of the impotence of bourgeois 
opinion, from which bourgeois science is only distinguished 
by less sincerity and a tendency to obscure things. 

To be “surprised” at the results of concentration; to “re- 
proach” the German capitalist government or society (“‘our- 
selves”); to fear that the use of stocks and shares might 
“hasten” concentration; to fear the American trusts (as a 
German specialist, S. Tschierschky, does), and to “prefer” the 
German cartels to them on the grounds that the trusts are 
capable of “hastening technical progress to an excessive de- 
gree”—what other name can be applied to all this except 
impotence? 

Meanwhile, the facts remain facts. ‘There are no trusts in 
Germany; there are only cartels—but Germany is governed 
by 300 magnates, and the number of these is constantly 
diminishing. The banks, in any case, in all capitalist coun- 
tries, and whatever may be the varieties of legislation regu- 
lating them, are strengthening and hastening the concentra- 
tion of capital and the formation of monopolies. 

“The banks are creating in the social structure, the form 

IMPERIALISM 25 

and precisely nothing but the form, of a general stocktaking 
and a general re-partition of the means of production.” So 
Marx wrote a half-century ago in Capital. (Vol. II., sec- 
tion 2.) 

The figures that we have quoted on the development of 
banking capital, on the increase in number of the branches 
of banks, and the increase in number of their open accounts, 
etc., show us that this “general bookkeeping” is that of the 
whole capitalist class; and is not only of the capitalists. For 
the banks collect, even though it may be temporarily, all kinds 
of financial revenues of small property-holders, of civil ser- 
vants, and of a small upper stratum of the working class. 
The “general distribution of the means of production” is what 
happens from the formal point of view, as a result of the de- 
velopment of modern banks, of which the chief, numbering 
from three to six in France, and from six to eight in Ger- 
many, are handling billions. 

But in swbstance distribution of the means of production 
is by no means general, or social; it is private, .¢., in con- 
formity with the interests of very big capital, and first and 
foremost of monopoly capital: in which the masses of the 
population have barely enough to live on, the development 
of agriculture is far surpassed by that of industry; and heavy 
industry levies a tribute on all other branches of production. 

The Savings Banks and Post Offices are beginning to com- 
pete against the banks in the matter of socializing capitalist 
economy. These are more “decentralized” establishments, i.e., 
their influence extends to a greater number of localities, to 
more neglected spots, to wider fields. An American commis- 
sion has collected the following data on the growth of de- 
posits in banks and saving banks. 

Deposits in Milliards of Marks 

Seer ee FRANCE G 

In Savings In Siviagé In crefit navies 
Year Banks Banks Banks Banks Banks Ass’tns Banks 
1880 8.4 1.6 0.9 0.5 0.4 2.6 
1888 12.4 2.0 15 2.1 1.1 0.4 4.5 
1908 23.2 4.2 Sid 4.2 7.1 Pees 13.9 

As they pay interest at the rate of 4 per cent. (414 per 
cent. on deposits), the Savings Banks must seek profitable in- 

26 IMPERIALISM 

vestments for their capital, they must go in for speculation, 
mortgages, etc. And so the frontiers between the Banks and 
the Savings Banks become more and more effaced. The Cham- 
bers of Commerce at Bochum and Erfurt, for example, de- 
mand that Savings Banks should be prevented from engag- 
ing in “purely” banking business, such as endorsing bills of 
exchange. ‘They also demand the limitation of the “bank- 
ing” operations of the Post Office. 

The banking kings seem to be afraid lest the State monopoly 
should unexpectedly catch them up. But it stands to reason 
that this fear does not make them go any further than the 
limits of competition between two department managers in 
the same office, if we may use the comparison; for, actually, 
it is still the same set of banking magnates who handle the 
billions entrusted to the Savings Banks, while State monopoly 
in a capitalist society is never anything else than a means of 
guaranteeing the income of millionaires who are on the point 
of going bankrupt in one branch of industry or another. 

The replacing of the old type of capitalism, in which free 
competition flourished, by a new capitalism in which monopoly 
reigns, is notably expressed by a decrease in the importance 
of the Stock Exchange. The German review, Die Bank, 
wrote: “For a long time now, the Stock Exchange has ceased | 
to be the indispensable intermediary of exchanges that it was 
formerly, when the banks were not yet able to place with 
their clients the biggest part of the scrip issued.” 

“Every bank is a Stock Exchange’—this modern saying 
contains more and more truth as the bank becomes greater 
and greater, and as capitalist concentration makes greater 
progress in the realm of finance. “If formerly, in the ’70’s, 
the Stock Exchange, flushed with the exuberance of youth” 
(a delicate allusion to the crash of 1873, and to the bucket- 
shop scandals), “opened the era of the industrialization of 
Germany, nowadays the banks and industry are able to trans- 
act their own business without its aid.” 

“The domination of our big banks over the Stock Exchange 
. . + is nothing else than an expression of the completeness 
of organization achieved by the German industrial State. If 
the domain of economic laws functioning automatically is 
thus restricted, and if the domain regulated deliberately by 

IMPERIALISM 27 

the banks is considerably increased, then the national economic 
responsibility of a very small number of directors is being 
increased to a formidable extent”—so wrote Professor Schulze- 
Gaevernitz, one of the defenders of German imperialism, who 
is looked upon as an authority amongst the imperialists in 
every country. This author naturally tries to mask one 
“detail”: that the “deliberate regulation” of economic life by 
the banks consists in a robbery of the public by a handful of 
“completely organized” monopolists. For the task of a bour- 
geois professor is not to lay bare the whole financial system, 
or to divulge all the intrigues of the finance monopolists, but 
rather to cover them up. 

In the same way, Riesser, a still more eminent economist 
and a financier himself, disposes of facts which he cannot 
deny, by means of some hollow phrases: ‘The Stock Ex- 
change is losing, to a greater and greater extent, its char- 
acter, indispensable to economy as a whole, and to the ex- 
change of securities in particular, of being not only the most 
exact means of measuring, but also of being an almost auto- 
matic regulator of economic movements, which are central- 
ized in it.” 

In other words, the old capitalism of free competition 
and its indispensable regulator the Stock Exchange, are pass- 
ing away. A new capitalism is succeeding it, which seems to 
have a somewhat transitory nature, and representing a kind 
of mixture of free competition and monopoly. The question 
crops up naturally: to what is this transitory capitalism lead- 
ing? But the bourgeois scholars are afraid to. face this ques- 
tion. 

“Thirty years ago, employers freely competing against one 
another carried out nine-tenths of the economic work which 
does not belong to the sphere of manual labor. At the pres- 
ent day, nine-tenths of this ‘brain work’ is performed by paid 
officials. Banking gives a lead in this evolution.” This 
admission by Schulze-Gaevernitz leads us once more to the 
question: what does this tendency of modern capitalism, of 
capitalism in its imperialist phase, lead to? 

Amongst the few banks which, as a result of the process 
_ of capitalist concentration, remain at the head of all capi- 
_ talist economy, there is to be seen a natural tendency, becom- 

28 IMPERIALISM 

ing more and more clear and strengthened, towards the agree- 
ment, the monopoly, the trustification of the banks. In 
America, there are no longer nine, but only two of the big 
banks, those of the billionaires Rockefeller and Morgan, who 
reign over a capital of eleven milliards (in marks). In Ger- 
many the absorption of the Union of Schaffhausen by the 
Disconto Gesellschaft, was commented on in the following 
terms by the Frankfurter Zeitung, one of the official organs 
of the Stock Exchange: . 

“The concentration of the banks is narrowing the circle of 
establishments from which it is possible to obtain credit, and 
consequently is increasing the dependence of large-scale in- 
dustry directly upon a small number of financial groups. The 
close relations between industry and the financial world being 
granted, it follows that the free movement of manufacturing 
companies in need of capital is restricted. And so large-scale 
industry is viewing the growing concentration of banks into 
trusts with mixed sentiments. And we have several times 
seen the beginnings of agreements amongst the big financial 
concerns, which aim at limiting competition between them.” 

Once more, the last word in the development of the banks, 
is monopoly. 

As for the close ties between the banks and industry, it is 
precisely on this ground that it is possible to estimate the new 
role of the banks. If a bank negotiates a bill for an indus- 
trial firm, opens a current account for it, etc., these opera- 
tions, separately considered, by no means diminish the inde- 
pendence of the industrial firm, and the bank plays no other 
part than that of a modest intermediary. But when such 
Operations are multiplied and become continuous, when the 
bank “‘collects” in its hands enormous sums of capital, when 
the running of a current account for the firm in question 
enables the bank—and this is what happens—to become bet- 
ter and better informed of the economic position of the client, 
then the result is a more and more complete dependence of 
industrial capital directly on the bank. 

Parallel with this process there is being developed a very 
close personal connection between the banks and the biggest 
industrial and commercial enterprises, the fusing of one with 
another through the acquisition of shares, through the entry 

IMPERIALISM 29 

of bank directors into the boards of management of industrial 
and commercial enterprises, and vice versa. 

The German economist, Jeidels, has compiled very complete 
data on this form of concentration of capitals and enterprises. 
Six of the biggest Berlin banks were represented by their direc- 
tors in 344 industrial companies; and by their managers in 
407 other companies. Altogether, they supervised a total of 
751 companies. In 289 of these they had either two repre- 
sentatives on the board of directors, or the presidency of the 
Board. Amongst these industrial and commercial companies, 
the most varied kinds of undertaking are represented: insur- 
ance, transport, restaurants, theatres, artistic production, etc. 
On the other hand, there were on the Board of Directors of 
six banks, in 1910, fifty-one of the biggest manufacturers, 
amongst whom were the directors of Krupps, the Hamburg- 
Amerika Lime, etc. From 1895 to 1910, each of these six 
banks had “participated” in the share issues of several hun- 
dreds of industrial companies. (The exact numbers vary be- 
tween 281 and 419.) 

The close connection between the banks and industry is com- 
pleted by the close connection of both with the State. ‘Seats 
on the Advisory Board,” wrote Jeidels, “are freely offered to 
reliable persons, especially to ex-civil servants, who are able 
to do a great deal to facilitate (!) relations with the authori- 
ties. . . . There is generally a member of parliament or a 
Berlin city councillor on the Advisory Board of a big bank.” 

The extension and the manufacture, so to speak, of the 
great capitalist monopolies is, therefore, going ahead at full 
steam, by all means, “natural” and “supernatural.” The re- 
sult is a fairly systematic division of labor amongst some hun- 
dreds of kings of finance who reign at present over modern 
capitalist society. 

“Accompanying this extension of activity of individual in- 
dustrialists” (sharing in the management of banks) “and to- 
gether with the allotting to provincial bank managers of a 
definite industrial region, there is a growth of specialization 
amongst the directors of the great financial institutions. 

“Generally speaking, this specialization is only possible 
when banking is on a large scale, and particularly when it 
has widespread connections with industry. 

30 IMPERIALISM 

“The division of labor follows two directions: on the one 
hand, the relations with industry as a whole are entrusted to 
one manager, who has special charge of them; on the other, 
each director assumes the supervision of several enterprises 
or groups of enterprises, whose interests are allied, or whose 
work is almost similar.” (Capitalism has reached the stage 
of an organized: supervision of firms.) “One specializes in 
German industry—sometimes even in West German industry” 
(the West is the most industrialized part of Germany) “others 
in relations with foreign States and foreign industry; in in- 
formation about industrial personalities; in what is happening 
on the Stock Exchange. Besides, each director is often charged 
with managing a locality or a branch of industry; one works 
mainly in the Advisory Boards of electric companies, another 
in chemical, brewing or the beet sugar industry; a third in 
several isolated undertakings, and at the same time in insur- 
ance companies. . . . In short, there can be no doubt that, 
in proportion as the big banks develop and diversify their 
operations, the division of labor amongst their directors be- 
comes increased with the object (or with the result) that 
they are raised to some extent above purely banking matters, 
and become more and more capable and competent in indus- 
trial matters, and in special questions affecting certain indus- 
tries; better and better prepared for exercising, in industry, 
the influence of the banks. This system is completed by the 
tendency of the banks to appoint in managerial posts only 
men who know industry well, such as factory owners, and 
former officials, especially those who have belonged to the 
staffs of mines or railways, etc.” 

We find the same system, with only a slight difference, in 
French banking. For instance, one of the three biggest banks, 
the Crédit Lyonnais, has organized a financial information 
service, which permanently employs about 50 engineers, statis- 
ticians, economists, jurists, etc., at an upkeep cost of six or 
seven hundred thousand francs annually. 

The service is in turn divided into eight sections, of which 
one deals with industrial establishments, another with general 
statistics, a third with railways and navigation, a fourth with 
funds, a fifth with financial relations, etc. 

The result is twofold: on the one hand a fusion, or, as N. I. 

IMPERIALISM 31 

Bukharin aptly calls it, a growing together, becoming more 
and more complete, between industrial and finance-capital; 
and on the other, a transformation of the banks into institu- 
tions of a truly “universal character.” On this question we 
think we should quote the exact terms used by Jeidels, who 
has best studied the subject: 

“After an examination of all their relations with industry,” 
he writes, “we perceive the universal character of the financial 
establishments working on behalf of industry. Contrary to 
other kinds of banks, contrary to the requirements often laid 
down in text books—according to which banks ought to 
specialize in one kind of business or in one branch of in- 
dustry so as not to lose a firm footing—the big banks are 
striving to make their industrial connections as varied and 
far-reaching as possible, and are tending to remedy the dis- 
proportion, that is to be seen in following up the history of 
certain banks, in the distribution of capital between areas and 
branches of industry. . . . There is one tendency which 
hopes to make the fusion with industry a general phenomenon; 
another tendency is working to make this fusion very closely- 
knit and solid. Both tendencies are given effect to, as yet in- 
completely, but already to a considerable extent and to an 
equal degree, in the six biggest German banks.” 

Quite often industrial and commercial circles complain of 
the “terrorism” of the banks. We are not surprised, for the 
big banks “command” as will be seen from the following 
example: 

On the 19th of November, one of the big Berlin “D” Banks 
(such is the name given to the four biggest banks whose name 
begins with the letter D), wrote to the board of directors of 
the German Central-North-West Cement Company, a letter 
which ran as follows: 

“We learn, from the advertisement that you have published 
on the 18th instant in a certain newspaper, that the next 
general meeting of your company, fixed for the 30th of this 
~ month, may be called upon to take measures which are likely 

to effect alterations in your undertakings which we cannot 
possibly agree with. We deeply regret that, for these rea- 
sons, we are obliged henceforth to refuse you che credit which 
has been hitherto allowed you. If the next general meeting 

32 IMPERIALISM 

does not decide upon measures inacceptable to us, and if we 
receive suitable guarantees on this matter for the future, we 
have no objection to negotiating with you the opening of a 
new credit.” 

In truth, this is the same old complaint of little capital 
oppressed by big capital. Only, this time, it is a whole syndi- 
cate which has fallen under the heading of “little.” The old 
struggle between big and little capital is beginning on a new 
and infinitely higher plane. 

It stands to reason that undertakings, financed by the 
big banks handling milliards, can hasten on technical progress 
also infinitely more than those of the preceding period. The 
banks are founding, for instance, societies of technical re- 
search, whose work, be it noted, goes to benefit only “allied” 
industrial concerns. ‘To this category belong, in Germany, 
the Electric Railway Research Association, and the Central 
Bureau of Scientific and Technical Research. 

The directors of the big banks themselves cannot fail to 
see that in this way new conditions of economic life are being 
created. But they are powerless before these phenomena. 

“Anyone,” wrote Jeidels, “who has watched, in recent 
years, the retirement and election of directors and managers 
of the big banks, cannot fail to have noticed that financial 
power was passing into the hands of men who consider the 
active intervention of the banks in the general development 
of production to be indispensable and of daily increasing im- 
portance. It often happens that, between these new men and 
the old bank directors, disagreements occur on this subject, 
and sometimes personal quarrels. The question arises, in 
reality, as to whether it is certain that the banks, as institu- 
tions of credit, will not suffer from these interventions in 
production, as to whether they are not sacrificing tried prin- 
ciples and an assured profit in a field of activity which has 
nothing in common with their role as intermediaries of credit; 
and which is leading them into a field where they depend 
still more than formerly on the state of trade. ‘This is the 
opinion of a number of the older bank directors, whilst most 
of the young men consider intervention in industry to be a 
necessity, as great as that which gave rise, simultaneously with 
big modern industry, to the big banks and modern industrial 

IMPERIALISM 33 

finance. The two parties in this discussion are only agreed 
on one point. They recognize that the new activity of the 
five banks has not got solid principles for a basis, and has 
not got a concrete objective in view.” 

The old form of capitalism has had its day. The new 
represents a transition towards something or other. To find 
“solid principles and a concrete objective” to harmonize 
monopoly and free competition is obviously to seek for the 
solution of an insoluble problem. ‘The confessions of the 
practical men impress us differently from the enthusiastic 
periods of the official apologists of “organized” capital, such 
as Schulze-Gaevernitz, Liefmann and similar theoreticians. 

To what period is the “new activity” of the big banks to 
be definitely ascribed? Jeidels gives us a fairly exact answer 
to this important question: 

“The bonds between the industrial enterprises with their 
new elements, their new forms and their new organs; more 
precisely, the great banks which are organized on both a cen- 
tralized and a decentralized basis, do not become a charac- 
teristic economic phenomenon before 1890, and the follow- 
ing years; in one sense, indeed, this initial point may be ad- 

‘vanced to the year 1897 with its huge amalgamations of 
businesses, which for the first time introduced a new form 
of decentralized organization, corresponding to the economic 

| policy of the banks. This commencing point may be put 
even further on, for it was only the crisis of 1900 which 
| enormously accelerated the process of concentration of in- 
_ dustry and banking, consolidated that process and for the 
first time gave to the great banks a monopoly of the connec- 
tion with industry, which had become much closer and more 
“active.” 

- Thus, the begining of the twentieth century marks the 
} | turning point at which the old capitalism gives place to the 
“new, at which control by capital in general gives place to 
control by finance-capital. 

CHAPTER III 
FINANCE-CAPITAL AND FINANCIAL OLIGARCHY 

“AN increasing proportion of industrial capital,” says Hilfer- 
ding, ‘“‘does not belong to the industrialists who employ it. 
They obtain the use of it only through the goodwill of the 
bank, which as against them represents the owner of the capi- 
tal. On the other hand, the bank is forced to place a more 
and more important part of its funds in business. Thus it 
is continually becoming more of an industrial capitalist: and 
this banker’s capital, this money capital, turned into indus- 
trial capital, is what I call ‘finance-capital.’?. . . Financial 
capital is that capital which the banks dispose of and which 
industrialists employ.” 

This definition is incomplete in so far as it is silent about 
one of the most important facts: the increase of the concen- 
tration of production and of capital to such an extent that 
it leads to monopoly conditions. But Hilferding’s whole ex- 
position, and particularly in the two chapters which precede 
the one from which our definition is taken, stresses the part 
played by capitalist monopolies. 

The concentration of industry: the monopoly arising there- 
from: the fusion of banking and industry: these are the steps 
in the rise of finance-capital and the notion contained in the 
term. 

We now have to describe how the domination of capitalist 
monopolies inevitably becomes, in conditions of commodity 
production and private property, the domination of a financial 
oligarchy. It should be noticed that the representatives of 
German bourgeois learning—and not of German learning 
alone—such as Riesser, Schulze-Gaevernitz, Liefmann, etc.— 
are all apologists for imperialism and for finance-capital. Far 
from throwing light on the system which conditions the for- 
mation of oligarchies, their methods, their legal and illegal 

34 

IMPERIALISM 35 

sources of income, and their relations with parliaments, they 
conscientiously obscure and camouflage these subjects. They 
dodge these awkward questions, in fact, by a few vague and 
pompous phrases: calling on “the sense of responsibility of 
bank directors,” praising “the sense of duty” of Prussian 
officials, giving serious study to ridiculous little plans for 
“supervision” and “regulation” by law, playing with theories, 
like, for example, the following “‘scientific” definition, arrived 
at by Professor Liefmann. “Commerce is an industrial ac- 
tivity tending to the collection and conservation of goods 
_which are then placed in use.” 

The conclusion is that primitive man, who knew nothing 
of exchange, understood “commerce,” and that it is going to 
continue in a Socialist society! 

But the facts concerning the monstrous rule of the financial 
oligarchy are so striking that in all capitalist countries, nota- 
bly America, France and Germany, a whole literature has 
sprung up which gives a fairly accurate picture of it from 

_a bourgeois point of view, and a criticism—petty bourgeois 
naturally. 

First and foremost comes the system of “participation” of 

which we have already spoken above. The German economist, 
Heymann, who, perhaps, concerned himself earlier than all 
others with this question, describes it thus: 
_ “The chief controls the parent company: the latter in its 
_turn reigns over the subsidiary or ‘daughter’ companies which 
similarly control others. Thus it is possible with a compara- 
tively small capital to dominate immense spheres of produc- 
‘tion. As a matter of fact, if holding 50 per cent. of the 
capital is always sufficient to control a company through its 
shares, the chief needs only a million to control eight millions 
in the second subsidiaries. And if the method of organiza- 
: tion is extended, it is possible with one million to control six- 
teen, Pantycwe or more.” 
_ Experience shows that it is sufficient to handle 40 per cent. 
of the shares in order to direct the affairs of a company, since 
a certain number of small shareholders find it impossible in 
ptactice to attend general meetings. The “democratization” 
of the system of shares and debentures, from which the bour- 
| Beois sophists, opportunists and social-democrats expect the 

36 IMPERIALISM 

“democratization” of capital, the strengthening of the small 
manufacturer and much besides, is, in fact, one of the ways 
of increasing the power of the financial oligarchy. For this 
reason, among others, in the most advanced or most “experi- 
enced” capitalist countries, the law allows the issue of shares 
of very small value. In Germany, it is illegal to issue shares 
of less value than one thousand marks, and the magnates of 
German finance look with an envious eye on England, where 
it is legal to issue shares at one pound sterling. Siemens, one 
of the chief captains of industry and a “monarch” of Ger- 
man finance, told the Reichstag on June 7th, 1900, that “the 
one pound share is the basis of British imperialism.” This 
merchant has a much more deeply “Marxian” idea of imper- 
ialism than a certain queer writer, generally held to be one 
of the founders of Russian Marxism, who considers that im- 
perialism is a fault peculiar to only one of the European 
nations. 

But the “‘system of participation” is not merely useful for 
formidably increasing the power of the monopolists. Besides 
this, it makes possible the carrying through of all kinds of 
shady and dirty deals with impunity, all emptying the pockets 
of the public, since the parent company is not legally respon- 
sible for the subsidiary companies, which are considered “‘in- 
dependent” and a means through which anything can be done. 
Here is an example taken from the German review, Die Bank 
(Bulletin for May, 1914): “The Steel Spring Company of 
Cassel was quoted some years ago among the German con- 
cerns giving the best returns. Through bad management its 
dividends fell from 15 per cent. to nil. It was established 
that the board, without consulting the stockholders, had 
made a loan of six million marks to one of. the subsidiary com- 
panies, the Hassia, which had a nominal capital of only some 
hundreds of thousands. There was no indication of this loan, 
amounting to nearly treble the capital of the parent com- 
pany, in its balance sheets. As a matter of law, this silence 
was possible and could last for two complete years without 
infringing any provisions of company law. ‘The president of 
the board of directors who as the responsible head signed the 
false balance sheets, was and is still the president of the Cassel 
Chamber of Commerce. The shareholders only heard of the 

IMPERIALISM 37 

subsidiary to the Hassia long afterwards, when it was proved 
to be an “error” (a word the writer might well have put in 
inverted commas), after the shares of the company, which 
those in the know were beginning to get rid of, had lost nearly 
all their value. 

“This typical example of falsified balance sheets, quite usual 
in joint stock companies, makes it clear why boards of direc- 
tors are more willing to run the risk of shady transactions 
than are individuals. The most modern technicalities in con- 

“nection with the drawing up of balance sheets not only make 
it possible to conceal doubtful undertakings from the average 
shareholder, but also allow the people most concerned to get 
out of their responsibility by selling their shares in time if 
things turn out badly, whereas the private man has to pay 
for all it does to his last farthing. 

“The balance sheets of most joint stock companies put us 
in mind of those manuscripts of the Middle Ages, from which 

_the visible inscription had first to be erased, in order to dis- 
cover beneath, another inscription giving the real meaning 
of the document. The simplest and, therefore, most usual 
procedure for making balance sheets indecipherable is to divide 
a business into several parts by setting up subsidiary com- 

_ panies—or by adding the business of these companies to it. 

- The advantage of this system for various objects—legal and 
illegal—is so evident that it is quite unusual to find an im- 
portant company in which it is not actually in use.” 

_ The author quotes as an example one of the most important 
monopolist companies, employing this system widely, the 

_A.E. G., the great German electrical trust, referred to below. 

In 1912, it was calculated that this company held shares in 

from .175 to 200 others, controlling them, of course, and 
giving a total capital of 1,500 million marks. 

All regulating laws, such as the necessity to publish balance 

_ sheets and to draw them up on certain models, the supervision 

of financial houses; these things about which professors and 

‘ officials with the best intentions—that is, with the best inten- 

_ tion of defending capitalism—discourse to the public, can have 

‘no kind of importance here. For private property is sacred, 

and no one can be hindered in buying, selling, exchanging or 

_ mortgaging shares, etc. 

38 IMPERIALISM 

An estimate may be formed of the extent of this system 
of participation in the big Russian banks from the figures 
given by E. Agahd, who was for fifteen years an official of 
the Russo-Chinese bank and published in May, 1914, a book 
called, loosely enough, Great Banks and the World Market. 

The author divides the great Russian banks into two classes: 
(a) those which operate as subsidiaries; (b) independent banks 
(the independence of the fatter being arbitrarily taken to 
mean independence of foreign banks). The author subdivides 
the first group into three sub-groups: German, British and 
French subsidiaries, having in view those houses in whose 
business the banks of the three great European countries 
participate. The author divides the capital of firms belong- 
ing to this group into (1) Productive capital engaged in in- 
dustrial or commercial undertakings; (2) Speculative capital 
reserved for Stock Exchange transactions and financial opera- 
tions. Holding to the petty bourgeois reformist viewpoint 
natural to him, E. Agahd thinks it is possible, while keep- 
ing the capitalist system, to distinguish these two kinds or 
investments and to do away with the latter. 

Here are the figures he supplies: 

Assets of the banks, according to the balance sheets of 
October and November, 1913, in millions of rubles. 

CAPITAL IN USE 
Groups of Russian Banks Productive Speculative Total 
(a) 4 Banks: Siberian Commercial Bank, 
Russian Bank, International Bank and Dis- 

Sount Bank Vly yt ce ee eae eel eines hd 413.7 859.1 1,272.8 
(6) 2 Banks: Industrial and Commercial 
and) Russo- British suncaccsducvacesssettanes leat 239.3 169.1 408.4 | 

(c) 5 Banks: Russo-Asiatic, Petrograd 
Private, Azov-Don, Union, Moscow Russo- j 
French) Commercial 2 ive seat tee ecieee Files 661.2 1,373.0 

Total (11 Banks) 1,364.8 1,689.4 3,054.2 

(d) 8 Banks: Moscow Merchants, Volga- 
Kama, Junker and Co., Petrograd Com- 
mercial (formerly Wawelberg), Bank of 
Moscow (formerly Riabouchinski), Mos- 
cow Discount, Moscow Commercial, Pri- 
Vate ‘Bank (Of MOSCOW ?}..eciscveusccescoceaseeoeescsnnte 504.2 391.1 895.2 

Total (19 Banks) 1,869.0 2,080.5 3,949.4 

IMPERIALISM 39 

According to these figures, of the four billions of rubles 
making up the active capital of the great Russian banks in 
1913, more than three-quarters, more than three billions, 
come from banks which in reality are only subsidiary com- 
panies of foreign banks, and chiefly of the banks of Paris (the 
famous trio: Parisian Union, Paris et Pays-Bas and Société 
Générale) and of Berlin (Deutsche Bank and Disconto). Two 
of the most important Russian banks, the Russian Bank for 
Foreign Trade and the International Commercial of Petro- 
grad, between 1906 and 1912 raised their capital from 44 to 

98 million rubles, and their reserves from 15 to 39 millions, 
_ employing three-fourths German capital. The first belongs 
to the Deutsche Bank group, and the second to the Disconto. 
The worthy Agahd is indignant at the spectacle of the ma- 
jority of the shares of these Russian financial houses in Ger- 
man hands, thus paralysing their Russian shareholders. And, 
naturally, the country which exports its funds reaps a splendid 
harvest. The Deutsche Bank, for instance, in putting the 
\ shares of the Siberian Commercial Bank on the Berlin market, 
_ kept them in its coffers for a whole year, and then sold them 
| at 193 per cent. that is, at nearly twice their face value, mak- 
| ing a profit of nearly 6 million rubles, which Hilferding calls 
“founders” profits.” 

Our author puts the total resources of the chief Petrograd 
| banks at 8 323 5,000,000 rubles: from the point of view of 
ik the participation in them, or more exactly their control by 
| foreign banks, he estimates it as follows: French banks, 
| 55 per cent.; English, 10 per cent.; German, 35 per cent. 
i? Of this sum of 8,235,000,000 rubles of actual capital, 
| 3,687,000,000 rubles, or over 40 per cent. falls upon the 
pac Prodamet and Produgol—syndicates in the oil, 

metallurgical and cement industries. Thus the fusion of bank- 
| ing and industrial capital in Russia, corresponding to the 
| formation of capitalist monopolies, has made great strides. 
_ Finance-capital, concentrated in a few hands and exercising 
(a virtual monopoly, exacts enormous and ever-increasing 
| profits from the floating of companies, issue of stock, State 
loans, etc., tightening up the grip of financial oligarchies and 
\ levying a tribute on the whole of society. Here is an in- 
| Stance, taken from a multitude, of the methods of constitut- 

40 IMPERIALISM 

ing American trusts. We quote Hilferding: “In 1885, Mr. 
Havemeyer founded the Sugar Trust, by amalgamating fifteen 
small firms, whose total capital amounted to nearly 6,500,000 
dollars. Suitably ‘watered,’ as the Americans say, the capital 
of the new trust was increased to 50,000,000 dollars. This 
‘re-capitalization’ anticipated in advance the profits of the 
monopoly, in the same way as the American Steel Trust anti- 
cipates its profits, by buying up as many iron fields as possible. 
In fact, the sugar trust managed to impose its prices on the 
market, which secured it such profits that it could pay ro 
per cent. dividends on the capital thus swollen, or about 70 
per cent. on the capital actually invested at the time of the 
creation of the big enterprise. In 1909, the capital of the 
sugar trust was increased to 90,000,000 dollars. In twenty- 
two years, it had become more than ten times what it had 
been.” 

In France, the rule of the “financial oligarchy” (denounced 
by Lysis in a book which ran through five editions up to 
1908), assumed a not very different form. Four of the most 
powerful banks enjoyed an “absolute monopoly” of the issue 
of new stock. In reality, this is a trust of the chief banks. 
And their monopoly ensures them monopolist profits from new 
issues. A country borrowing from France rarely gets more 
than 90 per cent. of the total of the loan, the remainder going 
to banks and agents. The bank rate at the time of the 
Russo-Chinese loan of 400,000,000 francs amounted to 8 per 
cent.: that of the Russian loan of 800,000,000 francs (1904), 
to 10 per cent., and of the Moroccan loan of 62,500,000 
francs (1904) to 18.75 per cent. Capitalism, the develop- 
ment of which began with petty usury, ends in the gigantic 
usury of high finance. ‘The French,” says Lysis, “are the 
moneylenders of Europe. Their whole economic life is pro- 
foundly modified by this transformation of capitalism. With- 
out increase of population or development of industry, busi- 
ness, or sea-borne carrying trade, the country can grow rich 
by usury.” Fifty persons representing a capital of 8,000,000 
francs can control 2,000,000,000 deposited in four banks. 
The system of participation, with which we are already ac- 
quainted, leads to the same result. The Société Générale, for 
instance, issues 64,000 bonds of one of its subsidiary com- 

IMPERIALISM 41 

panies, the Egyptian Refineries. The bonds are issued at 150, 
the bank gaining straight away 50 centimes in the franc. 
The dividends of the new company are then found to be non- 
existent. The public lost from 90 to 100 million francs. One 
of the directors of the Société Générale, belongs to the Board 
of directors of the Egyptian Refineries. Hence it is not sur- 
prising if the author is driven to such conclusions as “the 
French Republic is a financial monarchy,” “the financial 
oligarchy is the supreme power behind the press and the 
government.” 

The extraordinarily high rate of profit from the issue of 
securities, which is one of the chief functions of finance- 
capital, plays a large part in the development and stabilization 
of the financial oligarchy. ‘There is not in the whole country 
a single business bringing in profits like the issue of foreign 
loans,” says the German journal Die Bank. 

“No banking operation brings in profits to be compared 
with those from new issues.” According to the German 
Economist, the average profits made on the issue of industrial 

_ securities from 1895 to 1900 were as follows: 

, “In the ten years from 1891 to 1900, German financial 
_ houses ‘earned’ more than a thousand million marks on the 
issue of industrial securities. 

If, during periods of industrial boom, the profits of finance- 
capital are disproportionately large, so during periods of de- 
pression small businesses, and those not in an assured posi- 
tion, go out of existence, while the great banks profit by 
' buying up their shares for next to nothing, or through ad- 
_ vantageous ‘reconstructions.’ In the reconstruction of im- 
_ perilled undertakings, the share capital is decreased in face 
value, that is, profits are distributed on smaller capital and 
, for the future are calculated on this basis. If the income falls 
_ to zero, new capital is called in which, in conjunction with 
“the old, saves the situation. All these reorganizations and 

42 IMPERIALISM 

reconstructions, says Hilferding, have a double meaning for 
the banks: first, as profitable transactions; and secondly as 
splendid opportunities for getting control of the companies 
in difficulties. 

Here is an instance. The Union Mining Company of Dort- 
mund, founded in 1872, with a capital of about 40,000,000 
marks, saw the market price of its shares rise to 170 after it 
had paid in its first year a 12 per cent. dividend. Finance- 
capital received a “‘trifle’ of something like 28,000,000 
marks. At the foundation of this bank the chief part was 
played by that same Disconto Bank which attained a capital 
of 300 million marks. But the dividends of the Union fell 
to nothing.: the shareholders had to consent to a reduction 
of capital, that is, to losing some of it in order not to lose it 
all. By a series of reconstructions, more than 73,000,000 
marks disappeared in thirty years from the funds of the 
Union. “At present, the original shareholders of this com- 
pany have only got 5 per cent. of the nominal value of their 
shares. But the bank kept on doing well from each recon- 
struction.” 

Speculation in land situated in the suburbs of towns mak- 
ing rapid progress is also a very profitable operation for finance- 
capital. The monopoly of the banks here coincides with that 
of the means of communication, since the increase in value of 
the Jand and the possibility of selling it profitably in allot- 
ments is mostly dependent on good means of communication 
with the centre of the town; and these means of communica- 
tion are in the hands of large companies connected, by the 
participation system and by the distribution of positions on 
the directorate, with the interested banks. What happens is 
what the German writer, Eschwege, a contributor to Die 
Bank, who has made a special study of real estate business 
and the transactions connected with it, calls the formation: of 
a “bog.” Frantic speculation in land in the suburbs of large 
towns; collapse of building undertakings (like that of the 
Berlin firm of Boswau and Knauer, who had actually made 
100,000,000 marks with the help of the Deutsche Bank, “the 
most secure and strongest of the German banks”—the latter 
acting, of course, discreetly behind the scenes through the 
participation system and only losing 12,000,000 marks)— 

IMPERIALISM 43 

the ruin of small holders and of workers deluded by the 
firms doing building work on a large scale, criminal agree- 
ments with the ‘honest’ Berlin police and the Berlin officials 
with the aim of getting the right of issuing information about 
the land, building licenses, etc. 

“American methods,” strongly condemned by European 
professors and well-intentioned bourgeois have become in the 
age of finance-capital, those of every great town, no matter 
what country it is in. 

At the beginning of 1914, there was talk in Berlin of a 
transport trust to combine three Berlin transport undertak- 
ings: Metropolitan, Tramway Company and Omnibus Com- 
pany. “We know,” wrote Die Bank, “that this plan has 
come to a head since the majority of the shares in the bus com- 
pany has been acquired by the other two transport com- 
panies. We can believe those who, in folllowing this course, 
hope by a reorganization of the transport services to secure 
enough economies to allow the public to benefit in the end. 
But the question is complicated by the fact that behind the 
trust being formed are the banks, who, if they desire, can 
subordinate the means of communication, which they have 
monopolized, to the interests of their real estate business. 
To be convinced of the reasonableness of such a conjecture, 
we need only recall that the Metropolitan Company was 
founded with the help of one of the great banks. This com- 
pany’s interests are associated with those of the financial house 
in its land transactions. Its Eastern line, in fact, was going 
to open up lands belonging to the bank, who sold them, of 
course, later on, when the completion of the railway was a 
certainty, making fabulous profits on its own account and 
enriching certain private members.” 

A monopoly, once it is formed, and when it once controls 

_ thousands of millions, penetrates inevitably into every part of 
_ public life, quite apart from political circumstances and all 
other considerations. ‘The economic literature of Germany 
usually praises the integrity of the Prussian bureaucracy, 
- while alluding to the scandals usual in France and to American 
corruption. But the fact is that the bourgeois literature of 
Germany devoted to banking matters constantly has to go 
_ beyond the field of purely banking operations, and to speak, 

44 IMPERIALISM 

for instance, of “the attraction exercised by financial 
houses” in reference to the more and more frequent passing 
of officials into the employ of the banks. ‘How can one 
vouch for the integrity of a State official who is aspiring in 
his inmost heart, to a modest position in the Bernstrasse”? 
(the street in Berlin in which is situated the head office of the 
Deutsche Bank). The director of Die Bank, Alfred Lans~ 
burg, wrote in 1909 an article on the Economic Meaning of 
Byzantinism, chiefly devoted to William II.’s tours in Pales- 
tine, and to “the immediate result of this journey,” the con- 
struction of the Bagdad railway, that fatal “great German 
enterprise,” which “is more responsible for ‘encircling’ than 
all our political blunders taken together.” (It will be remem- 
bered that the encircling policy of Edward VII. tended to 
isolate Germany by surrounding her with hostile imperialist 
alliances). The contributor already referred to, M. Eschwege, 
published in 1912 an article called Plutocracy and Bureauc- 
racy, which contains some instructive examples. A German 
official named Felker, who was a member of the Commission 
on Trusts, and conspicuous by his activities, quickly got a 
well-paid position on the staff of the biggest trust of all, the 
Steel Syndicate. 

Similar cases, not in the least the result of chance, forced 
this bourgeois author to admit that “the economic liberty 
guaranteed by the German Constitution is at present, in 
many departments of economic life, only a meaningless 
phrase” and that under the rule of the plutocrats, “the widest 
political liberty does not alter the fact that we are not free.” 

As for Russia, we will be content with one example. All 
the papers spoke, some years ago, of the entry of the director 
of the Banking Department, Davydov, into the employment 
of a great bank who paid him so highly that in a few years 
his total salary must have been more than a million rubles. 
The Banking Department is charged with the duty of “‘co- 
ordinating the activities of all the establishments giving 
credits in the State,” and gives subsidies to banks in the capital 
of 800 to 1,000 million rubles. 

In general, it is characteristic of capitalism that it separates 
the ownership of capital from its application to production, 
financial capital from industrial or productive capital, the 

; 
, 
Ms 
" 

IMPERIALISM 45 

investor who lives only on his income from the entrepreneur, 
and all those who, in fact, share in the management of capital. 
Imperialism or the rule of finance-capital, is that highest stage 
of capitalism in which this separation reaches vast proportions. 
The supremacy of finance-capital over all other forms of 
capital means the rule of the investor and of financial oli- 
garchy, or the crystallization of a small number of financially 
powerful States out of the general body. To what extent? 
This may be judged from the statistics of the issue of securi- 
ties. In the Bulletin of the International Statistical Bureau, 
M. A. Neymarck has published very complete figures cover- 
ing the issue of securities all over the world. These figures 
have been partially quoted many times in economic literature. 
The following are the totals he gives for four ten-year 
periods: 

Total issues in milliards of francs. 

1871-1880 
1881-1890 
1891-1900 
1901-1910 

Between 1870 and 1880, the total amount of issues for 
the whole world was high, through loans resulting from the 
Franco-German war and the phase of development on which 
Germany then entered. In general, the increase is not very 
rapid during the three last decades of the 19th century, but 
the first ten years of the 20th century are noteworthy for an 
enormous increase, almost of 100 per cent. Thus the begin- 
ning of the 19th century marks a sudden change not only in 

connection with the extension of monopolies (cartels, syndi- 

cates, trusts), of which we have already spoken, but also with 
reference to the development of finance-capital. 
M. Neymarck estimates at about 815 milliards of francs 

‘the total sum of issued securities current in r910. With the 

intention of deducting from this sum amounts which might 
have figured more than once, he decreases the total to 575-600 
milliards, which amount is divided as follows among various 
countries: 

PY IMPERIALISM 

Financial Securities Current in 1910 
(Milliards of francs) 

Gredt') Britany si sih encore Aes ees netaeee oe eaten cae 142 
Waited ‘States: issih cies «cutee cote oars Sip: iy) 
PSPAMEE: SUS Lss iy. uivs chon soete tol sracevaeetgtes cen aaa dates aay sae LALO 479 
Germany .. ae eS 
UUSSla svat seccesavene hae | 
Austria tiun gary oes tiie oh ee ald. elesbesesvaanies 24 
Tita ioe ss Ue A Cen Cee See GS, bo An ame ata 14 
aD Ott cic ccrcsncssencrdsaaceneve eae nett onens aeleriaa er ese a untant 12 
Prod bandd ysakeitaccseventicscetgupvapceseaseesaensaeauesencemeacaty 12.5 
Bel orvstin (1264 as vctanesezeassone oepeine eva hicaon cence 7.5 
Spann ies nae eeee tices Wes deck otto ten Aee caer taatesed sentence 76e 
Switrerland. (sk. csoky- si sse abtaanes erase wtsxaesorienenemmeas’s 6.25 
Meerria rk ya as US eS che ee 3.75 
Sweden, Norway, Roumania, etc. ......scsceceseereene 2.5 

i io 2 | Mere nati porte ase a IR VEN deri Te Catia) 600 

It will be seen at once from these figures what a privileged 
position is held by four of the largest capitalist countries, each 
controlling from roo to 150 milliard francs in securities. 
Two of these countries are the oldest capitalist countries and 
as we shall see, possess the most colonies: England and France; 
the other two are in the front rank as regards rapidity of 
development, and the degree of extension of capitalist monop- 
olies in industrial affairs: the United States and Germany. 
Together, these four countries own 479 milliards of francs, 
that is, nearly 80 per cent. of the world’s finance-capital. 
Thus, by this means or otherwise, the whole world is more or 
less the debtor and vassal of these four international banker- 
countries, on which world finance-capital rests. 

It is now necessary to elaborate the part played by the ex- 
port of capital in the creation of an international network of 
dependence and connections of finance-capital. 

CHAPTER TV. 
THE EXPORT OF CAPITAL. 

In the old type of capitalism, that of free competition, the 
export of goods was the most typical feature. In the modern 
kind, the capitalism of monopolies, the export of capital be- 
comes the typical feature. 

Capitalism is the production of commodities at its highest 
stage when labor-power itself becomes a commodity. The 
development of exchange, both national and international, is 
one of the characteristics of capitalism. Inequality and ir- 
regularity in the development of individual undertakings, in- 
dividual branches of production, individual countries, are 
inevitable under the capitalist system. England became a 
capitalist country before any other, and, having introduced 
free trade, set up in the middle of the 19th century to be the 
workshop of the whole world, the great provider of manu- 
factured goods for all other countries, which in exchange 
were to keep her supplied with raw materials. But by the last 
quarter of the roth century, this monopoly was already 
undermined. Other countries, protecting themselves by tariff 
walls, had developed into independent capitalist countries. On 
_ the eve of the zoth century, we see a new class of monop- 
olies coming into existence. First there are combinations of 
capitalists in all advanced capitalist countries: secondly, the 
monopolist position of a few rich countries, in which the 
accumulation of capital reaches gigantic proportions. An 
enormous “excess of capital” becomes accumulated in the 
advanced countries. 

Now there is no doubt that, if capitalism could develop 
agriculture, which to-day has been everywhere left far behind 
by industry, if it could raise the standard of living of the 
- masses, who are everywhere still poverty-stricken and badly 

47 

48 IMPERIALISM 

fed in spite of a dizzy advance in technical knowledge, 
there could be no talk of an excess of capital. And the petty 
bourgeois critics of capitalism advance this argument on 
every occasion. But in that case capitalism would not be 
capitalism, for the inequalities of development and the 
wretched condition of the masses are the indispensable condi- 
tions, the very roots of this method of production. While 
capitalism remains itself, the excess of capital is not put aside 
to raise the standard of living of the masses in a given country, 
for this would mean a decrease of profits for the capitalists: 
but it is used to increase those profits by the export of capital 
abroad, to the backward countries. ‘There the profits are 
generally higher, for capital is scarce, the price of land is 
relatively small, wages are low, raw materials are cheap. The 
possibility of the export of capital is created by the entry of 
numerous backward countries into international capitalist life: 
the most important railway lines are either built or being 
built there: the elementary conditions for industrial develop- 
ment are in existence, etc. 

The necessity to export capital comes from the “over- 
development” of capitalism in certain countries where (with 
agriculture backward and the masses impoverished) “‘profit- 
able” investments are becoming scarce. 

Here are approximate figures showing the amount of capital 
invested abroad by the three great powers. 

Capital invested abroad (milliards of francs). 

Year Britain France Germany 
10 (1869) ous 
15 (1880) ? 
20 (1890) ? 
PLT Aa 12.5 
60 44 

This table shows that the export of capital did not develop 
formidable proportions until the beginning of the 2oth cen- 
tury. Before the war, the capital invested abroad by the 
three great powers amounted to between 175 and 200 mil- 
liard francs. At the modest estimate of 5 per cent., it was 
bringing in from 8 to 10 milliard a year. This is a solid basis 
for imperialist oppression, and the exploitation of most of the 

IMPERIALISM 49 

countries and nations of the world; it is a solid basis for the 
capitalist parasitism of a few wealthy States. 

How is this capital invested abroad divided? Where does 
it go? Only an approximate answer can be given to this 
question, but it will enlighten us on the general aspect of 
modern imperialism and its implications. 

Continents in which the capital (approximate figures) of the 
Great Powers is invested (1910) (milliards of marks). 

Britain France Germany Total 

Beare eco eestor cere BR as 18 45 
vas 37 4 10 51 

BAe ins 29 8 7 44 

Eaasieat separ en ereenes tees 70 35 35 140 

For Britain, colonies hold the leading place, even in Amer- 
ica (Canada), not to speak of Asia and elsewhere. The 
gigantic export of capital is here bound up with the posses- 
sion of gigantic colonies, of the importance of which for 
imperialism we shall speak below. In France the situation is 
quite different. French capital invested abroad is mostly in 
Europe, particularly i in Russia (at least ten milliard francs). 
This is mostly in government loans and not in capital in- 
vested in industrial undertakings. Compared to British im- 

_ perialism, which is colonial, French imperialism might be 
_ termed money-lending imperialism. In Germany, there is a 
third type: the German colonies are inconsiderable, and Ger- 
man capital invested abroad is divided fairly equally between 
Europe and America. 

The export of capital in the countries where it is intro- 
_ duced has a great influence on capitalist development, which 
it strongly accelerates. If then, it arrests to some extent the 
. development of countries which export it, it nevertheless al- 
_ ways extends and intensifies the capitalist development of the 
world as a whole. 
_ Almost. always those countries which export their capital 
are able to obtain “advantages” which throw a certain light 
on the peculiarities of the age of finance-capital and monop- 
olies. The following passage for instance, occurred in the 
Berlin review, Die Bank, for October, 1913. 

fi 

50 IMPERIALISM 

‘**A comedy worthy of the pen of Aristophanes is being 
played just now on the international money market. Numer- 
ous countries, from Spain to the Balkans, from Russia to the 
Argentine, from Brazil to China are urgently seeking loans; 
sometimes very insistently. The money market is not at the 
moment very bright and the political outlook is unpromising. 
But no particular money market can make up its mind to 
refuse the loan, fearing that another might do so and obtain 
in return valuable considerations. In this kind of business, 
the lender almost always gets something: a beneficial commer- 
cial treaty, a coal mine, the construction of a port, a profit- 
able concession, or an order for artillery.” 

Finance-capital has created the period of monopolies, and 
monopolies bring with them everywhere their own methods: 
the utilization of business “connections” for profitable trans- 
actions take the place of open competition on the market. 
Nothing is more usual than to stipulate, before making a 
loan, that some of it will be spent on purchases in the country 
of issue, particularly in orders for war material or for ships. 
In the course of the last two decades (1890-1910), France 
often had recourse to this method. The export of capital 
abroad thus becomes a way to encourage the export of com- 
modities. In these circumstances, transactions, especially be- 
tween big firms, take on a form “bordering on corruption,” 
as Schilder “‘delicately” puts it. Krupp in Germany, Schneider 
in France, Armstrong in England, are instances of firms 
closely connected with all-powerful banks and governments, 
whom it is not easy to “avoid” when arranging a loan. 

France, in making loans to Russia, by the commercial 
treaty of the 16th September, 1905, secured concessions to 
run till 1917. She did the same thing when the Franco-Jap- 
anese commercial treaty was made on the 19th August, 1911. 
The tariff war between Austria and Serbia, which lasted with 
a seven-months’ interval, from 1906 to 1911, was partly 
caused by competition between Austria and France for keep- 
ing Serbia supplied with war material. In January, 1912, 
M. Paul Deschanel said in the Chamber of Deputies, that 
French firms from 1908 to 1911 had supplied 45,000,000 
francs’ worth of war material to Serbia. 

A report from the Austro-Hungarian Consul at Sao-Paulo 

IMPERIALISM st 

(Brazil), states: “The construction of Brazilian railways is 
chiefly done by capital from France, Belgium, Britain and 

_ Germany. The countries involved secure orders for railway 
material during the preliminary financial negotiations con- 
nected with railroad construction.” 

Finance-capital thus extends its tentacles literally all over 
the world. Banks founded in the colonies, or their branches, 

_ play an important part in these operations. German im- 

' perialists look with envy on the old colonizing nations, which 
in this respect are “well established.” Great Britain had, in 
1904, 50 colonial banks with 2,279 branches (in 1910, there 
were 72 banks with 5,449 branches); France had 20 with 
136 branches; Holland 16 with 68 branches; and Germany 
had a “mere” 13 with 7o branches. 

_ The American capitalists, on their side, are jealous of the 
English and the Germans: ‘In South America,” they sadly 
wrote in 1915, ‘five German banks had forty branches and five 
English banks had seventy. England and Germany during 

the last twenty-five years have invested in the Argentine, 
Brazil and Uruguay, about four billion dollars, which puts 

_ under their control 46 per cent. of the total trade of these 

three countries.” 

| The countries exporting capital have divided the world in 

the metaphorical sense of the term. But finance-capital has 

_ also led to an actual division of the world. 

CHUA PT ERs. 
THE DIVISION OF THE WORLD AMONG CAPITALIST GROUPS 

THE capitalist monopoly groups—cartels, syndicates, trusts 
—divide among themselves first of all the whole internal trade 
of a country, grasping the whole of industry more and mote 
firmly. But in capitalist society, internal trade is connected 
with foreign trade. Capitalism has long ago created a world 
market. In proportion as the export of capital increases, 
and as foreign and colonial relations—‘the spheres of in- 
fluence” of the largest monopolist associations—extend on 
every side, things tend “naturally” towards an international 
agreement among these associations and towards the forma- 
tion of international cartels. 

This is a new degree of world concentration of capital 
and production, infinitely higher than any predecessor. Let 
us see how this super-monopoly develops. 

The electrical industry is the most typical of the latest 
victories of technical skill, i.e., of capitalism at the end of the 
nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth centuries. It has 
developed most in the two most advanced of the new cap- 
italist countries, the United States and Germany. In Ger- 
many, the crisis of 1900 had a particularly great effect on 
its concentration. The banks, already by this time deeply 
interested in industry, forced on, during this crisis, the 
collapse of unimportant firms and their absorption by the 
large ones. “The banks,” writes Jeidels, “refused a help- 
ing hand to the companies which needed it most—bringing 
on, after a frenzied boom, the inevitable failure of the com- 
panies which were not closely enough attached to them.” * 

After 1900, concentration in Germany proceeded as a result 
by leaps and bounds. Up to 1900, there had been seven or 
eight groups in the electrical industry. Each was formed of 
many companies—amounting altogether to twenty-eight— 

52 

IMPERIALISM 53 

and each was supported by from 2 to 11 banks. Between 
1908 and 1912 all the groups were united into two, or possibly 
one. This shows the process: 

Groups in the German electrical industry: 

(i) In 1900: 
Felten & Gillaume Lahmeyer Union Siemens-Schuckert Bergman 
CM TESTS I SES OR ed Halske& Co.  Kuymer 
ee 
Bergman 
Felten & Lahmeyer A.E.G. Siemens-Halske Failed in 
(General Electrical Company) ~Schuckert 1900 
SSAt p= sacar ey PRR be ps e ER SARS INIT GTI Do a 
(ii) In 1912: 
A.E.G. (Gen. Elec. Co.) Siemens-Halske-Schuckert 

SO EE eee eee 
(In close collaboration-since 1908) 

The famous A.E.G. (General Electrical Company), thus 
constituted, controls 175 to 200 companies (through shares) 
‘and directs altogether a capital of 1,500,000,000 marks. 
Abroad, it has 35 direct representatives of which twelve are 
_ joint stock companies, in more than ten States. In 1904, 
German capital, invested in the electric industry abroad, was 
already estimated at 233,000,000 marks. Of this sum, 62 
millions were invested in Russia. There is no need to say that 
' the A.E.G. is a huge combine. Its industrial companies num~ 
| ber no less than sixteen, and their factories make the most 
varied articles, from cables and insulators to motor-cars and 
_ aeroplanes. 
But concentration in Europe is only a part of the process 
of concentration in America, which has developed thus: 

ry 
- 

G.E.C. 
| United States Thomson-Houston & Co. Edison & Co. establish in 
| establish a firm in Europe Europe the French Edi- 
son Co. which sends on its 
1 patents to the German 
i Germany Union Electrical Company firm A.E.G, 
ae General Electrical Company (A.E.G.) 

_ Thus two “Great Powers” in the electrical industry were 

_ formed. “There is not an electrical company in the world 

rd 

54 IMPERIALISM 

which can be independent of them,” wrote Heinig in his 
article on The Paths of the Electricity Trust. As to the total 
business and the size of the enterprises of the two trusts, the 
following figures will give us at least an idea: 

Total business Net profits 
in mills. in mills. 
of marks Employees of marks 
America: 
General Elec. Co........... 1907 252 28,000 35.4 
1910 298 32,000 45.6 
Germany: 
PGi Ok © AUP Pa AER eer 1907 216 30,700 14.5 
1911 362 60,800 21.7. 

In 1907, the German and American trusts divided up the 
world by agreement. Competition between them ceased. The 
American General Electricity Company “‘received” the United 
States and Canada. The A.E.G. “received” Germany, Aus- 
tria, Russia, Holland, Denmark, Switzerland, Turkey and 
the Balkans. Special agreements, naturally secret, laid down 
the rules for the branch companies exploiting new branches 
of production or new countries not yet allotted. The two 
trusts were to exchange their discoveries and their experiences. 

It is easy to understand how difficult competition is becom- 
ing against this trust, which is practically world-wide—con- 
trolling a capital of several milliard marks, provided with 
branches, agencies, representatives in every country in the 
world. But the division of the world between two powerful 
trusts does not do away with the possibilities of re-division 
if the balance of forces changes, because of unequal develop- 
ments, wars, bankruptcies, etc. 

The oil industry supplies us with a curious example of such 
a revision, or rather of a struggle for the revision of agree- 
ments. 

“The world market for oil,” wrote Jeidels in 1905, “‘is 
already divided between two great financial groups, the Stand- 
ard Oil Co. of Rockefeller and the controllers of Russian oil, 
Rothschild and Nobel. The two groups are in alliance. But 
for many years, five enemies have been threatening their 
monopoly. 

“(i) The exhaustion of the American wells; (ii) the com- 

IMPERIALISM 55 

petition of the firm of Mentacheff of Baku; (iii) the Austrian 
wells; (iv) the Roumanian wells; (v) the wells of the Dutch 
colonies (the extremely rich firms, Samuel and Shell, con- 
nected with English capital also). The three last groups are 
connected with the great German banks, principally the 
Deutsche Bank. These banks have systematically developed 
on their own the extraction of oil, especially in Roumania. 
In 1907, 185,000,000 francs of foreign capital was invested 
in the Roumanian oil industry, of which 74 million came 
from Germany.” 

A struggle began which, in economic literature, is fittingly 
called “the struggle for the division of the world.” On one 
side, the Rockefeller trust, wishing to conquer everything, 
founded a daughter company in Holland, and set out to ac- 
quire the wells of the Dutch Indies, thus attempting to strike 
at its principal enemy, the Anglo-Dutch Shell trust. On the 
other side, the Deutsche Bank and other German banks aimed 
at “keeping” Roumania and at uniting it with Russia against 
Rockefeller. The latter controlled far more capital and an 
excellent system of oil transport, put at the disposal of the 
consumers. The struggle had to end, and it ended in 1907 
with the defeat of the Deutsche Bank which could only 
choose between two alternatives: to liquidate its oil business 
and lose millions, or to submit. It chose to submit, and con- 
cluded a very disadvantageous agreement with the American 
trust. The Deutsche Bank agreed not to attempt anything 
which might injure “American interests.” A clause of the 
agreement cancelled it if Germany should establish a State 
monopoly of oil. 

Then “the comedy of oil” began. One of the German oil- 
kings, von Gwinner, a director of the Deutsche Bank, began, 
through his private secretary, Strauss, a campaign for the 
State control of oil. The whole great machine of the largest 
German bank and all its “connections” were set in motion. 
The press showed a “‘patriotic” indignation against the “‘yoke” 
of the American trust, and the Reichstag passed, on March 
1sth, r911, by an almost unanimous vote, a motion asking 
the government to bring forward a plan for oil monopoly. 
The government hastened to acquiesce in the desire of the 
nation; and the Deutsche Bank, which hoped to deceive its 

56 IMPERIALISM 

American partner and improve its business by a State monop- 
oly, appeared to have won. Already, the German oil magnates 
saw visions of wonderful profits, which would not be less than 
those of the great Russian sugar growers. . . . But the great 
German banks quarrelled among themselves over the division 
of the spoil. The Disconto Gesellschaft exposed the aims of 
the Deutsche Bank; secondly, the government took fright at 
the idea of a struggle with Rockefeller. The Roumanian sup- 
ply was not very large; would it be possible to get oil without 
Mr. Rockefeller? Finally (1913) a milliard was required for 
armaments. The project of the oil monopoly was put aside. 
The Rockefeller trust came out of the struggle temporarily 
victorious. 

The Berlin review Die Bank said in this connection, that 
Germany could only fight the oil trust by establishing an 
electricity monopoly and by converting water power into 
electricity cheaply. “But,” it added, “the electricity monop- 
oly will come when the producers need it more definitely; 
when the next great failure in the electrical industry is at 
hand; and when the powerful electric workshops, so costly, 
constructed now almost everywhere by private concerns and 
for which these concerns receive already partial monopolies 
from towns, from the State, etc., can no longer work at a 
profit. Water power then must be used. But this cannot be 
converted into cheap electricity at State expense; all the same 
it must be handed over to ‘a private monopoly controlled by 
the State,’ because private industry has already concluded a 
series of contracts and secured heavy compensation. . . . So 
it was with the monopoly of potash, so it is with the oil 
monopoly, so it will be with the monopoly of electricity. It 
is time for our State-Socialists, who let themselves be blinded 
by beautiful principles, to understand once and for all that in 
Germany the monopolies have never had as their aim or effect 
the advantage of the consumer or even a share of the profits 
of industry for the State, but have only served to revive, 
at the expense of the State, private industry which was on the 
verge of bankruptcy.” 

Such’ are the valuable admissions which the German bour- 
geois economists are forced to make. We see plainly here 
how private monopolies and State monopolies are bound up 

IMPERIALISM 57 

together in the age of finance-capital, both being only differ- 
ing stages in the imperialist struggle between the largest mon- 
opolists for the division of the world. 

In the mercantile marine, the tremendous development of 
concentration has ended also in the division of the world. In 
Germany, two powerful companies have raised themselves to 
the first rank, the Hamburg-Amerika and the Nord-Deut- 
scher-Lloyd, both with a capital of 200 million marks in 
stocks and shares, and possessing 185-189 million marks’ 
worth of shipping tonnage. On the other side, in America, 
on January 1st, 1903, the Morgan trust—the International 
Company of Maritime Trade—was formed which united nine 
British and American navigation companies, and which con- 
trolled a capital of 120 million dollars (480 million marks). 

As early as 1903, the German giants and the Anglo-Amer- 
ica trust concluded an agreement and divided the world in 
accordance with the division of profits. The German com- 
panies undertook not to compete in the Anglo-American 
trafic. The German and American ports were carefully al- 
lotted to each, a common committee of control was appointed. 
This contract was concluded for twenty years. But a clause 
rendered it invalid in case of war. 

Extremely instructive also is the story of the creation of 
the International Rail Combine. The first attempt of the 
British, Belgian and German rail manufacturers to create such 
a cartel was made in 1884, at the moment of a serious busi- 
ness crisis. The manufacturers agreed not to compete with 
‘one another for the internal markets of the countries in- 
volved, and they divided the foreign markets in the following 
proportions: Britain 66 per cent.; Germany 27 per cent.; 

- Belgium 17 per cent. India was reserved entirely for Britain. 
_ A British firm which remained outside the cartel was fought 
_ by it; the costs of this economic war were met by a per- 
centage levied on all the sales. But in 1886 two British firms 
came out of the cartel, which collapsed. It is characteristic 
that the agreement could not be maintained in the periods of 
industrial prosperity which followed. 
_ At the beginning of 1904, the German steel syndicate was 
' founded. In November, 1904, the international rail cartel 
| was renewed, with the following proportions for foreign 

58 IMPERIALISM 

trade: England, 53.5 per cent.; Germany, 28.83 per cent.; 
Belgium, 17.67 per cent. France came in later with succes- 
sively 4.8 per cent., 5.8 per cent. and 6.4 per cent. in the 
first, second and third years, exceeding the 100 per cent. limit, 
i.e., when the total was 104.8 per cent. of the 1904 total, etc. 
In 1905, the United States Steel Corporation entered the car- 
tel, then Austria, then Spain. ‘“‘At this moment,” wrote 
Vogelstein in 1910, “the division of the world is at an end, 
and the great consumers, in the first place the State railways 
—since the world is divided up without their interests being 
considered—must live like the poet in the palace of Jupiter.” 

Or we may refer also to the International Zinc Syndicate, 
established in 1909 which divided production exactly between 
five groups of factories: German, Belgian, French, Spanish and 
British. Then there is the International Power Trust, of 
which Liefmann says that it is ‘‘a quite modern close alliance 
between all the German manufacturers of explosives who have 
divided up the whole world, so to speak, with the English and 
French manufacturers, organized in a similar manner.” 

Altogether, Liefmann counted in 1897 more than forty in- 
ternational cartels in which Germany had a share, while in 
1910 there were about 100. 

Certain bourgeois writers express the opinion that the in- 
ternational cartels, representing one of the most striking forms 
of the internationalization of capital, afford us the hope of 
the maintenance of peace under the capitalist system. Theo- 
retically this opinion is absurd, while in practice it is a sophism 
and a dishonest defence of the worst opportunism. The in- 
ternational cartels show to what point capitalist monopolies 
have developed, and what is the object of the struggle be- 
tween capitalist groups. This last circumstance is the most 
important; it alone shows us the historico-economic direction 
of events. For the forms of the struggle can change, and do 
change constantly, because of various relatively temporary 
and special causes, but the essence of the struggle, its class 
content, cannot change while classes exist. It is easy to under- 
stand, for example, that it may be useful for the interests 
of the German bourgeoisie to hide the reason for the actual 
economic struggle (the division of the world) and to em- 
phasize one form or another of it. Kautsky makes the same 

IMPERIALISM 59 

mistake. And it is a question not of the German bourgeoisie, 
but of the bourgeoisie throughout the world. The capitalists 
divide up the world, not because of original sin, but because 
the degree of concentration which has been reached forces 
them to take this road in order to get profits. And they 
divide it in proportion to capital, to “strength,” because there 
cannot be any other system of division in a system of com- 
modity production and capitalism. But the forces vary with 
economic and political development. In order to understand 
what takes place, it is necessary to know what questions are 
effected by this change of forces. Whether these changes 
are “purely” economic or non-economic (e.g., military), is 
in any case secondary and cannot change at all the funda- 
mental view of the most recent phase of capitalism. 

To substitute for the object of the struggles and agreements 
between capitalist groups the question of the form of these 
struggles and agreements (to-day peaceful, to-morrow belli- 
cose, the next day peaceful once more), is to descend into 
sophistry. 

The latest period of capitalism shows us that definite rela- 
tions are being established amongst capitalist groups, relations 
based on the economic partition of the world; whilst, parallel 
with this fact and in connection with it, definite relations are 
being established between political groups, between States, 
on the basis of the territorial division of the world, of the 
struggle for colonies, of the “struggle for economic territory.” 

CHAPTER) Vi 
THE DIVISION OF THE WORLD AMONG THE GREAT POWERS 

In his book on the Territorial Development of European 
Colonies, A. Supan, the geographer, gives the following brief 
statement of this development at the end of the 19th cen- 
tury: 

Percentage of Territories belonging to the European Colonizing 
Powers, including United States. 

1900 Increase 
PRELICA I cre cehtaeeeseamcae ene i 90.4 plus 79.6 
Polynesia ll i 98.9 plus 42.1 
IASia fsiscciees Hs : 56.6 plus 5.1 
Australia 100.0 — 
America 2752 minus 0,3 

“The characteristic feature of this period,” he concludes, 
“is, therefore, the division of Africa and Polynesia.” As there 
are no unoccupied territories—that is, belonging to no State 
—left, in Asia and America, the conclusion of Mr. Supan 
must be extended. We must say that the characteristic fea- 
ture of this period is the definitive partition of the earth— 
definitive, not in the sense that a mew partition is impossible, 
for on the contrary new partitions are possible and unavoid- 
able, but in the sense that the colonial policy of the capitalist 
countries has completed the conquest of the unoccupied terri- 
tories on our planet. For the first time, the world is com- 
pletely shared out, so that in the future territories will only 
be able to pass from one possessor to another, instead of ac- 
quiring a possessor for the first time. 

We are, therefore, passing through a peculiar period of 
world-wide colonial policy, attached by the closest of ties to 
the most recent phase of capitalist development, that of 
finance-capital. And so it is indispensable to dwell above 

60 

IMPERIALISM 61 

all on the facts, in order to ascertain exactly what distin- 
guishes this period from those preceding it, and from the 
present situation. In the first place, two questions of fact 
arise here. Is there to be observed an intensification of colonial 
policy, an intensification of the struggle for the colonies, ex- 
actly at the period of finance-capital? And how is the world 
divided up at present in this regard? 

The American writer, Morris, in his book on The History 
of Colonization sets out to give the total colonial possessions 
of Britain, France and Germany during different periods of 
the 19th century. He obtains, briefly, the following results: 

Colonial Possessions. 

BRITAIN FRANCE GERMANY 
Area in Population Areain Population Areain Population 
millions in millions in millions in 
of sq. mls. millions of sq. mls. millions of sq. mls. millions 
1815-1830 — 126.4 0.02 0.5 — —_ 
1860 2.5) 145.1 0.2 3.4 _ _— 
1880 Fok 267.9 0.7 FA) — _— 
1859 9.3 309.0 Se. 56.4 1.0 14.7 

For Britain, the period of vast colonial conquests is be- 
tween 1860-1880; and the last twenty years of the roth 
century are also of great importance. For France and Ger- 
many it is chiefly during these last twenty years that the 
gains are important. 

We have seen previously that the limit of pre-monopoly 
capitalist development, of capitalism with a predominance of 
free competition, is between 1860 and 1870. We now see 
that it is just immediately following that period that the 
“thoom” in colonial annexations begins, and that the struggle 
for a territorial division of the world becomes extraordinarily 
keen. It is, therefore, beyond doubt that the transition of 
capitalism to monopoly-capitalism, to finance-capitalism, is 
connected with the intensification of the struggle for the par- 
tition of the world. 

Hobson, in his work on imperialism, marks the years 1884- 
1900 as being those of the greatest colonial “expansion” of 
the chief European States. According to his estimate, Britain 
acquired during these years, 3,700,000 square miles of terri- 
tory with a population of 57,000,000 inhabitants; France 

62 IMPERIALISM 

acquired 3,600,000 square miles with a population of 36,000,- 
ooo inhabitants; Germany, 1,000,000 square miles with a 
population of 14,700,000 inhabitants; Belgium, 900,000 
square miles with 30,000,000 inhabitants; Portugal, 800,000 
square miles with 9,000,000 inhabitants. The hunt of all the 
capitalist States for colonies at the end of the 19th century 
is a fact well-known in the history of diplomacy and of 
foreign affairs. 

At the zenith of free competition in Britain, between 1840 
and 1860, her leading capitalist politicians declared them- 
selves against colonial policy, considering the emancipation 
of the colonies and their complete separation from the Mother 
Country as being not only inevitable but very desirable. 
M. Beer shows in an article on Modern British Imperialism, 
published in 1898, that in 1852, Disraeli, despite his general 
inclination to an imperialist policy, nevertheless declared: 
“The colonies are millstones round our necks.” But at the 
end of the 19th century, the heroes of the hour were Cecil 
Rhodes and Joseph Chamberlain, the open advocates of im- 
perialism and the most cynical exponents of imperialist policy. 

It is not without interest to observe that at this time the 
political managers of the British bourgeoisie were fully aware 
of the connection between what might be called the purely 
economic and the politico-social roots of modern imperialism. 

Chamberlain gave his blessing to imperialism by calling it 
a “truly wise and economical policy,” and he emphasized 
above all the fact that Germany, America and Belgium were 
competitors against Britain in the world market. 

Salvation, said the capitalist founders of cartels, syndicates 
and trusts, lies in monopolies. Salvation lies in monopolies, 
echoed the political leaders of the bourgeoisie, hastening to 
appropriate parts of the world not yet shared out. 

Stead, the journalist, relates how Cecil Rhodes, his close 
friend, said to him in 1895, in connection with his imperialist 
ideas: “Yesterday I was in the East End at an unemployed 
meeting. I heard inflammatory speeches: but they all echoed 
only one cry: ‘We want bread! We want bread!’ 1 thought 
about this on the way home, and I became more and more 
convinced of the importance of imperialism. My cherished 
idea provides a solution for the social problem. In order to 

IMPERIALISM 63 

save 40,000,000 inhabitants of the United Kingdom from a 
bloody civil war, we colonial statesmen must take possession 
of new lands suitable for peopling by the surplus population 
of this country, where we shall be able to find new markets 
for the goods produced in our factories and mines. The 
Empire, as I have always said, is a question of the belly. If 
you want to avoid civil war, you must become an imperialist.” 

Thus, in 1895, spoke Cecil Rhodes, millionaire, monarch 
of finance, the man who was mainly responsible for the Boer 
War. 

To tabulate as exactly as possible the territorial division 
of the world, and the changes which have occurred during 
the last ten years, let us take advantage of the data furnished 
by Supan in the work already quoted. Supan examines the 
years 1876 and 1900. We take by way of comparison, the 
year 1876—a year happily selected, for it is precisely at that 
time that the development of Western European capitalism, 
in its pre-monopoly stage, can be considered, generally speak- 
ing, as completed; and we take also the year 1914. We 
replace Supan’s figures by the more recent statistics of Hiibner 
(Geographical and Statistical Tables) : 

-Supan studied only the colonies; we think it useful, in 
order to make the picture of the division of the world more 
complete, to add summarized information on the non-colonial 
and semi-colonial countries, such as Persia, China and Turkey. 
Persia is already almost completely a colony; China and Turkey 
are on the way to becoming colonies. We gece the follow- 
ing results: ; 

Colonial Possessions of the Great Powers. 
(In millions of square kilometers and in millions of inhabitants) 

COLONIES “HOME” TOTALS 
1876 . 1914 1914 1914 

‘Avea) Popis)) Area. Pop. Area. Pop. | Area; Pop, 

Britain Taverevexsta': 22.3 1 251.95 33.5 393.5 3 46.5 33.8 440.0 
1 Russia E59) 174 55.2 5.4 136.2 22.8 169.4 
. Erance 6.0 10.6 Si5u 9; J eye su ine i ie | 25 
Germany? ;.....:. —_ crn 25, 12.3 i 64.9 3:4. °° 772 
(S EVS Ie Na area — — ai Ofna Ai te 97 Or 927.1) LOG.Z, 
gan ye. -pe.-,.:-. = 3) 19.2 4) 30 ofan in Zend 

“Total Aone 40.4. 273.8) 65.0 $23.4 16.5°'437-2. 81.5, 961.1 

64 IMPERIALISM 

Colonies of other powers (Belgium, Holland, etc.).............. 9.9 45.3 
Semi-colonial countries (Persia, China, Turkey) ......00.....001. 14.5 361.0 
Othes cowl eies 2) sips. sccscgcansparaeneeassaeaieasaceapesnspenscovocabebeteeaanags 28.0 289.2 

Total Area and Population of the World... 133.9 1656.6 

We see from these figures how complete was the partition 
of the world at the end of the r9th and beginning of the 2oth 
centuries. After 1876 colonial possessions are extended to 
an enormous degree, growing from 40 to 65 million square 
kilometers in area. For the six biggest powers the increase 
is one of 25 million square kilometers, that is, one and a half 
times greater than the area of the “Home” countries, 1642 
million. 

In 1876 three powers had no colonies, and a fourth, France, 
had scarcely any. In 1914, these four powers had 14.1 mil- 
lion square kilometers of colonies, or an area one and a half 
times greater than that of Europe, peopled with nearly 
100,000,000 human beings. 

The unequal rates of development in acquiring colonial 
possessions are very marked. Comparing, for instance, France, 
Germany and Japan—countries in which the area and popu- 
lation are not very different—it will be seen that the first 
(France) has annexed almost three times as much colonial 
area as the other two combined. But in finance-capital, France 
was also, at the beginning of the period we are considering, 
perhaps several times richer than Germany and Japan together. 

Apart from and on the basis of purely economic causes, 
geographical conditions and other factors influence colonial 
development. However strong, during the last few decades, 
the process of equalization of the world, of levelling up the 
economic and living conditions in different countries, under 
the pressure of heavy industry, exchange and finance-capital, 
great differences also remain between the six great powers. 
We see young capitalist powers (America, Germany, Japan) 
progressing very rapidly, while countries with an old capitalist 
development (France and Britain) have made much slower 
headway of late; and, finally, there is Russia, the most back- 
ward country economically, in which the latest imperialist 
capitalism is enmeshed, so to speak, in a thick web of pre- 
capitalist relations. 

IMPERIALISM 65 

Alongside of the colonial possessions of these great powers, 
we have placed the small colonies of the small States, which 
are the next possible and probable objects of a new colonial 
“share-out.” Most of these little States only keep their colonies 
thanks to conflicting interests which prevent them from being 
divided up amongst the strong. 

As for the semi-colonized States, they give us an example 
of the transitionary forms which are to be found in all do- 

_ mains of nature and society. Finance-capital is such a great, 
it may be said such a decisive, force in all economic and in- 
ternational relations, that it is capable of subordinating itself, 
and actually does subordinate itself even to States enjoying 
complete political independence. ‘We shall shortly see exam- 
ples of this. But naturally it finds the greatest ““convenience” 

_ and draws the biggest profits from a subordination involving 
the loss of the political independence of the countries and 
peoples in question. 

In this connection the semi-colonized countries offer us a 
| typical example of the middle course. It is natural that the 
_ struggle for these semi-dependent countries was bound to be- 
come particularly bitter during the period of. finance-capital, 

the rest of the world being already shared out. 

There was a colonial policy and an imperialism before the 
) modern phase of capitalism, and even before capitalism. Rome, 
| founded on slavery, carried out a colonial policy and gave 
_ effect to imperialism. But “general” reasonings on imper- 
| ialism, which forget or tone down the fundamental difference 

of social-economic systems, infallibly degenerate into abso- 
_lutely empty banalities, or into boasting, such as the compari- 
son of the grandeur of Rome and the grandeur of Britain. 

Even the colonial policy of capitalism in its previous phases 
is essentially different from that of finance-capital. 

_ The principal characteristic of modern capitalism is the 
_ domination of monopolist alliances of the biggest capitalists. 
These monopolies are the most solid when all the sources of 
| raw materials are controlled by the one group. And we have 

seen how furiously the international capitalist groups devote 

_ themselves to the task of making it quite impossible for an 
Opponent to compete, by purchasing, for instance, all iron 
_ deposits or oil fields, etc. Colonial possession alone gives com- 

66 IMPERIALISM 

plete guarantees of success to the monopolies against all the 
risks of the struggle against competitors, including the possi- 
bility of the latter defending themselves by means of a law 
establishing a State monopoly. The more capitalism develops, 
the more the need for raw materials arises; the more bitter 
competition becomes and the more feverishly the hunt for 
raw materials proceeds throughout the whole world, the more 
desperate becomes the struggle for the acquisition of colonies. 

Schilder writes: ‘“There is a fact which will seem to some 
people paradoxical, viz., that the increase of urban and in- 
dustrial population will suffer, sooner or later, much less from 
a shortage of raw materials for industry than from a shortage 
of necessities of life. Thus the shortage of wood is making 
itself felt. The price of wood is rising, like the price of 
leather, and the price of raw materials necessary for the textile 
industry. Associations of manufacturers are trying to strike 
a balance between industry and agriculture on a world scale; 
note, for instance, the International Federation of Cotton 
Spinners’ Associations in several important industrial coun- 
tries, and the European Union of Flax Spinners’ Associations 
founded on the same model in 1910.” 

The bourgeois reformists, of course, attempt to diminish 
the importance of facts of this kind by saying that it “would 
be possible” to obtain raw materials on an open market with- 
out a “costly and dangerous” colonial policy; and that it 
would be “‘possible” to greatly increase the supply of raw 
materials quite “simply” by improving agriculture. But 
these suggestions transform themselves into an apology for 
imperialism, because they are founded on a neglect of the 
principal characteristic of modern capitalism: monopoly. 
Free trade is becoming more and more a thing of the past. 
The combines and trusts are restricting it daily. And as for 
the “simple” improvement of agriculture, it resolves itself 
into a question of improving the condition of the masses, of 
raising wages and lowering profits. But are there, excepting 
in the imagination of the reformists, any trusts capable of 
interesting themselves in the condition of the masses instead 
of the conquest of colonies? 

The already-known sources of raw materials are not the 
only ones to interest finance-capital. It is also interested in 

IMPERIALISM 67 

possible sources of raw materials, because present-day technical 
development is extremely rapid, and because land which is 
to-day barren may be made fertile to-morrow with new 
processes, if big capital is devoted for that purpose. (To dis- 
cover these new processes a big bank can equip a whole ex- 
pedition of engineers, agricultural experts, etc.) This also 
applies to boring for materials, etc. Hence the inevitable 
tendency of finance-capital to extend its economic territory 
and even its uneconomic territory. In the same way that the 

trusts capitalize their property by estimating it at two or 

three times its value, taking into consideration its “possible” 
future revenues and the further results of monopoly, so 
finance-capital tends in general to take possession of the 
greatest area of land of any and every kind in any and every 
place and in any and every way, estimating possibilities of 
finding raw materials there, and fearing to be left behind in 
the insensate struggle for the last available scraps of un- 
appropriated territory, or for the re-partition of that which 
was already appropriated. 

The British capitalists are performing prodigies in order to 
develop cotton growing in their Egyptian colony. (In 1904, 
out of 2.3 million hectares of land under cultivation, 0.6 
millions, or more than a quarter, were devoted to cotton 
growing.) The Russians are doing the same in ¢heir colony, 
Turkestan. And in each case it is because they can thus beat 
their competitors more easily, and more easily achieve the 
monopolization of the sources of raw materials and the for- 
mation of a united textile trust, economical and profitable, 
embracing all the processes of production and of manufac- 
turing under a single control. 

The interests which export capital press on in their turn 
to the conquest of colonies, for it is easier on the colonial 
market—and sometimes it is only possible on the colonial 
market—to drive away a competitor by means of monopoly, 

_to make sure of orders, to strengthen the necessary ‘“‘connec- 

tions,” etc. 

The non-economic super-structure which grows up on the 
basis of finance-capital, its politics and its ideology, supports 
the tendency to colonial conquest. “Finance-capital does not 

68 IMPERIALISM 

want liberty, it wants domination,” as Hilferding very truly 
says. And a French bourgeois writer, developing and sup- 
plementing, as it were, the ideas of Cecil Rhodes, whom we 
previously mentioned, writes that social causes should be added 
to the economic causes of modern colonial policy. 

*‘As a result of the increasing complexity of life, a com- 
plexity and a difficulty weighing not only on the working 
masses, but also on the middle classes, impatience, irritation 
and hatred are accumulating in all the countries of the old 
civilization, and are a menace to public calm. Energy, rising 
out of the rut of a class, must be found employment and an 
outlet abroad, so as to prevent an explosion within.” 

Once we are speaking of colonial policy in the period of 
capitalist imperialism, it is indispensable to note that finance- 
capital and the international policy which is proper to it, and 
which resolves itself into the struggle of the great Powers 
for the economic and political division of the world, gives 
rise to a number of fransitional forms of State dependence. 
And the division into two principal groups of countries— 
possessors of colonies and colonized areas—is not sufficient to 
characterize the period. It is necessary to take into account 
the various kinds of dependence of countries which are politi- 
cally independent in form but are surrounded in reality with 
a fine network of financial and diplomatic bonds. We have 
already drawn attention to the semi-colonies; they give effect 
to one of these forms of dependence. Here is another of 
which Argentina provides us with an example. 

“South America, and especially Argentina,” writes Schulz- 
Gaevernitz in his work on British Imperialism, “is so depen- 
dent financially on London that it must almost be called a» 
commercial colony of England.” The capital invested by 
England in Argentina was estimated by Schilder on the in- 
formation of the Austro-Hungarian consul at Buenos Aires, 
to be worth 8,750 millions of francs in 1909. It is not diffi- 
cult to imagine what solid bonds, consequently, finance-capital 
(and its faithful ally, diplomacy) create between Britain and 
the Argentine bourgeoisie, what influence it guarantees Britain 
with those who control all the economic and political life of 
the country. 

The example of Portugal shows us a somewhat different 

IMPERIALISM 69 

form of financial and diplomatic dependence coinciding 
with political independence. Portugal is an independent 
sovereign State. But in fact, for more than two hundred 
years, since the war of the Spanish Succession (1700-1714), 
it has been under British protection. The British have de- 
fended Portugal and its colonies in order to fortify their own 
positions against Spain and France. In return they have re- 
ceived commercial advantages, preferential import of goods 
and, above all, of capital into Portugal and the Portuguese 
colonies, the right to use the ports and islands of Portugal, 
its telegraph cables, etc. 

Relations of this kind, between big and little States, have 

always existed. But during the period of capitalist imperial- 
ism they become a general-system, they form a part of the 
process of dividing up the world, they constitute, in short, 
one of the links in the chain of operations of world finance- 
capital. 
Before leaving the question of the division of the world, 
we have still to remark the following. American literature 
after the Spanish-American war, and English literature after 
the Boer War, clearly and definitely stated this question at 
the end of the roth century. German literature which always 
follows “‘zealously” on the track of “British Imperialism,” 
systematically recorded its progress. This is not all. French 
bourgeois literature raises the question in terms as wide and 
clear as it is possible to do so from the bourgeois point of 
view. Let us quote Ed. Driault, the historian, who wrote the 
following in his book, “Social and Political Problems at the 
End of the XIX Century,’ in the chapter on the great powers 
and the division of the world: 

“During recent years, all the free territory on the earth, 
with the exception of China, has been occupied by the powers 
of Europe and North America. Many conflicts have already 
occurred over this matter, and many displacements of in- 
_ terest foreshadow in the near future conflagrations which will 
be much more terrible. For it is necessary to make haste. 
The nations which are not provided with colonies run the 
risk of never receiving their share, and never participating in 
the tremendous exploitation of the earth which will be one 
of the essential features of the next century (ie., the zoth). 

70 IMPERIALISM 

That is why all Europe and America has lately become seized 
by the fever of colonial expansion of ‘imperialism,’ that most 
characteristic and most noteworthy feature of the end of the 
19th century.” And the author adds: “In this partition of 
the world, in this furious pursuit of the treasure, and of the 
big markets of the earth, the comparative forces of the em- 
pires founded in this 19th century are totally out of propor- 
tion with the place occupied in Europe by the nations who 
founded them. The dominant powers in Europe, those which 
decide the destinies of the Continent, are not similarly pre- 
ponderant in the whole of the world. And, as colonial power, 
the hope of controlling hitherto unknown wealth, will ob- 
viously influence the relative strengths of the European 
powers, the colonial question—‘imperialism’ if you prefer it— 
which has already transformed the political conditions of 
Europ?, will modify them more and more as time goes on.” 

Chm PT ERK Vii 
IMPERIALISM AS A SPECIAL STAGE OF CAPITALISM 

WE are now going to make an attempt to strike accounts, to 
summarize what we have said on the subject of imperialism. 

Imperialism emerged as the development and direct con- 
tinuation of the essential qualities of capitalism in general. 
But capitalism only became capitalist imperialism at a definite 
and a very high stage of its development, when certain of its 
essential qualities began to be transformed into their opposites, 
when the features of a period of transition from capitalism 
to a higher social and economic structure began to take shape 
_and be revealed all along the line. 

The feature that is economically essential in this process is 
the substitution of capitalist monopolies for capitalist free 
competition. Free competition is the fundamental quality of 
capitalism, and of commodity production generally. Monopoly 
is exactly the opposite of free competition; but we have 
seen this latter beginning to be transformed into monopoly 
beneath our very eyes, creating big industry and eliminating 
small, replacing big industry by still bigger industry, finally 
leading to such a concentration of production and capital that 
monopoly has been and is the result: cartels, combines and 
trusts, and, fusing with them, the power of a dozen or so 
banks manipulating thousands of millions. At the same time 
monopoly, which has sprung from free competition, does not 
drive the latter out of existence, but co-exists over it and 
with it, thus giving rise to a number of very acute and very 
great contradictions; antagonisms and conflicts. Monopoly is 
the transition from capitalism to a more highly developed 

order. 

If it were necessary to give the briefest possible definition 
of imperialism, it would be defined as the monopoly stage of 
capitalism. Such a definition would include the essential 

7i 

fe IMPERIALISM 

feature; for, on the one hand, finance-capital is the banking 
capital of the few biggest monopolist banks, fused with the 
capital of the monopolist groups of manufacturers; and, on 
the other, the division of the world is a transition from a 
colonial policy, ceaselessly extended without encountering 
opposition in regions not as yet appropriated by any capitalist 
power, to a colonial policy of monopolized territorial posses- 
sion—the sharing out of the world being completed. 

But very brief definitions, although convenient because they 
summarize the principal data, are nevertheless insufficient if 
the important features of the phenomenon defined are to be 
characterized. And so, without forgetting the conditional: 
and relative value of all definitions, which can never include 
all the manifestations of a phenomenon in its process of de- 
velopment, we must give a definition of imperialism embrac- 
ing its five essential features: 

(1) The concentration of production and capital, de- 
veloped so highly that it creates monopolies which play a 
decisive role in economic life. 

(2) The fusion of banking capital with industrial capital 
and the creation, on the basis of this financial capital, of a 
financial oligarchy. 

(3) The export of capital, which has become extremely 
important, as distinguished from the export of commodities. 

(4) The formation of international capitalist monopolies 
which share out the world amongst themselves. 

(5) The territorial division of the whole earth completed 
by the greatest capitalist powers. 

Imperialism is capitalism in that phase of its development 
in which the domination of monopolies and finance-capital 
has established itself; in which the export of capital has ac- 
quired very great importance; in which the division of the 
world among the big international trusts has begun; in which 
the partition of all the territories of the earth amongst the 
great capitalist powers has been completed. 

We shall see later how imperialism may and must be de- 
fined if consideration is given not only to the economic factors 
—to which the above definition is limited—but also to the 

IMPERIALISM 73 

historical place of this phase of capitalism as an aspect of 
capitalism in general or of the relations between imperialism 
and the two fundamental tendencies of the working class 
movement. The point to be noted just now is that imperial- 
ism, as we understand it, undeniably represents a particular 
phase of capitalist development. To convince the reader of 
this fact we have deliberately quoted as often as possible bour- 
geois economists, who are obliged to recognize beyond dispute 
the facts of modern capitalist economy. With the same 
object we have produced detailed statistics which reveal the 
extent to which banking capital has developed, etc., showing 
how the transition from quantity to quality, from adult capi- 
talism to imperialism, has expressed itself. Needless to say, 
the boundaries of all transition stages, both in nature and in 
society, are arbitrary and. shifting and it would consequently 
be absurd to discuss the exact year or the decade in which 
imperialism “definitely” became established. 

In this matter of defining imperialism it is chiefly with 
Karl Kautsky, the principal Marxist theoretician of the period 
of the Second International—that is, of the twenty-five years 
between 1889 and 1914—that issue must be joined. 

Kautsky, in 1915 and even from November, 1914, de- 
cisively attacked the fundamental ideas expressed in our defi- 
nition of imperialism. Kautsky said that imperialism must 
be considered not as a “phase” or as an economic stage, but 
as a policy; more precisely as the policy “preferred” by 
finance-capital; that imperialism cannot be “identified” with 
“contemporary capitalism”; that if capitalism must be taken 
to include “‘all the phenomena of contemporary capitalism” — 
the trusts, the cartels, protectionism, the hegemony of the 
financiers, and colonial policy—then the statement that im- 
perialism is necessary to capitalism becomes reduced to “the 

most stale tautology’; because imperialism then becomes 

“naturally a vital necessity for capitalism,” and so on. We 

' shall most exactly express Kautsky’s thought by quoting his 
| definition of imperialism, which is directly opposed to the 
_ ideas which we set forth (Kautsky having known for a long 
_ time of the arguments used for many years by the German 
_ Marxians in defence of these ideas, and having known the 

74 IMPERIALISM 

ideas to exist as a tendency in Marxism). Kautsky’s defini- 
tion states: 

“Imperialism is the product of highly developed industrial 
capitalism. It is the tendency of every industrial capitalist 
nation to annex or to bring under its control all the big 
agrarian regions (Kautsky’s italics) irrespective of what 
nations inhabit those regions.” 

This definition is entirely wrong, because it is one-sided, 
i.€., it selects the national question (admittedly of the greatest 
importance, by itself, and in its relation to imperialism) and 
it relates this question arbitrarily and inaccurately to indus- 
trial capital alone, in the countries which annex other nations, 
while at the same time it emphasizes, in an equally arbitrary 
and inaccurate manner, the annexation of agrarian regions. 

Imperialism is a tendency to annexations—this is what the 
political part of Kautsky’s definition amounts to. It is true, 
but very incomplete, for politically imperialism is a tendency 
to violence and reaction in general. But here we interest our- 
selves in the economic aspect of the question, as introduced 
by Kautsky in his definition. On this point he commits cry- 
ing errors. Imperialism is characterized not by industrial 
capital, but by finance-capital. It is not by accident that the 
particularly rapid development of fimance-capital in France, 
coinciding with the weakening of industrial capital, provoked, 
from 1880 and onwards, an extreme extension of annexationist 
(colonial) policy. 

And it is characteristic of imperialism to strive to annex 
not only agricultural regions, but even highly-industrialized 
regions (German appetites about Belgium, French appetites 
for Lorraine), because (1) the fact that the world is already — 
partitioned obliges those contemplating a new partition to 
stretch out their hands to every territory, and (2) because 
the rivalry of several great powers striving for hegemony, 
z.e., for the conquest of territory, not so much for their own 
advantage as to weaken the adversary and undermine his 
hegemony—this is an essential feature of imperialism (e.g., 
Belgium is chiefly necessary to Germany as a base for opera- 
tions against England; England needs Bagdad as a base for 
operations against Germany, etc.). 

IMPERIALISM 75 

| Kautsky refers more especially—and many times—to Eng- 
lish writers who, he alleges, have established the purely politi- 
| cal meaning of the word “imperialism” in Kautsky’s sense. 
Let us refer to Hobson’s book, Imperialism, which appeared 
in 1902. 
| “The new Imperialism differs from the old, first in sub- 
|| stituting for the ambition of a single growing empire the 
theory and the practice of competing empires, each motived 
|| by similar lusts of political aggrandizement and commercial 
| gain; secondly, in the dominance of financial or investing over 
mercantile interests.” 
i) We thus see that Kautsky is absolutely wrong in referring 
to English writers (unless he means to quote the most vulgar 
| English imperialist writers, or the direct apologists for im- 
| perialism). We see that Kautsky, while pretending to defend 
|| Marxism, is really taking a step to the rear as compared with 
i the liberal Hobson, who justly takes account of two “historical 
| concrete” peculiarities of modern imperialism: (1) the com- 
|| petition between several imperialisms and (2) the supremacy 
of the financier over the merchant. 
Yet if it were chiefly a question of the annexation of agri- 
_ cultural countries by industrial countries, the most important 
role would be played by the merchant. 
But Kautsky’s definition is not only false and foreign to 
Marxism. It serves as a basis for a whole system which 
breaks away all along the line from Marxian theory and prac- 
tice, of which we shall speak again later. The verbal debate 
_ raised by Kautsky as to whether the modern stage of capital- 
ism should be called “imperialism” or “the finance-capital 
_ stage” is of no importance. Call it what you will, it matters 
Tittle. The important fact is that Kautsky detaches the policy 
| of imperialism from its economics, speaks of annexations as 
| being a policy “‘preferred” by finance-capital, and opposes to 
| it another bourgeois policy which he alleges to be possible on 
_ the same basis of finance-capital. It appears from this that 
“monopolies, in economics, are compatible with methods which 
_ are neither monopolistic, nor violent, nor annexationist in 
politics. It appears from this that the territorial division of 
_ the world, which was completed during the period of finance- 

epee ee 

SHE 

76 IMPERIALISM 

capital and which determines the peculiarity of the present 
forms of rivalry between the great capitalist States, is com- 
patible with a non-imperialist policy. 

The result is a slurring-over and a concealment of the most 
profound contradictions of the latest stage of capitalism, in- 
stead of an exposure of their depth. The result is bourgeois 
reformism instead of Marxism. 

Kautsky enters into controversy with Cunow, the German 
apologist of imperialism and annexations whose cynical and 
crude argument runs as follows: Imperialism is modern capi- 
talism; the development of capitalism is inevitable and pro- 
gtessive; therefore imperialism is progressive; therefore, we 
should bow down before it and chant its praises. Something 
like the caricature which was drawn about 1894-95 by the 
Russian Narodniki (populists) against the Marxists. 

If the Marxists, they used to say to us, consider capitalism 
in Russia to be inevitable and a progressive move, why don’t 
they open a public-house and begin to encourage capitalism! 

Kautsky’s “reply” to Cunow is as follows: ‘Imperialism 
is not modern capitalism. It is only one of the forms of its 
policy. This policy we can and should fight against; we can 
and should fight against imperialism, annexations, etc.” 

The reply looks good. But it amounts in effect to nothing 
but a more cunning, more disguised (and, therefore, more 
dangerous) propaganda of reconciliation. For the “struggle” 
against the policy of the trusts and banks, unless it strikes at 
the economic basis of the trusts and banks, reduces itself to 
nothing but bourgeois reformism and pacifism, to innocent 
and benevolent expression of pious hopes. To avoid mention- 
ing existing contradictions, to forget the most important of 
them instead of revealing them in their full depth—this is 
Kautsky’s theory. 

“From a purely economic point of view,” writes Kautsky, 
“it is not impossible that capitalism will yet go through a new 
phase, that of the extension of the policy of the cartels to 
foreign policy, or of ultra-imperialism.” That is, of a 
super-imperialism, of the union of world imperialisms and 
not of their struggles; a phase when wars shall cease under 

if 

‘ 

IMPERIALISM a7 

capitalist rule, a phase of “the exploitation of the earth by 
finance-capital internationally united.” 

We shall have to dwell on this “theory of ultra-imperialism” 
to show how definitely and utterly it breaks with Marxism. 
According to the plan of the present essay, let us consult in 
this matter the exact economic data relating to it. Is “ultra- 
imperialism” possible “from the purely economic point of 
view?” 

If the “purely economic point of view” means pure abstrac- 
tion, all that can be said resolves itself into the following 
proposition: the evolution of capitalism tends to monopolies, 
hence it tends to a united world monopoly, to a universal 
trust. This is undeniable, but it is also completely devoid of 
meaning. 

If, on the other hand, we are discussing the “purely 
economic” conditions of the period of finance-capital, con- 
sidered as an actual historical period at the beginning of the 
zoth century, then lifeless abstractions about imperialism are 
best refuted by the concrete economic realities of the present 
world situation. (Kautsky’s line of argument on “ultra- 
imperialism,” encourages, amongst other things, that pro- 
foundly mistaken idea, which only brings grist to the mill 
of the apologists of imperialism, that the domination of 
finance-capital weakens the inequalities and contradictions of 
world economy, whereas in reality it strengthens them.) 

R. Calwer attempted in his little book, An Introduction to 
World Economics, to summarize the main purely economic 
data required to understand, in a concrete way, the internal 
relations of world economy at the end of the r9th and be- 
ginning of the 20th centuries. “He divides the world into 
five “main economic areas,” as follows: (1) Central Europe 
(the whole of Europe with the exception of Russia and 
Britain); (2) Britain; (3) Russia; (4) Eastern Asia; (5) 
America; and he includes the colonies in the ‘tareas” of the 
State to which they belong, “setting on one side a small num- 
ber of countries not yet situated in these areas, such as Persia, 

_ Afghanistan, Arabia, Morocco and Abyssinia.” 

Here is a summary of these economic data: 

78 IMPERIALISM 

Area Pop. Transport Trade Industry 
CHIEF Ft WG es Sic nC ae 
ECONOMIC in in Rlys. Merch. Impt. Output Output No. of 
AREAS millions millions in fleetin &expt. ofcoal of iron cotton 
of sa. thous. mills. in mlds. in mls. in mls. spindles 
kn. of km. of tons of mks. of tons. of tons. (mis,) 
Central Europe. 27.6 388 204 8 41 251 15 26 
[23.6] [146] 
BIIGISEY 1c. ecteceses 28.9 398 140 11 25 249 9 51 
[28.4] [355] 
Resta ne jiccceeitsse 22.6 131 63 1 3 16 3 7 
Eastern Asia...... 12 389 8 1 7 8) 00.2082 
JAE rtCa ssc c.suc0 39 148 379 6 ae 245 «14 19 

The figures in brackets show the area and population of the colonies. ' 

We notice three areas of highly developed capitalism—that 
is, with a high development of means of transport, of trade 
and of industry. They are the Central European, the British 
areas, and the American. Amongst them are three States 
which dominate the world: Germany, Britain, the United 
States. Imperialist rivalry and the struggle between them 
have become very keen because Germany only has a restricted 
area and few colonies (the creation of “Central Europe” being 
not yet achieved, and it is being fashioned in a life-and-death 
struggle). 

For the moment the distinctive feature of Europe is politi- 
cal division. In the British and American areas, on the other 
hand, political concentration is very highly-developed, but 
there is a tremendous disproportion between the immense 
colonies of the one and the insignificant colonies of the other. 
In the colonies, capitalism is only beginning to develop. The 
struggle for South America becomes more and more bitter. 

There are two areas of weak capitalist development: Russia 
and Eastern Asia. In the former the density of population is 
not great, in the latter it is very high; in the former, political 
concentration is very high, in the latter it does not exist. 
The partition of China is only beginning, and the competition 
between Japan and the U. S. A. in connection therewith. is 
continually gaining in intensity. 

Compare the ideas of Kautsky about “peaceful” ultra- 
imperialism with this stern reality, with the vast diversity of 
economic and political conditions, with the extreme dispro- 

IMPERIALISM 79 

portion of the rate of development of different countries, with 
the violent struggles of the imperialist States. As for the in- 
ternational cartels in which Kautsky sees the embryo of ultra- 
imperialism, do they not provide us with an example of the 
partition of the world and of its re-partition—of the transi- 
tion from peaceful sharing out to warlike sharing out, and 
vice versa? American and other finance-capital which has 
peacefully shared-out the world with the participation of 
Germany—in the international railway combine, for example, 
or in the international merchant marine—is it not now re- 
dividing the world on the basis of new alignments of forces 
resulting from changes which are by no means of a peaceful 
nature? 

Finance-capital and the trusts are aggravating instead of 
diminishing the differences between the rates of development 
of different parts in the world economy. When the align- 
ments of forces are modified, where, under capitalism, can 
the solution of contradictions be found, if not in the resort 
to force? 

We have in railway statistics some remarkably exact data 
on the different rates of development of capitalism and 
finance-capital in world economy. In the last decades of 
capitalist development, the total length of railways, expressed 
in thousands of kilometers, has altered as follows: 

1890 1913 Increase 
Europe ..... rate UT Oe 224 346 122 
1 UA otis CD arate Caen Re 268 411 143 
Colonies (total).......... 82 210 | 128 
Independent or semi- 
dependent states of 125 347 222 
Asia and America ‘ | 
43 137 94 
617 1,104 

The development of railway lines has, therefore, been more 
rapid in the colonies and in the independent or semi-inde- 
pendent States of Asia and América. Here finance-capital 
of the four ot five biggest capitalist States reigns undisputed. 
Two hundred thousand kilometers of new railway lines in the 
colonies and in the other countries of Asia and America repre- 

80 IMPERIALISM 

sent more than 40 milliards of marks in capital, newly-invested 
under particularly advantageous conditions, with special guar- 
antees of a good return, and with fruitful orders for the steel 
works, etc., etc. 

Capitalism is growing with the greatest rapidity of all in 
the colonies and in trans-oceanic countries. Amongst the 
latter mew imperialist powers are emerging (¢.g., Japan). 
The struggle of world imperialisms is becoming aggravated. 
The tribute levied by finance-capital on the most profitable 
colonial and trans-oceanic enterprises is increasing. In the 
process of sharing-out this booty, an exceptionally large part 
comes back to countries which, as far as increase of produc- 
tion is concerned, do not stand at the top of the list. In the 
case of the great powers considered with their colonies, the 

total length of railways (in thousands of kilometers) was as 
follows: 

1890 1913 Increase 
UOENS: UAL SC ence, Shaseeteedeueeret ne 268 413 145 
British Empires) fciiccceesesccerees 107 208 101 
Russia Ase scdaveats 32 78 46 
Germany .. 43 68 25 
France ....... 41 63 22 
BL Otali ee Geectttac et nteevacs eee 491 830 339 

Eighty per cent. of the total existing railways are, there- 
fore, concentrated in the hands of the five greatest powers. 
But the concentration of the ownership of these railways, 
that of finance-capital, is much greater still; French and Eng- 
lish millionaires, for example, being the possessors of an enor- 
mous number of stocks and shares in American, Russian and 
other railways. Thanks to “its” colonies, Britain has increased 
its length of railways by 100,000 kilometers, four times as 
much as Germany. Meanwhile the development of productive 
forces in Germany during the same lapse of time, and espe- 
cially the development of the coal and iron industries, has 
been much more rapid than in England—not to mention 
France and Russia. 

In 1892, Germany produced 4,200,000 tons of pig-iron, 
and Britain 6,800,000 tons; in 1912, Germany produced 
17,600,000 tons and Britain 9,000,000 tons. Germany had, 

IMPERIALISM 81 

therefore, an overwhelming superiority over England in this 
matter. 

We ask, was there under capitalism any means of remedy- 
ing the disproportion between the development of production 
and the accumulation of capital on the one side, and the 
division of colonies and spheres of influence by finance-capital 
on the other side—other than by the resort to arms? 

CHAPTER VIII 
PARASITISM AND THE DECAY OF CAPITALISM 

We have yet to examine a very important aspect of imper- 
ialism, an aspect te which too little attention is generally 
assigned in the treatment of this subject. One of the defects 
of the Marxist, Hilferding, is that, as compared with the 
non-Marxist Hobson, he has taken a step to the rear in this 
regard. We intend to deal with the parasitism which is 
characteristic of imperialism. 

As we have seen, the most deeply-rooted economic foun- 
dation of imperialism is monopoly. It is capitalist monopoly, 
that is monopoly which has grown out of capitalism, and 
exists in the general capitalist environment, of commodity pro- 
duction of goods and competition, and remains in permanent 
and insoluble contradiction with this general environment. 

However, like all monopoly, this capitalist monopoly in- 
fallibly gives rise to a tendency to stagnation and decay. In 
proportion as the monopoly prices become fixed, even though 
it be temporarily, so the stimulus to all progress tends to 
disappear: and so also arises the economic possibility of slow- 
ing down technical progress. For instance, in America a cer- 
tain Mr. Owens invents a machine intended to revolutionize 
the manufacture of bottles. ‘The German bottle-manufactur- 
ing trust buys the patent from Owens and keeps it in its 
strong-rooms, thus holding up its utilization. Certainly 
monopoly under capitalism can never completely, and for a 
long time, set aside competition on the world market. Cer- 
tainly, the possibility of diminishing the costs of production 
and increasing profits by introducing technical improvements, 
is an influence in the direction of change. Even so, the ten- 
dency to stagnation and corruption which is. characteristic 
of monopoly continues to make itself felt, and in certain 
spheres of production, in certain countries, for certain periods 
of time, it takes the upper hand. 

82 

IMPERIALISM 83 

Ownership (monopoly) of colonies which are especially 
big, rich and well situated, acts in the same way. 

Moreover, Imperialism is an immense concentration of 
money capital in a few countries, a concentration which 
amounts to 100 or 150 milliard francs in various securities. 
Hence the inevitable development of a class, or rather of a 
category, of bondholders (rentiers), people who live by clip- 
ping coupons, people entirely strangers to activity in any 
enterprise whatever, people whose profession is idleness. The 
export of capital, one of the essential economic bases of im- 
perialism, detaches still more bondholders from production; 
and sets the seal of parasitism on the whole country living 
on the labor of several overseas countries and colonies. 

“In 1893,” writes Hobson, “British capital invested abroad 
represented about 15 per cent. of the total wealth of the 
United Kingdom.” Let us remember that in 1915 this 
capital had increased about two and a half times. “Aggres- 
sive imperialism,” says Hobson further on, “which costs the 
taxpayers so dear, and means so little for the manufacturer 
and the trader, is a source of very great profit to the investor.’ 

The annual revenue which Great Britain receives from all 
its foreign and colonial trade, export and import, is estimated 
by Giffen, the statistician, at £18,000,000 sterling for 1899, 
calculating an average revenue of 2.5 per cent. on the total 
sum of £800,000,000 business. 

However important this amount may be, it is not enough 
to explain the aggressive imperialism of Great Britain. This 
is explained by the 90 to 100 million pounds sterling in 
revenue drawn from capital “invested” in revenue drawn in 
the shape of interest by bondholders. 

The revenue of the British bondholders is five times greater 
than that from the foreign trade of the greatest trading coun- 
try in the world. Such is the essence of imperialism and im- 
perialist parasitism. 

And so the notion of a “‘Bondholder State” (Rentnerstaat) 
or of a money-lending State is passing into current use in 
economic literature dealing with imperialism. The world has 
fallen apart into a handful of money-lending States and a 
vast majority of debtor-States. 

“Amongst investments abroad,” says Schulze-Gaevernitz, 

84 IMPERIALISM 

“first rank must be assigned to those settled upon countries 
which are allied or politically dependent: Britain gives loans 
to Egypt, Japan, China, South America. Her fleet plays the 
part of policeman in case of necessity. Britain’s political 
power protects her from a revolt of her debtors.” Sartorius 
von Waltershausen in his work on the State System of In- 
vesting Abroad, gives Holland as the model money-lending 
State, and points out that Britain and France have set their 
feet in the same path. Schilder considers that five industrial 
nations have become “‘very typical creditor nations”: Britain, 
France, Germany, Belgium and Switzerland. Holland does 
not appear on this list simply because it is “‘slightly indus- 
trialized.” The United States are creditors only of other 
American countries. 

“Britain is being gradually transformed from an industrial 
State into a creditor State. In spite of the absolute increase 
in industrial production and export, the relative importance 
of revenue, from interest and dividends, issues and specula- 
tions is on the increase when the whole national economy ‘is 
taken into account. In my opinion, it is precisely this fact 
which is at the base of imperialist expansion. The creditor 
is more firmly tied to the debtor than the merchant is to the 
buyer.” (Schulze-Gaevernitz.) 

Concerning Germany, A. Lansburg, the editor of Die Bank 
wrote the following in 1911 in an article entitled, Germany 
as a Bondholder Nation: ‘‘People laugh willingly in Germany 
at the tendency which France has to become a Bondholder 
Nation. But they forget that, so far as the middle class is 
concerned, the situation in Germany is becoming more and 
more like that in France.” 

The Rentier State is the state of parasitic decaying capi- 
talism, and this circumstance cannot fail to influence all the 
social-political relations of the country affected; and particu- 
larly the two fundamental tendencies of the working class 
movement. ‘To make this stand out most clearly, let. us 
listen to Hobson, whose testimony inspires more confidence 
since he cannot be suspected of leanings to “orthodox Marx- 
ism”; and since, being English, this author is well acquainted 
with the situation which exists in the country which is richest 
in colonies, in finance-capital, and in imperialist experience. 

IMPERIALISM 85 

Describing the connection between imperialism and the 
financiers, the growing profits from armaments, etc., Hobson, 
with the Boer War fresh in his mind, wrote as follows: 

“The people directing this definitely parasitical policy are 
the capitalists; but the same causes influence various sections 
of workers.* In numerous towns the most important indus- 
tries depend upon orders from the government. The imper- 
ialism of the metallurgical and shipbuilding centers is largely 

| due to this fact.” 

The author quoted considers that there are two causes which 
weakened former empires, viz., “economic parasitism” and the 
formation of armies composed of subject races. The first is 
the custom of economic parasitism, in virtue of which the 
ruling State makes use of its provinces, its colonies, and its 
dependencies, to enrich its ruling class and to corrupt its 
lower classes in order to keep them quiet.” Let us add for 
our part that the economic possibility of such corruption, 
whatever may be its form, requires the inflated profits pro- 
duced by monopoly. 

As for the second cause, Hobson writes: ‘‘One of the 
strangest symptoms of the blindness of Imperialism is the 
reckless indifference with which Great Britain, France and 
other imperial nations are embarking on this perilous depen- 
dence. Great Britain has gone farthest. Most of the fighting 
by which we have won our Indian Empire has been done more 
tecently by natives. In India, as in Egypt, great standing 
armies are placed under British commanders: almost all the 

_ fighting associated with our African dominions, except in the 
Southern part, has been done for us by natives.” 
| In the following words Hobson draws a picture of the 
possible results following the partition of China: 

“The greater part of Western Europe might then assume 
the appearance and character already exhibited by tracts of 
country in the South of England, in the Riviera, and in the 
tourist-ridden or residential parts of Italy and Switzerland, 
little clusters of wealthy aristocrats drawing dividends and 
pensions from the Far East, with a somewhat larger group of 
_ professional retainers and tradesmen and a large body of 

personal servants and workers in the transport trade and in 

the final stages of the production of the more perishable goods; 

86 IMPERIALISM 

all the main arterial industries would have disappeared, the 
staple foods and manufactures flowing in as tribute from Asia 
and Africa. 

“We have foreshadowed the possibility of even a larger 
alliance of Western States, a European federation of great 
Powers, which, so far from forwarding the cause of world- 
civilization, might introduce the gigantic peril of 2 Western 
parasitism, a group of advanced industrial nations, whose 
upper classes drew vast tribute from Asia and Africa, with 
which they supported great tame masses of retainers, no longer 
engaged in the staple industries of agriculture and manu- 
facture, but kept in the performance of personal or minor 
industrial services under the control of a new financial 
aristocracy. Let those who would scout such a theory as un- 
deserving of consideration examine the economic and social 
conditions of districts in Southern England to-day, which are 
already reduced to this condition and reflect upon the vast 
extension of such a system which might be rendered feasible 
by the subjection of China to the economic control of similar 
groups of financiers, investors and political and business oifi- 
cials, draining the greatest potential reservoir of profit the 
world has ever known, in order to consume it in Europe. The 
situation is far too complex, the play of world forces far too 
incalculable, to render this or any other single interpretation 
of the future very probable; but the influences which govern 
the Imperialism of Western Europe to-day are moving in 
this direction, and, unless counteracted or diverted, make to- 
wards some such consummation.” 

Hobson is quite right. If the forces of imperialism do not 
meet with resistance, they will lead to what he has described. 
The meaning of the “United States of Europe,” in the con- 
temporary imperialist sense, is correctly appreciated by him. 
He should only have added that, even inside the working class 
movement, the opportunists, who are for the moment domi- 
nant in nearly all countries, are ““working” systematically and 
without exception in this very direction. Imperialism, which 
means the partition of the world and the exploitation not of 
China alone, and which means the high profits of monopoly 
for a handful of very rich countries, creates the economic 
possibility of corrupting the upper layers of the proletariat, 

IMPERIALISM 87 

and thereby nourishes, defines and strengthens opportunism. 
Only, it must not be forgotten that the Social-Liberal Hobson 
naturally cannot see the forces acting directly against imper- 
ialism in general and opportunism in particular. 

The German opportunist, Gerhard Hildebrand, who in his 
day was expelled from the Party for defending imperialism, 
and would to-day make an excellent leader for the so-called 
*Social-Democratic” Party of Germany, completes Hobson’s 
theory by giving his blessing to the formation of a “United 
States of Western Europe” (without Russia) for “joint” 
action against . . . the African negroes, the “great Islamic 
movement”; for the “upkeep of a powerful army and navy 
against the Chino-Japanese coalition.” 

The description of British Imperialism in Schulze-Gaever- 
nitz’s book shows us the same parasitical traits. The national 
income of Great Britain approximately doubled from 1865 to 
1898, while the income “coming from abroad” increased nine 
times in the same period. If the “education of the negro for 
work” (an education which cannot do without compulsion) 
is a merit of imperialism, then the “danger” of imperialism 
is that “Europe will shift the burden of physical toil—first 
agricultural and mining, then of heavy industry—on to the 
black races, and will remain itself at leisure in the occupation 
of bondholder, thus perhaps paving the way for the economic 
and, later, the political emancipation of the colored races.” 

An increasing proportion of land is being taken away from 
agriculture in Britain for sport, the diversion of the rich. 
It is said of Scotland—the most aristocratic meeting place for 
hunting and for sport—that it “lives on-its past and on Mr. 
Carnegie.” Britain annually spends £14,000,000 sterling on 
racing and fox-hunting. The number of bondholders in Great 
Britain has risen to about 1,000,000. The percentage of pro- 
ducers amongst the total population is becoming smaller. 

No. of workers Percentage 
Population inthe big of producers 

Years. in millions. industries. in the total, 
BRO ees ad dvonvane ces 17.9 4.1 23 per cent. 
es iio! sarnag B20), 4.9 15 per cent. 

And, in speaking of the British working class, the bourgeois 
student of British Imperialism in the zoth Century, is obliged 

88 IMPERIALISM 

to distinguish systematically between the “upper layers” and 
the “lower layers, or proletarians properly so called.” The 
upper layers furnish the main body of co-operators, of trade 
unionists, of members of sporting bodies, and of numerous 
religious sects. Universal suffrage, which is still “‘sufficiently 
restricted” in Britain “to exclude the lower layers of prole- 
tarians properly so called,” is adapted to their needs. In order 
to present the condition of the British working class under its 
best possible aspect, only this upper layer—which constitutes 
only a minority of the proletariat—is generally spoken of. 
For instance: ““The question of unemployment is mainly a 
question of London and the lower proletarian elements, about 
whom the politicians care little.” It would be better to say: 
with whom the bourgeois politicians and the “Socialist” op- 
portunists reckon little. 

Amongst the special features of imperialism, connected with 
the facts that we are describing, there is the decreased rate of 
emigration from imperialist countries, and the increased rate 
of emigration from the backward countries, where low wages 
are paid, into the former. English emigration, Hobson re- 
marks, begins to fall off after 1884. In that year 242,000 
emigrants left England. In 1900, only 169,000 English peo- 
ple left the mother country. German emigration reached its 
maximum between 1880 and 1890 with a total of 1,453,000 
emigrants. In the course of the following two decades it fell 
to 544,000 and 341,000, respectively. 

On the other hand there was an increase in the number 
of workers coming into Germany from Austria, Italy, Russia 
and other countries. According to the 1907 census, there 
were 1,342,294 foreigners in Germany, of whom 440,800 
were industrial workers and 2 579329 were agricultural 
workers. 

In France, ‘fa notable proportion” of mining workers con- 
sists of foreigners: Polish, Italian and Spanish. In the United 
States, immigrants from Eastern and Southern Europe provide 
the most poorly-paid work hands, and American workers pro- 
vide the highest percentage of overseers or of better-paid 
workers. Imperialism has thus a tendency to create privi- 
leged sections amongst the workers, too, and to detach them 
from the main proletarian masses. 

IMPERIALISM 89 

It is worth noticing that in Britain, the tendency of im- 
perialism to divide the toilers in this way, to encourage oppor- 
tunism amongst them, and to give rise to a temporary organic 
decay in the working class movement, showed itself much 
earlier than the end of the 19th and beginning of the zoth 
centuries. For two big distinctive features of imperialism 
applied to Britain from midway through the roth century: 
vast colonial possessions and a monopolist position in world 
markets. Marx and Engels systematically followed, over 
some decades, this relation between working class opportunism 
and the imperialistic peculiarities of English capitalism. 
Engels, for instance, wrote the following to Marx on Octo- 
ber 7th, 1858: “The English working class is actually be- 
coming more and more bourgeois, which would seem to show 
that this most bourgeois of all the nations apparently wanted 
to bring matters to such a pass as to have a bourgeois aris- 
tocracy and a bourgeois proletariat side by side with the 
bourgeoisie. Obviously this is, to a certain extent, well cal- 

_ culated on the part of a nation which is exploiting the whole 
world.” Almost a quarter of a century later on, in a letter 
of August 11th, 1881, Engels speaks of the worst English 

trade unions which “allow themselves to be led by men 
brought by the capitalists or at least paid by them.” In a 
letter to Kautsky, of September 12th, 1882, Engels wrote: 

“You ask me what the English workers think of colonial 

policy? The same thing as they think about politics in 

_ general. There is no working class party here, there are only 

' Conservative and Liberal Radicals, and the workers very 

quietly enjoy together with them the fruits of the British 

_ colonial monopoly and of the British monopoly of the world 

market.” Engels set forth these ideas for the general public 
in his preface to the second edition of The Condition of the 

English Working Class which appeared in 1892. 

Here he clearly points out causes and effects. The causes 

sare: 

(1) Exploitation of the whole world by this country. 
(2) Its monopolistic position on the world market. 
(3) Its colonial monopoly. 

The effects are: 

90 IMPERIALISM 

(1) The transformation of a section of the British workers 
into the middle class. 

(2) The opportunity of leading it which part of the work- 
ing class accords to a section corrupted by the capi- 
talist class, or at least paid by it. 

Now, the imperialism of the beginning of the'20th century 
has completed the division of the world amongst a very few 
States, each of which to-day exploits (i.e., draws surplus-value 
from) a part of the world scarcely less than England exploited 
in 1858. Each of them retains, by means of trusts, cartels, 
finance-capital, and the relations between debtors and credi- 
tors, a monopoly position on the world market. Each of them 
enjoys to some degree a colonial monopoly. (We have seen 
that, of 75,000,000 sq. km. of total colonial area, 65,000,000 
sq. km., or 86 per cent. belong to six great powers: 61,000,000 
sq. km., or 81 per cent. belong to three powers.) 

The special feature of the present situation consists in such 
economic and political conditions as could not but intensify 
the incompatability between opportunism and the general and 
vital interests of the working class. Embryonic imperialism 
has become a dominant system; capitalist monopolies have 
come to occupy the chief place in economics and politics; the 
division of the world has been completed. On the other hand, 
instead of an undisputed monopoly by Britain, we see a few 
imperialist powers disputing among themselves as to the shar- 
ing in this monopoly and this struggle is characteristic of the 
whole period at the beginning of the twentieth century. 

Opportunism can, therefore, no longer triumph in the 
working class of any country for long decades, as was the 
case in England in the second half of the 19th century. But, 
in certain countries it has grown ripe, over-ripe and rotten, 
and has become entirely confused with bourgeois policy in 
the shape of “socialist jingoism.” 

CHAPTER IX 
THE CRITIQUE OF IMPERIALISM 

WE understand the critique of imperialism, in the broad sense 
of the term, to mean the attitude towards imperialist policy 
of the different classes of society taken as part of their general 
outlook. 

__ The enormous dimensions of finance-capital concentrated in 
a few hands and creating an extremely extensive network of 
close ties and relationships which involves not only the small 
and medium capitalists, but also even the very small; this, 
on the one hand, and on the other the bitter struggle against 

other national State groups of financiers for the partition of 

the world and the right to rule over other countries—these 
two factors taken together cause the complete conversion of 
all the possessing classes to the side of imperialism. The signs 
of the times are a “general” enthusiasm regarding its pros- 
pects, a passionate defence of imperialism, and every possible 
camouflage of its real nature. The imperialist outlook also 
penetrates the working class. There is no Chinese wall be- 
tween it and the other classes. And the leaders of the so- 
called “‘Social-Democratic” Party of Germany are to-day 
justly called Social-Imperialists; that is, Socialists in words 
and Imperialists in deeds. But as early as 1902, Hobson noted 
the existence of “Fabian Imperialists” belonging to the oppor- 
tunist Fabian Society. 

The bourgeois scholars and publicists generally undertake 
the defence of imperialism only in 2 somewhat veiled form, 
neglecting or concealing its complete domination and its pro- 
found roots, trying to concentrate attention on special aspects 
and secondary characteristics and doing their very best to 
distract attention from the main issue by means of fantastic 
schemes for “reform,” such as police supervision of the trusts 
and banks. Very rarely do we meet with straight-out cynical 

BP § 

92 IMPERIALISM 

imperialists who have the boldness to recognize the absurdity 
of all ideas of “reforming” the fundamental characteristics of 
imperialism. 

Let us give an example. The German imperialists make 
a valiant attempt in the Archives of World Economy to fol- 
low the movements for national emancipation in the colonies, 
especially, be it noted, in other colonies than in those belong- 
ing to Germany. They dwell on the disturbances and move- 
ments of protest in British India; the movement in Natal 
(South Africa); the movements in the Dutch East Indies, 
etc. One of them writes the following in connection with 
an English report of the conference of subject peoples and 
races, which brought together, on June 28-30, 1910, delegates 
from various peoples of Africa, Asia and Europe, which are 
subject to foreign domination: 

“They tell us we should fight against imperialism. The 
dominant States should recognize the right of subject peoples 
to dispose of themselves; an international tribunal should 
supervise the execution of treaties concluded between the 
Great Powers and backward peoples. ‘The conference goes 
no farther than the expression of these pious hopes. We do 
not see any trace of understanding of the fact that imper- 
ialism is indissolubly tied up with capitalism in its present 
form; and that the direct struggle against it is, therefore (!!) 
absolutely vain, unless it is to be confined to protests against 
isolated excesses of a particularly flagrant kind.” 

It is a fundamental point in the critique of imperialism to 
know whether a reformist modification of the bases of im- 
perialism is possible; that is, whether we must go forward 
to an increase of the antagonisms which they engender, or 
backwards to a reduction of their acuteness. As the political 
characteristics of imperialism are reaction all along the line 
and increased national oppression consequent upon the yoke 
of the financial oligarchy and the elimination of free com- 
petition, a democratic petty bourgeois opposition is rising 
against it in almost all imperialist countries at the beginning 
of the 2oth century. 

The breakaway from the Marxism of Kautsky and the 
broad international tendency which he represents, consists 
just in the fact that Kautsky and his fellow believers not 

IMPERIALISM 93 

only did not trouble to, but actually could not take up a 
stand against this petty bourgeois reformist opposition which 
is really reactionary in its economic basis; and, on the con- 
trary, became practically identified with it. 

In the United States, the imperialist war waged against 
Spain in 1898 stirred up the opposition of the “‘anti-imper- 
ialists,’ the last of the Mohicans of bourgeois democracy. 
They declared this war to be “criminal”; denounced the an- 
nexation of foreign territories as being a violation of the 
constitution, and they denounced the “jingo treachery” by 
means of which Aguinaldo, leader of the rebel native Filipinos, 
was deceived (first the Americans promised him the inde- 
pendence of his country; then they landed troops and annexed 
it). They quoted the words of Lincoln: “It is self-govern- 
ment when the white man governs himself; but when he 
governs himself and also governs others, it is no longer self- 
government, it is despotism.” 

But while all this criticism shrank from recognizing the 
indissoluble bond between imperialism and the trusts, and, 
therefore, between imperialism and the very foundations of 
capitalism, while it shrank from joining up with the mighty 
forces engendered by large-scale capitalism as it develops— 
it remained a “pious hope.” 

This is also the attitude of Hobson in his critique of im- 
perialism. Hobson anticipated Kautsky in revolting against 
the “inevitability of imperialism,” and in calling for the need 
to “raise the consuming capacity of the people” (under capi- 
talism!!). 

The petty bourgeois point of view in the critique of im- 
perialism, the domination of the banks, the financial oligarchy, 
etc., is that adopted by authors often quoted by us, such as 
Agahd, Lansburg, L. Eschwege; and, amongst French writers, 
Victor Bérard, author of a superficial book called British 
Imperialism, which appeared in 1900. All these authors, who 
make no claim to be Marxians, contrast imperialism with free 
competition and democracy; they condemn the Bagdad rail- 
way “scheme” as leading to dispute$ and war, and they utter 
“pious. hopes” of peace in every circumstance. This even 
applies to the compiler of international stock and share issues 
statistics, M. Neymarck, who, after calculating the hundreds 

94 IMPERIALISM 

of milliards of francs representing “international” values, ex- 
claimed in 1912: “Can we admit that there is any danger 
of peace being disturbed? Can we admit, in the presence of 
these enormous figures at stake, that anyone would risk start- 
ing a war?” 

Such simplicity of mind on the part of the bourgeois 
economist does not astonish us. In any case their interest 
lies in appearing so naive, and in talking seriously about peace 
in the presence of imperialism. But what remains of Kaut- 
sky’s Marxism when, in 1914-15-16, he takes up the same 
attitude as the bourgeois reformists and affirms that “every- 
body is agreed” (imperialists, pseudo-Socialists, and social 
pacifists?) on peace? Instead of the analysis of imperialism 
and the demonstration of its deeply-rooted internal contra- 
dictions, we have nothing but the “innocent desire” of the 
reformist not to see these contradictions, and not to mention 
them at all. 

Let us give a brief example of Kautsky’s economic critique 
of imperialism. He takes the statistics of British export and 
import trade with Egypt for 1872 and 1912. This import 
and export trade has developed more slowly than that of Eng- 
land itself. And thereupon Kautsky concludes: “We have 
no reason to suppose that English trade with Egypt would 
have been less developed under the influence of pure economic 
factors, even without military occupation.” And “the ten- 
dencies of capital to expansion can be best satisfied not by 
the violent methods of imperialism, but by peaceful democ- 
racy.” 

This reasoning of Kautsky, which is repeated in every key 
by his Russian followers, constitutes the substance of his 
critique of imperialism, and that is why we must pause on 
' it for a moment. Let us begin by referring to a passage by 
Hilferding, whose conclusions Kautsky on many occasions 
and notably in April, 1915, declared have been “unanimously 
adopted by all Socialist theoreticians.” 

“It is not the business of the proletariat,” wrote Hilferding, 
“to set up in opposition to progressive capitalist policy, the 
era which has passed of free trade and of a hostile attitude 
towards the State. The reply of the proletariat to the economic 
policy of finance-capital, of imperialism, cannot be free trade, 

IMPERIALISM 95 

but Socialism alone. It is not an ideal such as the restoration 
of free trade—now become a reactionary ideal—which should 
be the object of proletarian policy, but solely the complete 
abolition of competition by the overthrow of capitalism.” 

Kautsky broke away from Marxism by defending, in the 
period of finance-capital, the “reactionary ideal” of “peaceful 
democracy,” “‘the simple action of economic factors,” etc.— 
for this ideal is objectively retrogressive from monopoly capi- 
talism to the non-monopolist stage, and is a reformist swindle. 

Trade with Egypt (or with any other colony or semi- 
colony) would have been “better developed” without a mili- 
tary occupation, without imperialism, and without finance- 
capital. . . . What does this mean? That capitalism would 
develop more rapidly if free trade were not restrained either 
by monopolies in general or by the “‘connections” or the yoke 
(i.e., again the monopoly) of finance capitalism, or yet again 
by the colonial monopoly of certain countries? 

Kautsky’s reasoning can have no other meaning. Admitting 
that this is so, admitting that free competition, without any 
sort of monopoly, would develop capitalism and trade more 
rapidly. But the more rapidly capitalism and trade develops, 
the greater is the concentration of trade and capital which 
gives birth to monopoly. And monopolies have already been 
born—precisely out of free trade. Even if monopolies have 
begun to delay progress now, still this is not an argument in 
favor of free competition, which has become impossible once 
it has given birth to monopoly. 

If we correct this reasoning, and if it be said as “Spectator” 
says, that the trade of the British colonies with the mother 
country is now developing more slowly than their trade with 
other countries—then this also does not save Kautsky. For 
Britain is being defeated still by monopoly, séil] by imperial- 
ism, only of another country (Germany, America). It is 
known that the cartels have resurrected tariffs, but of a kind 
which is new and original: i.e., products suitable for export 

are protected. (Engels noted this in Vol. III. of Capital.) 
It is known, too, that the combines and finance-capital 
have a system peculiar to themselves, that of exporting goods 
at a price below their real value or “dumping,” as the English 
say? inside a given country the combine sells its products at 

96 IMPERIALISM 

a high price fixed by monopoly, abroad it sells them three 
times cheaper to undercut a competitor, to extend its own 
production to the utmost, etc. If German trade with the 
British colonies is developing more rapidly than that of Britain 
with the same colonies, that only proves that German 
imperialism is younger, stronger, and better organized than 
British; in short, is superior to it. But this by no means 
proves the superiority of free competition, for it is not free 
competition fighting against protectionism and colonial de- 
pendence in this struggle, but two rival imperialisms, two 
monopolies, two groups of finance-capital. The superiority 
of German imperialism over British imperialism is stronger 
than the wall of colonial frontiers or of protective tariffs. To 
“conclude” from this that there is any advantage in favor 
of free trade and “‘peaceful democracy” is to forget the essen- 
tial features and qualities of imperialism, is to substitute re- 
formism for Marxism. 

It is an interesting fact that even the bourgeois economist, 
A. Lansburg, whose critique of imperialism is as superficial 
as Kautsky’s, nevertheless came nearer to a scientific study 
of the data of commercial statistics. He did not confine him- 
self to a consideration of one country, chosen at random, and 
only to colonies in their relation to other countries; but he 
examined the export trade of an imperialist country (1) with 
countries which are financially dependent upon it, being its 
creditors; and (2) with countries which are not so dependent. 
He obtained the following results: 

Export Trade of Germany 

Millions of Marks Percentage 
1889 1908 Increase 

Countries Roumania ... 48.2 70.8 47 pe. 
Dependent Portugal ..... ele 1 OMG 32.8 73 pe. 
On Argentine |). incecyemante 60.7 147.0 143 pe. 
German Brazil ori in vue a, 48.7 84.5 73 pe. 
Finance Ch tl ae ser tay cane 28.3 52.4 85 pe. 
Capital Maa rlsery si tee aa ae ei 29.9 64.0 114 pe. 

otal evan! Pee 234.8 AS1.S 92 pe. 

IMPERIALISM 97 

Millions of Marks Percentage 
1889 1908 Increase 

Countries Great Britain 651.8 997.4 53 pe. 
Not France 210.2 437.9 108 pe. 
Dependent Belgium PANE yey 322.8 130 pe. 
On German Switzerland .. wh OE 401.4 127 pe. 
Finance Australia 21.2 64.5 205 pe. 
Capital East Indies 8.8 40.7 363 pe. 
SHOAL woeessepsvoko sees. 1,206.6 2,264.4 87 pe. 

-Lansburg has not added up his columns, and thereby gives 
evidence of a singular piece of inattention in not noticing that 
if these figures show anything, they speak against him; for 
the export trade into countries financially dependent on Ger- 
many has in spite of all developed more quickly (if only a 
little) than in the countries which are independent. (Let us 
emphasize the if, for Lansburg’s figures are far from being 
complete.) 

On the relation between export trade and loans, Lansburg 
wrote: 

“Jn 1890-91, a Roumanian loan was subscribed through 
the German banks, which had previously made advances on 
this loan. The loan was used chiefly for purchases by Rou- 
mania of railway material in Germany. In 1891, German 
export trade into Roumania rose to 55,000,000 marks. ‘The 
following year it fell to 39,400,000 marks; then, with in- 
tervals, to 25,400,000 marks in 1900. It only regained the 
level of 1891 during recent years, thanks to two new loans. 

“German export trade into Portugal rose, following the 
loans of 1888-9 to 21,100,000 (1890), then fell, in the two 
following years, to 16,200,000 and 7,400,000; and only re- 
gained its former level in 1903. 

“German trade with the Argentine is still more remarkable. 
Following the loans floated in 1887 and 1890, German export 
trade into the Argentine reached 60,700,000 marks in 1889. 
Two years later it only reached 18,600,000 marks, that is to 
say, less than one-third of the previous figures. It was not 

- until r901 that it regained and surpassed its level of 1889, 

and then only in connection with new loans floated by the 

_ State and by municipalities, with advances to build power 
_ stations, and with other credit operations. 

98 IMPERIALISM 

“As for Chili, German export trade with that country rose 
to 45,200,000 marks in 1892 after the loan negotiated in 
1889. The following year it fell to 22,500,000 marks. A 
new Chilian loan floated by the German banks in 1906 was 
followed by a rise of German exports in 1907, to 84,700, 000 
marks, only to fall again to 52,400,000 marks in 1908.” 

From all these facts Lansburg draws an amusing petty bour- 
geois moral. He says that they illustrate how unstable and 
irregular is export trade when it is bound up with loans, how 
bad it is to invest capital abroad instead of “naturally” and 
“harmoniously” developing national production, how “‘costly” 
are commissions to be paid by Krupps when foreign loans are 
floated, etc! 

But the facts are clear. The increase in export trade is 
closely connected with the swindling efforts of finance-capital, 
which cares not at all for middle class morality, but flays 
the same ox twice. First, it pockets the profits from the 
loan: then it pockets other profits from the same loan used 
by the borrower to make purchases from Krupps, or in obtain- 
ing railway material from the Steel Trust, etc. 

Let us repeat that we by no means consider Lansburg’s 
figures to be perfect. But we had to quote them because 
they are more scientific than Kautsky’s and because Lansburg 
showed the correct way of approaching the question. When 
discussing the importance of finance-capital in export trade, 
etc., it is necessary to be able to distinguish the special rela- 
tions of export trade with the operations of the financiers, 
with the circulation of the products of the combines, etc. To 
make a simple comparison between colonies and non-colonies, 
one imperialism and another imperialism, one semi-colony or 
colony (Egypt) and all other countries, is to obscure the very 
basis of the question. 

Kautsky’s theoretical critique of eee has nothing 
in common with Marxism and serves no other purpose than 
as a preamble to propaganda for peace and unity with the 
opportunists and the jingo Socialists, just because this critique 
avoids and obscures precisely the most profound and essential 
inherent contradictions of imperialism: the contradiction of 
monopolies existing side by side with free competition; the 
contradiction between the immense “operations” (and im- 

IMPERIALISM 99 

mense profits) of finance-capital and “‘honest” trade on the 
open market; the contradiction between combines and trusts 
on the one hand and non-trustified production on the other, 
etc. 

We have seen previously that the notorious theory of “‘ultra- 
imperialism,” born of Kautsky’s imagination, bears quite as 
much a backward character. 

Indeed, it is quite enough to compare facts which are well- 
known and indisputable, to become convinced of the entire 
falsity of the prospects which Kautsky presents to the German 
workers and the workers of all lands. Let us consider India, 
Indo-China and China. It is known that these three colonial 
and semi-colonial countries, inhabited by six to seven hundred 
million human beings, are subjected to the exploitation of the 
finance-capital of several imperialist States: Britain, France, 
Japan, the U. S. A., etc. 

Admitting that these imperialist countries form alliances 
amongst and against one another in order to defend and ex- 
tend their possessions, their interests, and their spheres of in- 
fluence in these Asiatic States. These will be “‘inter-imperial- 
ist” alliances. Admitting that all the imperialist powers con- 
clude an alliances for the “‘peaceful” sharing out of these parts 
of Asia. This would then be an “international unification” 
of finance-capital. (Such alliances have been produced in 
the 2oth century, notably with regard to China.) 

We ask, is it permissible to suppose, granted the perma- 
nence of the capitalist regime, and it is just this that Kautsky 
takes for granted, that such alliances would be more than 
temporary, that they would do away with frictions, conflicts 
and struggle in every possible form? 

_ This question only requires to be stated clearly enough to 
make it impossible for there to be any other reply than a 
negative. For there can be no other conceivable basis, under 
capitalism, for the sharing out of spheres of influence, of 
interests, of colonies, etc., than a calculation of the strength 
_ of the participants, their general economic, financial, mili- 
_ tary strength, etc. And strength among them is constantly 
varying, for there cannot be, under capitalism, an equal de- 
velopment of different undertakings, trusts, branches of in- 
dustry or countries. Hlalf-a-century ago, Germany was an 

100 IMPERIALISM 

insignificant country, as far as capitalist strength is con- 
cerned, by comparison with Britain. Japan was similarly 
insignificant as compared with Russia. Is it thinkable that 
in ten or twenty years’ time, there will have been no changes 
in the relative strengths of the capitalist powers? Absolutely 
unthinkable. 

And so “inter-imperialist” or “ultra-imperialist” alliances, 
whatever form they may assume, whether of one capitalist 
coalition against another or of a general union embracing 
all the capitalist powers—are inevitably nothing but truces 
in periods between wars. Peaceful alliances prepare the ground 
for wars and in their turn grow out of wars, the one con- 
ditioning the other, generating the alternating forms of peace- 
ful and warlike struggle out of the one same basis of imper- 
ialist connections and the relations between world economics 
and world politics. 

An American writer, D. J. Hill, in his History of Diplo- 
macy in the International Development of Europe, points out 
in his preface the following periods of contemporary diplo- 
matic history: 

(1) The revolutionary period. 

(2) The constitutional movement. 

(3) The present period of “commercial imperialism.” 

Another writer divides the history of Britain’s external 
policy, since 1870, into four periods. 

(1) The Asiatic period: that of the struggle against Rus- 
sian progress, in Central Asia, towards India. 

(2) The African period (approximately 1885-1902): of 
struggles against France for the partition of Africa 
(the Fashoda incident of 1898, which brought France 
within a hair’s-breadth of war with Britain). 

(3) The second Asiatic period: (Alliance with Japan 
against Russia), and 

(4) The European period, chiefly anti-German. 

“The political skirmishes of the advance troops takes place 
on the financial field,” wrote Riesser, the banker, in 1905, 
showing how French finance-capital operating in Italy was 

IMPERIALISM IOI 

preparing the way for a political alliance between the two 
countries, and how in the same way struggle was being de- 
veloped between Britain and Germany over Persia, between 
all the European capitalist powers over Chinese loans, etc. 
Behold, here the living reality of peaceful ‘‘ultra-imperialist” 
alliances, indissolubly bound up with ordinary imperialist con- 
flicts! 

The covering up of the deepest internal contradictions of 
imperialism by Kautsky inevitably becomes a camouflage of 
imperialism; and it does not fail to leave traces in this writer’s 
critique of the political qualities of imperialism. Imperialism 
is the epoch of finance-capital and of monopolies, which in- 
troduce everywhere the tendency to domination, not to free- 
dom. The result is reaction all along the line, whatever the 
political system, and an extreme intensification of existing 
antagonisms. Particularly acute becomes the yoke of national 
oppression and the striving for annexations, i.e., the violation 
of national independence (for annexation is nothing else but 
a violation of the right of a nation to dispose of itself). Hil- 
ferding justly draws attention to the relation between imper- 
ialism and the strengthening of national oppression. “Where- 
ever there are new countries,” he writes, “the capital imported 
into them intensifies contradictions and antagonisms and ex- 
cites the growing resistance of the people, who are awakened 
to national consciousness against the intruders. This resis- 
tance can easily become transformed into dangerous measures 
directed against foreign capital. Former social relations are 
profoundly revolutionized. The thousand-year-old agrarian 
isolation of countries situated outside the main current of 
history is broken, and they are dragged into the capitalist 
whirlpool. Capitalism itself gradually procures for the van- 
quished the means and resources for emancipating themselves. 
And they set out to obtain the objective which once seemed to 
the European nations to be the highest object: national unity 
as a means to obtain economic and cultural freedom. This 
movement for national independence threatens European capi- 
tal in its most valuable fields of exploitation, where the most 
radiant prospects are opening up before it, and in those places 
European capital can only maintain its domination by con- 
tinually increasing its military forces.” 

102 IMPERIALISM 

To this must be added that it is not only in new countries, 
but also in the old, that imperialism is leading to annexation, 
to the intensifying of national oppression, and, consequently, 
also to increasing resistance. 

Kautsky, while objecting to the strengthening of political 
reaction by imperialism, leaves in the shade the very burning 
question of the impossibility of unity with the opportunists 
during the imperialist epoch. While objecting to annexations, 
he couches his arguments in a form which will be most accept- 
able and least offensive for the opportunists. He is directly 
addressing a German audience, yet he mitigates the most 
topical and important facts, for instance the annexation by 
Germany of Alsace-Lorraine. Let us take an example to 
appreciate this “deviation of thought.” Let us suppose that 
a Japanese condemns the annexation of the Philippine Islands 
by the Americans. Will many believe that he protests be- 
cause he has a horror of annexation, and not because he has 
a desire himself to annex the Philippines? 

And shall we not recognize the “struggle” of the Japanese 
against annexations as being sincere and politically honest, 
only if he revolts against the annexation of Korea by Japan, 
and urges freedom of separation for Korea from Japan? 

Kautsky’s theoretical analysis of imperialism, his economic 
and political critiqué, are penetrated by a spirit, absolutely 
incompatible with Marxism, of obscuring and glozing over 
the most profound contradictions of imperialism and by a 
striving to defend at all costs that unity with opportunism 
in the European Labor Movement which is now crumbling 
away. 

CHAPTER X 
THE PLACE OF IMPERIALISM IN HISTORY 

We have seen that imperialism is, in its economic essence, 
monopolist capitalism. Its historic place is determined by 
this fact, for monopoly born out of free competition, and pre- 
cisely out of free competition, is the transition of the capitalist 
social order to a higher order. We must notice especially four 
chief aspects of monopolies, or four chief manifestations of 
capitalist monopoly, which are characteristic of the period 
under review. 

(1) Monopoly has grown up out of the concentration of 
production at a very advanced stage of the latter’s develop- 
ment. ‘This is illustrated in the case of monopolist capitalist 
unions: combines, syndicates and trusts. We have seen the 
large part that it plays in modern economic life. At the be- 
ginning of the zoth century, monopolies have acquired com- 
plete supremacy in the advanced countries. And if the first 
steps towards the formation of the combines were earlier made 
by countries enjoying the protection of high tariffs (Germany, 
America), Britain, with her system of free trade, has shown, 
only a little later, the same fact, namely, the birth of 
monopoly out of the concentration of production. 

(2) Monopolies have led to the intensive seizure of the 
most important sources of raw materials, especially for the 
coal and iron industry, which is the principal industry of 
capitalist society and that over which the trusts have the 
greatest control. The exercise of monopoly over the most 
important sources of raw materials has terribly increased the 
power of big capital, and has sharpened the antagonism be- 
tween production which is in the hands of the trusts, and 
production which is not. 

(3) Monopoly has sprung from the banks. These have 

developed into the monopolists of finance-capital out of 

103 

104 IMPERIALISM 

modest intermediaries. Some three or five of the biggest 
banks in each of the foremost capitalist countries have 
achieved the “personal union” of industrial and banking capi- 
tal, and concentrated in their hands the disposal of thousands 
upon thousands of millions which form the greater part of 
the capital and revenue of entire countries. A financial 
oligarchy, imposing an infinite number of financial ties of 
dependence upon all the economic and political institutions 
of contemporary capitalist society without exception—such 
is the most striking manifestation of this monopoly. 

(4) Monopoly has grown out of colonial policy. To the 
numerous “old” motives of colonial policy the capitalist 
financier has added the struggle for the sources of raw mate- 
rials, for the exportation of capital, for “spheres of influence,” 
i.e., for spheres of good business, concessions, monopolist 
profits, and so on; in fine, for economic territory in general 
When the European powers did not as yet occupy with their 
colonies a tenth part of Africa (as was the case in 1876), 
colonial policy was able to develop otherwise than by the 
methods of monopoly—by “free grabbing” of territories, so 
to speak. But when nine-tenths of Africa had been seized 
(towards 1900), when the whole world had been shared out, 
the period of colonial monopoly opened and as a result the 
period of bitterest struggle for the partition and the re- 
partition of the world. 

It is known in general how much monopolist capital has 
deepened all the inherent contradictions of capitalism. It is 
enough to mention the high cost of living and the yoke of 
the trusts. ‘This deepening of contradictions constitutes the 
most powerful driving force of the transitional period of 
history, which began from the time of the definite victory 
of finance-capital. 

Monopolies, oligarchy, the tendency towards domination 
instead of the tendency towards liberty, the exploitation of 
an increasing number of small or weak nations by an ex- 
tremely small minority of the richest or most powerful nations 
—all these have given birth to those distinctive characteristics 
of imperialism which oblige us to define it as parasitic or 
decaying capitalism. More and more there emerges, as one 
of the tendencies of imperialism, the creation of the ‘Bond- 

IMPERIALISM 105 

holding (Rentier) State,” the usurer State, in which the 
bourgeoisie lives on the exportation of capital and on the 
“clipping of interest coupons.” It would be a mistake to 
believe that this tendency to decay excludes the possibility of 
the rapid growth of capitalism. It does not. Separate 
branches of production, different strata of the bourgeoisie, and 
individual. countries display with more or less strength in the 
imperialist period one or other of these tendencies. In a gen- 
eral way capitalism is growing far more rapidly than before, 
but this growth is becoming more and more irregular, and 
the irregularity is showing itself, in particular, in the decay 
of the countries which are richest in capital (such as Eng- 
land). . 

In regard to the rapidity of Germany’s economic develop- 
ment, Riesser, the author of investigations on the great Ger- 
man banks, states: ‘““The-progress of the preceding period 
(1848-1870), itself not so slow, may be compared to the 
rapidity of the development of all German economy, and in 
particular, of the banks, during the period under consideration 
(1870-1905), in much the same way as the speed of a post- 
chaise of the good old days can be compared with that of 

the modern automobile which moves so fast that it becomes 
a danger to the careless pedestrian and to the passengers.” In 
its turn, this finance-capital, which has grown great with such 
speed, is not unwilling (precisely because it has grown so 
quickly) to pass on to a more “tranquil” enjoyment of 
colonies which call for conquest—and not only by peaceful 
methods—from richer nations. In the United States, the 
economic development of late years has been far quicker than 
in Germany, and just thanks to this has brought into high 
relief the parasitic character of modern American capitalism. 
On the other hand, the comparison even of the republican 
American bourgeoisie with the monarchical Japanese or Ger- 
man shows that the greatest political differences become in- 
significant during the imperialist period—not because they 
are unimportant in general, but because throughout it is a 
_case of a bourgeoisie with definite traits of parasitism. 
- The receipt of high monopoly profits by the capitalists of 
one of the numerous branches of industry, of one of the 
‘numerous countries, etc., gives them the economic possibility 

106 IMPERIALISM 

of corrupting individual sections of the working class and 
sometimes a fairly considerable minority, attracting them on 
to the side of the capitalists of a given industry or nation, 
against all the others. The deepening of antagonisms between 
imperialist nations for the partition of the world, increases 
the importance of this fact. And so there is created the bond 
between imperialism and opportunism, which has revealed 
itself first and most clearly in England, thanks to the fact 
that certain characteristics of imperialist development have 
been observable much sooner than in other countries. 

From all that has been said in this book on the economic 
nature of imperialism, it follows that we must define it as 
capitalism in transition, or, more precisely, as dying capitalism. 
It is very instructive in this respect to note that the bourgeois 
economists, describing modern capitalism, employ with great 
fluency such terms as “interlacing,” “absence of isolation,” 
etc.; the banks are “enterprises which by their objective and 
their course of development have a character not purely 
economic, but are departing more and more from the sphere 
of private economic management.” And the same Riesser, 
to whom these last words belong, declares with the greatest 
seriousness that the “prophecy” of the Marxists concerning 
“socialization” has not been realized! 

What then is the meaning of this word “interlacing”? It 
embraces only the most striking aspect of the process being 
accomplished before our eyes. It shows that the observer 
cannot see the wood for the trees. It slavishly follows the 
obvious, the fortuitous, the chaotic. It reveals him as a man 
overwhelmed by raw materials and entirely incapable of un- 
derstanding its meaning and importance. Ownership of shares 
and relations between owners of private property “‘mingle in 
a haphazard way.” But beneath this interlacing, what con- 
stitutes its very base are the changing social relations of pro- 
duction. When a big enterprise becomes gigantic and, work- 
ing on the basis of exact computation of mass data, systemat- 
ically organizes the supply of primary raw materials, to the 
extent of two-thirds, or three-fourths of all that is necessary 
for tens of millions of people: when the transport of these raw 
materials to the most suitable places of production, sometimes 
hundreds or thousands of miles away: when a central control 

IMPERIALISM 107 

directs all the successive stages of work right up to the man- 
ufacture of a number of varieties of finished articles: whey 
the distribution of these products is made on a uniform plan 
among tens and hundreds of millions of consumers (as in 
the case of the distribution of oil in America and Germany by 
the American “Standard Oil”)—then it becomes evident that 
we are in the presence of a socialization of production, and 
not at all a simple “interlacing”; that private economic rela- 
tions, and private property relations, constitute an outer cov- 
ering no longer suitable to its contents, a covering which must 
of necessity begin to decay if its destruction be postponed by 
artificial means; a covering which will be able to keep going 
quite a long time in a state of rottenness (putting things at 
the worst, if the cure of the opportunist abscess is put off for 
long), but which nevertheless will inevitably be got rid of. 

The enthusiastic admirer of German imperialism, Schulze- 
Gaevernitz, exclaims: 

“If the direction of the German banks rests in the long run 
with a dozen persons, their activity is nowadays more im- 
portant for the public good than that of the majority of the 
Ministers of State.” (The “interlacing” of the bankers, the 

ministers, the directors of industry, the bondholders, is here 

completely forgotten.) “If we logically think out the course 
of development of the tendencies which we have noticed, we 
arrive at this conclusion, that the money capital of the nation 
is united in the banks; the banks are bound between themselves 
by combines; the capital of the investing nations has been 
cast in the shape of securities. 

“Thus the brilliant prophecies of Saint-Simon are fulfilled. 
*The present anarchy of production due to the fact that eco- 
nomic relations are developing without uniform regulation, 
must give place to organization of production. Production 
will be directed not by chiefs of businesses independent of 
each other and ignorant of man’s economic needs, but by a 
special institution. The central committee of control, being 

_able to consider the large field of social economy from a more 

elevated point of view, will regulate it in such a way that it 
will be useful to the whole of society, will be able to put the 
means of production into suitable hands, and above all will 

occupy itself more particularly with maintaining constant 

108 IMPERIALISM 

harmony between production and consumption. Certain es- 
tablishments have assumed as part of their task a certain 
organization of economic labor: these are the banks.’ We are 
still far from the fulfilment of these prophecies of Saint- 
Simon, but we are on the way. It is Marxism, different from 
what Marx represents it, but different only in form.” 

There is nothing more to be said: a fine “refutation” of 
Marx which takes a step backward—from his precise scientific 
analysis to the guesswork of Saint Simon: the guesswork of 
genius, but guesswork all the same.
