What Is to Be Done?
Vladimir Lenin (1929)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Vladimir Lenin's 'Chto delat?' (1902) in English as 'What Is to Be Done? Burning Questions of Our Movement', Little Lenin Library vol. 4 (New York: International Publishers, 1929), including Lenin's appendix on Iskra and Rabocheye Dyelo. Scan via Internet Archive. Library stamps trimmed from the front; the publisher's catalogue at the back trimmed. This 1929 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

WHAT IS
TO BE DONE?


Burning Questions
of Our Movement


BY
V. I. LENIN


a}


INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK


Copyright, 1929, by
INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS CO., INC.


Cte 209


PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.


EpITOoR’s


PREFACE
CHAPTER


CONTENTS


MORE WORD: ost 3s.) an fear. o ee RS ee iS.


I. Docmatism AND “FREEDOM OF CRITICISM” . . . .


A.
B.
C.
D.


What is “Freedom of Criticism”? SANNSEL BSu ke ds
The New Advocates of “Freedom of Criticism” .
Criticism in Russia .

Engels on the Importance of in Theoretical Sirugete


II. THe SPONTANEITY OF THE MASSES AND THE C1rass-Con-


A.
B.
C.


SCIOUSNESS OF SoctAL-DEMOCRACY 6
The Beginning of the Spontaneous Movement .
Bowing to Spontaneity. Rabochaya Mysl . .
The Self-Emancipation Group and Rabocheye Dyelo


III. Trape-Union Pouirics anp Socrat-Democratic Pot.t-


A.


ne 2 Pp


gies” S *% es <
Political Aplendion and its ‘Hesiietion by the Fisch
omists .

A Tale of How Martynoe Rendered Plano More
Profound eeul i ;
Political Exposures and “Training in ' Revolutionary

Activity” sues ele


What is There in foikteca Between Swcnotilain and
Terrorism? . .

The Working Class as Giamptun of Dicnucriny

Again “Slanderers,” Again “Mystifiers” .


IV. THe PrimitIvENEss OF THE ECONOMISTS AND THE ORGAN-


A.
B.


ISATION OF REVOLUTIONISTS - . . .
What Are Primitive Methods? ,
Primitive Methods and Economism . . . . .


Organisation of Workers, and eee of Revo-
lutionists

The Scope of Oigandastional Wark: :

“Conspirative” Organisation and “Democracy”

Local and All-Russian Work .


eo at


V. THe “Pian” ror an Atu-Russian PouiticaL News-
PAPER.
A. Who Was Offended iy the Article “Where to Begin”?
B. Can a Newspaper be a Collective Organiser? .
C. What Type of Organisation do we Require? .


ConcLusION
APPENDIX - aE aa tee eel
CorRECTION TO Waar i: To Be Done?” . So wets ee


PAGE


105
119
125
133


143
143
148
159


166
169
176


EDITOR’S FOREWORD


What Is To Be Done? is one of Lenin’s outstanding revolutionary
writings. It has long been a classic in its field. The first genera-
tion of Russian Bolsheviks, which includes many of the present
Soviet leaders, have been brought up on this brilliant exposition
of the policies and tactics of the revolutionary Socialist movement.
Its uniqueness in Russian Marxist literature is due to the way it
treats the réle of the Party in the revolutionary struggle—a subject
to which slight attention was paid up to that time. The subtitle,
“Burning Questions of Our Movement,” which Lenin gave to this
brochure, indicates how deeply he felt the need of calling attention
to the problem of organisation.

What were these “burning questions” which Lenin, soon after
his return from Siberian exile, posed and to which he gave answers,
first in articles in the Jskra (““The Urgent Tasks of Our Movement,”
December, 1900; “Where To Begin,” May, 1901)* and finally
developed in What Is To Be Done?, published in March, 1902?

Ideologically, Marxism had won a decisive victory over Populism
which exercised hegemony among advanced Russian society and
revolutionary intelligentsia during the seventies and eighties. In
his early writings Lenin himself carried on sharp polemics against
Populist and other utopian perversions of Socialism, thereby greatly
contributing to the Marxist literary campaign designed to check
their influence on the nascent revolutionary workers’ movement.

The Marxist movement at that time suffered, however, from two
basic weaknesses. The first was the tendency prevalent in a section
of the movement and characterised as Economism, which maintained
that the economic struggles of the workers for the improvement of
their immediate working and living conditions should be the chief
preoccupation of the labor movement. The struggle against tsarism,
the Economists proposed to leave to the liberal bourgeoisie to whom
they ascribed a monopoly in that field. Lenin and other revolu-
tionary Socialists could not but consider such a policy as a travesty
on Marxism, as a complete break with the nature and aims of the
revolutionary labor movement, the very essence of which, they held,


*V.I. Lenin, The Iskra Period, Book I, pp. 53-58; 109-116.


was the struggle for power. Lenin goes hammer and tongs after
all those who attempt to separate the struggle against the tsarist
government from that against the capitalists, and brands the pure
and simple trade unionism of the Economists as thoroughly reac-
tionary and inimical to the interests of the workers.

The second weakness which Lenin vigorously attacks in this study
is the question of organisation. He raises this problem to the politi-
cal importance it deserves and makes an impassioned appeal to scrap
the existing form of organisation and build a theoretically sound
party, revolutionary in purpose and national in scope. Although
formally organised into a party a few years before (1898), the
Marxist movement consisted of little more than small circles, each
carrying on a more or less independent existence and engaging in
sporadic and planless activities. This loose aggregation of revolu-
tionists, carrying on their work in primitive, handicraft fashion,
and depending on the spontaneity of the masses, could not, accord-
ing to Lenin, become the organiser and leader of the revolutionary
struggles which were rapidly developing and which were involving
larger and larger masses of workers. Only a centralised party,
working according to a carefully prepared plan, with each member
assigned a specific task for which he is to be held accountable, could
successfully lead the Russian workingclass in the struggle against
capitalist exploitation and tsarist rule.

“Tf we have a strongly organised party, a single strike may grow
into a political demonstration, into a political victory over the
government,” Lenin wrote sometime before he began to work on
What Is To Be Done? Obviously, the party as he conceived it, had
to consist of members “who shall devote to the revolution not only
their spare evenings, but the whole of their lives.”


Written thirty years ago, What Is To Be Done? still retains its
freshness because of the revolutionary enthusiasm which permeates
its pages and the great lessons it has today for the workers in capi-
talist countries who would build their revolutionary parties after the
pattern fashioned by Lenin during the formative period of the
Bolshevik Party.

ALEXANDER TRACHTENBERG.

December, 1931.


WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
PREFACE


Accorp1nc to the author’s original plan, the present pamphlet was
intended for the purpose of developing in greater detail the ideas
that were expressed in the article he wrote in Iskra, No. 4, May,
1901, entitled “Where to Begin.” * First of all, we must apologise
to the reader for this belated fulfilment of the promise made in
that article (and repeated in reply to many private enquiries and
letters). One of the reasons for this belatedness was the attempt
to combine all the Social-Democratic organisations abroad which
was undertaken in June last (1901). Naturally, one wanted to see
the results of this attempt, for had it been successful, it would
perhaps have been necessary to express [skra’s views on organisation
from another point of view. In any case, such success promised to
put an end very quickly to the existence of two separate tendencies
in Russian Social-Democracy. As the reader knows, the attempt
failed, and, as we shall try to show farther on, failure was inevitable
after the new turn Rabocheye Dyelo took in its issue No. 10 towards
Economism. It was found to be absolutely necessary to commence
a determined fight against these diffused, ill-defined, but very per-
sistent tendencies, which may degenerate into many diverse forms.
Accordingly, the original plan of the pamphlet was changed and
considerably enlarged.

Its main theme was to have been the three questions presented
in the article: “Where to Begin,” viz., the character and the prin-
cipal content of our political agitation; our organisational tasks;
and the plan for setting up simultaneously in various parts of the
country, a militant, All-Russian organisation. These questions have
long engaged the mind of the author, and he tried to raise them in
the Rabocheye Gazeta at the time one of the unsuccessful attempts
was made to revive that paper (cf. Chap. V). But the original
plan to confine this pamphlet to these three questions, and to express
our views as far as possible in a positive form without, or almost
without, entering into polemics, proved quite impracticable for two

* See V. I. Lenin, The Iskra Pere Book I, p. 109.—Ed.


reasons. One was that Economism proved to be more virile than
we supposed (we employ the term Economism in the broad sense as
it was explained in Iskra No. 12, December, 1901, in an article
entitled “A Conversation with Defenders of Economism,” which
represented a synopsis, as it were, of the present pamphlet).* It
became unquestionably clear that the differences regarding the
solution of the three problems mentioned were to be explained to a
much greater degree by the fundamental antagonism between the two
tendencies in Russian Social-Democracy than by differences over
practical questions. The second reason was that the astonishment
displayed by the Economists concerning the views we expressed
in Iskra revealed quite clearly that we often speak in different
tongues, and therefore cannot come to any understanding without
going over the whole range of questions ab ovo; ** that it was neces-
sary to attempt in the simplest possible style, illustrated by numer-
ous and concrete examples, systematically “to clear up” all the
fundamental points of difference with all the Economists. I re-
solved to make this attempt to “clear up” these points, fully real-
ising that it would greatly increase the size of the pamphlet and
delay its publication, but I saw no other way of fulfilling the
promise I made in the article “Where to Begin.” In apologising
for the belated publication of the pamphlet I also have to apologise
for its numerous literary shortcomings. I had to work under great
pressure, and frequently had to interrupt the writing of it for other
work.

The three questions mentioned before still represent the main
theme of this pamphlet, but I had to start out with the examination
of two other, more general questions, viz., Why does an “innocent”
and “natural” slogan like “freedom of criticism” represent a fighting
watchword for us at the present time? And why can we not agree
on even so important a question as the réle of Social-Democracy in
relation to the spontaneous mass movement? Furthermore, the
exposition of our views on the character and the content of political
agitation developed into an explanation of the difference between
trade-union politics and Social-Democratic politics, and the exposi-
tion of our views on organisational tasks developed into an explana-
tion of the difference between primitive methods, which satisfy the
Economists, and an organisation of revolutionists, which in our

* See The Iskra Period, Book TI, p. 65.—Ed.


** Literally “from the egg”; from the beginning.—Ed.
10


—


opinion is essential. Moreover, I insist more strongly than ever on
the plan for a national political newspaper, the more so because of
the weakness of the arguments that were levelled against it, and
because the question that I put in the article “Where to Begin” as
to how we can set to work simultaneously, all over the country, to
establish the organisation we require was never really answered.
Finally, in the concluding part of this pamphlet I hope to prove
that we did all we could to avoid a rupture with the Economists, but
the rupture proved inevitable; that Rabocheye Dyelo acquired spe-
cial, “historical,” if you will, significance not so much because
it expressed consistent Economism, but because it fully and strik-
ingly expressed the confusion and vacillation that mark a whole
period in the history of Russian Social-Democracy, and that there-
fore, the polemics with Rabocheye Dyelo, which at first sight may
seem excessively detailed, also acquires significance; for we can
make no progress until we have completely liquidated this period.


February, 1902,


1
DOGMATISM AND “FREEDOM OF CRITICISM”
A. Wuat is “FREEDOM oF CriTICISM”?


“FREEDOM of criticism,” this undoubtedly is the most fashionable
slogan at the present time, and the one most frequently employed
in the controversies between the Socialists and democrats of all
countries. At first sight, nothing would appear to be more strange
than the solemn appeals by one of the parties to the dispute for
freedom of criticism. Can it be that some of the progressive parties
have raised their voices against the constitutional law of the ma-
jority of European countries which guarantees freedom to science
and scientific investigation? “Something must be wrong here,” an
onlooker who has not yet fully appreciated the nature of the dis-
agreements among the controversialists will say, when he hears this
fashionable slogan repeated at every cross-road. “Evidently this
slogan is one of the conventional phrases which, like a nickname,
becomes legitimatised by custom,” he will conclude.

In fact, it is no secret that two separate tendencies have been
formed in international Social-Democracy.* The fight between
these tendencies now flares up in a bright flame, and now dies down
and smoulders under the ashes of imposing “resolutions for an armis-
tice.” What this “new” tendency, which adopts a “critical” attitude

* This, perhaps, is the first occasion in the history of modern Socialism that
controversies between various tendencies within the Socialist movement have
grown from national into international controversies; and this is extremely
encouraging. Formerly, the disputes between the Lassalleans and tha
Eisenachers, between the Guesdists and the Possibilists, between the Fabians
and the Social-Democrats, and beween the Narodniki and the Social-
Democrats in Russia, remained purely national disputes, reflected purely
national features and proceeded, as it were, on different planes. At the pres-
ent time (this is quite evident now) the English Fabians, the French Minis-
terialists, the German Bernsteinists [revisionists—Ed.], and the Russian
“Critics”— all belong to the same family, all extol each other, learn from each
other, and are rallying their forces against “doctrinaire” Marxism. Perhaps,
in this first real battle with Socialist opportunism, international revolutionary
Social-Democracy will become sufficiently hardened to be able, at last, to put
an end to the political reaction, long reigning in Europe.

12


towards “obsolete doctrinaire” Marxism represents, has been
stated with sufficient precision by Bernstein, and demonstrated by
Millerand.

Social-Democracy must change from a party of the social revolu-
tion into a democratic party of social reforms. Bernstein has sur-
rounded this political demand by a whole battery of symmetrically
arranged “new” arguments and reasonings. The possibility of
putting Socialism on a scientific basis and of proving that it is
necessary and inevitable from the point of view of the materialist
conception of history was denied; the fact of increasing poverty,
proletarianisation, the growing acuteness of capitalist contradic-
tions, were also denied. The very conception of “ultimate aim”
was declared to be unsound, and the idea of the dictatorship of the
proletariat was absolutely rejected. It was denied that there is any
difference in principle between liberalism and Socialism. The
theory of the class struggle was rejected on the grounds that it
could not be applied to strictly democratic society, governed accord-
ing to the will of the majority, etc.

Thus, the demand for a decided change from revolutionary Social-
Democracy to bourgeois reformism, was accompanied by a no less
decided turn towards bourgeois criticism of all the fundamental
ideas of Marxism. As this criticism of Marxism has been going on
for a long time now, from the political platform, from university
chairs, in numerous pamphlets, and in a number of scientific works,
as the younger generation of the educational classes have been sys-
tematically trained for decades on this criticism, it is not surprising
that the “new, critical” tendency in Social-Democracy should spring
up, all complete, like Minerva from the head of Jupiter. This new
tendency did not have to grow and develop, it was transferred bodily
from bourgeois literature to Socialist literature.

If Bernstein’s theoretical criticism and political yearnings are
still obscure to any one, the trouble the French have taken to
demonstrate the “new method” should remove all ambiguities. In
this instance, also, France has justified its old reputation as the
country in which “more than anywhere else the historical class
struggles were always fought to a finish” [Engels, in his introduction
to Marx’s Eighteenth Brumaire]. The French Socialists have com-
menced, not to theorise, but to act. The more developed democratic


political conditions in France have permitted them to put Bernstein-
18


ism into practice immediately, with its inevitable consequences.
Millerand has provided an excellent example of practical Bernstein-
ism. It is not surprising that he so zealously defends and praises
Bernstein and Volmar! Indeed, if Social-Democracy, in essentials,
is merely a reformist party, and must be bold enough to admit
this openly, then, not only has a Socialist the right to join a bour-
geois cabinet, but he ought always to strive to obtain places in it.
If democracy, in essence, means the abolition of class domination,
then why should not a Socialist minister charm the whole bourgeois
world by orations on class co-operation? Why should he not
remain in the cabinet even after the shooting down of workers by
gendarmes has exposed, for the hundredth and thousandth time, the
real nature of the democratic co-operation of classes? Why should
he not personally take part in welcoming the Tsar, for whom the
French Socialists now have no other sobriquet than “Hero of the
Gallows, Knout and Banishment” (knouteur, pendeur et deporta-
teur)? And the reward for this humiliation and self-degradation
of Socialism in the face of the whole world, for the corruption of
the Socialist consciousness of the working class—the only thing
that can guarantee victory—the reward for this is, imposing plans
for niggardly reforms, so niggardly in fact, that much more has
been obtained even from bourgeois governments.

He who does not deliberately close his eyes cannot fail to see that
the new “critical” tendency in Socialism is nothing more nor less
than a new species of opportunism. And if we judge people not
by the brilliant uniforms they deck themselves in, not by the im-
posing appellations they give themselves, but by their actions, and
by what they actually advocate, it will be clear that “freedom of
criticism” means freedom for an opportunistic tendency in Social-
Democracy, the freedom to convert Social-Democracy into a demo-
cratic reformist party, the freedom to introduce bourgeois ideas and
bourgeois elements into Socialism.

“Freedom” is a grand word, but under the banner of Free Trade
the most predatory wars were conducted: under the banner of “free
labour,” the toilers were robbed. The term “freedom of criticism”
contains the same inherent falsehood. Those who are really con-
vinced that they have advanced science, would demand, not freedom
for the new views to continue side by side with the old, but the


substitution of the old views by the new views. The cry “Long live
14


freedom of criticism,” that is heard to-day, too strongly calls to
mind the fable of the empty barrel.*

We are marching in a compact group along a precipitous and
difficult path, firmly holding each other by the hand. We are sur-
rounded on all sides by enemies, and are under their almost
constant fire. We have combined voluntarily, especially for the
purpose of fighting the enemy and not to retreat into the adjacent
marsh, the inhabitants of which, right from the very outset, have
reproached us with having separated ourselves into an exclusive
group, and with having chosen the path of struggle instead of the
path of conciliation. And now several in our crowd begin to cry
out: Let us go into this marsh! And when we begin to shame
them, they retort: How conservative you are! Are you not ashamed
to deny us the right to invite you to take a better road!

Oh yes, gentlemen! You are free, not only to invite us, but to
go yourselves wherever you will, even into the marsh. In fact, we
think that the marsh is your proper place, and we are prepared to
render you every assistance to get there. Only, let go of our hands,
don’t clutch at us, and don’t besmirch the grand word “freedom”;
for we too are “free” to go where we please, free, not only to fight
against the marsh, but also those who are turning towards the
marsh,


B. Tue New Apvocates or “FREEDOM OF CRITICISM”


Now, this slogan (“Freedom of Criticism”) is solemnly advanced
in No. 10 of Rabocheye Dyelo, the organ of the League of Russian
Social-Democrats Abroad, not as a theoretical postulate, but as a
political demand, as a reply to the question: “Is it possible to
unite the Social-Democratic organisations operating abroad?”—“In
order that unity may be durable, there must be freedom of criti-
cism” [p. 36].

From this statement two very definite conclusions must be drawn:
1. That Rabocheye Dyelo has taken the opportunist tendency in
international Social-Democracy under its wing; and 2. That Rabo-
cheye Dyelo demands freedom for opportunism in Russian Social-
Democracy. We shall examine these conclusions.

Rabocheye Dyelo is “particularly” displeased with Iskra’s and

* The allusion here is to Krylov’s fable about the full and empty barrels


Tolling down the street, the second with much more noise than the first.—Ed,
16


Zarya’s “inclination to predict a rupture between the Mountain and
the Gironde in international Social-Democracy.” *

Generally speaking [writes Krichevsky, editor of Rabocheye Dyelo] this
talk about the Mountain and the Gironde that is heard in the ranks of Social-
Democracy, represents a shallow historical analogy, which looks strange when
it comes from the pen of a Marxist. The Mountain and the Gironde did not
represent two different temperaments, or intellectual tendencies, as idealist
historians may think, but two different classes, or strata—the middle bour-
geoisie on the one hand, and the petty bourgeoisie and the proletariat on tie
other. In the modern Socialist movement, however, there is no conflict of
class interests; the Socialist movement in its entirety, all of its diverse forms
[B. K.’s italics] including the most pronounced Bernsteinists stand on the
basis of the class interests of the proletariat, and of the proletarian class
struggle for political and economic emancipation [pp. 32-33].

A bold assertion! B. Krichevsky, have you heard the fact long
ago noted, that it is precisely the extensive participation of the
“academic” stratum in the Socialist movement in recent years that
has secured the rapid spread of Bernsteinism? And what is most
important—on what does our author base his opinion that even “the
most pronounced Bernsteinists” stand on the basis of the class
struggle for the political and economic emancipation of the prole-
tariat? No one knows. This determined defence of the most pro-
nounced Bernsteinists is not supported by any kind of argument
whatever. Apparently, the author believes that if he repeats what
the pronounced Bernsteinists say about themselves, his assertion
requires no proof. But can anything more “shallow” be imagined
than an opinion of a whole tendency that is based on nothing more
than what the representatives of that tendency say about themselves?
Can anything more shallow be imagined than the subsequent “hom-
ily” about the two different, and even diametrically opposite, types,
or paths, of party development? [Rabocheye Dyelo, pp. 33-35.]
The German Social-Democrats, you see, recognise complete free-
dom of criticism, but the French do not, and it is precisely the
latter that present an example of the “harmfulness of intolerance.”

* A comparison between the two tendencies in the revolutionary proletariat
(the revolutionary and the opportunist), and the two tendencies among the
revolutionary bourgeoisie in the eighteenth century (the Jacobin Mountain
and the Gironde) was made in a leading article in Iskra, No. 2, February,
1901, written by Plekhanov. The Cadets, the Bezzaglavtsi and the Men-
sheviks to this day love to refer to the Jacobinism in Russian Social-Democracy
but they prefer to remain silent about or . .. to forget the circumstances in
which Plekhanov ased this term for the first time against the Right Wing of


Social-Democracy. [Lenin’s note to 1908 edition —Ed.]
16


fo which we reply that the very example B. Krichevsky quotes,
illustrates how even those who regard history, literally from the
Ilovaisky * point-of-view sometimes describe themselves as Marx-
ists. Of course, there is no need whatever, in explaining the unity
of the German Socialist Party and the dismembered state of the
French Socialist Party, to search for the special features in the his-
tory of the respective countries, to compare the conditions of mili-
tary semi-absolutism in the one country with republican parliamen-
tarism in the other, or to analyse the effects of the Paris Commune
and the effects of the anti-Socialist laws in Germany; to compare
the economic life and economic development of the two countries,
or recall that “the unexampled growth of German Social-Democracy”
was accomplished by a strenuous struggle unexampled in the history
of Socialism, not only against the theoreticians (Muehlberger, Duehr-
ing),** the Socialists of the Chair, but also against mistaken tac-
tics (Lassalle), etc., ete. All that is superfluous!) The French
quarrel among themselves because they are intolerant; the Germans
are united because they are good fellows.

And observe, this piece of matchless profundity is intended to
“refute” the fact which is a complete answer to the defence of
Bernsteinism. The question as to whether the Bernsteinists stand
on the basis of the class struggle of the proletariat can be completely
and irrevocably answered only by historical experience. Conse-
quently, the example of France is the most important one in this
respect, because France is the only country in which the Bernstein-
ists attempted to stand independently on their own feet with the
warm approval of their German colleagues (and partly also of the


* Tlovaisky—the writer of official school text books on history noted for his
reactionary treatment of Russian history.—Ed.

** At the time Engels hurled his attack against Duehring, many representa-
tives of German Social-Democracy inclined towards the latter’s views, and
accusations of acerbity, intolerance, uncomradely polemics, etc., were pub-
licly hurled at Engels at the party congress. At the congress of 1877, Johann
Most, supported by his comrades, moved a resolution to prohibit the publica-
tion of Engels’ articles in the Vorwaerts because “they did not represent the
interests of the overwhelming majority of the readers,” and Vahlteich declared
that the publication of these articles had caused great damage te the party,
that Duehring had also rendered services to Social-Democracy: ‘We must
utilise the services of all those who offer them in the interest of the party;
let the professors engage in polemics if they care to do so, but the Vorwaerts
is not the place to conduct them in” [Vorwaerts, No. 65, June 6, 1877]. Here
we have another example of the defence of “freedom of criticism,” and it
would do our legal critics and illegal opportunists who love so much to quote
examples from the Germans, a deal of good to ponder over it!

17


Russian opportunists). [Cf. Rabocheye Dyelo, Nos. 2-3, pp. 83-
84]. The reference to the “intolerance” of the French, apart from
its “historical” significance (in the Nozdrev sense),* turns out
to be merely an attempt to obscure a very unpleasant fact with angry
invectives.

But we are not even prepared to make a present of the Germans
to B. Krichevsky and to the other numerous champions of “freedom
of criticism.” The “most pronounced Bernsteinists” are still toler-
ated in the ranks of the German Party only because they submit to
the Hanover resolution which emphatically rejected Bernstein’s
“amendments,” and to the Luebeck resolution, which, notwith-
standing the diplomatic terms in which it is couched, contains a
direct warning to Bernstein. It is a debatable point from the stand-
point of the interests of the German party, as to whether diplomacy
was appropriate in this case and whether, in this case, a bad peace
is better than a good quarrel.** Opinions may differ in regard to
the expediency or not of the methods employed to reject Bernstein-
ism, but the fact remains that the German party did reject Bern-
steinism on two occasions. Therefore, to think that the German
example endorses the thesis: “The most pronounced Bernsteinists
stand for the proletarian class struggle, for its economic and politi-
cal emancipation,” means to fail absolutely to understand what is
going on before one’s eyes.***


* A character in Gogol’s novel Dead Souls. An unusual liar, rogue, and
intriguer, he was frequently beaten for cheating, but he never took matters to
heart; to blackmail even a friend was an ordinary thing for him and he
“bore no grudge against that person.”—Ed.

** This is a Russian proverb.—E£d.

*** Tt must be observed that Rabocheye Dyelo always confines itself to a bare
statement of facts concerning Bernsteinism, and “refrains” from expressing its
own opinion on it. See, for example, the reports of the Stuttgart Congress
in Nos. 2-3 [p. 66], in which all the disagreements are reduced to disagree-
ments over “tactics,” and the bare statement is made that the overwhelming
majority remain true to the previous revolutionary tactics. Or take Nos. 4-5
[p. 25 f.], in which we have a bare paraphrasing of the speeches delivered
at the Hanover Congress, and a reprint of the resolution moved by Bebel.
An explanation and criticism of Bernstein is again put off (as was the case
in Nos. 2-3) to be dealt with in a “special article.” Curiously enough, in
Nos. 4-5 [p. 33], we read the following: “. . . the views expounded by Bebel
have the support of the enormous majority of the congress,” and a few lines
lower: “. .. David defended Bernstein’s views. ... First of all, he tried
to show that . . . Bernstein and his friends, after all is said and done [sic!],
stand for class struggle. . . .” This was written in December, 1899, and
in September, 1901, Rabocheye Dyelo, having perhaps lost faith in the cor-
rectness of Bebel’s views, repeats David’s views as its own!

18


More than that. As we have already observed, Rabocheye Dyelo
comes before Russian Social-Democracy, demands “freedom of
criticism,” and defends Bernsteinism. Apparently, it came to the
conclusion that we were unfair to our “critics” and Bernsteinists.
To whom were we unfair, when and how? About this not a word.
Rabocheye Dyelo does not name a single Russian critic or Bern-
steinist! All that is left for us to do is to make one of two possible
suppositions: First, that the unfairly treated party is none other
than Rabocheye Dyelo itself (and that appears to be confirmed by
the fact that in the two articles in No. 10 reference is made only
to the insults hurled at the Rabocheye Dyelo by Zarya and Iskra).
If that is the case, how is the strange fact to be explained that
Rabocheye Dyelo, which always vehemently dissociates itself from
Bernsteinism, could not defend itself, without putting in a word
on behalf of the “most pronounced Bernsteinists” and of freedom of
criticism? The second supposition is, that a third party has been
treated unfairly. If the second supposition is correct, why should
not this party be named?

We see, therefore, that Rabocheye Dyelo is continuing to play
the game of hide and seek that it has played (as we shall prove
below) ever since it commenced publication. And note the first
practical application of this much-extolled “freedom of criticism.”
As a matter of fact, not only has it now been reduced to abstention
from all criticism, but also to abstention from expressing independ-
ent views altogether. The very Rabocheye Dyelo, which avoids
mentioning Russian Bernsteinism as if it were a shameful disease
(to use Starover’s apt expression) proposes, for the treatment of
this disease, to copy word for word the latest German prescription
for the treatment of the German variety of the disease! Instead of
freedom of criticism—slavish (worse: monkey-like) imitation! The
very same social and political content of modern international
opportunism reveals itself in a variety of ways according to its
national characteristics. In one country the opportunists long ago
came out under a separate flag, while in others, they ignore theory,
and conduct a Radical-Socialist policy of practical politics. In a
third country, several members of the revolutionary party have
deserted to the camp of opportunism and strive to achieve their
aims not by an open struggle for principles and for new tactics, but
by gradual, unobserved, and, if one may so express it, unpunishable


corruption of their party. In a fourth country again, similar deserters
19


employ the same methods in the twilight of their political slavish-
ness, and with an extremely original combination of “legal” with
“illegal” activity, etc., etc. To talk about freedom of criticism and
Bernsteinism as a condition for uniting the Russian Social-Demo-
crats, and not to explain how Russian Bernsteinism has manifested
itself, and what fruits it has borne, means to talk for the purpose
of saying nothing.

We shall try, if only in a few words, to say what Rabocheye Dyelo
did not want to say (or perhaps did not even understand).


C. Criticism In Russia


The peculiar position of Russia in regard to the point we are
examining is that right from the very beginning of the spontaneous
labour movement on the one hand, and the change of progressive
public opinion towards Marxism on the other, a combination was
observed of obviously heterogeneous elements under a common flag
for the purpose of fighting the common enemy (obsolete social and
political views). We refer to the heyday of “legal Marxism.”
Speaking generally, this was an extremely curious phenomenon, that
no one in the eighties, or the beginning of the nineties, would have
believed possible. Suddenly, in a country ruled by an autocracy, in
which the press is completely shackled, and in a period of intense
political reaction in which even the tiniest outgrowth of political
discontent and protest was suppressed, a censored literature
springs up, advocating the theory of revolutionary Marxism, in a
language extremely obscure, but understood by those “interested.”
The government had accustomed itself to regard only the theory of
(revolutionary) Populism as dangerous without observing its inter-
nal evolution as is usually the case, and rejoicing at the criticism,
levelled against it no matter from what side it came. Quite a consid-
erable time elapsed (according to our Russian calculations) before
the government realised what had happened and the unwieldly army
of censors and gendarmes discovered the new enemy and flung itself
upon him. Meanwhile, Marxian books were published one after
another, Marxian journals and newspapers were published, nearly
every one became a Marxist, Marxism was flattered, the Marxists
were courted and the book publishers rejoiced at the extraordinary
ready sale of Marxian literature. It is quite reasonable to suppose


that among the Marxian novices who were carried away by
20


this stream, there was more than one “author who got a swelled
head... ”.s. 2”

We can now speak calmly of this period as of an event of the
past. It is no secret that the brief appearance of Marxism on the
surface of our literature was called forth by the alliance between
people of extreme and of extremely moderate views. In point of
fact, the latter were bourgeois democrats; and this was the conclu-
sion (so strikingly confirmed by their subsequent “critical” devel-
opment), that intruded itself on the minds of certain persons even
when the “alliance” was still intact.*

That being the case, does not the responsibility for the subsequent
“confusion” rest mainly upon the revolutionary Social-Democrats
who entered into alliance with these future “critics”? This ques-
tion, together with a reply in the affirmative, is sometimes heard from
people with excessively rigid views. But these people are absolutely
wrong. Only those who have no reliance in themselves can fear to
enter into temporary alliances with unreliable people. Besides, not
a single political party could exist without entering into such alli-
ances. The combination with the legal Marxists was in its way the
first really political alliance contracted by Russian Social-Demo-
crats. Thanks to this alliance an astonishingly rapid victory was
obtained over Populism, and Marxian ideas (even though in a vul-
garised form) became very widespread. Moreover, the alliance was
not concluded altogether without “conditions.” The proof: The
burning by the censor, in 1895, of the Marxian symposium, Mate-
rials on the Problem of the Economic Development of Russia. If
the literary agreement with the legal Marxists can be compared
with a political alliance, then that book can be compared with a
political treaty.

The rupture, of course, did not occur because the “allies” proved
to be bourgeois democrats. On the contrary, the representatives of
the latter tendency were the natural and desirable allies of the
Social-Democrats in so far as their democratic tasks that were
brought to the front by the prevailing situation in Russia were con-
cerned. But an essential condition for such an alliance must be
complete liberty for Socialists to reveal to the working class that
its interests are diametrically opposed to the interests of the bour-


* Reference is made here to an article by E. Tulin [Lenin] written against
Struve, bearing the title “Marxism, as Reflected in Bourgeois Literature.”
[See V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. I.—Ed.]

21


geoisie. However, the Bernsteinist and “critical” tendency to which
the majority of the legal Marxists turned, deprived the Socialists of
this liberty and corrupted Socialist consciousness by vulgarising
Marxism, by preaching the toning down of social antagonisms, by
declaring the idea of the social revolution and the dictatorship of
the proletariat to be absurd, by restricting the labour movement and
the class struggle to narrow trade unionism and to a “practical”
struggle for petty, gradual reforms. This was tantamount to the
bourgeois democrat’s denial of Socialism’s right to independence,
and consequently, of its right to existence; in practice it meant a
striving to convert the nascent labour movement into a tail of the
liberals.

Naturally, under such circumstances a rupture was necessary.
But the “peculiar” feature of Russia manifested itself in that this
rupture simply meant the closing to the Social-Democrats of access
to the most popular and widespread “legal” literature. The “ex-
Marxists” who took up the flag of “criticism,” and who obtained
almost a monopoly in the “sale” of Marxism, entrenched themselves
in this literature. Catchwords like: “Against orthodoxy” and “Long
live freedom of criticism” (now repeated by Rabocheye Dyelo) im-
mediately became the fashion, and the fact that neither the censor
nor the gendarmes could resist this fashion is apparent from the
publication of three Russian editions of Bernstein’s celebrated book
(celebrated in the Herostratus sense) and from the fact that the
books by Bernstein, Prokopovich and others were recommended
by Zubatov [Jskra, No. 10]. And this tendency did not confine
itself to the sphere of literature. The turn towards criticism was
accompanied by the turn towards Economism that was taken by
Social-Democratic practical workers.

The manner in which the contacts and mutual dependence be-
tween legal criticism and illegal Economism arose and grew, is an
interesting subject in itself, and may very well be treated in a
special article. It is sufficient to note here that these contacts un-
doubtedly existed. The notoriety deservedly acquired by the Credo
was due precisely to the frankness with which it formulated these
contacts and laid down the fundamental political tendencies of
Economism, viz.: Let the workers carry on the economic struggle (it
would be more correct to say the trade union struggle, because the
latter embraces also specifically labour politics), and let the Marx-


ist intelligentsia merge with the liberals for the political “struggle.”
22


Thus, it turned out that trade union work “among the people” meant
fulfilling the first part of this task, and legal criticism meant ful-
filling the second part. This statement proved to be such an ex-
cellent weapon against Economism that, had there been no Credo,
it would have been worth inventing.

The Credo was not invented, but it was published without the
consent and perhaps even against the will of its authors. At all
events the present writer, who was partly responsible for dragging
this “programme” into the light of day,* has heard complaints and
reproaches to the effect that copies of the résumé of their views
which were dubbed the Credo were distributed and even published
in the press together with the protest! We refer to this episode be-
cause it reveals a very peculiar state of mind among our Economists,
viz.: a fear of publicity. This feature is common among the Econo-
mists, and not among the authors of the Credo alone. It was re-
vealed by that most outspoken and honest advocate of Economism,
Rabochaya Mysl, and by Rabocheye Dyelo (which was indignant
over the publication of Economist documents in the Vademecum), as
well as by the Kiev Committee, which two years ago refused to per-
mit the publication of its profession de foi ** together with a pro-
test that had been written against it,*** and by many other indi-
vidual representatives of Economism.

This fear of criticism displayed by the advocates of freedom of
criticism cannot be attributed solely to craftiness (although no
doubt craftiness has something to do with: It would be unwise to
expose the young and as yet puny movement to the enemies’ at-
tack!) No, the majority of the Economists quite sincerely disap-
prove (and by the very nature of Economism they must disapprove)
of all theoretical controversies, factional disagreements, of broad
political questions, of schemes for organising revolutionaries, etc.
“Leave all this sort of thing to the exiles abroad!” said a fairly
consistent Economist to me one day, and thereby he expressed a very

* Reference is made here to the Protest Signed by the Seventeen against
the Credo. The present writer took part in drawing up this protest (the end
of 1899). The protest and the Credo were published abroad in the spring
of 1900. [See V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 11.—Ed.] It is now known
from the article written by Madame Kuskova, I think in Byloye [Past] that
she was the author of the Credo, and that Mr. Prokopovich was very promi-
nent among the Economists abroad at that time.

** Profession of faith—Ed.

*** As far as we know the composition of the Kiev Committee has been


changed since then.
23


widespread (purely trade unionist) view: Our business, he said, is
the labour movement, the labour organisations, here, in our locali-
ties; all the rest are merely the inventions of doctrinaires, an “ex-
aggeration of the importance of ideology,” as the authors of the
letter, published in Jskra, No. 12, expressed it in unison with
Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10.

The question now arises: Seeing what the peculiar features of
Russian “criticism” and Russian Bernsteinism were, what should
those who desired, in deeds and not merely in words, to oppose
opportunism have done? First of all, they should have made efforts
to resume the theoretical work that was only just commenced in
the period of legal Marxism, and that has now again fallen on the
shoulders of the illegal workers. Unless such work is undertaken
the successful growth of the movement is impossible. Secondly,
they should have actively combated legal “criticism” that was cor-
rupting people’s minds. Thirdly, they should have actively coun-
teracted the confusion and vacillation prevailing in practical work,
and should have exposed and repudiated every conscious or uncon-
scious attempt to degrade our programme and tactics.

That Rabocheye Dyelo did none of these things is a well-known
fact, and further on, we shall deal with this well-known fact from
various aspects. At the moment, however, we desire merely to show
what a glaring contradiction there is between the demand for “free-
dom of criticism’ and the peculiar features of our native criticism
and Russian Economism. Indeed, glance at the text of the resolution
by which the League of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad endorsed
the point-of-view of Rabocheye Dyelo.


In the interests of the further ideological development of Social-Democracy,
we recognise the freedom to criticise Social-Democratic theory in party
literature to be absolutely necessary in so far as this critcism does not run
counter to the class and revolutionary character of this theory [Two Con-
gresses, p. 10].


And what is the argument behind this resolution? The resolu-
tion “in its first part coincides with the resolution of the Luebeck
Party Congress on Bernstein. . . .” In the simplicity of their souls
the Leaguers failed to observe the testimonium paupertatis (certifi-
cate of mental poverty) they give themselves by this piece of imita-
tiveness! . . . “But . . . in its second part, it restricts freedom of
criticism much more than did the Luebeck Party Congress.”


So the League’s resolution was directed against the Russian
24


Bernsteinism? If it was not, then the reference to Luebeck is utterly
absurd! But it is not true to say that it “restricts freedom of criti-
cism.” In passing their Hanover resolution, the Germans, point by
point, rejected precisely the amendments proposed by Bernstein,
while in their Luebeck resolution they cautioned Bernstein person-
ally, and named him in the resolution. Our “free” imitators,
however, do not make a single reference to a single manifestation
of Russian “criticism” and Russian Economism, and in view of this
omission, the bare reference to the class and revolutionary charac-
ter of the theory, leaves exceedingly wide scope for misinterpreta-
tion, particularly when the League refuses to identify “so-called
Economism” with opportunism [Two Congresses, p. 8]. But all
this en passant. The important thing to note is that the opportunist
attitude towards revolutionary Social-Democrats in Russia is the
very opposite to that in Germany. In Germany, as we know, revolu-
tionary Social-Democrats are in favour of preserving what is: They
stand in favour of the old programme and tactics which are uni-
versally known, and after many decades of experience have become
clear in all their details. The “critics” desire to introduce changes,
and as these critics represent an insignificant minority, and as they
are very shy and halting in their revisionist efforts, one can under-
stand the motives of the majority in confining themselves to the dry
rejection of “innovations.” In Russia, howover, it is the critics and
Economists who are in favour of preserving what is: The “critics”
wish us to continue to regard them as Marxists, and to guarantee
them the “freedom of criticism” which they enjoyed to the full (for
as a matter of fact they never recognised any kind of party ties *


* The absence of recognised party ties and party traditions by itself marks
such a cardinal difference between Russia and Germany that it should have
warned all sensible Socialists from being blindly imitative. But here is an
example of the lengths to which “freedom of criticism” goes in Russia. Mr.
Bulgakov, the Russian critic, utters the following reprimand to the Austrian
critic, Hertz: “Notwithstanding the independence of his conclusions, Hertz,
on this point [on co-operative societies] apparently remains tied by the opinions
of his party, and although he disagrees with it in details, he dare not reject
common principles” [Capitalism and Agriculture, Vol. Il, p. 287]. The sub-
ject of a politically enslaved state, in which nine hundred and ninety-nine
out of a thousand of the population are corrupted to the marrow of their
bones by political subservience and completely lack the conception of party
honour and party ties, superciliously reprimands a citizen of a constitutional
State for being excessively “tied by the opinion of his party”! Our illegal
organisations have nothing else to do, of course, but draw up resolutions
about freedom of criticism. . . .

25


and, moreover, we never had a generally recognised party organ
which could “restrict” freedom of criticism even by friendly ad-
vice) ; the Economists want the revolutionaries to recognise “‘com-
plete equality in the movement” [Rabocheye Dyelo No. 10, p. 25],
i. e., to recognise the “legitimacy” of what exists; they do not want
the “ideologists” to try to “divert”? the movement from the path
that “is determined by the interaction of material elements and
material environment” [Letter published in Jskra, No. 12]; they
want recognition “for the only struggle that the workers can conduct
under present conditions,” which in their opinion is the struggle
“which they are actually conducting at the present time” [Special
Supplement to Rabochaya Mysl, p. 14]. We Revolutionary Social-
Democrats, on the contrary, are dissatisfied with this submission to
elemental forces, i. e., bowing to what is “at the present time”; we
demand that the tactics that have prevailed in recent years be
changed; we declare that “before we can unite, and in order that
we may unite, we must first of all firmly and definitely draw the
lines of demarcation between the various groups.” (See announce-
ment of the publication of Jskra.)* In a word, the Germans stand
for what is and reject the changes; we demand changes, and reject
subservience to, and conciliation with, what is.

This “little”? difference our “free” copyists of German resolutions
failed to notice!


D. ENGELS ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE THEORETICAL STRUGGLE


*“Dogmatism, doctrinairism,” “ossification of the party—the inevi-
table retribution that follows the violent strait-lacing of thought,”
these are the enemies against which the kindly champions of “free-
dom of criticism” are allying their forces in Rabocheye Dyelo.
We are very glad that this question has been brought up and we
would propose only to add to it another question:

Who are to be the judges?

Before us lie two publishers’ announcements. One, The Pro-
gramme of the Periodical Organ of the Russian Social-Democratic
League—Rabocheye Dyelo (Reprint from No. 1 of Rabocheye
Dyelo), and the other, Announcement of the Resumption of Pub-
lication of Osvobozhdeniye Truda. Both are dated 1899, when

* See “Declaration by the Editorial Board of Iskra,” The Iskra Period, Book


I, p. 38.—Ed.
26


the “crisis of Marxism” had long been discussed. And what do we
find? In the first production, we would seck in vain for any mani-
festation, or definite elucidation of the position the new organ in-
tends to occupy. Of theoretical work and the urgent tasks that
now confront it, not a word is said in this programme, nor in the
supplements to it, that were passed by the Third Congress of the
League in 1901 [Two Congresses, pp. 15-18]. During the whole
of this time, the editorial board of Rabocheye Dyelo ignored theo-
retical questions, notwithstanding the fact that these questions ex-
cited the minds of Social-Democrats in all countries.

The other announcement, on the contrary, first of all points to
the diminution of interest in theory observed in recent years, im-
peratively demands “vigilant attention to the theoretical aspect of
the revolutionary movement of the proletariat,” and calls for “ruth-
less criticism of the Bernsteinist and other anti-revolutionary tend-
encies in our movement. The issues of Zarya that have appeared
show to what extent this programme was carried out.

Thus we see that high-sounding phrases against the ossification of
thought, etc., conceal carelessness and helplessness in the develop-
ment of theoretical ideas. The case of the Russian Social-Democrats
strikingly illustrates the fact observed in the whole of Europe (and
long ago observed in German Marxism) that the notorious freedom
of criticism implies, not the substitution of one theory by another,
but freedom from every complete and thought-out theory; it implies
eclecticism and absence of principle. Those who are in the least
acquainted with the actual state of our movement cannot but see that
the spread of Marxism was accompanied by a certain deterioration
of theoretical standards. Quite a number of people, with very little,
and even totally lacking in, theoretical training, joined the move-
ment for the sake of its practical significance and its practical suc-
cesses. We can judge, therefore, how tactless Rabocheye Dyelo is
when, with an air of invincibility, it quotes the statement of Marx
that: “A single step of the real movement is worth a dozen pro-
grammes.” To repeat these words in the epoch of theoretical chaos
is sheer mockery. Moreover, these words of Marx are taken from
his letter on the Gotha Programme, in which he sharply condemns
eclectism in the formulation of principles: “If you must combine,”
Marx wrote to the party leaders, “then enter into agreements
to satisfy the practical aims of the movement, but do not haggle


over principles, do not make ‘concessions’ in theory.” This
27


was Marx’s idea, and yet there are people among us who strive—
in his name!—to belittle the significance of theory.

Without a revolutionary theory there can be no revolutionary
movement. This cannot be insisted upon too strongly at a time when
the fashionable preaching of opportunism is combined with absorp-
tion in the narrowest forms of practical activity. The importance
of theory for Russian Social-Democrats is still greater for three
reasons, which are often forgotten:

The first is that our party is only in the process of formation, its
features are only just becoming outlined, and it has not yet com-
pletely settled its reckoning with other tendencies in revolutionary
thought which threaten to divert the movement from the proper
path. Indeed, in very recent times we have observed (as Axelrod
long ago warned the Economists would happen) a revival of non-
Social-Democratic revolutionary tendencies. Under such circum-
stances, what at first sight appears to be an “unimportant” mistake,
may give rise to most deplorable consequences, and only the short-
sighted would consider factional disputes and strict distinction of
shades to be inopportune and superfluous. The fate of Russian
Social-Democracy for many, many years to come may be deter-
mined by the strengthening of one or the other “shade.”

The second reason is that the Social-Democratic movement is
essentially an international movement. This does not mean merely
that we must combat national chauvinism. It means also that a
movement that is starting in a young country can be successful only
on the condition that it assimilates the experience of other coun-
tries. In order to assimilate this experience, it is not sufficient
merely to be acquainted with it, or simply to transcribe the latest
resolutions. A critical attitude is required towards this experience,
and ability to subject it to independent tests. Only those who realise
how much the modern labour movement has grown in strength will
understand what a reserve of theoretical forces and political (as
well as revolutionary) experience is required to fulfil this task.

The third reason is that the national tasks of Russian Social-
Democracy are such as have never confronted any other Socialist
party in the world. Farther on we shall deal with the political
and organisational duties which the task of emancipating the whole
people from the yoke of autocracy imposes upon us. At the mo-
ment, we wish merely to state that the réle of vanguard can be ful-


filled only by a party that is guided by an advanced theery. To
28


OO


understand what this means concretely, let the reader call to mind
the predecessors of Russian Social-Democracy like Herzen, Belinsky,
Chernyshevsky and the brilliant band of revolutionists of the sev-
enties; let him ponder over the world significance which Russian
literature is now acquiring, let him . . . Oh! But that is enough!

We shall quote what Engels said in 1874 concerning the signifi-
cance of theory in the Social-Democratic movement. Engels recog-
nises not two forms of the great struggle Social-Democracy is con-
ducting (political and economic), as is the fashion among us, but
three, adding to the first two also the theoretical struggle. His rec-
ommendations to the German labour movement, which has now
become practically and politically strong, are so instructive from
the point of view of present-day controversies, that we hope the
reader will forgive us for quoting a long passage from his Intro-
duction to the Peasant War in Germany, which long ago became a
literary rarity.


The German workers have two important advantages compared with the
rest of Europe. First, they belong to the most theoretical people of Europe;
second, they have retained that sense of theory which the so-called “educated”
people of Germany have totally lost. Without German philosophy, particularly
that of Hegel, German scientific Socialism (the only scientific Socialism
extant) would never have come into existence. Without a sense for theory,
scientific Socialism would have never become blood and tissue of the workers.
What an enormous advantage this is, may be seen, on the one hand, from the
indifference of the English labour movement towards all theory, which is one
of the reasons why it moves so slowly, in spite of the splendid organisation of
the individual unions; on the other hand, from the mischief and confusion
created by Proudhonism in its original form among the Frenchmen and Bel-
gians, and in its caricature form, as presented by Bakunin, among the Span-
iards and Italians,

The second advantage is that, chronologically speaking, the Germans were
the last to appear in the labour movement. In the same manner as German
theoretical Socialism will never forget that it rests on the shoulders of Saint
Simon, Fourier and Owen, the three who, in spite of their fantastic notions
and Utopianism, belonged to the most significant heads of all time, and
whose genius anticipated the correctness of which can now be proved in a
Scientific way, so the practical German labour movement must never forget
that it has developed on the shoulders of the English and French movements,
that it had utilised their experience, acquired at a heavy price, and that for
this reason it was in a position to avoid their mistakes which in their time
were unavoidable. Without the English trade unions and the French political
workers’ struggles preceding the German labour movement, without the mighty
impulse given by the Paris Commune, where would we now be?

It must be said to the credit of the German workers that they utilised
the advantages of their situation with rare understanding. For the first time
in the history of the labour movement, the struggle is being so conducted
that its three sides, the theoretical, the political, and the practical economic

29


(resistance to the capitalists), form one harmonious and well-planned entity.
In this concentric attack, as it were, lies the strength and invincibility of the
German movement.

It is due to this advantageous situation on the one hand, to the insular
peculiarities of the British, and to the cruel oppression of the French move-
ments on the other, that for the present moment the German workers form
the vanguard of the proletarian struggle. How long events will allow them
to occupy this post of honour cannot be foreseen. But as long as they are
placed in it, let us hope that they will discharge their duties in the proper
manner. To this end it will be necessary to double our energies in all the
spheres of struggle and agitation. It is the specified duty of the leaders to
gain an ever-clearer understanding of the theoretical problems, to free them-
selves more and more from the influence of traditional phrases inherited from
the old conception of the world, and constantly to keep in mind that Socialism,
having become a science, demands the same treatment as every other science
—it must be studied. The task of the leaders will be to bring understanding,
thus acquired and clarified, to the working masses, to spread it wich increased
enthusiasm, to close the ranks of the party organisations and of the labour
unions with ever-greater energy. .. .

If the German workers proceed in this way they may not march exactly
at the head of the movement—it is not in the interest of the movement that
the workers of one country should march at the head of all—but they will
occupy an honourable place on the battle line, and they will stand armed for
battle when other unexpected grave trials or momentous events will demand
heightened courage, heightened determination, and the will to act.*


Engels’ words proved prophetic. Within a few years, the German
workers were subjected to severe trials in the form of the anti-Social-
ist laws; but they were fully armed to meet the situation, and suc-
ceeded in emerging from it victoriously.

The Russian workers will have to undergo trials immeasurably
more severe; they will have to take up the fight against a monster,
compared with which anti-Socialist laws in a constitutional country
are but pigmies. History has now confronted us with an imme-
diate task which is more revolutionary than all the immediate tasks
that confront the proletariat of any other country. The fulfilment
of this task, the destruction of the most powerful bulwark, not only
of European, but also (it may now be said) of Asiatic reaction,
places the Russian proletariat in the vanguard of the international
revolutionary proletariat. We shall have the right to count upon
acquiring the honourable title already earned by our predecessors,
the revolutionists of the seventies, if we succeed in inspiring our
movement—which is a thousand times wider and deeper—with the
same devoted determination and vigour.


* Third Edition, Leipzig, 1875. [English translation, pp. 27-30.—Ed.]


80


—


II


THE SPONTANEITY OF THE MASSES AND THE CLASS-CONSCIOUS-
NESS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY


We have said that our movement, much wider and deeper than
the movement of the seventies, must be inspired with the same de-
voted determination and energy that inspired the movement at that
time. Indeed, no one, we think, has up till now doubted that the
strength of the modern movement lies in the awakening of the
masses (principally, the industrial proletariat), and that its weak-
ness lies in the lack of consciousness and initiative among the revo-
lutionary leaders.

However, a most astonishing discovery has been made recently,
which threatens to overthrow all the views that have hitherto pre-
vailed on this question. This discovery was made by Rabocheye
Dyelo, which, in its controversy with Jskra and Zarya, did not con-
fine itself to making objections on separate points, but tried to
ascribe “general disagreements” to a more profound cause—to the
“disagreement concerning the estimation of the relative importance
of the spontaneous and consciously ‘methodical’ element.” Rabo-
cheye Dyelo’s indictment reads: “Belittling the importance of the
objective, or spontaneous, element of development.” * To this we
say: If the controversy with Jskra and Zarya resulted in absolutely
nothing more than causing Rabocheye Dyelo to think over these
“general disagreements,” that single result would give us consider-
able satisfaction, so important is this thesis, and so clearly does it
illuminate the quintessence of the present-day theoretical and
political differences that exist among Russian Social-Democrats.

That is why the question of the relation between consciousness and
spontaneity is of such enormous general interest, and that is why
this question must be dealt with in great detail.


A. THe BEGINNING OF THE SPONTANEOUS MovEMENT


In the previous chapter we pointed out how universally absorbed
the educated youth of Russia were in the theories of Marxism in


* Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10, 1901, pp. 17-18 [R. D.’s italics].
31


the middle of the nineties. The strikes that followed the famous
St. Petersburg industrial war of 1896 also assumed a similar whole-
sale character. The fact that these strikes spread over the whole
of Russia showed how deep the reviving popular movement was,
and if we must speak of the “spontaneous element” then, of course,
we must admit that this strike movement certainly bore a sponta-
neous character. But there is a difference between spontaneity and
spontaneity. Strikes occurred in Russia in the seventies, and in
the sixties (and also in the first half of the nineteenth century),
and these strikes were accompanied by the “spontaneous” destruc-
tion of machinery, etc. Compared with these “revolts” the strikes
of the nineties might even be described as “‘conscious,” to such an
extent do they mark the progress which the labour movement had
made since that period. This shows that the “spontaneous element,”
in essence, represents nothing more nor less than consciousness in
an embryonic form. Even the primitive rebellions expressed the
awakening of consciousness to a certain extent: The workers aban-
doned their age-long faith in the permanence of the system which
oppressed them. They began ... I shall not say to understand,
but to sense the necessity for collective resistance, and emphatically
abandoned their slavish submission to their superiors. But all this
was more in the nature of outbursts of desperation and vengeance
than struggle. The strikes of the nineties revealed far greater flashes
of consciousness: Definite demands were put forward, the time to
strike was carefully chosen, known cases and examples in other
places were discussed, etc. While the revolts were simply uprisings
of the oppressed, the systematic strikes represented the class struggle
in embryo, but only in embryo. Taken by themselves, these strikes
were simply trade union struggles, but not yet Social-Democratic
struggles. They testified to the awakening antagonisms between
workers and employers, but the workers were not and could not
be conscious of the irreconcilable antagonism of their interests to
the whole of the modern political and social system, 7. e., it was
not yet Social-Democratic consciousness. In this sense, the strikes
of the nineties, in spite of the enormous progress they represented
as compared with the “revolts,” represented a purely spontaneous
movement.

We said that there could not yet be Social-Democratic conscious-
ness among the workers. This consciousness could only be brought


to them from without. The history of all countries shows that the
32


working class, exclusively by its own effort, is able to develop only
trade-union consciousness, 7. e., it may itself realise the necessity
for combining in unions, to fight against the employers and to strive
to compel the government to pass necessary labour legislation,
etc.*

The theory of Socialism, however, grew out of the philosophic,
historical and economic theories that were elaborated by the edu-
cated representatives of the propertied classes, the intellectuals.
The founders of modern scientific Socialism, Marx and Engels,
themselves belonged to the bourgeois intelligentsia. Similarly, in
Russia, the theoretical doctrine of Social-Democracy arose quite
independently of the spontaneous growth of the labour movement;
it arose as a natural and inevitable outcome of the development of
ideas among the revolutionary Socialist intelligentsia. At the time
of which we are speaking, i. e., the middle of the nineties, this doc-
trine not only represented the completely formulated programme of
the Emancipation of Labour group but had already won the adhe-
sion of the majority of the revolutionary youth in Russia.

Hence, simultaneously we had both the spontaneous awakening
of the masses of the workers—the awakening to conscious life
and struggle, and the striving of the revolutionary youth, armed
with the Social-Democratic theories, to reach the workers. In this
connection it is particularly important to state the oft-forgotten
(and comparatively little-known) fact that the early Social-Demo-
crats of that period, zealously carried on economic agitation (being
guided in this by the really useful instructions contained in the
pamphlet Agitation that was still in manuscript) but they did not
regard this as their sole task. On the contrary, right from the
very beginning they brought up the general historical tasks of
Russian Social-Democracy, and particularly the task of overthrow-
ing the autocracy. For example, the St. Petersburg group of Social-
Democrats, which was formed by the League of the Struggle for the
Emancipation of the Working Class towards the end of 1895, got
out the first number of the journal known as Rabocheye Dyelo.
This number was completely ready for the press when it was seized
by the gendarmes who, on the night of December 8, 1895, raided


*Trade Unionism does not exclude “politics” altogether as some imagine.
Trade unions have always conducted political agitation and struggle (but not
Social-Democratic ones}. We shall deal with the difference between trade
union politics and Social-Democratic politics in the next chapter.

83


the house of one of the members of the group, Anatole Alekseyevich
Vaneyev,* and so the original Rabocheye Dyelo was not fated to
see the light. The leading article in this number (which perhaps
in thirty years’ time some Russkaya Starina [Russian Antiquary]
will discover in the archives of the Department of Police) de-
scribed the historic tasks of the working class in Russia, of which
the achievement of political liberty is regarded as the most impor-
tant. This number also contained an article entitled, “What Are
Our Cabinet Ministers Thinking Of?” which dealt with the wreck-
ing of the premises of the elementary education committees by the
police. In addition, there was some correspondence, from St.
Petersburg, as well as from other parts of Russia (for example, a
letter on the shooting down of the workers in the Yaroslav prov-
ince). This, if we are not mistaken, “first attempt” of the Rus-
sian Social-Democrats of the nineties was not a narrow, local, and
certainly not an “economic” newspaper, but one that aimed to unite
the strike movement with the revolutionary movement against the
autocracy, and to win all the victims of oppression and _ political
and reactionary obscurantism over to the side of Social-Democ-
racy. No one in the slightest degree acquainted with the state of
the movement at that period could doubt that such a paper would
have been fully approved of by the workers of the capital and the
revolutionary intelligentsia and would have had a wide circulation.
The failure of the enterprise merely showed that the Social-Dem-
ocrats of that time were unable to meet the immediate requirements
of the time owing to their lack of revolutionary experience and
practical training. The same thing must be said with regard to
the St. Petersburg Rabochy Listok [Workers’ Leaflet] and par-
ticularly with regard to the Rabochaya Gazeta and Manifesto estab-
lished in the spring of 1898 by the Russian Social-Democratic
Labour Party. Of course, we would not dream of blaming the
Social-Democrats of that time for this unpreparedness. But in order
to obtain the benefit of the experience of that movement, and to
learn practical lessons from it, we must thoroughly understand the
causes and significance of this or that shortcoming. For that reason

* A. A. Vaneyev died in eastern Siberia in 1899, from consumption, which
he contracted as a result of his solitary confinement in prison prior to his
banishment. That is why we are able to publish the above information, the ~


authenticity of which we guarantee, for it comes from persons who were


closely and directly acquainted with A. A. Vaneyev.
34


it is extremely important to establish the fact that part (perhaps
even a majority) of the Social-Democrats operating in the period of
1895-1898, quite justly considered it possible even then, at the very
beginning of the “spontaneous movement,” to come forward with
a most extensive programme and fighting tactics.*

The lack of training of the majority of the revolutionists being
quite a natural phenomenon, could not have aroused any particular
fears. Since the tasks were properly defined, since the energy ex-
isted for repeated attempts to fulfil these tasks, the temporary fail-
ures were not such a great misfortune. Revolutionary experience
and organisational skill are things that can be acquired provided
the desire is there to acquire these qualities, provided the shortcom-
ings are recognised—which in revolutionary activity is more than
half-way towards removing them!

It was a great misfortune, however, when this consciousness began
to grow dim (it was very lively among the workers of the group
mentioned), when people appeared—and even Social-Democratic
organs—who were prepared to regard shortcomings as virtues, who
tried even to put a theoretical basis to slavish cringing before spon-
taneity. It is time to summarise this tendency, the substance of
which is incorrectly and too narrowly described as Economism.


B. Bow1nc to SPONTANEITY
Rabochaya Mysl


Before dealing with the literary manifestation of this subservience,
we would like to mention the following characteristic fact (com-
municated to us from the above-mentioned source), which throws


*Iskra, which adopts a hostile attitude towards the activities of the Social-
Democrats of the end of the nineties, ignores the fact that at that time the
conditions were unfavourable for any other kind of work except fighting for
Petty demands, declare the Economists in their Letter to Russian Social-
Democratic Organs [Iskra, No. 12]. The facts quoted above show that the
Statement about “unfavourable conditions” is diametrically opposite to the
truth, Not only at the end, but even in the middle of the nineties, all the con-
ditions existed for other work, besides fighting for petty demands, all the
conditions—except the sufficient training of the leaders. Instead of frankly
admitting our, the ideologists’, the leaders’, lack of sufficient training—the
Economists try to throw the blame entirely upon “the absence of conditions,”
upon the influence of material environment which determined the road from
Which it was impossible to divert the movement by any kind of ideology.
«Jat is this but slavish cringing before spontaneity, but the fact that the
ideologists” are enamoured of their own shortcomings?

35


some light on circumstances of the rise and growth of two diverg-
ing Russian Social-Democratic tendencies among the comrades work-
ing in St. Petersburg. In the beginning of 1897, just prior to their
banishment, A. A. Vaneyev and several of his comrades attended a
private meeting at which the “old” and “young” members of the
League of the Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class
were gathered. The conversation centred chiefly around the ques-
tion of organisation, and particularly around the “rules for a work-
ers’ benefit club,” which, in their final form, were published in
Listok Rabotnika—[Workers’ Leaflet] Nos. 9-10, p. 46. Sharp
differences were immediately revealed between the “‘old” members
(the ““Decembrists,” as the St. Petersburg Social-Democrats jestingly
called them) and several of the “young” members (who subse-
quently took an active part in the work of Rabochaya Mysl), the
divergences were very great and a very heated discussion ensued.
The “young” members defended the main principles of the rules in
the form in which they were published. The “old” members said
that this was not what was wanted: That first of all it was necessary
to consolidate the League of the Struggle into an organisation of
revolutionaries which should have control of all the various workers’
benefit clubs, students’ propaganda circles, etc. It goes without
saying that the controversialists had no suspicion at that time that
these disagreements were the beginning of a wide divergence; on the
contrary they regarded them as being of an isolated and casual
nature. But this fact shows that Economism did not arise and
spread in Russia without a fight on the part of the “old” Social-
Democrats (the Economists of to-day are apt to forget this). And
if this struggle has not left “documentary” traces behind it, it is
solely because the membership of the circles working at that time
underwent such constant change that no continuity was established
and, consequently, differences were not recorded in any documents.

The appearance of Rabochaya Mysl brought Economism to the
light of day, but not all at once. We must picture to ourselves
concretely the conditions of the work and the short-livedness of
the majority of the Russian circles (and only those who have ex-
perienced this can have any exact idea of it), in order to under-
stand how much there was accidental in the successes and failures
of the new tendency in various towns, and why for a long time
neither the advocates nor the opponents of this “new” tendency


could make up their minds, indeed they had no opportunity to do
36


so—as to whether this was really a new tendency or whether it was
merely an expression of the lack of training of certain individuals.
For example, the first mimeographed copies of Rabochaya Mysl
never reached the great majority of Social-Democrats, and we are
able to refer to the leading article in the first number only be-
cause it was reproduced in an article by V. I. [Listok Rabotnika,
Nos. 9-10, p. 47ff.], who, of course, did not fail zealously, but un-
reasonably to extol the new paper, which was so different from the
papers and the schemes for papers mentioned above.* And this
leading article deserves to be dealt with in detail because it so
strongly expresses the spirit of Rabochaya Mysl and Economism
generally.

After referring to the fact that the arm of the “blue-coats” could
never stop the progress of the labour movement, the leading article
goes on to say: “. . . The virility of the labour movement is due
to the fact that the workers themselves are at last taking their fate
in their own hands, and out of the hands of the leaders,” and this
fundamental thesis is then developed in greater detail. As a matter
of fact the leaders (i. e., the Social-Democrats, the organisers of
the League of the Struggle) were, one might say, torn out of the
hands of the workers by the police; ** yet it is made to appear that
the workers were fighting against the leaders and eventually lib-
erated themselves from their yoke! Instead of calling upon the
workers to go forward towards the consolidation of the revolu-
tionary organisation, and to the expansion of political activity, they
began to call for a regress to the purely trade-union struggle. They
announced that “the economic basis of the movement is eclipsed by
the effort never to forget the political idea,” and that the watch-
word for the movement was “Fight for an economic position” (!) or
to go even one better, “The workers for the workers.” It was de-

*Tt should be stated in passing that the praise of Rabochaya Mysl in No-
vember, 1898, when Economism had become fully defined, especially abroad,
emanated from that same V. I., who, very soon after, became one of the
editors of Rabocheye Dyelo. And yet Rabocheye Dyelo denied that there
Were two tendencies in Russian Social-Democracy, and continues to deny it
to this day.

**“ That this simile is a correct one is shown by the following characteristic
fact. When after the arrest of the “Decembrists,” the news was spread among
the workers on the Schlusselburg Koad that the discovery and arrest was
facilitated by an agent provocateur, N. M. Mikhailov, a dental surgeon, who
had been in contact with a group associated with the “Decembrists,” they


were so enraged that they decided to kill him.
87


clared that strike funds “are more valuable for the movement than
100 other organisations.” (Compare this statement made in 1897
with the controversy between the “Decembrists’” and the young
members in the beginning of 1897.) Catch-words like: “We must
concentrate, not on the ‘cream’ of the workers, but on the ‘average’
worker—the mass worker’; “Politics always obediently follows eco-
nomics,” * etc., etc., became the fashion, and exercised irresistible
influence upon the masses of the youth who were attracted to the
movement, but who, in the majority of cases, were acquainted only
with legally expounded fragments of Marxism.

Consciousness was completely overwhelmed by spontaneity—the
spontaneity of the “Social-Democrats” who repeated V. V.’s “ideas,”
the spontaneity of those workers who were carried away by the
arguments that a kopeck added to a rouble was worth more than
Socialism and politics, and that they must “fight, knowing that they
are fighting not for some future generations, but for themselves
and their children.” [Leading article in Rabochaya Mysl, No. 1.]
Phrases like these have always been the favourite weapons of the
Western European bourgeoisie, who, while hating Socialism, strove
(like the German “Sozial-Politiker’” Hirsch) to transplant English
trade unionism to their own soil, and to preach to the workers that
the purely trade-union struggle is the struggle for their own and
their children’s welfare, and not a struggle for some kind of Social-
ism that will be realised only in the very remote future.** And
now the “V. V.’s of Russian Social-Democracy” repeat these bour-
geois phrases. It is important at this point to note three circum-
stances, which will be useful to us in our further analysis of con-
temporary differences.* **


* These quotations are taken from the leading article, in the first number
of Rabochaya Mysl already referred to. One can judge from this, the degree
of theoretical training possessed by these “V. V.’s of Russian Social-
Democracy,” who kept repeating the crude vulgarisms of “economic
materialism” at a time when the Marxists were carrying on a literary war
against the real V. V. who had long ago been dubbed “a past master of
reactionary deeds” for holding similar views on the relation between politics
and economics!

** The Germans even have a special expression: Nur Gewerkschajtler, which
means an advocate of the “pure and simple” trade-union struggle.

*** We emphasise the word contemporary for the benefit of those who may
pharisaically shrug their shoulders and say: It is easy enough to attack
Rabochaya Mysl now, but is not all this ancient history? Mutato nomine de
te fabula narratur [Change the name and the tale refers to you—Ed.], we
reply to such contemporary pharisees whose complete mental Sup secsinn to


Rabochaya Msyl will be proved farther on.
38


First of all, the overwhelming of consciousness by spontaneity to
which we referred above, also took place spontaneously. This may
sound like a pun, but alas, it is the bitter truth. It did not take
place as a result of an open struggle between two diametrically op-
posed points-of-view, in which one gained the victory over the other;
it occurred because an increasing number of “old” revolutionaries
were “torn away” by the gendarmes, and because increasing numbers
of “young” members and “V. V.’s of Russian Social-Democracy”
came upon the scene. Every one, who I shall not say has partici-
pated in the contemporary Russian movement, but who has at least
breathed its atmosphere, knows perfectly well that this was so.
And the reason why we, nevertheless, strongly urge the reader to
ponder well this universally known fact, and why we quote the
facts, as an illustration, so to speak, about the Rabocheye Dyelo as
it first appeared, and about the controversy between the “old” and
the “young” at the beginning of 1897, is that certain persons are
speculating on the public’s (or the very youthful youth’s) ignorance
of these facts, and are boasting of their “democracy.” We shall
return to this point farther on.

Secondly, in the very first literary manifestation of Economism,
we observe the extremely curious and highly characteristic phe-
nomenon—from the point-of-view of the differences prevailing
among contemporary Social-Democrats—that the adherents of the
“pure and simple” labour movement, the worshippers of the closest
“organic” (the term used by Rabocheye Dyelo) contacts with the
proletarian struggle, the opponents of the non-labour intelligentsia
(notwithstanding that it is a Socialist intelligentsia) are compelled,
in order to defend their positions, to resort to the arguments of
the bourgeois “pure and simple” trade unionists. This shows that
right from the outset, Rabochaya Mysl began unconsciously to carry
out the programme of the Credo. This shows (what the Rabocheye
Dyelo cannot understand) that subservience to the spontaneity of
the labour movement, the belittling of the réle of “the conscious
element,” of the réle of Social-Democracy, means, whether one
likes it or not, growth of influence of bourgeois ideology among the
workers. All those who talk about “exaggerating the importance
of ideology,” * about exaggerating the réle of the conscious ele-
ments,“* etc., imagine that the pure and simple labour movement

* Letter by the Economists, in Iskra, No. 12.


** Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10.
39


can work out an independent ideology for itself, if only the workers
“take their fate out of the hands of the leaders.’ But in this they
are profoundly mistaken. To supplement what has been said above,
we shall quote the following profoundly true and important utter-
ances by Karl Kautsky on the new programme of the Austrian
Social-Democratic Party: *


Many of our revisionist critics believe that Marx asserted that economic
development and the class struggle create, not only the conditions for Socialist
production, but also, and directly, the consciousness (K. K.’s italics) of its
necessity. And these critics advance the argument that the most highly
capitalistically developed country, England, is more remote than any other
from this consciousness. Judging from the draft, one must come to the
conclusion that the committee which drafted the Austrian Programme shared
this alleged orthodox-Marxian view which is thus refuted. In the draft pro- ©
gramme it is stated: “The more capitalist development increases the numbers
of the proletariat, the more the proletariat is compelled, and obtains the
opportunity to fight against capitalism.” The proletariat becomes “conscious”
of the possibility and necessity for Socialism. In this connection Socialist
consciousness is represented as a necessary and direct result of the proletarian
class struggle. But this is absolutely untrue. Of course, Socialism, as a
theory, has its roots in a modern economic relationship in the same way as the
class struggle of the proletariat has, and in the same way as the latter
emerges from the struggle against the capitalist-created poverty and misery
of the masses. But Socialism and the class struggle arise side by side and
not one out of the other; each arises out of different premises. Modern
Socialist consciousness can arise only on the basis of profound scientific
knowledge. Indeed, modern economic science is as much a condition for
Socialist production, as, say, modern technology, and the proletariat can
create neither the one nor the other, no matter how much it may desire to
do so; both arise out of the modern social process. The vehicles of science
are not the proletariat, but the bourgeois intelligentsia (K. K.’s italics): It
was out of the heads of members of this stratum that modern Socialism
originated, and it was they who communicated it to the more intellectually
developed proletarians who, in their turn, introduce it into the proletarian
class struggle where conditions allow that to be done. Thus, Socialist con-
sciousness is something introduced into the proletarian class struggle from
without (von Aussen Hineingetragenes), and not something that arose within
it spontaneously (urwiichsig). Accordingly, the old Hainfeld programme
quite rightly stated that the task of Social-Democracy is to imbue the pro-
letariat with the consciousness of its position and the consciousness of its
tasks. There would be no need for this if consciousness emerged from the
class struggle. The new draft copied this postulate from the old programme,
and attached it to the postulate mentioned above. But this completely broke
the line of thought... .


Since there can be no talk of an independent ideology being de-
veloped by the masses of the workers in the process of their move-


* Neue Zeit, 1901-1902, XX, I, No. 3, p. 79. The committee’s draft to which
Kautsky refers was passed by the Vienna Congress at the end of last year


in a slightly amended form.
40


ment * then the only choice is: Either bourgeois, or Socialist ideol-
ogy. There is no middle course (for humanity has not created a
“third” ideology, and, moreover, in a society torn by class antag-
onisms there can never be a non-class or above-class ideology).
Hence, to belittle Socialist ideology in any way, to deviate from it in
the slightest degree means strengthening bourgeois ideology. There
is a lot of talk about spontaneity, but the spontaneous development
of the labour movement leads to its becoming subordinated to
bourgeois ideology, it means developing according to the programme
of the Credo, for the spontaneous labour movement is pure and
simple trade unionism, is Nur-Gewerkschaftlerei, and trade union-
ism means the ideological subordination of the workers to the bour-
geoisie. Hence, our task, the task of Social-Democracy, is to com-
bat spontaneity, to divert the labour movement, with its spontaneous
trade-unionist striving, from under the wing of the bourgeoisie,
and to bring it under the wing of revolutionary Social-Democracy.
The phrases employed by the authors of the “Economic” letter
in Iskra, No. 12, about the efforts of the most inspired ideologists
not being able to divert the labour movement from the path that
is determined by the interaction of the material elements and the
material environment are tantamount to the abandonment of
Socialism, and if only the authors of this letter fearlessly thought
out what they say to its logical conclusion, as every one who enters
into the arena of literary and public activity should do, they would
have nothing else to do but “fold their useless arms over their
empty breasts” and . . . leave the field of action to the Struves and
Prokopoviches who are dragging the labour movement “along the
line of least resistance,” i. e., along the line of bourgeois trade


* This does not mean, of course, that the workers have no part in creating
such an ideology. But they take part not as workers, but as Socialist
theoreticians, like Proudhon and Weitling; in other words, they take part
only to the extent that they are able, more or less, to acquire the knowledge
of their age and advance that knowledge. And in order that working men
may be able to do this more often, efforts must be made to raise the level
of the consciousness of the workers generally; care must be taken that the
workers do not confine themselves to the artificially restricted limits of
literature for workers but that they study general literature to an increasing
degree. It would even be more true to say “were not confined,” instead of
not confine themselves,’ because the workers themselves wish to read and
do read all that is written for the intelligentsia and it is only a few (bad)
intellectuals who believe that it is sufficient “for the workers” to tell them a
few things about factory conditions, and to repeat over and over again what
has long been known.

41


unionism, or to the Zubatovs who are dragging it along the line of
clerical and gendarme “ideology.”

Recall the example of Germany. What was the historical service
Lassalle rendered to the German labour movement? It was that he
diverted that movement from the path of progressive trade unionism
and co-operation, along which it was travelling spontaneously (with
the benign assistance of Schulze-Delitzsch and those like him). To
fulfil a task like that, it is necessary to do something altogether
different from indulging in talk about belittling the spontaneous
element, about the tactics-process and about the interaction between
elements and environment, etc. A desperate struggle against spon-
taneity had to be carried on, and only after such a struggle, extend-
ing over many years, was it possible to convert the working popu-
lation of Berlin from a bulwark of the Progressive Party into one
of the finest strongholds of Social-Democracy. This fight is not
finished even now (as those who study the history of the German
movement from Prokopovich, and its philosophy from Struve be-
lieve). Even now the German working class is, so to speak, broken
up into a number of ideologies. A section of the workers is
organised in Catholic and Monarchist labour unions; another
section is organised in the Hirsch-Duncker unions, founded by the
bourgeois worshippers of English trade unionism, while a third
section is organised in Social-Democratic trade unions. The latter
is immeasurably more numerous than the rest, but Social-Democ-
racy was able to achieve this superiority and will be able to main-
tain it, only by unswervingly fighting against all other ideologies.

But why, the reader will ask, does the spontaneous movement, the
movement along the line of least resistance, lead to the domination
of bourgeois ideology? For the simple reason that bourgeois
ideology is far older in origin than Social-Democratic ideology;
because it is more fully developed and because it possesses im-
measurably more opportunities for becoming widespread.* And

*Tt is often said: The working class spontaneously gravitates towards
Socialism. This is perfectly true in the sense that Socialist theory defines
the causes of the poverty of the working class more profoundly and more
correctly than any other theory, and for that reason the workers are able
to appreciate it so easily, provided, however, that this theory does not step
aside for spontaneity and provided it subordinates spontaneity to itself.
Usually this is taken for granted, but Rabocheye Dyelo forgets or distorts this
obvious thing. The working class spontaneously gravitates towards Socialism,


nevertheless, the more widespread (and continuously revived in the most
42


the younger the Socialist movement is in any given country, the
more vigorously must it fight against all attempts to entrench non-
Socialist ideology, and the more strongly must it warn the workers
against those bad counsellors who shout against “exaggerating the
conscious elements,” etc. The authors of the Economic Letter, in
unison with Rabocheye Dyelo, declaim against the intolerance that
is characteristic of the infancy of the movement. To this we reply:
Yes, our movement is indeed in its infancy, and in order that it may
grow up the quicker, it must become infected with intolerance
against all those who retard its growth by subservience to spon-
taneity. Nothing is so ridiculous and harmful as pretending that
we are “old hands” who have long ago experienced all the decisive
episodes of the struggle!

Thirdly, the first number of Rabochaya Mysl shows that the term
“Economism” (which, of course, we do not propose to abandon
because it has more or less established itself) does not adequatel;
convey the real character of the new tendency. Rabochaya Mysl
does not altogether repudiate the political struggle: The Benefit
Society constitution, published in Rabochaya Mysl, No. 1, contains
a reference to fighting against the government. Rabochaya Mysl
believes, however, that “politics always obediently follow eco-
nomics” (and Rabocheye Dyelo gives a variation of this thesis when,
in its programme, it asserts that “in Russia more than in any other
country, the economic struggle is inseparable from the political
struggle”). If by politics is meant Social-Democratic politics, then
the postulates advanced by Rabochaya Mysl and Rabocheye Dyelo
are wrong. The economic struggle of the workers is very often
connected with (although not inseparable from) bourgeois politics,
clerical politics, etc., as we have already seen. If by politics is
meant trade-union politics, 7. e., the common striving of all workers
to secure from the government measures for the alleviation of their
distress, measures characteristic of their position, but which do not
altogether change that position, i. e., which do not remove the sub-
jection of labour to capital, then Rabocheye Dyelo’s postulate is
correct. That striving indeed is common to the British trade union-
ists, who are hostile to Socialism, to the Catholic workers, to the
“Zubatov” workers, etc. There are politics and politics. We see,
therefore, that Rabochaya Mysl does not so much deny the political


diverse forms) bourgeois ideology imposes itself spontaneously upon the


Working class more than any other.
43


struggle as bow to its spontaneity, to its lack of purpose. While
recognising the political struggle (it would be more correct to say:
the political desires and demands of the workers), which arises
spontaneously from the labour movement itself, it absolutely re-—
fuses independently to work out a specifically Social-Democratie
policy corresponding to the general tasks of Socialism and to con-
temporary conditions in Russia. Farther on we shall show that
Rabocheye Dyelo commits the same error.


C. THe Setr-EmMancipation Group anp Rabocheye Dyelo


We have dealt at such length with the little-known and now
almost forgotten leading article in the first number of Rabochaya
Mysl because it was the first and most striking expression of that
general stream of thought which afterwards found the light of day
in innumerable streamlets. V. I. was absolutely right when, in~
praising the first number and the leading article of Rabochaya Mysl,
he said that it was written in a “sharp and provocative” style
[Listok Rabotnika, Nos. 9-10, p. 49]. Every man with convictions, ©
who thinks he has something new to say, writes “provocatively” and
expresses his views strongly. Only those who are accustomed to sit
between two stools lack “provocativeness”; only such people are
able to praise the provocativeness of Rabochaya Mysl one day, and
attack the “provocative polemics” of its opponents the next.

We shall not dwell on the Special Supplement to Rabochaya Mysl
(below we shall have occasion on a number of points to refer to this
work, which expresses the ideas of the Economists more consist- —
ently than any other) but shall briefly mention the Manifesto of the
Self-Emancipation of the Workers’ Group [March, 1899, reprinted
in the London Nakanunye [On the Eve], No. 7, June, 1899]. The
authors of this manifesto quite rightly say that “the workers of
Russia are only just awakening, are only just looking around, and
instinctively clutch at the first means of struggle that come to their
hands.” But from this correct observation, they draw the same in-
correct conclusion that is drawn by Rabochaya Mysl, forgetting that
instinct is that unconsciousness (spontaneity) to whose aid the
Socialists must come; that the “first means of struggle that come ©
to their hands” will always be in modern society, the trade union
means of struggle, and the “first ideology that comes to hand” will —


be bourgeois (trade union) ideology. Similarly, these authors do
44


not “repudiate” politics, they merely say (merely!), repeating what
was said by V. V., that politics are the superstructure, and therefore,
“political agitation must be the superstructure to the agitation
carried on in favour of the economic struggle; it must arise on the
basis of this struggle and give precedence to it.”

As for Rabocheye Dyelo, it commenced its activity by “a defence”
of the Economists. It uttered a downright untruth in its very first
number [No. 1, pp. 141-142] when it stated that it “did not know
which young comrades Axelrod referred to” in his well-known pam-
phiet, in which he uttered a warning against the Economists.* In
the controversy that flared up with Axelrod and Plekhanov over
this falsehood, Rabocheye Dyelo was compelled to admit that “by
expressing ignorance, it desired to defend all the younger Social-
Democrats abroad from this unjust accusation” (Axelrod accused
the Economists of having a restricted outlook). As a matter of
fact this accusation was absolutely just, and Rabocheye Dyelo
knows perfectly well that, among others, it applied to V. I. a
member of its editorial staff. We shall observe in passing that in
this controversy Axelrod was absolutely right, and Rabocheye Dyelo
was absolutely wrong, in their respective interpretations of my
pamphlet: The Tasks of Russian Social-Democrats.** That pam-
phlet was written in 1897, before the appearance of Rabochaya
Mysl when I thought, and rightly thought, that the original tendency
of the St. Petersburg League of Struggle, which I described above,
was the predoiinant one. At all events, that tendency was the
predominant one until the middle of 1898. Consequently, in its
attempt to refute the existence and dangers of Economism, Rabo-
cheye Dyelo had no right whatever to refer to a pamphlet which
expressed views that were squeezed out by Economist views in St.
Petersburg in 1897-1898.***

*The Contemporary Tasks and Tactics of the Russian Social-Democrats,
Geneva, 1898. Two letters written to Rabochaya Gazeta in 1897.

** See V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. I.—Ed.

*** In its attempt to justify the first untruth it uttered (“we do not know
which young comrades Axelrod referred to”) Rabocheye Dyelo uttered a
Second, when, in its Reply it wrote: “Since the review of The Tasks was pub-
lished, a tendency has arisen, or has become more or less defined among
certain Russian Social-Democrats, towards economic one-sidedness, which
represents a step backwards from the state of our movement as described
in The Tasks” [p. 9]. This is what the Reply says, published in 1900. But
the first number of Rabocheye Dyelo (containing the review) appeared in


April, 1899. Did Economism arise only in 1899? No. The protest of the
45


But Rabocheye Dyelo not only “defended” the Economists—it
itself constantly fell into fundamental Economist errors. The cause
of these errors is to be found in the ambiguity of the interpretation
given to the following thesis in Rabocheye Dyelo’s programme:
“We consider that the most important phenomenon of Russian life,
the one that will mostly determine the tasks [our italics] and the
character of the literary activity of the league, is the mass labour
movement [Rabocheye Dyelo’s italics] that has arisen in recent
years.” That the mass movement is a most important phenomenon
is a fact about which there can be no dispute. But the crux of the
question is, What is the meaning of the phrase: The labour move-
ment will “determine the tasks”? It may be interpreted in one of
two ways. Lither it means subservience to the spontaneity of this
movement, i. e., reducing the rdle of Social-Democracy to mere sub-
servience to the labour movement as such (the interpretation given
to it by Rabochaya Mysl, the Self-Emancipation group and other
Economists) ; er it may mean that the mass movement sets before us
new, theoretical, political and organisational tasks, far more com-
plicated than those that might have satisfied us in the period before
the rise of the mass movement. Rabocheye Dyelo inclined and still
inclines towards the first interpretation, for it said nothing definitely —
about new tasks, but argued all the time as if the “mass movement”
relieved us of the necessity of clearly appreciating and fulfilling ©
the tasks it sets before us. We need only point out that Rabocheye
Dyelo considered that we could not possibly accept the overthrow
of the autocracy as the first task of the mass labour movement, and
that it degraded this task (ostensibly in the interests of the mass ~
movement) to the struggle for immediate political demands.
[Reply, p. 25.]

We shall pass over the article by B. Krichevsky, the editor of ©
Rabocheye Dyelo, entitled “The Economic and Political Struggle
in the Russian Movement,” published in No. 7, of that paper, in
which these very mistakes are repeated * and take up Rabocheye
Dyelo, No. 10.
Russian Social-Democrats against Economism (the protest against the Credo) |
appeared in 1899. Economism arose in 1897, as Rabocheye Dyelo very well
knows, for already in November, 1898, V. I. praised Rabochaya Mysl, in
Listok Rabotnika, Nos. 9-10.

*The “stages theory,” or the theory of “timid zigzags” in the political


struggle, is expressed in this article approximately in the following way:
46


We shall not, of course, enter in detail into the various objections
raised by B. Krichevsky and Martynov against Zarya and Iskra.
What interests us here solely, is the theoretical position taken up by
Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10. For example, we shall not examine the
literary curiosity, that Rabocheye Dyelo saw a “‘diametrical” contra-
diction between the postulate:


Social-Democracy does not tie its hands, it does not restrict its activities
to some preconceived plan or method of political struggle: It recognises all
methods of struggle, as long as they correspond to the forces at the disposal
of the party . . . under the given conditions, etc. [Jskra, No. 1].*


and the postulate:


Without a strong organisation, tested in the political struggle carried on
under all circumstances and in all periods, there can be no talk of a systematic
plan of activity, enlightened by firm principles and unswervingly carried out,
which alone is worthy of being called tactics [Iskra, No. 4].**


To confuse the recognition, in principle, of all means of struggle,
of all plans and methods, provided they are expedient—with the
necessity at @ given political moment, to be guided by a strictly
adhered to plan in talking of tactics, is tantamount to confusing the


“Political demands, which in their character are common to the whole of
Russia should, however, at first [this was written in August, 1900!] correspond
to the experience gained by the given stratum [sic!] of workers in the eco-
nomic struggle. Only [!] on the basis of this experience can and should the
political agitation be taken up,” etc. [p. 11]. On page 4, the author, pro-
testing against what he regards as the absolutely unfounded charge of
Economist heresy, pathetically exclaims: “What Social-Democrat does not
know that according to the theories of Marx and Engels, the class interest
is the decisive factor in history, and, consequently, that the proletarian struggle
for the defence of its economic interests must be of first-rate importance in
its class development and struggle for emancipation?” (our italics). The
word “consequently” is absolutely out of place. The fact that economic
interests are a decisive factor does not in the least imply that the economic
(i. e., trade union) struggle must be the main factor, for the essential and
“decisive” interest of classes can be satisfied only by radical political changes.
In particular the fundamental economic interests of the proletariat can be
satisfied only by a political revolution, that will substitute the dictatorship of
the proletariat for the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. B. Krichevsky repeats
the arguments of the “V. V.’s of Russian Social-Democracy” (i. e., politics fol-
lows economics, etc.), and the Bernsteinists of German Social-Democracy (for
example, by arguments like these, Woltmann tried to prove that the workers
Must first of all acquire “economic power” before they can think about politi-
cal revolution).

*See conclusion of article, “The Urgent Tasks of Our Movement,” The
Iskra Period, Book 1, p. 57.—Ed.

** See beginning of article “Where to Begin,” The Iskra Period, Book I,
P. 109.—£qd.

17


recognition by medical science of all kinds of treatment of diseases
with the necessity for adopting a certain definite method of treat-
ment for a given disease. The point is, however, that Rabocheye
Dyelo, while suffering from a disease which we have called sub-
servience to spontaneity, refuses to recognise any “‘method of treat-
ment” for that disease. Hence, it made the remarkable discovery
that “a plan of tactics contradicts the fundamental spirit of Marx-
ism” [No. 10, p. 18], that tactics are “a process of growth of party
tasks, which grow with the party” [(p. 11), Rabocheye Dyelo’s
italics]. The latter remark has every chance of becoming a cele-
brated maxim, a permanent monument to the tendency of Rabo-
cheye Dyelo. To the question: Whither? a leading organ replies:
Motion is a process of alteration in the distance between starting
point and destination. This matchless example of profundity is not
merely a literary curiosity (if it were, it would not be worth dealing ©
with at length), but the programme of the whole tendency, i. e., the
programme which R. M. (in the Special Supplement to Rabochaya
Mysl) expressed in the words: “That struggle is desirable which is
possible, and the struggle which is possible is the one that is going
on now.” It is the tendency of unbounded opportunism, which
passively adapts itself to spontaneity. '

“A plan of tactics contradicts the fundamental spirit of Marx-
ism!” But this is a libel on Marxism; it is like the caricature of it
that was presented to us by the Narodniks in their fight against us.
It means putting restraint on the initiative and energy of class-con-
scious fighters, whereas Marxism, on the contrary, gives a gigantic
impetus to the initiative and energy of Social-Democrats, opens up
for them the widest perspectives and, if one may so express it, places
at their disposal the mighty force of millions and millions of
workers “spontaneously” rising for the struggle. The whole his-_
tory of international Social-Democracy seethes with plans advanced
first by one and then by another political leader; some confirming
the far-sightedness and correct political and organisational insight
of their authors and others revealing their short-sightedness and
lack of political judgment. At the time when Germany was passing
one of the most important turning points in its history—the time of
the establishment of the Empire, the opening of the Reichstag, and
the granting of universal suffrage, Liebknecht had one plan for


Social-Democratic policy and work, and Schweitzer had another.
48


When the anti-Socialist laws came down on the heads of the German
Socialists, Most and Hasselmann, had one plan, that is, to call for
violence and terror; Héchberg, Schramm and (partly) Bernstein
had another, which they began to preach to the Social-Democrats,
somewhat as follows: They themselves provoked the passing of the
anti-Socialist laws by being unreasonably bitter and revolutionary,
and must now show that they deserve pardon by exemplary conduct.
There was yet a third plan proposed by those who paved the way
for and carried out the publication of an illegal organ. It is easy,
of course, in retrospect, many years after the fight over the selection
of the path to be followed has finished, and after history has
pronounced its verdict as to the expediency of the path selected, to
utter profound maxims about the growth of party tasks that grow
with the party. But at a time of confusion,* when the Russian
“critics” and Economists degrade Social-Democracy to the level of
trade unionism, and when the terrorists are strongly advocating the
adoption of a “plan of tactics” that repeats the old mistakes, at
such a time, to confine oneself to such profundities, means simply
to issue to oneself a “certificate of mental poverty.” At a time
when many Russian Social-Democrats suffer from lack of initiative
and energy, from a lack of “breadth of political propaganda, agita-
tion and organisation,** a lack of plans for a broader organisation
of revolutionary work, at such a time to say: “A plan of tactics
contradicts the fundamental spirit of Marxism,” not only means
theoretically to vulgarise Marxism, but also practically to drag the
party backward. Rabocheye Dyelo goes on sermonising:

The revolutionary Social-Democrat is only confronted by the task of
accelerating objective development by his conscious work; it is not his task
to obviate it or substitute his own subjective plans for this development.
Iskra knows all this in theory. But the enormous importance which Marxism
quite justly attaches to conscious revolutionary work causes it in practice,


owing to its doctrinaire view of tactics, to belittle the significance of the
objective or the spontaneous elements of development [p. 18].


Another example of the extraordinary theoretical confusion
worthy of V. V. and that fraternity. We would ask our philosopher:


* Ein Jahr Der Verwirrung ‘A Year of Confusion) is the title Mehring
Gave to the chapter of his History of German Social-Democracy in which he
describes the hesitancy and lack of determination displayed at first by the
cialists in selecting the “plan of tactics” for the new situation.

See leading article in Iskra, No. 1, “The Urgent Tasks of our Movement,”
The Iskra Period, Book I, p. 53.—Ed.
49


How may a deviser of subjective plans “belittle”? objective develop-
ment? Obviously by losing sight of the fact that this objective
development creates or strengthens, destroys or weakens certain
classes, strata, groups, nations, groups of nations, etc., and in this
way creates a definite international, political grouping of forces,
the position of revolutionary parties, etc. If the deviser of plans
did that, his mistake would not be that he belittled the spontaneous
element, but that he belittled the conscious element, for he would
then show that he lacked the “consciousness” that would enable him
properly to understand objective development. Hence, the very
talk about “estimating the relative significance” (Rabocheye Dyelo’s
italics) of spontaneity and consciousness sufficiently reveals a com- |
plete lack of “‘consciousness.” If certain “spontaneous elements of —
development” can be grasped at all by human understanding, then
an incorrect estimation of them would be tantamount to “belittling
the conscious element.” But if they cannot be grasped, then we
cannot be aware of them, and therefore cannot speak of them.
What is B. Krichevsky arguing about then? If he thinks that
Iskra’s “subjective plans” are erroneous (as he in fact declares
them to be), then he ought to show what objective facts are ignored -
in these plans, and then charge Jskra with a lack of consciousness
for ignoring them, with, to use his own words, “belittling the con-—
scious element.” If, however, while being displeased with sub-—
jective plans he can bring forward no other argument except that
of “belittling the spontaneous element” (!!) he merely shows:
1. That he theoretically understands Marxism 4 la Kareyevs and the
Mikhailovskys, who have been sufficiently ridiculed by Beltov,
and 2. That practically, he is quite pleased with the “spontaneous
elements of development” that have drawn our legal Marxists to-—
wards Bernsteinism and our Social-Democrats towards Economism,
and that he is full of wrath against those who have determined at
all costs to divert Russian Social-Democracy from the path of
spontaneous development.

And then follow things that are positively funny. “In the same
way as men and women will multiply in the old-fashioned way,
notwithstanding all the discoveries of natural science, so the birth
of a new social order will come about in the future mainly as a
result of elemental outbursts, notwithstanding all the discoveries of
social science and the increase in the number of conscious fighters.”


[p. 19.] Our grandfathers, in their old-fashioned wisdom used to
50


?


say: “Any fool can bring forth children,” and to-day the “modern
Socialists” (& la Narcissus Tuporylov) in their wisdom say: “Any
fool can help the spontaneous birth of a new social order.” We
too are of that opinion. All that is required for help of that kind
is to surrender to Economism when Economism reigns and to terror-
ism when terrorism arises. For example, in the spring of this year,
when it was so important to utter a note of warning against terror-
ism, Rabocheye Dyelo stood in amazement confronted by a problem
that was “new” to it and now, six months after, when the problem
has become less topical, it, at one and the same time, presents us
with the declaration: “We think that it is not and cannot be the
task of Social-Democracy to counteract the rise of terroristic
temper” [Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10, p. 23], and the congress reso-
lution: “The congress regards systematic and aggressive terror as
being inopportune” [Two Congresses, p. 18]. How beautifully
clear and connected this is! Not to counteract, but to declare
inopportune, and to declare it in such a way that the “resolution”
shall not apply to unsystematic and defencive terror. It must be
admitted that a resolution like that is extremely safe and com-
pletely insured against error, just as a man who talks, but says
nothing, is insured against error! And all that is required to be
able to draft a resolution like that is: Ability to keep at the tail end
of the movement. When Jskra ridiculed Rabocheye Dyelo for de-
claring the question of terror to be a new one,* the latter angrily
accused Iskra of “having the incredible effrontery to impose upon
the party organisations decisions on tactical questions arrived at by
a group of emigrant writers more than sixteen years ago” [p. 24].
Effrontery indeed, and an exaggeration of the conscious elements
to find the theoretical solutions to problems, and then to try to
prove to the organisation, to the party and to the masses that this
solution is correct! ** How much better it is to repeat something
that has been learned by rote, and, without “imposing” anything
upon anybody, swing with every “turn” in the direction of Econo-
mism or in the direction of terrorism. Rabocheye Dyelo even goes
so far as to generalise this gospel of worldly wisdom and accuses


105 See beginning of article “Where to Begin,” The Iskra Period, Book I, p.
—Ed.

** Nor must it be forgotten that in solving “theoretically” the problem of
terror, the Emancipation of Labour group generalised the experience of the
Preceding revolutionary movement.

51


Iskra and Zarya with “setting up its programme against the move-
ment, like a spirit hovering over the formless chaos” (p. 29). But
what else is the function of Social-Democracy if not to be a “spirit,”
not only hovering over the spontaneous movement but also raising
the movement fo the level of “its programme”? Surely, it is not its
function to drag at the tail of the movement: At best, this would be >
of no service to the movement; at the worst, it would be very, very
harmful. Rabocheye Dyelo, however, not only follows this “‘tactics-
process,” but elevates it to a principle, so that it would be more
correct to describe its tendency not as opportunism, but khvostism
(from the word khvost).* And it must be admitted, that those who —
have determined always to follow behind the movement like a tail,
are absolutely and forever ensured against “belittling the spon-
taneous element of development.”


And so, we have become convinced that the fundamental error
committed by the “new tendency” in Russian Social-Democracy lies —
in its subservience to spontaneity, and its failure to understand that —
the spontaneity of the masses demands a mass of consciousness from >
us Social-Democrats. The more spontaneously the masses rise, the -
more widespread the movement becomes, so much the more rapidly —
grows the demand for greater consciousness in the theoretical,
political and organisational work of Social-Democracy.

The spontaneous rise of the masses in Russia proceeded (and
continues) with such rapidity that the young untrained Social-
Democrats proved unfitted for the gigantic tasks that confronted
them. This lack of training is our common misfortune, the mis-
fortune of all Russian Social-Democrats. The rise of the masses
proceeded and spread uninterruptedly and continuously; it not only
continued in the places it commenced in, but it spread to new locali-_
ties and to new strata of the population (influenced by the labour
movement, the ferment among the students and the intellectuals i
generally, and even among the peasantry revived). Revolution-
aries, however, lagged behind this rise of the masses in both their
“theories” and in their practical activity; they failed to establish an
uninterrupted organisation having continuity with the past, and
capable of leading the whole movement.

In Chapter I, we proved that Rabocheye Dyelo degraded our
theoretical tasks and that it “spontaneously” repeated the fashion-


* Khvost is the Russian word for tail.—E£d.
52


able catchword “freedom of criticism”: that those who repeated
this catchword lacked the “consciousness” to understand that the
position of the opportunist “critics” and the revolutionaries, both
in Germany and in Russia, are diametrically opposed to each other.

In the following chapters, we shall show how this subservience to
spontaneity found expression in the sphere of the political tasks and
the organisational work of Social-Democracy.


III
TRADE-UNION POLITICS AND SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC POLITICS


WE shall start off again from the praises that have been sun;
for Rabocheye Dyelo. Martynov gave his article in No. 10 of Rabo-
cheye Dyelo, on his differences with IJskra, the title: “Exposure
Literature and the Proletarian Struggle.” He formulated the sub-
stance of these differences as follows:

We cannot confine ourselves entirely to exposing the state of affairs that


stand in its [the labour party’s] path of development. We must also respond
to the immediate and current interests of the proletariat [p. 63].


“|. .Iskra ... is in fact the organ of revolutionary opposition —


that exposes the state of affairs in our country, particularly the
political state of affairs. . . . We, however, work and shall continue —
to work for the cause of labour in close organic contact with the
proletarian struggle” [zbid.]. One cannot help being grateful to
Martynov for this formula. It is of exceptional general interest
because substantially it embraces not only our disagreements with
Rabocheye Dyelo, but the general disagreement between ourselves
and the Economists concerning the political struggle. We have
shown already that the Economists do not altogether repudiate
“politics,” but that they are constantly deviating from the Social-
Democratic conception of politics to the trade-unionist conception.
Martynov deviates in exactly the same way, and we agree, therefore,
to take him as an example of an Economist wandering into error on
this question. As we shall endeavour to prove, neither the authors
of the Special Supplement of Rabochaya Mysl, nor the authors of |
the manifesto issued by the Emancipation group, nor the authors of
the Economist Letter published in Jskra, No. 12, will have any right
to complain against this choice.


A. Pouiticat AGITATION AND Irs RESTRICTION BY THE ECONOMISTS


Every one knows that the spread and consolidation of the eco-
nomic * struggle of the Russian workers proceeded simultaneously
*In order to avoid misunderstanding we would state, that here, and


throughout this pamphlet, by economic struggle, we mean (in accordance with
54


with the creation of a “literature” exposing economic conditions,
i. e., factory and industrial conditions. These “leaflets” were de-
yoted mainly to the exposure of factory conditions, and very soon a
passion for exposures was roused among the workers. As soon as
the workers realised that the Social-Democratic circles desired to
and could supply them with a new kind of leaflet that told the whole
truth about their poverty-stricken lives, about their excessive toil and
their lack of rights, correspondence began to pour in from the fac-
tories and workshops. This “exposure literature” created a sensa-
tion not only in the particular factory dealt with and the conditions
of which were exposed in a given leaflet, but in all the factories to
which news had spread about the facts exposed. And as the
poverty and want among the workers in the various enterprises and
in the various trades are pretty much the same, the “Truth about
the life of the workers” roused the admiration of all. Even among
the most backward workers, a veritable passion was roused to “zo
into print”—a noble passion to adopt this rudimentary form of war
against the whole of the modern social system which is based upon
robbery and oppression. And in the overwhelming majority of cases
these “leaflets” were in truth a declaration of war, because the ex-
posures had a terrifically rousing effect upon the workers; it stimu-
lated them to put forward demands for the removal of the most
glaring evils, and roused in them a readiness to support these
demands with strikes. Finally, the employers themselves were.com-
pelled to recognise the significance of these leaflets as a declara-
tion of war, so much so that in a large number of cases they did not
even wait for the outbreak of hostilities. As is always the case,
the mere publication of these exposures made them effective, and
they acquired the significance of a strong moral force. On more
than one occasion, the mere appearance of a leaflet proved sufficient
to compel an employer to concede all or part of the demands put
forward. In a word, economic (factory) exposures have been an
™mportant lever in the economic struggle and they will continue to
be so as long as capitalism, which creates the need for the workers
ee defend themselves, exists. Even in the more progressive coun-
tries of Europe to-day, the exposure of the evils in some backward
the Meaning of the term as it has become accepted amongst us) the “practical
€conomic struggle” which Engels, in the passage we quoted above, described


“. .
as resistance to capitalism,” and which in free countries is known as the
trade-union struggle.


55


trade, or in some forgotten branch of domestic industry, serves a:
a starting point for the awakening of class-consciousness, for th
beginning of a trade-union struggle, and for the spread
Socialism.*

Recently, the overwhelming majority of Russian Social-Democrats
were almost wholly engaged in this work of exposing factory condi-
tions. It is sufficient to refer to the columns of Rabochaya Mysl ta
judge to what an extent they were engaged in it. So much so indeed,
that they lost sight of the fact that this, taken by itself, was not
substantially Social-Democratic work, but merely trade-union wor
As a matter of fact, these exposures merely dealt with the relations
between the workers in a given trade, with their immediate employ
ers, and all that it achieved was that the vendors of labour pow
learned to sell their “commodity”? on better terms, and to fight th
purchasers of labour power over a purely commercial deal. These
exposures might have served (if properly utilised by revolution-
aries) as a beginning and a constituent part of Social-Democrati¢
activity, but they might also (and with subservience to spontaneity,
inevitably had to) have led to a “pure and simple” trade-union
struggle and to a non-Social-Democratic labour movement. Social-
Democrats lead the struggle of the working class not only for
better terms for the sale of labour power, but also for the abolitio n
of the social system which compels the propertyless class to sell
itself to the rich. Social-Democracy represents the working class,
not in its relation to a given group of employers, but in its relation
to all classes in modern society, to the state as an organised political
force. Hence, it not only follows that Social-Democrats must not

*In the present chapter, we deal only with the political struggle; i. @5
whether it is to be understood in its broader or narrower sense. Therefore,
we refer only in passing, merely to point out a curiosity, to the accusation
that Rabocheye Dyelo hurls against IJskra of being “too restrained” in regard
to the economic struggle [Two Congresses, p. 27, rehashed by Martynov in his
pamphlet: Social-Democracy and the Working Class]. If those who make this
accusation counted up in terms of hundredweights or reams, as they are sO
fond of doing, what has been said about the economic struggle in the industrial
column of Jskra in one year’s issue, and compared this with the industrial


columns of Rabocheye Dyelo and Rabochaya Mysl taken together, they would
see that they lag very much behind even in this respect. Apparently, the


clearly, reveal their confusion. “Jskra,” they write, “willy-nilly [!] is com-
pelled [!] to take note of the imperative demands of life and to publish at
least [!!] correspondence about the labour movement” [Zwo Congress
p. 27]. Now this is really a crushing argument!

56


confine themselves entirely to the economic struggle; they must not
even allow the organisation of economic exposures to become the
predominant part of their activities. We must actively take up the
political education of the working class, and the development of its
political consciousness. Now, after Zarya and Iskra have made the
first attack upon Economism “all are agreed” with this (although
some agreed only nominally, as we shall soon prove).

The question now arises: What does political education mean?
Is it sufficient to confine oneself to the propaganda of working-class
hostility to autocracy? Of course not. It is not enough to explain
to the workers that they are politically oppressed (any more than
it was to explain to them that their interests were antagonistic to
the interests of the employers). Advantage must be taken of every
concrete example of this oppression for the purpose of agitation
(in the same way as we began to use concrete examples of eco-
nomic oppression for the purpose of agitation). And inasmuch as
political oppression affects all sorts of classes in society, inasmuch
as it manifests itself in various spheres of life and activity, in
industrial life, civic life, in personal and family life, in religious
life, scientific life, etc., etc., is it not evident that we shall not be
fulfilling our task of developing the political consciousness of the
workers if we do not undertake the organisation of the political
exposure of autocracy in all its aspects? In order to agitate over
concrete examples of oppression, these examples must be exposed
(in the same way as it was necessary to expose factory evils in order
to carry on economic agitation).

One would think that this was clear enough. It turns out, how-
ever, that “all” are agreed that it is necessary to develop political
consciousness in all its aspects, only in words. It turns out that
Rabocheye Dyelo, for example, has not only failed to take up the
task of organising (or to make a start in organising) in all-sided
political exposure, but is even trying to drag Iskra, which has un-
dertaken this task, away from it. Listen to this: “The political strug-
gle of the working class is merely [it is precisely not “merely”] a
more developed, a wider and more effective form of economic strug-
gle.” [Programme of Rabocheye Dyelo published in No. 1, p. 3.]
The Social-Democrats are now confronted with the task of, as far
#S possible, giving the economic struggle itself a political character”
[Martynov, Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10, p. 42]. “The economic strug-


gle is the most widely applicable method of drawing the masses into
57


active political struggle” (resolution passed by the congress of the
League and “amendments” thereto). [Two Congresses, pp. 11 and
17]. As the reader will observe, all these postulates permeate
Rabocheye Dyelo, from its very first number to the recently issued |
Instructions by the Editorial Committee, and all of them evidently
express a single view regarding political agitation and the political
struggle. Examine this view from the standpoint of the opinion pre-
vailing among all Economists, that political agitation must follow
economic agitation. Is it true that in general,* the economic strug-
gle “is the most widely applicable method” of drawing the masses
into the political struggle? It is absolutely untrue. All and sundry
manifestations of police tyranny and autocratic outrage, in ad-
dition to the evils connected with the economic struggle, are
equally “widely applicable’ as a means of “drawing in” the
masses. The tyranny of the Zemstvo chiefs, the flogging of the
peasantry, the corruption of the officials, the conduct of the police
towards the “common people” in the cities, the fight against the
famine-stricken and the suppression of the popular striving towards
enlightenment and knowledge, the extortion of taxes, the persecution
of the religious sects, the severe discipline in the army, the militarist —
conduct towards the students and the liberal intelligentsia—all these
and a thousand other similar manifestations of tyranny, though
not directly connected with the “economic” struggle, do they, in
general, represent a less “widely applicable” method and subject for
political agitation and for drawing the masses into the political
struggle? The very opposite is the case. Of all the innumerable
cases in which the workers suffer (either personally or those closely
associated with them) from tyranny, violence, and lack of rights,
undoubtedly only a relatively few represent cases of police tyranny
in the economic struggle as such. Why then should we beforehand
restrict the scope of political agitation by declaring only one of the


*We say “in general,” advisedly, because Rabocheye Dyelo speaks of
general principles and of the general tasks of the whole party. Undoubtedly,
cases occur in practice, when politics must follow economics, but only
Economists can say a thing like that in a resolution that was intended to
apply to the whole of Russia. Cases do occur when it is possible “right
from the beginning,” to carry on political agitation “exclusively on an eco-
nomic basis”; and yet Rabocheye Dyelo went so far as to say that “there was
no need for this whatever” [Two Congresses, p. 11]. In the next chapter,
we shall show that the tactics of the “politicians” and revolutionaries not
only do not ignore the trade-union tasks of Social-Democracy, but that, on the
contrary, they alone can secure the consistent fulfilment of these tasks.

58


methods to be “the most widely applicable,” when Social-Democrats
have other, generally speaking, not less “widely applicable” means?

Long, long ago (a year ago! ...) Rabocheye Dyelo wrote:

The masses begin to understand immediate political demands after one,
or at all events, after several strikes; immediately the government sets the
police and gendarmerie against them [No. 7, p. 15, August, 1900].

This opportunist theory of stages has now been rejected by the
League, which makes a concession to us by declaring: “There is no
need whatever to conduct political agitation right from the begin-
ning, exclusively on an economic basis.” [Two Congresses, p. 11.]
This very repudiation of part of its former errors by the League
will enable the future historian of Russian Social-Democracy to
discern the depths to which our Economists have degraded Socialism
better than any number of lengthy arguments! But the League must
be very naive indeed to imagine that the abandonment of one form
of restricting politics will induce us to agree to another form of
restriction! Would it not be more logical to say that the economic
struggle should be conducted on the widest possible basis, that it
should be utilised for political agitation, but that “there is no need
whatever” to regard the economic struggle as the most widely ap-
plicable means of drawing the masses into active political struggle?

The League attaches significance to the fact that it substituted the
phrase “most widely applicable method” by the phrase “a better
method,” contained in one of the resolutions of the Fourth Congress
of the Jewish Labour League (Bund). We confess that we find it
difficult to say which of these resolutions is the better one. In
our opinion both are bad. Both the League and the Bund fall into
error (partly perhaps unconsciously, owing to the influence of tradi-
tion) concerning the economic, trade-unionist interpretation of
politics. The fact that this error is expressed either by the word
“better” or by the words “most widely applicable” makes no material
difference whatever. If the League had said that “political agitation
on an economic basis” is the most widely applied (and not “ap-
Plicable”) method it would have been right in regard to a certain
Period in the development of our Social-Democratic movement. It
would have been right in regard to the Economists and to many (if
not the majority) of the practical Economists of 1898-1901 who
have applied the method of political agitation (to the extent that
they applied it at all) almost exclusively on an economic basis.


Political agitation on such lines was recognised, and as we have seen,
59


even recommended by Rabochaya Mysl, and by the Self-Emancipa-
tion group! Rabocheye Dyelo should have strongly condemned the
fact that useful economic agitation was accompanied by the harm
ful restriction of the political struggle, but instead of that, it declares
the method most widely applied (by the Economists) to be the most
widely applicable! It is not surprising, therefore, that when we
describe these people as Economists, they can do nothing else but
pour abuse upon us, and call us “mystifiers,” “disrupters,” “Papal
Nuncios,” and “slanderers,” * go complaining to the world that we
have mortally offended them and declare almost on oath that “not
a single Social-Democratic organisation is now tinged with Econo-
mism.** Qh, these evil, slanderous politicians! They must have de-
liberately invented this Economism, out of sheer hatred of mankind,
in order mortally to offend other people!

What do the words “to give the economic struggle itself a political
character,” which Martynov uses in presenting the tasks of Social-
Democracy, mean concretely? The economic struggle is the col-
lective struggle of the workers against their employers for better
terms in the sale of their labour power, for better conditions of life
and labour. This struggle is necessarily a struggle according to
trade, because conditions of labour differ very much in different
trades, and, consequently, the fight to improve these conditions can
only be conducted in respect of each trade (trade unions in the
Western countries, temporary trade associations and leaflets in
Russia, etc.). To give “the economic struggle itself a political
character” means, therefore, to strive to secure satisfaction for these
trade demands, the improvement of conditions of labour in each
separate trade by means of “legislative and administrative measures”
(as Martynov expresses it on the next page of his article, p. 43).
This is exactly what the trade unions do and always have done.
Read the works of the thoroughly scientific (and “thoroughly” op-
portunist) Mr. and Mrs. Webb and you will find that the British |
trade unions long ago recognised, and have long carried out the
task of “giving the economic struggle itself a political character”;
they have long been fighting for the right to strike, for the removal
of all juridical hindrances to the co-operative and trade-union
movement, for laws protecting women and children, for the im-—


* These are exactly the expressions used in Two Congresses, pp. 28, 30, 31,
and 32.


** Two Congresses, p. 32.
60


provement of conditions of labour by means of sanitary and factory
legislation, etc.

Thus, the pompous phrase: “To give the economic struggle itself
a political character,” which sounds so “terrifically” profound and
revolutionary, serves as a screen to conceal what is in fact the tra-
ditional striving to degrade Social-Democratic politics to the level
of trade-union politics! On the pretext of rectifying Iskra’s one-
sidedness, which, it is alleged, places “the revolutionising of dogma
higher than the revolutionising of life,” * we are presented with the
struggle for economic reform as if it were something entirely new.
As a matter of fact, the phrase “to give the economic struggle itself
a political character” means nothing more than the struggle for
economic reforms. And Martynov himself might have come to this
simple conclusion had he only pondered over the significance of
his own words. “Our party,” he says, turning his heaviest guns
against Iskra, “could and should have presented concrete demands
to the government for legislative and administrative measures against
economic exploitation, for the relief of unemployment, for the relief
of the famine-stricken, etc.” [Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10, pp. 42, 43.]
Concrete demands for measures—does not this mean demands for
social reforms? And again we ask the impartial reader, do we
slander the Rabocheye Dyeloists (may I be forgiven for this clumsy
expression!) when we declare them to be concealed Bernsteinists,
for advancing their thesis about the necessity for fighting for
economic reforms as a reason for their disagreement with Iskra?

Revolutionary Social-Democracy always included, and now in-
cludes, the fight for reforms in its activities. But it utilises “eco.
nomic” agitation for the purpose of presenting to the government,
not only demands for all sorts of measures, but also (and primarily \
the demand that it cease to be an autocratic government. More.
over, it considers it to be its duty to present this demand to the
sovernment, not on the basis of the economic struggle alone, but on
the basis of all manifestations of public and political life. In a
word, it subordinates the struggle for reforms to the revolutionary
struggle for liberty and for Socialism, in the same way as the part

* Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10, p. 60. This is the Martynov variation of the
application to the present chaotic state of our movement of the thesis: “A
step forward of the real movement is more important than a dozen pro-
grammes,” to which we have already referred above. As a matter of fact,
this is merely a translation into Russian of the notorious Bernsteinist phrase:


« . . . ° . .
The movement is everything, the ultimate aim is nothing.”
61


is subordinate to the whole. Martynov, however, resuscitates the
theory of stages in a new form, and strives to prescribe an ex-
clusively economic, so to speak, path of development for the political
struggle. By coming out at this moment, when the revolutionary
movement is on the up-grade, with an alleged special “task” of
fighting for reforms, he is dragging the party backwards, and is
playing into the hands of both “economic” and liberal opportunism.

Shamefacedly hiding the struggle for reforms behind the pompous
thesis “to give the economic struggle itself a political character,”
Martynov advanced, as if it were a special point, exclusively eco-
nomic (in fact, exclusively factory) reforms. Why he did that, we
do not know. Perhaps it was due to carelessness? But if he indeed
had only “factory” reforms in mind, then the whole of his thesis,
which we have just quoted, loses all sense. Perhaps he did it be-
cause he thought it possible and probable that the government would
agree to make “concessions” only in the economic sphere? * If
that is what he thought, then it is a strange error. Concessions are
also possible, and are made in the sphere of legislation concerning
flogging, passports, land-compensation payments, religious sects, the
censorship, etc., etc. “Economic” concessions (or pseudo-conces-
sions) are, of course, the cheapest and most advantageous conces-
sions to make from the government’s point-of-view, because by these
means it hopes to win the confidence of the masses of the workers. —
Precisely for this very reason, Social-Democrats must under no cir-_
cumstances create grounds for the belief (or the misunderstanding)
that we attach greater value to economic reforms than to political re-
forms, or that we regard them as being particularly important, etc.
“Such demands,” writes Martynov, concerning the concrete demands
for legislative and administrative measures referred to above, “would
not be merely a hollow sound because, promising certain palpable
results, they might be actively supported by the masses of the work-
ers... . We are not Economists, oh, no! We only cringe as
slavishly before the “palpableness’” of concrete results as do the —
Bernsteins, the Prokopoviches, the Struves, the R. M.’s, and tutti
quanti! We only wish to make it understood (with Narcissus
Tuporylov) that all that which “does not promise palpable results”
is merely a “hollow sound.” We are only trying to argue as if the


*P. 43. “Of course, when we advise the workers to present certain eco-
nomic demands to the government, we do so because in the economic sphere,
the autocratic government is compelled to agree to make certain concessions.”

62


masses of the workers are incapable (and, of course, have not
proved their capabilities, notwithstanding those who ascribe their
own philistinism to them) of actively supporting every protest
against the autocracy even if it promises absolutely no palpable
results whatever!

Take for example the very “measures” for the relief of unem-
ployment and the famine that Martynov himself advances. While
Rabocheye Dyelo was engaged, judging by what it has promised,
in drawing up a programme of “concrete [in the form of Acts of
Legislation? ] demands for legislative and administrative measures,”
“promising palpable results,” Iskra, which “constantly places the
revolutionising of dogma higher than the revolutionising of life,”
tried to explain the inseparable connection that exists between
unemployment and the capitalist system as a whole; uttered the
warning that “famine is.coming”; exposed the police “fight against
the famine-stricken” and the outrageous “provisional penal regula-
tions”; and Zarya published a special edition in the form of an
agitation pamphlet, entitled, Review of Internal Affairs, a part of
its text which was devoted to the famine. But good God! How
“one-sided” these incorrigibly narrow and orthodox doctrinaires
were in this; how deaf to the calls of “life itself”! Not one of these
articles contained—oh horror!—a single, can you imagine it?—
a single “concrete demand,” “promising palpable results”! Poor
doctrinaires! They sought to be sent to Krichevsky and Martynov
to be taught that tactics are a process of growth, etc., and that the
economic struggle itself should be given a political character!

In addition to its immediately revolutionary significance, the workers’ eco-
nomic struggle against the employers and the government [“economic struggle
against the government”!!] has also this significance that it constantly brings


the workers face to face with their own lack of political rights [Martynov,
p. 44].


We quote this passage not in order to repeat what has been said
already a hundred and a thousand times before, but in order to
thank Martynov for this excellent new formula: “The workers’
economic struggle against the employers and the government.”
What a pearl! With what inimitable talent and skill in eliminating
partial disagreements and shades of differences among Economists,
does this clear and concise postulate express the quintessence of
Economism: From calling to the workers to join “in the political


struggle which they carry on in the general interest, for the purpose
63


of improving the conditions of all the workers,” * continuing


through the theory of stages, to the resolution of the congress on the
“most widely applicable,” etc., “economic struggle against the gov-
ernment” is precisely trade-union politics, which is far, far away
from being Social-Democratic politics.


B. A Tate or How Martynov RENDERED PLEKHANOV MoRE
PROFOUND


“What a large number of Social-Democratic Lomonosovs ** ap-
peared among us lately!” observed a comrade to me one day, having
in mind the astonishing propensity of many of those who are in-
clined toward Economism to “seek for themselves” the great truths
(for example, like the one that the economic struggle stimulates
the workers to ponder over their lack of rights), and in doing so
ignore, with the supreme contempt of born geniuses, all that which
has already been produced by previous development of revolutionary
thought and of the revolutionary movement. Precisely such a born
genius is Lomonosov-Martynov. Glance at his article, “Immediate
Questions,” and observe how he “in his way” approaches that which
has been said long ago by Axelrod (and whom our Lomonosov
silently ignores) ; how, for example, he is beginning to understand
that we must not ignore the opposition of the various strata of the
bourgeoisie [Rabocheye Dyelo No. 9, pp. 61-62-71; compare this
with Rabocheye Dyelo’s Reply to Axelrod, pp. 22-23-24], etc.
But alas, he is only “approaching” and is only “beginning,” not
more than that, for so little has he understood Axelrod’s ideas, that
he talks about “the economic struggle against the employers and
the government.” For three years (1898-1901) Rabocheye Dvelo
has tried hard to understand Axelrod, but has sailed to do so yet!
Perhaps this is because Social-Democracy, “like humanity,” always
sets itself only tasks that can be achieved.

But the Lomonosovs are distinguished not only by the fact of
their ignorance of many things (that would not be so bad!) but also
by the fact that they are not conscious of their ignorance. Now
this is a real misfortune, and this misfortune stimulates them to at-
tempt to render Plekhanov “more profound.”


* Rabochaya Mysl, Special Supplement, p. 14.
** Kholmogory Lomonosov (1711-1765), the inventive genius and the recog-


nised father of Russian science—Ed.
64


Lomonosov-Martynov writes:


Much water has flowed beneath the bridges since Plekhanov wrote this
book. [Socialist Tasks in the Fight against the Famine in Russia]. The
Social-Democrats who for a decade led the economic struggle of the working
class . . . have failed as yet to lay down a broad theoretical basis for party
tactics. This question has now come to the fore, and if we would wish to lay
down such a theoretical basis we would certainly have to considerably deepen
the principles of tactics that Plekhanov at one time developed. . . . We would
now have to define the difference between propaganda and agitation differently
from the way in which Plekhanov defined it. [Martynov had just previously
quoted the words of Plekhanov: “A propagandist presents many ideas to one
or a few persons; an agitator presents only one or a few ideas, but he presents
them to a mass of people.”] By propaganda we would understand the revolu-
tionary elucidation of the whole of the present system or partial manifesta-
tions of it, irrespective of whether it is done in a form capable of being
understood by individuals or by the broad masses. By agitation, in the strict
sense of the word [sic!] we would understand: Calling the masses to certain
concrete actions that would facilitate the direct revolutionary intervention of
the proletariat in social life


We congratulate Russian, and international Social-Democracy
on Martynov’s more strict and more profound terminology. Up
till now we thought (with Plekhanov, and with all the leaders of
the international labour movement), that a propagandist, dealing
with say the question of unemployment, must explain the capitalistic
nature of crises, the reasons why crises are inevitable in modern
society, must describe how present society must inevitably become
transformed into Socialist society, etc. In a word, he must pre-
sent “many ideas,” so many indeed that they will be understood as
a whole only by a (comparatively) few persons. An agitator, how-
ever, speaking on the same subject will take as an illustration a
fact that is most widely known and outstanding among his audience
—say the death from starvation of the family of an unemployed
worker, the growing impoverishment, etc.—and utilising this illus-
tration, will direct all his efforts to present a single idea to the
“masses,” i. e., the idea of the senseless contradiction between the
increase of wealth and increase of poverty; he will strive to rouse
discontent and indignation among the masses against this crying
injustice, and leave a more complete explanation of this contradic-
tion to the propagandist. Consequently, the propagandist operates
chiefly by means of the printed word; the agitator operates with the
living word. The qualities that are required of an agitator are not
the same as the qualities that are required of a propagandist.


Kautsky and Lafargue, for example, we call propagandists; Bebel
65


and Guesde we call agitators. To point to a third sphere, or
function, of practical activity, and to include in this third func
“calling the masses to certain concrete actions,” is sheer nonsens
because the “call,” as a single act, either naturally and inevitabl
supplements the theoretical tract, propagandist pamphlet and agita:
tional speech, or represents a purely executive function. Take, for
example, the struggle now being carried on by the German Soci
Democrats against the grain duties. The theoreticians write
searches in tariff policy and “call” say, for a fight for commerce.
treaties and for free trade. The propagandist does the same thing
in the periodical press, and the agitator does it in public speeches.
At the present time, the “concrete action” of the masses takes the form _
of signing petitions to the Reichstag against the raising of the grain
duties. The call for this action comes directly from the theoreticians,
the propagandists and the agitators, and indirectly, from those
workers who carry the petition lists to the factories and to private
houses to get signatures. According to the “Martynov terminology, "4
Kautsky and Bebel are both propagandists, while those who carry
the petition lists around are agitators; is that not so?

The German example recalled to my mind the German word
Verballhornung, which literally translated means “to Ballhorn.”
Johann Ballhorn, a Leipzig publisher of the sixteenth century, pub-—
lished a child’s reader in which, as was the custom, he introduced
a drawing of a cock; but this drawing, instead of portraying an_
ordinary cock with spurs, portrayed it without spurs and with a
couple of eggs lying near it. On the cover of this reader he printed —
the legend “Revised edition by Johann Ballhorn.” Since that time
the Germans describe any “Revision” that is really a worsening, as
“Ballhorning.” And watching Martynov’s attempts to render Plek-
hanovy “more profound” involuntarily recalls Ballhorn to one’s
mind. ... y

Why did our Lomonosov “invent” this confusion? In order to-
illustrate how /skra “devotes attention only to one side of the case,
just as Plekhanov did a decade and a half ago” [p. 39]. “Accord-—
ing to Iskra, propagandist tasks force agitational tasks into the
background, at least for the present” [p. 52]. If we translate this _
last postulate from the language of Martynov into ordinary human
language (because humanity has not yet managed to learn the newly —
invented terminology), we shall get the following: “According to _
Iskra, the tasks of political propaganda and political agitation force

66


into the background the task of ‘presenting to the government con-
crete demands for legislative and administrative measures’ that
promise certain palpable results” (or demands for social reforms,
that is if we are permitted just once again to employ the old term-
inology of old humanity, which has not yet grown to Martynov’s
level). We suggest that the reader compare this thesis with the
following tirade:


What astonishes us in these programmes [the programmes advanced by
revolutionary Social-Democrats], is the constant stress that is laid upon the
benefits of labour activity in parliament (non-existent in Russia) and the
manner in which (thanks to their revolutionary Nihilism) the importance of
workers participating in the Government Advisory Committees on Factory
Affairs (which do exist in Russia) ... or at least the importance of workers
participaiing in municipal bodies, is completely ignored. . . .


The author of this tirade expresses more straightforwardly, more
clearly and frankly, the very idea which, although Lomonosov-
Martynov discovered it himself, actually originated in the mind of
R. M. in the Special Supplement of Rabochaya Mysl [p. 15].


C. PoxiricAL Exposures AND “TRAINING IN REVOLUTIONARY
ACTIVITY”


In advancing against Iskra his “theory” of “raising the activity
of the masses of the workers,” Martynov, as a matter of fact, dis-
played a striving to diminish this activity, because he declared the
very economic struggle before which all Economists grovel to be
the preferable, the most important and “the most widely applicable
means of rousing this activity, and the widest field for it.” This
error is such a characteristic one, precisely because it is not peculiar
to Martynov alone. As a matter of fact, it is possible to “raise
the activity of the masses of the workers” only provided this activity
is not restricted entirely to “political agitation on an economic
basis.” And one of the fundamental conditions for the necessary ex-
pansion of political agitation is the organisation of all-sided political
exposure. In no other way can the masses be trained in political
consciousness and revolutionary activity except by means of such
exposures. Hence, to conduct such activity is one of the most
important functions of international Social-Democracy as a whole,
for even in countries where political liberty exists, there is still


a field for work of exposure, although in such countries the work
67


court sentences, etc., etc., etc. These universal political exposures
are an essential and fundamental condition for training the masses
in revolutionary activity.

Why is it that the Russian workers as yet display so little revolu-
tionary activity in connection with the brutal way in which the
police maltreat the people, in connection with the persecution of
the religious sects, with the flogging of the peasantry, with the
outrageous censorship, with the torture of soldiers, with the persecu-
tion of the most innocent cultural enterprises, etc.? Is it because
the “economic struggle” does not “stimulate” them to this, because
such political activity does not “promise palpable results,” be-
cause it produces little that is “positive”? To advance this argument,
we repeat, is merely to shift the blame to the shoulders of others, to
blame the masses of the workers for our own philistinism (also
Bernsteinism). We must blame ourselves, our remoteness from
the mass movement; we must blame ourselves for being unable as
yet to organise a sufficiently wide, striking and rapid exposure of
these despicable outrages. When we do that (and we must and
can do it), the most backward worker will understand, or will feel,
that the students and religious sects, the muzhiks and the authors
are being abused and outraged by the very same dark forces that
are oppressing and crushing him at every step of his life, and,
feeling that, he himself will be filled with an irresistible desire to
respond to these things and then he will organise cat-calls against
the censors one day, another day he will demonstrate outside the
house of the provincial governor who has brutally suppressed
peasant uprising, another day he will teach a lesson to the gen-
darmes in surplices who are doing the work of the Holy Inquisition,
etc. As yet we have done very little, almost nothing, to hurl uni-
versal and fresh exposures among the masses of the workers. Many
of us as yet do not appreciate the bounden duty that rests upon us,
but spontaneously follow in the wake of the “drab every-day strug-
gle,” in the narrow confines of factory life. Under such circum-
stances to say that Jskra displays a tendency to belittle the sig-
nificance of the forward march of the drab every-day struggle in
comparison with the propaganda of brilliant and complete ideas
[Martynov, p. 61]—means to drag the party backwards, to defend
and glorify our unpreparedness and backwardness.

As for calling the masses to action, that will come of itself im-


mediately that energetic political agitation, live and striking ex-
69


court sentences, etc., etc., etc. These universal political exposures
are an essential and fundamental condition for training the masses
in revolutionary activity.

Why is it that the Russian workers as yet display so little revolu-
tionary activity in connection with the brutal way in which the
police maltreat the people, in connection with the persecution of
the religious sects, with the flogging of the peasantry, with the
outrageous censorship, with the torture of soldiers, with the persecu-
tion of the most innocent cultural enterprises, etc.? Is it because
the “economic struggle” does not “stimulate” them to this, because
such political activity does not “promise palpable results,” be-
cause it produces little that is “positive”? To advance this argument,
we repeat, is merely to shift the blame to the shoulders of others, to
blame the masses of the workers for our own philistinism (also
Bernsteinism). We must blame ourselves, our remoteness from
the mass movement; we must blame ourselves for being unable as
yet to organise a sufficiently wide, striking and rapid exposure of
these despicable outrages. When we do that (and we must and
can do it), the most backward worker will understand, or will feel,
that the students and religious sects, the muzhiks and the authors
are being abused and outraged by the very same dark forces that
are oppressing and crushing him at every step of his life, and,
feeling that, he himself will be filled with an irresistible desire to
respond to these things and then he will organise cat-calls against
the censors one day, another day he will demonstrate outside the
house of the provincial governor who has brutally suppressed
peasant uprising, another day he will teach a lesson to the gen-
darmes in surplices who are doing the work of the Holy Inquisition,
etc. As yet we have done very little, almost nothing, to hurl uni-
versal and fresh exposures among the masses of the workers. Many
of us as yet do not appreciate the bounden duty that rests upon us,
but spontaneously follow in the wake of the “drab every-day strug-
gle,” in the narrow confines of factory life. Under such circum-
stances to say that Jskra displays a tendency to belittle the sig-
nificance of the forward march of the drab every-day struggle in
comparison with the propaganda of brilliant and complete ideas
[Martynov, p. 61]—means to drag the party backwards, to defend
and glorify our unpreparedness and backwardness.

As for calling the masses to action, that will come of itself im-


mediately that energetic political agitation, live and striking ex-
69


posures are set going. To catch some criminal red-handed and
immediately to brand him publicly will have far more effect than
any number of “appeals to action”; the effect very often will be —
such, that it will be impossible to tell who exactly it was that “ap-—
pealed” to the crowd, and who exactly suggested this or that plan —
of demonstration, etc. Calls for action, not in the general, but in ~
the concrete, sense of the term, can be made only at the place of
action; only those who themselves go into action now can make
appeals for action. And our business as Social-Democratic publicists
is to deepen, expand and intensify political exposures and political
agitation. A word in passing about “calls to action.” The only
paper that prior to the spring events,* called upon the workers ac- —
tively to intervene in a matter that certainly did not promise any
palpable results for the workers, i. e., the drafting of the students
into the army, was Iskra. Immediately after the publication of the
order of January 11 “Drafting the 183 Students into the Army,”
Iskra published an article about it (in its February issue, No. 2),**
and before any demonstration was started openly called upon “the
workers to go to the aid of the students,” called upon the “people”
boldly to take up the government’s open challenge. We ask: How
is the remarkable fact to be explained that although he talks so
much about “calling for action,” and even suggests “calling for
action” as a special form of activity, Martynov said not a word
about this call? After this, is not Martynov’s allegation, that Jskra
was one-sided because it did not sufficiently “call for” the struggle
for demands “promising palpable results,” sheer philistinism?

Our Economists, including Rabocheye Dyelo, were successful be-
cause they disguised themselves as uneducated workers. But the
working-class Social-Democrat, the working-class revolutionist (and
their number is growing) will indignantly reject all this talk about
fighting for demands “promising palpable results,” etc., because he
will understand that this is only a variation of the old song about
adding a kopeck to the ruble. These working-class revolutionaries
will say to their counsellors of the Rabochaya Mysl and Rabocheye
Dyelo: You are wasting your time, gentlemen; you are interfering
with excessive zeal in a job that we can manage ourselves, and you
are neglecting your own duties. It is silly of you to say that the


* This refers to the big street demonstrations which commenced in the
spring of 1901.
** See The Iskra Period, Book I, p. 70.—Ed.
70


Social-Democrats’s task is to give the economic struggle itself a
political character, for that is only the beginning, it is not the
main task that Social-Democrats must fulfil. All over the world,
including Russia, the police themselves often give the economic
struggle a political character, and the workers are beginning to un-
derstand whom the government supports.*

The “economic struggle between the workers and the employers
and the government,” about which you make as much fuss as if
you had made a new discovery, is being carried on in all parts of
Russia, even the most remote, by the workers themselves who have
heard about strikes, but who have heard almost nothing about
Socialism. The “activity” you want to stimulate among us workers
by advancing concrete demands promising palpable results, we are
already displaying and in our every-day, petty trade-union work,
we put forward concrete demands, very often without any assistance
from the intellectuals whatever. But such activity is not enough
for us; we are not children to be fed on the sops of “economic”
politics alone; we want to know everything that everybody else
knows, we want to learn the details of all aspects of political life
and to take part actively in every political event. In order that we
may do this, the intellectuals must talk to us less on what we already
know,** and tell us more about what we do not know and what we


*The demand “to give the economic struggle itself a political character”
most strikingly expresses subservience to spontaneity in the sphere of political
activity. Very often the economic struggle spontaneously assumes a political
character, that is to say without the injection of the “revolutionary bacilli of
the intelligentsia,” without the intervention of the class-conscious Social-
Democrats. For example, the economic struggle of the British workers as-
sumed a political character without the intervention of the Socialists. The
tasks of the Social-Democrats, however, are not exhausted by political agita-
tion on the economic field; their task is to convert trade-union politics into
the Social-Democratic political struggle, to utilise the flashes of political
Consciousness which gleam in the minds of the workers during their economic
Struggles for the purpose of raising them to the level of Social-Democratic
Political consciousness. The Martynovs, however, instead of raising and
Stimulating the spontaneously awakening political consciousness of the work
ers, bow down before spontaneity and repeat over and over again, until one
is sick and tired of hearing it, that the economic struggle “stimulates” in
the workers’ minds thoughts about their own lack of political rights. It is
unfortunate, gentlemen, that the spontaneously awakening trade-union polit-
ical consciousness does not “stimulate” in your minds thoughts about your
Social-Democratic tasks!

**To prove that this imaginary speech of a worker to an Economist is
based on fact, we shall call two witnesses who undoubtedly have direct
knowledge of the labour movement, and who can be at least suspected of being
Partial towards us “doctrinaires,” for one witness is an Economist (who re-

ys


can never learn from our factory and “economic” experience,
is, you must give us political knowledge. You intellectuals «
acquire this knowledge, and it is your duty to bring us that kno
edge in a hundred and a thousand times greater measure than yot
have done up till now; and you must bring us this knowledge,
only in the form of arguments, pamphlets and articles which son
times—excuse my frankness!—are very dull, but in the form of I
exposures of what our government and our governing classes
doing at this very moment in all spheres of life. Fulfil this d
with greater zeal, and talk less about “increasing the activity of
masses of the workers’! We are far more active than you th
and we are quite able to support by open street fighting demands
that do not even promise any “palpable results” whatever! Y.
cannot “increase” our activity, because you yourselves are not su
ficiently active. Be less subservient to spontaneity, and think more
about increasing your own activity, gentlemen!


D. Wuart ts THERE In ComMoNn BETWEEN ECONOMISM
AND TERRORISM ?


of a non-Social-Democratic terrorist who, by chance, proved to be
in agreement with him. Speaking generally, however, between the


gards even Rabocheye Dyelo as a political organ!), and the other is a terrorist.
The first witness is the author of a remarkably truthful and lively article
entitled “The St. Petersburg Labour Movement and the Practical Tasks of
Social-Democracy,” published in Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 6. He divided
the workers into the following categories: 1. Conscious revolutionaries; :
Intermediate stratum; and 3. The Masses. Now the intermediate strat
he says “is often more interested in questions of political life than in its own
immediate economic interests, the connection between which and the genera
social conditions it has long understood. . . .” Rabochaya Mysl “is sharply
criticised. It keeps on repeating the same thing over and over again, things we
have long known, read long ago.” “Nothing in the political review again!”
[pp. 30-31]. But even the third stratum—the younger and more sensitive
section of the workers, less corrupted by the vodka shop and the church, that
has hardly ever had the opportunity of reading political literature, in a ram-
bling way discuss political events and ponder deeply over the fragmentary news —
they get about the student riots, etc. The second witness, the terrorist, writes
as follows: “. .. They read over once or twice the petty details of factory
life in other towns, not their own, and then they read no more. . . . ‘Awfully
dull,’ they say. ... To say nothing in a workers’ paper about the govern-
ment . . . signifies that the workers are regarded as being little children. . . -
The workers are not babies.” [Svoboda, published by the Revolutionary Social-
ist group, pp. 67-70.]
12


about which we shall have to speak farther on in connection with the
question of training the masses in revolutionary activity. |The
Economists and the modern terrorists spring from a common root,
namely, subservience to spontaneity, which we dealt with in a
previous chapter as a general phenomenon, and which we shall now
examine in relation to its effect upon political activity and the
political struggle. At first sight, our assertion may appear para-
doxical, for the difference between these two appears to be so
enormous: One stresses the “drab every-day struggle” and the other
calls for the most self-sacrificing struggle of individuals. But this
is not a paradox. The Economists and terrorists merely bow to
different poles of spontaneity: The Economists bow to the spon-
taneity of the “pure and simple” labour movement while the
terrorists bow to the spontaneity of the passionate indignation of
the intellectuals, who are either incapable of linking up the revolu-
tionary struggle with the labour movement, or lack the opportunity
to do so. It is very difficult indeed for those who have lost their
belief, or who have never believed, that this was possible, to find
some other outlet for their indignation and revolutionary energy
than terror. Thus, both the forms of subservience to spontaneity
we have mentioned are nothing more nor less than a beginning in
the carrying out of the notorious Credo programme. Let the work-
ers carry on their “economic struggle against the employers and
the government” (we apologise to the author of Credo for expressing
his views in Martynov’s words! But we think we have the right
to do so because even the Credo says that in the economic struggle
the workers “come up against the political régime”), and let the in-
tellectuals conduct the political struggle by their own efforts—with
the aid of terror, of course! This is an absolutely logical and in-
evitable conclusion which must be insisted upon—even though those
who are beginning to carry out this programme did not themselves
realise that it is inevitable. Political activity has its logic quite
apart from the consciousness of those who, with the best intentions,
call either for terror, or for giving the economic struggle itself a
political character. The road to hell is paved with good intentions,
and, in this case, good intentions cannot save one from being spon-
taneously drawn “along the line of least resistance,” along the line
of the purely bourgeois Credo programme. Surely it is not an ac-


cident that many Russian liberals—avowed liberals and liberals
73


terror, and strive to foster the spirit of terrorism that is running se
high at the present time.

The formation of the Svoboda Revolutionary Socialist group
which was formed with the object of giving all possible assistance
to the labour movement, but which included in its programme ter-
ror, and emancipation, so to speak, from Social-Democracy—this
fact once again confirmed the remarkable penetration of P. B.
Axelrod who literally foretold these results of Social-Democratic
wavering as far back as the end of 1897 [Modern Tasks and Mod-
ern Tactics], when he outlined his remarkable “two prospects.” All
the subsequent disputes and disagreements among Russian Social-—
Democrats are contained, like a plant in the seed, in these two
prospects.* t

From this point of view it will be clear that Rabocheye Dyelo, be-—
ing unable to withstand the spontaneity of Economism, has been
unable also to withstand the spontaneity of terrorism. It would be in- —
teresting to note here the specific arguments that Svoboda advanced ~
in defence of terrorism. It “completely denies” the deterrent réle of —
terrorism [The Regeneration of Revolutionism, p. 64], but instead —
stresses its “excitative significance.”” This is characteristic, firstly,
as representing one of the stages of the break-up and decay of the ©
traditional (pre-Social-Democratic) cycle of ideas which insisted
upon terrorism. To admit now that the government cannot be “terri-
fied,” and therefore disrupted, by terror, is tantamount to condemn.
ing terror as a system of struggle, as a sphere of activity sanctioned
by the programme. Secondly, it is still more characteristic as an ex- —
ample of the failure to understand our immediate task of “training —


* Martynov “conceives of another, more realistic [?] dilemma” [Social- :
Democracy and the Working Class, p. 19]: “Either Social-Democracy under- |
takes the direct leadership of the economic struggle of the proletariat and by that
[!] transforms it into a revolutionary class struggle .. .” “and by that,” i. e., ©
apparently the direct leadership of the economic struggle. Can Martynov
quote an example where the leadership of the industrial struggle alone has
succeeded in transforming the trade-union movement into a_ revolutionary —
class movement? Cannot he understand that in order to “transform” we must —
undertake the “direct leadership” of all-sided political agitation? “. .. Or ©
the other prospect: Social-Democracy refrains from taking the leadership of
the economic struggle of the workers and so ... clips its own wings. . - .”
In Rabocheye Dyelo’s opinion, which we quoted above, Iskra “refrains.”
We have seen, however, that the latter does far more to lead the economic strug-
gle than Rabocheye Dyelo, but it does not confine itself to this, and does not —
curtail its political tasks for the sake of it. a

74


the masses in revolutionary activity.”” Svoboda advocates terror as a
means of “exciting” the labour movement, and of giving it a “strong
impetus.” It is difficult to imagine an argument that disproves itself
more than this one does! Are there not enough outrages committed
in Russian life that a special “stimulant” has to be invented? On
the other hand, is it not obvious that those who are not, and cannot
be, roused to excitement even by Russian tyranny will stand by
“twiddling their thumbs” even while a handful of terrorists are
engaged in single combat with the government? The fact is, how-
ever, that the masses of the workers are roused to a high pitch of
excitement by the outrages committed in Russian life, but we are
unable to collect, if one may put it that way, and concentrate all
these drops and streamlets of popular excitement that are called
forth by the conditions of Russian life to a far larger extent than we
imagine, but which it is precisely necessary to combine into a single
gigantic flood. And this we must do. That this task can be accom-
plished is irrefutably proved by the enormous growth of the labour
movement, and the greed with which the workers devour political
literature, to which we have already referred above. Calls for terror,
and calls to give the economic struggle itself a political character
are merely two different forms of evading the most pressing duty
that now rests upon Russian revolutionaries, namely, to organise
an all-sided political agitation. Svoboda desires to substitute ter-
ror for agitation, although it openly admits that “as soon as in-
tensified and strenuous agitation is commenced among the masses
its excitative function will be finished.” [The Regeneration of
Revolutionism, p. 68.] This proves precisely that both the terrorists
and the Economists underestimate the revolutionary activity of the
masses, in spite of the striking evidence of the events that took place
in the spring, and whereas one goes out in search of artificial
“stimulants” the other talks about “concrete demands.” But both
fail to devote sufficient attention to the development of their own
“ctivity in political agitation and organisation of political ex-
Posures. And no other work can serve as a substitute for this work,
either at the present time, or at any other time.


E. Tse Worxine Crass as CHAMPION oF DEMOCRACY


We have seen that the organisation of wide political agitation,
and consequently, of all-sided political exposures are an absolutely


necessary and paramount task of activity, that is, if that activity is
7


to be truly Social-Democratic. We arrived at this conclusion sole
on the grounds of the pressing needs of the working class for po
cal knowledge and political training. But this ground by itsel
is too narrow for the presentation of the question, for it ignore
the general democratic tasks of Social-Democracy as a whole, a
of modern, Russian Social-Democracy in particular. In order
explain the situation more concretely we shall approach the subj
from an aspect that is “nearer” to the Economist, namely, from
practical aspect. “Every one agrees” that it is necessary to develog
the political consciousness of the working class. But the question
arises, How is that to be done? What must be done to bring thi:
about? The economic struggle merely brings the workers D
against” questions concerning the attitude of the government towards
the working class. Consequently, however much we may try to “give
to the economic struggle itself a political character” we shall never
be able to develop the political consciousness of the workers (to
degree of Social-Democratic consciousness) by confining oursel


trates Martynov’s abilities to confuse things, but because it strik
ingly expresses the fundamental error that all the Economists com-
mit, namely, their conviction that it is possible to develop the cl
political consciousness of the workers from within, that is to say,
exclusively, or at least mainly, by means of the economic struggle.


the Economists refuse to ponder deeply over the origins of th
disagreements, with the result that we absolutely fail to understand
each other. It is as if we spoke in different tongues.

The workers can acquire class political consciousness only from
without, that is, only outside of the economic struggle, outside of
sphere of relations between workers and employers. The sph
from which alone it is possible to obtain this knowledge is th
sphere of relationships between all classes and the state and
government—the sphere of the inter-relations between all classes.
For that reason, the reply to the question: What must be done in
order that the workers may acquire political knowledge? cannot be
merely the one which, in the majority of cases, the practical workers,
especially those who are inclined towards Economism, usually


content themselves with, i. e., “go among the workers.” To bri
76


political knowledge to the workers the Social-Democrats must go
among all classes of the population, must despatch units of their
army in all directions.

We deliberately select this awkward formula, we deliberately
express ourselves in a simple, forcible way, not because we desire to
indulge in paradoxes, but in order to “stimulate” the Economists
to take up their tasks which they unpardonably ignore, to make
them understand the difference between trade-union and Social-
Democratic politics, which they refuse to understand. Therefore, we
beg the reader not to get excited, but to hear us patiently to the end.

Take the type of Social-Democratic circle that has been most
widespread during the past few years, and examine its work. It
has “‘contact with the workers,” it issues leaflets—in which abuses
in the factories, the government’s partiality towards the capitalists,
and the tyranny of the police are strongly condemned—and rests
content with this. At meetings of workers, there are either no dis-
cussions or they do not extend beyond such subjects. Lectures and
discussions on the history of the revolutionary movement, on
questions of the home and foreign policy of our government, on
questions of the economic evolution of Russia and of Europe, and
the position of the various classes in modern society, etc., are ex-
tremely rare. Of systematically acquiring and extending contact
with other classes of society, no one even dreams. The ideal leader,
as the majority of the members of such circles picture him, is some-
thing more in the nature of a trade-union secretary than a Socialist
political leader. Any trade-union secretary, an English one, for
instance, helps the workers to conduct the economic struggle, helps
to expose factory abuses, explains the injustice of the laws and of
measures which hamper the freedom of strikes and the freedom to
Picket, to warn all and sundry that a strike is proceeding at a certain
factory, explains the partiality of arbitration courts which are in the
hands of the bourgeois classes, etc., etc. In a word, every trade-
union secretary conducts and helps to conduct “the economic strug-
gle against the employers and the government.” It cannot be too
Strongly insisted that this is not enough to constitute Social-Democ-
racy. The Social-Democrat’s ideal should not be a trade-union
Secretary, but a tribune of the people, able to react to every mani-
festation of tyranny and oppression, no matter where it takes place,
no matter what stratum or class of the people it affects; he must


be able to group all these manifestations into a single picture of
17


police violence and capitalist exploitation; he must be able to tak
advantage of every petty event in order to explain his Socialist
convictions and his Social-Democratic demands to all, in order te
explain to all and every one the world historical significance
the struggle for the emancipation of the proletariat.

Compare, for example, a leader like Robert Knight (the celal
brated secretary and leader of the Boiler Makers Society, one of the
most powerful trade unions in England) with Wilhelm Liebknecht,
and then take the contrasts that Martynov draws in his controversy
with ZJskra. You will see—I am running through Martynov’s
article—that Robert Knight engaged more in “calling the masses to
certain concrete actions” [p. 39] while Liebknecht engaged more in
“the revolutionary explanation of the whole of modern society, or
various manifestations of it” [pp. 38-39]; that Robert Knight
“formulated the immediate demands of the proletariat and pointed
to the manner in which they can be achieved” [p. 41], whereas
Wilhelm Liebknecht, while doing this “simultaneously guided th
activities of various opposition strata,” “dictated to them a positive
programme of action” [p. 41]; * that it was precisely Robert
Knight who strove “as far as possible to give to the economic strug:
gle itself a political character” [p. 42] and was excellently able “
submit to the government concrete demands promising certain pal-
pable results” [p. 43], while Liebknecht engaged more in “one-
sided exposures” [p. 40]; that Robert Knight attached more
significance to the “forward march of the drab, every-day struggle”
[p. 61], while Liebknecht engaged more in the “propaganda i
brilliant and finished ideas” [p. 61]; that Liebknecht converted th
paper he was directing into “an organ of revolutionary oppositio
exposing the present system and particularly the political cond
tions which came into conflict with the interests of the most varie
strata of the population” [p. 63], whereas Robert Knight “worke
for the cause of labour in close organic contact with the proletarian
struggle” [p. 63]—if by “close and organic contact” is meant the
subservience to spontaneity which we studied above from the
example of Krichevsky and Martynov—and “restricted the sphere
of his influence,” convinced, of course, as is Martynov, that “by
that he intensified that influence” [p. 63]. In a word, you will s¢


* For example, during the Franco-Prussian War, Liebknecht dictated a pro-
gramme of action for the whole of democracy—and this was done to 4
even greater extent by Marx and Engels in 1848.

78


that de facto, Martynov reduces Social-Democracy to the level of
trade unionism, and he does this, of course, not because he does not
desire the good of Social-Democracy, but simply because he was a
little too much in a hurry to make Plekhanov more profound, in-
stead of taking the trouble to understand him.

Let us return, however, to the elucidation of our thesis. We
said that a Social-Democrat, if he really believes it is necessary to
develop the political consciousness of the proletariat, must “go
among all classes of the people.” This gives rise to the questions:
How is this to be done? Have we enough forces to do this? Is
there a base for such work among all the other classes? Will this
not mean a retreat, or lead to a retreat from the class point-of-
view? We shall deal with these questions.

We must “go among all classes of the people” as theoreticians, as
propagandists, as agitators, and as organisers. No one doubts that
the theoretical work of Social-Democrats should be directed towards
studying all the features of the social and political position of the
various classes. But extremely little is done in this direction com-
pared with the work that is done in studying the features of factory
life. In the committees and circles, you will meet men who are
immersed say in the study of some special branch of the metal
industry, but you will hardly ever find members of organisations
(obliged, as often happens, for some reason or other to give up
practical work) especially engaged in the collection of material
concerning some pressing question of social and political life which
could serve as a means for conducting Social-Democratic work
among other strata of the population. In speaking of the lack of
training of the majority of present-day leaders of the labour move-
ment, we cannot refrain from mentioning the point about training in
this connection also, for it is also bound up with the “economic”
Conception of “close organic contact with the proletarian struggle.”
The principal thing, of course, is propaganda and agitation among
all strata of the people. The Western-European Social-Democrats
find their work in this field facilitated by the calling of public
meetings, to which all are free to go, and by the parliament, in
which they speak to the representatives of all classes. We have
neither a parliament, nor the freedom to call meetings, nevertheless
We are able to arrange meetings of workers who desire to listen to
@ Social-Democrat. We must also find ways and means of calling


meetings of representatives of all and every other class of the
79


population that desire to listen to a Democrat; for he who forg
that “the Communists support every revolutionary movement,”
we are obliged for that reason to emphasize general demo
tasks before the whole people, without for a moment concealing |
Socialistic convictions, is not a Social-Democrat. He who forg
his obligation to be in advance of everybody in bringing up, sha
ening and solving every general democratic question, is not —
Social-Democrat. }
“But everybody agrees with this!”—the impatient reader
exclaim—and the new instructions given by the last congress of
League to the Editorial Board of Rabocheye Dyelo says: “‘All eve
of social and political life that affect the proletariat either dire
as a special class or as the vanguard of all the revolutionary fore
in the struggle for freedom should serve as subjects for politics
propaganda and agitation.”” [Two Congresses, p. 17, our italics.
Yes, these are very true and very good words and we would
satisfied if Rabocheye Dyelo understood them, and if it refrai
from saying in the next breath things that are the very opposite
them. Surely, it is not sufficient to call ourselves the “vanguard,”
it is necessary to act like one; we must act in such a way that all
the other units of the army shall see us, and be obliged to admit
that we are the vanguard. And we ask the reader: Are the repré
sentatives of the other “units” such fools as to take merely our woré
for it when we say that we are the “vanguard”?
Just picture to yourselves the following: A Social-Democrat comes
into the “unit” of Russian educated radicals, or liberal constitution~
alists, and declares to them: We are the vanguard; “at the present
time we are confronted by the problem of—how to give as far as
possible to the economic struggle itself a political character.” The
radical, or constitutionalist, if he is at all intelligent (and there are
many intelligent men among Russian radicals and constitutionalists).
would only laugh at such a speech, and would say (to himself, of
course, for in the majority of cases they are experienced diplomats) :


Well, your “vanguard” must be composed of simpletons! It does not even


bourgeois democracy to give to the economic struggle of the workers @
political character. Why, we too, like all the West-European bourgeoisie,
are striving to draw the workers into politics, but only into trade-unio
politics and not into Social-Democratic politics. Trade-union politics
precisely bourgeois politics of the working class and the “vanguard’s” form
lation of its tasks is the formula for trade-union politics. Let them call them

80


selves “Social-Democrats if they like, I am not a child to get excited over a
label. But see that they do not fall under tthe influence of those pernicious
orthodox doctrinaires, let them allow “freedom of criticism” to those who
unconsciously are driving Social-Democracy into trade-unionist channels.


And the light chuckle of our constitutionalist will turn into
Homeric laughter when he learns that the Social-Democrats who talk
about Social-Democracy being the vanguard at the present time,
when spontaneity completely dominates our movement, fears nothing
so much as “belittling the spontaneous elements,” as “belittling the
significance of the forward march of the drab, every-day struggle, as
compared with the propaganda of brilliant and finished ideas,” etc.,
etc.! A “vanguard,” which fears that consciousness will outstrip
spontaneity, which fears to put forward a bold “plan” that would
compel universal recognition even among those who think differ-
ently from us—Are they not confusing the word “vanguard” with
the word “rearguard”?

Ponder over the following piece of Martynov reasoning. On page
42 he says that Iskra’s tactics of exposing abuses are one-sided, that
“however much we may spread distrust and hatred towards the
government, we shall not achieve our aim until we have succeeded
in developing sufficiently active social energy for its overthrow.”
This, it may be said in parenthesis, is the concern we have already
met with for increasing the activity of the masses, while at the same
time striving to restrict its activity. This is not the point we are
now discussing, however. Martynov, therefore, speaks of revolu-
tionary energy (“for its overthrow”). But what conclusion does he
arrive at? As in ordinary times, various social strata inevitably
march separately, therefore,


In view of that, it is clear that we Social-Democrats cannot simultaneously
guide the activities of various opposition strata, we cannot dictate to them a
Positive programme of action, we cannot point out to them in what manner
they can fight for their daily interests. . . . The liberal strata will themselves
take care of the active struggle for their immediate interests and this struggle
will bring them up against our political régime.


Thus, having commenced by speaking about revolutionary energy
—of the active struggle for the overthrow of the autocracy, Marty-
hov immediately turned towards trade-union energy and active
struggle for immediate interests! It goes without saying that we
cannot guide the struggle of the students, liberals, etc., for their


“immediate interests,” but this is not the point we were arguing
81


about, most worthy Economists! The point we were discussing -
the possible and necessary participation of various social strata
the overthrow of the autocracy; not only are we able, but it is o
duty to guide these “activities, of the various opposition strata”
we desire to be a “vanguard.” Not only will the students and our
liberals, etc., take care of the struggle that will bring them up
against our political régime; the police and the officials of the auto-
cratic government will see to this more than any one. But, if “we”
desire to be advanced democrats, we must make it our business to
stimulate in the minds of those who are dissatisfied only with
university or only with Zemstvo, etc., conditions the idea that the
whole political system is worthless. We must take upon ourselv:
the task of organising a universal political struggle under the lead-—
ership of our party in such a manner as to obtain the support of all
opposition strata for the struggle and for our party. We must
train our Social-Democratic practical workers to become political —
leaders, able to guide all the manifestations of this universal
struggle, able at the right time to “dictate a positive programme of
action” for the discontented students, for the discontented Zemstvo,
for the discontented religious sects, for the offended elementary
school teachers, etc., etc. For that reason, Martynov’s assertion that
“with regard to these, we can come forward merely in the negative
role of exposers of abuses . . . we can only dissipate the hopes
they have in various government commissions’—is absolutely
wrong (our italics). By saying this Martynov shows that he abso-
lutely fails to understand the réle the revolutionary “vanguard”
must really play. If the reader bears this in mind, the real sense of -
the following concluding remarks by Martynov will be clear to him:


Iskra is the organ of the revolutionary opposition which exposes the abuses —
of our system—particularly political abuses, in so far as they affect the
interests of the most diverse classes of the population. We, however, are
working and will continue to work for the cause of labour in close organic
contact with the proletarian struggle. By restricting the sphere of our in-
fluence, we at the same time intensify that influence. jl


The true sense of this conclusion is as follows: Iskra desires to
elevate working-class trade-union politics (to which, owing to mis-_
understanding, lack of training, or by conviction our practical work-
ers frequently confine themselves) to Social-Democratic politics, —
whereas Rabocheye Dyelo desires to degrade Social-Democratic poli-—


tics to trade-union politics. And while doing this, they assure the ©
82


world that these two positions are “quite compatible in the common
cause.” O! sancta simplicitas!

To proceed. Have we sufficient forces to be able to direct our
propaganda and agitation among all classes of the population? Of
course we have. Our Economists are frequently inclined to deny
this. They lose sight of the gigantic progress our movement has
made from (approximately) 1894 to 1901. Like real Khvostists,
they frequently live in the distant past, in the period of the beginning
of the movement. At that time, indeed, we had astonishingly few
forces, and it was perfectly natural and legitimate then to resolve
to go exclusively among the workers, and severely condemn any
deviation from this. The whole task then was to consolidate our
position in the working class. At the present time, however, gigantic
forces have been attracted to the movement; the best representatives
of the young generation of the educated classes are coming over to
us; everywhere, and in all provinces, there are people who have
taken part in the movement in the past, who desire to do so now,
who are striving towards Social-Democracy, but who are obliged to
sit idle because we cannot employ them (in 1894 you could count
the Social-Democrats on your fingers). One of the principal po-
litical and organisational shortcomings of our movement is that we
are unable to utilise all these forces, and give them appropriate
work (we shall deal with this in detail in the next chapter). The
overwhelming majority of these forces entirely lack the opportunity
for “going to the workers,” so there are no grounds for fearing
that we shall deflect forces from our main cause. And in order to
be able to provide the workers with real, universal, and live political
knowledge, we must have “our own men,” Social-Democrats, every-
where, among all social strata, and in all positions from which we
can learn the inner springs of our state mechanism. Such men are
required for propaganda and agitation, but in a still larger measure
for organisation.

Is there scope for activity among all classes of the population?
Those who fail to see this also lag intellectually behind the spon-
taneous awakening of the masses. The labour movement has
aroused and is continuing to arouse discontent in some, hopes for
Support for the opposition in others, and the consciousness of the
intolerableness and inevitable downfall of autocracy in still others.
We would be “politicians” and Social-Democrats only in name (as


Very often happens), if we failed to realise that our task is to
83


utilise every manifestation of discontent, and to collect and utj
every grain of even rudimentary protest. This is quite apart fj
the fact that many millions of the peasantry, handicraftsmen,
artisans, etc., always listen eagerly to the preachings of any §
Democrat who is at all intelligent. Is there a single class of
population in which no individuals, groups or circles are to be f our
who are discontented with the state of tyranny, and therefore ac
sible to the propaganda of Social-Democrats as the spokesmen
the most pressing general democratic needs? To those who de
to have a clear idea of what the political agitation of a So
Democrat among all classes and strata of the population should
like, we would point to political exposures in the broad sense of
word as the principal (but of course not the sole) form of
agitation.


We must “arouse in every section of the population that is at all enlight
a passion for political exposure,’ I wrote in my article “Where to Be
Uskra, No. 4, May, 1901), with which I shall deal in greater detail late

“We must not allow ourselves to be discouraged by the fact that the
of political exposure is still feeble, rare and timid. This is not because
general submission to political despotism, but because those who are able
ready to expose have no tribune from which to speak, because there is |


audience to listen eagerly to and approve of what the orators say, and becau


the latter can nowhere perceive among the people forces to whom it woul
be worth while directing their complaint against the ‘omnipotent’ R
government. ... We are now in a position to set up a tribune for
national exposure of the tsarist government, and it is our duty to do §
That tribune must be a Social-Democratic paper. . . .” * ‘


The ideal audience for these political exposures is the workin
class, which is first and foremost in need of universal and liv
political knowledge, which is most capable of converting this know!
edge into active struggle, even if it did not promise “palpa bl
results.” The only platform from which public exposures can
made is an All-Russian newspaper. “Unless we have a politica
organ, a movement deserving the name of political is inconceiv
in modern Europe.” In this connection Russia must undoubte
be included in modern Europe. The press has long ago becom
power in our country, otherwise the government would not spen
tens of thousands of rubles to bribe it, and to subsidise the Katkovs
and Meshcherskys. And it is no novelty in autocratic Russia for th
underground press to break through the wall of censorship am


* See The Iskra Period, Book I, p. 113.—Ed.
&4


compel the legal and conservative press to speak openly of it. This
was the case in the seventies and even in the fifties. How much
proader and deeper are now the strata of the people willing to read
the illegal underground press, and to learn from it “how to live and
how to die,” to use the expression of the worker who sent a letter
to Iskra [No. 7]. Political exposures are as much a declaration
of war against the government as economic exposures are a declara-
tion of war against the employers. And the wider and more power-
ful this campaign of exposure will be, the more numerous and
determined the social class which has declared war in order to com-
mence the war will be, the greater will be the moral significance of
this declaration of war. Hence, political exposures in themselves
serve as a powerful instrument for disintegrating the system we
oppose, the means for diverting from the enemy his casual or tem-
porary allies, the means for spreading enmity and distrust among
those who permanently share power with the autocracy.

Only a party that will organise real all-national exposures can
become the vanguard of the revolutionary forces in our time. The
word “all-national” has a very profound meaning. The overwhelming
majority of the non-working class exposers (and in order to become
the vanguard, we must attract other classes) are sober politicians
and cool business men. They know perfectly well how dangerous
it is to “complain” even against a minor official, let alone against
the “omnipotent” Russian government. And they will come to us
with their complaints only when they see that these complaints
really have effect, and when they see that we represent a political
force. In order to become this political force in the eyes of out-
siders, much persistent and stubborn work is required to increase
our own consciousness, initiative and energy. For this, it is not
sufficient to stick the label “vanguard” on “rearguard” theory and
practice.

But if we have to undertake the organisation of the real all-
national exposure of the government, then in what way will the class
character of our movement be expressed ?—the over-zealous advo-
cates of “close organic contact with the proletarian struggle” will
ask us. The reply is: In that we Social-Democrats will organise
these public exposures; in that all the questions that are brought up
by the agitation will be explained in the spirit of Social-Democracy,
Without any deliberate or unconscious distortions of Marxism; in


the fact that the party will carry on this universal political agitation,
85


uniting into one inseparable whole the pressure upon the gove
ment in the name of the whole people, the revolutionary traini
the proletariat—while preserving its political independence—t
guidance of the economic struggle of the working: class, the utilis


aaa


and bring into our camp increasing numbers of the proletarial il ;

But one of the characteristic features of Economism is its failu
to understand this connection. More than that—it fails to und
stand the identity between the most pressing needs of the prol
tariat (an all-sided political education through the medium
political agitation and political exposures), and the need for
general democratic movement. This lack of understanding is m
only expressed in “Martynovist” phrases, but also in the alleg
class point-of-view which is identical in thought with these phras
The following, for example, is how the authors of the Economi
Letter in No. 12 of Jskra expressed themselves.* ;


This fundamental drawback [overestimating ideology] is the cause of Iskre
inconsistency in regard to the question of the relations between
Democrats and various social classes and tendencies. By a process of theor
cal reasoning [and not by “the growth of party tasks which grow tog
with the party], Jskra arrived at the conclusion that it was necessary il
mediately to take up the struggle against absolutism, but in all proba
sensing the difficulty of this task for the workers in the present state of
[not only sensing, but knowing perfectly well that this problem will seem
dificult to the workers than to those Economist intellectuals who are
cerned about little children, for the workers are prepared to fight even
demands which, to use the language of the never-to-be-forgotten Martynov,
not “promise palpable results”] and lacking the patience to wait until
working class has accumulated sufficient forces for this struggle, Iskra b
to seek for allies in the ranks of the liberals and intellectuals.


Yes, yes, we have indeed lost all “patience” to “wait” for f
blessed time that has long been promised us by the “conciliator:
when the Economists will stop throwing the blame for their ot
backwardness upon the workers, and stop justifying their own la
of energy by the alleged lack of energy of the workers. We ask 0
Economists: What does “the workers accumulating forces for t


* Lack of space has prevented us from replying in full to this letter ©
tremely characteristic of the Economists. We were very glad this letter |
peared, for the charges brought against Iskra, that it did not mainta
consistent, class point-of-view, have reached us long ago from various sO
and we waited for an appropriate opportunity, or for a formulated expre
of this fashionable charge, in order to reply to it. And it is our habit
reply to attacks, not by defence, but by counter-attacks.

86


struggle” mean? Is it not evident that it means the political training
of the workers by revealing to them all the aspects of our despicable
autocracy? And is it not clear that precisely for this work we need
“allies in the ranks of the liberals and intelligentsia,” who are
prepared to join us in the exposure of the political attack on the
Zemstvo, on the teachers, on the statisticians, on the students, etc.?
Is this “cunning mechanism” so difficult to understand after all?
Did not P. B. Axelrod repeat to you over and over again since
1897: “The problem of the Russian Social-Democrats acquiring
direct and indirect allies from among the non-proletarian classes
will be solved principally by the character of the propagandist
activities conducted among the proletariat itself?” And Marty-
nov and the other Economists continue to image that the workers
must at first accumulate forces (for trade-union politics) in the
economic struggle with the employers and the government, and then
“go over [we suppose from trade-union “training for activity”] to
Social-Democratic activity.”

. . - In its quest, continue the Economists, Jskra “not infrequently
departs from the class point-of-view, obscures class antagonisms and
puts into the forefront the general discontent prevailing against the
government, notwithstanding the fact that the causes and the degree
of his discontent vary very considerably among the ‘allies.’ Such,
for example, is Iskra’s attitude towards the Zemstvo. . . .”

Iskra, it is alleged, promises those who are discontented with
the government’s doles to the nobility the aid of the working class,
but does not say a word about the class differences among these strata
of the people. If the reader will turn to the series of articles “The
Autocracy and the Zemstvo” [Nos. 2 and 4 of Iskra] to which,
in all probability, the author of the letter refers, he will find that
these articles * deal with the attitude of the government towards the
“mild agitation of the feudal-bureaucratic Zemstvo,” and towards
the “independent activity of even the propertied classes.” In these
articles it is stated that the workers cannot look on indifferently while
the government is carrying on a fight against the Zemstvo, and the
latter are called upon to give up making soft speeches, but to speak
firmly and resolutely when revolutionary Social-Democracy con-
fronts the government in all its strength. What there is in this that


Er Among these articles there was one (Iskra, No. 3) especially dealing
With the class antagonisms in rural districts. [See The Iskra Period, Book I,
P. 101.—Ed.}

87


the authors of the letter do not agree with is not clear. Do th
think that the workers will “not understand” the phrases “propertie
classes” and “feudal-bureaucratic Zemstvo”? Do they think


if they know nothing about the attitude of absolutism towards the
Zemstvo? All this remains unknown. One thing alone is clear an
that is that the authors of the letter have a very vague idea of wha
the political tasks of Social-Democracy are. This is revealed
more clearly by their remark: “Such also is Jskra’s attitude towar
the student movements” (i. e., also “obscures class antagonism”)
Instead of calling upon the workers to declare by means o
public demonstrations that the real centre of unbridled violence
and outrage is not the students but the Russian government [Isk
No. 2],* we ought, no doubt, to have inserted arguments in the spi
of Rabochaya Mysl. And such ideas were expressed by Soc
Democrats in the autumn of 1901, after the events of February a
March, on the eve of a fresh student up-grade movement, which
revealed that even in this sphere the “spontaneous” protest agai
autocracy is “outstripping”’ the conscious Social-Democratic lea
ship of the movement. The spontaneous striving of the worke
defend the students, who were being beaten up by the police and
Cossacks, is outstripping the conscious activity of the Social-Demo
cratic organisations! }
“And yet in other articles,” continue the authors of the letter,
“Iskra ‘condemns’ all ‘compromises,’ and ‘defends,’ for example.
the intolerant conduct of the Guesdists.” We would advise th
who so conceitedly and frivolously declare—usually in connectior
with the disagreements existing among the contemporary Soci
Democrats—that the disagreements are not essential and would
justify a split, to ponder very deeply over these words. Is it p
sible for those who say that we have done astonishingly little to
plain the hostility of the autocracy towards the various classes,
to inform the workers of the opposition of the various strata of
population towards autocracy, to work successfully in one organ
tion with those who say that such work is “ccompromise”—evidenth
compromise with the theory of the “economic struggle agains
employers and the government”?


* See The Iskra Period, Book I, p. 70.—Ed.
88


We urged the necessity of introducing the class struggle in the
rural districts on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the
emancipation of the peasantry (No. 3,* and of the irreconcilability
between the local government bodies and the autocracy in connec-
tion with Witte’s secret memorandum (No. 4). We attacked the
feudal landlords and the government which served the latter on the
occasion of the passing of the law (No. 8),** and welcomed the
secret Zemstvo congress that was held. We urged the Zemstvo to stop
making degrading petitions [No. 8], and to come out in the open
to fight. We encouraged the students, who began to understand the
necessity for the political struggle and began to take up that struggle
[No. 3], and at the same time, we lashed out at the “barbarous
lack of understanding” revealed by the adherents of the “purely stu-
dent” movement, who called upon the students to abstain from
taking part in the street demonstrations (No. 3, in connection with
the manifesto issued by the Executive Committee of the Moscow
students on February 25). We exposed the “senseless dreams” and
the “lying hypocrisy” of the cunning liberals of Rossiya [No. 5] and
at the same time we commented on the savage acts of the govern-
ment’s torture chambers where “peaceful writers, aged professors,
and scientists and the liberal Zemstvo were cruelly dealt with” [No.
5, “The Police Raid on Literature”]. We exposed the real signifi-
cance of the programme of the “concern of the government for the
welfare of the workers,” and welcomed the “valuable admission”
that “it is better by granting reforms from above to forestall the de-
mand for such reforms from below, than to wait for those demands
to be put forward” [No. 6].*** We encouraged the protests of the
statisticians [No. 7], and censured the strikebreaking statisticians
[No. 9]. He who sees in these tactics the obscuring of the class
Consciousness of the proletariat and compromise with liberalism
shows that he absolutely fails to understand the true significance of
the programme of the Credo and de facto is carrying out that pro-
gramme, however much he may deny this! Because, by that he is
dragging Social-Democracy towards the “economic struggle against
the employers and the government” but shies at liberalism, aban-


* See The Iskra Period, Book I, p. 101.—Ed.
** See Ibid., p. 176.—Ed.
*** See Ibid., p. 164.—Ed.

89


dons the task of actively intervening in every “liberal’’ question ane
defining his own Social-Democratic attitude towards such questions


by Rabocheye Dyelo * which in this way answers our charge
it “indirectly prepared the ground for converting the labour mo
ment into an instrument of bourgeois democracy.” In its simplic’
of heart Rabocheye Dyelo decided that this accusation was noth
more than a polemical sally, as if to say, these malicious doctrinai
can only think of saying unpleasant things about us; now what
be more unpleasant than being an instrument of bourgeois
mocracy? And so they print in heavy type a “refutation”: “No
ing but downright slander” [Two Congresses, p. 30], “mystifi
tion” [p. 31] “masquerade” [p. 33]. Like Jupiter, Raboe
Dyelo (although it has little resemblance to Jupiter) is angry
cause it is wrong, and proves by its hasty abuse that it is incapa
of understanding its opponents’ mode of reasoning. And

with only a little reflection, it would have understood why s
servience to the spontaneity of the mass movement and any
grading of Social-Democratic politics to trade-union politics me
precisely to prepare the ground for converting the labour move:
ment into an instrument of bourgeois democracy. The spontaneous
labour movement is able by itself to create (and inevitably will
ate) only trade unionism, and working-class trade-union poli
are precisely working-class bourgeois politics. The fact that
working class participates in the political struggle and even 1
political revolution does not in itself make its politics Social
Democratic politics. Will Rabocheye Dyelo deny that? Will it
last openly and without equivocation explain its position on
urgent questions of the international and of the Russian Soc
Democratic movement? Oh no, it never thinks of doing anyth:
of the kind, because it holds fast to the trick, which might
described as telling it in “negatives”: “It’s not me; it’s not
horse; I’m not the driver.” ** We are not Economists; Rabocha
Mysl does not stand for Economism; there is no Economism at 2}


.


* See The Iskra Period, Book I, p. 164.—Ed. q
** A popular version of the excuses offered by a gipsy caught with a stole

horse.—Ed.
90


in Russia. This is a remarkably adroit and “political” trick, which
suffers from this little defect, however, that the bodies that practice
it are usually dubbed with the nickname: “Anything you wish, sir.” *

Rabocheye Dyelo imagines that bourgeois democracy in Russia
is merely a “phantom” [Two Congresses, p. 32].** Happy people!
Like the ostrich, they bury their heads in the sand, and imagine
that everything around has disappeared. A number of liberal pub-
licists who month after month proclaimed to the world their tri-
umph over the collapse and even disappearance of Marxism; a
number of liberal newspapers (St. Peterburgskiye Vyedomosti,
Russkiye Vyedomosti and many others) which encourage the lib-
erals who bring to the workers the Brentano conception of the class
struggle and the trade-union conception of politics—the galaxy of
critics of Marxism, whose real tendencies were so very well dis-
closed by the Credo and whose literary products alone circulate
freely in Russia—the animation among revolutionary non-Social-
Democratic tendencies, particularly after the February and March
events—all these, of course, are mere phantoms! Of course, it has
nothing at all to do with bourgeois democracy!

Rabocheye Dyelo and the authors of the Economic Letter pub-
lished in Jskra No. 12, should “ponder over the question as to why
the events in the spring excited such animation among the revo-
lutionary non-Social-Democratic tendencies instead of increasing
the authority and the prestige of Social-Democracy. The reason
was that we failed to cope with our tasks. The masses of the work-
ers proved to be more active than we, we lacked adequately trained
revolutionary leaders and organisers aware of the mood prevailing
among all the oppositional strata and able to march at the head
of the movement, convert the spontaneous demonstration into a
political demonstration, broaden its political character, etc. Under
such circumstances, our backwardness will inevitably be taken ad-
vantage of by the more mobile and more energetic non-Social-

* Suggesting that they are subservient——Ed.

? ** This is a reference to the “concrete Russian conditions which fatalistically
impel the labour movemert on the revolutionary path.” But these people
refuse to understand that the revolutionary path of the labour movement
might not be a Social-Democratic path! When absolutism reigned in Western
Europe, the entire Western European bourgeoisie “impelled” and deliberately
impelled the workers on the path of revolution. We, Social-Democrats, how-
€ver, cannot be satisfied with that. And if we, by any means whatever, de-
&rade Social-Democratic politics to the level of spontaneous trade-union
Dolitics, we, by that, play into the hands of bourgeois democracy.


Democratic revolutionists, and the workers, no matter how strenu-
ously and self-sacrificingly they may fight the police and the troop
no matter how revolutionary they may act, will prove to be merely
the rearguard of bourgeois democracy, and not the vanguard of So.
cial-Democracy. Take, for example, the German Social-Democrats,
whose weak sides alone our Economists desire to emulate. Why
is it that not a single political event takes place in Germany with-
out adding to the authority and prestige of Social- -Democracy?
Because Social-Democracy is always found to be in advance of all
others in their revolutionary estimation of any event and in their
championship of every protest against tyranny. It does not soothe
itself by arguments about the economic struggle bringing the work-
ers up against their own lack of rights, and about concrete condi-
tions fatalistically impelling the labour movement on the path of
revolution. It intervenes in every sphere and in every question of
social and political life. In the matter of Wilhelm’s refusal to
endorse a bourgeois progressive as city mayor (our Economists
have not yet managed to convince the Germans that this in fact is”
a compromise with liberalism!) ; in the question of the law against
the publication of “immoral” publications and pictures; in the
question of the government’s influencing the election of the profes-
sors, etc., etc., everywhere Social-Democracy is found to be ahead
of all others, rousing political discontent among all classes, rousing”
the sluggards, pushing on the laggards and providing a wealth of
material for the development of the political consciousness and
political activity of the proletariat. The result of all this is that
even the avowed enemies of Socialism are filled with respect for
this advanced political fighter and sometimes an important docu-
ment from bourgeois and even from bureaucratic and Court circles
makes its way by some miraculous means into the editorial office
of Vorwaerts.

This, then, is the explanation of the seeming “contradiction” that
passes the understanding of Rabocheye Dyelo to such an extent
that it raises its arms and cries: “Masquerade”! Is it not a shock- q
ing thing: We, Rabocheye Dyelo, place the mass labour movement
as the cornerstone (and printed in heavy type!) ; we warn all and
sundry against belittling the significance of the spontaneous move-
ment; we desire to give the economic struggle itself, itself, itself,
a political character; we desire to maintain close and organic con-


tact with the proletarian struggle! And yet we are told that we
92


preparing the ground for converting the labour movement into an
instrument of bourgeois democracy! And who says this? People
who “compromise” with liberalism, intervene in every “liberal”
question (what a gross misunderstanding of the “organic contacts
with the proletarian struggle”! ), who devote so much attention to the
students and even (Oh horror!) to the Zemstvoists! People who
wish to devote a greater (compared with the Economists) percent-
age of their efforts to activity among non-proletarian classes of the
population! Is not this a “masquerade”?

Poor Rabocheye Dyelo! Will it ever find the solution of this
complicated puzzle?


Su


IV


THE PRIMITIVENESS OF THE ECONOMISTS AND THE "
ORGANISATION OF REVOLUTIONISTS '


Rabocheye Dyelo’s assertions—which we have analysed—that
the economic struggle is the most widely applicable means of polit-
ical agitation and that our task now is to give the economic struggle
itself a political character, etc., not only express a restricted view
of our political tasks, but also of our organisational tasks. The —
“economic struggle against the employers and the government”
does not in the least require—and therefore such a struggle can
never give rise to—an All-Russian centralised organisation that will
combine, in a general attack, all the numerous manifestations of
political opposition, protest and indignation, an organisation that
will consist of professional revolutionaries and be led by the real
political leaders of the whole people. And this can be easily under-
stood. The character of the organisation of every institution is_
naturally and inevitably determined by the character of the activity
that institution conducts. Consequently, Rabocheye Dyelo, by the
above-analysed assertions, not only sanctifies and legitimatises the”
narrowness of political activity, but also the narrowness of organi-—
sational work. And in this case also, as always, its consciousness —
shrinks before spontaneity. And yet, subservience to spontane-
ously rising forms of organisation, the lack of appreciation of the
narrowness and primitiveness of our organisational work, of our
“primitive methods” in this most important sphere, the lack of such
appreciation, I say, is a very serious complaint that our movement
suffers from. It is not a complaint that comes with decline, of
course, it is a complaint that comes with growth. But it is precisely
at the present time, when the wave of spontaneous indignation is, aS
it were, lashing us leaders and organisers of the movement, that a
most irreconcilable struggle must be carried on against all defence
of sluggishness, against any legitimisation of restriction in this”
matter, and it is particularly necessary to rouse in all those par-
ticipating in the practical work, in all who are just thinking of
taking it up, discontent with the primitive methods that prevail


among us and unshakable determination to get rid of them.
94


A. Wuat Are PrimitivE MretHops?


We shall try to answer this question by describing the activity of
a typical Social-Democratic circle of the period of 1894-1901. We
have already referred to the manner in which the students became
absorbed in Marxism at that period. Of course, these students
were not so much interested in Marxism as a theory; they were
interested in it because it provided the answer to the question:
“What is to be done?”; because it was a call to march against the
enemy. And these young warriors marched to battle with aston-
ishingly primitive equipment and training. In a vast number of
cases, they had almost no equipment, and absolutely no training.
They marched to war like peasants from the plough, snatching up a
club. A students’ circle with no contacts with the old members of
the movement, no contacts with circles in other districts, or even in
other parts of the same city (or with other schools), without the
various sections of the revolutionary work being in any way organ-
ised, having no systematic plan of activity covering any length of
time, establishes contacts with the workers and sets to work. The
circle gradually expands its propaganda and agitation; by its activi-
ties it wins the sympathies of a rather large circle of workers and
of a certain section of the educated classes, which provides it with
money and from which the “committee” recruits new groups of
members. The fascination which the committee (or the League of
Struggle) exercises on the youth increases, its sphere of activity
becomes wider and its activities expand quite spontaneously: the
very people who a year or a few months previously had spoken at
the gatherings of the students’ circle and discussed the question,
“Whither?” who established and maintained contacts with the
workers, wrote and published leaflets, established contacts with
other groups of revolutionists and procured literature, now set to
work to establish a local newspaper, begin to talk about organising
demonstrations, and finally, commence open conflicts (these open
conflicts may, according to circumstances, take the form of issuing
the very first agitational leaflet, or the first newspaper, or of organ-
ising the first demonstration). And usually, the first action ends
in immediate and complete defeat. Immediate and complete, pre-
Cisely because these open conflicts were not the result of a syste-
matic and carefully thought-out and gradually prepared plan for a


Prolonged and stubborn struggle, but simply the spontaneous
95


growth of traditional circle work; because naturally, the po
almost in every case, knew the principal leaders of the local mo
ment, for they had already “recommended” themselves to the poli
in their school-days, and the latter only waited for a convenient d
to make their raid. They gave the circle sufficient time to devel
their work so that they may obtain a palpable corpus delicti,* an
always allowed several of the persons known to them to remain
liberty for razvodka (which, I believe is the technical term use
both by our people and by the gendarmes) ** One cannot he
comparing this kind of warfare with that conducted by a mob of
peasants armed with clubs against modern troops. One can only
express astonishment at the virility displayed by the movement
which expanded, grew and won victories in spite of the lack of
training among the fighters. It is true that from the historical
point-of-view, the primitiveness of equipment was not only inevitable
at first, but even legitimate as one of the conditions for the wide
recruiting of fighters, but as soon as serious operations commenced
(and they commenced in fact with the strikes in the summer of
1896), the defects in our fighting organisations made themselves
felt to an increasing extent. Thrown into consternation at first and
committing a number of mistakes (for example, its appeal to the
public describing the misdeeds of the Socialists, or the deportation
of the workers from the capital to the provincial industrial centres)
the government very soon adapted itself to the new conditions of
the struggle and managed to place its perfectly equipped detach-


places. Raids became so frequent, affected such a vast number sf
people, and cleared out the local circles” so thoroughly, that i


assumed an incredibly sporadic character, and it became utterly
impossible to established continuity and connectedness in the work.
The fact that the local active workers were hopelessly scattered, the
casual manner in which the membership of the circles were Te
cruited, the lack of training in and narrow outlook on theoretical,
political and organisational questions were all the inevitable resu It
of the conditions described above. Things reached such a pas


* Offence within the meaning of the law.—Ed.

** Literally for “breeding purposes,” i. e., to breed more victims for é
police net. By allowing them to be at liberty and by shadowing their move
ments, the police were able to use them as innocent tools to betray


whereabouts of other revolutionists as yet unknown to them.—Ed.
Qe


that in several places the workers, because of our lack of stamina
and ability to maintain secrecy, began to lose faith in the intelli-
gentsia and to avoid them: The intellectuals, they said, are much
too careless and lay themselves open to police raids!

Any one who has the slightest knowledge of the movement knows
that these primitive methods at last began to be recognised as a
disease by all thinking Social-Democrats. And in order that the
reader, who is not acquainted with the movement, may have no
grounds for thinking that we are “inventing”? a special stage or
special disease of the movement, we shall refer once again to the
witness we have already quoted. No doubt we shall be excused for
the length of the passage quoted:


While the gradual transition to wider practical activity [writes B-v in
Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 6], a transition which is closely connected with the
general transitional period through which the Russian labour movement is
now passing, is a characteristic feature . . . there is, however, another and not
less interesting feature in the general mechanism of the Russian workers’
revolution. We refer to the general lack of revolutionary forces fit for action *
which is felt not only in St. Petersburg, but throughout the whole of Russia.
With the general revival of the labour movement, with the general develop-
ment of the working masses, with the growing frequency of strikes, and with
the mass labour struggle becoming more and more open, the intensification of
government persecution, arrests, deportation and exile, this lack of highly
skilled revolutionary forces is becoming more and more marked and, without
a doubt, must leave deep traces upon the general character of the movement.
Many strikes take place without the revolutionary organisations exercising
any strong and direct influence upon them. ... A _ shortage of agitational
leaflets and illegal literature is felt. . . . The workers’ circles are left without
agitators. . . . Simultaneously, there is a constant shortage of funds. In a
word, the growth of the labour movement is outstripping the growth and de-
velopment of the revolutionary organisations. ‘The numerical strength of the
active revolutionists is too small to enable them to concentrate in themselves
all the influence exercised upon the whole of the discontented masses of labour,
or to give this unrest even a shadow of symmetry and organisation... .
Separate circles, separate revolutionists, scattered, uncombined do not repre-
sent a united, strong and disciplined organisation with the planned develop-
ment of its parts. ...


Admitting that the immediate organisation of fresh circles to take
the place of those that have been broken up, “merely proves the
virility of the movement . . . but does not prove the existence of
an adequate number of sufficiently fit revolutionary workers,” the
author concludes:


The lack of practical training among the St. Petersburg revolutionists is
seen in the results of their work. The recent trials, especially that of the Self-


* All italics ours.
97


Emancipation group and the Labour versus Capital group clearly showed


Cs


that the young agitator, unacquainted with the details of the conditions of


4


labour and, consequently, unacquainted with the conditions under which agi-
tation must be carried on in a given factory, ignorant of the principles of
conspiracy, and understanding only the general principles of Social-Democraey y
[and it is a question whether he understands them] is able to carry on his
work for perhaps four, five, or six months. Then come arrests, which fel
quently lead to the break-up of the whole organisation, or at all events, of
part of it. The question arises, therefore, can the group conduct successful
and fruitful activity if its existence is measured by months? Obviously, the
defects of the existing organisations cannot be wholly ascribed to the transi-


oe)


tional period. . . . Obviously, the numerical and above all the qualitative
strength of the organisations operating is not of little importance, and the
first task our Social-Democrats must undertake is effectively to combine the
organisations and make a strict selection of their membership. d


B. Primitive Metuops anp EcoNnoMIsM


We must now deal with the question that undoubtedly must have
arisen in the mind of every reader. Have these primitive methods,
which are a complaint of growth that affect the whole of the move-—
ment, any connection with Economism, which is only one of the
tendencies in Russian Social-Democracy? We think that they have.
The lack of practical training, the lack of ability to carry on


Marxism right from the very outset. And, of course, no one can
blame the practical workers for their lack of practical training.
But, the term “primitive methods” embraces something more than
mere lack of training: It embraces the restrictedness of revolutionary


of revolutionists cannot be built up on the basis of such restrict
work, and lastly—and most important—it embraces the attempts


restrictedness of our eae aid activity until we eliminate
Economism generally (i. e., the narrow conception of Marxi
theory, of the réle of Social-Democracy, and of its political tasks
And these attempts were revealed in a two-fold direction. Som
began to say: The labour masses have not yet themselves broug
up the broad and militant tasks that the revolutionists desire to


“impose” upon them; they must continue for the time being té
98 q


fight for immediate political demands, to conduct “the economic
struggle against the employers and the government” * (this mass
struggle “easily understood” by these masses naturally corre-
sponds to an organisation “easily accessible” to the most untrained
youth). Others, far removed from “gradualness,” began to say:
We can and must “bring about a political revolution,” but there is
no reason whatever for building a strong organisation of revolu-
tionists that would train revolutionists for the stalwart and stubborn
struggle, in order to bring this revolution about. All we need do
is to snatch up the “easily understood”? wooden club, the acquaint-
ance with which we have already made. Speaking, without
metaphor, it means—we must organise a general strike,** or we must
stimulate the “spiritless” progress of the labour movement by means
of “excitative terror.” *** Both these tendencies, the opportunist
and the “revolutionary,” bow to the prevailing primitiveness; neither
believe that it can be eliminated, neither understand our primary and
most imperative practical task, namely, to establish an organisation
of revolutionists capable of maintaining the energy, the stability
and continuity of the political struggle.

We have just quoted the words of B-v: “The growth of the labour
movement is outstripping the growth and development of the revo-
lutionary organisations.” This “valuable remark of a close ob-
server” (Rabocheye Dyelo’s comment on B-v’s article) has a two-
fold value for us. It proves that we were right in our opinion that
the principal cause of the present crisis in Russian Social-Democ-
tacy is that the leaders (“‘ideologists,” revolutionists, Social-Demo-
crats) lag behind the spontaneous rising of the masses. It shows
that all the arguments advanced by the authors of the Economic
Letter in Iskra, No. 12, by B. Krichevsky, and by Martynov, about
the dangers of belittling the significance of the spontaneous elements,
about the drab every-day struggles, about the tactics-process, etc.,
are nothing more than a glorification and defence of primitive
methods. These people, who cannot pronounce the word “theoreti-
cian” without a contemptuous grimace, who describe their genu-
flections to common lack of training and ignorance as “sensitiveness


* Rabochaya Mysl and Rabocheye Dyelo, especially the Reply to Plekhanov.
i *See Who Will Bring About the Political Revolution? A symposium pub-
ished in Russia entitled, The Proletarian Struggle. Re-issued by the Kiev

mmittee.

*** Regeneration of Revolutionism and Svoboda.

99


to life,” reveal in practice a failure to understand our m
imperative practical task. To laggards they shout: Keep in sg
don’t run ahead! To people suffering from a lack of energy ar
initiative in organisational work, from lack of “plans” for wide an
bold organisational work, they shout about the “‘tactics-proces
The most serious sin we commit is that we degrade our political a
our organisational tasks to the level of immediate, “palpabl
“concrete” interests of the every-day economic struggle; and
they keep singing to us the old song: Give the economic stru
itself a political character. We say again: This kind of thing ¢
plays as much “sensitiveness to life” as was displayed by the h
in the popular fable who shouted to a passing funeral procession
May you never get to your destination.*

Recall the matchless, truly ““Narcissus”-like superciliousness
which these wiseacres lectured Plekhanov about the “workers’ cir
generally” [sic!/] being “incapable of fulfilling political tasks
the real and practical sense of the word, i. e., the sense of ex
pedient and successful practical struggle for political demands
[Rabocheye Dyelo’s Reply, p. 24.] There are circles and cire
gentlemen! Circles of “kustars,’” ** of course, are incapable
fulfilling political tasks and never will be, until they realise
primitiveness of their methods and abandon it. If besides this, th
amateurs are enamoured of their primitive methods, and insist 0
writing the word “practical” in italics, and imagine that practical
ity demands that their tasks be degraded to the level of und
standing of the most backward strata of the masses, then they
hopeless, of course, and certainly cannot fulfil general polit.
tasks. But circles of heroes, like those formed by Alexeyev
Myshkin, Khalturin and Zhelyabov, are able to fulfil political ta
in the genuine and most practical sense of the term, because their


sponding and sustained energy among the revolutionary cla $s
Plekhanov was a thousand times right not only when he pointeaay 10


taneous awakening was inevitable, but also when he set the “wo rk
ers’ circles” a great and lofty political task. But you refer to the
mass movement that has sprung up since that time in order to

* This refers to a popular fable about “Ivan the Fool.”—Ed.


** Kustars—handicraftsmen employing primitive methods in their work.— ed.
100


degrade this task, in order to curtail the energy and scope of
activity of the “workers” circles.” If you are not amateurs enam-
oured of your primitive methods, what are you then? You clutch
at your practicality, but you fail to see what every Russian practical
worker knows, namely, the miracles that the energy, not only of
circles, but even of individual persons is able to perform in the
revolutionary cause. Or do you think that our movements cannot
produce heroes like those that were produced by the movement in
the seventies? If so, why do you think so? Because we lack
training? But we are training ourselves, will train ourselves and
we will be trained! Unfortunately it is true that scum has formed
on the surface of the stagnant water of the “economic struggle
against the employers and the government”; there are people among
us who kneel in prayer to spontaneity, gazing with awe upon the
“posteriors” of the Russian proletariat (as Plekhanov expresses it).
But we will remove this scum. The time has come when Russian
revolutionists, led by a genuine revolutionary theory, relying upon
the genuinely revolutionary and spontaneously awakening class, can
at last—at last!—rise to their full height and exert their giant
strength to the utmost. All that is required in order that this may
be so is that the masses of our practical workers and the still
larger masses of those who dream of doing practical work even
while still at school shall meet with scorn and ridicule any sugges-
tion that may be made to degrade our political tasks, and to restrict
the scope of our organisational work. And we will achieve that,
don’t you worry, gentlemen!

In the article, “Where to Begin,” that I wrote in opposition to
Rabocheye Dyelo, I said: “Tactics in relation to some special ques-
tion, or in relation to some detail of party organisation may be
changed in twenty-four hours; but views as to whether a militant
organisation, and political agitation among the masses, is necessary
at all times or not cannot be changed in twenty-four hours, or
even in twenty-four months for that matter.” * To this Rabocheye
Dyelo replied: “This is the only charge Iskra has levelled against
us that claims to be based on facts, and even that is totally without
foundation. Readers of Rabocheye Dyelo know very well that right
from the outset we not only called for political agitation, without


* See “Where to Begin,” The Iskra Period, Book I, p. 110.—Ed.
101


waiting for the appearance of Iskra* . . .” [and while doing ;
you said that it was “impossible to impose on the mass labo
movement, or on the workers’ circles, the primary political tas
overthrowing absolutism,” that the only task they could carr
was to struggle for immediate political demands, and that “i
diate political demands are understood by the masses after a gs
or at all events, after a few strikes”] “. . . but in the publica
that we procured from abroad for the comrades working in R:
provided the only Social-Democratic political and agitati
material . . .” [and this only Social-Democratic material, the onl
political agitation that was carried on by you at all widely, we
based exclusively on the economic struggle, and you even went
far as to claim that this restricted agitation was “the most wid
applicable.” And you fail to observe, gentlemen, that your oy
arguments—that this was the only material provided—proves th
necessity for Iskra’s appearance, and proves how necessary it is |
Iskra to oppose Rabocheye Dyelo]. “. . . On the other hand,
publishing activity really prepared the ground for the tactical unit
of the party. ...” [Unity in the conviction that tactics are
process of growth of party tasks that grow together with the pa
A precious unity indeed!] “. . . and by that rendered possible #
creation of a ‘militant organisation’ for which the League did a
that an organisation abroad could do.” [Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 1
p- 15.] A vain attempt at evasion! I would never dream of deny
that you did all you possibly could. I have asserted and assert no}
that the limits of what is “possible” for you to do are restricted
the narrowness of your outlook. It is ridiculous to talk about
“militant organisation” fighting for “immediate political demand
or conducting “the economic struggle against the employers and the
government.” 4

But if the reader wishes to see the pearls of Economist primi rive
methods, he must, of course, turn from the eclectic and vacillati
Rabocheye Dyelo to the consistent and determined Rabochaya M:
In its Special Supplement, p. 13, R. M. wrote:


Now two words about the so-called revolutionary intelligentsia proper.
is true that on more than one occasion it proved that it was quite prepare
to “enter into determined battle with tsarism!” The unfortunate thing, ho


* The interjections in brackets are Lenin’s running comment on Rabocheyé
Dyelo’s reply to Iskra—Ed.
102


intelligentsia imagined that the battle with this political police was a political
struggle with the autocracy. That is why, to this day, it cannot understand
“where the forces for the fight against the autocracy are to be obtained.”


What matchless and magnificent contempt for the struggle with
the police the worshippers (in the worst sense of the word) of the
spontaneous movement display, do they not? They are prepared
to justify our inability to organise secretly by the argument that
with the spontaneous growth of the mass movement, it is not at all
important for us to fight against the political police!! Not many
are prepared to subscribe to this monstrous conclusion; our defects
in revolutionary organisation has become too urgent a matter to
permit them to do that. Martynov, for example, would also refuse
to subscribe to this, but in his case it is only because he is unable,
or lacks the courage, to think out his ideas to their logical con-
clusion. Indeed, does the “task” of prompting the masses to put
forward concrete demands promising palpable results call for
special efforts to create a stable, centralised, militant, organisation
of revolutionists? Cannot such a “task” be carried out even by
masses who do not “fight at all against the political police”? More-
over, can this task be fulfilled unless, in addition to the few leaders,
it is undertaken by the workers (the overwhelming majority), who in
fact are incapable of “fighting against the political police”? Such
workers, average people of the masses, are capable of displaying
enormous energy and self-sacrifice in strikes and in street battles,
with the police and troops, and are capable (in fact, are alone
capable) of determining the whole outcome of our movement—but
the struggle against the political police requires special qualities; it
can be conducted only by professional revolutionists. And we
must not only see to it that the masses “advance”’ concrete demands,
but also that the masses of the workers “advance” an increasing
number of such professional revolutionists from their own ranks.
Thus we have reached the question of the relation between an or-
ganisation of professional revolutionists and the pure and simple
labour movement. Although this question has found little re-
flection in literature, it has greatly engaged us “politicians,” in
conversations and controversies with those comrades who gravitate
more or less towards Economism. It is a question that deserves
special treatment. But before taking it up we shall deal with one
other quotation in order to illustrate the position we hold in regard


to the connection between primitiveness and Economism.
108


In his Reply, N. N. wrote: “The Emancipation of Labour groy
demands direct struggle against the government without first «
sidering where the material forces for this struggle are to
obtained, and without indicating ‘the path of the struggle.’”
phasising the last words, the author adds the following footnote
the word “path”: “This cannot be explained by the conspirato
aims pursued, because the programme does not refer to secret ph
ting but to a mass movement. ‘The masses cannot proceed by se
paths. Can we conceive of a secret strike? Can we conceive
secret demonstrations and petitions?” [Vademecum, p. 59.] Th
the author approaches quite close to the question of the “mate:
forces” (organisers of strikes and demonstrations) and to the “path
of the struggle, but nevertheless, is still in a state of consternatio
because he “worships” the mass movement, i. e., he regards it
something that relieves us of the necessity for carrying on revolu-
tionary activity and not as something that should embolden us and
stimulate our revolutionary activity. Secret strikes are impossible
—for those who take a direct and immediate part in them, but a
strike may remain (and in the majority of cases does remain)


care to prevent all news of strikes from spreading. Now her
indeed is a special “struggle against the political police” required, a
struggle that can never be conducted by such large masses as usually
take part in strikes. Such a struggle must be organised, accordin
to “all the rules of the art,” by people who are professionally
engaged in revolutionary activity. The fact that the masses are
spontaneously entering the movement does not make the organisa-
tion of this struggle less necessary. On the contrary, it makes i
more necessary; for we Socialists would be failing in our duty to
the masses if we did not prevent the police from making a secret of
(and if we did not ourselves sometimes secretly prepare) every
strike and every demonstration. And we will succeed in doing this,
precisely because the spontaneously awakening masses will also ad-
vance from their own ranks increasing numbers of “professional
revolutionists” (that is, if we are not so foolish as to advise the
workers to keep on marking time).


104


C. ORGANISATION OF WORKERS, AND ORGANISATION OF
REVOLUTIONISTS


It is only natural that a Social-Democrat who conceives the
political struggle as being identical with the “economic struggle
against the employers and the government,” should conceive “organ-
isation of revolutionists” as being more or less identical with
“organisation of workers.” And this, in fact, is what actually
happens; so that when we talk about organisation, we literally talk
in different tongues. I recall a conversation I once had with a
fairly consistent Economist, with whom I had not been previously
acquainted. We were discussing the brochure Who Will Make the
Political Revolution? and we were very soon agreed that the prin-
cipal defect in that brochure was that it ignored the question of
organisation. We were beginning to think that we were in complete
agreement with each other—but as the conversation proceeded, it
became clear that we were talking of different things. My inter-
locutor accused the author of the brochure just mentioned of ignor-
ing strike funds, mutual-aid societies, etc.; whereas I had in mind
an organisation of revolutionists, as an essential factor in “making”
the political revolution. After that became clear, I hardly remem-
ber a single question of importance upon which I was in agreement
with that Economist!

What was the source of our disagreement? It is the fact that on
questions of organisation and politics the Economists are forever
lapsing from Social-Democracy into trade unionism. The political
struggle carried on by the Social-Democrats is far more extensive
and complex than the economic struggle the workers carry on
against the employers and the government. Similarly (and indeed
for that reason), the organisation of revolutionary Social-Democrats
must inevitably differ from the organisations of the workers designed
for the latter struggle. The workers’ organisations must in the first
place be trade organisations; secondly, they must be as wide as
possible; and thirdly, they must be as public as conditions will
allow (here, of course, I have only autocratic Russia in mind). On
the other hand, the organisations of revolutionists must be com-
prised first and foremost of people whose profession is that of
revolutionists (that is why I speak of organisations of revolution-
ists, meaning revolutionary Social-Democrats). As this is the


Common feature of the members of such an organisation, all dis-
105


tinctions as between workers and intellectuals, and certair
distinctions of trade and profession, must be dropped. Such ¢
organisation must of necessity be not too extensive and as secret é
possible. Let us examine this three-fold distinction. i
In countries where political liberty exists the distinction betw
a labour union and a political organisation is clear, as is the di
tinction between trade unions and Social-Democracy. The rela’
of the latter to the former will naturally vary in each cour
according to historical, legal and other conditions—it may be m
or less close or more or less complex (in our opinion it should I
as close and simple as possible) ; but trade-union organisations
certainly not in the least identical with the Social-Democratic p:
organisations in those countries. In Russia, however, the yoke
autocracy appears at first glance to obliterate all distinctions be
a Social-Democratic organisation and trade unions, because all tr
unions and all circles are prohibited, and because the prince!
manifestation and weapon of the workers’ economic struggle
strike—is regarded as a crime (and sometimes even as a pol
crime! ). Conditions in our country, therefore, strongly “impel
workers who are conducting the economic struggle to concern the
selves with political questions. They also “impel” the Socia
Democrats to confuse trade unionism with Social-Democracy
our Krichevskys, Martynovs and their like, while speakin
thusiastically of the first kind of “impelling,” fail to observ
“impelling” of the second kind). Indeed, picture to yourselve
people who are immersed ninety-nine per cent in “the econ
struggle against the employers and the government.” Some of th
never, during the whole course of their activity (four t
months), thought of the necessity for a more complex organi
of revolutionists; others, perhaps, come across the fairly wi¢
distributed revisionist literature, from which they convince
selves of the profound importance of “the drab daily strug
Still others will be carried away, perhaps, by the seductive ™
of showing the world a new example of “close and organic conté
with the proletarian struggle’”—contact between the trade-union @
Social-Democratic movements. Such people would perhaps at
that the later a country enters into the arena of capitalism, the


Democratic trade unions. So far, the argument is absolutely corr
106


unfortunately, however, some go beyond that and hint at the
complete fusion of Social-Democracy with trade unionism. We
shall soon see, from the example of the statutes of the St. Petersburg
League of Struggle, what a harmful effect this has upon our plans of
organisation.

The workers’ organisations for carrying on the economic struggle
should be trade-union organisations; every Social-Democratic
worker should, as far as possible, support and actively work inside
these organisations. That is true. But it would be far from being
to our interest to demand that only Social-Democrats be eligible for
membership in the trade unions. The only effect of this, if it were
attempted, would be to restrict our influence over the masses. Let
every worker who understands the necessity for organisation, in
order to carry on the struggle against the employers and the govern-
ment, join the trade unions. The very objects of the trade unions
would be unattainable unless they united all who have attained at
least this elementary level of understanding, and unless they were
extremely wide organisations. The wider these organisations are,
the wider our influence over them will be. They will then be
influenced not only by the “spontaneous” development of the
economic struggle, but also by the direct and conscious action of
the Socialists on their comrades in the unions. But a wide organisa-
tion cannot be a strictly secret organisation (since the latter
demands far greater training than is required for the economic
struggle). How is the contradiction between the necessity for a
large membership and the necessity for strictly secret methods to be
reconciled? How are we to make the trade unions as public as
possible? Generally speaking, there are perhaps only two ways to
this end: Either the trade unions become legalised (which in some
countries precedes the legalisation of the Socialist and political
unions), or the organisation is kept a secret one, but so “free” and
“loose” that the need for secret methods become almost negligible
as far as the mass of the members are concerned.

The legalisation of the non-Socialist and non-political labour
unions in Russia has already begun, and there is no doubt that every
advance our rapidly growing Social-Democratic working-class move-
ment makes will increase and encourage the attempts at legalisation.
These attempts proceed for the most part from supporters of the
€xisting order, but they will proceed also from the workers them-


Selves and from the liberal intellectuals. The banner of legality
107


has already been unfurled by the Vassilyevs and the Zubatoys,
Support has been promised by the Ozerovs and the Wormses;
followers of the new tendency are to be found even among
workers. Henceforth, we must reckon with this tendency. How are
we to reckon with it? About this there can be no two opinion
among Social-Democrats. We must constantly expose any p
played in this movement by the Zubatovs and the Vassilyevs,
gendarmes and the priests, and explain to the workers what th
intentions are. We must also expose the conciliatory, “harmoniou
undertones that will be heard in the speeches delivered by liber.
politicians at the legal meetings of the workers, irrespective
whether they proceed from an earnest conviction as to the desir
bility of the peaceful co-operation of the classes, whether th
proceed from a desire to curry favour with the employers, or
simply the result of not being able to do otherwise. We must also
warn the workers against the traps often set by the police, who
such open meetings and permitted societies spy out the “hotheads,
and who, through the medium of the legal organisations, endeavour
to plant their agent-provocateurs in the illegal organisations. ‘G

But while doing all this, we must not forget that in the long run,
the legalisation of the working class movement will be to our ad-
vantage, and not to the Zubatovs. On the contrary, our campai
of exposure will help to separate the tares from the wheat.
the tares are, we have already indicated. By the wheat we mea
attracting the attention of increasing numbers of the more backward
sections of the workers to social and political questions, and
freeing ourselves, the revolutionists, from functions which are ess
tially legal (the distribution of legal books, mutual aid, etc.),
development of which will inevitably provide us with an increas:
quantity of material for agitation. Looked at from this point
view, we may say, and we should say to the Zubatovs and the
Ozerovs, “Keep at it, gentlemen, do your best!” We shall expose


every real step forward even if it is timid and vacillatings
shall say: Please continue! A real step forward can only result :
in a real, if small, extension of the workers’ field of action. Ane
every such extension must be to our advantage and help to hasten


the advent of legal societies, not of the kind in which agents-pro-
108


vocateurs hunt for Socialists, but of the kind in which Socialists
will hunt for adherents. In a word, our task is to fight down the
tares. It is not our business to grow wheat in flower-pots. By
pulling up the tares, we clear the soil for the wheat. And while
the old-fashioned folk are tending their flower-pot crops, we must
prepare reapers, not only to cut down the tares of to-day, but also
to reap the wheat of to-morrow.*

Legalisation, therefore, will not solve the problem of creating a
trade-union organisation that will be as public and as extensive as
possible (but we would be extremely glad if the Zubatovs and the
QOzerovs provided even a partial opportunity for such a solution—
to which end we must fight them as strenuously as possible! ). There
only remains the path of secret trade-union organisation; and we
must offer every possible assistance to the workers, who (as we
definitely know) have already adopted this path. Trade-union
organisations may not only be of tremendous value in developing
and consolidating the economic struggle, but may also become a
very useful auxiliary to the political, agitational and revolutionary
organisations.

In order to achieve this purpose, and in order to guide the nascent
trade-union movement in the direction the Social-Democrats desire,
we must first fully understand the foolishness of the plan of or-
ganisation with which the St. Petersburg Economists have been
occupying themselves for nearly five years. That plan is described
in the Rules of a Workers’ Fund, of July, 1897 [Listok Rabotnika,
Nos. 9 and 10, p. 46, in Rabochaya Mysl, No. 1], and also in the
Rules for a Trade Union Workers’ Organisation, of October, 1900
[special leaflet printed in St. Petersburg and quoted in Iskra, No. 1].
The fundamental error contained in both these sets of rules is that
they give a detailed formulation of a wide workers’ organisation
and confuse the latter with the organisation of revolutionists. Let


*“Iskra’s campaign against the tares evoked the following angry outbreak
on the part of Rabocheye Dyelo: “For Iskra, the signs of the times lie not
in the great events of the spring, but in the miserable attempts of the agents
of Zubatov to ‘legalise’ the working-class movement. It fails to see that these
facts tell against it and prove that the working-class movement is assuming
menacing proportions in the eyes of the government.” [Two Congresses, p.
27.1] For this we have to blame the “dogmatism” of the orthodox Marxists
who ignore the imperative demands of life. They obstinately refuse to see
the yard-high wheat and are fighting down the inch-high tares! Does this
not reveal a “distorted sense of perspective in regard to the Russian working-
class movement”? [ibid, p. 27.]

109


us take the last-mentioned set of rules, since it is drawn up
greater detail. The body of it consists of fifty-two paragraph
Twenty-three paragraphs deal with structure, the method of co
ducting business, and the competence of the “workers circl
which are to be organised in every factory (“not more than t
persons”) and which elect “central (factory) groups.” “The centr.
group,” says paragraph 2, “observes all that goes on in its facto
or workshop and keeps a record of events... .” “The centr
group presents to the contributors a monthly report on the state
the funds” (Par. 17), etc. Ten paragraphs are devoted to the
“district organisation” and nineteen to the highly complex con-
nection between the Committee of the Workers’ Organisation an
the Committee of the St. Petersburg League of Struggle (elected by
each district and by the “executive groups’—‘groups of propa-
gandists for maintaining contact with the provinces and with exiles
abroad, and for managing stores, publications and funds”). ”

Social-Democracy — “executive groups” connected with the eco-
nomic struggle of the workers! It would be difficult to find a more
striking illustration than this of how far the Economists’ ideas —
deviate from Social-Democracy on the question of trade unionism,
and how foreign to them is the idea that a Social-Democrat must
concern himself first and foremost with an organisation of revo-
lutionists, capable of guiding the whole proletarian struggle for
emancipation. To talk of “the political emancipation of the working —
class” and the struggle against “tsarist despotism,” and at the same —
time to write statutes like these, indicates a complete failure to
understand what the real political tasks of the Social-Democrats are. I
Not one of the fifty or so paragraphs reveals the slightest glimmer
of understanding that it is necessary to conduct the widest possible
political agitation among the masses, an agitation that deals with
every phase of Russian absolutism, and with every aspect of the
various social classes in Russia. Rules like these are of no use—
even for the achievement of trade union aims, quite apart from
political aims, for that requires organisation according to trade,
and yet the rules do not contain a single reference to this.

But most characteristic of all, perhaps, is the amazing top-heavi- |
ness of the whole “system,” which attempts to unite every factory
with the “committee” by a long string of uniform and ludicrously
petty rules and a three-stage system of election. Hemmed in by


the narrow outlook of Economism, the mind is lost in details which —
110


ositively reek of red tape and bureaucracy. In practice, of course,

three-fourths of the clauses are impossible of application; more-
over, a “conspiratorial” organisation of this kind, with its central
group in each factory, will render the work of the gendarmes
extraordinarily easy. Our Polish comrades have already passed
through a similar phase in their own movement, when everybody
was extremely enthusiastic about the extensive organisation of
workers’ funds; but these ideas were very quickly abandoned when
it was found that the funds only provided rich harvests for the
gendarmes. If we are out for wide workers’ organisations, and not
for wide arrests, if it is not our purpose to provide satisfaction to
the gendarmes, these organisations must remain absolutely loose
and not bound by any strict rules. . . . But will they be able to
function? Well, let us see what the functions are: “. . . To
observe all that goes on in the factory and keep a record of events”
(Par. 2 of the Rules). Must that really be formulated in a set of
rules? Could not the purpose be better served by correspondence
conducted in the illegal papers and without setting up special
groups? “. . . To lead the struggles of the workers for the im-
provement of their workshop conditions” (Par. 3 of the Rules).
This, too, need not be strictly formulated. Any agitator with any
intelligence at all can gather what the demands of the workers are
in the course of ordinary conversation and transmit them to a
harrow—not a wide—organisation of revolutionists to be embodied
in a leaflet; “. . . To organise a fund . . . to which contributions
of two kopecks per ruble * should be made (Par. 9) . . . to present
monthly reports to the contributors on the state of the funds (Par.
17) . . . to expel members who fail to pay their contributions
(Par. 10), and so forth. Why, this is a very paradise for the police;
for nothing would be easier than for them to penetrate into the
ponderous secrecy of a “central factory fund,” confiscate the money
and arrest the best members. Would it not be simpler to issue one-
kopeck or two-kopeck coupons bearing the official stamp of a well-
known (very exclusive and secret) organisation, or to make col-
lections without coupons of any kind and to print reports in a
certain agreed code in the legal paper? The object would thereby
be attained, but it would be a hundred times more difficult for the
8endarmes to pick up clues.


*Of wages earned.—Ed.
111


I could go on analysing the rules, but I think that what has been
said will suffice. A small, compact core, consisting of reliable, ex-
perienced and hardened workers, with responsible agents in the
principal districts and connected by all the rules of strict secrecy
with the organisations of revolutionists, can, with the wide sup-
port of the masses and without an elaborate set of rules, perform
all the functions of a trade-union organisation, and perform them,
moreover, in the manner Social-Democrats desire. Only in this way
can we secure the consolidation and development of a Social-Demo-
cratic trade-union movement, in spite of the gendarmes.

It may be objected that an organisation which is so loose that it
is not even formulated, and which even has no enrolled and regis:
tered members, cannot be called an organisation at all. That may
very well be. I am not out for names. But this “organisation without
members” can do everything that is required, and will, from the
very outset, guarantee the closest contact between our future trade-
unionists and Socialism. Only an incorrigible utopian would want
a wide organisation of workers, with elections, reports, universal
suffrage, etc., under autocracy.

The moral to be drawn from this is a simple one. If we begin
with the solid foundation of a strong organisation of revolutionists,
we can guarantee the stability of the movement as a whole, and
carry out the aims of both Social-Democracy and of trade unionism.
If, however, we begin with a wide workers’ organisation, supposed
to be most “accessible” to the masses, when as a matter of fact it
will be most accessible to the gendarmes, and will make the revo
lutionists most accessible to the police, we shall neither achieve
the aims of Social-Democracy nor of trade unionism; we shall not
escape from our primitiveness, and because we constantly rema
scattered and dispersed, we shall make only the trade unions
the Zubatov and Ozerov type most accessible to the masses.


in this matter also is in the same boat as the Economist. Svoboda—
a journal published especially for working men—in its first numb
contains an article entitled “Organisation,” the author of whi
tries to defend his friends the Economist workers of Ivanovo-V0%


nesensk. He writes:
112


It is a bad thing when the crowd is mute and unenlightened, and when the
movement does not proceed from the rank and file. For instance, the students
of a university town leave for their homes during the summer and other vaca-
tions and immediately the movement comes to a standstill. Can such a
workers’ movement which has to be pushed on from outside be a real force?
Of course not! It has not yet learned to walk, it is still in leading strings.
So it is everywhere. The students go off, and everything comes to a stand-
still. As soon as the cream is skimmed—the milk turns sour. If the “com-
mittee” is arrested, everything comes to a standstill until a new one can be
formed. And, one never knows what sort of a committee will be set up next
—it may be nothing like the former one. The first preached one thing, the
second may preach the very opposite. The continuity between yesterday and
to-morrow is broken, the experience of the past does not enlighten the future.
And all this is because no deep roots have been struck, roots in the crowd;
because, instead of having a hundred fools at work, we have ten wise men.
Ten wise men can be caught up at a snap; but when the organisation em-
braces the crowd, everything will proceed from the crowd, and nobody,
however zealous, can stop the cause [p. 63].


The facts are described correctly. The above quotation presents
a fairly good picture of our primitive methods. But the conclu-
sions drawn from it are worthy of the Rabochaya Mysl, both for
their stupidity and their political tactlessness. They represent the
height of stupidity, because the author confused the philosophical
and social-historical question of the “depth” of the “roots” of the
movement with the technical and organisational question of the best
method of fighting the gendarmes. They represent the height of
political tactlessness, because the author, instead of appealing from
the bad leaders to the good leaders, appeals from the leaders in
general to the “crowd.” This is as much an attempt to drag the
movement back organisationally, as the idea of substituting political
agitation by excitative terrorism is an attempt to drag it back po-
litically.

Indeed, I am experiencing a veritable embarras de richesses, and
hardly know where to begin to disentangle the confusion Svoboda
has introduced in this subject. For the sake of clarity, we shall
begin by quoting an example. Take the Germans. It will not be
denied, I hope, that the German organisations embrace the crowd,
that in Germany everything proceeds from the crowd, that the
working-class movement there has learned to walk. Yet, observe how
this vast crowd of millions values its “dozen” tried political lead-
ers, how firmly it clings to them! Members of the hostile parties
in parliament often tease the Socialists by exclaiming: “Fine demo-
crats you are indeed! Your movement is a working-class move-


ment only in name; as a matter of fact it is the same clique of
1138


leaders that is always in evidence; Bebel and Liebknecht, year in ©
and year out, ‘and that goes on for decades. Your deputies are
supposed to be elected from among the workers, but they are more
permanent than the officials appointed by the Emperor!” But the
Germans only smile with contempt at these demagogic attempts to
set the “crowd” against the “leaders,” to arouse turbid and vain
instincts in the former, and to rob the movement of its solidity and
stability by undermining the confidence of the masses in their “dozen
of wise men.” The political ideas of the Germans have already
developed sufficiently, and they have acquired enough political ex-
perience to enable them to understand that without the “dozen” of
tried and talented leaders (and talented men are not born by hun-
dreds), professionally trained, schooled by long experience and
working in perfect harmony, no class in modern society is capable
of conducting a determined struggle. Numerous demagogues in
Germany have flattered the “hundred fools,” exalted them above the
“dozen of wise men,” extolled the “mighty fists” of the masses, and
(like Most and Hasselmann) have spurred them on to reckless
“revolutionary” action and sown distrust towards the tried and
trusted leaders. It was only by stubbornly and bitterly combating
every symptom of demagogy within the Socialist movement that
German Socialism managed to grow and become as strong as it is.
Our wiseacres, however, at the very moment when Russian Social-
Democracy is passing through a crisis entirely due to our lack of
a sufficient number of trained, developed and experienced leaders
to guide the spontaneous ferment of the masses, cry out with the
profundity of fools, “it is a bad business when the movement does
not proceed from the rank and file.”

“A committee of students is no good, it is not stable.” Quite
true. But the conclusion that should be drawn from this is that
we must have a committee of professional revolutionists and it
does not matter whether a student or a worker is capable of qualify-
ing himself as a professional revolutionist. The conclusion you
draw, however, is that the working-class movement must not be
pushed on from outside! In your political innocence you fail to
observe that you are playing into the hands of our Economists and
furthering our primitiveness. I would like to ask, what is meant
by the students “pushing on” the workers? All it means is that the
students bring to the worker the fragments of political knowledge


they possess, the crumbs of Socialist ideas they have managed to
114


——


Sm


—_—


acquire (for the principal intellectual diet of the present-day stu-
dent, legal Marxism, can furnish only the A. B. C., only the crumbs
of knowledge). Such “pushing on from outside” can never be too
excessive; on the contrary, so far there has been too little, all too
little of it in our movement; we have been stewing in our own juice
far too long; we have bowed far too slavishly before the sponta-
neous “economic struggle of the workers against the employers
and the government.” We professional revolutionists must con-
tinue, and will continue, this kind of “pushing,” and a hundred
times more forcibly than we have done hitherto. The very fact that
you select so despicable a phrase as “pushing on from outside”—a
phrase which cannot but rouse in the workers (at least in the workers
who are as ignorant as you are yourselves) a sense of distrust
towards all who bring them political knowledge and revolutionary
experience from outside, and rouse in them an instinctive hostility
to such people—proves that you are demagogues—and a demagogue
is the worst enemy of the working class.

Oh! Don’t start howling about my “uncomradely methods” of
controversy. I have not the least intention of casting aspersions
upon the purity of your intentions. As I have already said, one may
be a demagogue out of sheer political innocence. But I have shown
that you have descended to demagogy, and I shall never tire of re-
peating that demagogues are the worst enemies of the working class.
They are the worst enemies of the working class because they arouse
bad instincts in the crowd, because the ignorant worker is unable
to recognise his enemies in men who represent themselves, and
sometimes sincerely represent themselves, to be his friends. They
are the worst enemies of the working class, because in this period
of doubt and hesitation, when our movement is only just beginning
to take shape, nothing is easier than to employ demagogic methods
to side-track the crowd, which can realise its mistake only by bitter
experience. That is why Russian Social-Democrats at the present
time must declare determined opposition to Svoboda and the Rabo-
cheye Dyelo which have sunk to the level of demagogy. We sball
return to this subject again.*


* For the moment we shall observe merely that our remarks on “pushing
®n from outside” and the other views on organisation expressed by Svobodo
apply equally to all the Economists including the adherents of Rabocheye
Dyelo, for they have either themselves preached and defended such views on
°rganisation, or have allowed themselves to be led astray by them.

115


fools!” This wonderful truth (which the hundred fools will ap,
plaud) appears obvious only because in the very midst of the argu.
ment you have skipped from one question to another. You bega
by talking, and continued to talk, of catching a “committee,” of
catching an “organisation,” and now you skip to the question of
getting hold of the “roots” of the movement in the “depths.” e
fact is, of course, that our movement cannot be caught precisely


down among the masses, but that is not the point we are discussing.
As far as “roots in the depths” are concerned, we cannot be “caught”
even now, in spite of all our primitiveness; but, we all compla
and cannot but complain, of the ease with which the organisations
can be caught, with the result that it is impossible to maintain con-
tinuity in the movement. If you agree to discuss the question of
catching the organisations, and to stick to that question, then I assert
that it is far more difficult to catch ten wise men than it is to catch
a hundred fools. And this premise I shall defend no matter how
much you instigate the crowd against me for my “anti-democratic”
views, etc. As I have already said, by “wise men,” in connection
with organisation, I mean professional revolutionists, irrespective
of whether they are students or working men. I assert: 1. That no
movement can be durable without a stable organisation of leaders
to maintain continuity; 2. that the more widely the masses are dra
into the struggle and form the basis of the movement, the more
necessary is it to have such an organisation and the more stable must.
it be (for it is much easier then for demagogues to side-track the
more backward sections of the masses); 3. that the organisation
must consist chiefly of persons engaged in revolution as a profes-
sion; 4. that in a country with a despotic government, the more W
restrict the membership of this organisation to persons who are
engaged in revolution as a profession and who have been profes-
sionally trained in the art of combating the political police, the
more difficult will it be to catch the organisation; and 5. the wider
will be the circle of men and women of the working class or of
other classes of society able to join the movement and perform
active work in it. y

} invite our Economists, terrorists and ‘“Economists-terrorists” ~

* This latter term is perhaps more applicable to Svoboda than the former,


for in an article entitled “The Regeneration of Revolutionism” it defends
116


to confute these premises. At the moment, I shall deal only with
the last two points. The question as to whether it is easier to catch
“a dozen wise men” or “a hundred fools,” in the last analysis,
amounts to the question we have considered above, namely, whether
it is possible to have a mass organisation when the maintenance of
strict secrecy is essential. We can never give a mass organisation
that degree of secrecy which is essential for the persistent and
continuous struggle against the government. But to concentrate
all secret functions in the hands of as small a number of profes-
sional revolutionists as possible, does not mean that the latter will
“do the thinking for all” and that the crowd will not take an
active part in the movement. On the contrary, the crowd will ad-
vance from its ranks increasing numbers of professional revolu-
tionists, for it will know that it is not enough for a few students
and workingmen waging economic war to gather together and form
a “committee,” but that professional revolutionists must be trained
for years; the crowd will “think” not of primitive ways but of
training professional revolutionists. The centralisation of the
secret functions of the organisation does not mean the concentration
of all the functions of the movement. The active participation of
the greatest masses in the dissemination of illegal literature will
not diminish because a dozen professional revolutionists concen-
trate in their hands the secret part of the work; on the contrary, it
will increase tenfold. Only in this way will the reading of illegal
literature, the contribution to illegal literature, and to some extent
even the distribution of illegal literature almost cease to be secret
work, for the police will soon come to realise the folly and futility
of setting the whole judicial and administrative machine into motion
to intercept every copy of a publication that is being broadcast in
thousands. This applies not only to the press, but to every function
of the movement, even to demonstrations. The active and wide-


terrorism, while in the article at present under review it defends Economism.
One might say of Svoboda that—“It would if it could, but it can’t.” Its
wishes and intentions are excellent—but the result is utter confusion; and
this is chiefly due to the fact that while Svoboda advocates continuity of
organisation, it refuses to recognise the continuity of revolutionary thought
and of Social-Democratic theory. It wants to revive the professional revolu-
tionist (“The Regeneration of Revolutionism”), and to that end proposes,
firstly, excitative terrorism, and secondly, “The organisation of the average
worker,” because he will be less likely to be “pushed on from outside.” In
other words, it proposes to pull the house down to use the timbers for warm-
ing it.
117


it will benefit by the fact that a “dozen” experienced revolutionists,
no less professionally trained than the police, will concentrate all
the secret side of the work in their hands—prepare leaflets, work
out approximate plans and appoint bodies of ieaders for each town
district, for each factory district, and for each educational insti-
tution (I know that exception will be taken to my “undemocratic”
views, but I shall reply to this altogether unintelligent objection
later on). The centralisation of the more secret functions in an
organisation of revolutionists will not diminish, but rather increase
the extent and the quality of the activity of a large number of other
organisations intended for wide membership and which, therefore,
can be as loose and as public as possible, for example, trade unions,
workers’ circles for self-education, and the reading of illegal liter-
ature, and Socialist, and also democratic, circles for all other sec-
tions of the population, etc., etc. We must have as large a number
as possible of such organisations having the widest possible variety
of functions, but it is absurd and dangerous to confuse these with
organisations of revolutionists, to erase the line of demarcation
between them, to dim still more the already incredibly hazy appre-
ciation by the masses that to “serve” the mass movement we must
have people who will devote themselves exclusively to Social-Demo-
cratic activities, and that such people must train themselves patiently
and steadfastly to be professional revolutionists.

Aye, this consciousness has hecome incredibly dim. The most
grievous sin we have committed in regard to organisation is that
by our primitiveness we have lowered the prestige of revolutionists
in Russia. A man who is weak and vacillating on theoretical ques-—
tions, who has a narrow outlook, who makes excuses for his own
slackness on the ground that the masses are awakening sponta-
neously, who resembles a trade-union secretary more than a people’s
tribune, who is unable to conceive a broad and bold plan, who is_
incapable of inspiring even his enemies with respect for himself,
and who is inexperienced and clumsy in his own professional art—
the art of combating the political police—such a man is not a revo-
lutionist but a hopeless amateur!

Let no active worker take offence at these frank remarks, for as
far as insufficient training is concerned, I apply them first and_
foremost to myself. I used to work in a circle that set itself a


great and all-embracing task: and every member of that circle suf
118


fered to the point of torture from the realisation that we were
proving ourselves to be amateurs at a moment in history when
we might have been able to say—paraphrasing a well-known epi-
gram: “Give us an organisation of revolutionists, and we shall over-
turn the whole of Russia!” And the more I recall the burning
sense of shame I then experienced, the more bitter are my feelings
towards those pseudo-Social-Democrats whose teachings bring dis-
grace on the calling of a revolutionist, who fail to understand that
our task is not to degrade the revolutionist to the level of an ama-
teur, but to exalt the amateur to the level of a revolutionist.


D. THe Scope oF ORGANISATIONAL WoRK


We have already heard from B-v about “the lack of revolutionary
forces fit for action which is felt not only in St. Petersburg, but over
the whole of Russia.” No one, we suppose, will dispute this fact.
But the question is, how is it to be explained? B-v writes:


We shall not enter in detail into the historical causes of this phenomenon;
we shall state merely that a society demoralised by prolonged political reac-
tion and split by past and present economic changes, advances from its own
ranks an extremely small number of persons fit for revolutionary work; that
the working class does of course advance from its own ranks revolutionary
workers who to some extent pass into the ranks of the illegal organisations,
but the number of such revolutionists are inadequate to meet the require-
ments of the times. This is more particularly the case because the workers
engaged for eleven and a half hours a day in the factory may perhaps be able
to fulfil mainly the functions of an agitator; but propaganda and organisation,
delivery and reproduction of illegal literature, issuing leaflets, etc., are duties
which must necessarily fall mainly upon the shoulders of an extremely small
intelligent force. [Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 6, pp. 38-39.]


There are many points in the above upon which we disagree with
B-v, particularly with those points we have emphasised, and which
most strikingly reveal that, although suffering (as every practical
worker who thinks over the position would be) from our primitive
methods, B-v cannot, because he is so ground down by Economism,
find the way out of this intolerable situation. It is not true to say
that society advances from its ranks few persons fit for “work.”
It advances very many but we are unable to make use of them all.
The critical, transitional state of our movement in this connection
may be formulated as follows: There are no people—yet there are
enormous numbers of people. There are enormous numbers of


people, because the working class and the most diverse strata of
119


:
society, year after year, advance from their ranks an increasing
number of discontented people who desire to protest, who are ready
to render effective aid in the fight against absolutism, the intoler-
ableness of which is not yet recognised by all, but is nevertheless
more and more acutely sensed by increasing masses of the people.
At the same time we have no people, because we have no political
leaders, we have no talented organisers capable of organising ex-
tensive and at the same time uniform and harmonious work that
would give employment to all forces, even the most inconsiderable.
“The growth and development of revolutionary organisations” not
only lag behind the growth of the labour movement, which even
B-v admits, but also behind the general democratic movement among
all strata of the people (in passing, probably B-v would now admit
this supplement to his conclusion). The scope of revolutionary
work is too narrow compared with the breadth of the spontaneous
basis of the movement. It is too hemmed in by the wretched theory
about the “economic struggle against the employers and the gov-
ernment.” And yet, at the present time, not only Social-Democratic
political agitators, but also Social-Democratic organisers must “go
among all classes of the population.” *

There is hardly a single practical worker, we think, who would
have any doubt about the ability of Social-Democrats to distribute
the thousand-and-one minute functions of their organisational work
among the various representatives of the most varied classes. Lack
of specialisation is one of our most serious technical defects, about
which B-v justly and bitterly complains. The smaller each separate
“operation” in our common cause will be, the more people we shall
find capable of carrying out such operations (who, in the majority
of cases, are not capable of becoming professional revolutionists) ,
the more difficult will it be for the police to “catch” all these “detail
workers,” and the more difficult will it be for them to frame up,
out of an arrest for some petty affair, a “case” that would justify
the government’s expenditure on the “secret service.” As for the
number ready to help us, we have already in the previous chapter
referred to the gigantic change that has taken place in this respect

*For example, in military circles an undoubted revival of the democratic
spirit has recently been observed, partly as a consequence of the frequent
street fights that now take place against “enemies” like workers and students.
And as soon as our available forces permit, we must without fail devote


serious attention to propaganda and agitation among soldiers and officers,


and to creating “military organisations” affiliated to our party.
120


in the last five years or so. On the other hand, in order to unite
all these tiny fractions into one whole, in order to avoid breaking
the movement up into fragments, in breaking up functions, and in
order to imbue those who carry out these minute functions with
the conviction of the necessity for and importance of their work,
without which they will never do the work,* it is necessary to have
an organisation of tried revolutionists. If we had such an organisa-
tion, the more secret it would be, the stronger and more widespread
would be the confidence of the masses in the party, and, as we know,
in time of war, it is not only of great importance to imbue one’s
own adherents with confidence in the strength of one’s army, but
also the enemy and all neutral elements; friendly neutrality may
sometimes decide the outcome of the battle. If such an organisa-
tion existed on a firm theoretical basis, and possessed a Social-
Democratic journal, we would have no reason to fear that the
movement will be diverted from its path by the numerous “outside”
elements that will be attracted to it. (On the contrary, it is precisely
at the present time, when primitive methods prevail among us, that
many Social-Democrats are observed to gravitate towards the Credo,
imagining that they alone are Social-Democrats.) In a word,
specialisation necessarily presupposes centralisation, and in its turn
imperatively calls for it.

But B-v himself, who has so excellently described the necessity
for specialisation, underestimates its importance, in our opinion, in
the second part of the argument that we have quoted. The number


*TI recall the story a comrade related to me of a factory inspector, who,
desiring to help, and in fact did help, Social-Democracy, bitterly complained
that he did not know whether the “information” he sent reached the proper
revolutionary quarter; he did not know how much his help was really re-
quired, and what possibilities there were for utilising his small services.
Every practical worker, of course, knows of more than one case similar to
this, of our primitiveness depriving us of allies. And these services, each
“small” in itself, but incalculable taken together, could be rendered to us
by office employees and officials, not only in factories, but in the postal
service, on the railways, in the Customs, among the nobility, among the
clergy, and every other walk of life, including even the police service and
the Court! Had we a real party, a real militant organisation of revolutionists,
we would not put the question bluntly to every one of these “abettors,” we
would not hasten in every single case to bring them right into the very heart
of our “illegality,” but, on the contrary, we would husband them very care-
fully and would train people especially for such functions, bearing in mind
that many students could be of much greater service to the party as “abettors”
—officials—than as “short-term” revolutionists. But, I repeat, only an
organisation that is already firmly established and has no lack of active forces
would have the right to apply such tactics.

121


of working-class revolutionists is imadequate, he says. This is
absolutely true, and once again we emphasise that the er
communication of a close observer” sched confirms our view of


only revolutionists, in general, but even working-class —
ists lag behind the spontaneous awakening of the working masses.
And this fact most strikingly confirms, even from the “practical”
point-of-view, not only the absurdity but even the political reaction-
ariness of the “pedagogics” to which we are so often treated when
discussing our duties to the workers. This fact proves that our
very first and most imperative duty is to help to train working-
class revolutionists who will be on the same level in regard to party
activity as intellectual rdvolepiciosale (we emphasise the words “in
regard to party activity,” because although it is necessary, it is not
so easy and not so imperative to bring the workers up to the level
of intellectuals in other respects). Therefore, attention must be
devoted principally to the task of raising the workers to the level
of revolutionists, but without, in doing so, necessarily degrading our-
selves to the level of the “labouring masses,” as the Economists wish —
to do, or necessarily to the level of the average worker, as Svoboda
desires to do (and by this, raises itself to the second grade of Econ-
omists “pedagogics”). I am far from denying the necessity for
popular literature for the workers, and especially popular (but, of
course, not vulgar) literature for the especially backward workers.
But what annoys me is that pedagogics are confused with questions
of politics and organisation. You, gentlemen, who talk so much
about the “average worker,” as a matter of fact, rather insult the
workers by your desire to talk down to them, to stoop to them when
discussing labour politics or labour organisation. Talk about
serious things in a serious manner; leave pedagogics to the peda-
gogues, and not to politicians and to organisers! Are there not
advanced people, “average people,” and “masses,” among the in-
telligentsia? Does not every one recognise that popular literature
is required for the intelligentsia and is not such literature written?
Just imagine some one, in an article on organising college or high-
school students, repeating over and over again, as if he had made
a new discovery, that first of all we must have an organisation of
“average students.” The author of such an article would rightly


be laughed at. He will be told: Give us an organisation idea, if you”
122


have one, and we ourselves will settle the question as to which of
us are “average,” as to who is higher and who is lower. But
if you have no organisational ideas of your own, then all your chat-
ter about “masses” and “average” is just simply boring. Try to
understand that these questions about “politics” and “organisation”
are so serious in themselves that they cannot be dealt with in any
other but a serious way: We can and must educate workers (and
university and high-school students) so as to enable them to under-
stand us when we speak to them about these questions; and when
you come to talk about these questions to us give us real replies to
them, do not fall back on the “average,” or on the “masses”; don’t
evade them by quoting adages or mere phrases.*

In order to be fully prepared for his task, the working-class
revolutionist must also become a professional revolutionist. Hence
B-v is wrong when he says that as the worker is engaged for 1114
hours a day in the factory, therefore the brunt of all the other
revolutionary functions (apart from agitation) “must necessarily
fall mainly upon the shoulders of an extremely small intellectual
force.” It need not “necessarily” be so. It is so because we are
backward, because we do not recognise our duty to assist every
capable worker to become a professional agitator, organiser, propa-
gandist, literature distributor, etc., etc. In this respect, we waste
our strength in a positively shameful manner; we lack the ability
to husband that which requires to be so carefully tended in order
that it may grow. Look at the Germans: they have a hundred times
more forces than we have. But they understand perfectly well that
the “average” does not too frequently promote really capable
agitators, etc., from its ranks. Hence, immediately they get a
capable workingman, they try to place him in such conditions as
will enable him to develop and apply his abilities to the utmost: he
is made a professional agitator, he is encouraged to widen the field
of his activity, to spread it from one factory to the whole of his
trade, from one locality to the whole country. He acquires experi-


* Svoboda No. 1, p. 66, articles on “Organisation”: “The heavy tread of
the army of labour will re-inforce all the demands that will be advanced by
Russian Labour”—Labour with a capital L, of course. And this very author
exclaims: “I am not in the least hostile towards the intelligentsia, but” [This
is the very word but that Shchedrin translated as meaning: The ears never
grow higher than the forehead!] “but I get frightfully annoyed when a man
comes to me and eloquently appeals to be accepted for his [his?] beauty
and virtues” [p. 62]. Yes. This “always frightfully annoys” me too.

123


ence and dexterity in his profession, his outlook becomes wider, his
knowledge increases, he observes the prominent political leaders
from other localities and other parties, he strives to rise to their
level and combine within himself the knowledge of working-class
environment and freshness of Socialist convictions with professional
skill, without which the proletariat cannot carry on a stubborn
struggle with the excellently trained enemy. Only in this way can
men of the stamp of Bebel and Auer be promoted from the ranks of
the working class. But what takes place very largely automatically
in a politically free country, must in Russia be done deliberately
and systematically by our organisations. A workingman who is at
all talented and “promising,” must not be left to work eleven hours
a day in a factory. We must arrange that he be maintained by the
party, that he may in due time go underground, that he change the
place of his activity, otherwise he will not enlarge his experience,
he will not widen his outlook, and will not be able to stay in the
fight against the gendarmes for several years. As the spontaneous
rise of the labouring masses becomes wider and deeper, it not only
promotes from its ranks an increasing number of talented agitators,
but also of talented organisers, propagandists, and “practical
workers” in the best sense of the term (of whom there are so few
among our intelligentsia). In the majority of cases, the latter are
somewhat careless and sluggish in their habits (so characteristic
of Russians). When we shall have detachments of specially trained
working-class revolutionists who have gone through long years of
preparation (and, of course, revolutionists “of all arms”) no po-
litical police in the world will be able to contend against them, for
these detachments will consist of men absolutely devoted and loyal
to the revolution, and will themselves enjoy the absolute confi-
dence and devotion of the broad masses of the workers. The sin we
commit is that we do not sufficiently “stimulate” the workers to
take this path, “common” to them and to the “intellectuals,” of pro-
fessional revolutionary training, and that we too frequently drag
them back by our silly speeches about what “can be understood” by
the masses of the workers, by the “average workers,” etc.

In this, as in other cases, the narrowness of our field of organisa-
tional work is without a doubt inherently due (although the over-
whelming majority of the Economists and the novices in a
work refuse to recognise it) to the fact that we restrict our theories


and our political tasks to a narrow field. Subservience to spon- —
124


taneity seems to inspire a fear to take even one step away from what
“can be understood” by the masses, a fear to rise too high above
mere subservience to the immediate requirements of the masses.
Have no fear, gentlemen! Remember that we stand so low on the
plane of organisation, that the very idea that we could rise too high
is absurd!


E. “CoNnsPIRATIVE” ORGANISATION AND “DEMOCRACY”


There are many people among us who are so sensitive to the
“voice of life” that they fear that voice more than anything in the
world, and accuse those, who adhere to the views here expounded,
of Narodovolism,* of failing to understand “democracy,” etc. We
must deal with these accusations, which, of course, have been echoed
by Rabocheye Dyelo.

The writer of these lines knows very well that the St. Petersburg
Economists accused the Rabochaya Gazeta of being Narodovolist
(which is quite understandable when one compares it with Rabo-
chaya Mysl). We were not in the least surprised, therefore, when,
soon after the appearance of Jskra, a comrade informed us that the
Social-Democrats in the town of X describe Iskra as a Narodovolist
journal. We, of course, were flattered by this accusation, because
the Economists would charge every real Social-Democrat with being
a Narodovolist. These accusations are called forth by a two-fold
misunderstanding. Firstly, the history of the revolutionary move-
ment is so little understood among us that the very idea of a mili-
tant centralised organisation which declares a determined war upon
tsarism is described as Narodovolist. But the magnificent organ-
isation that the revolutionists had in the seventies and which should
serve us all as a model, was not formed by the Narodovolists, but
by the adherents of Zemlya i Volya, who split up into Chernopere-
deltsi [Black Redistributionists—i.e., of the land.—Kd.] and
Narodovolists. Consequently, to regard a militant revolutionary
organisation as something specifically Narodovolist is absurd
both historically and logically, because no revolutionary tend-
ency, if it seriously thinks of fighting, can dispense with such
an organisation. But the mistake the Narodovolists committed was
not that they strove to recruit to their organisation all the discon-
tented, and to hurl this organisation into the battle against the


* Adherents of Narodnaya Volya, the People’s Will Party.—£d.
125


autocracy; on the contrary, that was their great historical merit.
Their mistake was that they relied on a theory which in substance
was not a revolutionary theory at all, and they either did not know
how, or circumstances did not permit them, to link up their move-
ment inseparably with the class struggle that went on within de-
veloping capitalist society. And only a gross failure to understand
Marxism (or an “understanding” of it in the spirit of Struveism)
could give rise to the opinion that the rise of a mass, spontaneous
labour movement relieves us of the duty of creating as good an
organisation of revolutionists as Zemlya i Volya had in its time, and
even a better one. On the contrary, this movement imposes this
duty upon us, because the spontaneous struggle of the proletariat
will not become a genuine “class struggle” until it is led by a strong
organisation of revolutionists.

Secondly, many, including apparently B. Krichevsky [Rabocheye
Dyelo, No. 10, p. 18] misunderstand the polemics that Social-
Democrats have always waged against the “conspiratorial” view on
the political struggle. We have always protested, and will, of
course, continue to protest against restricting the political struggle
to conspiracies.* But this does not of course mean that we deny
the necessity of a strong revolutionary organisation. And in the
pamphlet mentioned in the footnote below, after the polemics against
reducing the political struggle to a conspiracy, a description is given
(as a Social-Democratic ideal) of an organisation so strong as to
be able to resort to “rebellion” and to “every other form of
attack,” ** in order to “deliver a smashing blow against absolutism.”
The form a strong revolutionary organisation like that may take in
an autocratic country may be described as a “conspirative” organ-


* Cf. The Tasks of Russian Social-Democrats, p. 21. Polemics against P. L.
Lavrov. [See V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 11—Ed.]

** Tasks of Russian Social-Democrats, p. 23. [V.I. Lenin, Collected Works,
Vol. Il.—£d.] But we shall give another illustration of the fact that Rabocheye
Dyelo either does not understand what it is talking about, or changes its
views “with every change in the wind.” In No. 1 of Rabocheye Dyelo, we
find the following passage in italics: “The views expressed in this pamphlet
coincide entirely with the editorial programme of Rabocheye Dyelo [p. 142].
Is that so, indeed? Does the view that the mass movement must not be set
the primary task of overthrowing the autocracy coincide with the views ex-
pressed in the pamphlet, The Tasks of Russian Social-Democrats? Do the
theories about “the economic struggle against the employers and the gov-
ernment,” and the theory of stages, coincide with the views expressed in that
pamphlet? We leave it to the reader to judge as to whether an organ which
understands the meaning of “coincidence” in this peculiar manner can have
firm principles.

126


isation, because the French word “conspiration” means in Russian
“conspiracy,” and we must have the utmost conspiracy for an
organisation like that.* Secrecy is such a necessary condition for
such an organisation that all the other conditions (number and
selection of members, functions, etc.) must all be subordinated to
it. It would be extremely naive indeed, therefore, to fear the
accusation that we Social-Democrats desire to create a conspirative
organisation. Such an accusation would be as flattering to every
opponent of Economism as the accusation of being followers of
Narodovolism would be.

Against us it is argued: Such a powerful and strictly secret
organisation, which concentrates in its hands all the threads of
secret activities, an organisation which of necessity must be a
centralised organisation, may too easily throw itself into a prema-
ture attack, may thoughtlessly intensify the movement before
political discontent, the ferment and anger of the working class, etc.,
are sufficiently ripe for it. To this we reply: Speaking abstractly,
it cannot be denied, of course, that a militant organisation may
thoughtlessly commence a battle, which may end in defeat, which
might have been avoided under other circumstances. But we cannot
confine ourselves to abstract reasoning on such a question, because
every battle bears within itself the abstract possibility of defeat,
and there is no other way of reducing this possibility to a minimum
than by organised preparation for battle. If, however, we base our
argument on the concrete conditions prevailing in Russia at the
present time, we must come to the positive conclusion that a strong
revolutionary organisation is absolutely necessary precisely for the
purpose of giving firmness to the movement, and of safeguarding
it against the possibility of its making premature attacks. It is
precisely at the present time, when no such organisation exists yet,
and when the revolutionary movement is rapidly and spontaneously
growing, that we already observe two opposite extremes (which, as
is to be expected, “meet’’) 7. e., absolutely unsound Economism and
the preaching of moderation, and equally unsound “excitative


* The Russian word for “conspiracy” is zagovor, which means “conspiracy”
or “plot.” But the word conspiratsiya, “conspiracy,” in Russian revolutionary
literature usually means “secrecy.” Hence, a conspirative organisation would
be a secret organisation, but would not necessarily engage in plots. Except
in the above case, when it was important to bring out the play of words, the
word “conspiratsiya” has been rendered throughout the text as “secrecy,”
and the word “conspirative” was used only where the word zagovor has beer
used in the text, as in the sub-title of this section Ed.

127


'
terror,” which strives artificially to “call forth symptoms of its —
end in a movement that is developing and becoming strong, but
which is as yet nearer to its beginning than to its end” [V. Zasu-
lich, in Zarya, Nos. 2-3, p. 353]. And the example of Rabocheye
Dyelo shows that there are already Social-Democrats who give way
to both these extremes. This is not surprising because, apart from
other reasons, the “economic struggle against the employers and
the government” can never satisfy revolutionists, and because
opposite extremes will always arise here and there. Only a cen-
tralised, militant organisation, that consistently carries out a Social-
Democratic policy, that satisfies, so to speak, all revolutionary
instincts and strivings, can safeguard the movement against making ~
thoughtless attacks and prepare it for attacks that hold out the
promise of success.
It is further argued against us that the views on organisation here
expounded contradict the “principles of democracy.” Now while —
the first mentioned accusation was of purely Russian origin, this —
one is of purely foreign origin. And only an organisation abroad ~
(the League of Russian Social-Democrats) would be capable of giv-
ing its editorial board instructions like the following:


>


Principles of Organisation. In order to secure the successful development
and unification of Social-Democracy, broad democratic principles of party
organisation must be emphasised, developed and fought for; and this is par-
ticularly necessary in view of the anti-democratic tendencies that have become
revealed in the ranks of our party. [Two Congresses, p. 18.]


We shall see how Rabocheye Dyelo fights against Jskra’s “anti-
democratic tendencies” in the next chapter. Here we shall examine
more closely the “principle” that the Economists advance. Every
one will probably agree that “broad principles of democracy”
presupposes the two following conditions: first, full publicity and —
second, election to all functions. It would be absurd to speak about -
democracy without publicity, that is a publicity that extends beyond —
the circle of the membership of the organisation. We call the
German Socialist Party a democratic organisation because all it
does is done publicly; even its party congresses are held in public.
But no one would call an organisation that is hidden from every one
but its members by a veil of secrecy, a democratic organisation.
What is the use of advancing “broad principles of democracy” when
the fundamental condition for this principle cannot be fulfilled by @


secret organisation. “Broad principles” turns out to be a resonan
128


but hollow phrase. More than that, this phrase proves that the
urgent tasks in regard to organisation are totally misunderstood.
Every one knows how great is the lack of secrecy among the “broad”
masses of revolutionists. We have heard the bitter complaints of
B-v on this score, and his absolutely just demand for a “strict
selection of members” [Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 6, p. 42]. And yet
people who boast about their “sensitiveness to life” come forward
in a situation like this and urge that strict secrecy and a strict (and
therefore more restricted) selection of members is unnecessary, and
that what is necessary are—“broad principles of democracy”! This
is what we call being absolutely wide of the mark.

Nor is the situation with regard to the second attribute of democ-
racy, namely, the principle of election, any better. In politically
free countries, this condition is taken for granted. “Membership of
the party is open to those who accept the principles of the party
programme, and render all the support they can to the party”—
says paragraph 1 of the rules of the German Social-Democratic
Party. And as the political arena is as open to the public view as
is the stage in a theatre, this acceptance or non-acceptance, support
or opposition is announced to all in the press and at public meet-
ings. Every one knows that a certain political worker commenced
in a certain way, passed through a certain evolution, behaved in
dificult periods in a certain way; every one knows all his qualities,
and consequently, knowing all the facts of the case, every party
member can decide for himself whether or not to elect this person
for a certain party office. The general control (in the literal sense
of the term) that the party exercises over every act this person
commits on the political field brings into being an automatically
operating mechanism which brings about what in biology is called
“survival of the fittest.” “Natural selection,” full publicity, the
principle of election and general control provide the guarantee that,
in the last analysis, every political worker will be “in his proper
place,” will do the work for which he is best fitted, will feel the
effects of his mistakes on himself, and prove before all the world his
ability to recognise mistakes and to avoid them.

Try to put this picture in the frame of our autocracy! Is it
possible in Russia for all those “who accept the principles of the
party programme and render it all the support they can,” to control
every action of the revolutionist working in secret? Is it possible


for all the revolutionists to elect one of their number to any particu-
129


lar office when, in the very interests of the work, he must conceal
his identity from nine out of ten of these “all”? Ponder a little
over the real meaning of the high-sounding phrases that Rabocheye
Dyelo gives utterance to, and you will realise that “broad democ-
racy” in party organisation, amidst the gloom of autocracy and the
domination of the gendarmes, is nothing more than a useless and
harmful toy. It is a useless toy, because as a matter of fact, no
revolutionary organisation has ever practiced broad democracy, nor
could it, however much it desired to do so. It is a harmful toy,
because any attempt to practice the “broad principles of democracy”
will simply facilitate the work of the police in making big raids, it
will perpetuate the prevailing primitiveness, divert the thoughts of
the practical workers from the serious and imperative task of train-
ing themselves to become professional revolutionists to that of
drawing up detailed “paper” rules for election systems. Only
abroad, where very often people who have no opportunity of doing
real live work gather together, can the “game of democracy” be
played here and there, especially in small groups.

In order to show how ugly Rabocheye Dyelo’s favourite trick is of
advancing the plausible “principle” of democracy in revolutionary
affairs, we shall again call a witness. This witness, E. Serebryakov,
the editor of the London magazine, Nakanunye [On the Eve] has a
tenderness for Rabocheye Dyelo, and is filled with hatred against
Plekhanov and the Plekhanovists. In articles that it published on
the split in the League of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, Naka-
nunye definitely took the side of Rabocheye Dyelo, and poured a
stream of atrocious abuse upon Plekhanov. But this only makes
this witness all the more valuable for us on this question. In No. 7
of Nakanunye [July, 1899], in an article, entitled, “The Manifesto
of the Self-Emancipation of the Workers’ Group,” E. Serebryakov
argues that it was “indecent” to talk about such things as “self-
deception, priority, and so-called Areopagus in the serious revolu-
tionary movement,” and inter alia wrote:


Myshkin, Rogachev, Zhelyabov, Mikhailov, Perovskaya, Figner, and others
never regarded themselves as leaders, and no one ever elected or appointed
them as such, although as a matter of fact, they were leaders because both
in the propaganda period, as well as in the period of the fight against the
government, they took the brunt of the work upon themselves, they went into
the most dangerous places and their activities were the most fruitful. Priority
came to them not because they wished it, but because the comrades sur-
rounding them had confidence in their wisdom, thei: energy and loyalty. To

1890


be afraid of some kind of Areopagus [if it is not feared, then why write
about it?] that would arbitrarily govern the movement is far too naive. Who
would obey it?
We ask the reader in what way does ““Azeopagus” differ from “anti-
democratic tendencies”? And is it not evident that Rabocheye
Dyelo’s “plausible” organisational principles are equally naive and
indecent; naive, because no one would obey “Areopagus,” or people
with “anti-democratic tendencies,” if “the comrades surrounding
them had no confidence in their wisdom, energy and loyalty”; in-
decent, because it is a demagogic sally calculated to play on the
conceit of some, on the ignorance of the actual state of our move-
ment on the part of others, and the lack of training and ignorance of
the history of the revolutionary movement of still others. The only
serious organisational principle the active workers of our movement
can accept is: Strict secrecy, strict selection of members, and the
training of professional revolutionists. If we possessed these quali-
ties, “democracy” and something even more would be guaranteed
to us, namely: Complete, comradely, mutual confidence among
revolutionists. And this something more is absolutely essential
for us because, in Russia, it is useless to think that democratic
control can serve as a substitute for it. It would be a great mistake
to believe that because it is impossible to establish real “democratic”
control, the members of the revolutionary organisation will remain
altogether uncontrolled. They have not the time to think about the
toy forms of democracy (democracy within a close and compact
body enjoying the complete mutual confidence of the comrades),
but they have a lively sense of their responsibility, because they
know from experience that an organisation of real revolutionists
will stop at nothing to rid itself of an undesirable member. More-
over, there is a very well-developed public opinion in Russian (and
international) revolutionary circles which has a long history be-
hind it, and which sternly and ruthlessly punishes every departure
from the duties of comradeship (and does not “democracy,” real
and not toy democracy, represent a part of the conception of com-
radeship?). Take all this into consideration and you will realise
that all the talk and resolutions that come from abroad about “anti-
democratic tendencies” has a nasty odour of the playing at generals
that goes on there.

It must be observed also that the other source of this talk, z. e.,


naiveté, is also fostered by a confusion of ideas concerning the
181


meaning of democracy. In Mr. and Mrs. Webb’s book on trade
unionism,” there is an interesting section on “Primitive Democracy.”
In this section, the authors relate how, in the first period of exist-
ence of their unions, the British workers thought that in the interests
of democracy all the members must take part in the work of
managing the unions; not only were all questions decided by the
votes of all the members, but all the official duties were fulfilled by
all the members in turn. A long period of historical experience
was required to teach these workers how aburd such a conception
of democracy was and to make them understand the necessity for
representative institutions on the one hand, and of full-time pro-
fessional officials on the other. Only after a number of cases of ;
financial bankruptcy of trade unions occurred did the workers
realise that rates of benefit cannot be decided merely by a demo-
cratic vote, but must be based on the advice of insurance experts.

Let us take also Kautsky’s book, Der Parlamentarismus, die V olks-
gesetzgebung und die Sozialdemokratie. There you will find that

the conclusion drawn by the Marxian theoretician coincides with ‘
the lessons learned from many years of experience by the workers .
who organised “spontaneously.” Kautsky strongly protests against __
Rittinghausen’s primitive conception of democracy; he ridicules
those who in the name of democracy demand even that “popular
newspapers shall be directly edited by the people”; he shows
the necessity for professional journalists, parliamentarians, etc.,
and for the Social-Democratic leadership of the proletarian class
struggle; he attacks the “Socialism of Anarchists and littera-
teurs,” who in their “striving after effect”? proclaim the principle
that laws should be passed directly by the whole people, completely
failing to understand that in modern society this principle can have
only a relative application.


Those who have carried on practical work in our movement know
how widespread is the “primitive” conception of democracy among
the masses of the students and workers. It is not surprising that
this conception permeates rules of organisation and literature. The
Economists of the Bernstein persuasion included in their rules the
following: “§ 10. All affairs affecting the interests of the whole
of the union organisation shall be decided by a majority vote
of all its members.” The Economists of the terrorist persuasion re-


* The History of Trade Unionism.
182


peat after them: “The decisions of the committee must be circulated
among all the circles and become effective only after this has been
done” [Svoboda, No. 1, p. 67]. Observe that this proposal for a
widely applied referendum is advanced in addition to the demand
that the whole of the organisation be organised on an elective basis!
We would not, of course, on this account condemn practical work-
ers who have had too few opportunities for studying the theory and
practice of real democratic organisation. But when Rabocheye
Dyelo, which claims to play a leading réle, confines itself, under
such conditions, to resolutions about broad democratic principles,
how else can it be described than as a “striving after effect’?


F. Locat anp Axrt-Russtan WorkK


Although the objections raised against the plan for an organ-
isation outlined here on the grounds of its undemocratic and con-
spirative character are totally unsound, nevertheless a question
still remains that is frequently put and which deserves detailed
examination. This is the question about the relations between
local work and All-Russian work. Fears are expressed that this
would lead to the formation of a centralised organisation, and that
national work would be over-stressed at the expense of local work;
that this would damage the movement, would weaken our contacts
with the masses of the workers, and would weaken local agitation
generally. To these fears we reply that our movement in the past
few years has suffered precisely from the fact that the local workers
have been too absorbed in local work. Hence it is absolutely neces-
sary to somewhat shift the weight of the work from local work to na-
tional work. This would not weaken, on the contrary, it would
strengthen our ties and our local agitation. Take the question of cen-
tral and local journals. I would ask the reader not to forget that we
cite the publication of journals only as an example, illustrating an
immeasurably broader and more widespread revolutionary activity.

In the first period of the mass movement (1896-1898), an at-
tempt is made by local party workers to publish an All-Russian
journal, the Rabochaya Gazeta. In the next period (1898-1900),
the movement makes enormous strides, but the attention of the
leaders is wholly absorbed by local publications. If we add up all


the local journals that were published, we shall find that on the
133


average one paper per month was published.* Does not this illus-
trate our primitive ways? Does this not clearly show that our
revolutionary organisation lags behind the spontaneous growth of
the movement? If the same number of issues had been published,
not by scattered local groups, but by a single organisation, we
would not only have saved an enormous amount of effort, but we
would have secured immeasurably greater stability and continuity
in our work. This simple calculation is very frequently lost sight
of by those practical workers who work actively, almost exclusively,
on local publications (unfortunately this is the case even now in
the overwhelming majority of cases) as well as by the publicists
who display an astonishing Quixotism on this question. The prac-
tical workers usually rest content with the argument that “it is
difficult” for local workers to engage in the organisation of an All-
Russian newspaper, and that local newspapers are better than no
newspapers at all.** The latter argument is, of course, perfectly
just, and we shall not be behind any practical worker in our recog-
nition of the enormous importance and usefulness of local news-
papers in general. But this is not the point. The point is, Can we
rid ourselves of the state of diffusion and primitiveness that is so
strikingly expressed in the thirty numbers of local newspapers pub-
lished throughout the whole of Russia in the course of two-and-a-
half years? Do not restrict yourselves to indisputable but too gen-
eral statements about the usefulness of local newspapers generally;
have the courage also openly to recognise their defects as have
been revealed by the experience of two-and-a-half years. This
experience has shown that under the conditions in which we work,
these local newspapers prove, in the majority of cases, to be
unstable in their principles, lacking in political significance, ex-
tremely costly in regard to expenditure of revolutionary effort, and
totally unsatisfactory from a technical point of view (I have in mind,
of course, not the technique of printing them, but the frequency and
regularity of publication). These defects are not accidental; they
are the inevitable result of the diffusion which on the one hand ex-


*See Report to the Paris Congress, p. 14. “Since that time (1897) to
the spring of 1900, thirty issues of various papers were published in various
places. . . . On average, over one number per month was published.

** This difficulty is more apparent than real. As a matter of fact, there is
not a single local circle that lacks the opportunity of taking up some function
or other in connection with All-Russian work. “Don’t say: I can’t; say:
I won't.”

124


plains the predominance of local newspapers in the period under
review, and on the other hand is fostered by this predominance.
A separate local organisation is positively unable to maintain sta-
bility of principles in its newspaper, and it cannot raise it to the
level of a political organ; it is unable to collect and utilise suf-
ficient material dealing with the whole of our political life. While,
in politically free countries, it is often argued in defence of numer-
ous local newspapers that the cost of printing by local workers is
low, and that the local population can be kept more fully and
quickly informed, experience has shown that in Russia this argu-
ment can be used against local newspapers. In Russia, local news-
papers prove to be excessively costly in regard to the expenditure
of revolutionary effort, and are published rarely, for the very simple
reason that no matter how small its size, the publication of an
illegal newspaper requires as large a secret apparatus as is required
by a large enterprise, for such an apparatus cannot be run in a
small, handicraft workshop. Very frequently, the primitiveness of
the secret apparatus (every practical worker knows of numerous
cases like this) enables the police to take advantage of the publi-
cation and distribution of one or two numbers to make mass arrests
and to make such a clean sweep that it is necessary afterwards to
build up the entire apparatus anew. A well-organised secret ap-
paratus requires professionally well-trained revolutionists and
proper division of labour, but neither of these requirements can be
met by separate local organisations, no matter how strong they may
be at any given moment. Not only are the general interests of our
movement as a whole (consistent training of the workers in Socialist
and political principles) better served by non-local newspapers,
but even specifically local interests are better served. This may
seem paradoxical at first sight, but it has been proved up to the
hilt by the two-and-a-half years of experience to which we have
already referred. Every one will agree that if all the local forces
that were engaged in the publication of these thirty issues of news-
papers had worked on a single newspaper, they could easily have
published sixty if not a hundred numbers, and consequently, would
have more fully expressed all the specifically local features of the
movement. True, it is not an easy matter to attain such high de-
gree of organisation, but we must recognise the necessity for it.
Every local circle must think about it, and work actively to achieve


it, without waiting to be pushed on from outside; and we must
135


stop being tempted by the ease and closer proximity of a local news-
paper which, as our revolutionary experience has shown, proves to
a large extent to be more apparent than real.

And it is a bad service indeed those publicists render to the
practical work, who, thinking they stand particularly close to the
practical workers, fail to see this deceptiveness, and express the
astonishingly cheap and astonishingly hollow argument: We must
have local newspapers, we must have district newspapers, and we
must have All-Russian newspapers. Generally speaking of course,
all these are necessary, but when you undertake to solve a concrete
organisational problem surely you must take time and circumstances
into consideration. Is it not Quixotic on the part of Svoboda [No.
1, p. 68], in a special article “dealing with the question of a news-
paper” to write: “It seems to us that every locality where any
number of workingmen are collected, should have its own labour
newspaper. Not a newspaper imported from somewhere or other,
but its very own.” If the publicist who wrote that refuses to think
about the significance of his own words, then at least you, reader,
think about it for him. How many scores if not hundreds of
“localities where workingmen are collected in any more or less
considerable number” are there in Russia, and would it not be
simply perpetuating our primitive methods if indeed every local
organisation set to work to publish its own newspaper? How this
diffusion would facilitate the task of the gendarmes fishing out—
without any considerable effort at that—the local party workers at
the very beginning of their activity and preventing them from develop-
ing into real revolutionists! A reader of an All-Russian newspaper,
continues the author, would not find descriptions of the misdeeds of
the factory-owners and the “details of factory life in other towns
outside his district at all interesting.” But “an inhabitant of Oryol
would not find it dull reading about Oryol affairs. Each time he
picked up his paper he would know that some factory-owner was
‘caught’ and another ‘exposed,’ and his spirits would begin to soar”
[p. 69]. Yes, yes, the spirit of the Oryolian would begin to soar,
but the thoughts of our publicist also begin to soar—too high. He
should have asked himself: Is it right to concern oneself entirely
with defending the striving after small reforms? We are second
to no one in our appreciation of the importance and necessity of
factory exposures, but it must be borne in mind that we have


reached a stage when St. Petersburgians find it dull reading the St.
136


Petersburg correspondence of the St. Petersburg Rabochaya Mysl.
Local factory exposures have always been and should always con-
tinue to be made through the medium of leaflets, but we must raise
the level of the newspaper, and not degrade it to the level of a fac-
tory leaflet. We do not require “petty” exposures for our “news-
paper.” We require exposures of the important, typical evils of
factory life, exposures based on the most striking facts, and capable
of interesting all workers and all leaders of the movement, capable
of really enriching their knowledge, widening their outlook, and of
rousing new districts and workers of new trade groups.

“Moreover, in a local newspaper, the misdeeds of the factory
officials and other authorities may be seized upon immediately,
and caught red-handed. In the case of a general newspaper, how-
ever, by the time the news reaches the paper, and by the time they
are published, the facts will have been forgotten in the localities
in which they occurred. The reader, when he gets the paper, will
say: ‘God knows when that happened!’” [ibid]. Exactly: God
knows when it happened. As we know, from the source I have
already quoted, during two-and-a-half years, thirty issues of news-
papers were published in six cities. This, on the average, is one
issue per city per half year. And even if our frivolous publicist
trebled his estimate of the productivity of local work (which would
be wrong in the case of an average city, because it is impossible to
increase productivity to any extent by our primitive methods), we
would still get only one issue every two months, i. e., nothing at all
like “catching them red-handed.” It would be sufficient, however,
to combine a score or so of local organisations, and assign active
functions to their delegates in organising a general newspaper, to
enable us to “seize upon,” over the whole of Russia, not petty, but
really outstanding and typical evils once every fortnight. No one
who has any knowledge at all of the state of affairs in our organisa-
tions can have the slightest doubt about that. It is quite absurd to
talk about an illegal newspaper capturing the enemy red-handed,
that is, if we mean it seriously and not merely as a metaphor. That
can only be done by an anonymous leaflet, because an incident like
that can only be of interest for a matter of a day or two (take, for
example, the usual, brief strikes, beatings in a factory, demonstra-
tions, etc.).

“The workers not only live in factories, they also live in the


cities,” continues our author, rising from the particular to the gen-
187


eral, with a strict consistency that would have done honour to Boris
Krichevsky himself; and he refers to matters like the city councils,
city hospitals, city schools, and demands that labour newspapers
generally deal with these municipal affairs. This demand is an
excellent one in itself, but it serves as a remarkable illustration of
the empty abstraction which too frequently characterises discussions
about local newspapers. First of all, if indeed newspapers ap-
peared “in every place where any number of workers are gathered”
with such detailed information on municipal affairs as Svoboda
desires, it would, under our Russian conditions, inevitably lead to
striving for small reform, to a weakening of the consciousness of
the importance of an All-Russian revolutionary attack upon the
tsarist autocracy, and would strengthen that extremely virile tend-
ency, which has already become notorious by the famous remark
about revolutionists who talk more about non-existent parliaments,
and too little about existing city councils, and which has not been
uprooted but rather temporarily suppressed. We say “inevitably,”
deliberately, in order to emphasise that Svoboda obviously does not
want this but the contrary to happen. But good intentions are not
enough. In order that municipal affairs may be dealt with in their
proper perspective, in relation to the whole of our work, this per-
spective must be clearly conceived from the very outset; it must be
firmly established, not only by argument, but by numerous ex-
amples in order that it may acquire the firmness of a tradition.
This is far from being the case with us yet. And yet this must be
done from the very outset, before we can even think and talk about
an extensive local press.

Secondly, in order to be able to write well and interestingly about
municipal affairs, one must know these questions not only from
books, but from practical experience. And there are hardly any
Social-Democrats anywhere in Russia who possess this knowledge.
In order to be able to write in newspapers (not in popular pam-
phlets) about municipal and state affairs, one must have fresh and
multifarious material collected and worked up by able journalists.
And in order to be able to collect and work up such material, we
must have something more than the “primitive democracy” of a
primitive circle, in which everybody does everything and all en-
tertain one another by playing at referendums. For this it is neces-
sary to have a staff of expert writers, expert correspondents, an army


of Social-Democratic reporters, that has established contacts far and
138


wide, able to penetrate into all sorts of “state secrets” (about which
the Russian government official is so puffed up, but which he so
easily blabs), find its way “behind the scenes,” an army of men
and women whose “official duty” it must be to be ubiquitous and
omniscient. And we, the party that fights against all economic,
political, social and national oppression can and must find, collect,
train, mobilise, and set into motion such an army of omniscient
people—but all this has yet to be done! Not only has not a single
step been taken towards this in the overwhelming majority of cases,
but in many places the necessity for doing it is not even recognised.
You will search in vain in our Social-Democratic press for lively
and interesting articles, correspondence, and exposures of our diplo-
matic, military, ecclesiastical, municipal, financial, etc., etc., affairs
and malpractices. You will find almost nothing, or very little,
about these things.* That is why “I am always frightfully annoyed
when a man comes to me and says all sorts of nice things” about
the necessity for newspapers that will expose factory, municipal,
and government evils “in every place where any considerable num-
ber of workers are collected!”

The predominance of the local press over the central press may
be either a symptom of poverty, or a symptom of luxury. Of pov-
erty, when the movement has not yet developed the forces for large-
scale production, and continues to flounder in primitive ways and
in “the petty details of factory life.” Of luxury, when the move-
ment, having already mastered the task of all-sided exposure and
all-sided agitation, finds it necessary to publish numerous local
newspapers in addition to the central organ. Let each one decide
for himself as to what the predominance of local newspapers im-
plies at the present time. I shall limit myself to a precise formula-
tion of my own conclusion, in order to avoid misunderstanding.
Hitherto the majority of our local organisations devoted their minds


* That is why even examples of exceptionally good local newspapers fully
confirm our point-of-view. For example, Yuzhny Rabochy is an excellent news-
paper, and is altogether free from instability of principles. But it was unable
to provide what it desired for the local movement owing to the infrequency
of its publication and to extensive police raids. What our party must do
most urgently at the present time is to present the fundamental questions
of the movement, and carry on wide political agitation, but this the local
newspaper was unable to do. And that which it did exceptionally well, namely,
publish articles about the mine-owners’ congress, unemployment, etc., was
not strictly local material, it was required for the whole of Russia, and not
for the South alone. No articles like that have appeared in any of our Social-


Democratic newspapers.
139


almost exclusively to local newspapers, and devoted almost all their
activities to this work. This is unsound—the very opposite should
be the case. The majority of the local organisations should devote
their minds principally to the publication of an All-Russian news-
paper, and devote their activities principally to this work. Until
that is done, we shall never be able to establish a single newspaper
capable to any degree of serving the movement with all-sided press
agitation. When that is done, however, normal relations between
the necessary central newspapers and the necessary local news-
papers will be established automatically.


Tt would seem at first sight that the conclusion drawn, concerning
the necessity for transferring the weight of effort from local work
to All-Russian work, does not apply to the specifically economic
struggle. In this struggle, the immediate enemy of the workers are
individual employers or groups of employers, who are not bound
by any organisation having even the remotest resemblance to a
purely militant, strictly centralised organisation led in all its
minutest details by the single will of the organised Russian govern-
ment—which is our immediate enemy in the political struggle.

But that is not the case. As we have already pointed out many
times, the economic struggle is a trade struggle, and for that reason
it requires that the workers be organised according to trade and not
only according to their place of employment. And this organisation
by trade becomes all the more imperatively necessary, the more
rapidly our employers organise in all sorts of companies and syndi-
cates. Our state of diffusion and our primitiveness hinders this
work of organisation, and in order that this work may be carried
out, we must have a single, All-Russian organisation of revolution-
ists capable of undertaking the leadership of the All-Russian trade
unions. We have already described above the type of organisation
that is desired for this purpose, and now we shall add just a few
words about this in connection with the question of our press.

Hardly any one will doubt the necessity for every Social-Demo-
cratic newspaper having a special section devoted to the trade-
union (economic) struggle. But the growth of the trade-union
movement compels us to think about the trade-union press. It seems
to us, however, that with rare exceptions, it is not much use think-
ing of trade-union newspapers in Russia at the present time: That


would be a luxury, and in many places we cannot even obtain our
140


daily bread. The form of trade-union press that would suit the
conditions of our illegal works and that is already called for at the
present time is the Trade-Union Pamphlet. In these pamphlets,
legal * and illegal material should be collected and organised, on
conditions of labour in a given trade, on the various conditions pre-
vailing in the various parts of Russia, on the principal demands
advanced by the workers in a given trade, about the defects of the
laws in relation to that trade, of the outstanding cases of workers’
economic struggle in this trade, about the rudiments, the present
state and the requirements of their trade-union organisations, etc.
Such pamphlets would, in the first place, relieve our Social-
Democratic press of a mass of trade details that interest only the
workers employed in the given trade; secondly, they would record
the results of our experience in the trade-union struggle, would pre-
serve the material collected—which is now literally lost in a mass
of leaflets and fragmentary correspondence—and would generalise
this material. Thirdly, they could serve as material for the guidance
of agitators, because conditions of labour change relatively slowly,
the principal demands of the workers in a given trade hardly ever
change (see for example the demands advanced by the weavers in
the Moscow district in 1885 and in the St. Petersburg district in
1896), and a compilation of these demands and needs might serve

* Legal material is particularly important in this connection, but we have
lagged behind very much in our ability systematically to collect and utilise
it. It would not be an exaggeration to say that legal material alone would
provide sufficient material for a trade-union pamphlet, whereas illegal ma-
terial alone would not be sufficient. In collecting illegal material from workers,
on questions like those dealt with in the publications of Rabochaya Mysl,
we waste a lot of the efforts of revolutionists (whose place in this work,
could very easily be taken by legal workers), and yet we never obtain good
material because a worker who knows only a single department of a large
factory, who knows the economic results but not the general conditions and
standards of his work, cannot acquire the knowledge that is possessed by the
office staff of a factory, by inspectors, doctors, etc., and which is scattered in
petty newspaper correspondence, and in special, industrial, medical, Zemstvo
and other publications.

I very distinctly remember my “first experiment,” which I am not going to
repeat. I spent many weeks “examining” a workingman, who came to visit
me, about the conditions prevailing in the enormous factory at which he was
employed. True, after great effort, I managed to obtain material for a descrip-
tion (of just one single factory!), but at the end of each interview the working-
man would wipe the sweat from his brow, and say to me smilingly: “I would
rather work overtime than reply to your questions!”

The more energetically we carry on our revolutionary struggle, the more
the government will be compelled to legalise a part of the “trade-union” work,


and by that will relieve us of part of our burden.
141


for years as an excellent handbook for agitators on economic ques-
tions in backward localities, or among backward strata of the
workers. Examples of successful strikes, information about the
higher standard of life, of better conditions of labour, in one district,
would encourage the workers in other districts to take up the fight
again and again. Fourthly, having made a start in generalising the
trade-union struggle, and having in this way strengthened the con-
tacts between the Russian trade-union movement and Socialism, the
Social-Democrats would at the same time see to it that our trade-
union work did not occupy either too small or.too large a share of
our general Social-Democratic work. A local organisation, that is
cut off from the organisations in other towns, finds it very difficult,
and sometimes almost impossible, to maintain a correct sense of
proportion (and the example of Rabochaya Mysl shows what a
monstrous exaggeration is sometimes made in the direction of trade
unionism). But an All-Russian organisation of revolutionists, that
stands undeviatingly on the basis of Marxism, leads the whole of
the political struggle and possesses a staff of professional agitators,
will never find it difficult to determine the proper proportion.


jAD
a


—-


Vv
THE “PLAN” FOR AN ALL-RUSSIAN POLITICAL NEWSPAPER


“THE most serious blunder Jskra made in this connection,” writes
B. Krichevsky [Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10, p. 30], accusing us of
betraying a tendency to “convert theory into a lifeless doctrine by
isolating it from practice’—‘was in promoting its ‘plan’ for gen-
eral party organisation” [7. e., the article entitled “Where to Begin” ]
and Martynov echoes this idea by declaring that Jskra’s tendency to
belittle the march of the drab, every-day struggle in comparison
with the propaganda of brilliant and complete ideas . . . was
crowned by the plan for the organisation of a party that it advances
in an article in No. 4, entitled “Where to Begin?” [ibid., p. 61].
Finally, L. Nadezhdin has recently joined in the chorus of indigna-
tion against the “plan”? (the quotation marks were meant to express
sarcasm). In a pamphlet we have just received written by him,
entitled The Eve of Revolution (published by the Revolutionary
Socialist group, Svoboda, whose acquaintance we have already
made), he declares that: “To speak now of an organisation to be
linked up with an All-Russian newspaper means to propagate arm-
chair ideas and armchair work” [p. 126], that it is a manifestation
of “literariness,”’ etc.

It does not surprise us that our terrorist agrees with the cham-
pions of the “forward march of the drab, every-day struggle,” be-
cause we have already traced the roots of this intimacy between
them in the chapters on politics and organisation. But we must
here draw attention to the fact that L. Nadezhdin is the only one
who has conscientiously tried to understand the ideas expressed in
an article he disagrees with, and has made an attempt to reply to
it, whereas Rabocheye Dyelo has said nothing that is material to the
subject, but has tried only to confuse the question by a whole series
of inappropriate, demagogic sallies. Unpleasant though the task
may be, we must spend a little time on cleaning this Augean stable.


A. Wo Was OFFENDED BY THE ARTICLE “WHERE TO BEGIN’?


We shall quote a bouquet of the expletives and exclamations that


Rabocheye Dyelo hurled at us. “A newspaper cannot create a party
143


organisation; on the contrary, a party organisation must create a
newspaper. ...” “A newspaper, standing above the party, outside
of its control and independent of it, thanks to its having its own
staff of agents... .” “By what miracle has Iskra forgotten about
the actual existence of the Social-Democratic organisations of the
party to which it belongs? ...” “Those who possess firm principles
and a corresponding plan are the supreme regulators of the real
struggle of the party and dictate to it their plan....” “The plan
drives our lives and virile organisations into the kingdom of shadows
and desires to call into being a fantastic network of agents. . . .”
“If Iskra’s plans were carried out, every-trace of the Russian Social-
Democratic Labour Party, which is growing up in Russia, would
be completely wiped out... .” “The propagandist organ becomes
an uncontrolled autocratic legislator for the whole of the practical
revolutionary struggle. .. .” “What should be the attitude of our
party towards the propsal for its complete subordination to an
autonomous editorial board?” , etc., etc.

As the reader can see from the contents and tone of the above
quotations, Rabocheye Dyelo feels offended. But it is offended, not
for its own sake, but for the sake of the organisations and com-
mittees of our party which it alleges Jskra desires to drive into the
kingdom of shadows, and the traces of which it desires to obliterate.
Terrible, isn’t it? But a curious thing should be noted. The
article “Where to Begin” appeared in May, 1901. The articles in
Rabocheye Dyelo appeared in September, 1901. Now we are ir
the middle of January, 1902. During these five months, not a single
committee and not a single organisation of the party (neither be-
fore nor after September) protested against this monster which
desires to drive them into the kingdom of shadows; and yet scores
and hundreds of communications from all parts of Russia have
appeared during this period in Jskra, and in numerous local and
non-local publications. How is it that those whom it is desired to
drive into the kingdom of shadows are not aware of it and have not
felt offended about it, but a third party is offended over it?

This is to be explained by the fact that the committees and other
organisations are engaged in real work and do not play at “democ-
racy.” The committees read the article “Where to Begin,” saw that
it was an attempt “to work out a certain plan of organisation by
which the setting up of this organisation could be approached from


all sides,’ and as they knew very well that not one of these “sides”
144


will dream of “setting to work to build it” until it is convinced of
its necessity, and of the correctness of the architectural plan, they
naturally felt no offence at the boldness of the people who in Jskra
said: “In view of the urgency and importance of the question, we
take it upon ourselves to submit to our comrades an outline of a
plan which is developed in greater detail in a pamphlet that we are
preparing for the press.” Assuming people were actuated by mo-
tives of good-will, would they not understand that if the comrades
accepted the plan submitted to them, they would carry it out, not
because they are “subordinate” but because they were convinced of
its necessity for our common cause, and that if they did not accept
it, then the “outline” (a pretentious word, is it not?) would remain
merely an outline? Is it not sheer demagogy to oppose the outline
of a plan, not only by “picking it to pieces” and advising comrades
to reject it, but also by inciting those inexperienced in revolutionary
affairs against the authors of the plan merely on the grounds that
they dare to “legislate” and come out as the “supreme regulators,”
i. e., because they dare to propose an outline of a plan? Can our
party develop and make progress if an attempt to broaden the out-
look of local party workers so that they may be able to appreciate
broader views, tasks, plans, etc., is objected to, not on the ground
that these views are wrong, but on the grounds that the very “desire”
to broaden is “offensive”? L. Nadezhdin also “picked our plan to
pieces,” but he did not sink to such demagogy—demagogy that can-
not be explained by naiveté or by primitiveness of political views.
Right from the outset, he emphatically rejected the charge that we
intended to establish an “inspectorship over the party.” That is
why Nadezhdin’s criticism of the plan deserves serious treatment,
while Rabocheye Dyelo deserves only to be treated with contempt.

But contempt for a writer, who sinks to shouting about “‘autoc-
racy” and “subordination,” does not relieve us of the duty of dis-
entangling the confusion that such people create in the minds of
their readers, and here we can demonstrate to the world the nature
of the catchwords like “broad democracy.” We are accused of for-
getting the committees, of desiring or attempting to drive them into
the kingdom of shadows, etc. How can we reply to these charges
when, owing to considerations of secrecy, we are not in a position
to tell the reader anything about our real relationships with the com-
mittees? The people who broadcast slashing accusations which excite


the people appear to be ahead of us because of their recklessness
145


and their neglect of the duty of a revolutionist carefully to con-
ceal from the eyes of the world the relationships and contacts he
has, which he is establishing or trying to establish. Naturally, we
absolutely refuse once for all to compete with such people on the
field of “democracy.”

As for the reader who is not enlightened on all party affairs, the
only way in which we can fulfil our duty to him is to tell him, not
about what is and what is im Werden * but about a particle of what
has taken place and what it is permissible to tell him in view of its
being an event of the past.

The Bund hints that we are “pretenders”; the League abroad
accuses us of attempting to obliterate all traces of the party. Gen-
tlemen, you will get complete satisfaction when we relate to the
public four facts concerning the past.

First fact.*** The members of one of the Leagues of Struggle,
who took a direct part in the formation of our party, and in sending
a delegate to the party congress which established the party, came
to an agreement with one of the members of the /skra group about
the foundation of a special workers’ library in order to satisfy the
needs of the whole of the movement. The attempt to publish a
library failed, and the pamphlets written for it: The Tasks of Rus-
sian Social-Democrats, and The New Factory Act,**** by a round-
about way, and through the medium of third parties, found their
way abroad, and were there published.

Second fact. The members of the Central Committee of the Bund
came to one of the members of the /skra group with the proposal
to organise what the Bund then described as a “literary labora-
tory.” In making the proposal, they stated that unless this was
done, the movement would retrogress very much. The result of
these negotiations was the appearance of the pamphlet, The Cause
of Labour in Russia.*****


* What is in the process of becoming.—Ed.

** Iskra, No. 8. The reply of the Central Committee of the Bund to our
article on the national question.

*** We deliberately refrain from relating these facts in the order in which
they occurred.

**#** See V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. I1—Ed.

***** The author of this pamphlet asks me to state that this pamphlet, like
the one he wrote previously, was sent to the League on the assumption that the
editors of its publications were the Emancipation of Labour group (owing to
certain circumstances, he could not then—February, 1899—know about the
change in the editorship). This pamphlet will be republished by the League
at an early date.


He


146


Third fact. The Central Committee of the Bund, via a provincial
town, came to one of the members of Jskra with the proposal that
he accept the post of editor of the revived Rabochaya Gazeta and,
of course, received his consent. This proposal was later modified.
The comrade in question was invited to act as a contributor, in
view of a new arrangement that had been made with the editorial
board. To this also consent was, of course, given. Articles were
sent (which we managed to preserve); “Our Programme” which
was a direct protest against Bernsteinism, against the change of
policy in legal literature and in Rabochaya Mysl; “Our Immediate
Tasks” (“The publication of a party organ that shall appear regu-
larly and have close contacts with all the local groups”; the draw-
backs of the prevailing “primitive methods”) ; “Urgent questions”
(an examination of the argument that it is necessary first of all to
develop the activities of local groups before undertaking the pub-
lication of a central organ; an insistence on the paramount im-
portance of a “revolutionary organisation,” and on the necessity of
“developing organisation, discipline, and the technique of secrecy
to the highest stage of perfection”).* The proposal to resume pub-
lication of Rabochaya Gazeta was not carried out, and the articles
were not published.

Fourth fact. A member of the committee that organised the
second regular congress of our party communicated to a member
of the Iskra group the programme of the congress, and proposed
that group for the office of editing the revived Rabochaya Gazeta.
This preliminary step, as it were, was later sanctioned by the com-
mittee to which this member belonged, and by the Central Com-
mittee of the Bund; the /skra group was notified of the place and
time of the congress and (not being sure of being able, for certain
reasons, to send a delegate to the congress), drew up a written re-
port for the congress. In this report, the idea was suggested that
the mere election of a central committee would not only not solve
the question of the amalgamation at a time like this, when com-
plete confusion reigns, but may even compromise the grand idea of
establishing a party, in the event of an early and complete discovery
of the organisation, and a raid by the police, which was more than
likely in view of the prevailing lack of secrecy, and that therefore,
a beginning should be made by inviting all committees and all other
organisations to support the revived common organ, which will


* See V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. I1.—Ed.
147


establish real contacts between all the committees and really train
a group of leaders to lead the whole movement; that the committees
and the party could very easily transform this group into a central
committee as soon as the group had grown and become strong. The
congress, however, never took place owing to a number of police
raids and arrests; for reasons of secrecy, the report was destroyed,
having been read only by several comrades including the represen-
tatives of one committee. ‘

Let the reader now judge for himself the character of the methods
employed by the Bund in hinting that we were pretenders, or by
Rabocheye Dyelo, who accuses us of trying to relegate the com-
mittees to the kingdom of shadows, and to “substitute” an or-
ganisation for advocating the idea of a single newspaper for the
organisation of a party. Yes, we did report to the committees, on
their repeated invitation, on the necessity for accepting a definite
plan of work in common. It was precisely for the party organisa-
tions that we drew up this plan, in articles published in Rabochaya
Gazeta, and in the report to the party congress, again on the invita-
tion of those who occupied such an influential position in the party
that they took the initiative in its (actual) revival. And only after
the two-fold attempt of the party organisation, in conjunction with
ourselves, to revive the central organ of the party officially had
failed, did we think it our bounden duty to publish an unofficial
organ, in order that with this third attempt the comrades may have
before them the results of an experiment and not merely proble-
matical proposals. Now certain results of this experiment are avail-
able to the view of all, and all comrades may now judge as to
whether we properly understood our duties, and what must be
thought of people who strive to mislead those who are unacquainted
with the immediate past, simply because they are chagrined at our
having proved to some their inconsistency on the “national” ques-
tion, and to others the inadmissibility of their waverings in matters
of principle.


B. Can Aa NewspaPer BE A COLLECTIVE ORGANISER?


The main points in the article “Where to Begin” deal precisely
with this question, and reply to it positively. As far as we know;


the only attempt to examine this question and to reply to it in the


148


negative, was made by L. Nadezhdin, whose argument we reproduce
in full:


. .. The manner in which the question of the necessity for an All-Russian
newspaper is presented in Iskra, No. 4, pleases us very much, but we cannot
agree that such a presentation is suitable in an article bearing the title,
“Where to Begin.” Undoubtedly this is an extremely important matter, but
neither a newspaper, nor a whole series of popular leaflets, nor a whole
mountain of manifestoes, can serve as the basis for a militant organisation
in revolutionary times. We must set to work to build up strong political
organisations in the localities. We lack such organisations; we have been
carrying on our work mainly among intelligent workers, while the masses
have been engaged almost exclusively in the economic struggle. If we do not
build up strong political organisations locally, what will be the use of even
an excellently organised all-Russian newspaper? It will be a burning bush,
burning without being consumed and consuming nothing! Jskra thinks that
as a matter of fact people will gather around it, and they will organise. But
they will find it more interesting to gather and organise around something
more concrete! This something more concrete may be the extensive publica-
tion of local newspapers, the immediate setting to work to rally the forces of
labour for demonstrations, constant work by local organisations among the
unemployed (regularly distribute pamphlets and leaflets among them, convene
meetings for them, call upon them to resist the government, etc.). We must
organise live political work in the localities, and when the time comes to
amalgamate on this real basis—it will not be an artificial, a paper amalgama-
tion—it will not be by means of newspapers that such an amalgamation of
local work into an All-Russian cause will be achieved! [The Eve of the
Revolution, p. 54.]


We have emphasised the passages in this eloquent tirade which
most strikingly illustrate the author’s incorrect judgement of our
plan, and the incorrectness of the point of view generally that he
opposes to that of Jskra. Unless we set up strong political organisa-
tions in the localities—even an excellently organised All-Russian
newspaper will be of no avail. Absolutely true. But the whole
point is that there is no other way of training strong political or-
ganisations except through the medium of an All-Russian news-
paper. The author missed the most important statement Jskra made
before it proceeded to explain its “plan”: That it was necessary “‘to
call for the establishment of a revolutionary organisation, capable of
combining all the forces, and of leading the movement not only in
name but in deed, i. e., that will be ready at any moment to support
every protest and every outbreak, and to utilise these for the purpose
of increasing and strengthening the militant forces required for deci-
sive battle.” After the February and March events, every one will
agree with this in principle, continues Jskra, but we do not need a
solution of this problem in principle but a practical solution of it;


we must immediately bring forward a definite plan of construction in
149


order that every one may set to work to build from every side. And
now we are again being dragged away from a practical solution
towards something that is correct in principle, indisputable and
great, but absolutely inadequate and absolutely incomprehensible
to the broad masses of workers, namely, to “build up strong politi-
cal organisations!” This is not the point that is now being discussed,
most worthy author! The point is, How to train and what training
it should be?

It is not true to say that “‘we have been carrying on our work
mainly among intelligent workers, while the masses have been en-
gaged almost exclusively in the economic struggle.” Presented in
such a form, this postulate goes wrong on the point which Svoboda
always goes wrong on, and which is radically wrong, and that is,
it sets up the intelligent workers in contrast to the “masses.” Even
the intelligent workers have been “engaged almost exclusively in the
economic struggle” during the past few years. Moreover, the masses
will never learn to conduct the political struggle until we help to
train leaders for this struggle, both from among the intelligent
workers and from among the intellectuals; and such leaders can be
trained solely by systematic and every-day appreciation of all as-
pects of our political life, of all attempts at protest and struggle on
the part of various classes and on various pretexts. Therefore, to
talk about “training political organisations” and at the same time
to contrast a “paper organisation” of a political newspaper to “live
political work in the localities” is simply ridiculous! Why, Iskra
has adapted its “plan” for a newspaper to the “plan” for creating
a “militant preparedness” to support the unemployed movement,
peasant revolts, discontent among the Zemstvoists, “popular indig-
nation against the reckless tsarist Bashi-Buzuks,” etc. Every one
who is at all acquainted with the movement knows perfectly well
that the majority of local organisations never dream of these things,
that many of the prospects of “live political work” have never been
realised by a single organisation, that the attempt to call attention
to the growth of discontent and protest among the Zemstvo intelli-
gentsia rouses feelings of consternation and amazement in Nadezhdin
(“Good Lord, is this newspaper intended for the Zemstvoists?”—
The Eve of the Revolution, p. 129), among the Economists (Letter
to Iskra No. 12) and among many of the practical workers. Under
these circumstances, it is possible to “begin” only by stirring up


people to think about all these things, to stir them up to summarise
150


and generalise all the flashes of discontent and active struggle.
“Live political work” can be commenced in our time, when Social.-
Democratic tasks are being degraded, exclusively with live political
education, which is impossible unless we have a frequently issued
and properly distributed All-Russian newspaper.

Those who regard Iskra’s “plan” as a manifestation of literari-
ness have totally failed to understand the substance of the plan,
and imagine that what is suggested as the most suitable means for
the present time is the ultimate goal. These people have not taken
the trouble to study the two comparisons that were drawn to illus-
trate the plan proposed. Jskra wrote: The publication of an All.
Russian political newspaper must be the main line that must guide
us in our work of unswervingly developing, deepening, and ex-
panding this organisation (i. e., a revolutionary organisation always
prepared to support every protest and every outbreak). Pray tell
me: When a bricklayer lays bricks in various parts of an enormous
structure, the like of which has never been seen before, is it a
“paper” line that he uses to help him to find the correct place to
place each brick, to indicate to him the ultimate goal of the work
as a whole, to enable him to use not only every brick but even every
piece of brick, which, joining with the bricks placed before and
after it, forms a complete and all-embracing line? And are we not
now passing through a period in our party life, when we have
bricks and bricklayers, but we lack the guiding line, visible to all,
by which to guide our movements? Let them shout that in stretching
out the line, we desire to command. Had we desired to command,
gentlemen, we would have written on the title page, not “Jskra, No.
1,” but “Rabochaya Gazeta, No. 3,” as we were invited to do by a
number of comrades, and as we had a perfect right to do after the
events related above took place. But we did not do that. We wished
to have our hands free to conduct an irreconcilable struggle against
all pseudo-Social-Democrats; we wanted our line of policy, if
properly laid, to be respected because it was correct, and not because
it was carried out by an official organ.

“The question of combining local activity in central organs runs
in a vicious circle,” L. Nadezhdin tells us pedantically, “for this
requires homogeneous elements, and this homogeneity can be
created only by something that combines; but this combining element
may be the product of strong local organisations which at the


present time are not distinguished for their homogeneity.” This
151


truism is as hoary and indisputable as the one that: We must build
up strong political organisations. And is equally barren. Every
question “runs in a vicious circle” because the whole of political
life is an endless chain consisting of an infinite number of links.
The whole art of politics lies in finding the link that can be least
torn out of our hands, the one that is most important at the given
moment, the one that guarantees the command of the whole chain,
and having found it, to cling to that link as tightly as possible.*
If we possessed a staff of experienced bricklayers who had learned
to work so well together that they could dispense with a guiding
line and could place their bricks exactly where they are required
without one (and speaking abstractly, this is by no means impos-
sible), then perhaps we might seize upon some other link. But the
unfortunate thing is that we have no experienced bricklayers trained
to teamwork, that bricks are often laid where they are not needed
at all, that they are not laid according to the general line, and are
so scattered about that the enemy can shatter the structure as if it
were made not of bricks but of sand.
Here is the other comparison:


A newspaper is not merely a collective propagandist and collective agitator,
it is also a collective organiser. In that respect it can be compared to the
scaffolding erected around a building in construction; it marks the contours
of the structure, and facilitates communication between the builders, permitting
them to distribute the work, and to view the common results achieved by
their organised labour.**


Does this sound anything like the attempt of an armchair author
to exaggerate his réle? The scaffolding put up around a building is
not required at all for habitation, it is made of the cheapest ma-
terial, it is only put up temporarily and when finished with, as soon
as the shell of the structure is completed, is destroyed. As for the
building up.of revolutionary organisations, experience shows that
sometimes they may be built without scaffolding,—take the seventies


* Comrade Krichevsky and Comrade Martynov! I call your attention to this
outrageous manifestation of “autocracy” “uncontrolled authority,” “supreme
regulating,” etc. Just think of it: a desire to possess the whole chain!! Send
in a complaint at once. Here you have a subject for two leading articles
for No. 12 of Rabocheye Dyelo!

** Martynov, quoting the first sentence in this passage in Rabocheye Dyelo
[No. 10, p. 62] left out the second sentence, as if desiring to emphasise by that
either his unwillingness to discuss the essentials of the question, or his in-
capability of understanding it.

152


for example. But at the present time we cannot imagine that the
building we require can be put up without scaffolding.

Nadezhdin disagrees with this, and says: “Jskra thinks that people
will gather around it and will organise, but they will find it more
interesting to organise around something more concrete!” So! so!
“They will find it more interesting to gather around something more
concrete. . . .” There is a Russian proverb which says: “Don’t spit
into the well, you may want to drink out of it.” But there are
people who do not object to drinking from a well which has been
spat into. What despicable things our magnificent, legal “critics
of Marxism” and illegal admirers of Rabochaya Mysl have said in
the name of this—something more concrete! See how restricted our
movement is by our own narrowness, lack of initiative, and hesi-
tation and yet this is justified by the traditional argument about
“finding it more interesting to gather around something more
concrete!” And Nadezhdin, who regards himself as being particu-
larly sensitive to “life,” who so severely condemns “armchair”
authors, who (with pretensions to being witty) charges Iskra with
a weakness for seeing Economism everywhere, and who imagines
that he stands far above this discrimination between the “orthodox”
and the “critics,””—fails to see that with this sort of argument he is
playing into the hands of the very narrowness with which he is so
indignant and that he is drinking from a well that has actually
been spat into! The sincerest indignation against narrowness, the
most passionate desire to raise those who worship this narrowness
from their knees, is insufficient if the indignant one is swept along
without sail or rudder as “spontaneously” as the revolutionists of
the seventies, if he clutches at such things as “excitative terror,”
“agrarian terror,” “sounding-the-tocsin,” etc. Glance at this some-
thing “more concrete” around which he thinks it is “much easier”
to rally and organise: 1. Local newspapers; 2. Preparations for
demonstrations; 3. Work among the unemployed. It will be seen
at the very first glance that all these have been seized upon at
random in order to be able to say something, for however we may
regard them, it would be absurd to see in them anything especially
adapted for the purpose of “rallying and organising.” This very
Nadezhdin a few pages further on says: “It is time we simply stated
the fact that extremely petty work is being carried on in the locali-
ties, the committees are not doing a tenth of what they could do...


the combining centres that we have at the present time are a pure
153


fiction, they represent a sort of revolutionary bureaucracy, the
members of which mutually appoint each other to the posts of
generals; and so it will continue until strong local organisations
grow up.” These remarks while exaggerating the position some-
what, express many a bitter truth, but cannot Nadezhdin see the
connection between the petty work carried on in the localities and
the narrow outlook of the party workers, the narrow scope of their
activities, which is inevitable in view of the lack of training of the
party workers isolated in their local organisations? Has he, like
the author of the article on organisation published in Svoboda, for-
gotten how the adoption of a broad local press (in 1898) was
accompanied by a very strong intensification of Economism and
“primitive methods’? Even if a broad local press could be estab-
lished at all satisfactorily (and we have shown above that it is
impossible save in very exceptional cases)—-even then the local
organs could not “rally and organise” all the revolutionary forces
for a general attack upon the autocracy and for the leadership of a
united struggle. Do not forget that we are here discussing only the
“rallying,” the organising significance of a newspaper, and we
could put to Nadezhdin, who defends diffusiveness, the very question
that he himself has already put ironically: “Has some one left us
a legacy of 200,000 revolutionary organisers?” Furthermore,
“preparations for demonstrations” cannot be set up in contrast to
Iskra’s plan for the one reason alone that this plan includes the
organisation of the widest possible demonstrations as one of its
aims; the point under discussion is the selection of the practical
means. On this point also Nadezhdin has got confused and has lost
sight of the fact that only already “rallied and organised” forces
can “prepare for” demonstrations (which hitherto, in the over-
whelming majority of cases, have taken place quite spontaneously)
and we lack precisely the ability to rally and organise. “Work
among the unemployed.” Again the same confusion, for this too
represents one of the military operations of mobilised forces and
not a plan to mobilise the forces. The extent to which Nadezhdin
underestimates the harm caused by our diffusion, by our lack of
“200,000 men,” can be seen from the following: Many (including
Nadezhdin) have reproached Jskra with the paucity of the news it
gives about unemployment and with the casual nature of the corre-
spondence it publishes about the most common affairs of rural life.


The reproach is justified, but Jskra is “guilty without sin.” We
154


strive to “draw a line” even through the countryside, but there are
almost no bricklayers there, and we are obliged to encourage
every one to send us information concerning even the most common
facts in the hope that this will increase the number of our con-
tributors in this field and will train us all at least to select the
really most outstanding facts. But the material upon which we
can train is so scanty that unless we collect it from all parts of
Russia we will have very little to train upon at all. No doubt, one
who possesses at least as much capacity as an agitator and as much
knowledge of the life of the vagrant as apparently Nadezhdin has,
could render priceless service to the movement by carrying on
agitation among the unemployed—but such a one would be simply
burying his talents if he failed to inform all Russian comrades of
every step he took in his work, in order that others, who, in the
mass, as yet lack the ability to undertake new kinds of work, may
learn from his example.

Absolutely everybody now talks about the importance of unity,
about the necessity for “rallying and organising,” but the majority
of us lack a definite idea of where to begin and how to bring about
this unification. Every one will probably agree that if we “unite”
say, the district circles in a given city, it will be necessary to have
for this purpose common institutions, i. e., not merely a common
title of “League” but genuinely common work, exchange of material,
experience, and forces, distribution of functions, not only in the
given districts but in a whole city, according to special tasks,
Every one will agree that a big secret apparatus will not pay its
way (if one may employ a commercial expression) “with the re-
sources” (in material and man power, of course) of a single district
and that a single district will not provide sufficient scope for a
specialist to develop his talents. But the same thing applies to the
unification of a number of cities, because even such a field, like a
single locality, will prove, and has already proved in the history of
our Social-Democratic movement, to be too restricted: we have
already dealt with this in detail above, in connection with political
agitation and organisational work. We must first and foremost
widen the field, establish real contacts between the cities, on the
basis of regular, common work; for diffusion restricts the activities
of our people who are “stuck in a hole” (to use the expression
employed by a correspondent to Jskra), not knowing what is


happening in the world; they have no one to learn from, do not
155


know how to obtain or to satisfy their desire to engage in broad
activities. And I continue to insist that we can start establishing
real contacts only with the aid of a common newspaper, as a
single, regular, All-Russian enterprise, which will summarise the
results of all the diverse forms of activity and thereby stimulate our
people to march forward untiringly along all the innumerable paths
which lead to the revolution in the same way as all roads lead to
Rome. If we do not want unity in name only, we must arrange for
every local circle immediately to assign, say a fourth of its forces to
active work for the common cause, and the newspaper will imme-
diately convey to them ™* the general design, dimensions and char-
acter of this cause, will indicate to them precisely the most serious
defects of All-Russian activity, where agitation is lacking and
where contacts are weak, and point out which small wheel in the
great general mechanism could be repaired or replaced by a better
one. A circle that has not commenced to work yet, which is only
just seeking work, could then start, not like a craftsman in a small
separate workshop unaware of the development that has taken place
in “industry,” or of the general state of the given industry and the
methods of production prevailing in it, but as a participant in an
extensive enterprise that reflects the whole general revolutionary
attack upon the autocracy. And the more perfect the finish of
each little wheel will be, the larger the number of detail workers
working for the common cause, the closer will our network become
and the less consternation will inevitable police raids call forth in
the common ranks.

The mere function of distributing a newspaper will help to es-
tablish real contacts (that is, if it were a newspaper worthy of
the name, i. e., if it is issued regularly, not once a month like a big
magazine, but four times a month). At the present time, communi-
cation between cities on revolutionary business is an extreme rarity,
and at all events an exception rather than the rule. If we had a
newspaper, however, such communication would become the rule
and would secure, not only the distribution of the newspaper, of
course, but also (and what is more important) an interchange of

* A reservation: that.is, if a given circle sympathises with the policy of that
newspaper and considers it useful to become a collaborator, meaning by that,
not merely a literary collaborator but a revolutionary collaborator generally.
Note for Rabocheye Dyelo: among the revolutionists who attach value to
the cause and not to playing at democracy, who do not separate “sympathy”


from active and lively participation, this reservation is taken for granted.
1456


experience, of material, of forces and of resources. The scope
of organisational work would immediately become ever so much
wider and the success of a single locality would serve as a standing
encouragement to further perfection and a desire to utilise the ex-
perience gained by comrades working in other parts of the country.
Local work would become far richer and more varied than it is now:
political and economic exposures gathered from all over Russia
would provide mental food to the workers of all trades and in all
stages of development, would provide material and occasion for
talks and readings on the most diverse subjects, which indeed will
be suggested by hints in the legal press, by conversations among the
public and by shamefaced government communications. Every
outbreak, every demonstration, would be weighed and discussed
from all its aspects all over Russia; it would stimulate a desire not
to lag behind the rest, a desire to excel,—(we Socialists do not by
any means reject all rivalry or all “competition!”?)—and con-
sciously to prepare for that which at first appeared to spring up
spontaneously, a desire to take advantage of the favourable condi-
tions in a given district or at a given moment for modifying the
plan of attack, etc. At the same time, this revival of local work
would render superfluous that convulsive exertion of effort on the
part of all local workers, working as if in the “throes of death”
and the blunt invitation to join put to every one willing to perform
some service, as is often done to-day when organising every single
demonstration or publishing every single number of a local news-
paper. In the first place the police would find it much more diffi-
cult to dig down to the “roots” because they would not know in
what district to seek for them. Secondly, regular common work
would train our people to regulate the force of a given attack in
accordance with the strength of the forces of the given local detach-
ment of the army (at the present time no one ever thinks of doing
that because in nine cases out of ten these attacks occur spontane-
ously), and would facilitate the “transport”? from one place to
another, not only of literature, but also of revolutionary forces.

In the overwhelming majority of cases, these forces at the present
time shed their blood in the cause of restricted local work, but under
the circumstances we are discussing, occasions would constantly arise
for transferring a capable agitator or organiser from one end of
the country to the other. Beginning with short journeys on party


business at the party’s expense, our people would become accus-
157


tomed to live at the expense of the party, would become professional
revolutionists and would train themselves to become real political
leaders.

And if indeed we succeeded in reaching a point when all, or at
least a considerable majority of the local committees, local groups
and circles actively took up work for the common cause we could,
in the not distant future, establish a daily newspaper that would be
regularly distributed in tens of thousands of copies over the whole
of Russia. This newspaper would become a part of an enormous
pair of smith’s bellows that would blow every spark of class struggle
and popular indignation into a general conflagration. Around
what is in itself very innocent and very small, but in the full sense
of the word a regular and common cause, an army of tried war-
riors would systematically gather and receive their training. On
the ladders and scaffolding of this general organisational structure
there would soon ascend Social-Democratic Zhelyabovs from among
our revolutionists and Russian Bebels from among our workers who
would take their places at the head of the mobilised army and rouse
the whole people to settle accounts with the shame and the curse of
Russia. That is what we ought to be dreaming about!


“We ought to dream!” I wrote these words and then got scared.
It seemed to me that I was sitting at a “unity congress” and that
opposite me were the editors and contributors of Rabocheye
Dyelo. Comrade Martynov rises and turning to me says threaten-
ingly: “Permit me to enquire, has an autonomous editorial board
the right to dream without first obtaining permission of the party
committee?” He is followed by Comrade Krichevsky who (philo-
sophically deepening the words of Comrade Martynov who had long
ago deepened the words of Comrade Plekhanov) continues in the
same strain even more threateningly: “I go further. I ask, has a
Marxist any right at all to dream, knowing that according to Marx,
man always sets himself achievable tasks and that tactics is a process
of growth of tasks, which grow together with the party?”

The very thought of these menacing questions sends a cold shiver
down my back and makes me wish for nothing except a place to con-
ceal myself in. I will try to conceal myself behind the back of
Pisarev.

“There are differences and differences,” wrote Pisarev concerning the ques.


tion of the difference between dreams and reality. “My dream may run ahead
158


of the natural progress of events or may fly off at a tangent in a direction
to which no natural progress of events will ever proceed. In the first case
the dream will not cause any harm; it may even support and strengthen the
efforts of toiling humanity. There is nothing in such dreams that would distort
or paralyse labour power. On the contrary, if man were completely deprived
of the ability to dream in this way, if he could never run ahead and mentally
conceive in an entire and completed picture the results of the work he is only
just commencing, then I cannot imagine what stimulus there would be to
induce man to undertake and complete extensive and fatiguing work in the
sphere of art, science and practical work. . . . Divergence between dreams and
reality causes no harm if only the person dreaming believes seriously in his
dream, if he attentively observes life, compares his observations with the airy
castles he builds and if, generally speaking, he works conscientiously for the
achievement of his fantasies. If there is some connection between dreams and
life then all is well.


Now of this kind of dreaming there is unfortunately too little in
our movement. And those most responsible for this are the ones
who boast of their sober views, their “‘closeness” to the “concrete,”
i. e., the representatives of legal criticism and of illegal “khvostism.”


C. Wuat Type oF ORGANISATION Do WE REQUIRE?


From what has been said the reader will understand that our
“tactics plan” consists in rejecting an immediate call for the attack,
in demanding “a regular siege of the enemy fortress,” or in other
words, in demanding that all efforts be directed towards rallying,
organising and mobilising permanent troops. When we ridiculed
Rabocheye Dyelo for its leap from Economism to shouting for an
attack (in Listok Rabochevo Dyela, No. 6, April, 1901) it of course
hurled accusations against us of being “doctrinaire,” of failing to
understand our revolutionary duty, of calling for caution, etc. Of
course we were not surprised to hear these accusations coming from
those who totally lack balance and who evade all arguments by
references to a profound “tactics-process,” any more than we were
surprised by the fact that these accusations were repeated by Nadezh-
din who has a supreme contempt for durable programmes and tac-
tical bases.

It is said that history never repeats itself. But Nadezhdin is exert-
ing every effort to cause it to repeat itself and zealously imitates
Tkachev in strongly condemning “revolutionary culturism,” in
shouting about “sounding the tocsin” about a special “eve of the
revolution point-of-view,” etc. Apparently, he has forgotten the


well-known epigram which says: If an original historical event
159


represents a tragedy, the copy of it is only a farce. The attempt to
seize power, after the ground for the attempt had been prepared by
the preaching of Tkachev and carried out by means of the “terrify-
ing” terror which did really terrify was majestic, but the “ex-
citative” terror of a little Tkachev is simply ridiculous and is
particularly ridiculous when it is supplemented by the idea of an
organisation of average workers.

“If Iskra would only emerge from its sphere of literariness,”
wrote Nadezhdin, “it would realise that these [the working man’s
letter to Iskra No. 7, etc.] are symptoms of the fact that soon, very
soon the ‘attack’ will commence, and to talk now [sic!] about or-
ganisations linked up with an All-Russian newspaper is simply to
give utterance to armchair thoughts and to do armchair work.”
What unimaginable confusion this is: on the one hand excitative
terror and an “organisation of average workers” accompanied by
the opinion that it is “much easier” to gather around something
“more concrete” like a local newspaper,—-and on the other hand, to
talk “now” about an All-Russian organisation means to give ut-
terance to armchair thoughts, or, to speak more frankly and simply,
“Now” is already too late! But what about “the extensive organi-
sation of local newspapers,”— is it not too late for that my dear L.
Nadezhdin? And compare this with Iskra’s point-of-view and tac-
tics: excitative terror—is nonsense; to talk about an organisation
of averagé workers and about the extensive organisation of local
newspapers means to open the door wide for Economism. We must
speak about a single All-Russian organisation of revolutionists and
it will never be too late to talk about that until the real, and not the
paper attack, commences.


Yes, as far as our situation in regard to organisation is concerned, it is far
from brilliant, continues Nadezhin. Yes, Iskra is absolutely right when it says
that the mass of our military forces consist of volunteers and insurgents. .. .
You do very well in thus soberly presenting the state of our forces. But why
in doing so do you forget that the crowd is not ours and, consequently, it wili
not ask us when to commence military operations, it will simply go and
“rebel.” . . . When the crowd itself breaks out with its elemental destructive
force it may overwhelm and crush the “regular troops” to which all may have
rallied but which had not managed in time to establish itself as an extremely
systematic organisation. [Our italics.]


Astonishing logic! Precisely because the “crowd is not ours,”
it is stupid and reprehensible to call for an “attack” this very min-


ute, because an attack must be made by permanent troops and not
160


by a spontaneous outburst of the crowd. It is precisely because the
crowd may overwhelm and crush permanent troops that we must
without fail “manage” to keep up with the spontaneous rise of the
masses in our work of “establishing an extremely systematic or-
ganisation” among the permanent troops, for the more we “manage”
to establish such an organisation the more probable will it be that
the permanent troops will not be overwhelmed by the crowd, but
will take their place at the head of the crowd. Nadezhdin drops
into confusion because he imagines that these systematically or-
ganised troops are engaged in something that isolates them from the
crowd, when as a matter of fact they are engaged exclusively in all-
sided and all-embracing political agitation, i. e., precisely in work
that brings them into closer proximity and merges the elemental
destructive force of the crowd with the conscious destructive force
of the organisation of revolutionists. You gentlemen merely wish
to throw the blame for your sins on the shoulders of others. For
it is precisely the Svoboda group that includes terror in its pro-
gramme and by that calls for an organisation of terrorists, and such
an organisation would really prevent our troops from coming into
proximity with the crowd which, unfortunately, is still not ours,
and which unfortunately, does not yet ask us, or rarely asks us when
and how to commence military operations.

“We will overlook the revolution itself,” continues Nadezhdin
in his effort to scare Iskra, “in the same way as we overlooked re-
cent events which hurled themselves upon us like a bolt from the
blue.” This sentence together with the one quoted above clearly
demonstrates the absurdity of the “eve of the revolution point-of-
view” invented by Svoboda.* To speak frankly, this special point-
of-view” amounts to this that it is too late “now” to discuss and
prepare. If that is the case, oh most worthy opponent of “literari-
ness,” what was the use of writing a pamphlet of 132 pages on
“Questions of Theory and Tactics’? ** Don’t you think that it


* “The Eve of the Revolution,” p. 62.

**In his Review of Questions of Theory, L. Nadezhdin made almost no
contribution whatever to the discussion of questions of theory apart perhaps
from the following passage which appears to be a very peculiar one from the
“eve of the revolution point-of-view”: “Bernsteinism, on the whole, is losing
its acuteness for us at the present moment, as also is the question as to
whether Mr. Adamovich has proved that Mr. Struve has already deserved
dismissal or on the contrary whether Mr. Struve will refute Mr. Adamovich
and will refuse to resign—it really makes no difference, because the hour of
the revolution has struck” [p. 110]. One can hardly imagine a more striking

361


would have been more becoming for the “eve of the revolution
point-of-view” to have issued 132,000 leaflets containing the brief
appeal: “Kill them!”?

Those who place national political agitation as the cornerstone
of their programme, their tactics and their organisational work as
Iskra does, stand the least risk of overlooking the revolution. The
people who were engaged over the whole of Russia in weaving a
network of organisations to be linked up with an All-Russian news-
paper not only did not overlook the spring events, but on the con-
trary, they enabled us to foretell them. Nor did they overlook the
demonstrations that were described in Jskra, Nos. 13 and 14:
on the contrary, they took part in those demonstrations, clearly
appreciating their duty to come to the aid of the spontaneously
rising crowd and while rendering aid, at the same time, through the
medium of the newspaper, to make closer acquaintance with these
demonstrations and to place their experience at the disposal of all
Russian comrades. And if they live they will not overlook the revolu-
tion which first and foremost will demand of us experience in agita-
tion, ability to support (in a Social-Democratic manner) every
protest and ability to direct the spontaneous movements, and to
guard them from the mistakes of friends and the traps of enemies!

This brings us to the final argument that compels us to insist
particularly upon a plan of organisation that shall be centred
around an All-Russian newspaper to be brought about by means of
joint work for the establishment of a common newspaper. Only
such an organisation will secure flexibility necessary for the Social-
Democratic militant organisation, i. e., an ability to adapt itself im-
mediately to the most diverse and rapidly changing conditions of
struggle, an ability to “renounce an open fight against overwhelming
and concentrated forces, and yet capable of taking advantage of the
awkwardness and immobility of the enemy and attack at a time
and place where he least expects attack.” * It would be a
illustration of L. Nadezhdin’s infinite disregard for theory. We have proclaimed
“the eve of the revolution”—therefore “it really makes no difference” whether
the orthodox Marxists will succeed in driving the critics from their positions
or not!! And our wiseacre fails to see that it is precisely in the time
of revolution that we stand in need of the results of our theoretical combats
with the critics in order to be able resolutely to combat their practical
positions!

* Iskra, No. 4, “Where to Begin.” “Revolutionary culturists who do not
accept the eve of the revolution point-of-view, are not in the least disturbed


by the prospect of working for a long period of time,” writes Nadezhdin
162


grievous error indeed to build up the party organisation in the ex-
pectation only of outbreaks and street fighting, or only upon the
“forward march of the drab, every-day struggle.” We must always
carry on our every-day work and always be prepared for every-
thing, because very frequently, it is almost impossible to foresee
beforehand when periods of outbreaks will give way to periods of
calm. And even in those cases when it is possible te do so, it will
not be possible to utilise this foresight for the purpose of recon-
structing our organisation, because in an autocratic country these
changes from turmoil to calm take place with astonishing rapidity
and are sometimes due merely to a single night raid by the tsarist
janizaries. And the revolution itself must not by any means be
regarded as a single act (as Nadezhdin apparently imagines) but as
a series of more or less powerful outbreaks rapidly alternating with
more or less intense calm. For that reason, the principal content
of the activity of our party organisation, the “trick” of this activity
should be, to carry on work that is possible and necessary both in
the period of the most powerful outbreaks as well as in periods
of complete calm, that is to say: work of political agitation linked
up over the whole of Russia, that will enlighten all aspects of life
and will be carried on among the broadest possible strata of the
masses. But this work cannot possibly be carried on in contem-
porary Russia without an All-Russian newspaper, issued very fre-
quently. An organisation that is built up around this newspaper, an
organisation of collaborators of this paper (collaborators in the
broad sense of the word, i. e., all those working for it) will be ready
for everything, from protecting the honour, the prestige, and con-
tinuity of the party in periods of acute revolutionary “depression”
to preparing for, commencing and carrying out the national armed
insurrection.

Indeed, picture to yourselves a very ordinary occurrence with us,


[p. 62]. On this we shall observe: unless we are able to devise political
tactics and an organisational plan based precisely upon calculations for work
over a long period of time and at the same time, in the very process of this
work, put our party into readiness to spring to its post and fulfil its duty at
the very first, even unexpected, call, as soon as the progress of events becomes
accelerated, we will prove to be but miserable political adventurers. Only
Nadezhdin, who only yesterday began to describe himself as a Social-Democrat,
can forget that the aim of Social-Democracy is radically to transform the
conditions of life of the whole of humanity and that for that reason it is not
permissible for Social-Democrats to be “disturbed” by the question of the
duration of the work.
168


—the complete discovery and arrest of our organisation in one or
several localities. In view of the fact that all the local organisa-
tions lack a single, common regular task, such raids frequently re-
sult in the interruption of our work for many months. If, however,
all the local organisations had one common task, then, in the event
of a serious raid, two or three energetic persons could in the course
of a few weeks establish new youth circles, which, as is well known,
spring up very quickly even now, and link them up with the centre,
and when this common task, which has been interrupted by the raid,
is apparent to all, the new circles could spring up and link them-
selves up with it even more rapidly.

On the other hand, picture to yourselves a popular uprising.
Probably every one will now agree that we must think of this up-
rising and prepare for it. But how to prepare for it? Surely the
Central Committee cannot appoint agents to go to all the districts
for the purpose of preparing for the uprising! Even if we had a
Central Committee it could achieve nothing by making such appoint-
ments considering the conditions prevailing in contemporary Russia.
On the contrary, a network of agents * that would automatically be
created in the course of establishing and distributing a common
newspaper would not have to “sit around and wait” for the call to
rebellion, but would carry on the regular work that would guaran-
tee the highest probability of success in the event of a rebellion.
Such work would strengthen our contacts with the broadest strata
of the masses of the workers and with all those strata who are dis-
contented with the autocracy and who are so important to have in
the event of an uprising. It is precisely such work that would help
to cultivate the ability properly to estimate the general political
situation and consequently, the ability to select the proper moment
for the uprising. It is precisely such work that would train all
local organisations to respond simultaneously to the same political


* Alas, alas! Again I have I2t slip that awful word “agents” which jars so
awfully on the democratic ear. of Martynov! I wonder why this word did
not offend the sensibilities of the heroes ot the seventies and yet offends the
amateurs of the nineties? I like the word, because it clearly and distinctly
indicates the common cause to which all the agents bend their thoughts and
actions and if I had to replace this word by another, the only word I would
select would be the word “collaborator” if it did not suggest literariness and
diffusiveness. The thing we need is a militant organism of agents. The
numerous (particularly abroad) Martynovs whose favourite pastime is “‘play-
ing at generals” may instead of saying “passport agent” prefer to say, “Chief
of the Special Department for Supplying Revoluiionists with Passports,” etc.

164


questions, incidents and events that excite the whole of Russia, to
react to these “events” in the most vigorous, uniform and expedient
manner possible; for is not rebellion in essence the most vigorous,
most uniform and most expedient “reaction” of the whole people to
the conduct of the government? And finally, such work would
train all revolutionary organisations all over Russia to maintain
the most continuous and at the same time the most secret contact
with each other, which will create real Party unity,—for without
such contacts it will be impossible collectively to discuss the plan
of rebellion and to take the necessary preparatory measures on the
eve of it, which must be kept in the strictest secrecy.

In a word, the “plan for an All-Russian political newspaper”
does not represent the fruits of the work of armchair workers, in-
fected with dogmatism and literariness (as it seemed to those who
failed to study it properly), on the contrary it is a practical plan
to commence immediately to prepare on all sides for the uprising,
while at the same time never for a moment forgetting the ordinary,
every-day work,


165


CONCLUSION


Tue history of Russian Social-Democracy can be divided into
three distinct periods:

The first period covers about ten years, approximately the years
1884 to 1894. This was the period when the theory and the pro-
gramme of Social-Democracy germinated and took root. The num-
ber of adherents to the new tendency in Russia could be counted in
units. Social-Democracy existed without a labour movement; it was,
as it were, in its period of gestation.

The second period covers three or four years—1894-1898. In this
period Social-Democracy appeared in the world as a social move-
ment, as the rising of the masses of the people, as a political party.
This is the period of its infancy and adolescence. Social-Democratic
ideas spread among the intelligentsia like an epidemic and they
became entirely absorbed in the fight against Populism, in going
among the workers, and the latter, in their turn, were entirely ab-
sorbed in fomenting strikes. The movement made enormous strides.
The majority of the leaders were very young people who had by no
means reached the “age of thirty-five,” which to N. Mikhailovsky
appears to be a sort of natural borderline. Owing to their youth,
they proved to be untrained for practical work and they left the
scene with astonishing rapidity. But in the majority of cases the
scope of their work was extremely wide. Many of them began their
revolutionary thinking as Narodovolists. Nearly all of them
in their early youth enthusiastically worshipped the terrorist heroes.
It was a great wrench to abandon the captivating impressions of
these heroic traditions and it was accompanied by the breaking off
of personal relationships with people who were determined to
remain loyal to Narodnaya Volya and for whom the young Social-
Democrats had profound respect. The struggle compelled them to
educate themselves, to read the illegal literature of all tendencies
and to study closely the questions of legal Populism. Trained in
this struggle, Social-Democrats went into the labour movement
without “for a moment” forgetting the theories of Marxism which
illumined their path or the task of overthrowing the autocracy. The


formation of the party in the spring of 1898 was the most striking
166


and at the same time the last act of the Social-Democrats in this
period.

The third period, as we have seen, began in 1897 and definitely
replaced the second period in 1898 (1898—?). This was the period
of confusion, disintegration, and vacillation. In the period of
adolescence the youth’s voice breaks. The voice of Russian Social-
Democracy in this period began to break, began to strike a false
note—on the one hand, in the productions of Messrs. Struve and
Prokopovich, Bulgakov and Berdyaev, on the other hand in the
productions of V. I-na and R. M., B. Krichevsky and Martynov.
But it was only the leaders who wandered from the path; the move-
ment itself continued to grow and advanced by enormous strides.
The proletarian struggle spread to new strata of the workers over
the whole of Russia and at the same time indirectly stimulated the
revival of the democratic spirit among the students and among other
strata of the population. The consciousness of the leaders, however,
shrank before the breadth and power of the spontaneous rising;
among Social-Democrats, a different streak predominated—a streak
of party workers who had been trained almost exclusively on “legal”
Marxian literature, and the more the spontaneity of the masses called
for consciousness, the more they lacked consciousness. The leaders
not only lagged behind in regard to theory (“freedom of criticism”)
and practice (“primitiveness”) but even tried to justify their back-
wardness by all sorts of high-flown arguments. Social-Democracy
was degraded to the level of trade unionism in legal literature by
the Brentanoists and in illegal literature by the Khvostists. The
programme of the Credo began to be put into operation, especially
when the “primitiveness” of the Social-Democrats caused a revival
of non-Social-Democratic revolutionary tendencies.

And if the reader reproaches me for having dealt in excessive
detail with Rabocheye Dyelo, I will say to him in reply: Rabocheye
Dyelo acquired “historical” significance because it most strikingly
reflected the “spirit” of this third period.* It was not the consistent
R. M. but the weathercock Krichevskys and Martynovs who could
properly express the confusion and vacillation, and the readiness to

*T could also reply in the German proverb: Den Sack schaégt man, den
Esel meint man. It was not Rabocheye Dyelo alone that was carried away
by the fashion of “criticism” but also the masses of practical workers and
theoreticians; they became confused over the question of spontaneity and


. slipped from the Social-Democratic to the trade-union conception of our politi-


cal and organisational tasks,
167


make concessions to “criticism,” to Economism and to terrorism.
It is not the lofty contempt for practical work displayed by the
worshippers of the “absolute” that is characteristic of this period,
but the combination of pettifogging practice and utter disregard for
theory. It was not so much the downright rejection of “grand
phrases” that the heroes of this period engaged in as in their
vulgarisation: Scientific Socialism ceased to be a complete revolu-
tionary theory and became a petty-bourgeois idea “freely” diluted
with the contents of every new German textbook that appeared; the
slogan “class struggle” did not impel them forward to wider and
more strenuous activity but served as a soothing syrup, because
(sic!) the “economic struggle is inseparably linked up with the
political struggle”; the idea of a party did not serve as a call for
the creation of a militant organisation of revolutionists, but was
used to justify some sort of a “revolutionary bureaucracy”’ and in-
fantile playing at “democracy.”

When this third period will come to an end and the fourth period
will commence, we do not know (at all events it is already heralded
by many symptoms). Just now we are passing from the sphere of
history into the sphere of the present and partly into the sphere of
the future. But we firmly believe that the fourth period will see
the consolidation of militant Marxism, that Russian Social-Democ-
racy will emerge from the crisis in the full strength of manhood,
that a “new guard” will arise, that instead of the present rear-guard
of opportunists, we will have a genuine vanguard of the most revo-
lutionary class.

In the sense of calling for such a “new guard” and summing up
as it were all that has been expounded above, my reply to the ques-
tion: “What is to be done?” can be put briefly: Liquidate the Third
Period.


APPENDIX
THE ATTEMPT TO UNITE ISKRA WITH RABOCHEYE DYELO


Ir remains for us to describe the organisational tactics Jskra
adopted towards Rabocheye Dyelo. These tactics have been already
fully expressed in /skra, No. 1, in an article entitled “The Split in
the League of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad.” * From the out-
set we adopted the point-of-view that the real League of Russian
Social-Democrats Abroad, which at the first congress of our party
was recognised as the party’s representative abroad, had split into
two organisations;—that the question of the party’s representation
remains an open one and that the settlement reached at the Inter-
national Congress at Paris by the election of two members to repre-
sent Russia on the International Socialist Bureau, one from each of
the two sections of the divided League, was only a temporary and
conditional settlement. We declared that on essentials Rabocheye
Dyelo was wrong; in principie we emphatically took the side of
the Emancipation of Labour group, but at the same time we refused
to enter into the details of the split and noted the services rendered
by the League in the sphere of purely practical work.**

Consequently, ours was, to a certain extent, a waiting policy; we
made a concession te the opinion prevailing among the majority
of the Russian Social. Democrats that the most determined opponents
of Economism could work hand in hand with the “League” because,
it was said, the “League” has frequently declared its agreement in
principle with the Emancipation of Labour group and that it did
not claim an independent position on fundamental questions of
theory and tactics. The correctness of the position we took up has
been proved indirectly by the fact that almost simultaneously with
the publication of the first number of Iskra [December, 1900] three
members separated from the League and formed the so-called
“Group of Initiators” and offered their services: 1. To the foreign
section of the /skra organisation; 2. To the Revolutionary Social-

* See article of the same title, The Iskra Period, Book I, p. 65—Ed.

** Our opinion of the split was based not only upon a perusal of the litera-


ture on the subject but also on information gathered by several members of


our organisation who had been abroad.
169


Democrat Organisation; and 3. To the “League” as mediators in
negotiations for reconciliation. It is true that when a speaker re-
lated these facts at the “Unity” Congress last year, a member of
the Management Committee of the “League” declared that their
rejection of the offer was due entirely to the fact that the League
was dissatisfied with the composition of the Initiators’ group. While
I consider it my duty to quote this explanation I cannot, however,
refrain from observing that the explanation is an unsatisfactory
one; knowing that two organisations had agreed to enter into nego-
tiations, the “League” could have approached them through other
intermediaries, or directly.

In the spring of 1901 both Zarya [No. 1, April] and Iskra
[No. 4, May] entered into open polemics with Rabocheye Dyelo.
Iskra particularly attacked the “historical turn” taken by Rabocheye
Dyelo which, in its April supplement, and’ consequently after the
spring events, revealed instability in regard to terror, and the cails
for “blood,” with which many had been carried away at the time.
Notwithstanding these polemics, the “League” agreed to the resump-
tion of negotiations for reconciliation through the mediation of a
new group of “conciliators.” A preliminary conference of rep-
resentatives of the three organisations named above took place in
June at which a draft agreement was drawn up on the basis of a
detailed “agreement on principles” that was published by the
“League” in the pamphlet Two Congresses and by the League in the
pamphlet entitled Documents of the Unity Congress.*

The contents of this agreement on principles (or as it is more
frequently named, the Resolutions of the June Conference), clearly
shows that we put forward as an absolute condition for unity the
most emphatic repudiation of all manifestations of opportunism
generally and of Russian opportunism in particular. Paragraph 1
reads: “We repudiate every attempt to introduce opportunism into
the proletarian class struggle—attempts which are expressed in so-
called Economism, Bernsteinism, Millerandism, etc.” “The sphere
of Social-Democratic activities include . . . intellectual struggle
against all opponents of revolutionary Marxism” [4, C]; “In every

* The “League,” in quotation marks, is the section of the League of Russian
Social-Democrats Abroad that supported Rabocheye Dyelo, and the League,
without quotation marks, is that section which supported Iskra. In the Rus-
sian text the former is described as the “Soyus,” which means League, and


the latter as “Liga,” and in this way the two sections were distinguished from


one another.—Ed.
170


sphere of organisational and agitational activity Social-Democracy
must not for a moment forget that the immediate task of the Russian
proletariat is—to overthrow the autocracy” [5, A]; “. . . agita-
tion, not only on the basis of the every-day struggle between wage
labour and capital” [5, B]; “. . . not recognising . . . stages of
purely economic struggles and of struggles for partial political de-
mands” [5, C]; “. . . we consider important for the movement criti-
cism of the tendency which elevates primitiveness ... and re-
strictedness of the lower forms of the movement into a principle”
[5, C-D]. Even a complete outsider, who has read these resdlutions
at all attentively, will have realised from the very way in which they
are formulated that they are directed against those who are oppor-
tunists and Economists, against those who, even for a moment, forget
about the task of overthrowing the autocracy, who recognise the
theory of stages, who have elevated narrowness to a principle, etc.
And any one who has any acquaintance at all with the polemics
conducted by the Emancipation of Labour group, Zarya and Iskra
against Rabocheye Dyelo, cannot but be convinced that these reso-
lutions repudiate point by point the very errors into which Rabo-
cheye Dyelo had wandered. Consequently, when one of the members
of the “League” declared at the “Unity” Congress that the articles
in No. 10 of Rabocheye Dyelo were prompted, not by a new “histori-
cal turn” on the part of the “League,” but by the fact that the resolu-
tions were too “abstract,” * this assertion was quite justly ridiculed
by one of the speakers. The resolutions are not abstract in the
least, he said, they are incredibly concrete: a single glance at them
is sufficient to see that there is a “catch” in this.

The latter remark served as the occasion for a characteristic epi-
sode at the congress. On the one hand, B. Krichevsky seized upon
the word “catch” in the belief that this was a slip of the tongue
which betrayed our evil intentions (“To set a trap”) and pathetically
exclaimed: “A catch, for whom?” “Yes, indeed, for whom?”—
Plekhanov rejoined sarcastically. “I will stimulate Comrade Ple-
khanov’s perspicacity,” replied B. Krichevsky, “I will explain to him
that the trap was set for the editorial board of Rabocheye Dyelo
(general laughter), “but we have not allowed ourselves to be
caught!” (A remark from the left: all the worse for you!) On ithe
other hand, a member of the Borba group (the conciliators), in
opposing the “League’s” amendment to the resolution and wishing


* This expression is repeated in Two Congresses, p. 25.
171


to defend our speaker, declared that obviously the word “catch”
was dropped in the heat of polemics.

For my part, I think the speaker responsible for uttering the word
under discussion was not at all pleased with this “defence.” I think
’ the word “catch” was a “true word spoken in jest”: We have
always accused Rabocheye Dyelo of instability and vacillation and,
naturally, we had to try to catch it in order to put a stop to this
vacillation. There is not the slightest suggestion of evil intent in
this, for we were discussing instability of principles. And we suc-
ceeded in “catching” the “League” in such a comradely manner *
that B. Krichevsky himself and one other member of the Managing
Committee of the “League” signed the June resolutions.

The articles in Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10 (our comrades saw this
number for the first time when they arrived at the congress, a few
days before the meetings started), clearly showed that the “League”
had taken a new turn in the period between the summer and the
autumn: the Economists had again got the upper hand on the edi-
torial board, which turned with every “wind,” and the board again
defended “the most pronounced Bernsteinists,” “freedom of criti-
cism” and “spontaneity,” and through the mouth of Martynov began
to preach the “theory of restricting” the sphere of our political in-
fluence (for the alleged purpose of making this influence more
complex). Once again Parvus’ apt observation that it was difficult
to catch an opportunist with a formula was proved correct. An
opportunist will put his name to any formula and as readily aban-
don it, because opportunism is precisely a lack of definite and firm
principles. To-day, the opportunists have repudiated all attempts
to introduce opportunism, repudiated all narrowness, solemnly
promised “never for a moment to forget about the task of over-
throwing the autocracy,” to carry on “agitation not only on the


* Precisely: In the introduction to the June resolutions we said that Rus-
sian Social-Democracy as a whole always took its stand on the basis of the
principles of the Emancipation of Labour group and that the “League’s”
merit lay particularly in its publishing and organising activity. In other
words, we expressed our complete readiness to forget the past and to recognise
the usefulness (for the cause) of the work of our comrades of the “League”
on the condition that it completely ceased the vacillation which we tried to
“catch.” Any impartial person reading the June resolutions will so interpret
them. If, now the “League” after having caused a split by its new turn
towards Economism (in its articles in No. 10 and in the amendments), solemnly
accuses us of prevaricating [Two Congresses, p. 30] because of what we
said about its merits, then, of course, such an accusation can only raise
a smile.

172


basis of the every-day struggle between wage labour and capital,”
etc., etc. But to-morrow they will change their form of expression
and revert to their old tricks on the pretext of defending spontaneity
and the forward march of the drab every-day struggle, of proclaim-
ing demands promising palpable results, ete. By asserting that in
the articles in No. 10 “the ‘League’ did not and does not now see any
heretical departure from the general principles of the draft adopted
at the conference” [Two Congresses, p. 26], the “League” reveals a
complete lack of ability, or a lack of desire, to understand the essen-
tial points of the disagreements. ¥
After the appearance of Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10, only one thing
remained for us to do and that was to open a general discussion in
order to ascertain whether all the members of the “League” agree
with these articles and with its editorial board. The “League” is
particularly displeased with us because of this and accuses us of
sowing discord in the “League,” of not minding our own business,
etc. These accusations are obviously unfounded because with an
elected board which “turns” with every breeze, everything depends
precisely upon the direction of the wind, and we defined the direc-
tion of the wind at private meetings at which no one, except mem-
bers of the organisations who had gathered together for the purpose
of uniting, were present. The amendments to the June resolutions
submitted in the name of the “League” have removed the last
shadow of a hope of an agreement. The amendments are docu-
mentary evidence of the new turn towards Economism and of the
fact that the majority of the members of the “League” are in agree.
ment with Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10. Amendments were moved to
delete the words “so-called Economism” from the reference in the
resolution to manifestations of opportunism (on the pretext that
“the sense” of these three words “was vague”—but if that were so,
all that was required was a more precise definition of the nature of
a widespread error), and to delete “Millerandism” (although B.
Krichevsky defended it in Rabocheye Dyelo, Nos. 2 and 3, pp. 83-84,
and still more openly in the Vorwdris).* Notwithstanding the fact
that the June resolutions definitely indicated the tasks of Social-
Democracy, viz., “to guide every manifestation of the proletarian
struggle against all forms of political, economic and social oppres-


* A controversy over this subject had started in the Vorwdarts between its
present editor, Kautsky, and the editorial board of Zarya. We shall not fail
to acquaint the reader with the nature of this controversy.

173


sion,” and by that called for the introduction of system and unity
in all these manifestations of the struggle, the “League” added the
absolutely superfluous sentence to the effect that “the economic
struggle is a. powerful stimulus to the mass movement” (taken by
itself, this assertion cannot be disputed, but in view of the existence
of narrow Economism it cannot but give occasion for false interpre-
tations). More than that, the restriction of “politics” was intro-
duced into the June resolution by the deletion of the words “not
for a moment” (forget the aim of overthrowing the autocracy) as
well as by the addition of the words “the economic struggle is the
most widely applicable means of drawing the masses into active po-
litical struggle. It is quite understandable that after such amend-
ments had been introduced all the speakers on our side should one
after another refuse to take the floor on the ground that further
negotiations with people who were again turning towards Econo-
mism and who were striving to secure for themselves freedom of
vacillation were useless.

“Tt was precisely the fact that the ‘League’ regarded the preserva-
tion of the independent features and the autonomy of Rabocheye
Dyelo as the sine qua non of the durability of our future agreement,
that Iskra regarded as the rock upon which our agreement fell to
pieces” [Two Congresses, p. 25]. This is very inexact. We never
had any designs against Rabocheye Dyelo’s autonomy.* We did
indeed absolutely refuse to recognise the independence of its fea-
tures, if by “independent features” is meant independence on ques-
tions of principle regarding theory and practice: The June resolu-
tions did indeed absolutely repudiate swch independence of features
because, in practice, such “independent features” meant, as we have
said already, vacillation and support for the vacillations that now
prevail among us, and the intolerable confusion that reigns in party
affairs. Rabocheye Dyelo’s articles in its issue No. 10, and its
“amendments” clearly revealed its desire to preserve precisely this
kind of independence of features, and such a desire naturally and
inevitably led to a rupture and a declaration of war. But we were
all ready to recognise Rabocheye Dyelo’s “independent features” in
the sense that it should concentrate on definite literary functions. A

* That is if the editorial consultations that were proposed in connection
with the establishment of a joint supreme council of the combined organisa-
tions are not to be regarded as a restriction of autonomy. But in June


Rabocheye Dyelo agreed to this.
174


proper distribution of functions naturally called for: (1) A scien-
tific magazine, (2) a political newspaper, and (3) a popular sym-
posium of articles and popular pamphlets. Only by agreeing to
such a distribution of functions would Rabocheye Dyelo have proved
that it sincerely desired to abandon once and for all its erring ways
against which the June resolutions were directed. Only such a dis-
tribution of functions would have removed all possibility of friction
and would have guaranteed a durable agreement which would at
the same time have served as a basis for a fresh revival and new
successes of our movement.

Not a single Russian Social-Democrat can have any doubts now
about the fact that the final rupture between the revolutionary and
opportunist tendencies was brought about, not by any “organisa-
tional” circumstances, but by the desire of the opportunists to per-
petuate the independent features of opportunism and to continue to


cause confusion of mind by arguments like those advanced by
the Krichevskys and Martynovs.


175


CORRECTION TO WHAT IS TO BE DONE


Tue Group of Initiators, to whom I referred in the pamphlet
What Is To Be Done?,* have asked me to make the following cor-
rection to my description of the part they played in the attempt to
reconcile the Social-Democratic organisations abroad:


Of the three members of this group only one left the “League” at the end
of 1900; the others left in 1901, only after they had become convinced that it
was impossible to obtain the “League’s” consent to a conference with the
foreign organisations of Jskra and the Revolutionary Social-Democrat Organisa-
tion, which is what the Group of Initiators had proposed. First of all, the
Managing Committee of the “League” rejected the proposal for a conference
on the ground that the persons making up the Group of Initiators were not
“competent” to act as mediators and for that reason it at that time expressed
the desire to enter into direct contact with the Iskra organisation abroad.
Soon after, however, the Managing Committee of the “League” informed the
Group of Initiators that after the appearance of the first number of Jskra
containing the report of the split in the “League,” it had altered its decision
and no longer desired to have communication with Jskra. After this, how can
one explain the statement made by a member of the Managing Committee of
the “League” that the “League’s” rejection of a conference was called forth
entirely by its dissatisfaction with the composition of the Group of Initiators?
It is true that it is equally difficult to explain why the Managing Committee of
the “League” agreed to a conference in June last; for the remarks contained
in the first issue of Jskra still remained in force and Iskra’s “hostility”
to the “League” was still more strongly expressed in the first volume of


Zarya and in No. 4 of Iskra, both of which appeared prior to the June con:
ference.


Iskra, No. 18, April 1, 1902.


* See p. 169.—Ed.


THE END


