Essays and Dialogues (Giacomo Leopardi, 1893)
==========================================================
The great Italian pessimist's prose — the Operette morali in the classic English selection. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (cu31924027704877).

CORNELL 

jUNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


PRINTED IN U.S.A. 


Cornell University 
Library 


The original of tliis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924027704877 


PQ4709.E°5AS"te"^'-»-ary 


Essai 


THE 

ENGLISH AND FOREIGN PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY. 


Philosophical Inquiry is essentially the chief intellectual study 
of our age. It is proposed to produce, under the title of " The 
English and Foreign Philosophical Library," a series of 
works of the highest class connected with that study. 

The English contributions to the series consist of original 
works, and of occasional new editions of such productions as 
have already attained a permanent rank among the philosophical 
writings of the day. 

Beyond the productions of English writers, there are many 
recent publications in German and French which are not readily 
accessible to English readers, unless they are competent German 
and French scholars. Of these foreign writings, the translations 
have been entrusted to gentlemen whose names will be a guaran- 
tee for their critical fidelity. 

" The English and Foreign Philosophical Library" claims 
to be free from all bias, and thus fairly to represent all develop- 
ments of Philosophy, from Spinoza to Hartmann, from Leibnitz- 
to Lotze. Each original work is produced under the inspection 
of its author, from his manuscript, without intermediate sugges- 
tions or alterations. As corollaries, works showing the results 
of Positive Science, occasionally, though seldom, find a place in 
the series. 

The series is elegantly printed in octavo,, and the price regu- 
lated by the extent of each volume. The volumes will follow in 
succession, at no fixed periods, but as early as is consistent with 
the necessary care in their production. 


THE FOLLOWING HAVE ALREADY APPEARED:— 

Vols. I.-III.] In Three Volumes, post 8vo, pp. 350, 406, and 384, with 
Index, cloth, £1, 1 is. 6d. 

A HISTOBY OF MATERIALISM. 

By Professor F. A. IiAITGE. 

Authorised Translation from the German by Ernest C. Thomas. 

" This is a work which has long and impatiently been expected by a large circle of 
leaders. It has been well praised by two eminent scientists, and their words have 
created for it, as regards its appearance in our English tongue, a sort of ante-natal 
reputation. The reputation is in many respects well deserved. The book is marked 
throughout by singular ability, abounds In striking and suggestive reflections, subtle 
and profound discussions, felicitous and graphic descriptions of mental and social move- 
ments, both in themselves and in their mutual relations." — Scotsman. 


THE ENGLISH AND FOREIGN PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY. 


"Although it is only a few years sinee Lange's book was ""SmaUy published it 
already rank! as a classic in the philosophical iteratm-e of Germany .So far ?? he has 
proceeded, Mr. Thomas has done his work with great spirit and mteUigenoe We have 
tested the translation at different points, and have always found that it reflects the 
original freely and accurately. "—PaiJil^aiiiTaaeJie. ,_,,., . ., m j„ ,„j.„^ f„^ 

"We see no reason for not endorsing the translator's 'judgment, that it is raised far 
above the level of ordinary controversial writmg by its thoroughness, comprehensiveness, 
and impartiality."— ftmiempwary Bsmw. 


Vol. IV.] Post 8vo, pp. xii.— 362, cloth, los. 6d. 

NATURAL LAW : An Essay in Ethics. 

By EDITH SIMCOX. 

Second Edition. 

" Miss Simcox deserves cordial recognition for the excellent work she has done in 
vindication of naturalism, and especially for the high nobility of her ethical purpose." — 
Aihe.noiU'm. 

" A book which for the rest is a mine of suggestion. " — Acade^iy, 
" This thoughtfiil and able work is in many respects the most important contribution 
yet made to the ethics of the evolution theory." — Mivd. 


Vols. V, VI.] In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. 268 and 288, cloth, 153. 
THE CREED OF CHRISTENDOM: 

ITS FOUNDATIONS CONTRASTED WITH ITS SUPEESTEUCTURE. 
By W. E. GRBG. 

Sixth Edition, with a New Introduction. 

" No candid reader of the ' Creed of Christendom ' can close the book without the 
secret acknowledgment that it is a model of honest investigation and clear exposition, 
conceived in the true spirit of serious and faithful research." — Westminster Review. 

"This work remains a monument of his industry, his high literary power, his clear 
intellect, and his resolute desire to arrive at the truth. In its present shape, with its 
new introduction, it will be still more widely read, and more warmly welcomed by those 
who believe that in a contest between Truth and Error, Truth never can be worsted." — 
Scotsman. 


Vol. VII.] Second Edition. Post 8vo, pp. xix. — 249, cloth, 7s. 6d, 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF RELIGION 

TO THE SPEEAD OF THE UNIVEE8AL EBLIGI0N8. 

By O. P. TIBLB, 
Dr. Theol., Professor of the History of Eeligions in the University of Leiden. 

Translated from the Dutch by J. EsTLiN Caepehtbe, M.A. 

' ' Few books of its size contain the result of so much wide thmking, able and laborious 
study, or enable the reader to gain a better bird's-eye view of the latest results of inves- 
ligations into the religious history of nations. As Professor Tiele modestly says, ' In this 
little book are outliues — pencil sketches, I might say — nothing more.' But there are 
some men whose sketches from a thumb-nail are of far more worth than an enormous 
canvas covered with the crude painting of others, and it is easy to see that these pages, 
full of information, these sentences, cut and perhaps also dry, short and clear, condense 
the fruits of long and thorough research." — Scotsmtm. 


THE ENGLISH AND FOREIGN PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY. 

Vol. VIII.] Post 8vo, pp. 276, cloth, 7s. 6d. 

RELIGION IN CHINA: 

Containing a Brief Account of the Three Religions of the Chinese, with 

Observations on the Prospects of Christian Conversion 

amongst that People. 

By JOSEPH BDKINS. D.D.. Peking. 

**We confidently recommend a careful perusal of tlie present work to all interested 
in this great subject." — London and China Express. 

"Dr. Edkins has been most careful in noting the varied and often complex phases of 
opinion, so as to give an account of considerable value of the subject." — Scotsman. 


Vol. IX.] Post 8vo, pp. xviii. — 198, cloth, 7s. 6d, 

A CANDID EXAMINATION OF THEISM. 

By PHYSICUS. 

" An essay of marked ability that does not belie its title." — Mind. 

'* On the whole a candid, acute, and honest attempt to work out a problem which is 
of vast and perpetual interest." — Scotsman. 

" It is impossible to go through this work without forming a very high opinion of his 
speculative and argumentative power, and a sincere respect for his temperance of state- 
ment and his diligent endeavour to make out the best case he can for the views he rejects." 
— Academe/. 

'* This is a telling contribution to the question of questions. The author has pushed 
a step further than any one before him the bearing of modern science on the doctrine of 
Theism. " — Examiner. 


Vol. X.] Post 8vo, pp. xii. — 282, cloth, los. 6d. 

THE COLOUK SENSE : Its Origin and Development. 

AN ESSAY IN COMPARATIVE PSYCHOLOGY. 

By GRANT ALLEN, B.A., Author of "Physiological .Esthetics." > 

*' The book is attractive throughout, for its object is pursued with, an earnestness and 
singleness of purpose which never fail to maintain the interest of the reader." — Saturday 
Review. 

" A work of geninne research and bold originality. "— Westminster^ Review. 

' ' All these subjects are treated in a very thorough manner, with a wealth of illustra- 
tion, a clearness of style, and a cogency of reasoning, which make up a most attractive 
volume. " — Nature. 


THE ENGLISH AND FOREIGN PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY. 


Vol. XL] Post 8vo, pp. xx.— 316, cloth, los. 6d. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF MUSIC. 

BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF 

A COURSE OF LECTURES 

Dbliverbd at the Royal Institution of Great Britain, 

IN February and March 1877. 

By WILLIAM POLE, MuB. Doc. Oxon. 

Fellow of the Royal Societies of London and Edinburgh ; one of the Examiners in Music 
to the University of London. 

"We may recommend ifc as an extremely useful compendium of modern research 
into the scientific basis of music. There is no want of completeness." — P(3ll Mall Gazette. 

"The book must be interesting to all musical sf^udents, and to candidates for the 
musical degrees at London University (where the author is an examiner) it will be 
indispensable." — Tonic-Sol-fa Eeporter. 

" The ' Philosophy of Music ' will be read with eagei-ness by a large class of readers 
who might turn over with a certain impatience the laboriously reasoned pages of 
Helmholtz." — Musical Times. 


Vol. XII.] Post 8to, pp. 168, cloth, 63. 

CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE HISTORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT 
OF THE HUMAN RACE. 

LECTURES AND DISSERTATIONS 

By LAZASUS GEIQEB, 
Author of " Origin and Evolution of Human Speech and Reason." 

Translated from the Second German Edition hy David Asher, Ph.D., 

Corresponding Member of the Berlin Society for the Study 

of Modern Languages and Literature. 

" The papers translated in this volume deal with various aspects of a veiy fascinating 
study. Herr Geiger had secured a place in the foremost ranks of German philologers, 
but he seems to have valued Jiis philological researches clliefly as a means of throwing 
light on the early condition of mankind. He prosecuted his inquiries in a thoroughly 
philosophical spirit, and he never offered a theory, however paradoxical it might seem 
at first sight, for which he did not advance solid arguments. Unlike the majority of 
German scholars, he took pleasure In working out his doctrines in a manner that was 
likely to make them interesting to the general public ; and his capacity for clear and 
attractive exposition was hardly inferior to that of Mr. Max MUUer himseil. " — St. Jaims's 
Gazette. 


Vol. XIII.] Post 8vo, pp. 350, with a Portrait, cloth, los. 6d. 

DR. APPLETON : His Life and Literary Relics. 

3y JOHN H. APPLETON, M.A., 
Late Vicar of St. Mark's, Staplefleld, Sussex ; 

iND 

A. H. SATOE, M.A., 

Fellow of Queen's College, and Deputy Professor of Comparative Philology, Oxford. 

" Although the life of Dr. Appleton was uneventful, it is valuable as illustrating the 
manner in which the speculative and the practical can be combined. His biographers 
talk of his geniality, his tolerance, his kindliness, and these characteristics, combined 
with his fine intellectual gifts, his searching analysis, his independence, his ceaseless 
energy and ardour, render his life specially interesting."— iftinco»j/onnM(. 


THE ENGLISH AND FOREIGN PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY. 


Vol. XIV.] Post 8vo, pp. xxvi. — 370, with Portrait, lUustrationa, and an 
Autograph Letter, cloth, I2s. 6d. 

EDGAR QUINET . 

HIS EABLT LIFE AND WRITINGS. 

By RICHARD HEATH. 

" La plante est visible dans son germe. Et qui ne voudrait, s'il le pouvait, voir un 
monde dans Tembryon." — Histoire de mes idies. 

" Witbout attacbing tbe immense value to Edgar Quinet's writings wbicb Mr. Heatb 
considers tbeir due, we are quite ready to own tbat tbey possess solid merits wbicb, 
perbaps, bave not attracted sufficient attention in tbis country. To a truly reverent 
spirit, Edgar Quinet joined tbe deepest love for bumanity in general. All bis works are 
pervaded by ttiese two prominent cbaracteristics, wbicb were tbe basis of bis entire 
pbilosopby. It may be, tbat tbeir influence sometimes carried bim to lengtbs wbicb, 
looked at in tbe cold ligbt of common sense, appear Quixotic and even reprebensible. 
But, after all, tbe world would be a dreary place to live in witbout a fair proportion of 
enthusiasts to stir tbe stagnant puddle, and give it movement and cbange. Making all 
allowance for tbe bero-worsbipping instinct wbicb impelled Mr. Heatb to produce tbis 
book, be deserves credit for tbe completeness and finisb of tbe portraiture to wbicb be 
set bis band. It bas evidently been a labour of love, for tbe text is marked tbrougbout 
by infinite painstaking, botb in style and matter." — Globe. 


Vol. XV.] Second Edition, post 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. 

THE ESSENCE OF CHRISTIANITY. 

By LUDWIG PEUEEBACH. 

Translated from the Second German Edition by Marian Evans, 
Translator of Strauss's " Life of Jesus." 

" I confess that to Feuerbaoh I owe a debt of inestimable gratitude. Feel- 
ing about in uncertainty for the ground, and finding everywhere shifting sands, 
Feuerbach oast a sudden blaze into the darkness, and disclosed to me the way." 
— From S. Baring-Gould's " The Origin and Development of Religious Belief," 
Part II. , Preface, page xii. 


Vol. XVI.] Third Edition, revised, post 8vo, pp. 200, cloth, 33. 6d. 
AUaUSTE COMTE AND POSITIVISM. 

By tbe late JOHN STUART MILL, M.P. 


Vols. I.-II.] EXTRA SERIES. 

Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. 348 and 374, with Portrait, cloth, 2is. 
LESSING : His Life and Writings. 

By JAMES SIME, M.A. 
Second Edition. 

"It is to Lessing that an Englisbraan wo\ild turn witb readiest affection. We cannot 
but wonder that more of tbis man is not known amongst us." — Thomas Carlyle. 


THE ENGLISH AND FOREIGN PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY. 

" But to Mr. James Sime has been reserved the honour of presenting to the English 
public a full-length portrait of Leasing, in which no portion of the canvas is uncovered, 
and in which there is hardly a touch but tells. He has studied his subject with that 
patient care which only reverence and sympathy can support ; he has attained the true 
proportion which can alone be gained by penetration and clear insight into motive and 
purposes. We can say that a clearer or more compact piece of biographic criticism has 
not been produced in England for many a day." — Westminster Review. 

" An account of Lessing's life and work on the scale which he deserves is now for the 
first time offered to Enghsh readers. Mr. Sime has performed his task with industry, 
knowledge, and sympathy; qualities which must concur to make a successful biogra- 
pher." — Fall Mall Gazette. 

" This is an admirable book. It lacks no quality that a biography ought to have. Its 
method is excellent, its theme is profoundly interesting : its tone is the happiest mixture 
of sympathy and discrimination : its style is clear, masculine, free from effort or affecta- 
tion, yet eloquent by its very sincerity. It is not a page too long ; and though the reader 
closes it with regret, the critic must own that it is not a page too short." — Staildard. 

*'He has given a life of Lessing clear, interesting, and full, while he has given a 
studyofhis writings which bears distinct marks of an intimate acquaintance with his 
subject, and of a solid and appreciative judgment." — Scotsman* 


Vol. III.] Vol. I,, post 8vo, pp. 264, cloth, price 7s. 6d. 

AN ACCOUNT OP THE POLYNESIAN RACE : 

ITS OK|IGIN AND MIGRATIONS, 

AND THE ANCIENT HISTOEY OF THE HAWAIIAN PEOPLE TO THE TIMES OF 
KAMEHAMEHA I. 

By ABRAHAM POENANDBE, Circuit Judge of the Island of Maui, H.I, 

"Mr, Pomander has evidently enjoyed excellent opportunities for promoting the 
study which has produced this work. Unlike most foreign residents in Polynesia, he has 
acquired a good knowledge of the language spoken by the people among whom he dwelt 
This has enabled him, during his thirty-four years' residence in the Hawaiian Islands, to 
collect material which could be obtained only by a person possessing such an advantage. 
It is so seldom that a private settler in the Polynesian Islands takes an intelH'gent interest 
in local ethnology and archaeology, and makes use of the advantage he possesses, that 
we feel especially thankful to Mr. Pomander for his labours in this comparatively little 
known field of research." — Academy. 


Vols. IV., V.] In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. viii.— 408 ; viii.— 402, cloth, 21s. 
ORIENTAL RELIGIONS, 

AND THBIB RELATION TO UNIVERSAL RELIGION. 
By SAMUEL JOHNSON. 

I.— INDIA. 


Vol. VI.] Vol. II., post 8vo, pp. 408, cloth, price los. 6d. 

AN ACCOUNT OF THE POLYNESIAN RACE : 

ITS ORIGIN AND MIGRATIONS, 

AND THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE HAWAIIAN PEOPLE TO THE TIMES OP 
KAMEHAMEHA I. 
By ABRAHAM PORNANDER, Circuit Judge of the Island of Maui H.I. 


THE ENGLISH AND FOREIGN PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY. 

TEE FOLLOWim VOLUMES ABE IN PREPARATION: 

In Three Volumes, post 8vo, cloth. 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

By EDWARD VON HAETMANN. 

Translated from the German. 


Post 8vo, cloth. 
THE PROSE WORKS OF GIACOMO LEOPARDI. 

Translated from the Italian by Chaeles Edwaedj)s. 


In Three Volumes, post 8to, cloth. 
THE WORLD AS WILL AND REPRESENTATION. 

By ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER. 
Translated from the German. 


LONDON : TEUBNER & CO., LUDGATE HILL. 

1000—36/1/82. 


THE 
ENGLISH AND FOREIGN 

PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY. 


VOLUME XVII. 


EALLANTYNE, HANSON AND Cfl 
EDINBURGH AND LONDON 


ESSAYS AND DIALOGUES 


GIACOMO LEOPARDI. 


TRANSLATED 


CHARLES EDWARDES. 


MXVo :fi3iograpbical Sl^etcb. 


LONDON: 
TRUBNER & CO., LUDGATE HILL. 

1882. 

\AU rights reserved.^ 

r 


ORNELL 
UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 

-4^09 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Biographical Sketch vii 

CHistokt of the Human Race q^- 

DlALOGUE BETWEEN HeECULBS AND AtLAS . . . -15 

DiAIOGUB BETWEEN FASHION AND DEATH . . . -19 

Prize Competition of the Academy of Sillographs . 24 
Dialogue between a Goblin and a Gnome ... 28 
Dialogue between Malambkuno and Farfarello . . 33 
Dialogue between Nature and a Soul .... ^^3§P- 
Dialogue between the Earth and the Moon . y'^^^ 

The Wager op Prometheus (3^ 

Dialogue between a Natural Philosopher and a Meta- 
physician C ';£ > 

Dialogue between Tasso and his Familiar Spirit . 65 
Dialogue between Nature and an Icelander . . 73 

Paeini on Glory .80 

Dialogue between Ruysch and his Mummies . . .110 
Remarkable Sayings of Philip Ottonieri . . -117 
Dialogue between Golumbus and Gutierrez . . .139 

Panegyric of Birds 144 

The Song of the Wild Cock 151 

Dialogue between Timandro and Eleandro . . .156 

Copernicus 167 

Dialogue between an Almanac Seller and a Passer-by Cvj^^ 
Dialogue between Plotinus and Porphtrius . . .182 
Comparison of the Last Words of Brutus and Theo- 

phrastus 196 

Dialogue between Tristano and a Friend . . .Cso^ 


BIOGEAPHICAL SKETCH. 


" Manure with Despair, but let it be genuine, and you will have a 
noble harvest." — Kahbl. 

The name of Giacomo Leopardi is not yet a house- 
hold word in the mouths of Englishmen. Few of 
us have heard of him ; still fewer have read any 
of his writings. If known at all, he is probably 
coupled, in a semi-contemptuous manner, with 
other foreign representatives of a phase of poetic 
thought, the influence of which has passed its 
zenith. As a contemporary of Byron, Leopardi 
is perhaps credited with a certain amount of 
psychological plagiarism, and possibly disregarded 
as a mere satellite of the greater planet. But if 
this be so, it is unjust. His fame is his own, and 
time makes his isolation and grand individuality 
more and more prominent. What Byron and 
Shelley, MiUevoye, Baudelaire and Gautier, Heine 
and Platen, Pouchkine and Lermontofi", are to 
England, France, Germany, and Eussia respec- 
tively, Leopardi is, in a measure, to Italy. But 
he is more than this. The jewel of his renown is 


viii BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

triple-faceted. Philology, poetry, and philosophy 
were each in turn cultivated by him, and he was 
of too brilliant an intellect not to excel in them 
all. As a philologist he astonished Niebuhr and 
delighted Creuzer ; as a poet he has been com|)ared 
with Dante ; as a philosopher he takes high rank 
among the greatest and most original men of 
modern times. One of his biographers (Dovari : 
" Studio di G. Leopardi," Ancona, 1877) has termed 
him "the greatest philosopher, poet, and prose- 
writer of the nineteenth century." Though such 
eulogy may be, and doubtless is, excessive, the fact 
that it has been given testifies to the extraordinary 
nature of the man who is its subject. 

In Germany and France, Leopardi is perhaps as 
well known and highly appreciated as in Italy. 
His poems have been translated into the languages 
of those countries ; and in France, within the last 
year, two more or less complete versions of his 
prose writings have appeared. Biographies, reviews, 
and lighter notices of the celebrated Italian are of 
repeated and increasing occurrence on the Continent. 
England, however, knows little of him, and hitherto 
none of his writings have been made accessible to 
the English reading public. The following brief 
outline of his life may in part help to explain 
the peculiarly sombre philosophical views which 
he held, and of which his works are chiefly an 
elaboration. 

Giacomo Leopardi was born at Eecanati, a small 
town about fifteen miles from Ancona, on the 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. ix 

29t]i June 1798. He was of. noble birth, equally 
on the side of his father and mother. Provided 
with a tutor at an early age, he soon left him far 
behind in knowledge ; and when only eight years 
old, he discarded the Greek grammar he had 
hitherto used, and deliberately set himself the task 
of reading in chronological order the Greek authors 
of his father's library. It was due to his own 
industry, and his father's care, that later he acquired 
a perfect acquaintance with classical literature. 
In 1 8 10 he received his first tonsure, in token of 
his dedication to the Church ; but this early pro- 
mise was not destined to be fulfilled. Before he 
was eighteen years of age Leopardi had attained 
recognised distinction for the amount and matter 
of his erudition. The mere catalogue of his 
writings — chiefly philological — by that time is of 
sufficient length to excite wonder, and their nature 
is still more surprising. Latin commentaries and 
classical annotations were apparently child's play 
to him. Writing in 181 5 to the Eoman scholar 
Canc^Uieri, who had noticed one of these classical 
productions, Leopardi says : " I see myself secured 
to posterity in your writings. , . . Commerce with 
the learned is not only useful, but necessary for me." 
He was only seventeen when he completed a task 
which represented the sum of all his early study. 
This was an " Essay on the Popular Errors of the 
Ancients," of considerable length (first published 
posthumously), in the course of which he cites 
more than four hundred authors, ancient and 
modern. A single extract will suffice to sLow 


X BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

that his youthful powers of expression were as 
precocious as his learning, though his judgment 
was doubtless at fault. He thus reviews the 
wisdom of the Greeks : 

'-' The philosophy of the ancients was the science of 
differences ; and their academies were the seats of con- 
fusion and disorder. Aristotle condemned what Plato 
had taught. Socrates mecked Antisthenes; and Zeno 
scandalised Epicurus. Pythagoreans, Platonians, Peri- 
patetics, Stoics, Cynics, Epicureans, Sceptics, Cyrenaics, 
Megarics, Eclectics scufled with and ridiculed one 
another ; while the truly wise laughed at them all. The 
people, left to themselves during this hubbub, were not 
idle, but laboured silently to increase the vast mound of 
human errors." 

He ends this Essay with a eulogy of the 
Christian religion : "To live in the true Church is 
the only way to combat superstition." Shortly 
afterwards, increasing knowledge, which Goethe 
has called "the antipodes of faith," enabled him 
to perceive that Eoman Catholicism, the antidote 
which he then prescribed for superstition, was 
itself full charged with the poison he sought to 
destroy. 

In 1817 Leopardi made acquaintance by letter 
with Pietro Giordani, one of the leading literary 
men of the day, and a man of varied experience 
and knowledge. In his first letter Leopardi opens 
his heart to his new friend : 

" I have very greatly, perhaps immoderately, yearned 
for glory ... I burn with love for Italy, and thank 
Heaven that I am an Italian. If I Live, I will live for 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xi 

literature; for aught else, I would not live if I 

could." (2ist March 1817.) 

A month later, from t]ie same source we are 
able to discern traces of that characteristic of 
Leopardi's temperament which by certain critics is 
thought to explain his philosophy. Writing to 
Giordani, he expatiates on the discomforts of 
Eecanati and its climate ; and proceeds : — 

"Added to. all this is the obstinate, black, and bar- 
barous inelancholy which devours and destroys me, which 
is nourished by study, and yet increases when I forego 
study. I have in past times had much experience of 
that sweet sadness which generates fine sentiments, and 
which, better than joy, may be said to resemble the 
twilight ; but my condition now is like an eternal and 
horrible night. A poison saps my powers of body and 
mind." 

In the same letter he gives his opinion on the 
relative nature of prose and poetry. 

" Poetry requires infinite study and application, and its 
art is so profound, that the more you advance in proficiency, 
so much the further does perfection seem to recede. . . . 
To be a good prose writer first, and a poet later^ seems 
to me to be contrary to nature, which first creates the 
poet, and then by the cooling operation of age concedes 
the maturity and tranquillity necessary for prose." 

(30th April 1817.) 

The correspondence between Leopardi and Gior- 
dani lasted for five years, and it is from their 
published letters that we are able to form the 
best possible estimate of Leopardi's character and 
aspirations. His own letters serve as the index of 


xii BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

his physical and mental state. In them we trace 
the gradual failure of his health, the growth of 
sombreness in his disposition, and the change which 
his religious convictions underwent. During his 
twentieth year he suffered severely in mind and 
body. Forced to lay aside his studies, he was 
constantly a prey to ennui, with all its attendant 
discomforts. He thus writes to Giordani of his 
condition, in August 1817 : 

" My ill-health makes me unhappy, because I am not 
a philosopher who is careless of life, and because I am 
compelled to stand aloof from my beloved studies. . . . 
Another thing that makes me unhappy, is thought. I 
believe you know, but I hope you have not experienced, 
how thought can crucify and martyrise any one who 
thinks somewhat differently from others. I have for a 
long time suffered such torments, simply because thought 
has always had me entirely m its power ; and it will 
kill me unless I change my condition. Solitude is not 
made for those who burn and are consumed in them- 
selves." (1st August 1817.) 

His mental activity was numbed by his physical 
incapacity ; the two combined reduced him to a 
state of despair. There is a noble fortitude in the 
following words of another letter addressed to 
Giordani : — 

" I have for a long time firmly believed that I must 
die within two or three years, because I have so ruined 
myself by seven years of immoderate and incessant 
study. ... I am conscious that my life cannot be other 
than unhappy, yet I am not frightened ; and if I could 
in any way be useful, I would endeavour to bear my 
condition without losing heart. I have passed years so 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xiii 

full of bitterness, that it seems impossible for worse to 
succeed tbem; nevertheless I will not despair even if 
my sufferings do increase ... I am born for endurance." 

(2d March 1818.) 

Leopardi was now of age, and at the time of life 
when man's aspirations are keenest. He had 
repeatedly tried to induce his father to let him go 
forth into the world, and take his place in the 
school of intellect ; but all his endeavours were in 
vain. Though seconded by Giordani, who some 
months before had become personally acquainted 
with his young correspondent during a visit of a 
few days to Casa Leopardi, the Count was resolute 
in refusing to grant his son perniission to leave 
Eecanati. Giacomo, driven to desperation, con- 
ceived a plan by which he hoped to fulfil his desire 
in spite of the paternal prohibition. The follow- 
ing extract from the Count's diary furnishes the 
gist of the matter, and also gives us some small 
insight into his own character : — 

" Griacomo, wishing to leave the country, and seeing 
that I was opposed to his doing so, thought to obtain my 
consent by a trick. He requested Count Broglio to 
procure a passport for Milan, so that I might be alarmed 
on hearing of it, and thus let him g6. I knew about it, 
because Solari wrote unwittingly to Antici, wishing 
Giacomo a pleasant journey; I immediately asked 
Broglio to send me the passport, which he did with an 
accompanying letter. I showed all to my son, and 
deposited the passport in an open cupboard, telling him 
he could take it at his leisure. So all ended." 

Thus the plot failed, and Giacomo was con- 
strained to resign himself, as best he could, to a 


xiv BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

continuance of the " life worse than death " which 
he lived in Eecanati. Two letters written in anti- 
cipation of the success of his scheme, one to his 
father, and the other to Carlo, his brother, are of 
most painful interest. They suggest unfilial con- 
duct on his part, and unfatherly treatment of his 
son on the part of Count Monaldo. 

" I am weary of prudence," lie writes in the letter to 
Carlo, " which serves only as a clog to the enjoyment of 
yauth. . . How thankful I should be if the step I am 
taking might act as a warning to our parents, as far as 
you and our brothers are concerned ! I heartily trust you 
will be less unhappy than myself. I care little for the 
opinion of the world ; nevertheless, exonerate me if you 
have any opportunity of doiug so. . . . What am I ? a 
mere good-for-nothing creature. I realise this most 
intensely, and the knowledge of it has determined me to 
take this step, to escape the self-contemplation which so 
disgusts me. So long as I possessed self-esteem I was 
prudent ; but now that I despise myself, I can only find 
reUef by casting myself on fortune, and seeking dangers, 
worthless thing that I am. ... It were better (humanly 
speaking) for my parents and myself that I had never 
been born, or had died ere now. Farewell, dear brother." 

The letter to his father is in a different key. It 
is stern and severe, and contains reproofs, direct 
and inferential, for his apparent indifference to his 
sons' future prospects. Giacomo upbraids him with 
intentional blindness to the necessities of his 
position as a youth of generally acknowledged, 
ability, for whom Eecanati could offer no scope, or 
chance of renown. He goes on to say : 

" Now that the law has made me my own master, I 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xv 

have determined to delay no longer in taking my destiny 
on my own shoulders. I know that man's felicity con- 
sists in contentment, and that I shall therefore have 
more chance of' happiness in hegging my bread than 
through whatever bodily comforts I may enjoy here. . . . 
I know that I shall be deemed mad ; and I also know 
that all great men have been so regarded. And because 
the career of almost every great genius has begun with 
despair, I am not disheartened at the same commence- 
ment in mine. I would rather be unhappy than insig- 
nificant, and suffer than endure tedium. . . . Fathers 
usually have a better opinion of their sons than other 
people; but you, on the contrary, judge no one so 
unfavourably, and therefore never imagined we might 
be born for greatness. ... It has pleased Heaven, as a 
punishment, to ordain that the only youths of this town 
with somewhat loftier aspirations than the Eecanatese 
should belong to you, as a trial of patience, and that the 
only father who would regard such sons as a misfortune 
should be ours.'' 

The relationship between Giacoino and his parents 
has been a vexed question with all his biographers, 
who, for the most part, are of the opinion that they 
had little sympathy with him in the mental suf- 
ferings he underwent. The Count has been called 
" despoto sistematico " in the administration of 
his household ; and the most favourably disposed 
writers have agreed to regard him as somewhat 
of a Eoman father. But there does not seem to 
be sufficient evidence to support the theory that 
he was intentionally harsh and repressive to 
the extent of cruelty in his treatment of his chil- 
dren. He was an Italian of the old school, and 
as such his conduct was probably different from 


xvi BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

that of more modern Italian fathers; but that 
was all. 

In 1819, when>is whole being was in a turmoil 
of disquiet, Leopardi made his ddbut as a poet, 
with two Odes — ^the one addressed to Italy, and 
the other on the monument to Dante, then recently 
erected in Florence. The following literal transla- 
tion of the first stanza of the Ode to Italy gives 
but a faint echo of the original verse : — 

" my country, I see the walls and arches, the 
columns, the statues, and the deserted towers of our 
ancestors ; fcut their glory I see not, nor do I see the 
laurel and the ircin which girt our forefathers. To-day, 
unarmed, thou showest a naked brow and naked hreast. 
Alas ! how thou art wounded ! How pale thou art, and 
bleeding ! That I should see thee thus ! queen of 
beauty ! I call on heaven and earth, and ask who thus 
has humbled thee. And as a cro-wning ill, her arms are 
weighed with chains ; her hair dishevelled and unveiled ; 
and on the ground she sits disconsolate' and neglected, 
her face hid in her knees, and weeping. Weep, Italia 
mine, for thou hast cause, since thou wert born to 
conquer 'neath Fortune's smiles and frowns. 

patria mia, vedo le mura e gli arcM 
B le colonne e i simulacri e 1' erme 
Torri degli avi nostri. 

Ma la gloria non vedo, 

Non vedo il lauro e il ferro ond' eran carchi 

1 nostri padri anticU. Or fatta inerme, 
Nuda la fronts e nudo il petto mbstri. 
Oimfe quante ferite, 

Che lividor, che sangue ! oh qual ti veggio, 
Formosiasima donna ! lo chiedo al cielo, 
E al mondo : dite, dite : 
Chi la ridusse a tale 1 E questo fe peggio, 
Che di catene ha carche ambe le braccia. 
Si che sparte le chiome e senza velo 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xvii 

Siede in terra negletta e sconsolata, 

Nascondendo la faccia 

Tra le ginoccliia, e piange. 

Piangi, che ben liai donde, Italia mia, 

Le genti a vincer nata 

Et nella fausta sorte e nella ria." 

These odes, whicli represent the first fruits of 
his muse, ring with enthusiasm. They are the 
expression of a soul fired with its own flame, which 
serves to Ulumine and vivify a theme then only 
too real in his country's experience, the sufferings 
of Italy. Patriotism pervades his earliest verse ; 
sadness and hopelessness that of later times. For 
these two odes Giordani bestowed unsparing eulogy 
on his young prot^g^. Before their appearance he 
had begun to regard Leopardi as the rising genius 
of Italy, and had not hesitated to say to him, 
" Inveni hominem ! " Now, however, his admira- 
tion was unbounded ; he thus apostrophised' him : 
" nobilissima, e altissima, e fortissima anima ! " 
He referred to the reception of his poems at 
Piacenza in these terms : " They speak of you as 
a god." 

In 1822 Leopardi first left home. Repeatedly, 
year after year, he had besought his father to 
permit him to see something of the world. Ho 
longed to associate with the men who represented 
the intellect of his country. With his own fellow- 
townsmen he had little sympathy, and they on 
their part regarded him as a phenomenon, eccentric 
rather than remarkable. They gave him the titles 
of "little pedant," "philosopher," "hermit," &c., 
in half ironical appreciation of his learning. As 


xviii BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

he was- naturally very sensitive, these petty vexa- 
tions became intensified to him, and were doubtless 
one of the chief reasons of his unfailing dislike for 
his native place. In one of his essays, that of 
" Parini on Glory," we discover a reference to 
Leopardi's life at Eecanati, which place is really 
identical with the Bosisio of the essay. Yet the 
prophet who is not a prophet in his own country 
when living, seldom fails of recognition after death. 
A statue is now raised to Leopardi in the place 
that refused to honour him in life. The apprecia- 
tive recognition he failed to attract in Eecanati, 
he hoped to obtain at Eome. But Count Monaldo, 
his father, long maintained his resistance to his 
son's wishes. Himself of a comparatively unas- 
piring mind, content with the fame he could acquire 
in his own province, he saw no necessity why his 
son should be more ambitious. Probably also his 
paternal love made him fearful of the dangers of 
the world, to which his son would be exposed. Of 
these hazards he knew nothing from experience ; 
and they were doubtless magnified to . him by his 
imagination. Yet, though naturally a man rather 
deficient in character than otherwise, Count Mon- 
aldo was, as we have seen, in his own household, 
a stern not to say unreasonable disciplinarian. 
Only after repeated solicitations from his son, and 
remonstrances from his friends, did he give 
Giacomo the desired permission, chiefly in the 
hope that at Eome he might be induced to enter 
the Church, towards which he had latterly mani- 
fested some signs of repugnance. The five months 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xix 

spent by Leopardi in Eome sufficed to disenchant 
him of his ideas of the world of life. A day or two 
after his arrival he writes to Carlo his brother : 

'' I do not derive the least pleasure from the great 
things I see, because I know that they are wonderful, 
without feeling that they are so. I assure you their 
multitude and grandeur wearied me the first day." 

(25th November 1822.) 

Again, to Paulina his sister : " The world is not 
beautiful ; rather it is insupportable, unless seen 
from a distance." 

Ever prone to regard the real through the 
medium of the ideal, he was bitterly disappointed 
with his first experience of men. The scholar, 
whom he was prepared to revere, proved on 
acquaintance to be — 

" a blockhead, a torrent of small talk, the most wearisome 
and afflicting man on earth. He talks about the merest 
trifles with the deepest interest, of the greatest things 
with an infinite imperturbability. He drowns you in 
compliments and exaggerated praises, and does both in 
so freezing a manner, and with such nonchalance, that 
to hear him one would think an extraordinary man the 
most ordinary thing in the world." (asth November 1822.) 

The stupidest Kecanatese he termed wiser and 
more sensible than the wisest Eoman. Again, to 
his father he complains of the superficiality of the 
so-called scholars of Eome. 

" They all strive to reach immortality in a coach, as 
bad Christians would fain enter Paradise. According to 
them, the sum of human wisdom, indeed the only true 
science of man, is antiquity. Hitherto I have not 


XX BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

encountered a lettered Eomau who understands the term 
literature as meaning anything except archaeology. Philo- 
sophy, ethics, politics, eloquence, poetry, philology, are 
unknown things in Eome, and are regarded as childish 
playthings compared to the discovery of some bit of 
copper or stone of the time of Mark Antony or Agrippa. 
The best of it is that one cannot find a single Eoman 
who really knows Latin or Greek ; without a perfect 
acquaintance with which languages, it is clear that anti- 
quity cannot be studied." (gth December 1822.) 

He was disheartened by the depraved condition 
of Eoman literature. Everywhere he saw merit 
disregarded or trodden under foot. The city was 
full of professional poets and poetesses, and literary 
cliques formed for the purpose of the self-laudation 
of their members. Illustrious names of the past 
were insulted by the pseudo-great men of the day, 
whose fame was founded on writings of the most 
contemptible nature. These circumstances made 
Leopardi confess, in a letter to his brother, that 
had he not 

"the harbour of posterity, and the conviction that 
in time all would take its proper place (illusory hope, 
but the only, and most necessary one for the true 
scholar)," (i6th December 1822.) 

he would abandon literature once for all. But it 
was only during moments of depression that such 
words as these escaped him. He loved study for 
its own sake ; fame was, after all, but a secondary 
consideration. Nor were men of genuine worth 
entirely wanting in Rome. Niebuhr, then Prussian 
ambassador at the Papal Court, Eeinhold, the Dutch 
ambassador, Mai, subsequently a cardinal, were 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xxi 

noble exceptions to the general inferiority. By 
them Leopardi was highly esteemed. Niebuhr 
especially was profoundly struck with his genius. 
" I have at last seen a modern Italian worthy of 
the old Italians and the ancient Eomans," was his 
remark to De Bunsen after his first interview with 
the young scholar. Both he and De Bunsen became 
firm friends with Leopardi. They endeavoured 
their utmost to procure for him some official 
appointment from Cardinal Consalvi, then Secretary 
of State, and his successor ; but owing to the 
intrigues, prejudices, and disturbances of the Papal 
Court they we're unable to effect 'anything on his 
behalf. It was an unfulfilled intention of De 
Bunsen's, later in life, to write a memoir of. 
Leopardi, for whom he always felt the highest 
esteem and admiration. 

Count Monaldo's wish that his son should become 
an ecclesiastic was never realised. Leopardi was 
of too honest a nature to profess what was not 
in accordance with his convictions. The secular 
employment that he sought, he could not obtain, 
so perforce he seems to have turned his mind 
towards literary work — the drudgery of letters as 
distinct from the free, untrammelled pursuit of 
literature. He obtained the charge of cataloguing 
the Greek manuscripts of the Barberine Library, 
and his spirits rose in anticipation of some dis- 
covery he hoped to make which might render 
him famous. " In due time we will astonish the 
world," he writes to his father. He was indeed 
successful in finding a fragment of Libanius hitherto 


xxii BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

unpublished ; but the glory seems to bave been 
stolen from him, since the manuscript was ushered 
forth to the world by alien hands. Poor Leopardi ! 
all his hopes seemed destined to be proved illusive. 
It was time for him to leave a place that could 
furnish him with no othet pleasure than that of 
tears. "I visited Tasso's grave, and wept there. 
This is the first and only pleasure I have experienced 
in Eome" (Letter to Carlo, February 15, 1823). 
Already he had begun to steel himself to the 
shocks of fortune ; suffering and misfortune he 
could bear ; mental agony and despair were too 
strong for him. In a lone; letter to his sister 
Paulina, he tries to impart to her a little of the 
philosophy of Stoicism which he had taken to 
himself. She was distressed about the rupture of 
a matrimonial arrangement contracted by the Count 
between her and a certain Eoman gentleman of 
position and fortune. Leopardi thus consoles her : 

"Hope is a very wild passion, because it necessarily 
carries with it very great fear. ... I assure you, ' Paolina 
mia,' that unless we can acquire a little indifference 
towards ourselves, life is scarcely possible, much less can 
it be bappy. You must resign yourself to fortune, and 
not hope too deeply. ... I recommend this philosophy 
to you, because I think you resemble me in mind and 
disposition." (19th AprU 1823.) 

Four years later Leopardi confesses the insuf- 
ficiency of his own remedies. Writing to Dr. 
Puccinotti in 1827, he says : 

" I am weary of life, and weary of the philosophy of 
indifference which is the only cure for misfortune and 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xxiii 

ennui, but which at length becomes an ennui itself. I 
look and hope for nothing but death." 

(l6th August 1827.) 

In May 1823, he left Eome, and returned to 
Recanati. 

The succeeding ten years of Leopardi's life -were, 
during his intervals of health, devoted to poetry 
and literature. He had passed the Eubicon of his 
hopes ; henceforth he studied to expound to the 
world the uselessness of its own anticipations, and 
its essential unhappiness. His bodily infirmities 
increased with years. His frame, naturally weak, 
suffered from the effects of early over-application ; 
his eyes and nerves were a constant trouble to 
him. To obtain what relief was possible from 
change of air, and to remove himself from Recanati, 
which he detested increasingly, Leopardi went to 
Bologna, Florence, Milan, and Pisa, wintering now 
at one place, now at another. From family reasons, 
his father was unable to supply him with sufficient 
money to secure his independence. Consequently 
he was obliged to turn to literature for a livelihood. 
The publisher Stella, of Milan, willingly engaged 
his services, and for several years Leopardi was 
in receipt of a small but regular payment for his 
literary labours. He compiled Chrestomathies of 
Italian prose and poetry, and made numerous 
fragmentary translations from the classics. A 
commentary on Petrarch, to which he devoted 
much time and care, is, in the words of Sainte- 
Beuve, " the best possible guide through such a 
charming labyrinth." As he said of himself, 


xxlv BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

"mediocrity is not for me," so in all that lie 
undertook the mark of his genius appeared. At 
Florence Leopardi was honoured by the represen- 
tatives of Italian literature and culture, who there 
formed a brilliant coterie. Colletta was desirous 
of his co-operation in the " History of Naples," 
with which he was occupying the last years of his 
life. The " Antologia " and '" Nuove Eicoglitore " 
reviews were open to contributions from his pen. 
Giordani, Niccolini, Capponi, and Gioberti, amongst 
others, welcomed him with open arms. To these 
his Tuscan friends he dedicated his " Canti " in 
1830, with the following touching letter : — 

" My dear Friends, — Accept the dedication of this 
book.' Herein I have striven, as is often done in poetry, 
to hallow my sufferings. This is my farewell (I cannot 
but weep in saying it) to literature and studies. . Once 
I hoped these dear resources would ha:ve been the 
support of my old age i pleasures of childhood and youth 
might vanish, I thought, and their loss would be support- 
able if I were thus cherished and strengthened. But 
ere I was twenty years of age, my physical infirmities 
deprived me of half my powers ; my hfe was taken, yet 
death was not bestowed on me. Eight years later I 
became totally incapacitated ; this, it seems, will be my 
future state. Even to read these letters you know that 
I make use of other eyes than mine. Dear friends, my 
sufferings are incapable of increase ; already my misfor- ' 
tune is too great for tears. I havd lost everything, and 
am but a trunk that feels and suffers." . . . 

It is scarcely wonderful that, under such circum- 
stances, his philosophy should fail him. A code of 
ethics, however admirable intrinsically, has but 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xxv 

cold consolation to offer to one whose life is pro- 
longed pain. Leopardi at one time allowed the 
idea of suicide to rept, and almost take root, in 
his mind. He describes the incident: "A great- 
desire comes into my mind to terminate once for 
all these wretched years of mine, and to make my- 
self more completely motionless.'" But he was of 
a nature noble and , strong enough to resist such 
temptation. 

He left Eecanati for the last time in 1830. The 
next two years were passed in Florence, Eome, and 
Pisa. Whilst in Eome, Leopardi received sub- 
stantial proof of his fame in being- elected an 
Academician of the Crusca. At length the doctors 
recommended him to try Naples, from the mUd 
air and general salubrity of which place they 
anticipated much improvement in his condition. 
Thither he went in company with a young friend, 
Antonio Eanieri, whose acquaintance he had made 
in Florence. In the house of Eanieri he stayed 
from 1833 until his death in 1837, tended by him 
and his sister Paulina (his second Paulina, as he 
used to call her) with a devotedness and affection 
as rare as it was noble. Posterity will couple 
together the names of Eanieri and Leopardi as 
naturally as we associate together those of Severn 
and Keats. All that could be done for the unfor- 
tunate poet, Eanieri did. His condition was a 
singular one. Before he left Florence for Naples, 
the doctor said of him that his frame did not 
possess sufficient vitality to generate a mortal 
illness ; yet he was seldom, if ever, free from 


xxvi BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

suffering. He died on the i4tli June 1837, as lie 
and his friend were on the point of setting out 
from Naples to a little villa that Ranieri possessed 
•on one of the slopes of Vesuvius. On the night 
of the 15th he was buried, in the church of St. 
Vitale, near the reputed grave of Virgil. His 
tomb is marked by a stone erected at the expense 
of Ranieri, bearing the signs of the cross, and the 
owl of Minerva, together with an inscription from 
the pen of Giordani. The few following lines 
from his own verse would form a suitable epitaph 
for one whose life was spent in bodily and mental 
disquietude : — 

" weary heart, for ever shalt thou rest 
Henceforth. Perished is the great delusion 
That I thought would ne'er have left me. Perished ! 
Nought now is left of all those dear deceits ; 
Desire is dead, and not a hope remains. 
Eest then for ever. Thou hast throhbed enough ; 
Nothing here is worth such palpitations. 
Our life is valueless, for it consists 
Of nought but ennui, bitterness, and pain. 
This world of clay deserveth not a sigh. 
Now calm thyself ; conceive thy last despair, 
And wait for death, the only gift of Fate." 

(Poem « A Se Stessc") 

These words might have been an echo of 
Q^kyamuni's utterance beneath the sacred fig-tree 
of B6dhimanda, when, according to the legend, he 
was in process of transformation from man to 
Buddha : the resemblance is at any rate a remark- 
able one. 

In 1846, the Jesuits made an impudent attempt 
to convince the public that Leopardi died repent- 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xxvii 

ing of his philosopliical views, and that he had 
previously expressed a desire to enter the Society 
of Jesus. A long letter from a certain Francesco 
Scarpa to his Superior, giving a number of pre- 
tended details of Leopardi's history, conversion, 
and death, appeared in a Neapolitan publication, 
entitled " Science and Faith." Eanieri came for- 
ward to show the entire falsity of these statements ; 
and to give a more authoritative denial to them, 
he engaged the willing help of Vicenzo Gioberti. 
The latter in his " Modern Jesuit " contested their 
truth in every respect. He said : " The story put 
forward in this letter is a tissue of lies and delibe- 
rate inventions ; it is sheer romance from begin- 
ning to end." . It is thought by some people that 
Leopardi's father was concerned in this Jesuit 
manifesto. But, although the Count was doubtless 
shocked beyond measure that his son did not 
hold the same beliefs as himself, it is scarcely 
credible that he should concoct a series of such 
absurdities as were contained in Scarpa's letter. 

Leopardi anticipated that posterity, and even 
his contemporaries, would endeavour to explain the 
pessimism of his philosophy by his personal mis- 
fortunes and suflferings. Accordingly, in a letter 
to the philologist Sinner, he entered a protest 
against such a supposition : 

"However great my sufferings may have been, I do 
not seek to diminish them by comforting myself with 
vain hopes, and thoughts of a future and unknown happi- 
ness. This same courage of my convictions has led me 
to a philosophy of despair, which I do not hesitate to 


xxviii BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

accept. It is the cowardice of men, who would ^ fain 
regard existence as something very valuable, that insti- 
gates them to consider my philosophical opinions as the 
result of my sufferings, and that makes them persist in 
charging to my material circumstances that which is due 
to nothing but my understanding. Before I die, I wish 
to make protest against this imputation of weakness and 
trifling; and I would beg of my readers to burn my 
writings rather than attribute them to my sufferings." 

(24th May 1832.) 

Eanieri thus describes Leopardi's personal ap- 
pearance : 

" He was of middle height, inclined to stoop, and 
fragile ; his complexion was pale ; his head was large, 
and his brow expansive ; his eyes were blue and languid ; 
his nose was well formed (slightly aquihne), and his other 
features were very delicately chiselled ; his voice was 
soft and rather weak ; and he had an ineffable and almost 
celestial smile." 

His friend here scarcely even suggests what 
others have perhaps unduly emphasised, that is, 
Leopardi's deformity. He was slightly humpbacked ; 
doubtless the consequence of those studies which 
simultaneously ruined him and made him famous. 

It were an omission not to refer to the influence 
which love exerted over Leopardi's life. So strong 
was this, in the opinion of one of his critics, that 
he even ascribes his philosophy to an " infelicissimo 
amore." Another writer says of him that " his 
ideal was a woman." Eanieri asserts that he died 
unmarried, after having twice felt the passion of 
love as violently as it was ever realised by any 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xxix 

man. His poems also testify how omnipotent at 
one time was this bitter-sweet sensation. 

" I recall to mind the day when love fifst assaulted 
me ; when I said, Alas ! if this be love, how it pains me ! " 

(The rirst Lov^.) 

Again : 

" It was morning, the time when a light and sweeter 
sleep presses our rested lids. The sun's first grey light 
began to gleam across the balcony, through the closed 
windows into my still darkened chamber. Then it was 
that I saw close by, regarding me with iixed eyes, the 
phantom form of her who first taught me to love, and left 

me weeping." ' (The Dream.) 

His poem to Aspasia is a frank confession of love, 
and the humiliation he suffered in its rejection. It 
is a noble, yet a terrible poem. Opening with a 
description of the scene that met his eye as he 
entered the room where his charmer sat, " robed in 
the hue of the melancholy violet, and surrounded 
by a wondrous luxury," pressing " tender and burn- 
ing kisses on the round lips " of her children, and 
displaying " her snowy neck," he saw as it were 
" a new heaven, and a new earth, and the lustre of 
a celestial light." 

" Like a divine ray, woman, thy beauty dazzled my 
thought. Beauty is like sijch music as seems to open 
out to us. an unknown Elysium. He who loves is filled 
with the ecstasy of the phantom love conceived by his 
imagination. In the woman of his love he seeks to dis- 
cover the beauties of his inspired vision; in his words 
and actions he tries to recognise the personality of his 
dreams. Thus when he strains her to his bosom, it is not 


XXX BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

the woman, but the phantom of his dream that he em- 
hraces." 

Then comes the awakening. He vituperates the 
reality for not attaining to the standard of his 
ideal. 

"Earely the woman's nature is comparable with that 
of the dream image. No thought like ours can dwell 
beneath those narrow brows. Vain is the hope that man 
forges in the fire of those spai;kling eyes. He errs in 
seeking profound and lofty thoughts in one who is by 
nature inferior to man in all things. As her members are 
frailer and softer, so is her mind more feeble and confined." 

He betrays his position, and gives the key to his 
unjust censure of woman's powers. 

" Now, boast thyself, for thou canst do so. Tell how 
thou art the only one of thy sex to whom I have bent my 
proud head, and offered my invincible heart. Tell how 
thou hast seen me with beseeching brows, timid and 
trembling before thee (I burn with indignation and shame 
in the avowal), watching thy every sign and gesture, 
beside myself in adoration of thee, and changing expres- 
sion and colour at the slightest of thy looks. The charm 
is broken ; my yoke is on the ground, sundered at a single 

blow." (Aspasia.) 

Who were the real objects of Leopardi's affection, 
is not at all clear. Certain village girls of Eecanati, 
immortalised in his verse as Nerina and Silvia, 
were the inspirers of his first love ; but his brother 
Carlo bears witness to the superficial nature of his 
affection in their cases. They merely served as the 
awakeners of the sensation; his own mind and 
imagination magnified it into a passion. True it is 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xxxi 

that his nature was one that yearned and craved 
for love in no ordinary degree. When at Eome, 
isolated from his family, he wrote to Carlo : " Love 
me, for God's sake. I need love, love, love, fire, 
enthusiasm, life." He addressed similar demands 
to Giordani and others with whom he was on the 
most intimate terms. Indeed we are tempted to 
conjectures as to what might have been the fruif; 
of Leopardi's life had he found a helpmate and a 
consoler in his troubles. 

A brief consideration of the general nature of 
Leopardi's poetry and prose may not be out of place 
in this short summary. 

His poems are masterpieces of conception and 
execution. Their matter may be open to criticism ; 
but their manner is beyond praise. His odes are 
of the nobler kind. Full of fire and vigour, they 
reach the sublime where he stimulates his fellow- 
countrymen to action, and urges them to aspire to 
a freedom, happily now obtained. His elegies 
breathe out an inspired sorrow. They are the pro- 
duct of a mind filled with the sense of the misery 
that abounds on earth, and unable, though desirous, 
to discern a single ray of light in the gloom of 
existence. His lyrical pieces are the most beautiful 
and emotional of his poems. The following, entitled 
" The Setting of the Moon," though pervaded with 
' the spirit of sadness that is so predominant a char- 
acteristic of Leopardi's verse^ contains some charm- 
ing imagery : — 

"As in the lonely night, over the silvered fields and 


xxxii BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

the waters where the zephyrs play, where the far-off 
shades take a thousand vague appearances and deceitful 
forms, amid the tranquil waves, the foliage and the 
hedges, the hill-slopes and the villages, the moon arrived 
at heaven's boundary descends behind the Alps and 
Apennines into the infinite bosom of the Tyrrhenian Sea ; 
whilst the world grows pale, and the shadows disappear, 
and a mantle of darkness shrouds the valley and the 
hills ; night alone remains, and the carter singing on his 
way salutes with a sad melody the last reflection of that 
fleeing light which hitherto had led his steps : So vanishes 
our youth, and leaves us solitary with life. So flee 
away the shadows which veiled illusive joys ; and so 
die too the distant hopes on which our mortal nature 
rested. Life is left desolate and dark, and the traveller, 
trying to pierce the gloom, looks here and there, but 
seek^ in vain to know the way, or what the journey yet 
before him ; he sees that all on earth is strange, and he a 
stranger dwelling there. . . . You- little hills and strands, 
when falls the light which silvers in the west the veil 
of night, shall not for long be orphaned. On the other 
side of heaven the first grey light of dawn shall soon be 
followed by the sun, whose fiery rays shall flood you and 
the ethereal fields with a luminous stream. But mortal 
life, when cherished youth has gone, has no new dawn, 
nor ever gaias new light ; widowed to the end it stays, and 
on life's other shore, made dark by night, the gods have 
set the tomb's dark seal." 

In his interpretation of nature he is literal, but 
withal truly poetic : he worships her in the con- 
crete, but vituperates her in the abstract, as 'repre- 
sentative to him of omnipresent Deity, creative, but 
also destructive. The two or three poems that may 
be termed satirical, are at the same time half elegiac. 
In them he ridicules and censures the folly of his 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xxxiii 

contemporaries, and mourns over the mystery of 
things. To these, however, there is one exception, 
the longest of all his poems. This is known as 
the " Continuation of the Battle of the Frogs and 
Mice." It consists of eight cantos, comprising 
about three thousand lines, and was first published 
posthumously. The abruptness of its ending gives 
the idea, erroneous or not, of incompleteness. Leo- 
pardi had, several years before, translated and 
versified Homer's " Batrachomyomachia," and this 
satire takes up the story where Homer ends. It is 
exclusively a ridicule of the times, with especial 
reference to his own country and her national 
enemy, Austria. In style and treatment it has 
been compared with Byron's " Don Juan," from 
which, however, it totally diff'ers in its intrinsic 
character. It abounds in beauties of description, 
sentiment, and expression, and well deserves to be 
considered his chefd'aeuvre. Leopardi thus describes 
his method of poetic composition : — 

" I compose only when under an inspiration, yielding 
to which, in two minutes, I have designed and organised 
the poem. This done, I wait for a recurrence of such 
inspiration, which seldom happens until several weeks 
have elapsed. Then I set to work at composition, bub 
so slowly that I cannot complete a poem, however short, 
in less than two or three w^eks. Such is my method ; 
without inspiration it were easier to draw water from a 
stone than a single verse from my brain." 

Leopardi's reputation was firmly established by 
the appearance of his " Operette morali," as his 
prose writings were termed. Monti classed them 


xxxiv BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

as the best Italian prose compositions of the cen- 
tury. Gioberti compared them to the writing of 
Machiavelli. Giordani, with his usual tendency to 
extravagance, gives his friend the following pom- 
pous panegyric : — " His style possesses the con- 
ciseness of Speroni, the grandiloquence of Tasso, the 
smoothness of Paruta, the purity of Gelli, the wit 
of Firenzuola, the solidity and magnificence of 
Pallavicino, the imagination of Plato, and the 
elegance of Cicero." Leopardi has been aptly 
termed an aristocrat in his writing. Too much of 
a reasoner to be very popular with the masses, who 
do not care for the exertion of sustained thought,, 
his logic is strikingly clear to the intelligent. 
His periods are occasionally as long as those of 
Machiavelli or Guicciardini, but their continuity 
and signification are never obscure. Ranieri bears 
witness to the fact that his prose was the fruit of 
very great labour. 

The subject and tendency of Leopardi's writings 
will be evident to the reader of the following 
dialogues. Framed on the model of Lucian, they 
will compare favourably with the writings of the 
Greek satirist in subtlety and wit, in spite of their 
sombre tone. They cannot be said to possess 
much originality, save in treatment. The subjects 
discussed, and even the arguments introduced, 
are mostly old. Every acute moraliser since the 
world began has, in more or less degree com- 
mensurate with his ability, debated within him- 
self the problems here considered. Facts, beliefs, 
opinions, theories, may be marshalled to produce 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xxxv 

an infinite number of diverse harmonies ; but no 
one such combination formed by the mind of man 
may be put forward as the true and ultimate 
explanation of the mystery of life. Leibnitz, with 
his harmony of universal good, is as fallible as 
Leopardi or Schopenhauer with their harmonies of 
evil. In either case the real is sacrificed to the 
ideal, whether of good or evil. Either from 
temperament or circumstances, these philosophers 
were predisposed to give judgment on life, favour- 
ably or adversely, without duly considering the 
attributes of existence. As M. Dapples, in his 
French version of Leopardi, has remarked, he early 
withdrew from actual life, i.e., life with all those 
manifold sensations which he himself defines to be 
the only constituents of pleasure in existence. His 
body proved little else than the sensation of suf- 
fering. All his vitality was concentrated in his 
mind ; so that he was scarcely a competent and 
impartial judge of the ordinary pleasures and ills 
of life. He could not be otherwise than prejudiced 
by his own experiences, or rather lack of experi- 
ences. Yet, though Leopardi was physically inca- 
pable of many of life's pleasures, he none the less 
passionately yearned for them. • Strength and 
desire struggled within him, and the former only 
too frequently proved weaker than the latter. 
Thus he was innately adapted for pessimism. 

We consider Leopardi to have been a man of the 
grandest intellectual powers, capable originally of 
almost anything to which the human mind could 
attain ; but that his reason, later in life, became 


xxxvi BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

somewhat perverted by his sufferings. Were 
human life as absolutely miserable a thing as he 
represents it to be, it would be insupportable. 
That he should so regard it does not seem remark- 
able when we consider his circumstances ; he was 
poor, seldom free from pain, and unsupported by a 
creed. For the suffericgs of his life, he could see 
no shadow of atonement or compensation : a future 
state was incomprehensible to him. He bestows 
much gratuitous pity on the human race, which 
we, though revering his genius, may return to him 
as more deserving of it than ourselves. His heart 
was naturally full of the most lively affection ; but 
he could never sufficiently satisfy the yearnings of 
his nature. Like Ottonieri, whose portrait is his 
own to a great extent, his instincts were noble ; 
like him also he died without effecting much in 
proportion to his powers. 

The conclusions of Leopardi's philosophy may be 
thus summed up. The universe is an enigma, totally 
insoluble. The sufferings of mankind exceed all 
good that men experience, estimating the latter 
in compensation for the former. Progress, or, as 
we call it, civilisation, instead of lightening man's 
sufferings, increases them ; since it enlarges his 
capacity for suffering, without proportionately aug- 
menting his means of enjoyment. 

How far are these conclusions refutable ? It may 
be regarded as indubitable that the first two cannot 
be refuted without the aid of revelation. Science is 
incompetent to explain the "why" and the "where- 
fore" of the universe ; it is yet groping to discover 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xxxvii 

the ''how." Still less can any satisfactory explanation 
be given of the purpose for which suffering exists, 
unless we rely on revelation. Eeligion, which 
modern philosophers somewhat contemptuously de- 
signate as "popular metaphysics," can alone afford 
an explanation of these problems. Q^kyamuni, 
nearly 2500 years ago, asked, "What is the cause 
of all the miseries and sufferings with which man 
is afflicted ? " He himself gave what he considered 
to be the correct answer : " Existence ; " and then 
he traced existence to the passions and desires 
innate in man. These last were to be conquered 
in the condition of insensibility to all material 
things called " Nirvana." Truly his remedy was a 
radical one, and had he succeeded in procuring 
universal acceptances for his doctrines, the human 
race would have become extinct a few generations 
later than his own time. But "Nirvana" is unnatural 
if it be nothing else ; unnatural in itself and in the 
steps that lead up to it. And although it is due 
to Schopenhauer, and his more or less heterodox 
disciples, that this Buddhistic dogma is regarded 
theoretically by some people with a certain amount 
of favour, we think the instincts of life are strong 
enough within them all to resist any decided incli- 
nation on their part to carry it into effect. 

As for the third conclusion, it must be admitted 
that man's susceptibilities of suffering are enlarged 
with increasing culture. Leopardi has shown us 
that the more vividly we realise the evils that 
surround and affect us, so much the more keenly 
do they arouse in us sensations of pain. Knowledge 


xxxviii BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

of them makes us suffer from them. The bliss of 
ignorance is rudely dispelled by the cold hand 
of science. But must this necessarily continue 1 
May not the same progress which exposes the 
wound find the salve to heal it ? We trust and 
think so, in spite of all assertions to the contrary. 
There is nothing in the near future of humanity 
that need alarm us : men will not work less because 
they think more ; nor is there any sufficient reason 
to show that increasing knowledge must represent 
increasing sorrow. As Johnson has said : " The 
cure for the greatest part of human miseries is not 
radical but palliative." For the material means of 
palliation we look to science. We hope and think 
that there is good to be gained from these writings 
of Leopardi, in spite of the tone of despair that 
rings throughout them. His theory of the "infe- 
licitk " of things, cheerless though it be, often 
suggests ideas, sublime in themselves and noble in 
their effect ; and the very essence of his philosophy 
resolves itself into a recommendation to act, rather 
than by contemplation to lose the power of action ; 
for, as he says, "A life must be active and 
vigorous, else it is not true life, and death is 
preferable to it." 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xxxix 

A brief reference to tlie most recent publications 
on Leopardi may be interesting as tending to 
throw light on his domestic relationships, and as 
giving lis an idea of his own habits, in private life. 
Antonio Eanieri (now in his seventy-sixth year) in 
a book ^ published at Naples in 1880 gives many 
interesting details of the poet's life. He first met 
him at Florence, and was touched with compassion 
for his unfortunate state. , 111 and helpless, he 
was incapable of doing anything but weep in 
despair at the thought of being obliged to return 
to his native place. " Eecanati and death are to 
me one and the same thing," he exclaimed through 
his tears. Ranieri in a generous moment replied : 
" Leopardi, you shall not return to Eecanati, The 
little that I possess is enough for two. As a 
benefit to me, not to yourself, we will henceforth 
live together." This was the beginning of what 
Eanieri calls his "vita nuova." He coiiducted 
Leopardi from Florence to Eome ; thence back to 
Florence ; and finally from Florence to Naples. 
The doctors everywhere shrugged their shoulders 
at his case, and suggested, as delicately as possible, 
the mortal nature of his maladies. At Naples 
Eanieri and his sister Paulina did all they could 
for Leopardi, and from 1833 to his death in 1837 
supplied all his wants. He could seldom see to 
read or write. " We used to read to him constantly 
and regularly, and were fortunately conversant 
with the languages he knew," says Eanieri. Occa- 
sionally he was able to go to the theatre, and 

1 Sette anni di Sodalisio con Giacomo Leopardi. 


xl BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

enjoyed it greatly. In his habits he seems to have 
tried his friend's temper and patience considerably. 
He was wont to turn night into day, and day into 
nio-ht. Ranieri and his sister often did the same 
in order to read, work, and talk with him. He 
breakfasted between three and five o'clock in 
the afternoon, and dined about midnight. Like 
Schopenhauer, he delighted in after-dinner con- 
versation, which he termed " one of the greatest 
pleasures of life." He was very obstinate in per- 
sonal matters, disobeying the doctors in his diet 
and everything else. His fondness for his old 
clothes was remarkable; he loved them for their 
associations. Eanieri mentions " a certain very 
ancient overcoat which for seven years" had tor- 
mented him, and which he used to entreat Leopardi 
to lay aside, but which he clung to with an incre- 
dible aflfection, preferring it to a new one that he 
allowed the moths to destroy. The mere names 
of wind, cold, and snow were enough to pale him. 
He could not bear fire, and formerly used to 
pass the winters three parts submerged in a sack 
of feathers, reading and writing thus the greater 
part of the day. He was very terrified when the 
cholera appeared at Naples, to avoid which he and 
Eanieri went to a country house of the latter's on 
one of the slopes of Vesuvius. Here Leopardi 
wrote his poem "La Ginestra," inspired by the 
desolate scenes at the foot of the mountain. He 
died suddenly at Naples, as he and Eanieri's 
household were about to set ofi" again for the 
country. The Neapolitan Journal " II Progresso," 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. xli 

in an article on his death, remarked of him that 
" sucli brilliancy is not allowed to illumine the 
earth for long." 

" Notes Biographiques sur Leopardi et sa Famille" 
(Paris, 1 88 1 ). This is a book of considerable value. 
Written by the widow of Count Carlo Leopardi, 
Giacomo's younger brother, and his "other self," 
it is most valuable as delineating the characters of 
Leopardi's father and mother. A softer light is 
shed on the character of Leopardi's mother. "We 
learn that she was not passionless, hard, and un- 
sympathetic, as we had previously supposed her 
to be. On the contrary, she was a good woman, of 
deep affection, who made it the aim of her married 
life to work for the welfare of the family of which 
she became a member. Weighted with debt almost 
to the point of exhaustion, the estates of Casa 
Leopardi needed a skilful and vigorous admini- 
strator, if they were to continue in the hands of 
their old owners. Count Monaldo Leopardi was 
not such an administrator. He was a man devoted 
"tout entier k science," and occupying himself 
more with bibliology and archaeology than with the 
finances of his estate. The Jews of Perousa, Milan, 
and the March towns would, Sooner "or later, have 
tightened their hold on Ihe Leopardi patrimony to 
such a degree that the ancient family could only 
have continued to exist as proprietors on sufferance. 
But, in the words of the authoress of this book. 
Providence watched over the house "en lui envoyant 

daDs la jeune marquise Adelaide Antici I'ange qui 

d 


xlii BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. 

devait la sauver." The young bride accepted her 
position with an entire knowledge ■ of the responsi- 
bilities that would accompany it. She took the 
reins of the neglected administration, and sefo 
herself the task of restoring the fortunes of Casa 
Leopardi. By her exertions the Pope was made 
acquainted with their difficulties, and by his inter- 
vention an arrangement was made between the 
creditors and the Leopardi family, whereby the 
former were restrained from demanding the amount 
of their debt for forty years, receiving thereon in 
the mean time interest at 8 per cent, per annum. 
This was the life-work of Countess Leopardi. 
During forty years she administered the finances 
of Casa Leopardi, and by the end of that time 
succeeded in freeing the family from the burden 
with which it had been long encumbered. She 
died in 1857, ten years after her husband, and 
twenty years later than her eldest son, Giacomo. 

St. Mark's Place, Wolverhampton, 
December, 1881. 


( xliii ) 


The following works, amongst others, have been 
made .use of in the preparation of this volume : — 

Opere Leopardi. 6 vols. Firenze, 1845. 
Opere inedite Leopardi. Cugnoni : Halle, 1878. 
Studio di Leopardi. A. Baragiola : Strasburg, 1876. 
Traduction complete de Leopardi. F. A. Aulard : Paris, 

1880. 
Opuscules et Pens^es de Leopardi. A. Dapples : Paris, 

1880. 
G. Leopardi : sa Vie et ses (Euvres. Bouch^ Leclercq : 

Paris, 1874. 
Le Pessimisme. E. Caro : Paris, 1878. 
Pessimism. Jas. Sully: London, 1877. 
La Philosophie de Schopenhauer. Th. Eibot : Paris, 1874. 
II Buddha, Confucio, e Lao-Tse. C. Puini : Firenze, 1878- 
Article in Quarterly Eeview on Leopardi. 1850. 
Article in Fraser's Magazine, Leopardi and his Father : a 

Study, by L. Villari. November 1881. 


<s» 


HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. 


IT is said that the first inhabitants of the earth were 
everywhere created simultaneously. Whilst children 
they were fed by bees, goats, and doves, as the poets say 
the infant Jove was nourished. The earth was much 
smaller than it is at present, and devoid of mountains 
and hills. The sky was starless. There was no sea ; 
and the world as a whole was far less varied and beauti- 
ful than it now is. 

Yet men were never weary of looking at the sky an d 
the earth, which excited within them feelings of wonder 
ajc\(\ ad miration. They fv^ngidprpH t.TiPm hnt.b t.n be rif 
^^n^j^ te fixtent. maiestv. and magnificence. Their souls 
were fillpd wjj h joyous bnpp.s, and every sensation of life 
gave them inexpressible pleasure. Their contentment 
daily increased, so that they at length t hought t^ ^pimspi^^p^ SO "* pjr^"^- 
supremely happy. In this peaceful state of mind they 
passed their infancy and youth . 

Arrived at a mature age, their feelings began to 
experience some alteration . As their early hopes, to 
which they had perseveringly adhered, failed of realisa- 
tion, thev no longer put faith in them . But, on the other V 
hand, present happiness isolated from anticipation of tX^^A^'^^^ffAA 
the future, did not suf&ce them ; especially seeing that, *> V^ " 
either from habit or because the charm of a first acquaint- 
anceship had worn off, nature and all the incidents of 


2 HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. ■ 

life gave them much less pleasure than at first. They 
travelled over the earth, and visited the most distant lands. 
This they could easily do, because there were neither 
seas, mountains, nor obstacles of any kind to oppose 
them. After a f ew__xga rs. most men had proved the 
fiTij|,fi nature of the earth, the boundaries of which were 
by no means so remote as to be unattainab le. They' 
found too, that all countries of the world, and all men, 
with but slight differences, were alike. These discoveries 
/-u so greatly increased their dismntent. tba.t a. weariness of 
c-'^^jf^^ lifa V^cfimpi prevalent among men even before they had 
■^ y^s/^ passed the threshold of manho od. And as men grew 
older, this feeling gradually transformed itself into a 
hatr ed of existence, so that at length, seized by despair, 
they in one way or another hesitated not to abandon the 
light and life once so beloved. 
I It seemed to the gods a shocking thing that living crea - 

^**\ .tures shoul d prefer death to lifSj and should destroy tEem - 
[Jf- selve s f or no other reason tha n_^atJ.hPY W<^^" wpary nf 
existence. It also amazed them beyond measure to find 
their gifts held in such contempt , and so unequivocally ' 
rejected by men. They thought the world liad been en- 
dowed with sufficient beauty, goodness, and harmony to 
make it not merely a bearable, but even a highly enjoy- 
able place of residence for every living thing, and especially 
f or man, whom they had fabricated with p ecuLiaTcare, and 
a marvellous perfection . At the same time, touched with 
a deep feeling of compassion for the distress men exhibited, 
/ they began to fear lest the renewal and increase of thes e 
i^\J\ deplorahle actions might not soon result in the extin ction 
\f\r-^^ *'^° ^'imnn rnP" ""utr^iry tn dritiuy, nnrl thrj-~TTniiT?T 
*" thus lose the most perfect work of their creation, and be 

deprived of the honours they received from men. 

Joye jletermined therefore to improve the condition of 
men, s ince it seemed necessary, and to increase thS 
means whereby they might obtain happiness. ^Jhej^ 
complained of the deceitfulness of thing s ; which were 


d^' 


HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. 3 

•D£itIi£L as great, beautiful, -perfect, nor varied aa thp.y at, 

first imagined them to be: b ut were, on the contrary, -\-\'0^'^ 

small, imperfect, and mnnntoTinnH They derived no 

pleasure from their youth ; still less were they satisfied 

with the times of maturity, and old age. Their infancy (W/<^'''^j 

alone gave them pleasure , an d yearning for the sweetness u 

o f their earlv davs. the y bp.sought Jove to ma^tp. thpir - ^iSsM^ P*- 

condition one of perpetual childhood. But the god could '^'^j^^nSf — 

not satisfy them in this mattpr ■ for it was contrarylio ciiB-L*^ - 

ihe laws of naturp, and the divine decrees and intentions. sfUf o'««*-^ 

^"either could he communi cate his own infini ty to mortal 
cffeatTlt'eS. , nor tne world itself, any more than hp r-milH 
bestow infinite happiness and perfection on men and 
things. It Rp.pmpd hpst tn Tiim t,n pytp.nd the lim its of 
creation , at the same time increasing the world's diversity '" 
and beauty . In fulfilment of this intention , he enlarged _ 
j he earth on all sides ; and made the sea to flow as a 
separation between inhabited places, so that it might, 
vary the aspect of thiugs, and by severing their roads, 
prevent men from easily discovering the confines of the 
world. He also designed the sea to serve as a vivi d ^'(i/^f-''''^ 
r epresenta-tinn'of thp infinity •yliip. h they desir ed. Then <l^.+l:o4<- , 
it was that the waters covered the island Atlantis, as: 
well as many other vast tracts of country; but the 
remembrance of this island alone has survived the multi- 
tude of centuries that have passed since that time. 

Jove formed valleys by lowering certain places; and 
by exaltiQg others he created hills and mountains. He 
bespread the night with stars ; purified the atmosphere ; 
increased the brilliancy and light of day ; intensified the 
colours of the sky and the country, and gave them more 
variety. He also mixed the generations of men, so that 
t he aged of one generation were contempnraneous with 
t he children of another . Above all, Jove determined_ to 
multiply resemblances of that infinity fo r which men so 
eagerly craved. H e could not really satisfy them, but 
wjshir | c r t-,n' soothe and appease their imagination. whicE"^ 


4 HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. 

hgj £new had been the chief source of their h appiness 
i n childhoorl , he P.Tup ln ypi^ Tnany PTppf^jpnts like, t .hat"j)f 
th e sea. He created th s p.nbn^and hid it in valleys 
and caverns, and gave to the forests a dull deep whisper- 
ing, c onjoined with a myatarious UT idlllf^i"^ "^ fhpinJjoi;^- 
tops . He created also the gorgeous land of dreams, and 
gave men power to visit it in their sleep. There they 
could experience such perfect happiness as could not in 
reality be accorded to them. This served as a substitute 
for the vague unrealisable conception of felicity formed by 
men within themselves, and to which Jove himself could 
not have given any real expression, had he desired to do so. 

By these means the god infused new strength and 
vigour into the minds of men, and endea red life to them 
-a gain, so that they were full of admiration for the beauty 
and immensity of nature. This happy state lasted 
longer than the previous one. It s duration was chie fly 
due to the diversity of ag es among men, whereby those 
wno were cnuiea and wearied with their experience of 
the world, were comforted by the society of others full 
of the ardency and hopefulness of youth. 

But in pro cess of time this novelty wore off, and men 
,01^ !V, ag al5 ^ becdme disuohleuLe rr a^y^A wogr^^j r yith lite . So 
C^ despondent did they become, that then is said to liave ' 
originated the custom attributed by history to certain 
ancient nations; the birth of a child was celebrated 
with tears, and the death of a parent was the occasion 
of rejoicing for his deliverance.* At length wickedness 
became universal. This was either because men thought 
that Jove disregarded them, or because it is the nature 
of misfortune to debase even the noblest minds. 

I t is a popular error to imagine that man's mis fortunes 
/^•''"'lia ^ie result of his impiety and iniquity ! On tbe, 
contrary, his wickedness is the consequence of his mis- 


.0> 


'^^Mf^ The gods avenged themselves for their injuries, and 


^ See Herodotus, Strabo, &c. 


HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. ; 

punished mortals for their renewed perverseness, b;^_the <J^OC(_^ 
deluge_of_I}fiucalion. There were o nly two survivors o f 
tEis s bipwrRp.V nf t.T^p. human r^c e. Deucalion and Pyrrha. 
These unhappy ones wer e filled with the sense of their 
wr etcneane ss, and far trona" regretting the loss of all 
their fellows, t hemselves loudly invoked death fr om the 
s ummit of a rock . But Jove commanded them to 
remfedy the depopulation of the earth, and seeing that 
they had not the heart to beget a new generation, 
directed them t o take stones from the hill-sides, and 
cast -thom ovor thoir chould ers. F rom these stones men 
vfp.Tp. o.rp .atpA^ an d the earth was again peopled. 

The history of the past had enlightened Jove as to 
the nature of men, and had shown him that it is not 
sufficient for them, as for other animals, merely to live 
in a state of freedom from sorrow and physical discom- 
fort. He knew that whatever their condition of life, ^-'"^""^ 
fWjr_jlYpnl^ gQoV t.Vip iTnpng,cij|i1p^ and .i f unpn i ioocDod o f 
gen uine evils, would t orment themselves with imaginary 
oges/ The god resolved therefore to employ new means 
for the preservation of the miserable race. For this pur- 
pose he used two especial artifices. In the first place, he 
strewed life with veritable evi ls ; and secondly, instituted 
a thousand kinds o f business and labour, to distract me n 
a s much as possible from saJf-f-f^tp.Tnp latiyTi. and their 
dRsirps fnj- ^ .n unk nown and imagmary happiness . 

He began hy RendiufT a. jmultitude of diseases , and an 
infinite number of other calamities among them, with 
the intention of varying the conditions of life so as to 
obviate the feeling of satiety which had resulted before, 
and to induce me n to esteem t he good things they pos- 
ses sed so much t he more b y contrast with Lhesg -new 
evils! The god hoped that men would be betteF~able 
"to^ar the absence of the happiness they longed for, 
when occupied and under t he discipl inF "^^ anfFp.nncr. 
He also determined by means of these physical infir- 
mities and exertions, to reduce the vigour of men's 


J/#(as_theJ: 
[t^y^^^!^^^'^ I remov^i. 


6 HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. 

Tm'ni^H. t.n Tiiimhlp. their pride, to make them bow the 
Viparl tn npp.p.asit.y a nrl be more contented with their lot. 
He knew that disease and misfortune would operate as 
a preventive to the committal of those acts of suicide 
which had formerly been rife ; for they would not only 
make men cowardly and weak, but would help to attac h 
t hem to life bv the hope of an "TJPitP""" ^^-"^ ^'^"^ '^llfh . 
sufferings. For it is a characteristic of the unfortunate 
thev imagine hat)T)iness will wait on them as soon 
rmmediate c g-nHP nf their pres ent misfortune is 


Jove then created the winds and the rain-clouds, pre- 
pared the thunder and lightning, gave the trident to 
Neptune, launched comets, and arranged eclipses. By 
means of these and other terrible signs, he resolved to 
frjghtp.Ti mnrtals fro m time to time^ knowing that fe ar 

and actual danger wmilrl tpTnpnra.rily rpmnpilp fi" lif^i 
not only the unhappy. b l1<"' p'^pt^ thnap whn -ninst detestp.H 
anrl WPT P TT""*" '^ifp^cnrl tn pnt nn nnrl +r, tliniT cviptoTiPP 

As a cure for the idleness of the past, Jove gave 
to men a taste and desire for new foods and drinks, 
unprocurable, however, without the greatest exertions. 
Previous to the deluge men had lived on water, herbs, 
and such fruits as were yielded by the earth and the 
trees, just as certain people of California and other places 
live even in the present day. He assigned different 
climates to different countries, and appointed the seasons 
of the year. Hitherto there had been no diversity of 
temperature in any place, but the atmosphere was uni- 
formly so eq[uable and mild that men were ignorant o£ 
the use of clothing. Now, however, they were obliged to 
exert themselves industriously to remedy the inclemency 
and changeability of the weather. 

Jove gave Mercury command to lay the foundations 
of the first cities, and to divide men into different races', 
nations, and languages, separated by feelings of rivalry 
and discord. He was also commissioned to teach them 


HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. 7 

music and those other arts, which, owing to their nature 
and origin, are still called divine. Jove himself dis- 
tributed laws and constitutions to the new nations. 
Finally, as a supreme gift, he sent amonpf men certai n 
sublime an d superhuman Phantoms, to whom he com- 
mit ted very great mtluence and control over the people 
of the earth. They were called Justice, Virtue, GloryT 
^_Patrio tism, & c. Among these Phantoms was one named 
LoYe^~whi ch"TEen first entered the world. For previous 
to the introduction of clothes, the sexes were drawn 
towards one another by merely a brute instinct, far dif- 
ferent from loVe. The feeling was comparable to that 
which we experience towards articles of food and such 
things, that we desire, but do not love. 

By these divine decrees the condition of man was 
infinitely amteliorated, and rendered easier and pleasanter 
than before; in spite of the fatigues, sufferings, and 
terrors which were now inseparable from humanity. 
And this result was chiefly due to the wonderful 
ch imerasT w noni MOme Men regarded as genii, others as 
gods, and whom they followed with an intense veneration 
and enthusiasm for a very long time. To such a pitch was 
their ardour excited by the poets and. artists of the times, 
that numbers of m en did not hesitate to sac rifice their 
Iive s~to one or other of these PhantomsT i'ar from dis- 
plraising Jove, this fact gratified him exceedingly, for he 
judged that if men esteemed their life a gift worthy of. 
sacrifice to these fine and glorious illusions, they would 
be less likely to repudiate it as before. This happy 
state of affairs was of longer duration than the preceding 
ages. And even when after the lapse of many centuries, 
a tendency to decline became apparent, existence, thanks 
to these bright illusions, was still easy and bearable 
enough, up to a time not very far distant from the 
present. This decline was chiefly due to the facility 
with which men were able to satisfy their wants and 
desires ; the growing inequality between men in their 


8 HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. 

social and other conditions, as they receded farther and 
farther from the republican models founded by Jove ; 
the reappearance of vanity and idleness as a consec[uence 
of this retrocession ; the diminishing interest with which 
the variety of life's incidents inspired them ; and many 
other well-known and important causes. Again men 
were filled with the old feeling of disgust for their exist- 
ence, and again their minds clamoured for an unknown 
happiness, inconsistent with the order of nature. 

But the total revolution of tha fortunes of men, and 
the end of that epoch which we nowadays designate as 
the "old world," was due to one especial influence. It 
was this. Among the Phantoms so appreciated by the 
ancients was a certain one call^ dr^ j s rkvm ^ This Phan- 
tom had duly contributed to the prosperity of the times, 
and like the others received high honour from men, a 
number of whom consecrated themselves to her service. 
She badr^eertrently TJfemi ged her disciples to show them 
her mistress, th^sJ^athA^ -i'^P^^^Q^^ spirit who associated 
witTi the gods in heaven, whence she had never yet 
descended. The Phantom assured them that she would 
bring Truth among men, and that this spirit would, 
exercise so marvellous an influence over their life, that in 
knowledge, perfection, and happiness they would almost 
rival the gods themselves. But h ow could a shadow 
fulfil any promise, much less induce the 'irutn to de sceM 
to earth ? So after a l ong confiding expectancy, men 
^ perceived the fa,lseness of Wisdoq i. At the same time,' 
greedy of novelty because of the idleness of their life, 
and stimulated partly by ambition of equa lling the g ods, 
and partly by the intensity of their yearning for the 
happiness thev imagined would ensue from the possession 
of Truth, they presumptuously requested Jove to lend 
them this noble spirit for a time, and reproached him 
for having so long jealously withheld from men the great 
advantages that would follow from the presence of Truth. 
They with one accord expressed dissatisfaction with their 


HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. g 

lot, and renewed their former hateful whinings about the 
meanness and misery of human things. The Phantoms, 
once so dear to them, were now almost entirely aban- 
doned, not that men had discerned the unreality of 
their nature, but because they were so debased in mind 
and manners as to have no sympathy with even the 
appearance of goodness. Thus they wickedly rejected 
the greatest gift of gods to men, and excused themselves 
by saying that none but inferior genii had been sent on 
earth, the nobler ones, whom they would wilKngly have 
worshipped, being retained in heaven. 

Many things long before this had contributed to lessen 
the goodwill of Jove towards men, especially the magni- 
tude and number of their vices and crimes, which were 
far in advance of those punished by the deluge. He 
was out of patience with the human race, the restless 
and unreasonable nature of which exasperated him. He 
recognised the futility of all effort on his part to make 
men happy and contented. Had he not enlarged the 
world, multiplied its pleasures, and increased its diversity ? 
Yet all things were soon regarded by men (desirous and 
at the same time incapable of infinity) as ec[ually 
restricted and valueless. Jove determined therefore to 
make a per petual example of the hnman rar.p. Tip. 
resolved to punish men un sparinprl y, and rpdnfA thPTr^^ to 
a sta te of miSerV far SUrpa-qsincr j -heiv fnrmpv nnr,r{^i■^nr^ 

Towards the attainment of this end, h e purposed sending 
Truth amon^ men, not for a. tinnp. nr ily gg t.Tipy f^pcirprlj 

^at~for eternitv. flTld gi'^i^g bpr gnprnmn nnntrn] gnH 

dominion over the human race, in stead of the Phantoms 
that were now so greatly despised. 

The other gods marvelled at this decision of Jove, as 
likely to exalt the human race to a degree prejudicial to 
their own dignity. But he explained to them that all 
genii are not beneficial, and that apart from this, it was 
not of the nature of Truth to produce the same results 
among men as with the gods. Tor whereas to the gods 


lo HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. . 

sheunveilfid the ef -prnitv nf t heir iov. to mortals sha 
would "expose the immensity of thei i" unhappiness.^ 
representing it to them not as a matter of chance, but as 
<n. inevitable and perpetual necessity . And smce human 
evils are great in proportion as they are believed to be 
so by their victims, it may be imagined how acute an 
gO^-l^afaiction Truth will prove to men. The vanity of all 
u^tKP^^,;earthly things will b e apparent to them ; they will find" 
X'f^cT ^^''^tha.t nothi ng is genuine skW their owri unhappines s. 
AtS>^\f' ' Above ail, t hey will lose hope, hitherto the greatest solace 

.ff^y^ and support of life. Deprived of hope , they will have 

nothing to stimulate them tn any p.xertiona ; conse- 
quently work, industry, and all mental culture will 
languish, and the life of the living will partake of the 
inertness of the grave. Yet in spite of their despair and 
i nactivit y, men will st ill be~tormented bv their old longing 
f or happiness intensified and quickened, b ecause they will 
A be less distracted by cares, and the stir of action. They 
.1^^'^ win alsn he deprive d "f ^-^^ p^wpr nf iTT|f^,fTiT^fi,tirvn, whicE 
j'S^^ flV in itself could mvsteriously transport them into a state- 

/•Ay^^ / nf hfippni i ».«i« rnnTp jWftbl a- tn tY]P. fp.lip.ity fnr which t.h ey 

" And," said Jove, " all those representations of infinity 


which I designedly placed in the world to deceive and 
satisfy men, and all the vague thoughts suggestive of 
happiness, which I infused into their minds, wiU yield 
to the doctrines of Truth. The earth, which formerly 
displeased them for its insignificance, will do so increasedly 
when its true dimensions are known, and when all the 
secrets of nature are made manifest to them. And finally, 
with the disappearance of those Phantoms that alone 
gave brightness to existence, human life will become 
aimless and valueless. Nations and countries will lose 
even their names, for with Patriotism will vanish all 
incentive to national identities. Men will unite and 
form one nation and one people (as they will say), and 
will profess a universal love for the race. But in 


HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. ii 

reality there will be the least possible union amongst 

them ; they will be divided into as many peoples as 

there are individuals. For having no special country to 

love, and no foreigners to hate, every man will hate his 

neighbour, and love only himself. The evU consequences 

of this are incalculable. Nevertheless, men will not put 

an end to their unhappiness by depriving themselves 

of life, because under the sway of Truth they will become 

as cowardly as miserable. T ruth will increase thp. hittp.r- 

ness of their existence, and at the same time bereavpi ' — " ^ 

them of sufficient courage to reject it ." 

These words of Jove moved the gods to compassion 
for the human race. It seemed to them that so great 
inflictions were inconsistent with the divine attribute 
of mercy. 

But Jove continued : " There will remain to humanity r &' 

a certain consolation proceeding from the P hantom Love , " ^ ^^ ' 
which alone I purpose leaving among men. And even 
Truth, in spite of her almost omnipotence, will never 
quite prevail over Love, nor succeed in chasing this 
Phantom from the earth, thou gh the struggle between 
them will be perpetual.. T hus the life of man, divide d 
betwixt the worship of Truth and Love, will consist o f 
two epochs, du r ing which these influences will respectively 
c nntrnl bia miTid and actions. To the aged, i nstead of 
the solace of Love, will be granted a state of contentment 
wit h their existence, s imilar to that of other animals. 
T hey willlove life for its own sake, n ot for any pleasure 
or profit they derive from it." 

Accordingly, Jove removed the Phantoms from earth, 
save only Love, the least noble of all, and sent Truth 
among men to exercise over them perpetual rule. The 
consequences foreseen by the god were not long in 
making themselves manifesto And strange to say, 
whereas the spirit before her descent on earth, and when 
she had no real authority over men, was honoured by a 
multitude of temples and sacrifices, her presence had the 


,iJ*^ 


Lo^ 


13 HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. 

effect of cooling their enthusiasm on her behalf. With 
the other gods this was not so ; the more they made 
themselves manifest, the more they were honoured ; but 
Truth saddened men, and ultimately inspired them with 
such hatred that they refused to worship her, and only 
by constraint rendered her obedience. And whereas 
formerly, men who were under the especial influence of 
any one of the ancient Phantoms, used to love and revere 
that Phantom above the others, Truth was detested and 
cursed by those over whom she gained supreme control. 
So, unable to resist her tyranny, men lived from tha t 
[ time in the nnrnp lete state of misery, which is their f ate 
/ in the -n resent d ay, and to which they are eterna lly 

But not long ago, pity, which is never exhausted in 
the minds of the gods, moved Jove to compassionate 
the wretchedness of mortals. He noticed especially the 
affliction of certain men, remarkable for their high 
intellect, and nobility, and purity of life, who were extra- 
ordinarily oppressed by the sway of Truth. Now in 
former times, when Justice, Virtue, and the other Phan- 
toms directed humanity, the gods had been accustomed 
at times to visit the earth, and sojourn with men for 
awhile, always on such occasions benefiting the race, or 
particular individuals, in some especial manner. But since 
men had become so debased, and sunk in wickedness, they 
had not deigned to associate with them. Jove theref ore, 
pitying our condition, asked the immortals whether any 
one of them would visit the earth as of old, and console 
men under their calamities, especially such as seemed 
undeserving of the universal affliction. All the gods 
were silent. At Jeng^Love^he son of celestial Venus, 
.Rearing the same~iiame ^"^e Phantom ^Love^t very 
different m nature and/ power, and the m ost compas'- 
sio nate of the immortajfe. offered himself j or jhe miss ion 
proposed by Jove. .Ti^is deity was so "beloved by' the 
other gods, that hitherto they had never allowed him to 


HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. 13 

quit their presence, even for a moment. The ancients 
indeed imagined that the god had appeared to them from 
time to time ; but it was not so. They were deceived 
by the subterfuges and transformations of the Phantom 
Love. The deity of the same name first visited mankind 
after they were placed under the empire of Truth. 

Since that time the god has rarely and briefly de- 
scended, because of the general unworthiness of humanity, 
and the impatience with which the celestials await ..^.p,^^^ 
his return. When he comes on earth he chooses Ce«/<- - _ 
the tender and noble Kearts of the most generous a nd *=*«»r»^~^ " 
magnanimous persons. Here he rests for a short time, 
"Hiffusing in them so strang p nnd w nnrirmiR a. sweetness, 
and inspiring them with afFp.cf-.inns .tjo loff-.y and vignrmiR ^ 
that they then experience what is entirely new to man- q ^ 

kind, the substance r ather than the semblance of happi- '^"^^^vi'^ • 
iigas— Sometimes, though very rarely, he brings about 
the union of two hearts, abiding in them both simul- 
taneously, and exciting within them a reciprocal warmth 
and desire. All within whom he dwells beseech him to 
effect this union ; but Jove forbids him to yield to their 
entreaties, save in very few instances, because the 
happiness of such mutual love approaches too nearly to 
the felicity of the immortals. 

The man in whom Lnve abides is the happiest of 
mortals. And not only is he blessed by the presence 
of the deity, but he is also charmed by the old mysterious 
Phantoms, which, though removed from the lot of rtien, 
by Jove's permission follow in the train of Love, in spite 
of the great opposition of Truth, their supreme enemy. 
But Truth, like all the other genii, is powerless to resist 
the will of the gods. And, since destiny has granted 
to Love a state of eternal youth, the god can partially 
give effect to tha t first desire of men, that they might 
return to the happiness of thei r childhood. In jbhe souTs 
^e' inhabi ts, JLov e awakens and vivifies, so l ong as he 
stays there, the boundless hopes, and the sweet and fine 


14 HISTORY OF THE HUMAN RACE. 

illusio ns of early life. Many persons, ignorant and 
incapable oi appreciating Love, vituperate and affront the 
god, even to his face. But he disregards these insults, 
and exacts no vengeance for them, so noble and com- 
passionate is his nature. Nor do the other gods any- 
longer trouble themselves about the crimes of men, being 
satisfied with the vengeance they have already wrought 
on the human race, and the incurable misery which is 
its portion. Consequently, wicked and blasphemous men 
suffer no punishment for their offences, except that they 
are absolutely excluded from being partakers of the divine 
favours. 


( 15 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN HERCULES 
AND ATLAS. 


Arcules. Father Atlas, Jove's compliments, and in 
case you should b^ weary of your burden, I was to relieve 
you for a few hours, as I did I don't know how many cen- 
turies ago, so that you may take breath, and rest a little. 

Atlas. Thanks, dear Hercules, and I am very much 
obliged to Jove. But the world has become so ^^oht. 
that this cloak which I wear as a protection against the . 
snow, incommodes me more. Indeed, were it not Jove's 
will that I should continue to stand here, supporting this 
ball on my back, I would put it under my arm, or in my 
pocket, or suspend it from a hair of my beard, and go 
about my own affairs. 

Hercules. How has it become so light? I can easily 
see it has changed shape, and has become a sort of roll, 
instead of being round as when I studied cosmography in 
preparation for that wonderful voyage with the Argo- 
nauts. But still I cannot see why its weight should 
have diminished. 

Atlas. I am as ignorant of the reason as you are. -, 
But take the thing for a moment in your hand, and / 
satisfy yourself of the truth of my assertion. ^ 

Hercules. Upon my word, without this test, I would 
not have believed it. But what is this other novelty 
ttat I discover ? The last time I bore it, I felt a strong 
pulsation on my back, like the beat of an animal's heart ; 


i6 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

and I heard a continuous buzzing like a wasp's nest. But 
jnos*..iii-thTO]aa-jQ£tc.e^ liJie-na. .w.^toh .aatb, a, bjoke a spr ing, 
and as for the buzzing, I don't hear a sound of^it . 

AUas. I know nothing of this 'either, except that 
long ago, the world ceased making any motion, or sensible 
noise. I even had very great suspicions that it was 
dead, and expecting daily to be troubled by its corrup- 
tion, I considered how and where I should bury it, and 
what epitaph I should place on its tomb. But when I 
saw that it did not decompose, I came to the conclu- 
sion that it had changed from an animal into a, plant, 
like Daphne and others ; and this explained its silence 
and immobility. I began to fear lest it should soon 
wind its roots round my shoulders, or bury them in my 
body. 

Hercules. I am rather inclined to think i t is asleep, 
and that its repose is like that of Epimenides,^ which 
lasted more than half a century. Or perhaps it is like 
Hermotimus,' whose soul used to ■ leave his body when it 
- / \ pleased, and stay away many years, disporting itself in 
,j ■ ' ' foreign lands. To put an end to this game, the friends of 
Hermotimus burned the body ; so that tEe spirit return- 
ing, found its home destroyed, and was obliged to seek 
shelter in another body, or an inn. So, to prevent the 
world from sleeping for ever, or lest some friend, thinkiag 
it were dead, should set it on fire, let us try to arouse it . 

Atlas. I am willing. But how shall we do it ? 

Hercules. I would give it a good blow with this club, if' 
I were not afraid of smashing it, and were I not sure that 
it would crack under the stroke like an egg. Besides, I 
fear lest the men, who in my time used to wrestle with 
lions, but are now only a match for fleas, should faint 
from so sudden a shock. Suppose I lay aside my club, 
and you your cloak, and ■ga have a ^ame at ball with 
the p^rjittle_sphere. I wish I had brought the rackets 

1 See Pliny, Diogenes Laertius, ApoUonius, Varro, &o. 

2 See ApoUonius, Pliny, Tertullian, &o. 


HERCULES AND ATLAS. 17 

that Mercury and I use in the celestial courts, but we 
can do without them. 

Atlas. A likely thing indeed ! So that your father 
seeing our game, may make a third, and with his 
thunderbolt precipitate us both I do not know where, as 
he did Phaeton into the Po ! 

Hercules. That might be, if, like Phaeton, I were the 
son of a poet, and not his own son ; and if there were 
not this difference between us, that whereas poets 
formerly peopled cities by the melody of their art, I 
could depopulate heaven and earth by the power of my 
club. And as for Jove's bolt, I would kick it hence to 
the farthest quarter of the empyrean. Be assured that 
even if I wished to appropriate five or six stars for the 
sake of a game, or to make a sling of a comet, taking 
it by the tail, or even to play at ball with the sun, my 
father would make no objection. Besides, our intention 
is to do good to the world, whereas Phaeton simply 
wished to show off his fleetness before the Hours, who 
held the steps for him when he mounted his chariot. 
He also wanted to gain reputation as a skilful coach- 
man, in the eyes of Andromeda, Callisto, and the other 
beautiful constellations, to whom, it is said, he threw, 
in passing, lustre bonbons, and comfits of light ; and to 
make a fine parade of himself before the celestial gods 
during his journey that day, which chanced to be a festival. 
In short, don't give a thought to the possibility of my 
father's wrath. In any case, I will bear all the blame ; 
so throw off your cloak, and send me the ball. 

Atlas. Willingly or not, I must do as you wish ; 
since you are strong and armed, whereas I am old and 
defenceless. But do take care lest it fall, in which 
case it will have fresh swellings, or some new fracture, 
like that which separated Sicily from Italy, and Africa 
from Spain. And if it should get chipped in any way, 
there might be a war about what men would call the 
detachment of a province or kingdom. 

B 


i8 DIALOGUE BETWEEN HERCULES 4ND ATLAS. 

Hercules. Eely on me. 

Atlas. Then here goes. See how it quivers on account 
of its altered shape ! 

Hercules. Hit a little harder; your strokes scarcely 
reach me. 

Atlas. It is the fault of the ball. The south-west 
wind catches it, because of its lightness. 

Hercules. It is its old failing to go with the wiud. 

Atlas. Suppose we were to inflate the ball, since it has 
no more notion of a bounce than a melon. 

Hercules. A new shortcoming ! Formerly it used to 
leap and dance like a young goat. 

Atlas. Look out ! Eun quickly after that. For Jove's 
sake, take care lest it fall ! Alas! it was an evil hour 
when you came here. 

Hercules. You sent me such a bad stroke that I could 
not possibly have caught it in time, even at the risk of 
breaking my neck. Alas, poor little one ! . . . How are 
you ? Do you feel bad anywhere ? I don't hear a sigh, 
nor does a soul move. The y are all still a s leep. 

Atlas. Give it back to me, by all the horns of the Styx, 
and let me settle it again on my shoulders. And you, 
take your club, and hasten to heaven to excuse me with 
Jove for this accident, which is entirely owing to you. 

Hercules. I will do so. For many centuries there 
has been in my father's house a certain poet, named 
Horace. He was made court poet at the suggestion 
of Augustus, who has been deified by Jove for his 
augmentation of the Eoman power. In one of his songs, 
this poet says that the just man would stir not, though 
the world feU. Since the world has now fallen, and no 
one has moved, it follows that all men are just. 

Atlas. Who doubts the justice of men ? But do not 
lose time ; run and exculpate me with your father, else 
I shall momentarily expect a thunderbolt to transform 
me from Atlas into Etna. 


( 19 ) 


"Already has passed the thousaadth year," 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN FASHION 
AND DEATH. 


Fashion. Madam Death, Madam Death ! 

Death. "Wait until your time comes, and then I will 
appear without being called by you. 

Fashion. Madam Death ! 

Death. Go to the devil I will come when you least 
expect me. 

Fashion. As if I were not immortal ! 

Deojth. Immortal ? 

since the age of immortals ended. 

Fashion. Madam is as much a Petrarchist as if she were 
an Italian poet of the fifteenth or eighteenth century. 

Death. J liVf Pofvgrfli feeeaase — hn rnmpngppl my 

Jriumph, and because he refers , so often to nie . But I 
must be moving. 

Fashion. Stay ! For the love you bear to the seven 
cardinal sins, stop a moment and look at me. 

Death. Well. I am looking. 

Fashion. Do you not recognise me ? 

Death. You must know that I have bad sight, and am 
without spectacles. The English make none to suit me ; 
and if they did, I should not know where to put them. 

Fashion. I_ am Fas hion, your sister . 

Death. My sister"? — — — 


20 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

Fashion. Yes. Do you not remember we are both 
born of Decay ?.. 

Death. As if I, who am the chief enemy of Memory, 
should recollect it ! 

Fashion. But I do. I know also that wejb oth equally 
profit b y the_jn cessfflt^_change .g3;"j dpRt^'-'^*^i"ii -Of thiag f 
here below, although you do so in one way, and I iu 
another. 

Death. Unless you are speaking to yourself, or to 
some one inside your throat, raise your voice, and pro- 
nounce your words more distinctly. If you go mumb- 
ling between your teeth with that thin spider-voice 
of yours, I shall never understand you; because you 
ought to know that my hearing serves me no betta* than 
my sight. 

Fashion. Although it be contrary to custom, for in 
Trance they do not speak to be heard, yet, since we are 
sisters, I will speak as you wish, for we can dispense 
with ceremony between ourselves. I say then that our 
common nature and custom is tn incessantl y renew- Um. 
world. You attack the life of man, and overthrow all 
people and nations from beginning to end ; whereas I 
content myself for the most part with influencing beards, 
head-dresses, costumes, furniture, houses, and the like. 
It is true, I do some things comparable to your supreme 
action. I pierce ears, lips, and noses, and cause them 
to be torn by the ornaments I suspend from them. I 
impress men's skin with hot iron stamps, under the pre- 
tence of adornment. I compress the heads of children 
with tight bandages and other contrivances ; and make 
it customary for all men of a country to have heads of 
the same shape, as in parts of America and Asia. I 
torture and cripple people with small shoes. I stifle 
women with stays so tight, that their eyes start from 
their heads ; and I play a thousand similar pranks. I 
also frequently persuade and force men of refinement 
to hear daily numberless fatigues and discomforts, and 


FASHION AND DEATH. 21 

often real sufferings ; and some even die gloriously for 
love of me. I will say nothing of the headaches, colds, 
inflammations of all kinds, fevers — daily, tertian, and 
quartan — which men gain by their obedience to me. 
They are content to shiver with cold, or melt with heat, 
simply because it is my will that they cover their 
shoulders with wool, and their breasts with cotton. 
In fact, they do everything in my way, regardless of their 
own injury. 

Death. In truth, I believe you are my sister; the 
testimony of a birth certificate could scarcely make me 
surer of it. But standing still paralyses me, so if 
you can, let us run; only you must not creep, because 
I go at a great pace. As we proceed you can tell 
me what you want. If you cannot keep up with me, 
on account of our relationship I promise when I die 
to bequeath you all my clothes and effects as a New 
Year's gift. 

Fashion. If we ran a race together, I hardly know 
which of us would win. For if you run, I gallop, and 
standing stUl, which paralyses you, is death to me. So 
let us run, and we will chat as we go along. 

Death. So be it then. Since your mother was mine, 
you ought to serve me in some way, and assist me in 
my business. 

Fashion. I have already done so — more than you 
imagine. Above all, I, who annul and transform other 
customs unceasingly, have nowhere changed the custom 
of death; for this reason it has prevailed from the 
beginning of the world until now. 

.Death. A great miracle forsooth, that you have never 
done what you could not do ! 

Fashion. Why cannot I do it? You show how 
ignor9,nt you are of the power of Fashion. 

Death. Well, well : time enough to talk of this when 
you introduce the custom of not dying. But at present, 
I want you, lite a good sister, to aid me in rendering 


22 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

my task more easy and expeditious than it has hitherto 
been. 

Fashion. I have already mentioned some of my labours 
which are a source of profit to you. But they are trifling 
in comparison with those of which I will now tell you. 

Little by little, and especially in modern times, I have 
brought into disuse and discredit those exertions and 
exercises which promote bodUy health ; and have sub- 
stituted numberless others which enfeeble the body in a 
thousand ways, and shorten Life. Besides, I have intro- 
duced customs and manners, which render existence a 
thing more dead than ahve, whether regarded from a 
physical or mental point of view ; so that this century 
may be aptly termed the century of death. And whereas 
formerly you had no other possessions except graves and 
vaults, where you sowed bones and dust, which are but 
a barren seed, now you have fine landed properties, and 
people who are a sort of freehold possession of yours as 
soon as they are born, though not then claimed by you. 
And moifi ^You. who used formerly to be hatejL and vitii,- 
perated, are in the present day, thanks to me, valued 
jnd lauded by. all men of genius. Such anone prefers 
you to life itself, and holds you m such high esteem that 
he invokes you, and looks to you as his greatest hope. 

But this is not all. I perceived that men had some 
vague idea of an after-life, which they called immor- 
tality. They i m agined they live d in the memory of 
their fe llo ws, and this remembran c e they sought after 
eagerly . ^.Ofjgour se this was in reali ty m ere fancy, s ince 
what could it matter to them when dead, that they lived 
in the minds of men ? As well might they dread cpn- 
tamination in the grave ! Yet, fearing lest this chimera 
might be prejudicial to you, in seeming to diminish 
your honour and reputation, I have abolished the fashion 
of seeking immortality, and its concession, even when 
merited. So that now, whoever dies may assure himself 
that he is dead altogether, and that every bit of him goes 


FASHION AND DEATH. 23 

into the ground, just as a little fish is swallowed, bones 
aiid all. 

These important things my love for you has prompted 
me to effect. I have also succeeded in my endeavour to 
increase your power on earth. I am more than ever 
desirous of continuing this work. Indeed, my object in 
seeking you to-day was to make a proposal that for the 
future we should not separate, but jointly might Scheme 
and execute for the furtherance of our respective designs. 

Death. You speak reasonably, and I am willing to do 
as you propose. 


( 24 ) 


PRIZE COMPETITION ANNOUNCED BY 
THE ACADEMY OF SILLOGRAPHS. 


The Academy of Sillograplis, ardently desiring to advance 
the common welfare, and esteeming nothing more con- 
formable to this end than the promotion of the progress 

" Of the Kappy century in which we live," 

as says an illustrious poet, has taken in hand the careful 
consideration of the nature and tendency of our time. 
After long and mature consultation, the Academy has 
Tesnlved to call our era the ap;e of mf^phinpR ; not only 
^T |SA t.Tip. men nf tn-day-.liye and move jerhaps more 
mechanically tha n in past times , but also on account of 
the numeiousmachines rSw^n vented a nd utilised for so 
many _ di^rent_, purposes. To such an extent indeed is 
this carried , that machines and not dict^ may be said to 
j]a2aagejmman_jifeirs, and condu ct the business o f life^ 
This circumstance greatly pleases the said Academy, not 
so much because of the manifest convenience of the 
arrangement, as for two reasons, which it thinks very 
important, although ordinarily they are not so regarded. 
The one is the possibility that in process of time the influ- 
ence and usefulness of machines may extend to spiritual 
as well as material things. Am'' as by virtue of these 
machines and inventions, we are already protected from 
lightning, storms, and other such evils and terrors ; 
similarly there may be discovered some cure for envy. 


THE ACADEMY OF SILLOGRAPHS. 25 

calumny, perfidy, and trickery ; some safety-cord or 
other invention to deliver us from egotism, from the 
prevalence of mediocrity, from prosperous fools, bad and 
debased persons, from the universal spirit of Indifference, 
from the wretchedness peculiar to the wise, the cultivated, 
the noble-minded, and from other discomforts which for 
many centuries have been more invincible than either 
lightning or tempests. The other and chief reason con- 
cerns the rmhappy fipndit.inn of thp hnr nn.Ti race . Most 
philosophers despair of its improvement, or the cure of 
its defects, which probably equal or exceed in number 
its virtues. They believe it would be easier to entirely 
re-create the race in another way, or to substitute a 
different " genus " altogether, than to amend it. The 
Academy of Sinographs is therefore of opinion that it 
is very expedient for t^<^-" t." wit.ViriT-Q-^ frnm the, business 
of life as much as possible, and gradually t o resign in 
favour of machines. And being resolved to support with 
all its might the progress of this new order of things, it 
now begs to offer three prizes for the inventors of th e 

The aim of the first machine must be 'to represent a 
friend warranted not to abuse or ridicule his absent friend; 
nor forsake his friend when he hears him made the sub- 
ject of jest ; nor to seek the reputation of acuteness, 
sarcasm, and the power of exciting men's laughter at his 
friend's expense; nor to divulge or boast of secrets con- 
fided to him ; nor to take advantage of his friend's 
intimacy and confidence in order to supplant and surpass 
him ; nor to envy his friend's good fortune. But it must 
be solicitous for his friend's welfare, join issue with him 
against his misfortunes, and assist him in deeds as well 
as words. Eeference to the treatises of Cicero and the 
Marquise of Lambert on "Friendship " may be advantage- 
ously made for further suggestions as to the manufacture 
of this automaton. The Academy thiuks the invention 
of this machine ought not to be regarded as either impos- 


26 PRIZE COMPETITION ANNOUNCED BY 

sible, or even very difficult, seeing that besides the auto- 
mata of Eegiomontano, Vaucanson, and others, and the 
one in London which drew figures and portraits, and wrote 
from dictation, there are machines that can even play 
chess unassisted. Now in the opinion of many " savants," 
human life is a game, and some assert it to be a thing 
even more frivolous. They say that the game of chess 
is a more rationally conceived thing, and its hazards are 
less uncertain than those of life. Besides, Pindar has 
called life a thing of no more substance than the dream 
of a shadow ; in which case it ought not to be beyond the 
capacity of a vigilant automaton. As to speech, there is 
no reason why men should not be able to communicate 
this to machines of their manufacture. For amongst 
examples of manufactures so endowed, we may number 
the 'Statue of Memnon, and the head formed by Albertus 
Magnus ; this latter was so loquacious that St. Thomas 
Aquinas, irritated at its incessant tittle-tattle, broke it 
in pieces. And if the parrot of ISTevers (though certainly 
this was an animal, however small a one) could converse, 
how much more credible that a machine, conceived by 
the mind of man, and constructed by his hands,- should 
be able to acquire such attainments ? The machine ought 
not to be so talkative as the parrot of Nevers, and 
other similar ones, which we see and hear everywhere ; 
nor as the head made by Albertus Magnus ; for it 
must not weary its friend, thereby inciting him to its 
destruction. 

The inventor of this machine shall receive a reward of 
a gold medal weighing four hundred sequins, which on 
the one side shall have a representation of the figures of 
Pylades and Orestes, and on the other side the name of 
the person rewarded, together with the inscription, " First 
verifier of the ancient fables." 

The second machi na must be an g-riifip ^igl -man 

worked by steam, adapted and constructed for virtuous 
and mag nanimous j Lfitiaas. The Academy is of opinion 


THE ACADEMY OF SILLOGRAPHS. 27 

that since'"no other method appears to exist, steam ought to 
be capable of directing an animated automaton in the paths 
of virtue and glory. Candidates for this competition are 
referred to books of poems and romances for suggestiohs 
as to the qualities and powers with which to endow the 
figure. The reward to be a gold medal weighing four 
hundred and fifty sequins, stamped on the one side with 
some fanciful design significative of the age of gold, and 
on its reverse the name of the inventor of the machine, 
together with this inscription from the fourth eclogue of 
Virgil : " Quo ferrea primum desinet ac toto surget gens 
aurea mundo." 

The third machine should be empowered to act a s 
a woman, realising the conception formed partly by 
Count Baldassar Castiglione, who describes his idea in 
the book of the "_CorJifigianQ^' and partly by others, 
easily discoverable in various writings which must be 
consulted and combined with those of the Count. Nor 
ought the invention of this machine to appear impossible 
to men of our times, when it be remembered that 
jPjgmalionlong ago, in an age far from scientific, was able 
to fabricate a spouse with his own hands, who was con- 
sidered to be the best woman that had ever existed. To 
the originator of this machine a gold medal weighing five 
hundred sequins is assigned, on the one side of which 
?hall be represented the Arabian Phoenix of Metastasio, 
perched on a tree of some European species, and on the 
other side shall be written the name of the recipient, 
with the inscription, " Inventor of faithful women, and 
conjugal happiness." The Academy decrees that the 
cost of these prizes must be defrayed with what was 
discovered in the satchel of Diogenes, late Secretary of 
this Academy, or by means of one of the three golden 
asses th at belonged to three Sillographic Academicians, 
Apuleius, Firenzuola, and Macchiavelli ; all which pro- 
perty passed to the Sillographists by will of the deceased, 
as may be read in the Chronicles of the Academy. 


( 28 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN A GOBLIN 
AND A GNOME. 


Goblin. You here, son of Beelzebub ! wliere are you 
going ? 

Gnome. My father has sent me to find out what these 
rascals of men are doing. He is inclined to suspect, 
something, because it is so long since they gave us any 
trouble, and in all his realms there is not a single one to 
be seen. He wonders whether any great change has 
taken place, and thinks perhaps they have returned to 
the primitive system of barter, whereby they use sheep 
instead of gold and silver ; or the civihsed people have 
become dissatisfied with paper notes for money, as they 
have often been, or have taken to cowrie shells such as 
savages use ; or the laws of Lycurgus have been re-estab- 
lished. The last possibility seems to him the least 
likely. 

Goblin. " ^You seek them in vaia . fop th^ y are all 
^dead." as said the survivors in a tragedy where the prin- 
cipal personages died in the last act. 

Gnome. What do you mean ? 

Gohliri. I mean that men are all dead, and the race 
is lost. 

Gnome. My word ! what news for the papers ! But 
how is it they have not already mentioned it ? 

Goblin. Stupid. Do you not see that if there are no 
men there will be no more newspapers ? 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN A GOBLIN AND A GNOME. 29 

Gnome. Yes, that is true. But how shall we know in 
future the news of the world ? 

Goblin. News ! what news ? That the sun rises and 
sets? That it is hot or cold? That here or there it 
has rained or snowed, or been windy ? 

Since men disappeared. Fortune has unbandaged her 
eyes, put on spectacles, and attached her wheel to a pivot. 
She sits with arms crossed, watching the world go round 
without troubling herself in the least as to its affairs. 
There are no more kingdoms nor empires to swell them- 
selves, and burst like bubbles, for they have aU vanished. 
There is no more war; and the years are as like one 
another as two peas. 

Gnome. No one will know the day of the month, since 
there will be no more calendars printed ! 

Gohlin. What a misfortune ! Nevertheless, the moon 
will continue her course. 

Gnome. And the days of the week will be nameless ! 

Gohlin. What does it matter? Do you think they 
will not come unless you call them ? 6r, that once passed, 
they will return if you call out their names ? 

Gnome. And no one will take any count of the years ! 

Gohlin. We shall be able to say we are young when 
we are old; and we shall forget our cares when we 
cannot fix their anniversary. Besides, when we are 
very old, we shall not know it, nor be expect,ing death 
daily. 

Gnome. But how is it these rogues have disappeared ? 

Gohlin. S ome killed themselves w ith fighting; others 
w ere drowned, in the sea, j-jome ate each otfieiFr Not a 
jRpw Am-nTnittP^q HinVidp Some difiiLaLfiflJaflOaadlsafiss ; 
and some turne d their. brains with study. Debauch, and 
a thousand other excesses, put an end to many more. In 
short, they have arrived at their end, by endeavouring, 
as long as they lived, to viol ate the laws of nature, and 
to po contrary to their welfar e. 

Gnome. Still, I do not understand how an entire race 


30 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

of animals can become extinct without leaving any trace 
behind it. 

Goblin. You who are a specialist in geology ought to 
know that the circumstance is not a new one, and that 
many kinds 6i animals lived anciently, which to-day 
are nowhere to be found except in the remains of a 
few petrified bones. Moreover, these poor creatures 
employed none of the means used by men for their 
destruction. 

Gnome. It may be so. I should dearly like to resus- 
citate one or two of the rascals, just to know what they 
would think when they saw all going on as before, in 
spite of the disappearance of the human race. Would 
they then imagine that everything was made and main- 
tained solely for them ? 

Gohlin. They would not like to realise that the world 
e^sts_solely_fbr the use of the Goblins. 

Gnome. You are joking, my friend, if you mean what 
you say. 

Gohlin. Why ? Of course I do. 

Gnome. Go along with you, buffoon ! ^ho does no t 
kn ow, that the world is made for the Gnomes ? 

Gohlin. For the Gnomes, who live underground ! That 
is one of the best jokes I have ever heard. What good 
are the sun, moon, air, sea, and country to the Gnomes? 

Gnome. And pray of what use to the Goblins are the 
mines of gold and silver, and the whole body of earth, 
except the outer skin ? 

Gohlin. Well, well: suppose we abandon the discus- 
sion. It is unimportant after aU. For I imagine even 
the lizards and gnats think the whole world was created 
for their exclusive service. Let each of us believe what 
we please, for nothing wiU make us change our opinion. 
But, between ourselves, if I had not been born a Goblin, 
I should be in despair. 

Gnome. And I, had I not been born a Gnome. But 
I should like to know what men would say of their 


A GOBLIN AND A GNOME. 31 

impertinence in former times, wlien, besides other mis- 
deeds, they sank thousands of underground shafts, and 
stole our goods from us by force, asserting that they 
belonged to the human race. Nature, they said, con- 
cealed and buried the things down below, as a sort of 
game at hide and seek, just to see if they could discover 
and abstract them. 

Goblin. I do not wonder at that, since they not only 
imagined the things of the world were at their service, 
but they also regarded them as a mere trifle compared 
to the human race. They called their own vicissitudes 
" revolutions of the world ; " and histories of their nations, 
" histories of the world ; " although the earth contained 
about as many different species of animals as living 
individual human beings. Yet these animals, though 
made expressly for the use of men, were never conscious 
of the so-called revolutions of the world ! 

Gnome. Then even the fleas and gnats were made for 
the service of men ? 

Gohlin. Just so. To exercise their patience, men said. 

Gnome. As if, apart from fleas, man's patience were 
not tried sufficiently ! 

Goblin. And a certain man named Chrysippus termed 
pigs pieces of meat expressly prepared by nature for 
man's table. Their souls, he said, served the purpose 
of salt, in preserving them from decay. 

Gnome. In my opinion, if Chrysippus had had a little 
sense (salt) ia his brain, instead of imagination (soul), 
lie would never have conceived such an idea. 

Gohlin. Here is another amusiag circumstance. An 
infinite number of species of animals were never seen, 
nor heard of by men their masters, either because they 
lived where man never set foot, or because they were 
too small to be observed. Many others were only dis- 
covered during the last days of the human race. The 
same may be said of plants, minerals, &c. Similarly, 
from time to time, by means of their telescopes, they 


32 DIALOGUE BETWEEN A GOBLIN AND A GNOME. 

perceived some star or planet, of the existence of whicli 
hitherto, during thousands and thousands of years, they 
had been ignorant. They then immediately entered it 
on the catalogue of their possessions ; for they regarded 
the stars and planets as so many candles placed up 
above to give light to their dominions, because they 
were wont to transact much business in the night. 

Gnome. And in summer, when they saw those little 
meteor flames that rush through the air at night, they 
imagined them to be sprites employed in snuffing the 
candles for the good of mankind. 

Goblin. Yet now that they are all gone, the earth is 
none the worse off. The rivers still flow, and the sea, 
although no longer used for navigation and traffic, is 
not dried up. 

Gnome. The stars and planets still rise and set ; nor 
have they gone into mourning. 

GoUin. Neither has the sun put on sackcloth and 
ashes, as it did, according to Virgil, when Caesar died ; 
about whom I imagine it concerned itself as little as 
Pompey's Pillar. 


( 33 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN MALAMBRUNO ~ ^ 
AND FARFARELLO. yC^jJ&^ 

Malamlrurbo. Spirits of tlie deep, Farfarello, Ciriatto, 
EaconerOjAstarotte, Alichino, or whatever else you are 
called, I adjure you in the name of Beelzebub, and 
command you by virtue o^ my art, which can unhinge 
the moon, and nail the sun in the midst of the heavens, 
come one of you with your prince's permission, to put 
all the powers of hell at my disposal. 

Farfarello. Here I am. 

Mai. Whb are you ? 

Far. Farfarello, at thy service. 

Mai. Have you the mandate of Beelzebub ? 

Far. I have; and can thus do for thee aU that the 
king himself could do, and more than lies in the power 
of all other creatures together. 

Mai. It is well. I wish to be satisfied in but one 
desire. 

Far. Thou shalt be obeyed. What is it ? Dost thou 
wish for majesty surpassing that of the Atrides ? 

Mai. No. 

Far. More wealth than shall be found in El Dorado, 
when it is discovered ? 

Mai. No. 

Far. An empire as large as that of which Charles V. 

dreamt one night ? 

Mai. No. 

c 


34 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

Far. A mistress chaster than Penelope ? 

Mai. No: methinks the devil's aid were superfluous 
for that. 

Far. Honours and success, however wicked thou 
mayst be ? 

Mai. I should rather more need the devil, if I wished 
the contrary, under such circumstances. 

Far. Then what dost thou want ? 

Mai. Make me happy for a moment. 

Far . 'T'eaShot. 

Mai. Why? 

Far. I give you my word of honour — I cannot do it. 

Mai. The word of honour of a good demon ? 

Far. Yes, to be sure. Thou shouldest know that 
th CTB are good devils as well as good mem . 

Mai. And you must know that I wiU hang you by 
the tail to one of these beams if you do not instantly 
obey me without more words. 

Far. It were easier for you to kill me, than for me to 
satisfy your demands. 

Mai. Then return with my malediction, and let 
Beelzebub come himself. 

Far. Beelzebub and the whole army of hell would be 
equally powerless to render you or any of your race 
happy. 

Mai. Not even for a single moment ? 

Far. As impossible for a moment, half a moment, or 
the thousandth part of a moment, as for a lifetime. 

Mai. Well, sinqe you cannot make me happy in any 
way, at least free me from nn happiTieRs. 

Far. On condition that vou no longer love yourself 
^ab ove eve r ything else. 

Mai. I shall only cease doing that w hen I die. 

Far. But as long as you live you w'ill be unable to do 
it. Your nature would tolerate anything rather than 
that. 

Mai. So it is. 


MALAMBRUNO AND FARFARELLO. 35 

Far. Consequently, loving yourself above everything, 
you desire your own happiness more than anything. 
But because this is unattainable, you must necessarily be 
unhappy. 

Mai, Even when engaged in pleasure ; since no grati- 
fication can make me happy, or satisfy me. 

Far. Truly none. 

Mai. And because pleasure cannot satisfy my soul's 
innate desire for happiness, it is not true pleasure, and 
during its continuance I shall stUl be unhappy. 

Far. As you say: because in men and other living 
beings, the deprivation of happiness, even though pain 
and misfortune be wantiog, implies express unhappiness. 
This, too, during the continuance of so-called pleasures. 

Mai. So that frnm bi^th tn linfjith fi^ir ^ mhappiness 
never ceases for an instant. 


Far. Yes, it ceases whenever you sleep dreamlessly , or 
when, from one fianRfi "^ ^ni^thc^r^ you are deprived of 
your senses^ 

Mai. But never, so long ag we are sensible that we 
live. 

Far. Never. 

Mai. So that in fact it w^.re ]^etter not to live than_t o_ 
live. 

Far. If the absence of unhappiness be better than 
unhappiness itself. 

Mai. Then? 

Far. Then if you would like to give me your soul 
before its time, I am ready to carry it away with me. 


( 36 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN NATURE 
AND A SOUL. 


Nature. Go, my beloved child. You shall be regarded 
as my favoured one for very many centuries. Live : be 
g reat and unhappy . 

Sovl. What evil have I done before beginning to live, 
that you condemn me to this misery ? 

Nature. What misery, my child ? 

Soul. Do you not ordain that I am to be unhappy ? 

Nature. Yes ; but only so far as to enable you to be 
great, -which you cannot become without unhappiness. 
Besides, you are destined to animate a h^jiman body, and 
alljnen are of necessity unhapp y from their birt h. 

Soul. It were more reasonable that you made happiness 
a necessity ; or this being impossiblej it were better not 
to bring men into the world. 

Nature. I can do neither the one thing nor the other, 
because I am subordinate to Destiny, who decrees the 
contrary. The reason of this is as much a mystery to 
myself as to you. Now that you are created and designed 
to animate a human being, no power in the world can 
save you from the unhappiness common to men. More- 
over, your infelicity will be especially great, owing to the 
perfection with which I have fashioned you. 

Boul. I know nothiug yet, because I have only just 
begun to live. Doubtless this is why I do not under- 
stand you. But tell me, is greatness the same thing as 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN NATURE AND A SOUL. 37 

extreme unhappiness ? If, however, they are different, 
why could not the one be separated from the other ? 

Nature. In the souls of men, and proportionately in 
those of all animals, they are inseparable, because excel- 
lence of soul implies great capacity for knowledge, which 
in exposing to men the unhappiness of humanity may be 
termed unhappiness itself. Similarly, a life of greater 
intensity involves a greater love of self, manifested in 
different ways. An increased desire for happiness is a 
consequence of this self-love and increased unhappiness, 
because of the impossibility of satisfying this desire, and 
as the unfortunate condition of humanity becomes realised. 
All this is decreed from the beginning of creation, and is 
unalterable by me. 

Moreover, the keenness of your intellect and the 
strength of your imagination wiU lessen considerably 
your power of self-control. Brute animals readily adapt 
all their faculties and powers to the attainment of their 
ends ; but men rarely do so, being usually prevented by 
their reason and imagination, which give birth to a thou- 
sand doubts in deliberation, and a thousand hindrances 
in execution. The less men are inclined or accustomed 
to deliberate, the more prompt are they in decision, and 
the more vigorous in action. But such souls as yours, 
self-contained, and proudly conscious of their greatness, . 
are really powerless for self-rule, and often succumb to 
irresolution both in thought and action. This tempera- 
ment is one of the greatest curses of human life. 

Added to this, although by your noble talents you 
will easily and quickly excel most men in profound 
knowledge and works of the greatest difficulty, you 
will yet find it almost impossible to learn, or put in 
practice, a host of things, trivial enough, but very essential 
for your intercourse with others. At the same time, you 
will see your inferiors, and even men of scarcely any 
intelligence, perfectly at home with these things. Such 
difficulties and miseries as these occupy and surround 


38 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

great souls; but they are amply atoned for by fame, 
praise, and honours paid to their greatness, and by the 
lasting memory they leave behind them. 

Soul. Whence will come these praises and honours, — 
from heaven, from you, or from whom ? 

Nature. From men, who alone can dispense them. 

Soul. But I thought my ignorance of those things 
necessary for the intercourse of life, which intellects 
inferior to mine so easily comprehend, would cause me 
to be despised and shunned, not praised by men, I 
thought too that I should surely live unknown to most 
of them, because of my unfitness for their society. 

Natv/re. I have not the power to foresee the future, so 
I cannot say exactly how men will behave to you whilst 
you are on earth. But judging from past experience, 
I think they will probably be jealous of you. This is 
another misfortune to which great minds are peculiarly 
liable. Perhaps too, they wiU despise you, and treat you 
with indifference. Fortune herself, and even circum- 
stances, are usually unfriendly to such as you. 

But directlv after your death, as happened to one 
named Camoens, or a few years later, like Milton, you 
wi U be eulogised and lauded to the skies, i f not by 
every one, at any rate by the few men of noble minds. 
Perhaps the ashes of your body wUl be deposited in a 
magnificent tomb, and your likeness reproduced in many 
different forms, and passed about from hand to hand. 
Men will also study your life and writings, and at length 
the world will ring with your name. Always proArided 
you are not hindered by evil fortune, or even by the 
very excess of your genius, from leaving undoubted 
testimonies of your merit ; instances are not wanting of 
such unfortunates, known only to myself and Destiny. 

Soul. mother, I care not if I be deprived of all 
knowledge, so long as I obtain what I most desire, 
happiness. And as for glory, I know not whether it be 
a good or evil thing, but I do know that I shall only 


NATURE AND A SOUL. 39 

value it in so far as it procures me happiness, directly 
or indirectly. Now, on your own showing, the excellence 
with which you have endowed me, though it may be 
fruitful of glory, is also productive of the greatest unhap- 
piness. Yet even this paltry glory I may not gain until 
I am dead, when I fail to see how I shall benefit by it. 
And besides, there is the probability that this phantom 
glory, the price of so much suffering, may be obtained 
neither in life nor after death. 

In short, from what you yourself have said, I con- 
clude that far from loving me with peculiar affection, as 
you afi&rmed, you bear me greater malice than that of 
which I can be the victim, either at the hands of men 
or Destiny. Why else should you have endowed me 
with this disastrous excellence, about which you boast 
so much, and which will be the chief stumbling-block in 
the road to happiness, the only thing for which I care ? 

Natwe. My child, all men are destined to be unhappy, 
as I have said, without any fault of mine. But in the 
midst of this universal misery, and amid the infinite 
vanity of all their pleasures and joys, ^lory is bv most 
men co nsidered to be the grp^p^f, prnnd-nf liia, and the 
worthiest object of ambition and fatigue. Therefore, 
not hatred but a feeling of especial kindliness, has 
prompted me to assist you as far as I could in your 
attainment of this glory. 

Send. Tell me : among the animals you mentioned, are 
there any of less vitality and sensibility than men ? 

Nature. All are so, in more or less degree, beginning 
with plants. Man, being the most perfect of them all, 
has greater life and power of thought than all other 
living beings. 

Soul. Then if you love me, place me in the most 
imperfect thing existing, or that being impossible, at 
least deprive me of this terrible excellence, and make 
me like the most stupid and senseless soul you have 
ever created. 


40 DIALOGUE BETWEEN NATURE AND A SOUL. 

Nature. I can satisfy your second request, and will 
do so, since you reject the immortality I would have 
given you. 

Smd. And i nstead of the immortality. I beseech y nn 
^ hasten my deat h as much as possible. 

Nature. I "will consult Destiny about that. 


( 41 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE EARTH 
AND THE MOON. 


Earth. Dear Moon, I know t'.Tiat, ynn fan gppaV a'nrl , .,^ 

ans wer questions like a human being, for I liavA hparrl ^-^^^Z^^^^^ 
So Irom many of ths poets. Besides, our children say 
you have really a mouth, nose, and eyes like ■ every one 
else, and that they see them with their own eyes, which 
at their time of life ought to be very sharp. As- for m e. 
no doubt you know that I am a person; ind eed, when I 
was young, i had a numBir of children ; so you wUl not 
be surprised to hear me speak. And the reason, my fine 
Moon, why I have never uttered a word to you before, 
although I have been your neighbour for I don't know 
how many centuries, is that I have been so occupied' as 
to have no time for gossip. JB^t now mv businea^ is so 
trifling that it can look after its elf. I don't know what 
to "do, &-Q.& am ready to die of ennuL So in future, I 
nope we "may oiten' have some talk together; and I 
should like to know all about your affairs, if it does not 
inconvenience you to recount them to me. 

Moon. Be easy on that score. May the Fates never 
trouble me more than you are likely to ! Talk as much 
as you please, and although , as I believe von knoWi T am 
p ytiii,] f.r |__g2]f""q. I will willingly listen and reply, to 
omige youT 

Earth. Do you hear the d elightful sound jnade by the 
heavenly bodies in motion ? 


42 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

Moon. To tell you the truth, ^ 

Uarth. Nor .do I; sav e only the whistling of the wind, 
which blowslSom my poles to the equator, andlrom the 
equator to the poles, and which is far from musical. 
But Pythagoras asserts that the celestial spheres make 
an incredibly sweet harmony, and that you take part in 
the concert, and are the eighth chord of this universal 
lyre. As f or me, I am so deafen ed by my own noise 
that_I_hBiai_ni2thing. 

Moon. I also am do ubtl ess deafened, s ince I hear no 
more than you. But it is news to me that I am a 
chord. 

Earth. Now let us change the subject. Tell me ; are 
you really inhabited, as thousands of ancient and modern 
philosophers affirm — from Orpheus to De Lalande ? la 
spite of all my efforts to prolong these horns of mine, 
which men call mountains and hills, and from the 
summits of which I look at you in silence, I have failed 
to discern a single one of your inhabitants. Yet I am 
told that a certain David Fabricius, whose eyes were 
keener than those of Lynceus, at one time observed 
your people extending their linen to be dried by the 
sun. 

Moon. I know nothing about your horns. I will 

admit that, T am intitj jiij-Qrl 

Earths What colour are your men ? 

Moon. What men ? 

EarthTThosQ that you contain. Did you not say you 
were inhabited ? 

Moon. Yes, what then ? 

Earth. Does it not follow that all your inhabitants 
are animals ? 

Moon. Neither animals nor men, though I am really 
in ignorance as to the nature of either the one or the 
other. AsJ"or the men you speak of, I have not an idea 
what yoiTmeanr""'^ 

Earth. Then what sort of creatures are yours ?. 


THE EARTH AND THE MOON. 43 

Moon. They are of very many different kinds, as un- 
known to you, as yours are to me. 

Earth. This is so strange that if you yourself had 
not informed me of it, I would never have believed it. 
Were y ou ever conquered by any of your inhabitants ? 

Moon. JSTot that I know of. But howT'~And for 
what reason ? 

Earth. Through ambition and jealousy ; by means of 
diplomacy and arms. ,. 

Moon. I do not know what you mean by arms, ambi- 
tion, and diplomacy. Indeed, I understand nothing of 
what you say. 

Earth. But surely if you do not understand the mean- 
ing of arms, you know something of war ; because, not 
long ago, a certain doctor discovered through a tele- 
scope, which is an instrument for seeing a long distance, 
that you possessed a fine fortress with proper bastions. 
Now this is certain proof that your races are at any 
rate accustomed to sieges and mural battles. 

Moon. Pardon me. Mother Earth, if I reply to you a 
little more at length than would be expected from one 
so subjugated as it seems I am. But in t ruth. YOU 
a ppear to me more., t han vain to ima gi T)ja-t h aJi-£y.eiy- 
^ng in the world is con f ormable to voui;, tj:^ing,^ ; as i f 
Mat ure had i ig _gther jntgntio,o , thaiuJa ..COpy»y»n emctly 
"vn eacii ot her creations. I tell you I am inhabited, 
and you ~jump~"to the conclusion that my inhabitants 
are men. I assert that they are not, and whilst admit- 
ting that they may be another race of beings, you endow 
them with qualities and customs similar to those of your 
people. You also speak to me about the telescope of a 
certain doctor. But it seems to me the sight of these 
telescopes is about as good as that of your children, who 
discover that I have eyes, a mouth, and a nose, all of 
which I am ignorant of possessing. 

Earth. Then it is not true that your provinces are 
intersected by fine long roads, and that you are culti- 


44 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

vated ; which things are clearly discernible with a tele- 
scope from Germany.^ 

Moon. I do not know whether I am cultivated," and 
I have never observed my roads. 

JEarth. Dear Moon, you must know that I am of a 
coarse composition, and very simple-minded. No wonder 
therefore that men easily deceive me. But I can assure 
you that if your own inhabitants do not care to conquer 
you, you are by no means free from such danger; for 
at different times many people down here have thought 
of subduing you, and have even made great preparations 
for doing so. Some have tried to reach you by going 
to my highest places, standing on tiptoe, and stretching 
out their arms. Besides, they have made a careful 
study of your surface, and drawn out maps of your 
countries. They also know the heights of your moun- 
tains, and even their names. I warn you of these 
things out of pure good-will, so that you may be pre- 
pared for any emergency. 

Now, permit me to ask you another question or two. 
Are you much disturbed by the dogs that bay at you? 
What do you think of those people who show you 
another moon in a well ? Are you masculine or femi- 
nine ? ^ — because anciently there was a difference of 
opinion. Is it true that the Arcadians came into the, 
world before you ? * Are your women, or whatever I 
should call them, oviparous, and did one of their eggs 
fall down to us, once upon a time ? * Are you perforated 
like a bead, as a modern philosopher believes ? * Are 

1 See German newspapers of March 1824, for particulars of tlie 
discoveries attributed to Gruithuisen. 

" See Macrobius, Satwrnal : lib. 3. cap. 8 ; TertulUan, Apolog., cap. 
15. The moon was also honoured as the god moon. In the German 
language moon is masculine. 

' See Menander, Ub. i. cap. 15, in Rhetor, graec. veter. 

* Athen : lib, 2. ed. Casaub. p. 57. 

' Antonio di Ulloa. See Carli, Lettere Americane, par. 4. lett. 7. 
Milan, 1784. 


/ 


I THE EARTH AND THE MOON. 45 

you made of green cheese, as some English say ? Is it 
"jue that Mahomet one fine night cut you in two like 
a water melon, and that a good piece of your body 
i^YL into his cloak ? Why do you like to stay on the 
tops of minarets ? What do you think of the feast of 
Bdiram ? 

Moon. You may as well go on. I need not answer 
such questions, nor depart from my accustomed habit 
of silence. If you wish to be so frivolous, and can find 
nothing else to talk to me about except matters incom- 
prehensible to me, your people had better construct 
another planet to rotate round them, which they can 
design and populate as they please. You seem unable 
to talk of anything but men, and dogs, and such things, 
of which I know as much as of that one great being 
round which I am told our sun turns. 

Earth. Truly the more I determine not to touch on 
personal matters, the less I succeed in my resolution. 
But for the future I will be more careful. Tell me; do 
you amuse yourself by drawing up my sea-water, and 
then letting it fall again ? 

Moon'. It may be. But if I have done this, or other 
such things, I am unaware of it. And you, it seems to 
me, do not consider what you effect here, which is of 
so much the more importance as your size and strength 
are greater than mine. 

Earth. I know nothing of these effects, except that 
from time to time I deprive you of the sun's light, and 
myself of yours, and that I illumine you during your 
nights, as is sometimes evident to me. 

But I am forgetting one thing, which is the most , 
important of all. I_j]iauMJike.JiQ»JgiQ2LiLJu;iDStaJs 
corr ect in saying tha,t eYervthi ns:..jiBM.JL2§£a..-a3Lt^L-ag L^) 
youth, bea uty, he alth, the vigour and mone y spent i n 
t&Tp^JsiSt of gloiryrin"the"iiistruction.Q£,Qyida:fia*^ftJi<i 
ffiuTnding ~6f "promoting useful institutions , flies to you ; 
so that you possess aU things . pertaining to man, except 


46 DIALOGUE BETWEEN ^ 

folly, which has never left mankind. If this be true, Ii 
reckon you ought to be so full as to have scarcely any/ 
space unoccupied, especially since men have recentLf 
lost a great many things (such as patriotism, virtue, 
magnanimity, righteousness), not merely in part, or 
singly, as in former times, but completely, and without 
exception. And certainly if you have not got these 
things, I do not know where else they can be. But 
supposing you have them, I wish we could come to an 
agreement whereby you might soon return the lost things 
to me ; for I imagine you must be greatly encumbered, 
especially with common sense, which I understand crowds 
you very much. In return for this, I wiU see that men 
pay you annually a good sum of money. 

Moon. Men again ! Though folly, as you say, has 
not left your domains, you wish nevertheless to make an 
utter fool of me, by depriving me of what reason I pos- 
sess, to supply the deficiency in your people. But I do 
not know where this reason of yours is, nor whether it 
can be found in the universe. I know well that it is not 
here, any more than the other thiags you mention. 

Earth. At least, you can tell me if your inhabitants 
are acquainted with vices, misdeeds, misfortunes, suffer- 
ing, and old age; i n short, evils ? Do you understand 
these names ? 

Moon. Y es, I underst and these well p.Tinnfjh. and not 
onlyjhe names. I am lul l of "them, instead of the~ot ber- 
thmgs. ..~~~* 

Earth. Which are the mor e numerous among y our 
people, virtues or vi5 §i?: " '. 

Moon. Vi ces, by a long way. 

Earth. iJoes pleasu re or pai n predominate ? 

Moon. Painjs^ infinitely , m ore prpvalPT ij-. 

Earth. And your inhabitants, are they mostly happy 
or unhappy ? 

Moon. SojnhaEpy that I would not exc hange my lot 
\^ith_thg happiest of them, ~— 


THE EARTH AND THE MOON. 47 

Earth. It is the same here. I wonder why we diffe r 
so much in ot her things, yet agree in this. 

Moon. 1 am also like you in shape. I rotate like you. 
and am iliummed by the same sun. It is no more 
wonderful that we should resemble each other in these 
things, than that we should possess common failings ; 
because evil is as common to all the planets of_the 
universe, or at least of the solar system, as lo-tundity, 
movement, and light And if you could speak loud 
enSUgli lor Uranus or Saturn, or any other planet, to 
hear you, and were to ask them if they contained 
unhappiness, and whether pleasure or pain predominated, 
each would answer as I have done. I speak from 
experience, for I have already questioned Venus and 
Mercury, to whom I am now and then nearer than 
you. I have also asked certain comets which have 
passed by me ; they all replied to the same effect. I 
firmly believe even the "sun and every star would make 
the same response. 

Earth. S till I am very hopeful In f u ture I tru st 

men will permit_m e to experience m uehjhagpmess. 

Moon. TH^ie as mu ch^_ag_ yriu pleaae. J will a,nswfiT 

for i t ytnr may ^ opfi_t"r ever. 

~~Earth. Ha ! I)id you hear that ? These men and 
animals of mine are making an uproar. It is night on 
the side from which I am speaking to you, and at first 
they were all asleep. But, tl^sfnks to our c onversati on. 
they.jja-naw-iaad e awake, and/very frightene d. 

Moon. And here, on the othelr side, you see it is day. 

Earth. Yes. Now I d^n ^t ^sh to terrif y^ my jpggple, 
or interrupt their sleep, which is the bes t thing _they 
possgssj'so' let us postpone conversation'untLl another 
opportunity._2Adieu,~aird-^0Cid-dayTo you^ 

JfoojirAdieu. Good-night. 


( 48 ) 


.THE WAGER OF PROMETHEUS. 


In the year 833,265 of the reign of Jove, the Col- 
lege of the Muses caused certain notices to be printed 
and affixed in the public places of the city and suburbs 
of Hypernephelus. These notices contained an invitation 
to all the gods, great and small, and the other inhabitants 
of the city, who had recently or anciently originated 
some praiseworthy invention, to make representation 
thereof, either actually, or by model or description, to 
certain judges nominated by this College. And, regretting 
that its well-known poverty prevented it from displaying 
the liberality it would have liked to show, the College 
promised to reward the one whose invention should be 
judged the finest or most useful, with a crown of laurel. 
In addition to the prize itself, the College would give tne 
victor permission to wear the crown, day and night, in 
public and private life, and both in the city and outside 
it ; he might also be painted, sculptured, or modelled in 
any manner or material whatever, with the emblem of 
victory on his brow. 

Not a few of the gods contested the p rize, simply to 
kill time, a. thincr as necessary for the citizens oi'Hyperne^ 
phelus, as for the people of other towns. They had no 
wish for the crown, which was about as valuable as a 
cotton night-cap; and as f or the glory, if even men 
despise it as soon as they become philosophers, it may be 
imagined in what esteem the phantom was held by the 


THE WAGER OF PROMETHEUS. 49 

gods, who are so much wiser than the wisest of men, if 
indeed they are not the sole possessors of wisdom, as 
Pythagoras and Plato affirm. 

The prize was awarded with an unanimity hitherto 
unheard of in cases of reward bestowed on the most 
meritorious. Neither were there any unfair influences 
exercised, such as favouritism, underhand promises, or 
artifice. Three competitors were chosen : "RanchuR. for 
the invention of wine; Minerva, for that of oil, with 
which the gods were daily wont to he anointed after the 
bath ; and Vulcan, f or having made a conner not of an 

economical desigi ^, 'hy wTnV.h fnnVinpr p.mi1rl-lia„e3!:pp.rli- 

ti ouslv conducted with b ut, , little fire. It was necessary 
to divide the prize into three parts, so there only 
remained a little sprig of laurel for each of the victors. 
But they all three declined the prize, whether in part or 
the whole. Yulcan said, that since he was obliged to 
stand the greater part of his time at the forge fire, 
perspiring and considerably exerting himself, the en- 
cumbrance on his brow would be a great annoyance to 
him ; added to which, the laurel would run risk of being 
scorched or burnt, if some spark by chance were to fall 
on its dry leaves and set it on fire. Minerva excused 
herself on the ground of having to wear a hehnet large 
enough, as Homer says, to cover the united armies of a 
hundred cities ; consequently any increase of this weight 
would be very inconvenient, and out of the question. 
Bacchus did not wish to change his mitre and chaplet of 
vine leaves for the laurel, which, however, he would 
willingly have accepted, had he been allowed to put it 
up as a sign outside his tavern ; but the Muses declined 
to grant it for that purpose. Finally, the wreath 
remained in the common treasury of the CoUege. 

None of the competitors for the prize envied the three 
successful gods ; nor did they express vexation at the 
award, nor dispute the verdict — ^with one exception, 
PrmriRtheus. This god brought to the contest tt 


50 THE WAGER OF PROMETHEUS. 

model he ha d used in the formation of the first man. 
"Attached to the model was some writing which explamed 
the qualities and ofl&ce of the human race, his invention. 
The chagrin displayed by Prometheus in this matter 
caused no little astonishment ; since all the other gods, 
whether victors or vanquished, had regarded the whole 
affair as a joke. But on further inquiry it transpired 
that what he especially desired, was not the honour, but 
rather the privilege accompanying success. Some thought 
he meant to use the laurel as a protection for his head 
against storms ; . as it is said of Tiberius that whenever 
he heard thunder, he donned his crown, esteeming the 
laurel proof against thunderbolts. But this suggestion 
was negatived by the fact that the city of Hypernephelus 
never experienced either thunder or lightning. Others, 
more rationally, affirmed that Prometheus, owing to age, 
had begun to lose his hair, and being greatly troubled 
at this misadventure, as are many mortals in similar cir- 
cumstances (and either not having read Synesius' eulogy 
on baldness, or being unconvinced by it), wished, like 
Julius Csesar, to hide the nakedness of his head beneath 
the leafy diadem. 

But to turn to facts. One day Prometheus, talking 
with Momus, bitterly complained of the preference given 
to the wine, oil, and copper-pot, in comparison with the 
human race, which he said was the finest achievement 
of the immortals that the universe had ever seen. And 
not being able sufficiently to convince Momus, who gave 
various reasons against this assertion, they made a wager 
on the subject. Prometheus proposed that they should 
deg.ceiid_:together to the e'arth, iSd jlighting by chance 
in the first place they should discover inhabited by man 
in each of the five parts of the world, they might find 
out whether or not there were in all or most of these 
parts cnn£luaiVR^^fivideTip.e ihat TTim2^_if_Jj^ _Tnr^ r"^^^^^"' 
'creature.„of_thejinivCTse. Momus accepted the wager; 
and having settled the amount, they began without delay 


THE WAGER OF PROMETHEUS. 51 

to descend towards the earth. First of all they directed 
themselves to the New World, which, from its name, and 
the fact that as yet none of the immortals had set foot 
in it, greatly excited their curiosity. 

They touched ground towards the north of Popuyan, 
not far from the river Cauca, in a place which showed 
many signs of human habitation. There were traces of 
cultivation, level roads broken and impassable in places, 
trees cut and strewn about, appearances of what might 
be graves, and here and there human bones were scattered. 
But the celestials could neither hear the voice, nor see 
the shadow of a living man, though they listened acutely, 
and looked all around them. They proceeded, walking 
and flying, for the distance of many miles, passing moun- 
tains and rivers, and finding everywhere the same traces 
of human habitation, and the same solitude. 

"How is it these countries are now deserted," said 
Momus to Prometheus, "though they were evidently 
once inhabited ? " 

Prometheus mentioned the inundations of the sea, 
earthquakes, storms, and heavy rains, which he knew 
were ordinary occurrences in the tropics. Indeed, as if 
in confirmation of his words, they could distinctly hear 
in the neighbouring forests the incessant patter of rain- 
drops falling from the branches of trees agitated by the 
wind. 

But Momus was unable to understand how that locality 
could be affected by inundations of the sea, which was 
so distant as not to be visible on any side. Still less 
could' he comprehend why the earthquakes, storms, and 
rains should have destroyed the human beings of the 
country, sparing however, the jaguars, apes, ants, eagles, 
parrots, and a hundred other kinds of animals and birds 
which surrounded them. 

At length, descending into an immense valley, they 
discovered a little cluster of houses, or wooden cabins, 
covered with palm leaves, and environed on all sides by 


52 THE WAGER OF PROMETHEUS. 

a fence like a stockade. Before one of these cabins, 
many persons, some standing, some sitting, were gathered 
round an earthen pot suspended over a large fire. 

The two celestials, having taken human form, drew 
near, and Prometheus, courteously saluting them all, 
turned to the one who seemed to be their chief, -and asked 
him what they were doing. 

Savage. Eating, as you see. 

Prom. What savoury food have you got ? 

Savage. Only a little bit of meat. 

Prom. Of a domestic, or wild animal ? 

Savage. Domestic, in truth, since it is my own son. 

Prom. What ! Had you then, like Pasiphae, a calf for 
your son ? 

Savage. Not a calf, but a child like every one else. 

Prom. Do you mean what you say ? Is it your own 
flesh and blood that you are eating ? 

Savage. My own ? No. But certainly that of my 
son. Why else did I bring him into the world, and 
nourish him ? 

Prom. What ! To eat him ? 

Savage. Why not ? and I will also eat his mother 
when she can have no more children. 

Momus. As one eats the hen after her eggs. 

Savage. And I will likewise eat my other women, when 
they can no longer have children. And why also should 
I keep these slaves of mine alive, if it were not that from 
time to time they give me children to eat ? But when 
they are old, I will eat them all one after the other, if I 
live.' 

Prom. Tell me, do these slaves belong to your tribe 
or to another ? 

Savage. Another. 

Prom. Far from here ? 

Savage. A very long way. A river divides their huts 
from ours. And pointing with his finger to a hillock, he 
^ ' See Robertson's Hist, of America, Book VI. 


THE WAGER OF PROMETHEUS. 53 

added: They used to live there, but our people have 
destroyed their dwellings. 

By this time it seemed to Prometheus that many of 
the savages were standing looking at him with the sort 
of appreciative gaze that a cat gives to a mouse. So, 
to avoid being eaten by his own manufactures, he rose 
suddenly on the wing, and Momus followed his example. 
And such was their fright that in setting out they uncon- 
sciously behaved as did the Harpies towards the Trojans 
when at meat. But the cannibals, more hungry, or less 
dainty, than the companions of ^iieas, continued their 
horrid repast, 

Prometheus, very dissatisfied with the New "World, 
turned immediately towards Asia, the older one. Having 
traversed almost in an instant the space which lies 
between the East and West Indies, they both descended 
near Agra, in a field where they saw a number of people. 
These were all gathered round a funeral pyre of wood, 
by which men with torches were standing, ready to set 
it on fire; and on a platform was a...:KOJin gLJvtoTna,Ti xery 
sumptuously attired, and wearing a variety of barbaric 
adornments, who, dancing and shouting, displayed signs 
of the liveliest joy. Prometheus, seeing her, imagined 
that a second Lucretia or Virginia, or some imitator of 
the children of Erectheus, of Iphigenia, Codrus, Menecius, 
Curtius, or Decius, was about to sacrifice' herself volun- 
tarily on behalf of her country, in obedience to the decree 
of some oracle. Learning however that the woman was 
about to die because her husband was dead, he supposed 
that, like Alcestis, she wished at the cost of her own life 
to reanimate her husband. But, whe n they informed 
hi m that she was.^l y induce EjEaWrfllESs^ilbeeause-it 
yas cus tomary for widows of her casbe to do so . and that 
she had'alWS^^TLated her husband, that she was drunk, 
and that the dead man, instead of being resuscitated, was 
to be burnt in the same fire, he abruptly turned his back 
on the spectacle, and set out for Europe. On their way 


54 THE WAGER OF PROMETHEUS. 

thither, Prometheus and his companion held the following 
conversation. 

Momus. Did you think, when at so great a hazard you 
stole fire from heaven to give to men, that some of them 
would make use of it to cook one another in pots, and 
others voluntarily to hum themselves ? 

Prom. No, indeed ! But consider, dear Momus, that 
the men we have hitherto seen are barbarians ; and one 
must not judge of human nature from barbarians, but 
rather from civilised people, to whom we are now going. 
I have a strong conviction that among these latter we 
shall see things, and hear words, which will astonish as 
much as delight you. 

Momus. I for my part do not see, if men are the 
most perfect race of the universe, why they need be 
civilised in order not to burn themselves, oi eat their 
own children. Other animals are all uncivilised, and 
yet none of them deliberately burn themselves, except 
the phcenix, which is fabulous ; rarely they eat their 
own kind; and much more rarely make food of their 
own offspring by any chance whatever; neither do 
they specially give birth to them for that purpose. I 
also understand that of the five divisions of the world, 
only the smallest possesses even incompletely the 
civilisation that you praise. To this may be added 
minute portions of other parts of the world. And you 
yourself will not venture to assert that the civilisation 
of the present day is such that the men of Paris or 
Philadelphia have reached the highest possible state of 
perfection. Yet, to enable them to attain to their 
present imperfect state of civilisation, how much time 
has had to elapse ? Even as many years as the world 
can number from its origin to the existing age. Again, 
almost all the inventions which have been of greatest 
use or importance in the advancement of civilisa- 
tion have originated rather fortuitously than rationally. 
Hence, human civilisation is a work of chance rather 


THE WAGER OF PROMETHEUS. 55 

than nature, and where opportunity has been lacking, 
the people are still barbarians, though on the same level 
of age as civilised people. 

Consequently I make the following deductions : that 
man in the savage state is many degrees inferior to 
every other animal ; that civilisation as compared with 
barbarism is only possessed even in the present day by 
a small portion of the human race ; that" these privileged 
people have only reached their existing state of culture 
after the lapse of many ages, and more by chance than 
anything else ; and finally, that the present state of 
civilisation is imperfect. Consider, therefore, whether 
your opinion about the human race would not be better 
expressed in saying, that it is chief among races, but 
supre me rat her in im psrfp.ntiQ Ti, t,}^p.Ti pprfpntian It does 
not affect the case that men themselves, in talking and 
reasoning, continually confuse perfection and imperfec- 
tion, arguing as they do from certain preconceived 
notions, which they take for palpable truths.. It is 
certain that the other races of creatures were each from 
the very beginning in a state of perfection. And, since 
it is clear that man in a savage state compares unfavour- 
ably with other animals, I do not understand how beings, 
naturally the most imperfect among the races, as it 
seems men are, come to be esteemed superior to all 
others. 

Added to which, human civilisation, so difficult t o 
acquire, and almost impossible to perfect, is not s o 
ifnm ULable that it (itonot relapse, in fact, we find it 
ha:s done so several times, among people who once 
possessed a high degree of culture. 

In conclusion, I think your brother Epimetheus would 
have gained the prize before you, had he brought to the 
judges his model of the first ass, or first frog. I will, 
however, quite agree with you as to the perfection of 
man, if you on your part will admit that his excellence 
is of the kind attributed to the world by Plotinus. This 


S6 THE WAGER OF PROMETHEUS. 

philosopher says the world in itself is supremely perfect, 
but containing as it does every conceivable evil, it is in 
reality as bad as can be. From the same point of view, 
I might perhaps agree with Leibnitz, that the present 
world is the best of all possible worlds. 

There can be' no doubt that Prometheus had prepared 
a concise and crushing reply to all this reasoning ; but 
it is very certain he did not give it expression, for just 
then they found themselves over the city of London. 
The gods descended, and seeing a great many people 
rushing to the door of a private house, they mixed with 
the crowd, and entered the building. "Within, they 
found a dead man, who had been shot in the breast, laid 
out on a bed. He had a pistol clenched in his right 
hand, and by his side lay two children, also dead. 
There were several people of the house in the room, 
who were being questioned by magistrates, whUe an 
official wrote down their replies. 

Prom. Who are these unfortunate beings ? 

Servant. My master and his children. 

From. Who has killed them ? 

Servant. My master himself. 

Prom. What ! Do you mean to say he killed his 
children and himself? 

Servant. Yes. 

Prom. Alas ! Why did he do that ? Surely some 
great misfortune must have befallen him. 

Servant. None that I know of. 

Prom. Perhaps he was poor, or despised by every one, 
unfortunate in love, or in disgrace at court. 

Servant. On the contrary, he was very rich, and I 
believe universally esteemed. He cared nothing about 
love, and was in high favour at court. 

Prom. Then why has he done this thing ? 

Servant. He was weary of life, — so he says in the 
writing he has left. 

Prom. What are these judges doing ? 


THE WAGER OF PROMETHEUS. 57 

Servant. Taking evidence as to whether my master 
was out of his miad or not. Unless he is proved to have 
been insane, his goods fall to the crown by law; and 
really there is nothing to prevent their so doing. 

Prom. But had he no friend or relative to whom he 
could entrust his children instead of killing them ? 

Servant. Yes, he had; and especially one friend, to 
whom he has commended his dog.^ 

Momus was about to congratulate Prometheus on the 
good effects of civilisation, and the happiness that seemed 
to be inseparable from human hfe. He wished also to 
remind him that no animal except man voluntarily 
killed itself, or was impelled by feelings of despair to 
take the life of its own offspring. But Prometheus 
anticipated him, and paid the bet at once, without visit- 
ing the two remaining parts of the world. 

1 A fact. 


( 58 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN A NATURAL PHILO- 
SOPHER AND A METAPHYSICIAN. 


Natural Philosopher. Eureka ! Eureka ! 

Metaphysician. What is it ? What have you found ? 

Nat. Phil. Thejjl.onongJife.^ 

Met. And the book that you carry ? 

Nat. Phil. Explains my theory. This invention of 
mine will p |ive me. eternal life . Others may live long, 
"EuFTshall live for ever. I mean that I shaU acquire 


jortal 

Met. Follow my advice. G-e t a leaden caske t^ ; enclose 
therei n your hnnk ; huryit; and leave'ln your will direc- 
tions where it may be foimd, witJT JTTRf.rnp.f-.inTiH to y our 
heirs not to exhume the book untjl ^liey s hall bavpi rlis- 
c overe H thf " ^'i ^^ livinr ^ Vinppy jifo 

Nat. Phil. And meanwhile ? 

Met. Meanwhile your invention will be good for 
nothing. It were far better if it taught the art nf Ii'vitict 
b riefly^ 

Nat. Phil. That has already been known a long time. 
The discovery was not a difficult one. 

Met. At any rate I prefer it to yours. 

Nat Phil. Why ? 

Met. Because if life be n nt happy a.s hitherto it has 
.not begg nt"were better l;;^, erirli^rp ;^ f^ hort term of it tjian 

IfoL^kil. No, no. I differ from you. li fe is a _good_ 
j2Jt§gl^ and is naturally desired and loved by every one. 

'■ See Instruction in the Art of Long Life, by Hufeland. 


A DIALOGUE. 59 

Met. So men think. But thev arp. rlpp.fiivprl Similarly 
people deceive themselves in thinking that colours are 
attributes of the objects coloured; whereas really they 
are not qualities of objects, hut of light. I assert that 
man loves and desires nothing but his own happin ess. 

Jle therefore loves his life only inasmuch as he esteems 

it the instrument or subiPf-tf "f bi n TiappiT^pcag Hence _it 
is happiness that he always loves, and not life : although 
he very often attributes to the one the affection he has 
for the other. It is true that this illusion and that ' 
relating- to colours are both natural. But as a proof that 
the love of life in men is unnatural, or rather unnecessary, 
think of the many people that in olden times preferred 
to die rather than live. In our own time too many 
people often wish for death, a nd some kill thpty ^ selv es. 
No w such things could not oc cur if .jnanjiaturally- Jjwed 
^ Efe itse lf. The Tove of happiness, on the contrar y^ is 
innat e in every living being ; indeed the world would 
perish before they ceased loving and seeking it in every 
possible form. And as for your assertion that life in 
itself is a good thing, I challenge you to prove your 
words by any arguments you please, whether of physics 
or metaphysics. Personally I am of opinion that a happy 
life is undoubtedly a good thiiig. But this is because 
of the happiness,, not the life. An unhappy Life is there- 
fore an evil. An d since it is ordained that hum an life 
should be inseparable from unhappiness , I leave you to 
draw your own conclusions. 

Ifat. Phil. Le li us drop the subject, if you please ijt 
is too m elanchol y. Answer me one question candidly, 
and without such subtleties. If man ha d the power to 
1jvp for pvRT T mean in this life and not after death, d o 

J2r tib^""^ ^" wnnlt^ "hp happy ? 

Met. AHow me to answer you by a fable. Moreover, 
as I have never tasted immortality, I cannot reply to 
you from experience. Besides, I have never by any 
chance met an immortal, the very existence of whom is 


6o DIALOGUE BETWEEN A NATURAL PHILOSOPHER 

a mere matter of legend. If Cagliostro were alive, lie 
could perhaps enligliten you, since he was said to have 
lived for several centuries. But he is now dead, like 
his contemporaries. 

To return to the fable. The wise Chiro, who was a 
god, in time became so wearied of his life, that he asked 
permission from Jove to die. This was granted to him ; 
so he died.^ If immortality wrought such an effect on 
the gods, how would it be with men? The Hyper- 
boreans, an unknown but famous people, whose country 
is inaccessible by sea or land, were, it is said, -rich in 
all manner of things, and possessed a race of asses of 
peculiar beauty, which they used to offer as sacrifices. 
They had the power, unless I am mistaken, of living for 
ever, and knew nothing of fatigues, cares, wars, discords, 
or crimes. Yet we learn that after several thousand years 
of life, they all killed themselves by jumping from a 
certain rock into the sea, where they were drowned. 
Here is another legend. The brothers Biton and Cleobus, 
at a festival, when the mules were not ready, attached 
themselves to the chariot of their mother, who was a 
priestess of Jxmo, and drew her to the temple. Touched 
by their devotion, the priestess asked Juno to reward 
her sons for their piety by the greatest gift possible for 
men to receive. The goddess caused them both to die 
peacefully within an hour, instead of giving them immor- 
tality, ag they had expected. 

.The same happened to Agamede and Trophonius. 
When these two men had finished the temple of Delphi, 
they begged Apollo to "reward them. The god asked 
them to wait seven days, at the end of which time he 
would do so. On the seventh night he sent them a 
sweet sleep from which they have never awakened. 
They are so satisfied with their recompense that they 
have asked nothing more. 

' See Lucian, Dial. Menip. and Chiro. 
^ See Pindar, Strabo, and Pliny. 


AND A METAPHYSICIAN. 6i 

On the subject of legends, here is one which intro- 
duces a question I would have you answer. I know 
that by you and your colleagues human life is generally 
considered to be, as a rule, of an uniformly average 
duration : this in all countries and under all climates. 
But Pliny relates that the men of some parts of India 
and Ethiopia do not exceed the age of forty years. They 
who die at this age are considered very old. Their 
children marry at seven years of age : and this state- 
ment is verified by the custom in Guinea, the Deccan, 
and elsewhere in the torrid zone. Now, regarding it as 
true that these. people do not live more than forty years 
(and this as a natural limit, and not due to artificial cir- 
cumstances), I ask you whether you imagine their lot 
ought to be considered more or less happy than that of 
others ? 

JVat. Phil. Undoubtedly, more miserable, since they 
die so soon. 

Met. I am of the contrary opinion for the very same 
reason. But that does not matter. Give me your 
attention for a moment. I de ny that life itself, i.e.. the \ 
mere sensation of existence,'has anything, pi fia.snrabl p. nr ^^^ ■ vo ^ 
desirable in its nature. But we ail w^ f"T <-bp nf-.bpr I^j^s^j^^j^ 


thino-. also called life ; "I mean gtrength.^a n d nn m cr o u fi 


_S§nsaiiaaa, Thus, all activitV. anri p.vPTy fi\,rnr\g and _ 


lively pasainn provided it be neither disas^reeable nor 


Pfiinful^ p1p,p.spa us simply because it is gt.rnng a-nd livplv 

although it possess no other pleasurable attributes. 

Now t hese me n, whose life normally lasts only forty 
years, that is, half the time granted by nature to other 
men, w ould experience every moment an intensity of 
l ife, twi ce as str ong as ours, b ecause their growth, matu- 
rity, anT decline are" accomplished twice as rapidly as 
with us. Their energy of life therefore ought to be 
twice as intense as ours at every moment of their exis- 
tence. A nd to this greater intensity t here must corre- 
spond a_more li vely activity of the wil l, more vivacity 


TVe-^' 


Ct/ 


^. 


62 DIALOGUE BETWEEN A NATURAL PHILOSOPHR 

and animation. Thus they experience in less time th 
same quantity of life as we have. And the fewer yeai 
that these favoured people spend on the earth are s 
well filled that there is no sensible vacuum; wherea 
this same quantity of life is insufficient to vivify a terr 
twice as long. Their actions and sensations, diffuse 
over so limited a space, can duly occupy all their exis 
tence; but our longer life is constantly divided b; 
protracted intervals devoid of all activity and livel; 
passion. And since existence itself is ia no sens 
desirable, but only in so far as it is happy ; and sine 
good or evU fortune is not measurable by the number o 
our days ; I conclude that the life of these people, thougl 
shorter than ours, is much the richer in pleasures, o 
what are so called. Their life must then be preferabL 
to ours, or even to that of the earliest kings of Assyria 
Egypt, China, India, and other countries, who are sai( 
to have lived thousands of years. So that, far fron 
being desirous of immortality, I am content to leav( 
it to fishes, which are by Leeuwenhoek believed to b( 
immortal, provided they are neither eaten by us no: 
their fellows. Ttistead of dp.lavinp ; tViPi dpyfilnp rnptif-, n 
t he b^ y, jn nr^pr t.n Ipngt.TiATi ]ifp as Maupertuis^ pro 
posed, I would rath? r p^'-"='^'^'^%\ s it until th e duratioi 
rifjTiir TT^waa ag shnrt a.H that nf t.lio i"ns fif;.ta CftHfif 
ephemgrals; which insects, although the most aged doei 
^ not live beyond a single day, nevertheless preside ove: 
three generations before they die. If it were so. t hei 
th ere would at l eaaLb e no ti mfj for f aaai ^ 

What do you think of my reasoning ? 

JVat. Phil. It does not persuade me. I know tha 
you love metaphysics, whereas I for my part hold t( 
physics. To your subtleties, I oppose simple commbi 
sense, which is sufficient for me. Thus, I venture t( 
assert, without appealing to the microscope, that life i 
better than death. Judging between the two, I wouL 

1 See Zettres PhUosojphiques : let. ii. 


■> 


AND A METAPHYSICIAN. 63 

give the apple to the former, without troubling them to 
strip for the contest. 

Met. And I would do the same. But when I call to 
mind th'e custom of those barbarians, who, for p-vPTy 
unhappy day of their lives, used to throw a black stone 
into a quiver, and fo r every happy day a white on e. I 
cannot help thinking how few white stones compared to 
the black ones would be found therein on the death of 
the proprietor of the quiver. Personally, I should like 
to have now all the stones representing the days of life 
yet remaining to me, and per missio n to separate them, 
throwing away all the black oiies and re tammg only those 
that were white ; even though the number of the latter J 
was exc eedingly small, and thilr colour a doubttul wEt^ 

Ifat. Phil. Many people, on the contrary, would be 
glad to inc rease the number of their black stones, even 
though they were blacker t han they naturally w ould 
be: because they always, in their minds, drpad tVip last 
as the bla-ckfist of all And such people, of whom I 
am one, wiU really be able to add many stones to their 
normal quantity, if they follow out the instructions con- 
tained in my book. 

Met. Every one thinks and works in his own way. 
Death also will not fail to do the same. But if you 
wish, in prolonging man's life, really to be of service to 
him, discover an art to increase the number and strength 
of sensations, and their eitec!^ This would be a genuine tV^'^^r-^'c- 
aug mentati on of human life, for it wouia nil up those lon g pcot^M^"^ 
int ervals of time, during which we vegetate rather th an ■po'^' 
l ive. You could then boast of having truly prolonged 
human life; and without having sought after the 
impossible, or used violence to natural laws ; rather, by 
having strengthened them. For does it not seem as 
though the ancients were more full of life than we are, 
in spite of the many and great dangers by which they 
were surrounded, and which generally shortened their 
existence ? 


64 


A DIALOGUE. 


You will tliTis render a real service to man, whose 
life is, I will not say more happy, but certainly less 
unhappy, when it is better occupied and more violently 
agitated, without pain or discomfort. Wh en, on the 
other han d, ex istence is so full of idleness and ennui as 
to' DO justly termed "empLy^' lliB saving ot r yrrhus, " tnere 
is^ no amerencR between life and -d ftft4#rr^is iiteraTTy 


realised We re .this say ing true, I should be in no slight 

terror of deatET ' ' ' ' ~~ 

But finally, unless life be active and viprorouR. it is 

not true life, and death is far preferable to it. ' " 


( 6s ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TASSO AND HIS 
FAMILIAR SPIRITJ 


Spirit. Ah, Torquato. How are you ? 

Tasso. As well as it is possible to be, when in prison, 
and up to the neck in misfortunes. 

Spirit. Courage ! After supper is not the time to be 
sorrowful. Cheer up, and let us laugh at your griefs. 

Tasso. I am little inclined for that. But somehow 
your presence and conversation always do me good. 
Come and sit down by me. 

Spirit. How can I sit ? Such- a thing is not easy for 
a spirit. But what does it matter ? Consider that I am 
seated. 

Tasso. O h, that I could see m y Lfio nnra. ncrain ! When- 
ever I think of her, I feel a thrill of joy that reaches 
from the crown of my head to the extremity of my feet, 
and all my nerves and veins are pervaded with it. My 
mind, too, becomes inilamed with certain imaginings and 
longings that seem for the time to transform me. I 
cannot think that I am the Torquato who has experienced 
so much misfortune, and I often mourn for myself as 
though I were dead. Truly, it would seem that worldly 
friction and suffering are wont to overwhelm and lethar- 

^ Tasso, during his mental hallji - life of Tasso, mentions this, and 
cinations.used tofancy, likeSocrates, states that he was once present 
•ffiat he wis Tisiteg by a triaaarY dm-ing such a colloquy or soliloquy 
spir it, with which he would hold between Tasso and his imagined 
long conv ersatio ns. Manso, in his companion. 
" E 


66 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

gise our first nature within each of us. This from time 
to time awakens for a brief space, but less frequently as 
we grow older, when it always withdraws, and falls into 
an increasingly sound sleep. Finally, it dies, although 
our life still continues. In short, I marvel how the 
thought of a woman should have sufficient power to 
rejuvenate the mind, and make it forget so many troubles. 
Had I not lost all hope of seeing Leonora again, I could 
almost believe I might still succeed in being happy. 

Spirit. Which do you consider the more delightful, to 
see the dear woman, or to think of he r^? 

'I'asso. i 5o not know. It is true whe n near me she 

rppttipH nnly g-jgftmaji-.^— a±_ji. distj ^i.TiP.p.^ ho wever, she WaS 

lik e a goddess. 

Spirit. These goddesses are so amiable that when one 
approaches you, she instantaneously puts off her divinity, 
and pockets her halo of greatness for fear of dazzling the 
mortal to whom she appears. 

Tasso. There is only too much truth in what you say. 
But do you not think it is a great failing in women that 
they prove really to be so very different from what we 
imagine ? 

Spirit. I scarcely think it is their fault that they are, 
like us, made of flesh and blood, instead of ambrosia and 
nectar. What in the world has a thousandth part of the 
perfection with which your fancy endows women ? It 
surprises me that you are not astonished to find that men 
are men, that is, creatures of little merit and amiability, 
since you cannot understand why women are not really 
angels. 

Tasso. In spite of all this, I am dying to see her again. 

Spirit. Compose yourself. This very night you shall 
dream of her. I will lead her to you, beautiful as youth, 
and so kindly disposed that you wiU be encouraged to 
speak to her much more freely and readily than in 
former times. You wiU be induced at length to take her 
by the hand, and she, looking intently at you, will surfeit 


TASSO AND HIS FAMILIAR SPIRIT. 67 

your soul with sweetness. And to-morrow, whenever 
you think of the dream, your heart will overflow with 
affection. 

Tasso. "What a consolation ! A dream instead of the 
truth. 

Spirit. What is truth ? 

Tasso., I am as ignorant on the subject as Pilate was. 

Spirit. Well, I wiU tell you. Between truth or 
reality, and a dream there is this d iSerehce — thelatteF 
is much the finer thing of the two. 


Tasso. What ! The pleasure of a dream worth m ore 
than a real pleasure ? 

Spirit. It is. As an instance, I know a man who 
studiously avoids meeting his sweetheart the following 
day after she has appeared to him in a dream. He know s 
full well that he would not find in her all t he charm s 
with which she was endowed in the dream, a;nd that 
reality, dispelling the illusi on, woul d Hiprive h i m nf thp 
pleasure he felt . The ancients too, who were much more 
diligent and skilful in their search after all the enjoy- 
ments possible for man to have, did wisely in endeavouring 
by various means to realise the sweetness and pleasure 
of dreams. Pythagoras also was right when he forbad 
the eating of beans for supper; these vegetables producing 
a dreamless or troubled sleep.'' I could also find excuse 
for those superstitious people who were wont, before going 
to bed, to invoke the aid of Mercury, the president of 
dreams. They offered sacrifice to him that he might 
grant them happy dreams, and used to keep an image of 
the god at the foot of their bed. Thus it was that being 
unable to procure any happiness during the day, people 
sought it in the night-time. I am of opinion that they 
were in a measure successful, and that Mercury paid 
more attention to their prayers than was the custom of 
the other gods. 

Tasso. But, since men live for nothing but pleasure, 
^ ApoUonius, Hist. Comment., cap. 46, &o. 


68 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

whether of mind or body, if this pleasure can only be 
found when we dream, it follows that we live for no 
other purpose but to dream. ISTow I really cannot admit 
that. 

Spirit. You already admit it, inasmuch as you live, 
and are willing to live. But_w^t-4a.pleasure_?_ 

Tasso. My acquaintance with it is too slight to enable 
me to answer you. 

Spirit. No one has any real acquaintance with it, 
because pleasure is not a reality, but a conception. It is 
a desire, not a fact. A sentiment, imagined not experi- 
enced; or, better, it is a conception, and not a sentiment at 
all. Do you not perceive that even in the very moment 
of enjoyment, however ardently it may have been longed 
for or painfully acquired, your mind, not deriving com- 
plete satisfaction from the happiness, anticipates at some 
future time a greater and more complete enjoyment ? 
It is expectation that constitutes pleasure. Thus, you 
never weary of placing reliance on some pleasure of the 
future, which melts away just when you expect to enjoy 
it. The truth is, you possess nothing but the hope of a 
more complete enjoyment at some other time; and the 
satisfaction of imagining that you have had some enjoy- 
ment, and of talking about it to others, less because you 
are vain than to persuade yourself that the illusion is a 
reality. Hence, everyone that consents to live makes 
this fugitive dream his aim in life. TTp. bf^lipvp" i" tl""^ 
reality of past and future enjoyment, both ofwhich beliefs 
are fake^ndjaacifiil«" 

Tasso. Then is it impossible for a man to believe that 
he is actually happy ? 

Spirit. If such a belief were possible, his happiness 
would be genuine. But tell me : do you eyer remember 
having been able at any moment in your life to say 
sincerely, " I am happy " ? Doubtless you have daily been 
able to say, and have said in all sincerity, " I shall be 
happy ; " and often too, though less sincerely, " I have 


TASSO AND HIS FAMILIAR SPIRIT. 69 

been happy." T hus, pleasure is always either a. fhvn anf 
the past, or the future, never the prese nt. 

Tasso. You may as well say it is non-existent. 

Spirit. So it seems. 

Tasso. Even in dreams ? 

Spirit. Even in dreams, considering pleasure in its 
true sense. 

Tasso. And yet pleasure is the sole object and aim of 
life ! By the term pleasure I mean the happiness which 
ought to be a consequence of pleasure. 

Spirit. Assuredly. 

Tasso. Then our life, being deprived of its real aim, 
must always be imperfect, and existence itself unnatural. 

Spirit. Perhaps. 

Tasso. There is no perhaps in the matter. But why 
is it that we live ? I mean, why do we consent to 
live? 

Spirit. How should I know ? You yourselves ought 
to know better than I. 

Tasso. I assure you I do not know. 

Spirit. Ask some one wiser than yourself. Perhaps he 
may be able to satisfy you. 

Tasso. I will do so. But certainly, the life that I lead 
is an unnatural state, because apart from my sufferings, 
ennui alone murders me. 

Spirit. What is ennui ? 

Tasso. As to this, I can answer from experience. 
Ennui seem s to me of the nature of atmosphere, which 
fills up the spaces between material bodies, and also the 
voids in the bodies themselves. Whenever a body dis- 
appears, and is not replaced by another, air fills up the 
gap immediately. So too, in human life , the int ervals 
between pleasures and pains are occupied by ennui . 
^-And smce in the material world, according to the Peri- 
patetics, there can be no vacuum, so also in our life 
there is none, save when for some cause or other the 
mind loses its power of thought. At all other times 


70 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

the mind, considered as a separate identity from the 
body, is occupied with some sentiment. If void of 
pleasure or pain, it is full of ennui ; for this last is also 
a sentiment like pleasure and pain. 

Spirit. And, since all your pleasures are like cobwebs, 
exceedingly fragile, thin and transparent, ennui pene- 
trates their tissue, and saturates them, just as air pene- 
trates the webs. I believe ennui is really nothing but 
the desire of h appiness, without the illusion of pleasu re 
"and the sufi'ering of p ain. This desire, we have said, is 
'never completely satisfied, since true pleasure does not 
exist. So that human life may be said to be interwoven 
with pain and ennui, and one of these sentiments dis- 
appears only to give place to the other. This is the 
fate of all men, and not of yourself alone. 

Tasso. What remedy is there for ennui ? 

Spirit. Sleep, opium, and pain. The last is the best 
of the tEree,^ because he who suffers never experiences 
ennui. 

Tasso. I would rather submit to ennui for the rest of 
my lifej than take such medicine. But its force and 
strength may be diminished by action, work, and even 
other sentiments; though these do not entirely free us 
from ennui, since they are unable to give us real pleasure; 
Here in prison however, deprived of human society^ 
without even the means of writings reduced for an 
amusement to counting the ticks of the clock, looking at 
the beams, cracks, and nails of the ceiling, thinking 
about the pavement stones, and watching the gnats and 
flies which flit across my ceU, I have nothing to relieve 
for a moment my burden of ennui. 

Spirit. How long have you been reduced to this kind 
of life ? 

Tasso. For many weeks, as you know. 

Spirit. Have you felt no variation in the ennui which 
oppresses you, from the first day until now ? 

Tasso. Yes. I felt it more at first. Gradually my 


TASSO AND HIS FAMILIAR SPIRIT. 71 

mind is becoming accustomed to its own society; I 
derive more and more pleasure from my solitude, and 
by practice I am acquiring so great a readiness in con- 
versation, or rather chattering to myself, that I seem to 
have in my head a company of talkative people, and the 
most trifling object is now sufficient to give rise to end- 
less discourse. 

Spirit. This habit will grow on you daily to such an 
extent, that when you are free, you will feel more idle 
in society than in solitude. Custom has made you bear 
patiently your kind of life, and the same influence works 
not only in people who meditate like you, but in every- 
one. Besides, the very fact that you are separated from 
men, and even, it may be said, from life itself, will be of 
some advantage to you. Disgusted and wearied with 
human affairs, as you are from your sad experience, you 
will in time begin to look on them, from a distance, with 
an appreciative eye. In your solitude they will appear 
to you more beautiful, and worthy of affection. You 
will forget their vanity and misery, and will take upon 
yourself to re-create the world as you would have it. 
Consequently, you will value, desire, and love life. And, 
provided there be the possibility or certainty of your 
return to human society some .day, your new aspect of 
life win fill and gladden your mind with a joy like that 
of childhood. "^(3 

Solitude d oes indeed someti mes act liT ^° " gpf^nnil — 
vouth. It rejuvenates The soul, revives the imagination, 
and renews in an experienced man those iTnprp.asinTiH of 
early in nocence that you so ardently desir e. But yoitf^'^/'^gw^ 
eyes seem heavy with sleep : I will now therefore leave 
you to prepare the fine dream I promised you. Thus 
between dreams and fancies, your life shall pass without 
other gain than the fact of its passing, which is the sole 
benefit of life. To hasten it should be the one aim of 
your existence. You are often obliged to cling to life, 
as it were with your teeth ; happy will be the day when 


72 DIALOGUE. 

death releases you from the, struggle . But after all, time 
passes as tediously with your persecutor in his palace 
and gardens, as with you in your prison chamber. 
Adieu. 

Tasso. Adieu, yet stay a moment. Your conversation 
always enlivens me. It does not draw me from my 
sadness, but my mind, which is generally comparable to 
a dark night, moonless and starless, changes when you 
are near to a condition like that of a grey dawn, plea- 
surable rather than otherwise. Now tell me how I can 
find you in case I want you at some future time. 

Spirit. Do you not yet know ? — In any 
liquor. "" 


( 73 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN NATURE 
AND AN ICELANDER. 


An Icelander who had travelled over most of the earth, 
and had lived in very many different lands, found 
himself one day in the heart of Africa. As he crossed 
the equator in a place never before penetrated by man, 
he had an adventure like that which happened to Vasco 
di Gama, who, when passing the Cape of Good Hope, was 
opposed by two giants, the guardians of the southern 
seas, that tried to prevent his entrance into the new 
waters.^ The Icelander saw in the distance a huge bust, 
in appearance like the colossal Hermes he had formerly 
seen in the Isle of Pasqua. At first he thought it was 
made of stone, but as he drew near to it he saw that the 
head belonged to an enormous woman, who was seated 
on the ground, resting her back against a mountain. 
The figure was alive, and had a countenance both magni- 
ficent and terrible, and eyes and hair of a jet black 
colour. She looked fixedly at him for a long time in 
silence. At length she said : 

Natwe. Who art thou? What doest thou here, where 
thy race is unknown ? 

Icelander. I am a poor Icelander, fleeing from ISTature. 
I have fled fro m her ev er since I was a child, through a 
hundred different parts of the world, and I am fleeing 
from her now. 

1 Camoens' Lusiad, canto 5. 


74 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

Nature. So flees the squirrel from the rattlesnake, 
and runs in its haste deliberately into the mouth of its 
tormentor. I am that from which thou fleest. 

Icelander. Nature ? 

Nature. Even so. 

Icelander. I am smitten with anguish, for I consider 
no worse misfortune could befall me. 

Nature. Thou mightest well have imagined that I was 
to be found in countries where my power is supremest. 
But why dost thou shun me ? 

Icelander. You must know that from my earliest 
youth, experience convinced me of the vanity of life, 
and the folly of men. I saw these latter ceaselessly 
struggling for pleasures that please not, and possessions 
that do not satisfy. I saw them inflict on themselves, 
and voluntarily suffer, infinite pains, which, unlike the 
pleasures, were only too genuine. In short, the more 
ardently they sought happiness, the further they seemed 
removed from it. These things made me determine 
to abandon every design, to live a life of peace and 
obscurity, harming no one, striving in nought to better 
my condition, and contesting nothing with anyone. I 
de spaired of hap piness, which I Tp.ga.rdp.d-a^ . a. thing witbr 
held from our race, and my only aim was to shield 
myself from sul'eringr "'^!^t that I had the least inten- 
tion of abstaining from work, or bodily labour ; for there 
is as great a difference between mere fatigue and pain,^ 
as between a peaceful and an idle life. 

But when I began to carry out my project, I learnt 
from experience how fallacious it is to think that one 
can live inoffensively amongst men without offending 
them. Though I always gave them precedence, and 
took the smallest part of everything, I found neither 

1 Cicero says : "Labour and pain the body. When they cut Marius' 

are not identical. Labour is a toil- veins, it was pain ; when he marched 

some function of body or mind — at the head of the troops in a great 

pain an unpleasant disturbance in heat, it was labour." — Tuac. Q/uaat. 


NATURE ANP AN ICELANDER. 75 

rest nor happiness among them. However, this I soon 
remedied. By avoiding men I fogfidjQvself from their 
persecutions. I took refuge inAolitudeJ —easilv obtain- 
able in my native island. Having done this, I lived 
•without a shadow of enjoyment ; yet I found I had not 
escaped all suffering. The intense cold of the long 
winter, and the extreme heat of summer, characteristic 
of the country, allowed me no cessation from pain. And 
when, to warm myself, I passed much time by the fire, 
I was scorched by the flames,' and blinded by the smoke. 
I suffered continuously, whether in the open air, or in 
the shelter of my cabin. In short, I failed to obtain 
that life of peace which was my one desire. Terrible 
storms, Hecla's menaces and rumblings, and the con- 
stant fires which occur among the wooden houses of my 
country, combined to keep me in a state of perpetual 
disquietude. Such annoyances as these, trivial though 
they be when the mind is distracted by the thoughts 
and actions of social and civil life, are intensified by 
solitude. I endured them all, together with the hope- 
less monotony of my existence, solely in order to obtain 
the tranquillity I desired. I perceived that the more I 
isolated myself from men, and confined me to my own 
little sphere, the l^ss I succeeded in protecting myself 
from the discomforts and sufferings of the outer world. 

Then I determined to try other climates and countries, 
to see if anywhere I could live in peace, harming no one, 
and exist without suffering, if also without pleasure. I 
was urged to this by the thought that perhaps you had 
destined for the human race a certain part of the earth 
(as you have for many animals and plants), where alone 
they could live in comfort. In which case it was our own 
fault if we suffered inconvenience from having exceeded 
our natural boundaries^ I have therefore been over the 
whole earth, testing every country, and always fulfilling 
my intention of troubling others in the least possible 
degree, and seeking nothing for myself but a life of tran- 


76 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

quillity. But in vain. The tropical sun burnt me ; the 
Arctic cold froze me ; in temperate regions the change- 
ability of the weather troubled me ; and everywhere I 
have experienced the fury of the elements. I have been 
in places where not a day passes without a storm, and 
where you, Nature, are incessantly at war with simple 
people who have never done you any harm. In other 
places cloudless skies are compensated for by frequent 
earthquakes, active volcanoes, and subterranean commo- 
tions. Elsewhere hurricanes and whirlwinds take the 
place of other scourges. Sometimes I have heard the 
roof over my head groan with the burden of snow that 
it supported ; at other times the earth, saturated with 
rain, has broken away beneath my feet. Elvers have 
burst their banks, and pursued me, fleeing at full speed, 
as though I were an enemy. Wild beasts tried to devour 
me, without the least provocation on my part. Serpents 
have sought to ■ poison or crush me ; and I have been 
nearly kiUed by insects. I make no mention of the 
daily hazards by which man is surrounded. These last 
are so numerous that an ancient philosopher ^ laid down 
a rule, that to resist the constant influence of fear, it 
were well to fear everything. 

Again, sickness has not failed to torment me, though 
invariably temperate, and even abstemious, in all bodily 
pleasures. In truth, out natural constitution is an 
admirably arranged affair ! You inspire us with a strong 
and incessant yearning for pleasure, deprived of which 
our life is imperfect ; and on the other hand you ordain 
that nothing should be more opposed to physical health 
and strength, more calamitous in its effects, and more 
incompatible with the duration of life itself, than this 
same pleasure. But although I indulged in no pleasures, 
numerous diseases attacked me, some of which endangered 
my life, and others the use of my limbs, thus threatening 
me with even an access of misery. All, during many 
^ Seneca, Natural, Question : lib. f , cap. 2. 


NATURE AND AN ICELANDER. 77 

days or months, caused me to experience a thousand 
bodily and mental pangs. And, -whereas in sickness we 
endure new and extraordinary sufferings, as though our 
ordinary life were not sufficiently unhappy ; you do not 
compensate for this by giving us equally exceptional 
periods of health and strength, and consequent enjoyment. 
In regions where the snow never melts, I lost my sight ; 
this is an ordinary occurrence among the Laplanders in 
their cold country. The sun and air, things necessary 
for life, and therefore unavoidable, trouble us continually ; 
the latter by its dampness or severity, the former by its 
heat, and even its light ; and to neither of them can man 
remain exposed without suffering more or less incon- 
venience or harm. In short, I cannot recollect a single 
day during which I have not suffered in some way ; 
whereas, on the other hand, the days that have gone by 
without a shadow of enjoyment are countless. I con- 
clude therefore that we are destined to suiler much in 
proportion as we enjoy little, and that it is as impossible 
to live peacefully as happily. I also naturally come to 
the conclusion that you are the avowed enemy of men, 
and all other creatures of your creation. Sometimes 
alluring, at other times menacing ; now attacking, now 
striking, now pursuing, now destroying ; you are always 
engaged in tormenting us. Either by habit or necessity 
you are the enemy of your own family, and the execu- 
tioner of your own flesh and blood. As for me, I have 
lost all hope. Experience has proved .. to _me- t hat though 
it be possible to escape from men^nd_their.xieraecutions. 
it is impossible to evade you, who will never cease tor- 
menting us until yoxl ha ve-.t]MddeiL..:Ua^undfir.jfoot. Old 
age, with all its bitterness, and sorrows, and accumulation 
of troubles, is already near to me. This worst of evils 
you have destined for us and all created beings,. from the 
time of infancy. From the fifth lustre of life, decline 
makes itself manifest ; its progress we are powerless to 
stay. Scarce a third of life is spent in the bloom of 


78 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

youth ; but few moments are claimed by maturity ; all 
the rest is one gradual decay, with its attendant evils. 

nature. Thinkest th ou then that the world was made 
for thee ?^ It is time Ibhou knewest that in my designs^ 


operations, and rlrprr"^^ r^pY^r. rro^yp " ^^"lljif^*'' ^i^J^ 
happiness _or u nhappiness of man. If I cause you to 
"suffer, I am unaware of the fact ; nor do I perceive that 
I can in any way give you pleasure. What I do is iu 
no sense done for your enjoyment or benefit, as you 
seem to think. Finally, if I by chance exterminated 
your species, I should not know it. 

Icelander. Suppose a stranger invited me to his house 
in a most pressing manner, and I, to oblige him, accepted 
his invitation. On my arrival he took me to a damp 
and unhealthy place, and lodged me in a chamber open 
to the air, and so ruiuous that it threatened momentarily 
to collapse and crush me. Far from endeavouring to 
amuse me, and make me comfortable, he neglected to 
provide me with even the necessaries of life. And 
more than this. Suppose my host caused me to be 
insulted, ridiculed, threatened, and beaten by his sons 
and household. And on my complaining to him of such 
ill-treatment, he replied : " Dost thou think I made 
this house for thee ? Do I keep these my children and 
servants for thy service ? I assure thee I have other 
things to occupy me, than that I should amuse thee, or 
give thee welcome." To which I answered : " Well, 
my friend, though you may not have built your house 
especially for me, at least you might have forborne to 
ask me hither. And, since I owe it to you that I am 
here, ought I not to rely on you to assure me, if possible, 
a life free from trouble and danger ? " 

Thus I reply to you. I am well aware you did not 
make the world for the service of men. It were easier 
to beUeve that you made it expressly as a place of 
torment for them. But tell me : why am I here a t aU ? 
Did I ask to come into the woridl Or am Tiere 


NATURE AND AN ICELANDER. 79 

unnaturally, contrary to your will ? If however, you 
yourself have placed me here, without giving me the 
power of acceptance or refusal of this gift of life, ought 
you not as far as possible to try and make me happy, 
or at least preserve me from the evils and dangers, 
which render my sojourn a painful one ? And what I 
say of myself, I say of the whole human race, and of 
every living creature. 

Nature. Thou forgettest that the life of the world is 
^ a perpetual cycle of production and destruction, so 
combined that the one works for the good of the other. 
By their joint operation the universe is preserved. If 
either ceased, the world would dissolve. Therefore, if 
suffering were removed from the earth, its own existence 
would be endangered. 

Icelander. So say all the philosophers. But since 
that which is destroyed suffers, and that which is born 
from its destruction also suffers in due course, and finally 
is in its turn destroyed, would you enlighten me on one 
point, about which hitherto no philosopher has satisfied 
me ? For whose pleasure and service ia this w retched 
life of the world mainta ined, by the suffering and death 
of aU. t he beings which_c ompose,j£.? 
' Whilst they discussed these and similar questions, 
two lions are said to have suddenly appeared. The 
beasts were so enfeebled and emaciated with hunger 
fSaF'^ey were scarcely able to devour the Icelander. 
They accomplished the feat howeYgii_an d thus gained 
suf ficient strength to live to the end of the dav . 

"But certain people dispute this fact. They affirm that 
a violent wind having arisen, the unfortunate Icelander 
was blown to the ground, and soon overwhelmed beneath 
a magnificent mausoleum of sand. Here his corpse was 
remarkably preserved, and in process of time he was trans- 
formed into a fine mummy. Subsequently, some travellers 
discovered the body, and carried it off as a specimen, ulti- 
mately depositing it in one of the museums of Europe. 


( 8o ) 


PARINI ON GLORY 


Gf^EPPE Paeini ^ was in our opinion one of the very few 
Italians who to literary excellence j oined depth of thought. 
and acquaintance with_contem porary philosophy. These 
lattefattributes are now so essential to^the cultivation of 
the helles lettres, that their absence would be inconceiv- 
able, did we not find an infinite number of Italian litUro/- 
teurs of the present day, in whom they are wanting. 

He was remarkable for his simplicity, his compassion 
for the u nfortunate and his own country, hi s fidelity, 
Kgli-mindedne_s 3, and the courag e with which he bore 
the adversities of nature and fortune, which tormented 
him during the whole course of his miserable and lowly 
life. Death however drew him from obscurity. 

He had several disciples, whom he taught, first of all, 
to gain experience of men and things, and then to amuse 
themselves with eloquence and poetry. Among his 
followers was a youth, lately come to him, of wonderful 
genius and industry, and of very great promise. To him 
one day Parini spoke as follows : 

" You seek, my son, the only avenue to glory which is 
open to people who lead a private life, such glory as is 
sometimes the reward of wisdom, and literary and other 
studies. Now you are not unaware that this glory, 
though far from "being .despised, was by our greatest 
ancestors held in less esteem than that derivable from 

1 Parini lived 1729-1799. As a philosopher and satirist he seems to 
have exercised no slight influence over the mind of Leopardi. 


PARINI ON GLORY. 8i 

other things. Cicero, for instance, though a most ardent 
and successful follower of glory, frequently and emphati- 
cally makes apology for the time and labour he had 
spent in its pursuit. On one occasion he states that his 
literary and philosophical studies were secondary to 
his public life ; on another, that being constrained by 
the wickedness of the age to abandon more important 
business, he hoped to spend his leisure profitably amid 
these studies. He invariably rated the gl ory of his 
writings at a lower value than t hat acquired from 
his_. consulship and hia_ IahoiuSiron JbfihalfJ'Qi™:^ 
r epublic. - 

" Indeed, if human life be the principal subject of 
literature, and to rule our actions the first lesson of 
philosophy ; there can be no doubt th at action itself 
is as much more important and noble tha q thoug hts 
and writing, as the end is nobler than the means, or 
as things and subjects in comparison with words and 
reasoning. For no man, however clever he be, is 
naturally created for study, nor born to write. Action 
alone is natural to him. And we see the majority of 
fine writers, and especially illustrious poets in the present 
age (Vittorio Alfieri, for instance), impelled to action in 
an extraordinary degree. Then, if by chance the deeds 
of these men prove unacceptable, either from the nature 
of the times or their own ill-fortune, they take up the 
pen and write grand things. Nor^^ean. people wyite,. who 
- ha ve neither the disposition nor power to act. From 
Sns you will easily understand wJiy so few Italians gain 
immortal fame by their writings ; it is that they are by 
nature unfit for noble actions. Antiquity, especially that 
of the early Greeks or Eomans, is, I think, comparable 
to the design of the statue of Telesilla, who was a 
poetess, a warrior, and the saviour of her country. She 
is represented holding her helmet, at which she looks 
intently and longingly, as though she desired to place it 
on her head; at her feet lie some books almost disre- 

F 


82 PARINI ON GLORY. 

garded, as forming but an insignificant part of her 
glory.^ 

" But m en of modern times are differently situated to 
the ancients. Glory is less open to them. They who 
" Tnfl.T?e_ stnjijes their vocation in life show the g^reatest 
^^ssibie m agnanimity ; nor need they, like Cicero, 
apologise"to their country for the profession they have 
chosen. I therefore applaud the nobility of your 
decision. But since a life of letters, being unnatural, 
cannot be lived without injury to the body, nor without 
increasing in many ways the natural infelicity of your 
mind, I regard it as my duty to explain to you the 
various difficuIti§aJliti^"'^"^^-"-*^- "P- the pursuit of that glory 
towards which you aspire, and the resul ts that will follow ' 
""auccesr''^sho Sr ja ttam- it. You will then be able to 
estimate, on the one hand, the importance and value of 
the goal, and your chance of reaching it ; and, on the 
other, the sufferings, exertions, and discomforts inseparable 
from the pursuit. Thus, you may be better able to decide 
whether it be expedient to continue as you have begun, 
or to seek glory by some other road." 


CHAPTER II. 

"I MIGHT first of all say a great deal about the 
i^^valries, e nvy, bitter cens ur es, libels, injustices, sch emes 
and plots against your character, both in public and 
private, and the many other difficulties which the 
wickedness of men will induce them to oppose to you 
in the path you have chosen. These obstacles, always 
very hard to overcome and often insuperable, exercise a 
further influence. It is owing to them that more thail 
one author, not only in life, but even when dead, is robbed 
of the honour that is due to him. Such an one, not 
having been famous when alive, because of the hatred or 
' Pausanias, lib. 2, cap. 20. 


PARINI ON GLORY. 83 

envy with which he was regarded by others, when dead 
remains in obscurity, because he is forgotten; for it 
rarely happens that a man obtains glory after he has 
ceased writing, when there is no one to excite an interest 
in him. 

"I do not intend to refer to the hindrances which arise 
from matters personal to the writer, and other more trivial 
things. Yet it is often owing to these latter that writ- 
ings worthy of the highest praise, and the fruit of infinite 
exertions, are for ever excluded from fame, or having been 
before the world for a short time, fall into -• oblivion, and 
disappear entirely from the memory of men. For the 
same causes other writings, either inferior to or no better 
than these, become highly honoured. I will merely ex- 
pose to you the difficulties and troubles which, apart from 
the malice of men, will stubbornly contest the prize of 
glory. These embarrassments are of ordinary, not excep- 
tional occurrence, and have been experienced by most 
great writers. 

"You are aware that no one can be called a great 
writer, nor obtains true and lasting glory, except by means 
of excellent and perfect works, or such as approach perfec- 
tion. The following very true utterance of Castiglione 
is worthy of being engraved on your mind : — ' It is very 
seldom that a person unaccustomed to write, however 
learned he be, can adequately recognise the skill and 
industry of writers ; or appreciate the delicacy and 
excellence of styles, and those subtle and hidden signifi- 
cations which abound in the writings of the ancients.' 

" In the first place, consider how very few people 
practise or learn the art of composition ; and think from 
how small a number of men, whether in the present or 
the future, you can in any case look for the magnificent 
estimation which you hope will be the reward of your 
life. Consider, too, how much influence style has in 
securing appreciation for writings. On this, and their 
degree of perfection, depends the subsequent fate of all 


84 PARINI ON GLORY. 

works that come under the heading of ' light literature.' 
So great is the influence of style, that a book presumably 
celebrated for its matter often proves valueless when 
deprived of its manner. Now, language is so interwoven 
with style that the one can hardly be considered apart 
from the other. Men frequently confuse the two together, 
and are often unable to express the distinction between 
them, if even they are aware of it in the first place. 
And as for the thousand merits and defects of language 
and style, with difficulty, if at all, can they be discerned 
and assigned to their respective properties. But it is 
certain, to quote the words of Castiglione, that no foreigner 
is ' accustomed to write ' with elegance in your language. 
It follows therefore that style, which is so great and 
important a necessity in composition, and a thing of such 
unaccountable difficulty and labour, both in acquirement 
and usage, can only properly be judged and appreciated 
by the persons who in one single nation are accustomed 
to write. For all other people the boundless exertions 
attached to the formation of style will be almost use- 
less, and as if entirely wasted. I will not refer to the 
infinite diversities of opinion, and the various tendencies 
of readers ; owing to which the number of persons 
adapted to perceive the good qualities of this or that 
book is still more reduced. 

" You must regard it as an undoubted fact that^Jn 
_order to distinctly recognise the value of a perfect or 
nearly perfect work, deserving of i mmortality, it is not 
enough' ^rely_j;q"'be accusto med-, to write. You_vour- 
self must be able to_ accomplish the work in question 
almo st as perfectly _a£^ the^ writer himself. And as 
experience gradually teaches you what qualities consti- 
tute a perfect writer, and what an infinity of difficulties 
must be surmounted before these can be obtained, you 
will learn how to overcome the latter, and acquire the 
former ; so that in time knowledge and power will prove 
to be one and the same thing. Hence a man cannot 


PARINI ON GLORY. 85 

discern nor fully appreciate the excellence of perfect 
writers until he is able to give expression to it in his 
own writings ; because such perfection can only be 
appreciated by what may be termed a transference of it 
iuto oneself. Until this be done, a man cannot really 
understand what constitutes perfection in writing, and 
will therefore be unable to duly admire the best writers. 

" E"ow most literary men, because they write easily, 
think they write well ; they therefore regard good writing 
as a facile accomplishment, even though they assert the 
contrary. Think, then, how the number will be reduced 
of those who might appreciate and laud you when, after 
inconceivable exertions and care, you succeed in' pro- 
ducing a noble and perfect work. In the present day 
there are scarcely two or three men in Italy who have 
acquired the art of perfect writing ; and although this 
number may appear to you excessively small, at no time 
nor place has it ever been much greater. 

" I often wonder to myself how Virgil, as a supreme 
example of literary perfection, ever acquired the high 
reputation in which he is now held. For I am certain 
that most of his readers and eulogisers do not discover 


_in his poems more than on e„beauty_for every .ten or 
tw enty revealed to m e by continuous stud y apd medita - 
tion. Not that i imaigine i have succeeded in estimating 
him at his proper value, nor have derived every possible 
enjoyment from his writings. In truth, the esteem and 
admiration professed for the greatest writers is ordinarily 
the result of a blind predisposition in their favou r, rather 
than the outcome of an impartial judgment, or the con- 
sequence of a due appreciation of their merits. 

" When I was young I remember first reading Virgil, 
being on the one hand unbiassed in my judgment, and 
careless of the opinion of others (a very rare thing, by 
the by); and, on the other hand, as ignorant as most 
boys of my age, though perhaps not more so than is 
the unchanging condition of many readers. I refused to 


86 PARINI ON GLORY. 

admit that Virgil's reputation was merited, since I failed 
to discover in him much more than is to be found in 
very ordinary poets. Indeed, it surprises mp- that Virjril'a 
fam e should excel that of Lu can. For we see the mass 
of readers, at all times, equally when the literature of 
the day is of a debasing or an elevating tendency, much 
prefer gross and unmistakable beauties to those that 
are delicate and half- concealed. They also prefer fervour 
to modesty; often indeed even the apparent to the real; 
and usually mediocrity to perfection. 

" In reading the letters of a certain prince, exception- 
ally intelligent,, whose writing was remarkable for its 
wit, pleasantry, smoothness, and acuteness, I clearly dis- 
cerned that in his heart he preferred the Henriad to the 
jEneid ; although the fear of shocking men's sensibilities 
might deter him from confessing such a preference. 

" I am astonished that the judgment of a few, correct 
though it be, should have succeeded in controlling that 
of numbers, and should have established the custom of 
an esteem no less blind than just. This, however, does 
not always occur, a nd I imagine that the fame ga ined 
Jjy the best writers is rather a matter of_ p.^anp.F. tfiaTi"_ 
merit. ,_ My opinion may be confirmed by what I say 
as we proceed." 


CHAPTEE III. 

"We have seen how very few people will be able to 
appreciate you when you succeed in becoming a perfect 
writer. Now. I wish to indicate some of the hindrances 
that wiU prevent even these few from rightly estimating 
your_-s;orth,_ although they j,e§ the signs of it. . 

"In the first place, there can be no doubt that all 
writings of eloquence or poetry are judged, not so much 
on their merits, as by the effect they produc e in th e 
mind of the reader. So that the "reader ni^' be said 


PARINI ON GLORY. 87 

to consider them rather in himself than in themselves. 
Consequently men who are naturally devoid of imagina- 
tion and enthusiasm, though gifted "with much intelli- 
gence, discernment, and no little learning, are almost 
quite incapable of forming a correct judgment of fanciful 
■writings. They cannot in the least immerse their minds 
in the mind of the writer, and usually have within them- 
selves a feeling of contempt for his compositions, because 
unable to discover in what their so great fame consists. 
Such reading awakens no emotion within them, nor does 
it arouse their imagination, or create in them any especial 
sensation of pleasure. And even people who are natur- 
ally disposed and inclined to receive the impression of 
whatever image or fancy a writer has properly signified, 
very often experience a feeling of coldness, indifference, 
languor, or dulness ; so that for the time' they resemble 
the persons just mentioned. This change is due to 
divers causes, internal and external, physical and mental, 
and is either temporary or lasting. At such times no 
one, even though himself an excellenb writer, is a good 
judge of writings intended to excite the affections or 
the imagination. Again, there is the danger of satiety 
due to previous reading of similar writings. Certain 
passions too, of more or less strength, from time to 
time invest the mind, leaving no room for the emotions 
which ought to be excited by the reading. And it often 
happens that places; spectacles, natural or artificial, music; 
and a hundred such things, which would ordinarily^ excite 
us, are now incapable of arousing or delighting us in 
the least, although no less attractive than formerly. 

" But, thou t rh a man, jgi. prie-Q ii^-ather of these-^easons, 
may be ill disposed to a ppreciate the effects of eloettie-nce 
or po etry, he does not for that reason defer j udgment o f 
boots on BotT these subjects' which he then happens to 
reaZTToTTEe^first time. I myself sometimes take up 
"BomerTtScero, or Petrarch, and read without feeling the 
least emotion. Yet, as I am quite aware of the merits of 


88 PARINI ON GLORY. 

these writers, both because of their reputation, and my 
own frequent appreciation of their charms," I do not 
for a moment think them undeservedly praised simply 
because I am at present too dull to do them justice. 
But it is different -^ith"-'^""^" T^'^'^ ^"^ the first time. 
^hichare too new t o have acquired a reputation . There 
is nothing in such cases to prevent the reader forming a 
low opinion of the author and the merits of his book, if 
his mind be indisposed to do justice to the sentiments 
and imagery contained in the work. Nor would it be 
easy to induce him to alter his judgment by subsequent 
study of the same book under better auspices ; for pro- 
bably the disgust inspired by his first reading will deter 
him from a second ; and in any case the strength of first 
impressions will be almost invincible. 

" On the other hand, the mind is sometimes, for one 
reason or another, in such a state of sensibiLity, vivacity, 
vigour, and fervour, that it follows even the least sug- 
gestion of the reading ; it feels keenly the slightest touch, 
and as it reads is able to create within itself a thousand 
emotions and fancies, sometimes losing itself in a sort 
of sweet delirium, when it is almost transported out of 
itself. As a natural result of this, the mind, reviewing 
the pleasures enjoyed in the reading, and not distinguish- 
ing between its own predisposition and the actual 
merits of the book, experiences a feeling of so great 
admiration, and forms so high a conception of it, as ev^n 
to rank the book_ above ^others^of mueiugieatemneiit, 
read under less_ felicitous circumstances. See therefore 
to what uncertainty is subject even tlie truth and justice 
of opinions from the same persons, as to the writings 
and genius of others, quite- apart from any sentiment of 
malice or favour. So great is thi s nnp.prta.inty that a, 
man varies cons iderably ii3_J;ds ^^tjaatinn cf wftrks nf 
equal value, and ^ even _ the _saDia._2TOrk, at different 
times ,of T ^eTu nder different circumstances, and even at 
different hours of the day." ~ " """' 


PARINI ON GLORY. 89 


CHAPTEE IV. 

" Perhaps you may think that these difficulties, due to 
mental indisposition on the part of readers, are of rare 
occurrence. Consider, then, how frequently a man, as he 
grows old, hecomes incapable of appreciating the charms 
of eloquence and poetry, no less than those of the other 
imitative arts, and everything beautiful in the world. 

This intfillp.ctua.l dp.cav-iH.a^-Twae.gHj.fapL-nf miv natrrm In 

the present day it is so much greater than formerly, 
begins so much earlier, and progresses so much more 
rapidly, especially in the studious, as our experience is 
enlarged in more or less degree by the knowledge begot- 
ten of the speculations of so many past centuries. For 
which reason, and owing to the present condition of 
civilised life, the^_EhaflJicaiis- aL..eMldhoo d soon vanis h 
fromthe imafTination-of-mftH-^ with them go the hopes of 
the mind, and with the hopes most of the desires, pas- 
sions, and energy of life and its faculties. Whence I 
often wonder that men of mature age, especially the 
learned and those inclined to meditate about human 
affairs, should yet be subject to the influence of poetry 
and eloquence, which are, however, unable to produce any 
real effect on them. 

" It may be regarded as a fact that, in order to be 
greatly moved by imagination of the grand and beautiful, 
one must believe that there is something really grand 
and beautiful in human life, and that poetry is not liiere 
fable. The young always believe such things, even 
when they know their fallacy, until personal experience 
forces them to accept the truth. But it is difficult to 
put faith in them after the sad discipline of practical life ; 
especially when experience is combined with habits of 
study and speculation. 

" From this it would seem that the young ar e generall y 
^etterj"udges~orwntings ihteligM'fo'arouie" the affections 


go PARINI ON GLORY. 

and t he imagination, than men of mature and advanced 
^er"""Sut^ on_fche_othp.r hand, the mung!!axLnoYices_in 
Titefatufer~They~exact from books a superhuman, bound- 
TeisT and impossible pleasure, and where they fail to 
experience this they despise the writer. Illiterate people ; 

have the same idea of the functions of literature. And | 

youths addicted to reading prefer, both in their own writ- ] 

ings and those of others, extravagance to moderation, ' 

magnificence or attractiveness of style and ornamentation, i 

to the simple and natural, and sham beauties to real { 

ones. This is partly due to their limited experience, | 

and partly to the impetuosity of their time of life. Con- ' 

sequently, although the young are doubtless more inclined 
than their elders to applaud what seems good to them, 
since they are more truthful and candid, ttiey— are 
.seldom capable of appreciating the excellences of lite- 
rary works. As we grow older, the influence exercised 
over us by art increases, as that of nature diminishes. 
Nevertheless both nature and art are necessary to pro- 
duce effect. 

"Dwellers in large towns are compelled to sacrifice 
the beautiful to the useful. Even though of warm and j 

sensitive natures and lively imagination, they cannot 
experience as an effect of the charms either of nature or 
literature any tender or noble sentiment, any sublime or 
delightful fancy ; unless indeed, like you, they spend 
most of their time in solitude. For few things are so 
opposed to the state of mind necessary to appreciate 
such delights, as the conversation of these men, the riot i 

of these places, and the sight of the tinselled splendour, i 

the falseness, the miserable troubles, and stOI more miser- 
able idleness which abound there. I also thin k that t^ e 
UtUrateurs of large .towns ,9ie,^s -a"^i3ej4ess--qualified_ 
to judge _bboks than those of small towns ; because, like 
everything else, the literature^oFlarge towns is ordinarily 
false and pretentious, or superficial. 

" And whereas the ancients used to regard literature 


PARINI ON GLORY. 91 

and the sciences as a pleasing change from more serious 
business, in the present day the majority of men who in 
large towns profess to be students regard literature and 
writing as merely an agreeable variation of their other 
amusements. 

" I think tha t works of art, whether painting, sculpture, 
or architecture, would be much more_appreciated if they 
were disseminated throughout a c ountry in different-sized 
towns, instead of being, as at present accumulated^rrTEfe 
chief cities. For in the latter places men are so full of 
tnoughts, ^so occupied wit h pleasurable pursuits and vain 
and frivol nus excitements^ t hat thev a.re very ra.TelV capar— - 
ble of the profound pleasures of the intellect. Besides, 
a multitude of fine things gathered together have a dis- 
tracting influence ; the mind bestows but little attention 
on individual things, and is sensible of no especial grati- 
fication; or else it becomes satiated, and regards them 
all as indifferently as though they were objects of the 
commonest kind. 

"I say the same of music, which is nowhere so elabo- 
rate, or brought to such perfection, as in large towns, 
where men have less appreciation for the wonderful 
emotions of the art, and are indeed less musical than 
elsewhere. 

" Never theless, large towns are^a usef ul hom e fozihe. 
fostermg and perfecting of the ar ts; althcmgh their 
inhabitants are less under the influence of their charms 
than the people of other places. It may be said 
that artists, who work in solitude and silence, strive 
laboriously and industriously to please men, who, because 
accustomed to the bustle and noise of cities, are almost 
totally incapable of appreciating the fruit of their 
exertions. 

" The fate of writers may in a measure be compared 
to that of artists." 


92 PARINI ON GLORY. 


CHAPTEE V. 

" We will now return to the consideration of authors. 

" It is a characteristic of writings approaching perfec- 

tion that they usually please more when read a second 

taSe. thaiT t hey pleased at first. . The contrary effect is 

produced by many books written carefully and skilfully, 

but which really possess few merits. These when read 

a second time are less esteemed than at first. But both 

kinds of books, when read only once, often deceive eve n 

~the learne d and e '^-pPTipyppj. P" tha^, \nu\iifc\r nr\ ii ~ h nciks. a.rs 

preterred to,jxcellfiBt-o-nes. In the present day, however, 

even students lrg;^J)rofessi ori_Cai;i rgr ply he. ^r]r^■\^n,^.^ t,njrpa_fl 

new^ book's a second time , especially such as come under 
"the heading of light literature. This was not so in olden 
times, because then but few books were in existence. 
Now, it is very different. We possess the literary 
bequests- of all past times. Every nation has its litera- 
ture, and produces its host of' books daily. There are 
writings in all languages, ancient and modern, relating 
to every branch of science and learning, and so closely 
connected and allied that the student must study them 
all as far as possible. You may therefore easily imagine 
that a book does not obtain full consideration on a first 
reading, and that a second reading is out of the question. 
Yet the first opinion that we form of a new book is 
seldom changed. 

"For the same reasons, even in the. first reading of 
books, especially those of light literature, very rarely 
sufficient attention and study is given to discover the 
laborious perfection, the subtle art, and the hidden and 
unpretentious virtues of the writings. Thus, in the 
present day the condition of excellent books is really 
worse than that of indifferent ones. For the charms and 
qualifications of most of tlie latter, whether true or false, 
are so exposed to the eye, that, however trivial they may 


PARINI ON GLORY. 93 

be, they are easily discernible at first sight. We may 
therefore say with truth, that the exertion necessary to 
produce perfect writing is almost useless for fame. But, 
on the other hand, books composed, like most modern 
ones, rapidly and without any great degree of excellence, 
though perhaps celebrated for a time, cannot fail to be 
soon forgotten. And many works of recognised value 
are also lost in the immense stream of new books which 
pours forth daily, before they have had time to establish 
their celebrity. They perish for no intrinsic fault of 
their own, and give place to other books, good and bad, 
which each in turn live their short spell of life. So that 
whereas the ancients could acquire glory in a thousand 
ways, we can only attain it by one single avenue, after 
much more exertion than formerly. 

" The book s of the a ncjents-alfl ne. gn^'^ ivp this universal 
shi pwreck of aU l ater writings^ JTheir fameoa.establijshed 
a nd confir med^ they are diligently and repeatedly read, 
' and are made the subject of careful study. And it is 
noteworthy that a modem book, if intrinsically equal to 
any of the ancient writings, would rarely, if ever, give 
its readers as much pleasure as the ancient work. This 
for two reasons. In the first place, it would not be read 
with the care and attention that we bestow on celebrated 
writings ; very few people would read it twice ; and no 
one would study it (for none but scientific books are 
studied until made venerable by age). In the second 
place, the world-wide and permanent reputation of writ- 
ings, whether or not due to their internal excellence, 
adds to their value, and proportionately increases the 
pleasure they give ; often, indeed, most of the charm of 
such literature is simply due to its celebrity. 

" This reminds me of some remarkable words of 
Mon tesquieu about the origin of human pleasures. He 
says : ' The mind often creates within itself many 
sources of pleasure, which are intimately dependent on 
each other. Thus, a thing that has once pleased us, 


94 PARINI ON GLORY. 

pleases us again simply because it did so before ; we 
couple together imagination of the present and remem- 
brance of the past. For example, an actress who pleased 
us on the stage, will probably please us in private hfe : 
her voice ; her manner ; the recollection of the applause 
she excited; perhaps, too, her role of princess joined to her 
real character, — all combine and form a mixture of inilu- 
ences producing a general feeling of pleasure. Our 
minds are always full of ideas subordinate to one or 
more primary ideas. A woman famous for one cause or 
another, and possessed of some slight inherent defect, is 
often able to attract by means of this very defect. And 
women are ordinarily loved less because they inspire 
affection than because they are well born, rich, or highly 
esteemed by others.'^. ... 

" Often indeed a woman's reputation for beauty and 
grace, whether well or ill founded, or even the mere fact 
that others have been under the influence of her charms, 
suffices to inspire a man with affection for her. And 
who does not know that m ost ple asu, yes ar p dn'^ Jo the 

imagination rather. . tlig^^ -^-q-^-^j-''— ■"■"J'>'»»^ «"*' »i^i i"m- --iQ° ^f t i Tx° 

things that pleas^ us ? 

" These remarks refer to writings no less than to all 
other things. Indeed ^ will veptnrp. -to say tba LJESIS-" 
p oem to be published eauaJ "j*- miprrinr tn thci Tliniflj unrl 
carefully r-aaa-lTO-.a.n eTce11f.Ti,t ,jiid,o;e nf pnp.t.ry, it would 
S ^e less satisfaction and appear less charm iioglJEhan the 
_Grggk_mapJifli:piecar-much less would its fame be com- 
parable with that of the Iliad ; for its real merits would 
not be aided by twenty-seven centuries of- admiration, 
nor the thousand reminiscences and other associations 
that connect themselves with Homer's poem. Similarly 
I affirm that if any one were to read carefully either the 
' Jerusalem ' or the ' Furioso,' without knowing anything 
of their celebrity, he would be much less pleased than 
others who were aware of their fame. 

^ Ex : Fragment Sur le godt, &o. 


PARINI ON GLORY. 


95 


" In short, it may be accepted as a general rule that the 
first readers of every remarkable work which in after ages 
becomes famous, and the contemporaries of the writer, derive 
less enjoyment from such reading than all other people. . 

" This fact cannot but be very disadvantageous to the 
interest of writers." 


CHAPTEE VI. 

" Such are a few of the obstacles that may prevent you 
from acquiring glory from the studious, or even from 
those who excel in knowledge and the art of writing. 

"Now there are many people who, though educated 
sufficiently for the purposes of daily life, are neither 
writers nor students to any very great extent. They 
read simply for amusement, and, as you know, are only 
capable of appreciating certain qualities in literature. 
The chief reason of this has been already partly explained. 
There is, however, another cause. It is that they only 
seek momentary pleasure in what they read. But the 
present in itself is trivial and joyless to all men. Even 
the sweetest things, as says Homer, 

' Love, sleep, song, and the dance,' 

soon weary us, if to the present there be not joined the 
hope of some pleasure or future satisfaction, dependent 
on them. For it is contrary to human nature to be 
greatly pleased with that of which hope does not form a 
constituent part. And so great is the power of hope 
that it enlivens and sweetens many exertions, painful and 
laborious in themselves; whereas, on the other hand, 
things innately charming, when unaccompanied by hope, 
are scarce sufficiently attractive to be welcomed. We 
see studious people never tired of reading, often even of 
the driest kind ; and they experience a constant delight 
in their studies, carried on perhaps throughout the greater 
part of the day. The reason of this is that they have 


96 PARINI ON GLORY. 

the future ever before their eyes; they hope in some 
way, and at some time, to reap the benefit of their 
labours. Such people always have their interests at 
heart. They do not take up a book, either to pass time 
or for amusement, without also distilling from it more or 
less definite instruction. Others, on the contrary, who 
seek to learn nothing from books, are satisfied when they 
have read their first few pages, or those that have the 
most attractive appearance. They wander wearily from 
book to book, and marvel to themselves how any one can 
find prolonged pleasure in prolonged reading. 

" It is clear that any skill or industry displayed by 
the writer is almost entirely wasted on such people, who 
I nevertheless compose the mass of readers. And even 
men of studious inclinations, having later in life changed 
the nature of their studies, almost feel a repugnance for 
books which would formerly have given them intense 
delight ; and though still able to discern their value, are 
wearied rather than pleased by their merits, because 
instruction is not at all what they desire." 


CHAPTEE VII. 

" HiTHEKTO we have considered writings in general, and 
certain things relating to light literature in particular, 
towards which I see you are more especially attracted. 
Let us now turn to philosophy, though it must not be 
supposed that this science is separable from the study 
of letters. 

" Perhaps you will think that because philosophy is 
derived from reason, which among civiHsed people is 
usually a stronger power than the imagination or the 
affections, the value of philosophical works ought to be 
more universally recognised than that of poems, and 
other writings which treat of the pleasurable and the 
beautiful. It is, however, my opinion that poetry i§_ 


PARINI ON GLORY. 97 

better uiK^giatofldnind n,ppreciated th an phi losophy. In 
the first place, it is certain that a subtle intelligence 
and great power of reasoning are not sufficient to ensure 
much progress in philosophy. Considerable imaginative 
power is also requisite. Indeed, judged from the nature 
of their intellects, Descartes, Galileo, Leibnitz, ISTewton, 
and Vico would have made excellent poets ; and, on the 
other hand, Homer, Dante, and Shakespeare might have 
been great philosophers. This subject would require 
much elaboration; I will therefore merely affirm that 
rmne but philnRnphCTs n.a-q p erfectly appreciate the value 
and realise the charm of philosophical book s. Of course, 
refer to their substance, and not to whatever superficial 
merit they may have, whether of language, style, or any- 
thing else. And, just as men are by nature unpoetical, 
and consequently rarely catch the spirit of a poem or 
discern its imagery, although they may follow the 
meaning of its words ; similarly, people unaccustomed 
to meditate and philosophise within themselves, or who 
are incapable of deep sustained thought, cannot com- 
prehend the truths that a philosopher expounds, however 
clear and logical his deductions, arguments, and conclu- 
sions may be, although they understand the words that 
he Tises and their signification. Because, being unable 
or unused to analyse the essence of things by means of 
thought, or to separate their own ideas into divisions, 
or to join and bind together a number of these ideas, or 
simultaneously to grasp with the mind many particulars 
so as to deduce a single general rule from them, or to 
follow unweariedly with the mind's eye a long series 
of truths mutually connected, or to discover the subtle 
and hidden connection between each truth and a hundred 
others ; they can with difficulty, if at all, grasp and 
follow his working, or experience the impressions proved 
by the philosopher. Therefore, they can neither under- 
stand nor estimate rightly all the influences that led him 
to this or that opinion, and made him affirm or deny 


98 PARINI ON GLORY. 

this or that thing, and doubt such and such another. 
Possibly they may understand his ideas, but they neither 
recognise their truth nor probabiLity ; because they are 
unable to test either the one or the other. They are 
like those cold and passionless men who are incapable of 
appreciating the fancies and imagery of the poets. And 
you know it is common to the poet and the philosopher 
to penetrate into the depths of the minds of men, and 
thence to bring into light all their hidden emotions, pror 
fundities, and secret working, with their respective causes 
and effects ; thus, men who are incapable of s ympat hy 
wjt h the noet and his thoughts, are also incap able_of 
entering into the thoughts of the philosopher. 
^'"^Eins why we see daily many meritorious wotks, 
clear and intelligible to all, interpreted by some people 
as containing a thousand undoubted truths, and, by 
others, a thousand patent errors. They are attacked 
in public and private, not only from motives of malice, 
interest, and other similar causes, but also because of the 
incapacity of the readers, and their inability tp com^ 
prehend the certainty of the principles, the correctness 
of the deductions and coaclusions, and the general fit- 
ness, sufficiency, and truth of the reasoning put forward. 
It often happens that philosophical writings of the most 
sublime nature are accused of obscurity, not necessarily 
because they are obscure, but either because their vein 
of thought is of too profound or novel a nature to be 
easily intelligible, or because the reader himself is too 
dense to be a competent judge of such works. Think, 
then, how difficult it must be to gain praise for philo- 
sophical writings, however meritorious they may be. 
For there can be no doubt that the number of really 
profound philosophers, who alone can appreciate one 
another, is in the present day very small, although 
philosophy is more cultivated than in past times. 

" I will not refer to the various sects into which 
those who profess philosophy are divided. Each sect 


PARINI ON GLORY. 


99 


ordinarily refuses to allow that there is aught estimable 
iu the others ; this is not only from unwillingness, but 
also because it occupies itself with different principles 
of philosophy." 


CHAPTEE VIII. 

" If, as the result of your learning and meditation, you 
chanced to discover some important truth, not only 
formerly unknown, but quite unlocked for, and even 
antagonistic to the opinions of the day, you must not 
anticipate in your lifetime any peculiar commendation 
. for this discovery. You will gain no esteem, even from 
the wise (exce_pt perhaps from a very few), until by fre- 
quent and varied reiteration of these truths the ears of 
men have become accustomed to their sound ; then only, 
after a long time, the intellect begins to receive them. 

'' For no truth contrary to current opinion, even though 
demonstrable with almost geometrical certitude, can ever . 
' unless capable of material proof, be suddenly,esta.m ^ed. 
Time, custom, and example alone are able to. give it a 
solid foundation. Men accustom themselves to belief, 
as to everything else ; indeed they generally believe from 
habit, and not from any sentiment of conviction within 
their minds. At length it happens that the once-ques- 
tioned truth is taught to children, and is universally 
accepted. People are then astonished that it was ever 
unknown to them, and they ridicule their ancestors and 
contemporaries for the ignorance and obstinacy thpy mani- 
fested in opposing it. The greuter and more important 
the new truths, so much the greater will be. the difl&culty 
of procuring acceptance for them ; since they will over- 
throw a proportionately large number of opinions hitherto 
rooted in the minds of men. Por even acute and prac- 
tised intellects do not easily enter into the spirit of 
reasonings which demonstrate new truths that exceed 
the limits of their own knowledge; especially when 


loo PARINI ON GLORY. 

these are opposed to beliefs long established within 
them. Descartes, in his geometrical discoveries, was 
understood by but very few of his contemporaries. It 
was the same with Newton. Indeed, the condition of 
men pre-eminent in knowledge is somewhat similar to 
that of literary men, and 'savants' who live in places 
innocent of learning. The latter are not deservedly 
esteemed by their neighbours; the former fail to be 
duly appreciated by their contemporaries. Both are 
often despised for their difference in manner of life and 
opinions from other men, who neither do justice to their 
ability nor to the writings they put forth in proof of it. 

" There is no doubt that the human race makes con- 
tinual progress in knowledge. As a body, its march is 
slow and measured ; but it includes certain great and 
remarkable minds which, having devoted themselves to 
speculation about the sensible or intelligible phenomena 
of the universe, and the pursuit of truths, travel, nay 
sometimes flash, to their conclusions in an immeasurably 
short space of time. And the rapid progress of these 
intellects stimulates other men, who hasten their foot- 
steps so as to reach, later on, the place where these 
superior beings rested. But not until the lapse of 
a century or more do they attain to the knowledge 
possessed by an extraordinary intellect of this kind. 

" It is ordinarily be|ip.vpd^q.t bnTnan .krowle'i'gg '^'^'^'^ 
most of its_ progress to these supre me intellects, which 
arise from tim^ to tjme, like mira.niM of na.t.urp j I, on " 
the.jeoata?aiiq^-4biii3£ jihat it owes more to men_Q£- common 
^powers than to those who __arg, eg geptionally endowed. 
Suppose a case',lnwirich one of the latter, having rivallecl 
his contemporaries in knowledge, advances independently, 
and takes a lead of, say ten paces. Most other men, far 

1 It is in the order of Providence elaborate the pregnant queries and 

that the inventive, generative, con- illumining guesses of the former, 

stitutive mind should come first ; — S. T. Coleridge, Table Talk, Oct. 

and then that the patient and col- 8, 1 830. 
lective mind should follow, and 


PARINI ON GLORY. loi 

from feeling disposed to follow him, regard his progress 
in silence, or else ridicule it. Meanwhile, a number of 
moderately clever men, partly aided perhaps by the ideas 
and discoveries of the genius, but principally through 
their own endeavours, conjointly advance one step. The 
masses unhesitatingly follow them, being attracted by 
the not inordinate novelty, and also by the number of 
those who are its authors. In process of time, thanks to 
the exertions of these men, the tenth step is accomplished; 
and thus the opinions of the genius are universally 
received throiighout the civilised world. Eut _ J:heir 
originator, dead long ago, onlyjfcgamim..3JalaJiPd^j[n§ga,- 
sonable^ repy^ation. This is due partly to the fact that 
he is forgotten, or to the low esteem in which he was 
held when living; added to which men are conscious 
that they do not owe their knowledge to him, and that 
they are already his equals in erudition, and will soon 
surpass him, if they have not done so already. They 
are also his superiors, in that time has enabled them to 
demonstrate and affirm truths that he only imagined, to 
prove his conjectures, and give better form and order to 
his inventions, almost, as it were, maturing them. Per- 
chance, after a time, some student engaged in historical 
research may justly appraise the influence of this genius, 
and may announce him to his countrymen with great 
^clat ; but the fame that may ensue from this will soon 
give way to renewed oblivion, 

" The progress of human knowledge, like a falling 
weight, increases momentarily in its speed ; none the less 
very rarely men of a generation change their beliefs or 
recognise their errors, so as to believe at one time the 
opposite of what they previously believed. Each genera- 
tion prepares the way for its successor to know and believe 
many things contrary to its own knowledge and belief. 
But most men are as little conscious of the increasing 
development of their knowledge, and the inevitable 
mutation of their beliefs, as they are sensible of the per- 


102 PARINI ON GLORY.. 

petual motion of the earth. And a man never alters his 
opinions so as to be conscious of the alteration. But 
-were he suddenly to embrace an opinion totally discor- 
dant with his old beliefs, he could not fail to perceive 
the change. It may therefore be said, that ordinarily 
no truths, except such as are determinable by the 
senses, will be believed by the contemporaries of their 
discoverer." 

CHAPTER IX. 

'J N ow let u s , supp.Qa e-.4fe.at-eateg¥>T3ifflgiflt7H»ev-i3vercome. 
and that aided by fortu ne you h ave actually in your life- 
Time acquired not only "^ceIe5rity, but glory. "What will 
be t hp frin'trnf thisT S the first place, men wiU wish 
to see you, and make your acquaintance; they will 
indicate you as a distinguished man, and wiU honour you 
in every possible way. Such are the best results of 
literary glory. It would seem more natural to look for 
such demonstrations in small than in large towns ; for 
these latter are subject to the distracting influence of 
wealth and power, and all the arts which serve to amuse 
and enliven the inactive hours of men's lives. But 
because small towns are ordinarily wanting in things 
necessary to stimulate literary excellence, they are rarely 
the abode of men devoted to literature and study. The 
people of such places esteem learning and wisdom, and 
even the fame men seek by these means, at a very low 
value ; neither the one nor the other are objects of envy 
to them. And if a man who is a d istinguished scholar 
take up his resi dence in a small town, his notabilit y is 
of no advantage to him. Rather the contrary. For 
though his fame would secure him high honour in towns 
not far distant, he is there-regarded-as the most forlorn a nd 
obscure individual in.JJie place. Just as a man who pos- 
sessed nothing but an abundance of silver and gold would 
be even poorer than other men in a place where these 


PARINI ON GLORY. 103 

metals were valueless ; similarly a wise and studious man 
who makes his abode in a place where learning and genius 
are unknown, far from being considered superior to other 
men, will be despised and scornfully treated unless he 
happen to have some more material possessions. Yet such 
a man is often given credit for possessing much greater 
knowledge than he really has, though this reputation does 
not procure him any especial honour from these people. 

" When I was a young man, I used occasionally to 
return to Bosisio, my native place. Every one there 
knew that I spent my time in study and writing. , The 
peasants gave me credit for being poet, philosopher, 
doctor, mathematician, lawyer, theologian, and sufficiently 
a linguist to know all the languages in the world. 
They used to question me indiscriminately on any subject, 
or about any trifle that chanced to enter their minds. 
Yet they did not hold me in much esteem, and thought 
me less iustructed than the learned people of all other 
places. But whenever I gave them reason to think my 
learning was not as extensive as they supposed, I fell 
vastly in their estimation, and in the end they used to 
persuade themselves that after all my knowledge was no 
greater than theirs. 

" We have already noticed the difficulties to be over- 
come in large towns before glory can be acc[uired, or the . 
fruit of it enjoyed. I will now add that although no 
fame is more difficult to merit than that of being an 
'excellent poet, writer, or philosopher, nothing is less 
lucrative to the possessor. You know that the misery 
and poverty of the greatest poets, both in ancient and 
modern times, is proverbial. Homer, like his poetry, is 
involved in mystery; his country, life, and history are 
an impenetrable secret to men. But, amid this uncer- 
tainty and ignorance, there is an unshaken tradition that 
H omer was poor and unhappy. It is as if time wished 
to bear witness that the fate of other noble poets was 
shared by the prince of .poetry. 


104 PARINI ON GLORY. 

" But, passing over the other benefits of glory, we will 
simply consider what is called honour. No part of fame 
is usually less honourable and more useless than this. 
It may be that so many people obtain it undeservedly, 
or even because of the extreme difficulty of meriting it at 
all ; certain it is that such reputation is scarce esteemed, 
if regarded as trustworthy. Or perhaps it is due to the 
fact that most clever half-cultured men imagine they 
either are, or could easily become, as proficient in literature 
and philosophy as those who are successful in these studies, 
and whom they accordingly treat as on an intellectual 
equality. Possibly both causes combine in their influence. 
It is certain, however, that the man who is an ordinary 
mathematician, natural philosopher, philologist, antiquary, 
artist, sculptor, musician, or who has only a moderate 
acquaintance with a single ancient or foreign language, 
is usually more respected, even in large towns, than a 
really remarkable philosopher, poet, or writer. Conse- 
quently, poetry and philosophy, the noblest, grandest, 
and most arduous of things pertaining to humanity, and 
the supreme efforts of art and science, are in the present 
day the most neglected faculties in the world, even in 
their professed followers. Manual arts rank higher than 
these noble things ; f or no one would pretend to a know- 
ledge" ofthem unless he really possessed it, nor could 
this knowledge be acquired without study and exertion. 
In short, the poet and the philosopher derive no benefit 
in life from their genius and studies, except perhaps the 
glory rendered to them by a very few people. Poetry 
and philosophy resemble each other in that they are both 
as unproductive and barren of esteem and honour, as of 
all other advantages." 


CPIAPTEE X. 

" Feom men you will scarcely derive any advantage what- 
ever from your glory. You will therefore look within 


PARINI ON GLORY. 105 

you for consolation, and in your solitude will nerve 
yourself for fresh exertions, and lay the foundation of 
new hopes.-- Tor like all other human benefits, literary 
glory is more pleasing in anticipation than in reality, if 
indeed it can ever be said to be realised. You will 
therefore at length console yourself with the thought of 
that last hope and refuge of noble minds, gosterity. 
Even Cicero, richly renowned as he was in life, turned 
his mind yearningly towards the future, in saying : 
' Thinkest thou I should have undertaken so many 
labours, during day and night, in peace and war, had I 
imagined my glory was limited to this life ? Far better 
were a life of idleness and peace, devoid of cares and 
fatigue. No. My soul, in some inexplicable way, used 
ever to fix its hopes on posterity, and looked for the 
dawn of its true life from the hour of death.' ^ Cicero 
here refers to the idea of immortality innate in the 
minds of men. But the true explanation lies in the 
fact that all earthly benefits are no sooner acquired than 
their insignificance becomes apparent ; they axe„ unworthy 

jyfj^o ff1itt\""P» ^^(" 7 have co st. jjlOII ^^. ahnvPt fl.T|, an 

exam ple of this : . it i s a dear purchase;^ and of^little use . 
to the purchaser. B ut, as Simonides says, ' Sweet hope 
cheers us with its phantom beauties, and with its vain 
prospect stimulates us to work. Some men await the 
friendly dawn, others the advance of age, and others 
more auspicious seasons. Every mortal cherishes within 
him hopes of coming good from Pluto and the other 
gods.' Thus, as we experience the vanity of glory, hope, 
driven and hunted from place to place, findiag at length 
no spot in the whole of life whereon to rest, passes 
beyond the grave and alights on posterity. ^For-maa^.^ 
ever turns instinctively from the present to the future, 
about which he hopes much in proportion as he knows 
little. Hence, they who are desirous of glory in life, 
chiefly nourish themselves on that which they hope to 
^ De Senectide. 


io6 PARINI ON GLORY. 

gain after death . Forth e lack of enjoyment in the 
pre sent, man consoles himse lf with hopes of future 
happiness, as vain as that of t he ^]3resent." 


CHAPTEE XI. 

" ^T what,, after all , i« this f|.pppa.1 that, wp. makejo^ 
ju ^.rit.yL? The human imagination is such that it forms 
a more exalted conception of posterity than of the men 
of past or present times, simply because we are totally 
ignorant of the people who are yet to be. But, reason- 
ably, and not imaginatively, do we really think our 
successors will be better than ourselves ? I am of a 
contrary opinion, and for my part put faith in the pro- 
verb that says ' ^the world grows w r^i-gQ gg if. ggpg' It 
were better for men of genius if they could appeal to 
their wise ancestors, who, according to Cicero, were not 
inferior in point of numbers, and far superior in excellence 
to their successors. But, though such appeal would be sure 
of a truer judgment, it is certain that the greatest men of 
our day would be held in little esteem by the ancients. 

" It may be allowed that the men of the future, being 
free from any spirit of rivalry, envy, love, or hatred, not 
indeed amongst themselves, but towards us, ought to be 
better c[ualified than ourselves to pass impartial judgment 
on our writings. For other reasons, too, they may be 
better judges. Posterity will perhaps have fewer excel- 
lent writers, noble poets, and subtle philosophers. In 
which case the few followers of these sublime influences 
will honour us the more. It is also probable that their 
control over the minds of the people will be still less 
than that exercised by us. Again, will the affections, 
imagination, and intellect of men be, as a rule, more 
powerful than they are at present ? If not, we shall 
gain by the comparison. 

" Literature is peculiarly exposed to the influence of 


PARINI ON GLORY. 107 

custom. In times of debased literature, we see how 
firmly this or that barbarism 'is retained and upheld, as 
though it alone were reasonable and natural. At such 
times the best and greatest writers are forgotten or 
ridiculed. Where, then, is the certainty that posterity 
will always esteem the kind of writing that we praise ? 
Besides, it is a question whether or not we ourselves 
esteem what is really praiseworthy. For jnen ha7q„„ ^if-„ , 
fgre nt opinions about what constitutes good writing, and 
these vary ac cording to the times, th e nature of places 
and people, customs, usages, and individuals. Yet it is 
to this variety and variability of influences that the glory 
of writers is subjected. 

" Philosophy is even more diverse and changeable than 
other sciences.^ At first sight the contrary of this would 
seem to be true; for whereas the 'belles lettres' are con- 
cerned with the study of the beautiful, which is chiefly 
a matter of custom and opinion, sciences seek the truth, 
which is fixed and unchangeable. But this truth is hid 
from mortals, though, as centuries go by, some little of it 
is revealed. Consequently, on the one hand, in their 
endeavours to discover it, and their conjectures as to its 
nature, men are led to embrace this or that resemblance 
of truth ; thereupon opinions and sects multiply. And, 
on the other hand, it is due to the ever-increasing number 
of fresh discoveries, and new aspects of truth obtained 
dailyi that even these divisions become subdivided ; and 
opinions which at one time were regarded almost as cer- 
tainties change shape and substance momentarily. Tt is 
owing to the changeability of sciences and philosophy 

^ Compare the following from H. fact that even the truths the philo- 
Rogers' Essay on Leibnitz : " The sopher has taught or discovered 
condition of great philosophers is form but stepping-stones in the pro- 
far less enviable than that of great gross of science, and are afterwards 
poets. The former can never possess digested, systematised, and better 
80 large a circle of readers under expounded in other works composed 
any circumstances ; but that num- by inferior men." 
ber is still further abridged by the 


108 PARINI ON GLORY. 

that they are so Tin jirgj^iip-ti-V-e- "f pilory. gl>>ier at, t.TiP. 
/hands of coiitemporja,ries. .QX.JBaateEite. Tor when new 
discoveries, or new ideas and conjectures, greatly alter the 
condition of this or that science from its present state, 
how will the writings and thoughts of men now cele- 
brated in these sciences be regarded ? Who, for instance, 
now reads Galileo's works ? Yet in his time they were 
most wonderful; nor could better and nobler books, 
full of greater discoveries and grander conceptions, be 
then written on such subjects. But now every tyro in 
physics or mathematics surpasses Galileo in his know- 
ledge. Again, how many people in the present day read 
the writings of Francis Bacon ? Who troubles himself 
about Malebranche ? And how much time will soon be 
bestowed on the works of Locke, if the science almost 
founded by him progresses in future as rapidly as it 
gives promise of doing ? 

" Truly the very intellectual force, industry, and labour, 
which philosophers and scientists expend in the pursuit 
of their glory, are in time the cause of its extinction or 
obscurement. For by their own great exertions they 
open out a path for the still further advancement of the 
science, which in time progresses so rapidly that their 
writings and names fall gradually into oblivion. And 
it is certainly dif&cult for most men to esteem others for a 
knowledge greatly inferior to their own. Who can doubt 
that the twentieth century will discover error in what the 
wisest of us regard as unquestionable truths, and will 
surpass us greatly in their knowledge of the truth ? " 


CHAPTEE XII. 

" Finally, you would perhaps like to know my opinion, 
and decided advice to you, about your intended profession. 
The question is one as to the advisability of your pursuiag 
or abandoning this path to glory, a thing so poor in use- 


PARINI ON GLORY. 109 

fulness, and so hard and uncertain both to secure and 
retain, that it may be compared to a shadow which you 
can neither feel when you hold, nor yet keep from fleeing 
away. I will tell you then briefly my true opinion. I con- 
sider your wonderful genius, noble disposition, and prolific 
imagination to be the most fatal and lamentable qualities 
distributed by Fortune to humanity. But since you possess 
them, you will scarcely be able to avoid their harmful 
influence. In the present day there is but one possible 
benefit to be gained from such endowments as yours ; 
viz., t he glory tha t sometimes rewards industry in litera- 
ture and study. You know those miserable men, who 
having accidentally lost or injured a limb, try to make 
as much profit as possible from their misfortune, which 
they ostentatiously display to excite the pity and conse- 
quent liberality of passers-by. In the same way I advise 
yo u to endeavour t o procure by means of your endow- 
ments the only possible advantage, trifling and uncertain 

. r /■ I IIWMIII^IiwW I I II ^ '" ■ II III! WW 

though it be. _ Such qualities as yours are usually 
regarded as gteat natural gifts, and are often envied by 
those who do not possess them. But this feeling is 
opposed to common sense ; as well may the sound man 
envy those wretched fellows their bodily calamities, or 
wish to mutilate himself in the same way, for the sake 
of the miserable profit he might gain. Most men work 
as long as they can, and enjoy themselves as much as 
their nature will permit. But great writers are naturally , 
and by their manner of life , incapable of many hunia ii 
pleaSurSs : voluntarily denrived of many others ; often 
despised by th^ir fplltiw-m'^Tij saye-jiadiaps..^— very fpffl 
who pursue the same studies ; they ar e destined to lead 
aj ife Hke unto-d^atilT flUfT to-.TiKmiSy-l^^^ the grave. 

if even that be granted them. 

""Fut Del tinY must be obeyed : duty commands us to 
follow" it" courageously and nobly whithersoever it may 
lead us. Such resignation is especially necessary for 
you, and those who resemble you.". 


( no ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN FREDERIC RUYSCH 
AND HIS MUMMIES. 


Chorus of the dead in RuyscKs laboratory. 

Death, thou on e eternal thipg. 
That takest all within thine arms, 
In thee our coarser nature rests 
In peace, set free from life's alarms : 
Joyless and painless is our state. 
Our spirits now no more are torn 
By racking thought, or earthly fears ; 
Hope and desire are now unknown. 
Nor know we aught of sorrow's tears* 
Time flows in one unbroken stream, 
As void of ennui as a dream. 
The troubles we on earth endured 
Have vanished ; yet we sometimes see. 
Their phantom shapes, as in a mist 
Of mingled thought and memory : 
They now can vex our souls no more. 
What is that life we lived on earth ? 
A mystery now it seems to be. 
Profound as is the thought of death, 
To wearers of mortality. 
And as from death the living flee, 
~^o from tne vita l lia me flee we. 
Our portion now is peaceful rest, 
Joyless, painless. Wears_aot-iileat_ 


FREDERICK RUYSCH AND HIS MUMMIES. in 

Witli happiness : that ia forbid 
Both to the livincr and t.hp. dp.a.rl. 

Ruysch {outside his laboratory, looking through the key- 
hole). Diamine ! Who has been teaching these dead 
folks music, that they thus sing like cocks, at midnight ? 
Verily I am in a cold sweat, and nearly as dead as them- 
selves. I little thought when I preserved them from 
decay, that they would come to life again. So it is how- 
ever, and with all my philosophy I tremble from head to 
foot. It was an evil spirit that induced me to take these 
gentry in. I do not know what to do. If I leave them 
shut in here, they may break open the door, or pass 
through the keyhole, and come to me in bed. Yet I do 
not like to show that I am afraid of the dead by calling 
for help. I will be brave. Let us see if I cannot make 
them afraid in their turn. 

{Entering.) — Children, children, what game are you 
playing at ? Do you not remember that you are dead ? 
What does all this uproar mean ? Are you so puffed up 
because of the Czar's visit,^ that you imagine yourselves 
no longer subject to the laws of Ifature ? I am presum- 
ing this commotion is simply a piece of pleasantry on 
your part, and that, there is nothing serious about it. If, 
however, you are truly resuscitated, I congratulate you, 
although I must tell you that I cannot afford to keep you 
living as well as dead, and in that case you must leave 
my house at once. Or if what they say about vampires 
be true, and you are some of them, be good enough to 
seek other blood to drink, for I am not disposed to let 
you suck mine, with which I have already liberally filled 
your veins. In short, if you will continue to be quiet 
and silent as before, we shall get on very well together, 
and you shall want for nothing in my house. Otherwise, 
I warn you that I will take hold of this iron bar, and kill 
you, one and all. 

' See note. 


112 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

A Mummy. Do not put yourself about. I promise 
you we will all be dead again without your killing us. 

Rwysch. Then what is the meaning of this singing 
freak ? 

Mummy. A moment ago, precisely at midnight, was 
completed for the first time that great mathematical 
epoch referred to so often by the ancients. To-niyht also 
t he dead have snoken for, the first time. A nd all the 
"dead in every cemetery and sepulchre, in the depths of 
the sea, beneath the snow and the sand, under the open 
sky, and wherever they are to be found, have like us 
chanted the song you have just heard. 

Euyscfh. And how long will your singing or speaking 
last? 

Mummy. The song is already finished. We are 
allowed to speak for a quarter of an hour. Then we 
are silent again until the completion of the, second great 
year. 

Buysch. If this be true, I do not think you will disturb 
my sleep a second time. So talk away to your hearts' 
content, and I will stand here on one side, and, from 
curiosity, gladly listen without interrupting you. 

Mummy. We can only speak in response to some living 
person. The dead that are not interrogated by the living, 
when they have finished their song, are quiet again. 

Buysch. I am greatly disappointed, for I was curious 
to know what you would talk about if you could con- 
verse with each other. 

Mummy. Even if we could do so, you would hear 
nothing, because we should have nothing to say to one 
another. 

Buysch. A thousand questions to ask you come into 
my mind. But the time is short, so tell me briefly what 
feelings you experienced in body and soul when at the 
point of death. 

Mummy. I do not remember the exact moment of 
death. 


FREDERIC RUYSCH AND HIS MUMMIES. 113 

The other Mummies. Nor do we. ^ 

Buysch. Why not ? <^^'^-P 

Mummy. For the same reason that you cannot per- q| 

ceive the moment when you f all asleep, however much 

you try to do so. 

Buysch. But sleep is a natural thing. 

Mummy. And does not death seem natural to you? 

Show me a man, beast, or plant that shall not die. 

Buysch. I am no longer surprised that you sing and 

talk, if you do not remember your death. 

" A fatal blow deprived Hm of Ms breath ; 
Still fought he on, unconscious of his death " — 

as says an Italian poet. I thought that on the subject 
of death you fellows would at least know something 
more than the living. Now tell me, did you feel any 
pain at the point of death ? 

Mummy. How can there be pain at a time of uncon- 
sciousness ? 

Buysch. At any rate, every one believes the moment of 
departure from this life to be a very painful one. 

Mummy. As if death were a sensation, and not rather 
the contrary. 

Buysch. Most people who hold the views of the 
Epicureans as to the nature of the soul, as well as those 
who cling to the popular opinion, agree in supposing 
that death is essentially a pain of the most acute kind. 

Mummy. Well, you shall put the question to either 
of theni from us. If man be unaware of the exact 
point of time when his vital functions are suspended 
in more or less degree by sleep, lethargy, syncope, or 
any other cause, why should he perceive the moment 
when these same functions cease entirely ; and not merely 
for a time, but for ever ? Besides, how could there be 
an acute sensation at the time of death ? Is death 
itself a sensation ? When the faculty of sense is not 
only weakened and restricted, but so minimised that it 


114 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

may be termed non-existent, how could any one experi- 
ence a lively sensation ? Perhaps you think this very 
extinction of sensibility ought also to be an acute sensa- 
tion ? But it is not so. For you may notice that even 
sick people who die of very painful diseases compose 
themselves shortly before death, and rest in tranquillity ; 
they are too enfeebled to suffer, and lose all sense of 
pain before they die. 

You may say this from us to whoever imagines it 
will be a painful effort to breathe his last. 

Buysch. Such reasoning would perhaps satisfy the 
Epicureans, but not those people who regard the soul 
as essentially different from the body. I have hitherto 
been one of the latter, and now that I have heard the 
dead speak and sing I am more than ever disinclined 
to change my opinions. We consider death to be_ £ 
sep aration of the snnl and bfttily- a.Ti fl^t.n us it is incom- 
prehensible how these two substances, so joined and 
agglutinated as to form one being, can be divided with- 
out great force and an inconceivable pang. 

Mummy. Tell me : is the spirit joined to the body 
by some nerve, muscle, or membrane which must be 
broken to enable it to escape ? Or is it a member which 
has to be severed or violently wrenched away ? Do you 
not see that the soul necessarily leaves the body when 
the latter becomes uninhabitable, and not because of any 
internal violence ? Tell me also : were you sensible 
of the moment when the soul entered you, and was 
joined, or as you say agglutinated, to your body ? If not, 
why should you expect to feel any violent sensation at 
its departure ? Take my word for it, the departure of 
the soul is as quiet and imperceptible as its entrance. 

I ^ Buysch. Thpn wViat. 1H ^pgtVi, if jt-. |»o Tint, pain ? 

J*'' Mummy. It_israther pleasiir,<3., .j -J i an anything- else. 

You must know tEaF death, like sleep, is not accomplished 

v' in a moment, but .giaduaUy. It is true the transition 

is more or less rapid according to the disease or manner 


FREDERIC RUYSCH AND HIS MUMMIES. iij 

of death. But ultimatel y de ath c omes like sleep, -with- 
out either sense of pain or pleasure. Just before death 
pain is impossible, for it is too acute a thing to be 
experienced by the enfeebled senses of a dying person. 
It were more rational to regard it as a pleasure ; becduse 
most human joys, far from being of a lively nature, are 
made up of a sort of languor, in which pain has no part. 
Consequently, man's senses, even when approaching 
extinction, are capable of pleasure ; since languor is 
often pleasurable, especially when it succeeds a state of 
suffering. Hence the languor of death ought to be 
pleasing in proportion to the intensity of pain from 
which it frees the sufferer. As for myself, if I canijot 
recall the circumstances of my death, it may be because 
the doctors forbade me to exert my brain. I remember, 
however, that the sensation I experienced differed little 
from the feeling of satisfaction that steals over a man, 
as the languor of sleep pervades him. 

The other Mummies. We felt the same sensation. 

Euyseh. It may be as you say, although every one with 
whom I £ave conversed on this subject is of a very 
different opinion. It is true, however, they have not 
spoken from experience. Now tell me, did you at 
the time of death, whilst experiencing this sensation of 
pleasure, realise that you were dying,- and that this feel- 
ing was a prelude to death, or what did you think ? 

Mummy. Until I was dead I believed I should 
recover, and as long as I had the faculty of thought I 
hoped I should still live an hour or two. I imagine 
most people think the same. 

Tlu other Mummies. It was the same with us. 

Buysch. Cicero says ^ that, however old and broken- 
down a man may be, he always anticipates at least 
another year of life. 

But how did you perceive at length that your soul 
had left the body ? Say, how did you know you were 
^ De Senectute. 


ii6 FREDERICK RUYSCH AND HIS MUMMIES. 


dead ? . . . You do not answer. Children, do you not 
hear ? . . . Ah, the quarter of an hour has expired. 
Let me examine them a little. Yes, they are quite dead 
again. There is no fear that they will give me such 
another shock. 


I will go to bed. 


Note. — rrederic Ruysch (1638- 
1 73 1 ) was one of the cleverest ana- 
tomists Holland has ever produced. 
For sixty years he held a profes- 
sorship of anatomy at Amsterdam, 
during which time he devoted him- 
self to his art. He obtained from 
Swammerdam his secret of preserv- 
ing corpses by means of an injection 
of coloured wax. Ruysch, it is said, 
also made use of his own blood for 
this purpose. His subjects, when 
prepared, looked like living beings, 


and showed no signs of corruption. 
Czar Peter visited Holland in 1698, 
and was amazed at what he saw in 
Ruysch's studio. In 171 7 the Czar 
again visited Holland, and succeeded 
in inducing Ruysch to dispose of his 
collection of animals, mummies, &c. 
These were all transported to St. 
Petersburg. Ruyschformed a second 
collection as valuable as the first, 
which after his death was publicly 
sold. 


( 117 ) 


REMARKABLE SA YINGS OF PHILIP 
OTTONIERI. 1 


CHAPTEE I. 

Philip Ottonieei, a few of whose remarkable sayings I 
am about to recount, partly heard from his own mouth 
and partly related to me by others, was born at Nubiana 
in the province of Valdivento. There he lived most of 
his life, and died a short time ago, leaving behind him 
the reputation of having never injured any one either by 
word or deed. He was detested by the majority of his 
fellow-citizens, because he tn^ lr , .so little, interest in the 
many things that gave them pleasure ; although he did 
n othing to show that he despised tho se who differed from 

himself in th is respect. He is believed to have been, 

not only in theory, butSso in practice, what so many of 
his contemporaries professed to be, that is, aphjlpsopher^ 
For this reason other men thought him peculiar, though 
really he never affected singularity in anything. Indeed, 
he once said that a man who nowadays practised the 
greatest possible singularity in dress, manners, or actions, 
would be far less singular than were those ancients who 
obtained a reputation for singularity; and that the differ- 
ence between such a person and his contemporaries would 
by the ancients have been regarded as scarcely worthy 
of notice. And, comparing J. J. Eousseau's singularity, 

1 A fictitious personage. 


ii8 REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF 

which seemed very strildng to the people of his gene- 
ration, with that of Democritus and the first Cyniu 
philosophers, he said that whoever nowadays lived as 
differently from his contemporaries as these Greeks lived 
from theirs, would not merely be regarded as singular, 
but would be treated as outside the pale of human 
society. He thought, too, that the degree of civilisatio n 
reached by any^ countr y mipfht ^p estiTna.tp.d from ohserva- 

tionjif_the_degree of gingnlfirity poRsihli^ in thf. iTihq,bi- _ 

tants of that country. 

Though very temperate in his habits of life, he pro- 
fessed Epicureanism, perhaps lightly rather than from 
conviction. But bftcfvriflp.TinTip.rl Epi curus. afSrming that 
i n his time and nation therp. was nrnch more pleasure t.n 
' 5e obtained from the pursuit of glory and virtue, tha n 
from idleness, indifference, and sensuality, w hich things 
were considered by that philosopher to represent the 
greatest good of life. He said also that the Epicurean- 
ism of modern times has nothing in common with the 
Epicureanism of the ancients. 

In philosophy, he liked to call himself ^nrratio. Like 
Socrates, too, he often spent great part of the day reason- 
ing philosophically with any chance acquaintance, and 
especially with certain of his friends, on any impromptu 
subject. But unlike Socrates, he did not frequent the 
shops of the shoemakers, carpenters, and blacksmiths ; 
for he was of opinion that, though the artisans of 
Athens may have had time to spend in philoso- 
phising, those of Nubiana would starve were they to 
follow such an example. Nor did he, like Socrates, 
explain his conclusions by means of endless interrogation 
and argument ; for, he said, although men in the present 
day may have more patience than their ancestors, they 
would never consent to reply to a thousand consecutive 
questions, still less to hear their answers answered. In 
fact, he only resembled Socrates in his manner of 
speaking, sometimes ironical, sometimes equivocal. 


PHILIP OTTONIBRI. 119 

He analysed the famous Socratic irony in the follow- 
ing way : — 

"Socrates was naturally very tender-hearted, and of 
a most lovable disposition. But he was physically so 
unattractive that it is probable he despaired from his 
youth of ever inspiring others with a warmer feeling 
than that " of friendship, far insufficient to satisfy his 
sensitive and ardent nature, which often felt towards 
others a much more lively affection. He was courageous 
in all matters of the intellect, but seems to have been 
wanting in natural courage, and those other qualities 
that would have enabled him to hold his own in public 
life, amid the tumult of wars, the sedition, and the 
license of all kinds, then characteristic of Athenian 
affairs. In addition to this, his ridiculous and insignifi- 
cant figure must have been no slight prejudice to him 
among people who made little distinction between- the 
good and the beautiful, and who were also much addicted 
to banter. Thus it happened that in a free city, full of 
wealth and the bustle and amusements of life, Socrates, 
poor, rejected by love, incapable of a public career, yet 
gifted with very great intelligence which doubtless 
intensified the consciousness of his defects, resigned him- 
self to a life of philosophising on the actions, manners, 
and thoughts of his fellow-citizens. The irony he used 
was natural to a man who found himself as it were 
excluded from participation in the .existence of others. 
But it was due to his inherent nobility and affableness, 
and perhaps also to the celebrity he gained by his 
reasonings, and which flattered his self-esteem, that this 
irony, instead of being bitter and contemptuous, was 
pleasing, and expressed in a friendly manner. 

"Then it was that Philosophy, as Cicero has well 
said, made her first descent from heaven, and was led by 
Socrates into the towns and houses of men. Hitherto 
occupied with speculations as to the nature of hidden 
things, she now studied the manners and lives of men. 


120 REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF 

and discussed virtues and vices, things good and useful, 
and the contrary. But Socrates did not primarily think 
of introducing this novel feature into philosophy, nor did 
he propose to teach anything, nor even aspire to the 
name of philosopher, which then only belonged to those 
■who made physics or metaphysics the study of their lives. 
He openly proclaimed his ignorance of all things, and in 
his conversation with others simply discussed the affairs 
of his neighbours, and the topics of the day. He pre- 
ferred this, amusement to the real study of philosophy, 
or any other science or art; and being naturally more 
inclined to act than speculate, he only adopted this 
manner of life, because shut out from a more con- 
genial employment. He was always more willing to 
converse with young and handsome persons than with 
others ; in this way he hoped to gain at least esteem, 
where he would far rather have had. love." 

And since all the schools of Greek philosophy are 
traceable directly or indirectly to the Socratic school, 
Ottonieri asserted that the flat nose and satyr-hke 
visage of a highly intellectual and warm-hearted man 
were the origin of all Greek philosophy, and, conse- 
quently, the philosophy of modern times. He also 
said that in the writings of his followers, the indi- 
viduality of Socrates is comparable to those theatrical 
masks of the ancients, which always retained their name, 
character, and identity, but the role of which varied in 
each distinct performance. 

He left behind him no philosophical or other writings 
for public benefit. Being asked one day why he did not 
give written as well as verbal expression to his philo- 
sophical views, he replied : ^^eadin a ia n. p.ni7 vp.rsa.tinTi 

^Id—withr-the— ^writei Now, aa in f6tes and publi c 

entertainmentSj__they_jwho take no active part in the 
spectacle or performance soon~ bec ome ti red, similarly in 
cdnversaiion men prefer t.n a peak~rather TEl aZJmtgfa. 
And books necessarily resemble those people who take 


PHILIP OTTONIERI. 121 

all the speaking to themselves, and never listen to others. 
Consequently, to atone for their monopoly of talking, 
they ought to say many fine and excellent things, 
expressing them in a remarkable manner. Every book 
that does not do this inspires the same feeling of 
aversion as an insatiable chatterer." 


CHAPTER II. 

Ottonieei made no distinction bet ween business and 
pleasure. However serious bas occupation, he called it 
pastime . Only once, having been idle temporarily, he 
confessed he had then experienced no amusement. 

He said that o ur truest pleasures are due to the 
imagination. Thus, children construct a world out of 


nothing, whereas men find nothing in the world. He 
compared those pleasures termed real to an artichoke, 
all the leaves of which must be masticated in order to 
reach the pith. He added that such artichokes as these 
are very rare ; and that many others resemble them in 
exterior, but within are void of kernel. He for his part, 
finding the leaves unpalatable, determined to abstain 
from both leaves and kernel. 

Being asked what was the worst moment of life, he 
said: " Except those of pain -iar foar, thn worrt Tnflta£nts 
are- in mv opinion, those spen t in pleasure. For the 
anticipation and recollection of these last, which fill up 
the remainder of life, are better and more delightful than 
the pleasures themselves." He also made a comparison 
between pleasures and odours. The latter he considered 
usually leave behind a desire to experience them again, 
proportioned to their agreeableness ; and he regarded the 
sense of smell as the most difficult to satisfy of all our 
senses. Again, he compared odours to anticipations of 
good things ; and said that odoriferous foods are generally 
more pleasing to the nose than the palate, for their scent 


122 REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF 

originates savoury expectations which are seldom suf- 
ficiently realised. He explained why sometimes he was 
so impatient about the delay of a pleasure sure to occur 
sooner or later, by saying that he feared the enjoyment he 
should derive from it would be of diminished force, on 
account of the exaggerated anticipation conceived by his 
mind. For this reason he endeavoured in the meantime 
to forget the coming good, as though it were an impending 
misfortune. 

He said that each of us in entering the world resembles 
a man on a hard and uncomfortable bed. As soon as the 
man lies down, he feels restless and begins to toss from 
side to side and change his position momentarily, in the 
hope of inducing sleep to close his eyes. Thus he 
spends the whole night, and though sometimes he believes 
himself on the point of falling asleep, he never actually 
succeeds in doing so. At length dawn comes, and he 
rises unrefreshed. 

Watching some bees at work one day in company with 
certain acquaintances, he remarked : " Blessed are ye, if 
ye know not your unhappiness." 

He considered the miseries of mortals to be incalculable, 
and that no single one of them could be adequately 
deplored. 

In answer to Horace's question, " Why is no one con- 
tent with his lot ? " he said : " Because no one's lot is 
happy. Subjects equally with princes, the weak and the 
strong, were they happy, would be contented, and would 
envy no one. For men are no more incapable of being 
satisfied than other animals. But since happiness alone 
can satisfy them, they are, necessarily dissatisfied, because 
essentially unhappy." 

" If a man could be found," he said, "who had attained 
to the summit of human happiness, that man would be 
the most miserable of mortals. For even the oldest of 
us have hopes and schemes for the improvement of our 
condition." He recalled a passage in Zenophon, where 


PHILIP OTTONIERI. 123 

a purchaser of land is advised to buy badly cultivated 
fields, because such as do not in the future bring forth 
more abundantly than at the time of purchase, give less 
satisfaction than if they were to increase in productive- 
ness. Similarly, all things in which we can observe 
improvement please us more than others in which 
improvement is impossible. 

On the other hand, he observed that no condition is so 
bad that it cannot be worse ; and that however unhappy 
a man may be, he cannot console or boast himself that 
his misfortunes are incapable of increase. Though hope 
is unbounded, the good things of life are limited. Thus, 
were we to consider a single day in the life of a rich or 
poor man, master or servant, bearing in mind all the cir^ 
cumstances and needs of their respective positions, we 
should generally find an equality of good throughout. 
But nature has not limited our misfortunes ; nor can the 
min4 scarcely conceive a cause of suffering which is non- 
existent, or which at some time was not to be found 
among humanity. Thus, whereas most men vainly hope 
for an increase of the good things they possess, they 
never want for genuine objects of fear; and if Fortune 
sometimes obstinately refuses to benefit us in the least 
degree, she never fails to afSict us with new torments of 
such a nature as to crush within us even the courage of 
despair. 

j Be often use d to laugh at those philosophers who 
think that a man is able^ fTpc- bJniRpl f from the tyranny 
of I'ortune, b y h aving a contempt for good and evil 
things wnicn are entirely beyond his control ; as if happi- 
ness and the contrary were absolutely in his own power 
to accept or refuse. On the same subject he also said, 
amongst other things, that however much a man may 
act as a philosopher in his relations with others, he is 
never a philosopher to himself. Again, he said that it 
is as impossible to take more interest in the affairs of 
others than in our own, as to regard their affairs as 


^y,-.x. 


124 REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF 

though they were our own. But, supposing this philo- 
sophical disposition of mind were possible, which it is 
not, and possessed by one of us, how would it stand the 
test of a thousand trials ? Would it not be evident that 
the happiness or unhappiness of such a person is never- 
theless a matter of fortune ? "Would not the very dis- 
position they boast of be dependent on circumstances ? 
Is^n ot man's reason daily governe d by acmrlpnts of a.11^ 
_kinds ? Do not the numberless bodily disturbances due 
to stupidity, excitement, madness, rage, dullness, and a 
hundred other species of folly, temporary or continuous, 
trouble, weaken, distract, and even extinguish it ? Does 
not memory, wisdom's ally, lose strength as we advance 
in age ? How many of us fall into a second childhood ! 
And we almost all decrease in mental vigour as we grow 
old; or when our mind remains unimpaired, time, by 
means of some bodUy disease, enfeebles our courage and 
firmness, and not infrequently deprives us of both attri- 
butes altogether. In short, it is utter folly to - confess 
that physically we are subject to many things over which 
we have no control, and at the same time to assert that 
the mind, which is so greatly dependent on the body, 
is not similarly controlled by external influences. He 
summed up by saying th at man as a whole is absolutely 

in the-PO WPT fff F^T-^mn TtoiTirr ggVoH ¥r,T -whaf purpOSe 

he thought men were born, he laughingly replied : ^'To 
realise how much better it wp.rp nnt to bfi bft;;Ti." 


CHAPTER III. 

On the occasion of a certain misfortune, Ottonieri said: 
" It is less hard to lose a much-loved person suddenly, 
or after a short illness, than to see him waste away 
gradually, so that before his death he is transformed in 
body and mind into quite another being- from what he 
formerly was. This latter is a cruel thing ; for the 


PHILIP OTTONIERI. 125 

beloved one, instead of leaving to us the tender recollec- 
tions of Ms real identity, remains with us a changed 
being, in whose presence our old affection slowly but 
surely fades away. At length he dies ; but the remem- 
brance of him as he was at the last destroys the sweeter 
and earlier image within us. Thus he is lost entirely, 
and our imagination, instead of comforting, saddens us. 
Such misfortunes as these are inconsolable." 

One day he heard a man lamenting and saying, " If 
only I were freed from this trouble, all my other troubles 
would be easy to bear.'' He replied : " Not so ; for then 
those that are now light would be heavy." 

Another person said to him: "Had this pain con- 
tinued, I could not have borne it." Ottonieri answered : 
" On the contrary, habit would have made it more 
bearable." 

TmicViiTi^r -maTiY things as to hum an nature, he held 
opinions n ot in. accordance with those of the multitude, 
and often diH'erp-nt t^om those of rearnedTifienl Fot 
instance, he thought it unwise to address a petition to 
any one when the person addressed is in a state of extra- 
ordinary hilarity. " And," he said, " when the petition 
is such that it cannot be granted at once, I consider 
occasions of joy and sorrow as equally inopportune to 
its success. Por both sentiments make a man too selfish 
to trouble himself with the affairs of others. In sorrow 
our misfortune, in joy our good fortune, monopolises our 
mind, and erects, as it were, a barrier between us and 
matters external to ourselves. Both are also peculiarly 
unsuitable for exciting compassion : when sorrowful, we 
reserve all pity for ourselves ; when joyful, we colour all 
things with our joy, and are inclined to regard the 
troubles and misfortunes of others as entirely imaginative, 
or else we refuse to think of them, as too discordant with 
the mind's present condition. The best time to ask a 
favour, or some beneficial promise for others, j s when 
the person petitioned is in a state of cjuiet, happy good- 


126 REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF 

humour, unacco mpanied by any excessive joyfulness; or 
Toetter still, when under .the influence of that keen but 
indefinite pleasure which results from a reverie of thought, 
and consists of a peaceful agitation of the spirit. At such 
times men are most open to pity and entreaty, and are 
often glad to please others, and give expression to the vague 
gratifying activity of their thoughts by some good action." 

He also denied that an afflicted person ordinarily 
receives more pity from fellow-sufferers than from other 
people. Tor a man's companions in misfortune are 
always inclined to give their own troubles precedence 
over his, as being more serious and compassionable. And 
often, when a man in recounting his sufferings thinks he 
has excited the sympathy of his auditors, he is inter- 
rupted by one of them who expatiates in turn on his 
misfortunes, and ends by trying to show that he is the 
more afflicted of the two. He said that in such cases it 
generally happens as occurred to Achilles when Priam 
prostrated himself at his feet, with entreaties and lamen- 
tations. The tears of Priam excited the tears of Achilles, 
who began to groan and weep like the Trojan king. 
This he did, not from sympathy, but because of his own 
misfortunes, and the thoughts of his dead father and 
friend. " We compassionate others," he said, " when 
they suffer from evils we have experienced ; but not so 
when we and they suffer simultaneously." 

He said that from carelessness and thoughtlessness 
we do many cruel or wicked things, which very often 
have the appearance of genuine cruelty and malicious- 
ness. Por example, he mentioned the case of a man who 
spending his time away from home left his servants in 
a dwelling scarcely weather proof, not designedly, but 
simply from thoughtlessness or disregard of their comfort. 
He considered malice, inhumanity, and the like to be far 
less common among men than merp. thnn ghtlpsanpsa tn 
which he attributed very many things called by harder 
names. 


PHILIP OTTONIERI. 127 

He once said that it were better to be completely un- 
grateful towards a benefactor than to make some trifling 
return for his great kindness. For in the latter case 
the benefactor must consider the obligation as cancelled, 
whatever may have been the motive that inspired the 
donor, and however small the return. He is thus 
despoiled of the bare satisfaction of gratitude, on which 
he probably reckoned ; and yet he cannot regard himself 
as treated ungratefully, though he is so in reality. 

I have heard the following saying attributed to him : — 
" We are inclined and accustomed to give our acquaint- 
ances credit for being able to discern our true merits, or 
what we imagine them to be, and to recognise the virtue 
of our words and actions. We also suppose that they 
ponder over these virtues and merits of ours, and never 
let them escape their memory. But, on the other hand, 
we do not discern similar qualities in them, or else are 
unwilling to acknowledge the fact." 


CHAPTEE IV. 

Ottonieei observed that irresolute men sometimes per- 
severe in their undertakings in the face of the greatest 
opposition. This is even a consequence of their irresolu- 
tion; for were they to abandon their design, it would 
be evidence that they had for once fulfilled a determina- 
tion. Sometimes they skilfully and speedUy carry out a 
resolution. To this they are urged by fear lest they 
should be compelled to cease their task, when they would 
return to the state of perplexity and uncertainty in 
which they were formerly. Thus they strenuously 
hasten the execution of their design, stimulated rather 
by anxiety and uncertainty as to whether they wiU con- 
quer themselves, than by the goal or the difficulties to 
be overcome before it can be reached. 

At another time he said, with a smile, that people 


1 28 REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF 

accustomed to give expression to their every thought and 
feeling in conversation with others, cry out when alone if 
a fly bite them, or if they chance to upset a glass of water; 
and, on the other hand, they who live solitary lives become 
so reserved that even the presentiment of apoplexy would 
not induce them to speak in the presence of others. 

He was of opinion that most men reputed great in 
ancient and modern times have obtained their reputation 
through a preponderance of one quality over the rest 
in their character. And a man possessed of the most 
brilliant but evenly proportioned endowments, would fail 
to acquire celebrity either with his contemporaries or 
posterity. 

He divided t he ^°" r>£._civi1i>prl , naiinna infn fliro^ 

^classes. T he first class are they whose individual nature, 
and partly also their natural human constitution, become 
tra nsformed under the influence of the arts an d customs 
of urban Jife. Among these he included all men who 
are skUful in business, whether private or public, who 
appreciate society, and make themselves universally 
agreeable to their fellows. Generally speaking, such 
men alone inspire esteem and respect. The second class 
are they who ^preserye_their_ primitive nature in a grea ter"" 
degreej_eithgr from lack of culture or because they are 
naturally incapable of being influenced by the arts, 
manners, and customs of others. This is the most 
numerous of the three classes, and is held in general 
contempt. It embraces those who are known as the 
common people, or who deserve to be included with 
them, be their station in Life what it may. TheJhM 
class, incomparably the smallest in numbers, and often 
even more despised than the second, consists of those 
men in whom nature is strong enough to resist and often 
repulse the civilising influence of the times. They are 
seldom apt in business, or self-governed in society ; nor 
do they shine in conversation, nor succeed in making 
themselves agreeable to * their fellow-men. This class is 


PHILIP OTTONIERI. 129 

su bdivided into two varieties. The one includes those 
strong and courageous natures that despise the contempt 
they excite, and often indeed esteem it more than honour. 
They differ from other men, not only by nature, but also 
by choice and preference. Having nothing in common 
with the hopes and pleasures of society, solitary in a 
crowd, they avoid other men as much as they themselves 
are avoided. Specimens of this class are rarely met 
with. The other variety consists of persons whose nature 
is a compound of strength, weakness, and timidity, and 
who are therefore in a constant state of agitation. They 
are as a rule desirous of associating with their fellows, 
and wishing to emulate the men of the cultivated class, 
they feel acutely the contempt in which they are held by 
■their inferiors. These men are never successful in life; 
they fail in ever becoming practical, and in society are 
neither tolerable to themselves nor others. Not a few 
of our most gifted men of modern times have belonged 
to this division in more or less degree. J. J. JBousseau 
is a famous example,, and with him may be bracketed 
one of the ancients, _YirgiL. Of the latter it is said, on 
the authority of Melissus, that he was very slow of speech, 
and apparently a most ordinary endowed man. And this, 
together with the probability that owing to his great 
talents Virgil was little at ease in society, seems likely 
enough, both from the laboured subtlety of his style, and 
the nature of his poetry ; it is also confirmed by what 
we read towards the end of the Second Book of the 
Georgics. There the poet expresses a wish for a quiet 
and solitary life, as though he regarded it as a remedy 
and refuge more than an advantage in itself. Now, 
seeing that with rare exceptions men of these two species 
are never esteemed until they are dead, and are of little 
power in the world ; he asserted as a general rule, that 
the only way to gain esteem during life is to live 
unnaturally. And since the first class, which is the 
mean of the two extremes, represents the civilisation 

I 


I30 REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF 

of our times ; he concluded from this and other circum- 
stances that th e conduct of human affairs is entirely in 
the han ds of mediocrity. 

""" -He distinguished also three conditions of old age, com- 
pared with the other ages of man. When nature and 
manners were first instituted, men were just and virtuous 
at all ages. Experience and knowledge of the world 
did not make men less honest and upright. Old age 
was then the most venerable time of life ; for besides 
having all the good qualities common to other men, the 
aged were naturally possessed of greater prudence and 
judgment than their juniors. But in process of time, 
the conduct of men changed ; their manners became 
debased and corrupt. Then were the aged the vUest of 
the vile; for they had served a longer apprenticeship 
to vice, had been longer under the influence of the 
wickedness of their neighbours, and were besides pos- 
sessed of the spirit of cold indifference natural to their 
time of life. Under such conditions they were power- 
less to act, save by calumny, fraud, perfidy, cunning, 
dissimulation, and other such despicable means. The 
corruption of men at length exceeded all bounds. They 
despised virtue and well-doing before they knew any- 
thing of the world, and its sad truth. In their youth 
they drained the cup of evil and dissipation. Old age 
was then not indeed venerable, for few things thence- 
forward could be so called, but the most bearable time of 
life. For whereas the mental ardour and bodily strength 
which formerly stimulated the imagination and the con- 
ception of noble thoughts, had often given rise to virtuous 
habits, sentiments, and actions ; the same causes latterly 
increased man's wickedness by enlarging his capacity for 
evil, to which it lent an additional attractiveness. But 
this ardour diminished with age, bodily decrepitude, and 
the coldness incident to age, things ordinarily more 
dangerous to virtue than vice. In addition to this, 
excessive knowledge of the world became so dissatis- 


PHILIP OTTONIERI. 131 

factory and wearisome a thing, that instead of conducting 
men from good to evil, as formerly, it gave them strength 
to resist wickedness, and sometimes even to hate it. So 
that, comparing old age with the other periods of life, it 
may he said to have been as better to good in the earliest 
times ; as worse to bad in the corrupt times ; and subse- 
quently as bad to worse." 


CHAPTEE V. 

Ottonieei often talked of the q uality of self-love, nowa- 
days calle d egotism. I wiirharrate some of his remarks 
on this subject. 

He said that " if you hear a person speak well or ill 
of another with whom he has had dealings, and term him 
honest or the contrary ; value his opinion not a whit. 
He speaks well or ill of the man simply as his relation- 
ship with him has proved satisfactory or the reverse." 
He said that no one can love without a rival. Being 
asked to explain, he replied : " Because the person beloved 
is a very close rival of the lover." 

" Suppose a case," he said, " in which you asked a 
favour from a friend, who could not grant it without 
incurring the hatred of a third person. Suppose, too, 
that the three interested people are in the same condition 
of life. I af&rm that your request would have little 
chance of success, even though your gratitude to the 
granter might exceed the hatred he would incur from the 
other person. The reason of this is as follows : we fear 
men's an^er and hatred more than we value their love 
and g ratitude. And rightly so. For do we not oftener see 
the former productive of results than the latter ? Besides, 
hatred or vengeance is a personal satisfaction; whereas 
gratitude is merely a service pleasing to the recipient." 

He said that respect and services rendered to others 
in expectation of some profitable return, are rarely sue- 


132 REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF 

cessful; because men, especially nowadays when they 
are more knowing than formerly, are less inclined to give 
than receive. ^Nevertheless, such services as the young 
render to the old who are rich or powerful, attain their 
end more often than not. 

The following remarks about modern customs I remem- 
ber hearing from his own mouth : — 

"Nothing m akes a man of the world so ashamed as 
the fee ling^t]iat.Jap- jr. .^. shamed, if by chance he ever 
re alises it . 

""" " Marvellous is the power of fashion ! For we see 
nations and men, so conservative in everything else, and 
so careful of tradition, act blindly in this respect, often 
indeed unreasonably, and against their own interests. 
.Fashion ip ( jf.p pof.in She constrains men to lay aside, 
change, or assume manners, customs, and ideas, just when 
she pleases ; even though the things changed be rational, 
useful, or beautiful, and the substitutes the contrary.^ 

" There are an infinite number of things in public and 
private life which, though truly ridiculous, seldom excite 
laughter. If by chance a man does laugh in such a case, 
he laughs alone, and is soon silent. On the other hand, ' 
we laugh daily at a thousand very serious and natural 
things ; and such laughter is quickly contagious. Thus, 
jnost things which excite laughter are in reality anythin g 
but ridiculous j _an"d"we often la.ugh simply because there 
is nothing to laugh at, or nothing worthy of laughter. 

" We frequently hear and say such things as, ' The 
good ancients,' ' our good ancestors,' &c. Again, ' A man 
worthy of the ancients,' by which we mean a trustworthy 
and honest man. Every generation believes, on the one 
hand, that its ancestors were better than its contem- 
poraries ; and on the other hand, that the human race 
progresses as it leaves the primitive state, to return to 
which would be a movement for the worse, further and 
further behind. Wonderful contradiction ! 

' See "Dialogue between Fashion and Death,'\p. 19. 


PHILIP OTTONIERI. 133 

"The true is not necessarily the beautiful. Yet, 
though beauty be preferable to truth, where the former 
is wanting, the latter is the next best thing. Now in 
large towns the beautiful is not to be found, because it 
no longer has a place in the excitement of human life. 
The true is equally non-existent ; for all things there are 
false or frivolous. Consequently, in large towns one sees, 
feels, hears, and breathes nothing but falsity, which in 
time, custom renders even pleasurable. To sensitive 
minds, what misery can exceed this ? 

" People who need not work for their bread, and who 
accordingly leave the care of it to others, have usually 
great difficulty in providing themselves with one of the 
chief necessities of Life, occupation. This may i' ^d p,p.d hp, 

p.a.np.d t.hp. grrpat.Pg<-, ^p(^ppaity nTli% .ilai? jf, jyiP.lnrlPH ,f|,]] 

others. It is greater even than the necessity of living ; 
for life itself, apart from happiness, is not a good thing. 
And possessing life, as we do, our one endeavour should 
be to endure as little unhappiness as possible. Now, on 
the one hand, an idl^ atkI PTnp|,y ijfp. j^ v ery unhappy ; 
and on the other hand, the best way to pass our time is 
to spend it in providing for our wants." 

He said that the custom of buying and selling human 
beings has proved useful to the race. In confirmation 
of this, he mentioned the practice of inoculating for 
small-pox, which originated in Circassia ; from Constan- 
tinople it passed to England, and thence became dissemi- 
nated throughout Europe. Its office was to mitigate the 
destructiveness wrought by true small-pox, which besides 
endangering the life and comeliness of the Circassian 
children and youths, was especially disastrous in its 
effects on the sale of their maidens. 

He narrated of himself that on leaving school to enter 
the world of life, he mentally resolved, inexperienced, 
and devoted to truth as he was, to praise no person or 
thing that did not seem really deserving of praise. He 
kept his determination for a whole year, during which 


134 REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF 

time he did not utter a single word of praise. Then he 
broke his vow, fearing lest, from want of practice, he 
should forget all the eulogistic phraseology he had learnt 
shortly before, at the School of Ehetoric. From that 
time he absolutely renounced his intention. 


CHAPTEE VI. 

Ottonieei was accustomed to read out passages from 
books taken at hazard, especially those of ancient writers. 
He would often interrupt himself by uttering some 
remark or comment on this or that passage. 

One day he read from Laertius' " Lives of the Philo- 
sophers," the passage where Chilo, being asked how the 
learned differed from the ignorant, is said to have replied, 
that the former possess ' hopes.' Ottonieri said : ".^ijB-ali 
is changed. The, ignorant hop e, b ut the learned do not." 

Again, as he read in the same book bow Socrates~ 
affirmed that the world contains but one benefit, know- 
ledge, and but one evil, ignorance, he said : " I know 
nothing about the knowledge and ignorance of the 
ancients ; but in the present day I should reverse this 
saying." 

Commenting on this maxim of Hegesias, also from the 
book of Laertius, " The wise man attends to his own 
interests in everything," he said : " If all men who carry 
out this principle be philosophers, Plato may come and 
establish his republic throughout the civilised world." 

He greatly praised the following saying of Bion 
Borysthenes, mentioned by Laertius : " Thrj '^^" """^ 
^;^^^_£jyfftefiti bappmaas, snfFp.r mnat-." To this he added : 
" And they on the other hand are Jhappiest w ho are con - 
tetfEed with least, and who j,re accii stomed to enjoy their 
happiness over again^in memory." 

Prom Plutarch he read "how" Stratocles excited the 
anger of the Athenians by inducing them on a certain 


PHILIP OTTONIERI. 135 

occasion to sacrifice as though they were victors ; and 
how he then replied by demanding why they blamed 
him that he had made them happy and joyful for the 
space of three days. Ottonieri added : " Nature might 
make the same response to those who complain that she 
endeavours to conceal the truth beneath a multitude of 
vain but beautiful and pleasing appearances. How have 
I injured you, ia making you happy for three or four 
days ? " 

On another occasion he remarked that Tasso's saying 
about a child induced to take his medicine under a false 
belief, " he is nourished on deception," is equally appli- 
cable to all our race, in relation to the errors in which 
'man puts faith. 

Eeading the following from Cicero's " Paradoxes " — 
" Do pleasures make a person better or more estimable ? 
Is there any one who boasts of the pleasures he enjoys ? " 
he said : " Beloved Cicero, I cannot say that pleasures 
make men in the present day either more estimable or 
better ; but undoubtedly they cause them to be more 
esteemed. For in the present day most young men 
seek esteem by no other way than pleasure. And not 
only do they boast of these pleasures when they obtain 
them, but they din the intelligence of their enjoyment 
into the ears of friends and strangers, willing or unwill- 
ing. There are also many pleasures which are eagerly 
desired and sought after, not as pleasures, but for the 
sake of the renown, reputation, and self-satisfaction that 
they bring ; and very often these latter things are appro- 
priated when the pleasures have neither been obtained, 
nor sought, or else have been entirely imaginary." 

He noted from Arrian's History of the Wars of 
Alexander the Great, that at the battle of Issus, Darius 
placed his Greek mercenaries in the van of his army, 
and Alexander his Greeks at the wings. He thought 
that this fact alone was sufficient to determine the 
result of the battle. 


136 REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF 

Hp. np.vRr hlamerl authors for writing mucb ^_a1boiit 
themselves. On the contrary, he applauded them for 
I'd doing, and said that on such occasions they are nearly 
always eloquent, and their style, though perhaps unusual 
and even singular, is ordinarily good and fluent. And 
this is not surprising ; for writers treating of themselves 
have their heart and soul in the work. They are at no 
loss what to say ; their subject and the interest they take 
in it are jointly productive of original thought. They 
confine themselves to themselves, and do not drink at 
strange fountains ; nor need they be commonplace and 
trite. There is nothing to induce them to garnish their 
writing with artificial ornamentation, or to affect an 
unnatural style. And it is an egregious error to suppose 
that readers are ordinarily little interested in a writer's 
confessions. For in the first place, whenever a man 
relates his own experiences and thoughts simply and 
pleasingly, he succeeds in commanding attention. 
Secondly, because in no way can we discuss and repre- 
sent the affairs of others more truthfully and effectively 
than by treating of our own affairs ; seeing that all men 
have something in common, either naturally or by force 
of circumstances, and that we are better able to illustrate 
human nature in ourselves than in others. In confirma- 
tion of these opinions, he instanced Demosthenes' Oration 
for the Crown, in which the speaker, continually referring 
to himself, is surpassingly eloquent. And Cicero, when 
he touches on his own affairs, is equally successful ; 
peculiarly so in his Oration for Milo, admirable through- 
out, but above all praise towards the end, where he 
himself is introduced. Bossuet also is supremely excel- 
lent in his panegyric of the Prince de Cond^, where he 
mentions his own extreme age and approaching death. 
Again, the Emperor Julian, whose writings are all else 
trifling, and often unbearable, is at his best in the 
" Misopogony " (speech against the beard), in which he 
replies to the ridicule and maUce of the people of 


PHILIP OTTONIERI. 137 

Antioch. He is here scarcely inferior to Lucian in wit, 
vigour, and acuteness ; whereas his work on the Csesars, 
professedly an imitation of Lucian, is pointless, dull, 
feehle, and almost stupid. In Italian literature, which 
is almost devoid of eloc[uent writings, the apology of 
Lorenzo de Medici is a specimen of eloquence, grand and 
perfect in every way. Tasso also is often eloquent where 
he speaks much of himself, and is nearly always exces- 
sively so in his letters, which are almost occupied with 
his own affairs. 

CHAPTER VIL 

Many other famous sayings of Ottonieri are recorded. 
Amongst them is a reply he gave to a clever, well-read 
young man, who knew little of the world. This youth 
said that he learned daily one hundred- pages of the 
art of self-government in society. " But," remarked 
Ottonieri, " the book has five million pages'." 

Another youth, whose thoughtless and impetuous 
behaviour constantly got him into trouble, used to 
excuse himself by saying that life is a comedy. " May 
be/' replied Ottonieri, " but even then it is better for 
the actor to gain applause than rebuke ; often, too, 
the ill-trained or clumsy comedian ends by dying of 
starvation." 

One day he saw a murderer, who was lame, and 
could not therefore escape, being carried off by the 
police. "See, friends," he said, "Justice, lame though 
she be, can brings the doer of evil to account, if he also 
be lame." 

During a journey through Italy he met a courtier, 
who, desirous of acting the critic to Ottonieri, began : " I 
will speak candidly, if you will allow me." "I will 
listen attentively," said the other, " for, as a traveller, I 
appreciate uncommpn things." 

Being in need of money, he once asked a loan from 


138 REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF PHILIP OTTONIERI. 

a certain man, who, excusing himself on the plea of 
poverty, added that were he rich, the necessities of his 
friends would be his first thought. " I should be truly 
sorry were you to bestow on us such a valuable 
moment," replied Ottonieri : " God grant you may never 
become rich ! " 

"When young, he wrote some verses, using certain 
obsolete expressions. At the request of an old lady he 
recited them to her. She professed ignorance of their 
meaning, and said that in her day such words were not 
in use. Ottonieri replied : " I thought they might have 
been, simply because they are very ancient." 

Of a certain very rich miser who had been robbed of 
a little money, he said : " This man behaved in a miserly 
manner even to thieves." 

He said of a man who had a mania for calculating on 
every possible occasion : " Other men make things ; this 
fellow counts them." 

Being asked his opinion about a certain old terra- 
cotta figure of Jove, over which some antiquaries were 
disputing, he said : " Do you not see that it is a Cretan 
Jove?" 

Of a foolish fellow, who imagined himself to be an 
admirable reasoner, yet was illogical whenever he spoke 
two words, he said : " This person exemplifies the Greek 
definition of man, as a ' logical animal.' " 

When on his deathbed, he composed this epitaph, 
which was subsequently engraved on his tomb : 

HERB HE 
THE BONES OF 

PHILIP OTTONIEEI. 

BOEN FOE VIRTUE AND QLOEY, 

HE LIVED IDLE AND USELESS, 

AND DIED IN OBSCUEITT; 

NOT WITHOUT A KNOWLEDGE OF NATUEE 

AND HIS OWN DESTINY. 


( 139 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN CHRISTOPHER 
COLUMBUS AND PIETRO GUTIERREZ. 


Columbus. A fine mght, friend. 

Gutierrez. Fine indeed ; but a sight of land would be 
much finer. 

Col. Decidedly. So even you are tired of a life at 
sea. 

Gut. Not so. But I am rather weary of this voyage, 
which turns out to be so much longer than I expected. 
Do not, however, think that I blame you, like the 
others. Eather, consider that I will, as hitherto, do all 
I can to help you in anything relating to the voyage. 
But just for the sake of some talk I wish you would tell 
me candidly and explicitly, whether you are as con- 
fident as at first about finding land in this part of the 
world ; or if, after spending so much time to no purpose, 
you begin at all to doubt. 

Col. Speaking frankly as to a friend who will not 
betray me, I confess I am a little dubious ; especially 
because certain evidences during the voyage, which filled 
me with hope, have turned out deceitful ; for instance, the 
birds which flew over us from the west, soon after we left 
Gomera, and which I considerered a sure sign of land 
not far distant. Similarly, more than one conjecture and 
anticipation, made before setting out, regarding different 
things that were to have taken place during the voyage, 
have failed of realisation. So that at length I cannot 


140 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

tut say to myself, " Since these predictions in which I put 
the utmost faith have not been verified, why may not 
also my chief conjecture, that of finding land beyond the 
ocean, be also unfounded ? " It is true this belief of 
mine is so logical, that if it be false, on the one hand it 
would seem as if no human judgment could be reliable, 
except such as concern things actually seen, and touched ; 
and on the other hand, I remember how seldom reality 
agrees with expectation. I ask myself, "What ground 
have you for believing that both hemispheres resemble 
each other, so that the western, like the eastern, is part 
land and part water ? Why may it not be one immense 
sea ? Or instead of land and water, may it not contain 
some other element ? And, supposing it to have land 
and water -like the other, why may it not be uninhabited ? 
or even uninhabitable ? If it be peopled as numerously 
as our hemisphere, what proof have you that rational 
beings are t6 be found there, as in ours ? And if so, why 
not some other intelligent animals instead of men ? 
Supposing they be men, why not of a kind very different 
from those you are acquainted with ; for instance, with 
much larger bodies, stronger, more skilful, naturally 
gifted with much more genius and intelligence, more 
civilised, and richer in sciences and arts ? " 

These thoughts occur to me. And in truth, we see 
nature endowed with such power, so diverse and mani- 
fold in her effects, that we not only are unable to form 
a certain opinion about her works in distant and unknown 
parts of the world, but we may even doubt whether we 
do not deceive ourselves in drawing conclusions from the 
known world, and applying them to the unknown. Nor 
would it be contrary to probability to imagine that the 
things of the unknown world, in whole or part, were 
strange and extraordinary to us. For do we not see with 
our own eyes that the needle in these seas falls away 
from the Pole Star not a little towards the west ? Such 
a thing is perfectly novel, and hitherto unheard of by 


COLUMBUS AND GUTIERREZ. 141 

all navigators ; and even after much thought I can arrive 
at no satisfactory explanation of it. I do not infer that 
the fables of the ancients regarding the wonders of the 
undiscovered world and this ocean are at all credible. 
Annonus, for instance, said of these parts, that the nights 
were illumined by flames, and the glow of fiery torrents, 
which emptied themselves into the sea. We observe 
also, how foolish hitherto have been all the fears of 
miraculous and terrible novelties felt by our fellow- 
sailors during the voyage ; as when, on coming to that 
stretch of seaweed, which made as it were a meadow 
in the sea, and impeded us so greatly, they imagined we 
had reached the verge of navigable waters. 

I say this simply because I wish you to see 
that although this idea of mine about undiscovered 
land may be founded on very reasonable suppositions, 
in which many excellent geographers, astronomers, and 
navigators, with whom I conversed on the subject in 
Spain, Italy, and Portugal, agree with me, it might yet be 
fallacious. In short, we often see many admirably drawn 
conclusions prove erroneous, especially in matters about 
which we have very little knowledge. 

Gut. So that in fact you have risked your own life, 
and the lives of your companions, on behalf of a mere 
possibility. , 

Col. 1 cannot deny it. But, apart from the fact 
that men daily endanger their lives for much frailer 
reasons, and far more trifling things, or even without 
thinking at all, pray consider a moment. 

If you, and I, and all of us were not now here in this 
ship, in the middle of this ocean, in this strange solitude, 
uncertain and hazardous though it be, what should we 
be doing ? How should we be occupied ? How should 
we be spending our time ? More joyfully perhap s ?. 
More probably, in greater troub l e and difficulty ; or worse , 
i n a state of ennui ? 

Tor what is implied in a state of life free from uncer- 


-19 


142 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

tainty and danger ? If contentment and happiness, it is 
preferable to all others ; if weariness and misery, I know 
nothing so undesirable. 

I do not wish to mention the glory and useful intelli- 
gence that we shall take back with us, if our enterprise 
succeed, as we hope. If the voyage be of no other use 
to us, i t is very advantageous, i nasmuch as it for a time 
frees us from ennui, endears life to us, and enhances 
the value of many things that we should not otherwise 
esteem. 

You remember perhaps what the ancients say about 
unfortunate lovers. These used to throw themselves from 
the rock of St. Maur (then called Leucadia) into the sea ; 
being rescued therefrom, they found themselves, thanks 
to Apollo, delivered from their love passion. Whether 
or not this be credible, I am quite sure that the lovers, 
having escaped their danger, for a short time even with- 
out Apollo's assistance,' loved the life they previously 
hated ; or loved and valued it increasedly. Every voy- 
age* is, in my opinion, comparable to the leap from the 
Leucadian rock, producing the same useful results, 
though these are of a more durable kind. 

It is ordinarily believed that sailors and soldiers, 
because incessantly in danger of their lives, value 
existence more lightly than other people. For the same 
reason, I come to a contrary conclusion, and imagine few 
persons hold life" m such high e strnjatioii' aa soldiers an d_ 
^sailors. Just as we care nothing for many benefits as 
soon as we possess them ; so sailors cherish and value, 
very greatly, numerous things that are far from being 
good, simply because they are deprived of them. Who 
would think of including a little earth in the catalogue 
of human benefits ? None but navigators ; and especially 
such as ourselves, who, owing to the uncertain nature of 
our voyage, desire nothing so much as the sight of a 
tiny piece of land. This is our first thought on awaking, 
and our last before we fall asleep. And if at some future 


COLUMBUS AND GUTIERREZ. 143 

time we chance to see in the distance the peak of a 
mountain, the tops of a forest, or some such evidence of 
land, "we shall scarcely be able to contain ourselves for 
joy. Once on terra Jirma, the mere consciousness of 
being free to go where we please will suf&ce to make us 
happy for several days. 

Gut. That is all very true ; and if your conjecture 
only prove to be as reasonable as your justification of it, 
we shall not fail to enjoy this happiness sooner or later. 

Col. Personally, I think we shall soon do so ; though 
I dare not actually promise such a thing. You know 
we have for several days been able to fathom ; and the 
quality of the matter brought up by the lead seems 
to me auspicious. The clouds about the sun towards 
evening are of a different form and colour to what they 
were a few days ago. The atmosphere, as you can feel, 
is warmer and softer than it was. The wind no longer 
blows with the same force, nor in so straightforward and 
unwavering a manner ; it is inclined to be hesitating and 
changeable, as though broken by some impediment. To 
these signs add that of the piece of cane we discovered 
floating in the sea, which bore marks of having been 
recently severed; and the little branch of a tree with 
fresh red berries on it ; besides, the swarms of birds that 
pass over us, though they have deceived me before, are 
now so frequent and immense, that I think there must 
be some special reason for their appearance, particularly 
because we see amongst them some which do not resemble 
sea birds. In short, all these omens together ihake me 
very hopeful and expectant, however diffident I may pre- 
tend to be. 

Gut. God grant your surmises may be true. 


( 144 ) 


PANEGYRIC OF BIRDS. 


Amelio, a lonely philosopher, was seated, reading, one 
spring morning in the shade of his country house. Being 
distracted by the songs of the birds in the fields, he 
gradually resigned himself to listening and thinking. 
At length he threw his book aside, and taking up a pen 
wrote as follows : — 

.Birds are naturally the most joyful creatur es in the 
world. I do not say this because of the cheerful inliu'^ 
ence they always exercise over us ; I mean that they 
themselves are more light-hearted and joyful than any 
other animal. For we see other animals ordinarily 
stolid and grave, and many even seem melancholy. 
They rarely give signs of joy, and when they do, these 
are but slight and of brief duration. In most of their 
enjoyments and pleasures they do not express any 
gratification. The green fields, extensive and charming 
landscapes, noble planets, pure and sweet atmosphere, if 
even a cause of pleasure to them, do not excite in them 
any joyful demonstrations ; save that on the authority 
of Zenophon, hares are said to skip and frolic with 
delight when the moon's radiance is at its brightest. 

Birds, on the other hand, show extreme joy, both in 
motion and appearance; and it is the sight of this 
evident disposition for enjoyment on their part that 
gladdens us as we watch them. And this appearance 
must not be regarded as unreal and deceptive. They 


PANEGYRIC OF BIRDS. 145 

sing to express the happiness they feel, and the happier 
they are, the more vigorously do they sing. And if, as 
it is said, they sing louder and more sweetly when in 
love than at other times, it is equally certain that other 
pleasures besides love incite them to sing. For we may 
notice they warble more on a quiet and peaceful day, 
than when the day is dark and uncertain. And in 
stormy weather, or when frightened, they are silent ; but 
the storm passed, they reappear, singing and frolicking 
with one another. Again, they sing in the morning 
when they awake ; being partly incited to this by a 
feeling of joy for the new day, and partly by the plea- 
sure generally felt by every animal when refreshed 
and restored by sleep. They also delight in gay foliage, 
rich valleys, pure and sparkling water, and beautiful 
country. ... 

It is said that birds' voices are softer and sweeter, and 
their songs more refined, with us than among wild and 
uncivilised people. This being so, it would seem that 
birds are subject to the influence of the civilisation with 
which they associate. Whether or not this be true, it is 
a remarkable instance of the providence of nature that 
they should have capacity for flight, as well as the gift 
of song, so that their voices might from a lofty situation 
reach a greater number of auditors. It is also provi- 
dential that the air, which is the natural element of 
sound, should be inhabited by -vocal and musical 
creatures. 

Truly the singing of birds is a great solace and plea- 
sure to us, and all other animals. This fact is not, I 
believe, so much due to the sweetness of the sounds, nor 
to their variety and harmony, as to the joyful significa- 
tion of songs generally, and those of birds in particular. 
Birds laugh, as it were, to show their contentment and 
happiness. It may therefore be said that they partake 
in a degree of man's privilege of laughter, unpossessed by 
other animals. Now some people think that man may 

K 


146 PANEGYRIC OF BIRDS. 

as well he termed a laughing animal, as an animal pos- 
sessed of mind and reason; for laughter seems to them quite 
as much peculiar to man as reason. And it is certainly 
wonderful that man, the most wretched and miserable of 
all creatures, should have th e faculty of laughter, which 
is wanting in other animals. MgrvA]1mig akn is t.Vip hrr^ 
wp _mf),Trp. nf t.liia fapjjJ iyJ- JEfi-SBg peopip iBwfFpring from 
some terrible calamity or mental distress, others who 
have lost all love of life, and regard every human thing 
as full of vanity, who are almost incapable of joy, and 
deprived of hope,_laughHft6*estheiess. Indeed, the more 
such men realise the vanity of hope, and the misery of 
life, the fewer their expectations and pleasures, so much 
the more do they feel inclined to laugh. Now it is 
scarcely possible to explain or analyse the nature of 
laughter in general, and its connection with the human 
mind. Perhaps it may aptly be termed a species of 
mom entary folly or delirium . Tor men can have no 
reasonable and just cause for laughter, because nothing 
really satisfies nor truly pleases them. It would be 
curious to discover and trace out the history of this 
faculty. There is no doubt that in man's primitive and 
wild state, it was expressed by a peculiar gravity of 
countenance, as in other animals, who show it even to 
the extent of melancholy. For this reason I imagine 
that laughter not only came into the world after tears, 
which cannot be questioned, but that a long time passed 
before it appeared. During that time, neither the mother 
greeted her child with a smile, nor did the child smil- 
ingly recognise her, as Virgil says. And the reason why, 
in the present day, among civilised people, children smile 
as soon as they are born, is explainable by virtue of 
example : they see others smile, therefore they also smile. 
It is prnV.g'hWfhgf. lnn^v,f<i>T. ^rifiJDfjit ed in drunkenness.^ 

^ Compare Shakespeare's Henry IV., Part 2, Act 4, sc. 3. Falstaff: 
"... nor a man cannot make him laugh ; — but that's no marvel, he 
drinks no wine." 


PANEGYRIC OF BIRDS. 147 

another peculiarity of the human race. This vice is 
far from being confined to civilised nations, for we know- 
that scarcely any people can be found that do not possess 
an intoxicating liquor of some kind, which they indulge 
in to excess. And this cannot be wondered at, when we 
remember that men, the mo R*-, nnTiappy ^f q]] flnima1s_ 
are above all pleased with anything that easily alienates 
their minds, such as self-forgetfulness, or a suspension of 
their usual life ; from which interruption and temporary 
diminution of the sense and knowledge of their peculiar 
evils they receive no slight benefit. And whereas 
savages have ordinarily a ssid and grave countenance, 
yet, when in a state of drunkenness, they laugh immo- 
derately, and talk and sing incessantly, contrary to their 
custom. But I will discuss this matter more in detail 
in a history of laughter which I think of composing. 
Having discovered its origin, I will trace its history and 
fortune to the present day, when it is more valued than 
at any previous time. It occupies among civilised nations 
a place, and fills an office somewhat similar to the parts 
formerly played by virtue, justice, honour, and the like, 
often indeed frightening and deterring men from the 
committal of evil. 

But -to return to the birds. From the effect their 
singing produces in me, I conclude that the sight and 
recognition of joy in others, of which we are not envious, 
gratifies and rejoices us. We may therefore be grateful 
to Nature for having ordained that the songs of birds, 
which are a demonstration of joy and a species of laughter, 
should be in public, differing from the private nature 
of the singing and laughter of men, who represent the 
rest of the world. And it is wisely decreed that the 
earth and air should be enlivened by creatures that seem 
to applaud universal life with the joyful harmony of 
their sweet voices, and thus incite other living beings 
to joy, by their continual, though false, testimony to the 
happiness of things. 


148 PANEGYRIC OF BIRDS. 

It is reasonable that birds should be, and show them- 
selves, more joyful than other creatures. Por, as I have 
said, they are naturally better adapted for joy and 
happiness. In the first place, apparently, they are 
not s ubject to ennui. They change their position 
momentarily, and pass from country to country, however 
distant, and from the lowest regions of the air to the 
highest, quickly and with wonderful ease. Life to them 
is made up of an infinite variety of sights and experiences. 
Their bodies are in a continuous state of activity, and 
they themselves are full of vital power. All other 
animals, their wants being satisfied, love quietude and 
laziness ; none, except fishes and certain flying insects, 
keep long in motion simply for amusement. The savage, 
for instancy, except to supply his daily wants, which 
demand little and brief exertion, or when unable to hunt, 
scarcely stirs a step. He loves idleness and tranquillity 
above everything, and passes nearly the whole day sitting 
in silence and indolence within his rude cabin, or at its 
opening, or in some rocky cave or place of shelter. 
Birds, on the contrary, very rarely stay long in one place. 
They fly backwards and forwards without any necessity, 
simply as a pastime, and often having gone several 
hundred miles away from the country they usually fre- 
quent, they return thither the same evening. And even 
for the short time they are in one place, their bodies 
are never still. Ever turning here and there, they are 
always either flocking together, pecking, or shaking them- 
selves, or hopping about in their extraordinarily viva- 
cious and active manner. In short, from the time a bird 
bursts its shell until it dies, save intervals of sleep, it is 
never still for a moment. From these considerations it 
may reasonably be affirmed that whereas the normal 
state of animals, including even man, is quietude, that of 
j3ixds_is_Eaotion. 

We find also that birds are so endowed that their 
natural qualities harmonise with the exfierior qualities 


PANEGYRIC OF BIRDS. 149 

and conditions of their life ; this again makes them better 
adapted for happiness than other animals. They haVe 
remarkably acute powers of hearing, and a faculty of 
vision almost inconceivably perfect. Owing to this last 
they can discern simultaneously a vast extent of country, 
and are daily charmed by spectacles the most immense 
and varied. From these things it may be inferred that 
birds ought to TJOs sess an imagination, vivid and powerful 
in the highest degree. Not the ardent and stormy imagi- 
nation of Dante or Tasso ; for this is a disastrous endow- 
ment, and the cause of endless anxieties and sufferings. 
But a fertile, light, and childish fancy, such as is pro- 
ductive of joyful thoughts, sweet unrealities, and manifold 
pleasures. This is the noblest gift of Nature to living 
creatures. And birds have this faculty in a great 
measure for their own delight and benefit, without experi- 
encing any of its hurtful and painful consequences. Por 
their prolific imagination, as with children, combines, 
with their bodily vigour, to render them Jtiappy and con- 
tented, instead of being injurious, and productive of 
misery, as with most men. Thus, birds may be said to 
resemble children equally in their vivacity and restless- 
ness, and the other attributes of their nature. If the 
advantages of childhood were common to other ages, and 
its evils not exceeded later in life, man might perhaps 
be better able to bear patiently the burden of existence. 

To me it seems that the nature of birds, considered 
aright, is manifestly more perfect than that of other 
animals. For, in the first place, birds are superior to 
other animals in sight and hearing, which are the principal 
senses of life. In the second place, birds naturally prefer 
motion to rest, whereas other creatures have the contrary 
preference. And since activity is a more living thing 
than repose, birds may be said to have more life than 
other animals. It fnlWa.. there fore that birds are physi- 
c ally, and in the exer cise of their faculties, superior to 
other creatures. 


150 PANEGYRIC OF BIRDS. 

Now, if life be better than its contrary, the fuller 
and more perfect the life, as with birds, the greater is 
the superiority of creatures possessing it, over less 
endowed animals. 

We must not forget also that birds are adapted to 
bear great atmospheric changes; Often they rise instan- 
taneously from the ground far up into the air, where the 
cold is extreme ; and others in their travels fly through 
many different climates. 

In short, just as Anacreon wished to be changed into 
a mirror that he might be continually regarded by the 
mistress of his heart, or into a robe that he might cover 
her, or balm to anoint her, or water to wash her, or 
bands that she might draw him to her bosom, or a pearl 
to be worn on her neck, or shoes that she might at least 
press him with her feet ; so I_ should like tempm-arily tn 
betran^fMmgd- 1 utra . ■a.-^bird,. in rvrrlpr tn pvporig ncfi \,\ mv 
' cpiitentm.ent. and j oy f ukLesa_0£ JilJe. 


( 151 ) 


THE SONG OF THE WILD COCK. 


Certain Hebrew savants and writers affirm, that be- 
tween heaven and earth, or rather, partly in one and 
partly on the other, lives a wild cock which stands with 
its feet resting on the earth, and touching the sky with 
its crest and beak. This gigantic cock, besides possessing 
other peculiarities mentioned by these writers, has the 
use of reason ; or else, like a parrot, it has been taught, 
I know not by whom, to express itself in human fashion. 
In proof of this, an old parchment manuscript has been 
discovered, containing a canticle written in Hebrew 
characters, and in a language compounded of Chaldean, 
Targumic, Eabbinical, Cabalistic and Talmudic, entitled 
" Morning Song of the Wild Cock." (Scir detarnegdl bara 
letzafra.) This, not without great exertion, and the inter- 
rogation of more than one Eabbi, Cabalist, theologian, 
jurist, and Hebrew philosopher, has been interpreted and 
translated as follows. I have not yet been able to ascer- 
tain whether this song is still uttered by the cock on 
certain occasions, or every morning, or whether it was 
sung but once, or who is said to have heard it, or if 
this language be the proper tongue of the cock, or 
whether the canticle was translated from some other 
language. In the following translation I have used 
prose rather than verse, although it is a poem, in order 
to ensure as literal a rendering as possible. The broken 
style and occasional bombast must not be imputed to 


152 THE SONG OF THE WILD COCK. 

me, for it is a reproduction of the original ; and in this 
respect the composition partakes of the characteristics of 
Oriental languages, and especially of Oriental poems. 

" Mortals, awake ! The day breaks ; truth returns to 
the earth and vain fancies flee away. Arise ; take up 
again the burd en of life: forsake the false world for 
tEeTirue. 

" Now is the tiirae when each one takes again to his 
mind all the thoughts of his real life. He recalls to 
memory his intentions, aims, and labours; and thinks 
of the pleasures and cares that must occur during the 
new day. And every one at this time eagerly seeks to 
discover in his mind joyful hopes and sweet thoughts. 
Few, however, are satisfied in this desire : for all men 
it is a misfortu ne to awake. The miserable man is no 
soouei' aroused than he falls again into the clutches of 
his unhappiness. Yery sweet a thing is that sleep 
induced by joy or hope. These preserve ^themselves in 
their entirety until the following morning, when they 
either vanish or decrease in force. 

" If the sleep of mortals were continuous and identical 
with life ; if under the star of day all living beings 
languished on the earth in utter rest, and no work was 
wrought ; if the oxen ceased bellowing in the meadows, 
the beasts roaring in the forests, the birds singing in the 
air, the bees buzzing, and the butterflies skimming over 
the fields ; if no voice nor motion except that of the 
waters, winds, and tempests anywhere existed, the uni- 
verse would indeed be useless ; but would there be less 
happiness or more misery than there is to-day ? 

" I ask of thee, Sun, author of day, and guardian 
of eve ; in the course of the centuries measured out 
and consummated by thee, thus rising and setting, hast 
thou ever a t any time seen one livin g hriug pnnnPTrfl-nf 
Jbappiness ? Of the numberless works of mortals which 
hitherto thou hast seen, thinkest thou that a single one 
was successful in its aim of procuring satisfaction, durable 


THE SONG OF THE WILD COCK. 153 

or temporary, for its originator ? And seest thou, or 
hast thou ever seen, happiness within the boundaries of 
the world ? Where does it dwell ? In what country, 
forest, mountain, or valley; in what land, inhabited or 
uninhabited ; in which planet of the many that thy 
flames illumine and cherish ? Does it perchance hide 
from thee in the bowels of the earth, or the depths of 
the sea ? What living being, what plant, or other thing 
animated by thee, what vegetable or animal p&,rticipates 
in it ? And thou thyself, like an indefatigable giant, 
traversing swiftly, day and night, sleepless and restless, 
the vast course prescribed to thee ; art thou content or 
happy ? 

" Mortals, arouse yourselves ! Not yet are you free 
from life. The time will come when no eternal force, 
no internal agitation, shall awaken you from the repose 
of sleep, in which you shall ever and insatiably rest. For 
the present, death is not granted to you ; only from time 
to ti me you are permitted to taste briefly "its resemblance, 
"bpcaTiHe lifp. would fail were it not often suspended . 
Too long abstention from this short and fleeting sleep 
is a fatal evil, and causes eternal sleep. Such thing is 
life, that to secure its continuance it must from time 
to time be laid aside ; man then in sleep refreshes him- 
self with a taste, and, as it were, a fragment of death. 

" Tt piPRTTi!^ as though flp-afh wp.r pt.he „p,?H&ntia.I a^'m of 
all thin p Tf^ Tha.t which has no existence cannot die ; 
yet aU that exists has proceeded from nothing. The 
final cause of existence is not haT)T).in£ a&rior.jLQlihinsLis. 
Eappy. It is true, living creatures seek this end in all 
their works, but none obtain it ; and during all their 
life, ever deceiving, tormenting, and exerting themselves, 
they suffer indeed for no other purpose than to die. 

" The earliest part of the day is ordinarily the most 
bearable for living beings. Tew, when they awake, find 
again in their minds delightful and joyful thoughts, but 
almost all people give birth to them for the time being. 


154 THE SONG OF THE WILD COCK. 

For then the minds of men, being free from any special 
concentration, are predisposed to joyfulness, and inclined 
to bear evils more patiently than at other times. Thus 
. aman_ who fall s-aeieetu ui the anguish of despair is filled 
ane w witLJia p. e when- h^ awakes. thougJi it can p rofit^ 
him nothing. Many misfortunes and peculiar hardships, 
many causes of fear and distress, then seem less for- 
midable than they appeared the previous evening. Often, 
also, the pangs of yesterday are remembered with con- 
tempt, and are ridiculed as follies and vain fancies. 

" The evening is comparable to old age ; and on the 
other hand, the d awn ot the morning resembles youth ; 
the one full of comfort and hope, and then sad evening 
with its discouragement and tendencies to look on the 
dark side of things. But, just as the time pi youth in 
life is very short and fleeting, so is the infancy of each 
new day, which quickly ages towards its evening. 

"Youth, if indeed it be the best of life, is a very 
wretched thing. Yet even this poor benefit is so soon 
over, that when by many signs man is led to perceive 
the decline of his existence, he has scarcely experienced 
its perfection, or fully realised its peculiar strength, 
which, once diminished, the best part of life is gone with 
every race of mortals. Th us, in all her works. Nature 
tu rns and points towards death : for old age reigns 
universally. Every part of the world hastens untiringly, 
with diligence and wonderful celerity, towards death. 
Thfi^'^ynrld itReI£-i3lQ,iio- aoonis PT^TOr t from decay , for 
although in autumn and winter it appears as it were 
sick and aged, nevertheless in the spring it ever 
rejuvenates. But just as mortals in the first part of 
each day regain some portion of their youth, yet grow 
old as the day progresses, and are at length extinguished 
in sleep ; so although in the beginning of the year the, 
world becomes young again, none the less it perpetually 
ages. The time will com e when this world, and Natu re 
herself, shall- die. And as at the present day there 


THE SONG OF THE WILD COCK. 155 

remains no trace nor record of many very great kingdoms 
and empires, so in the whole world there shall not be 
left a vestige of the infinite changes and catastrophes of 
created things. A naked silence and an utter calm 
shall fill the vast space. Thus, this wonderful and 
fearful mystery of u niversal existence shall be unloosed, 
and shall melt away before it be made manifest or be 
comprehended." ^ 

^ This is a poetical not philosophical conolueion. Speaking philosophi- 
cally, existence, which has had no beginning, will have no ending. 


156 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TIMANDRO 
AND ELEANDRO. 


Timandro. I am very anxious to have some conver- 
sation with you. It is about t he matter and t endency 

of yrvny wrif-,iTif T{a anrl wnrrjp which Seem tO me" mOSt 

blamable. 

Meandro. So long as you find no fault with my 
actions, I confess I do not much care ; because words 
and writings are of little conseq^uence.- 

Tim. There is nothing in your actions, as far as I 
can see, for which I need blame you. I am aware 
that you benefit no one because you cannot do so, and 
I observe that you injure no one because you are 
unwilling to do so. But I consider your speech and 
writings very reprehensible, and I do not agree with you 
that they are of little importance. Our life may almost 
be said to consist of nothing else. For the present we 
wUl disregard the words, and simply consider the writ- 
ings. In ttie first place, the inceg °qT^t TitnporQfinn gnH 
continuous satire that you bestow oj . th r h n mnii inrr 
ar e out oTIas hion. 

Mean. My brain also is out of fashion. It is quite 
natural for a child to resemble its father. 

Tim. Then you must not be surprised if your books, 
like everything contrary to the custom of the day, are ill 
received. 

Mean. That is a small misfortune. They were not 


TIMANDRO AND ELEANDRO. 157 

■written for the purpose of begging a little bread at the 
doors of the rich. 

Tim. Forty or fifty years ago, philosophers used to say. 
hard things about the human race, but now they do just 
the contrary. 

Mean. Do you believe that forty or fifty years ago the 
philosophers were right or wrong in their statements ? 

Tim. More often right than wrong. 

Mean. Do you think that in these forty or fifty 
years the human race has changed to the opposite of 
what it then was ? 

Tim. Not at all. But that has nothing to do with 
the question. 

Mean. Why not ? Has humanity progressed in 
strength and perfection, that the writers of to-day should 
be constrained to flatter, and compelled to reverence it ? 

Tim. What have such pleasantries to do with so 
grave a matter ? 

Mean. Then seriously. I am not unaware that the 
people of this century, although continuing to ill-treat 
their fellow-men as their ancestors did, have yet a very 
high opinion of themselves, such as men of the past 
century did not possess. But I, who ill-treat no one, 
do not see that I am obliged to speak well of others 
against my conscience. 

Tim. You must, however, like all men, endeavour 
to serve your race. 

Mean. If my race, on the contrary, does its best to 
injure me, I do not see that this obligation holds, as 
you say. But supposing you are right, what ought I to 
do, if I caimot be useful to my race ? 

Tim. By actions, perhaps, you may be unable to be 
of much use. Such power is in the hands of but few 
people. But by your writings you can, and indeed ought 
to serve it. And the race is not benefited by book j 
which snarl inc ^SSSSEly at men in g en eral. Such be- 
haviour is, on tne contrary, extremely injurious. 


158 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

Mean. I admit that it does no good, but I also 
imagine it does no harm. Do you, however, think books 
are able to help the human race ? 

Tim. Not I only, but all the world think so. 

Mean. What kind of books ? 

Tim. Many kinds j but especially books treating of 
morals. 

Mean. All the world does not think so, because I, 
amongst others, do not, as a woman once said to Socrates. 
If books of morals could be useful to men, I should place 
poetry above all others. I use the word poetry in its 
widest sense, as including all writings, the aim of which 
is to excite the imagination, whether in prose or verse. 
Now I hold in little esteem that sort of poetry which, 
when read and meditated over, does not leave in the 
mind of the reader a sufficiently elevating sentiment to 
deter him for half an hour from giving way to a single 
base ,thought or unworthy action. If, however, the 
reader commits, for example, a breach of faith towards his 
best friend an hour after such reading, I do not condemn 
the poetry for that, because then the finest, most stirring, 
and noblest poetry the world possesses would come under 
condemnation. Exceptions to this influence are readers 
who live in great cities. These people, however great 
their concentration, cannot forget themselves for even 
half an hour, nor are they much pleased, or moved, by 
any sort of poetry. 

Tim. You speak, as usual, maliciously, and so as to 
leave an impression that you are habitually ill-treated by 
others. This, in most instances, is the true cause of the 
ill-humour and contempt exhibited by certain people to- 
wards their race. 

Mean. Indeed, I cannot say that men have treated, 
or do treat me very well. If I could say so, I imagine I 
should be unique in my experience. But neither have 
they done me any serious harm, because in demanding 
nothing from men, and having nothing in common with 


TIMANDRO AND ELEANDRO. 159 

them, I scarcely give them a chance of offending me. I 
must confess, however, that recognising clearly, as I do, 
how ignorant I am of the simplest means of making 
myself agreeable to others, both in conversation and the 
daily intercourse of life, whether from a natural defect 
or fault of my own, I should esteem men less if they 
treated me better. 

Tim. Then you are so much the more to blame. 
For, had you even a mistaken ground of complaint, your 
hatred and desire for revenge against men would be in a 
measure justifiable. But your hatred, from what you say, 
is based on nothing in particular, except perhaps an 
extraordinary and wretched ambition of becoming famous 
as a misanthrope like Timon — a desire abominable in 
itself, and especially out of place in a century like the 
present, so peculiarly devoted to philanthropy. 

Elean. I need not reply to your remark about ambi- 
tion, because I have already said that I want nothing 
from men. Does that seem incredible to you ? You 
will at least grant that it is not ambition which urges 
me to write books, such as on your own showing are more 
likely to bring me reproaches than glory. Besides, I am 
so far from hating the human race, that I neither can nor 
wish to hate even those who particularly offend me. 
Indeed, the fact that hatred is so completely foreign to 
me, goes far to explain my inability to do as other men 
do. But I cannot change this, because I always think 
that whenever a man displeases or injures another, he does 
so in the hope of procuring some pleasure or advantage 
for himself. His aim is not to injure others (which Can 
never be the motive of any action, nor the object of any 
thought), but to benefit himself, — a natural desire, and 
undeserving of odium. Again, whenever I notice a par- 
ticular vice or fault in my neighbour, I carefully examine 
myself, and as far as circumstances will allow, I put 
myself in his place. Thereupon I invariably find that I 
should have done the same as he, and been guilty of the 


i6o DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

same faults. Consequently my mind loses what irrita- 
tion it previously felt. I reserve my wrath for occasions 
when I might see some wickedness of which my nature 
is incapable ; but so far I have never met with such a 
case, rtaally, the thought of the vanity of human things 
is so constantly in my mind that I am unable to excite 
myself about any one of them. Hatred and anger seem 
to me great and strong passions, out of harmony with 
the insignificance of life. Thus you see there is a great 
difference between Timon and myself. Timon hated and 
shunned all men except Alcibiades, for whom he reserved 
all his affection, because he saw in him the initiator of 
innumerable evils for their common country. I, on the 
other hand, without hating Alcibiades, would have especi- 
ally avoided him. I would have warned my fellow-citizens 
of their danger, exhortiag them at the same time to take 
the requisite steps to preserve themselves from it. Some 
say that Timon did not hate men, but beasts in the like- 
ness of men. As for me, I neither hate men nor beasts. 

Tim. 'Not do you love any one. 

Mean. Listen, my friend. I am born to love. I 
have loved; and perhaps with as deep a passion as is 
possible for human soul to feel. To-day, although, as you. 
see, I am not sufficiently old to be naturally devoid of 
passion, nor even of a lukewarm age, I am not ashamed 
to say that I love no one except myself, by the necessity 
of nature, and that as little as possible. Nevertheless, 
I would always rather bear suffering myself than be the 
cause of it to others. I believe you can bear witness 
to • the truth of this, little as you know about my 
habits. 

Tim. I do not deny it. 

Mean. I try to procure for men, even at my own 
expense, that greatest possible good, which alone I seek 
for myself, viz., a state of freedom from sufferin sr. 

Tim. But do you distinctly confess that you do not 
love the human race in general ? 


TIMANDRO AND ELEANDRO. i6i 

Mean. Yes, absolutely. But in such a way that if 
it depended on me, I would punish those who deserved 
punishment, without hating them, as also I would 
benefit my race to the utmost, although I do not love it. 

Tim. WeU, it may be so. But then, if you are 
not incited by injuries received, nor by hatred, nor 
ambition, why do you write in such a manner ? 

Mean. For many- reasons. First, because I cannot 
tolerate deceit and dissimulation. I may sometimes have 
to give way to these in conversation, but never in 
my writings; because I am often obliged to speak 
unwillingly, but I never write unless I please. I should 
derive no satisfaction from puzzling my brains, and 
expressing the result on paper, unless I could write 
what I really think. All sensible people laugh at those 
who now-a-days write Latin, because no one speaks, and 
few understand, the language. I think it is equally 
absurd to take for granted, whether in conversation or 
writing, the reality of certain human qualities no longer 
extant, and the existence of certain rational beings, 
formerly considered as divinities, but now really regarded 
as non-existent equally by those who mention them, and 
those who hear them mentioned. I could understand men 
using masks and disguises in order to deceive other men, 
or to avoid being recognised. But it seems childish for 
them all to conceal themselves behind the same kind of 
mask, and use the same disguise, whereby they deceive no 
one, but recognise each other perfectly, in spite of it. 
Let them lay aside their masks, and retain merely their 
clothes. The effect will be precisely the same, and they 
wiU be more at ease. Besides, this perpetual simulation, 
though useless, and this eternal acting of a part between 
^ which and oneself there is nothing in common, cannot be 
carried on without fatigue and weariness. If men had 
passed suddenly, instead of . gradually, from the savage 
condition to their present state of civilisation, would the 
names of the things just mentioned be found in general 

L 


i62 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

usage, with the custom of deducing from them a thousand 
philosophical conclusions ? In truth, this custom seems 
• to me like one of those ceremonies and ancient practices 
so incompatible with our present habits, which neverthe- 
less continue to exist by force of usage. I for my part 
cannot submit to these ceremonies ;' and I write in the 
language of modern times, not that of the Trojan era. 
In the second place, I do not so much, in my writings, 
find fault with the human race, as ^g ;rieYe over its deatinv. 
There is nothing I think more clear and palpable than 
the n ecessary unhappiness of all living b eings. If this 
unhappiness be not a fact, then all my argtilnents are 
wrong, and we may abandon the discussion. If it be 
true, why may I not lament openly and freely, and say 
that I suffer ? Doubtless, if I did nothing but weep 
incessantly (this is the third cause which moves me), I 
should become 'a nuisance to others as well as myself, 

without profiting any one. But in lau ghjnfy at our 

misfor tunes, we do much to rented v them . I erldeavour 
therefore to persuade others to profit in this way, as I 
have done. Whether I succeed or not, I feel assured 
that such laughter is the only solace and remedy that can 
be found. The poets say. that despair has always a 
smile on its lips. 

But you must not think that I am devoid of com- 
passion for the unhappiness of humanity. Its condition 
is incurable by art, industry, or anything else, therefore 
I consider it far more manly and consistent with a 
magnanimous despair to laugh at our common woes, than 
to sigh, weep, and moan with others, thereby encouraging 
them in their lamentations. 

Lastly, perinit me to say that I' desire as much as 
you, or any one else, the welfare of my race in general, 
but I am hopeless of its attainment ; nor can I, like so 
many philosophers of this century, nourish and soothe 
my mind with anticipations of good. My despair is 
absolute, unchangeable, and so based on firm judgment 


TIMANDRO AND ELEANDRO. 163 

and conviction, that I cannot imagine such a thing as a 
joyous future, nor can I undertake anything with the 
hope of bringing it to completion. And you are well 
aware that man is never inclined to attempt what he 
knows or thinks cannot succeed ; or if he does, he acts 
feebly and without confidence. Similarly a writer, who 
expresses himself contrary to his real opinion, though 
this be erroneous, utters nothing worthy of consideration. 
' Tim. But when his judgment is, like yours, a false 
one, he should rectify it. 

Mean. My judgment is of myself alone, and I am 
quite sure I do not err in announcing my unhappiness. 
If other men are happy, I congratulate them with all 
my heart. I know also that death alone can deliver me 
from my misfortune. If others are more hopeful, I 
rejoice once again. 

Tim. We are all unhappy, and have always been 
so. I scarcely think you can take credit for the novelty 
of your idea. But man's present condition, superior as 
it is to his past, will be greatly improved in the future. 
You forget, or seem to disregard the fact, that man is 
perfectible. 

Mean. Perfectible he may be. But that he is capable 
of perfection, which is of more importance, I know not 
who can convince me. 

Tim. He has not yet had time to reach perfection. 
Ultimately he will no doubt attain to it. 

Mean. I do not doubt it. The few years that have 
passed since the world began are, I agree with you, quite 
insufficient to complete our education. We cannot judg^ 
from what seem to us the nature and capabilities of man. 
Besides, humanity hitherto has been too occupied with 
other business to give itself up to the task of attaining 
perfection. But in future aU its endeavours will be 
towards this one aim. 

Tim. Yes, the whole civilised world is working zeal- 
ously towards this end. , And, taking into consideration 


i64 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

the number and sufficiency of the means employed, 
■which have indeed recently increased in an astounding 
manner, we have every reason to think that the goal will 
be reached, sdoner or later. This conviction itself is by, 
no means one of the least stimulants to progress, be- 
cause it gives birth to a host of undertakings and 
labours useful for the common welfare. If, then, at any 
time it was fatal and blamable to manifest despair like 
yours, and to teach men such doctrines as the absolute 
necessity of their wretchedness, the vanity of life, the 
insignificance of their race, and the evil of their nature, 
much more is it so in the present day. Such conduct 
can only result in depriving us of courage, and that 
feeling of self-esteem which is the foundation of an 
honest, useful, and glorious life ; it will also divert us 
from the path of our own welfare. 

Mean. Kindly say distinctly, whether or not you 
regard as true what I have said about the unhappiness 
of mankind. 

Tim. You return to your old argument. Well, sup- 
posing I admit the truth of what you say, how does 
that alter the matter ? I would remind you that it is 
not always well to preach truth simply because it is truth. 

Mean. Answer me another question. Are these 
truths, which I merely express, without any pretence 
of preaching, of primary or secondary importance in 
philosophy ? 

Tim. In my opinion they are the very essence of all 
philosophy. 

Mean. In that case, they greatly deceive themselves 
who affirm that man's perfection consists in complete 
knowledge of the truth ; that his misfortunes are the 
consequence of his ignorance and prejudices ; and that 
the human race will be happy when men have discovered 
the truth, and conform their lives to its teaching. Yet 
such doctrines are taught by most philosophers, ancient 
and modern. But you are of opinion that these truths.. 


TIMANDRO AND ELBANDRO. 165 

though confessedly the substance of all philosophy, jaught 
to be concealed from the m aioritY of men. You would 
rather that they were unknown or disregarded by all 
men, because of the baneful influence they exercise over 
the mind. And this is equivalent to an admission that 
philosophy ought to be banished from the earth. I 
grant you, however, that the final conclusion to be drawn 
from true and perfect philosophy is that it wer^ better 
to dispense with philosophy. It would therefore seem 
that, first of all, philosophy is superfluous, since its con- 
clusions are attainable without its assistance; secondly, 
it is extremely injurious, because its conclusion is a very 
painful one to be accepted, and when accepted is useless : 
nor is it in man's power to disregard truths once recog- 
nised. Besides, the habit of philosophising is one of 
the most difficult habits to throw off. Thus, philosophy 
which at first inspires hope as a possible remedy for the 
ills of humanity, ends by seeking in vain a cure for 
itself. And now I would ask you why you imagine we 
are nearer perfection than our ancestors were ? Is it 
that we are better acquainted with the truth ? This 
cannot be, since we have seen that such knowledge is 
extremely prejudicial to man's happiness. Perhaps, how- 
ever, it is because some few men in the present day 
have learnt that the truest philosopher is he who abstains 
from philosophy ? But in what then are we superior 
to the men of primitive times, who were perfectly 
unacquainted with philosophy ? And even in the 
present day savages abstain from philosophy, without 
feeling the least inconvenience. 

In what, therefore, are we more advanced than our 
ancestors; and what means of attaining perfection do 
we possess, which they had not ? 

Tim. We have many of great importance. To explain 
them would be a work of considerable time. 

Mean. Put them aside for the moment, and recon- 
sider my theory. I say thaf if, oq the' one hand, I 


i66 DIALOGUE BETWEEN TIMANDRO AND ELEANDRO. 

express in my writings certain hard and bitter truths, 
whether to relieve my mind, or console myself in laugh- 
ing at them, I do not fail at the same time to deplore 
and disadvise the search after that cold &,nd miserable 
truth, acquaintance with which reduces us to a state of 
either indifference and hypocrisy, or baseness of soul, 
moral corruption, and depravity. And, on the other 
hand, X praise and exalt those noble, if false ideas, which 
give birth to high-minded and vigorous actions and 
thoughts, such as further the welfare of mankind, or 
individuals ; those glorious illusions, vain though they 
be, which give value to life, and which are natural to 
the "soul ; in short, the superstitions of antiquity, dis- 
tinct from the errors of barbarism. These latter should 
be rooted out, but the former respected. Civilisation 
and philosophy having exceeded their natural bounds, 
as is usual with all things pertaining to humanity, have 
drawn us from one state of barbarism only to precipi- 
tate us into another, no better , than the first. ''This new - 
barbari sm, born of reason and science instead nf ianor 
ranee, ma nifests itself more in the mind than the b^dy, 
Y'etT iinagme, that though these superstitions become 
daily more necessary for the well-being of civilised nations, 
the possibility of their re-introduction diminishes daily. 

And as for man's perfection, I assure you if I had 
perceived any signs of it, I would have written a volume 
in praise of the human race. But since I have not yet 
seen it, and as it is improbable I ever shall see it, I think 
of leaving in my will a certain sum of money for the pur- 
pose of procuring an annual panegyric of the hrnnan race. 
to be publiclv recited fi-nm iht^. t.^mp ^f \\^^ pfirfpflfiinr, 
a nd to pay.fo iJ]ieL-erectiQfljaf ,a-tpmplp, statu p».auaaim- 
ment, as may be judgedbest, to commemorate the event. 


( i67 ) 


COPERNICUS : 

A DIALOGUE IN FOUR SCENES. 

Scene I. — The, First Hour and the Sun. 

First Hour. Good day, Excellency. 

Sun. Thanks ; good-night as well. 

First Hour. The horses are waiting, your Excellency. 

Sun. Very well. 

First Hour. And the Morning Star has been up some 
time. 

Sun. All right. Let it rise and set, just as it pleases. 

First Hour. What do I hear your Excellency say ? 

Swn. I wish you would leave me alone. 

First Hour. But, Excellency, the night has already 
lasted so long, that it can last no longer ; and if we delay, 
imagine. Excellency, the confusion that will ensue. 

Sun. I don't mean to stir, whatever happens. 

First Hour. Excellency ! what is this ? Does your 
Excellency feel ill ? 

Sun. No, no ; I feel nothing, except that I don't wish 
to move. So you can go and attend to your own affairs. 

First Hour. How can I go unless your Excellency 
comes ? I am the first Hour of the day, and how can 
the day exist, if your Excellency does not deign to go 
forth as usual ? 

Sun. If you will not be of the day, you shall be of 
the night; or better, the hours of the night shall do 


i68 COPERNICUS. 

double duty, and you and your companions shall be idle. 
For you must know I am tired of this eternal goiag 
round to give light to a race of little animals that live 
far away in a ball of clay, so small that I, who have good 
sight, cannot see it. During the night I have decided 
not to trouble myself any more in this fashion. If men 
want light, let them make their own fires for the purpose, 
or provide it in some other way. 

First Sour. But, Excellency, how can the little fellows 
manage that ? It will be a very great expense for them 
to keep lanterns or candles burning all day long. If 
only they could now discover a certain atmosphere to 
warm and illumine their streets, rooips, shops, taverns, 
and everything else at little expense, then they would 
not be so badly off. But men will have to wait some 
three hundred years, more or less, before they discover 
this ; and meanwhile, all the oil, wax, pitch, and tallow 
of the earth will be exhausted, and they will have 
nothing more to burn. 

Sun. Let them hunt the will-o-the-wisp, and catch 
those shining things called glow-worms. 

First Hour. And how wUl they protect themselves 
against the cold ? For without the assistance of your 
Excellency, all the forests together will not make a fire 
large enough to warm them. Besides, they will also die 
of hunger, since the earth will no longer bring forth its 
fruits. And so, after a few years, the seed of the poor 
little folk will be lost. They wiU go groping about the 
earth, seeking food and warmth, until having consumed 
every possible thing, and used up the last flicker of fire, 
they will all die in the darkness, frozen like pieces of 
rock-crystal. 

Sun. What is this to do with me ? Am I the nurse 
of the human race ; or the cook, that I should look after 
the preparation of their food ? And why need I care 
if a few invisible little creatures, millions of miles away 
from me, are unable to see, or bear the cold, when. 


COPERNICUS. 169 

deprived of my light and -warmth ? Besides, even sup- 
posing, as you say, that I ought to act the part of stove 
or fireplace to this human family, surely it is more 
reasonable, if men want to warm themselves, that they 
should come to the stove, than that the stove should go 
whirling round them. Therefore, if the Earth requires 
me, let it come hither to satisfy its needs. I want 
nothing from the Earth, that I should thus trouble 
myself to rotate round it. 

First Hour. Your Excellency means, if I understand 
rightly, t hat henceforth the Earth must do for itself that 
w hich hitherto yo u have done on its behalf . 

Sun. Yes : now and for the future. 

First Hour. Well, your Excellency knows best what 
is right, and can do as it pleases you. But nevertheless, 
will your Excellency deign to think what a number of 
beautiful and useful things will be destroyed by this new 
decree. The day will be deprived of its handsome gilded 
chariot, and beautiful horses, which bathe themselves in 
the sea. Amongst other changes, we poor Hours must 
suffer ; we shall no longer have a place in heaven, but 
shall have to descend from our position as celestial 
children to that of terrestrials, unless, as is more probable, 
we dissolve into thin air instead. But be that as it 
may, the difficulty will be to persuade the Earth to go 
round, necessarily a hard thing, because it is unaccus- 
tomed to do so; and the experience of rotating and 
exerting itself incessantly will be all the more strange, 
seeing that hitherto it has never stirred from its present 
position. If, then, your Excellency now begins to think 
of idleness, I fear the Earth will be as little desirous of 
bestirring itself as ever it was. 

Sun. In that case, it must be pricked, and made to 
bestir itself as much as is necessary. But the quickest 
and surest way is to find a yoet. or, better, a nhilosop Jijer. 
who will persuade the Earth to mav fi-itaelf. or persuasion 
being unsuccessful, wiU use force. For philosophers and 


170 COPERNICUS. 

poets ordinarilymanage these affairs. When I was younger 
I used to have a great esteem for the poets, though they 
rather caricatured me in representing me racing madly, 
great and stout as I am, round and round a grain of 
sand, simply for the sake of amusement or exercise. But 
now that I am older, I am more partial to philosophy. 
I study to discern the utility, not the beauty of things, 
and poetry seems to me either absurd or wearisome. I 
wish, also, to have good substantial reasons for whatever 
I do. ISTow, I see no reason why I should value a life 
of activity more than a life of ease and idleness. I have 
determined, therefore, in future, to leave the fatigues and 
discomforts to others, and for my own part to live quietly 
at home, without undertaking business of any kind. 
This change in me is partly due to my age, but has 
chiefly been brought about by' the philosophers, a race 
of people whose power and influence increase daily. 
Consequently , to induce the Earth to rotettfi i" ^J plaf.e 
a_ QQat would intrinsically be better than a philosophe r : 
because the poets are accustomed to pive a fictitious 
value to things by exaggerating the tru th, beauty, and 
utility 01 subjects about which they treat, and because 
by raising a thousa,nd pleasurable hopes, they often incite 
people to fatigues they would else have avoided ; whereas 
philosophers weary them. Bu j^ nn-cy th^.f-, t.bp power of 
philosophers is so predominant, I doubt whether a poe t 
would be of m uc h use, i £,-even j he Earth gave him a 
hearing. Therefore, we had better have recourse to a 
philosopher. It is true, philosophers are usually Little 
■ suited, and still less inclined, to stimulate other people 
to exertions ; but possibly in so extreme a case, they 
may be induced to act contrary to custom. The Earth 
has, however, one alternative ; it has the option of 
declining to undertake all this hard labour. Its destruc- 
tion will then ensue, and I am far from sure that this 
would not be the best thing for it. But enough of this : 
we shall see what will take place. Now, either you or 


COPERNICUS. 171 

one of your companions had better go at once to tha 
Earth. If there you discover any one of these philoso- 
phers in the open air, regarding the heavens, and wonder- 
ing about the cause of this protracted night, as well he 
may, take charge of him, and bring him hither on your 
back. Do you clearly understand ? 

First Sour. Yes, Excellency. You shall be obeyed. 

Scene II. — Cope rnicus pacing the terrace of his Jious e, 
ioith his eyes anxiously directed tovjards the 
eastern horizon. A roll of paper in his hand, 
which ever and anon he uses as a telescope. 

This is a marvellous thing. Either the clocks are 
all wrong, or else the sun should have risen more than 
an hour ago. Yet not a gleam of light is to be seen in 
the east, though the sky is as bright and clear as , a 
mirror. All the stars shine as if it were midnight. 
I must go and consult the Almagest and Sacrobosco, and 
see what they say about this event. I have often heard 
talk of the night Jove passed with the wife of Amphi-. 
tryon, and I also remember reading a little while ago, in 
a modern Spanish book, that the Peruvians record a very 
long night, at the end of which the sun proceeded forth 
from a certain lake called Titicaca. Hitherto I have 
regarded these as mere tales, and have never wavered 
in my belief. Now, however, that I perceive reason and 
science to be absolutely useless, I am determined to 
believe the truth of these, and similar things. I will 
also visit the lakes and puddles in the neighbourhood, 
and see if I can fish out the sun. 

Ha ! what is this thair I hear ? It is like the flapping 
of the wings of some huge bird. 


172 COPERNICUS. 

Scene III. — The Last Hour and Copernicus. 

Last Sour. Copernicus, I am the Last Hour. 

Copernicus. The Last Hour ! Well, I suppose I must 
be resigned. But I beg of you, if possible, to give me 
enough time to make my will, and put my things in 
order, before I die. 

Last Hour. Die ! What do you mean ? I am not 
the last hour of your life. 

Copernicus. Oh, then, what are you ? The last hour 
of the of&ce of the breviary ? 

Last Hour. I can quite imagine you prefer that one 
to the others, -when you are in your stall. 

Copernicus. But how do you know I am a Canon ? 
And how is it you know my name ? 

Last Hour. I procured my information about you, 
from certain people in the street. I am, in fact, the Last 
Hour of day. 

Copernicus. Ah ! now I understand. The First Hour 
is unwell ; and that is why day is not yet visible. 

Last Hour, I have news for you. There will never 
be any more daylight unless you provide it yourself. 

Copernicus. You would throw on me the responsibility 
of making daylight ? A fine thing, indeed ! 

Last Hour. I will tell you how. But first of all, you 
must come with me at once to the house of the Sun, my 
father. You shall hear more when we set out. His 
Excellency will explain everything when we arrive. 

Copernicus. I trust it is all right. But the journey, 
unless I am mistaken, must be a very long one. And 
how can I take enough food to prevent my dying of 
hunger a few years before reaching the Sun ? Besides, 
I doubt if his Excellency's lands produce the where- 
withal to supply me with even a single meal. 

Last Hour. Do not trouble yourself with these doubts. 
You wm not stay long in my father's house, and the 
journey will be completed in a moment. For you must 
know that I am a spirit. 


COPERNICUS. 173 

Copernicus. Maybe. But I am a body. 

Last Hour. Well, well : you are not a metaphysician 
that you need excite yourself about these matters. Come 
now, mount on my shoulders, and leave all the rest to me. 
i. Goperniciis. Courage. There, it is done ! I will pur- 
sue this novelty to its issue. 

Scene IV. — Copernicus and the Sion. 

Copernicus. Most noble Lord. 

Sun. Forgive me, Copernicus, if I do not offer you a 
chair: one does not use such things here. But we 
wUl soon despatch our business. My servant has already 
explained the matter to you ; and from what the child 
teUs me, I imagine you will do very well for our purpose. 

Copernicus. My lord, I discern great difficulties in the 
matter. 

Sun. Difficulties ought not to frighten such a man as 
yourself. They are even said to make the brave man 
stiU more courageous. But tell me briefly of what these 
difficulties consist. 

Copernicus. In the first place, although philosophy is 
a great power, I doubt whether it can persuade the Earth 
to change its comfortable sitting posture for a state of 
restless activity; especially in these times, which are 
not heroic. 

Sun. And if persuasion be ineffectual, you must try force. 

Copernicus. Willingly, Illustrious, if I were a Hercules, 
or even an Orlando, instead of a mere Canon of Varmia. 

Sun. What has that to do with it ? Did not one of 
yo.ur ancient mathematicians say, that if he had standing 
room given him outside the world, he would undertake 
to move heaven and earth ? Now, you are not required 
to move heaven, and behold, you are already in a place 
outside the earth. Therefore, unless you are not so 
clever as that ancient, you will no doubt be able to 
jnove the Earth, whether it be willing, or not. 


174 COPERNICUS. 

Copernicus. My lord, such a thing might be possible. 
But a lever would be necessary, of such dimensions that 
neither I nor even your Illustrious Lordship could pay 
half the cost of its materials and manufacture. There 
are, however, other and far more serious difficulties, which 
I will now mention. 

You know the Earth has hitherto occupied the prin- 
cipal position in the Universe, that is the centre. Motion- 
less, it has had nothing to do but regard all the other 
spheres, great and small, brilliant and obscure, continu- 
ously gyrating around and on all sides of it with a mar- 
vellous regularity and speed. AU things seem to be 
occupied in its service; so that the Universe may be 
likened to a court, in the midst of which the Earth sits 
as on a throne, surrounded by attendant globes, like 
courtiers, guards, and servants, each of which fulfils its 
respective office. Consequently, the Earth has always 
regarded itself as Empress of the Universe. So far, indeed, 
little fault can be found with its control, and I do not 
think your design an improvement on the old state of 
affairs. But what shall I say to you about men ? We 
esteem ourselves (and shall always do so) to be in the 
same relation to the rest of created beings as the Earth 
is to the Universe. And more than this. Supreme among 
terrestrial creatures, we all, including the ragged beggar 
who dines on a morsel of black bread, have a most 
exalted idea of ourselves. We are each of us emperors, 
and our empire is only bounded by the Universe, for it 
includes all the stars and planets, visible and invisible. 
Man is, in his own estimation, the final cause of all 
things, including even your Illustrious Lordship. 

Now, if we remove the Earth from its place in the 
centre, and make it whirl round and round unremittingly, 
what will be the consequence ? Simply, that it will act 
like all the other globes, and be enrolled in the number 
of the planets. The n all its terrestrial majesty will vanish. 
and the Earth will have to abdicate its imperial throne. 


COPERNICUS. 175 

Men, too, will lose their human majesty, an d be deprived 
_ of their suipremacy : the v wiU be left alone with their rags, 
and miseries, which are not insignificant. 

Sun. In short, Don Nicolas, what do you wish to 
prove by this discourse ? Is it that you have scruples of 
conscience lest the deed should be treasonable ? 

Copernicus. No, it is not that, Illustrious. For, to the 
best of my knowledge neither the Codes, nor the Digest, 
nor the books of public, imperial, international, or natural 
law, make any mention of such treason. What I wanted 
to show was, that this action, subverting our planetary 
relationships, wiU not only work alteration in the order 
of nature; for it will change the position of things 
inter se, and the ends for which created beings now 
exist; it will also necessarily make a great revolution 
in the science of metaphysics, and everything connected 
with the speculative part of knowledge. The result will 
be that men, even if they are able and willing to critically 
examine into the why and wherefore of life, will discover 
themselves and their aims to be very different from what 
they are now, or from what they imagine them to be. 

Sun. My dear child, the thought of these things does 
not disturb me much ; so little respect have I for meta- 
physics, or physics, or even alchemy, necromancy, or any 
such things. Besides, men will in time become content 
with their position ; or, if they do not like it, they may 
argue the matter to their hearts' content, and will doubt- 
less succeed in believing just what they please. In this 
way they may stUl deceive themselves under the names 
of Barons, Dukes, Emperors, or anything else. If, how- 
ever, they are inconsolable, I confess it will not give me 
much uneasiness. 

Copernicus. Well, then, apart from men and the Earth, 
consider, Illustrious, what may reasonably be expected to 
happen in regard to the other planets. These, when they 
see the Earth reduced to their condition, and doing pre- 
cisely what they do, just like one of themselves, will be 


176 COPERNICUS. 

jealous of its apparent superiority. They will be dis- 
satisfied with their own naked simplicity and sad loneli- 
ness, and will desire to have their rivers, mountains, seas, 
plants, animals, and men ; for they will see no reason 
why they should be in the smallest degree less endowed 
than the Earth. Thereupon will ensue another great 
revolution in the Universe : an infinite number of new 
races and people will instantaneously proceed from their 
soil, like mushrooms. 

Sun. Well, let them come, and the more the merrier. 
My Light and heat will suffice for them all'without any 
extra expense. The Universe shall have food, clothes, 
and lodging amply provided gratis. 

Copernicus. But, if your Illustrious Lordship will 
reflect a moment, yet another objection may be dis- 
cerned. The stars, haAang rivalled the Earth, will turn 
their attentions to you. They wUl notice your fine 
throne, noble court, and numerous planetary satellites. 
Consequently, they also wUl wish for thrones. And 
more, they will desire to rule, as you do, over inferior 
planets, each of which must of course be peopled and 
ornamented like the Earth. It is needless to mention 
the increased unhappiness of the human race. Their 
insignificance wiU. be greater than ever. They will burst 
out in all these millions of new worlds, so that even the 
tiniest star of the milky way will be provided with its 
own race of mortals. Now, looking at this, solely as 
affecting your interests, I affirm that it will be very pre- 
judicial. Hitherto you have been, if not the first, 
certainly the second in the Universe ; that is, after the 
Earth ; nor have the stars aspired to rival you in dignity. 
In this new state, however, you wOl have as many equals 
as stars, each with their respective stars. Beware then 
lest this change be ruinous to your supremacy. 

Sun.. You remember Csesar's remark, when, crossing 
the Alps, he happened to pass a certain miserable little 
barbarian village. He said that he would rather be the 


COPERNICUS. 177 

first in that village, than the second in Eome. Similarly 
I would rather be first in this my own world than second 
in the Universe. But you must not think it is ambition 
that makes me desirous of changing the present state of 
things ; it is solely my love of peace, or, more candidly, 
idleness. Therefore it is a small matter to me whether 
I am first or last in the Universe : unlike Cicero, I care 
more for ease than dignity. 

Oopernicus. I also, Ulustrious, have striven my utmost 
to obtain this ease. But, supposing your Lordship is 
successful in your endeavour, I doubt whether it will be 
of long duration. For, in the first place, I feel almost 
sure that before many years have elapsed you will be 
impelled to go winding round and round like a windlass, 
or a wheel, without however varying your locality. Then, 
after a time, you will probably be desirous of rotating 
round something — the Earth for instance. Ah ! well, be 
that as it may ; if you persist in your determination, I 
will try to serve you, in spite of the great difficulties 
necessarily to be overcome. If I fail, you must attribute 
the failure to my inability, not unwillingness. 

Sun. That is well, my Copernicus. Do your best. 

Copernicus. There is however yet another obstacle. 

Sun. What is it ? 

Copernicus. I fear lest I should be burnt alive for my 
pains. In which case, it would be improbable that I, 
like the Phoenix, should rise from my ashes. I should 
therefore never see your Lordship's face again. 

Sun. Listen, Copernicus. You know that once upon 
a time I was a prophet, when poetry ruled the world, 
and philosophy was scarcely hatched. I will now utter 
my last prophecy. Put faith in me on the strength of 
my former power. This is what I say. It may be that 
those who come after you, and confirm your deeds, shall 
be burnt, or killed in some other way; but you shall be 
safe, nor shall you suffer at all on account of this under- 
taking. And to make your safety certain, dedicate to 

M 


178 


COPERNICUS. 


the Pope the book ^ you will write on the subject. If 
you do this, I promise that you will not even lose your 
canonry. 


^ Copernicus did in effect dedi- 
cate his book on the "Revolution 
of the Celestial Bodies," the printing 
of which was only completed a tew 
days before his death, to Pope Paul 
III. The system expounded therein 
was condemned by a decree of Paul 
V. in l6l6. This condemnation 
remained in force until 1 82 1, when 


it was revoked by Pius VII. The 
sun is supposed to be in the centre, 
and motionless ; the earth and the 
rest of the planets move round it in 
elliptical orbits. The heavens and 
stars are supposed to be stationary, 
and their apparent diurnal motion 
from east to west is imputed to the 
earth's motion from west to east. 


( 179 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN AN ALMANAC 
SELLER AND A PASSER-BY. 


Almanac Seller. Almanacs ! New Almanacs ! New 
Calendars ! Who wants new Almanacs ? 

Fasser-h/. Almanacs for the New Year ? 

Aim. Seller. Yes, Sir. 

Passer. Do you think this New Year will be a happy- 
one? 

Aim. Seller. Yes, to he sure. Sir. 

Passer. As happy as last year ? 

Aim. Seller. Much more so. 

Passer. As the year before ? 

Aim. Seller. Still more. Sir. 

Passer. Why ? Should you not like the New Year to 
resemble one of the past years ? 

Aim. Seller. No, Sir, I should not. 

Passer. How many years have gone by since you 
began to sell almanacs ? 

Aim. Seller. About twenty years. Sir. 

Passer. Which of the twenty should you wish the 
New Year to be like ? 

Aim. Seller. I do not know. 

Passer. Do you not remember any particular year 
which you thought a happy one ? 

Aim. Seller. Indeed I do not, Sir. 

Passer. And yet life is a fine thing, is it not ? 

Aim. Seller. So-they say. 


i8o DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

Passer. "Would you not like to live these twenty 
years, and even all your past life from your birth, over 
again ? 

Aim. Seller. Ah, dear Sir, would to God I could ! 

Passer. But if you had to live over again the life you 
have already lived, with all its pleasures and sufferings ? 

Aim. Seller. I should not like that. 

Passer. Then what other life would you like to live ? 
Mine, or that of the Pridce, or whose ? Do you not think 
that I, or the Prince, or any one else, would reply exactly 
as you have done ; and that no one would wish to repeat 
the same life over again ? 

Aim. Seller. I do believe that. 

Passer. Then would you recommence it on this con- 
dition, if none other were offered you ? 

Aim. Seller. No, Sir, indeed I would not. 

Passer. Then what life would you like ? 

Aim. Seller. Such an one as God would give me with- 
out any conditions. 

Passer. A life at hap-hazard, and of which you would 
know nothing beforehand, as you know nothing about the 
New Year ? 

Aim. Seller. Exactly. 

Passer. It is what I should wish, had I to live my life 
over again, and so would every one. But this proves 
that Fate has treated us all badly. And it is clear that 
each person is of opinion that the evil he has experienced 
exceeds the good, if no one wnnlrl w^aV) f,f| 1^ ^, re-bfiTn on 
condition of living h is own Ijff, y^yfiy p,gf»,iTi fmTn ihp 
beginning, with just its same p roportion of good and evi l. 
This life, which is such a fine thing, is not the life we 
are acc[uainted with, but that of which we know nothing ; 
it is not the past life, but the future. With the New 
Year Fate will commence treating you, and me, and 
every one well, and the happy life will begin. Am I 
not right ? 

Aim. Seller. Let us hope so. 


AN ALMANAC SELLER AND A PASSER-BY. i8i 

Passer. Show me the best almanac you have. 
Aim. Seller. Here it is, Sir. This is worth thirty soldi. 
Passer. Here are thirty soldi. 

Aim. Seller. Thank you, Sir. Good day. Sir. — 
Almanacs ! New Almanacs ! New Calendars ! 


l82 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN PLOTINUS 
AND PORPHYRIUS. 


"One day when I._EQ rphTriTi3. was meditating about 
takinp: my own life. Plotinus guessed my intention. He 
interrupted me, and said that such a design could not 
proceed from a healthy mind, but was due to some melan- 
choly indisposition, and that I must have change of air" 
(Ex. Life of Plotinus, by Porphyrins). 

The same incident is recounted in the life of Plotinus by 
Eunapius, who adds that Plotinus recorded in a book the 
conversation he then held with Porphyrins on the subject. 

Plotinus. You know, Porphyrius, how sincerely I am 
your friend. You will not wonder therefore that I am 
unquiet about you. For some time I have noticed how 
sad and thoughtful you are ; your expression of counten- 
ance is unusual, and you have let fall certain words which 
make me anxious. In short, I fear that you contemplate 
some evil design. 

Porphyrius. How ! What do you mean ? 

Plotinus. I think you intend to do yourself some 
injury ; it were a bad omen to give the deed its name. 
Listen to me, dear Porphyrius, and do not conceal the 
truth. Do not wrong the friendship that has so long 
existed between us. I know my words will cause you 
displeasure, and I can easily understand that you would 
rather have kept your design hid. But I could not be 
silent in such a matter, and you ought not to refuse to 
confide in one who loves you as much as himself. Let us 


PLOTINVS AND PORPHYRIUS. 183 

then talk calmly, weighing our words. Open your heart 
to me. Tell me your troubles, and let me be auditor of 
your lamentations. I have deserved your confidence. I 
promise, on my part, not to oppose the carrying out of your 
resolution, if we agree that it is useful and reasonable. 

Forphyrius. I have never denied a request of yours, 
dear Plotinus. I will therefore confess to you what I 
would rather have kept to myself ; nothing in the world 
would induce me to tell it to anyone else. You are 
right in your interpretation of my thoughts. If you 
wish to discuss the subject, I will not refuse, in spite of 
my dislike to do so ; for on such occasions the mind 
prefers to encompass itself with a lofty silence, and to 
meditate in solitude, giving itself up for the time to 
a state of complete self-absorption. Nevertheless, I am 
wniing to do as you please. 

In the first place, I may say that my design is not ' 
the consequence of any special misfortune. It is simply / 
the result of a n utter weariness of life, and a continuou s \ 
ennui which has^ong possessed me like a pain. To_this 1 
mav be added a fef -lin,o ; of the vanity and nothingness of^ 
all t.TiiTicrp, -yliip.k pprvadRS, ^" ^" ,] 3odY and soul. JJo not 
"fiy that this disposition of mind is unreasonable, though 
I will allow that it may in part proceed from physical 
causes. It is in itself perfectly reasonable, and therein , 
differs from all our other dispositions ; for everything / 
which makes us attach some value to life and human | 
things, proves on analysis to be contrary to reason, 
and to proceed from some illusion or falsity . Nothing 
is more rational than e nnui.^ Pleasiixaa_ai:e-alEjS2Sr~ 
"Pain itseit, at least mental pam, is equally false, because 
on examination it is seen to have scarcely any founda- 
tion, or none at all. The same may be said of fear and 

1 " E nnui is a sta te only "vpor-ion^o^ 1-.y fhe. ;T.foli;nraiiii. The greater 
the mind, the more const4,nt, f)ainful, and terrible is the ennui it suffers. 

En nui is in some respents the suh limpgt. nf JunniTi trn*' *" " {Leopardi's 

"Pensieri," Nos. Ixvii. and Ixviii.) 


iS4 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

hope. Ennui jdonejjwhicli is born from the vanity of 
things, is genuine, and never decejves, If, then, all else 
be vain, the reality of l2eTs"'sumined up in ennui.„„_ 

PlotinusTlirmaj be so. I will not contradict you as 
to that. But we must now consider the nature of your 
project. You know Plato refused to allow that man is 
at liberty to escape, like a fugitive slave, from, the 
captivity in which he is placed by the will of the gods, 
in depriving himself of life. 

Porphyrins. I beg you, dear Plotinus, to leave Plato 
alone now, with his doctrines and dreams. It is one 
thing to praise, explain, and champion certain theories 
in the schools and in books, but quite another to prac- 
tically exemplify them. School -teaching and books 
constrain us to admire Plato, and conform to him, 
because such is the custom in the present day. But 
in real life, far from being admired, he is even detested. 
It is true Plato is said to have spread abroad by his 
writings the notion of a future life,, thus leaving men in 
doubt as to their fate after death, and serving a good 
purpose in deterring men from evil in this life, through 
fear of punishment in the next. If I imagined Plato to 
have been the inventor of these ideas and beliefs, I would 
speak thus to him : — 

"You observe, OPJaiQ^ow inimical to our race the 
power which governs the world has always been, whether 
known as Nature, Destiny, or Fate. Many reasons con- 
tradict the supposition that man has that high rank in 
the order of creation which we are pleased to imagine ; 
but by no reason can he be deprived of the characteristic 
attributed to him by Homer — that of suffering. Nature, 
however, has given us a remedy for airevLLs. Tt i s death. 
little feared by those who are not fully intelligent, and 
by aR others desired. , 

" But you have deprived us of this dearest consolation 
of our life, fuU of suffering that it is. The doubts raised 
by you have torn this comfort from our minds, and 


PLOTINUS AND PORPHYRIUS. 185 

made the thought of death the bitterest of all thoughts. 
T hanks to you, unhappy mortals now ,feaii±he-ato rm-JpH ,c j 
-iTTs^T] t.Tio pnrf p^ iven from their one place of rey rnae, 
_ a,nd robbed of the only remedy they could look for, they 
resi£;n t >iPTngp.1vp.g to hVi^ fa ufferings and troubles of life . 
Thus, you have been more cruel towards us than Destiny, 
Nature, or Fate. And since this doubt, once conceived, 
can never be got rid o f, to you is it due that your fellow - 
men reg ard death as something more terrible than life . 
1 ou are to blame that rest and peace are for ever banished 
from the last moments of man, whereas all other animals 
die in perfect fearlessness. This one thing, Plato, was 
wanting to complete the sum of human misery. 

"True, your intention was good. But it has failed 
in its purpose. Violence and injustice are not arrested, 
for evil-doers only realise the terrors of death in their 
last moments, when quite powerless to do more harm. 
Your doubts trouble only the good, who are more dis- 
posed to benefit than injure their feUow-men, and the 
weak and timid, who are neither inclined by nature nor 
disposition to oppress anyone. Bold and strong men, 
who have scarcely any power of imagination, and those 
who require some other restraint than mere law, regard 
these fears as chimerical, and are undeterred from evil 
doing. We see daily instances of this, and the experi- 
ence of aU. the centuries, from your time down to the 
present, confirms it. Good laws, still more, good edu- 
cation, and mental and social culture, — these are the 
things that preserve justice and mildness amongst men. 
Civilisation, and the use of reflection and reason, make 
men almost always hate to war with each other and 
shed one another's blood, and render them disinclined to 
quarrel, and endanger their lives by lawlessness. But 
such good results are never due to threatening fancies, 
and bitter expectation of terrible chastisement; these, 
like the multitude and cruelty of the punishments used 
in certain states, only serve to increase the baseness and 


i86 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

ferocity of men, and are therefore opposed to the well- 
being of human society. 

"Perhaps, however.^ y"" -^i^l T^p^y ^'-hat you have 
promised a reward i ^.hp. fiitnrp for the ffood. — _What 
then is this reward ? _A ^ state ..of lif a which seems fu ll 
of ennui, even less tolerable than our present existence ! 

TEeTitterness' of your punishments is unmistakable; 
but the sweetness of your rewards is hidden and secret, 
incomprehensible to our minds. How then can order 
and virtue be said to be encouraged by your doctriue ? 
I wUl venture to say that if but few men have been 
deterred from evil by the fear of your terrible Tartarus, 
no good man has been led to perform a single praise- 
worthy action by desire of your Elysium. Such a Para- 

. disc does not attract us in the least. But, apart from 
the fact that your heaven is scarcely an inviting place, 
who among the best of us can hope to merit it ? What 
man can satisfy your inexorable judges, Minos, Eacus, 
and Ehadamanthus, who will not overlook one single 
fault, however trivial ? Besides, who can say that he 
has reached your standard of purity ? In short, we 
cannot look for happiness in the world to come ; and 
however clear a man's conscience may be, or however 
upright his life, in his last hour he will dread the future 
with its terrible incertitude. It is due to your teaching 
■that fear is a much stronger influence than hope, and 
may be said to dominate mankind. 

" This then is tbp. rAsnlf-. ^f yn ur doctrines. Man. 
whose life on e arth is wretched in the extreme, antici- 
pates death,_not as an end to all his miseries, but as 
^^g heginning _of_a c ondition more wretched still. Thus, 
you surpass in cruelty, not only "Mature and Destiny, but 
the most merciless tyrant and bloodthirsty executioner 
the world has ever known. 

"But what cruelty can exceed that of your law , 

^ fo rBiddin^^an to putan e nd to his sufferings an d 
troubles by voluntaS ^ depriving himself of life, ther eby 


PLOTINUS AND PORPHYRIUS. 187 

triumphing over the horrors of death ? Other animals 
do not desire to put an end to their life, because their 
unhappiness is less than ours ; nor would they even 
have sufficient courage to face a voluntary death. But 
if they did wish to die, what should deter them from 
fulfilling their desire ? They ^^re affected by no pro- 
hibition, nor fear of the future. Here again you make 
us inferior jtobrut e beasts. The liberty they possess, 
■^hey dS-__not use ; the liberty granted also to us by 
Nature, so miserly in her gifts, you take away. Thus, 
the only creatures capable' of desiring death, have the 
right to die refused them. Nature, Destiny, and Fortune I 
overwhelm us with cruel blows, that cause us to suffer 
fearfully ; you add to our sufferings by tying our arms 
and enchaining our feet, so that we can neither defend 
ourselves, nor escape from our persecutors. 

" Truly, when I think over the great wretchedness of 
humanity, it seems to me that your doctrines, above all 
things, Plato, are guilty of it, and that men may well 
complain of you more than of Nature. For the latter, 
in decreeing for us an existence full of unhappiness, has 
left us the means of escaping from it when we please. 
Indeed, unhappiness cannot be called extreme, when 
we have in our hands the power to shorten it at will. 
Besides, the mere thought of being able to quit life at 
pleasure, and withdraw from the miseries of the world, 
is so great an alleviation of our lot, that in itself it 
suffices to render existence supportable. Consequently, 
there can be no doubt that our chief unhappiness pro- 
ceeds from the fear, that in abbreviating our life we 
might be plunged into a state of greater misery than 
the present. And not only will our misery be greater 
in the future, but it will be so full of the refinement of 
cruelty, that a comparison of these unexperienced tortures 
with the known sufferings of this life, reduces the latter 
almost to insignificance. 

"You have easily, Plato, raised this question of 


1 88 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

immortality ; but the human species will become extinct 
'before it is settled. Your genius is the most fatal thing 
that has ever afBicted humanity, and nothing can ever 
exist more disastrous in its effects." 

That is what I would say to Plato, had he invented 
the doctrine we are discussing ; but I am well aware he 
did not originate it. However, enough has been said. 
Let us drop the subject, if you please. 

Plotinus. Porphyrins, you know how I revere Plato ; 
yet in talking to you on such an occasion as this, I will 
give you my own opinion, and will disregard his 
authority. The few words of his that -I spoke were 
rather as an introduction than anything else. Eeturning 
to my first argument, I affirm that not only Plato^_and 
every other philosopher, but TSTature herself, teaches_us_ 
'^ai"rfis improper to take away our own life.. I will 
not say much on this point, because if you reflect a 
little, I am sure you will agree with me th at suicid e is 
un natural. It is indeed an action the most contrary 
possible to nature. The whole order of things would be 
subverted if the beings of the world destroyed them- 
selves. And it is repugnant and absurd to suppose that 
life is given only to be taken away by its possessor, and 
that beings should exist only to become non-existent. 
_The law of self-preservation is the strictest law of 
__natiu:a.™Jts mamtenance is enjoined in every possible 
way on man and all creatures of the universe. And, 
apart from anything else, do we not instinctively fear, 
hate, and shun death, even in spite of ourselves ? There- 
fore, since suicide is so utterly contrary to our nature, I 
cannot think that it is permissible. 

Porphyrius. I have already meditated on the subject 
from all points of view ; for the mind could not design 
such a step without due consideration. It seems to me 
that all your reasoning is answerable with just as much 
counter reasoning. But I will be brief. 

You doubt whether it be permissible to die withou:t 


PLOTINUS AND PORPHYRIUS. 189 

necessity. I ask you if it be permis sible to ^ be^unhappv ? 1 
Nature, you say, torbids smeide. It is a strange thing ' 
that since she is either unable or unwilling to make me 
happy, or free me from unhappiness, she should have 
the power to force me to live. If Nature has given us 1 
a love of life, and a hatred of death, she has also given 
us a love of happiness, and a hatred of suffering ; and ) 
the latter instincts are much more powerful than the 
former, because happiness is the supreme aim of all our 
actions and sentiments of love or hatred. For to what 
end do we shun death, or desire life, save to promote 
our well-being, and for fear of the contrary ? 

How the n can it be un natura l to es ca2e^,^QaL.a^ffp-^- 
ing m the onl^ __ way open to ma^n, th at_JSt^byijd;^iflg ; 
since in life it can never be avoided ? How, too, can it 
be true, that Nature forbids me to devote myself to 
death, which is undoubtedly a good thing, and to reject 
life, which is undoubtedly an evil and injurious thing, 
since it is a source of nothing but suffering to me ? 

Plotinus. These things do not persuade me that suicide 
is not unnatural. Have we jiot_a_strono^n5tinctivg_ 
horror of death ? \Besides, ^e never see brute beasts, 
""Tvliieh—iHvarriarbly follow the instincts of their nature 
(when not contrarily trained by man), either commit 
suicide, or regard death as anything but a condition to 
be struggled against, even in their moments of greatest 
suffering. In short, all men who commit this desperate 
act, will be found to have lived out of conformity to 
nature. They, on the contrary, who live naturally, 
would without exception reject suicide, if even the 
thought proposed itself to them. 

Porphyrius. Well, if you like, ^ I wi ll admit that the 
action is contrary to nature. But whaF hasTEat to do 
"witEltTlf we ourselves do not conform to nature ; that 
is, are no longer savages ? Compare ourselves, for 
instance, "wiffiTEeTSEabitaSts of India or Ethiopia, who 
are said to have retained their primitive manners and 


igo DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

wild habits. You would scarcely think that these people 
were even of the same species as ourselves. This trans- 
formation of life, and change of manners and customs 
by civilisation, has been accompanied, in my opinion, by 
an immeasurable increase of suffering. Sa.va.crp.a Tiever 
wish to commit suicide, nor does their imagination ever 
induce them to regard"'9eath as a"~desirable " thtPg ^ ^ 
whereas we'wh o"aTe"liivilised wish for i'E^andjCTset^aLgg^ 
voluntarily seek it. 

~~]Srow7iFman be permitted to live unnaturally, and be 
consec[uently unhappy, why may he not also die unnatu- 
rally ? For death is indeed the only way by which he 
can deliver himself from the unhappiness that results 
from civilisation. Or, why not return to our primitive 
corldition, and state of nature ? Ah, we should find it 
almost impossible as far as mere external circumstances 
are concerned, and in the more important matters of 
the mind, quite impossible.. What is less natural than 
medicine ? By this I mean surgery, and the use of 
drugs. They are both ordinarily used expressly to com- 
bat nature, and are quite unknown to brute beasts and 
savages. Yet, since the diseases they remedy are unna- 
tural, and only occur in civilised countries, where people 
have fallen from their natural condition, these arts, 
being also unnatural, are highly esteemed and even 
indispensable. Similarly, suicide, which is a radical cure 
for the disease of despair, one of the outcomes of civilisa- 
tion, must not be blamed because it is unnatural : for^ 
unnatura,l evils require unnatural remedies. It would 
indeed be hard and unjust that reason, which increases 
our misery by forcing us to go contrary to nature, should 
in this matter join hands with nature, and take from us 
our only remaining hope and refuge, and the only 
resource consistent with itself, and should force us to 
continue in our wretchedness. 

The truth is this, Plotinus. Our primitive nature has 
departed from us for ever. Habit and reason have given 


PLOTINUS AND PORPHYRIUS. igi 

US a new nature ia place of the old one, to which we 
shall Jiever return. Formerly, it was unnatural for men 
to commit suicide, or desire death. In the present day, 
hoth are natural. They conform to our new nature, 
which however, like the old one, still impels us to seek 
our happiness. And since death is our greatest good, 
is it remarkable that men should voluntarily seek it ? 
For o ur reason. <-fi]],s r° <->'a<-. (],pq<-k ic ■nr.f^r. evil,, hut, .as, 
tbp. -rp.Tinqdy for alLfivils,, ig.tji,ejmost desirable of things. 

Now tell me : are all other actions of civilised men 
regulated by the standard of their primitive nature ? 
If so, give me a single instance. No, it is our present, 
and not our primitive nature, that interprets our actions ; 
in other words, it is our reason. Why then should 
suicide alone be judged unreasonably, and from the aspect 
of our primitive nature ? Why should this latter, which 
has no influence over our life, control our death ? Why 
should not the same reason govern our death which rules 
our life ? It is a fact, whether due to reason or our 
unhappiness, that in many people, especially those who 
are unfortunate and afflicted, the primitive hatred of 
death is extinguished, and even changed into desire and 
love, as I have said. Such love, though incompatible 
with our early nature, is a reality in the present day. 
We are also necessarily unhappy because we live unnatu- 
rally.. It were therefore manifestly unreasonable to 
assert that, the prohibition which forbade suicide iu the 
primitive state should now hold good. This seems to me 
sufficient justification of the deed. It remains to be 
proved whether or not it be useful. 

Plotinus. Never mind that side of the question, my 
dear Porphyrins, because if the deed be permissible, I 
have no doubt of its extreme utility. But I will never 
admit that a forbidden and improper action can be use- 
ful. The matter really resolves itself into this : which is 
the better, to suffer, or not to suffer? It is 'certain that 
most men would prefer suffering mixed with enjoyment. 


192 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

to a state devoid of both suffering and enjoyment, so 
ardently do we desire and thirst after joy. But this 
is beside the question, because enjoyment and pleasure, 
properly speaking, are as impossible as suffering is inevi- 
table. I mean a suffering as continuous as our never 
satisfied desire for pleasure and happiness, and quite 
apart from the peculiar and accidental sufferings which 
must infallibly be experienced by even the happiest of 
men. In truth, were we certain that in continuing to 
live, we should continue thus to suffer, we should have 
sufficient reason to prefer death to life ; because existence 
does not contain a single genuine pleasure to compensate 
for such suffering, even if that were possible. 

Porphyrius. It seems to me that ennui alone, and the 
fact that we cannot hope for an improved existenc e, are 
sufficiently cogent reasons to induce a desire for death, 
even though our condition be one of prosperity. And 
it is often a matter of surprise to me that we have 
no record of princes having committed suicide through 
ennui and weariness of' their grandeur, like other men 
in lower stations of life. "We read how Hegesias, the 
Cyrenaic, used to reason so eloquently about the miseries 
of life, that his auditors straightway went and committed 
suicide ; for which reason he was called the " death 
persuader," and was at length forbidden by Ptolemy to 
hold further discourse on the subject. Certain princes, 
it is true, have been suicides, amongst others Mithridates, 
Cleopatra, and Otho. But these all put an end to 
themselves to escape some peculiar evils, or from dread 
of an increase of misfortune. Princes are, I imagine, 
more liable than other men to feel a hatred of their 
condition, and to think favourably of suicide. Por have 
they not reached the summit of what is called human 
happiness? They have nothing to hope for, because 
they have everything that forms a part of the so-called 
good things of this life. They cannot anticipate greater 
pleasure to-morrow than they have enjoyed to-day. 


PLOTINUS AND PORPHYRIUS. 193 

Thus they are more unfortunately situated than all less 
exalted people. For the present is always sad and 
unsatisfactory ; the future alone is a source of pleasure. 

But be that as it may. We see then that there is 
nothing to prevent men voluntarily quitting life, and 
preferring death, save th e fea.r of s^nnfhpiv wm-lrl Allj 
other, reasons are palpably ill-founded. They are due 
to a wrong estimate, in comparing the advantages and 
evils of existence ; and whoever at any time feels a strong 
attachment to life, or lives in a state of contentment, 
does so imder a mistake, either of judgment, will, or 
even fact. 

Plotinus. That is true, dear Porphyrins. But never- 
theless, let me advise, nay implore, you to listen to the 
counsels of Nature rather than Eeason. Follow the 
iastiacts of that primitive Nature, mother of us all, who, 
though she has manifested no affection for us in creating 
us for unhappiness, is a less bitter and cruel foe than 
our own reason, with its boundless curiosity, specula- 
tion, chattering, dreams, ideas, and miserable learning. 
Besides, Nature has sought to diminish our unhappiness 
by concealing or disguising it from us as much as pos- 
sible. And although we are greatly changed, and the 
power of nature within us is much lessened, we are 
not so altered but that much of our former manhood 
remains, and our primitive nature is not quite stifled 
within us. In spite of all our folly, it wiU never be 
otherwise. So, too, the mistaken view of life that you 
mention, although I admit that it is in reality palpably 
erroneous, will continue to prevail. It is held not only 
by idiots and the half-witted, but by clever, wise, and 
learned men, and always will be, unless the Nature that 
made us — and not man nor his reason — herself puts an 
end to it. And I assure you that neither disgust of 
life, nor despair, nor the sense of the nullity of things, 
the vanity of all anxiety, and the insignificance of man, 
nor hatred of the world and oneself, are of long duration ; 

N 


194 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

although such dispositions of mind are perfectly reason- 
able, and the contrary unreasonable. For our physical 
condition changes momentarily in more or less degree ; 
and often without any especial cause life endears itself 
to us again, and new hopes give brightness to human 
things, which once more seem worthy of some attention, 
not indeed from our understanding, but from what may 
be termed the higher senses of the intellect. This is 
why each of us, though perfectly aware of the truth, 
continues to live in spite of Eeason, and conforms to the 
behaviour of others ; for our life is controlled by these 
senses, and not by the understanding. 

Whether suicide be reasonable, or our compromise 
with life unreasonable, the former is certainly a horrible 
and inhuman action. It were better to follow Mature, 
and remain m a n, than act l ike a monster in followi ng 
KeasonT Besides, ought we not to give some thought 
to tEe "friends, relatives, acquaintance, and people with 
whom we have been accustomed to live, and from whom 
we should thus separate for ever ? And if the thought 
of such separation be nothing to us, ought we not to 
consider their feelings ? They lose one whom they 
loved and respected; and the atrocity of his death 
enhances their grief. I know that the wise man is not 
easily moved, nor yields to pity and lamentation to a 
disquieting extent; he does not abase himself to the 
ground, shed tears immoderately, nor do other similar 
things unworthy of one who clearly understands the 
condition of humanity. But such fortitude of soul 
should be reserved for grievous circumstances that arise 
from nature, or are unavoidable ; it is an abuse of forti- 
tude to deprive ourselves for ever of the society and 
conversation of those who are dear to us. J ig is a 
^gfeg^^^aa--gal^&2LgLJwise_ man. who takes no account 
of the^grief experienced^ by hjs friends, relations, and 
agauaiiitajice s H e who scarcely troubles himseE about 
the grief his clemi would cause to his friends and famHy 


PLOTINUS AND PORPHYRIUS. 


195 


is selfish ; he cares little for others, and aU for himself. 
And truly, the suicide thinks only of himself. He 
desires nought but his personal welfare, and throws away 
all thought of the rest of the world. In sh ort, suicide. 
is an action of the most unqualified and sordid Rg-ntism . 
and is certainly th eleast attractive form of self -lo ye tha- 
exists in the world. , 

Finally, my dear Porphyrius, the troubles and evils of 
life, although many and inevitable, when, as in your case, 
unaccompanied by grievous calamity or bodily infirmity, 
are after all easy to be borne, especially by a wise and 
strong man like yourself. And indeed, life itself is of so 
httle importance, that man ought not to trouble himself 
much either to retain or abandon it; and, without 
thinking greatly about it, we ought to give the former 
instinct precedence over the latter. 

If a friend begged you to do this, why should you not 
gratify him ? 

Now I earnestly entreat you, dear Porphyrius, by the 
memory of our long friendship, put away this idea. Do 
not grieve your friends, who love you with such warm 
affection, and your Plotinus,^ who has no dearer nor better 
friend in the world. Help us to bear the burden of life, 
instead of leaving us without a thought. Let us live, 
dear Porphyrius,^ and console each other. Let us not 


^ Plotinus was bom 204 A.D. 
He began teaching philosophy in 
Rome, and was highly esteemed at 
court. Eunapius says of him, " The 
heayenly elevation of his mind, and 
his perplexed style, made him very 
tiresome and unpleasant." He was 
asc'etio in his habits ; disparaged 
patriotism ; depreciated material 
things J purposely forgot his birth- 
day ; and acted altogether rather 
as a spectator of other men's lives- 
than as a living man himself. 


He was a pupil of Plotinus, and 
like him established a school of 
philosophy at Rome. From study 
of the writings of Plotinus he fell 
into a state of disgust with life, and 
retiring from Rome, lived alone in 
a solitary and wild part of Sicily. 
Here he determined to put an end 
to his life by starvation. He was 
found by Plotinus. w ho had'f oUowed 
him from Rome, in a state rf._ex- 
"ff^^i^weakness, ji,jMi- was,_J;g„his 
wise cou nsels, dissu aded from' com- 
pietmg Ills mtention. 


196 PLOTINUS AND PORPHYRIUS. 

refuse our share of the sufferings of humanity, apportioned 
to us by destiny. Let us cling to each other with mutual 
encouragement, and hand in hand strengthen one another 
better to bear the troubles of life. Our time after all 
wUl be short ; and when death comes, we will not com- 
plain. In the last hour, our friends and companions will 
comfort ms, and we shall be gladdened by the thought 
that after death we shall still live in their memory, and 
be loved by them. 


( 197 ) 


COMPARISON OF THE LAST WORDS OF 
MARCUS BRUTUS AND THEOPHRASTUS. 


i THINK, in all ancient history there can be found no 
words more lamentable and terrifying, yet withal, speaking 
humanly, more true, than those uttered by Marcus Brutus 
shortly before death, in disparagement of virtue. This is 
what, according to Dionysius Cassius, he is reported to have 
said : — 

" miserable virtue ! Thou art but a mere phrase, 
and I have followed thee, as though thou wert a reality. 
Fate is stronger than thee. 

ir'lutarch, in his life of Brutus, makes no mention of 
this, which has induced Pier Vettori to conclude that 
Cassius has here taken licence in prose often accorded to 
poetry. But its truth is confirmed by the witness of 
Florus, who states that Brutus, when at the point of death, 
exclaimed, that virtue was " an - expression, and not a 
jreality." 

Many people are shocked at those words of Brutus, 
and blame him for uttering them. They infer from their 
meaning, either that virtue is a sealed book to them, or 
else that they have never experienced ill-fortune. The 
former inference alone is credible. In any case, it is 
certain they but slightly understand, and stUl less realise 
the unhappiness of human affairs, or else they stupidly 
wonder why the doctrines of Christianity were not in 
force before the time of Christ. 


198 COMPARISON OF THE LAST WORDS OF 

Other people interpret these words as demonstrating 
that Brutus was not after all the nohle and pious man 
he' was supposed to have been. They imagine that just 
before death he threw off the mask. But they are wrong ; 
and if they give Brutus credit for sincerity in uttering 
these words in repudiation of virtue, let them consider 
how it were possible for him to abandon what he never 
possessed, or to disassociate himself from that with which 
he never had any association. If they think he was 
insincere, and spoke designedly and with ostentation, let 
them explain what object he could have in speaking vain 
and fallacious words, and immediately afterwards acting 
in accordance with them? Are facts deniable, simply 
because they are not in harmony with words ? 

Brutus was a man overwhelmed by a great and 
unavoidable catastrophe. He was diRhea.rte ned. and 
wearied,with life ar ri ,forf,i^jip_j.Tirl having abandonedall 
desires and hopes, the deceitfulness of which he had 
experienced, he determined to ta.kp. bis Hpgf-.iny int.n his 
own hands, and t,f> pnt. an p.nrl |,f) bis iin happiness. 
Why should he, at the very moment of eternal separation 
from his fellows, trouble to hunt the phantom of glory, 
and study to give forth words and thoughts to deceive 
those around him, and to gain human esteem, when he 
was about to leave humanity for ever ? What was it to 
him that he might gain a reputation on that earth which 
appeared so hateful and contemptible to him ? 

These words of Brutus are well known to most of us. 
The following utterance of Theophrastus at the point of 
death is, I believe, less known, though very worthy of con- 
sideration. It forms a parallel with that of Brutus, both 
as to its substance and time of delivery. Diogenes 
Laertius mentions it, not, in my opinion, as original to 
himself, but as an extract from some more ancient and 
important work. He says that Theophrastus, just before 
death, being asked by his disciples whether he would leave 
them any token or words of advice, replied : 


MARCUS BRUTUS AND THEOPHRASTUS. 199 
" J^One, exr .fipt. t.llflt, Tnan rlpgpi"gpg_-and— i^jopfg m^m^j 

pleasures for the sake of, glory. But no sooner does jip. 
begin to live than death overtakes him. Hence the Icffle~ 
of glory is as fa tal a_thing..,as.-pQRsihlfi. _Stri ve to live 
happily : a bandon studies , which are a weariness ; or 
c ultivate them only so that thev mav Prmp; you tame . 
Life is more vain than useful. As for me, I have no 
time to think more about it; you must study what is 
most expedient." So saying, he died. 

Other sayings of Theophrastus on this occasion are 
mentioned by Cicero and St. Jerome. These are better 
known, but have nothing to do with our subject. 

It would seem that Theophrastus lived to the age of 
more than a hundred, having devoted all his lifetime to 
study and writing, and having been an unwearied pursuer 
of glory. Suidas says that his death was due to the 
excess of his studies, and that he died surrounded by ■ 
about two thousand of his disciples and followers, rever- 
enced for his wisdom throughout the whole of Greece, 
regretting his pursuit of glory, just as Brutus repented of 
virtue. These two words , glory and vi rtue, were by the 
ancients regarded as almost synonymous in meaning, 
though it is not so in the present day. Theophrastus 
did not indeed say that glory is more frequently a matter 
of f6rtune than merit, which is oftener true now than in 
former times ; but had he said so, there would have been 
no difference between his idea and that of Brutus. 

Such abjurations, or rather apostasies, of those noble 
errors which beautify, nay compose our very life, are of 
daily occurrence. They are due to the fact that the 
. human intelligence in process of time discovers, not only 
the nakedness, but even the skeleton of things : wisdom 
also, which was regarded by the ancients as the consola- 
tion and chief cure for our unhappiness, has been obliged 
to impeach our condition, aind almost requires a consola- 
tion for itself, since had not men followed it, they would 
not have known the greatness of their misfortune, or at 


200 COMPARISON OF THE LAST WORDS OF 

least would have been able to remedy it with hope. But 
the ancients used to believe, according to the teaching 
of Nature, that things were things, and not appearances, 
and that human Hfe was destined to partake of happiness 
as well as unhappiness. Consequently, such apostasies 
as these were very rare, and were the result not of pas- 
sions and vices, but of a sentiment and realisation of the 
truth of things. Therefore they deserve careful and philo- 
sophical consideration. 

The words of Theophrastus are the more surprising ■ 
when we think of the circumstances in which he died. 
He was prosperous and successful; and it would seem as 
though he could not have a single cause for regret. , His 
chief aim, glory, he had succeeded in acquiring long ago. 
The utterance of Brutus, on the other hand, was one of 
those inspirations of misfortune which sometimes open 
out a new world to our minds, and persuade us of truths 
that require a long time for the mere intelligence to dis- 
cover. Misfortune may indeed be compared in its effect 
to the frenzy of lyric poets, who at a glance, as if situated 
in a lofty place, take in as much of the domain of human 
knowledge as requires many centuries before it be dis- 
cerned by philosophers. In almost all ancient writings 
(whether philosophical, poetical, historical, or aught else), 
we meet with many very sorrowful expressions, common 
enough to us nowadays, but strange to the people of those 
times. These sentences, however, were mostly due to the 
innate or accidental misfortune of the writer, or the 
persons who spoke them, whether imaginary or real, 
And r arely we find on t he monuments of the ancients 
any expression ot the sadness or ennui which theyTelt 


b etiaufee ot the unreaiitv of happiness, or their misfortune's, 
whether natural, or due to force of circumstances. For 
wBenl;hey suffered, they lamented their sufferings as the 
only hindrance to their happiness, which they not only 
considered it possible to obtain, but even man's right, 
although Fate proved sometimes too strong. 


MARCUS BRUTUS AND THEOPHRASTUS. 201 

Now, let us seek what could have placed in the mind 
of Theophrastus this sentiment about the vanity of glory 
and life, which, considering his epoch and nation, is an 
extraordinary one. In the first place, we find that the 
studies of this philosopher were not limited to one or 
two branches of science. The record of his writings, 
which are mostly lost, informs us that his knowledge 
included little less than everything then knowable. And 
this universal science was not like that of Plato, subor- 
dinated to his imagination, but conformed to the teaching 
of Aristotle in being the result of experience and reason ; 
its aim, too, was not the discovery of the beautiful, but 
.that which is its especial contrary, the useful. This 
being so, it is not wonderful that Theophrastus should 
attain to the height of human wisdom, — that is^_a_know- 
l edge of the vamty of life. ^EJ^JSS.'^o^^ itself. For it is 
a fact that the numerous discoveries made recently by 
philosophers about the nature of men and things, are 
chiefly the result of a comparison and synthesis of the 
different sciences and studies, whereby the mutual con- 
nection between the most distant parts of nature is 
demonstrated. 

Besides, from his book of " Characters " we learn how 
clearly Theophrastus discerned the qualities and manners 
of men; indeed, with the exception of the poets, very 
few ancient writers equal him in this respect. And this 
faculty is the sure sign of a mind capable of numerous, 
diverse, and powerful sensations. For, to produce a keen 
representation of the moral qualities and passions of 
men, the writer relies less on what actual ■ facts he may 
have collected, or observations made, about the manners 
of others, than on his own mind, even though his 
personal habits be very different from those of his 
subjects. 

Massillon was asked one day what enabled him to 
describe so naturally the habits and feelings of men, who, 
like himself, lived more in solitude than society. He 


202 COMPARISON OF THE LAST WORDS OF 

replied : " I contemplate myself." Dramatists and other 
poets do the same thing. Now a many-sided mind, 
subtle in discernment. cannorbutJfifiiihp'^-"fVff|T"^''° anTT-- 


"aTJsolute unha nniness of l if e ;. it acquires a tendency to 
sadness a!fter "meditation excited by numerous studies, 
especially such as are concerned with the very essence 
of things, like the speculative sciences. 

It is certain that Theophrastus, who loved study and 
glory above everything, and was master or rather founder 
of a very numerous school, knew and formally announced 
the uselessness._of-Jiuman exertions, including his own 
teaching and that of others ; the little affinity existing 
between virtue and happiness of life ; and the superior 
power of fortune to merit in the acquirement of happi- 
ness, equally among the wise and others. In this 
respect, perhaps, he was superior to all the Greek philo- 
sophers, especially those preceding Epicurus, from whom 
both in manners and thought he was essentially different. 
This is owing partly to circumstances already mentioned, 
and is also due to other things referred to by ancient 
writers on the subject of his teaching. It would seem 
as though his own fate has proved the truth of his 
doctrine. For he is not esteemed by modern philoso- 
phers as he ought to be, since all his moral writings are 
lost, with the exception of his " Characters." His 
writings, too, on the subjects of politics and laws, and 
almost all those relating to metaphysics, are also missing. 
Besides, the ancient philosophers were little inclined to 
give him credit for keener perception than they pos- 
sessed ; on the contrary, many of them, especially such 
as were shallow and conceited, blamed and ill-t*eated 
him. These men taught that the wise man is essentially 
happy, and that virtue and wisdom suffice to procure 
happiness; although they were only too weU aware of 
the contrary, even supposing they had any real know- 
ledge of either the one or the other. Philosophers will 
never be cured of this idea. Even the philosophy of 


MARCUS BRUTUS AND THBOPHRASTUS. 203 

the present day teaches the same thing ; whereas, correctly 
speaking, it can only say that everything beautiful, 
delightful, and great, is mere falsity and nothingness. 

But to return to Theophrastus. Most of the ancients 
were incapable of the profound and sorrowful sentiment 
that inspired him. "Theophrastus is roughly handled 
by all the philosophers in their writings and schools for 
having praised this saying of Callisthenes : ' Fortune, 
not wisdom, is the mistress of life.' They consider that 
no philosopher ever gave expression to a weaker senti- 
ment." So says Cicero, who in another place remarks 
that Theophrastus in his book about " The Happy Life," 
attributed much influence to fortune, which he' considered 
a most important factor of happiness. Again, he adds, 
" Let us make much use of Theophrastus ; but give 
virtue more reality and value than he gave to it." 

Perhaps it may be imagined from these remarks that 
Theophrastus had little sympathy with the weaknesses of 
human nature, and that he waged war against their influ- 
ence in public and private life, both by his writings and 
actions. It might also be thought that he would restrict 
the empire of the imagination in favour of that of reason. 
As a matter of fact, he did just the contrary. Concerning 
his actions, we read in Plutarch's book against Colotes 
that our philosopher twice freed his country from a 
tyranny. As for his teachings, Cicero says that Theo- 
phrastus in a writing on the subject of " Wealth," dilated 
at considerable length on the advantages of magnificence 
and pomp at the shows and national festivals ; indeed he 
considered the chief usefulness of riches to lie in the 
consequent power of expenditure that accompanied them. 
This idea is blamed and ridiculed by Cicero, with whom, 
however, I will not discuss the question, for his superficial 
knowledge of philosophy might have easily led him to a 
wrong conclusion. I imagine Cicero to have been a man 
rich in civil and domestic virtues, but ignorant of the 
greatest stimulants a;nd bulwarks of virtue that the world 


204 COMPARISON OF THE LAST WORDS OF 

possesses, namely, those things that are peculiarly adapted 
to excite and arouse the mind, and exercise the powers 
of the imagination. 

I -wlLL mer ely say that those men among the ancients 
and mode rns who knew best and realised -mnst, st.Tnngly 
aM~ ^epiy the nullity of e.vp:Tvth.mp^^r,c{ f.he fnrcfi of 
tr uth, have not "niv rp. f rainpri frnm PTirlnn.vnnring t.n 
lead others to their condition, but have even laboured har d 
to conceal-aBd-f'^"7 '""°" ^^nfrf^ t.hpmgpli^pa They acted 
like men who had learnt from experience the wretch ed- 
ness that resulted from wisdom and knowledge . Many 
celebrated examples of this are furnished, especially in 
recent times. Truly, if our philosophers f uUy understood 
what they endeavour to teach, and realised in their own 
persons the consequences of their philosophy, instead of 
welc oming their knowledge, they would hate and ab hor 
it/__ The y_would strive to forget what they kno w, and io 
shut their eyes to that which th ey see. They would 
take refuge, as their best resource, in those swee t 
unre alities, which N'ature herself has placed in all-o ur 
mmd s • nor wo uld they think it well to enforce on 
others th e doctrine of the n othingness of all thjngs. If, 
howeveff^esire of glory should mcite them to do this 
last, they will admit that in this part of the universe 
we can only live by putting faith in things that are non- 
existent. 

There is another considerable difference between the 
circumstances of Theophrastus and Brutus, that of time. 
When Theophrastus lived, the influence of those fictions 
and phantoms which ruled the thoughts and actions of 
the ancients, had not departed. The epoch of Brutu s, 
'nthe other hand, mav be .. termed-th e. last age ojT the^ 
imagifl.atiifm.. Knowledge and experience of the truth 
prevailed amongst the people. Had-itj iQt been^ g Brutus 
need jot hav efled from life as he did, and thTEoman 
r epublic w ou^^^ H iavc di(\ dwifJThi7¥ r — 2!md^ot only 
the republic, but also the whole of antiquity, that is, the 


A 


MARCUS BRUTUS AND THEOPHRASTUS. 205 

old customs and characteristics of the civilised world, were 
at the point of d eath, together with the opinions- which 
gave birth to, and supported them. Life had already 
lost its value, and w ise men sought to console themselves 
not so much for ttieir tate as tor existe nce itself ; because 
they regarded it as incredible that man should be born 
essentially and solely for misery. Thus thev arrived at 
the conception of another life, which might explain the 

TPggriT^ nf ^2^TrhTft_ fi,Tir) n/rthlo gti'fijj^-ns. Such explanation 

had hitherto been found in life itself, but was so no 
longer, nor was it ever again to be found there. 

To these ideas of futurity are due the noble senti- 
ments often expressed by Cicero, especially in his oration 
for Archias. 


( 2o6 ) 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN TRISTANO 
AND' A FRIEND. 


Friend. I have read your book. It is as melancholy 
as usual. 

Tristano. Yes, as usual. 

Friend. M elancholY.. Hi sp.nnHnlat.fi^ hnpp.lf.pfj, Tt, is p.l^ar^ 
that this lifea p pears to you an ab "Tnina.]-)]f» tkino- 

Tristano. How can I excuse myself ? I was then so 
firmly convinced of the truth of my notion about the 
unhappiness of life. 

Friend. Unhappy it may be. But even then, what 
good ... 

Tristano. No, no; on the contrary , it is Yei;y b fippy 
I hav e changed- my opinion now . But when I wrote 
this book I had that folly in my head, a,s I tell you. 
And I was so full of it, that I should have expected 
anything rather than to doubt the truth of what I wrote 
on the subject. Por I thought the conscience of every 
reader would assuredly bear witness to the truth of my 
statements. I imagined there might be differences of 
opinion as to the use or harm of my writings, but none 
as to their truth. I also believed that my lamentations, 
since they were aroused by misfortunes common to all, 
would be echoed in the heart of every one who heard 
them. And when I afterwards felt impelled to deny, not , 
merely some particular observation, but the whole fabric 
of my book, and to say that life is not unhappy, and that 


TRISTAN O AND A FRIEND. 207 

if it seemed so to me, it must have been the effect of 
illness, or some other misfortune peculiar to myself, I 
was at first amazed, astonished, petrified, and for several 
days as though transported into another world. Then I 
began to think, and was a little irritated with myself. 
Finally I laughed, and said to myself that the human 
race possesses a characteristic common to husbands. Por 
a married man who wishes to live a quiet life, relies on 
the fidelity of his wife, even when half the world knows 
she is faithless. Similarly, when a man takes up his 
abode in any country, he makes up his mind to regard it 
as one of the best countries in the world, and he does so. 
For the same reason, men, desiring to live, agree to con- 
sider life a delightful and valuable thing ; they therefore 
believe it to be so, and are angry with whoever is of the 
contrary opinion. Hence it follows, that in reality 
people always believe, not the truth, but what is, or 
appears to be, best for them. The human race, which 
has believed, and will continue to put faith in . so many 
absurdities, will never ack nowle dge that it knows nothing, 
that it is nothing, and that it has nothing to hope . No 
philosopher teaching any one of these three things would 
be successful, nor would he have followers, and the popu- 
lace especially would refuse to believe in him. For, 
apart from the fact that aU three doctrines have little to 
recommend them to any one who wishes to live, the two 
first offend man's pride, and they all require courage and 
strength of mind in him who accepts them. Now, men 
are cowards, of ignoble and narrow minds, and always 
anticipating good, because always ready to vary their 
ideas of good according to the necessities of life. They 
are very willing, as Petrarch says, to surrender to fortune ; 
very eager and determined to console themselves in any 
misfortune ; and to accept any compensation in exchange 
for what is denied them, or for that which they have lost ; 
and to accommodate themselves to any condition of life, 
however wicked and barbarous. When deprived of any 


DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

desirable thing, they nourish thp.m selves on illusions. 
from which they derive as much satisfaction as if their 
conceptions were the most genuine and real things in the 
world. As for me, I cannot refrain from laughing at tTie 
human race, enam oured of life, just as the people in the 
""south of Europe laugh at husbands enamoured of faithless 
wives. I consider men show very little courage in i;hus 
allowing themselves to be deceived and deluded like 
fools; they are not only content to bear the greatest 
sufferings, but also are willing to be as it were puppets 
of Nature and Destiny. I here refer to the deceptions of 
the intellect, not the imagination. Whether these senti- 
ments of mine are the result of illness, I do not know ; 
but I do know that, well or ill, I despise men's c^ 
I reject e very ,phjl,jl^^h^ consola tion arS"musiYe comfort, 
and am courageous e noug h to beaTTSe" deprivation of 
every hope, to look steadily on t he desert ^ofli f e, to hi de 

^opMt of ourjmn^^lj^^^ii'i t°-.iSS§Ei,,.SlLi^£,-^S5i' 
quences of a philosophy, sorrowful but true. This philo- 
sophy, if of no other use, gives the courageous man 
the proud satisfaction of being able to rend asunder the 
cloak that conceals the hidden and mysterious cruelty of 
human destiny. 

This I said to myself, almost as though I were the 
inventor of this bitter philosophy, which I saw rejected 
by every one as a new and unheard-of thing. But, on 
reflection, I found that it dated from the time of Solomon, 
Homer, and the most ancient poets and philosophers, 
who abound with fables and sayings which express the 
unhappiness of human life. One says that " man is the 
most miserable of the animals." Another that, " it were 
better not to be born, or, being born, to die in the cradle." 
Again, "whom the gods love, die young;" besides number- 
less other similar sayings. ' And I also remembered that 
from then even until now, all poets, philosophers, and 
writers, great and small, have in one way or another 
echoed and confirmed the same doctrines. 


TRISTANO AND A FRIEND. 209 

Then I began to think again, and spent a long time 
in a state of wonder, contempt, and laughter. At length 
I tu rned to study the^ matter m ore deeply, and cajoa to 
tS e"_conclusion that man^ unhappiness is one of the 
innate err ors of the mind, and that the refutation of 
th is idea, through the demonstration of the happiness of 
life, i s one of the greatest discoveries of the nineteenth 
cen^ryTTTow, therefore, I am at peace, and confess I 
was wrong to hold the views I previously held. 

Friend. Then have you changed your opinion ? 

Tristano. Of course. Do you imagine I should oppose 
the discoveries of the nineteenth century ? 

Friend. Do you believe all the century believes ? 

Tristano. Certainly. Why not ? 

Friend. You believe then in the infinite perfectibility 
of the human race, do you not ? 

Tristano. Undoubtedly. 

Friend. Do you also believe that the human race 
actually progresses daily ? 

Tristano. Assuredly. It is true that sometimes I 
think one of the ancients was physically worth four of us. 
And the body is the man ; because (apart from all else) 
high-mindedness, courage, the passions, capacity for action 
and enjoyment, and all that ennobles and vivifies life, 
depend on the vigour of the body, without which they 
cannot exist. The weak man is not a man, but a child, 
and less than a chUd, because it is his fate to stand aside 
and see others live. AU he can do is to chatter. Life 
is not for him. Hence in olden times, and even in more 
enlightened ages, weakness of bod y _was _regurdgi_aa. 
ignominious. 

' JbJufwith us, it is very long since education deigned to 
think of such a base and abject thing as the body. The 
mind is its sole care. Yet, in its endeavours to cultivate 
the mind, it 'destroys the body without perceiving that 
the former is also necessarily destroyed. And even if it 
were possible to remedy this false system of education, it 


210 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

would be impossible to discover, without a radical change 
in the state of modern society, any cure for the other 
inconveniences of life, whether public or private. 

Everything that formerly tended to preserve and per- 
fect the body, seems to-day to be in conspiracy for its 
destruction. The consequence is, that, compared with 
the ancients, we are little better than children, and they in 
comparison with us may indeed be terraed perfect men. 
I refer equally to individuals in comparison with in- 
dividuals, as to the masses (to use this most expressive 
modern term) compared to the masses. 

I will add also that the superior vigoux of.the ancient s 
is manifested in their moral and metaphysical systems. 

But I do not allow myself to be influenced by such 
trifling objections, and I firmly believe that the human 
race is perpetually in a state of progression. 

Friend. You believe also, if I rightly understand you, 
that knowledge, or, as it is called, enlightenment, continu- 
ally increases. 

Tristano. Assuredly. Although I observe that the 
desire of knowledge grows in proportion as the apprecia- 
tion for study diminishes. And, astonishing to say, if 
you count up the number ' of truly learned men who 
lived contemporaneously a hundred and fifty years ago, 
or even later, you will find them incomparably more 
numerous than at present. It may perhaps be said that 
learned -people are-rare-^owadaya. because knowl edge is 
more univer sally, digsfimiaatedr-uistead oTbeiiig''cSQ5ned 
to the heads of a few ; and that the multitude of edu- 
cated people compensate for the rarity of learned people. 
But knowledge is not like riches, which whether divided 
or accumulated, always make the same total. In a c ountry 
where e very_oneknows_ a little, th e total '^Enowledgel s' 
small ;^ ^ because" knowledge begets knowledge, but will not 
bear dispersion. For superficial instruction cannot indeed 
be divided amongst many, though it may be common to 
many unlearned men. Genuine knowledge belongs only 


TRISTANO AND A FRIEND. 2rr 

to the learned, and depth in knowledge to the few that 
are very learned. And, with rare exceptions, only the 
man who is very learned, and possessed of an immense 
fund of knowledge, is able to add materially to the 
sum of human science. Now, in the present time, it is 
daily more difficult to discover a really learned man, 
save pei-haps in Germany, where science is not yet 
dethroned. 

I utter these reflections simply for the sake of a little 
talk and phUosophisiug, not because I doubt for a single 
moment the truth of what you say. Indeed, were I to 
see the world quite full of ignorant impostors on the one 
hand, and presumptuous fools on the other, I should still 
hold to my present belief that knowledge and enlighten- 
ment are on the increase. 

Friend. Of course, then, you believe that this century 
is superior to all the preceding ones ? 

Tristano. Decidedly. All the centuries have had this 
opinion of themselves ; even those of the most barbarous 
ages. The present century thinks so, and I agree with 
it. But if you asked me in what it is superior to the 
others, and whether in things pertaining to the body or 
the mind, I should refer you to what I said just now on 
the subject of progress. 

Friend. In short, to sum it up in two words, do you 
agree with what the journals say about nature, and human 
destiny ? We are not now talking of literature or politics, 
on which subjects their opinion is indisputable. 

Tristano. Precisely. I bow before the profound philo- 
sophy of the journals, which will in time supersede every 
other branch of literature, and every serious and exacting 
study. The journals are the guides and lights of the 
present age. Is it not so ? 

Friend. Very true. Unless yo u are speaking ironically . 
YOU have hp.c.nmp. one of us . 

Tristano. Yes. Certainly I have. 

Friend. Then what shall you do with your book ? Will 


212 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

you allow it to go down to posterity, conveyiug doctrines 
so contrary to the opinions you now hold ? 

Tristano. To posterity? Permit me to laugh, since 
you are no doubt joking ; if I thought otherwise, I should 
laugh all the more. For it is not a personal matter, but 
one relating to the individuals and individual things of 
the nineteenth century; about whom and which there 
is no fear of the judgment of posterity, since they wiU 
know no more about the matter than their ancestors 
knew. " Individuals are eclipsed in the crowd," as our 
modern thinkers elegantly say ; which means, that the 
individual need not put himself to any inconvenience, 
because, whatever his merit, he can neither hope for the 
miserable reward of glory, in reality, nor in his dreams. 

Leave therefore the masses to themselves ; although I 
wotild ask the wiseacres who illumine the world in the 
present day, to explain how the masses can do anything 
without the help of the individuals that compose them. 

But to return to my book, and posterity. Books now 
are generally written in less time than is necessary for 
reading them. Their worth is proportioned to their cost, 
and their longevity to their value. It is my opinion 
that the twentieth century will make a very clean sweep 
of the immense bibliography of the nineteenth. Perhaps 
however it will say something to this effect : " We have 
here whole libraries of books which have cost some 
twenty, some thirty years of labour, and some less, but 
all have required very great exertion ; let us read these 
first, because it is probable there is much to be learnt 
from them. These at an end, we will pass to lighter 
literature." 

My friend, this is a puerile age, and the few men re- 
maining are obliged to hide themselves for very shame, 
resembling, as they do, a well-formed man in a land of 
cripples. And these good youths of the century are 
desirous of doing all that their ancestors did. Like 
children they wish to act on the spur of the moment, 


TRISTANO AND A FRIEND. 213 

without any laborious preparation. They would like 
the progress of the age to be such as to exempt them 
and their successors from all fatiguing study and appli- 
cation in the acquirement of knowledge. For instance, 
a commercial friend of mine told me the other day that 
even mediocrity has become very rare. Scarcely any one 
is fit to fulfil properly the duty which devolves upon 
him, either by necessity or choice. This seems to me 
to mark the true 'distinction between this century and 
the preceding ones. At all times greatness has been 
rare ; b ut in fo rmer centuries medjocnty prevailed, 
where as m oux.7cfia.taxry niilljfjy .prpygjls. All people 
wish To be everything. Hence, there is such confusion 
and riot, that no attention is paid to the few great men 
who are still to be found, and who are unable to force 
a way through the vast multitude of rivals. Thus, 
whilst the lowest people believe themselves illustrious, 
obscurity and success in nothing is the common fate 
both of the highest and lowest. 

But, long live statistics ! Long live the sciences, 
economical, moral, and political; the pocket encyclo- 
paedias; the manuals of everything; and aU the other 
fine creations of our age ! And may the nineteenth 
century live for ever! For though poor in results, it 
is yet very rich and great in promise, which is well 
known to be the best of signs. Let us therefore console 
ourselves that for sixty-six^ more years this admirable 
century will have the talking to itself, and will be able 
to utter its own opinions. 

Friend. You speak, it seems, somewhat ironically. 
But you ought at least to remember that this is a 
century of transition. 

Tristano. What do you infer from that ? All centuries 
have been, and will be, more or less transitional ; because 
human society is never stationary, and will never at any 
time attain to a fixed condition. It follows therefore 

^ Written iu 1834. 


214 DIALOGUE BETWEEN 

that this fine word is either no excuse for the nineteenth 
century, or is one common to all the centuries. It 
remains to be seen whether the transition now in pro- 
gress is from good to better, or from bad to worse. 

But perhaps you mean to say that the present age is 
especially transitional, inasmuch as it is a rapid pas- 
sage from one state of civilisation to another, absolutely 
different. In which case I would ask your permission 
to laugh at this rapidity. Every transition requires a 
certain amount of time, and when too rapidly accom- 
plished, invariably relapses, and the progress has to 
recommence from the very beginning. Thus it has 
always been. For nature does not advance by leaps; 
and when forced, no durable result is obtained. In short, 
precipitous transitions are only apparent transitions, and 
do not represent genuine progress. 

Friend. I advise you not to talk in this fashion 
with every one, because if you do you will gain many 
enemies. 

Tristano. What does it matter ? Henceforth, neither 
enemies nor friends can do me much harm. 

Friend. Very probably you will be despised as one 
incapable of comprehending the spirit of modern philo- 
sophy, and who cares little for the progress of civilisation 
and the sciences. 

Tristano. I should be very sorry for that; but what 
can I do ? If I am despised, I will endeavour to console 
myself. 

Friend. But have you, or have you not, changed your 
opinions ? And what is to be done about your book ? 

Tristano. It would be best to burn it. If it be not 
burnt, it may be preserved as a book full of poetic 
dreams, inventions, and melancholy caprices ; or better, 
as an expression of the unhappiness of the writer. 
Because, I will tell you in confidence, my dear friend, 
that I believe you and every one else to be happy. As 
for myself, however, with your permission, and that of 


TRISTANO AND A FRIEND. 215 

the centur y, I am very unhappy, and all the journals of 
both worlds cannot persuade me to!~tEe " contrary. 
• Friend. I do not know the cause of this unhappiness 
of which you speak. But a man is the best judge of 
his own happiness or unhappiness, and his opinion 
cannot be wrong. 

Tristano. Very true. And more, I tell you frankly 
that I do not submit to my unhappiness, nor bow the 
head, and come to terms with Destiny, like other men. 
I ardently wish for death above eyg r yt.hing , with such 
warmtk and sincerity as I firmly believe few have 
desired it. 

I would not speak to you thus, if I were not sure 
that when the time came I should not belie my words. 
I may add that although I do not yet foresee the end 
of my life, I have an inward feeling that almost assures 
me the hour of which I speak is not far distant. I am 
more than ripe for death, and it seems to me too absurd 
and improbable, that being dea4 spiritually, as I am, and 
the tale of my life being told in every part, I should linger 
out the forty or fifty years with which Nature threatens 
me. I am terrified at the mere thought of such a thing. 
But, like all evils that exceed the power of imagination, 
this seems to me a dream and illusion, devoid of truth. 
So that if any one speaks to me about the distant future, 
as though I were to have a part in it, I cannot help 
smiling to myself, so sure am I that I have not long to 
live. This thought, I may say, alone supports me. 
Boo ks and studies, which I often wonder I ever loved , 
jfreat designs, and hopes of glory and immortaIity ,_ are_ 
thingajxaw-undes erving of even a smile. ^ Nor do t now 
laugh at the projects and hopes of this century. I 
cordially wish them every possible success, and I praise, 
admire, and sincerely honour their good intentions. But 
I do not envy posterity, nor those who have still a long 
life before them. Formerly I used to envy fools, 
imbeciles, and people with a high opinion of themselves, 


2i6 DIALOGUE BETWEEN TRISTANO AND A FRIEND. 

and I would willingly have changed my lot with any 
one of them. Now, I envy neither fools, nor the wise, 
the great, the small, the weak, the powerful. I envy^ 
Jjhe dead, and with them alone w ou ld I exchangfi .B]xiQt.. 
Every pleasurable fancy, every thought of the future 
that comes to me in my solitude, and with which I pass 
away the time, is allied with the thought of death, from 
which it is inseparable. And in this longing, neither 
the remembrance of my childish dreams, nor the thought 
of having lived in vain, disturbs me any more as formerly. 
When death comes to me, I shall die as peacefully and 
contentedly as if it were the only thing for which I had 
ever wished in the world. This is the sole prospect that 
reconciles me to Destiny. 

If, on the one hand, I were offered the fortune and 
fame of Caesar or Alexander, free from the least stain ; 
and, on the other hand , death to-day. I should unhesi- 
tatingly choose to digjin-day 


THE END. 


PRINTED BY BALANTYNE, HANSON AND CO. 
EDINEUKaH AND LONDON, 


CATALOGUE OF IMPORTANT ¥OEKS, 

PUBLISHED BY 

57 AND 59 LUDGATE HILL. 


AFRICA. — Map op Sodth Aprioa; Containing Cape Colony, Griqualand, Kaffraria, 
Zululand, Natal, Transvaal, Orange Free State, and other Territories. Compiled 
from the best available Colonial an^ Imperial Information, and from the Official 
Map recently compiled by the Surveyor-General, Cape Town. By T. B. John- 
ston, F.E.G.S., F.K.S.E., &c., Geographer to the Queen. In Sheet, 12s. 6d. ; 
in Cloth Case, 15s. j on Boiler, Varnished, 15s. 

AGASSIZ.— An Essay on Classipioation. By Louis Agassiz. 8vo, pp. vii. and 
381, cloth. 1859. 12s. 

AHI^ABDT. — The Divans op the Six Ancient Akabio Poets, Ennabiga, 'Ahtaea, 
Tharafa, Zuhais, 'Alqitama, and Imrdulquais ;■ chiefly according to the MSS. 
of Paris, Gotha, and Leyden, and the Collection of their Fragments, with a 
List of the various Readings of the Text. Edited by W. Ahlwardt, Professor 
of Oriental Languages at the University of Greif swald. Demy 8vo, pp. xxx. and 
340, sewed. 1870. 12a. 

AHN. — Pbaotioal Grammae op the German LAsaoAGE. By Dr. F. Ahn. A New 
Edition. By Dr. Dawson Turner, and Prof. F. L. Weinmann. Crown 8vo, pp. 
cxii and 430, cloth. 1878. 3s. 6d. 

AHN.— New, Peaoticai., and East Method op Lbaknino the German Language. By 
Dr. F. Ahn. First and Second Course. Bound in 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 86 and 120, 
cloth. 1866. 3s. 

AHN.— Key to Ditto. 12mo, pp. 40, sewed. 8d. 

AHN. — Manual of German and Enqiish Conversations, or Tade Mecum for Eng- 
lish Travellers. 12mo, pp. x. and 137, cloth. 1875. Is. 6d. 

AHN. — German Commercial Letter Writer, with Explanatory Introductions in 
English, and an Index of Words in French and English. By Dr. F. Ahn. 12mo. 
pp. 248, cloth. 1861. 4s. 6d. 

AHN. — New, Praotioal, and Easy Method op Learning the Frehoh Language. 
By Dr. F. Ahn. First Course and Second Course. 12mo, cloth. Each Is. 6d. The 
Two Courses in 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 114 and 170, cloth. 1865i 3s. 

AHN.— New, Pbaotioal, and Easy Method op Learning the French Language. 
Third Course, containing a French Reader, with Notes and Vocabulary. By H. 
W. EhrUch. 12mo, pp. viii. and 125, cloth. 1866. Is. 6d. 

AHN. — Manual op French and English Conversations, for the use op Schools 
AND Travellers. By Dr. F. Ahn. 12mo, pp. viii. and 200, cloth. 1862. 2s. 6d. 

AHN. — French Commercial Letter WwIbr. By Dr. F. Ahn, Second Edition. 
12mo, pp. 228, cloth. 1866. 4s. 6d. 

A 


2 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

AHN.— Net, Practical, ahd East Method op Learsino the Italiak Lanquaoe. 
By Dr. F. Ahn. First and Second Course. 12mo, pp. 198, cloth. 1872. • 3s. 6d. 

AHN.— Key to Ditto. 12mo, pp. 22, sewed. 1865. Is. 

AHN. — New, Practical, and Easy Method op Learniko the Dutch Lahqfaoe, 
being a complete Grammar, with Selections. By Dr. F. Ahn. 12mo, pp. viii. 
and 166, cloth. 1862. 3s. 6d. 

AHN. — Ahs's Course. Latin Grammar for Beginners. By W. Ihne, Ph.D. 12mo, 
pp. vi. and 184, cloth. 1864. 3s. 

ALABASTEK.— The Wheel of the Law : Buddhism illustrated from Siamese 
Soxirces by the Modern Buddhist, a Life of Buddha, and an Account of the Fhra 
Bat. By Henry Alabaster, Esq., Interpreter of Her Majesty's Consulate-General 
in Siam, Member of the Boyal Asiatic Society. Demy 8to, pp. Iriii. and 324, 
cloth. 1871. 14s. 

ALLEN.— The Colour Sense. See English and Foreign Philosophical Library, 
Vol. X. 

ALLIBONE. — A Ceitical Dictionary of English Litbkatuee and Bkitish and 
American Authors (Living and Deceased). From the Earliest Accounts to the 
latter half of the 19th century. Containing over 46,000 Articles (Authors), with 
40 Indexes of subjects. By S. Austin Allibone. In 3 vols, royal 8vo, cloth. 
£5, 8s. 

ALTHAUS.— The Spas op Europe. By Julius Althaus, M.D. 8vo, pp. 516, (Sloth. 
1862. 12b. 

AMATEUR Mbohahio's 'Workshop (The). A Treatise containing Plain and Concise 
Directions for the Manipulation of Wood and Metals ; including Casting, Forg- 
ing, Brazing, Soldermg, and Carpentry. By the Author of " The Lathe and its 
Uses." Sixth Edition. Demy 8vo, pp. vi. and 148, with Two Full-Page Illus- 
trations, on toned paper and numerous Woodcuts, cloth. 1880. 6s. 

AMATEUR MECHANICAL SOCIETY.— JOURNAL OP THE AMATEUR Mechanical 
Society. 8vo. Vol. i. pp. 344 cloth. 1871-72. 12s. Vol. ii. pp. vi. nnd 290, 
cloth. 1873-77. 12s. Vol. iii. pp. iv. and 246, cloth. 1878-79. 12s. 6d. 

AMERICAN Almanac and Treasury of Facts, Statistical, Financial, and 
Political. Edited by Ainsworth E. Spofford, Librarian of Congress. Crown 
8vo, cloth. 1878, 1879, 1880, 1881. 7s. 6d. each. 

AMERY.— Notes on Forestry. By C. F. Amery, Deputy Conservator N. W. Pro- 
vinces, India. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 120, cloth. 1875. 5s. 

AMBERLEY.— An Analysis of Eeligious Belief. By Viscount Amberley. 2 vols, 
demy 8vo, pp. xvi. and 496 and 512, cloth. 1876. 30& 

AMONGST MACHINES. A Description of Various Mechanical Appliances used in 
the Manufacture of Wood, Metal, and other Substances. A Book for Boys 
copiously Illustrated. By the Author of "The Young Mechanic." Second 
Edition. Imperial 16mo, pp. viii. and 336, cloth. 1878. 7s. 6d. 

ANDERSON.— Practical Mekcaktilh Correspohbenoe. A Collection of Modern 
Letters of Business, with Notes, Critical and Explanatory, and an Appendix 
containing a Dictionary of Commercial Technicalities, pro forma Invoices Ac- 
count Sales, Bills of Lading, and Bills of Exchange.; also an Explanation of the 
German Cham Eule. 24th Edition, revised and enlarged. By William Anderson 
I2mo, pp. 288, cloth. 5a. 


Published by Trvbner & Co. 3 

ANDERSON and TUGMAN. — Mskoantilk Correspondbnob, containing a Collection 
of Commercial Letters in Portuguese and English, with their translation on opposite 
pages, for the use of Business Men and of Students in either of the Languages, treat- 
ing in modem style of the system of Business in the principal Commercial Cities 
of the World. Accompanied by pro forma A,ocounts, Sales, Invoices, Bills of 
Lading, Drafts, &c. With an Introduction and copious Notes. By William 
Anderson and James E. Tugman. 12mo, pp. xi. and 193, cloth. 1867. 6s. 

APEL. — Prose Speoimehs for TransIlAtion into Gebmait, with copious Vocabularies 
and Explanations. By H. Apel. 12mo, pp. viii. and 246, cloth. 1862. 4s. 6d. 

APPLETON (Dr.)— Life and Liter art Eelios. See English and Foreign Philoso- 
phical Library, Vol. XIII. 

ARAGO.— Les Aeistooeaties. A Comedy in Verse. By Etienne Arago. Edited, 
with English Notes and Notice on Etienne Arago, by the Eev. E. P. H. Brette, B. D. , 
Head Master of the French School, Christ's Hospital, Examiner in the University 
of London. Fcap. Svo., pp. 244, cloth. 1868. 4s. 

ARNOLD.— The Light of Asia ; or. The Great Eenukoiation (Mahabhinish- 
kramana). Being the Life and Teaching of Gautama, Prince of India, and Founder 
of Buddhism (as told in verse by an Indian Buddhist). Third Edition. By 
Edwin Arnold, M. A., C.S.L,&c. Cr. Svo, pp. -xiii. and 238, cloth. 1880. 7s. 6d. 
Popular Issue. Seyenth Edition; Limp parchment. 1881. 2s. 6d. 

ARNOLD. — The Iliad and Odtsset op Ihdia. By Edwin Arnold, M.A., F.E.G.S., 
&c. , &c. Fcap. Svo, pp. 24, sewed. Is. 

ARNOLD. — A Simple Traksliteral Grammar of the Turkish LANOtrAOE. 
Compiled from Various Sources. With Dialogues and Vocabulary. By Edwin 
Arnold, M.A., C.S.I., F.E.G.S. Post Svo, pp. SO, cloth. 1877. 2s. 6d. 

ARNOLD. — Indian Poetry. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

ARTOM. — Sermons. By the Rev. B. Artom, Chief Eabbi of the Spanish and Por- 
tuguese Congregations of England. First Series. Second Edition. Crown Svo, 
pp. viii. and 314, cloth. 1S76. 63. 

ASHER.— On the Stddt of Modern Languaqks in general, and of the English Lan- 
guage in particular. An Essay. By David Asher, Ph.D. 12mo, pp. viii. and 
80, cloth. IS.59. 2s. 

ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BENGAL. List of Publications on application. 

ASIATIC SOCIETY.— Journal of the Kotal Asiatic Sooibtt of Great Britain 
AND Ireland, from the Commencement to 1863. First Series, complete in 20 Vols. 
Svo, with many Plates. £10, or in parts from 4s. to 6s. each. 

ASIATIC SOCIETY.— Journal op the Eotai Asiatic Society op Great Britain 
and Ireland. New Series. Svo. Stitched in wrapper. 1864-81. 
Vol. I., 2 Parts, pp. Iv. and 490, 16s.— Vol. II., 2 Parts, pp. 522, 16s.— Vol. III., 2 Parts, 
pp. 616, with Photograph, 22s.— Vol. IV., 2Parts, pp. 521, 16s.— Vol. V., 2 Parts, pp. 463, with 
10 full-page and folding Plates, 18a.— Vol. VI., Part 1, pp. 212, with 2 Plates and a Map, 83.— 
VoL VL Part 2, pp. 272, with Plate and Map, 8s.— Vol. VII., Part 1, pp. 194, with a Plate, 
8s.— Vol. VII., Part 2, pp. 204, with 7 Plates and a Map, 8s.— Vol. VOL, Part 1, pp. 166, with 
3 Plates and a Plan, Ss.- Vol. VIII., Part 2, pp. 162, 8s.— Vol. IX., Part 1, pp. 164, with a 
Plate, 8s.— Vol. iX., Part 2, pp. 292, with 3 Plates, 10s. 6d.— Vol. X., Part 1, pp. 166, with 2 
Plates and a Map, 8s.— Vol. X., Part 2, pp. 146, 6s.— Vol. X., Part 3, pp. 204,.8b.— Vol. XI., 
Part 1, pp. 128, 6s.— Vol. XI., Part 2, pp. 168, with 2 Plates, 7s. 6d.— Vol. XI., Part 3, pp. 260, 
88.— Vol. XII , Part 1, pp 162, 6s.— Vol. XII,, Part 2, pp. 182, with 2 Plates and Map,6s — 
Vol. XII., Part 3, pp. lOU, 4s.— Vol. XII., Part 4, pp. x., 152., cxx.,'16, 8a.— Vol. XIII., Part 1, 
pp. 120, 6a.— Vol. XIII., Part 2, pp. 170, with a Map, 8s.— Vol. XIII., Part 3, pp. 178, with a 
Table, 7p.>6d.— VoL XIII., Part 4, pp. 282, with a Plate and Table, 10s. 6d. 


4 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

ASFLET.—The Complete Fbench Cotiesb. Part II. Containing all the Rules of 
French Syntax, &o., &o. By Georges C. Asplet, French Master, Frome. Fcap. 
8vo, pp. XX. and 276, cloth. 1880. 2s. 6d. 
ASTON.— A Short Grammar of the Japanese Spoken Language. By TV. G. Aston, 

M.A. Third Edition. Crown 8to, pp. 96, cloth. 1873. 12s. 
ASTON.— A Gbammar of the Japanese 'Weitten Languace. By W. G. Aston, 
M.A., Assistant Japanese Secretary H.B.M.'s Legation, Yedo, Japan. Second 
Edition. 8vo, pp. 306, cloth. 1877. 28s. 
ASTONISHED AT AMERICA. BEING CuESORY DEDUCTIONS, &c., &c. By Zigzag. 

Fcap. 8to, pp. xvi.-108, boards. 1880. Is. 
AUCTOKES SANSCRITI. 
Vol. I. THS jAiMlNiTA-NTiTA-MALi-ViSTAEA. Edited for the Sanskrit Text 
Society, under the supervision of Theodor Goldstucker. Large 4to, pp. 582, 
cloth. £3, 13s. 6d. 
Vol. II. The Institutes ob' Gautama. Edited, with an Index of Words, by A. 
F. Stenzler, Ph.D., Prof, of Oriental Languages in the University of Breslau. 
8vo, pp. iv. and 78, cloth. 1876. 4s. 6d. Stitched, 3s. 6d. 
Vol. III. VaitIna Sutea : The Ritual of the Athaeva Veda. Edited, with 
Critical Notes and Indices, by Dr. R. Garbe. 8vo, pp. viii. and 120, sewed. 
1878. 5s. 
Vol. I V. — Vaedh amana's G anaeatnamahodadhi, with the Author's Commentary. 
Edited, with Critical Notes and Indices, by Julius Eggeling, Ph.D. 8vo. 
Part I., pp. xii. and 240, wrapper. 1879. 63. Part U., pp. 240, wrapper. 1881. 
6s. 

AU6IEE.— Diane. A Drama in Verse. By ]Emile Augier. Edited with English 
Notes and Notice on Augier. By Theodore Karoher, LL.B., of the Royal Military 
Academy and the University of London. 12mo, pp. xiii. and 146, cloth. 1867. 
2s. 6d. 

AUSTIN.— A Peaotioal TREATiaE on the Preparation, Combination, and Applica- 
tion of Calcareous and Hydraulic Limes and Cements. To which is a,dded many 
useful Recipes for various Scientific, Mercantile, and Domestic Purposes. By 
James G. Austin, Architect. 12mo, pp. 192, cloth. 1862. 5s. 

AXON.— The Mechanic's Friend. A collection of Receipts and Practical Sug- 
gestions relating to Aquaria, Bronzing, Cements, Drawing, Dyes, Electricity, 
Gilding, Glass-working, &c. Numerous Woodcuts. Edited by W. E. A. Axon, 
M.R.S.L., F.S.S. Crown 8vo, pp. xii. and 339, cloth. 1875. 4s. 6d. 

BABA.— An Elementary Grammar of the Japanese Language, with easy progressive 
Exercises. By Tatui Baba. Crown 8vo, pp. xiv. and 92, cloth. 1873. os. 

BACON.— The Life and Times of Feanois Bacon. Extracted from the Edition of 
his Occasional Writings by James Spedding. 2 vols, post 8vo, pp. xx , 710 and 
xiv., 708, cloth. 1878. 21s. 

BADEN-POWELL.- Peoteotion and Bad Times, with Special Reference to the 
Political Economy of English Colonisation. By George Baden-Powell M A 
F.R. AS., F.S.S., Author of "New Homes for the Old Country," &o., &c. 8vo' 
pp. xii. -376, cloth. 1879. 6b. 6d. ». . 1 

BADEE.— The Natural and Morbid Changes of the Human Ete, and their 
Trbatmkht. ByC. Bader. Medium 8vo, pp. viii. and 506, cloth. 1868. 168. 

BADEE.— PLATES ILLUSTRATWO THE NATURAL AND MORBID CHANGES OF THB HUMAS 

Ete. By C. Bader. Sk chromo-lithographic Plates, each containing the figures 
of SIX Eyes, and four lithographed Plates, with figures of Instruments. With an 
Explanatory Text of 32 pages. Medium 8vo, in a portfolio. 2I3. Price for Text 
and Atlas taken together, £1, 12s. 


Published hy Truhner & Co. 5 

BASLET. — Indian Missionary Eeoobd and Mbmokial Volume. By the Rev. B. 
H. Badley, of the American Methodist Mission. 8vo, pp. xii. and 280, cloth. 
1876. 10s. 6d., 

BALFOUR.— Waifs and Strays fkom the Far East; being a Series of Disconnected 
Essays on Matters relating to China. By Frederick Henry Balfour. ] vol. demy 
Sto, pp. 224, clotl^. 1876. 10s. 6d. 

BALFOUE.— The Divine Classic op Nan-Hua ; being the Works of Chuang Tsze, 
Taoist Philosopher. With an Excursus, and Copious Annotations in English and 
Chinese. By F. H. Balfour, F.R.G.S , Author of "Waifs and Strays from the 
Far East," &c. Demy 8vo, pp. xlviii. and 426, cloth. 1881. 14s. 

BALL.— The Diamonds, Coal, and Gold of India,; their Mode of Occurrence and 
Distribution. By V. Ball, M.A., F.G.S., of the Geological Survey of India. 
Foap. 8vo, pp. viii. and 136, cloth. 1881. 5s. 

BALLAD SOdETV — Subscriptions, small paper, one guinea; large paper, two guineas 
per annum. List of publications on application. 

BALLANTYNE. — Blehehts op Hindi and BKA,r Bhakha Grammar. Compiled for 
the use of the East India College at Haileybury. By James B. Ballantyne. Second 
Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. 38, cloth. 1868. 5s. 

BALLANTYITE. — First Lessons in Sanskrit Grammar; together with an Introduc- 
tion to the Hitopade^a. New Edition. By James B. Ballantyne, LL.D., Librarian 
of the India OfBce. 8vo, pp. viii. and 110, cloth. 1873. 3s. 6d. 

BARANOWSKI.^Vadb Mecum de la Langub Feanjaise, redige d'apres les Dic- 
tionnaires classiques avec les Exemples de Bonnes Locutions que donne I'Academie 
Fran;aise, on qu'on trouve dans les ouvrages des plus celdbres auteurs. Par J. J. 
Barauowski, avec I'approbation de M. E. Littr^ S^nateur, &c. 32mo, pp. 224. 
1879. Cloth, 23. 6d. ; morocco, 33. 6d. ; morocco tuck, 4s. , 

BARENTS' RELICS.- Becovered in the summer of 1876 by Charles L. W. Gardiner, 
Esq., and presented to the Dutch Government. Described and explained by J. 
K. J. de Jonge, Deputy JBoyal Architect at the Hague. Published by command 
of His Excellency, W. F. Van F.E.P. TaelmanKip, Minister of Marine. Trans- 
lated, with a Preface, by S. R. Van Campen. With a Map, Illustrations, and a 
fac-simile of the Scroll. 8vo, pp. 70, cloth. 1877. 5s. 

BARRICRE and CAPENDtJ.— Les Faux Bonshommes, a Comedy. By Th&dore 
Barrifere and Ernest Capendu. Edited, with English Notes and Notice on Bar- 
rifere, by Professor Ch. Cassal, LL.D., of University CoUege, London. 12mo, pp. 
xvi. and 304, cloth. 1868. 4s. 

BARTH. — The Eelioions of India. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

BARTLETT.— Dictionary of Americanisms. A Glossary of Words and Phrases 
colloquially used in the United States. By John KusseU Bartlett. Fourth 
Edition, considerably enlarged and improved. 8vo, pp. xlvi. and 814, cloth. 
1877. 20s. 

BATTYE.— .What is Vital Fobce? or, a Short and Comprehensive Sketch, includ- 
ing Vital Physics, Animal Morphology, and Epidemics ; to which is added an 
Appendix upon Geology, Is the Dentrital Theory of Geology Tenable ? By 
Richard Fawcett Battye. 8vo, pp. iv. and 336, cloth. 1877. 7s. 6d. 

BAZLEY.— Notes, on the Epicyolodlal CoiriNa Frame of Messrs. Holtzapffel & 
Co. With special reference to its Compensation Adjustment, and with numerous 

. Illustrations of its Capabilities. By Thomas Sebastian Bazley, M.A. 8vo, pp. 
xvi. and 192, cloth. Illustrated. 1872. 10s. 6d. 


6 A Catalogue of Important Wm-ks, 

BAZLEY.— The Stars in Theie Coueses: A Twofold Series of Maps, -with a 
Catalogue, showing how to identify, at any time of the year, all stars down to the 
5.6 magnitude, inclusive of Heis, which are clearly visible in English latitudes. 
By T. S. Bazley, M.A., Author of "Notes on the Bpicycloidal Cutting Frame." 
Atlas folio, pp. 46 and 24, Folding Plates, cloth. 1878. 15s. 

SEAL. — Trateis of Fah-Hiam ahd Suno-Yoh, Buddhist PUgrims, from China to 
India (400A.D. andSlSA.n.) Translated from the Chinese. By Samuel BeaJ, B.A., 
Trin. Coll., Cam., &c. Crown Svo, pp. Ixxiii, and 216, with a coloured Map, 
cloth, ornamental. 1869. 10s. 6d. 

BEAL. — A Catena of Bddbhist Somptubes from the Chinese. By S. Beal, B.A., 
Trinity College, Cambridge ; a Chaplain in Her Majesty's Fleet, &c. Svo, pp. 
xiv. and 436, cloth. 1871. 15s. 

BEAL. — The Bomantic Legend of Sakta Buddha. From the Chinese-Sanskrit. 
By the Rev. Samuel Beal. Crown 8vo., pp. 408, cloth. 1875., 12s. 

BEAL.— Dhammapada. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

BEAL. — Buddhist Literature in China : Abstract of Four Lectures, Delivered by 
Samuel Beal, B.A., Professor of Chinese at University College, London. Demy 
Svo. \_Nearly ready, 

BEAMES.— Outlines of Indian PHiLoioay. With a Map showing the Distribution 
of Indian Languages. By John Beames, M.B.A.S., Bengal Civil Service, Member 
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, the Philological Society of London, and the 
Soci^te Asiatique of Paris. Second enlarged and revised Edition. Crown Svo, 
pp. viii. and 96, cloth. 1868. 6s. 

BEAMES. — A Comparative Grammar of the Modern Aryan Lamguaoes of India, 
to wit, Hindi, Panjabi, Sindhi, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, and Bengali. By John 
Beames, Bengal Civil Service, M.E.A.S., &c., &c. Demy Svo. Vol. I. On Sounds. 
Pp. xvi. an(? 360, cloth. 1872. 16s.— Vol. II. The Noun and the Pronoun. 
Pp. xii. and 348, cloth. 1875. I63.— Vol. III. The Verb. Pp. xii. and 316, cloth. 
1879. 168. 

BELLEW.— From the Indus to the Tigris. A Narrative of a Journey through the 
Countries of Balochiatan, Afghanistan, Khorassan, and Iran in 1872 ; together 
with a complete Synoptical Grammar and Vocabulary of the Brahoe Language, and 
a Becord of the Meteorological Observations and Altitudes on the March from the 
Indus to the Tigris. By Henry Walter BeUew, C.S.I., Surgeon, Bengal Staff 
Corps. Demy Svo, pp. viii. and 496, cloth. 1874. 14s. 

BELLEW.— Eashmib and Kashghar ; a Narrative of the Journey of the Embassy 
to Kashghar in 1873-74. By H. "W. Bellew, C.S.L Demy Svo, pp. xxxii. and 
420, cloth. 1875. 16s. ' '"' 

BELLEW.— The Races of Afghanistan. Being a Brief Account of the Principal 
Nations Inhabiting that Country. By Surgeon-Major H. W. Bellew, C.S.L, late 
on Special Political Duty at Kabul. Svo, pp. 124, cloth. 1880. 7s. 6d. 

BELLOWS.— English Outline Vocabulary for the use of Students of the Chinese 
Japanese, and other Languages. Arranged by John Bellows. With Notes on tho 
Writing of Chinese with Boman Letters, by Professor Summers, King's CoUeee 
London. Crown Svo, pp. vi. and 368, cloth. 1867. 6a. = e . 

BELLOWS.— Outline Diotiohart for the use of Missionaries, Explorers, and 
Students OF Lahquagb. By Max Muller, M.A., Taylorian Professor in the Uni- 
versity of Oxford. With an Introduction on the proper use of the ordinary 
English Alphabet in transcribing Foreign Languages. The Vocabulary compiled 
by John Bellows. Crown Svo, pp. xixi. and 36S, limp morocco. 1867 7s 6d. 


Puhlished by Trubner & Co, 7 

BELLOWS. — Tods lbs Vkebbs. Conjugations of all the Verba in the French and 
English Languages. ' By John Bellows. Eevised by Professor Beljame, B.A., 
LL.B., of the University of Paris, and Official Interpreter to the Imperial Court, 
and George B. Strickland, late Assistant French Master, Koyal Naval School, 
Loudon. Also a New Table of Equivalent Values of French and English Money, 
Weights, and Measures. 32mo, 76 Tables, sewed. 1867. la. 

BELLOWS. — Frehoh and English Diotiohakt fok the Pocket. By John Bellows. 
Containing the French-English and English-French divisions on the same page ; 
conjugating all the verba ; distinguishing the genders by different types ; giving 
numerous aids to pronunciation ; indicating the liaison or non-liaison of terminal 
consonants ; and translating units of weight, measure, and value, by a series of 
tables differing entirely from any hitherto published. The new edition, which is 
but six ounces in weight, has been remodelled, and contains many thousands of 
additional words and renderings. Miniature maps of France, the British Isles, 
Paris, and London, are added to the Geographical Section. Second Edition. 32mo, 
pp. 608, roan tuck, or persian without tuck. 1877. 10s. 6d. ; morocco tuck, 12s. 6d. 

BENEDIX.— Deb Vetter.- Comedy in Three Acts. By Koderich Benedix. With 
Grammatical and Explanatory Notes by F. Weinmann, German Master at the 
Boyal Institution School, Liverpool, and 6. Zimmermann, Teacher of Modern 
Languages. 12mo, pp. 128, cloth. 1863. 2s, 6d. 

BENFEY. — A Phactioal Grammar or the Sanskrit Lahquaqb, for the use of Early 
Students. By Theodor Benfey, Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Gottin- 
gen. Second, revised, and enlarged Edition. Koyal 8vo, pp. viii. and 296, cloth. 
1868. 10s. 6d. 

BEHTHAM. — Theory op Legislation. By Jeremy Bentham. Translated from the 
French of Etienne Dumont by K Hildreth. Fourth Edition. Post 8vo, pp. xv. 
and 472, cloth. 1882. 7s. 6d. 

EEVERIDGE. — The District of Bakarganj. Its History and Statistics. By H. 
Beveridge, B.C.S., Magistrate and Collector of Bakarganj. 8vo, pp. xx. and 
460, cloth. 1876. 21a. 

BICENELL. SeeBA.mz. 

BIQANDET. — ^The Life op Gaudama. See Triihner's Oriental Series. 

BIECH.— Fasti Monastici Aevi Saxohioi ; or. An Alphabetical List of the Heads of 
Religious Houses in England previous to the Norman Conquest, to which is pre- 
fixed a Chronological Catalogue of Contemporary Foundations. By Walter de 
GrayBiich. , 8vo, pp. vii. and 114, cloth. 1873. 5s. 

BIRD.— Phtsiologioal Essays. Drink Craving, Differences in Men, Idiosyncrasy, and 
the Origin of Disease. By Kobert Bird, M.D. demy 8vo, pp. 246, cloth. 1870. 7s. 6d. 

BLACK.— Young Japan, Yokohama and Yedo. A Narrative of the Settlement 
and the City, from the Signing of the Treaties in 1858 to the Close of the Year 
1879; with a Glance at the Progress of Japan during a Period of Twenty-one 
Years. By John B. Black, formerly Editor of the " Japan Herald and the 
"Japan Gazette." Editor of the "Far East." 2 vols, demy Svo, pp. xvm. and 
418 ; xiv. and 522, cloth. 1881. £2, 2s. 

BLADES.— Shakspebb and Ttpoorapht. Being an Attempt to show Shakspere's 
Personal Connection with, and Technical Knowledge of, the Art of Pnntmg ; also 
Remarks upon some common Typographical Errors, with especial reference to the 
Text of Shakspere. By William Blades. Svo, pp. viii. and 78, with an Illustra- 
tion, eloth. 1872. 3s. 


8 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

BLADES.— The Biography and Typogbapht op "William Caxton, England's First 
Printer. By William Blades. Founded to a great extent upon the Author's 
"Life and Typography of William Caxton." Brought up to the Present Date, 
and including all Discoveries since made. Elegantly and appropriately printed in 
demySvo, on hand-made paper, imitation old bevelled binding. 1877. £1, Is. 
Cheap Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. 1881. 5s. 

BLADES. — The Enemies of Books. By William Blades, Typograph. Crown 8vo, 
pp. xvi. and 112, parchment wrapper. 1880. 5s. 

BLAEE7. — Memoibs op Dr. Robert Blaket, Professor of Logic and Metaphysics, 
Queen's College, Belfast, Author of "Historical Sketch of Moral Science," &c., 
&c. Edited by the Eev. Henry Miller, of St. Andrews (Presbyterian Church of 
England), Hammersmith. Crown 8to, pp. xii, and 252, cloth. 1879. 5s. 

BLEEK.— Kbynjrd the Fox in SoniH Afkioa ; or, Hottentot Fables and Tales, 
chiefly Translated from Original Manuscripts in the Library of His Excellency Sir 
George Grey, K.C.B. By W. H. 1. Bleek, Ph.D. Post 8vo, pp. xxvi. and 94, 
cloth. 1864. 3s. 6d. 

BLEEK.— A Brief Aooount of Bushman Folk Lobe, and other Texts. By W. H. 
I. Bleek. Ph.D. Folio, pp. 21, paper. 2s. 6d. 

BOEHMEE.— Spanish Eepormebs op Two Centubibs, from 1520, their Lives and 
Writings. Described by E. Boehmer, D.D., Ph.D. Vol. i. royal 8vo, pp. 232, 
cloth. 1874. 12s. 6d. Eoxburghe, 15s. 

BOJESEN. — A GruiDE 10 TEE Danish LANQCAaE. Designed for English Students. 
By Mrs. Maria Bojesen. 12mo, pp. 250, cloth. 1863. 5s. 

BOLIA. — The German Oaligeaphist : Copies for German Handwriting. By C. 
Bolia. Oblong 4to, sewed. Is. 

BOY ENGINEERS.— See under Ldkin. 

BOYD. — NIgXnanda ; or, the Joy of the Snake World. A Buddhist Drama in Five 
Acts. Translated into English Prose, with Explanatory Notes, from the Sanskrit 
of SS-Harsha-Deva. By Palmer Boyd, B.A., Sanskrit Scholar of Trinity College, 
Cambridge. With an Introduction by Professor Cowell, Crown 8vo, pp. xvi. 
and 100, cloth. 1872. 4s. 6d. 

BRAMSEN. — Japanese Chbonological Tables, showing the Date, according to 
the Julian or Gregorian Calendar, of the First Day of each Japanese Month. 
From Tai-Kwa, 1st year, to Mei-ji, 6th year (645 A. D. to 1873 a.d.). With an 
Introductory Essay on "Japanese Chronology and Calendars, By W. Bramsen. 
Oblong f cap. 4to, pp. 50-84, cloth. 1880. 14s. 

BRAMSEN.— The Coins OP Japan. By W. Bramsen. Part L The Copper, Lead, 
and Iron Coins issued by the Central Government. 4to, pp. 10, with Plates of 74 
Coins, boards. 1880. 5s. 

BRAMSEN.— Japanese Weights, with their Equivalents in French and English 
Weights. Compiled by W. Bramsen. Fcap. folio sheet. 1877. Is. 

BRAMSEN.— Japanese I^ineal Measures, with their Equivalents in French and 
English Measures. Compiled by W. Bramsen. Fcap. folio sheet. 1877. Is. 

BRENTANO.— On the History and Development of Gilds, and the Origin of 
Trabe-TJnions. By Lujo Brentano, of Aschaffenburg, Bavaria, Doctor Juris 
TJtriusque et Philosophise. 1. The Origin of GUds. 2. Religious (or Social) 
Gilds. 3. Town-Gilds or Gild-Merchants. 4. Craft-Gilds. 5. Trade-Unions. 
8vo, pp. xvi. and 136, cloth. 1870. 3s. 6d. 

BRETSCHNEIDER.— Early European Keseahches into the Flora op China. 
By E. Bretschneider, M.D., Physician of the Russian Legation at Peking. Demy 
8vo, pp. iv. and 194, sewed. 1881. 7s. 6d. 


Published by Triibnei' & Co. 9 

BRETTE.— French ExAMrtTATiOH Papebs set at the University oe London erom 
1839 TO 1871. Arranged and edited by the Eev. P. H. Ernest Brette, B.D. 
Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 278, cloth. 3a. 6d. ; interleaTed, 4b. 6d. 

BRITISH MnsEUM. — List op Pdblications op the Trustees of the British 
Museum, on application. 

BROWN. — The Dervishes ; or, Oriental Spiritualism. By John P. Brown, 
Secretary and Dragoman of the Legation pf the United States of America at Con- 
stantinople. Crown 8to, pp. viii. and 416, cloth, with 24 lUuatrations. 1868. 14s. 

BROWN.— Sanskrit Prosody and Numerical Symbols Explained. By Charles 
Philip Brown, M.E.A.S., Author of aTelugu Dictionary, Grrammar, &o.. Professor 
of Telugu in the University of London. 8vo, pp. viii. and 56, cloth. 1869. 3s. 6d. 

BROWNE.— How to use the Ophthalmoscope ; being Elementary Instruction in 
Ophthalmoscopy. Arranged for the use'of Students. By Edgar A. Browne, Sur- 
geon to the Liverpool Bye and Ear Infirmary, &o. Crown 8vo, pp. xi. and 108, 
with 35 Figures, cloth. 1876. 3s. 6d. 

BROWNE.— A BangAli Primer, in Homan Character. By J. F. Browne, B.C.S. 
Crown 8v'o, pp. 32, cloth. 1881. 2s. 

BRUNTON. — Map of Japan. See under Japan. 

BtJCHNEE.— Force and Matter : Empirico-PhUosophical Studies intelligibly ren- 
dered. With an additional Introduction expressly written for the English edition. 
ByDr. Louis'Buchner. Edited by J. Frederick CoUingwood, F.E.S.L., F.G.S. 
Second English, completed from the Tenth German Edition. With a Portrait of 
the Author. Crown 8vo, pp. vi. and 284, cloth. 1881. 5s. 

BUDGE.— Archaic Classics. Assyrian Texts; being Extracts from the Annals of 
Shalmaneserll., Sennacherib, and Assur-Bani-Pal. With Philological Notes. By 
Ernest A. Budge, M.II.A.S., Assyrian Exhibitioner, Christ's College, Cambridge. 
Small 4to, pp. viii. and 44, cloth. 1880. 7a. 6d. 

BUDGE.— History op Esakhaddon. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

BURGESS :— 

ABCHffiOLO&ICAL SURVEY OP WESTERN INDIA :— ^ ^ 

Report of the First Season's Operations in the Belgam and Kaladi 
Districts. January to May 1874. By James Burgess, F.E.G.S. With 5b 
Photographs and Lithographic Plates. Eoyal 4to, pp. viii. and 45 ; halt 
bound. 1875. £2, 2s. . „ , . j., li. * 

Eepobt on the Antiquities op KiTHilwto and Kaohh, being the result ot 
the Second Season's Operations of the Archaeological Survey of Western 
India, 1874-75. By James Burgess, F.E.G.S. Eoyal 4to, pp. x. and 242, 
with 74 Plates: half bound. 1876. £3, 3s. 

Report on the Antiquitles in the Bidar and Aurangabad Districts, m 
the Territories of His Highness the Nizam of Haiderabad, being the result 
of the Third Season's Operations of the Arohseologioal Survey of Western 
India, 1875-76. By James Burgess, F.E.G.S., M.E.A.S., ArcWogical Sur- 
veyor and Eeporter to Government, Western India. Eoyal 4to, pp. vm. and 
138, with 63 Photographic Plates ; half bound. 1878. ki, ^s. . 

Report on the Buddhist Cave Temples and their Inscbiphons jcontam- 
ing Views, Plans, Sections, and Elevation of FaQadea of Cave Temples , 
Dfa^iglof Architectural and Mythological Sculptures; Facsimiles of In- 
scriptions, &c.; with Descriptive and Expl^5»t° Vp^> l^^c Znerrova! 
Inscriptions, &c., &c. By James Burgess, LL.D., F.R.G-|i ^^l, ,f "P^o ^ 
, 4to, hllf-morocco, gilt top, with numerous Plates and ^o^^U.^Jj^^2..^ 


10 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

BURMA.— The Bbitish Burma Gazettebk. Compiled by Major H. E. Spearman, 
under the direction of the Government of India. 2 vols. 8vo, pp. 764 and 87S, 
with 11 Photographs, cloth. 1880. i;2, 10s. 

BUENELL.— Elements of South Indian Pal«ogkapht, from the Fourth to the 
Seventeenth Century A.D., being an Introduction to the Study of South Indian 
Inscriptions and MSS. By A. C. Bumell. Second enlarged and improved 
Edition. 4to, pp. xiv. and 148, Map and 35 Plates, cloth. 1878. £2, 12s. 6d. 

BtlKNELL.— A Classified Index to the Sanskrit MSS. in the Palace at 
Tanjore. Prepared for the Madras Government. By A. C. Burnell, Ph.D., &c., 
&c 4to, stiff wrapper. Part I., pp. iv.-80, Vedio and Technical Literature. 
Part II., pp. iv.-80, Philosophy and Law. Part III., Drama, Epics, Puranas, and 
Zantras ; Indices. 1879. 10s. each. 

BURNEY.— The Bots' Manual op Seamasship and Gunnkbt, compiled for the use 
of the Training-Ships of the Boyal Navy. By Commander C. Bumey, E.N., 
F.II.G.S., Superintendent of Greenwich Hospital School. Seventh Edition. Ap- 
proved by the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to be used in the Training- 
Ships of the Eoyal Navy. Crown 8vo, pp. xxii. and 352, with numerous Illus- 
trations, cloth. 1879. 6s. 

BURNEY.— The Young Seaman's Manual and Uiggeb's Guide. By Commander 
C. Bumey, B..N., F.E.6.S. Sixth Edition. Eevised and corrected. Approved 
by the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty. Crown 8vo. pp. xxxviii. and 592, 
cloth. With 200 Illustrations and 16 Sheets of Signals. 1878. 7». 6d. 

BURTON.— Captain Eiohard F. Edkton's Handbook for Overland Kxpeditioks ; 
being an English Edition of the "Prairie Traveller," a Handbook for Overland 
Expeditions. With Illustrations and Itineraries of the Principal Eoutes between 
the Mississippi and the Pacific, and a Map. By Captain Eandolph B. Maroy (now 
General and Chief of the Staff, Army of the Potomac). Edited, with Notes, by 
Captain Eichard F. Burton. Crown 8vo, pp. 270, numerous Woodcuts, Itinera- 
ries, and Map, cloth. 1863. 6s, 6d. 

BUTLER. — The Spanish Teacher and Colloquial Phrase-Book. An easy and 
agreeable method of acquiring a Speaking Knowledge of the Spanish Language. 
By Francis Butler. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xviii. and 240, half-roan. 2s. 6d. 

BUTLER. — Hungarian Poems and Fables fob English Eeaders. Selected and 
Translated by B. D. Butler, of the British Museum ; with Illustrations by A. G. 
Butler. Foolscap, pp. vi. and 88, limp cloth. 1877. 2s. 

BUTLER. — The Legend of the Wondrous Hunt. By John Arany. With a few 
Miscellaneous Pieces and Folk-Songs. Translated from the Magyar by E. D. 
Butler, F.E.G.S. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 70. Limp cloth. 2s. 6d. 

CAITHNESS.— Serious Letters to Serious Friends. By the Countess of Caith- 
ness, Authoress of "Old Truths in a New Light." Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 352, 
cloth. 1877. 7s. 6d. 

CAITHNESS.— Lectures on Popular and Scientific Subjects. By the Earl of 
Caithness, F.E.S. Delivered at various times and places. Second enlarged 
Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. 174, cloth. 1879. 2s. 6d. 

CALCUTTA REVIEW.— Selections from Nos. I.-XL 5s. each. 

CALDER.— The Coming Era. By Alexander Calder, Officer of the Legion of 
Honour, and Author of "The Man of the Future." 8vo, pp. 422, cloth. 1879. 
lOs. 6d. 


Publislied by Tri^ner d: Co. 11 

CALDWELL.— A Comparative Grammar op the Dravidian or South Ikdian 
Family of Languages. By the Rev. R. Caldwell, LL.D. A second, corrected, 
and enlarged Edition. Demy 8vo, pp. 804, cloth. 1875. 28a. 

CALENDARS OF STATE PAPERS. List on application. 

CALL.— Reverberations. Revised. With a chapter from My Autohiography 
By "W. M. W. Call, M.A., Cambridge, Author of "Lyra Hellenica" and 
"Golden Histories." Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 200, cloth. 1875. 4s. 6d. 

CALLAWAY.— Nursery Tales; Traditions, and Histories of the Zulus. Iu 
their own words, with a Translation into English, and Notes. By the Rev. Canon 
Callaway, M.D. Vol. I., 8vo, pp. xiv. and 378, cloth. 1868. 16s. 

CALLAWAY.— The Religious System of the Amazulu. 

Part I.— XJnkulunkulu ; or. The Tradition of Creation as existing among the 
Amazulu and other Tribes of South Africa, in their own words, with a Transla- 
tion into English, and Notes. By the Rev. Canon Callaway, M.D. 8vo, pp. 
128, sewed. 1868. 4s. 

Part IL — Amatongo ; or, Ancestor-Worship as existing among the Amazulu, in 
their own words, with a Translation into English, and Notes. By the Rev. 
Canon Callaway, M.D. 8vo, pp. 127, sewed. 1869. 43. 

Part m. — Izinyanga Zokubula ; or. Divination, as existing among the Amazulu, 
in their own words, with a Translation into English, and Notes. By the Eev. 
Canon Callaway, M.D. 8vo, pp. 150, sewed. 1870. 4s. 

Pari IV. — On Medical Magic and "Witchcraft. 8vo, pp. 40, sewed. Is. 6d. 

CAMERINI.— L'Eoo Itallano ; a Practical Guide to Italian Conversation. By E. 
Camerini. With a Vocabulary. 12mo, pp. 98, cloth. 1860. 4s. 6d. 

CAMPBELL. — The Gospel of the World's Divine Order. By Douglas Camp- 
bell. New Edition. Revised. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 364, cloth. 1877. 4s. 6d. 

CANDID Examination of Theism. By Physious. Post 8vo, pp. xviii. and 198, 
cloth. 1878. 7s. 6d. 

CANTICUM CANTICOEITIII, reproduced in facsimile, from the Soriverius copy in the 
British Museum. WitK an Historical and Bibliographical Introduction by I. Ph. 
Berjeau, Folio, pp. 36, with 16 Tables of Illustrations, vellum. 1860. £2, 2s. 

CAREY. — ^The Past, the Present, and the Future. By H. C. Carey. Second 
Edition, dvo, pp. 474, cloth. 1856. 10s. 6d. 

CARNEGY.- Notes on the Land Tenures and Revenue Assessments of Upper 
■- India. By P. Camegy. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 136, and forms, cloth. 1874. 6s. 

CATHERINE 11., MEMOIRS OF THE Empress. Written by herself. With a Preface 
by A. Herzen, Trans, from the French. 12mo, pp. xvi. and 352, bds. 1859. 
7s. 6d. 

CATLIN. — 0-Kee-Pa. a Religious Ceremony ; and other Customs of the Mandans. 

By George Catlin. With 13 coloured Illustrations. Small 4to, pp. vi. and 52, 

cloth. 1867. 14s. 
CATLIN.— The Lifted and Subsided Kooks of America, with their Influence on 

the Oceanic, Atmospheric, and Land Currents, and the Distribution of Races. 

By George Catlin. With 2 Maps. Cr. 8vo, pp. xii. and 238, cloth. 1870. 6s. 6d. 

CATLIN. — Shut your Mouth and Save your Life. By George Catlin, Author of 
" Notes of liavels amongst the North American Indians," &c. , &o. With 29 Illus- 
trations from Drawings by the Author. Eighth Edition, considerably enlarged. 
Crown 8vo, pp. 106, cloth. 1882. 2s. 6d. 

CAXTON.— The Biography and Typography of. See Blades. 


12 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

CAZTON CELEBBATION, 1877.— Catalogue op the Lojjs Collection op Anti- 
quities, Curiosities, and Appliances Connected with the Art op Printing. 
Edited by 6. Bullen, F.S.A. Post 8vo, pp. xx. and 472, cloth, 3s. 6d. 

GAZELLES.— Outline op the Bvolution-Philosopht. By Dr. W. E. Gazelles. 
Translated from the French by the Kev. O. B. Frothingham. Crown 8vo, pp. 
156, cloth. 1875. 3s. 6d. 

CHALDIERS.— The Speculations on Metaphysics, Poutt, and Morality op 
" The Old Philosopher," Lau-tsze. Translated from the Chinese, with an Intro- 
duction by John Chalmers, M.A. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xx. and 62, cloth. 1868. 4s. 6d. 

CHAMBERLAIN.- The CLASSICAL PoBTRT of the Japanese. By Basil Hall 
Chamberlain, Author of " Yeigo Henkaku, Ichiran." Post 8vo, pp. xii. and 228, 
cloth. 1880. 7s. 6d. 

CHAPMAN.— Chloropobm and other ANaiSTHETics : Their History and Use dur- 
ing Childbirth. By John Chapman, M.D. 8vo, pp. 51, sewed. 1859. Is. 

CHAPMAN.— DiARRHCE A and Cholbra : Their Nature, Origin, and Treatment 
through the Agency of the Nervous System. By John Chapman, M.D,, 
jtt.R.C.P., M.E.C.S. 8to, pp. xix. and 248, cloth. 7s. 6d. 

CHAPMAN. — Medical Chabitt : its Abuses, and how to Eemedy them. By John 
Chapman, M.D. 8vo, pp. viii. and 108," cloth. 1874. 2s. 6d. 

CHAPMAN.— Sba-Siokness, and how to Prevent it. An Explanation of its 
Nature and Successful Treatment, through the Agency of the Nervous System, 
by means of the Spinal Ice Bag ; with an Introduction on the General Principles 
of Neuro-Therapeutios. By John Chapman, M.D., M.E.C.P., M.E.C.S. Second 
Edition. 8vo, pp. viii. and 112, cloth. 1868. 3b. 

CHAPTERS ON Christian Catholicity. By a Clergyman. 8vo, pp. 282, cloth. 
1878. 5s. 

CHARNOCK.— A GLOSSARY OP THE Essex Dialect. By Richard Stephen Charnock, 
Ph.D., F.S.A. Fcap., pp. xii. and 64, cloth. 1880. Ss. 6d. 

CHARNOCK.— Prcenomina ; or. The Etymology of the Principal Christian Names 
of Great Britain and Ireland. By E. S. Charnock, Ph.D., F.S.A. Crown 8vo, 
pp. xvi. and 12S, cloth. 1882. 6s. 

CHAUCER SOCIExT.— Subscription, two guineas per annum. List of Publications 
on application. 

CHILDERS.— A Pali-English DICTIONARY, with Sanskrit Equivalents, and with 
numerous Quotations, Extracts, and References. Compiled by Robert Csesar 
Childers, late of the Ceylon Civil Service. Imperial 8vo, double columns, pp. 
648, cloth. 1875. £3, 3s. 

CHILDERS. — The Mahapabinibbanasutta op the Sdtta Pitaka. The Pali Text. 
Edited by the late Professor E. C. Childers. 8vo, pp. 72, limp cloth. 1878. 5s. 

CHINTAMON.— A COMMENTARY ON THE TEXT OP THB BHAGAVAD-GlTiC ; or, the 
Discourse between Khrishna and Arjuna of Divine Matters. A Sanskrit Philoso- 
phical Poem. . With a few Introductory Papers. By Hurrychund Chintamon, 
Political Agent to H. H. the Guicowar Mulhar Eao Maharajah of Baroda. Post 
8to, pp. 118, cloth. 1874. 6s. 

CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS OP Great Britain and Ireland during the 
Middle Ages. List on application. 

CLARE.— A Forecast op the Eeligion op the Future. Being Short Essays on 
some important Questions in Religious Philosophy. By 'W. W. Clark. Post 
8vo, pp. 232, cloth. 1879. Ss. 


Published by Trubner & Co. 13 

CLAUSEWITZ.— OnWab. By General Carl von Clausewitz. Translated by Colonel 
J. J. Graham, from the third German Edition. Three volumes complete in one. 
Fcap 4to, double columns, pp. xx. and 564, with Portrait of the author, cloth. 
187.S. £1, Is. 

CLEMENT AND H0TTON. — ARTISTS OP THE Nineteenth Century and their 
Works. A Handbook containing Two Thousand and Fifty Biographical Sketches. 
By Clara Erskine Clement and Lawrence Hutton. 2 vols, crown 8vo, pp. Ixxxvii, 
386 and 44, and Mi. 374 and 44, cloth. 1879. 2l3. 

COLEBROOEE. — THE Life and Miscellaneous Essays of Henry Thomas Cole- 
BEOOKE. The Biography by his Son, Sir T. B. Colebrooke, Bart., M.P. 3 vols. 
Vol. I. The Life. Demy 8vo, pp. xii. and 492, with Portrait and Map, cloth. 
1873. 14s. Vols. IL and III. The Essays. A new Edition, with Notes by E. 
B. Cowell, Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Cambridge. Demy Svo, 
pp. xvi. and 544, and x. and 520, cloth. 1873. 28s. 

COIiENSO, — Natal Sermons. A Series of Discourses Preached in the Cathedral 
Church of St Peter's, Maritzburg. By the Eight Rev. John William Colenso, 
D.D., Bishop of Natal. 8vo, pp. viii. and 373, cloth. 1866. 7s. 6d. The Second 
Series. Crown 8vo, cloth. 1868. 5s. 

COLYMBIA. Crown 8vo, pp. 260, cloth. 1873. 5s. 

" The book is amusing as well as clever." — AthencEU/m. " Many exceediogly humorous pas- 
sages."— Pufeljc Opinion. "Deserves to be read." — Scotgman, *' Neatly done." — Gi-aphie, 
"Tery amusing." — Examiner. i 

COMTE.— A General View of Positivism. By Auguste Comte. Translated by 
Dr. J. H. Bndges. 12mo, pp. xi. and 426, cloth. 1865. 8s. 6d. 

COMTE. — The Catechism of Positive Keligion : Translated from' the French of 
Auguste Comte. By Eichard Congreve. 18mo, pp. 428, cloth. 1858. 6s. 6d. 

COMTE. — The Positive Philosophy op Auguste Comte. Translated and condensed 
by Harriet Martiuean. 2 vols. Second Edition. 8vo, cloth. Vol. I., pp. xxiv. 
and 400; Vol. IL, pp. xiv. and 468. 1875. 25s. 

CONGREVE. —The Eoman Empire of the West. Four Lectures delivered at the 
Philosophical Institution, Edinburgh, February 1855, by Eichard Congreve, M.A. 
8vo, pp. 176, cloth. 1855. 4s. 

CONGrREVE. — ^Elizabeth of England. Two Lectures delivered at the Philosophi- 
cal Institution, Edinburgh, January 1862. By Eichard Congreve. 18mo, pp. 114, 
sewed. 1862. 2s. 6d. 

CONTOPOULOS.— A LEXICON OF MODERN Greek-English and English Modern 
Greek. By N. Contopoulos. Part I. Modem Greek-English. Part II. English 
Modern Greek. 8vo, pp. 460 and 582, cloth. 1877. "278. 

CONWAY. — ^The Sacred Anthology : A Book of Ethnical Scriptures. Collected 
and Edited by Moncure D. Conway. Fifth Edition. Demy 8vo, pp. viii. and 480, 
cloth. 1876. 123. 

CONWAY. — Christianity. By Moncure D. Conway, M.A.', Minister of South 
Place Chapel, and at the Atheneeum, Camden Eoad. 18mo, pp. 146, stitched in 
wrapper. 1876. Is. 

CONWAY.— Human Sacrifices in England. Four Discourses by Moncure D. 
Conway. 18mo, pp. 64, sewed. 1876. Is. 

CONWAY.— Idols and Ideals. With an Essay on Christianity. By Moncure D. 
Conway, M.A., Author of " The Eastern PUgrimage," &o. Crown 8vo, pp. 352, 
cloth. 1877. 5s. 


14 A Oatahgue of Important Works, 

COOMABA SWAMY.— The Dathavansa ; ■ or, The History of the Tooth Eelic of 
Gotama Buddha, in Pali verse. Edited, with an English Translation, by Mutu 
Coomara Swamy, F.E.A.S. Demy 8to, pp. 174, cloth. 1874. 10s. 6d. English 
Translation. With Notes, pp. 100. 6s. 

COOMABA SWAMY.— SUTTA NiPATA ; or. Dialogues and Discourses of Gotama 
Buddha (2500 years old). Translated from the original Pali. With Notes and 
Introduction. By Mutu Coomara Swamy, F.E.A.S. Crown 8vo, pp. xxxvi. and 
160, cloth. 1874. 6s. 

COBNELIA. A Novel. Post 8vo, pp. 250, boards. 1863. Is. 6d. 

COTTA.— Geology and Histobt. A popular Exposition of all that is known of the 
Earth and its Inhabitants in Pre-historio Times. By Bemhard Ton Ootta, Pro- 
fessor of Geology at the Academy of Mining, Freiberg, in Saxony. 12mo, pp. 
iv. and 84, cloth. 1865. 2s. 

COUSIN. — The Philosophy of Kant. Lectures by Victor Cousin. Translated from 
the French. To which is added a Biographical and Critical Sketch of Kant's 
Life and Writings. By A. G. Henderson. Large post 8vo, pp. xoiv. and 194, 
cloth. .1864. 6s. 

COUSIN. —Elements oe Psychology : included in a Critical Examination of Locke's 
Essay on the Human Understanding, and in additional pieces. Translated from 
the French of Victor Cousin, with an Introduction and Notes. By Caleb S. 
Henry, D.D. Fourth improved Edition, revised according to the Author's last 
corrections. Crown 8vo, pp. 568, cloth, 1871. 8s. 

COWELL.— Pbakeita-Pbakasa; or. The Prakrit Grammar of Vararuohi, with the 
Commentary (Manorama) of Bhamaha ; the first complete Edition of the Original 
Text, with various Eeadings from a collection of Six MSS. in the Bodleian Library 
at Oxford, and the Libraries of the Koyal Asiatic Society and the East India 
House ; with Copious Notes, an English Translation, and Index of Prakrit Words, 
, to which is prefixed an Easy Introduction to Prakrit Grammar. By Edward 
Byles CoweU, of Magdalen Hall, Oxford, Professor of Sanskrit at Cambridge. 
New Edition, with New Preface, Additions, and Corlrections. Second, Issue. 
8vo, pp. xxxi. and 204, cloth, 1868, 14s. 

COWELL. — A Short Ihtroduoiion to the Ordinary Prakwt of the Sanskrit 
Dramas. With a List of Common Irregular Prakrit Words. By B. B. CoweU, 
Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Cambridge, and Hon. LL.D. of the 
University of Edinburgh. Crown 8vo, pp. 40, limp cloth. 1875. 3s. 6d. 

COWELL.— The Sarvadaesana Sangraha. See Trubner's Oriental Series. 

COWLEY.— Poems. By Percy TunniclifE Cowley. Demy 8vo, pp. 104, cloth. 
188L 5b. 

CEANBBOOK— Ckedibilia ; or. Discourses on Questions of Christian Faith. By 
the Eev. James Cranbrook, Edinburgh. Eeissue. Post 8vo, pp. iv. and 190, 
cloth. 1868. 3s. 6d. 

CEANBBOOK.— The Founders OE CHEisstANiTY; or, Discourses upon the Origin 
of the Christian Eeligion. By the Eev. James Cranbrook, Edinburgh. Post 8vo, 
Ijp. xii. and 324. 1868. 6s. 

CBAWFOBD. — Ebcollections of Travel in New Zealand and Australia. By 
James Coutts Crawford, F. G. S. , Eesident Magistrate, Wellington, &c. , &c. 'With 
Maps and Illustrations. 8to, pp. xvi, and 468, cloth. 1880. 18s. 

CBOSLAND.— Apparitions ; An Essay explanatory of Old Facts and a New Theory. 
To which are added Sketches and Adventures. By Newton Crosland. Crown 8vo 
pp. viii, and 166, cloth. 1873. 2s. 6d. 


Published by Triibner cfc Co. 15 

CROSLAND.— Pith : Essays and Sketches Grave and Gat, with some Verses 
and Illustrations. By Newton Crosland. Crown 8vo, pp. 310, cloth. 1881. 5s. 

CUBAS.— TuE Eepublic op Mexico in 1876. A Political and Ethnographical 
Division of the Population, Character, Habits, Costun^es, and Vocations of its 
Inhabitants. Written in Spanish by A. G. Cubas. Translated into English by 
G. E. Henderson. Illustrated with Plates of the Principal Types of the Ethno- 
graphic Families, and several Specimens of Popular Music. 8vo, pp. 130, cloth. 
1881. 5s. 

CTTMMINS. — ^A Gbammab of the Old Fkiesic Language. By A. H. Cummins, 
A.M. Crown Svo, pp. x. and 76, cloth. 1881. 3s. 6d. 

CUNHINGHAUC. — The Ancient Geography of India. I. The Buddhist Period, 
including the Campaigns of Alexander and the Travels of Hwen-Thsang. By 
Alexander Cunningham, Major-General, Royal Engineers (Bengal Betired). With 
13 Maps. Svo, pp. XX. and 590, cloth. 1870. £1, 8s. 

CUITNINGHAM. — The Stupa of Bhaehdt : A Buddhist Monument ornamented with 
numerous Sculptures illustrative of Buddhist Legend and History in the Third 
Century B.c. By Alexander Cunningham, C.S.I., CLE., Maj.-Gen., E.E. (B.R.>, 
DiT.-G«i. Archaeol. Survey of India. Eoyal 8vo, pp. viii. and 144, with 57 Plates, 
cloth. 1879. £3, 3s. 

CnNNINGHAII. — 4iich£OI.ooical Survey op India, Reports from 1862-75. By 
A. Cunningham, C.S.I., CLE., Major-General, R.E. (Bengal Retired), Director- 
General, Archseological Survey of India. With numerous Plates, cloth. Vols. L- 
XI. lOs. each. 

CUSHMAN. — Charlotte Cushman : Her Letters and Memories of her Life. 

Edited by her friend, Emma Stebbins. Square Svo, pp. viii. and 308, cloth. 

With Portrait and Illustrations. 1S79. 12s. 6d. 

OUST.— Languages of the East Indies. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

CUST. — LiNGDiSTic AND ORIENTAL EsSATS. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

OUST.— PiCTUKES OP Indian Life, Sketched with the Pen from 1852 to 1881. By 
K. N. Cust, late I.C.S., Hod. Sec. Royal Asiatic Society. Crown Svo, pp. x. and 
346, cloth. With Maps. 1881. 7s. 6d. 

DANA— A Text-Book op Geology, designed for Schools and Academies. By James 
D. Dana, LL.D., Professor of Geology, &c., at Yale College. Illustrated. Crown 
Svo, pp. vi and 354, cloth. 1876. 10s. 

DANA.— Manual of Geology, treating of the Principles of the Science, with special 
Reference to American Geological History ; for the use of Colleges, Academies, 
and Schools of Science. By James D. Dana, LL.D. Illustrated by a Chart of the 
World, and over One Thousand Figures. Svo, pp. xvi and SOD, and Chart, cL 21s. 

DANA— The Geological Story Briefly Told. An Introduction to Geology for 
the General Reader and for Beginners in the Science. By J. D. Dana, LL.D. 
Illnstrated. 12mo, pp. xii. and 264, cloth. 7s. 6d. 

DANA — A System op Mineralogy. Descriptive Mineralogy, comprising the most 
Recent Discoveries. By J. D. Dana, aided by G. J. Brush. Fifth Edition, re- 
written and enlarged, and illustrated vrith upwards of 600 Woodcuts, with 
Appendix and Corrections. Royal Svo, pp. xlviiL and 892, cloth. £2, 2s. 

DANA— A Text Book of Miseealogt. With an Extended Treatise on Crystallo- 
graphy and Physical Mineralogy. By E. S. Dana, on the Plan and vrith the 
Co-operation of Professor J. D. Dana. Third Edition, revised. Over 800 Wood- 
cuts and 1 Coloured Plate. Svo, pp. viii. and 486, cloth. 1879. 18s. 


16 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

DANA.— Manual op Minekalooy and Lithologt ; Containing tlie Elements of 
the Science of Minerals and Rocks, for the Use of the Practical JMineralogist and 
Geologist, and for Instruction in Schools and Colleges. By J. D. Dana. Third 
Edition, rearranged and rewritten. Illustrated by numerous Woodcuts. Crown 
8vo, pp. viii. and 474, cloth. 1879. 7s. 6d. 

DATES and Data Relating to Rblioious Anthkopology and Biblical Aboh^e- 
OLOGY. (Primseval Period.) Svo, pp. viii. and 106, cloth. 1876. 5s. 

DATTDET. — Lbtibrs fbom my Mill. From the French of Alphonse Daudet, by 
Mary Corey. Fcap. Svo, pp. 160. 1880. Cloth, 3s.; boards, 28. 

DAVIDS— Buddhist Bieth Stoeies. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

DAVIES— Hindu Philosophy. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

DAVIS. — NTabeative of the Noeth Polae Expedition, U.S. Ship Polaris, Cap- 
tain Charles Francis Hall Commanding. Edited under the direction of the Hon. 
G. M. Robeson, Secretary of the Navy, by Rear-Admiral C. H. Davis, U.S.N. 
Third Edition. With numerous Steel and Wood Engravings, Photolithographs, 
and Maps. 4to, pp. 696, cloth. 1881. £1, 8s. 

DAY.— The Peehistoeio Use op Ieon and Steel ; with Observations on certain 
matter ancillary thereto. By St. Jrfhn V, Day, C.E., F.R.S.E., &o. Svo, pp. 
xxiv. and 278, cloth. 1877. 12b. 

DE FLANDRE. — MONOGEAMS OP THEBB OE MoEB LBTTEES, DESIGNED AND DEAWN 

ON Stone. By C. De Flandre, F.S. A. Soot., Edinburgh. With Indices, showing 
the place and style or period of every Monogram, and of each individual Letter. 
4to, 42 Plates, cloth, 1S80. Large paper, £7, 7b. ; small paper, £3, 3s. 

DELEFIEBBE.— HiSTOiEE Litteeaieb dbs Fous. Par Octave Delepierre. Crown 
Svo, pp. 184, cloth. 1860. 6s. 

DELEPIEERE.-^Maoaeonbana Andea ; overum Nouveanx Melanges de Litterature 
Maoaronique. Par Octave Delepierre. Small 4to, pp. 180, printed by WTiitting- 
ham, and handsomely bound in the Roxburghe style. 1862. 10s. 6d. 

DELEPIEERE.— Analyse des Tbavaux de la Sooietb des Philobiblon db Lon- 
DEES. Par Octave Delepierre. Small 4to, pp. viii. and 134. bound in the Rox- 
burghe style. 1862. 10s. 6d. 

DELEPIERRE.— Bevde Analytique dbs Ouveaoes fioEITS EN Centons, depuiB les 
Temps Anciens, jusqu'au xix"™ Sifecle. Par un Bibliophile Beige. Small 4to 
pp. 508, stiff covers. 1868. £1, lOs. ^ ' 

DELEPIERRE.— Tableau db la LittSeatubb du Centon, ohez les Anoiens et chez 
les Modeenes. Par Octave Delepierre. 2 vols, small 4to, pp. 324 and 318 
Paper cover. 1875. £1, Is. 

DELEPIERRE.— L'Enpee : Essai Philosoph qne et Historique Bur les Ldgendes de 
iQ7r%^*'S% ^^^ OcUye pt\emerce. Crown Svo, pp. . 160, paper wrapper. 
1876. 6s. Only 250 copies prmted. *^ * '^'^ 

DENNYS.— AHaitobook OP the Canton Vbenaculae op the Chinese Language. 
Being a Senes of ^troductory Lessons for Domestic and Business Purposes. B v 
N. B. Dennys, M.K,A.S„ &c. Royal Svo, pp. iv. and 228, cloth. 1874. 30s 


Published hy Tmbner & Co. 17 

DENNYS.— A Handbook op Malay Colloquial, as spoken in Singapore, being a 

Series of Introductory Lessons for Domestic and Business Purposes. By N B. 

, Dennys,Ph.D., F.E.G.S.,M.R.A.S. Impl. 8vo, pp. vi. and 204, cloth. 1878. 2l8. 

SENNYS. — The Folk-Loee op China, and its Appinities with that op thb 
Abyan and Semitic Races. By N. E. Dennys, Ph.D., F.B.G.S., M.E.A.S. 
8to, pp. 166, cloth. > 1876. lOs. 6d. 

DE VALDES.— XVII. Opuscules. By Juan De Valdes. Translated from the 
Spanish by John T. Betts. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 188, cloth. 1882. 6s. 

DE VEKE.— Studies in English ; or, Glimpses of the Inner Life of our Language. 
By M. Scheie deVere, LL.D. 8vo, pp. vi. and 365, cloth. 1867. lOs. 6d. 

DE VERE.— Americanisms : The English of the New World. By M. Scheie de 
Vere, LL.D. 8vo, pp. 685, cloth. 1872. 20s. 

DE VINNE.— The Invention op Printinq: A CoUeotionof Texts and Opinions. 
Description of Early Prints and Playing Cards, the Block-Books of the Fifteenth 
Century, the Legend of Lourens Jauszoon Coster of Haarlem, and the "Works of 
John Gutenberg .and his Associates. Illustrated with Fao-similes of Early Types 
and 'Woodcuta. By Theo. L. De Vinne. Second Edition. In royal 870, elegantly 
printed, and bound in cloth, with embossed portraits, and a multitude of Fac- 
similes and Illustrations. 1877. £1, Is. 

DEWEY.— Clasbipication and Subject Index for cataloguing and arranging the 
books and pamphlets of a Library. By Melvil Dewey. 8vo, pp. 42, boards. 
1876. 5b. 

DICKSON.— Who was Scotland's first Printer ? Ane Compendious and breue 
Tractate, in Commendation of Andrew Myllar. Compylit be Robert Dickson, 
F.S.A. Scot. Fcap. 8to, pp. 24, parchment wrapper. 1881. Is. 

DOBSON.— Monograph op the Asiatic Chieoptera, and Catalogue of the Species 
of Bats in the Collection of the Indian Museum, Calcutta. By G. E. Dobson, 
M.A., M.B., F.L.S., &c. 8vo, pp. viii. and 228, cloth. 1876. 12s. 

D'ORSEY.— A Practical Geammab of Portuguese and English, exhibiting in a 
Series of Exercises, in Double Translation, the Idiomatic Structure of both Lan- 
guages, as now written and spoken. Adapted to Ollendorff's System by the Kev. 
Alexander J. D. D'Orsey, of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and Lecturer on 
Public Reading and Speaking at King's College, London. Third Edition. 12mo, 
pp. viii. and 298, cloth. 1868. 7s. 

D'ORSEY. — Colloquial Portuguese ; or. Words and Phrases of Every-day Life. 
Compiled from Dictation and Conversation. For the Use of English Tourists in 
Portugal, Brazil, Madeira, &c. By the Rev. A. J. D. D'Orsey. Third Edition, 
enlarged. 12mo, pp. viii. and 126, cloth. 1868. 3b. 6d. 

DOUGLAS. — Chinese-English Dictionary op the Vernacular or Spoken Lan- 
guage of Amoy, with the principal variations of the Chang-Chew and Chin- 
Chew Dialects. By the Rev. Carstairs Douglas, M. A, LL.D., Glasg., Missionary 
of the Presbyterian Church in England. High quarto, double columns, pp. 632, 
cloth. 1873. £3, 3s. 

DOUGLAS. — Chihbse LANOtTAOE AND LITERATURE. Two Lectures delivered at the 
Royal Institution, by E. K. Douglas, of the British Museum, and Professor of 
Chinese at King's College. Crown 8vo, pp. 118, cloth. 1875. 5s. 

DOUGLAS. — The Life op Jenohiz Khan. Translated from the Chinese. With an 
Introduction. By Robert K. Douglas, of the British Museum, and Professor of 
Chinese at Being's College. Crown 8vo, pp. xxxvi. and 106, cloth. 1877. 5s. 

i B 


18 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

DOUSE.— Gkimm's Law. A Study ; or. Hints towards an Explanation of the so- 
called "LautversoMebung;" to which are added some Remarks on the Primitive 
Indo-European K, and several Appendices. By T. Lb Marohant Douse. 8vo, 
pp. xvi. and 232, cloth. 1876. 10s. 6d. 

DOWSON. — ^DiCTiONAEY OP Hindi; Mythologt, &c. See Trtibner's Oriental 
Series, 

DOWSON. — A Gbammae of the tTKDn OK HindSstanI Language. By John Dow- 
son, M.E.A.S., Professor of Hindustani, Staff College, Sandhurst. Crown 8vo, 
pp. xvi. and 264, with 8 Plates, cloth. 1872. 10s. 6d, 

DOWSON. — A Hindustani Exercise Book; containing a Series of Passages and 
Extracts adapted for Translation into Hindiistani. By John Dowson, M.B,A.S., 
Professor of Hindustani, Staff College, Sandhurst. Crown 8vo, pp. 100, limp 
cloth. 1872. 2s. 6d. 

DUNCAN.— Geography of India, comprising a Descriptive Outline of all India, 
and a Detailed Geographical, Commercial, Social, and Political Account of each 
of its Provinces. With Historical Notes. By George Duncan. Tenth Edition 
(Revised and Corrected to date from the latest Official Information). 18mo, pp. 
viii. and 182, limp cloth. 1880. Is. 6d. 

DUSAR. — A Grammar oe the German Language ; with Exercises. By P. Friedrich 
Dusar, First German Master in the Military Department of Cheltenham College. 
Second Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 208, cloth. 1879. 43. 6d. 

EARLY ENGLISH TEXT SOCIETY.— Subscription, one guinea per annum. Extra 
Series. Subscriptions — Small paper, one guinea; large j)aper, two guineas, per 
annum. List of publications on application. 

EASTWICK.— Khirad Aproz (the Illuminator of the Understanding). By Maulavl 
Hafizu'd-din. A New Edition of the Hindiistani Text, carefully revised, with 
Notes, Critical and Explanatory. By Edward B. Eastwiok, F.E.S., FiS.A., 
M.R.A.S., Professor of Hindfistani at Haileybury College. Imperial 8vo, pp. 
xiv. and 319, cloth. Reissue, 1867. 18s. 

EASTWICK.— The Gulistan. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

ECHO (Deutsohes). The German Echo. A Faithful Mirror of German Conver- 
sation. By Ludwig Wolfram. With a Vocabulary. By Henry P. Skelton. 
Post 8vo, pp. 130 and 70, cloth. 1863. Ss. J J j a <= uuu 

ECHO FRANpAIS. A PRACTICAL GuiDE TO Conversation. By Fr. de la Frustori 
With a complete Vocabulary. By Anthony Maw Border. Post 8vo, pp. 120 and 
72, cloth. 1860. 3s. 

ECO ITALIANO (L'). A Praoticai, Guide to Italian Conversation. By Eueens 
Camerini. With a complete Vocabulary. By Henry P. Skelton. Post 8vo, pp. 
: VI., 128, and 98, cloth. 1860, 4s. 6d. 

ECO DE MADRID The Echo of Madrid. A Practical Guide to Spanish Con- 
versation. By J. E. Hartzenbusch and Henry Lemming. With a complete 
Vocabulary, containing copious Explanatory Remarks. By Henrv Lemmine 
Post 8vo, pp. xii., 144, and 83, cloth. 1860. 5s. ■> j & 

EDDA S«mundar Hinns ^oba. The Edda of Ssemund the Learned. Translated 
from the Old Norse by Benjamin Thorpe. Complete in 1 vol. fcap. 8vo pp. viii. 
and 132, and pp. viu. and 170, cloth. 1866. 7s. 6d. 


Fuhlished hy Triibner dc Co. 19 

BDKINS.— China's Place in Philolooy. An attempt to show that the Languages 
of Europe and Asia have a common origin. By the Kev. Joseph Edkins. Crown 
8vo, pp. xxiii. and 403, cloth. 1871. 10s. 6d. 

EDEINS. — Introduotion to the Study of the Chinbsk Characters. By J. Edkins, 
D.D., Peking, China. Koyal 8vo, pp. 340, paper boards. 1876. 18s. 

EDKINS.— Religion in China. See English and Foreign Philosophical Library, 
Vol. XIII. 

EDKINS.— Chinese Buddhism. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

EDWARDS.— Memoirs of LrBEARiES, together with a Practical Handbook of Library 
Economy. By Edward Edwards. Numerous Illustrations. 2 vols, roval 8vo, cloth. 
VoL i. pp. xxviii. and 841 ; Vol. ii. pp. xxx-vi and 1104. 1859. £2, 8s. 
Ditto, large paper, imperial 8vo, cloth. £4, 4s. 

EDWAKDS. — Chapters op the Biosbaphical History oe the Feesch Academy. 
1629-1863. With an Appendix relating to the Unpublished Chronicle " liber de 
Hyda." By Edward Edwards. 8vo, pp. 180, cloth. 1864. 6s. 
Ditto, large paper, royal 8yo. 10s. 6d. 

EDWAEDS.— Libraries and Founders op Libraries. By Edward Edwards. 8vo, 
pp. six. and 506, cloth. 1865. 18s. 
Ditto, large paper, imperial 8vo, cloth. £1, lOs. 

EDWARDS.— Free Town Libraries, their Formation, Management, and History in 
Britain, France, Germany, and America. Together with Brief Notices of Book 
Collectors, and of the respective Places of Deposit of their Surviving Collections. 
By Edward Edwards. 8vo, pp. xvi. and 634, cloth. 1869^ 2l3. 

EDWARDS. — Lives ov the Founders op the British Museum, with Notices of its 
Chief Augmentors and other Benefactors. 1570-1870. By Edward Edwards. 
With Illustrations and Plans. 2 vols. 8vo, pp. xii. and 780, cloth. 1870. 30s. 

EGER AND GRIME. — An Early English Eomance. Edited from Bishop Percy's 
Folio Manuscripts, about 1650 A.D. By John W. Hales, M.A., FeUow and late 
Assistant Tutor of Christ's College, Cambridge, and Frederick J. Furnivall, M.-A., 
of Trinity "Hall, Cambridge. 4to, large paper, half bound, Eoxburghe style, pp. 
64. 1867. 10s. 6d. 

EGGELING.— See AuCTORES Sanskriti, Vol. IV. 

EGYPTIAN GENERAL STAFF PUBLICATIONS :— 

Provinces op the Equator : Summary of Letters and Reports of the Governor- 
General. Part 1. 1874. Koyal 8vo, pp. viii. and ,90, stitched, with Map. 
1877. 5s. 

General Report on the Province op Kordopan. Submitted to General C. P. 
Stone, Chief of the General Staff Egyptian Army. By Major H. G. Prout, 
Corps of Bnginers, Commanding Expedition of Reconnaissance. Made, at El- 
Obeiyad (Kordofan), March 12th, 1876. Royal 8vo, pp. 232, stitched, with 
6 Maps. 1877. 10s. 6d. . , , 

Bbpoet on the Seizure by the Abyssinians of the Geological and MineraJo- 
gioal Reconnaissance Expedition attached to the General Staff of the Egyptian 
Army. By L. H. Mitchell, Chief of the Expedition. Containing an Account 
of the subsequent Treatment of the Prisoners and Final Release of the Com- 
mander. Royal 8vo, pp. xii. and 126, stitched, with a Map. 1878. 7s. 6d. 

EGYPTIAN CALENDAR for the year 1295 A.H. (1878 A.D.) : Corresponding with the 
years 1594, 1595 of the Koptic Era. 8vo, pp. 98, sewed. 1878, 2s. 6d. 


20 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

EHRLICH.— French Reader : With Notes and Vocabulary. By H. "W. Ehi-lich. 
12mo, pp. viii. and 125, limp cloth. 1877. Is. 6d. 

EITEL.— Buddhism : Its Historical, Theoretical, and Popiikr Aspects. In Th^^ee 
Lectures. By B. J. Eitel, M.A., Ph.D. Second Edition. Demy 8vo, pp. 130. 
1873. 5s. , 

EITEL. — Feng-Shui ; or. The Rudiments of Natural Science in China. By E. J. 
Eitel, M.A., Ph.D. Koyal Sto, pp. vi. and 84, sewed. 1873. Bs. 

EITEL. — Handbook fob the Student of Chinese Buddhism. By the Eev. E. J. 
Eitel, of the London Missionary Society. Crown 8to, pp. viii. and 224, cloth. 
1870. 18s. 

ELLIOT.— Memoirs on the Histokt, Folk-Lore, and Distbibution of the Races 
OF THE North- Wbbtebn Provinces of India. By the late Sir Henry M. Elliot, 
K.C.E. Edited, revised, and rearranged by John Beames, M.R.A.S., &c., &c. In 
2 vols, demy 8vo, pp. xx. , 370, and 396, with 3 large coloured folding Maps, cloth. 
1869. £1, 16s. 

ELLIOT.— The Histoby of India, as told by its own Historians. The Muhammadan 
Period. Edited from the Posthumous Papers of the late Sir H. M. Elliot, K.C.B., 
East India Company's Bengal Civil Service. Revised and continued by Professor 
John Dowson, -M.R.A.S., Staff College, Sandhurst. 8vo. Vol. I. o.p.— Vol. II., 
pp. X. and 580, cloth. 18s.— Vol. IIL, pp. xii. and 627, cloth. 24s.— VoL IV., 
pp. xU. and 564, cloth. 1872. 21s.— Vol. V., pp. x. and 576, cloth. 1873. 
21s.— Vol. VL, pp. viii. 574, cloth. 21s.— Vol. VII., pp. viii. -574. 1877. 21s. 
Vol. VIII., pp. xxxii.-444. With Biographical, Gteographical, and General 
Index. 1877. 24s. 

ELLIS. — Etruscan Numerals. By Robert EUis, B.D., late Fellow of St. John's 
College, Cambridge. 8vo, pp. 52, sewed. 1876. 2s. 6d. 

ENGLISH DIALECT SOCIETY.— Subscription, 10s. 6d. per annum. List of publica- 
tions on application. 

ENGLISH AND FOEEIGN PHILOSOPHICAL LIBKAKY (THE). 

Post 8vo, cloth, uniformly bound. 

I. to III.— A History of Materialism, and Criticism of its present Importance. 
By Professor F. A. Lange. Authorised Translation from the German 
by Ernest C. Thomas. In three volumes. Vol. I. Second Edition. 
pp. 350. 1878. 10s. 6d.— Vol. II., pp. viii. and 398. 1880. 10s. 6d. 
—Vol. IIL, pp. viii. and 376. 1881. 10s. 6d. 

IV.— Natural Law : an Essay in Ethics. By Edith Simcox. Second 
Edition. Pp. 366. 1878. 10s. 6d. 
V. and VI.— The Creed of Christendom ; its Foundations contrasted with Super- 
structure. ByW.R. Greg. Sixth Edition, with a New Introduction. 
In two volumes, pp. 280 and 290. 1879. 15s. 
VII.— Outlines of the History of Religion to the Spread of the 
Universal Religions.- By. Prof. C. P. Tiele. Translated from 
the Dutch by J. Estlin Carpenter, M.A., with the author's assist- 
ance. Second Edition. Pp. xx. and 250. 1880. 7s. 6d 
VIII.— Religion in China; containing a brief Account of the Three ReUgions 
of the Chinese; with Observations on the Prospects of Christian 
Conversion amongst that People. By Joseph Edkins, D.D., Peking. 
Second Edition. Pp. xvi. and 260. 1878. 7s. 6d. 

IX.— A Candid Examination of Theism. By Physicus. Pp. 216. 
1878i 7b,' od. 


Published by Truhner & Co. 21 

ENGLISH AND FOREIGN PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY— coji Jin ue(i. ' 

X. — The Colodr-Sense ; ita Origin and Development ; an Essay in Com- 
parative Psychology. By Grant Allen, B.A., author of " Phy- 
siological iEsthetics." Pp. xii. and 282. 1879. 10s. 6d. 
XI.— The Philosophy oe Music ; being the substance of a Course of 
Lectures delivered at the Eoyal Institution of Great Britain in 
February and March 1877. By William Pole, F.R.S., F.K.S.E., 
Mus. Doc, Oxen. Pp.336. 1879. 10s. 6d. 

Xn. — CONTMBDTIONS TO THE HiSTORT OE THE DEVELOPMENT OE THE HUMAN 
Race : Lectures and Dissertations, by Lazarus Geiger. Translated 
from the Second German Edition, by David Asher, Ph.D. Pp. 
X. and 1.56. 1880. 63. 

XIII. — Db. Appleton : his Life and Literary Relics. By J. H. Appleton, 
M.A., and A. H. Sayce, M.A. Pp. 350. 188L 10s. 6d. 

XIV. — Edgab Quinet : His Early Life and "Writings. By Richard Heath-. 
With Portraits, Illustrations, and an Autograph Letter. Pp. xxiii. 
and 370. 188L 12b. 6d. 
XV. — The Essence oe Christianity. By Ludwig Feuerbach. Translated 
from the Second German Edition by Marian Evans, translator of 
Strauss's " Life of Jesus." Second English Edition. Pp. xz. and 
340. 1881. 7s. 6d. 

XVI. — ^AuGUSTE COMTE AND POSITIVISM. By the late John Stuart Mill, 

M.P. Third Edition. 8vo, pp. 200. 1882. 3s. 6d. 
XVII. — Essays and Dialogues oe Giacomo Leopardi. Translated by 
Charles Edwardes. With Biographical Sketch. Pp. xliv. and 216. 
1882. 

Eoctra Series. 
I. and II. — Lessing : His life and Writings. By James Sime, M.A. Second 
Edition. 2 vols., pp. xxii. and 328, and xvi. and 358, with por- 
traits. 1879. 21s. 
III. — An Account of the Polynesian Race : its Origin and Migrations, 
and the Ancient History of the Hawaiian People to the Times of. 
Kamehameha I. By Abraham Fomander, Circuit Judge of the 
Island of Maui, H.I. Vol. I., pp. xvi. and 248. 1877. 7s. 6d. 
IV. and v.— Oriental Religions, and their Relation to Universal Religion — 
India. By Samuel Johnson. In 2 vols., pp. viii. and 408; viii. 
and 402. 1879. 2l3. 
VI. — An Account oe the Polynesian Race : its Origin and Migration, 
and the Ancient History of the Hawaiian People to the Times of 
Kamehameha I. By Abraham Fornander, Circuit Judge of the 
Island of Maui, H.L Vol. IL, pp. viii. and 400, cloth. 1880. 10s. 6d. 
ETHERINGTON.— The Student's Grammar oe the Hind! Language. By the Rev. 
W. Etherington, Missionary, Benares. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. xiv., 
255, and xiii., cloth. 1873. 12s. 
EYTON.— Domesday Studies : An Analysis and Digest or the Staeeordshire 
Survey. Treating of the Method of Domesday in its Relation to Staffordshire, 
&c., with Tables, Notes, &c. By the Rev. Robert W. Eyton, late Rector of 
Ryton, Salop. 4to-, pp. vii. and 135, cloth. 1881. £1, Is. 
FABEB. — The Mind op Mencius. See Triibuer's Oriental Series. 
FALEE. — Art in the House. Historical, Critical, and .fflsthetical Studies on the 
Decoration and Furnishing of the Dwelling. By Jacob von Falke, Vice-Director 
of the Austrian Museum of Axt and Industry at Vienna. Translated from the Ger- 
man. Edited, with Notes, by Charles C. Perkins, M.A. Royal 8vo, pp. xxx. 
356, cloth. With Coloured Frontispiece, 60 Plates, and over 150 Illustrations in 
the Text. 1878. £3. 


22 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

FAKLEY.— EsTPT, CrpEDS, AND Asiatic ToBKBr. By J. Lewis Farley, author of 
"The Eesources of Turkey," &e. 8vo, pp. xvi. and 270, cloth gUt. 1878. 
10s. 6d. 

FEATHERMAN.— The SOCIAL HiSTOET OF the Kaces of Mankind. Vol. V. 
The Abam^ians. By A. Featherman. Demy 8vo, pp. xvii. and 664, cloth. 
1881. £1, Is. 

FENTON.— Eablt Hebrew Life: a Study in Sociology. By John Fenton. Svo, 
pp. xxlv. and 102, cloth. 1880. 5s. 

FERGUSON AND BURGESS.— THE Cave Temples OP INDIA. By James Ferguson, 
D.C.L., F.K.S., and Oames Burgess, F.E.G-.S. Impl. 8to, pp. xx. and 536, with 
98 Plates, half bound. 1880. £2, 2s. 

FER6USS0N. — Chinese Reseabches. First Part. Chinese Chronology and 
Cycles. By Thomas Fergusson, Memher of the North China Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society. Crown Svo, pp. viii. and 274, sewed. 1881. 10s. 6d. 

FEUERBACH.— The ESSENCE OP Chbistianitt. By Ludwig Feuerbaoh. Translated 
from the Second German Edition by Marian Evans, translator of Strauss's " Life 
of Jesus." Second English Edition. Post 8to, pp. xx. and 340, cloth, 1881. 
7s. 6d. 

FICHTE.— J. G. FicHTB's Popular WoBKa : The Nature of the Scholar— The Voca- 
tion of Man — The Doctrine of Religion. With a Memoir by William Smith, LL.D. 
Demy 8to, pp. viii. and 564, cloth. 1873. 15s. 

FICHTE.— The Chabacteeistics op the Present Age. By Johann Gottlieb Fiohte. 
Translated from the German by WiUiam Smith. Post Svo, pp. xi. and 271, cloth. 
1847. 6s. 

FICHTE.— Memoir op Johann Gottlieb Fiohte. By William Smith. Second 
Edition. Post 8vo, pp. 168, cloth. 1848. 4s. 

FICHTE.— On the Nature op the Scholar, and its Manipbstations. By Johann 
Gottlieb Piehte. Translated from the German by William Smith. Second Edi- 
tion. Post 8vo, pp. vii. and 131, cloth. 1848. 3s. 

FICHTE.— The Science op Knowledge. By J. 6. Fichte. Translated from the 
German by A. E. Kroeger. Crown Svo, pp. 378, cloth. 1868. 10s. 

FICHTE.— The Science op Rights. By J. G. Fichte. Translated from the German 
by A. E. Kroeger. Crown 8vo, pp. 506, cloth. 1869. 10s. 

FICHTE.— New Exposition op the Science op Knowledge. By J G Fichte 
Translated from the German by A. E. Krceger. Svo, pp. vi and 182, cloth. 1869. 6s'. 

FIELD.— Odtlines op an International Code. By David Dudley Field Second 
Edition. Royal Svo, pp. iii. and 712, sheep. 1876. £2," 2s. 

FIGANIERE.— Elva: AStoryoptheDarkAges. By Viscount de FiganiSre GO 
St. Anne, &c. Crown Svo, pp. viii. and 194, cloth. 1878. 5s, » • • 

FISCHEL.— Specimens op Modern German Pbose and Pobtet; with Notes 
Grammatical, Historical, and Idiomatical. To which is added a Short Sketch of 
the History of German Literature. By Dr. M. M. Fisohel, formerly of Queen's 
College, Harley Street, and late German Master to the Stockwell Grammar School 
Crown Svo, pp. viu. and 280, cloth. 1880. 4s. »>-"""'. 

JISKE.— The Unseen Wobld, and other Essays. By John Fiske M A T.T, -R 
Crown Svo, pp. 350. 1876. 10s. ' '' ^^•*'- 


Published by Trilbner & Co. 23 

FISKE.— Myths and Mtth-Makebs; Old Tales and Superstitions, interpreted by 
Comparative Mythology. By John Fiske, M.A., LL.B., Assistant Librarian, and 
late Lecturer on Philosophy at Harvard University. Crown 8vo, pp. 260, cloth. 
1873. 10s. 6d. 

riTZGERAlD.— Australian Oeohids. By E.D. Fitzgerald, F.L.S. Folio.— Part I. 
7 Plates.— Part IL 10 Plates.— Part III. 10 Plates.— Part IV. 10 Plates.— 
Part V. 10 Plates.— Part VI. 10 Plates. Bach Part, Coloured 21».; Plain, lOs. 6d. 

FORJETT.— Extern AL Evidences OF Cheistiamtt. By E. H. Foriett. 8to, pp. 
114, cloth. 1874. 2s. 6d. 

FORNANDER.— The Polynesian Race. See English and Foreign Philosophical 
Library, Extra Series, Vols. III. and VI. 

FORSTER.— Political Presentments.- By 'Williani Forster, Agent-General for 
New South Wales. Crowa 8vo, pp. 122, cloth. 1878. 4s. 6d. 

FOULKES.- The Daya Bhaga, the Law of Inheritance of the Sarasvati Vilasa. 
The Original Sanskrit Text, with Translation by the Eev. Thos. Foulkes, F.L.S., 
M.E.A.S., F.R.G.S., Fellow of the University of Madras, &c. Demy 8vo, pp. 
xxvi. and 194-162, cloth. 1881. 10s. 6d. 

FOX. — Memorial Edition op Collected Works, by W. J. Fox. 12 vols. 8vo, 
cloth. S,S. 

FRANKLYN.— Odtunbs oe Military Law, and the Laws oe EviDEiroE. By H. B. 
Franklyn, LL.B. Crown 16mo, pp. viii. and 152, cloth. 1874. 3s. 6d. 

FRIEDRICH. — Progressive German Reader, with Copious Notes to the First Part. 
ByP. Fiiedrich. Crown 8vo, pp. 166, cloth. 1868. 4s. 6d. 

FRIEDRICH. — A GRAMMATICAL COITRSB OF THE GERMAN LANeUAQE. By P. Fried- 

rich. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 102, cloth. 1877. 3s. 6d. 

FRIEDRICH.— A GRAMMAR OF THE GERMAN LANStTASE, WITH EXERCISES. See 
uitder DcsAR. 

FRIEDERICI. — BiBLIOTHECA Oribntalis, or a Complete List of Books, Papers, 
Serials, and Essays, published in England and the Colonies, German'y and 
France ; on the History, Geography, Religions, Antiquities, Literature, and 
Languages of the East. Compiled by Charles Friederici. 8vo, boards. 1876, 
pp. 86, 2s. 6d. 1877, pp. 100, 3s. 1878, pp. 112, 3s. 6d. 1879, 3s. 1880, 3s. 

FRCEMBLING. — GRADUATED German Reader. Consisting of a Selection from the 
most Popular Writers, arranged progressively ; with a complete Vocabulary for 
the first part. ByFriedrichOtto Froembling. Sixth Edition. 12mo, pp. viU. and 
306, cloth. 1879. 3s. 6d. 

FRCEMBLING. — GRADUATED Exercises foe Translation into German. Consist- 
ing of Extracts from the best English Authors, arranged progressively ; with an 
Appendix, containing Idiomatic Notes. By Friedrich Otto Froembling, Ph.D., 
Principal German Master at the City of London School. Crown 8vo, pp. xiv. and 
322, cloth. With Notes, pp. 66. 1867. 4s. 6d. Without Notes, 4s. 

FROUDE.— The Book of Job. By J. A. Froude, M.A., late Fellow of Exeter Col- 
lege, Oxford. Reprinted from the Westminster Seview. 8vo, pp. 38, cloth. Is. 

FRUSTON.— Echo Franpais. A Practical Guide to French Conversation. By F. 

de la Fruston. With a Vocabulary. 12mo, pp. vi. and 192, cloth. 3s. 
FRYER.- The Khyeng People of the Sandoway Distbiot, Abakan. By G. E. 
• Fryer, Major, M.S.C., Deputy Commissioner, Sandoway. With 2 Plates. 8vo, 

pp. 44, cloth. 1875. 3a. 6d. 


24 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

FRYER.— PifLi Studies. No. I. Analysis, and Pali Text of the SubodhSlankara, or 
Easy Khetoric, by Sangharakkhita Thera. 8vo, pp. 35, cloth. 1875. Ss. 6d. 

FURNIVALL.— Education in Eaelt Enolakd. Some Notes used as forewords to 
a Collection of Treatises on "Manners and Meals in Olden Times," for the Early 
English Text Society. By Frederick J. FurnivaU, M.A. 8to, pp. 4 andlxxiv., 
sewed. 1867. Is. 

GALLOWAY. — A Tkbatise ON Fuel. Scientific and Practical. By Eohert Gallo- 
way, M.;R.I.A., F.O.S., &o. With lUustrations. Post 8vo, pp. x. and 136, 
cloth. 1880. 6s. 

GALLOWAY.— Education: Soientieic and Technical; or, How the Inductive 
Sciences are Taught, and How they Ought to be Taught. By Robert Galloway, 
M.R.I.A., F.C.S. 8vo, pp.Exvi. and 462, cloth. 1881. 10s. 6d. 

GARBE. — See Auctobes Sanskeiti, Vol. III. 

GARFIELD. — THE LIFE AND PUBLIC Seevicb oe James A. Gakfibld, Twentieth 
President of the United States. A Biographical Sketch. By Captain F. H. Mason, 
late of the 42d Regiment, 11.8. A. With a Preface by Bret Harte. Crown 8vo. 
pp. vi. and 134, cloth. With Portrait. 1881. 2s. 6d. 

GARRETT.— A CLASSICAL DiOTlONAKT OE INDIA : Illustrative of the Mythology, 
Philosophy, Literature, Antiquities, Arts, Manners, Customs, &c., of the Hindus. 
By John Garrett, Director of Public Instruction in Mysore. 8vo, pp. x. and 794, 
cloth. With Supplement, pp. 160. 1871 and 1873. £1, 16.?. 

GAUTAMA.— The Institutes of. See Auotores Sanskbiti, Vol. II. 

GAZETTEER op THE CENTRAL Peovinces OF INDIA. Edited by Charles Grant, 
Secretary to the Chief Commissioner of the Central Provinces. Second Edition. 
With a very large folding Map of the Central Provinces of India. Demy 8vo, pp. 
clvii. amd 582, cloth. 1870. £1, 4s. 

GEIGER. — A Peep at Mexico ; Narrative of a Journey across the Republic from 
the Pacific to the Gulf, in December 1873 and January 1874. By J. L. Geiger, 
F.R.G.S, Demy 8vo, pp. 368, with Maps and 45 Original Photographs. Cloth, 
24s. 

GEIGER. — Contributions to the Histoet oe the Development of the Human 
Race : Lectures and Dissertations, by Lazarus Geiger. Translated from the 
Second German Edition, by David Asher, Ph.D. Post 8vo, pp. X.-156, cloth. 
1880. 6s. 

GELDART. — FAITH AND Freedom. Fourteen Sermons. By E. M. Geldart, M.A. 
Crown 8vo, pp. vi. and 168, cloth. 1881. 4s. 6d. 

GEOLOGICAL MAGAZINE (The) : OE, MONTHLY JOURNAL OP Geoloot. With 
which is incorporated "The Geologist." Edited by Henry Woodward, LL.D., 
F.R.S., F.G.S., &c., of the British Museum. Assisted by Professor John Morris 
M.A.,F.G.S., &c., and Robert Etheridge, F.R.S., L. & E., F.G.S., &c., of the 
Museum of Practical Geology. 8vo, cloth. 1866 to 1880. 20s. each. 

GILES.— Chinese Sketches.— By Herbert A. Giles, of H.B.M.'s China Consular 
Service. 8vo, pp. 204, cloth. 1875. 10s. 6d. 

GILES. — A Dictionary oe Colloquial Idioms in the Mandarin Dialect By 
Herbert A. Giles. 4to, pp. 65, half bound. 1873. 283. 

GILES.— Synoptical Studies in Chinese Character. By Herbert A Giles 8™ 
pp. 118, half bound. 1874. ISs. ° "•• 


Published by Trubner & Co. 25 

GILES.— Chinese without a Teaoheb. Being a Collection of Easy and Useful 
Sentences in the Mandarin Dialect. "With a Vocabulary. By Herbert A. Giles. 
12mo, pp. 60, haH bound. 1872. 5s. 

GILES.— The San Tzu Ching j or, Three Character Classic ; and the Ch'Jen Tsu 
Wen ; or, Thousand Character Essay. Metrically Translated by Herbert A. GUes. 
12nio, pp. 28, half bound. 1873. 23. 6d. 

GLASS.— Advance Thodght. By Charles E. Glass. Crown 8vo, pp. xxxvi. and 188, 
cloth. 1876. 6s. 

' GOETHE'S Faust.— See Sooones. 
GOETHE'S Minor Poiais. See Selss. 

GOLDSTUCKEE. — A Diotionakt, Sanskrit and Enolish, extended and improved 
from the Second Edition of the Dictionary of Professor H. H. Wilson, with his 
sanction and concurrence. Together with a Supplement, Grammatical Appen- 
dices, and an Index, serving as a Sanskrit-English Vocabulary. By Theodore Gold- 
stuoker. Parts I. to VI. 4to, pp. 400. 1856-63. 6s. each. 

OOLDSTifCKER.— See AwctobesSanskeiti, Vol. I. 

GOOROO SIMPLE. Strange Surprising Adventures of the Venerable G. S; and hi» 
Five Disciples, Noodle, Doodle, Wiseacre, Zany, and Foozle ; adorned with Fifty 
Illustrations, drawn on wood, by Alfred Crowquill. A companion Volume t» 
" Miinchhausen " and "Owlglass, "based upon the famous Tamul tale of theGooroo 
Paramartan, and exhibiting, in the form of a fkUfuUy-construoted consecutive 
narrative, some of the finest specimens of Eastern wit and humour. Elegantly 
printed on tinted paper, in crown 8vo, pp. 223, richly gilt ornamental cover, gilt 
edges. 1861. 10s. 6d. 

COVER. — The Folk-Sohgs of Southern India. By C. E. Gover, Madras. Con- 
tents : Canarese Songs ; Badaga Songs ; Coorg Songs ; Tamil Songs ; The Cural ; 
Malayalam Songs; Telugu Songs. 8vo, pp. xxviii. and 300, cloth. 1872. 
10s. 6d. 

GRAMMATOGRAPHT. A Manual or Eefbrenoe to the Alphabets oe Ancient 
and Modern LANOUAOEa. Based on the German Compilation of F. Ballhom. 
Eoyal 8vo, pp. 80, cloth. 1861. 7b. 6,d. 

GRAY. — ^Dabwiniana : Essays and Eeviews pertaining to, Darwinism. By Asa 
Gray. Crown 8vo, pp. xii. and 396, cloth. 1877. 10s. 

GRAY.— Natural Science and Religion : Two Lectures Delivered to the Theo- 
logical School of Yale College. By Asa Gray. Crown 8vo, pp. 112, cloth. 1880. 5s. 

GREEN.— Shakespeare and the Emblem- Writers : An Exposition of their Simi- 
larities of Thought and Expression. Preceded by a View of the Emblem-Book 
Literature down to a.d. 1616. By Henry Green, M.A. In one volume, pp. xvi. 
572, profusely illustrated with Woodcuts and Photolith. Plates, elegantly bound 
in cloth gilt, 1870. Large medium 8vo, £1, lis. 6d. ; large imperial 8vo. £2, 12s. 6d. 

GREEN.— Andrea AlCLiTl, and his Books of Emblems : A Biographical aod Biblio- 
graphical Study. By Henry Green, M.A. With Ornamental Title, Portraits, 
and other Ulustrations. Dedicated to Sir William StirUng-Maxwell, Bart. , Rector 
of the University of Edinburgh. Only 250 copies printed. Demy 8vo, pp. 360, 
handsomely bound. 1872. £1, Is. 


26 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

GREENE.-A NEW Method op Leakning to Read, 'Wkite, aud Speak the 
Febnoh LANsnAGE ; or, First Lessons in French (Introductory to Ollendortt s 
Larger Grammar). By G. W. Greene, Instructor in Modern Languages in Brown 
University. Third Edition, enlarged and rewritten. Fcap. 8vo, pp. <24», cloth. 
1869. 38. 6d. 

GREG.— Tkuth versus EDrFlCATlON. By W. B. Greg. Fcap. 8vo, pp. 32, cloth. 
1869. Is. 

GREG.— "Why AEE Women Eedustdant? By W. K. Greg. Fcap. 8vo, pp. 40, cloth. 
1869. Is. 

GEEG.— LiTEEAET AND SOCIAL JUDGMENTS. By W. B. Greg. Fourth Edition, 
considerably enlarged. 2 vols, crown 8vo, pp. 310 and 288, cloth. 1877. 15s. 

CtREG. — MisTAKB)N Aims and Attainable Ideals of the Artisan Class. By W. 
E. Greg. Crown 8to, pp. vi. and 332, cloth. 1876. 10s. 6d. 

GREG. — Enigmas of Lipb. By W. E. Greg. Thirteenth Edition, with a postscript. 
Contents: EeaUsable Ideals. Malthus Notwithstanding. Non-SurVival of the 
Fittest. Limits and Directions of Human Development. The Significance of Life. 
De Profundis. Elsewhere. Appendix. Crown 8to, pp. xxii. and 314, cloth. 
1879. 10s. 6d. 

GREG.— Political Problems for our Age and Country. By W. E. Greg. Con- 
tents: I. Constitutional and Autocratic Statesmanship. II. England's Future 
Attitude and IMission. III. Disposal of the Criminal Classes. IV. Eecent 
Change in the Character of English Crime. Y. The Intrinsic Vice of Trade- 
Unions. VI. Industrial and Co-operative Partnerships. VII. The Economic 
Problem. VIII. Political Consistency. IX. The Parliamentary Career. X. The 
Price we pay for Self-government. XI. Vestryism. XII. Direct v. Indirect 
Taxation. XIII. The New E^gime, and how to meet it. Demy 8vo, pp. 342, 
cloth. 1870. 10s. 6d. 

GREG.— The Great Duel : Its true Meaning and Issues. By W. B. Greg. Crown 
8vo, pp. 96, cloth. 1871. 2s. 6d. 

GREG.- The Creed of Christendom. See English and Foreign Philosophical 
Library, Vols. V. and VI. 

GREG.— EOCKS Ahead ; or. The Wamings of Cassandra. By "W. E. Greg. Second 
Edition, with a Eeply to Obiectors. Crown 8vo, pp. xliv. and 236, cloth. 1874. 
9s. 

GREG.- MisoELLANBOns Essays. By W. E. Greg. Crown 8vo, pp. 260, cloth. 
1881. 7s. 6d. 
Contents :— Eocks Ahead and Harbours of Befuge. Foreign Policy of Great 
Britain. The Echo of the Antipodes. A Grave Perplexity before us. Obli- 
gations of the Sou. The Bight Use of a Surplus. The Great Twin 
Brothers : Louis Napoleon and Benjamin Disraeli. Is the Popular Judgment 
in Politics more Just than that of the Higher Orders ? Harriet Martinean. 
Verify your Compass. The Prophetic Element in the Gospels. Mr. Frederick 
Harrison on the Future Life. Can Truths be Apprehended which could 
not have been discovered ? 

GREG.— lNTBRLEA\rES IN THE "WORKDAY PhOSB OP TWENTY YEARS. Bv PerCV Greg. 
Fcap. 8vo, pp. 128, cloth. 1875. 2s. 6d. j j e 

. GREG.— The Devil's Advocate. By Percy Greg, Author of " Interleaves." 2 vols. 
post8vo, pp. iv., 340, and 352, cloth. 1878. £1, Is. 


Published ly Trvhner & Co. -27 

6RE6.— AOEOSS THE Zodiac: The Story of a "Wrecked Record. Deciphered, 
Translated, and Edited by Percy Greg, Author of " The Devil's Advocate," &c. 
In 2 vols, crown 8vo, pp. vi.-296, and vi.-288, cloth. 1880. 21s. 

GRIFFIN.— The Rajas of the Punjab. ■ Being the History of the Principal States 
in the Punjab, and their Political Relations with the British Government. By 
lepel H. Griffin, Bengal Civil Service, Acting Secretary to the Government of the 
Punjab, Author of "The Punjab Chiefs," &c. Second Edition. Royal 8vo, 
pp. xvi. and 630, cloth. 1873. SI, Is. 

GKIFFIN.— The World under Glass. By Frederick Griffin, Author of "The 
Destiny of Man," "The Storm King," and other Poems. Fcap. 8vo, pp. 204 
cloth gilt. 1879. 3s. 6d. 

GEIFFIS.— The Mikado's Empire. Book I. History of Japan, from 660 B.C. to 
1872 A.D. — Book II. Personal Experiences, Observations, and Studies in Japan, 
1870-1874. By W. E. Griffis, A.M. 8vo, pp. 636, cloth. Illustrated. 1877. 
20s. 

GRIFFITH.— The Birth op the War God. See Trubuer's Oriental Series. 

GRIFFITH.— YusUE AND ZuLAlKHA. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

GRIFFITH.— Scenes from the Ramatana, Meghaduta, &o. Translated by Ralph 
T. H. Griffith, M.A., Principal of the Benares College. Second Edition. Crown 
8vo, pp. xviii. and 244, cloth. 1870. 6s. 

Contents — Preface — Ayodhya — Bayan Doomed — The Birth of Bama — The Heir-Apparent — 
Manthara's Guile — Dasaratha's Oath— The Step-mother — Mother and Son — The Triumph of 
love— Farewell !- The Hermit's Son— The Trial of Truth— The Forest— The Kape of Sita— 
Bama'a Despair — The Messenger Cloud — Khumbakarna— The Suppliant Dove — True G-loJ7 — 
Feed the Poor— The Wise Scholar. 

GRIFFITH.- The RiJaiTAN OF VALMfa. Translated into English Verse. ByRalph- 
T. H. Griffith, M.A., Principal of the Benares College. Vol. I., containing Books 
I. and II., demy 8vo, pp. xxxii. and 440, cloth. 1870. 18s. — Vol. II., containing 
Book II., with additional Kotes and Index of Karnes. Demy 8vo, pp. 504, cloth. 
1871. 18s.— Vol. III., demy 8vo, pp. 390, cloth. 1872. 15s.— Vol. IV., demy 
8vo, pp. viii. and 432, cloth. 1873. I83.— Vol. V., demy 8vo, pp. viii. and 360, 
cloth. 1875. 15s. The complete work, 5 vols. £4, 4s. 

GROTE.— Review of the Work of Mr. John Stuart Mill entitled "Examination of 
Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy." By George Grote, Author of the "History 
of Ancient Greece," " Plato, and the other Companions of Socrates," &c, 12mo, 
pp. 112, cloth. 1868. 3s. 6d. 

GROUT. — Zulu-Land ; or. Life among the Zulu-Kafirs of Natal and Zulu-Land, 
South Africa. By the Rev. Lewis Grout. Crown 8vo, pp. 352, cloth. With 
Map and Illustrations. 7s. 6d. 

6R0WSE.— Mathura : A District Memoir. :ByF. S. Growse, B.C.S., M.A., Oxon, 
CLE., Fellow of the Calcutta University. Second edition, illustrated, revised, 
and enlarged, 4to, pp. xxiv. and 520, boards. 1880. 42s. 

6UEERNATIS.— Zoological Mythology ; or, The Legends of Animals, By Angelo 
de Gubematis, Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Literatiire in the Institute 
di Studii Superorii e di Perfezionamento at Florence, &c. 2 vols. 8vo, pp. xxvi. 
and 432, and vii. and 442, cloth. 1872. £] , 83. 

This work is an important contribution to the study of the comparative mythology of the Indo- 
• Germanic nations. The author introduces the denizens of the air, earth, and water in the vari- 
ous characters assigned to them in the myths and legends of all civilised nations, and traces the 
- migration of the mythological ideas from the times of the early Aryans to those of the Greeks, 
Romans, and Teutons. 


28 A Catalogue oflnvportant Works, 

GULSHAN I. EAZ : The Mystic Eose Garden oe Sa'd dd Diif Mahmud Shabis- 
TAHI. The Persian Text, with an English Translation and Notes, chiefly from the 
Commentary of Muhammed Bin Yahya Lahiji. By E. H. Whinfield, M.A., Bar- 
rister-at-Law, late of H.M.B.C.S. 4to, pp. xvi., 94, 60, cloth. 1880. 10s. 6d. 

GUMFACH. — Tkbatt Eights of the Foreign Merchant, and the Transit System 
in China. By Johannes von Gumpach. 8to, pp. xviii. and 421, sewed. 10s. 6d. 

GUTHEIE.— On Mr. Spencer's Formdla of Evolution as an Exhacstivb State- 
ment OF THE Changes of the TTnivbrsb. By Malcolm Guthrie. Post 8vo, pp. 
xii. and 268, cloth. 1879. 6s. 6d. 

GUTHRIE. — On Mr. Spenobr's Unification of Knowledge. By Malcolm 
Guthrie, Author of " On Mr. Spencer's Formula of Evolution as an Exhaustive 
Statement of the Changes of the Universe." Crown Svo. \In preparation. 

HAAS.— CATALOCfUE OF SANSKRIT AND PALI BOOKS IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM:. By 
Dr. Ernst Haas. Printed by permission of the Trustees of the British Museum. 
4to, pp. vlii. and 188, paper boards. 1876. 21s. 

HAFIZ OF SHIRAZ. — SeIiKOHONS prom his Poemb. Translated from the Persian 
by Hermann Bicknell. With Preface by A. S. Bicknell. Demy 4to, pp. xx. and 
384, printed on fine stout plate-paper, with appropriate Oriental Bordering in gold 
and colour, and Illustrations by J. E. Herbert, E. A. 1875. £2, 2s. 

HAFIZ.— See Trubner's Oriental Series. 

HAGEN.— NORICA ; or, Tales from the Olden Time. Translated from the German of 
August Hagen. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xiv. and 374. 1850. 5s. 

HAHN.— TsuNl-IlGOAM, the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi. By Theophilus 
Hahn, Ph.D., Custodian of the Grey Colleotion, Cape Town, &c., &o. Post Svo, 
pp. xiv. and 154. 1882. 7s. 6d. 

H ALDEMAN. —PENNSYLVANIA Dutch : A Dialect of South Germany with an Infusion 
of English. By S. S. Haldeman, A.M., Professor of Comparative Philology in the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. Svo, pp. viii. and 70, cloth. 1872. 3s. 
6d. 

HALL.— On English Adjectives in -Able, with Special Eeference to Eeliable. 
By FitzBdward Hall, C.E., M.A., Hon. D.C.L. Oxon; formerly Professor of 
Sanskrit Language and Literature, and of Indian Jurisprudence in King's College, 
London. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 238, cloth. 1877. 7s.' 6d. 

HALL.— Modern English. By FitzEdward Hall, M. A., Hon. D.C.L. Oxon. Crown 
8vo, pp. xvi. lind 394, cloth. 1873. 10s. 6d. 

HALL.— Sun and Earth as Great Forces in Chemistry. By T. W. Hall M D 
L.E.C.S.E. Crown Svo, pp. xii. and 220, cloth. 1874. 3s. ' ' 

HALL.— Arctic Expedition. See Nourse. 

HALLOCK.— The Sportsman's Gazetteer and General Guide. The Game 
Animals, Birds, and Fishes of North America : their Habits and various methods 
of Capture, &o., &o. With a Directory to the principal Game Eesorts of the 
Country. By Charles Hallock. Fourth Edition. Crown Svo, cloth. Maps and 
Portrait. 1878. 15s. ^ 

HAM.— The Maid of Corinth. A Drama in Four Acts. By J. Panton Ham. 
Crown Svo, pp. 65, sewed. 2s. 6d. 


Published by Truhner & Co. 29 

HARDY.— Cheismakity akd Buddhism Compahed. By the late Eev. E. Spence 
Hardy, Hon. Memter Eoyal Asiatic Society. 8vo, pp. 138; sewed. ■. 1875. 7s. 6d. 

HAELEY.— The SIMPLIFICATION OF En&lish Spelling, specially adapted to the Eis- 
ing Generation. An Easy Way of Saving Time in Writing, Printing, and Eeading. 
By Dr. George Harley, F.E.S., F.C.S. 8vo. pp. 128, cloth. 1877. 2b. 6d. 

HARRISON.— The Meaning op History. Two Lectures delivered by Frederic 
Harrison, M.A. 8vo, pp. 80, sewed. 1862. Is. 

HARRISON.— Woman's Handiwoek in Modern Homes. By Constance Gary 
Harrison. With numerous Illustrations and Five Coloured Plates, from designs 
by Samuel Colman, Eosina Emmet, George Gibson, and others. 8vo, pp. xii. and 
242, cloth. 1881. 10s. 

BARTING. — British Animals Extinct within Historic Times : with some Ac- 
count of British Wild White Cattle. By J. E. Harting, F.L.S., P.Z.S. With 
Illustrations by Wolf, Whymper, Sherwin, and others. Demy 8vo, pp. 256, 
cloth. 1881. 14s. A few copies, large paper, 31b. 6d. 

HARTZENBUSCH and LEMMING. — Eco DE Madrid. A Practical Guide to Spanish 
Conversation. By J. E. Hartzenbuach and H. Lemming. Second Edition. Post 
8vo, pp. 250, cloth. 1870. 5s. 

HASE.— Miracle Plays and Saoebd Dramas : An Historical Survey. By I)r. 
Karl Hase, Translated from the German by A. W. Jackson, and Edited by the 
Eev. W. W. Jackson, Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. Crown 8vo, pp. 288. 
1880. 9s. 

HAUG. — Glossary and Index of the Pahlavi Texts of the Book of Arda Viraf, 
the Tale of Gosht — J. Fryano, the Hadokht Nask, and to some extracts from the 
Dinkard and Nirangistan ; prepared from Destur Hoshangji Jamaspji Asa's 
Glossary to the Arda Viraf Namak, and from the Original Texts, with Notes on 
Pahlavi Grammar by E. W. West, Ph.D. Eevised by M. Haug, Ph.D., &c. 
Pubhshed by order of the Bombay Government. 8vo, pp. viii. and 352, sewed. 
1874. 25s. 

HAUG.- The Sacred Language, &c., op the Parsis. See Trubner's Oriental 
Series. 

HAUPT.— The London Aebitrageub ; or. The English Money Market, in con- 
nection with Foreign Bourses. A Collection of Notes and Formute for the Arbi- 
tration of Bills, Stocks, Shares, Bullion, and. Coins, with all the Important 
Foreign Countries. By Ottomar Haupt. Crown 8to, pp. viii. and 196, cloth. 
1870. 7s. 6d. 

HAWEEN. — Upa-Sastra : Comments, Linguistic, Doctrinal, on Sacred and Miythio 
Literature. By J. D. Hawken. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 288, cloth. 1877. 7s. 6d. 

HAZEN.— The School and the Army in Germany and France, with a Diary of Siege ■ 
Life at Versailles. By Brevet Major-General W. B. Hazen, U.S.A., Col. 6th In- 
fantry. 8vo, pp. 408, cloth. 1872. 10s. 6d. 

HEATH.— Edgar Quinbt. See English and Foreign Philosophical Library, Vol. 
XIV. 

HEBREW LITERATURE SOCIETY. Subscription, one guinea per annum. List of 
publications on application. 

BEBREW MIGRATION FROM EGYPT (tHE). 8vo, pp. xu. and 440, cloth. 1879. 
16s. 


30 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

HECKER.— The Epidemics of the Middle Ages. Translated by G-. B. Babington, ■ 
M.D., F.E.S. Third Edition, completed by the Author's Treatise on Child-Pil- 
grimages. By J. F. C. Heoker. 8vo, pp. 384, cloth. 1859. 9s. 6d. 
Contents.— The Black Death— The , Dancing Mania— The Sweating Sickness— Child Pil- 
grimages. 

HEDLEY. — Mastbepiecbs OP Gekmak Poetbt. Translated in the Measure of the 
Originals, by F. H. Hedley. With Illustrations by Louis Wanke. Crown Svo,. 
pp. viii. and 120, cloth. 1876. 6s. 

HEINE. — Wit, Wisdom, and Pathos from the Prose of Heinrich Heine. With a 
few pieces from the " Book of Songs." Selected and Translated by J. Snodgrass. 
With Portrait. Crown Svo, pp. xx. and 340, cloth. 1879. 7s. 6d. 

HEINE. — PicinBES OE Travel. Translated from the German of Henry Heine, by 
Charles G. Leland. 7th Revised Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. 472, with Portrait, 
cloth. 1873. 7s. 6d( 

HEINE. — Heine's Book of Songs. Translated by Charles G. Leland. Fcap. Svo, 
pp. xiv. and 240, cloth, gilt edges. 1874. 7s. 6d. 

HENDRIK.— Memoirs of Hans Hbndbik, the Aeotio Teavellee; serving under 
Kane, Hayes, Hall, and Nares, 1853-76. Written by HimseU. Translated from 
the Eskimo Language, by Dr. Henry Eink. Edited by Prof. Dr. 6. Stephens, 
F.S.A. Crown Svo, pp. 100, Map, cloth. 1878. 3s. 6d. 

HENNELL.— Peesent Keligion: As a Faith owning Fellowship with Thought.. 
Vol. I. Part I. By Sara S. Hennell. Crown Svo, pp. 570, cloth. 1865. 7s. 6d. 

HENNELL.— Present Eeligion : As a Faith owning Fellowship with Thought. 
Part II. First Division. Intelleotual Effect : shown as a Principle of Metaphy- 
sioal Comparativism. By Sara S. Hennell. Crown Svo, pp. 618, cloth.- 1873.. 
7s. 6d. 

HENNELL. — COMPARATIVISM shown as Furnishing a Eeligious Basis to Morality. 
(Present Religion. Vol. III. Part II. Second Division: Practical Effect.) By 
Sara S. Hennell. Crown 8vo, pp. 220, stitched in wrapper. 1878. 3s. 6d. 

HENNELL.— Thoughts in Aid of Faith. Gathered chiefly from recent Works in 
Theology and Philosophy. By Sara S. Hennell. Post Svo, pp. 428, cloth. 1860. 6s. 

HENWOOD.— The Metallieeeocs Deposits of Cornwall and Devon ; with Ap- 
pendices on Subterranean Temperature ; the Electricity of Eocks and Veins ; the 
Quantities of Water in the Cornish Mines; and Mining Statistics. (Vol. V. of 
the Transactions of the Eoyal Geographical Society of Cornwall.) By William 
Jory Kenwood, F.E.S., F.G.S. Svo, pp. x. and 515 : with 113 Tables, and 12 
Plates, half bound. £2, 2s. 

HENWOOD.— Obsbevations on Metalliferous Deposits, and on Subteeeanean 
Tbmpbbatukb. (Vol. VIII. of the Transactions of the Eoyal Geological Society- 
of Cornwall.) By William Jory Henwood, F.E.S., F.G.S., President of the 
Eoyal Institution of Cornwall. In 2 Parts. Svo, pp. xxx., vii. and 916- with 
38 Tables, 31 Engravings on Wood, and 6 Plates. £1, 16s. 

HEPBURN.— A Japanese AND English Dictionabt. With an EngUsh and Japanese 
Index. By J. C. Hepburn, M.D., LL.D. Second Edition. Imperial Svo. pp. 
xxxii., 632, and 201, ploth. £8, 8s. *^ 

HEPBURN.— Japanese-English and English-Japanese Dictionabt. By J. C 
Hepburn, M.D., LL.D. Abridged by the Author. Square fcap. , pp. vi. and 536". 
cloth. 1873. 18b. 

HERNISZ.— A Guide to Convebsation in the English and Chinese Languages 
for the Use of Americans and Chinese in California and elsewhere. By Stanislas 
Hemisz. Square Svo, pp. 274, sewed. 1855. 10s. 6d. 


Published by Trubner & Go. 31 

HERSHON.— Talmudic Miscellany. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

HEEZEN.— DU DBVEiOPPEMEOT DES ID^ES EEVOLUTIONNAIRES EN EtTSSIB. Par 

Alexander Herzen. 12mo, pp. xziii. and 144, sewed. 1853. 2s. 6d. 

HEBZEN. — A separate Hat of A. Herzen's works in Bussian may be had on 
application. 

HILL.— The Histort oe the Reform Movement in the Dental Profession in Great 
Britain during the last twenty years. By Alfred Hill, Licentiate in Dental Sur- 
gery, he. Crown 8vo, pp. xvi. and 400, cloth. 1877. 10s. 6d. 

HILLEBRAND.— France and the French in the Second Half of the Nine- 
teenth Century. By Karl Hillebrand. Translated from the Third German 
Edition. Post 8to, pp. xx. and 262, cloth. 1881. lOs. 6d. 

HINDOO Mythology Pophlakly Treated. Being an Epitomised Description of 
the various Heathen Deities illustrated on the Silver Swami Tea Service pre- 
sented, as a memento of his visit to India, to H.B.H. the Prince of Wales, K.G., 
G.C.S.I., by His Highness the Gaekwar of Baroda. Small 4to, pp. 42, limp cloth. 
1875. 33. 6d. 

HODGSON.— Essays on the Languages, Literature, and Eeligion of NiPAL 
AND Tibet. Together with further Papers on the Geography, Ethnology, and 
Commerce of those Countries. By B. H. Hodgson, late British Minister at the 
Court of Nepal. Royal 8vo, cloth, pp. xii. and 276. 1874. 14s. 

HODGSON. — Essays on Indian Subjects. See Trubner's Oriental Series. 

HODGSON.— The Education of Gikls; and the Employment of Women op 
the Upper Classes EducaMonally considered. Two Lectures. By W. B, 
Hodgson, LL.D. • Second Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. xvi. and 114, cloth. 1869. 
33. 6d. 

HODGSON. — Turgot: His Life, Times, and Opinions. Two Lectures. ByW. B. 
Hodgson, LL.D. Crown 8vo, pp. vi. and 83, sewed. 1870. 2s. 

HOERNLE.— A COMPARATIVE Grammar of the Gaudian Languages, with Special 
Reference to the Eastern Hindi. Accompanied by a Language Map, and a Table 
of Alphabets. By A. F. Eudolf Hoemle. Demy 8vo, pp. 474, cloth. 1880. IBs. 

HOLBEIN SOCIETY. — Subscription, one guinea per annum. List of publications. 
on application. 

HOLMES-FORBES. — The Science of Beauty. An Analytical Inquiry into the 
Laws of iEsthetics. By Avary "W. Holmes-Forbes, of Linooln'3 Inn, Barrister-at- 
Law. Post 8vo, cloth, pp. vi. and 200. 1881. 6s. 

HOLST.— The Constitutional and Political History of the United States. 
By Dr. H. von Hoist. Translated by J. J. Lalor and A. B. Mason. Royal Svo.. 
Vol. I. 1750-1833. State Sovereignty and Slavery. Pp. xvi. and 506. 1876. 18s. 

Yol II. 1828-1846. Jackon's Administration— Annexation of Texas. Pp. 

720. 1879. £1, 2s. 

HOLYOAKE.— The History of Co-operation in England : its Literature and its 
Advocates By G. J. Holyoake. Tol. I. The Pioneer Period, 1812-44. Crown 
Svo, pp. xii. and 420, cloth. 1875. 63.— Vol. II. The Constructive Period, 1845- 
78. ' Crown 8vo, pp. X. and 504, cloth. 1878. 8s. 

HOLYOAKE.— The Trial of Theism accused of Obstructing Secular Life. By 
G. J. Holyoake. Crown Svo, pp. xvi. and 256, cloth. 1877. 43. 


32 A Gatalogue of Important Works, 

HOLYOAKE.— Eeasomno fbom Facts : A Method of Everyday Logic. By G. J. 
Holyoake. Fcap., pp. xii. and 94, wrapper. 1877. Is. 6d. 

EOFEINS. — Elementaet Gbammab of the Turkish Language. 'With a few Easy 
Exercises. By F. L. Hopkins, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of Trinity Hall, Cam- 
bridge. Crown 8vo, pp. 48, cloth. 1877. 3s. 6d. 

HOWSE. — A Geammak of the Cebe Language. "With which is combined an 
Analysis of the Chippeway Dialect. By Joseph Howse, F.R.G.S. 8vo, pp. xx. 
and 324, cloth. 1865. 7s. 6d. 

HULME.— Mathematical Drawing Insteuments, and How to Use Them. By 
F. Edward Hulme, F.L.S., F.S.A., Art-Master of. Marlborough College, Author of 
"Principles of Ornamental Art," "Familiar Wild Flowers," "Suggestions on 
Floral Design," &c. With Illustrations. Second Edition. Imperial 16mo, pp. 
xvi. and 152, cloth. 1881. 3s. 6d. 

HUMBERT.— On "Tenant Bight." By C. F. Humbert. 8ro, pp. 20, sewed. 
1875. Is. 

HUMBOLDT.— The Sphbee and Duties of Goveenment, Translated from the 
German of Baron Wilhelm Von Humboldt by Joseph Coulthard, jun. Post 8to, 
pp. XV. and 203, cloth. 1854. 5s. 

HUMBOLDT.— Lettees OF WiLUAM Von Humboldt to a Female Feiend. A com- 
plete Edition. Translated from the Second German Edition by Catherine M. A. 
Couper, with a Biographical Notice of the Writer. 2 vols, crown 8vo, pp. xxviii. 
and 592, cloth. 1867. 10s. 

HUNT.— The Eeligion of the Heaet. A Manual 6f Faith and Duty. By Leigh 
Hunt. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xxiv. and 259, cloth. 2s. 6d. 

HUNT.— Chemioai. and Geological Essays. By Professor T. Sterry Hunt. 
Second Edition. 8vo, pp. xxii. and 448, cloth. 1879. 12s. 

HUNTER.— A Compaeative Didtionaet of the Non-Abtan Languages of India 
AND High Asia. With\a Dissertation, Political and Linguistic, on the Aboriginal 
Peaces. By W. W. Hunter, B. A., M.E.A.S., Hon. Fel. Ethnol. Soc, Author of 
the " Annals of Rural Bengal," of H.M.'s Civil Service. Being a Lexicon of 144 
Languages, illustrating Turanian Speech. Compiled from the Hodgson Lists, 

^ Government Archives, and Original MSS., arranged with Prefaces and Indices in 
English, French, German, Russian, and Latin. Large 4to, toned paper, pp. 230, 
cloth. 1869. 42s. 

HUNTER.— The Indian Mussulmans. By W. W. Hunter, B.A., LL.D., Director- 
General of Statistics to the Government of India, &c.. Author of the " Annals of 
Rural Bengal," &o. Third Edition. 8vo, pp. 219, cloth. 1876. 10s. 6d. 

HUNTER.— Famine Aspects of Bengal Disteicts. A System of Famine Warnings 
By W. W. Hunter, B.A., LL.D. Crown Bvo, pp. 216, cloth. 1874. 7s. 6d. 

HUNTER.— A Statistical Account of Bengal. By W. W. Hunter, B.A. LL.D. 
Director-General of Statistics to the Government of India, &c. In 20 vols 8vo' 
half morocco. 1877. £5. • ■ > 

HUNTER.— Catalogue of Sanskeit Manusceipts (Buddhist). Collected in Nepal 
by B. H. Hodgson, late Resident at the Court of Nepal. Compiled from Lists in 

•.Calcutta, France, and England, by W. W. Hunter, CLE., LL.D. 8vo pp 28 
paper. 1880. 2s. '^''' ' 


Published by Triibner & Co. 33 

EtrNTEK. —The Impbrial Gazettebe of India. By W. W. Hunter, C. I. B. , LL. D. , 
Director-General of Statistics to the Government of India. In Nine Volumes. 
8vo, pp. xxxiii. and 544, 539, 567, six. and 716, 509, 513, 555, 537, and xii. and 
478, half morocco. With Maps. 1881. £3, 3s. 

HUNTER.— An Account op the British Settlement of Aben, in Ababia. Com- 
piled by Capt. F. M. Hunter, Assistant Political Eesident, Aden. 8vo, pp. xii. 
and 232, half bound. 1877. 7s. 6d. 

HUNTER.— A Statistical Account of Assah. By "W. W. Hunter, B.A., LL.D., 
C.I.E., Director-General of Statistics to the Goyeminent of India, &c. 2 vols. 
Svo, pp. 420 and 490, with 2 Maps, ha morocco. 1879. lOs. 

HURST. — HiSTOKT OF Eationalism : embracing a Survey of the Present State of 
Protestant Theology. By the Kev. John F. Hurst, A.M. With Appendix of 
Literature. Bevised and enlarged from the Third American Edition, Crown Svo, 
pp. xvii. and 525, cloth. 1867. 10s. 6d. 

HTETT.— Prompt Eemmdies fok Accidents and Poisons : Adapted to the use of 
the Inexperienced till Medical aid arrives. By W. 'K. Hyett, F.E.S. A Broad- 
sheet, to hang up in Country Schools or Vestries, Workshops, Offices of Factories, 
Mines and Docks, on board Yachts, in Eailway Stations, remote Shooting 
Quarters, Highland Manses, and Private Houses, wherever the Doctor lives at a 
distance. Sold for the benefit of the Gloucester Eye Institution. In sheets, 21^ 
by 17^ inches, 2s. 6d. ; mounted, 3s. 6d. 

HYIIAITS. — Pupil Versus Teacher. Letters from a Teacher to a Teacher. Fcap. 
8vD, pp. 92, cloth. 1875. 23. 

IHNE.— A Latin Grammar for Beginners. By W. H. Ihne, late Principal 
of Carlton Terrace School, LiverpooL Crown Svo, pp. vi. and 184, cloth. 
1864. 3s. 

IEHWi(NU-S Saf^; or, Brothers of Purity. Translated from the Hindustani by 
Professor John Dowson, M.E.A.S., Stafi College, Sandhurst. Crown Svo, pp. 
viii. and 156, cloth. 1869. 7s. 

INDIA. — Aecheological Survey of Western India. See Burgess. 

INDIA.— Publications of the Aroh^olosical Survey of India. A separate list 
on application. 

INDIA.— Pdblications of the Geographical Department op the India Office, 
London. A separate Ust, also list of all the Government, Maps, on applica- 
tion, 

INDIA — Publications op the Geological Survey op India. A separate list on 
application. 

INDIA OFFICE PUBLICATIONS :— 

Aden, Statistical Account of. 53. ' 

) Assam, do. do. Vols. I. and II. 5a. each. 

Bengal, do. do. Vols. I. to XX. 100s. per set. 

Do. do. do. Vols. VI. to XX. 6s. each. 

Bombay Code. 21s. 
Bombay Gazetteer. Vol. II. 14s. 

Do. do. Vols. III. to VI. 8s. each. 

Bureess' Archaeological Survey of Western India. Vols. I. and III. 42s. each. 

Do. do. do. Vol. II. 63s. 

Burma (British) Gazetteer. 2 vols, i 60s. 
Catalogue of Manuscripts and Maps of Surveys. 12s. 
Chambers' Meteorol6gy (Bombay) and Atlas. 30s. 


34 A.Catalogueof Important Works, 

INDIA OFFICE PUBLICATIONS— co»(MiK«rf. 
Cole's Agra and Muttra. 70s. 
Cook's Gums and Eesins. 5s. _. , , 

Corpus Inscriptionnm Indioarum. Vol.1. 3^s. 
Cunningham's Archseological Survey. Tols. I. to XI. lOs. each. 

Do. Stupa of Bharut. 633. 

Egerton's Catalogue of Indian Arms. 2s. 6d. 
Ferguson and Burgess, Cave Temples of India. 42s. 

Do. Tree and Serpent Worship. 105s. 

Hunter's Imperial Gazetteer. 9 vols. 63s. 

Kurz. Forest Flora of British Burma. Vols. I. and II. las. each. 
-Liotard's Materials for Paper. 23. 6d. 
Markham's Tibet. 21s. 

Do. . Memoir of Indian Surveys. 10s. 6d. 
Do. Abstract of Eeports of Surveys. Is. 6d. 
Mitra (Eajendralala), Buddha Gaya. 60s. 
Mysore and Coorg Gazetteer. Vols. I. and II. 10s. each. 

Do. do. Vol. III. 5s. 

N. "W. P. Gazetteer. Vols. I. and II. 10s. each. 

Do. do. Vols. III. to V. 12s. each. 

Oudh do. Vols. I. to III. 10s. each. 

Pharmacopoeia of India, The. 6s. 
People of India, The. Vols. I. to VIII. 45s. each. 
Eaverty's i^'ptes on Afghanistan and Baluchistan. 2s. 
Eajputana Gazetteer. 3 vols. 15s. 
Saunders' Mountains and Eiver Basins of India. 3s. 
Sewell's Amaravati Tope. 3s. 
Smith's (Brongh) Gold Mining in "Wynaad. Is. 

Trigonometrical Survey, Synopsis of Great. Vols. I. to VI. IDs. 6d. each. 
Trumpp's Adi Granth. 52s. 6d. 
Watson's Cotton for Trials. Boards, lOs. 6d. Paper, 10s. 

Do. Ehea Fibre. 2s. 6d. 

Do. Tobacco. 5s. 

INDIAN GAZETTEER. See GAZETTEER. 

INGLEBY.— See Shakbspeaee. 

INMAN.— Nautical Tables. Designed for the use of British Seamen. By the Eer, 
James Inman, D.D., late Professor at the Eoyal Naval College, Portsmouth. 
Demy 8vo, pp. xvi. and 410, cloth. 1877. 15s. 

INMAN.— HiBTOET OE THE ENGLISH ALPHABET : A Paper read before the Liverpool 
Literary and Philosophical Society. By T. luman, M.D. 8vo, pp. 36, sewed.. 
1872. Is. 

IN SEARCH OF TRUTH. Conversations on the Bible ajid Popular Theology, for 
Young People. By A. M. Y. Crown 8vo, pp. x. and 138, cloth. 1875. 2s. 6d. 

INTERNATIONAL NnMiSMATA Okientalia (The). — Eoyal 4to, in paper wrapper. 
Part I. Ancient Indian Weights. By E. Thomas, F.E.S. Pp.84, with a Plate and 
Map of the India of Manu. 9s. 6d. — Part II. Coins of the TJrtukI TurkumSjis. 
By Stanley Lane Poole, Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Pp. 44, with 6 Plates. 
9s. — Part III. The Coinage of Lydia and Persia, from the Earliest Times to the 
Fall of the Dynasty of the Achsemenidse. By Barclay V. Head, Assistant-Keeper 
of Coins, British Museum. Pp. viii.-56, vrith 3 Autotype Plates. 10s. 6d. — 
Part IV. The Coins of the Tulnni Dynasty. By Edward Thomas Eogers. Pp. 
iv.-22, and 1 Plate. 5s. — Part V. The Paithian Coinage. By Percy Gardner, 
M.A. Pp. iv.-66, and 8 Autotype Plates. 18s.— Part VI. The Ancient Coins 
and Measures of Ceylon. By T. W. Ehys Davids. Pp. iv. and 60, and 1 Plate. 


Published by Trubner dt Co. 35 

nfTEBNATIONAL NuMiSMATA OsiBSTAhi.— continued. 

10s.— Vol. I., containing the first six parts, as specified above. Koyal 4to, half 
bound. £3, 13s. 6d. 

Vol. II. Coiirs OF THE Jews. Being a History of the Jewish Coinage and Money 
in the Old and New Testaments, By Frederick W. Madden, M.R.A.S., Member 
of the Numismatic Society of London, tSeoretary of the Brighton College, &c., 
&;o. With 279 woodcuts and a, plate of alphabets. Boyal 4to, pp. xii. and 330, 
1881. Sewed. £2. 

The Coins op Aeakan, or Peg0, and of Burma. By Sir Arthur Phayre, C.E., 
K.C.S.I., G.C.M.G., late Commissioner of British Burma. Boyal 4to, with 
Autotype Illustrations. [In preparation. 

JACKSON.— Ethnologt and Phbbnologt as an Aid to the Histobiait. By the 
late J. W. Jackson. Second Edition. With a Memoir of the Author, by his 
Wife. Crown 8vo, pp. xx. and 324, cloth. 1875. 43. 6d. 

JACKSON.— The Shbopshiee Wobd-Booe. A Glossary of Archaic and Provincial 
Words, &c., used in the County. By Georgina F. JacksOn. Crown 8vo, pp. civ. 
and 524, cloth. 1881. 31s. 6d. 

JACOB.— HiNDn Pantheism. See Trilbner's Oriental Series, 

JAGIELSKI. — On Mabienbad Spa, and the Diseases Curable by its Waters and 
Baths. By A. V. Jagielski, M.D., Berlin. Second Edition. Crown 8to, pp. viii. 
and 186. With Map. Cloth. 1874. 5s. 

JAMISON.— The Life and Tim;bs op Bertkand Dd Gubsolin. A History of the 
Fourteenth Century. By D. F. Jamison, of South Carolina. Portrait. 2 vols. 
8to, pp. xvi., 287, and viii., 314, cloth. 1864. £1, Is. 

JAPAN. — Map of Nippon (Japan) : Compiled from Native Maps, and the Notes of 
most recent Travellers. By K Henry Brunton, M.I.O.E., F.E.G.S., 1880. Size, 
5 feet by 4 feet, 20 milea to the inch. In 4 Sheets, £1, Is.; EoUer, varnished, 
£1, lis. 6d.; Folded, in Case, £1, 5s. Sd. 

JATAKA (The), together with its Commbntabt : being tales of the Anterior Births 
of Gotama Buddha. Now first published in Pali, by V. Fausboll. Text. 8vo. 
Vol. I., pp. viii. and 512, cloth. 1877. 28s.— VoL II., pp. 452, cloth. 1879. 
28s.— Vol. III. in preparation. (For Translation see Trtibner's Oriental Series, 
"Buddhist Birth Stories.") 

JENKINS.— Vest-Pocket Lexicon. An English Dictionary of all except familiar 
Words, .including the principal Scientific and Technical Terms, and Foreign 
Moneys, Weights and Measures; omitting what everybody knows, and contain- 
ing what everybody wants to know and cannot readily find. By Jabez Jenkins. 

■ 64mo, pp. 564, cloth. 1879. Is. 6d. 

JOHNSON.— Oeibntal Eeligions. See English and Foreign Philosophical Library, , 
Extra Series, Vols. IV. and V. 

JOLLY.— See NAKADfTA. 

JOMINI.— The Art op War. By Baron.de Jomini, General and Aide-de-Camp to 
the Emperor of Eussia. A New Edition, with Appendices and Hajpa. Translated 
from the French. By Captain 6. H. Mendell, and Captain W. O. Craighill. 
Crown 8vo, pp. 410, cloth. 1879. 9a. 


36 A GatalogvJs oflmpoKtant Works, 

JORDAN. — Album to the Codkse of Lectdees on Metallurgy, at the Paris 
Central School of Arts and Manufactures. By S. Jordan, O.E.M.I. & S.L Demy 
4to, paper. With 140 Plates, Description of the Plates, Numerical Data, and 
Notes upon the Working of the Apparatus. £4. 

JOSEPH. — ^Religion, Natural and Ebvbalbd. A Series of Progressive Lessons 
for Jewish Youth. By N. S. Joseph. CrOwn 8vo, pp. xu.-296, cloth. 1879. 
3s. 

JOVENALIS SATIR£. With a Literal EngUah Prose Translation and Notes. By 
J. D. Lewis, M.A., Trin. Coll. Oamb. Second Edition. 8to. [In preparation. 

EARCHER. — QuESTIoifNAlKB Peasoais. Questions on French Grammar, Idiomatic 
Difficulties, and Military Expressions.' By Theodore Karoher, LL.B. Fourth 
Edition, greatly enlarged. Crown 8vo, pp. 224, cloth. 1879. 4s. 6d. Interleaved 
with writing paper, 5s. 6d. 

EARDEC. — The Spieii's Book. Containing the Principles of Spiritist Doctrine on 
the Immortality of the Soul, &c., &c., according to the Teachings of Spirits of 
High Degree, transmitted through various mediums, collected and set in order by 
Allen Kardec. Translated from the 120th thousand by Anna BlackweU. Crown 
8vo, pp. 512,- cloth. 1875. 7s. 6d. 

EARDEC. — The Medium's Book; or. Guide for Mediums and for Evocations. 
Containing the Theoretic Teachings of Spirits concerning all kinds of Manifesta- 
tions, the Means of Communication with the Invisible World, the Development 
of Mediauimity, &c., &c. By Allen Kardec. Translated by Anna BlackweU. 
Crown 8vo, pp. 456, cloth. 1876. 7s. 6d. 

EARDEC— Heaven and. Hell ; or, the Divine Justice Vindicated in the Plurality 
of Ejdstences. . By Allen Kardec. Translated ]by Anna BlackweU. Crown 8vo, 
pp. viii. and 448, cloth. 1878. 7s. 6d. 

EENDRICK.— Greek Ollendorep. A Progressive Exhibition of the Principles of 
the Greek Grammar. By Asahel C. Kendrick. 8vo, pp. 371, cloth. 1870. 9s. 

EEYS OF THE CREEDS (The). Third Kevised Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. 210, 
cloth. 1876. 6s. ' ^^ 

EINAHAKT.— Tallets Aur THEiE Relation to Fissures, Feactuees, and Faults. 
ByG. H. Kinahan, M.B,.I.A., F.K.G.S.L, &c. Dedicated by permission to his 
Grace the Duke of Argyll. Crown 8vOj pp. 256, cloth, illustrated. 7s. 6d. 

EING'S STRATAGEM (The) ; Oe, The Pearl of Poland ; A Tragedy in Five Acts. 
By Stella. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. 94, cloth. 1874. 2s. 6d. 

KINGSTON.— The Unity of Creation. A Contribution to the Solution of the 
Eeligions Question. By F. H. Kingston. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 152, cloth. 
1874. 5s. 

EISTNER.— Buddha and his Dooteinbs. A Bibliographical Essay Bv Otto 
Kistner. 4to, pp. iv. and 32, sewed. 1869. 2s. 6d. 

^^^™-— ■''^'',!?^^-?^'*^'J™''' °''' -*-otive and Passive Home Gymnastics, for Healthy 
and Unhealthy People, By C. Klemm. With Illustrations. 8vo. pp. 60. 
wrapper. 1878. Is. '^'' ' 

EOHl.— Teavels in Canada and through the States op New York and 
PMfNSTLVAiiM. By J. G. Kohl. Translated by Mrs Percy Sinnett. Revised by 
the Author. Two vols, post 8vo, pp. xiv. and 794, cloth. 1861. £1, Is. ^ 

^^^^;-DiOTiONARY OF THE Suahili LANGUAGE. CompUed by the' Rev. Dr. L. 
Krapf, missionary of the Church Missionary Society in East Africa. With an 
Appendix, containing an outline of a Suahili Grammar. Medium 8vo. 

[Nearly ready. 


Published by Trnhner & Co. 37 

KEAUS.— Cablsbad and its Natural Healing Agents, from the Physiological 
and Therapeutical Point of View. By J. Kraus, M.D. "With Notes Introductory 
by the Eev. 3. T. Walters, M.A. Second Edition. Revised and enlarged. Crown 
8vo, pp. 104, cloth. 1880. 5s. 

KROEGER.— The Minnesingee of Geemaky. By A. E. Kroeger. Fcap. 8to, pp. 
290, cloth. 1873. 7s. , ^ v , ve 

KURZ.— FOEBST Floea of Beitish Buema. By S. Kurz, Curator of the Her- 
barium, Eoyal Botanical Gardens, Calcutta. 2 vols, crown 8vo, pp. xxx., 550, 
and 614, cloth. 1877. 30s. 

LACERDA'S JouKNET TO Cazembe in 1798. Translated and Annotated by Captain 
E. F. Burton, F.R.G.S. Also Journey of the Pombeiros, &c. Demy 8vo, pp. viii. 
and 272. With Map, cloth. 1873. 73. 6d. ' 

LANARI. — Collection op Italian and English Dialogues. By A. Lanari. 
Fcap. 8vo, pp. viii. and 200, cloth. 1874. 3s. 6d. 

I1AND4— The Pmhoiplbs oe Hbbkew Gkammak. By J. P. N. Land, Professor of 
Logic and Metaphysics in the University of Leyden. Translated from the Dutch, 
by Eeginald Lane Poole, BaUiol CoUege, Oxford. Part I. Sounds. Part II. 
Words. With Large Additions by the Author, and a new Preface. Crown 8to, 
pp. XX. and 220, cloth. 1876. 7s. 6d. 

LANE. — The Koean. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

LANGE. — ^A HiSTOET OF Mateeialism. See English and Foreign PhUosophical 
Library, Vols. I. to III. 

' LANGE.— Geemania. A German Eeading-book Arranged Progressively. By F. K. 
W. Lange, Ph.D. Part I. Anthology of German Prose and Poetry, with 
Vocabulary and Biographical Notes. 8vo. pp. xvi. and 216, cloth, 1881, 3s. 6d. 
Part n. Essays on German History and Institutions, with Notes. 8vo, pp. 124, 
cloth. Parts I. and II. together. 5s. 6d. 

LANGE. — Gebman Prose Weiting. Comprising English Passages for Translation 
into German. Selected from Examination Papers of the University of London, 
the College of Preceptors, London, and the Eoyal Military Academy, Woolwich, 
arranged progressively, with Notes and Theoretical as well as Practical Treatises 
on themes for the writing of Essays. By F. K, W. Lange, Ph.D., Assistant Ger- 
man Master, Eoyal Academy, Woolwich ; Examiner, Eoyal College of Preceptors 
London. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 176, cloth. ^ 1881. 43. 

LATHE (the) and its Uses ; or. Instruction in the Art of Turning Wood and Metal, 
including a description of the most modem appliances for the Ornamentation of 
Plain and Curved Surfaces, &o. Fifth Edition. With additional Chapters and 
Index. Ulustrated. 8vo, pp. iv. and 316, cloth. 1878. 16s. 

LE-BRUN.— Mateeials foe Translating from English into French ; being a 
short Essay on Translation, followed by a Graduated Selection in Prose and Verse. 
By L. Le-Brun. Fifth Edition. Eevised and corrected by Henri Van Larm. 
Post 8vo, pp. xii. and 204, cloth. 1874. 4s. 6d. 

LEE. — Illustrations op the Physiology of Eeligion. In Sections adapted for 
the use of Schools. Part I. By Henry Lee, F.E.C.S., formerly Professor df 
Surgery, Eoyal CoUege of Surgeons, &o. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 108, cloth. 
1880. 33. 6d. 

LEES.— A Practical Guide to Hkamh, and to the Home Treatment op the 
Common Ailments of Life : With a Section on Cases of Emergency, and Hints 
to Mothers on Nursing, &c. By F. Arnold Lees, F.L.S. Crown 8vo, pp. 334, 
stiff covers. 1874. 3s. 


38 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

lEGGE.— The Chinese Classics. 'With a Translation, Critical and Exegetical, 
Notes, Prolegomena, and copious Indexes. By James Legge, D.D., of the Lon- 
don Missionary Society. In 7 vols. Koyal 8vo. Vols. I.-V. in Eight Parts, 
published, cloth. £2, 2s. each Part. 

LEGGE. —The Chinese Classics, translated into English. With Preliminary Essays 
and Explanatory Notes. Popular Bdition. Eeprodnoed for General E6aders from 
the Author^s work, containing the Original Text. By James Legge, D.D. Crown 
,8ro. Vol. I. The Life and Teachings of Confucius. Third Edition. Pp. vi. 
and 338, cloth. 1872. 10s. 6d.— Vol. II. The Works of Mencius. Pp. x. and 402, 
cloth, 12s.— Vol. III. The She-King ; or, The Book of Poetry. Pp. vi. and 432, 
cloth. 1876. 12s. 

LEGGE.— CoNrcoiANisM IN Relation to Chkistianity. A Paper read before the 
Missionary Conference in Shanghai, on May 11th, 1877. By Rev. James Legge, 
D.D., LL.D., &o. 8vo, pp. 12, sewed. 1877. Is. 6d. 

LEGGE. — A Letter to Pkoeessok Max Mullee, chiefly on the Translation into 
English of the Chinese Terms Ti and Shang Ti. By James Legge, Professor of 
the Chinese Language and Literature in the University of Oxford. Crown 8vo, 
pp. 30, sewed. 1880. Is. 

LEIGH. — The Kelioion op the Woeld. By H. Stone Leigh. 12mo, pp. xii. and 
66, cloth. 1869. 2s. 6d. 

LEIGH. — The Stoey of Philosophy. By Aston Leigh.- Post 8vo, pp. xii. and 
210, cloth. 1881. 6s. 

LELAND. — The Beeitmann Ballads. The only authorised Edition. Complete in 1 
voL, including Nineteen Ballads, illustrating his Travels in Europe (never before 
printed), with Comments by Fritz Schwackenhammer. By Charles 6. Leland. 
Crown 8vo, pp. xxviii. and 292, cloth. 1872. 6s. 

LELAND. — The Musio Lesson of Confucius, and other Poems. By Charles G. 
Leland. Fcap. 8vo, pp. viii. and 168, cloth. 1871. 3s. 6d. 

LELAND. — Gaudeamus. Humorous Poems translated from the German of Joseph 
Victor Scheffel and others. By Charles G. Leland. 16mo, pp. 176, cloth 1872. 
3s. 6d. , . i-f , . 

LELAND.— The Egyptian Sketch-Book. By C. G. Leland. Crown Svo, pp. viii. 
and 316, cloth. 1873. 7s. 6d. 

LELAND.— The Enolish Gipsies and their Language. By Charles G. Leland. 
Second Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. xvi and 260, cloth. 1874. 7s. 6d. 

LELAND.— English Gipsy Songs in Eommany, with Metrical English Translations. 
By Charles 6. Leland, Professor E. H. Palmer, and Janet Tuokev. Crown Svo do. 
xii. and 276, cloth. 1875. 7s. 6d. ' ^^ 

LELAND.— Fu-Sang ; OR, The Discoveey of America by Chinese Buddhist Priests 
in the Fifth Century. By Charles G. Leland. Crown 8vo, pp. 232, cloth. 1875 
7s. 6d. 

LELAND.— PiDaisr-EHGLiSH Sing-Song ; or, Songs and Stories in the China-English 
Dialect. With a Vocabulary. By Charles G. Leland. Crown Svo vo viii and 
140, cloth. 1876. 5s. *^' 

LEOFABDI. — See English and Foreign PhUosophical Library, Vol. XVII. 


Published by Trubner dt Go. 39 


lEO. — FoDR Chafteks of North's Plutarch, Containing the Lives of Caius Mar- 
ciusj Coriolanus, Julius Csesar, Marcus Antonius, and Marcus Brutus, as Sources 
to Shakespeare's Tragedies ; Coriolanus, Julius Caesar, and Antony and Cleo- 

- patra ; and partly to Hamlet and Timon of Athens., Fhotolithographed in the 
size of the Edition of 1595. With Preface, Notes comparing the Text of the 
Editions of 1579, 1595, 1603, and 1612 ; and Eeference Notes to the Text of the 
Tragedies of Shakespeare. Edited by Professor F. A. Leo, Ph.D., Vice-Presi-^ 
dent of the New Shakespeare Society ; Member of the Directory of the German 
Shakespeare Society ; and Lecturer at the Academy of Modem Philology at Berlin. 

1 Folio, pp. 22, 130 of facsimiles, haJf-morocco. Library Edition (limited to 250 
copies), £1, lis. 6d. ; Amateur Edition (50 copies on a superior large hand-made 
paper), £3, 3s. 

LERMONTOFF. — THE DEMON. By Michael Lermontoff. Translated from the 
Russian by A. Condie Stephen. Crown 8vo, pp. 88, cloth. 1881. 2s. 6d. 

lESLEY.— Man's Obioin and Destiny. Sketched from the Platform of the Physical 
Sciences. By. J. P. Lesley, Member of the National Academy of the United 
States, Professor of Geology, University of Pennsylvania. Second (Revised and 

'' considerably Enlarged) Edition, crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 142, cloth. 1881. 7s. 6d. 

LESSING. — Letters On BibijoUlTBT. By Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. Translated 
from the German by the late H. H. Bernard, Ph. D. 8vo, pp. 184, cloth. 1862. 5s. 

LESSING.— See English and Foreign Philosophical Library, Extra Series, Vols. I. 

and II. 
LETTERS ON THE "War between Geemant and France. By Mommsen, Strauss, 

Max Muller, and Carlyle. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. 120, cloth. 1871. 23. 6d. 

LEWES.— Pboblbms op Life and Mind. By George Henry Lewes. First Series : 
The Foundations of a Creed. Vol. I., demy 8to. Third edition, pp. 488, cloth. 
12s.— Vol. II., demy 8vo, pp. 552, cloth. 1875. 16s. 

LEWES. — Problems of Lieb and Mind. By George Henry Lewes. Second Series. 
The Physical Basis of MiHn. 8vo, with Illustrations, pp. 508, cloth. 1877. 
16s. Contents. — The Nature of Life; The Nervous Mechanism; Animal Auto- 
matism ; The Keflex Theory. 

LEWES.— Problems op Life and Mind. By George Henry Lewes. Third Series. 
Problem the First— The Study of Psychology : Its Object, Scope, and Method. 
• Demy 8vo, pp. 200, cloth. 1879. 7s. 6d. 

LEWES. — Problems of Lipe and Mind. By George Henry Lewes. Third Series. 
Problem the Second — Mind as a Function of the Organism. Problem the Third — 
■The Sphere of Sense and Logic of Feeling. Problem the Fourth— The Sphere of 
Intellect and Logic of Signs. Demy 8vo, pp. x. and 500, cloth. 1879. 15s. 

LEWIS.— See Juvenal and PIiny. 

LIBRARIANS, Transactions and Proceedings op the Conference op, held in 
London, October 1877. Edited by Edward B. Nicholson and Henry B. Tedder. 
Imperial 8vo, pp. 276, cloth. 1878. £1, 8s. 

LIBRARY ASSOCIATION OF THE UNITED KINGDOM, Transactions and Proceed- 
ings of the Annual Meetings of the. Imperial 8vo, cloth. First, held at 
Oxford, October 1, 2, 3, 1878. Edited by the Secretaries, Henry E. Tedder, 
Librarian of the Athenserun Club, and Ernest C. Thomas, late Librarian of the 
Oxford Union Society. Pp. viii. and 192. 1879. £1, 8s.— Second, held at Man- 
chester, September 23, 24, and 25, 1879. Edited by H. K. Tedder and E. C. 
Thomas. Pp. x. and 184. 1880. £1, Is.— Third, held at Edinburgh, October 
5, 6, and 7, 1880. Edited by E. C. Thomas and C. Welsh. Pp. x. and 202. I 
1881. £1, Is. 


40 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

LILLIE.— Buddha and Eablt Buddhism. By Arthur Lillie late Eegiment of 
Lucknow. With numerous Illustrations drawn on "Wood by the Author. Jr-ost 
8to, pp. xiv. and 256, cloth. 188U 7s. 6d. 

LITTLE FBEKCH READER (The). Extracted from " The ModernFrench Keader." 
Second Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. 112, cloth. 1872. 28. 

LLOTD AND Newton.— Pkussia's Eepeeseotativb Man. By F. Lloyd of the 
Universities of Halle and Athens, and W. Newton, F.E.G.S. Crown 8vo, pp. 
648, cloth. 1875. 10s. 6d. 

LOBSCHEID.— Chinese and English Dictionaet, arranged according to the Radi- 
cals. By W. Lobscheid. 1 vol. imperial 8vo, pp. 600, eloth. £2, 8s. 

LOBSCHEID.— English and Ohinesb Diotionakt, with the Punti and Mandarin, 
Pronunciation. By W. Lobscheid. Four Parts. Folio, pp. viii. and 2016, boardsv 
£8, 8s. 

LONG.— Eastern Peovekbs. See Tnibner's Oriental Series. 

LOVETT.— The Liee and Steugglbs of "William Lovett in his pursuit of Bread, 
Knowledge, and Freedom ; with some short account of the different Associations 
he belonged to, and of the Opinions he entertained. 8vo, pp. vi. and 474, cloth. 
1876. 5s. . 

LOVELY. — "Where to go eor Help : Being a Companion for Quick and Easy 
Eeference of Police Stations, Fire-Bngine Stations, Fire-Escape Stations, &c., 
&c., of London and the Suburbs. Compiled by "W. Lovely, E.N. Second Edi- 
tion. 18mo, pp. 16, sewed. 1881. 3d. 

LOWELL, — The Biglow Papers. By James Eussell Lowell. Edited by Thomas 
Hughes, Q.C. A Eeprint of the Authorised Edition of 1859', together with the 
Second Series of 1862. Firsthand Second Series in 1 vol. Fcap., pp. lxviii.-140 
and lxiv.-190, cloth. 1880. ' 2s. 6d. - 

LUCAS. — The Children's Pi)NTATEUOH : "With the Hephterahs or Portions from 
the Prophets. Arranged for Jewish Children. By Mrs. Henry Lucas. Crown 
8vo, pp. viii. and 570, cloth. 1878. 5s. 

LUDEWIG. — The Litehature or American Aboriginal Languages. By Hermann 
E. Ludewig. "With Additions and Corrections by Professor "Wm. "W. Turner. 
Edited by Nicolas Triibner. 8vo, pp. xxiv. and 258, cloth. 1858. 10s. 6d. 

LTJEIN.— The Bot Engineers : "What they did, and how they did it. By the Eev. 
L. J. Lukin, Author of " The Young Mechanic," &o. A Book for Boys ; 30 En- 
gravings. Imperial 16mo, pp. viii. and 344, cloth. 1877. 7s. 6d. 

LUX E TENEBRIS ; OE, The Testimony oe Consciousness. A Theoretic Essay. 
Crown 8vo, pp. 376, with Diagram, cloth. 1874. 10s. 6d. 

UACCORMAC— The Conversation op a Soul with God : A Theodicy. By Henry 
MacOormac, M.D. 16mo, pp. xvi. and 144, cloth. 1877. 3s. 6d. 

MACKAY.— Gaelic Etymology op the English Language. By Charles Maokay,, 
LL.D. Eoyal 8vo, pp. xxxii and 604, cloth. 1878. 42s. 

MADDEN.— Coins op the Jews. Being a History of the Jewish Coinage and Money 
in the Old and New Testaments. By Frederick W. Madden, M.E.A.S. Member 
of the Numismatic Society of London, Secretary of the Brighton College, &c., &o. 
"With 279 "Woodcuts and a Plate of Alphabets. Eoyal.4to, pp. xii. and 330, cloth. 
ISSl. x2, 2s. 


Published by Trubner & Co. 41 

MADELUNG.— The Causes and Opbkative Tbbatmbnt op Dupuyteen's Fingbk 
Contraction. By Dr. Otto W. Madelung, Lecturer of Surgery at the Univer- 
sity, and Assistant Surgeon at the TTniversity Hospital, Bonn. 8vo, pp. 24, sewed. 
1876. Is. 

BAHAPARINIBBANASnTTA.— See Childees. 

HAHA-VIRA-CHAEITA; or, The Adventures of the Great Hero Eama. An Indian 
Drama in Seven Acts. Translated into English Prdse from the Sanskrit of 
Bhavabhiiti. By John Hckford, M.A.. Crown 8vo, cloth. 5s. 

MALET.— Incidents in the Biogeapht of Dust. By H. P. Malet, Author of 
" The Interior of the Earth," &o. Crown 8vo, pp. 272, cloth. 1877. 6s. 

MALET.— The Beginnings. By H. P. Malet. Crown 8i^o, pp. six. and 124, cloth. 

1878. ^s. 6d. ■ 

UALLESON. — Essays and Lectuees on Indian Histoeical Subjects. By Colonel 
G. B. MaUeson, C.S.I. Second Issue. Crown 8vo, pp. 348, cloth. 1876. 5s. 

HANDLE?. — ^WoMAN Outside Cheistendom. An Exposition of the Influence 
exerted by Christianity on the Social Position and Happiness of Women. By 
J. G. Mandley. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 160, clotli. 1880. 5s. 

UAinFDLnS VOOABULOETJM. A Bhyming Dictionary of the English Language. By 
Peter Levins (1570). Edited, with an Alphabetical Index, byTIemy B. Wheatley- 
8to, pp. xvi. and 370, cloth. 1867. 14s. 

UANCEnVBES. — A Eeteospect or the Autumn Manceuvees, 1871. With 5 Plans. 
By a Eecluse. 8vo, pp. xii. and 133, cloth. 1872. 5s. 

MAKIETTE-BEY. — The Monuments op TTppee Egypt : a translation of the 
"Itineraire de la Haute Egypte" of Augusts Mariette-Bey. Translated by 
Alphonse Mariette. Crown 8yo, pp. xvi. and 262, cloth. 1877. 7s. 6d. 

MARKHAM.— QuiCHUA Geammae and Dictionaey. Contributions towards a 
Grammar and Dictionary of Quichua, the Langnage of the Yncas of Peru. Col- 
lected by Clements B. Markham, F.S.A. Crown 8vo, pp. 223, cloth, £1, lis. 6d. 

MAEKHAM. — Ollanta : A Drama in th« Quichua Language. Text, Translation, 
and Introduction. By Clements B. Markham, C.B, Crown 8vo, pp. 128, cloth. 
1871. 7s. 6d. 

HABEHAJU. — A Memoir op the Lady Ana de Osoeio, Countess of Chinoon, and 
Vice-Queen of Peru, A.D. 1629-39. With a Plea for the correct spelling of the. 
Ghinchona Genus. By Clements B. Markham, C.B., Member of the Imperial Aca- 
demy Natures Curiosorum, with the Cognomen of Chmchon. Small 4to, pp. xii. and 
100. With 2 Coloured Plates, Map, and Illustrations. Handsomely bound. 
1874. 283. 

MAEKHAM.— A Memoie on the Indian Surveys. By Clements E. Markham,, 
C.B., F.E.S., &c., &c. Published by Order of H. M. Secretary of State for India 
in ConncU. Illustrated with Maps. Second Edition.- Imperial 8vo, pp. xxx. 
and 481, boards. 1878. 10s. 6d. 

MAEKHAM.— Naeeativiis op the Mission op Geoege Bogle to Tibet, and of the 
Journey of Thomas Manning to Lhasa. Edited with Notes, an Introduction, and 
Lives of Mr. Bogle and Mr. Manmng. By Clements E. Markham, C.B., F.E.S. 
Second Edition. 8vo, pp. clxv. and 362, cloth. With Maps and Illustrations. 

1879. 21s. 

UAEMONTEL. — Belisaibe. Par Marmontel. Nouvelle Edition. 12mo, pp. xii. 
and 123, cloth. 1867. 2s. 6d. 


42 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

MAKTIN AND TaiJBNEK.— The Cdkkent Gold and Silver Coiisrs or all Codnteies, 
their Weight and Fineness, and their Intrinsic Value in English Money, with 
Facsimiles of the Coins. By Leopold C, Martin, of Her Majesty's Stationery 
Office, and Charles Triibner. In 1 vol. medium 8vo, 141 Plates, printed in Geld 
and Silver, and representing about 1000 Coins, with 160 pages of Text, hand- 
somely bound in embossed cloth, richly gilt, with Kmblematical Designs on the 
Cover, and gat edges. 1863. £2, 2s. 

MARTIN. — The Chinese : their Education, Philosophy, and Letters. By W. 
A. P. Martin, D.D., LL.D., President of the Tung wen College, Pekin. 8vo. pp. 
320, cloth. 1881. 7s. 6d. 

MAKTINEAU.— Essays, Philosophical and Theolooioal. By James Martineau. 
2 vols, crown 8vo, pp. iv. and 414— x. and 430, cloth. 1875. £1, 4s. 

MARTINEAU.— Letters eeom Ireland. By Harriet Martineau. Reprinted from 
the I>aily News. Post 8vo, pp. viii. and 220, cloth. 1852. 6s. 6d. 

MATHEWS.— Abraham Ibn Ezra's Commentary on the Canticles after the 
First Eeobnsion. Edited from the MSS., with a translation, by H. J. Mathews, 
B.A., Exeter CoUege, Oxford. Crown 8vo, pp. x., 34, and 24, limp cloth. 1874. 
2s. 6d. 

MAXWELL.— A MANUAL OF THE Malay Language. By W. B. Maxwell, of the 
Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law ; Assistant Eesident, Perak, Malay Peninsula. 
With an Introductory Sketch of the Sanskrit Element in Malay. Crown 8vo, 
pp. viii. and 182, cloth. 1882. 7s. 6d. 

MAYER.— On the Art op Pottery : with a History of its Rise and Progress in 
Liverpool. By Joseph Mayer, F.S.A., r.E.S.N.A., &c. 8vo, pp. 100, boards. 
1873. 5s. 

MATERS.— Treaties Between the Empire of China and Foreign Powers, 
together with Regulations for the conduct of Foreign Trade, &c. Edited by W. 
F. Mayers, Chinese Secretary to HB.M.'s Legation at Peking. 8vo, pp. 246, 
cloth. 1877. 25s. " 

MAYERS.- The Chinese Government : a Manual of Chinese Titles, categorically 
arranged and explained, with an Appendix. By Wm. Fred. Mayers Chinese 
Secretaiy to H.B.M.'s Legation at Peking, &c., &c. Royal 8vo, pp. viii. and 160, 
' cloth. 1878. 30s. .• • cc , 

M'CRINDLE.— Ancient India, as Described by Megasthenes and Arrian- 
bemg a translation of the fragments of the Indikaof Megasthenes collected by 
S^-„?*'"^i?'?' ^^^ °* ^^^ ^^* ^'^^ °* tlie Indika of Arrian. By J. W 
■MCrindle, M.A., Principal of the Government College, Patna, &o. With 
Introduction, Notes and Map of Ancient India. Post 8vo, pp. xi. and 224, 
cloth. 1877. 7s. 6d. ' 

M'CRINDLE.— The Commerce and Kavigation of the Ebythrjean Sea. Being 
a Translation of the Periplus Maris Erythraei, by an Anonymous Writer, and of 
^rr f 1"°°"''* ."* *^« ,Y°y?g? °f Nearkhos, from the Mouth of the Indus to the 
Bv T W M^n'v^? ^t\ With Introduction, Commentary, Notes, and Index. 
m9 7s" 6d ^^^^^^' ^•■^■' Edinburgh, &o. Post 8vo, pp. iv. and 238, cloth. 

^^SS^o^T "^ 1"^°"^'^ ^^"^ *f "■ ^°y^' "Olt^ming Directions for the use of 
all kinds of Tools, and for the construction of Steam Engines and Mechanical 

?^l'if^?fi^'"^° ^^' ^?^.f ^?'?'"S in Wood and Metal. Fifth fiSdot 
Imperial 16mo, pp. iv. and 346, and 70 Engravings, cloth. 1878. 6s. 


Published by Triihner & Co. 43 

MECHANIC'S Workshop (Amateck). A Treatise containing Plain and Concise 
Directions for the Manipulation of Wood and Metals, including Casting, Forging, 
Brazing, Soldering, and Carpentry. By the Author of " The Lathe and its Uses." 
Sixth Edition. Demy 8vo, pp. iv. and 148. Illustrated, cloth. 1880. 6s. 

MEDITATIONS on Death and BrERNrrT. Translated from the German by Frederica 
Kowan. Published by Her Majesty's gracious permission. 8vo, pp. 386, cloth. 
1862. Ms. 6d. 
Ditto. Smaller Edition, crown 8vo, printed on toned paper, pp. 352, cloth. 
1863. 6s. 

MEDITATIONS ON Life and its Eeligioijs Duties. Translated from the German 
by Frederica Rowan. Dedicated to H.K.H. Princess Louis of Hesse. Published 
by Her Majesty's gracious permission. Being the Companion Volume to " Medi- 
tations on Death and Eternity." 8to, pp. vi. and 370, cloth. 1863. 10s. 6d. 

Ditto. Smaller Edition, crown 8vo, printed on toned paper, jip. 338. 1863. 
6s. 

MEDLICOTT. — A MANUAL OF THE Geology oe India, chiefly compiled from the 
observations of the Geological Survey. By H. B. Medlicott, M. A. , Superintendent, 
Geological Survey of India, and W. T. Blanford, A.R.S.M., F.E.S., Deputy Super- 
intendent. Published by order of the Government of India. 2 vols. 8vo, pp. 
xviii.-lxxx.-818. with 21 Plates and large coloured Map mounted in case, uniform, 
cloth. 1879. 16s. 

MEGHA-DUTA (The). (Cloud-Messenger.) By Kalidasa. Translated from the 
Sanskrit into English Verse by the late H. H. Wilson, M.A., F.K.S. The Vocabu- 
lary by Francis Johnson. New Edition. 4to, pp. xi.. and 180, cloth. 10s. 6d. 

MENKE.— Orbis Antiqdi Descbiptio : An Atlas illustrating Ancient History and 
Geography, for the Use of Schools ; containing 18 Maps engraved on Steel and 
Coloured, vrith Descriptive Letterpress. By D. T. Menke. Fourth Edition. 
Foho, half bound morocco. 1866. 5s. 

MEREDYTH.— Arca, A REPERTOIRE OP Original Poems, Sacred and Secular. By 
F. Meredyth, M.A., Canon of Limerick Cathedral. Crown 8vo, pp. 124, cloth. 
1875. OS. 

METCALFE. — The Englishman and the Scandinavian. By Frederick Met- 
calfe, M.A., Fellow of Lincoln CoUege, Oxford; Translator of "Gallus" and 
"Charicles;" and Author of "The Oxonian in Iceland." Post 8vo, pp. 512, 
cloth. 1880. 18s. 

IDCHEL. — Leb Ecossais en France, Les FRANgAls en feossE. Par Franoisque 
Michel, Correspondant de I'lnstitut de France, &c. In 2 vols. 8vo, pp. vii., 547, 
and 551, rich blue cloth, with emblematical designs. With upwards of 100 Coats 
of Arms, and other Illustrations, Price, £1, 12s. — Also a Large-Paper Edition 
(limited to 100 Copies), printed on Thick Paper. 2 vols. 4to, half morocco, with 3 
additional Steel Engravings. 1862. £3, 33. 

mu.— Augusts Comte and Positivism. By the late John Stuart Mill. M.P. 
Third Edition. 8vo, pp. 200, cloth. 1882. 3s. 6d. 

MILLHOUSE.— Manual op Italian Conversation. For the Use of Schools. By 
John MUlhouse. 18mo, pp. 126, cloth. 1866. 2s. 

MILtHOUSE. — New English and Italian Pbonounoinq and Explanatory Dic- 
tionary. By John MUlhouse. Vol. I. English-Italian. Vol. II. Italian-English. 
Fourth Edition. 2 vols, square 8vo, pp. 654 and 740, cloth. 1867. 12s. 


44 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

miLNE.-N0TES ON Cbtstallogeapht and Cbtstallo-phtsics. Being ttie Sub- 

atance of Lectures deUvered at Yedo during the years 1876-1877. Hy JoJin 

MUne, F.a.S. 8vo, pp. viii. and 70, cloth. 1879. 3s. 
miNOCHCHERJI.— Pahlavi, GnjiRATi, AUD English Dictionaet. By Jamashji 

Dastur Minoohoherji. Vol. I., with Photograph of Author. 8vo, pp. clxxu. and 

168, cloth. 1877. 14a. 
MITEA.— Bdddha Gata : The Hermitage of Sakya Muni. By Eajendralala Mitra, 

LL.D., C.I.E., &o. 4to, pp. xvi. and 258, with 51 Plates, cloth. 1879. i,i. 
MOCATTA.— MOKAL BIBLICAL Gleanings and Peaotical Teachings, Illustrated 

by Biographical Sketches Drawn from the Sacred Volume^ By J. L. Mocatta. 

8vo, pp. viii. and 446, cloth. 1872. 7s. 

MODERN FRENCH READER (The). Prose. Junior Course. Sixth Edition. , Edited 
by Ch. Caaaal, LL.D., and Thgodore Karcher, LL.B. Crown 8to, pp. xiv. and 224, 
cloth. 1879. 2s. 6d. 
Senioe Course. Third Edition. Crown 8to, pp. xiv. and 418, cloth. 1880. 43. 

MODERN FRENCH READER.— A Glossaet of Idioms, Gallicisms, and other Diffi- 
culties contained in the Senior Course of the Modem French Reader ; with Short 
Notices of the most important French "Writers and Historical or Literary Charac- 
ters, and hints as to the works to be read or studied. By Charles Caasal, LL.D., 
&c. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 104, cloth. 1881. 2s. 6d. 

MODERN FRENCH READER. —SENIOR COURSE, AND GLOSSARY combined. Bs. 

MOEELET.— Travels in Central America, including Accounts of some Eegiona 
unexplored since the Conquest. From the French of A. Morelet, by Mrs. M. F. 
Squier. Edited by El G. Squier. 8vo, pp. 430, cloth. 1871. 8s. 6d. 

MORFIT.— A Practical Treatise on the Manufaotube oe Soaps. By Campbell 
Morfit, M.D., F.C.S., formerly Professor of Applied Chemistry in the University 
of Maryland. With Illustrations. Demy 8vo, pp. xii. and 270, cloth. 1871. 
£2, 12s. 6d. 

MORFIT. — A Practical Tkeatise on Pore Fertilizers, and the Chemical Con- 
version of Rock Guanos, Marlstones, Coprolites, and the Crude Phosphates of 
Lime and Alumina generally into various valuable Products. By Campbell Morfit, 
M.D., F.C.S., formerly Professor of Applied Chemistry in the University of Mary- 
land. With 28 Plates. 8vo, pp. xvi. and 547, cloth. 1873. £4, 4s. 

MORRIS. — A Descriptive and Historical Account op the Godavert District, 
in the Presidency op Madras. By Henry Morris, formerly of the Madras Civil 
Service, author of " A History of India, for use in Schools," and other works. 
With a Map. 8vo, pp. xii. and 390, cloth. 1878. 12s. 

MOSENTHAL.— Ostriches and Ostrich Fabming. By J; de Mosenthal, late 
Member of the Legistive Council of the Cape of Good Hope, &c., and James E. 
Harting, F.L.S., F.Z.S., Member of the British Ornithologist's Union, &c. Second 
Edition. With 8 full-page illustrations and 20 woodcuts. Eoyal 8vo, pp. xxiv. 
and 246, cloth. 1879. 10s. 6d. , 

MOTLEY.— John Lotheop Motley : a Memoir. By Oliver Wendell Holmes. 
English Copyright Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. xii. and 275, cloth. 1878. 6s. 

MUELLER.— The Oeganic OoNSTrruENTS OP Plants and Vegetable Substances, 
and their Chemical A.nalysis. By Dr. G. C. Wittstein. Authorised Translation 
from the German Original, enlarged with numerous Additions, by Baron Ferd. 
von Mueller, K.O.M.G., M. & Ph. D., F.E.S. Crown 8vo, pp. xviii and 332. 
wrapper. 1880. 14». 


Published by Trubner & Co. 45 

unELLEB. — Select Extra-Tkopioal Plants bbadily eligible foe Indtjsteial 
CULTUBE OE Natueausation. With Indications of their Native Countries and 
some of their Uses. By F. Von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M.D., Ph.D., F.E.6. 8vo, 
pp. X., 394, cloth. 1880. 83. 

M0HAMMED. — The LlFE OF MuHAJTMBD. Based on Muhammad Ibn Ishak. By 
Ahd El Malik Ibn Hisham. Edited by Dr. Ferdinand Wustenfeld. One volume 
containing the Arabic Text. 8vo, pp. 1026, aewed. £1, Is. Another volume, con- 
taining Introduction, Kotes, and Index in German. 8vo, pp. Ixxii. and 266, sewed. 
7s. 6d. Each part sold separately. 

HUIB. — EXTEACTS rEOM THE CoBAN. In the Original, with English rendering. 
Compiled by Sir "William Muir, K.C.S.I., LL.D., Author of "The Life of 
Mahomet." Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 64, cloth. 1880, 3s. 6d. 

MTIIR.— Okigdtal Sanskeit Texts, on the Origin and History of the People of 
India, their Keligion and Institutions. CoUeoted, Translated, and Illustrated by 
John Muir, D.C.L., LL.D., Ph.D., &c. &o. 

Vol. I. Mythical and Legendary Accounts of the Origin of Caste, with an Inquiry 
into its existence in the Vedic Age. Second Edition, rewritten and 
greatly enlarged. 8vo, pp. xx. and 532, cloth. 1868. £1, Is. 
Vol II. The Trans-Himalayan Origin of the Hindus, and their Affinity with the 
Western Branches of the Aryan Race. Second Edition, revised, with 
Additions. 8vo, pp. xxxii. and 512, cloth. 1871. £1, Is. 
Vol. III. The Vedas : Opinions of their Authors, and of later Indian Writers, on 
their Origin, Inspiration, and Authority. Second Edition, revised and 
enlarged. 8vo, pp. xxxii. and 312, cloth. 1868. 16s. 
VoL IV. Comparison of the Vedic with the later representation of the principal 
Indian Deities. Second Edition, revised. 8vo, pp: xvi. and 524, cloth. 
1873. £1, Is. 
Vol. V. Contributions to a Knowledge of the Cosmogony, Mythologj^ Religious 
Ideas, Life and Manners of the Indians in the Vedic Age. 8vo, pp. xvi. 
and 492, cloth. 1870. £1, Is. ' 

UUIR. — Teanslations eeom THE Sanskeit. See Trubner's Oriental Series. 

MtJLLER.— Outline Dictionaet, for the Use of Missionaries, Explorers, and 
Students of Language. With an Introduction on the proper Use of the Ordinary 
English Alphabet in transcribing Foreign Languages. ByF. MaxMuller, M.A. The 
Vocabulary compiled by John Bellows. 12mo, pp. 368, morocco. 1867. 7s. 6d. 

MULLEK.— Lecture on Buddhist Nihilism. By F. Max MuUer, M.A. Fcap. 
8vo, sewed. 1869. Is. 

mULLEB. — The Saceed Hymns oe the Beahmins, as preserved to us in the oldest 
collection of religious poetry, the Eig-Veda-Sauhita. Translated and explained, by 
F. Max MaUer, M. A . , Fellow of All Souls' College, Prof essor'of Comparative Philo- 

i; logy at Oxford', Foreign Member of the Institute of France, &o. , &c. Vol. I. Hymns 
to the Maruts or the Storm-Gods. 8vo, pp. clii. and 264, cloth. 1869. 12s. 6d. 

UinJiEB. —The Hymns or OSHB Riq-Vbda, in the Samhita and Pada Texts. Reprinted 
from the Editio Princeps. By F. Max Muller, M. A. , &c. Second Edition, with 
the two Texts on Parallel Pages. In two vols. 8vo, pp. 1704, sewed. £1, 12s. 

MULLEY.— Geeman Gems in an English Setting. Translated by Jane MuUey. 
Fcap., pp. xii. and 180, cloth. 1877. Ss. 6d. 

N^GiNANDA ; OE, The Joy of the Snake World. A Buddhist Drama in Five 
Acts. Translated into English Prose, with Explanatory Notes, from the Sanskrit 
of Sri-H»r»ha-Deva, by Palmer Boyd, B.A. With an Introduction by Professor 
Cowell. Crown 8vo, pp. xvi. and 100, cloth. 1872. 4s. 6d. 


46 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

NAPIEE.— Folk Lobe ; or, Superstitious Beliefs in the West of Scotland within 
this Century. With an Appendix, showing the probable relation of the modern 
FestiTals of Christmas, May Day, St. John's Day, and Hallowe'en, to ancient Sun 
and Fire Worship. By James Napier, F.E.S.B., &c. Crown 8vo, pp. vii. and 
190, cloth. 1878. 4s. 

NARADIYA DHABMA-SASTSA ; OE, THE INSTITUTES OF Naeada. Translated, for 
the first time, from the unpublished Sanskrit original. By Dr. Julius Jolly, 
University, Wurzburg. With a Preface, Notes, chiefly critical, an Index of 
Quotations from Narada in the principal Indian Digests, and a general Index. 
Crown 8vo, pp. xxxv. and 144, cloth. 1876. 10s. 6d. 

NEVILL. — Haitd List op Mollusoa in the Indian Museum, Calcutta. By 
GeoflErey NeTill, C.M.Z.S., &c., First Assistant to the Superintendent of the 
Indian Museum. Part I. Gastropoda, Pulmonata, and Prosobrauchia-Neuro- 
branchia. 8to, pp. xvi. and 338, cloth. 1878. 15s. 

NEWMAH.— The Odes of Hobace. Translated into XJnrhymed Metres, with Intro- 
duction and Notes. By F. W, Newman. Second Edition. Post 8vo, pp. xxi. 
and 247, cloth. 1876. 4s. 

NEWMAN. — Theism, Dootbinai and Peactioal ; or. Didactic Eeligious Utterances. 
By F. W. Newman. 4to, pp. 184, cloth. 1858. 43. 6d. 

NEWMAN. — HoMEBic Tkanslation in Theokt and PRACTICE. A Reply to Matthew 
Arnold. By F. W. Newman. Crown 8vo, pp. 104, stiff covers. 1861. 2s. 6d. 

NEWMAN. — Hiawatha: Rendered into Latin. With Abridgment. By F. W. 
Newman. 12mo, pp. vii. and 110, sewed. 1862. 2s. 6d. 

NEWMAN. — A Histoky of the Hebrew Monaeoht from the Administration of 
Samuel to the Babylonish Captivity. By F. W. Newman. Third Edition. Crown 
8vo, pp: X. and 354, cloth. 1865. _ 8s. 6d. 

NEWMAN.— Phases of Faith ; or. Passages from the History of my Creed. New 
Edition ; with Eeply to Professor Henry Rogers, Author of the ' ' Eclipse of Faith." 
Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 212, cloth. 1881. 3s. 6d. 

NEWMAN.— A Handbook of Modern Aeabio, consisting of a Practical Grammar, 
with numerous Examples, Dialogues, and Newspaper Extracts, in European 
Type. By F. W. Newman. Post 8vo, pp. xx. and 192, cloth. 1866. 6s. 

NEWMAN.— Translations of English Poetey into Latin Verse. Designed as 
Part of a New Method of Instructing in Latin. By F. W. Newman. Crown 8vo, 
pp. xiv. and 202, cloth. 1868. 63. 

NEWMAN. — The Soul : Her Sorrows and her Aspirations. • An Essay towards the 
Natural History of the Soul, as the True Basis of Theology. By F. W. Newman. 
Ninth Edition. Post 8vo, pp. xi. and 162, cloth. 1874. 3s. 6d. 

NEWMAN.— Miscellanies ; chiefly Addresses, Academical and Historical. By F. 
W. Newman. 8vo, pp. iv. and 356, cloth. 1869. 7s. 6d. 

NEWMAN.— The Iliad of Homer, faithfully translated into Unrhymed English 
Metre, by F. W. Newman. Eoyal 8vo, pp. xvi. and 384, cloth. 1871. 10s. 6d. 

NEWMAN.— A DiCTiONABY OF Modern Arabic. 1. Anglo- Arabic Dictionary. 2. 
Anglo-Arabic Vocabulary. 3 Arabo-English Dictionary. By F. W. Newman. 
In 2 vols, crown 8vo, pp. xvi. and 376-464, cloth. 1871. £1, Is. 

NEWMAN.— Hebrew Theism. By F. W. Newman. Eoyal 8vo, pp. viii. and 172. 
Stiff wrappers. 1874. • 4s. 6d. 


Published by Trubner (& Go. 47 

NEWMAN.— The Moral Inplubnoe op Law. A Lecture by F. W. Newman, May 
20, 1860. Crown 8vo, pp. 16, sewed. 3d. 

NEWMAN.— Sm Against God. An Anniversary Discourse, preached at Clerken- 
well Unitarian Free Church, St John's Square, London, on Sunday morning, 
June 6, 1875. By "Emeritus " Prof. F. "W. Newman. Crown 8to, pp. 11, 
sewed. Sd. 

NEWMAN. — Religion not Histokt. By F. W. Newman. Foolscap, pp. 58, paper 
wrapper. 1877. Is. 

NEWMAK. — Moening Pkayers in the Household of a Bblievbb in God. By F. 
W. Newman. Crown 8vo, pp. 80, limp cloth. 1878. Is. 6d. 

NEWMAN.— Eeokganization op English Institutions. A Lecture by Emeritus 
Professor F. W. Newman. Delivered in the Manchester Athenaeum, October 15, 
1875. Crown 8to, pp. 28, sewed. 1880. 6d. 

NEWMAN.- What is Cheistianity without Christ? By F. W. Newman, 
Emeritus Professor of University College, London. 8vo, pp. 28, stitched in 
wrapper. 1881. Is. 

. NEW SOUTH WALES, PuBLICATloifS OP THE GovBENMBNT OF. List On application. 

NEW SOUTH WALES.— Journal and Proceedings op the Eotal Society of. 
Published annually. Price 10s. 6d. list of Contents on application. 

NEWTON. — Patent Law and Pkaotice: showing the mode of obtaining and 
opposing Grants, Disclaimers, Confirmations, and Extensions of Patents. With a 
Chapter on Patent Agents. By A. V. Newton. Enlarged Edition. Crown 8vo, 
pp. xiL and 104, cloth. 1879. 2s. 6d. 

NEW ZEALAND INSTITUTE PUBLICATIONS :- 

I. TBAifSAOTiONS AND Pkoobbdings of the New Zealand Institute. Demy 8vo, 

stitched. Vols; I. to XII., 1868 to 1880. £1, Is. each. 
II. An Index to the Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand -In- 
stitute. Vols. I. to VIII. Edited and Published under the Authority of the 
Board of Governors of the Institute. By James Hpctor, C.M.G., M.D., F.E.S. 
Demy, 8vo, 44 pp., stitched. 1877. 2s. 6d. 

NEW ZEALAND. —Geological Survey. List of Publications on application. 

NOIRIT.— A French Course IN Ten Lessons. By Jules Noirit, B.A. Lessons I.- 
IV. Crown 8vo, pp. xiv. and 80, sewed. 1870. la. 6d. 

NOIRIT. — French Grammatical Questions for the use of Gentlemen preparing 
for the Army, Civil Service, Oxford Examinations, &c. , &c. By Jules Noirit. 
Crown 8vo, pp. 62, cloth. 1870. Is. Interleaved, Is. 6d. 

NOUESE.— Narrative op the Second Arctic Expedition made by Charles F. 
Hall. His Voyage to Kepulse Bay; Sledge Journeys to the Straits of Fury and 
Hecla, and to King William's Land, and Residence among the Eskimos during 
the years 1864^9. Edited under the orders of the Hon. Secretary of the Navy, 
by Prof. J. E. Nourse, U.S.N. 4to, pp. 1. and 644, cloth. With maps, heliotypes, 
steel and wood engravings. 1880. £1, 8s. 

NTTGENT'S Improved French and English Aim English and French Pocket 
Dictionary. Par Smith. 24mo, pp. 489 and 320, cloth. 1873. 3s. 

NIJTT.— Two Treatises on Verbs containing Feeble and Double Letters. By 
K. Jehuda Hayug of Fez. Translated into Hebrew from the original Arabic by 
B. Moses Gikatilia of Cordova, with the Treatise on Punctuation by the same 
author, translated by Aben Ezra. Edited from Bodleian MSS., with an English 
translation, by J. W. Nutt, M.A. Delny 8vo, pp. 312, sewed. 1870. 5s. 


48 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

NUTT.— A Sketch op Samaritan Histobt, Dogma, ajto Liteeatdee. An Intro- 
troduction to "Fragments of a Samaritan Targum." By J. W. Nutt, M.A., &c., 
&c. Demy 8vo, pp. 180, cloth. 1874. 5s. 

OEHLENSCHLAGER.^AxEL AND Valboeo : a Tragedy, in Five Acts, and other 
Poems. Translated' from the Danisli of Adam Oehlensohlager by Pierce Butler, 
M.A., late Eeotor of Uleombe, Kent. Edited by Professor Palmer, M.A., of St. 
John's Coll., Camb. With a Memoir of the Translator. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xii. and 
164, cloth. 1874. 5s. 

OERA LINDA BOOK (The). — From a Manuscript of the 13th Century, with the per- 
mission of the proprietor, C. Over de linden of the Helder. The Original Frisian 
Text as verified by Dr. J. O. Ottema, accompanied by an English Version of Dr. 
Ottema's Dutch Translation. By W. E. Sandbach. 8vo, pp. xxv. and 254, cloth. 
1876. 5s. 

OGAREFF. — EssAi SUE LA Situation RnssE. Lettres ^ un Anglais. ParN. Ogareff. 
12mo, pp. 150, sewed. 1862. 3s. 

OLCOTT.— A Boddhist Catechism, according to the Canon df the Southern Church. 
By Colonel H. S. Olcott, President of the Theosophical Society. 24mo, pp. 32. Is. 

OLLENDORFF.— Mbtodo Paea apbendee a Lbbe, escribir y hablar el Ingles seguu 
el sistema de Ollendorff. Por Eamon Palenzuela y Juan de la Carreno. 8vo. pp. 
xlvi. and 460, cloth. 1873. 7s. 6d. 
Key to Ditto. Crown 8vo, pp. 112, cloth. 1873. 4s. 

OLLENDORFF.— Metodo paea apeender a Lebe, escribir y hablar el Frances, 
segun el verdadero sistema de Ollendorff ; ordenado en lecciones progresivas, con- 
sistiendo de ejercicios orales y esoritos ; enriquecido de la pronunciaoion figm-ada 
como se estila en la conversacion ; y de un Apfendice abrazando las reglas de la 
sintaxis, la formacion de los ve^bos regnlares, y la conjugaeion de los irregnlares. 
• Por TeodoroSimonn^, Professor deLenguas. Crown 8vo, pp. 342, cloth. 1873 6s. 
Key to Ditto. Crown 8vo, pp. 80, cloth. , 1873. 3s. 6d. 

OPPERT.— Lists of Sanskrit MANuscjiiPTS in Private Libraries of Southern 
India, Compiled, Arranged, and Indexed' by Gustav Oppert, Ph.D. Vol. I. 8vo. 
pp. viii. 620, cloth. 1881. £1, Is. • • ' ^- -^ <"-". 

ORIENTAL SERIES.— See TeCbnbe's Oeibntai. Series. 

ORIENTAL Text Society's Pdblications. A Ust may be had on application. 

ORIENTAL CONGRESS.— EePOKT of THE PROCEEDINGS OP THE SECOND INTERNA- 
TIONAL CONORESS OP OeIENTAUSTS HELD IN LONDON, 1874. Eoval 8vo PP 
viii. and 68, sewed. 1874. 5s. ■> - > rr 

ORIENTALISTS.— Teansactions OP THE Second Session of the Inteenationae 
CONGEESS op Orientalists. Held in Loudon in September 1874. Edited bv 
Eobert K. Douglas, Hon. Sec. 8vo, pp. viii. and 456, cloth. 1876. 21s. 

OTTE.-How TO Leaen Danish (Dano-Norwegian) : a Manual for Students of 
Damah based on the OUendorffian system of teaching languages, and adapted for 
selt-mstruction. ByE.0.Otte. Crown 8vo, pp. xx. and 338, cloth. 1879. 7s 6d 
Key to above. Crown 8vo, pp. 84, cloth. 3s. 

OVERBECK. -Catholic Orthodoxy and Anolo-Catholicism. A Word about the 

Intercommunion between the EngUsh and Orthodox Churches. BvJ.J Overbeok 
D.D. 8vo, pp. viii. and 200, cloth. 1866. 5s. "es. rsy j. j. uverDecfe, 

*'^wfd^''^l'87?T *^'"'^^^™™' ^^ ''' "^^ °^*''^^°'^' ^■^- Crown 8vo, pp. 48 


Puhlislied by Triibner & Co. 49 

OV£RBE0E. — A PLAIN ViBW OP THE Claims op the Okthodox Catholic Chukoh 
AS Opposed to all otheb Chkistlvn Denominations. By J. J. Overbeok, 
D.D. Crown Svo, pp. iv. and 138, wrapper. 1881. 2s. 6d. 

OWEN.— EOBBBT Owen, the Founder of Socialism in England. By Arthur John 
Booth, M.A. Crown Svo, pp. viii. and 220, cloth. 1869. 5s. 

OWEN.— Footfalls on the Botjnuakt op Anothek Woeld. With Narrative 
Illustrations. By E. D. Owen. An enlarged English Copyright Edition. Post 
Svo, pp. XX. and 392, cloth. 1S75. 7e. 6d. 

OWEN.— The Debatable Land between this 'Woeld and the Next. With 
Illustrative Narrations. By Robert Dale Owen. Second Edition. Crown Svo, 
pp. 456, cloth. 1874. 7s. 6d. 

OWEN.— Thbeadino mt Way : Twenty-Seven Years of Autobiograijhy. By E. D. 
Owen. Crovn Svo, pp. 344, cloth. 1874. 7s. 6d. 

OYSTER (The) : Whebe, How, and When to Find, Beeed, Cook, and Eat It. 
Second Edition, vrith a New Chapter, "The Oyster-Seeker in London." 12mo, 
pp. viii. and 106, boards. 1863. Is. 

PALESTINE. — Memoies op the Suevet op Westebn Palestine. Edited by W. 
Besant, U.A., and B. H. Palmer, M.A., under the Direction of the Committee 
of the Palestine Exploration Fund. Complete in seven volumes. Demy 4to, 
cloth, with a Portfolio of Flans, and large scale Map. Second Issue. Price 
Twenty Guineas. 

PALMER.— Leaves peom a Woed-Huntee's Note-Book. Being some Contribu- 
tions to English Etymology. By the Eev. A. Smythe Palmer, B.A., sometime 
Scholar in the University of Dublin. Crown Svo, pp. xji. and 316, cl. 1876. .7s. 6d. 

PALMER.— A Concise Diotionaet op the Pebsian Language. By E. H. Palmer^ 
M.A., of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law, Lord Almoner's Reader, and Pro- 
fessor of Arabic, and Fellow of St. John's College in the University of Cambridge. 
Square royal 32mo, pp. 726, cloth. 1876. 10s. 6d. 

PALMER. — The Song op the Ebed, and otheb Pieces. By E. H. Palmer, M.A., 
Cambridge. Crown Svo, pp. 208, cloth. 1876. 5s. 

PALMER.— Haitz. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

PALMER.— The Pateiabch and the Tsae. Translated from the.Euss by William 
Palmer, m:.A. Demy Svo, cloth. Vol. I. The Replies op the Humble Nicon. 
Pp. xl. and 674. 1871. 12s. — Vol. II. Testimonies conoeening the Pateiabch 
Nicon, the Tsae, and the Botabs. Pp. Ixxviii. and 554. 1873. 12s. — Vol. III. 
HiSTOBT op the Condemnation op the Pateiabch Nicon. Pp. Ixvi. and 5.58. 
1873. 12s.— Vols. IV., v., and VI. Seevices op the Pateiabch Nicon to the 
Chdboh and State op his Countet, &c. Pp. Ixxviii. and 1 to 660 ; xiv.-661- 
1028, and 1 to 254 ; xxvi.-1029-1656, and 1-72. 1876. 36s. 

PARKER— Thbodoeb Pabkeb's Celebeatbd Discouese on Mattees Peetainino 
TO Religion. People's Edition. Crown Svo, pp. 35L 1872. Stitched, Is. 6d. ; 
cloth, 23, 

PARKER.— Thbodoee Pabkeb. a Biography. By 0. B. Frothingham. Crown 
Svo, pp. viii. and 588, cloth, with Portrait. 1876. 12s. 

PARKER.— The Collected Wobks op Theodobe Pabkeb, Minister of the Twenty- 
* eighth Congregational Society at Boston, U.S. Containing his Theological, 

Polemical, and Critical Writings ; Sermons, Speeches, and Addresses ; and 

Literary Miscellanies. In 14 vols, Svo, cloth. 6b. each. 

D 


50 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

FABKER. — CoiLECTED "WOEKS — Continued. 

Vol. I. Discourse on Matters Pertaining to Eeligion. Preface by the Editor, 

and Portrait of Parker from a medallion by Saulini. Pp. 380. 
Vol. II. Ten Sermons and Prayers. Pp. 360. 
Vol. III. Discourses of Theology. Pp. 318. 
Vol. IV. Discourses on Politics. Pp. 312. 
Vol. V. Discourses of Slavery. I. Pp. 336. 
Vol. VI. Discourses of Slavery. II. Pp. 323. 
Vol. VII. Discourses of Social Science. Pp. 296. 
Vol. VIII. Miscellaneous Discourses. Pp. 230. 
Vol. IX. Critical Writings. I. Pp. 292. 
Vol. X. Critical "Writings. II. Pp. 308. 

Vol. XI. Sermons of Theism, Atheism, and Popular Theology. Pp. 257. 
Vol. XH. Autobiographical and Miscellaneous Pieces. Pp. 356. 
Vol. XIII. Historic Americans. Pp. 236. 

Vol. XIV. Lessons from the World of Matter and the World of Man. Pp. 
352. 

PATEESON.— Notes ON Militaet Sobveting Asm Eeconnaissahoe. By Major 
William Paterson. Fifth Edition. With 16 Plates. Demy 8vo, pp. xvi. and 
142, cloth. 1881. 7s. 6d. 

FATEBSON. — TREATISE ON MILITARY DRAWnre. With a Course of Progressive 
Plates. By Captain W. Paterson, Professor of Military Drawing at the Eoyal 
Military College, Sandhurst. Oblong 4to, pp. xii. and 31, cloth. 1862. £1, Is. 

PATERSON. — The Orometek fob Hill Measuring, combining Scales of Distances, 
Protractor, Clinometer, Scale of Horizontal Equivalents, Scale of Shade, and 
Table of Gradients. By Captain William Paterson. On cardboard. Is. 

PATERSON. — Central America. By W. Paterson, the Merchant Statesman. 
From a MS. in the British Museum, 1701. With a Map. Edited by S. Bannis- 
ter, M.A. 8vo, pp. 70, sewed. 1857. 23. 6d. 

PATON. — ^A History op the Egyptian Ebvoi^toton, from the Period of the Mame- 
lukes to the Death of Mohammed Ali ; from Arab and European Memoirs, Oral 
Tradition, and Local Eesearch. By A. A. Paton. Second Edition. 2 vols, demy 
Svo, pp. xii. and 395, viii. and 446, cloth. 1870. ISs. 

FATON.— Henry Beyle (otherwise De Stendahl). A Critical and Biographical 
Study, aided by Original Documents and Unpublished Letters from the Private 
Papers of the Family of Beyle. By A. A. P^ton. Crown Svo, pp. 340, cloth. 
1874. 7s. 6d. 

PATTON.— The Death of Death ; or, A Study of God's Holiness in Connection 
with the Existence of Evil, in so far as Intelligent and Eesponsible Beings are 
Concerned. By an Orthodox Layman (John M. Patton). Eevised Edition, crown 
Svo, pp. xvi. and 252, cloth. 1881. 6s. 

PAULI.— Simon de Montfort, Eael or Leicester, the Creator of the House of 
Commons. By Eeinhold Pauli. Translated by Una M. Goodwin. With Intro- 
duction by Harriet Martine.^u. Crown Svo, pp. xvi. and 340, cloth. 1876. 6s. 

PETTENKOFEE.— The Eelation of the Air to the Clothes we wear, the House 
WE LI VE IN, AND THE Soil we dwell on. Three Popular Lectures delivered before 
the Albert Society at Dresden. By Dr. Max Von Pettenkof er, Professor of Hygiene 
at the University of Munich, &o. Abridged and Translated by Augustus Hess, 
M.D., M.E.C.P., London, &o. Cr. Svo, pp. viii. and 96, limp cl. 1873. 2s. 6d. 

PETEUCCELLI.— Preliminaiees de la Question Eomainb de M. Ed. About. Par 
F. Petruccelli de la Gattina. Svo, pp. xv. and 364, cloth. 1860. 7a. 6d. 


Published by Triibner & Co. 51 

^^f^--^i'yAN Philology, according to the most recent researclies (Glottologia 
Ana Eecentissima). Eemarka Hiatorioal and Critical. By Domenico Pezzi. 
Translated by B. S. Roberts, M.A. Crown 8vo) pp. xvi. and 200, cloth. 1879. 6a. 

PHILLIPS.— The Dootkine op Addai, the Apostle, now first edited in a com- 
plete form in the Original Syriao, with English Translation and Note^. By 
George Phtlhps, D.D., President of Queen's College, Cambridge. 8vo, pp. xv. 
and 52 and 53, cloth. 1876. 7a. 6d. 

PHILOLOGICAL SOCIETY, TuANSACTlONS OP, published irregularly. List of publi- 
cations on application. 

PHILOSOPHY (The) op Inspiration and Eevelation. By a Layman. With a 
preliminary notice of an Essay by the present Lord Bishop of Winchester, con- 
tained in a volume entitled " Aids to Faith." 8vo, pp. 20, sewed. 1875. 6d. 

PICCIOTTO.— Sketches op Anglo-Jewish History. By James Piociotto. Demy 
8to, pp. xi. and 420, cloth. 1875. 12s. 

PIESSE.— Chemistry IN the Bkewing-Eoom : being the substance of a Course of 
Lessons to Practical Brewers. With Tables of Alcohol, Extract, and Original 
Gravity. By Charles H. Piesse, F.C.S., Public Analyst. Poap., pp. viii. and 62, 
cloth. 1877. 5s. 

PIRY.— Le Saint Edit, Etude db Littebatube Chinoise. Pr^par^e par A. 
Th^ophile Piry, du Service des Douanea Maiitimes de Chine. 4to, pp. xx. and 
320, cloth. 1879. 21s. 

PLAYPAIE.— The Cities and Towns op China. A Geographical Dictionary. 
By G. M. H. Playfair, of Her Majesty's Consular Service in China. 8vo, pp. 
506, cloth. 1879. £1, 5s. 

PLINY. — The Letters op Pliny the Younger. Translated by J. D. Lewis, M.A., 
Trinity College, Cambridge. Post 8vo, pp. vii. and 390, cloth. 1879. 5s. / 

PLUMPTRE.— Kino's College LEOTUEBa on Elooution ; on the Physiology and 
Culture of Voice and Speech and the Expression of the Emotions by Language, 
Countenance, and Gesture. To which is added a Special Lecture on the Causes 
and Cure of the Impediments of Speech. Being the substance of the Introduc- 
tory Course of Lectures annually delivered by Charles John Plumptre, Lecturer 
on Public Eeading and Speaking at King's College, London, in the Evening 
Classes Department. Dedicated by permission to H.E.H. the Prince of Wales. 
ifew and greatly Enlarged Illustrated Edition. Post 8vo, pp. xvi. and 488, cloth. 
1880. 158. 

PLUMPTRE. — General Sketch op the History op Pantheism. By C. E. 
Plumptre. Vol. I., from the Earliest Times to the Age of Spinoza; Vol. II., 
from the Age of Spinoza to the Commencement of the 19th Century. 2 vols 
demy 8vo, pp. viii. and 395 ; iv. and 348, cloth. 1881. 18a. 

POLE. — The Philosophy op Music. See English and Foreign Philosophioallibrary. 
VoL XL 

PONSARD.— Chaelottb Cokday. A Tragedy. By F. Ponsard. Edited, with Eng- 
lish Notea and Notice on Ponaard, by Professor C. Cassal, LL.D. 12mo, pp. xi. 
and 133, cloth. 1867. 2s. 6d. 

PONSARD.— L'HoNNECB et L' Argent. A Comedy. By Franjois Ponsard. Edited, 
withEn^lish Notes and Memoir of Ponsard, by Professor 0. Cassal, LL.D.. Fcap. 
8vo, pp.°xvi. and 172, cloth. 1869. 3s. 6d. 


52 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

^^FK°™tBBLGiDM, HOLLAND, AND THE Rhine. Is. -Italian Lakes. 18.-7]^™- 
TEEiNG Places o^ the South. 2s.-Switzeeland, Savoy, ^d Nqkth Italy. 
2s. 6d.— General Continental Guide. Ss.— Geneva. Is.— I-aeis. is.— iJEB- 
NESE Obeeland. Is. — Italy. 4s. 

PKATT-A Gkammae and Dictionaey of the Samoan Lajsiguage. By Rev. 
GeorEe Pratt, Forty Years a Missionary of the London Missionary Society in 
SaZa. Second Edition. Edited by Rev. S. J. Whitmee, F.B.G.S. Crown 
8vo, pp. viii. and 380, cloth. 1878. 18s. 

QUINET.— The Religious Revolution or the Nineteenth Century. From the 
French of Edgar Quinet. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xl. and 70, parchment. 1881. Is. 6d. 

QUINET.— Edgar Quinet. See English and Foreign Philosophical Library, Vol. XIV. 

RAM KAZ.— Essay on the Architecture op the Hindus. By Ram Raz, Native 
Judge and Magistrate of Bangalore, Corr. Mem. R.A.S. With 48 Plates. 4to, 
pp. xiv. and 64, sewed. 1834. £2, 2s. 

EAMSAT.-^Tabulab List OF ALL the Australian Birds at present known to 
THE Author, showing the distribution of the species. By E. P. Ramsay, F.LS., 
&o.. Curator of the Australian Museum, Sydney. 8vo, pp. 36, and Map ; boards. 
1878. 53. 

BAND, M'NALLT, & CO.'S BUSINESS Atias of the United States, Canada, and 
West Indian Islands. With a Complete Reference Map of the World, Beady 
Reference Index, &c., of all Post Offices, Railroad Stations, and Villages in the 
United States and Canada. With Official Census. 4to, pp. 212, cloth. 1881. 
£2, 12s. 6d. 

BASE. — Grammar of the Anglo-Saxon Tongue, from the Danish of Erasmus 
■ Rask. By Benjamin Thorpe. Third Edition, corrected and improved, with 
Plate. Post 8vo, pp. vi. and 192, cloth. 1879. 5s. 6d. 

RASK. — A Short Tractate on the Longevity ascribed to the Patriarchs in the 
Book of Genesis, and its relation to the Hebrew Chronology; the Flood, the 
Exodus of the Israelites, the Site of Eden, &c. From the Danish of the late 
Professor Rask, with his manuscript corrections, and large additions from his 
autograph, now for the first time printed. With a Map of Paradise and the 
circumjacent Lands. Crown 8vo, pp. 134, cloth. 1863. 2s. 6d. 

RATION. —A Handbook of Common Salt. By J. J. L. Ratton, M.D., M.C., 
Surgeon, Madras Army. 8vo, pp. xviii. and 282, cloth. 1879. 7s. 6d. 

BAVENSTEIN.— The Russians on the Amur ; its Discovery, Conquest, and Colo- 
nization, with a Description of the Country, its Inhabitants, Productions, and 
Commercial Capabilities, and Personal Accounts of Russian Travellers. By E. G. 
Ravenstein, F.B.G.S. With 4 tinted Lithographs and 3 Maps. 8vo. pp. 500, 
cloth. • 186L 15s. 

RAVENSTEIN AND HULLEY.— The GYMNASIUM AND ITS Fittings. By E. G. 
Rajrenstein and John Hulley. With 14 Plates of Illustrations. 8vo. pp. 32. 
sewed. 1867. 2s. 6d. 

RAVENSTEIN.— On Physioal Education : with special reference to our Elemen- 
tary School*. Prize Essay. By E. G. Ravenstein, F.S.S., F.R.G.S., &o. Crown 
8vo, pp. 20, sewed. 1874. 6d. 


Published by Triihier dc Co. 53 

EAVEETy.— Notes on Afghanistan and Part of Baldohistan, Geographical, 
Ethuographioal, and Historical, extracted from the Writiugs of little known 
Afghan, and Tajyik Historians, &o., &c., and from Personal Observation. By 
Major H. 6. Raverty, Bombay Native Infantry (Retired). Foolscap folio. Sec- 
tions I. and II., pp. 98, wrapper. 1880. 2s. Section III., pp. vi. and 218. 

1881. ds. 

EEADE.— The Maettrdom of SLuf. By "Winwood Eeade. Fifth Edition. 
Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 544, cloth. 1881. 7s. 6d. ' 

EECOED OFFICE.— A Separate Catalosue of the Official Publications of 
THE Public Record Office, on sale by Triibner & Co., may be had on application. 

EECOEDS OF THE HEAET. By Stella, Author of "Sappho," "The King's 
Stratagem," &c. Second English Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. xvi. and 188, with 
six steeA-plate engravings, cloth. 1881. 3s. 6d. 

SEDHOUSE. — The Turkish Vade-Meoum or Ottoman Colloquial Language : 
Containing a Concise Ottoman Grammar; a Carefully Selected Vocabulary 
Alphabetically Arranged, in two Parts, English and Turkish, and Turkish and 
English ; Also a few Familiar Dialogues and Naval and Military Terms. The 
whole in English Characters, the Pronunciation being fully indicated. By J. 
W. Redhouse, M.R.A.S. Third Edition. ' 32mo, pp. viii. and 372, cloth. 

1882. 6s. 

EEDHOUSE. — On the History, System, and Varieties of Turkish Poetry. 
Illustrated by Selections in the Original and in English Paraphrase, with a Notice 
of- the Islamic Doctrine of the Immortality of Woman's Soul in the Future State. 
By J. W. Redhouse, Esq., M.R.A.S. 8vo, pp. 62, cloth, 2s. 6d.; wi-apper. Is. ed. 
1879. 

REDHOUSE.— The MesnevI. See Tnibner's Oriental Series. 

EEEMELIN.— A Critical Review of American Politics. By C. Reemelin, of 
Cincinnati, Ohio. Demy 8vo, pp. xxiv. and 630, cloth. 1881. 143. 

EEHAN. — ^An Essay on the Age and Antiquity of the Book of Nabathj;an 
Agriculture. To which is added an Inaugural Lecture on the Position of the 
Shemitic Nations in the History of Civilisation. By Ernest Eenan. Crown 8vo, 
pp. xvi. and l48, cloth. 1862. 3s. 6d. 

EENAN. — The Life of Jesus. By Ernest Benan. Authorised English Translation. 
Crown 8vo, pp. xii. and 312, cloth. 2s. 6d. ; sewed. Is. 6d. 

EENAN. — The Apostles. By Ernest Renan. Translated from the original French. 
8vo, pp. vui. and 288, cloth. 1869. 7s. 6d. 

EEFOET OF A General Conference of Liberal Thinkers, for the discussion 
of matters pertaining to the religious needs of our time, and the methods of 
meeting them. Held June 13th and 14th, 1878, at South Place Chapel, Finabury, 
London. 8vo, pp. 77, sewed. 1878. Is. 

RHODES.— Universal Curve Tables for Facilitating the Laying out of 
Circular Arcs on the Ground foe Railways, Canals, &e. Together with 
Table of Tangential Angles and Multiples. By Alexander Rhodes, C.E. Oblong 
ISmo, band, pp. ix. and 104, roan. 1881. 5a. 

EHYS.— Lectures on Welsh Philology. By John Rhya, M.A., Professor of 
Celtic at Oxford, Honorary Fellow of Jesus College, &c., &o. Second Edition, 
Revised and Enlarged. Crown 8vo, pp. xiv. and 467, cloth. 1879. 15s. 


54 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

EICE — Mtsobe and Cooeg. a Gazetteer compiled for the Government oflndia. 
By Lewis Kice, Director of Public Instruction, Mysore and Coorg. Vol. I. 
Mysore in. General. With 2 Coloured Maps. Vol. II. Mysore, by Districts. 
With 10 Coloured Maps. Vol. III. Coorg. With a Map. 3 vols, royal 8to, 
pp. xii. 670 and xvi. ; 544 and xxii. ; and 427 and xxvu., cloth. 1878. 25s. 

EICE.— Mysoee Inscriptions. Translated for the Government by Lewis Rice. 
8vo, pp. xcii. and 336-xxx., with a Frontispiece and Map, boards. 1879. 30s. 

EIDLET.— KXmilaboI, AND OTHEB Adstealian LANGUAGES. By the Eev. William 
Ridley, B.A. Second Edition, revised and enlarged by the author; with com- 
parative Tables of Words from twenty Australian Languages, and Songs, Tradi- 
tions, Laws, and Customs of the Australian Race. Small 4to, pp. vi. and 172, cloth. 
1877. 10s. 6d. 

EIG-VEDA-SANHITA. A Collection of Ancient Hindu Hymns. Constituting the 1st 
to the 8th Ashtakas, or Books of the Rig- Veda ; the oldest authority for the Reli- 
gious and Social Institutions of the Hindus. Translated from the Original San- 
skrit. By the late H. H. Wilson, M. A. , F. R. S. , &c. , &o. 
Vol. I. 8vo, pp. lii. and 348, cloth. 21s. 
Vol. II. 8vo, pp. XXX. and 346, cloth. 1854. 21s. 
Vol. IIL 8vo, pp. xxiv. and 525, cloth. 1857. 21s. 

Vol. IV. Edited by E. B. CoweU, M.A. 8vo, pp. 214, cloth. 1866. 14s. 
Vols. V. and VI. in the Press. 

EILEY. — Medleval Cheonicles of the City of London. Chronicles of the Mayors 
and Sheriffs of London, and the Events which happened in their Days, from the 
Year a.d. 1188 to A.D. 1274. Translated from the original Latin of the "Liber 
de Antiquis Legibus " (pubUshed by the Camden Society), in the possession of the 
Corporation of the City of London ; attributed to Arnold Fit^-Thedmar, Alder- 
man of London in the Reign of Henry III. — Chronicles of London, and of the 
Marvels therein, between the Years 44 Henry III., A.D. 1260, and 17 Edward III., 
A.D. 1343. Translated from the original Anglo-Norman of the " Croniques de 
London," preserved in the Cottouian Collection (Cleopatra A. iv.) in the British 
Museum. Translated, with copious Notes and Appendices, by Henry Thomas 
Riley, M.A., Clare Hall, Cambridge, Barrister-at-Law. 4to, pp. xii. and 319, cloth. 
1863. 128. 

EIOLA. — How to Leaen Russian : a Manual for Students of Russian, based upon 
the OUendorffian System of Teaching Languages, and adapted for Self-Instruc- 
tion. By Henry Riola, Teacher of the Russian Language. With a Preface by 
W.R.S.- Ralston, M.A. Crown 8vo, pp. 576, cloth. 1878. 12s. 
Ket to the above. Crown 8vo, pp. 126, cloth. 1878. 5s. 

EIOLA.— A Geaduatbd Russian Readee, with a Vocabulary of all the Russian 
Words contained in it. By Henry Riola, Author of " How to Learn Russian." 
Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 314, cloth. 1879. 10s. 6d. 

EIPLEY.— Saoeed Rhetoeio ; or, Composition and Delivery of Sermons. By 
Henry L Ripley. 12mo, pp. 234, cloth. 1858. 2s. 6d. 

EOCHE.— A Feench Geammab, for the use of English Students, adopted for the 
Public Schools by the Imperial Council of Public Instruction. By A. Roche. 
Crown 8vo, pp. xii. and 176, cloth. 1869. 3s. 

EOCHE.— Pbobb and Poetbt. Select Pieces from the best English Authors, for 
Reading, Composition, and Translation. By A. Roche. Second Edition. Fcap. 
8vo, pp. viii. and 226, cloth. 1872. 2b. 6d. 


Published hy Trubner dc Go. 55 

ROTD.— The Birds op Coenwall and the Scillt Islands. By the late Edward 
Hearle Rodd. Edited, with an Introduction, Appendix, and Memoir, by J. E. 
Harting. 8vo, pp. Ivi. and 320, with Portrait and Map, cloth. 1880. 14s. 

ROGERS.— The 'Waverley Dictionary : An Alphabetical Arrangement of all the 
Characters in Sir Walter Scott's Waverley Novels, with a Descriptive Analysis 
of each Character, and Illustrative Selections from the Text. ' By May Kogers. 
12mo, pp. 358, cloth. 1879. 10s. 

ROSS.— Alphabetical Manual op Blowpipe Analysis; showing all known 
Methods, Old and New. By Lieut. -Colonel W. A. Kosa, late R.A., Member of 
the German Chemical Society (Author of "Pyrology, or Fire Chemistry"). 
Crown 8vo, pp. xii. and 148, cloth. 1880. 3s. 6d. 

ROSS.— Pyrology, ob Fire Chemistry ; a Science interesting to the General Philo- 
sopher, and an Art of infinite importance to the Chemist, Metallurgist, Engineer, 
&c., &c. By W. A. Koss, lately a Major in the Koyal Artillery. Small 4to, pp. 
xxviii. and 346, cloth. 1875. 36s. 

ROSS.— Celebrities op the Yorkshire Wolds. By Frederick Ross, Fellow of the 
Royal Historical Society. 12mo, pp. 202, cloth. 1878. 4s. 

ROSS.— COREAN Primer : being Lessons in Corean on all Ordinary Subjects. Trans- 
literated on the principles of the " Mandarin Primer,", by the same author. By 
Rev. John Ross, Newchwang. 8vo, pp. 90, wrapper. 1877. 10s. 

ROSS.— Honour OE Shame? ByR. S.Ross. 8vo, pp. 183. 1878. Cloth. 3s. 6d; 
paper, 2s. 6d. 

ROSS.— Removal op the Indian Troops to Malta. By R. S. Ross. 8vo, pp. 77, 
paper. 1878. Is. 6d. 

ROSS.— The Monk op St. Gall. A Dramatic Adaptation of Soheffel's " Ekke- 
hard." By B. S. Ross. Crown 8vo, pp. xii. and 218. 1879. os. 

ROUGH Notes op Journeys made in the years 1868-1873 in Syria, down the Tigris, 
India, Kashmir, Ceylon, Japan, Mongolia, Siberia, the United States, the Sand- 
wich Islands, and Australasia. Demy Svo, pp. 624, cloth. 1875. 14b. 

ROTJSTAING.— The Four Gospels Explained by their Writers. With an 
Appendix on the Ten Commandments. Edited by J. B. Roustaing. Translated 
by W. E. Kirby. 3 vols, crown Svo, pp. 440-456-304, cloth. 1881. 15s. 

ROUTLEDGE.— English Bulb and Native Opinion in India. From Notes taken 
in 1870-74. By James Routledge. 8vo, pp. x. and 338, cloth. 1878. 10s. 6d. 

ROWLEY.— Ornithological Miscellany. By George Rowley Dawson, M. A., F.Z.S. 
Vol. L Part 1, 153.— Part 2, ZOs.— Part 3, 15s.— Part 4, 20s. 
Vol. II. Part 5, 203.— Part 6, 20s.— Part 7, 10s. 6d.— Part 8, 10s. 6d.— Part 9, 
10s. 6d.— Part 10, 10s. 6d. 
Vol. in. Part 11, 10s. 6d.— Part 12, 10s. 6d.— Part 13, 10s. 6d.— Part 14, 20s. 

ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON (The).- CATALOGUE OP Scientific Papers (1800- 
1863), Compiled and Published by the Royal Society of London. Demy 4to, 
cloth, per vol. £1 ; in half-morocco, £1, 8s. Vol. I. (1867), A to Cluzel. pp. 
Ixxix and 960 ; Vol. II. (1868), Coaklay— Graydon. pp. iv. and 1012 ; Vol. 
IIL (1869), Greatheed— Leze. pp. v. and 1002 ; Vol. IV. (1870), L'Heritier de 
Brutille — Pozzetti. pp. iv. and 1006 ; Vol. V. (1871), Praag — Tlzzani. pp. iv. 
and 1000 : Vol. VI. (1872), Tkalec — Zylius, Anonymous and Additions, pp. xi. 
and 763. Continuation of above (1864-1873) ; Vol. VIL (1877), Ate Hyrtl. pp. 
xxxi. and 1047 ; Vol. VHL (1879), Ibafiez— Zwicky. pp. 1310. A List of the 
Publications of the Royal Society (Separate Papers from the Philosophical 
Transactions), on application. 


56 A Catalogue, of Important Works, 

RUNDALL.— A Shoet and Bast "Way to "Write Enolish as Spoken. Metliode 
Eapide et Facile d'Ecrire le Fran(;aia oomme on le Parle. Kurze und Leiohte 
Weise Deutsoh zu Sohreiben wie man es Spriclit. By J. B. Kundall, Certificated 
Member of the London Shorthand Writers Association. 6d. each. 

KUTHERFOBD. — THE ACTOBIOGBAPHT OF Mark Eutheefoed, Dissenting Minister. 
Edited by his friend, Eenben Shapcott. Crown Svo, pp. xii. and 180, boards. 
1881. 5s. 

SAMAVIDHANABRiHMANA (The) (being the Third Brahmana) of the S4ma Veda. 
Edited, togetber with the Commentary of S4yana, an English Translation, Intro- 
duction, and Index of Words, by A. C. BurneU. Vol. I. Text and Commentary, 
with Introduction. Demy 8vo, pp. xxxviii. and 104, cloth. 1873. 12s. 6d. 

SAMUELSON. — HiSTOBT OF Deink. A.Eeview, Social, Scientific, and Political. By 
James Samuelson, of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law. Second Edition. 
8to, pp. xxviii. and 288, cloth. 1880. 6s. 

SAND. — MoLlfiBE. A Drama in Prose. By George Sand. Edited, with Notes, by 
Th. Karcher, LL.B. 12mo, pp. xx. and 170, cloth. 1868. 3s. 6d. 

SARTORIUS. — Mexico. Landscapes and Popular Sketches. By C. Sartorius. 
Edited by Dr. Gaspey. With Engravings, from Sketches by M. Eugendas. 4to, 
pp. vi. and 202, cloth gilt. 1859. 18s. 

SATOW. — An English Japanese Diotionaet of the Spoken Language. By 
Ernest Mason Satow, Japanese Secretary to H.M. Legation at Yedo, and Ishibashi 
Masakata of the Imperial Japanese Foreign Oiiice. Second Edition. Imperial 
32mo, pp. XV. and 416, cloth. 1879. 12s. 6d. 

SAVAGE.— The Morals of Evolution. By M. J. Savage, Author of " The Eeli- 
gion of Evolution," &c. Crown 8vo, pp. 192, cloth. 1880. 5s. 

SAVAGE. — Belief in God ; an Examination of some Fundamental Theistic Pro- 
blems. By M. J. Savage. To which is added an Address on the Intellectual Basis 
of Faith. By W. H. Savage. 8vo, pp. 176, cloth. 1881. 5s. 

SAYCE.— An Assyrian Gkammab for Comparative Purposes. By A. H. Sayoe, 
M.A., Fellow and Tutor of Queen s College, Oxford. Crown 8vo, pp. xvi. and 
188, cloth. 1872. 7s. 6d. 

SAYCE.— The Peinoiplbs of Compaeative Philologt. By A. H. Sayce, M.A. 
Crown 8vo, pp. 384, cloth. 1874. 10s. 6d. 

SCHAIBLE.— An Essay on the Systbmatio Training op the Body. By C. H. 
Schaible, M.D., &c., &c. A Memorial Essay, Published on the occasion of the 
first Centenary Festival of Frederick L. Jahn, with an Etching by H. Herkomer. 
Crown 8vo, pp. xviii. and 124, cloth. 1878. 5s. 

SCHILLER.— The Beide of Messina. Translated from the German of Schiller in 
English Verse. By Emily Allfrey. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 110, cloth. 1876. 2s. 

SCHLAGINTWEIT.— Buddhism in Tibet : Illustrated by Literary Documents and 
Objects of Religious Worship. By Emil Schlagintweit, LL.D. With a folio Atlas 
of 20 Plates, and 20 Tables of Kative Print in the Text. Roy. 8vo, pp. xxiv. and 
404. 1863. £2,23. "' ' ''^ 

SCHLEICHER.— A Compendium of the Compaeative Geammae of the Indo- 
Eubopeah, Sanskrit, Greek, and Latin Languages. By August Schleicher, 
Translated from the Third Gennan Edition, by Herbert Bendall, B.A., Chr" 
Coll., Camb. 8vo. Part L, Phonology. Pp.184, cloth. 1874. 7s. 6d. Part II ' 
Morphology. Pp. viii. and 104, cloth. 1877. 6s. 


Published ly Trubner & Co. 67 

SCHULTZ. -Universal Dollak Tables (Complete United States). Covering all 
ixohanges between the United States and Great Britain, France, Belgium, 
1874 15 ' ^^*'"' """^ Germany. By C. W. H. Sohultz. 8to, cloth. 

SCHtrLTZ— Universal Interest and General Percentase Tables. On the 
Decimal System. "With a Treatise on the Currency of the World, and numerous 
examples for Self- Instruction. By C. W. H. Sohultz. Svo, cloth. 1874. 10s. 6d. 

SCHULTZ.— English Gbrmau Exchange Tables. By C. W. H. Sohultz. "With a 
Treatise on the Currency of the "World. Svo, boards. 1874. 5s. 

SCHWENDLEE.— Instructions for Testing Telegraph Lines, and the Technical 
Arrangements in Offices. "Written on behalf of the Government of India, under 
the Orders of the Director-General of Telegraphs in India. By Louis Sohwen- 
dler. Vol. L, demy Svo, pp. 248, cloth. 1878. 12s. Vol. IL, demy Svo, pp. xi. 
and 268, cloth. 3880. 9s. > :i > ev 

SCOONES.— Faust. A Tragedy. By Goethe. Translated into EngUsh Verse, by 
"William Daltou Scoones. Foap., pp. vL and 230, cloth. 1879. 5s. 

SCOTT.— The English Life op Jesus. By Thomas Scott. Crown Svo, pp. xxviii, 
and 350, cloth. 1879. 2s. 6d. 

SOOTUS.- A Note on Mb. Gladstone's " The Peace to Come." By Scotus. Svo, 
pp. 106. 1878. Cloth, 23. 6d; paper wrapper. Is. 6d. 

SELL.— The Faith op Islam. By the Eev. E. Sell, FeUow of the University of 
Madras. Demy Svo, pp. xiv. and 270, cloth. 1881. 6s. 6d. 

SELSS.— Goethe's MinorPoems. Selected, Annotated, and Rearranged. By Albert 
M. Selss, Ph.D. Crown Svo, pp. xxxi. and 152, cloth. 1875. 3s. 6d. 

SERMONS NEVEK PREACHED. By PhiUp Phosphor. Crown Svo, pp. vi. and 124, 
cloth. 1878. 2s. 6d. 

SEWELL.— Bepobt on the Amaeavati Tope, and Excavations on its Site in 1877. 
By Robert Sewell, of the Madras C.S., &c. "With four plates. Boyal 4to, pp. 
70, boards. 1880. 3s. 

SHADWELL. — A System of Political Economv. By John Lancelot Shadwell. 
Svo, pp. 650, cloth. 1877. ISs. 

SHADWELL.— Political Eoonomt eob the People. By John Lancelot Shadwell, 
Author of "A System of Political Economy." Reprinted from the "Labour 
News." Fcap., pp. vi. and 154, limp cloth. 1S80. Is. 6d. 

SHAKESPEARE'S Centukib op Peatse ; being Materials for a BKstory of Opinion 
on Shakespeare and his Works, culled from Writers of the First Century after 
his Rise. By C. M. Ingleby. Medium Svo, pp. xx. and 384. Stiff cover. 1S74. 
£X, Is. Large paper, fcap. 4to, boards. £2, 2s. 

SHAKESPEARE. — Hebmeneutics ; OB, The Still Lion. Being an Essay towards 
the Restoration of Shakespeare's Text. By C. M. Ingleby, M.A., LL.D., of 
Trinity College, Cambridge. Small 4to, pp. 168, boards. 1875. 63. 

SHAKESPEARE.— The Man and the Book. By C. M. Ingleby, M.A., LL.D. 
Svo. Part I. 6s. 

SHAKESPEARE. — Occasional Papers on Shakespeare; being the Second Part 
of "Shakespeare: the Man and the Book." By C. M. Ingleby, M.A., LL.D., 
V.P.R.S.L. Small 4to, pp. x. and 194, paper boards. 18S1. 6s. 


58 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

SHAKESPEARE.— A New Taeiobum Edition of Shakespeare. Edited by Horace 
Howard Furness. Eoyal 8vo. Vol. I. Komeo and Juliet. Pp. X3dii. and 480, 
cloth. 1871. 18s.— Vol. II. Macbeth. Pp. six. and 492. 1873. 18s.— Vols. 
III. and IV. Hamlet. 2 vols. pp. xx. and 474 and 430. 1877. 36s.— Vol. V. 
King Lear. Pp. vi. and 504. 1880. 18s. 

SHAKESPEABE.— CoNCOEDANCE TO Shakespeare's Poems. By Mrs. H. H. Fur- 
ness. Koyal 8vo, cloth. 18s. 

SHAKSFERE SOCIETY (The New).— Subscription, One Guinea per annum. List of 
Publications on application. 

SHERRIN6. — The Sacred City of the Hindus. An Account of Benares in 
Ancient and Modern Times. Bv the Eev. M. A. SheiHng, M.A., LL.D. ; and 
Prefaced with an Introduction by FitzEdward HaU, D.O.L. With Illustrations. 
8vo, pp. xxxvi. and 388, cloth. 21s. 

SHERRING. — Hindd Tribes and Castes; together with an Account of the 
Mohamedan Tribes of the North-West Frontier and of the Aboriginal Tribes of 
the Central Provinces. By the Eev. M. A. Sherring, M.A., LL.B,, Lond., &c. 
4to. Vol. n. Pp. Ixviii. and 376, cloth. 1879. £2, 8s.— Vol. IIL, with Index of 
3 vols. Pp. xii. and 336, cloth. . 1881. 32s. 

SHERRING.— The Hindoo Pilgrims. By Eev. M. A. Sherring, M.A., LL.D. 
Crown 8vo, pp. 126, cloth. 1878. 5s. 

SHIELDS.— The Final Philosophy ; or. System of Perfectible Knowledge issuing 
from the Harmony of Science and EeUgion. By Charles W. Shields, D.D., Pro- 
fessor in Princeton College. Eoyal 8vo, pp. viii. and 610, cloth. 1878. 18s. 

SIBREE.— The Great African Island. Chapters on Madagascar. A Popular 
Account of Eecent Eesearches in the Physical Geography, G«ology, and Explora- 
tion of the Country, and its Natural History and Botany ; and in the Origin and 
Divisions, Customs and Language, Superstitions, Folk-lore, and Eeligious Beliefs 
and Practices of the Different Tribes. Together with Illustrations of Scripture 
and Early Church History from Native Habits and Missionary Experience. By 
the Eev. James Sibree, jun., F.E.G.S., Author of "Madagascar and its People," 
&c. 8vo, pp. xii. and 272, with Physical and Ethnological Maps and Four Illus- 
trations, cloth. 1879. 12s. 

SIBREE.— Fancy and other Ehymbs. By John Sibree, M.A., London. Crown 
8vo, pp. iv. and 60, cloth. 1880. 2s. 

SIEDENTOPF.— The GERMAN Caligraphist. Copies for German Handwriting. 
By E. Siedentopf. Obi. fcap. 4to, sewed. 1869. Is. 

SIMCOX.— Natural Law. See English and Foreign Philosophical Library, Vol. IV 

SIME.— Lessing. See English and Foreign Philosophical Library, Extra Series, 
Vols. I. and II. 

SIMFSON-BAIEIE.— The Dramatic Unities in the Present Day. By E. Simpson- 
Baikie. Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo, pp. iv. and 108, cloth. 1878. 2s. 6d. 

SIMFSON-BAIKIE.— The International Dictionary for Naturalists and Sportsmen 
in English, French, and German. By Edwin Simpson-Baikie. 8vo, pp. iv and 
284, cloth. 1880. 15s. " ' ^^ 

SINCl'aIR.— The Messenger : A Poem. By Thomas Sinclair, M.A. Foolscap 
8vo, pp. 174, cloth. 1875. 5b. 

SINCLAIR.— LovBS's Trilogy : A Poem. By Thomas Sinclair, M.A. Crown 8vo 
pp. 150, cloth. 1876. 5s. ' 


Published by Tmbner <& Co. 69 

SINNETT.— The OconM World. By A. P. Sinnett. 8vo, pp. 172, cloth. 1881. 5s. 

SINCLAIR.— The Mount : Speech from its English Heights. By Thomas Sinclair, 
M.A. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 302, cloth. 1877. lOs. 

SMITH.— The Ditinb Goveenment. By S. Smith, M.D. Fifth Edition. Crown 
8vo, pp. xii. and 276, cloth. 1866. 6s. 

SMITH.— The Eecbnt Depression of Trade. Its Nature, its Causes, and the 
Kemedies which have been suggested for it. By Walter E. Smith, B.A., New 
College. Being the Oxford Cobden Prize Essay for 1879. Crown Svo, pp. vi. and 
108, cloth. 1880. 3s. 

SMYTH.— -The Abobioines of Victoria. With Notes relating to the Habits of 
the Natives of other Parts of Australia and Tasmania. Compiled from various 
sources for the Grovernment of Victoria. By E. Brough Smyth, r.L.S., F.G.S., 
Ac, &c. 2 vols, royal 8vo, pp. lxTii.-484 and vi.-456, Maps, Plates, and Wood- 
cuts, cloth. 1878. £3. 3s. 

SNOW— A Theologioo-Political Treamse. By G. D. Snow. Crown Svo, pp. 180, 
cloth. 1874. 4s. 6d. 

SOLLING. — Diutiska : An Historical and Critical Survey of the Literature of Ger- 
many, from the Earliest Period to the Death of Goethe. By Gustav Soiling. 8vo, 
pp. xviii. and 368. 1863. 10s. 6d. 

SOILING. — Select Passages from the Works op Shakespeare. Translated and 
Collected. German and English. By G. Soiling. 12mo, pp. 155, cloth. 1866. 
33. 6d. 

SOLLING. — Macbeth. Kendered into Metrical German (with English Text ad- 
joined). By Gustav Soiling. Crown 8vo, pp. 160, wrapper. 1878. 3s. 6d. 

SONGS of the Semitic in English Verse. By G. E. W. Crown Svo, pp. iv. and 
134, cloth. 1877. 5s. 

SOUTHALL. — The EPOCH OP THE MAMMOTH AND THE APPARITION OP MaN UPON 
Eaeth. By James C. SouthaU, A.M., LL.D. Crown Svo, pp. xii. and 430, cloth. 
Illustrated. 1878. 10s. 6d. 

SOUTHALL.— The Recent Origin op Man, as illustrated by Geology and the 
Modem Science of Prehistoric Archaeology. By James C. SouthaU. Svo, pp. 
606, cloth. Illustrated. 1875. 30s. 

SPANISH EEFOBMEBS op Two Centuries prom 1520 ; Their Lives and Writing, 
according to the late Benjamin B. Wiffen'e Plan, and with the Use of His Mate- 
rials. Described by E. Boehmer, D.D., Ph.D. Vol. I. With B. B. Wiffen's 
Nan'ative of the Incidents attendant upon the Eepublication of Beformistas 
Antiguos Bspaiioles, and with a Memoir of B. B. Wiffen. By Isaline Wiffen. 
Eoyal Svo, pp. xvi. and 216, cloth. 1874. 12s. 6d. Eoxburghe, 15s. 

SFEDDING. — The Life and Times of Francis Bacon. Extracted from the Edition 
of his Occasional Writings, by James Spedding. 2 vols, post Svo, pp. xx.-710 and 
xiv.-708, cloth. 1878. 21s. 

SPINOZA. — Benedict de Spinoza : his Life, Correspondence, and Ethics. By E. 
Willis, M.D. Svo, pp. xliv. and 648, cloth. 1870. 21s. 

SPIRITUAL EVOLUTION, An Essay on, considered in its bearing upon Modern 

Spiritualism, Science, and Eeligion. By J. P. B. Crown Svo, pp. 156, cloth. 

1879. 3s. 
SPRUNER.— Dr. Karl Von Sprunee's Historico-Geographical Hand-Atlas, 

containing 26 Coloured Maps. Obi. cloth. 1861. 15s. 
SQUIER. — Honduras ; Descriptive, Historical, and Statistical. By E. G. Squier, 

M.A., F.S.A. Or. Svo, pp. viii. and 27S, cloth. 1870. 3s. 6d. 


^0 A Oatahgue of Important Works, 

STATIONERY OFFICE.— Publications op Heb Majesty's Statiokekt Office. 
List on application. 

STEDMAN.— Oxford : Ita Social and Intellectual Life. With Remarks and Hints 
on Expenses, the Examinations, &c. By Algernon M. M. Stedman, B.A., "Wad- 
ham College, Oxford. Crown 8vo, pp. xvi. and 309, cloth. 1878. 7s. 6d. 

STEELE.— An teASTBBif LovE Stokt. Kusa Jitakaya : A Buddhistic Legendary 
Poem, with other Stories. By Th. Steele. Cr. 8to, pp. xii. and 260, cl. 1871. 6». 

STENT.— The Jade Chaplbt. In Twenty -four Beads. A Collection of Songs, 
Ballads, &c. (from the Chinese). By G. C. Stent, M.N.C.B.E.A.S. Post 8to, pp. 
viii. and 168, cloth. 1874. 5s. 

STENZLEE.— See AuOTOBES Sanskbiti, Tol. II. 

STOKES.— Goidelica— Old and Early-Middle Irish Glosses: Prose and Verse. 
Edited by Whitley Stokes. 2d Edition. Med. 8vo, pp. 192, cloth. 1872. 18s. 

STOKES. — Beunans Mekiasek. The Life of Saint Meriasek, Bishop and Confessor. 
A Cornish Drama. Edited, with a Translation and Notes, by Whitley Stokes. 
Med. 8to, pp. xvi. and 280, and Facsimile, cloth. 1872. 15s. 

STRANGE.— The Bible ; is it " The Word of God " ? By Thomas Lumisden Strange. 
Demy 8vo, pp. xii. and 384, cloth. 1871. 7s. 

STRANGE. — ^The Speakeb's Commentabt. Reviewed bv T. L. Strange. Cr. 8vo, 

pp. viU. and 159, cloth. 1871. 2s. 6d. 
STRANGE. — The DEVELOPMENT OF Creation on the Earth. By T. L. Strange. 

Demy 8vo, pp. xii. and 110, cloth. 1874. 2s. 6d. 

STRANGE.- The Legends of the Old Testament. By T. L. Strange. Demy 8vo, 
pp. xii. and 244, cloth. 1874. 5s. 

STRANGE.— The SOURCES and Development of Chbistianitt. By Thomas 
Lumisden Strange. Demy 8vo, pp. xx. and 256, cloth. 1875. 58. 

STRANGE.- What is Chbistianitt? An Historical Sketch. Illustrated with a 
Chart. By Thomas Lumisden Strange. Foolscap 8vo, pp. 72, cloth. 1880. 
2s. 6d. 

STRANGE.- Contributions to a Series op Controversial Weitinqb, issued by 
the late Mr. Thomas Scott, of Upper Norwood. By Thomas Lumisden Strange. 
Fcap. 8vo, pp. viii. and 312, cloth. 1881. 23. 6d. 

STRANGFORD. — ORIGINAL Letters and Papers of the Late Viscount Stbanqfobd 
UPON Philological and Kindred Subjects. Edited by Viscountess Strangford. 
Post 8vo, pp. xxii. and 284, cloth. 1878. 12s. 6d. 

STRATMANN. — ^The Tragicall Historib of Hamlet, Prince op Denmarkb. By 
William Shakespeare. Edited according to the first printed Copies, with the various 
Readings and Critical Notes. By F. H. Stratmann. 8vo, pp. vi. and 120, 
sewed. 3s. 6d. 

STRATMANN.— A Dictionary op the Old English Language. Compiled from 
Writings of the Twelfth, Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Centuries. By 
F. H. Stratmann. Third Edition. 4to, pp. i. and 662, sewed. 1878. SOs. 

STUDIES of Man. By a Japanese. Crown 8vo, pp. 124, cloth. 1874. 23. 6d. 

SWEET.— History of English Sounds, from the Earliest Period, including an In- 
vestigation of the General Laws of Sound Change, and full Word Lists. By 
Henry Sweet. Demy 8vo, pp. iv.-164, cloth. 1874. 4s. 6d. 

STED AHMAD.— A SERIES OF ESSAYS ON THE Life op Mohammed, and Subjects 
subsidiary thereto. By Syed Ahmad Khan Bahadur, C.S.I. Svo, pp. 532, 
with 4 Tables, 2 Maps, and Plate, cloth. 1870. 30s. 


Published by Trilhner & Go. 61 

TALBOT.— Anamsis of the Obqakibation op the Prussian Aemt. By Lieuten- 
?2J, o*'^ ^- ^^'''o*' 2d Prussian Dragoon Guards. Eoyal 8vo, pp. 78, cloth. 
1S71> 3s. 

TAYLEE.— A Ketrospeot of the Bbligigus Life op England ; or, Church, 
Puritanism, and Free Inquiry. By J. J. Tayler, B.A. Second Edition. Re- 
issued, with an Introductory Chapter on Recent Development, by James Martineau, 
LL.D., D.D. Post 8vo, pp. 380, cloth. 1876. 7s. 6d. 

TAYLOR.— Prince Deukalion : A Lyrical Drama. By Bayard Taylor. Small 4to, 
pp. 172. Handsomely bound in white vellam. 1878. 12s. 

TECHNOLOGICAL Dictionart of the Terms employed in the Arts and Sciences ; 
Architecture ; Civil Engineering ; Mechanics ; Machine-Making ; Shipbuilding and 
Navigation; Metallurgy; Artillery; Mathematics; Physics; Chemistry; Minera- 
logy, &c. With a Preface by Dr. K. Karmarsoh. Second Edition. 3 vols. 
Vol. I. German-English-French. 8vo, pp. 646. 12s. 
Vol. II. English-German-French. 8vo, pp. 666. 12s. 
Vol. III. French-German-English. 8vo, pp. 618. 12s. 

TECHNOLOGICAL DICTIONARY. -—A PooKET Di'cTiONAKT OF TECHNICAL Teems 
USED IN Arts and Manufactures. English-Germau-French, Deutsch-EngUsoh- 
Pranzosisch, Fran^ais-AUemand-Anglais. Abridged from the above Techno- 
logical Dictionary by Rumpf, Mothes, and TJnverzagt. With the addition of 
Commercial Terms. 3 vols. sq. 12mo, cloth, 12s. 

TEGNER.— Esaias Tegnfer's Frithiof's Saga. Translated from the Swedish, with 
Notes, Index, and a short Abstract of the Northern Mythology, by Leopold 
Eamel. Crown 8vo, pp. vi. and 280, cloth. 1874. 7s. 6d. With Photographic 
frontispiece, gilt edges, 10s. 

THEATBE FbanOais Modeene.— a Selection of Modem French Plays. Edited by 
the Kev. P. H. E. Brette, B.D., C. Caasal, LL.D., and Th. Karoher, LL.B. 

First Series, in 1 vol. crown 8vo, cloth, 6s., containing — 

Charlotte Cord at. A Tragedy. By F. Ponsard. Edited, with English Notes 
and Notice on Ponsard, by Professor C. Cassal, LL.D. Pp. xii. and 134. Sepa- 
rately, 2s. 6d. 

Diane. A Drama in Verse. By Emile Augier. Edited, with English Notes and 
* Notice on Augier, by Th. Earcher, LL.B. Pp. xiv. and 145. Separately, 

2s. 6d. 

Le Votaqe X Dieppe, A Comedy in Prose. By Wafflard and Fulgence. Edited, 
with English Notes, by the Rev. P. H. E. Brette, B.D. Pp. 104. Separately, 
2s. 6d. 

Second Series, crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. , containing — 

MoLlilEE. A Drama in Prose. By George Sand. Edited, with English Notes 
and Notice of George Sand, by Th. Karcher, LL.B. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xx. and 
170, cloth. Separately, Ss. 6d. 

Le3 Aeistocbaties. a Comedy in Verse. By Etienne Arago. Edited, with Eng- 
lish Notes and Notice of Etienne Arago, by the Eev. P. H. E. Brette, B.D. 2d 
Edition. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xiv. and 236, cloth. Separately, 4s. 

Third Series, crown 8vo, cloth, 6s., containing — 
Les Faux Bonshommes. A Comedy. By Theodore Barri^re and Ernest Ca- 

pendu. Edited, with English Notes and Notice on Barrifere, by Professor C. 

Cassal, LL.D. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xvi. and 304. 1868. Separately, 4s. 
L'HONNEUB ET l'Aegent. A Comedy. By Francois Ponsard. Edited, with 

English Notes and Memoir of Ponsard, by Professor C. Cassal, LL.D. 2d 

Edition. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xvi. and 171, cloth. 1869. Separately, 3s. 6d. 


62 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

THEISM. — A Candid Examination op Theism. By Physicus. Post 8vo, pp. xviii. 
and 198, cloth. 1878. 7s. 6d. 

THEOSOFHY AND THE HiGHEK Life; or, Spiritual Dynamics and the Divine and 
Miraculous Man. By G. W., M.D., Edinburgh, President of the British Theoso- 
phical Society. 12mo, pp. iv. and 138, cloth. 1880. 3s. 

THOM.— St. Paul's Epistles to the Cobinthians. An Attempt to convey their 
Spirit and Significance. By the Eev. J. H. Thom. 8vo, pp. xii. and 408, cloth. 
1851. 5s. 

THOMAS.— Eaelt Sassanian Inscriptions, Seals, and Coins, illustrating the 
Early History of the Sassanian Dynasty, containing Proclamations of Ardeshir 
Babek, Sapor I., and his Successors. "With a Critical Examination and Explana- 
tion of the celebrated Inscription in the H&ji&bad Cave, demonstrating that Sapor, 
the Conqueror of Valerian, was a professing Christian. By Edward Thomas. 
Illustrated. 8vo, pp. 148, cloth. 7s. 6d. 

THOMAS.— The Chronicles op the Pathan Kings op Dbhli. Illustrated by 
Coins, Inscriptions, and other Antiquarian Bemains. By E. Thomas, F.B.A,S. 
With Plates and Cuts. Demy 8vo, pp. xxiv. and 467, cloth. 1871. 28s. 

THOMAS.— The Eevenue Resources op the Mughal Empire in India, from 
A.D. 1593 to A.D. 1707. A Supplement to "The Chronicles of the Path&n Kings 
of Delhi." By E. Thomas, F.E.S. 8vo, pp. 60, cloth. 3s. 6d. 

THOMAS.— Sassanian Coins. Communicated to the Numismatic Society of 
London. By E. Thomas, F.E.S. Two Parts, 12mo, pp. 43, 3 Plates and a Cut, 
sewed. 6s. 

THOMAS.— J AINISM ; OR, The Early Faith op Asoka. With Illustrations of the 
Ancient Eeligions of the East, from the Pantheon of the Indo-Scythians. To 
which is added a Notice on Bactrian Coins and Indian Dates. By Edward 
Thomas, F.E.S. 8vo, pp. viii.-24 and 82. With two Autotype Plates and 
Woodcuts. 1877. 7s. 6d. 

THOMAS.— The Theory and Practice op Creole Grammar. By J. J. Thomas. 
8vo, pp. viii. and 135, boards. 12s. 

THOMAS.— Eecoeds op the Gupta Dynasty. Illustrated by Inscriptions, Written 
History, Local Tradition, and Coins. To which is added a Chapter on the Arabs 
inSind. By Edward Thomas, F.E.S. Folio, with a Plate, pp. iv. and 64, cloth. 
14s. 

THOMAS.— Boyhood Lays. By William Henry Thomas. 18mo, pp. iv. and 74. 
cloth. 1877. 2s. 6d. , yy . ix , , 

THOMSON.— Evolution and Involution. By George Thomson, Author of " The 
World of Being," &c. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 206, cloth. 1880. 5s. 

THOMSON.— Institutes op the Laws op Ceylon. By Henry Byerley Thomson, 
Second Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court of Ceylon. In 2 vols. 8vo, pp xx. 
amd 647, pp. xx. and 713, cloth. With Appendices, pp. 71. 1866. £2, 2s. 

THOEBURN.— BanniJ ; OK, OuR AFGHAN Frontier. By S. S. Thorbum, F.C.S. 
Settlement Officer of the Bannti District. , 8vo, pp. x. and 480, cloth. 1876." 186. 

THORPE.- Diplomatarium Anglicum Mvi Saxonici. a Collection of English 
Charters, frW the reign of King .fflthelberht of Kent, a.d. dcv., to that of WU- 
liam the Conqueror. Containing : I. Miscellanebus Charters. II. WUls III 
Guilds. IV. Manumissions and Acquittances. With a Translation of the Anglo' 
Saxon. By the late Benjamin Thorpe, Member of the Eoyal Academy of Sciences 
at Munich, and of the Society of Netherlandish Literature at Levden 8vo dd 
xlii. and 682, cloth. 1865. £1, Is. ' ' ^^' 


Published hy Trubner dt Co. 63 

THOUGHTS ON LOGIC ; or, the S.N.I.X. Propositional Theory. Crown 8vo, pp. iv. 
and 76, cloth. 1877. 2a. 6d. 

THOUGHTS ON THEISM, with Suggestions towards a Public Keligious Service in 
Harmony with Modern Science and Philosophy. Sixth Thousand. Eevised and 
Enlarged. 8vo, pp. 74, sewed. 1879. Is. 

THURSTON. — Friction and Lubrication. Determinations of the Laws and Co- 
efficients of Friction by new Methods and with new Apparatus. By Eobert H. 
Thurston, A.M., C.E., &c. Crown 8to, pp.xvi. and 212, cloth. 1879. 63. 6d. 

TIELE.— See English and Foreign Philosophical LibrarT,'Vol. VII. 

TOLHAUSEN. — A Synopsis of the Patent Laws of Various Countries. By A. 
Tolhausen, Ph.D. Third Edition. 12mo, pp. 62, sewed. 1870. Is. 6d. 

T0NSBER6.— Norway. Illustrated Handbook for Travellers. Edited by Charles 
Tonsberg. With 134 Engravings on Wood, 17 Maps, and Supplement. Crown 
8vo, pp. Ixi., 482, and 32, cloth. 1875. 18s. 

TOPOGRAPHICAL WOKKS. — A List op the various Works prepared at the 

TOPOORAPHICAL AND STATISTICAL DEPARTMENT OP THE WAK OFFICE may be 
had on application. 

TOREENS.— Empire in Asia :' How we came by it. A Book of Confessions. By 
,. W. M. Torrens, M.P. Med. 8to, pp. 426, cloth. 1872. 14s. 

TOSCANI.— Italian Conversational Course. A New Method of Teaching the 
Italian Language, both Theoretically and Practically. By Giovanni Toscani, Pro- 
fessor of the Italian Language and Literature in Queen's CoU., London, &c. 
Fourth Edition. 12mo, pp. xiv. and 300, cloth. 1872. 5s. 

TOSCANI.— Italian Reading Course. By G. Toscani. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xii. and 
160. With table. Cloth. 1875. 4s. 6d. 

TOULON.— Its Advantages as a Winter Residence for Invalids and Others. 
By an English Resident. The proceeds of this pamphlet to be devoted to the 
English Church at Toulon. Crown 8vo, pp. 8, sewed. 1873. 6d. 

TEIMEN.— South-African Butterflies ; a Monograph [of the Extra-Tropical 
Species. By Roland Trimen, F.L.S., F.Z.S., M.E.S., Curator of the South 
African Museum, Cape Town. Royal 8to. [In preparation. 

TRUBNER'S American, European, and Oriental Literary Record. A Register 
of the most Important Works published in America, India, China, and the British 
Colonies. With Occasional Notes on German, Dutch, Danish, French, Italian, 
Spanish Portuguese, and Russian Literature. The object of the Publishers in 
issuing this publication is to give a full and particular account of every publica- 
tion of importance issued in America and the East. Small 4to, 6d. per number. 
Subscription, 5s. per volume. 

TRUBNER — Trubner's Bibliographical Guide to American Literature : 
A Classed List of Books published in the United States of America, from 1817 
to 1857 With Bibliographical Introduction, Notes, and Alphabetical Index. 
Compiled and Edited by Nicolas Trubner. In 1 vol. 8vo, haU bound, pp. 750. 
1859. 18s. 


,64 A Catalogue of Important WorJcs, 

■TEiJBNER'S OKIENTAL SERIES :— 

Post 8vo, cloth, uniformly bound. 
Essays ok the Sacked Language, Weitings, and Religion op 
THE Pabsis. By Martin Haug, Ph.D., late Professor of Sanskrit and 
Comparative Philology at the University of Munich. Second Edition. 
Edited by E. W. West, Ph.D. Pp. xvi. and 428. 1878. 16s. 

Texts peom the Buddhist Canon, commonly known as Dhamma- 
pada. With Accompanying Narratives. Translated from the Chinese 
by S. Beal, B.A., Trinity College, Cambridge, Professor of Chinese, Uni- 
versity College, London. Pp. viil. and 176. 1878. 7s. 6d. 

The Histoet of Indian Literature. By Albreoht Weber. Trans- 
lated from the German by John Mann, M.A., and Dr. Theodor Zacha- 
riae, with the Author's sanction and assistance. Pp. 368. 1878. 18s. 

A Sketch of the Modekn Languages of the East Indies. Accom- 
panied by Two Language Maps, Classified List of Languages and 
Dialects, and a List of Authorities for each Language. By Robert Cust, 
late of BLM.I.C.S., and Hon. Librarian of K.A.S. Pp. xii. and 198. 
1878. 12s. 

The Bikth of the Wab-God: A Poem. By KaiidasS.. Translated 
from the Sanskrit into English Verse, by Ralph T. H. Griffiths, M.A., 
Principal of Benares CoUege. Second Edition. Pp. xii. and 116. 1879. 5s. 

A Classical Dictionary of Hindu Mythology and Histoet, Geo- 
graphy AND Literature. By John Dowson, M.R.A.S., late Professor 
in the Stafi College. Pp.432. 1879. I6s. 

Metrical Translations feom Sanskeit iWritees ; with an Introduc- 
tion, many Prose Versions, and Parallel Passages from Classical 
Authors. By J. Muir, C.E.I., D.C.L., &c. Pp. xliv.-376. 1879. 14s. 

Modern India and the Indians : being a Series of Impressions, Notes, 
and Essays. By Monier Williams, D.C.L., Hon. LL.D. of the University 
of Calcutta, Boden Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Oxford. 
Third Edition, revised and augmented by considerable additions. With 
Illustrations and Map, pp. vii. and 368. 1879. 14s. 

The Life oh Legend of Gaudama, the Buddha of the Burmese. With 
Annotations, the Ways to Neibban, and Notice on the Phongyies, or 
Burmese Monks. By the Right Rev. P. Bigandet, Bishop of Ramatha, 
Vicar Apostolic of Ava and Pegu. Third Edition. 2 vols. Pp. xx.-368 
and vui.-326. 1880. 21s. 

Miscellaneous Essays, relating to Indian Subjects. By B. H. Hodg- 
son, late British Minister at Nepal. 2 vols. , pp. viii.-408, and viii.-348. 
1880. 28s. 

Selections from the Koran. By Edward William Lane, Author of an 
"Arabic-English Lexicon," &c. A New Edition, Revised, with an 
Introduction. By Stanley Lane Poole. Pp. cxii. and 174. 1879. 9s. 

XJhinese Buddhism. A Volume of Sketches, Historical and Critical. 
By J. Edkins, D.D., Author of " China's Place in Philology," "Religion 
in China," &c., &o. Pp. Ivi. and 454. 1880. 18s. 

The Gulistan ; or. Rose Gakden op Shekh Mushliu'd-Din Sadi op 
Shieaz. Translated for the first time into Prose and Verse, with 
Preface and a Life of the Author, from the Atish Kadah, by E. B. 
Eastwick, F.R.S., M.R.A.S., &c. Second Edition. Pp. xxvi. and 244. 
1880. 10b. 6d. 


Published by Trubner & Co. 65 

TEUBNER'S ORIENTAL SSS.lE&-cmitinued. 

A Talmudic Miscellany ; or, One Thousand and One Extracts from the 
Talmud, the Midrashim, and the Kabbalah. Compiled and Translated 
by P. J. Hershon. With a Preface by the Rev. F. W. Farrar, D.D., 
F.E.S., Chaplain in Ordinary to Her Majesty, and Canon of "West- 
minster. "With Notes and Copious Indexes. Pp. xxviii. and 362. 1880. 
14s. 

The History op Esabhaddon (Son of Sennacherib), King of Assyria, 
B.C. 681-668. Translated from the Cuneiform Inscriptions upon 
Cylinders and Tablets in the British Museum Collection. Together 
with Original Texts, a Grammatical Analysis of each word. Explana- 
tions of the Ideographs by Extracts from the Bi-Lingual Syllabaries, 
and List of Eponyms, &c. By Ernest A. Budge, M.K.A.S., Assyrian 
Exhibitioner, Christ's CoUege, Cambridge. Post Svo, pp. xii. and 
164, cloth. 1880. 10s. 6d. 

Buddhist Birth Stories; or, Jataka Tales. The oldest Collection of 
Folk-Lore extant : being the Jatakatthavannana, for the first time 
edited in the original Pali, by V. FausboU, and translated by T. "W. 
Rhys Davids. Translation. Vol. I. Pp. cxvi. and 348. 1880. 18s. 

The Classicai. Poetry of the Japanese. By Basil Ch amberlain , Author 
of " Yeigio Henkaku, Ichiran." Pp. xii. and 228. 1880. 7s. 6d. 

LiNdUiSTic AND Oriental Essays. Written from the year 1846-1878. 
ByR. Cast, Author of "The Modern Languages of the East Indies." 
Pp. xii. and 484. 1880. 18s. 

Indian Poetry. Containing a New Edition of "The Indian Song of 
Songs," from the Sanskrit of the Gita Govinda of Jayadeva ; Two Books 
from " The Iliad of India" (Mahabhdrata) ; " Proverbial Wisdom " from 
the Shlokas of the Hitopad§sa, and other Oriental Poems. By Edwin 
Arnold, M.A., C.S.I., &c., &o. Pp. viii. and 270. 1881. 7s. 6d. 

The Religions of India. By A. Barth. Authorised Translation by 
Rev. J. Wood. Pp. XX. and 310. 1881. 16s. 

Hindu Philosophy. The Sankhya Karika of Iswara Krishna. An 
Exposition of the System of KapUa. With an Appendix on the Nyaya 
and Vaiseshika Systems. By John Davies, M.A., M.R.A.S. Pp. vi. 
and 151. 1881. 6s. 

A Manual op Hindu Pantheism. The Vedantasara. Translated with 
Copious Annotations. By Major 6. A. Jacob, Bombay Staif Corps, 
Inspector of Army Schools. "With a Preface by B. B. Cowell, M.A., 
Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Cambridge. Pp. x. and 130. 
1881. 6s. 

The MesnevI (usually known as the Mesneviyi Sherif, or Holy MesnevI) 
of Mevlanf (Our Lord) Jelalu-'d-Din Mnhammed, Er-Ruml. Book the ' 
First. Together with some Account of the Life and Acts of the Author, 
of his Ancestors, and of his Descendants. Illustrated by a selection 
. of Characteristic Anecdotes as collected by their Historian Mevlana 
Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, El Eflaki El Arifi. Translated, and the Poetry 
Versified by James W. Eedhouse, M.E.A.S., &o. Pp. xvi. and 136; 
vi. and 290. 1881. £1, Is. 
. Eastern Problems and Emblems Illustrating Old Truths. By the 
Rev. J. Long, Member of the Bengal Asiatic Society, F.R.G.S. Pp. 
XV. and 280. 1881. 6s. 

The Quatrains op Omar Khayyam. A New Translation. By E. H. 
Whinfield, late of H.M. Bengal Civil Sei-vioe. Pp. 96. 1881. 5s. 

E 


66 A Catalogue of Important Works, 

TEUBNEE'S OEIENTAL SERIS&— continued. 

Thb Mind of Mbnoids ; or, Political Economy Founded upon Moral PhUo- 
sophy. A Systematic Digest of the Dootiines of the Chinese Philosopher ■ 
Menoius. The Original Text Classified and Translated, with Com- 
ments, hy the Rev. B. Faber, Khenish Mission Society. Translated 
from the German, with Additional Notes, by the Kev. A. B. Hutchin- 
son, Church Mission, Hong Kong. Author in Chinese of " Primer Old 
Testament History," &o., &o. Pp. xvi. and 294. 1882. lOs. 6d. 

Y6sup AND ZnLAlKHA. A Poem by Jami. Translated from the Persian 
into English Verse. By E. T. H. Griffith. Pp. xir. and 304. 1882. 8s. 6d. 

TSDNI— IiGOAM : The Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi. By Theophilus 
Hahn, Ph.D., Custodian of the Grey Collection, Cape Town, Corres- 
ponding Member of the Geographical Society, Dresden ; Corresponding 
Member of the Anthropological Society, Vienna, &c,, &c. Pp. xii. and 
154. 1882. 7s. 6d. 

A CoMPBEHBNSivE COMMENTAET TO THE QuEAN. To which is prefixed 
Sale's Preliminary Discourse, with Additional Notes and Emendations. 
Together with a Complete Index to the Text, Preliminary Discourse, 
and Notes. By Eev. E. M. Wherry, M.A., Lodiana. Vol. I. Pp. xii. 
and 392. 1882. 12s. 6d. 

The following works are in preparation : — 
Buddhist Eecokds of the Westekn "Worli), being the Si-Yu-Ki by 
Hwen Thsang. Translated from the original Chinese, with Introduc- 
tion, Index, &c. By Samuel Beal, Trinity College, Cambridge, Profes- 
sor of Chinese, Uniyersity College, London. In 2 vols. 
Obientai; Eeligionb in thbie EELATioii TO Universal Eeligion. By 
Samuel Johnson. First Section — India. Second Section — China, In 
4 vols. 
The Odes oe Haipz. Being a Complete Metrical Translation of the 
Works of the Great Lyric Poet of Persia. By E. H. Palmer, M.A., 
Lord Almoner's Professor of Arabic in the University of Cambridge. 
Indian Tales ekom Tibetan Sodkobs. Translated from the Tibetan 
into German, with 'Introductions by Anton Schiefner, of the Imperial 
Academy of St. Petersburg. Eendered into English, with Notes, by "W. 
E. S. Ealston. 
The Saevadaesana Sangeaha. Translated from the Sanskrit, with Notes. 
■ By B. B. Cowell and A. E. Gough. 
UNGEE.— A Shoet Cdt to Eeading : The Child's First Book of Lessons. Part I. 
ByW. H. Unger. Foui-th Edition. Cr. 8vo, pp. 32, cloth. 1873. 5d. InfoUo 
sheets. Pp. 44. Sets A to D, lOd. each ; set E, 8d. 1873. Complete, 4s. 
Sequel to Part I. and Part II. Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo, pp. 64, cloth. 1873. 
6d. Parts I. and II. Third Edition. Demy 8vo, pp. 76, cloth. 1873. Is. 6d. 
UNGER.— W. H. Ungee's Continuous Supplementaet 'Weiting Models, designed 
to impart not only a good business hand, but correctness in transcribing. Oblong 
8vo, pp. 40, stiff covers. 1874. 6d. , = " 

UNGER.— The Student's Blue Book: Being Selections from Official Corre- 
spondence, Eeports, &c. ; for Exercises in Eeading and Copying Manuscripts, 
•Writing, Orthography, Punctnation, Dictation, PrScis, Indexing, and Digesting, 
and Tabulating Accounts and Eeturns. Compiled by W. H Uneer Folio, pp. 
100, paper. 1875. 4s. " '^'' 

UNGER.— Two Hundbed Tests in English Oethogeaphy, or Word Dictations. 
CompiledbyW. H. Unger. Foolscap, pp. viii. and 200, cloth. 1877. Is. 6d. plain, 
2s. 6d. interleaved. 


Published by Trubner dc Co. 67 

''^^?^-— The Sobipt Primer : By which one of the remaining difficulties of 
Children is entirely removed in the first stages, and, as a consequence, a consider- 
able saying of time will be effected. In Two Parts. By W. H. Unger. Part 1. 
12mo, pp. xvi. and 44, cloth. Sd. Part II., pp. 59, cloth. 5d. 

UNGER. — Pkbliminart Word Dictations on the Eules for Spelling. By W. 
H. Unger. 18mo, pp. 44, cloth. 4d. 

URIOOECHEA.— Mapoteoa Colombiana : Catalogo de Todos los Mapas, Pianos, 
Vistas, &c., relatives a la Am^rioa-Espafiola, Braail, e Mas adyacentes. Arre- 
glada cronologicamente i precedida de una introducoion sobre la historia cartogra- 
fica de America. Por el Doctor Ezequiel Uricoeohea, de Bog6ta, Nueva Granada. 
8vo, pp. 232, cloth. 1860. 6s. 

VAITANA SUTEA.— See AucTOBES Sanskeiti, Vol. III. 

VAN CAMPEN.— The Ddtoh in the Aectio Seas. By Samuel Richard Van 

Campen, author of "Holland's Silver Feast." 8vo. Vol. I. A Dutch Arctic 

Expedition and Eoute. Third Edition. Pp. xxxvii. and 263, cloth. 1877. 10s. 6d. 

Vol. II. in preparation. 
VAN DE WEYER.— Ohoix d'Opusottlbs Philosophiques, HistoIiiques, Politiques 

ET Litt^eaires de Sylvain Van de "Weyer, Precfedfe d'Avant propos de I'Editeur. 

Eoxburghe style. Crown 8vo. Peemibeb SfiElE. Pp. 374. 1863. 10s. 6d. — 

Deuxieme SfeEB. Pp. 502. 1869. 12s.— Tboisibme SfeiE. Pp. 391. 1875. 

10s. 6d.— QUATBlliME S^BIE. Pp. 366. 1876. 10s. 6d. 

VAN LAUN.— Grammar op the French Language. By H. Van Laun. Parts 
I. and IL Accidence and Syntax. 13th Edition. Cr. 8vo, pp. 151 and 120, cloth. 
1874. 4s. Part III. Exercises. 11th Edition. Cr. 8vo, pp. xii. and 285, cloth. 
1873. 3s. 6d. 

VAN LAUN. — LsgoNS GEADUiES de TBADnoTiON ET DB Lectcbe ; or, Graduated 
Lessons in Translation and Beading, with Biographical Sketches, Annotations 
on History, Geography, Synonyms and Style, and a Dictionary of Words and 
Idioms. By Henri Van Laun. 4th Edition. 12mo, pp. viii. and 400, cloth. 
1868. 5s. . 

VAEDHAMANA'S GANARATNAMAHODADHI. See Auctoees Sanskeiti, Vol. IV. 

VELASQUEZ AND SiMONrfs New Method to Bead, "Weite, and Speak the 
Spanish Language. Adapted to Ollendorff's System. Post 8to, pp. 558, cloth. 
1880. 6s. 
Key. • Post 8vo, pp. 174, cloth. 43. 

VELASQUEZ. — ^A Dictionaet op the Spanish and English Languages. For 
the Use of Young Learners and Travellers. By M. Velasquez de la Cadena. 
In Two Parts. I. Spanish-English. 'II. English-Spanish. Crown 8vo, pp. viii. 
and 846, cloth. 1878. 7s. 6d. 

VELASQUEZ.— A PeOnouncing Diction art op the Spanish and ENOtisH Lan- 
guages. Composed from the Dictionaries of the Spanish Academy, Terreos, and 
Salv&, and Webster, Worcester, and Walker. Two Parts in one thick volume. 
By M. Velasquez de la Cadena. Eoy. 8vo, pp. 1280, cloth. 1873. £1, 4s. 

VELASQUEZ. — New Spanish Eeadee : Passages from the most approved authors, 
in Prose and Verse. Arranged in progressive order. Witli Vocabulary. By M. 
Velasquez de la Cadena. Post 8vo, pp. 352, cloth. 1866. 63. 

VELASQUEZ. — An East Inteoduction to Spanish Conveesation, containing aU 
that is necessary to make a rapid progress in it. Particularly designed for 
persons who have little time to study, or are their own instructors. By M. 
Velasquez de la Cadena. 12mo, pp. 150, cloth. 1863. 2s. 6d. 

VERSES AND Verselets. By a Lover of Nature. Foolscap 8vo, pp. viii. and 
88, cloth. 1876. 2s. 6d. 


68 A Gatalogue of Importmit Wm-ks, 

VICTORIA GOVERNMENT.— Publications op the Government op Vicioeia. 

List in preparation. 
VOGEL. — On Beer. A Sifcatistioal Sketch. By M. Vogel. Fcap. 8vo, pp. xii. and 

76, cloth limp. 1874. 2s. 

WAFFLARD and FULGENCE.— Lb Voyage k Dieppe. A Comedy in Prose. By 
Wafflard and Fulgence. Edited, with Notes, by the Kev. P. H. E. Brette, B.D. 
Cr. 8vo, pp. 104, cloth. 1867. 2s. 6d. 

WAKE. — The Evolution op Moramtt. Being a History of the Development of 
Moral Culture. By C. Staniland Wake. 2 vols, crown 8vo, pp. xTi.-506 and 
xii.-474, cloth. 1878. 21s. 

WALLACE.— On MIRACLES AND Modern Spibitualism ; Three Essays. By Alfred 
Eussel 'Wallace, Author of "The Malay Archipelago," "The Geographical Dis- 
tribution of Animals," &c., &o. Second Edition, crown Svo, pp. Tiii. and 236, 
cloth. 1881. 5s. 

WANKLYN and CHAPMAN.— Water Analtsis. A Practical Treatise on the 
Examination of Potable Water. By J. A. Wanklyn, and B. T. Chapman. Fifth 
Edition. Entirely rewritten. By J. A. Wanklyn, M.E.C.S. Crown Svo, pp. x. 
and 182, cloth. 1879. 5s. 

WANKLYN.— Milk Analysis ; a Practical Treatise on the Examination of Milk and 
its Derivatives, Cream, Butter, and Cheese. By J. A. Wanklyn, M.E.C.S., &c. 
Crown 8vo, pp. viii. and 72, cloth. 1874. 5s. 

WANKLYN.— Tea, Coppee, and Cocoa. A Practical Treatise on the Analysis of 
Tea, Coffee, Cocoa, Chocolate, Mat^ (Paraguay Tea), &o. By J. A. Wanldyn, 
M.R.C.S., &o. Crown Svo, pp. viii. and 60, cloth. 1874. Ss. 

WAR OFFICE. -A List op the various Military Manuals and other Works 
published under the superintendence op the War Oppice may be had on 
application. 

WARD. — Ice : A Lecture delivered before the Keswick Literary Society, and pub- 
lished by request. To which is appended a Geological Dream on Skiddaw. By 
J. CUfton Ward, F.G.S. Svo, pp. 28, sewed. 1870. Is. 

WARD.— Elementary Natural Philosophy; being a Course of Nine Lectures, 
specially adapted for the use of Schools and Junior Students. By J. Clifton 
Ward, F.G.S. Fcap. Svo, pp. viii. and 216, with 154 Illustrations, cloth. 1S71. 
3s. 6d. 

WARD.— Elementary Geology : A Course of Nine Lectures, for the use of Schools 
and Junior Students. By J. Clifton Ward, F.G.S. Fcap. Svo, pp. 292. with 120 
Illustrations, cloth. 1872. 4s. 6d. 

WATSON.— Index to the Native and Scientipio Names op Indian and other 
Eastern Economic Plants and Products, oi-iginally prepared under the autho- 
rity of the Secretary of State for India in Council. By John Forbes Watson 
M.D. Imp. Svo, pp. 650, cloth. 1868. £1, lis. 6d. 

WEBER. —The History op Indian Literature. By Albreoht Weber. Translated 
from the Second German Edition, by John Mann, M.A., andTheodor Zacharaiae 
Ph.D., with the sanction of the author. Post Svo, pp. xxiv. and 360, cloth. 
1878. 18s. 

WEDGWOOD. -The PRINCIPLES OP GEOMETRICAL DEMONSTRATION, reduced from the 
Original Conception of Space and Form. By H. Wedgwood, M.A. 12mo pp 48 
cloth. 1844. 2s. ' '^^' ' 

WEDGWOOD.— On the Development op the Understanding. By H Wedewood 
A,M. 12mo, pp. 133, cloth, 1848. 3s, ■ "cugwoou, 


Published by Tiiihner & Co. 69 

WCTGWOOD.— The Geometky of the Three First Books of Euclid. By Direct 
J^ooi from Definitions Alone. By H. Wedgwood, M.A. 12mo, pp. 104, cloth. 
1856. 3s. 

WEDGWOOD.— On the Origin of Language. By H. Wedgwood, M.A. 12mo, 
pp. 165, cloth. 1866. 3s. 8d. 

WEDGWOOD.— A Diotionart of English Ettmoloqt. By H. Wedgwood. 
Third Edition, revised and enlarged. With Introduction on the Origin of 
Language. 8yo, pp. Ixxii. and 746, cloth. 1878. £1, Is. 

WEISBACH. — Theoketioal Mechanics : A Manual of the Mechanics of Engiueer- 
■ ing and of the Construction of Machines ; with an Introduction to the Calculus. 
Designed as a Text-book for Technical Schools and Colleges, and for the use of 
Engineers, Architects, &c. By Julius Weisbach, Ph.D., Oberbergrath, and Pro- 
fessor at the Eoyal Mining Academy at Freiberg, &c. Translated from the Ger- 
man by Eckley B. Core, A.M., Mining Engineer. Demy 8to, with 902 woodcuts, 
pp. 1112, cloth. 1877. 31s. 6d. 

WELLER. — ^An Improved Dictionary j English and French, and French and Eng- 
lish. By E. Weller. Eoyal 8to, pp. 384 and 340, cloth. 1864. 7a. 6d. 

WEST and BITHLEB. — A Digest of the Hindu Law of Inheritance and Parti- 
tion, from the Replies of the Sfctris in the Several Courts of the Bombay Pre- 
sidency. With Introduction, Notes, and Appendix. Edited by Raymond West 
and J. G. Buhler. Second Edition. Demy Svo, 674 pp., sewed. 1879. £1, lis. 6d. 

WETHERELL. — Thf. Manufactube OF YiNEGAB, its Theory and Practice; with 
especial reference to the Quick Process. By C. M. Wetherell, Ph.D., M.D. 8vo, 
pp. 30, cloth. 7s. 6d. 

WHEELDON. — ^ANGLING RESORTS NEAR LONDON : The Thames and the Lea. By J. 
P. Wheeldon, Piscatorial Correspondent to "Bell's life." Crown Svo, pp. viii. 
and 218. 1878. Paper, Is. 6d. 

WHEELER. — The History of India from the Earliest Ages. By J. Talboys 
Wheeler. Demy 8vo. Vol. I. containing the Vedio . Period and the Mah& 
BhSrata. With Map. Pp. Ixxv. and 576, ol. 1867, o. p. Vol II. The Ramayana. 
and the Brahmanic Period. Pp. Ixxxviii. and 680, with 2 Maps, ol. 21s. Vol. 

III. Hindu, Buddhist, Brahmanical Revival. Pp. xxiy.-500. With 2 Maps, 
8vo, ol. 1874. 18s. This volume may be had as a complete work with the fol- 
lowing title, " History of India ; Hindu, Buddhist, and Brahmanical." Vol. 

IV. Part 1. Mussulman Rule. Pp. xxxii.-320. 1876. 14s. Vol. IV., Part II., 
completing the History of India dovra to the time of the Moghul Empire. 
1881. 

WHEELER.— Early Records of British Indla : A History of the English Settle- 
ments in India, as told in the Government Records, the works of old Travellers, 
and other Contemporary Documents, from the earliest period down to the rise of 
British Power in India. By J. Talboys Wheeler, late Assistant Seeretary to the 
Government of India in the Foreign Department. Royal Svo, pp. xxxii. and 392, 
cloth. 1878. 15s. 

WHEELER.- The Foreigner in China. By L. N. Wheeler, D.D. With Intro- 
duction by Professor W. C. Sawyer, Ph.D. Svo, pp. 268, cloth. 1881. 6s. 6d. 

WHERRY.- A Comprehensive Commentaky to the Quran. To which is prefixed 
Sale's Preliminary Discourse, with additional Notes and Emendations. Together 
with a complete Index to the Text, Preliminary Discourse, and Notes. By Rev. 
E. M. Wherry, M. A., Lodiana. 2 vols, post Svo, cloth. Vol. I. Pp. xii. and 392. 
1882.'' 12s. 6d. 


70 A Oatalogw of Important Works. 

WHINFIELD.— QUATEAINS OP Omak Khattam. See Trtibner's Oriental Series. 
WHINFIELD.— See GuLBHAN I. Eaz. 

WHIST.— Shokt Euites FOB Modern 'Whist, Extracted from the "Quarterly 
Eeview" of January 1871. Printed on a Card, folded to fit the Pocket. 1878. 6d. 

WHITNEY. — LANonAOE AND THE Studt OF LANGUAGE : Twelve Lectures on the 
Principles of Linguistic Science. By W. D. Whitney. Third Edition. Crown 
8vo, pp. xii. and 504, cloth. 1870. lOs. 6d. 

WHITNEY. — Language and its Study, with especial reference to the Indo- 
European Family of Languages. Seven Lectures by W. D. Whitney, Instructor, 
in Modern Languages in Yale College. Edited vrith Introduction, Notes, Tables, 
&c., and an Index, by the Eev. E. Morris, M.A., LL.D, Second Edition. 
Crown 8vo, pp. xxii. and 318, cloth. 1880. 5s. 

WHITNEY.— Oriental and Linguistic Studies. By W. D. Whitney. First Series. 
Crown 8vo, pp. x. and 420, cloth. 1874. 12s. Second Series. Crown 8vo, pp. xii. 
and 434. .With chart, cloth. 1874. 12b. 

WHITNEY. — A Sanskrit Geammab, including both the Classical Language and the 
older Dialects of Veda and Brahmana. By William Dwight Whitney, Professor 
of Sanskrit and Comparative Philology in Yale College, Newhaven, &c., &c. 
8vo, pp. xxiv. and 486. 1879. Stitched in wrapper, 10s. 6d ; cloth, 12s. 

WHITWELL.— lEON Smemee's Pocket Analysis Book. By Thomas Whitwell, 
Member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, &c. Oblong 12mo, pp. 152, 
roan. 1877. 5s. 

WILKINSON.— The Saint's Teavel to the Land of Canaan. Wherein are dis- 
covered Seventeen False Eests short of the Spiritual Coming of Christ in the 
Saints, with a Brief Discovery of what the Coming of Christ in the Spirit is. By 
B. Wilkinson. Printed 1648 ; reprinted 1874. Fcap. 8vo, pp. 208, cloth. Is. 6d. 

WILLIAMS.— The Middle Kingdom. A Survey of the Geography, Government, 
Education, &o., of the Chinese Empire. By S. W. WiUiams. New Edition. 
2 vols. 8vo. \In preparation. 

WILLIAMS.— A Syllabic Dictionaey of the Chinese Language ; arranged ac- 
cording to the Wu-Fang Yuen Yin, with the pronunciation of the Characters as 
heard in Pekin, Canton, Amoy, and Shanghai. By S. Wells Williams, LL.D. 
4to, pp. 1336. 1874. £5, 5s. 

WILLIAMS.— MoDEEN India and the Indians. See Triibner's Oriental Series. 

WILSON.— Works or the late Horace Hayman Wilson, M.A., F.K.S., &c. 

Vols. I. and II. Essays and Lectures chiefly on the Eeligion of the Hindus, by 
the late H. H. Wilson, M.A., F.E.S., &c. Collected and Edited by Dr. Eem- 
hold Eost. 2 vols, demy 8vo, pp. xiii. and 399, vi. and 416, cloth. 21s. 

Vols. III., IV., and V. Essays Analytical, Critical, and Philological, on Subjects 
connected with Sanskrit Literature. Collected and Edited by Dr Eeinhold 
Eost. 3 vols, demy 8vo, pp. 408, 406, and 390, cloth. 36s. 

VoU. VI., VIL, VIII., IX., and X. (2 parts). Vishnu PurtoS, a System of Hindu 
Mythology and Tradition. Translated from the original Sanskrit, and Illus- 
trated by Notes derived chiefly from other PuranSs. By the late H H WUson 
Edited by FitzEdward HaU, MA., D.C.L., Oxou. Vols. I. to V. (2 parts) 
Demy 8vo, pp. cxl. and 200, 344, 346, 362, and 268, cloth. £3, 4s. 6d. 

Vols. XI. and XH. Select Specimens of the Theatre of the Hindus. Translated 
from the original Sanskrit. By the late H. H. Wilson, M.A., P.E.S. Third 
corrected Edition. 2 vols, demy 8vo, pp. Ixxi. and 384, iv. aiid 418, cloth. 21s. 


Published by Triibner & Co. 71 

WISE.— Commentary on the Hindu System of Medicine. By T. A. "Wise, 
M.D. 8vo, pp. XX. and 432, cloth. 1845. 7s. 6d. 

WISE.— Review of the Hibtoey of Medicine. By Thomas A. Wise. 2 toIs. 
demy 8vo, cloth. Vol. I., pp. xoviii. and 397. Vol. II., pp. 574. 10s. 

WISE.— Facts and Fallacies op Modern Protection. By Bernhard Eingrose 
Wise, B. A., Scholar of Queen's College, Oxford. (Being the Oxford Cobden Prize 
Essay for 1878.) Crown 8vo, pp. vii. and 120, cloth. 1879. 2s. 6d. 

WITHERS.— The English Language as Pronounced. By G. Withers, Eoyal 
8vo, pp. 84, sewed. 1874. Is. 

WOOD.— Chronos. Mother Earth's Biography. A Romance of the New School. 
By Wallace Wood, M.D. Crown 8vo, pp. xvi. and 334, with Illustration, cloth. 
1873. 63. 

WOMEN.— The Rights op Women. A Comparison of the Relative Legal Status of 
the Sexes in the Chief Countries of Western Civilisation. Crown 8vo, pp. 104, 
cloth. 1875. 2s. 6d. 

WRIGHT.— Feudal Manuals op English History, a series of Popular Sketches of 
our National History compiled at diflferent periods, from the Thirteenth Century 
to the Fifteenth, for the use of the Feudal Gentry and NobUity. Now first edited 
from the Original Manuscripts. By Thomas Wright, M.A., F.S.A., &c. Small 
4to, pp. xxix. and 184, cloth. 1872. 15s. 

WRIGHT. — The Homes op other Days. A History of Domestic Manners and 
Sentiments during the Middle Ages. By Thomas Wright, M.A., F.S.A. With 
niustrations from the Illuminations in Contemporary Manuscripts and other 
Sources. Drawn and Engraved by F. W. Fairholt, F.S.A. Medium 8vo, 350 
Woodcuts, pp. XV. and 512, cloth. 1871. 21s. 

WRIGHT. — ^A Volume op Vocabularies, Ulustrating the Condition and Manners of 
our Forefathers, as well as the History of the forms of Elementary Education, and 
of the Languages Spoken in this Island from the Tenth Century to the Fifteenth. 
Edited by Thomas Wright, M.A., F.S.A., &o., &c. [In the Press. 

WRIGHT.— The Celt, the Roman, and the Saxon; a History of the Early 
Inhabitants of Britain down to the Conversion of the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity. 
Illustrated by the Ancient Remains brought to light by Recent Research. 
By Thomas Wright, M.A., F.S.A., &c., &c. Third Corrected and Enlarged 
Edition. Cr. 8vo, pp. xiv. and 562. With nearly 300 Engravings. Cloth. 1875. 14s. 

WRIGHT.— Mental Travels in Imagined Lands. By H. Wright. Crown 8,vo, 
pp. 184, cloth. 1878. 5s. 

YOUNG. —Labour in Europe and America. A Special Report on the Rates of 
Wages, the Cost of Subsistence, and the Condition of the Working Classes in 
Great Britain, Germany, France, Belgium, and other Countries of Europe, also in 
the United States and British America. By Edward Young, Ph.D. Royal 8vo, 
pp. vi. and 864, cloth. 1876. 10s. 6d. 

YOUNG MECHANIC (The).— See Mechanic. 

ZELLER. — Strauss and Rbnan. An Essay by E. Zeller. Translated from the 
German. Post 8vo, pp. 110, cloth. 1866. 28. 6d. 


PERIODICALS 

PUBLISHED AND SOLD BY TEUBNER & CO. 


ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE OF Gbeai Britain and Ieeland (Journal of).— 
Quarterly, Ss. 

ARCHITECT (Ameeican) and Building News.— Contains General Architectural 
News, Articles on Interior Decoration, Sanitary Engineering, Construction, 
Building Materials, &c., &o. Four full-page Illustrations accompany each 
Number. Weekly. Annual Subscription, £1, lis. 6d. Post free. 

ASIATIC SOCIETY (Eotal) oe Geeat Bkitain and Ireland (Journal of).— 
Irregular. 

ATLANTIC MONTHLY. — Devoted to Literature, Science, Art, and Politics. 
Monthly, Is. Annual Subscription, 14s. Post free. 

BIBLICAL ARCHiEOLOeiCAL SOCIETY (TRANSACTIONS oe).— Irregular. 

BIBLIOTHECA SACRA.— Quarterly, 4s. 6d. Annual Subscription, 18b. Post free. 

BRITISH ARCHAEOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION (JouENAL OP).— Quarterly, 8s. 

BRITISH HOMffiOPATHIC SOCIETY (ANNALS Oe).— HaU-yearly, 2s. 6d. 

BROWNING SOCIETY'S PAPERS.- Irregular. 

CALCUTTA REVIEW.— Quarterly, 8s. 6d. Annual Subscription, 34s. Post free. 

CALIFORNIAN. — A Monthly Magazine devoted to the Literature, Art, Music, 
Politics, &c., of the West. Is. 6d. Annual Subscription, I89. Post free. 

CAMBRIDGE PHILOLOGICAL SOCIETY (TRANSACTIONS Oe).— Irregular. i>i 1 m 

ENGLISHWOMAN'S REVIEW.— Social and Industrial Questions. Monthly, 6d. 

GEOLOGICAL MAGAZINE, or Monthly Journal of Geology, Is. 6d. Annual Sub- 
scription, 18s. Post free. 

GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF GLASGOW (TRANSACTIONS OP).— Irregular. 

INDEX MEDICUS.— A Monthly Classified Record of the Current Medical Literature 
of the World. Annual Subscription, 30s. Post free. 

INDIAN ANTIQUARY.— A Journal of Oriental Eesearch in Archeology, History, 
Literature, Languages, Philosophy, Religion, Folklore, &c. Annual Subscrip- 
tion, £2. Post free. 

LIBRARY ASSOCIATION OE THE UNITED KINGDOM (Monthly Notes op the).— 
Monthly, 3d. Annual Subscription, 3s. 6d. Post free. 

LIBRARY JOURNAL.— Official Organ of the Library Associations of America and of 

the United Kingdom. Monthly, Is. 6d. Annual Subscription, 20s. Post free. 
MANCHESTER QUARTERLY.— Is. 6d. 


Periodicals. 73 

MATHEMATICS (American Journai, of).— Quarterly, 7s. 6d. Annual Subscrip- 
tion, 24s. Post free. < •» j . r 

ORTHODOX CATHOLIC EEVIEW.— Irregular. 

PHILOLOGICAL SOCIETY (Trahbactions AND Pkoobedings OP).— Irregular. 

FUBLISHESS' WEEKLY.— The American Book-Trade Journal. Annual Sub- 
scription, 18s. Post free. 

SCIENTIFIC AMEEICAN.— ■Weekly. Annual subscription, 18s. Post free. 

SUPPLEMENT to ditto.— Weekly. Annual subscription, 24s. Post free. 

SCIENCE AND AETS (AMERICAN JOURNAL OE).— Monthly, 2s. 6d. Annual Subscrip- 
tion, 30s. 

SPECULATIVE PHILOSOPHY (JOURNAL OP).— Quarterly, 4s. Annual Subscription, 
16s. Post free, 173. 

SUNDAY REVIEW.— Organ of the Sunday Society for Opening Museums and Art 
Galleries on Sunday.— Quarterly, Is. Annual Subscription, 4b. 6d. Post free. 

TRtfBNER'S American, European, and Oriental Literary Record.— A Register 
of the^ost Important Works Published in America, India, China, and the British 
Colonies. With occasional Notes on German, Dutch, Danish, French, Italian, 
Spanish, Portuguese, and Russian Literature. Subscription for 12 Numbers, 5s. 
Post free. 

TRUBNER & CO.'S Mohthlt List of New and Forthcoming Works, Official and 
other Authorised Publications, and New American Books. Post free. 

WESTMINSTER REVIEW.— Quarterly, 6s. Annual Subscription, 22s. Post free. 

WOMAN'S SUPFRAGE JouHNAli. — Monthly, Id. 


TROBNER & CO.'S CATALOGUES. 


Any of the following Catalogues sent per Post on receipt of Stamps. 


Agricultural Works. 2d. 

Anglo-British. Philology and Literature. Id. 

Arabic, Persian, and Turkish Books, printed in the East. Is. 

Bibliotheca Hispano- Americana. Is. 6d. 

Brazil, Ancient and Modern Books relating to. 2s. 6d. 

British Museum, Publications of Trustees of the. Id. 

Educational "Works. Id. 

Guide Books. Id. 

Homoeopathic Medical Publications. Id. 

Important Works, published by Triibner & Co. 2d. 

Linguistic and Oriental Publications. 2d. 

Medical, Surgical, Chemical, and Dental Publications. 2d. 

Modern German Books. 2d. 

Portuguese Language, Ancient and Modern Books in the. 6d. 

Sanskrit Books. 2s. 6d. 

Scientific Works. 2d. 


looo — 20/2/82
