Letters from Egypt, Ethiopia, and the Peninsula of Sinai (Lepsius, 1853)
========================================================================
Richard Lepsius — Letters from Egypt, Ethiopia, and the Peninsula of Sinai, translated (London, 1853), public domain. The Denkmäler expedition's field correspondence. Scan via Internet Archive (fromegyptethiopi00leps). Raw OCR, not proofread.

UBMRT 

UHFVERSmr  OF  CALIFORNIA 

RIVERSIDE 


4--   /"5-    "■      '. 


:,    V  . 


i^ 


LETTERS 

FROM 

EGYPT,  ETHIOPIA,  AND  THE 
PENINSULA  OF  SINAI. 

EY 

DR.  RICHARD  LEPSIUS. 

WITH  EXTRACTS   FROM   HIS 

CHEONOLOGY    OF    THE    EGYPTIANS, 

WITH  REFERENCE   TO  THE  EXODUS   OF   THE  ISRAELITES. 
REVISED   BY  THE  AUTHOR. 


TRANSLATED  BY 

LEONORA  AND  JOANNA  B.  HORNER. 


LONDON : 
HENRY  G.  BOHN,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MDCCCLIII. 


1)JhU 


c 


TRA^sSLATORS'   PREFACE. 


The  first  part  of  this  volume  consists  of  Letters  from 
Eg^'pt,  Etliiopia,  and  tlie  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  published  in 
1852.  In  addition  to  the  Map  of  the  jS'ile,  published  in 
the  G-erman  edition,  and  the  view  of  Blount  Earkal,  we 
have  been  enabled,  through  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Lepsius,  to 
give  a  Map  of  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  from  an  unpub- 
lished pamphlet,  printed  at  Berlin  in  1S4G  {Reisc  des  Prof^ 
Lepsius  von  Tlieben  nacli  der  Halhinsel  des  Sinai,  vom  4  Mdrz 
his  zum  14  April,  1845),  which  will  be  found  to  contribute 
much  to  the  elucidation  of  the  interesting  Letter  on  Mount 
Sinai. 

In  the  Appendix  we  have  inserted  a  geological  paper,  by 
Mr.  Homer,  from  the  "  Edinburgh  Philosophical  Journal" 
for  July,  1850,  in  which  some  doubts  are  thrown  upon 
the  theory  of  Dr.  Lepsius  concerning  a  supposed  exca- 
vation of  the  bed  of  the  Xile  within  the  historical  period. 
We  have  done  this  at  the  request  of  Dr.  Lepsius,  who  is 
desirous  to  call  more  particular  attention  to  the  subject. 

The  Letters  are  succeeded  by  extracts  (chiefly  relating  to 
the  Hebrew  Chronology)  from  Dr.  Lepsius's  larger  work  (of 
which  only  one  volume  has  yet  been  published),  Die  Chro- 
nolofjie  der  jEf^ypter,  in  which  he  states  his  conclusions 
respecting  the  date  of  the  Exodus.  "We  have  also  obtained 
permission  from  Chevalier  Eunsen  to  add  a  note  (p.  475), 
pointing  out  how  far  he  diflers  from  Dr.  Lepsius  respecting 
the  period  when  the  Israelites  entered  Egypt.     It  has  been 


6  AUTHOE  S  PREFACE  TO  THE  LETTEES. 

thought  desirable  to  omit  those  sections  which  enter  into 
the  subject  more  minutely  than  would  interest  the  general 
reader. 

The  whole  of  this  portion  of  the  translation  has  been 
revised  by  the  author,  and  throughout  the  volume,  what- 
ever alterations  or  additions  have  been  suggested  by  him, 
are  placed  between  brackets. 

A  Table  of  the  Egyptian  Dynasties,  drawn  up  by  Mr. 
Horner,  has  been  added,  and,  at  his  request,  revised  by 
Dr.  Lepsius,  who  has  inserted  the  results  of  his  latest  in- 
vestigations concerning  the  dates  of  the  different  Dynasties. 

"Wherever  measurements  by  feet  are  mentioned,  French 
feet  are  to  be  understood,  unless  it  is  otherwise  specified. 

August,  1853. 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  LETTERS. 

The  object  of  the  Scientific  Expedition  which  the  King 
OF  Prussia  sent  to  Egypt  in  the  year  1842,  was  to  inves- 
tigate and  collect,  with  an  historical  and  antiquarian  view, 
the  ancient  Egyptian  monuments  in  the  Xile  valley,  and 
upon  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai.  It  was  fitted  out  and  main- 
tained for  more  than  three  years  by  the  munificence  of  the 
King,  and  enjoyed  uninterruptedly  his  gracious  favour  and 
sympathy,  as  well  as  the  most  active  and  kind  attention 
from  Alexander  y.  Humboldt,  and  by  a  rare  union  of  for- 
tunate circumstances,  it  attained  the  purposes  they  had  in 
view,  as  completely  as  could  be  expected.  A  "  Preliminary 
Account  of  the  Expedition,  its  Kesults,  and  their  Publica- 
tion" (Berlin,  1849 ;  4to),  was  issued  at  the  same  time  with 


ATTnOR  S  PEEFACE  TO  THE  LETTERS.  7 

the  first  portion  of  the  great  work  upon  the  Monuments, 
which  will  be  publislied  by  desire  of  his  Majesty,  in  a  style 
corresponding  with  the  magnificence  of  the  treasures  we 
brought  away  with  us,  and  which  will  contain  a  concise  survey 
of  the  principal  results  of  the  Expedition. 

In  the  work  upon  '■  the  Monuments  of  Egj'pt  and  Ethi- 
opia," here  announced,  which  will  comprise  more  than  800 
folio  plates,  half  of  which  are  already  completed,  and  240 
published,  these  results  will  be  fidly  displayed,  as  far  as 
regards  Sculpture,  Topography,  and  Architecture,  and  they 
will  be  considered  more  accurately  in  the  accompanying  text. 

Independently,  however,  of  our  strictly  scientific  labours, 
it  appeared  right  to  ofter  a  picture  to  a  larger  circle  of  inte- 
rested readers  of  the  external  features  of  the  Expedition,  the 
;[>ersonal  co-operation  of  the  different  members  belonging  to 
it,  the  obstacles,  or  the  fortunate  circumstances  of  the  journey, 
the  condition  of  the  countries  that  we  traversed,  and  the 
influence  they  exercised  on  the  immediate  objects  of  our 
undertaking ;  finally,  a  series  of  remarks  on  the  individual 
sites  of  the  monuments  in  that  most  historical  of  all  coun- 
tries, with  all  the  meaning  and  completeness  in  which  they 
appear  to  those  travellers  who,  by  their  study  of  tliat  most 
ancient  history,  are  peculiarly  prepared  to  understand  them, 
but  which  may  also  excite  an  increased  sympathy  in  others 
who  have  acknowledged  the  great  importance  of  this  newly- 
established  science.  If  it  should  directly  further  a  correct 
criticism  of  the  scientific  labours  which  have  resulted  from 
tliis  journey,  and  which  are  being  gradually  published,  to 
consult  the  circumstances  under  which  the  materials  were 
collected,  I  believe  that  no  farther  justification  is  necessary 
for  the  publication  of  the  fo^io^ving  Letters,  however  little 
pretension  they  may  have  on  the  one  side  to  the  completeness 
and  the  literary  charm  of  a  regidar  account  of  travels,  or,  on 
the  other  side,  to  the  value  of  a  strictly  scientific  work. 


a  attthor's  peeface  to  the  lettees. 

The  Letters  have  remained  almost  throughout  in  their 
original  form ;  some  are  respectfully  addressed  to  his  Ma- 
jesty the  King,  some  to  his  Excellency  Eichhorn,  at  that 
time  Minister  of  Public  Instruction,  or  to  other  distinguished 
patrons  and  honoured  men,  such  as  A.  r.  Humboldt,  Bunsen, 
v.  Olfers,  Ehrenberg,  and  lastly,  some  to  my  father,  who 
constantly  preserved  the  liveliest  interest  in  all  tliat  con- 
cerned me.  Several  letters,  immediately  upon  their  arrival 
in  Europe,  were  printed  in  the  newspapers,  especially  in  the 
Prussian  Gazette,  and  from  that  were  received  into  other 
papers.  The  immaterial  alterations  in  some  of  the  details 
are,  for  the  most  part,  only  made  for  publication.  All  addi- 
tions or  expansions  are  put  in  the  form  of  notes.  To  this 
class  belong  the  more  detailed  notes  and  the  proofs  given 
concerning  the  true  position  of  Sinai,  which,  I  believe,. is 
poiated  out  for  the  first  time  by  me ;  this  has  since  been 
criticised  from  different  quarters,  and  has  been  condemned 
by  some,  while  it  has  met  with  approbation  from  others. 
The  subject  of  the  36th  Letter  on  the  decoration  of  the 
Egyptian  Museum  in  Berlin  is  certainly  very  different  from 
the  rest ;  but  as  an  exception  it  may  be  justified,  since  the 
point  there  considered  is  not  only  of  local  interest  in  Berlin, 
but  is  valuable  in  all  cases  of  observation,  where  there  are 
similar  requirements,  and  where  the  subject  treated  about 
is  a  method  of  adjustment  between  ancient  Egyptian  and 
modem  Art. 

Berlin,  2nd  Jane,  1852. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Preliminary  AccouxT  OF  THE  Expedition  AND  ITS  Rksults      .        .     12 
Letter  I. —  On  hoard  the  Oriental  Steamer,  bth  September^  ISA'i  .     35 

Voyage  to  Alexandria. 

Letter  II. — Alexandria,  23rd  September,  \  842 38 

Malta— Gobat — Isenberg — Krapt' — Alexandria — Mohammed  Ali. 

Letter  111.— Cairo,  Uth  October,  1842 .    41 

Alexandria — Pompey's  Pillar — Cleopatra's  Needle — Wernc's  Collection  of 
Natural  History — Departure  from  Alexandria — Sais — Naliarich — Cairo 
— Heliopolis — The  Celebration  ot  tiie  King's  Birthday  at  the  Pyramids 
— Panoramic  View  from  the  Pyramid  of  Cheops. 
Letter  IV. — At  the  foot  of  the  largest  Pyramid ,  2nd  January,  1843  .  .  01 
Pyramids  of  Gizeh — Tombs  of  Private  Individuals — Sphinx — A  Deluge  of 
Rain — Celebration  of  Christmas — Life  jn  the  Camp. 

Letter  V. — Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  17th  January,  1843 56 

The  Hieroglyphic  Memorial  tablet  on  the  Pyramid  of  Cheops — What  we 
gained  in  a  Historical  point  of  View. 
Letter  VI. — Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  28th  January,  lS4o        .         .         .         .50 
The  most  ancient  Royal  Dynasties — Tomb  of  Prince  Merhet — Tombs  of 
Private  Individuals — Ravages  committed  by  the  Arabs — Most  ancient 
Obelisk. 

Letter  VIL—Saqara,  18th  March,  1843 64 

Pyramids  of  Meidiim— The  Structure  of  Pyramids — Tlie  Enigma  of  the 
Sphinx — Locusts — Comet. 

Lettkk  \m.— Saqdra,  13th  April,  ISiS .60 

Prince  Albert  of  Prussia — Festivities  in  Cairo — Entrance  of  Pilgrims — 
Mulid  e'  Nebbi — Doseh — Visit  of  the  Prince  to  the  Pyramids — Most 
ancient  Application  of  the  Pointed  Arch  in  Cairo — The  most  ancient 
Round  Arch  in  Egvpt — Attack  by  Night  in  Saqara — Day  of  Trial. 

Lt^t^kk  ]X.— Cairo,  22nd  April,  1843 70 

Plan  of  the  Site  of  the  Pyramid  Fields — Cairo. 
Letter  X. — Ruins  of  the' Labyrinth,  o\st  May,  1843         .        .         .        .81 
Departure  for  the  Faium — Camels  and  Dromedaries — Lischt — Meidum — 
Illahun — Labyrinth — Arabic  Song — Bedouins — Turkish  Kawass. 

Lt^tter  XI.— The  Labyrinth,  2oth  Jn7ie,  1843 80 

The  Ruins  of  the  Labyrinth  —  Its  First  Builder— Its  Pyramid— Lake 
JIffiris. 
Letter  XIL— r^e  Labyrinth,  18th  July,  1843  .        .        .        .        .        .    94 

Journey  round  the  Faium — The  Dams  of  Moeris — Birket-el-Qorn — Diraeh 
— Qasr  Qeriin. 

Letter  XlU.-Cairo,  14tk  Aiiyust,  1843 OS 

Departure  of  Frey — Ethiopian  Manuscripts. 
LErrER  XIV.— Thebes,  13th  October,  1843  ...  .        .  100 

Voyage  on  the  Nile  to  Upper  Egypt — Rock-Grotto  of  Surarieh — Tombs  of 
the  Sixth  Dynasty,  in  Central  Egypt;  of  the  Twelfth,  in  Benihassan, 
Siut,  Berscheh— Arrival  in  Thebes'— Climate— Journey  onwards. 
B 


•^Q  CO^"TE^"TS. 

PAGE 

Letter  XV—Kornslv,  10th November,  1843   .......  105 

Greek  Inscriptions— Benihassau—Berscheli— Tombs  of  the  Sixth  Dynasty 
—El  Amarna—Siut— Alabaster  Quarries  of  El  Bosra— EehmnBCChem- 
niis)— Thebes— El  Kab  (Eileithyia)—Edfu—Ombos— Egyptian  Canon 
of  Proportions— Assuan—Philse— Hieroglyphic-Demotic  Inscriptions- 
Succession  of  the  Ptolemies— Entrance  into  Lower  Nubia— Debot—Ger- 
tassi— Kalabscheh  (Talmis)  — Dendi'ir- Dakkeh  (Pselchis)— Korte— 
Hierasykaminos—]\Iehencli—Sebuii—Korusko— Nubian  Language. 

Letter  XYl.—Koi^usJco,  bth  January,  184-4 130 

Scarcity  of  Camels— Excursion  to  Wadi  Haifa— Achmed  Pascha  Menekle 
and  the  newlv-named  Pascha  of  the  Sudan. 

Letter  XVIL— £"'  Darner,  '2Uh  January,  1844 133 

Nubian  Desert— Eoft  I\Iountain  Range— Wadi  E'  Suft— Wadi  Murbad— 
Ababde  Arabs— Abu  Hammed— The  Province  of  Berber — El  Mecheref 
— :\Io2:i-an  or  Atbara  (Astaboras)— E'  Damer — j\Ianderal 
Letter  XVII  L-Ow  the  Blue  River ^  Province  of  Senndr,  13?  N,  Lat, 

2jid  March,  1844 148 

The  borders  of  a  Tropical  Climate— Kawass — ^Ha^  Ibrahim— Meroe — 
Begerauieh — Pyramids— Ferlini — The  Age  of  the  Sfonuments — Schendi 

Ben  Naga — Naga  in  the  Desert — Mesaurat  e'  Sofra  —  Tamaniat — 

Chartum— Bahr  el  Abiat  (the  'White  River)— Dinka  and  Schilluk — 
goba — Kamliu — Bauer — Inscription  on  Marble — Baobab — Abu  Harras — 
Rahad — Character  of  the  Country — Dender — Dileb  Palms — Sennar — 
Abdin — Romali — Sero — Return  towards  the  North — Wed  Medineh — 
goriba — Sultana  Nasr — Gabre  ^Mariam — Rebabi — Funeral  Ceremony — 
The  Military — Emin  Pascha — Taiba — Messelemieh — Kamlin — Soba — 
Vase  with  an  Inscription. 

Letter  XIX.— C/irtr^MWi,  21s<J/arcA,  1844 190 

Mihtary  Revolt  at  Wed  Medineh — Insurrection  of  the  Slaves. 
\jEts-ef.XX..— The  Pyramids  of  Meroe,  "lind  April,  IMA..        .        .         .193 
Tamaniat — Qirre  ]\lountain  Range — Meroe — Return  of  the  Turkish  Ai-mj 
from  Taka — Osman  Bey — Prisoners  from  Taka — Language  of  the  Bis- 
chari  from  Taka — Customs  in  the  South — Pyramids  of  Meroe — Ethio- 
pian Inscriptions — Name  of  ^Nleroe. 

Letter  'SSl.—Keli,  '19th  April,  1844 210 

Departure  fi'om  Meroe — Groups  of  Tombs  north  of  Meroe. 

Letter  XXIL— Ba?'I-aZ,  9?/i  J/a?/,  1844 213 

The  Desert  of  Gilif— Gos  Bmni — Wada  Gaqedul — ]\Iageqa — Trees  of  the 
Desert — Wadi  Abu  Dom — "Wadi  Gazal — Coptic  Churches — Greek  In- 
scriptions— Pyramids  of  Xuri — Arrival  at  Barkal. 

Letter  XXIIL— J/om?«^  Barkal,  2Sth  May,  1844 222 

Ethiopian  Kings— Temple  of  Ramses  II.— Napata—Meraui— Climate. 

Letter  XXIV.— Do/i^roto,  15^/i./M«e,  1844 225 

Excursion  into  the  Cataract  Country- Ban— Departure  from  Barkal — 
Pyramids  of  Tangassi,  Kurru,  and  Zuma — Churches  and  Fortifica- 
tions of  Bachit,  ]Magal,  Geliel  Deqa— Old  Dongola— Nubian  Language. 

Letter  XXV. — Dongola,  2ord  June,  1844 233 

Island  of  Argo — Kerman  and  Defufa— Tombos — Inscriptions  of  Tuth- 
mosis  I. — Languages  of  Darfur. 
Letter  XXVL—Koi-usko,  17 th  Auyust,  1844    ......  235 

Fakir  Fenti—Sese—Soleb—GebefDosche—Sedeinga—Amara— Island  of 
Sai— Sulphur  Spring  of  Okmeh— Semneh— Heiglits  of  the  Nile  in  the 
Reign  of  Amenemha-Moeris— Abu  Simbel— Greek  Inscription  in  the 
Reiga  of  Psammeticus  I.— Ibrim  (Primis)  Anibe— Korusko. 


COyTE>'TS.  11 

PAGE 

Lettilr  XXVlL—PJdlce,  1st  September,  ISU 241 

Wadi  Keniis — Bega  Language  of  the  Bischari — Talmis — Pliila3 — Meroitic- 
Etliiopian  Inscriptions. 
LE.TrERXXViU.—  T/iebes—Quma,'2itk  November,  ISiA.        .        .        .243 
Excavations  in  tlie  Temple  and  in  the  Eock-Tombs  of  Ramses  II. — Lan- 
guages of  the  Sudan — History  and  Civilisation  of  Ethiopia. 
Letter  XXIX.— Thebes— Qurna,  8th  January,  1845         .         .         .        .245 
Monuments  and  Plaster  Casts  we  took  away  yn'Ja.  us. 

Letter  XXX.—Thtbes,  2hth  February,  1845 246 

Description  of  Thebes — The  Temple  of  Karnac,  and  its  History — Luqsor 
— El  Asabif — Statue  of  Memnon  —  The  r^Iemnonium — Temple  of 
Ramses  II. — Medinet  Habu — The  Royal  Tombs — Tombs  of  Private 
Individuals  from  the  Time  of  Psammeticus — Imperial  Time — Coptic 
Convents  and  Churches — Copts  of  the  present  Day — Revenge  for 
bloodshed  among  the  Arabs — Our  dwelling  in  Abd-el-Quruu— Visit 
from  Travellers. 

LETiKYiXXXl.-Onthe  Red  Sea,  2\st  March,  WAh 274 

Change  of  abode  from  Qurna  to  Karnac — Departure  to  the  Peninsula  of 
Sinai  —  Qenneh — Seid  Hussen — Stone-Quarries  and  Inscriptions  of 
Hamamat— Gebel  Fatireh — Losing  our  Way — Porphyry  t>uarries  at 
Gebel  Doclian — Gcbel  Zcit. 
Letter  XXXll.-Convent  of  Sinai,  2Ath  March,  1845  .  .  .  .290 
Landing  at  Tor — Gebel  Hammam — Wadi  Hebran — Convent — Gebel  Alusa 
— Gebel  Sefsaf. 

Letter  XXXUL-On  the  Red  Sea,  Gth  April,  1845 293 

Departure  from  the  Convent — AVadi  e'  Seheikh — Ascent  of  Serbal — Wadi 
Firan — Wadi  ]Mokatteb — Copper  !Mines  of  Wadi  !Maghdra — Rock-In- 
scriptijns  of  the  Fourth  Dynasty — Sarbut  el  Chadem — Mounds  of 
Dross — Wadi  Xasb — Harbour  of  Abu  Zelimeli — The  true  Position  of 
Sinai — Tradition  of  the  Monks — Local  and  Historical  Conditions — Elim 
at  Abu  Zelimeh — Mara  in  Wadi  Gharandel — The  Desert  of  Sin — Sinai, 
the  Mount  of  Sin — The  Mount  of  God — Subsistence  of  the  Israelites — 
Eaphiuim  at  Pharan — Sinai-Choreb  at  Eaphidim — Review  of  the 
Question  upon  Sinai. 
Letter  XXXIV .—Thebes— Karnac,  Ath  May,  1845  .  .  .  .321 
Return  to  Thebes — Revenge  for  bloodshed. 

LetterXXXV.— CozVo,  10?/<./?/(y,  1845 322 

Dendera — El  Amarna — Dr.  Bethman — Removal  of  the  Sepulchral  Cham- 
bers at  the  Pyramids. 
Letter  XXXVI.—CVnVo,  11^/i  Jm/5/,  1845         .        .        .        .        .        .323 

The  Egyptian  Museum  in  Berlin — Pictures  on  the  Walls. 

'Letty.rXXXKH.- Jaffa,  1th  October,  l%Vo 332 

Journey  across  the  Delta — San  (Tanis) — Arrival  in  Jaffa. 
Letter  XXXXlll.-Sazareth,  iHh  November,  1845  .         .         .         .         .333 
Jerusalem — Xablus  (Sichem) — Tabor — Nazareth — Lake  of  Tiberias. 

Letter  XXXIX.— Smyrna,  1th  December,  1845 336 

Carmel — Libanou — Beyrut — Departure  to  Damascus — Zahleh — Tomb  of 
Koah — Barada — Tomb  of  Abel — Inscriptions  at  Barada — Tomb  of  Seth 
—  Ealbec  —  Ibrahim — Cedars  of  Libanon — Egyptian  and  Assyrian 
Eock-Inscriptions  at  Nahr  el  Kelb. 


PRELIMINARY  ACCOUNT 

OP  THE 

EXPEDITION  AND  ITS  RESULTS. 


li\  tlie  year  1842,  in  accordance  with  the  proposal  of 
Eichhorn,  at  that  time  Minister  of  Instruction,  and  at  the 
recommendation  of  MM.  Alexander  v.  Humboldt  and  Bun- 
sen,  his  Majesty  King  Frederic  William  IV.  of  Prussia  de- 
termined to  send  a  scientific  expedition  to  investigate  the 
remains  of  ancient  Egyptian  and  Ethiopian  civilisation  stiU 
in  preservation  in  the  iS^ile  valley  and  the  adjacent  countries. 
The  dii'ection  of  the  undertaking  was  entrusted  to  me,  after 
the  detailed  plans  of  the  proposed  expedition  had  been  mi- 
nutely examined  by  the  Boyal  Academy  of  Sciences,  and  in 
all  points  graciously  approved  by  the  King. 

The  land-surveyor,  Gr.  Erbkam,  from  Berlin,  and  the 
draughtsmen  and  painters,  Ernest  and  Max  Weidenbach, 
from  Naumburg,  and  J.  Erey,  from  Basle,  were  appointed 
to  make  the  drawings  and  coloured  representations,  as  well 
as  those  architectonic  plans,  which  had  to  be  executed  on  the 
spot.  AVhen  J.  Erey  was  obliged  to  return  to  Europe  from 
Lower  Egypt,  on  account  of  the  injurious  climate,  he  was 
replaced  by  the  painter  0.  Georgi,  from  Leipzig.  Two 
English  artists,  also,  J.  Bonomi,  who,  from  the  interest  he 
took  in  the  journey,  became  attached  to  our  party  while  we 
were  in  London,  and  the  architect  J.  Wild,  who  joined  us  of 
his  own  accord,  took  an  active  part  in  the  expedition  as  long 
as  it  remained  in  Lower  Egypt.  Lastly,  during  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  journey,  we  enjoyed  the  society  of  the  present 
Counsellor  of  Legation,  H.  Abeken,  who  accompanied  us 
voluntarily  and  on  an  independent  footing,  and  who  in 
various  ways  promoted  the  antiquarian  objects  of  the  journey. 
We  were  also  provided  with  the  means  of  obtaining  plaster 
casts  of  those  representations  that  were  best  qualified  for 
the  purpose,  by  the  addition  of  Eranke  the  moulder. 

The  different  members  of  the  expedition  arriving  by  va- 


THE  EXPEDITION  AND  ITS  EESULTS.  13 

rioiis  roads,  met  m.  Alexandria,  outlie  18th  September,  1812. 
On  the  9th  jS^ovember  we  encamped  near  the  great  Pyramids 
ot"  GizeJi.  What  we  obtained  on  that  spot,  as  well  as  from 
the  adjoining  Pyramid  fields  of  Abusir,  Saqaj-a,  and  Daschur, 
which  are  situated  to  tlie  south,  occupied  us  exclusively 
and  uninterruptedly  for  more  than  six  months.  The  inex- 
haustible number  of  important  and  instructive  monuments 
and  representations,  which  we  met  with  in  these  Necropoli, 
the  most  ancient  that  have  existed  in  any  country,  surpassed 
every  expectation  we  had  been  entitled  to  hold  concerning 
them,  and  accounts  for  our  long  abode  in  this  part  of  the 
country,  which  is  the  first  approached  and  visited,  but 
has,  notwitlistanding,  been  very  little  investigated.  If  we 
except  the  celebrated  and  well-known  examination  of  the 
Pyramids  in  the  year  1837,  by  Colonel  Howard  Yyse,  as- 
sisted by  the  accomplished  architect  Perring,  little  had  been 
done  to  promote  a  more  minute  investigation  of  this  re- 
markable spot ;  the  Prench-Tuscan  expedition,  in  particular, 
did  little  more  than  pass  through  it.  Xevertheless,  the 
innumerable  tombs  of  private  individuals  grouped  about 
those  royal  Pyramids,  partly  constructed  of  massive  square 
blocks,  partly  hewn  into  the  living  rock,  contain,  almost  ex- 
clusively, representations  belonging  to  the  old  Egyptian 
Monarchy,  which  terminated  between  two  and  three  thou- 
sand years  before  Christ ;  indeed,  most  of  them  belong  to  the 
fourth  and  fifth  Manethonic  Dynasties,  therefore  between 
three  and  four  thousand  years  before  Christ.  The  wonderful 
age  of  tliose  Pyramids,  and  of  the  surrounding  tombs,  is  no 
longer  generally  denied  by  intelligent  inquirers,  and  in  the 
first  volume  of  my  "  Egyptian  Chronology,"*  which  has  lately 
appeared,  I  have  endeavoured  to  furnish  a  critical  proof  of 
the  certain  foundations  we  possess  for  a  more  special  deter- 
mination of  time  as  far  back  as  that  period.  But  were  any  one 
only  to  believe  in  the  lowest  acceptation  of  modern  scholars 
concerning  the  age  of  the  first  Egy^^tian  Dynasties,  he  would 
still  be  compelled  to  yield  priority  to  those  monuments  be- 
fore any  other  Egyptian  remains  of  art,  and  generally  before  all 
artistic  remains  belonging  to  the  whole  race  of  man,  to  which 
we  can  historically  refer.  It  is  only  to  this  that  we  can  attri- 
bute the  wonderful  growth  in  the  interest  which  we  attach, 

*  Chronologie  der  ^gypter.     Vol.  i.    Berfin,  1849. 


1^  PEELIMI^'ART  ACCOTJXT  OF  THE 

.partly  to  the  monuments  themselves,  as  proofs  of  the  earliest 
activity  shown  in  art,  partly  to  the  various  representations 
of  the  manner  of  living  in  those  primitive  times. 

On  the  western  border  of  the  Desert,  which  stretches 
from  the  most  northerly  groups  of  P^Ti-amids  at  Abu  Eoasch, 
past  the  ruins  of  the  old  capital  of  Memphis,  to  the  Oasis- 
peninsula  of  the  "  Faium,"  we  discovered  the  remains  of 
sixt3'-seven  Pyramids,  which,  with  a  few  exceptions,  were 
only  destined'  for  kings,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
principal  groups  we  investigated,  still  more  minutely,  180 
tombs  of  private  individuals,  which  deserved  to  be  more 
particularly  recorded.  A  great  many  of  these  sepulchral 
chambers,  richly  adorned  with  representations  and  inscrip- 
tions, could  only  be  reached  by  excavations.  Most  of  them 
-belonged  to  the  highest  functionaries  of  those  flourishing 
Dynasties,  among  whom  there  were  also  thirteen  royal 
princes  and  seven  princesses. 

After  we  liad  taken  the  most  careful  topographical  plans 
of  all  the  fields  of  Pyramids,  and  had  noted  down  the  archi- 
tectonic ground  plans,  and  sections  of  the  most  important 
tombs,  and  after  we  had,  in  the  most  complete  manner,  drawn 
or  taken  paper  impressions  of  their  pictures  and  inscriptions, 
as  far  as  they  were  accessible  to  us,  we  had  accomplished 
more  completely  than  we  ever  hoped  to  do,  the  £rst  and 
most  important  task  of  our  journey,  since  we  had  ac- 
quired a  basis  for  our  knowledge  concerning  the  monuments 
of  the  oldest  Egyptian  monarchy. 

On  the  19th  May,  1843,  we  proceeded  still  farther,  and 
encamped  on  the  23rd  in  the  Paium,  upon  the  ruins  of  the 
LABYEiis'Tn.  Its  true  position  was  long  ago  conjectured ; 
and  our  first  view  dissipated  all  our  doubts  concerning  it. 
The  interesting  discovery  of  the  actual  site  of  the  ^ancient 
Lake  Moeris  was  made  about  the  same  time,  by  the  distin- 
guished Prench  architect  Linant,  which  we  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  confirming  on  the  spot.  This  greatly  facilitated 
the  means  of  comprehending  the  topographical  and  historical 
conditions  of  this  province,  so  remarkable  in  all  its  features. 
The  magnificent  schemes  which  converted  this  originally  de- 
solate Oasis  into  one  of  the  most  productive  parts  of  Egypt, 
were  intimately  connected  with  each  other,  and  must  have 
belonged,  if  not  to  a  single  king,  still  to  one  epoch  of  time. 
The  most  important  result  we  obtained  by  our  investigations 


EXPEDTTIOIS'  A'SH  ITS  EESTJLTS.  15 

of  the  Labyrinth  and  of  the  adjoining  P\Tamids,  was  the  de- 
termination of  the  historical  position  of  the  original  founder ; 
this  we  obtained  by  excavations,  which  occupied  a  consider- 
able time.     We  discovered  that   the   king,  who  was   erro- 
neously called  Moeris  by  the  Greeks,  from  Lake  jNIere — i.  e. 
from  tlie  Lake  of  the  ]Sile  inundation — lived  at  the  end  of 
the  12th  Manethonic  Dynasty,  shortly  before  the  invasion 
of  the   Hyksos,   and   was   called  Amenemhe    by   Manetho 
'Afiev^^rjs,  the  third  of  his  name.     His  predecessors  in  the 
same  Dynasty  had  already  founded  the  town  of  Crocodilopolis, 
in  the  centre  of  the  Faium,  which  is  proved  by  some  ruins 
that  still  exist  belonging  to  that  period ;  and  they  probably 
conducted  the  ISile  Canal,  Bahr-.Jusef,  which  branches  off 
from  Derut-Scherif,  into  the  basin  of  the  Desert."    That  part 
of  the  basin  which  is  most  advanced,  and  situated  highest,  ter- 
minated in  a  lake  formed  by  means  of  gigantic  dams,  many  of 
which  stiU  exist ;  and  the  connection  of  the  canal  was  regu- 
lated by  sluices  in  such  a  manner,  that  in  the  dry  season  the 
reserved  water  could  flow  back  again  into  the  valley  of  the 
jN'ile,  and  irrigate  the  country  round  the  capital  long  after 
the  Kile  had  retreated  within  its  banks.     Amenemhe  built 
his  Pyramid  on  the  shore  of  the  lake,  and  a  splendid  temple 
in   front   of  it.      It   afterwards   formed  the  centre  of  the 
Labyrinth,  whose   many  hundred  chambers,  forming  three 
regular  masses  of  buildings,  surrounded  the  oldest  portion, 
and,  according  to  Herodotus,  were  destined  by  the  Dode- 
carchs  for  the  general  Diets.    The  ruins  of  the  Labyrinth  had 
never  yet  been  correctly  represented,  not  even  in  their  general 
arrangement.     An  Arabian  canal,  which  was  carried  through 
it  at  a  later  period,  had  dra^\Ti  away  the  attention  of  passing 
travellers  from  that  portion  of  the  chambers  which  was  in 
best  preservation.     "We  have  made  the  most  exact  ground 
plan,  accompanied  by  sections  and  views.     A  journey  round 
the  province,   as  far  as  Birqet-el-Qorn,   and  beyond  it,  to  • 
the  ruins  of  JDimeli  and  Qasr  Qerun,  induced  us  to  remain 
several  months  in  this  neighbourhood. 

On  the  23rd  August  we  embarked  at  Beni-suef,  visited  a 
small  rock-temple  of  King  SetJios  I.  at  Surarieh,  on  the 
eastern  shore,  and  farther  on,  the  remains  of  later  monu- 
ments in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tehieli.  At  Knm-ahnar,  a 
little  to  the  south  of  2^auiet-el-meitin,  we  examined  a  series  of 
nineteen  rock-tombs  belonging  to  the  6th  Manethonic  Dy- 


16  PEELIMINAET  ACCOUNT  OP  THE 

nastj.  The  groups  of  tombs  which  are  scattered  about  a 
few  days'  journey  to  the  south,  at  SchecJi-Said,  El-Harih, 
Wadi-Selin,  and  still  farther  on,  at  Qasr-e'-Saidt,  also  be- 
longed to  this  period,  which,  in  point  of  age,  was  immediately 
connected  with  the  flourisliing  time  of  the  great  builder  of  the 
P}Tamids.  If  we  judge  by  the  remains  now  extant,  it  ap- 
pears that  there  were,  at  that  early  period  especially,  in  this 
portion  of  Central  Egypt,  a  number  of  flourishing  cities. 
Eoyal  kindred  are  frequently  met  with  among  tiie  ancient 
possessors  of  the  tombs,  but  no  sons  or  daughters  of  the  king, 
because  there  was  no  royal  residence  in  that  neighbourhood. 
But  we  found  the  last  flourishing  period  of  the  Old  Monarchy 
— the  12th  Manethonic  Dynasty — represented  in  this  part 
of  Egypt  by  the  most  beautiful  and  most  considerable  re- 
mains. The  rock-tombs  of  Beni  Hassan,  so  remarkable  for 
their  architecture,  as  well  as  for  the  various  paintings  on 
their  walls,  peculiarly  belong  to  this  period.  The  town  to 
w^hich  they  appertained,  the  residence  of  a  governor  of  the 
eastern  province  of  the  country,  has  entirely  disappeared, 
all  except  the  name,  which  is  preserved  in  the  inscriptions. 
It  appears  that  it  only  flourished  a  short  time  during  this 
dynasty,  and  again  declined  at  the  invasion  of  the  Hyksos. 
In  the  neighbouring  Berscheli  also,  and  farther  on,  among 
the  Lybian  rocks,  behind  the  town  of  Slut,  which  was  as  im- 
portant 4000  years  ago  as  it  is  at  present,  we  again  found 
the  same  plans  of  tombs  on  as  magnificent  a  scale,  whose 
period  of  erection  might  be  recognised  even  at  a  distance. 

It  is  a  singular  fact,  that  in  point  of  age  the  greater 
proportion  of  the  remains  of  the  Egyptian  monuments  be- 
come more  modern  the  higher  we  ascend  the  Nile  valley,  the 
reverse  of  what  might  have  been  expected  from  a  large  view 
of  the  subject ;  according  to  which  the  Egyptian  civilisation 
of  the  aS'ile  valley  extended  from  south  to  north.  While  the 
Pyramids  of  Lower  Egypt,  with  the  monuments  around 
them,  had  displayed  the  oldest  civilisation  of  the  3rd,  4th, 
and  5th  Dynasties  in  such  wonderful  abundance,  we  found 
the  6th  Dynasty,  and  the  most  flourishing  period  of  the  12th, 
the  last  of  the  Old  Monarchy,  especially  represented  in 
Central  Egypt.  Thebes  was  the  brilliant  capital  of  the  New 
Monarchy,  especially  of  their  first  Dynasties,  surpassing  all 
other  places  in  the  number  of  its  wonderful  monuments ; 
and  even  now  it  ofl'ers  us  a  reflection  of  the  splendour  of 


EXPEDITION  AND  ITS  EESULTS.  17 

Egypt  in  her  greatest  times.  Art,  which  still  created  mag- 
nificent things  even  in  its  decline,  under  the  Ptolemies  and 
the  Eoman  emperors,  has  left  considerable  monuments  be- 
hind it,  consisting  of  a  series  of  stately  temples  in  Dendera, 
JErment,  EsneJi,  JEdfu,  Kum-Gmho,  Dehod,  JvalahscJieJi,  Dcii- 
cJur,  Dakkeh,  which  are  all,  witli  the  exception  of  Dendera, 
in  the  southern  part  of  the  Thebaid,  or  in  Lower  Kubia. 
Lastly,  those  monuments  of  the  Nile  valley  which  are  situated 
most  to  the  south,  especially  those  of  tlie  ''Island"  of 
3Ierde,  are  the  latest  of  all,  and  most  of  them  belong  to  the 
centuries  after  the  Christian  era. 

"We  hastened  immediately  from  the  monuments  of  the  Old 
Monarchy  in  Central  Egypt  to  Thebes,  and  deferred  till  our 
return  the  examination  of  the  well-preserved,  but  modern 
temple  of  Dendera,  the  ruins  of  Abydos,  and  several  other 
places.  But  of  Thebes,  also,  we  took  but  a  preliminary 
survey,  for  we  onlv  remained  there  twelve  days,  from  the  6th 
to  the  18th  of  October. 

"We  were  impatient  to  commence  immediately  our  second 
fresh  task,  which  consisted  in  the  investigation  of  the  Ethio- 
pian countries,  situated  higher  up  the  river.  The  French- 
Tuscan  expedition  did  not  go  beyond  "Wadi  Haifa ;  "U^ilkin- 
son's  careful  description  of  the  Nile  land  and  its  monuments, 
which  contains  so  much  information,  only  extends  a  little 
higher  up,  as  far  as  Semneh.  The  most  various  conjectures 
were  still  entertained  concerning  the  monuments  of  Gebel 
Earkal  and  Meroe,  with  reference  to  their  age  and  their 
signification.  It  was  necessary  to  obtain  a  general  view  of 
the  true  relation  between  the  History  and  Civilisation  of 
Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  founded  upon  a  complete  examination 
of  the  remains  which  are  still  extant. 

Therefore,  after  a  cursory  visit  to  the  temple  ruins,  as  far 
up  as  "Wadi  Haifa,  we  returned  to  Korusko,  from  which  place 
we  started  on  the  8th  of  January,  1844,  through  the  G-reat 
Desert  to  Abu-Hammed,  and  the  L^'pper  Nile  countries. 
On  the  16th  of  January  we  arrived  at  Abu-Hammed,  on  the 
other  side  of  the  desert ;  on  the  28th,  at  Begerauieh,  near  to 
which  the  Pyramids  of  Meroe  are  situated.  Erom  Schendi, 
which  lies  more  to  the  south,  we  visited  the  temple  ruins 
of  iVaya  and  Wadi  e'  Sofra,  far  on  in  the  interior  of  the 

c 


18  PKELIMIXAET  ACCOUNT  Or  THE 

eastern  desert.  On  the  5th  of  February  we  reached  ChaHwm, 
at  the  couflneuce  of  the  White  and  the  Blue  ]S'ile.  From 
this  place,  accompanied  by  Abeken,  I  descende.d  the  Blue 
Eiver,  passed  the  ruins  of  Sola  and  Senndr,  as  far  as  the  13° 
of  K".  lat. ;  whilst  the  other  members  of  the  expedition  re- 
turned from  Chai-tiim  to  the  Pyramids  of  Meroe,  The  tropical 
countries  of  the  Nile,  when  contrasted  with  those  northern 
ones,  devoid  of  rain,  extending  south  as  far  as  the  17° ;  and 
the  plants  and  animals  now  almost  exclusively  confined  to 
South  Ethiopia,  when  compared  with  individual  representa- 
tions of  the  ancient  Egyptian  monuments,  were  rendered 
still  more  interesting  by  the  discovery  of  some  monuments, 
with  inscriptions  upon  them,  near  Soba,  by  which  we  obtained 
traces  of  the  ancient  vernacular  language  of  those  districts 
in  a  written  character  resembling  the  Coptic. 

I  also  made  use  of  our  residence  in  these  districts  to  be 
instructed  by  the  natives  of  the  adjacent  countries  in  the 
grammar  and  vocabulary  of  their  languages. 

On  the  5th  of  April  I  returned  with  Abeken  to  the  other 
members  of  the  expedition  at  Beg  eraideh.  After  drawings 
had  been  made  of  all  that  still  existed  which  peculiarly  re- 
presented the  state  of  civilisation  in  Ethiopia,  and  after  we 
had  taken  the  most  exact  plans  of  the  localities,  we  proceeded 
in  six  days,  by  the  desert  Gilif,  to  Gehel  BarJcal,  where  we 
arrived  on  the  6th  of  May.  Here  was  the  more  northern, 
the  more  ancient,  and,  to  judge  by  the  remains,  also  the 
more  important  capital  of  the  State  of  Meroe.  At  the  foot  of 
this  single  mass  of  rock,  which  rises  in  an  imposing  manner, 
and  is  called  there,  in  the  hieroglyphical  inscriptions,  "  The 
Sacred  Mountains,"  is  situated  Napata.  The  history  of  this 
place,  which  we  may  still  derive  from  its  ruins,  gives  us  at 
once  a  key  to  the  relations  which  subsisted  in  general  between 
Ethiopia  and  Egypt,  as  regards  the  history  of  their  civilisa- 
tion. AYe  find  that  the  most  ancient  epoch  of  art  in  Ethiopia 
was  purely  Egyptian.  It  is  as  early  as  the  period  of  the 
great  Eamses,  who,  of  all  the  Pharaohs,  extended  his  power 
farthest,  not  only  towards  the  north,  but  also  towards  the 
south,  and  testified  this  by  monuments.  At  an  early  period 
he  built  a  great  temple  here.  The  second  epoch  begins  with 
King  Taliraha,  also  known  as  the  ruler  of  Egypt,  the 
TUrhaka  of  the  Bible.     This  spot  was  adorned  with  several 


EXPEDITION  AND  ITS  EESULTS.  19 

magnificent  monuments  by  liim  and  his  immediate  succes- 
sors, and  though  they  "^ere  built  in  a  style  no^y  employed  by 
natiye  kings,  it  is,  neyertheless,  only  a  faithful  copy  of  the 
Eg}'ptian  style.  Lastly,  the  third  epoch  is  that  of  the  kings 
of  Merde,  whose  dominion  extended  as  far  as  Philae,  and  was 
manifested  also  at  Gebel  Barkal  by  numerous  monuments. 
On  an  intermediate  journey  into  the  Cataract  country, 
situated  farther  up  the  riyer,  which  we  had  cut  off  by  the 
Desert  journey,  I  found  only  Middle-Age,  but  no  ancient, 
Etliiopian  remains  of  buildings. 

The  fertile  and  extensiye  proyince  of  Dongola,  on  the 
northern  frontier,  wliich  we  trayersed  on  the  4th  of  June, 
after  our  departure  from  Barkal,  afforded  us  but  fe^y  re- 
markable ancient  remains;  we  may,  howeyer,  mention  among 
these  the  island  of  Argo,  with  its  monuments,  from  the 
13th  Manethonic  Dynasty.  They  became  still  more  nume- 
rous in  the  northern  borders  of  Dongola,  from  which  a 
nearly  continuous  Cataract  country  extends  as  fiu*  as  "Wadi 
Haifa.  Xear  Tomhos  we  found  traces  of  the  Egyptian  do- 
minion under  the  Pharaohs  of  the  17th  and  18th  Dmasties, 
rock-tablets  with  the  shields  of  the  two  first  Thuthmosis 
and  of  the  third  Amenophis.  Earther  on,  at  Sesehi,  there 
were  the  remains  of  temples  of  the  first  Sethos  of  the  19feh 
Dynasty.  The  great  Temple  of  Soleb,  built  by  Amenophis 
III.  and  IV.,  detained  us  fiye  days.  The  ruins  of  the  Temple 
of  Sedeinga,  and  those  upon  the  island  of  Sai,  belonged  to 
the  18th  and  19th  Dynasties.  Opposite  this  island  stood 
the  remarkable  Temple  of  Amdra,  which  was  built  by  the 
Kings  of  Meroe  and  Xaga,  and  is  still  an  important  proof 
of  the  extent  of  their  dominion. 

Semneh  was  the  next  point  we  reached.  The  Nile  is 
here  compressed  within  a  breadth  of  only  about  1150  feet 
between  high  rocky  shores.  On  both  sides  there  are  ruins 
of  old  temples  of  the  ISth  Dynasty.  But  tliese  were  not 
the  earliest  buildings  which  were  erected  here.  We  found 
a  considerable  number  of  inscriptions  from  the  12th  and 
13th  Manethonic  Dynasties,  especially  on  the  large  founda- 
tions of  the  Temple  of  Kummeh,  situated  lower  down,  oppo- 
site Semneh  on  the  eastern  bank,  as  well  as  on  the  scattered 
rocks  on  both  banks  in  the  neighbourhood  of  that  temple, 
Many  of  them  were  intended  to  indicate  the  highest  risings 

c2 


20  PKELIiII>'^ART  ACCOUNT  OF  THE 

of  the  Xile  during  a  series  of  years,  especially  in  tlie  reigns 
of  tlie  Kings  Amenemhe  III*  and  Sebekhotep  I.,  and  by 
comparing  them,  we  obtained  the  remarkable  result,  that 
about  4000  years  ago  the  Xile  used  to  rise  at  that  point,  on 
an  average,  twenty-two  feet  higher  than  it  does  at  present. 
Tliis,  therefore,  which  we  saw  before  us  was  the  most  ancient 
IN'ilometer ;  and  the  earliest  statements  of  the  heights,  and 
their  greatest  number,  were  recorded  during  the  reign  of 
the  same  king,  the  Moeris  of  the  G-reeks,  with  whom  we 
had  already  become  acquainted  in  the  Faium,  as  the  great 
hydraulic  architect.  The  strong  fortifications  on  both  banks 
of  that  narrow  part  of  the  river  convinced  us  at  once  that, 
during  the  early  times  of  the  12th  D^masty,  this  remark- 
able point  served  as  the  boundary  of  the  Egyptian  domi- 
nion, against  the  Ethiopian  nations  who  dwelt  more  to  the 
south. 

At  Wadi  Haifa,  on  the  30th  of  July,  we  again  left  the  Cata- 
ract country,  remained  from  the  2nd  to  the  11th  of  August 
in  Abu  Simlel,  examined  until  the  end  of  the  month  the 
ruins  of  Ilrim,  Anibe,  Derr,  Amada,  Sebua,  Daklceh,  Kuban, 
Gerf-Hussen,  Sabagura,  Dendur,  Kalabsclieli,  Debot,  and 
spent  the  whole  of  the  following  month  in  examining  the 
monuments  of  the  Island  of  Tliilce,  and  the  islands  of  Sigeli, 
Konosso,  Sehel,  and  JElepliantine,  surrounding  it,  and  of  the 
stone  quarries  between  Pliilce  and  Assuan.  October  was 
spent  visiting  Ombos,  the  two  Silsilis,  Edfu,  the  desert  Tem- 
ple of  Redesieh,  El-Kcib,  Esneli,  Tod,  and  JErment. 

On  the  2nd  of  November  we  again  arrived  on  Theban 
ground,  and  first  visited  the  rock-tombs  of  QurnaJi,  on  the 
west  side,  where  we  remained  nearly  four  months,  till  the 
20th  of  Eebruarj',  1845,  when  we  encamped  for  three  more 
months  at  Karnah,  The  number  of  monuments  of  all  kinds, 
both  above  and  below  gi-oimd,  at  Thebes,  is  so  great  that 
they  may  be  truly  called  inexhaustible,  even  for  a  combined 
power  like  ours,  and  for  the  limited  portion  of  time  which 
we  were  able  to  devote  to  their  investigation.  Eut  the  age 
of  the  monuments  at  Thebes  is  almost  exclusively  limited  to 
the  New  Monarcliy ;  and  the  most  ancient  we  discovered, 
such  as  one  might  generally  expect  to  find,  are  not  earlier 
than  the  11th  Manethonic  Dynasty,  the  last  but  one  of  the 
Old  Monarchy ;  for  this  simple  reason,  because  it  was  in  this 


ZXPEDITIOX  AXD  ITS  KESULTS.  21 

D\Tiasty  that  Thebes  first  became  a  royal  residence,  and 
hence  the  focus  of  Eg}^ptian  splendour.  The  great  break  in 
the  succession  at  the  end  of  the  12th  D^Tiasty,  caused  bv 
the  invasion  of  the  Hvksos,  and  their  dominion,  which  lasted 
many  centuries,  first  drove  the  Egyptian  power  back  into 
Ethiopia,  and  at  lengtli  entirely  destroyed  it,  till  the  power- 
ful Pharaohs  of  the  17th,  18th,  and  19th  Dvnasties  again 
advanced  from  the  south,  drove  back  the  Semitic  intru- 
ders, and  raised  the  power  of  the  Egyptian  empire  to  its 
summit.  The  greater  proportion  of  Theban  monuments 
date  also  from  this  period.  As  we  may  suppose  they  have 
been  the  principal  object  of  investigation  to  all  travellers, 
therefore  our  work  liere  had  been  for  the  most  part  anti- 
cipated. 

]S'evertheless  it  was  necessary  to  re-examine  the  whole 
ground  most  carefully,  partly  to  complete  the  deficiencies 
left  by  our  predecessors,  partly  to  make  a  proper  selection  of 
those  monuments  which  were  of  most  importance  for  our 
particular  purpose,  and  which  we  were  anxious  to  insert 
among  our  collections,  either  in  the  shape  of  a  drawing,  or 
an  impression  upon  paper,  or  even  in  the  original  itself. 
AVe  directed  our  principal  attention  during  the  whole  jour- 
ney, and  especially  here,  to  taking  the  most  exact  archi- 
tectonic plans  of  all  the  buildings  and  other  localities  which 
appeared  to  us  to  be  of  any  consequence ;  and  for  this  pur- 
pose we  did  not  hesitate  to  make  extensive  excavations.  By 
this  means  we  succeeded,  amongst  other  things,  in  dis- 
covering, and  recording  for  the  first  time,  a  perfect  plan  of 
the  most  beautiful  of  all  the  temple  buildings,  namely,  the 
Ammon  Temple,  built  by  Eamses  II.,  which  is  described 
by  Diodorus  under  the  name  of  the  sepulchre  of  Osyman- 
dyas.  We  made  several  excavations  also  in  the  valleys  of 
the  royal  tombs,  and  opened,  for  instance,  the  rock-tomb  of 
the  same  Eamses  II.,  one  of  the  largest  of  those  which  have 
hitherto  been  accessible.  Unfortunately,  the  interior  cham- 
bers were  so  much  destroyed  by  the  dirt  and  rubbish  that 
had  fallen  in,  that  we  could  make  out  little  more  from  the 
representation  upon  the  walls  than  the  proprietor  of  the 
tomb. 

Accompanied  by  the  artist  Max  Weidenbach,  I  made  an 
intermediate  journey  from  Karnak  to  the  peninsula  of  Sinai. 


22  PEELIMI^'AET  ACCOi:>^T  or  THE 

"We  went  tliitlier  bv  the  old  road  from  Koptos  to  Aennum 
{Pliiloterci),  now  leading  from  Qeneh  to  Koser,  which  con- 
ducted us  fii'st  to  the  remarkable  stone  quarries  oi  Ham- 
mamcd,  already  worked  out  during  the  Old  Xonarchj.  The 
numerous  rock-inscriptions,  which  date  as  far  ba«k  as  the 
6th  Dynasty,  occupied  us  here  for  five  whole  days.  From 
this  place  we  passed  through  the  Arabian  chain  of  moun- 
tains to  the  north,  as  far  as  Gehel  Ze'it,  where  we  embarked 
for  Tor,  situated  opposite.  AYe  ascended  through  Wadi 
Hebran  to  the  convent,  and  from  thence  through  Wadi  e' 
Schech,  Wadi  Fircin,  W.  Mokatteh,  W.  Maglidra,  by  Sarhut 
el  CMdem,  down  again  to  Abu  Zelimeli,  where  we  got  into 
our  vessel,  to  return  to  Koser  and  Thehes. 

As  early  as  the  4th  Manethonic  Dynasty,  between  three 
and  four  thousand  years  before  Christ,  this  Desert  Penin- 
sula was  subject  to  Eg_\^t,  and  was  principally  colonised  by 
the  Egyptians  on  account  of  the  Copper  mines,  which  are 
there  met  with  on  the  limits  of  the  primitive  mountain 
range,  and  the  surrounding  sandstone  mountains.  Upon 
several  rock-tablets  of  Wadi  Maglidra,  the  kings  of  those 
oldest  Dynasties  were  represented  fighting  with  the  Semitic 
aborigines,  and  the  inscriptions  of  Sarhd  el  Chddem  were 
at  least  as  early  as  the  12th  Dynasty.  We  did  not,  also, 
lose  sight  of  the  great  interest  which  is  attached  to  these 
localities  of  the  peninsula  in  connection  with  the  Old  Tes- 
tament. More  especially,  I  believe,  that  I  have  succeeded 
for  the  fii'st  time  (nOt  excepting  Burckhardt)  in  determining 
the  correct  position  of  Sinai,  since,  contrary  to  the  tradition 
of  the  convent,  hitherto  accepted,  I  did  not  recognise  it  in  one 
of  the  southern  mountains,  but  in  Serial,  which  is  situated 
several  days'  journey  more  to  the  north,  at  whose  base 
lies  the  only  fertile  oasis  of  the  whole  peninsula.  This 
opinion  which  has  been  ali-eady  published  in  a  preliminary 
account  of  the  journey,  addressed  to  the  King  of  Prussia, 
has  met  with  frequent  oppositions,  but  has  also  latterly  re- 
ceived much  approbation,  I  believe,  in  a  special  treatise  upon 
the  question,  by  AY.  Hogg,  printed  in  the  last  half  of  the 
"Transactions  for  the  Eoyal  Societv  of  Literature"  (1848). 
I  have  not  hitherto  been  able  to  discover  anv  material  coun- 
ter-arguments in  the  discussions  which  have' been  held  upon 
the  subject,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  much  stronger  evidence 


EXPEDTTIO>'  AXD  ITS  EESULTS.  23 

that,  contrary  to  the  later  Byzantine  tradition,  the  more 
ancient  Christian,  and  probably  tlie  Egyptian  tradition  itself, 
considered  Serbal,  at  whose  foot  the  oldest  convent  was 
situated,  to  be  the  true  Sinai. 

On  the  14:th  of  April  we  returned  to  Thebes,  and  finally  left 
it  on  the  16th  of  May.  On  oiu'  way  back  to  Lower  Egypt,  we 
re-examined  more  minutely  the  monuments  of  SchenhuVy 
D  end  era,  Hon,  Ahyclos,  Echnim,  El  Bosra,  Tel  el  Amarna^ 
and  El  Hihe,  and  on  the  27th  of  June,  our  party,  wliich  had 
been  increased  at  the  last  stage  by  the  addition  of  Dr.  Beth- 
nmnn,  again  entered  Cairo. 

I  was  detained  there  myself  some  months  longer  than  the 
other  members  of  the  expedition,  in  order  to  direct  the  trans- 
portation of  several  sepulchral  chambers  in  the  neighboiur- 
liood  of  the  Great  Pyramids,  and  to  superintend  the  em- 
barkation of  the  valuable  blocks  of  stone,  together  with  tlie 
other  monuments,  which  we  brought  with  us  from  Upper 
Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  and  which  the  Viceroy  Mohammed  Ali 
sent  as  a  present  to  his  Majesty  the  King  of  Prussia.  In 
this  troublesome  as  well  as  important  affair,  for  the  practical 
performance  of  which  four  experienced  workmen  had  been 
expressly  sent  from  BerHn  to  Egypt,  I  had  only  the  kind 
assistance  of  Dr.  Bethmann,  who  accompanied  me  on  an 
independent  footing  during  the  remainder  of  the  journey 
back. 

Atler  a  final  visit  to  Alexandria,  we  embarked  on  the  25th 
of  September  at  Cairo  for  Damietta,  but  on  the  way  visited 
the  ruins  of  Samanud,  Behhet,  and  the  Hamses-Temple  of  San 
(Tanis),  and  left  Egypt  on  the  1st  of  October,  in  a  vessel 
which  toolv  us  to  Jaffa.  After  we  had  traversed  the  whole  length 
of  Palestine,  and  from  Jerusalem  had  visited  the  Dead  Sea, 
and  from  Beyrout,  Damascus,  and  Baalbec,  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Nalir  el  Kelh,  the  ancient  Lykos,  we  came  upon  the  last 
Egyptian  monuments  in  the  north,  namely,  those  celebrated 
memorial-tablets,  which  the  great  Eamses  11.  engraved  be- 
side the  old  military  road,  as  a  recollection  of  his  warlike 
and  victorious  Asiatic  campaigns  in  the  fourteenth  centuiy 
before  Christ.  After  a  period  of  more  than  3000  years, 
neither  the  form,  nor  even  the  Xame-Shield  of  the  powerful 
Pharaoh,  at  whose  court  Moses  was  educated,  had  been 
destroyed  by  the  destructive  sea-air.     On  one  tablet,  indeed. 


24  PRELIMINAET  ACCOUNT  OF  THE 

I  was  able  to  distinguisli  the  date  of  the  fourth,  on  another 
that  of  the  second  year  of  his  reign. 

According  to  the  testimony  of  Herodotus,  similar  monu- 
ments of  Sesostris  are  also  found  in  Ionia,  and  some  time 
ago,  one  which  he  describes  as  being  there,  was  re-discovered. 
But  an  excursion  from  Smyrna  to  that  spot  soon  convinced 
us  that  the  rock-picture  of  Karabel  was  produced  by  an 
Asiatic  and  not  by  an  Egyptian  chisel. 

Lastly,  we  saw  in  the  Hippodrome,  at  Constantinople, 
the  obelisk  of  the  third  Tuthmosis,  but,  like  others,  sought 
in  vain  for  the  second,  which  earlier  travellers  would  have 
us  believe  that  they  had  seen.  On  the  24th  December,  I 
left  Constantinople,  and  landed  on  the  5th  January,  1846, 
in  Trieste. 

The  whole  journey,  of  which  this  is  a  very  hast)'  sketch, 
was  one  of  the  most  fortunate  expeditions  which  has  ever 
been  undertaken  for  a  similar  purpose.  None  who  partici- 
pated in  it  suffered  from  the  climate  or  the  accidental 
casualties  of  a  journey,  ^^e  travelled  under  the  powerful 
and,  in  every  way  efficient  protection  of  the  A^iceroy.  AVe 
had  an  explicit  and  written  permission  to  make  excavations, 
wherever  we  should  consider  it  desirable,  and  we  employed 
it,  to  acquire  a  number  of  interesting  monuments  for  the 
Eoyal  Museum  at  Berlin,  which  would  either  have  remained 
in  Egypt  as  rubbish  under  the  sandhills,  or  exposed,  like  so 
many  others,  to  be  destroyed,  for  all  kinds  of  material  pur- 
poses. 

The  scientific  results  of  the  expedition  have,  in  almost 
all  respects,  surpassed  our  own  expectations.  In  confirma- 
tion of  this  it  will  be  sufficient  briefly  to  survey  these 
results,  which  I  shall  do  in  the  following  pages,  according  to 
their  principal  objects,  and  by  entering  into  some  of  the 
details. 

The  plan  of  the  journey,  as  a  whole,  and  in  its  individual 
parts,  was  founded  principally  with  a  Historical  purpose  in 
view.  The  French-Tuscan  expedition,  compared  with  ours 
was  a  Journey  of  Discovery,  with  all  the  advantages,  but 
also  with  all  the  disadvantages,  connected  with  such  an 
undertaking.  "We  were  able  from  the  commencement  to 
aspire  after  a  certain  completeness,  within  the  wide  limits 


EXPEDITION  AXD  ITS  EESULTS.  25 

that  were  assigned  us,  not  however  failing  in  making  new 
discoveries,  which  were  as  important  as  they  were  unex- 
pected. The  investigation  of  the  most  ancient  Egyptian  times, 
namely,  the  epoch  of  the  first  Pharaonic  Monarchy,  from  about 
3900  to  1700  before  Christ,  extending  the  history  of  the 
world  almost  two  thousand  years  farther  back,  was  left 
entirely  unfathomed  by  Champollion.  He  only  ascended  the 
Nile  valley  as  far  as  the  second  Cataract,  beyond  which  there 
existed  a  great  number  of  Egyptian  monuments  of  all  kinds, 
wholly  unexamined,  in  which  we  must  seek  for  an  explana- 
tion of  all  those  Ethiopian  antiquities  which  are  inseparable 
from  the  Egyptian. 

The  most  important  results  we  obtained,  therefore,  were 
in  Chronology  and  History.  The  Pyramid-fields  of  Memphis 
gave  us  a  notion  of  the  Civilisation  of  Egypt  in  those  primi- 
tive times,  which  is  pictorially  presented  to  us  in  400  large 
drawings,  and  will  be  considered  in  future  as  the  first 
section  in  that  portion  of  the  history  of  man,  capable 
of  investigation,  and  must  be  regarded  with  the  greatest 
interest.  Those  earliest  Dynasties  of  Egyptian  dominion, 
now  afford  us  more  than  a  barren  series  of  empty,  lost,  and 
doubtful  names.  They  are  not  only  free  from  every  real  doubt 
and  arranged  in  the  Order  and  the  Epochs  of  time,  which  have 
been  determined  by  a  critical  examination,  but  by  showing  us 
the  flourishing  condition  of  the  people  in  those  times,  both 
in  the  afiairs  of  the  State,  Civil  afiairs,  and  in  the  Arts,  they 
have  received  an  intellectual  and  frequently  a  very  individual 
historical  reality.  We  have  already  mentioned  the  discovery 
of  five  different  burial-places  of  the  6th  Dynasty  in  Central 
Egypt,  and  what  we  obtained  from  them.  The  prosperous 
times  of  the  Xew  Monarchy,  namely,  the  period  of  splendour 
in  the  Thebaid,  as  well  as  the  Dynasties  which  followed,  were 
necessarily  more  or  less  completed  and  verified.  Even  the 
Ptolemies,  with  whom  we  appeared  to  be  perfectly  ac- 
quainted in  the  clear  narratives  of  Grrecian  history,  have 
come  forward  in  a  new  light  through  the  Egyptian  represen- 
tations and  inscriptions,  and  their  deficiencies  have  been 
filled  up  by  persons  who  were  hitherto  considered  doubtful, 
and  were  hardly  mentioned  by  the  Greeks.  Lastly,  on  the 
Egyptian  monuments  we  beheld  the  Eoman  emperors  in  still 


2S  peelimh^art  accou^tt  of  the 

greater  and  almost  imbroken  series,  in  their  capacity  of 
Eg^-ptian  governors,  and  they  have  been  earned  down  since 
Caracalla,  who  had  hitherto  been  considered  as  the  last  name 
written  in  hieroglyphics,  through  two  additional  later  em- 
perors, as  far  as  Decius,  by  which  means  the  whole  Egyptian 
moniunental  history  has  been  extended  for  a  series  of  years 
in  the  other  direction. 

Eg^-ptian  Philology  has  also  made  considerable  progress 
by  tliis  journey.  The  lexicon  has  been  increased  by  our 
becoming  acquainted  with  several  hundred  signs,  or  groups, 
and  the  grammar  has  received  a  great  many  corrections. 
Such  copious  materials  have  also  been  acquired  for  these 
purposes,  especially  by  the  numerous  paper  impressions  of 
the  most  important  inscriptions,  that  Egyptian  Philology 
must  be  essentially  furthered  by  their  being  gradually 
adopted.  Eor  owing  to  the  strict  accuracy  of  these  im- 
pressions, they  are  almost  as  valuable,  in  many  investiga- 
tions, as  an  equally  large  collection  of  origiaal  monuments.  In 
addition  to  this,  the  history  of  the  Egyptian  language,  which 
by  the  great  age  atti'ibuted  to  the  earliest  written  monuments, 
embraces  a  period  of  time  between  five  or  sis:  thousand  years, 
becomes  now  of  much  greater  importance  in  the  universal 
history  of  the  human  language  and  writing.  Among  the 
individual  discoveries  we  made,  the  one  which  attracted  most 
attention,  was  that  of  the  two  decrees  on  the  Island  of 
Philse,  which  were  bilingual,  namely,  written  in  hierogly- 
phics, and  in  the  demotic  character, — one  of  which  contains 
the  decree  belonging  to  the  Eosetta  inscription,  referring  to 
the  wife  of  Epiphaues. 

In  spite  of  numerous  writings  upon  Egyptian  Mythology, 
it  has  nevertheless  been  hitherto  deficient  in  a  fixed  monu- 
mental basip.  In  the  Temple  at  Thebes  we  beheld  a  series  of 
representations  whose  meaning  had  not  hitherto  been  recog- 
nised, and  which  seem  to  me  to  afibrd  entirely  new  conclu- 
vsions  for  the  correct  comprehension  and  development  of 
Egyptian  mythology.  The  series  of  the  first  arrangement  of 
the  gods  mentioned  by  Herodotus  and  Manetho,  which  in 
modem  investigations  has  been  difi'erentlT  arranged  in  its 
details  by  all  scholars,  is  at  length  placed  beyond  all  doubt,. 
and  certainly  difiers  in  all  essential  points  from  what  has 


EXPEDITION  AXD  ITS  EESTJLTS.  27 

been  hitlierto  everywhere  adopted.  I  will  briefly  allude  here 
to  another  fact,  important  both  in  the  history  of  mytho- 
lo|^^  as  well  as  in  a  purely  historical  point  of  riew,  and 
whicli  was  elicited  by  an  attentive  investigation  of  the  monu- 
ments. The  direct  succession  of  the  reigning  royal  family 
was  interrupted,  towards  the  end  of  the  18th  D^iiasty. 
Through  the  monuments  we  became  acquainted  ^vith  several 
kings  of  this  period,  who  were  not  afterwards  admitted  in 
the  legitimate  lists,  but  were  regarded  as  unauthorised  co- 
temporary  or  intermediate  kings.  Among  these  Ameno- 
phis  IV.  is  to  be  particularly  noted,  who,  during  a  very 
active  reign  of  twelve  years,  endeavoured  to  accomplish  a 
complete  reformation  of  all  secular  and  spiritual  institutions. 
He  built  a  royal  capital  for  himself  in  Central  Egypt,  near 
the  present  Tel-el- Am arna,  introduced  new  offices  and  usages, 
and  aimed  at  no  less  a  thing  than  to  abolish  the  whole  reli- 
gious system  of  the  Egyptians,  which  had  hitherto  subsisted, 
and  to  place  in  its  stead  the  single  worship  of  the  Sun.  In 
all  the  inscriptions  composed  during  his  reign,  there  is  not 
one  Egyptian  god  mentioned  except  the  Sun  ;  even  in  other 
words  the  sacred  symbols  were  avoided,  e.  g.  the  word  muf, 
mother,  Coptic  mat,  was  no  longer  written  as  usual  with  the 

hawk    V\      the  spnbol  of  the  goddess  Hint,  but     c:,  j  ait, 

with  the  universal  phonetic  signs.  Indeed,  the  former  gods 
and  their  worship  were  persecuted  to  such  an  extent  by 
this  king,  that  he  erased  all  the  gods'  names,  with  the 
single  exception  of  the  Sim-god  Ba,  from  every  monument 
that  was  accessible  throughout  the  country,  and  because  his 
own  name,  Amenophis,  contained  the  name  of  Amnion,  he 
changed  it  into  Bech-en-aten,  "AYorshipper  of  the  Sun's 
disk."  Therefore  the  fact,  which  has  often  been  previously 
remarked,  that  at  one  particular  period  the  name  of  Amnion 
was  intentionally  destroyed,  forms  only  part  of  an  event  which 
had  a  much  wider  influence,  and  which  unexpectedly  reveals 
to  us  the  religious  movements  of  those  times. 

The  History  of  Art  has  never  yet  been  considered  in  tlie 
point  of  view  from  which  Egypt,  and  all  that  concerns  it,  is 
now  regarded.     This  necessarily  formed  a  particular  object 


28  PRELIMINAEY  ACCOUNT  OF  THE 

of  our  expedition,  and  most  directly  gained  by  tlie  in- 
creased chronological  knowledge  we  obtained  concerning 
the  monuments.  For  tbe  first  time  we  were  able  to  pursue 
all  its  branches  during  the  old  Egyptian  Monarchy,  pre- 
vious to  the  invasion  of  the  Hyksos,  and  accordingly  to 
extend  both  it  and  the  history  of  Egypt  about  sixteen 
centuries  farther  back,  and  some  tens  of  years  lower  down 
in  time.  The  different  epochs  of  Egyptian  art  now  first 
appeared  clear  and  distinct,  each  marked  by  its  peculiar 
character,  intimately  connected  with  the  general  develop- 
ment of  the  people.  They  had  so  frequently  been  mis- 
understood, tliat  no  one  believed  in  their  existence ;  they 
were  lost  in  the  general  uniformity.  I  must  mention, 
as  one  of  the  most  important  facts  connected  with  this, 
that  we  found  innumerable  instances  on  unfinished  monu- 
ments of  three  difierent  canons  of  proportions  of  the  human 
body;  one  belonging  to  the  most  ancient  Pharaonic  Mo- 
narchy, anotlier  later  than  the  12th  Dynasty,  when  Thebes 
first  began  to  flourish  ;  a  third,  which  appears  at  first  in 
the  time  of  the  Psammetichi,  with  an  entire  alteration 
in  the  Principle  of  the  division,  and  which  remained  un- 
altered till  the  time  of  the  Roman  emperors.  The  last  is 
the  same  which  Diodorus  expressly  mentions  in  his  first 
book.  Among  the  separate  branches  of  Egyptian  art,  Archi- 
tecture, which  was  almost  unnoticed  by  the  Erench-Tuscan 
expedition,  was  with  us  peculiarly  attended  to,  by  the  ex- 
tremely careful  and  circumspect  laboiu's  of  our  architect 
Erbkam.  This  was  befitting  the  important  position  occupied 
by  this  particular  branch,  in  which  grandeur,  that  element  of 
art,  peculiarly  belonging  to  the  Egyptian  beyond  all  other 
nations,  was  capable  of  being  developed,  and  has  developed 
itself  to  the  utmost.  The  study  of  the  sculpture  and  paint- 
ings devolved  upon  the  other  artists  who  accompanied  us, 
and  the  ability  and  fidehty  with  which  they  fulfilled  their 
task  must  be  recognised  by  every  one.  The  'Egyptian  style 
associated  with  the  limited  views  characteristic  of  the  infancy 
of  art,  nevertheless  possesses  a  highly-cultivated  ideal  ele- 
ment, which  must  be  acknowledged  by  every  one.  The  genius 
of  G-reece  could  never  have  bestowed  on  *art  such  a  marked 
character,  indicative  of  a  period  of  prosperous  liberty,  if  it 


EXPEDITION  AND  ITS  RESULTS.  29 

had  not  received  it  as  a  severe,  chaste,  and  carefully  niir- 
tured  child  from  the  Egyptians.  The  principal  task  of  the 
history  of  Egyptian  art  is  to  point  out  wherein  consisted 
this  cultivation  of  art,  peculiar  to  the  Egyptians,  above  all 
the  primitive  nations  of  Asia. 

In  the  next  place,  Egyptian  archaeology,  in  the  widest 
sense  of  the  word,  claimed  a  large  portion  of  our  time  and 
attention :  an  extensive  field,  already  examined,  both  suc- 
cessfully and  diligently,  by  AYilkinson  and  Eosellini,  which 
they  were  enabled  to  do  by  means  of  tlie  inexhaustible 
number  of  separate  objects  belonging  to  every-day  life, 
still  in  preservation,  and  by  the  representations  of  them, 
which  are  found  in  all  directions,  far  surpassing  any  other 
ancient  remains. 

On  that  account  it  was  still  more  necessary  to  make  a 
stricter  investigation,  and  to  regard  it  from  a  liigher  point  of 
view,  rather  than  accumulate  a  greater  number  of  individual 
things,  that  notwithstanding  obtruded  themselves  on  all  sides, 
and  which,  besides,  we  collected  in  large  quantities,  as  material 
to  work  upon. 

Lastly,  Geography  and  Chorography,  which  travellers  are 
especially  expected  to  promote,  required  to  be  more  pecu- 
liarly prosecuted.  We  must  particularly  mention  here,  that 
besides  the  peculiar  investigation  of  the  Pyramid  fields  at 
Memphis,  and  in  the  Eaium,  which  have  been  already  alluded 
to,  our  records  of  the  ruins  of  towns,  and  ancient  monu- 
ments in  the  'Nile  country,  as  far  up  as  Sennar,  are  more 
perfect  and  exact  than  any  hitherto  made.  "With  regard  to 
the  modern  geographical  names,  which  must  always  be 
viewed  in  comparison  with  the  ancient,  I  have  been  most 
particular  in  obtaining  the  Arabic  names — at  least,  through- 
out the  district  we  traversed — in  order  to  counteract,  as  far 
as  lay  in  my  power,  the  insufferable  confusion  in  the  names 
which  are  marked  down.  During  the  journey,  I  made  special 
maps  for  the  individual  portions  of  the  eastern  mountains 
of  Egypt  and  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,  and  I  collected  geogra- 
phical accounts  from  travellers  concerning  some  remote  dis- 
tricts, which  we  did  not  enter,  and  which  are  but  little  known  ; 
and  I  had  geographical  drawings  made  of  them.  Our  in- 
vestigations of  the  historical  places  in  the  peninsula  of  Sinai 


30  PEELIMINAET  ACCOUNT  OP  THE 

liave  been  already  alluded  to.  Tlie  diseoverj,  mentioned 
above,  of  the  most  ancient  kilometer  at  Semneh,  lias  added, 
in  a  remarkable  degree,  also  to  the  history  of  the  physical 
condition  of  the  Nile  valley ;  since  it  is  quite  evident,  from 
the  -water  just  above  the  second  Cataract,  standing  at  that 
time  twenty-two  feet  higher  than  at  present,  and  the  height 
of  the  water  in  the  Thebaid  being  contemporaneously  twelve 
to  fifteen  feet  lower,  that  the  fall  of  the  Nile  in  the  inter- 
mediate country  was  thirty-five  feet  greater  in  those  times 
than  it  is  now.  But  this  gradual  levelling  of  the  bed  of  the 
river  must  have  had  the  most  decided  influence  on  the  his- 
tory of  the  cultivation  of  the  valley,  and  of  the  whole  popu- 
lation ;  because  the  soil  on  the  banks  of  the  river  in  the 
district  of  JSTubia,  more  especially  owing  to  the  considerable 
sinking  of  the  water,  being  inaccessible  to  the  natural  over- 
flowings, was  laid  dry,  and  could  only  be  irrigated  with 
great  difficulty,  and  imperfectly,  by  means  of  artificial  water- 
wheels. 

Considerable  progress  was  made  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
African  languages,  by  the  iuvestigation  which  I  w^as  princi- 
pally enabled  to  make  in  the  southern  part  of  our  journey. 
I  inquu^ed  into  and  noted  down  as  much  of  the  grammar 
and  vocabulary  of  three  languages,  as  would  enable  me  to 
give  a  distinct  idea  of  them.  Fii'st,  Ivongiira,  spoken  at 
Dar-Eur  and  the  adjacent  countries,  a  Central  African-Negro 
language.  Secondly,  the  Nuba  language,  which  is  spoken 
in  two  chief  dialects,  in  one  part  of  the  Nubian-Nile  valley 
and  in  the  neighbouring  countries  situated  to  the  south- 
west, and  also  appears  to  be  derived  from  the  interior  of 
Africa.  It  had  hitherto  never  been  a  written  language, 
and  I  collected  together  for  the  fixst  time  a  piece  of  written 
Nubian  literature,  for  I  made  a  Nubian  Sheikh,  who  was  per- 
fectly familiar  wiih.  the  Arabic  language  and  \ATiting,  trans- 
late the  Fables  of  Locman,  a  portion  of  the  Thousand  and 
One  Nights,  and  the  Gospel  of  St.  Mark,  from  the  Arabian 
into  the  Nubian  tongue,  and  write  down  besides  nineteen 
Nubian  songs,  some  of  them  in  rhyme,  some  only  rhythmical, 
and  translate  them  into  Arabic.  Unfortunately,  these  pre- 
cious packets,  all  but  the  Nubian  gospel,  were  lost  in 
Europe,  with  little  hope  of  recovery.     The  third  language 


EXPEDITION  AND  ITS  EESTJLTS.  31 

investigated  by  me  was  the  Beg'a,  which  is  spoken  by  the 
Bischari  nation,  who  dwell  between  the  Eed  Sea  and  the 
Nubian  Nile.  This  language  occupies  an  important  posi- 
tion with  reference  to  phLLolou:y,  since  it  seems  to  be  a  branch 
of  the  original  Asiatic  stock,  of  which  the  African  oftsets 
may  be  comprehended  under  the  name  of  the  Hamitic  lan- 
guages ;  and  is,  besides,  particularly  interesting  in  our  study 
of  the  monuments,  because,  most  probably,  it  was  once  the 
key  to  decipher  the  ancient  Ethiopian  inscriptions,  num- 
bers of  which  were  discovered  by  us  upon  the  Island  of 
Meroe,  and  from  that  place,  in  the  IsHe  valley,  as  far  down 
as  Philje.  These  inscriptions  are  "written  in  simple  cha- 
racters, from  right  to  left,  and  derive  their  origin  from  the 
powerful  nation  of  the  Meroitic  Ethiopians,  whose  direct 
descendants  we  behold  in  the  present  Beg'a  nations.  By 
comparing  those  languages  with  the  other  languages  of 
Africa,  which  are  ah-eady  better  known,  I  thuik  1  sliall  be 
able  to  separate,  according  to  fixed  principles,  these  "  Ha- 
mitic languages"  of  north  and  north-east  Ainca  (which  may 
still  be  referred  to  their  native  home  in  Asia)  from  the 
numerous  other  languages  of  this  enigmatical  continent ;  and 
I  am  now  engaged  in  preparing  these  philological  investiga- 
tions for  special  publication. 

I  must  finally  mention,  among  the  results  of  our  journey, 
two  collections  of  inscriptions.  In  the  first  place,  all  the 
Greek  inscriptions  in  the  countries  we  travelled  through 
were  carefully  sought  out,  and  impressions  of  them  were 
taken  upon  paper;  by  which  G-rseco-Egyptian  archcTology, 
and  more  particularly  the  learned  collections  of  inscriptions 
which  have  lately  excited  such  lively  interest,  will  pro- 
bably be  completed,  confirmed,  or  justified  in  a  satisfactory 
manner.  Secondly,  in  the  peninsula  of  Sinai  we  made  as 
perfect  a  collection  as  was  possible  of  the  so-caUed  Sinaitie 
Inscriptions,  which  are  found  engraved  on  the  rocks  in  dif- 
ferent districts  of  the  peninsula,  but  principally  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  old  town  of  Farau,  at  the  foot  of  the  moun- 
tain range  of  Serbalj  and  at  a  resting-place  of  the  caravans 
in  "Wadi  Mokatteb,  situated  farther  north,  which  is  named 
after  them. 

We  were   only  able  casually  to  turn  our   attention  to 


32  THE  EXPEDITION  AKD  ITS  EESULTS. 

objects  of  Natural  Science ;  nevertheless,  I  did  not  however 
neglect,  especially  during  remote  mountainous  journeys,  to 
collect  specimens  of  stone  and  earth  from  the  more  re- 
markable localities.  A¥e  not  only  visited  the  celebrated 
stone  quarries  in  the  chalk  mountains  of  Tura,  in  the  sand- 
stone range  of  Selseleh,  in  the  granite  rocks  of  Assuan,  and 
others  situated  in  the  Nile  valley,  but  also  those  alabaster 
quarries  of  El  Bosra,  opposite  Siut,  which  were  discovered  a 
few  years  ago  by  the  Bedouins,  in  which  last  we  found  a 
rock-inscription  from  the  commencement  of  the  17th  Dy- 
nasty. They  resemble  those  quarries  of  granite  and  breccia- 
verde  at  HAM:vrAMAT,  upon  the  road  leading  from  Qeneh 
to  the  Eed  Sea,  which  have  been  worked  from  the  earliest 
times,  and  also  the  porph}Ty  and  granite  quarries  at  Grebel 
Patireh  (Mons  Claudianus),  and  at  G-ebel  Dochan  (Mons 
Porphy rites),  in  the  Arabian  chain  of  mountains,  celebrated 
in  the  Eoman  period.  I  also  had  an  opportunity  of  pur- 
chasing an  interesting  Ethnographical  and  Natural  History 
collection  in  Alexandria,  obtained  by  H.  AVerne  during  ]\Io- 
hammed  All's  second  expedition  up  the  Nile,  which  pene- 
trated as  far  as  the  4°  N.  lat.,  of  which  an  account  was 
published  ;  and  I  received  a  valuable  collection  of  Eg)^ptian 
fishes  for  the  Anatomical  Museum  in  Berlin,  from  the  cele- 
brated French  physician  Clot  Bey. 


LETTERS 

FEOM 

EGYPT     AND     ETHIOPIA 

DKDICATED, 
WITH    THE    rnOFOUNDEST   VENEPvATION    AND    GRATlTl'Dr, 

TO 

ALEXANDER  VOX  IIUiMBOLDT. 


PEEPAEATIO^'S  lOT.  JorK>'Er.  35 

LETTEE  I. 

On  board  the  Oriental  Steamer,  the  oth  of  September,  1842. 

All  our  efforts  were  taxed  to  enable  us  to  depart  on  tiie 
1st  September ;  the  delay  of  one  daj  would  have  cost  us  a 
whole  month,  so  it  was  necessary  to  be  doubly  active.  A 
visit  to  Paris  was  indispensable,  and  I  reached  it  in  thirty-one 
hours  from  London ;  but  two  days  were  all  that  could  be 
spared  to  procure  what  was  requisite  in  the  way  of  pur- 
chases, letters,  and  notes.  I  returned  richly  laden  from  this 
city,  ever  rich  to  me  in  interest,  information,  and  various 
proofs  of  kindness.  In  London,  I  acquired  two  additional 
excellent  travelling  companions — Bonomi  and  "V\^ild,  who 
had  lately  determined  to  share  in  the  expedition  on  an  in- 
dependent footing.  The  former,  abeady  well  known  as  a 
traveller  in  Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  not  only  has  a  thorough  prac- 
tical acquaintance  with  the  mode  of  life  in  those  parts,  but 
also  possesses  a  critical  knowledge  of  Egyptian  art,  and  is  a 
master  in  Egyptian  drawing ;  the  latter,  a  young  architect, 
full  of  genius,  seeks  with  enthusiasm  in  the  East  a  new  field 
for  the  exercise  of  the  rich  and  various  gifts  with  which  he 
is  endowed.  At  length,  everything  was  purchased,  provided, 
and  packed,  and  we  had  bid  farewell  to  our  friends.  Bunsen 
alone,  with  his  usual  kindness,  and  unwearied  friendship, 
accompanied  us  as  far  as  Southampton,  the  place  of  our 
embarkation,  where  we  spent  the  evening  together. 

As  at  other  times,  when  landing  from  a  stormy  sea  after 
days  of  rough  tossicg,  we  suddenly  enjoy  an  almost  incon- 
ceivable degree  of  repose  in  the  quiet  harbour,  although  for 
a  long  time  we  still  feel  the  ground  tottering  beneath  us, 
and  fancy  we  hear  the  sound  of  the  breakers,  so  on  this  occa- 
sion I  experienced  the  same,  though  the  case  was  reversed  ; 
when,  after  the  whirl  of  the  last  days  and  weeks,  and  coming 
from  the  immense  metropolis  of  the  world,  I  reached  the 
harbour,  and  entered  the  narrow,  quickly  traversed  and  sur- 
veyed, wooden  house  of  the  monotonous  wilderness  of  the 
ocean.     AH  at  once  there  was  nothing  more  to  provide  and 

d2 


36  DErAUTUEE  niOM  SOUTHAMPTON. 

to  hasten ;  the  long  row  of  more  than  thirty  chests  of  our 
baggage  had  vanished  piece  by  piece  into  the  dark  hold  of 
the  ship  ;  our  cabins  required  no  arrangement,  for  they  could 
scarcely  contain  more  than  our  o-rti  persons.  The  absence  of 
disturbance  for  some  time  caused  a  new  and  undefined  kind  of 
disturbance  :  anxiety,  without  anything  to  be  anxious  about. 

Among  the  passengers,  I  will  only  mention  the  missionary 
Lieder,  a  Grerman  by  birth,  returning  with  his  English  wife 
to  Cairo.  Commissioned  by  the  English  Missionary  Society, 
he  has  founded  and  conducted  a  boys'  and  girls'  school 
there,  which  is  now  to  be  restricted  exclusively  to  the  chil- 
dren of  the  Coptic  Christians.  Lieder  has  introduced  in- 
struction in  the  Coptic  language  into  this  school,  and  has 
thus  restored  to  an  honourable  position  that  remarkable  and 
most  ancient  language  of  the  country,  which,  for  many  cen- 
turies past,  has  been  entirely  supplanted  among  the  people 
by  the  Arabic  tongue.  It  is  true  that  the  Holy  Scriptures 
still  exist  in  the  country  in  the  Coptic  tongue,  and  are  even 
used  in  public  worship,  but  they  are  only  chanted  as  psalms, 
and  are  no  longer  understood. 

We  started  from  Southampton  on  the  1st  September, 
about  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning.  The  wind  was  against 
us,  and  therefore  we  did  not  reach  Falmouth  till  twenty- 
four  hours  afterwards,  where  our  ship  waited  for  the  London 
mail,  to  take  in  the  letters.  "We  remained  several  hours  at 
anchor  there,  in  a  charming  bay ;  an  old  castle  is  situated 
at  the  entrance  on  either  side,  while  in  the  background  the 
town  forms  an  extremely  picturesque  group.  About  three 
o'clock  we  again  put  to  sea,  and  as  there  was  a  side-wind,  it 
caused  much  sea-sickness  among  our  party.  I  consider  my- 
self fortunate,  that  even  on  the  most  stormy  voyages  I  have 
never  been  in  this  disagreeable  condition,  which  neverthe- 
less has  something  comic  in  it  for  those  who  are  not  suffer- 
ing. It  is  a  curious  circumstance  that  the  same  motion 
which  rocks  the  child  into  a  sweet  slumber,  or  which  invites 
us  to  a  pleasure-sail  in  the  tossing  boat,  on  shipboard  owing 
to  the  slower  time  of  the  wide-swinging  pendulum,  becomes 


THE  BAY  OF  BISCAY.  37 

intolerable  suifering,  and  prostrates  the  strongest  heroes, 
without,  however,  being  accompanied  by  any  serious  danger. 

The  following  day  we  reached  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  and 
with  difficulty  cut  through  the  long  and  deep  waves,  which 
rolled  out  from  the  distant  coast.  On  the  morning  of  the 
4th  instant,  Sunday,  very  few  appeared  at  breakfast.  About 
eleven  o'clock,  in  spite  of  the  Aiolent  motion,  we  assembled 
for  divine  service.  The  English  flag,  as  the  most  sacred 
cloth  in  the  ship,  was  spread  over  the  pulpit  desk ;  Hen* 
Lieder  preached,  simply  and  well.  About  four  o'clock  we 
saw  the  Spanish  coast  for  the  first  time,  in  faint,  misty  out- 
line. The  nearer  we  approached  it,  the  waves  gradually  fell, 
for  the  wind  blew  off  shore.  Air,  sky,  and  sea  were  incom- 
parably beautiful.  Cape  Finisterre,  and  the  adjoining  head- 
lauds,  became  more  clear.  AVe  descried  several  small  sailing- 
vessels  along  the  coast ;  and  all  kinds  of  sea-fowl  swarmed 
round  the  ship.  By  degrees,  the  whole  company,  even  the 
ladies,  collected  on  deck.  The  sea  became  as  smooth  as 
the  clearest  mirror,  and  we  kept  the  Spanish  coast  in  sight 
the  whole  afternoon.  The  sun  descended  magnificently  intc 
the  sea ;  the  evening  star  was  soon  followed  by  the  whole 
host  of  the  heavenly  stars,  and  a  glorious  niglit  wrapt 
around  us. 

But  now  the  most  splendid  spectacle  presented  itself  tliat 
I  have  ever  seen  at  sea.  The  ocean  began  to  lighten  up,  all  the 
crests  of  the  breaking  waves  glowed  with  an  emerald-green  fire, 
and  a  brilliant  greenish-white  wat€rfall  fell  from  the  paddle- 
wheels  of  the  vessel,  which  left  in  its  long  wake  a  broad, 
light  streak  in  the  dark  sea.  The  sides  of  the  vessel,  and  our 
downward  gazing  faces,  were  lighted  up  as  bright  as  moon- 
light, and  I  was  able  to  read  print  without  any  difficulty  by 
this  water-fire.  When  the  illuminating  matter,  which,  ac- 
cording to  Elirenberg's  researches,  proceeds  from  infusorial 
animalcula),  was  most  intense,  we  saw  flames  dancing  over 
the  sea,  as  far  as  the  coast,  so  that  it  seemed  as  if  we  were 
sailing  through  a  more  richly-starred  sky  than  tliat  which 
was  above  us.     I  have  frequently  observed  this  illumination 


38  iirtrtiYAL  at  malta. 

of  the  sea  on  the  Mediterranean  also,  but  never  "with  such 
extraordinary  brilliancy  as  on  this  occasion.  The  spectacle 
was  quite  like  enchantment. 

Suddenly  I  observed  between  the  waves  new  living  streaks 
of  fire,  which  radiated  from  the  vessel  like  two  gigantic  ser- 
pents, and,  judging  by  the  proportions  of  the  ship,  were 
at  least  from  sixty  to  eighty  feet  long ;  they  moved  in  a 
deceptive  manner,  in  large  windings  beside  the  vessel,  crossed 
the  waves,  dipped  into  the  foam  of  the  paddle-wheels,  re- 
appeared, retreated,  hurried  forward,  and  finally  vanished  in 
the  distance.  For  a  long  time  I  could  not  explain  this  phe- 
nomenon. I  thought  of  the  old  tales,  so  frequently  re- 
peated, of  the  huge  sea-serpents  which  have  been  seen  from 
time  to  time.  jN'othing  could  more  closely  resemble  what 
was  here  before  us.  At  length  it  occurred  to  me  that  it 
might  however  only  be  fishes  running  a  race  with  the 
vessel,  and,  by  their  rapid  movements,  brushing  the  surface 
of  the  luminous  sea,  they  might  produce  the  long  streaks 
of  light  behind  them.  J^evertheless,  the  ocular  demonstra- 
tion remained  as  deceptive  as  before;  I  could  discover 
nothing  of  the  dark  fishes,  nor  determine  their  size ;  but  I 
at  length  consoled  myself  by  my  own  conjecture. 


LETTEE  II. 

Alexandria,  the  2Zrd  of  September,  1842. 
I  PUT  my  last  letter  into  the  post  in  Gribraltar,  on  the  7th 
September,  where  we  employed  the  few  hours  which  were 
granted  us  in  viewing  the  citadel.  The  African  continent 
lay  before  us,  a  light  streak  on  the  horizon.  Beneath  me, 
apes  were  clambering  on  the  rocks,  the  only  ones  in  Europe 
which  live  in  a  wild  state,  and  on  that  account  they  are  left 
unmolested.  In  Malta,  which  we  reached  on  the  11th  Sep- 
tember, we  found  the  painter  Erey,  from  Basle,  whom  I  had 
known  at  Eome.  He  told  me  first,  by  word  of  mouth,  that 
he  desired  to  join  in  the  expedition,  and  had  arrived  some 
days  before  from  Naples.   "We  were  compelled  to  wait  nearly 


MALTA  AKD  ALEXAJN'DEIA.  39 

three  days  for  the  post  from  Marseilles.  This  gave  us  at 
least  an  opportunity  to  visit  the  wonders  of  the  island; 
namely,  the  gigantic  buildings  discovered,  a  few  years  back, 
near  La  Yaletta,  and  to  make  some  purchases.  Through 
Lieder,  I  became  acquainted  with  Grobat,  who  has  hitherto 
managed  the  Maltese  station  of  the  English  Missionary 
Society,  but  is  now  waiting  for  a  new  destination,  as  pecu- 
niary circumstances  compel  the  society  to  give  up  this  station 
entirely.  It  gave  me  great  pleasure  to  make  the  acquaintance 
of  this  distinguished  person.* 

From  Malta  we  were  accompanied  by  the  missionary 
Isenberg,  who,  like  Gobat,  had  lived  for  a  long  time  in 
Abyssinia,  and  is  also  well  known  to  linguists  by  his  gram- 
mar of  the  Amharic  language.  A  young  girl  from  Basle  was 
under  his  protection — Eosina  Dietrich,  the  bride  of  the  mis- 
sionary Krapf,  who  has  married  her  here,  and  is  now  going 
to  return  with  her  and  his* colleagues,  Isenberg  and  Miihl- 
eisen,  to  the  English  missionary  station  in  Schoa,  by  the 
next  Indian  steamer.  He  was  married  in  the  English  chapel, 
and  I  was  present  as  a  witness  at  the  ceremony,  which  was 
performed  with  simplicity  and  feeling. 

On  our  arrival,  on  the  18th  September,  we  foimd  Erbkam, 
Ernest  Weidenbach,  and  Franke,  already  here.  They  had 
been  waiting  for  us  several  days. 

Mohammed  Ali  had  put  to  sea  with  the  fleet,  as  he  was 
impatiently  expecting  the  arrival  of  Sami  Bey,  who  was  to 
bring  him  intelligence  of  the  desired  reduction  of  tribute ; 
in  place  of  which,  he  had  received  the  appointment  of  Grand 
Yizier. 

The  Swedish  Consul- General,  d'Anastasi,  who  as  the 
representative  of  our  Consul- General  Yon  TTagner,  still 
absent,  manages  the  affairs  of  Prussia,  and  who  enters  with 
zeal  into  all  our  interests,  presented  us  to-day  to  the  Yiceroy, 

*  On  the  sudden  death  of  JBishop  Alexander,  which  happened  shortly 
after  our  departure  from  Palestine,  Gobat,  as  is  known,  was  selected 
by  H.  M.  the  King  of  Prussia  to  be  Bishop  of  the  Evangelical  Bishopric 
of  Jerusalem,  which  he  has  administered,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  eflS- 
caciously  ever  since  1846. 


40  MOHAMMED  ALL 

and  we  have  just  returned  from  tlie  audience.  He  expressed 
himself  much  pleased  with  the  vases,  which  I  delivered  to 
the  Pascha  in  the  name  of  our  Sovereign,  and  he  felt  himself 
still  more  honoured  by  the  King's  letter,  of  which  he  imme- 
diately ordered  a  written  translation  to  be  made,  and  perused 
it  with  great  attention  in  our  presence,  and  desired  that  I 
should  be  informed  that  he  would  give  me  the  answer  when 
we  should  again  leave  the  country.  "We  were  received,  and 
dismissed  standing ;  coffee  was  handed  to  us,  and  he  showed 
us  other  attentions,  some  of  which  were  afterwards  care- 
fully explained  to  me  by  d'Anastasi.  Boghos  Bey,  his  confi- 
dential minister,  was  the  only  one  present,  and  remained 
standing  all  the  time.  Mohammed  Ali  appeared  to  be 
cheerful,  and  youthful  in  his  actions  and  conversation ;  no 
debility  was  visible  in  the  features  and  flashing  eye  of  the 
old  man  of  seventy-three.  He  spoke  with  interest  of  his 
expeditions  up  the  JS'ile,  and* assured  us  ho  intended  to 
repeat  them,  till  he  should  have  found  the  sources  of  the 
"Wkite  Eiver.  On  my  inquiring  about  his  Museum  in  Cairo, 
he  replied,  that  it  certainly  had  not  hitherto  been  very  success- 
ful, but  that  frequently,  when  rapid  progress  was  expected  in 
his  enterprises,  unjust  claims  were  made  on  him  relative  to 
these  matters  in  Europe ;  since  he  was  compelled  first  to 
obtain  a  basis  and  foundation,  which,  with  us,  had  long  been 
prepared.  I  only  cursorily  alluded  to  our  excavations  ;  and  in 
the  course  of  conversation  assumed  that  he  had  granted  us  per- 
mission to  make  them ;  this  I  am  soon  to  receive  in  due  form.* 

*  Previous  to  my  departure  from  Alexandria,  the  firman  of  the 
Viceroy  was  presented  to  me,  with  unlimited  permission  to  make  al. 
the  excavations  which  I  might  think  desirable,  and  Avith  instructions 
to  the  local  authorities  to  render  me  assistance.  All  the  workmen  and 
aid  necessary  for  forming  and  transporting  our  collection  of  antiquities, 
■were  demanded  in  return  for  money,  through  virtue  of  our  firman, 
from  the  Sheikhs  of  the  neighbouring  villages,  or  the  Mudhirs  of  the 
provinces,  by  the  Kawass,  Avho  had  been  given  us  by  the  government, 
and  they  were  never  refused.  Tlie  monuments  from  the  southern 
regions  were  transported  from  IMount  Barkal  to  Alexandria  on  govern- 
ment boats,  and  three  sepulchral  chambers  near  the  great  Pyramids  of 
Gizeh  were  also  added,  which  were  carefully  taken  to  pieces  by  the 
aid  of  four  workmen,  sent  expressly  for  the  purpose  from  Berlin,  and 


ALEXA^•DRIA.  41 

LETTEE  III. 

Cairo,  the  \6th  October,  1S42. 
We  were  detained  almost  fourteen  days  in  Alexandria. 
The  whole  time  was  spent  in  preparations  for  our  farther 

were  put  on  board  a  vessel  opposite  Old  Cairo.  I  also  received,  before 
my  departure  from  Egypt,  a  written  permit  for  the  exportation  of  the 
collection ;  and  the  objects  themselves  were  presented  from  the  Viceroy 
to  H.  M.  the  King  of  Prussia. 

These  peculiar  favours,  at  a  time  when  all  private  travellers,  anti- 
quarian speculators,  and  even  diplomatic  persons,  were  expressly  forbid- 
den by  the  Egyptian  Government  to  make  any  collection,  or  to  export 
antiquities,  have  caused  many  unfavourable  judgments  to  be  passed  on 
our  expedition.  We  have  been  chiefly  accused  of  a  tliirst  for  de- 
struction, which,  under  the  given  circumstances,  would  presuppose  a 
peculiarly  barbarous  feeling  to  have  existed  in  our  party;  for  as  we 
did  not,  like  many  of  our  rivals,  excavate  and  transport  tlie  monu- 
ments, the  greater  part  of  which  had  previously  been  invisible,  hur- 
riedly and  by  night,  and  v/ith  bribed  assistance,  but  leisurely,  and 
with  ox)en  aid  from  the  authorities,  and  before  the  eyes  of  numerous 
travellers,  all  disregard  in  our  treatment  of  tlie  remaining  monuments, 
of  which  perhaps  they  formed  a  part,  would  certainly  have  been  so 
much  the  more  blameable,  since  it  was  so  easy  to  avoid  it.  "We  might, 
however,  trust  to  a  more  correct  judgment  than  what  is  usually  pos- 
sessed by  the  greater  y»roportion  of  ordinary  travellers  or  collectors, 
with  regard  to  the  value  of  the  individual  monuments;  besides,  we 
were  not,  after  all,  in  danger  of  being  deceived  in  this  matter  by  per- 
sonal self-interest,  as  Ave  made  our  selection  of  the  monuments  not  for 
ourselves,  but  commissioned  by  our  government,  for  the  lioyal  Museum 
in  Berlin,  therefore  for  the  benefit  of  science,  and  a  public  eager  after 
knowledge. 

The  collection,  which  chiefly  on  account  of  its  historical  value,  may 
be  placed  on  an  equal  footing  with  the  most  important  European 
museums,  was  incorporated  immediately  on  its  arrival  with  the  Koyal 
collections,  without  my  remaining  myself  officially  connected  with 
it ;  and  it  is  already  arranged  and  exhibited  to  the  public.  A  more 
accurate  examination  is  best  fitted  to  place  the  inconsiderate  accu- 
sations of  more  recent,  and  even  German  tourists,  in  their  proper 
light,  some  of  whom  have  gone  so  far,  for  example,  very  recently, 
Herr  Julius  Braun,  in  the  Algemeiner  Augsburg  Gazette,  as  to  charge 
us  with  the  mutilation  of  the  gods,  which  happened  more  than  3000 
years  ago,  in  the  temple  of  El  Kab.  Besides,  it  would  prove  an  entire 
ignorance  of  Egyptian  affairs  at  the  present  time,  or  of  that  which 
chiefly  lends  the  monuments  of  antiquity  their  real  interest  to  us,  if 
all  were  not  desirous  to  preserve  in  the  public  museums  of  Europe,  as 
many  as  possible  of  the  treasures  of  those  countries,  which  are  really 
as  valuable,  as  they  are  undervalued  in  their  own  home,  and  number* 
of  which  are  still  daily  destroyed. 


42  ALEXANDRIA. 

journey.  I  saw  the  Pasclia  several  times  again,  and  found 
liim  always  favourably  inclined  towards  our  expedition.  But 
we  had  gained  Kttle  in  a  scientific  point  of  view.  We  visited 
Pompey's  Pillar,  which  has  nevertheless  no  connection  with 
Pompey,  but,  as  we  learn  by  the  Grreek  inscription  on  the 
base,  was  placed  there  by  the  Prefect  Publius,  in  honour  of 
the  Emperor  Diocletian.  The  blocks  of  the  foundation  are 
partly  fragments  of  older  buildings ;  the  Eoyal  Eing  of  the 
second  Psammeticus  could  still  be  recognised  upon  one  of 
them. 

The  two  obelisks,  of  which  the  one  still  standing  is  called 
Cleopatra's  Needle,  are  very  much  destroyed  on  the  sides 
which  are  exposed  to  the  weather,  and  in  part  have  become 
totally  illegible.  They  were  erected  by  Thftmosis  III., 
in  the  sixteenth  century  before  Christ;  at  a  later  period 
Eamses  Miamtjn  has  inscribed  his  name,  and  still  later,  on 
the  outermost  borders  of  the  four  sides,  another  king,  who 
proved  to  be  hitherto  wholly  unknown,  and  was  therefore 
gladly  greeted  by  me.  I  must  also  mention  an  interesting  col- 
lection of  objects  of  every  sort  connected  with  ethnography 
and  natural  history,  which  was  made  by  Werne,  a  native  of  • 
Prussia,  during  the  second  expedition  of  the  Pascha  up  the 
!N"ile,  as  far  as  the  AVhite  Eiver,  in  lands  till  then  unknown, 
and  which  a  few  months  previously  had  been  conveyed  to 
Alexandria.*  It  appeared  to  me  of  such  value,  and  to  be  so 
unique  in  its  kind,  that  I  have  purchased  it  for  our  Museums. 
"While  we  were  still  there,  it  was  packed  up,  ready  to  be 
despatched.     I  think  it  will  be  welcome  in  Berlin. 

At  length  the  Bujurldis  (Firman)  of  the  Pascha  was  ready, 
and  we  hastened  to  quit  Alexandria.  We  embarked  the  same 
day  that  I  received  it  (the  30th  September),  on  the  Mahmu- 
dieh  canal.  Darkness  surprised  us  before  we  had  accomplished 
this  first  difficult  departure.     It  was  nine  o'clock  before  we 

*  The  journal  of  this  expedition  up  the  Nile  has  been  since  pub- 
lished under  the  title  Expedition  zur  Entdeckung  der  Quellen  des 
Weissen  Nil,  1840—1841.  By  Ferd.  VYerne.  With  a  Preface  by- 
Karl  Ritter.  A  map  and  a  table  of  figures.  Berlin:  G.  Reimer 
1848.     8vo. 


EVIXS  OF  SAIS  A^D  XAHARIEH.  43 

drove  off  from  our  hotel,  on  the  extensive  and  beautiful 
Frank-square,  in  two  carriages  belonging  to  M.  d'Anastasi, 
preceded  by  the  customary  runners  with  torches.  The  gate 
was  opened  at  the  watchword  that  had  been  given  to  us ; 
our  baggage  had  already  been  conveyed  to  the  boat  some 
hours  previously  on  camels,  so  that  we  were  able  to  depart 
very  soon  after  our  entrance  into  the  roomy  vessel,  which 
I  had  hired  in  the  morning.  The  Nile,  which  we  entered 
at  Atfeh,  had  tolerably  high  waves,  as  the  wind  was  strong 
and  unfavourable.  The  usual  mode  of  navigation  here,  is 
with  two  pointed  sails,  which  rise  upwards  like  the  wings  of 
a  bee ;  these  are  easily  beaten  down,  by  every  violent  gust  of 
wind,  not  without  danger,  especially  in  the  dark.  I  there- 
fore granted  the  sailors  permission  to  stop  every  stormy 
night. 

The  following  day,  the  2nd  of  October,  we  landed  at  Sa 
EL  Hagee  to  visit  the  ruins  of  ancient  Sais,  the  city  of  the 
Psammetici,  famous  by  its  temple  to  Minerva.  The  circular 
walls  of  the  town,  built  of  bricks  of  IN'ile  earth,  and  the  de- 
serted ruins  of  the  houses,  are  alone  extant ;  there  are  no  re- 
mains of  stone  buildings  with  inscriptions.  We  paced  the 
circumference  of  the  city,  and  made  a  simple  plan  of  the  loca- 
lity. The  Acropolis  was  situated  to  the  north-west  of  the 
town,  which  is  even  now  marked  by  tolerably  high  mounds  of 
rubbish.  We  spent  the  night  at  Nekleh.  I  have  got  the 
great  maps  of  the  "  Description  de  I'Egypte"  beside  me,  on 
which  we  were  able  to  trace  almost  every  step  of  our  excur- 
sions. We  have  hitherto  found  it  almost  everywhere  to  be 
depended  upon. 

The  3rd  of  October  we  landed  on  the  western  bank,  to 
inspect  the  remains  of  the  old  Eosetta  canal,  and  spent 
almost  the  whole  afternoon  till  sunset  in  examining  the  ruins 
of  an  old  town  near  Nahaeieh.  No  walls  are  now  visible, 
only  mounds  of  rubbish,  yet  we  found  in  the  houses  of  the 
modern  town  several  stones  with  inscriptions,  chiefly  built  into 
door-sills,  which  had  originally  belonged  to  a  temple  of  King 
Psammeticus  I.  and  Apries  (Hophre).     The  next  night  we 


44  AEEIVAL  AT  CAIHO. 

stopped  on  the  western  bank  at  Teirieh,  and  landed  there 
the  following  morning  to  search  for  some  ruins,  an  hour  dis- 
tant from  the  bank,  but  from  which  we  obtained  nothing. 
The  Libyan  desert  here  for  the  first  time  advances  quite  close 
to  the  Nile,  and  presented  us  with  a  new  and  deeply  impres 
sive  sight. 

On  the  following  morning,  we  first  saw  the  Great  Pyramids 
of  Memphis,  rising  above  the  horizon  ;  I  could  not  for  a  long 
time  take  my  eyes  off  them.  "We  still  continued  to  sail  on 
the  Eosetta  arm  ;  about  mid-day  we  reached  the  so-called 
Cowsbelly,  where  the  Nile  divides  into  its  two  principal 
arms.  Now  for  the  first  time  we  were  able  to  survey  the 
noble,  wonderful  river  in  its  whole  magnitude,  which  with  its 
fertilising  and  sweet-tasting  water,  influences  the  life  and 
manners  of  the  inhabitants  on  its  banks  like  no  other 
river  in  the  world-.  It  usually  attains  its  greatest  height 
about  the  beginning  of  October.  But  this  year  an  inundation 
has  occurred,  such  as  has  not  been  remembered  for  genera- 
tions past.  A  breach  in  the  dams  is  dreaded,  which  after  the 
great  murrain,  that  is  said  to  have  carried  oif  up  to  the  last 
week  forty  thousand  head  of  cattle,  would  cause  Egypt  to 
be  afflicted  a  second  time  this  year. 

About  five  o'clock  in  the  evening  we  arrived  at  Bulaq,  the 
harbour  of  Cairo.  We  rode  at  once  from  the  harbour  to  the 
touii,  and  made  arrangements  for  a  considerable  stay.  By- 
the-by,  when  we  say  Cairo,  and  the  Erencli  La  Caire,  it  pro- 
,  ceeds  from  a  pure  error  in  language.  The  town  is  never  called 
anything  by  the  Arabs  now,  but  Masr,  and  the  country  the 
same  ;  that  is  the  old  Semetic  name,  which  is  more  easily  pro- 
nounced by  us  in  the  dual  termination  Mis'raim.  It  was 
only  in  the  tenth  century,  when  the  present  city  was  founded, 
that  the  modern  Masr,  by  the  addition  El  Qahireh,  that 
is  "  the  victorious,"  was  distinguished  from  the  earlier  Mass 
EL  Atiqeh,  the  present  Old  Cairo.  The  Italians  then  omitted 
the  k,  which  they  could  not  pronounce,  mistook  the  Arabic 
article  el  for  their  masculine  il,  and  thus  by  its  termination 
also,  stamped  the  whole  word  as  masculine. 


CAIRO.  45 

It  vras  just  the  commencement  of  the  Musuhnans'  holy 
fksting  month,  the  Eamadan.  during  which  they  neither 
take  food,  nor  "drink  smoke  or  water"  the  Avhole  day, 
and  receive  no  visits,  but  only  begin  the  whole  business 
of  life  after  sunset ;  thus  completely  changing  day  and 
night,  which,  on  account  of  our  Arabian  servants,  causes  U3 
much  inconvenience.  Our  Kawass  (the  Pascha's  guard  of 
honour  that  had  been  given  us),  which  had  missed  the  time 
of  our  departure  from  Alexandria,  established  itself  here, 
As  our  Prussian  vice-consul  is  out  of  health,  I  applied  to  the 
Austrian  consul,  M.  Champion,  to  whom  I  had  been  warmly 
recommended  by  Ehrenberg,  with  respect  to  our  being  pre- 
sented to  the  representatives  of  the  Pascha  at  this  place.  He 
received  us  with  the  greatest  politeness  and  anxiety  to  serve 
us,  and  has  obtained  for  us  everywhere  a  good  reception.  On 
my  official  visits,  which,  on  account  of  the  Eamadan,  were 
necessarily  made  about  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  was 
usually  accompanied  by  Erbkam  and  Bonomi.  Our  torch- 
bearers  ran  before  us,  then  followed  on  asses,  first  the  Draofo- 
man  of  the  consul,  and  our  Pascha's  Kawass,  then  we  our- 
selves, in  stately  procession.  "We  rode  almost  across  the 
whole  town  to  the  Citadel,  through  the  narrow  streets,  which 
were  filled  with  Arabs,  and  picturesquely  illuminated  by  our 
torches,  there  we  first  paid  a  visit  to  Abbas  Pascha,*  a  grand- 
son of  Mehemet  Ali.  He  is  governor  of  Cairo,  but  rarely 
there.  Prom  him  we  went  to  Scherif  Pascha,  his  representa- 
tive, and  then  to  the  minister  of  war,  Ahmet  Pascha.  We 
were  everywhere  received  with  great  courtesy. 

On  the  day  after  our  arrival,  I  received  a  diploma  as  hono- 
rary member  of  the  older  Egyptian  Society,  from  which  tlie 
younger  one,  which  had  already  forwarded  to  London  the 
same  invitation  to  me,  has  separated.  Both  held  meetings 
during  the  first  days  after  our  arrival,  but  I  was  only  able  to 
attend  one  of  them,  in  which  an  interesting  paper  was  read 
by  Krapf,  on  certain  nations  in  Central  Africa.  The  accounts 

*  Abbas  Pascha  has  been  Viceroy  of  E^ypt  since  the  death  of 
Ibrahim  Pascl)a=  in  1S4S. 


46  HELIOPOLIS. 

were  given  liim  by  a  native  of  tlie  coimtrj  of  Enarea,  who  had 
travelled  into  the  country  of  the  Doko  on  mercantile  business, 
and  describes  the  people  there  very  much  as  Herodotus  de- 
scribes the  Libyan  dwarf  nation,  according  to  the  account 
of  the  Nasamonians,  namely,  as  composed  entirely  of  little 
people,  about  the  size  of  children  from  ten  to  twelve  years 
old.  We  might  almost  imagiae  that  they  were  speaking  of 
apes.  As  the  geographical  notices  of  the  hitherto  wholly 
unknown  land  of  the  Doko  are  also  interesting,  I  had  the 
whole  paper  copied,  in  order  to  send  it  along  with  the  small 
map  which  belongs  to  it,  to  our  venerated  Eitter.* 

On  the  13th  of  October  we  made  our  first  excursion  from 
this  place  to  the  ruins  of  Heliopolis,  the  biblical  On, 
whence  Joseph  took  his  wife  Asnath,  the  daughter  of  a  priest. 
Nothing  remains  of  this  highly-praised  city,  which  prided 
itself  in  possessing,  next  to  Thebes,  the  most  learned  body  of 
priests,  but  the  walls,  which  now  resemble  great  ramparts  of 
earth,  and  an  obelisk  still  erect,  and  perhaps  in  its  original 
site.  The  peculiar  interest  of  this  obelisk  is,  that  it  was 
erected  by  King  Sesuetesen  I.  in  the  Old  Monarchy,  about 
B.C.  2300,  and  is  by  far  the  most  ancient  of  all  known  obelisks ; 
for  the  broken  one  in  the  Fajoim  at  Crocodilopolis,  which  bears 
the  name  of  the  same  king,  is  rather  a  lengthened  stele,  or 
tablet,  in  the  form  of  an  obelisk.  Boghos  Bey  has  received 
a  present  of  the  ground  on  which  the  obelisk  stands,  and  has 
laid  out  a  garden  round  it.  The  flowers  of  the  garden  have 
attracted  a  multitude  of  bees,  and  they  have  been  unable  to 
find  a  more  commodious  habitation  than  in  the  deep  and 
sharply-cut  hieroglyphics  of  the  obelisk.  Within  the  space 
of  a  twelvemonth,  they  have  covered  the  inscriptions  of  the 
four  sides  to  such  a  degi'ee,  that  a  great  portion  of  them  have 
now  become  quite  illegible.     They  had  been,  however,  pre- 

*  This  paper — An  account  of  the  river  Goschop,  and  of  the  countries 
of  Enarea,  Caffa,  and  Doko,  given  by  a  native  of  Enarea  (with  a 
map)— has  been  translated  by  Ritter,  and  was  communicated  to  the 
Geographical  Society  at  Berlin  on  the  7th  January,  1843,  and  was 
printed  in  the  monthly  reports  of  this  society  in  the  latter  part  of  the 
year.    P.  172—188. 


riEST  TI3IT  TO  THE  PTEA.MIDS.  47 

viously  published,  and  we  liad  little  difficulty  in  our  exami- 
nation, because  three  sides  bear  the  same  inscription,  and 
that  on  the  fourth,  also,  differs  but  little. 

Yesterday,  the  loth  October,  was  our  king's  birtliday,  and 
I  had  selected  this  day  for  the  first  visit  to  the  Great  Pyra- 
mids. "VYe  would  there,  vrHh  a  few  friends,  commemorate 
our  King  and  our  Fatherland  in  a  joyous  festival.  We  invited 
the  Austrian  consul,  Champion ;  the  Prussian  consul,  Bokty ; 
our  learned  countryman,  Dr.  Pruner,  and  Messrs.  Lieder, 
Isenberg,  Miihleisen,  and  Krapf  to  join  our  party,  some 
of  whom  however,  were  to  our  regret,  prevented  from  at- 
tending. 

The  morning  was  beautiful  beyond  description,  fresh  and 
festive.  "We  rode  in  a  long  procession  through  the  yet  quiet 
city,  and  through  the  green  avenues  and  gardens  which  are 
now  laid  out  before  it.  "Wherever,  almost,  that  we  met  with 
new  and  well  carried  out  works,  Ibrahim  Pascha  was  named 
to  us  as  their  originator.  He  seems  to  be  doing  much  in  all 
parts  of  Egypt  for  the  embellishment  and  improvement  of  the 
country. 

It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  scene  that  met  our  view 
when  we  emerged  from  the  avenues  of  date-trees  and  acacias ; 
the  sun  rose  on  the  left  behind  the  Moqattam  hills,  and  illu- 
minated the  summits  of  the  Pyramids  in  front,  which  lay 
before  us  in  the  plain  like  gigantic  rock  crystals.  All  were 
overpowered,  and  felt  the  solemn  influence  of  the  splendour 
and  grandeur  of  this  morning  scene.  At  Old  Cairo  we  were 
transported  across  the  Nile  to  the  village  of  Gizeh,  from 
which  the  largest  Pyramids  are  called  Haeam  el  Gizeh. 
Prom  this  spot,  in  the  dry  season,  one  may  ride  over  to  the 
Pyramids,  by  a  straight  road,  in  an  hour,  or  little  more.  But 
as  the  inundation  now  stands  at  its  highest  point,  we  were 
compelled  to  make  a  great  circuit  on  long  dams ;  we  came 
nearly  as  far  up  as  Saqara,  and  only  reached  the  foot  of  the 
greatest  Pyramid  at  the  end  of  five  hours  and  a  half. 

The  unexpected  length  of  the  ride  gave  us  an  appetite  for 
the  simple  breakfast  which,  in  order  to  strengthen  us  for  the 


48  TIEW  FKOM  PYKAMID  OF  CUEOrS. 

ascent  of  the  greatest  Pyramid,  Ave  partook  forthwith  in  one 
of  the  old  sepulchral  chambers  ;  these  had  been  here  hewn  in 
the  rock,  somewhere  about  five  thousand  years  ago,  and  are 
now  inhabited  by  some  Bedouins.  Meantime,  a  spacious 
tent,  with  decorations  of  various  colours,  which  I  hired  in 
Cairo,  had  arrived.  I  had  it  pitched  on  the  northern  side 
of  the  Pyramid,  and  the  great  Prussian  royal  standard,  the 
black  eagle  with  the  golden  sceptre,  the  crown  and  the  blue 
sword  on  a  white  ground,  which  our  artists  had  themselves, 
during  the  last  few  days,  sketched,  stitched,  and  fastened  to  a 
high  pole,  was  planted  before  the  door  of  the  tent. 

About  thirty  Bedouins  had,  in  the  meanwhile,  gathered 
around  us,  and  waited  for  the  moment  when  we  should  ascend 
the  Ppamids,  in  order  to  raise  us,  with  their  strong  brown 
arms,  up  the  steps,  which  are  between  three  and  four  feet 
high.  Scarcely  had  the  signal  for  departure  been  given,  than 
immediately  each  of  us  was  surrounded  by  several  Bedouins, 
who  dragged  us  up  the  rough,  steep  path  to  the  summit,  as 
in  a  whirlwind.  A  few  minutes  later,  and  our  flag  was  un- 
furled on  the  summit  of  the  oldest  and  highest  of  human 
works  that  is  known,  and  we  greeted  the  Prussian  eagle 
with  three  joyous  cheers  to  our  king.  Flying  towards  the 
south,  the  eagle  turned  his  crowned  head  towards  our  home 
in  the  north,  from  which  a  refreshing  wind  blew,  and  diverted 
the  hot  rays  of  the  mid-day  sun  from  ofi"  us.  We  also  looked 
homewards,  and  each  one  thought  aloud,  or  silently  in  his 
heart,  of  those  who  losing,  and  beloved,  he  had  left  behind. 

The  panoramic  view  of  the  landscape  spread  out  at  our 
feet  next  riveted  our  attention.  On  the  one  side  the  Nile 
valley,  a  wide  sea  of  overflowed  waters,  intersected  by  long 
serpentine  dams ;  here  and  there  broken  by  villages  rising 
above  its  surface  like  islands,  and  by  cultivated  promontories 
filling  the  whole  plain  of  the  valley  that  extended  to  the  op- 
posite Moqattam  hills,  on  whose  most  northerly  point  the  ci- 
tadel of  Cairo  rises  above  the  town  stretched  out  at  their  base. 
On  the  other  side,  the  Libyan  desert,  a  still  more  wonderful 
sea  of  sandy  plains  and  barren  rocky  hills,  boundless,  colourless, 


TIEW  rfiOil  PYllAillD  OF  CHEOPS.  49 

noiseless,  enlivened  by  no  creature,  no  plants,  no  trace  of  the 
presence  of  man,  not  even  by  tombs  ;  and  between  both,  the 
ruined  Necropolis,  whose  general  position  and  simple  outline 
lay  spread  out  clearly  and  distinctly  as  on  a  map. 

What  a  spectacle,  and  what  recollections  did  it  caR  forth ! 
When  Abraham  came  to  Egypt  for  the  first  time,  he  saw 
these  very  PjTamids,  which  had  been  already  built  many  cen- 
turies before  his  coming.  In  the  plain  before  us  lay  ancient 
Memphis,  the  residence  of  the  kings  on  whose  tombs  we 
were  then  standing  ;  there  dwelt  Joseph,  and  ruled  the  land 
under  one  of  the  most  powerful  and  wisest  Pharaohs  of  the 
newly  restored  Monarchy.  Farther  away,  to  the  left  of  the 
Moqattam  hills,  where  the  fruitful  low  ground  extends  on 
the  eastern  arm  of  theNile,  beyond  Heliopolis,  distinguished 
by  its  Obelisk,  begins  the  blest  region  of  Groshen,  out  of 
which  Moses  led  his  people  to  the  Syrian  desert.  It  would 
not,  indeed,  be  difB.cult  from  our  position  to  recognise  that 
ancient  fig-tree  on  the  road  to  Heliopolis,  at  Matarieh,  under 
whose  shade,  according  to  the  tradition  of  the  country,  Mary 
rested  with  the  infant  Christ.  How  many  thousand  pil- 
grims of  all  nations  have  since  visited  these  wonders  of  the 
world  down  to  ourselves,  who,  the  youngest  in  time,  are 
yet  but  the  predecessors  of  many  other  thousands  who  will 
succeed  us,  ascend  these  Pyramids,  and  contemplate  them 
with  astonishment.  I  will  not  describe  any  further  the 
thoughts  and  feelings  which  agitated  me  during  these  mo- 
ments. There,  at  the  goal  of  the  wishes  of  many  years, 
and  at  the  same  time  at  the  commencement  of  our  expedi- 
tion ;  there,  at  the  summit  of  the  Cheops-Pyramid,  to  which 
the  first  link  of  our  whole  monumental  historical  inquiry — 
not  merely  for  the  history  of  Egypt,  but  for  that  of  the 
world — is  immoveably  attached ;  there,  where  I  looked  down 
upon  the  wonderful  field  of  tombs,  from  which  the  Moses'- 
wand  of  science  now  calls  forth  the  shadows  of  the  ancient 
dead,  and  causes  them  to  pass  before  the  mirror  of  history, 
in  the  order  of  their  time  and  rank,  with  their  names  and 
titles,  and  with  all  their  peculiarities,  customs,  and  surround- 
ing accompaniments. 

E 


50  EETTJEX  TO  CAIEO. 

After  I  had  taken  an  exact  survey  of  the  neighbouring 
tombs,  with  a  view  to  select  some  points  for  future  excava- 
tions, we  once  more  descended  to  the  entrance  of  the  P}Tamid, 
and,  providing  ourselves  with  lights,  entered,  like  miners, 
the  steeply  sloping  shaft  with  some  guides,  and  reached 
the  gallery,  and  so-called  King's  Chamber,  by  paths  already 
familiar  to  me  by  drawings.  "We  admired  the  in  finitely  fine 
seams  of  the  enormous  blocks,  and  examined  the  quality  of  tho 
stones  of  the  passages  and  chambers.  In  the  spacious  hall, 
whose  floor,  walls,  and  ceiling,  are  entirely  built  of  granite, 
and,  therefore,  return  a  metallic-sounding  echo,  we  sang  our 
Prussian  hymn,  which  sounded  so  powerful  and  so  solemn 
that  our  guides  afterwards  told  the  remaining  Bedouins  that 
we  had  selected  the  innermost  part  of  the  Pyramid  to  per- 
form divine  service  and  utter  a  loud  general  prayer.  We 
now  visited  also  the  so-called  Chamber  of  the  Queen,  and 
then  quitted  the  Pyramid,  reserving  the  view  of  the  chambers 
which  were  more  difficult  of  access  for  a  future  and  longer 
visit. 

Meantime,  our  orientally-ornamented  tent  had  been  ar- 
ranged, and  a  dinner  was  prepared  within  it,  seasoned  by 
the  importance  of  the  festival,  of  which  only  Prussians  par- 
took, with  the  exception  of  our  two  English  companions. 
It  need  hardly  be  told  that  our  first  toast  on  this  occasion, 
also,  was  to  the  king  and  his  household,  a.nd  it  required  no 
great  eloquence  to  inspire  all  hearts. 

The  remainder  of  the  day  passed  in  cheerfiil,  festive,  and 
tender  reminiscences  and  conversation,  till  the  time  for  our 
departure  had  arrived.  We  were  still  obliged  to  wait  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  after  sunset  to  give  our  servants,  our 
mule-drivers,  and  other  Arabian  attendants,  time  to  eat  their 
frugal  meal,  as,  on  account  of  the  Eamadan,  in  spite  of  the 
heat  and  labours  of  the  day,  they  had  not  yet  tasted  any- 
thing. Then  the  clear,  full  moon  guided  us  in  the  cool  and 
silent  night  across  the  sea  of  sand  and  waters,  through  vil- 
lages and  palm-groves  back  to  the  city,  which  we  did  not 
reach  before  midnight. 


Tn£  PYRAMIDS  OF  GIZEH.  51 


LETTER  IV. 

At  the  foot  of  the  largest  Fyrarnid,  the  2nd  Jan.,  1843. 
Still  always  here !  in  full  activity  since  the  9th  Novem- 
ber, and  perhaps  for  several  vreeks  longer  in  the  new  year. 
But  yet,  how  could  I  suspect  from  the  accounts  that  have 
hitherto  been  given  by  travellers  what  a  harvest  we  had  to 
gather  on  this  spot ;  here,  on  the  oldest  scene  of  all  deter- 
'minable  chronological  human  history.  It  is  strange  how 
little  this  spot  has  been  examined,  though  it  has  been  the 
most  frequently  visited  in  Egypt.  I  will  not,  however, 
quarrel  with  our  predecessors,  as  we  reap  the  fruits  of  their 
neglect.  I  have  rather  been  compelled  to  restrain  our  desire 
to  see  more  of  this  land  of  wonders,  as  we  shall  perhaps 
have  to  discharge  half  of  our  whole  task  on  this  spot.  Two 
tombs,  besides  the  Pyramids,  are  conspicuously  marked  on 
the  best  of  the  earlier  maps.  Eosellini  has  only  accurately 
examined  one  tomb ;  and  Champollion  says,  in  his  letters : 
"  II  y  a  peu  a  faire  ici,  et  lorsqu'on  aura  copie  des  scenes  de 
la  vie  domestique,  sculptees  dans  un  tombeau,  je  regagnerai 
nos  embarcations."  We  have  given  forty-five  tombs  on  our 
accurate  topographical  plan  of  the  whole  necropolis,  whose 
occupants  have  become  known  to  me  by  their  inscriptions, 
and  altogether  I  have  recorded  eighty-two,  which  seemed 
worthy  of  notice,  by  their  inscriptions  or  by  other  pecu- 
liarities.* Eew  of  them  belong  to  later  times ;  almost  all  of 
them  were  built  during,  or  shortly  after  the  erection  of  the 
great  Pyramids,  and  therefore  afibrd  us  an  invaluable  series 
of  dates  for  the  knowledge  of  the  oldest  determinable  civili- 
sation of  the  human  race.  The  architecture  of  that  period, 
about  which  I  formerly  could  only  offer  conjectures,t  is  now 
clearly  developed  before  me.     "We  have  thus  early  presented 

*  On  our  departure  for  Upper  Egypt,  we  had  minutely  examined  130 
private  tombs,  and  had  discovered  the  remains  of  67  Pyramids. 

t  See  my  essay,  Sur  fordre  des  colonnes  piliers  en  Egypte  et  ses  rap- 
ports avec  le  second  ordre  Egyptien  et  la  colonne  Grecque  (avec  deux 
planches),  in  the  ninth  volume  of  the  Anuales  de  I'lnstitut.  de  Cor- 
resp.  Arche'ol.    Rome,  1838. 


52  THE  PYEA^I^D3  OP  GIZEH. 

to  US  almost  all  the  different  component  parts  of  architec- 
ture ;  sculptures  of  entire  figures,  of  all  sizes,  in  alto-relievo 
and  basso-relievo,  are  presented  in  astonishing  numbers. 
The  style  is  verv  marked,  and  beautifullv  executed,  but  it  is 
evident  that  the  Egyptians  of  that  time  did  not  yet  possess 
that  canon  of  proportions  which  we  find  prevailing  at  a  later 
period.* 

The  painting  on  a  very  fine  coating  of  lime  is  often  beau- 
tiful beyond  conception,  and  is  sometimes  preserved  as  fresh* 
and  perfect  as  if  it  had  been  done  yesterday.  The  repre- 
sentations on  the  walls  chiefly  contain  scenes  from  the  life 
of  the  deceased,  and  appear  especially  intended  to  place 
before  the  eyes  of  the  spectator  his  wealth  in  cattle,  fish, 
game,  boats,  domestics,  &c.  "We  thus  become  familiar  with 
all  the  details  of  his  private  life.  The  numerous  inscriptions 
describe  or  designate  these  scenes,  or  they  exhibit  the  often 
widely-branching  family  of  the  deceased,  and  all  his  titles 
and  offices,  so  that  I  could  almost  compose  a  court  and  state 
calendar  of  King  Cheops,  or  Chephren,  The  most  splendid 
tombs  or  rock-sepulchres  belonged  principally  to  the  princes, 
their  relatives,  or  the  highest  official  persons  under  the 
kings  beside  whose  Pyramids  they  are  laid ;  and  not  unfre- 
quently,  I  have  found  the  tombs  of  father,  son,  and  grand- 
son, even  great  grandson,  so  that  whole  pedigrees  of  those 
distinguished  families,  who,  above  5000  years  ago,  formed 
the  nobility  of  the  land,  are  brought  to  light.  The  most 
beautiful  of  the  tombs,  which,  with  many  others,  I  myself 
discovered  beneath  the  sand,  which  here  buries  all  things, 
belongs  to  a  prince  of  the  ^mily  of  King  Cheops, 

I  am  now  employing  daily  from  forty  to  sixty  people  in 
excavations  and  similar  works.  I  have  also  made  them  dig 
in  front  of  the  great  Sphinx,  to  disclose  the  small  temple 
which  is  situated  between  its  paws,  and  to  expose  the  colossal 
stele  of  a  single  block  of  granite,  eleven  feet  high  and  seven 
feet  broad,  which  forms  the  back  wall  of  the  little  temple, 
and  which  is  still  covered  up  with  sand  to  nearly  its  entire 
*Seep.  115 


A  STonii-  03 

height.  It  is  one  of  the  few  monuments  here  from  the 
times  of  the  great  Pharaohs  of  the  Xew  Monarchy,  after  the 
expulsion  of  the  Hvksos :  I  have  had  a  plaster  cast  taken 
of  it. 

The  Egyptian  winter  is  not  always  so  spring-like  as  is 
sometimes  imagined  in  Europe.  About  sunrise,  when  all 
hasten  to  their  work,  we  have  already  had  it  -j-  o'^  B.  (43^ 
Fahr.).  so  that  the  sketch ers  could  hardly  use  their  fingers. 

The  winter  season  began  here  with  a  scene  which  will 
always  be  vividly  remembered  by  me.  I  had  ridden  out  to 
the  excavations,  when  seeing  a  large  black  cloud  approach- 
ing, I  sent  a  servant  to  the  tents,  to  take  care  of  them,  but 
as  it  began  to  rain  slightly,  I  soon  rode  after  him  myself. 
Shortly  after  my  arrival  a  storm  of  wind  began  ;  I  therefore 
ordered  the  cords  of  the  tents  to  be  secured,  but  soon  a 
violent  shower  of  rain  came  in  addition,  which  alarmed  aU 
our  Arabs,  and  drove  them  into  the  rock-tomb,  in  which  is 
our  kitchen.  Erbkam  and  Franke  were  the  only  ones  of 
our  own  party  here.  Suddenly  the  storm  became  a  regular 
hurricane,  such  as  I  had  never  witnessed  in  Europe,  and  a 
hailstorm  came  down  on  us,  which  almost  turned  the  day 
into  night.  I  had  the  greatest  trouble  to  drive  our  Arabs 
out  of  the  grotto,  that  they  might  bring  our  things  to  the 
rock-tombs,  where  it  was  dry,  as  every  moment  we  might 
expect  the  overthrow  of  the  tents.  And  it  was  not  long 
before  first  our  common  tent  fell  down,  and  when  I  had 
hastened  from  that  into  my  own,  in  order  to  hold  it  from 
the  inside,  this  also  broke  down  above  me.  After  I  had 
crawled  out,  I  found  that  my  things  were  tolerably  well 
covered  by  the  tent,  so  that  for  the  present  I  might  leave 
them  alone,  to  prevent  a  still  greater  danger.  Our  tents, 
protected  from  the  worst  winds,  the  north  and  west,  lay  in 
a  depression  of  the  valley,  towards  which  the  plateau  of  the 
Pyramids  inclines.  From  that  place  I  suddenly  saw  a  rapid 
mountain  torrent  precipitating,  like  a  gieantic  serpent  on 
its  certain  prey,  upon  our  encampment,  already  hadi   de- 


04  A  STOEM. 

stroyed  and  beaten  into  the  sand.  The  principal  stream 
first  dashed  towards  the  great  tent ;  another  arm  threatened 
mine,  but  did  not  however  quite  reach  it.  Everything,  how- 
ever, which  had  been  floated  out  of  our  tents  by  the  heavy 
rain  was  carried  off  by  both  streams,  which  united  below  the 
tents,  and  was  borne  a  hundred  steps  farther  into  a  deep 
hollow  behind  the  Sphinx,  where  a  great  lake,  which  fortu- 
nately had  no  outlet,  formed  itself  in  a  moment. 

Now  picture  to  yourself  this  scene  !  Our  tents  shattered 
to  the  ground  by  the  storms  of  rain  and  hail,  between  two 
mountain  torrents,  which  at  once  dug  out  a  channel  for 
themselves  in  the  sandy  ground,  in  several  places  six  feet 
deep,  and  carried  down  with  them  into  the  muddy,  foam- 
covered,  slimy  lake,  our  books,  drawings,  sketches,  linen, 
instruments  of  all  kinds,  even  our  levers  and  iron  crows,  in 
short  ever}i:hing  they  laid  hold  on.  In  addition  to  this,  we 
ourselves,  with  dripping  clothes,  without  hats,  securing  the 
heavier  articles,  pursuing  the  lighter  ones,  wading  up  to  the 
waist  in  the  stream  or  lake,  to  fish  out  what  the  sand  had 
not  yet  swallow^ed,  and  all  this  the  work  of  a  quarter  of  an 
hour,  at  whose  expiration  the  sun  forthwith  shone  again,  and 
proclaimed  the  end  of  this  deluge  scene  by  a  splendid  and 
brilliant  rainbow. 

It  was  difficult  to  see  at  once  what  we  had  lost,  and  where 
we  had  to  begin,  to  bring  things  again  into  some  order. 
Both  the  Weidenbachs  and  Trey  had  gazed,  from  the  tombs 
where  they  were  working,  upon  the  whole  scene,  as  a  mag- 
nificent natural  spectacle,  not  suspecting  what  we  had  ex- 
perienced here,  till  I  sent  for  them  to  assist  us  immediately 
in  preparing  for  the  approaching  night.  For  several  days 
we  continued  to  fish  and  dig  for  our  things.  Many  were 
lost,  much  had  become  useless ;  the  greater  part  of  what  was 
not  enclosed  in  chests  and  trunks  bore  more  or  less  traces  of 
this  flood.  After  all,  however,  nothing  essential  was  de- 
stroyed. I  had  flrst  placed  in  safety  the  great  portfolios, 
with  my  manuscripts  and  books ;  in  short,  a  few  days  after- 


CHRISTMAS  AT  THE  PYRAMIDS.  55" 

death,  the  whole  affair  only  seemed  to  me  a  remarkable  pic- 
ture, which  I  should  be  sorry  to  forget,  without  leaving  any 
disagreeable  consequences  behind  it. 

Since  then,  we  have  often  had  to  suffer  from  violent  winds, 
which  sometimes  fill  the  air  for  several  days  together  with 
sand,  to  such  a  degree,  as  to  be  annoying  to  the  lungs ;  it 
entirely  prevents  painting  with  colours,  and  covers  the 
drawing  and  writing-paper  incessantly  with  a  most  disagree- 
able and  constantly  renewed  coat  of  dust.  This  fine  sand 
penetrates  all  our  clothes,  enters  every  box,  even  those  which 
close  most  perfectly,  fills  nose,  ears,  and  hair,  and  is  the 
unavoidable  ingredient  of  all  food,  solid  and  liquid. 

5th  January. — On  the  evening  of  the  first  Christmas 
holiday,  I  surprised  my  companions  by  a  great  fire,  which  1 
had  caused  to  be  lighted  on  the  summit  of  the  highest  Pyra- 
mid. The  flame  illuminated  both  the  other  Pyramids  splen- 
didly, as  well  as  the  whole  field  of  tombs,  and  shone  quite 
across  the  valley  as  far  as  Cairo.  That  was  indeed  a 
Christmas  Pyramid!  I  only  let  Abeken  into  the  secret, 
who,  with  his  constantly  cheerful  temper,  and  his  intellectual 
and  instructive  conversation,  had  happily  joined  us  on  the 
10th  December.  With  his  assistance  I  then  prepared  a 
special  Christmas-tree  for  the  following  day,  in  the  King's 
Chamber  of  the  Great  Pyramid.  "We  planted  a  young  palm- 
tree  in  the  sarcophagus  of  the  ancient  king,  and  adorned  it 
with  lights,  and  small  presents,  which  I  had  ordered  from  the 
town  for  us  children  of  the  desert.  St.  Sylvester  must  have 
his  share  of  honours  also.  At  twelve  o'clock  on  New-year's 
Eve  immense  flames  rose  simultaneously  at  midnight  from 
the  three  great  PjTamids,  and  proclaimed  the  changes  of  the 
Christian  year,  far  and  wide,  to  the  Islamite  provinces  at 
their  base. 

I  consider  it  to  be  a  useful  mental  regimen  to  our  party 
that  their  tedious  and  monotonous  labours,  more  especially 
those  of  our  artists,  should  be  relieved  not  by  the  weekly 
holiday  of  Sunday  only,  but  also  as  often  as  there  are  oppor- 
tunities, by  cheerful  festiWties  and  agreeable  diversions.  Nor 


lo  LIFE  J-^  THE  CAMP. 

lias  the  slightest  discord  hitherto  disturbed  the  happj  dis- 
position and  the  good-humour  of  our  confederation,  which 
dailj  acquires  fresh  elasticity,  both  from  the  abundance  of 
new  impressions  that  we  receive,  and  from  the  mutual  re- 
ciprocation of  the  diflferent  natures  and  talents,  as  by  over- 
coming the  manifold  difficulties  and  hardships  of  this  Bedouin 
life  itself. 

Tou  may  judge  of  the  variety  of  the  elements  of  which 
our  assembled  party  is  composed,  by  the  Babel  of  languages 
in  which  we  continually  move ;  the  English  language  is  com- 
petently represented  by  our  companions.  Wild  and  Bonomi ; 
French  and  Itahan  serve  for  our  intercourse  with  the  au- 
thorities, with  strangers  and  Levantine  interpreters.  "We 
give  orders,  eat,  and  travel,  in  Arabic,  and  we  reflect,  talk, 
sing,  and  live,  in  good  G-erman.  But  during  the  day  we 
usually  all  live  separate,  and  uninterruptedly  each  at  his  own 
work.  We  take  our  coff'ee  before  sunrise,  and  our  dinner 
after  sunset ;  and  breakfast  during  work.  Thus  our  draughts- 
men have  already  been  enabled  to  supply  our  swelling  port- 
folios with  a  hundred  great  folio  sheets,  cleanly  executed, 
partly  in  pencil,  partly  in  colours. 


LETTER  y. 

The  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  llth  Jamiary,  1843. 

-  The  inscription  which  was  composed  in  celebration  of  the 

king's  birthday  has  now  become  a  stone  monumental  tablet, 

in  the  fashion  of  the  old  steles  and  Proskynemata,*  and  its 

contents  are  as  follows ;  the  nearer,  indeed,  it  approaches 

*  Proskynemata.  "  Sometimes  travellers  who  happened  to  pass  by  a 
temple  inscribed  a  votive  sentence  on  the  walls,  to  indicate  their  re- 
spect for  the  deity,  and  solicit  his  protection  during  their  journey,  the 
complete  formula  of  which  contained  the  adoration  (proskunema)  of  the 
writer,  with  the  assurance  that  he  had  been  mindful  of  his  wife,  his 
family,  and  friends;  and  the  reader  of  the  inscription  was  sometimes 
included  in  a  share  of  the  blessings  it  solicited.  The  date  of  the  king's 
reign,  and  the  day  of  the  month,  were  also  added,  with  the  profession 
and  parentage  of  the  writer." —  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egypt,  vol.  iii., 
p.  395.— Tr. 


TABLET  OS   PYRAMID  OF  CHEOPS.  57 

the  manner  of  the  Egyptians,  tlie  less  appropriate  is  it  in 
German : 

"  Thus  speak  the  servants  of  the  King,  whose  name  is  the 
SuK  AifD  EocK  or  Prussia,  Lepsius  the  scribe,  Erbkam  the 
architect,  the  Brothers  Weidenbach  the  painters,  Frey  the 
painter,  Franke  the  moulder,  Bonomi  the  sculptor,  "Wild  the 
architect :  All  hail  to  the  Eagle,  the  Peotector  of  the 
Cross,  to  the  King  the  Suis'  akd  Eock  of  Prussia,  to  the 
Son  of  the  Sun,*  who  freed  his  Eatherland,  Frederick  "Wil- 
liam the  Fourth,  the  Philopator,  the  Father  of  his  Country, 
the  Gracious  One,  the  Favourite  of  "Wisdom  and  History, 
the  Guardian  of  the  Ehine,  whom  Germany  has  chosen,  the 
Dispenser  of  Life.  May  the  Most  high  God  grant  the 
King,  and  his  Consort,  the  Queen  Elizabeth,  the  Eich  in 
Life,  the  Philometor,  the  Mother  of  her  Country,  the  Gra- 
cious One,  an  ever  new  and  long  Kfe  on  Earth,  and  a  blessed 
habitation  in  Heaven  through  all  Eternity.  In  the  year  of 
our  Saviour,  1842,  in  the  tenth  month,  on  the  fifteenth  day, 
on  the  forty-seventh  Birthday  of  his  Majesty,  on  the  Pyra- 
mid of  King  Cheops  ;  in  the  third  year,  in  the  fifth  month, 
on  the  ninth  day  of  the  reign  of  his  Majesty ;  in  the  year 
3164  from  the  commencement  of  the  Sothis  period  under  the 
King  Menepthes." 

"We  left  behind  us  the  hieroglyphic  inscription  engraved 
on  stone  and  painted  with  oil  colour,  occupying  a  space  five 
feet  broad  and  four  feet  high.  The  stone,  specially  polished 
and  prepared  for  the  purpose,  is  placed  at  a  considerable 
height  near  the  entrance  into  the  Pyramid  of  Cheops. 

It  seemed  to  me  fitting,  that  while  the  members  of  the  Prus- 
sian expedition  dedicated  this  tablet  to  the  much-honoured 
Prince  by  whom  they  were  sent  hither,  they  should  at  the 
same  time,  for  the  sake  of  future  travellers,  leave  behind 
them  some  traces  of  their  activity  on  this  field  of  Pyramids, 
where  it  was  reserved  for  them  to  gather  together  the  rich 

*  "  Every  Pharaoh  was  the  Sun  of  Egypt,  and  over  his  name  bore 
'  Son  of  the  Sun ;'  and  as  the  sun  was  Phra,  so  each  king  was  called 
Phra.  Each  monarch  by  law  inherited  his  father's  throne  in  lineal 
succession,  so  that  the  incumbent  was  Phra  son  of  Phra." — Gliddon's 
Ancient  Egypt,  p.  32. — Tk. 


58 


PTEAMIDS  OF  GIZEH. 


materials  for  tlie  first  chapter  of  the  Scientific  History  of 
Nations. 

Do  not,  however,  believe  that  these  are  the  important 
works  which  detain  us  here  so  long.  Our  journej  has  this 
advantage  over  previous  ones — that  spots  like  this  are  en- 
titled to  occupy  us  until  they  have  been  thoroughly  ran- 
sacked. "We  already  know  that  even  the  gigantic  and  mag- 
nificent ruins  of  the  Theban  plain  can  reveal  nothing  which 
can  equal  in  interest  the  Memphitic  times  of  the  Old  Mo- 
narchy. 

We  must,  indeed,  one  day  depart ;  but  it  will  even  then 
be  with  the  conviction  that  we  leave  an  infinite  amount  of 
interesting  materials  behind,  which  might  still  be  obtained. 
I  had  already  resolved  on  our  departure  several  days  ago, 
when  suddenly  a  series  of  tombs,  different  in  architecture, 
and  in  the  style  of  the  figures  and  hieroglyphics,  with  other 
titles,  and  besides,  as  was  to  be  expected,  -with  other  Tcinqs* 
names,  again  disclosed  a  new  epoch. 

It  is  still  by  no  means  conclusive  how  much  has  been 
gained  in  an  historical  point  of  view,  or,  at  any  rate,  it  is 
but  dimly  discerned.  I  was,  however,  in  the  right  when, 
even  in  Europe,  I  proposed  to  reconstruct  the  3rd  Dynasty 
from  the  monuments.  I  have  not  yet  found  a  single  Shield 
which  could  be  safely  placed  before  the  4th  Dynasty.  It 
appears  that  the  builders  of  the  great  Pyramids  desired  to 
assert  their  rights,  to  having  formed  the  commencement  of 
monumental  history,  although  it  is  as  clear  as  day  that  they 
were  not  the  first  to  build  and  to  inscribe  their  monuments. 
We  have  even  now  found  many  kings'  names  hitherto  un- 
known, and  variations  of  other  names  ;  thus  : 


KEKA. 


!<^ 


HEEAKir. 


USESKEF. 


ANA, 


PYEAMIDS  or  GIZEH.  59 

The  name  which  I  had  hitherto  read  Amchuea,  in  the 
detailed  and  painted  inscriptions,  which  throw  no  incon- 
siderable light  on  the  figurative  meaning  of  the  hieroglyphicai 
images,  exhibits  a  decidedly  different  sign  from  the  well- 
known  group  LJ  J^  *^  p  AMCHr,  namely  ^  about  the 
pronunciation  of  which  I  am  still  in  the  dark. 

There  is  nothing  to  alter  with  respect  to  the  assignment 
of  the  great  Pyramids.  It  cannot  be  doubted,  after  our  re- 
searches, that  the  second  Pyramid  really  belongs  to  Schafra 
(more  correctly  Chafra,  the  Chephyren  of  Herodotus),  as 
the  first  does  to  Chufu  (Cheops),  and  the  third  to  Menkera 
(Mykerinos,  Mencherinos).  I  think  I  have  now  discovered 
the  pathway  up  from  the  valley  to  the  second  Pyramid  ;  it 
led  directly  to  its  temple,  past  the  Sphinx,  but  it  was  pro- 
bably destroyed  at  an  early  period.  The  number  also  of 
the  PjTamids  continues  to  increase.  I  have  found  three, 
in  Abu  Eoasch,  in  place  of  one  hitherto  known,  and  two 
fields  of  tombs.  Two  Pyramids  once  stood  also  at  Zauiet 
EL  Areian,  a  village  which  has  now  almost  disappeared,  and 
there  is  a  great  field  of  ruins  adjoining  to  it.  The  careful 
researches,  measurements,  and  notes  of  Perring,  in  his  beau- 
tiful work  on  the  Pyramids,  save  us  much  time  and  trouble. 
We  are  thus  the  more  able  to  direct  our  attention  to  the 
private  tombs,  and  their  hieroglyphicai  representations,  such 
as  are  wholly  wanting  in  the  Pyramids.  But  nothing  is 
yet  determined,  nothing  is  ripe  for  definitive  arrangement, 
though  wide  prospects  open  before  us.  Our  portfolios  swell ; 
many  things  have  been  cast  in  plaster,  and  among  them  the 
great  stele  between  the  paws  of  the  colossal  Sphinx  from  the 
first  year  of  Tuthmosis  lY. 

LETTEE  VI. 

TTie  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  \1th  January,  1843. 
I  HAVE  ordered  ten  camels  to  be  here  to-morrow  evening, 
that  we  may  start  for  Cairo  the  day  after  to-morrow,  before 
sunrise,  with  the  original  monuments  and  plaster  casts,  of 


60  PYRAMIDS  OF  CflZEH. 

wliicli  we  have  already  collected  a  considerable  number,  and 
we  shall  deposit  them  there,  till  our  return  from  the  South, 
This  will  be  the  commencement  of  our  departure  for  Saqara. 
A  series  of  tombs,  only  recently  discovered,  belonging  to 
the  Dynasties  which  immediately  succeed  that  of  Cheops, 
has  already  delayed  our  departure  once.  The  5th  Dynasty, 
which  in  Africanus  appears  as  the  Elephantine  Collateral 
Dynasty,  and  as  such  was  not  to  be  expected  here,  now  lies 
complete  before  us,  and  in  substance  such  as  I  already  had 
constructed  it  in  Europe.  The  gaps  have  been  filled  up  with 
three  kings,  whose  names  were  hitherto  unknown.  At  the 
same  time,  several  kings,  who  had  hitherto  been  merely 
visionary,  were  added  to  the  7th  and  8th  Dynasties,  from 
which  we  had  hitherto  obtained  no  monumental  names. 
The  reference  to  the  5th  Dynasty  as  the  immediate  successor 
of  the  4th,  is  of  invaluable  importance,  and  would  in  itself 
alone  richly  repay  us  for  our  residence  of  many  months  in 
this  place.  We  are  still  always  occupied  with  buildings, 
sculptures,  and  inscriptions,  which  by  the  Eoyal  Eings  being 
more  exactly  defined,  will  be  placed  in  a  flourishing  epoch 
of  civilisation,  between  three  and  four  tliousand  years  before 
Christ.  These  numbers,  hitherto  so  incredible,  cannot  be  too 
frequently  called  to  the  remembrance  of  ourselves  and  others ; 
the  more  criticism  is  thereby  challenged,  and  compelled  to 
make  earnest  researches  on  the  subject,  so  much  the  better 
for  the  cause.  Conviction  will  immediately  follow  in  the 
steps  of  stimulated  criticism,  and  we  shall  then  at  length 
approach  the  results  which  are  connected  with  it  in  all 
branches  of  antiquarian  research. 

A  roll  of  papers  will  be  sent  to  you  along  with  this  letter, 
which  contains  several  drawings,  that  we  have  taken  from 
the  sepulchral  chambers  in  this  place.  They  are  excellent 
samples  of  the  oldest  Architecture,  Sculpture,  and  Painting 
which  the  history  of  art  can  produce,  and  the  most  beautiful 
and  best  preserved  that  we  have  found  on  the  whole  field  of 
tombs.  I  hope  that  we  shall  one  day  see  these  sepulchral 
chambers  arranged  in  perfect  order  in  the  New  Museum  in 


TOMB  OF  PlilNCE  MEEHET,  61 

Berlin.  That  indeed  would  be  the  fairest  trophj  that  we 
could  carry  out  of  Egypt.  Their  transport  will  certainly  be 
attended  with  some  difficulties,  for  you  will  easily  see  by 
their  dimensions  that  ordinary  means  would  not  in  this  case 
be  sufficient.  I  have,  therefore,  as  a  preliminary  step,  written 
a  letter  direct  to  his  Majesty  the  King,  and  inquired  whether 
it  would  not  be  possible  to  send  a  vessel  here  expressly  for 
this  purpose,  either  next  year,  or  at  the  conclusion  of  our  ex- 
pedition, with  workmen  and  implements,  to  take  these  mo- 
numents to  pieces  in  a  inore  skilful  manner  than  we  are 
capable  of  doing,  and  to  bring  them,  with  the  other  collec- 
tions, to  Berlin. 

Six  of  the  subjoined  sheets  contain  drawings  of  a  sepul- 
chral chamber,  which  I  myself  discovered  beneath  the  sand, 
and  whose  colours  are  preserved  almost  as  fresh  and  perfect 
as  you  see  them  in  the  drawing.*  It  belongs  to  a  Prince 
Merhet,  and  as  he  was  a  priest  of  Chuff  (Cheops),  and  as 
he  had  called  one  of  his  sons  Chuff-mer-nuteeu,  and  pos- 
sessed eight  \^llages,  the  names  of  which  are  combined  with 
that  of  Chufu,  and  as  the  situation  of  the  tomb  is  on  the 
western  side  of  the  Pyramid  of  Chufu,  and  the  style  of  the 
representations  are  in  perfect  keeping  with  it,  it  is  more 
than  probable  that  Merhet  was  a  son  of  Chufu,  from  which 
circumstance  all  the  representations  become  still  more  in- 
teresting. This  prince  was  at  the  same  time  superintendent 
of  all  the  royal  buildings,  therefore  he  filled  the  office  of 
"  Chief  of  the  Board  of  Works"  (Oberhofbaui-ath),  a  high 
and  important  position  at  that  period  of  most  magnificent 
buildings,  which  we  have  frequently  seen  occupied  by  princes 
and  royal  relatives.  "We  may  therefore  conjecture,  that  he 
also  himself  superintended  the  building  of  the  largest  Pyra- 

*  The  colours  have  now,  alas!  almost  entirely  disappeared.  Owing 
to  the  unequal  grain  of  the  stone  all  the  representations  were  pre- 
pared with  a  thin  layer  of  lime  for  the  groundwork,  before  they  were 
painted;  this  lime  has  peeled  off  in  the  transport  and  by  the  action  of 
the  damp  sea  air,  so  that  the  rough  sculpture  alone  remains.  In  the 
Work  on  the  Monuments  of  the  Prussian  Expedition  (Div.  II.,  sheet 
19 — 22),  the  colours  have  been  given  faithfully,  as  they  were  preserved 
in  their  original  freshness  when  covered  by  the  sand. 


62  TOMB  or  PEINCE  ilERHET. 

mid.  Is  not  this  aloue  sufficient  to  justify  tlie  attempt  to 
transfer  the  beautifully-constructed  sepulchral  chamber  of 
this  princely  architect  to  Berlin,  which  otherwise  will,  sooner 
or  later,  be  destroyed  by  the  Arabs,  and  be  used  to  build 
their  ovens,  or  be  burnt  in  their  lime-kilns  ?  There,  it 
would  at  least  be  preserved,  and  be  accessible  to  the  ad- 
miration or  the  study  of  those  who  are  eager  after  know- 
ledge, so  long  as  European  art  and  science  teach  us  to  value 
such  monuments.  To  reconstruct  it,  a  space  must  be  left 
perfectly  free  of  6  m.  30,  (19  feet  8  inches)  in  breadth,  4  m. 
60,  (15  feet)  in  height,  and  3  m.  80,  (12  feet  5J  inches)  in 
depth,  and  this  might  siu'ely  be  reserved  for  it  in  the  Kew 
Museum.* 

I  observe,  that  such  chambers  form  only  a  small  portion 
of  the  entire  structure  of  the  tomb,  and  were  not  intended 
for  the  reception  of  the  mummy.  The  tomb  of  Prince 
Merhet  is  above  70  feet  long,  45  broad,  and  15  high.  It  is 
solidly  constructed  of  great  square  stones,  with  slanting 
outer  surfaces.  The  chamber  is  alone  left  vacant,  and  one, 
or,  as  in  this  instance,  two  square  shafts,  leads  from  the  flat 
roof  through  the  building  down  to  the  living  rock ;  at  the 
bottom  of  which,  about  60  feet  deep,  rock-chambers  open  at 
the  side,  in  wliich  the  sarcophagi  were  deposited.  I  have 
carefully  preserved  the  venerable  remains  of  the  skull  of  the 
ancient  prince  of  the  house  of  Cheops,  which  I  found  in  his 
mummy  chamber.  We  found,  alas !  little  more,  as  this  tomb 
also,  like  most  of  the  others,  had  been  long  ago  broken  open. 
The  entrance  originally  was  closed  by  a  slab  of  stone.  The 
chamber  above  ground  alone  remained  accessible  at  all  times, 
and  was  therefore  ornamented  with  representations  and  in- 
scriptions. Here  the  sacrifices  ofiered  to  the  dead  were 
brought  to  the  occupant  of  the  tomb.  It  was  generally  dedi- 
cated to  the  worship  of  the  deceased,  and  so  far  corresponded 
to  the  temple  that  was  erected  before  every  pyramid  belong- 

*  After  our  return  from  the  south,  two  entire  sepulchral  chambers, 
besides  the  one  here  mentioned,  -were  taken  to  pieces  and  brought  to 
Europe.  All  three  are  now  reconstructed,  with  the  other  monuments, 
in  the  New  Museum  at  Berlin.    See  Letter  XXXV. 


TOMB  OF  PEINCE  MEEHET.  63 

ing  to  a  king,  for  his  worship.  Like  those  temples,  these 
chambers  have  also  their  entrance  always  from  the  east.  The 
shafts,  like  thiS  Pyramids,  lie  behind,  to  the  west,  because 
the  deceased  was  believed  to  be  in  the  west,  whither  he  had 
gone  with  the  setting  sun,  to  the  Osiris  of  Amente. 

The  seventh  sheet  finally,  contains  two  pillars,  and  their 
architrave,  from  the  tomb  of  a  royal  relative,  who  was  at  the 
same  time  the  prophet  of  four  kings,  and  whose  name  was 
Ptah-nefru-be-u.  The  tomb  was  constructed  later  than  that 
of  Prince  Merhet,  in  the  fifth  Manethonic  D}'nasty.  It 
belongs  to  an  entire  group  of  tombs,  whose  architectonic 
plan  and  connection  with  one  another  is  very  remarkable, 
and  which  I  have,  therefore,  completely  divested  of  sand,  and 
brought  to  the  light  of  day,  while  previously  neither  the  en- 
trance, nor  anything  but  the  extreme  summit  of  the  outer- 
most encircling  walls,  were  visible. 

I  also  send  you  the  whole  plan  of  this  tomb,  besides  one 
of  those  contiguous  to  it,  but  I  think  I  shall  only  bring 
away  with  me  the  architrave,  and  the  beautifully  painted 
pillars  of  the  most  southern  chamber,  which  can  be  easily 
removed.  On  the  architrave  appears  the  name  and  titles 
of  the  deceased,  who  is  also  represented  at  full  length  on 
the  four  lateral  faces  of  the  pillars.  Ami,  the  father  of  the 
deceased,  appears  on  the  front  sides  of  the  northern  pillars ; 
AsESKEF-AifCH,  his  grandfather,  on  that  of  the  southern. 
The  pillars  are  twelve  feet  high,  slender,  and  as  usual, 
without  capitals,  but  with  the  abacus. 

I  have  entirely  isolated  the  whole  chamber  at  the  tomb 
of  Prince  Merhet ;  but  for  the  present  I  have  relinquished 
the  idea  of  taking  it  to  pieces,  as  this  is  not  the  most 
favourable  season  for  its  removal.  I  have  therefore  caused 
this  tomb,  as  well  as  the  other,  to  be  refilled  with  sand ;  and 
when  I  arrive  at  Cairo  to-morrow,  I  shall  obtain  an  order, 
to  prevent  any  of  the  tombs  that  have  been  opened  by  us, 
from  being  robbed  of  their  stones.  It  is  really  revolting  to 
see  how  long  lines  of  camels  from  the  neighbouring  villages 
come  here  daily,  and  march  off  again,  loaded  with  building 


64  PYRAMID  OF  MEIDUM. 

stones.  Fortunately — for  is  not  everything  for  tlie  best — the 
accommodating  Pellahs  are  more  attracted  by  the  Psam- 
metic  tombs,  than  by  those  belonging  to  the  most  ancient 
Dynasties,  in  which  the  great  blocks  are  not  sufficiently 
manageable.  I  begin,  however,  to  have  more  serious  fears 
for  the  tombs  of  the  5th  and  7th  Dynasties,  which  have 
been  built  with  stones  of  a  more  moderate  size.  Yes- 
terday a  beautiful  standing  pillar,  covered  with  inscriptions, 
which  was  just  going  to  be  sketched,  was  overturned  by  the 
robbers  behind  our  backs.  They  do  not  seem  to  have  suc- 
ceeded in  breaking  it  to  pieces.  The  people  here  are  so 
degenerate  that  their  strength  is  quite  insufficient,  with  all 
their  assiduity,  to  destroy  what  their  great  predecessors  have 
erected. 

A  few  days  ago,  we  found  a  small  obelisk  erect,  in  its 
original  position,  in  a  tomb  from  the  commencement  of  the 
7th  Dynasty.  It  is  only  a  few  feet  high,  but  in  good  pre- 
servation, and  with  the  name  of  the  occupant  of  the  tomb 
inscribed  upon  it.  This  form  of  monument,  which  is  first 
conspicuous  in  the  K'ew  Monarchy,  is  thus  removed  several 
Dynasties  farther  back  in  the  Old  Monarchy,  even  than  the 
Obelisk  of  Heliopolis. 

LETTEE  YII. 

Saqara,  the  ISth  March,  1843. 
A  SHOET  time  ago,  I  made  an  excursion  with  Abeken  and 
Bonomi  to  the  more  distant  Pyramids  of  Lischt  and 
Meidum.  The  last  especially  interested  me  extremely,  as  it 
has  solved  in  a  general  manner  some  enigmas  in  the  struc- 
ture of  the  Pyramids,  which  had  long  occupied  my  mind.* 
As  an  exception  to  the  general  rule,  it  lies  almost  in  the 
lower  plain,  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Bahr  Jussuf, 

*  A  separate  essay,  Ueber  den  Bau  der  Pyramiden,  was  sent  by 
me  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  in  1843,  and  it  was  printed  in 
consequence  of  a  resolution  of  the  3rd  of  August  of  that  year.  See  the 
Monthly  Report  (Monat's  Bericht)  of  the  Academy-,  1843,  p.  177—203, 
with  three  Plates. 


STEUCTUEE  OF  THE  PTEAMIDS.  65 

and  is  only  just  removed  out  of  reacli  of  the  inundation ; 
but  it  rises  up  so  high  and  stately  from  the  flat  surface  of 
the  surrounding  country,  that  it  attracts  notice  even  from  a 
great  distance.  Its  square,  sharp-angled  tower-like  centre, 
which  diminishes  slightly  at  the  summit,  namely,  at  an 
angle  of  74°,  rises  from  an  envelopment  of  rubbish,  which 
surrounds  it  almost  half-way  up,  to  the  height  of  120  feet. 
Another  hundred  feet  higher,  there  succeeds  a  platform, 
from  which  rises  a  more  slender  tower  of  moderate  height, 
in  the  same  angle,  which  again,  in  the  centre  of  its  flat 
upper  surface,  bears  the  remains  of  a  third  elevation.  The 
walls  of  the  principal  tower  are  for  the  most  part  smoothl}'- 
polished,  but  have  stripes  at  intervals  that  have  been  left 
rough,  the  cause  of  which  afc  first  appeared  almost  inex- 
plicable ;  but  on  more  minute  examination,  I  also  found  in 
the  interior  of  the  half-destroyed  building  which  surrounds 
the  base,  some  rising  walls  that  were  smooth,  and  having  the 
same  angle  as  the  tower ;  in  front  of  these,  again  lay  other 
walls,  which  followed  one  upon  another  like  scales.  At 
length  it  occurred  to  me  that  the  whole  building  had  pro- 
ceeded from  a  small  Pyramid,  which  had  been  erected  in 
stages  of  about  forty  feet  high,  and  then  first  increased  and 
heightened  simultaneously  on  all  sides,  by  superimposed 
coverings  of  stone,  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet  in  breadth,  till 
at  length  the  great  steps  were  filled  up  so  as  to  form  one  com- 
mon flat  side,  giving  the  usual  pyramidal  form  to  the  whole. 
This  gradual  growth  explains  the  enormous  magnitude  of 
particular  Pyramids,  beside  so  many  other  smaller  ones. 
Each  king  began  the  building  of  his  Pyramid  as  soon  as  he 
ascended  the  throne ;  he  only  designed  a  small  one,  to  ensure 
himself  a  complete  tomb,  even  were  he  destined  to  be  but  a 
few  years  upon  the  throne.  Put  with  the  advancing  years 
of  his  reign,  he  increased  it  by  successive  layers,  till  he 
thought  that  he  was  near  the  termination  of  his  life.  If  he 
died  during  the  erection,  then  the  external  covering  was 
alone  completed,  and  the  monument  of  death  finally  re- 
mained proportionate  to  the  duration  of  the  life  of  the  king. 


66  THE  SPHINX. 

It',  in  tlie  course  of  centuries,  all  the  other  conditions  which 
determine  our  calculations  had  equally  remained,  then,  as 
bv  the  rings  of  a  tree,  we  might  even  now  have  been  able  to 
calculate  the  years  in  the  reigns  of  particular  kings,  by  the 
coatings  of  the  Pyramids. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  great  enigma  of  the  bearded  giant 
Sphinx  still  remains  unsolved !  When,  and  by  whom,  was 
the  colossal  statue  erected,  and  what  was  its  significa- 
tion ?  "We  must  leave  the  reply  to  more  fortunate  succes- 
sors. It  is  almost  half-covered  up  with  sand,  and  the  granite 
stele,  above  eleven  feet  high,  which  stands  between  the  paws, 
and  which  in  itself  forms  the  back  wall  of  a  small  temple, 
which  is  here  inserted,  was  totally  invisible.  Even  the  im- 
mense excavations  made  by  Caviglia,  in  the  year  1818,  had 
long  disappeared,  so  as  not  to  leave  a  trace  behind.  By  means 
of  between  sixty  to  eighty  persons  labouring  for  whole  days 
together,  we  almost  reached  the  base  of  the  stele,  a  drawing  of 
which  I  caused  immediately  to  be  made,  as  well  as  an  impres- 
sion on  paper,  and  also  a  plaster  cast,  in  order  to  set  it  up  one 
day  in  Berlin.  Tliis  stele,  on  which  the  Sphinx  is  itself  repre- 
sented, was  erected  by  Tuthmosis  IY .,  and  dates  from  the  first 
year  of  his  reign.  Thus,  he  must  have  found  the  Colossus 
already  there.  We  are  accustomed  to  regard  the  Sphinx,  in 
Egypt,  as  a  portrait  of  the  king,  and  generally  indeed,  for  that 
of  a  particular  king,  whose  features  it  is  said  to  represent ; 
therefore,  with  the  single  exception,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  of 
one  female  sphinx,  which  represents  the  wife  of  King  Horus, 
they  are  always  andro-sphinxes.  In  the  hieroglyphic  written 
character,  the  Sphinx  is  called  Neb  (the  Lord),  and  forms 
e.  g.  the  middle  syllable  in  the  name  of  the  King  JSTecta- 

NEBUS. 

But  what  king  does  our  Colossus  represent  ?  He  stands 
in  front  of  the  second  PjTamid,  that  of  Schafra  (Chephren), 
not  exactly  in  the  axis,  yet  parallel  with  the  sides  of  the  tem- 
ple, which  stands  before  it,  and  in  such  a  manner,  as  if  the  rock 
beside  the  Sphinx  on  the  northern  side  was  intended  as  its 
counterpart.     Sphinxes,  rams,  statues,  and  obelisks,  used  be- 


THE  SPHi:SX.  67 

sides  always  to  stand  in  former  times  in  pairs  before  the  en- 
trances of  the  temples.  But  what  a  powerful  impression 
would  have  been  made  on  the  approaching  worshipper  by 
two  such  giant  watchmen,  between  which  the  ancient  path- 
way led  up  to  the  Temple  of  Chephren.  They  would  have 
been  worthy  of  that  period  of  vast  colossal  monuments,  and 
in  due  proportion  with  the  Pyramid  which  rises  up  behind. 
I  cannot  deny  that  this  connexion  would  be  most  satisfactory 
to  me.  What  other  motive  would  have  induced  the  Theban 
kings  of  the  ISth  Dynasty,  who  are  alone  to  be  thought 
of  in  the  New  Monarchy,  to  adorn  the  Memphitic  Field  of 
Death  with  such  a  wonder  of  the  world,  if  entirely  uncon- 
nected with  what  surrounds  it.  In  addition  to  this,  upon 
the  steles  of  Tuthmosis,  the  name  of  King  Chepheen  is 
inscribed  in  a  line,  which  farther  on  is  almost  entirely  broken 
away ;  a  portion  of  his  Name-Shield,  unfortunately  quite 
isolated,  has  been  still  preserved,  therefore  undoubtedly  it 
had  some  sort  of  reference  to  the  builder  of  the  Pyramid 
which  is  situated  behind  it. 

On  the  other  hand,  indeed,  the  question  arises  :  If  King 
Chephren  was  represented  here,  why  does  not  the  image  bear 
his  name  ?  It  is  rather  designated  as  Haeem-chti  (Horus 
in  the  Horizon),  that  is,  as  the  image  of  the  Sun-god,  the 
emblem  of  all  kings,  and  also  Haemachis  in  one  of  the 
Greek  inscriptions  which  have  been  found  in  front  of  the 
Sphinx.  It  does  not  appear  to  me  altogether  improbable 
that  Pliny's  fable  is  founded  on  this,  who  makes  a  King 
Amasis  (Armasis)  be  buried  in  the  Sphinx  ;*  for  we  surely 
cannot  suppose  it  was  a  real  sepulchre.  Another  considera- 
tion to  be  borne  in  mind  is  that  I  have  not  in  general  met 
with  the  image  of  the  Sphinx  in  that  oldest  period  of  the 
builders  of  the  Pyramids  ;  yet  too  much  stress  need  not  be 
laid  on  this ;  the  form  of  the  Sphinx  is  not  often  found,  even 
in  inscriptions  or  representations,  in  the  New  Monarchy.  In 
short,  the  true  CEdipus  is  still  wanting  for  this  king  of  all 

*  I  liave  spoken  more  at  length  on  this  in  my  Chronology  of  the 
Egyptians,  vol.  i.,  p.  294. 

e2 


68  SWAEil  OF  LOCUSTS. 

spbinxes.  He  who  can  clear  away  the  inexhaustible  sand- 
flood  which  is  again  burying  that  very  field  of  tombs,  and  who 
can  expose  to  view  the  base  of  the  Sphinx,  the  ancient  path- 
way to  the  temple,  and  the  surrounding  hills,  might  soon 
venture  to  decide  this  question. 

The  enigmas  of  history  are  in  this  land  associated  with 
many  enigmas  and  wonders  in  nature,  which  I  must  not 
leave  wholly  unnoticed.  I  must  at  least  describe  to  you  the 
most  recent. 

I  had  descended  into  a  mummy-pit  with  Abeken,  that 
we  might  open  some  sarcophagi  we  had  discovered,  and  I  was 
not  a  little  astonished,  on  stepping  out,  to  fijid  myself  in  an 
actual  snow-storm  of  locusts,  which  almost  darkening  the 
sky,  moved  above  our  heads  in  hundreds  of  thousands  from 
the  desert  in  the  south-west  towards  the  valley.  I  fancied 
it  was  a  single  flight,  and  in  haste  called  the  others  out  of 
the  tombs,  that  they  might  witness  the  Egyptian  wonder 
before  it  had  passed  away.  But  the  flight  continued,  in- 
deed the  workmen  said,  it  had  even  begun  an  hour  previously. 
We  now  observed  for  the  first  time,  that  the  whole  country, 
far  and  wide,  was  covered  with  locusts.  I  sent  a  servant 
into  the  desert  to  find  out  the  breadth  of  the  flight.  He 
ran  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  then  returned,  and  said 
that  still  as  far  as  he  had  been  able  to  see,  he  could  discover 
no  termination.  I  rode  home,  still  in  the  midst  of  the 
storm  of  locusts.  They  fell  down  in  heaps  on  the  border  of 
the  fruitful  plain ;  and  so  it  lasted  the  whole  day  through, 
till  evening,  and  so  on  the  next,  from  morning  till  night, 
to  the  third,  indeed  to  the  sixth  day,  and  even  longer,  but 
in  less  numerous  flights.  The  day  before  yesterday,  a  storm 
of  rain  seems  for  the  first  time  to  have  beaten  down  the 
rear-guard,  and  destroyed  them  in  the  desert.  The  Arabs 
make  great  smoking  fires  in  their  fields,  they  rattle  and 
scream  all  day  long  to  protect  their  crops  from  the  unex- 
pected invasion.  But  it  will  avail  them  little.  These  mil- 
lions of  graminivorous  winged  insects  cover  even  the  ad- 
jacent sandy  plain  like  a  new  living  vegetation,  to  such  a 


STTAEM  or  LOCUSTS.  69 

degree,  that  scarcely  anything  is  to  be  seen  of  tlie  ground  ; 
and  when  they  swarm  up  from  any  point,  they  fall  down 
again  on  whatever  is  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood ;  ex- 
hausted by  their  long  journey,  in  their  eagerness  they  fill 
their  hollow  stomachs,  and,  as  if  conscious  of  their  enormous 
numbers,  they  appear  to  have  lost  even  all  fear  of  their 
natural  enemies,  man,  animals,  smoke,  and  noise.  But  what 
is  most  wonderful  to  me,  is  their  origin  from  the  naked 
desert,  and  the  instinct  which  has  led  them  from  some  oasis 
across  the  inhospitable  sandy  sea,  to  the  rich  pastures  of  the 
Nile  valley.  The  last  time  that  this  land-plague  of  Egypt 
exhibited  itself  to  a  similar  extent  was  above  fourteen  years 
ago.  The  people  say  that  it  is  sent  by  the  comet  which  we 
have  observed  in  the  south-west  for  the  last  twelve  days,  and 
which  now,  in  the  hours  of  evening,  since  it  is  no  longer 
outshone  by  the  moon,  again  stretches  its  magnificent  tail 
of  fire  across  the  heavens.  The  zodiacal  light,  which  is  so 
rarely  seen  in  the  north,  has  also  been  visible  of  late  almost 
every  evening. 

I  have  only  now  been  enabled  completely  to  conclude  my 
account  with  Gizeh,  and  to  combine  the  historical  results. 
I  have  every  reason  to  rejoice  over  it;  the  4th  and  5th 
Dynasties  are  completed,  with  the  exception  of  one  king.  I 
have  just  received  the  somewhat  illegible  drawing  of  a  stone 
which  has  been  bmlt  into  a  wall  in  the  village  of  Abusir, 
representing  a  series  of  kings  of  the  4th  and  5th  Dynas- 
ties upon  their  thrones,  and,  as  it  appears,  in  chronological 
order.     I  intend  to  ride  there  myself  to  see  the  original. 


LETTEE  VIII. 

Saqdra,  the  \Sth  April,  1843. 

I  HASTEN  to  communicate  to  you  an  event  which  I  should 
not  like  you  to  hear  for  the  first  time  from  other  quarters, 
perhaps  with  alterations  and  exaggerations.  Our  camp,  a  few 
days  ago,  was  attacked  and  plundered  during  tlie  night  by 


70  FESTIVAL  IIS"  CATEO. 

an  armed  "band ;  yet  none  of  our  party  were  seriously  in- 
jured, and  nothing  that  is  irreparable  was  lost.  The  affair 
therefore,  is  over,  and  the  consequences  may  only  prove  a 
useful  lesson  to  us.  But  I  must  first  go  back  several  days 
in  my  journal. 

On  the  3rd  of  April,  his  R.H.  Prince  Albert  (of  Prussia) 
returned  to  Cairo  from  Upper  Egypt.  The  following  day  I 
visited  the  city,  and  laid  before  the  prince  a  portion  of  our 
labours,  in  which  he  especially  took  a  lively  interest  as  he  had 
abeady  seen  more  of  this  land  of  wonders  than  we  ourselves, 
and  the  field  of  Pyramids  alone  he  had  still  left  unvisited. 
On  his  first  arrival  in  Cairo,  I  was  absent  on  an  excursion  of 
several  days  to  the  Taium,  with  Abeken  and  Bonomi.  The 
prince  returned  at  the  very  time  of  the  celebration  of  some 
of  the  chief  festivals  of  the  Mahometans,  which,  had  he 
not  been  there,  I  should  probably  have  neglected  to  attend. 
On  the  6th,  the  entrance  of  the  returning  caravan  of  pilgrims 
from  Mecca  was  welcomed  by  a  solemn  festival,  and,  some 
days  later,  the  birthday  of  the  Prophet,  "Mulid  e'  ]N"ebbi," 
was  celebrated,  one  of  the  most  original  feasts  of  the  entire 
East.  The  principal  actors  in  it  are  dervishes,  who  spend 
the  day  in  processions,  and  perform  their  horribly  extatic 
dances,  called  sikrs,  in  the  evening,  in  tents  illuminated 
by  coloured  lamps,  which  are  erected  in  the  avenues  of  the 
Ezbekieh.  Between  thirty  and  forty  of  this  religious  sect 
place  themselves  in  a  circle,  and,  keeping  time,  begin  first 
slowly,  then  gradually  more  vehemently,  to  throw  the  upper 
part  of  their  bodies,  which  are  naked,  backwards  and  forwards 
into  the  most  violent  distortions,  like  people  who  are  pos- 
sessed. At  the  same  time,  they  ejaculate  in  a  rhythm,  with 
a  loud  screaming  voice,  their  Prophet's  sajnug.  La  ilaha 
ill'  Allah  ("There  is  no  Ood  but  Allah"),  which,  gra- 
dually stammered  out  lower  and  more  feebly,  is  finally  almost 
rattled  in  the  throat,  till  at  length,  their  strength  being  en- 
tirely exhausted,  some  fall  down,  others  withdraw  reeling,  and 
the  broken  circle  is,  after  a  short  pause,  replaced  by  another. 
What  a  fearful,  barbarous  worship,  which  the  astonished 


DOSEH,  THE  THAlirLI>'Q.  71 

multitude,  great  and  small,  people  of  condition  and  those 
of  inferior  rank,  contemplate  with  seriousness  or  in  stupid 
veneration,  and  in  which  they  themselves  not  unfrequently 
take  an  active  part.  The  god  who  is  appealed  to  is  evi- 
dently much  leas  the  object  of  adoration  than  the  appeal- 
ing, raptured  saints  themselves  ;  for  the  crazy  and  the 
simple,  or  men  and  women  who  are  physically  disordered  in 
other  ways,  are  very  generally  held  sacred  by  the  Mahome- 
tans, and  are  treated  with  great  reverence.  It  i^  the  de- 
moniacal force  in  nature,  acting  without  being  comprehended, 
and  therefore  regarded  with  fear,  which  is  worsliipped  by  the 
natural  man  wherever  he  perceives  it,  because  he  feels  that 
it  is  connected  with,  yet  not  under  the  control  of  his  mental 
faculties  ;  first,  in  the  mighty  elements,  then  in  the  wonder- 
ful instincts  of  animals — to  us  dark,  yet  subject  to  a  law  ; 
finally,  in  the  still  more  exciting,  extatic,  or  generally  ab- 
normal psychological  conditions  of  his  own  race.  We  must 
indeed,  regai'd  the  Egyptian  worship  of  animals — in  as  far  as 
it  was  not  merely  a  symbolic  embodiment  of  deeper  and 
more  refined  ideas — as  resting  on  the  same  basis  of  a  uni- 
versal worship  of  nature ;  and  the  adoration  paid  to  men  with 
disordered  intellects,  which  appears  occasionally  in  other 
nations  also,  may  be  considered  as  a  remarkable  ofiset  from 
that  tendency.  Whether  such  conditions  really  exist  at  the 
present  time,  or  whether,  as  among  the  dervishes,  it  is  pro- 
duced artificially,  and  is  intentionally  cherished,  will  not  be 
detected  by  the  multitude ;  and  besides,  for  the  individual 
case,  it  is  indiflerent.  An  uncomfortable  feeling  of  fear 
creeps  over  us  in  such  a  neighbourhood,  and  we  feel  it 
necessary  to  avoid  uttering  any  expressions,  or  even  to  give 
a  sign  of  disgust,  or  to  betray  that  we  see  through  it,  lest 
we  should  direct  the  brutal  outbursts  on  ourselves. 

The  festival,  which  lasts  nine  days,  closes  with  a  pecuHar 
ceremony  called  Doseh,  the  Trampling,  but  which  I  could 
not  bear  to  look  at.  The  sheikh  of  the  Saadieh  dervishes 
rides  to  the  chief  sheikh  of  all  the  dervishes  in  Egypt, 
El  Bekri.     On  the  way  thither,  a  great  number  of  these 


72  YISIT  TO  PTEAMIDS  A>T)  SAQAEA. 

holy  people,  and  others  who  do  not  consider  themselves  in- 
ferior to  them  in  piety,  throw  themselves  flat  on  the  ground, 
face  downwards,  and  in  such  a  manner  that  the  feet  of  one 
always  lies  close  to  the  head  of  another.  The  sheikh 
then  rides  over  this  living  carpet  of  human  bodies,  and  his 
horse  is  obliged  to  be  led  on  each  side  by  a  servant,  to  com- 
pel it  to  make  this  march,  unnatural  even  to  the  animal. 
Each  body  receives  two  treads  from  the  horse  ;  the  greater 
number  spring  up  again  unhurt,  but  whoever  comes  away 
seriously,  or,  as  sometimes  occurs,  mortally  injured,  has,  be- 
sides, this  disgrace,  that  it  is  believed  that  on  the  previous 
day  he  had  either  misunderstood  or  neglected  to  say  the 
proper  prayers  and  charm-formularies,  which  were  alone  able 
to  protect  him. 

On  the  7th  April,  Erbkam  and  I  accompanied  the  prince 
to  the  Pyramids,  first  of  all  to  those  of  Gizeh.  The  Pyramid 
of  Cheops  was  ascended,  and  the  interior  was  visited.  In 
order  to  exhibit  the  beautiful  tomb  of  Prince  Merhet,  I 
caused  it  to  be  re-opened.  We  next  proceeded  to  our  camp 
at  Saqara. 

Here  we  heard  that  during  tlie  previous  night  a  daring 
robbery  had  been  committed  in  Abeken's  tent.  He  was 
sleeping  in  it,  on  his  return  from  Cairo,  beside  a  burning 
light,  when  his  full  portmanteau,  pistols,  and  other  objects 
lying  near,  were  purloined.  It  was  only  whde  the  thief  was 
making  his  retreat  that  a  noise  was  heard  by  the  slumbering 
guards,  composing  the  night-watch,  immediately  behind  the 
tent ;  the  darkness,  however,  hindered  all  pursuit. 

After  the  prince  had  also  seen  the  most  beautiful  tomb  of 
Saqara,  we  rode  across  the  plain  to  Mitrahinneh,  to  \'isit  the 
pounds  of  ruins  at  Memphis,  and  the  half-buried  colossal  gra- 
nite statue  of  Eamses  INIiamun  (Sesostris)*,  the  face  of  which 
is  still  preserved  almost  without  a  blemish.  It  was  late 
in  the    evening   before  we    again  reached  Cairo,    after   a 

♦  We  have  been  told  on  good  authority  that  this  statue  is  not  com- 
posed of  granite,  but  of  limestone  from  the  neishbouring  hills. — Tb. 


TUE  POINTED  ARCH.  73 

day 'a  journey  ol'  sixteen  hours,  hardly  interrupted  even  by 
short  pauses  for  repose ;  but  the  unusual  exertion  seemed 
rather  to  heiijhten  than  to  depress  the  priuee's  cheerful 
cnjoyim-nt  in  irivilliug. 

i '  .  ly  we  visited  the  mosques  of  the  city,  which 

are  :       .  ,  irtly  by  their  splendour,  and  in  part,  also, 

are  peculiarly  interesting  for  the  history  of  architecture  in 
the  middle  ages,  as  the  earliest  general  application  of  the 
pointed  an'h  is  here  visible.  The  questions  which  relate  to 
this  most  characteristic  department  of  architecture,  the  so- 
called  gothic  style,  interested  me  so  deeply  a  few  years 
ago,  that  even  liere  I  could  not  forbear  following  my  old 
pursuit.  Tlic  pointed  arch  is  found  in  the  oldest  mosques, 
even  as  far  back  as  the  ninth  century.  Upon  the  conquest 
of  Sicily  by  the  Arabs,  the  new  form  of  arch  was  transported 
to  that  island,  where,  in  the  eleventh  century,  it  was  found 
by  the  Normans,  the  next  conquerors,  and  was  still  more  ge- 
nerally adopted,  Without  entering  into  furtiier  details,  it 
seems  to  me  scarcely  possible  to  indicate  any  historical  con- 
nexion of  the  Norman  pointed  arch  of  Palermo  with  our 
style  of  ix)inted  arch  of  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries. 
The  acceptance  of  such  a  connexion  would  be  still  more  diffi- 
cult for  the  explanation  of  the  rows  of  pointed  arches  to  be 
found  already  much  earlier  in  Germany,  which  are  sporadic, 
but  still  according  to  rule;  those,  for  example,  in  the  cathe- 
dral of  Naumburg  as  early  as  the  eleventh  century,  and  in 
Meraleben  even  in  the  tenth.  Theorists  do  not  indeed  admit 
this  yet,  but  1  am  still  waiting  for  a  refutation  of  the  argu- 
ments 1  have  brought  forward.* 

The  Nilometer  on  the  island  of  Koda,  which  we  visited 

•  Compare  my  e.«say,  Utber  die  ausgedehnte  Anwendung  des  SpitZ' 
boqcns  in  I),ul.<ch/(ind  i'rn  10  and  11  Jahrltundcrt,  as  ail  Introduction  to 
U.  Gaily  Kni^'ht's  Kntwickclun?  der  Architectur  vora  10  bis  14 
Jahrhundcrt  untcr  den  Nurniunnen,  translated  from  the  En{,4i6h  ; 
Ixipzij:,  li?41,  at  G.  Wi^and's;  and  my  father's  treatise,  Der  Dom  zu 
Nanmbunj,  bv  C.  P.  lA-[isius;  Leipzig,  1840  (in  Tuttrich's  Denkm. 
der  Bduk.,  ii.'.  Lief.  .3,  4) 


74  THE  EOUND  AKCH. 

after  the  mosques,  also  contains  a  series  of  pointed  arches, 
belonging  to  the  original  building,  which  dates  as  far  back 
as  the  ninth  century,  proved  by  the  Cufic  inscriptions,  which 
have  been  carefully  examined  by  those  who  are  learned  in 
these  matters. 

Egypt,  however,  does  not  only  lay  claim  to  the  oldest 
application,  therefore,  perhaps  to  the  invention,  of  the 
pointed  arch,  but  also  to  that  of  the  round  arch.  Near  the 
Pyramids  there  are  a  number  of  tombs  having  stone  vaulted 
roofs,  whose  single  blocks  exhibit  the  correct  concentric 
cut.  These  belong  to  the  26th  Manethonic  Dynasty  of 
the  Psammetici,  that  is,  to  the  seventh  and  sixth  centuries 
before  Christ,  and  are  therefore  coeval  with  the  Cloaca 
Maxima  and  the  Career  Mamertinus  in  Eome.  But  we  have 
also  found  tombs  with  vaulted  roofs  made  of  Nile  mud 
bricks,  which  go  back  as  far  as  the  time  of  the  Pyramids. 
Now,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  others,  I  deny  that  the 
brick  arch,  whose  single  bricks  with  their  parallel  surfaces, 
are  only  made  concentric  by  the  wedge  of  cement,  pre- 
supposes a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  actual 
principle  of  the  arch,  and  more  especially  with  its  qualities 
of  support ;  and,  as  a  proof  of  this,  we  never  meet  with  a 
concentric  joined  arch  before  the  time  of  the  Psammetici, 
but  frequently  an  apparently  real  arch,  in  like  manner  cut 
out  of  horizontal  layers  of  stone.  But  wherever  the  brick 
arch  was  very  ancient,  we  may  there  most  naturally  place 
the  development  of  the  concentric  stone  arch,  which  is  met 
with  at  a  later  period  at  that  very  place,  contemporaneous 
at  least  with  its  appearance  in  other  countries. 

On  the  following  morning  I  was  intending  to  accompany 
the  prince  into  the  interesting  institute  of  M.  Lieder,  when 
Erbkam  arrived  unexpectedly  from  our  camp.  He  reported 
that  during  the  previous  night,  between  two  and  three  in 
the  morning,  a  number  of  shots  had  been  suddenly  fired  in 
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  our  tents,  and  that  at  the 
same  time  a  body  of  more  than  twenty  people  had  broken 


ATTACK  ON  CAMP  AT  SAQABA.  7-3 

iiitx)  the  camp.     Our  encampment  is  on  a  narrow  flat  space 
in  front  of  the  rock-tombs,  whicli  are  excavated  about  half- 
way up  the  precipitous  sides  of  the  Libyan  valley,  and  the 
great  accumulation  of  rubbish  has  formed  a  broad  terrace 
before  them.     It  was  only  accessible  on  one  side,  by  a  cleft, 
which  passes  our  terrace  from  above,  downwards.     It  was 
from  this  point  that  the  attack  was  made.     They  first  fell 
upon  the  tent  in  which  we  all  take  our  meals,  and  which 
also  serves  the  purpose  of  a  drawing-room,  which  soon  fell 
down.  Then  followed  the  otlier  ij^reat  tent,  in  which  Erbkam, 
Frey,  Eniest  Weidenbach,  and  Franke,  were  sleeping.     This 
was  also  torn  down,  and  covered  its  inmates,  who,  in  the 
general  confusion,  extricated  themselves  with  difficulty  from 
the  ropes  and  canvas.     Besides  all  this,  the  arms  had  been 
taken  the  day  before  into  one  tent,  for  the  reception  of  the 
prince,  and  had  been  arranged  and  secured  to  tlie  central 
pole,  so  that  no  one  had  them  at  hand.     The  watchmen — 
cowardly  fellows — who  knew  that  by  the  orders  of  the  police 
here,  they  would  incur  punishment,  were  anything  of  the 
sort  to  befal  us,  even  should  they  not  be  to  blame,  had  imme- 
diately run  off  on  all  sides,  uttering  loud  cries,  and  have  not 
yet  returned.     The  robbers  now  laid  hold  of  the  chests  and 
boxes  which  stood  nearest  to  them,  rolled  whatever  they 
could   seize   down   the   hill,   and    soon  disappeared   across 
the  plain.     Their  muskets  were  evidently  not  loaded  with 
ball,   for  no   one  had  been  wounded  by  them;    they  had, 
however,  attained  their  object,  which  was  to  increase  the 
confusion.     E.  Weidenbach,  and  some  of  our  servants,  had 
alone  been  wounded  in  the  head  and  shoulders,  though  not 
dangerously,  by  the  butt-ends  of  their  muskets,  or  by  blud- 
geons.    The  purloined  articles  must,  however,  have  bitterly 
disappointed  the  expectation  of  the  robbers,  for  the  great 
trunks  scarcely  contained  anything  but  European  clothes, 
and  other  thinsrs,  which  no  Arab  can  use.     A  number  of 
coloured  sketches  are  most  to   be  regretted — the  Sunday 
studies,  up  to  the  present  time,  of  the  very  able  artist  Frey. 


76  AEA.B,  FELLAH,  BEDOUIN. 

We  know  besides,  very  well,  from  whence  tWs  attack  has 
proceeded.  "We  dwell  on  the  frontier  of  the  territory  of 
Abusir,  an  Arab  village  which  has  been  long  under  evil 
report,  situated  between  Kafr  el  Batran,  at  the  foot  of  the 
Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  and  Saqara.  By  Arabs  (Arab.  pi.  'Urban) 
I  mean,  according  to  the  custom  of  this  country,  those  inha- 
bitants who,  as  we  are  informed,  only  settled  at  a  later  period 
in  the  JN'ile  valley,  and  having  obtained  certain  privileges, 
founded  some  villages  here.  They  are  distinguished  by  their 
free  origin,  and  their  more  manly  character,  from  the  Fellahs 
(Fellah',  pi.  Fellah'in),  the  original  peasants  of  the  land, 
who,  enervated  by  their  centuries  of  bondage,  have  reached 
a  low  point  of  degradation,  and  who  were  not,  besides, 
able  to  withstand  the  encroachment  of  Islam.  The  name 
of  Bedouin  (Bedaui,  pi.  Bedauin)  belongs  alone  to  the 
ever  free  son  of  the  Desert,  who  only  roves  about  the 
borders  of  the  inhabited  country.  In  the  vicinity  of  the 
Pyramids  there  are  now  a  number  of  Arab  villages.  To 
these,  also,  belong  the  three  places  I  have  mentioned.  Since 
our  place  of  encampment  was  within  the  territory  of  the 
Sheikh  of  Abusir,  a  young,  handsome,  and  enterprising  man, 
he  had  a  certain  claim  to  supply  us  with  the  necessary 
number  of  well-paid  watchmen.  I,  however,  preferred  to 
place  ourselves  under  the  protection  of  the  more  trust- 
worthy, and  more  powerful  Sheikh  of  Saqara,  whom  I  had 
known  before,  and  within  whose  district  the  principal  field 
of  our  labours  is  situated.  This  determination  deprived 
the  people  of  Abusir  of  a  reward,  and  us  of  their  friendship, 
as  I  had  already  observed  for  some  time  past,  without  vexing 
myself  any  further  about  it.  They  had  manifestly  taken  the 
opportunity  at  the  present  time,  when  I  was  absent  in  Cairo 
with  several  servants,  to  execute  this  prank.  The  footmarks 
were  traced  through  the  plain  to  Abusir,  and  a  little  clever  boy 
probably  served  as  a  spy,  the  grandson  of  an  old  Turk  from 
the  Mameluke  times,  the  only  friend  in  Abusir,  with  whom 
we  sometimes  exchanged  visits.     It  must  have  been  also  by 


TRIAL  AT  SAQARA.  77 

means  of  tliia  boy,  who  often  came  to  our  camp,  that  the 
first  theft  was  committed  in  Abeken's  tent,  with  which  lie 
was  well  acquainted. 

The  attack  was  a  serious  afiair,  and  its  consequences  might 
be  important,  if  it  remained  unpunished.  I  went  imme- 
diately with  ^I.  von  "NVagner  to  Scherif  Pascha,  the  minister, 
whose  bu.'^inerjs  it  was  to  iind  out  the  oftenders. 

A  few  days  afterwards  the  plain  beneath  our  camp  became 
an  animated  scene.  The  mudhir  (governor)  of  the  province 
arrived  with  a  splendid  cavalcade,  and  a  great  troop  of  under 
officials,  and  servants,  and  pitched  his  gay  camp  at  the  foot 
of  the  hill.  AVe  exchanged  visits  of  ceremony,  and  discussed 
what  had  happened.  The  mudhir  told  us  beforehand  that 
thf  individual  offenders  would  not  be  found  out,  at  any  rate 
they  would  not  be  brought  to  confess,  because  each  knew 
that  his  throat  stood  a  poor  chance.  However,  on  the  second 
day,  the  Sheikhs  of  Saqara  and  of  Abusir,  and  a  number  of 
suspected  persons  were  brought  forward,  in  order  to  bo  put 
upon  their  trial.  As  was  to  be  expected,  no  decision  was 
come  to,  neither  by  personal  interviews,  nor  examinations. 
The  punishment  was  therefore  summarily  executed.  One 
after  tiie  other  they  were  tied  to  a  post,  their  faces  towards 
the  ground,  and  the  soles  of  their  feet  upwards.  They  were 
then  unmercifully  bastinadoed  with  a  long  whip  of  hippo- 
potamus hide,  called  hurbatscli,  often  till  they  tainted.  It 
was  in  vain  tliat  I  urged  that  I  saw  no  reason  to  punish 
these  particular  persons,  and  I  was  still  more  astonished 
when  our  old  venerable  friend,  the  Sheikh  of  Saqara,  for 
whose  innocence  I  would  have  accepted  any  surety,  was  also 
led  up,  and,  like  the  others,  was  laid  in  the  dust.  I  ex- 
[)ressed  my  surprise  to  the  mudhir,  and  protested  earnestly 
against  it,  but  received  for  answer  that  he  could  not  be  ex- 
empted from  the  punishment,  as  though,  indeed,  we  had  not 
been  on  his  ground  and  territory,  we  had  however  received 
the  watchmen  from  him,  who  had  run  off",  and  bad  not  then 
returned.  "With  some  difficulty  I  obtained,  at  least,  a  mitiga- 
tion of  the  punishment ;  but  he  had  already  become  almost 


78  TEIAL  AT  SAQAEA. 

insensible,  and  it  was  necessary  to  have  him  carried  to  the  tent, 
where  his  feet  were  bound  up.  The  whole  afiair  ended  with 
a  compensation  in  money  for  the  value  of  the  stolen  articles, 
which  I  purposely  did  not  estimate  at  too  low  a  price,  as 
every  loss  of  money  remains  for  years  in  the  remembrance 
of  the  Arab,  while  he  forgets  the  bastinado,  indeed  boasts  of 
it,  as  soon  as  he  no  longer  feels  it.  Nezel  mm  c'  semma  c' 
nebut,  hdrakah  onin  Allah,  say  the  Arabs,  i.  e.  "The  rod 
came  from  Heaven,  a  blessing  from  God."  But  also  in  the 
matter  of  the  fine,  the  sum  that  we  demanded  was  so  dis- 
tributed, that  the  rich  Sheikh  of  Saqara  was  compelled  to 
pay  a  far  greater  share  than  the  Sheikh  of  Abusir,  a  par- 
tiality which  was  probably  in  some  measure  owing  to  the 
intercession  of  the  old  distinguished  Turk  of  Abusir  with  the 
Turkish  mudhir. 

As  soon  as  the  money  was  paid  down  I  went  to  our 
Sheikh  of  Saqara,  whose  unmerited  adverse  fate  had  seriously 
vexed  me,  and  I  publicly  gave  him  the  half  of  his  money 
back  again,  promising  in  confidence  that  afterwards,  when 
the  mudhir  should  have  departed,  I  would  restore  to  him 
also  the  other  half.  This  was  such  an  unexpected  thing  to 
the  old  sheikh,  that  he  looked  at  me  for  a  long  time  incredu- 
lously, then  kissed  my  hands  and  feet,  and  called  me  his  best 
friend  on  earth  ;  I,  who  had  just  been,  at  all  events,  the  indi- 
rect occasion  of  his  beautiful  beard  being  soiled  with  dust,  and 
of  his  feet  being  so  lacerated  as  to  cause  him  weeks  of  pain. 
His  wondering  joy,  however,  was  not  directed  so  much  at  me 
as  at  the  unhoped-for  sight  of  the  money,  which  never  loses 
its  charm  with  the  Arab. 

There  is  a  curious  mixture  of  noble  pride  and  vulgar 
avarice  to  be  found  in  the  Arab,  which  is  at  first  quite  in- 
comprehensible to  the  European.  Their  free  noble  bearing, 
and  imperturbable  repose,  appear  to  express  nothing  but  a 
proud  sense  of  honour;  balanced,  however,  against  the 
smallest  gain  of  money,  it  melts  away  like  wax  before  the  sun, 
and  the  most  contemptuous  treatment  is  not  taken  into  con- 
sideration, but  is  borne  with  crouching  servility  where  money 


PYliAillD  FIELDS.  79 

IS  in  question.  We  might  at  first  imagine  one  of  these 
two  natures  to  be  hypocrisy,  or  dissimulation;  but  the  con- 
tradiction returns  too  often  in  all  forms,  both  great  and 
small,  not  to  lead  to  the  conviction  that  it  is  characteristic  of 
the  Arab,  if  not  of  the  entire  East.  Even  as  early  as  in  the 
days  of  the  Romans,  the  Egyptians  had  so  far  degenerated, 
that  Ammianus  Marcellinus  could  say  of  them :  Eruhescit 
apud  eo8,  si  quis  non  infitiando  trihuta  pJurimas  in  carpore 
vibices  ostendat*  and  in  the  same  manner  the  fellah  to-day 
points  witli  a  contented  smile  to  his  scars  as  soon  as  the  tax- 
gatherer  has  withdrawn,  who,  in  spite  of  his  instruments  of 
torture,  has  been  cui'tailed  of  a  few  piastres 


LETTER  IX. 

Cairo,  the  22nd  April,  1843. 

A  YiOLEXT  cold,  which  for  some  time  checked  my  usual 
activity,  has  led  me  hither  from  our  camp  at  Saqara.  The 
worst  is,  that  we  are  still  obliged  to  postpone  our  fur- 
tlier  journey.  Certainly  all  whicli  such  a  spot  afiords  is  of 
the  utmost  interest,  but  the  abundance  of  material  this  time 
almost  causes  us  embarrassment.  The  most  important,  but 
most  difhcult  works,  and  those  which  occupy  the  longest 
time,  are  those  of  our  architect  Erbkam.  To  him  belongs 
the  great  task  of  making  the  most  detailed  plans  of  the 
border  of  the  desert,  in  nearly  the  central  point  of  which  we 
lie  encamped.  This  ground  comprises  the  almost  uninter- 
rupted field  of  tombs  from  the  Pyramid  of  Rigah  as  far  as 
that  of  Dahschur.  The  separate  plans  of  the  northern  fields 
of  Abu  Roasch,  Gizeh,  Zauiet  el  Arrian  are  already  com- 
pleted. However  meritorious  the  sketches  of  Perring, 
they  cannot  be  compared  in  exactitude  with  ours.  Entire 
Necropoli,  with  tlie  Pyramids  belonging  to  them,  have  been 
newlv  discovered,  partly  by  myself,  partly  by  Erbkam.     Some 

♦  He  among  them  bluslics,  who  cannot  show  many  strokes  upon  his 
body,  for  nou-pa^-ment  of  tribute. — Ta. 


80  CAIRO. 

of  the  PjTamids,  hitherto  unknown,  are  even  now  from  eighty 
to  a  hundred  feet  high;  others  are  indeed  almost  wholly 
demolished,  but  were  originally  of  considerable  extent,  as  is 
manifested  by  their  base.  My  return  to  Saqara  will,  it  is 
to  be  hoped,  give  the  signal  for  our  departure. 

We  shall  go  by  land  to  the  Faium,  the  province  which 
branches  off  into  the  desert.  The  season  is  still  incom- 
parably beautiful,  and  the  desert-journey  will  undoubtedly 
be  far  more  conducive  to  our  health  than  the  voyage  on  the 
Nile,  which  we  before  contemplated. 

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  my  state  of  health  will  not  detain 
me  long  here,  for  my  impatience  daily  increases  to  return 
from  the  living  city  of  the  Mamelukes  into  the  solemn  Death- 
city  of  the  old  Pharaohs.  And  yet  it  would  perhaps  afford 
you  more  pleasure  if  I  were  able  to  paint  in  colours,  or  in 
w^ords,  what  I  here  see  before  my  windows. 

I  live  in  the  extensive  square  of  the  Ezbekieh,  in  the  most 
beautiful  and  most  frequented  part  of  the  city.  Formerly, 
there  was  a  great  lake  in  the  centre,  which  is  now,  however, 
converted  into  gardens.  Broad  streets  run  round  it,  sepa- 
rated for  riders,  and  foot  passengers,  and  shaded  by  lofty 
trees.  There  all  the  East  pass  by,  with  their  gaily-coloured, 
various,  yet  always  picturesque  costumes ;  the  poorer  classes 
with  blue  and  white  tucked  up  blouses,  and  the  richer  with 
long  garments  of  different  materials,  with  silk  kai'tuns,*  or 
fine  cloth  dresses  of  delicately  contrasted  colours,  with  white, 
red,  green,  and  black  turbans,  or  with  the  more  refined, 
but  less  becoming,  Turkish  tarbusch  ;t  amidst  these  some 
Greeks,  with  their  dandy  tunics,  or  Arab  Sheikhs,  wrapped 
up  in  their  wide  antique  mantles,  thrown  around  them  ;  the 
children  wliolly  or  half  naked,  also  with  shaven  heads,  on 
which  now  and  then  a  single  tuft  stands  up  from  the  crown, 
as  if  ready  to  be  laid  hold  of;  the  women  with  veiled  faces, 
but  whose  eyes  painted  round  with  black,  peer  forth  ghost- 
like hither  and  thither  through  peep-holes  in  the  veil.     AH 

*  Kaftan,  an  open  tunic— Te.  f  Tarbusch,  red  cap.— Tb. 


DEPJLBTUBE  FOU  THE  FAirM.  81 

tlieaiiiJBid  a  hundred  other  indescribable  figures,  walk,  glide, 
and  ruah  past,  on  foot,  on  asses,  mules,  dromedaries,  camels, 
horsetj,  only  not  in  carriages ;  for  these  were  more  used  even 
in  the  time  of  the  Pharaohs  than  they  are  at  present.  If  I 
look  up  from  the  stn^et,  my  view  is  bounded  on  one  side  by 
splendid  mosques,  with  cupolas,  and  slender-springing  mina- 
rotti,  together  with  long  rows  of  houses,  most  of  tliem  built 
carelessly,  yet  some  of  a  more  distinguished  class,  richly 
oniamented  with  artistically  carved  grated  windows,  and 
elegant  balconies ;  on  the  other  side,  by  the  green  domes  of 
palm-trees,  or  by  leafy  sycamores  and  acacias.  Finally,  in 
the  distant  background,  beyond  the  flat  roofs,  and  green 
intervening  masses,  the  far-shining  sister-pair  of  the  two 
largest  Pyramids  stand  out  distinctly  on  the  Libyan  horizon 
in  sharp  lines  through  the  thin  vapour.  A\Tiat  a  contrast 
from  that  mongrel  Alexandria,  where  innate  Eastern  habits 
and  feelings  still  struggle  for  mastery  with  the  overpowering 
high -pressure  civilisation  of  Europe.  It  seems  to  me  as  if 
we  had  already  here  penetrated  into  the  innermost  heart  of 
the  East  of  the  present  day. 


LETTEE  X. 

Oil  the  JRuins  uf  the  Lahf/ritiili,  the  3lst  May,  1843. 

Aftte  my  return  to  the  camp  of  Saqara,  I  only  required 
three  more  days  to  finish  our  work  there.  I  paid  a  last  visit 
to  the  ruins  of  ancient  Memphis,  the  plan  of  which  Erbkam 
had  meanwhile  completed ;  some  interesting  discoveries  ter- 
minated our  researches. 

On  the  19th  of  May  we  at  length  set  out  on  our  journey, 
with  twenty  camels,  two  dromedaries,  thirteen  asses,  and 
one  horse.  "VMien  I  speak  of  camels  and  dromedaries,  it  is 
perhaps  not  superfluous  to  observe  what  is  here  understood 
by  these  names,  for  in  Europe  an  incorrect  or  rather  arbi- 
trary- distinction  is  made  between  them,  which  is  unknown 
here.     "\Ve  Germans  call  camel  what  the  Erench  call  droma- 

Q 


82  DEOMEDAET  Xl^D  CAMEL. 

daire,  and  dromedary  ( Trampelthier,  Germ,  a  corruption  of 
dromedary),  what  they  call  chameau.  The  first  is  said  to  have 
07ie  hump,  the  other  two.  According  to  that,  there  can  be 
no  question  of  dromedaries  or  cTiameaux  in  Egypt,  for  here 
there  are  no  two-humped  creatures,  although  now  and  then 
they  appear  in  one-humped  families.  In  Syria  again,  and 
the  central  parts  of  Asia,  there  would  be  no  camels  or  drama- 
daires ;  at  least  the  one-humped  animals  are  very  rare.  In 
truth,  however,  it  is  a  very  immaterial  difference,  and  whe- 
ther the  one  hump  of  fat  on  the  back  be  divided  in  two  or 
not,  in  itself  alone  would  perhaps  scarcely  justify  the  dis- 
tinction of  a  different  species.  The  people  of  the  East,  at 
the  present  day  at  least,  make  no  distinction  between  them ; 
neither  did  the  ancients  also,  for  the  one-humped  creatures 
do  not  carry  easier,  nor  move  quicker,  than  the  others.  Nor 
does  the  rider  sit  more  conveniently  between  two  humps,  for 
the  saddle  is  equally  raised  over  the  two  as  over  the  one 
hump.  On  the  other  hand  a  great  distinction,  although  not 
founded  on  natural  history  grounds,  has  been  generally 
established  between  the  strong,  dull  camel,  used  as  a  beast 
of  burden,  commonly  called  gtmel,  and  the  younger,  more 
tractable,  broken-in,  riding  camel,  which  is  called  heggin, 
because  the  pilgrims  to  Mecca  {hdgg,  pi.  lieggdg)  set  a  great 
value  on  good  riding  animals.  An  Arab  takes  it  as  much 
amiss  if  his  slim  favourite  camel  is  called  a  gemel,  as  if  with 
us,  a  weU-broken  horse  was  to  be  described  as  a  plough  or 
draught -horse.  Dromedarius,  or  cameliis  dromas,  KdyLrjkos 
dpofids,  does  not  appear  to  have  meant  more  among  the 
ancients,  as  the  name  proves,  than  a  courser  of  a  slight 
breed,  suited  for  riding. 

As  these  last  are  far  more  expensive,  it  is  often  difficult  to 
procure,  even  a  few  of  the  better  animals  from  the  Arabs 
who  furnish  them ;  most  of  us  are  obliged  to  be  contented 
with  ordinary  beasts  of  burden.  IMine  was  this  time  en- 
durable, and  received,  at  least,  the  title  of  heggin,  from  the 
Arabs. 


JOURNEY  TO  THE  FAIUM.  85 

I  did  not  wait  lor  the  decampment  of  the  general  party, 
in  which  the  Sheikhs  of  Saqira  and  Mitrahinneh  were  in- 
cluded, but  rode  on  in  front  with  Erbkam,  always  beside  the 
desert.  On  our  way,  the  latter  made  one  more  plan  of  a 
Pyramid,  "with  the  surrounding  ground,  which  I  had  ob- 
sen-ed  on  a  former  trip.  "We  have  now  a  list  of,  altogether, 
Bixty-seven  Pyramidi?,  almost  twice  as  many  as  are  to  be 
found  in  Perring.  The  topographical  plans  of  Erbkam  are 
most  invaluable. 

Soon  alter  sunset  we  arrived  at  the  first  P}Tamid  of  Lischfy 
where  we  found  our  tents  already  pitched.  The  following 
morning  I  made  the  caravan  depart  early,  and  I  remained 
beliind  with  Erbkam,  that  we  might  employ  ourselves  in 
examiniug  and  noting  down  the  two  Pyramids,  which  stand 
rather  widely  apart  in  this  isolated  field  of  death.  AVe  did 
not  follow  till  two  o'clock,  and  arrived  about  seven  in  the 
evening  at  our  tents,  which  were  pitched  on  the  south 
side  of  the  stately  Pyramid  of  Meidum.  It  was  again  a 
short  day's  journey  to  the  Pyramid  of  Illahun,  and  thence 
through  the  embouchure  of  tlie  Eaium  to  this  spot,  three 
hours  more.*  It  was  late  before  we  started.  I  left  Erbkam 
and  E.  AVeidenbach  beliind,  to  put  on  paper  the  examination 
of  the  ground ;  and  I  rode  off  with  only  two  servants,  half 
an  hour  in  advance  of  the  caravan,  in  order  to  reach  the 
Labyrinth  by  a  more  interesting  route,  along  the  Bahr 
Jussuf,  and  to  fix  upon  the  place  of  encampment. 

Here  we  have  been,  on  the  southern  side  of  the  Pyramid 
of  ^Iceris,  since  the  23rd  May,  and  are  settled  among  the 
ruins  of  the  Labyrinth ;  for  I  was  certain  from  the  first, 
after  we  had  made  but  a  hasty  survey  of  the  whole,  that  we 
are  perfectly  entitled  to  designate  them  under  this  name :  I 
did  not,  however,  imagine  that  it  would  have  been  so  easy 
for  us  to  become  convinced  of  this. 

As  soon  as  Erbkam  had  measured  and  noted  down  a  small 

*  The  Germans  generally  calculate  distance  by  the  hour,  which  cor- 
responds to  about  three  English  miles,  as  this  distance  can  be  traversed 
at  a  foot  pace  within  that  space  of  time. — Tk. 

g2 


84  THE  LABTEINTH, 

plan  of  what  is  extant,  I  caused  some  excavators  to  be  levied 
from  the  surrounding  \iLlages,  through  the  Mudhir  of  Me- 
dinet  el  Faium,  the  governor  of  the  province,  and  ordered 
them  to  make  trenches  through  the  ruins,  and  to  dig  at  four 
or  five  places  at  once,     A  hundred  and  eight  people  were 
thus  occupied  to-day.     "With  the  exception  of  those  belong- 
ing to  the  nearest  place,  Howara,  who  return  home  every 
evening,  I  allow  these  people  to  encamp  on  the  northern  side 
of  the  Pyramid,  and  to  spend  their  nights  there.     They  have 
their  overseers,  and  bread  is  brought  to  them ;  every  morn- 
ing they  are  counted,  and  they  are  paid  every  evening ;  each 
man  receives  a  piastre — about  two  silver  groschens  ;*  each 
child,  half  a  piastre,  sometimes,  when  they  have  been  parti- 
cularly diligent,  as  much  as  thirty  paras  (there  are  forty  of 
them  in  a  piastre).      Each  of  the  men  brings  with  him  a 
pickaxe,  and  a  shallow,  woven  basket  (inalctaf).  The  children, 
who  form  the  greatest  numbers,  are  only  required  to  bring 
baskets.  The  maktafs  are  filled  by  the  men,  and  carried  away 
by  the  children  on  their  heads.    This  is  done  in  long  proces- 
sions, which  are  kept  in  order  and  at  work  by  special  overseers. 
Their  chief  pleasure,  and  a  material  assistance  in  their 
daily  work,  is  singing.     They  have  some  simple  melodies, 
which  at  a  distance,  owing  to  their  great  monotony,  make 
almost  a  melancholy  impression.    Wliennear  them,  however, 
the  unmerciful  persistence  of  the  shrill  voices,  as  they  often 
amuse  themselves  many  hours  together  in  the  same  manner, 
is  hardly  to  be  borne.     It  is  only  the  consideration  that  I 
am  helping  so  many  to  bear  half  their  burden  for  the  day, 
and  that  I  materially  further  the  work,  which  has  constantly 
prevented  me  interfering  when  it  reaches  this  point,  till  I 
sometimes  at  length  leave  my  tent  in  despair,  in  order,  by 
employing  myself  at  a  greater  distance,  to  obtain  some  re- 
pose for  my  ears.     The  only  variety  in  the  execution  of  the 
stanza  of  two  lines,  is  that  the  first  line  is  sung  by  one 
voice,  the  second  by  the  whole  chorus,  while  the  hands  are 
clapped  at  every  bar  of  common  time.     For  example : 
*  About  twopence-halfpenny  English  money. 


EASTEBN  MUSIC. 

85 

r.       Solo.                                          Chorus.                                   Solo 

^^-= 

fc 

1.  Om  rai  Vx'-ta-kul  nia-ku-li     U  a-na  bagh  -  bagh-tet  a'-lei  (Dill) 

2.  Dill  di-sa  —  ri     mdl  u  mal  Bun  ydl  dill  ebanne  u  a'-lei  (Yd) 
Ya-iuin  sa  -  ball'    u    le-be'n  U    sumneh      saih    'a-le-l     &c. 

i.c.  1.  My  mother  eats  mj  dates, 

And  I — anger  overcomes  me. 

2.  The  shade  of  A«ser  (vesper-time)  lowers  itself  and  lowers  itself. 

ITie  wall  ( bunyun). 

3.  (Oh)  Happiness  (when)  the  morning  milk 

And  butter  pour  over  me. 
Maim,  in  the  first  line,  is  really  only  "food,'"  but  it  has 
become  a  general  expression  for  dates,  because,  in  the  huta 
of  the  Fellah,  this  is  the  chief,  and,  for  many  people,  the  only 
food.     Another  rather  more  animated  melody  is  this  one  : 

Chorus. 


Solo. 


P 


ill 


±Z]L 


:M: 


-^  ^r 


I 


Solo. 


lEE 


T 


m 


in  which  till-  cliorus,  in  exception  to  the  general  rule,  se- 
parates into  two  parts.  I  hardly  think,  however,  that  these 
thirds  are  intentional,  they  slip  in  of  themselves ;  for  it 
sometimes  happens  that  single  voices  join  in  singinor  the 
same  cadence  in  a  totally  different  strain  without  paying  any 
regard  to  whole  hours  of  discord.  The  Arab — I  might  almost 
say,  the  people  of  the  East  generally — are  devoid  of  the 
sense  of  making  the  simplest  complications  of  several  voices 
into  a  harmony.  The  most  artistic  music  of  the  best  singers 
and  performers,  which  often  inexpressibly  delights  the  most 
civilised  Musidman  in  Cairo,  and  collects  large  masses  of 
people  as  an  audience,  consists  only  in  a  melody  a  hundred 
times  repeated,  flourishing,  restless,  and  whirling,  whose 
theme  cannot  be  retained,  and  can  scarcely  be  detected  by 
a  European  ear.     Xor  are  the  different  instruments,  when 


S6  THE  BEDOUiyS. 

played  together,  employed  for  any  harmonious  united  variety, 
beyond  what  is  suggested  by  the  rhythm. 

"We  have  eight  watchmen  during  the  night,  who  really  do 
watch,  as  I  often  convince  myself  by  making  a  nightly 
round.  One  of  them  walks  constantly  up  and  down  with 
his  gun  on  the  ramparts  surrounding  our  camp,  for  if  any 
where,  we  have  to  fear  another  attack  here,  not  from  the 
Arabs,  but  from  the  still  more  dangerous  Bedouins,  who 
inhabit  the  borders  of  the  desert  in  many  single  hordes, 
and  are  not  under  the  control  of  great  sheikhs,  who  we 
might  secure  in  our  interests.  From  Illahun  to  this  place, 
we  passed  through  a  Bedouin  camp,  whose  sheikh  must 
have  known  of  our  arrival,  as  he  rode  out  to  meet  me  on 
horseback,  and  offered  his  services,  if  we  should  require  any- 
thing here.  Farther  on,  we  met  an  old  man  and  a  girl  in  a 
distracted  state,  uttering  loud  cries  of  despair.  They  threw 
dust  into  the  air,  and  heaped  it  on  their  heads.  As  we  ap- 
proached nearer  to  them,  they  complained  to  us  with  incon- 
solable expressions  that  two  Bedouins  had  just  robbed  them 
of  their  only  buffalo.  We  actually  saw  the  robbers  still  in 
the  distance,  on  horseback,  driving  the  buffalo  before  them 
into  the  desert.  I  was  alone  with  my  dragoman  and  my 
little  donkey-boy,  Auad,  a  lively,  dark-skinned  Berber,  and 
I  could  be  of  no  assistance  to  these  poor  people.  Such  thefts 
are  not  unfrequent  here.  A  short  time  ago,  one  tribe  drove 
a  hundred  and  twenty  camels  away  from  another  tribe,  and 
none  of  them  have  yet  come  back. 

Nevertheless,  we  shall  probably  remain  here  unmolested ; 
for  the  sentence  we  passed  at  Saqara  is  well  known,  and  they 
are  aware  that  we  are  specially  recommended  to  the  autho- 
rities. They  have  also  now  become  convinced  that  we  carry 
no  gold  or  silver  with  us  in  our  heavy  chests,  which  was  for- 
merly very  generally  believed  among  the  Arabs.  Added  to 
this,  we  are  ourselves  well  armed  against  any  new  attack.  I 
have  collected  the  most  valuable  chests  in  my  own  tent,  and 
every  night  an  English  double-barrelled  gun  and  two  pistols 
lie  ready  beside  my  bed.  Besides,  I  clear  out  my  tent  every 
eveniag,  that  we  may  be  prepared  for  anything,  especially 


CAMP  LIFE.  87 

for  storms,  from  whicli  we  have  Lad  to  suffer  much  latterly, 
and  of  a  degree  of  violence  unknown  in  Europe.  Abeken's 
tent  foil  three  times  over  his  head  in  one  day,  and  the  last 
time  roused  him  in  a  verj'  disagreeable  manner  out  of  his 
sleep.  Thus  we  are  often  whole  days  and  nights  in  constant 
expectation  that  during  the  next  gust  of  wind  our  airy  house 
may  fall  dovni  upon  our  heads  ;  under  this  apprehension,  it 
requires  some  habit  to  continue  to  work  or  to  sleep  quietly. 

It  appears  that  we  are  to  have  a  taste  of  all  the  plagues  of 
Egypt.  Our  experience  began  with  the  inundation  at  the 
Great  Pyramids  ;  then  came  the  locusts,  whose  young  fry 
has  now  increased  like  sand  upon  the  sea-shore,  and  is  again 
devouring  the  green  fields  and  trees,  which,  combined  with 
the  previous  cattle  disease,  is  indeed  sufficient  to  cause  a 
famine ;  then  occurred  the  hostile  attack  which  was  pre- 
ceded by  a  daring  robbery.  ISTor  has  even  a  conflagration 
been  wholly  wanting.  By  an  incautious  salute,  AVild's  tent 
was  set  on  fire  and  partly  burnt  in  Saqara,  while  we  stood 
around  in  bright  sunshine,  which  prevented  the  fire  being 
scon  by  us.  Xow  comes,  in  addition  to  this,  the  annoyance 
of  mice,  which  we  had  not  hitherto  experienced  ;  they  gnaw, 
play,  and  squeak  away  in  my  tent,  as  if  they  had  always  been 
at  home  there,  quite  unconcerned  whether  I  am  within  it  or 
not.  During  tlie  night  they  run  over  my  bed,  and  over  my 
face  ;  and  yesterday  I  started  up  frightened,  out  of  my  sleep, 
because  I  suddenly  felt  the  sharp  little  tooth  of  one  of  these 
audacious  guests  upon  my  foot.  I  sprang  up  in  a  rage, 
struck  a  light,  and  knocked  against  all  the  chests  and  pegs  ; 
but  on  lying  down  once  more,  I  was  soon  driven  out  of  bed 
again.  In  spite  of  all  these  annoyances,  however,  we  con- 
tijiue  to  keep  up  a  good  and  cheerful  spirit,  and  God  be 
thanked,  they  have  hitlierto  only  threatened  us,  and  made 
us  heedful,  not  materially  injured  us. 

The  superintendence  over  the  servants,  and  the  manage- 
ment of  much  extra  business,  has  now  been  considerably 
alleviated,  by  my  having  brought  a  well-qualified  Kawass 
\yit\i  me  from  Cairo.  These  Kawass,  who  form  a  peculiar 
band  of  sub-officers  of  the  Pascha,  are  considered  here,  in  the 


DO  TUBKISH  KAWASS. 

country,  a  peculiar  and  important  class  of  persons.  Only- 
Turks  are  appointed,  and  they  possess,  through  their  na- 
tionality alone,  an  innate  superiority  over  every  Arab.  There 
are  probably  few  nations  who  have  so  much  natural  ability 
to  rule  as  the  Turks,  who,  nevertheless,  we  are  often  accus- 
tomed to  regard  as  rude,  uncouth,  and  half  barbarians.  On 
the  contrary,  as  a  nation,  they  have  some  degree  of  distinction. 
Imperturbable  repose,  calmness,  reserve,  and  energy  of  will, 
appear  to  belong  to  every  Turk,  down  to  the  common  soldier, 
and  do  not  fail  to  make  a  certain  impression  upon  the  Euro- 
pean on  first  acquaintance.  This  external  bearing  with  the 
appearance  of  deliberate  firmness,  this  reserved  proud  polite- 
ness easily  passing  into  nice  shades  of  ceremonial,  is  met 
with  in  a  still  higher  degree  among  the  upper  rank  of  Turks, 
who  have  all,  from  childhood  upwards,  passed  through  a  school 
of  the  strictest  etiquette  in  their  own  families.  They  have 
an  innate  contempt  for  everything  which  does  not  belong  to 
their  own  nation,  and  appear  to  have  no  feeling  for  the 
natural  superiority  of  higher  mental  culture  and  civilisation 
which  the  ordinary  European  usually  inspires  among  other 
Qations. 

Nothing  is  to  be  gained  from  the  Turk  by  kindness,  con- 
siderate attention,  demonstration,  or  even  by  anger ;  these 
he  considers  as  proofs  of  weakness.  The  greatest  reserve 
alone,  and  the  most  careful  distant  politeness  towards  the 
great,  or  the  bearing  of  a  person  of  some  consequence,  and 
absolute  commands  to  inferiors,  answers  the  purpose  here. 
A  Turkish  Kawass  drives  a  whole  village  of  Eellahs,  or  Arabs, 
before  him,  and  makes  a  decided  impression  even  on  the  still 
prouder  Bedouins.  The  Pascha  employs  the  Elawass-corps 
as  special  messengers,  and  on  commissions,  throughout  the 
whole  country.  They  are  the  chief  executive  servants  of  the 
Pascha,  and  of  the  governors  of  the  pro\inces.  Every  foreign 
consul  has  also  a  similar  Kawass,  without  whom  he  hardly 
takes  a  single  step,  since  he  is  his  guard  of  honour,  the  sign, 
and  -the  right  hand  of  his  indisputable  authority.  When  he 
rides  out,  the  Kawass  rides  before  him  with  a  great  silver 
fitick,  and  drives  the  people  and  animals  with  words  or  blows 


THE  LABTEINTH.  W 

out  of  his  path ;  and  woe  to  him  who  should  make  a  move- 
ment, or  even  a  gesture  of  disobedience.  The  Pascha  some- 
times also  gives  such  a  guard  of  honour,  with  similar  autlio- 
rity,  as  an  escort  to  strangers  who  are  specially  recommended 
to  him,  and  thus  we  also  received  a  Kawass  at  the  commence- 
ment of  our  journey,  who  however,  during  our  long  period 
of  repose  in  Gizeh  was  only  a  burden,  and  at  length,  on 
account  of  his  making  extravagant  demands,  was  not  very 
graciously  dismissed  by  me.  On  the  occasion  of  the  attack  in 
Saqara,  I  caused  another  to  be  given  me  by  Scherif  Pascha ; 
but  he  still  is  not  the  sort  of  man  that  we  want,  so  I  have 
now  brouirht  a  third  with  me  from  Cairo,  who  hitherto  has 
proved  an  excellent  one.  He  relieves  me  from  the  entire 
superintendence  over  the  servants,  and  manages  admirably 
all  that  I  have  to  transact  with  the  people  and  authorities  of 
the  country.  If  I  were  in  Europe  I  should  have  supposed 
that  I  had  more  than  sufficient  strength  for  the  whole  external 
guidance  of  the  expedition,  as  well  as  for  its  more  immediate 
object,  but  in  this  climate  one  must  measure  by  a  diHerent 
scale.  Patience  and  repose  are  here,  just  as  necessary  ele- 
ments of  life,  as  meat  and  drink. 

LETTEE  XI 

The  Labyrinth,  the  25th  June,  1843. 

These  lines  are  Avritten  to  you  from  the  distinctly  recog- 
nised Labyrinth  of  Maoris  and  the  Dodecarchs,  not  from  the 
doubtful  spot  whose  identity  is  still  contested,  of  which  I 
myself  was  unable  to  form  any  conception  from  the  hitherto 
more  than  deficient  descriptions  even  of  those  who  have 
removed  the  Lab}-rinth  hither.  An  immense  cluster  of 
chambers  stiU  remahis,  and  in  the  centre  lies  the  great 
square,  where  the  courts  once  stood,  covered  with  the  re- 
mains of  large  monolithic  granite  columns,  and  of  others  of 
white  hard  limestone,  shining  almost  like  marble. 

I  approached  the  spot,  fearing  that  we  must  only  endear 
vour,  as  others  had  done  before  us,  to  confirm  the  information 
of  the  ancients  on  the  geographical  position  of  the  place ; 


90  THE  LABTIlI>'Tn. 

that  all  form  of  the  edifice  itself  had  disappeared,  and  that  an 
unshapely  heap  of  ruins  might  deter  us  from  making  any  ex- 
aminations. Instead  of  this,  at  the  first  superficial  survey  of 
the  ground,  a  number  of  complicated  spaces,  of  true  laby- 
rinthine forms,  immediately  presented  themselves,  both  above 
and  below  ground,  and  the  eye  could  easily  detect  the  prin- 
cipal buildings,  more  than  a  stadium  (Strabo)  in  extent. 
"Where  the  French  expedition  had  vainly  sought  for  cham- 
bers, we  literally  at  once  find  hundreds  of  them,  both  next  to, 
and  above  one  another,  small,  often  diminutive  ones,  beside 
greater  ones,  and  large  ones,  supported  by  small  columns, 
with  thresholds,  and  niches  in  the  walls,  with  remains  of 
columns,  and  single  casing-stones,  connected  by  corridors, 
without  any  regularity  in  the  entrances  and  exits,  so  that  the 
descriptions  of  Herodotus  and  Strabo,  in  this  respect,  are 
fully  justified.  But  at  the  same  time  also,  the  opinion,  which 
was  never  adopted  by  me,  and  is  irreconcileable  with  any 
architectonic  view,  that  there  are  serpentine,  case-like  wind- 
ings, in  place  of  square  rooms,  is  decidedly  refuted. 

The  whole  is  so  arranged,  that  three  immense  masses  of 
buildings,  300  feet  broad,  enclose  a  square  place,  which  is 
600  feet  long  and  500  feet  wide.  The  fourth  side,  one  of  the 
narrow  ones,  is  bounded  by  the  P}Tamid,  which  lies  behiad 
it ;  it  is  300  feet  square,  and  therefore  does  not  quite  reach 
the  side  wings  of  the  above-mentioned  masses  of  bmldings. 
A  canal  of  rather  modern  date,  passing  obliquely  through 
the  ruins,  and  which  one  can  almost  leap  over,  at  least  at  the 
present  season,  cuts  ofi"  exactly  the  best  preserved  portion  of 
the  lab}Tinthian  chambers,  together  with  part  of  the  great 
central  square,  which  at  one  time  was  divided  into  courts. 
The  travellers  preferred  not  wetting  their  feet,  and  remained 
on  this  side,  where  the  continuation  of  the  wings  of  the  build- 
ings is  certainly  more  concealed  beneath  the  rubbish.  But 
the  chambers  lying  on  the  farther  side,  especially  their 
soutliern  point,  where  the  walls  rise  nearly  ten  feet  above  the 
rubbish,  and  about  twenty  feet  above  the  base  of  the  ruins, 
are  to  be  seen  very  well  even  from  this,  the  eastern  side ;  and 
viewed  from  the  summit  of  the  Pyramid,  the  regular  plan  of 


THE  LABYHIXTH.  '91 

the  whole  desi^  lies  before  one  as  on  a  map.  Erbkam  has 
been  occupied  ever  since  our  arrival,  in  making  the  special 
plan,  on  which  even*  chamber  or  wall,  however  small,  will  be 
noted  down.  The  farther  portion  of  the  ruins  is,  therefore, 
by  far  the  most  difficult  to  record.  On  this  side  it  is  an 
easier  task,  but  so  much  the  more  difficult  to  understand. 
Here  the  labyrinth  of  chambers  passes  on  southwards.  The 
courts  were  situated  between  this  and  the  Pvramid  Ivinsr 
opposite  on  the  northern  side.  But  almost  all  of  these  have 
disappeared.  AVe  have,  therefore,  nothing  to  guide  us  but  the 
dimensions  of  the  square,  which  lead  us  to  suppose  that  it 
wa-s  divided  into  two  halves,  by  a  long  wall,  against  which  the 
twelve  courts  (for  we  cannot,  indeed,  witli  any  certaintv, 
make  out  that  there  were  more)  abutted  on  both  sides,  so 
that  their  entrances  turned  towards  opposite  sides,  and  had 
immediately  facing  them  the  extensive  mass  of  innumerable 
chambers. 

But  who  was  the  Maros,  Mendes,  Imandes,  who,  by  the 
account  of  the  Greeks,  erected  the  Labyrinth,  or  rather  the 
P\Tamid  belonging  to  it,  for  his  tomb  ?  In  tlie  Manethonic 
list  of  Kings,  we  find  the  builder  of  the  LabjTinth  introduced 
towards  the  end  of  the  12th  Dynasty,  the  last  of  the  Old 
Monarchy,  shortly  before  the  invasion  of  the  Hyksos.  The 
fragments  of  the  mighty  columns  and  architraves  which  we 
have  dug  up  from  the  great  square  of  the  halls,  exhibit  the 
name-shields  of  the  sixtli  king  of  this  same  12th  Dynasty, 
Amenemha  III.  Thus  the  important  question  of  its  place 
in  histor}'  is  answered,*  AVe  have  also  made  excavations  on 
the  north  side  of  the  Pyramid,  because  it  is  here  that  we  con- 
jecture the  entrance  must  have  been.  But  it  has  not  been 
hitherto  discovered.  AVe  have  only  as  yet  penetrated  into  a 
chamber  which  lay  in  front  of  the  Pyramid,  and  which  was 
covered  by  a  great  quantity  of  rubbish,  and  we  have  several 
times  found  the  name  of  Amenemha  here  also.  The  builder 
and  occupier  of  the  P}Tamid  is  therefore  determined.  But 
this  does  not  refute  the  statement  of  Herodotus,  that  the 
Dodecarchs,  only  200  years  before  his  time,  had  undertaken 
*  Compare  my  Chronology  of  the  Egyptians,  i.,  p.  262,  &c. 


92  LAKE  M(ERIS. 

the  building  of  the  Labyrinth.  We  have  found  no  inscrip- 
tions in  the  ruins  of  the  great  masses  of  chambers  which 
surround  the  central  space.  It  may  be  easily  proved  by 
future  excavations  that  this  whole  building,  and  probably 
also  the  disposition  of  the  twelve  courts,  belong  only,  in 
fact,  to  the  26th  Dynasty  of  Manetho,  so  that  the  original 
temple  of  Amenemha  formed  merely  part  of  this  gigantic  ar- 
chitectural enclosure. 

So  much  for  the  Labyrinth  and  its  Pyramid.  The  exact 
position  which  its  biiilder  occupies  in  history  is  by  far  the 
most  important  result  that  we  could  altogether  hope  to 
obtain  here.  I  must  now  say  a  few  words  respecting  the 
other  world's  wonder  of  this  province,  Lake  Mceris. 

The  obscurity  which  has  hitherto  hung  over  it  seems  at 
length  to  have  been  dispersed,  by  a  beautiful  discovery,  which 
was  made  a  short  time  ago  by  the  excellent  Linant,  the 
director  of  the  water-works  of  the  Pascha.  Hitherto  there 
was  only  one  point  of  agreement,  that  the  lake  was  situated 
in  the  Paium.  Now,  as  at  the  present  day  there  is  only  one 
single  lake  in  this  remarkable  semi-oasis,  the  Birqet-el-Qorn, 
which  is  situated  in  its  most  remote  and  lowest  parts,  this 
must  be  the  Lake  Moeris ;  we  have  no  other  choice.  Its 
celebrity,  however,  rested  principally  upon  this,  that  it  was 
an  artificially  designed  (Herodotus  says  an  excavated)  and 
extremely  profitable  lake,  which  was  filled  by  the  Nile  when 
it  was  high,  and  when  the  water  was  low,  flowed  off  again  by 
the  connecting  canal;  and  irrigating  on  the  one  side  the 
grounds  of  tlie  Faium,  on  the  other,  during  its  reflux,  the 
adjacent  tracts  of  the  Memphitic  district,  at  the  same  time 
yielded  extremely  rich  fishing  near  the  double  sluices  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Paium.  To  the  annoyance  of  Antiquarians 
and  Philologists,  not  one  of  all  these  peculiarities  belonged  to 
the  Birqet-el-Qorn.  This  is  not  an  artificial,  but  a  natural 
lake,  which  is  only  in  part  fed  by  the  water  of  the  Jussuf 
canal.  One  of  its  useful  quahties  can  be  hardly  said  to  exist, 
since  no  fishing-boat  enlivens  its  surface,  encircled  by  an 
arid  desert,  because  the  brackish  water  contains  scarcely  any 
fish,  and  is  in  no  degree  favourable  to  the  vegetation  on  its 


LAKE  M(EBIS.  9g^ 

shores.  When  the  Nile  is  at  its  height,  and  there  is  a  more 
abundant  supply  of  water,  it  certainly  rises;  but  it  is 
situated  at  far  too  low  a  level  to  allow  a  di'op  of  the  water 
with  which  it  has  been  supplied,  ever  to  flow  back  again. 
The  whole  province  must  be  buried  beneath  the  flood  before 
the  waters  could  find  their  way  back  into  the  valley,  for  the 
artificially  lowered  rocky  channel  through  which  "the  Bahr. 
Jussuf  id  brought  hither,  branching  oft'  from  the  Nile  about 
forty  miles  south,  lies  higher  than  the  whole  oasis.  The 
surface  of  the  Birqct-el-Qorn  is  now  about  seventy  feet  below 
the  point  where  the  canal  flows  in,  and  can  never  have  risen 
to  a  much  greater  height,*  which  is  proved  by  some  remains 
of  a  temple  upon  its  shores.  As  little  does  it  agree  with  the 
statement,  that  the  Labyrinth,  and  the  capital  Arsinoe,  the 
present  Medinet-el-Faium,  were  situated  on  its  shores. 

Linant  has  now  discovered  huge  dams,  miles  in  length,  of 
the  most  ancient  solid  construction,  which  separates  the 
ujjpermost  portion  of  the  shell-like,  convex-formed  basin  of 
the  Faium  from  those  parts  which  are  situated  lower  and 
lie  farther  back,  and,  according  to  him,  could  only  have  been 
intended  to  retain  artificially  a  great  lake,  which  now,  how- 
ever, since  the  dams  have  been  long  broken  through,  lies 
completely  dry.  This  lake  he  holds  to  be  that  of  Maoris.  I 
must  confess  that  the  whole  thing,  when  he  first  communi- 
cated it  to  me  by  word  of  mouth,  impressed  me  with  the  idea 
that  it  was  an  extremely  happy  discovery,  which  will  also 
spare  us  in  future  many  fruitless  researches.  An  inspection  of 
the  ground  has  now  removed  all  my  doubts  as  to  the  correct- 
ness of  this  view.     I  hold  it  to  be  an  insubvertible  fact. 

♦  According  to  Linant,  the  diflFerence  amounts  to  22  metres,  that  is, 
70  feet  ]iheiulaud  (72  English).  In  June,  1843,  an  engineer  of  the 
Viceroy,  Nascimboni,  who  was  engaged  in  making  a  new  map,  and 
levelling  the  P'aium,  visited  us  in  our  camp,  at  the  Pyramid  of  Moeris. 
lie  had  only  found  a  descent  of  2  metres  (6  feet  6  inches  English)  from 
Illalum  to  Medinct,  but  from  tlience  to  Birqet-el-Qorn,  75  metres  (246 
feet  English).  I  am  not  aware  that  anything  has  been  published  about 
this  considerable  difference  of  measurements.  Sir  G.  Wilkinson,  in  his 
Mod.  Eg.  and  Thebes,  vol.  ii.,  346,  states  the  surface  of  the  water  to  be 
about  125  English  feet  below  the  bank  of  the  Nile  at  Beuisuef. 


94.  JOUEXET  EOrXD  THE  PAIUM. 

Linant's  treatise  is  now  being  printed,  and  I  will  send  it  to 
you  as  soon  as  it  is  to  be  had.* 

But  finally,  if  you  ask  me  wbat  tbe  name  of  Moeris  has 
to  do  with  that  of  Amenemha,  I  can  only  answer,  nothing. 
The  name  Moeris  neither  appears  on  the  monuments,  nor  in 
Manetho.  I  rather  think  that  here  again  we  find  one  of  the 
numerous  misunderstandings  of  the  G-reeks.  The  Egyptians 
called  the  lake,  Phiom  en  mere,  the  Lake  of  the  Nile-inunda- 
tion (Copt.  UHpe^  inundatio).  The  Greeks  made  out  of 
mere^  the  water  which  formed  the  lake,  a  "King  Moeris  who 
designed  the  lake,  and  then  troubled  themselves  no  further 
about  the  true  originator,  Amenemha.  At  a  later  period  the 
whole  province  received  the  name  c|)iou,  Phiom,  the  Lake, 
from  which  the  present  name  Paium  has  been  derived. 


LETTER  XII. 

The  Labyrmth,  the  I8ih  July,  1843. 

"We  have  accomplished  our  journey  round  that  remarkable 
province,  the  Paium,  very  rarely  visited  by  Europeans,  which, 
on  account  of  its  fertility,  may  be  named  the  Garden  of 
Egypt ;  and  precisely  because  these  parts  are  almost  as  un- 
known as  the  distant  oases  of  Libya,  you  will,  perhaps,  be 
glad  to  hear  some  more  details  about  them  from  me. 

I  started  with  Erbkam,  E.  AYeidenbach,  and  Abeken,  on 
the  3rd  of  July.  We  went  from  the  Labpinth  along  the 
Bahr  "Wardani,  which  skirts  the  eastern  border  of  the  desert, 
and  forms  the  boundary,  to  which  the  shore  of  Lake  Moeris 
at  one  time  extended  towards  the  East.  The  canal  is  now 
dry,  and  is  replaced  by  the  still  more  recent  Bahr  Scherkieh, 
which,  as  they  say,  was  made  by  the  Sultan  Barquq,  and  is 
conducted  through  the  middle  of  the  Labyrinth ;  it  at  first 
crosses  the  Wardani  several  times,  but  afterwards  keeps  more 

*  Memoire  sur  le  las  Mceris,  presente  et  lu  a  la  Societe  Egyptienne 
l9  5  Juillet,  1842,  par  Linant  de  Bellefonds,  inspecteur-general  des 
ponts,  et  chaussees,  publie  par  la  Societe  Egyptienne.  Alexandrie, 
1843.    4to.    Compare  my  Chronology,  vol.  i.,  p.  26ii  &c. 


DAMS  OF  LAKE  M(EEIS.  95 

inland.  In  three  hours  we  reached  the  point  where  the  huge 
dam  of  Moeris  projects  from  the  middle  of  the  Faium  into  the 
desert.  It  runs  out  in  this  spot  for  about  one  and  a  half  geo- 
graphical miles  as  far  as  El  Elam.  In  the  middle  of  this  tract 
it  is  intersected  by  Bahr-bela-ma,  a  deep  bed  of  a  stream,  wliich 
now  cuts  througli  the  old  lake-bottom,  and  is  usually  dry,  but 
when  there  is  a  great  supply  of  water,  it  is  used  as  an  outlet 
for  the  Buperlluity  towards  Tamieh,  and  into  the  Birqet-el- 
Qom.  Tliis  enabled  us  to  examine  the  dam  itself  from  a 
nearer  point  of  view.  The  current,  which  at  times  is  swollen 
and  rapid,  has  scooped  out  a  passage  for  itself  since  the  de- 
struction of  the  lake,  not  only  tlirough  the  alluvial  soil  that 
formed  the  bottom  of  the  lake,  but  also  through  several  other 
layers  of  earth,  and  even  through  the  slightly  indurated 
limestone  lying  undermost ;  so  that  the  water,  at  this  season, 
reduced  certainly  to  a  minimum,  flows  about  sixty  feet  lower 
than  the  present  dry  bottom  of  the  lake.  I  measured  accu- 
rately the  separate  layers  of  earth,  and  carried  away  with  me 
a  specimen  of  each.  The  breadth  of  the  dam  cannot  be 
detenniued  with  certainty,  but  may,  perhaps,  have  amounted 
to  150  feet.  The  height  of  the  dam  has  probably  become 
somewhat  lower  with  time.  I  found  it  to  be  1  m.  90  (6  feet 
;3  inches  Euglish)  above  the  present  bottom  of  the  lake,  and 
5  m.  GO  (IS  feet  4  inches  English)  above  the  opposite  plain. 
If  we  suppose  this  last  to  be  on  a  similar  level  with  the 
original  bottom  of  the  lake  (which  was,  however,  probably 
lower,  because  the  external  ground  was  irrigated,  and  con- 
sequently became  elevated),  then  the  dam,  apart  from  its 
gradual  levelling  from  above  downwards,  must  have  been 
formerly  as  much  as  5  m.  GO,  consequently  17  feet  high,  and 
the  ground  in  the  inner  part  of  the  lake,  during  its  existence 
of  more  than  two  thousand  years,  must  have  risen  by  deposits 
of  earth  about  11  feet.  But  if  we  admit  that  the  black  earth 
also,  from  11  to  12  feet  thick,  which  is  still  to  be  found  outside 
of  the  dams,  was  deposited  within  the  historical  times,  then 
the  above  numbers  would  even  require  to  be  doubled.  Thus 
we  have  some  idea  how  its  utility  must  have  been  much 


96  MONUMENTS  OF  EIAHMU. 

diminished  with  time;  for  the  lake  (if  we  assume  that  its 
circumference  is  what  Linant  asserts),  by  the  filling  up  of  the 
11  feet  of  earth,  must  have  lost  13,000  millions  of  square 
feet  of  ^the  water,  which  it  might  have  formerly  contained. 
An  elevation  of  the  dams  could  in  no  possible  manner  have 
prevented  this,  because  they  had  been  already  placed  in 
exact  relation  to  the  point  of  the  influx  of  the  Bahr  Jussuf 
into  the  Eaium.  This  may  have  been  one  of  the  most 
substantial  reasons  why  Lake  Moeris  was  allowed  at  a  later 
period  to  fall  into  decay;  and  even  Linant's  bold  project  to 
restore  the  lake  could  not  wholly  repair  this  loss,  even  if  he 
were  to  make  the  Bahr  Jussuf  branch  off  from  the  Nile  at  a 
much  higher  point  than  was  thought  necessary  by  the  old 
Pharaohs. 

In  two  hours  and  a  half  from  this  intersection,  following 
the  dam  to  El  Elam,  where  it  ceases,  we  reached  the  remark- 
able remains  of  the  two  monuments  of  Biahmu,  which  Linant 
considers  to  be  the  Pyramids  of  Moeris  and  his  consort,  which 
were  seen  by  Herodotus  in  the  lake.  They  were  built  out 
of  great  massive  blocks ;  the  nucleus  of  each  of  them  is  still 
standing,  but  not  in  the  centre  of  the  almost  square  rect- 
angle, which,  by  their  appearance,  they  seem  to  have  originally 
occupied.  They  rose  at  an  angle  of  64°,  therefore,  with  a 
much  steeper  inclination  than  Pyramids  usually  do.  Their 
present  height,  which,  however,  seems  to  have  been  originally 
the  same  as  it  is  now,  only  amounts  to  twenty-three  feet,  to 
which,  nevertheless,  must  be  added,  a  pecidiar  and  somewhat 
projecting  base  of  seven  feet.  A  small  excavation  convinced 
me  that  the  lowest  layer  of  stone,  which  only  reaches  four 
feet  beneath  the  present  ground,  was  founded  neither  on 
sand  nor  on  rock,  but  upon  Nile  mud,  which  more  especially 
render  the  great  antiquity  of  these  buildings  very  doubtful. 
At  least  it  is  to  be  inferred  from  this  that  they  did  not 
stand  in  the  lake,  which,  if  it  encircled  them,  must  have  had 
a  remarkable  curve  outwards  to  the  north-west. 

"We  had  been  riding  hitherto  on  the  line  of  separation 
between  the  ancient  bottom  of  the  lake  and  the  adjacent 


BIEQET-EL-QOEK.  97 

district.  The  former  is  bare  and  sterile,  since  the  land,  at 
the  present  day,  lies  so  high  that  it  cannot  be  overflowed. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  broad  tract  of  land  enclosing  the 
ancient  lake,  forms  by  far  the  most  beautiful  and  most  fertile 
part  of  the  Faium.  AVe  now  traversed  this  district,  while 
we  left  the  capital  of  the  province,  Medinet  el  Faium,  with 
the  mounds  of  the  ancient  Ceocodilopolis  on  our  left, 
and  rode  by  Selajin  and  Fidimin,  to  Agamieh,  where  we  spent 
tlie  night.  The  next  morning,  near  Bischeh,  we  reached 
the  limits  of  this  continuous  garden-land.  Here  we  entered 
a  new  region,  forming  a  striking  contrast  to  the  former, 
by  its  sterility  and  desolation,  enriching  it  like  a  girdle,  and 
separating  it  from  the  crescent-shaped  Birqet-el-Qorn, 
situated  in  the  lowest  and  most  distant  part.  About  mid- 
day we  reached  the  lake.  The  only  boat  which  was  to  be 
had,  far  and  wide,  conveyed  us  in  an  hour  and  a  half  across 
the  expanse  of  water,  encircled  all  around  by  the  desert,  to 
an  island  lying  in  the  centre  of  the  lake,  called  Geziret-el- 
Qorn.  We,  however,  found  nothing  on  it  worthy  of  notice, 
not  even  a  trace  of  a  building,  so  towards  the  evening  we 
returned. 

The  next  morning  we  re-crossed  the  lake  in  a  more  north- 
erly direction,  and  landed  on  a  small  peninsula  of  the  oppo- 
site sliore,  which  rises  at  once  150  feet,  to  a  plateau  of  the 
Libyan  Desert,  commanding  the  whole  Oasis.  AYe  then 
ascended,  and  about  an  hour  distant  from  the  shore,  in  the 
midst  of  the  inhospitable  desert,  devoid  of  water  and  vegeta- 
tion, we  found  the  extensive  ruins  of  an  ancient  town,  which 
on  earlier  maps  is  named  Medinet  Nimrud.  They  were 
utterly  unacquainted  with  this  name  here  ;  the  place  was 
only  known  by  the  designation  of  Dimeh.  On  the  following 
day,  the  7th  July,  the  regular  plan  of  these  ruins,  with  the 
remains  of  its  temple,  was  noted  down  by  Erbkam,  who  had 
spent  the  night  here  with  Abeken.  There  are  no  inscriptions 
on  the  temple,  and  whatever  sculptures  we  found,  were 
placed  in  this  remarkable  building  at  a  late  period.     It  was 

H 


VQ  THE  FAIUM. 

probably  intended  only  as  a  military  station,  against  in- 
vasions from  Lybia  into  tbe  rich  country  of  the  Eaium. 

On  the  8th  July  we  went  in  our  boat  to  Qase  Qeetjn, 
an  old  town  on  the  southern  end  of  the  lake,  with  a  temple 
of  late  date,  and  in  excellenc  preservation,  but  with  no  in- 
scriptions, the  plan  of  which  was  taken  on  the  following  day. 
Prom  this  place  we  followed  the  southern  frontier  of  the 
Oasis,  by  Neslet,  as  far  as  the  ruins  of  Medinet  Madi,  on 
Lake  Gthaeaq,  near  which  the  ancient  dams  of  Lake  Moeris 
projected  from  the  north,  and  on  the  11th  July  we  again 
arrived  at  our  camp  on  the  ruins  of  the  Labyrinth.  "We 
found  all  well,  including  Frey,  whom  we  had  left  indisposed, 
and  whose  repeated  attacks  of  illness,  probably  produced  by 
the  climate,  cause  me  some  anxiety. 

To-morrow  I  am  thinking  of  going  to  Cairo  with  Abeken 
and  Bonomi,  to  hire  a  boat  for  our  journey  south,  and  to 
prepare  everything  that  is  requisite  for  our  final  departure 
from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  capital.  We  shall  take  four 
camels  with  us  for  the  transport  of  the  monuments  which 
we  have  collected  in  the  Faium,  and  strike  into  the  shortest 
road,  namely,  from  here  by  Tamieh,  which  we  did  not  touch 
at,  on  our  journey  round,  and  thence  across  the  desert 
heights  which  separate  this  part  of  the  Faium  from  the 
Nile  valley ;  we  shall  then  descend  into  it  by  the  Pyramids 
of  Dahschur,  and  thus  hope  to  reach  Cairo  in  two  days  and 
a  half. 

LETTEE  XIII. 

Cairo,  the  Uth  August,  1843. 
I  EEGEET  to  say  that  I  received  such  uncomfortable 
accounts  of  the  state  of  Frey's  health,  soon  after  our  arrival 
in  Cairo,  that  Abeken  and  Bonomi  at  length  determined 
to  go  to  our  camp,  and  to  bring  him  in  a  litter  which 
they  took  with  them,  from  the  Labyrinth  to  Zani  on  the 
Nile,  and  thence  by  water  to  this  place.    As  soon  as  Br. 


ETHIOPIAN  MiJNTSCRIPTS.  99 

Pruner  had  seen  him,  he  pronounced  that  the  only  advisable 
course  was  to  let  him  immediately  return  to  Europe.  The 
liver  complaint,  under  which  he  was  found  to  be  suffering, 
ijs  incurable  in  Egypt,  and  as  it  had  already  made  great  pro- 
gress, he  left  us  yesterday  at  mid-day.  May  the  climate  of 
home  soon  restore  our  friend's  strength,  who  is  both  amiable 
and  full  of  talent,  and  is  a  great  loss  to  us  all. 

A  few  days  ago,  I  purchased  some  Ethiopian  Manuscripts 
for  the  Library  at  Berlin,  from  a  Basque,  Domingo  Lorda, 
who  has  lived  a  long  time  in  Abyssinia,  and  accompanied 
D'Abadie  on  several  journeys.  He  bought  them,  probably, 
for  a  small  sum,  in  a  convent  situated  on  the  island  of 
Thana,  near  Gorata,  one  day's  journey  from  the  sources  of 
the  Blue  Nile,  whose  inhabitants  were  brought  to  a  state  of 
great  distress  by  locusts.  The  one  contains  the  history  of 
Abyssinia,  from  Solomon  to  Christ,  and  is  said  to  come  from 
Asum,  and  to  be  between  five  and  six  hundred  years  old. 
This  first  part  of  the  Abyssinian  history,  called  Kebre 
Negest,  "  the  Fame  of  the  Kings,"  is  said  to  be  far  more 
rare  than  the  second,  Tarik  Negest,  "  the  History  of  the 
Kings  ;"  but  this  manuscript  also  contains  at  the  end  a  list  of 
the  Ethiopian  kings  since  the  time  of  Christ.  The  largest 
manuscript,  adorned  with  many  great  pictures  in  the  By- 
zantine style,  and  by  what  I  learn  about  it  from  Lieder, 
almost  unique  in  its  kind,  contains  chiefly  the  histories  of 
saints.  The  third  contains  the  still  valid  Canones  of  the 
Church,  complete.  I  hope  that  it  will  be  an  acceptable  pur- 
chase for  our  Library.* 

*  The  same  Domenico  Lorda  again  travelled  that  year  to  Abyssinia, . 
and  sent  six  other  Abyssinian  manuscripts  to  Herr  Lieder  from  thence, 
who  showed  them  to  me  on  my  return  to  Cairo.  These,  also,  on  my 
suggestion,  were  afterwards  obtained  for  the  Koyal  Library.  By 
M.  Lorda's  account  they  contain : 

A.  Abuscher — Almanacco  perpetuo  Civilc-Ecclesiastico-Storico. 

B.  Sktta  Negiiest— Codice  dell' Imperadore  Eeschias. 

C.  JusEPH — Storia  Civile,  ed  Ecclesiastica.  (?) 

D.  Beraan — Storia  Civile,  ed  Ecclesiastica. 

E.  Philkisius  e  Marisak— Due  Opere,  in  un  volume,  che  trat- 
tano  della  Storia  Civile. 

F.  SiNODDS — Dritto  Canonico. 

h2 


100  JOTJENEY  TO  UPPER  EGYPT. 

The  purchases  for  our  journej  are  also  now  completed ;  a 
convenient  boat  is  hired,  which  will  save  us  from  the  great 
difficulties  of  a  land  journey,  since  this,  more  especially  during 
the  impending  season  of  inundation,  could  scarcely  be  accom- 
plished. 


LETTEE  XIV. 

Thebes,  the  \Bth  October,  1843. 
On  the  16th  August  I  went  from  Cairo  to  the  Faium, 
from  which  our  camp  broke  up  on  the  21st.  Two  days  later 
we  sailed  away  from  Beni-suee,  and,  sending  the  camels 
back  to  Cairo,  only  took  the  asses  with  us  in  our  boat,  as,  on 
considering  the  matter  more  attentively,  we  found  that  the 
land  journey,  originally  contemplated  by  me  along  the  range 
of  the  hdls  some  distance  from  the  river  on  the  western 
side,  was  quite  impracticable  during  the  inundation,  and  on 
the  eastern  bank  would  have  been  partly  too  fatiguing,  and 
partly  devoid  of  objects  of  interest  to  us  on  account  of  the 
proximity  of  the  desert  frontier  on  that  side,  beyond  which 
there  is  nothing  for  us  to  explore.  We  have,  therefore,  only 
made  excursions  from  the  boat,  sometimes  on  foot,  some- 
times on  asses,  principally  to  the  eastern  hills,  which  are 
easily  reached ;  but  on  the  western  bank,  also,  we  have 
visited  the  most  important  points. 

The  very  day  after  our  departure  from  Beni-suef  we  found 
a  small  rock-temple  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  village  of 
SuRARiEH,  unnoticed  by  earlier  travellers,  not  even  men- 
tioned by  "Wilkinson,  which,  as  early  as  the  19th  Dynasty, 
was  dedicated  by  Menephthes,  the  son  of  Eamses  Miamun, 
to  the  Egyptian  Yenus  (Hathor).  Farther  on  are  several 
groups  of  tombs,  which  had  also  hitherto  received  scarcely 
any  notice,  although,  from  their  extreme  antiquity,  they  are 
peculiarly  interesting.  The  whole  of  Middle  Egypt,  judging 
by  the  tombs  which  have  been  preserved,  seems  to  have 
principally  flourished  during  the  Old  Monarchy,  before  the 


SU-T.  101 

invasion  of  the  Ilyksos,  not  only  during  the  12tli  Dynast^', 
to  which  the  renowned  tombs  of  Benihassan,  Siut,  and 
Berscheh  belong,  but  even  as  early  as  the  6th.  We  have  found 
groups  of  tombs,  of  considerable  size,  from  this  early  period, 
which  belonged  to  towns  whose  names  even  are  no  longer 
known  in  the  later  Egyptian  geography,  because  they  had 
probably  been  destroyed  by  the  Hyksos.  We  remained  the 
longest  time  in  Benihassan,  namely,  sixteen  days.  Hence 
the  season  has  now  arrived,  which  we  must  not  lose  for  our 
journey  south.  In  the  following  places,  therefore,  notes 
alone  were  taken,  and  paper  impressions  of  a  most  impor- 
tant kind ;  for  instance,  in  El  Amarna,  in  Siut,  in  the  vene- 
rable Abydos,  and  in  the  more  recent,  but  not  on  that 
account  less  magnificent,  Temple  of  Dendera,  which  is 
almost  in  perfect  preservation.  In  Siut  we  visited  the 
Governor  of  Upper  Egypt,  Selim  Pascha,  who  for  several 
months  past  has  been  working  an  ancient  alabaster  quarry, 
which  had  been  re-discovered  by  the  Bedouins,  between 
Berscheh  and  Gauata. 

The  town  of  Siut  is  beautifully  built  and  in  a  charming 
situation,  especially  when  viewed  from  the  steep  rock  on  the 
western  bank  of  the  valley  close  behind  it.  The  view  of  the 
overflowed  Xile  valley  from  these  heights  is  the  most  beauti- 
ful wliich  we  have  yet  seen,  and,  at  the  same  time,  extremely 
characteristic  of  the  inundation  season,  in  which  we  are  now 
travelling.  From  the  foot  of  the  steep  rock,  a  small  dam  over- 
grown with  sont-trees,*  and  a  bridge,  leads  across  to  the  town, 
which  lies  like  an  island  in  the  boundless  sea  of  inundation. 
The  gardens  of  Ibrahim  Pascha,  extending  on  the  left,  form 
another  island,  green  and  fresh,  covered  with  trees  and  brush- 
wood. The  town,  with  its  fifteen  minarets,  rises  high  above 
the  mounds  of  rubbish  of  the  ancient  Lycopolis.  A  still  larger 
dam  leads-  from  it  to  the  Nile,  and,  towards  the  south,  other 
long  dams  may  be  seen,  like  floating  threads  drawn  across  the 
mass  of  waters.  On  the  other  side  the  Arabian  chain  of  mouu- 

*  Sont,  or  Acacia,  ^limosa  Nilotica. — Sir  G.  Wilkinson. — Tr. 


102  THEBES, 

tains  approach  tolerably  near,  by  vrliich  the  valley  becomes 
closed  in,  forming  a  picture  which  can  be  easily  surveyed. 

"We  have  been  in  the  royal  city  of  Thebes  since  the  6th 
October,  Our  boat  landed  us  first,  under  the  walls  of  Luqsor, 
at  the  most  southern  point  of  the  Theban  ruins.  The  strong 
current  of  the  river  has  here  encroached  to  within  such  a 
short  distance  of  the  old  temple  that  it  is  itself  even  in 
considerable  danger.  I  endeavoured  to  obtain  a  view  over 
the  ruins  of  Thebes,  from  the  summit  of  the  temple,  in  order 
to  compare  it  with  the  image  that  I  had  formed  of  it  from 
maps  and  descriptions.  The  distances,  however,  are  too  great 
to  make  a  good  picture.  You  look  upon  a  wide  landscape, 
in  which  the  scattered  groups  of  temples  stand  forth  as  single 
points,  and  can  only  be  recognised  by  one  who  has  a  previous 
knowledge  of  the  subject.  Towards  the  north,  at  the  dis- 
tance of  a  short  hour,  rise  the  mighty  Pylones  of  Kaenak, 
which  of  itself  formed  a  town  of  temples  altogether  gigantic 
and  astonishing.  TTe  spent  the  succeeding  days  in  taking  a 
cursory  survey  of  them.  On  the  other  side  of  the  river,  at 
the  foot  of  the  Libyan  range,  are  the  Memnoxia,  once  an 
uninterrupted  series  of  splendid  buildings,  unrivalled  among 
the  monuments  of  antiquity.  Even  now  the  temples  of 
Medinet  Habu,  with  their  high  mounds  of  rubbish,  are 
distinguishable  in  the  distance,  at  the  southern  end  of  this 
series,  exactly  opposite  to  Luqsor ;  and  at  the  northern  end, 
an  hour  from  that  point  dovrn  the  river,  the  temple  of 
QuR^^AH,  which  is  in  good  preservation ;  between  them  both 
stands  the  temple  of  Eamses  Miamun  (Sesostris),  abeady  of 
gi-eat  celebrity,  from  its  description  by  Diodorus.  Thus  the 
four  Arabian  places,  Karnak,  and  Luqsor  on  the  eastern  side 
of  the  river,  Quruah,  and  IMediuet  Habu  on  the  western, 
form  a  great  square,  which  measures  on  every  side  about 
half  a  geographical  mile,  and  gives  us  some  notion  of  the 
magnitude  of  the  most  splendid  portion  of  ancient  Thebes. 
How  far  the  remaining  inhabited  portion  of  the  City  of  a 
Hundred  Gates  extended  towards  the  east,  north,  and  south, 
it  is  difficult  to  discover  now,  because  all  that  in  the  lapse  of 


THEBES.  103 

time  has  not  maintained  its  origuial  position,  has  gradually 
disappeared  beneath  the  annually  increasing  rise  of  the  soil 
of  the  lower  plain  by  the  inundation. 

No  one  ever  inquires  here  about  the  weather,  for  one  day- 
is  exactly  like  the  other,  serene,  clear,  and  hitherto  not  too 
hot.  AVe  have  no  momiag  or  evening  red,  as  there  are 
neither  clouds  nor  vapours ;  but  the  first  ray  of  the  morning 
calls  forth  a  world  of  colours  in  the  bare  and  rugged  lime- 
stone mountains  closing  in  around  us,  and  in  the  brownish 
glitterinf^  desert,  contrasted  with  the  black,  or  green-clothed 
lower  phiin,  such  as  is  never  seen  in  northern  countries. 
There  is  scarcely  any  twilight,  as  the  sun  sinks  down  at 
once.  The  separation  of  night  and  day  is  just  as  sudden  as 
that  between  meadow  and  desert ;  one  step,  one  moment, 
dindes  the  one  from  the  other.  The  sombre  brilliancy  of 
the  moon  and  starlight  nights  is  so  much  the  more  refreshing 
to  the  eye  which  has  been  dazzled  by  the  ocean  light  of  day. 
The  air  is  so  pure  and  dry,  that  except  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  river,  in  spite  of  the  sudden  change  at  sunset, 
there  is  no  fall  of  dew.  We  have  almost  entirely  forgotten 
what  rain  is,  for  it  is  above  six  months  since  it  last  rained 
with  us  in  Saqiira.  A  few  days  ago  we  rejoiced,  when,  towards 
evening,  we  discovered  some  light  clouds  in  the  sky  to  the 
south-west,  which  reminded  us  of  Europe.  Nevertheless,  we 
do  not  want  coolness  even  in  the  daytime,  for  a  light  \vind  is 
almost  always  blowing,  which  does  not  allow  the  heat  to 
become  too  oppressive.  Added  to  this,  the  Nile  water  is 
pleasant  to  the  taste,  and  may  be  enjoyed  in  great  abundance 
without  any  detriment. 

The  clay  water-bottles  (Qulleh)  are  invaluable  to  us ;  they 
are  composed  of  fine,  porous  Nile  mud,  which  allows  the 
water  to  ooze  through  them  continually ;  the  evaporation  of 
this,  as  soon  as  it  appears  on  the  warm  surface,  as  is  well 
known,  produces  cold,  and  thus,  by  this  simple  process,  the 
bottles  are  constantly  kept  cool  in  the  hottest  period  of 
the  day.  The  drinking-water,  on  that  account,  is  usually 
cooler  than  it  is  in  Europe  during  the  summer.     We  princi- 


104  LirE  IN  TUE  EAST. 

pally  live  upon  poultry,  and,  as  a  change,  we  occasionally 
kill  a  sheep.  There  are  very  few  vegetables.  Every  meal 
is  concluded  by  a  dish  of  rice.  For  dessert  we  have  the 
most  beautiful  yellow  melons,  or  juicy  red  water-melons. 
The  dates  also  are  excellent,  but  not  to  be  had  everywhere. 
I  have  at  length,  to  the  great  joy  of  my  companions,  learned 
to  smoke  a  Turkish  pipe,  which  keeps  me  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
in  perfect  Icef:  by  this  word  the  Arabs  designate  their  easy 
repose,  their  comfort;  for  as  long  as  one  ''  drinks"  the  blue 
smoke  of  the  long  pipe  from  the  shallow  bowl,  so  easily 
overset,  it  is  impossible  to  leave  one's  position,  or  to  under- 
take anything  else.  AYe  have  a  convenient  costume — loose 
trousers  of  light  cotton  stuff,  and  over  them  a  wide  long 
tunic,  with  short  wide  sleeves.  Besides  this  I  wear  a  broad, 
turned-up,  grey  felt  hat,  as  a  European  badge,  which  keeps 
the  Arabs  in  proper  respect.  We  eat,  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  country,  on  a  low  round  table,  not  a  foot  high, 
sitting  on  cushions,  with  our  legs  folded  under  us.  This 
position  has  become  so  convenient  to  me,  that  I  even  write 
in  it,  sitting  on  my  couch,  the  letter  portfolio  on  my  knees, 
as  a  support.  Above  me  is  spread  out  a  canopy  of  gauze 
to  keep  off  the  flies — this  most  shameless  plague  of  Egypt 
during  the  day — and  the  gnats  during  the  night.  In  other 
respects,  we  suffer  fiir  less  from  vermin  here,  than  in  Italy. 
"We  have  not  yet  been  bit  by  scorpions  and  serpents,  but  in 
return  there  are  very  malignant  wasps,  which  have  frequently 
stung  us. 

We  shall  only  remain  here  till  the  day  after  to-morrow, 
and  shall  then  travel  towards  the  south  without  stopping. 
We  shall  wait  for  our  return  to  devote  as  much  time  and 
labour  as  the  treasures  in  this  spot  demand.  At  Assuan,  on 
the  frontiers  of  Egypt,  we  shall,  for  the  first  time,  change 
our  mode  of  transport,  and  send  back  oiu'  great  boat,  in 
which  we  already  feel  quite  at  home.  On  the  other  side  of 
the  cataracts  we  shall  take  two  smaller  boats  for  our  journey 
onwards. 


GEEEK  INSCRIPTIONS.  105 


LETTEE  XY. 


Korusko,  the  20th  Aovember,  1843.* 
OuE  joumej  from  the  Faiura,  through  Eg}'pt,  was  neces- 
sarily very  much  hastened  owing  to  the  advanced  season.  "We 
have,  therefore,  rarely  remained  longer  at  a  place  than  was 
requisite  for  a  hasty  survey,  and  have  chiefly  confined  our- 
selves, during  the  past  three  months,  to  keeping  an  exact 
register  of  what  exists,  and  to  increasing  our  important  col- 
lection of  impressions  upon  paper  of  the  most  interesting 
inscriptions. 

On  our  rapid  journey  as  far  as  Wadi  Haifa,  we  have  col- 
lected from  three  to  four  hundred  impressions,  or  exact 
copies,  of  Greek  inscriptions  alone.  They  often  confirm  Le- 
tronne's  acute  conjectures,  but  also  not  unfrequently  cor- 
rect the  unavoidable  mistakes  of  such  a  difficult  work  as  his. 
In  the  inscription  from  which,  without  any  foundation,  it 
was  proposed  to  settle  the  position  of  the  town  of  Akoris,  his 
conjecture,  I2IAI  AOXIAAI,  is  not  verified :  L'Ii6te  had  read 
MOXIAAI,   but   it    is    MQXIAAI,   and    before    EPQEQS,    not 

EPEEQ2. 

The  dedicatory  inscription  of  the  Temple  of  Pselciiis  (as 
it  is  given  in  the  inscription,  in  accordance  with  Strabo,  in- 
stead of  Pselcis)  is  almost  as  long  again  as  Letronne  assumes 
it  to  be,  and  the  first  line  does  not  end  witli  KAE0nATPA2, 
but  with  AAEA<I>H2,  so  that  we  must  probably  restore  it 
thus : 

'Ynep  QaaiXiCDS  YlToXefiaiov  /cat  ^aa-iXia-crTjs 

KXeonaTpas  Trjs  dbeX(pT)s 
Oeiov  Evfpy€To)v.f      .      .      .4, 

*  This  letter,  addressed  to  Alexander  von  Humboldt,  has  been  already 
printed  in  the  Prussian  Gazette,  Berlin,  9th  Feb.,  1844. 

t  "  Dedicated  to  King  Ttolemy  and  Cleopatra,  his  sister,  benevolent 
deities." — Tr. 

X  The  emendation,  aStX^f)?,  in  this  inscription,  which  dates  from 
the  thirty-fifth  year  of  Euergetes  (b.c.  136),  is  of  importance  in 
certain  chronological  determinations  of  that  period.    Letronne  (Rec. 


106  geeee:  iirscEiPTioisrs. 

At  the  end  of  the  second  line  TQIKAI,  therefore,  is  con- 
firmed. The  surname  of  Hermes,  "^hich  follows  in  the  third 
line,  however,  has  been  nAOTnNOYa>l  (ai)  differing  from  the 
writing  in  other  later  inscriptions,  where  he  is  called 
nAYTN0Y$I2.  The  same  surname  is  also  not  unfrequently 
found  in  hieroglyphics,  and  then  sounds  Tut  en  Pnuhs,  that 
is  to  say,  Thoth  of,  or  Lord  of  Uvov.-^,  a  town,  the  site  of 
which  is  still  uncertain.  I  have  already  met  with  this  Thoth 
in  temples  of  earlier  date,  where  he  frequently  appears  beside 
the  Tliotli  of  ScJwiun,  i.  e.  Hermopolis  Magna.  In  the  po- 
pular language  it  was  called  Pet-Pnuls  ;  from  this,  it  became 
Taot-F7iupMs. 

The  interesting  problem  about  the  owner  of  the  name, 
EvTrdifop,  which  Letronne  endeavours  to  solve  in  a  new 
manner,  by  means  of  the  inscriptions  on  the  obelisk  of  Philae, 
appears  to  be  decided  by  tlie  hieroglyphic  inscriptions,  where 

des  Inscr.,  vol.  i.,  p.  33 — 56)  assumed  that  Cleopatra  III.,  the  niece  and 
second  wife  of  Euergetes  II.,  was  here  meant.  Hence  alone  he  con- 
cluded that  this  king,  in  the  oflScial  documents  written  before  his  ex- 
pulsion, in  the  year  132  e.g.,  only  joined  the  name  of  his  wife,  Cleopatra 
III.,  to  his  own,  and  therefore  he  fixed  the  date  of  all  the  inscriptions, 
in  which  both  the  Cleopatras,  the  sister,  and  the  (second)  wrfe  are 
named  after  the  king,  in  the  period  after  the  return  of  Euergetes  (127 
— 117),  e.g.  the  inscriptions  on  the  obelisk  of  Philffi  (Rec, vol.  1.,  p. 
333).  In  this  determination  of  the  time,  he  is  followed  by  Franz  (Corp. 
Inscr.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  285),  who,  for  the  same  reason,  fixes  the  date  of  the 
inscriptions  (c.  i.,  no.  4841,  4860,  4895,  4896)  between  b.c.  127  and  117, 
although  he  was  already  aware  of  my  correction  of  the  inscription  of 
Pselchis  (c.  i.,  no.  5073). 

It  is  indeed  singular  that  only  one  Cleopatra  is  mentioned  in  the 
inscription  of  Pselchis;  but  as  it  is  Cleopatra  II.,  the  first  wife  of  the 
king,  who  he  always  distinguishes  from  his  second  wife  by  the  appel- 
lation of  sister;  it  cannot  thence  be  concluded  that  from  the  very 
commencement  of  his  second  marriage  he  expressly  excluded  all  men- 
tion of  the  latter  in  the  documents.  This  also  is  confirmed  in  the  most 
distinct  manner  by  two  Demotic  Papyri  belonging  to  the  royal  museum, 
in  which  both  Cleopatras  are  mentioned,  although  the  one  papyrus  is  as 
early  as  the  year  b.c.  141,  the  other,  a  duplicate,  is  from  the  year  b.c. 
136.  All  inscriptions  which,  according  to  Letronne  (Rec.  des  Inscr., 
tome  i.,  no.  7,  26,  27,  30,  31)  and  Pranz  (Corp.  Inscr.,  vol.  iii.,  no. 
4841,  4860,  4895,  4896),  from  the  reasons  stated,  date  between  the 
years  b.c.  127  and  117,  may,  therefore,  still  be  placed,  with  equal 
probability,  in  the  years  145  to  132. 


GEEEK  I>^SCHIPT10:!fS.  107 

the  same  circumstances  recur,  but  lead  to  other  conjec- 
tures.* I  have  found  several  very  perfect  series  of  the 
Ptolemies,  the  longest  down  to  Xeos  Dionysos,  and  his  con- 

*  Compare  Letronne,  Recueil  des  Inscriptious  Grecques  de 
I'Egypte,  tome  i.,  p.  365,  &c.  Ptolemy  Eupator  is  not  mentioned  by 
authors.  He  was  introduced  for  the  first  time  among  the  predecessors 
of  Soter  II.,  who  were  worshipped  as  divinities,  in  a  Greek  papyrus 
[in  Leyden*],  which  was  composed  in  the  reign  of  Soter  II.,  in  the 
year  b.c.  105,  and  he  was  inserted  between  Philometor  and  Euergetes. 
Bockh,  who  published  the  Papyrus  (1821),  referred  the  surname  of 
Euergetes  to  Soter  II.  and  his  wife,  and  considered  Eupator  to  be  a  siu*- 
name  of  the  deified  Ecergictes  II.  In  the  sameyear,  ChanipoUion  Figeac 
also  wrote  about  this  papyrus,  and  endeavoured  to  prove  that  Eupator 
was  the  son  of  Philometor,  who  was  killed  by  Euergetes  II.,  on  his 
ascent  to  the  throne.  Tiiis  view  was  assented  to  at  a  later  period  by  St» 
Martin,  Bockh,  and  Letronne  (Rech.  pour  ser  Ii  I'Hist.  dc  I'Eg.,  p.  124). 
Meanwhile,  the  name  of  Eupator  was  discovered  in  a  second  papyrus 
from  the  reign  of  Soter  II.,  as  well  as  in  the  letter  of  Numenius  on 
the  Pliilensic  obelisk  of  H.  Bankes,  from  the  time  of  Euergetes  II.  In 
both  inscriptions  the  name  of  Eupator  was  mentioned;  it  did  not,  how- 
ever, follow,  but  preceded  Philometor,  and  therefore  could  not  signify 
his  son.  Letronne  now  conjectured  (Recueil  des  Inscr.,  vol.  i.,  p. 
365)  that  Eupator  was  another  surname  of  Philometor.  But  then  it 
would  not  have  been  kol  6eov  Evirdropos  /cut  6eov  ^^iXoixrjTopoSf 
but  Koi  6(ov  'EvnaTopos  tov  kol  ^tXofirjTopos.  In  a  letter  to  Letronne, 
of  the  1st  Dec,  1844,  from  Thebes,  which  is  printed  in  the  Revue 
Archeol.,  vol.  i.,  p.  678,  &c.,  I  communicated  to  him  that  I  had  also 
found  the  name  of  Eupator  in  several  hieroglyphic  inscriptions,  and 
indeed  always  before  Philometor.  Tlie  same  reason  which  I  had  em- 
ployed against  Letronne's  explanation  of  the  Greek  name  (the  pas- 
sage is  not  printed  along  with  it  in  the  Revue),  namely,  the  simple 
repetition  of  the  Oeov,  did  not  even  permit  us  in  the  hieroglypliic  list 
to  consider  Eupator  another  surname  of  Philopator.  He  nmst  have 
been  a  Ptolemy  who,  for  a  short  time  at  least,  was  acknowledged  as 
king,  but  who  is  not  mentioned  by  authors;  and,  indeed,  according  to 
Franz  (Corp.  Inscr.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  285),  and  also  by  the  acknowledg- 
ment of  Letronne  (Rec,  vol.  ii.,  p.  536),  he  must  have  been  an  elder 
brother  of  Philometor,  who  died  in  a  few  months,  and  therefore  was 
omitted  in  the  Ptolemaic  canon. 

But  the  son  of  Philometor,  and  of  his  sister,  Cleopatra  IL,  mentioned 
by  Justinus  and  Josephus,  who  was  formerly  believed  to  have  been 
re -discovered  in  the  Eupator  of  the  [Leyden]  papyrus,  is  particularly 
mentioned  in  the  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  among  the  other  Ptolemies, 
in  his  place  between  Philometor  and  Euergetes,  and  we  thence  become 
acquainted  with  his  name,  which  had  not  been  added  by  the  authors. 
He  is  sometimes  named  Philopator,  sometimes  Neos  Philopator, 


*  Note.— Leyden  in  place  of  Berlin,  both  here  and  below,  is  a  correc- 
tion by  the  author,  April,  1853.— Tr. 


108  GEEEK  INSCRIPTIONS. 

sort  Cleopatra,  wlio,  according  to  the  hieroglypliic  inscrip- 
tions, was  surnamed,  by  the  Egyptians,  TsTPHiENA.*  A 
fact  worthy  of  consideration  is  connected  with  this,  namely, 
that  in  this  Egyptian  list  of  the  Ptolemies,  the  first  king 
is  never  Ptolemy  Soter  I.,  but  Philadelphxjs.  In  Qurna, 
where  Euergetes  II.  worships  his  predecessors,  not  alone 
Philometor,  the  brother  of  Euergetes  is  wanting,  which  is 
easily  explained,  but  also  Soter  I.,  and  Eosellini  is  mistaken 
when  he  regards  the  king  who  is  worshipped  under  the  title 
of  Philadelphus,  about  whom  Champollion  was  still  doubtful, 
as  Soter  I.  instead  of  Euergetes  I.  It  appears  that  the  son 
of  Lagus,  although  he  assumed  the  title  of  king  from  the  year 
305,  was  yet  not  acknowledged  as  such  by  the  Egyptians,  as 

and  he  must  therefore  also  be  placed  in  future  as  Philopator  II.  in  the 
series  of  the  reigning  Ptolemies.  Among  fourteen  hieroglyphic  lists  of 
the  Ptolemies,  which  come  down  at  least  as  far  as  the  second  Euergetes, 
seven  of  their  number  give  Philopator  II.;  in  four  other  lists,  in 
which  his  name  might  appear,  he  is  passed  over,  and  these  all  seem  to 
belong  to  the  first  years  of  Euergetes  II.,  his  murderer,  when  the  omis- 
sion is  easily  explained.  It  is  natural  that  he  does  not  appear  in  the 
canon,  because  neither  he  nor  Eupator  lived  to  witness  a  change  of 
the  Egyptian  year  during  his  reign ;  on  the  other  hand,  as  was  to  be 
expected,  he  is  also  named  in  the  protocol  of  the  Demotic  Papyrus,  in 
which  the  Ptolemies  who  are  worshipped  as  divinities  are  exliibited, 
and  in  which  Young  had  also  already  correctly  acknowledged  Eupator. 
In  fact,  he  is  here  cited  in  all  the  lists  with  which  I  am  acquainted  (five 
in  Berlin,  from  the  years  114,  103,  99,  89,  one  in  Turin  from  the  year 
89),  which  are  of  more  recent  date  than  Euergetes  II.,  as  well  as  in  a 
Berlin  papyrus  from  the  fifty-second  year  of  Euergetes  himself  (b.c. 
118).  A  comparison  also  of*  the  demotic  lists  shows  finally  that  the 
transposition  of  the  names  Eupator  and  Philometor  in  the  Greek  papy- 
rus from  the  year  b.c.  105  (not  106,  as  Franz  writes — Corp.  Inscr., 
p.  285)  is  not  alone  an  error  of  the  copyist  in  writing,  as  this,  and  other 
transpositions  also,  are  not  unfrequent  in  the  Demotic  Papyrus.  The 
diflferent  object  of  the  hieroglyphic  and  the  demotic  lists  makes  it  con- 
ceivable that  such  deviations  were  not  admissible  in  the  former,  as  in 
the  latter  lists. 

*  Wilkinson  (Mod.  Eg.  and  Th.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  275)  considers  this 
Cleopatra  Tryph^na  to  be  the  celebrated  Cleopatra,  the  daughter 
of  Neos  Dionysos;  Champollion  (Lettres  d'Eg.,  p.  110)  thinks  she  ia 
the  wife  of  Philometor;  but  the  Shields  connected  with  her  name 
belong  neither  to  Ptolemy  XIV.,  the  elder  son  of  Neos  Dionysos,  nor  to 
Ptolemy  VI.  Philometor,  but  to  Ptolemy  XIII.  Neos  Dionysos,  or 
Auletes,  who  is  always  called  on  the  monuments  Philopator  Philadel- 
phus.   Cleopatra  Tryph^na  was,  consequently,  the  wife  of  Ptolemt 

AUL.KTES. 


GREEK  iySCEIPTIO>'S.  109 

ills  shields  do  not  appear  on  a  single  monument  which  was 
erected  by  him.  So  much  the  more  do  I  rejoice  that  I  have 
nevertheless  found  his  name  mentioned  once,  in  an  inscrip- 
tion of  Philadelphus,  as  the  father  of  Arsinoe  II.  But  here, 
we  must  observe,  Soter  has,  indeed,  the  royal  ring  round  liis 
name,  and  also  a  peculiar  Throne-shield  name,  but  quite  con- 
trary to  the  usual  Egyptian  custom,  no  king's  title  stands 
before  either  of  the  shields,  although  his  daughter  is  called 
*•  royal  daughter"  and  "  royal  lady."* 

*  The  inscription  alludecJ  to  is  to  be  found  in  the  rock-grotto  of 
EcHMiM.  and  M-as  undoubtedly  first  engraved  before  the  reign  of  Ptolemy 
Philadclplius.  He  is  also  named  with  double  shields  and  tlie  usual 
royal  titles,  but  without  the  surname  of  Soter  upon  a  stele  in  Vienna, 
•which  was  erected  in  tlie  reign  of  Phiiopator.  Here,  however,  he  bears 
a  different  Throne  shield  from  that  in  Eclunim,  and  certainly,  strange 
to  say,  it  is  the  same  which  even  before  his  time  was  borne  by  Philip 
Aridaius,  and  Alexander  II.,  under  whom  Ptolemy,  son  of  Lagus,  was 
governor  of  Egypt.  He  is  also  mentioned  upon  a  statue  of  the  king  in 
the  ruins  of  Memphis,  on  which  the  Horus  name  of  the  king  also  ap- 
pears, and  which  probably  might  have  been  engraved  during  his  reign. 
Finally,  tlie  Soters  are  also  frequently  mentioned  by  tlieir  surnames 
alone  at  the  head  of  the  worshipped  ancestors  of  later  kings;  as  in  the 
liosetta  inscription,  and  in  the  bilinqual  decrees  of  PhilsD  (see  below, 

p.  121),    T*    T*  .   while  Soter  II.  is  always  written  r-i  ^ 

p.  iiuter  enti  nehem,  which  would  correspond  to  the  Coptic  n .  flOTTOCiT- 

n(J^I_I,f/ews  servator.  In  the  demotic  inscriptions,  the  first  Soters  are 
also  designated  by  nehem,  and  in  the  singular  by  the  Greek  word, 
p.  s>iter. 

Although,  therefore,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  Soters  who,  ac- 
cording to  the  Demotic  Papyrus,  were  especially  worshipped  along  with 
the  otiier  Ptolemies,  not  only  in  Alexandria  and  Ptole3iais,  but  also 
in  TiiKBEs,  were  regarded  as  the  head  of  the  Ptolemaic  Dynasty,  it  is 
nevertheless  so  much  the  more  remarkable,  that  hitherto  not  a  single 
structure  can  be  pointed  out  which  was  erected  under  Ptolemy  Soter 
when  king,  although  he  ruled  twenty  years  in  this  capacity.  In  addi- 
tion to  this,  the  above-mentioned  hieroglyphic  lists  of  the  Ptolemies 
commence  the  series  without  exception,  not  with  the  Soters,  but  with 
the  Adelphes  ;  and,  as  was  mentioned  before,  his  shields  in  Echmim  bear 
nn  royal  title;  and  in  Karnak  under  Euergetes  II.,  in  one  and  the  same 
representation,  Philadelphus  is  designated  as  king,  and  the  Soter,  cor- 
responding to  him  in  space,  as  710  king.  In  the  demotic  series  of  kings, 
also,  of  the  Papyrus,  the  Alexandrine  series  was  wont  to  omit  the 
Soters,  till  the  reign  of  Philometor,  and  to  make  the  Adelphes  imme- 
diately succeed  Alexander  the  Great.  The  earliest  period  that  I  have 
met  with  the  Soters  is  in  a  Papyrus,  from  the  17th  year  of  Phiiopator 


110  TOMBS  IN  CENTEAL  EGYPT. 

It  is  astonishing  how  little  Champ ollion  seems  to  have 
attended  to  the  monuments  of  the  Old  Monarchy.  During 
his  whole  journey  through  Central  Egypt,  as  far  as  Dendera, 
he  only  found  the  rock-tombs  of  Benihassan  worthy  of 
notice,  and  these  also,  he  considered  to  be  works  of  the  16th 
and  17th  Dynasties,  therefore  belonging  to  the  New  Mo- 
narchy. He  also  mentions  Zauiet  el  Meitin  and  Siut,  but 
hardly  notices  them. 

So  little  has  been  said  by  others,  besides,  on  most  of  the 
monuments  of  Central  Egypt,  that  almost  everything  that 
we  here  found  was  new  to  me.  I,  therefore,  was  not  a  little 
astonished  when  we  discovered  in  Zauiet  el  Meitin  a  series 
of  nineteen  rock-tombs,  all  of  them  bearing  inscriptions,  which 
informed  us  who  were  their  inhabitants,  and  belonging  to  the 
old  time  of  the  6th  Dynasty,  therefore  extending  almost  to 
the  period  of  the  great  Pyramids.  Eive  among  them  con- 
tain, more  than  once,  the  Shield  of  Makrobioten  Apappus 
Pepi,  who  is  said  to  have  lived  to  the  age  of  a  hundred  and 
six  years,  and  to  have  reigued  a  hundred  years ;  in  another, 
Cheops  is  mentioned.  Apart  from  these  there  is  also  a 
single  grave  from  the  period  of  Ramses. 

In  Benihassan,  I  have  had  a  complete  drawing  made  of 
an  entire  rock-tomb ;  it  is  to  give  a  specimen  of  the  magnifi- 
cent style  of  architecture  and  artistic  skill,  from  the  second 

(B.C.  210),  the  oldest  of  the  Berlin  collection;  the  Theban  worship  of 
the  Ptolemies  seems  to  have  whuUy  excluded  the  Soters.  Although 
the  commencement  of  the  roy.d  guvernment  is  therefore  fixed  in  the 
year  b.c.  305,  as  is  specified  in  tlie  canon,  and  most  undeniably  con- 
firmed by  the  above-mentioned  liieroglyphic  stele  in  Vienna,  which  has 
been  already  cited  for  that  purpose  by  my  friend,  M.  Pinder  (Beitr. 
zur  Aelterem  Miinzkunde,  vol.  i.,  p.  201)  in  his  instructive  essay,  On 
the  Era  of  Phihp  upon  Coins,  it  appears,  however,  to  have  offered 
another  legitimate  opinion,  by  which  not  Ptolemy  Lagus,  but  Phila- 
delphus,  the  first  son  of  the  king  (if  not  Porphyrogenitus),  was  con- 
sidered the  head  of  the  Ptolemies.  It  may  thence  be  also  explained 
why  we  find  an  astronomical  Era  employed  in  the  reign  of  Euergetes, 
that  of  the  otherwise  unknown  Dionysius,  which  began  from  the  year 
285,  the  first  year  of  the  rei^in  of  Pliiladelphus,  while  the  coins  of  Phi- 
ladelphus  do  not  reckon  as  the  cianmenceraent  of  a  new  era  from  the 
beginning  of  his  own  reign,  nor  from  the  year  305,  but  from  the  year  of 
the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great,  or  the  commencement  of  the  gover- 
norship of  Ptolemy.    (See  Pinder,  p.  205.) 


CENTEAL  EGYPT.  Ill 

flourisliing  period  of  the  Old  Monarcliy,  during  the  powerful 
12th  Dj-nasty.*  I  think  it  will  excite  some  attention  among 
the  Eg}'ptologists,  when  they  shortly  learn  from  Bunsen's 
work,  why  I  make  a  division  in  the  tablet  of  Abydos,  and 
why  I  ventured  to  transfer  Sestjetesen  and  Amenemha, 
these  well-known  Pharaohs  of  Heliopolis,  the  Faiiim,  Beni- 
hassan,  Thebes,  and  as  far  as  "Wadi  Haifa,  from  the  New, 
to  the  Old  Monarchy.  It  must  have  been  a  brilliant  period 
in  Egypt  at  that  time,  which  these  magnificent  halls  for  the 
dead  alone  testify.  At  the  same  time,  among  the  rich  re- 
presentations on  the  walls,  which  exhibit  a  high  standard 
of  the  peaceful  arts,  as  well  as  the  refined  luxury  of  the 
great  at  that  period,  it  is  interesting  even  then  to  meet  with 
the  prognostics  of  that  great  adverse  destiny,  which  brought 
Egypt  for  several  centuries  under  the  power  of  her  northern 
enemies.  Gladiatorial  games,  which  form  a  characteristic  re- 
presentation of  frequent  recurrence,  in  many  tombs  occupy 
entire  walls,  by  which  we  may  conclude  they  were  extensively 
practised  at  that  period,  but  afterwards  almost  disappeared. 
Among  these  we  frequently  find  amidst  the  red  or  dark- 
brown  people  of  the  Egyptian  race,  and  of  those  races  dwell- 
ing more  to  the  south,  a  very  light-coloured  people,  standing 
singly  or  in  small  divisions,  who  have  usually  a  different 
costume,  and  most  of  them  have  the  hair  of  the  head  and 
beard  red,  and  have  blue  eyes.  They  also  sometimes  appear 
among  the  domestics  of  persons  of  rank,  and  are  manifestly 
of  northern,  probably  of  Semetic,  origin.  "We  find  victories 
of  the  kings  over  the  Ethiopians  and  Negroes  mentioned  on 
the  monuments  of  that  period ;  therefore  it  is  not  surprising 
to  see  black  slaves  and  attendants.  We  learn  nothing  of 
wars  against  the  northern  neighbours,  but  it  appears  that 
the  migrations  of  people  from  the  north-east  had  already 
begun  at  that  time,  and  that  many  emigrants  sought  a  home 
in  the  fruitful  land  of  Egypt,  in  exchange  for  service,  or 
other  useful  employments. 

*  See  Denkmaler  aus   Aegypten  und  Aethiopien,  Abth.  II.,  Bl. 
123—133. 


112  J3EKISASSAN. 

I  here  allude  particularly  to  tlie  remarkable  scene  in  the 
tomb  of  the  royal  relative  Neheea-si-Numhotep,  the 
second  tomb  approaching  from  the  north,  which  gives  au 
animated  idea  of  the  entrance  of  Jacob  with  his  family,  and 
which  might  tempt  us  really  to  connect  these  circumstances, 
if  Jacob  had  not  come  at  a  much  later  period,  and  if  we  were 
not  compelled  to  acknowledge  that  such  immigrations  of  single 
families  could  never  have  been  a  rare  event.  These,  how- 
ever, were  the  predecessors  of  the  Hyksos,  and  assuredly  in 
many  respects  paved  the  way  for  them.  As  it  is  only  painted, 
and  is  still  in  very  good  preservation,  I  have  traced  through 
the  whole  representation,  which  is  about  eight  feet  long,  and 
one  and  a  half  high.  The  royal  scribe  Nefeuhotep,  who 
introduces  the  company  before  the  high  official,  to  whom  the 
tomb  belongs,  hands  him  a  sheet  of  papyrus.  Upon  this,  the 
sixth  year  of  King  Sesurtesen  II.  is  mentioned,  when  that 
family  of  thirty-seven  persons  came  to  Egypt.  Their  chief, 
and  lord,  was  called  Abscha,  they  themselves  Aamf,  a 
popular  name,  which  we  meet  with  again  associated  with  the 
same  light- coloured  race ;  this,  with  three  other  races,  is 
frequently  represented  in  the  royal  tombs  of  the  19th 
Dynasty,  and  formed  one  of  the  four  principal  families  of 
the  human  race  known  to  the  Egyptians.  Champollion, 
when  he  was  in  Benihassan,  regarded  them  as  Greeks ;  he 
was  not  then  aware  of  the  extreme  age  of  the  monuments 
which  were  before  him.  Wilkinson  considers  them  to  be 
prisoners ;  this  is  contradicted  by  their  appearing  with 
weapons  and  lyres,  with  women,  children,  asses,  and  baggage. 
I  view  them  as  a  migrating  Hyksos  family,  who  pray  to  be 
received  into  the  blessed  land,  and  whose  descendants,  per- 
haps, opened  the  gates  of  Egypt  to  the  Semetic  conquerors, 
aUied  to  them  by  race. 

The  town,  to  which  the  rich  rock-necropolis  of  Beni- 
hassan belonged,  and  which  is  named  in  the  hieroglyphic 
inscriptions  Nus,  must  have  been  of  considerable  size,  and, 
doubtless,  lay  opposite,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Nile,  where 
ancient  mounds  exist  even  at  the  present  time,  and  are 


CENTRAL  EGYPT.  113 

marked  upon  the  French  maps.  That  no  more  of  this  town 
of  ]N'us  vras  known  in  the  geography  of  the  Greeks  and 
Eomans  than  of  many  other  towns  of  the  Old  Monarchy, 
ought  not  to  surj)rise  us,  if  we  consider  that  the  dominion  of 
the  Hyksos  intervened,  which  lasted  five  hundred  years.  It 
is  thought  that  the  sudden  fall  of  the  Monarchy,  and  of  this 
flourishing  town,  may  be  ti-aced,  even  now,  to  have  happened 
at  the  end  of  the  12t]i  Dynasty  by  this  circumstance — that 
only  eleven  of  the  numerous  rock-tombs  have  inscriptions, 
and  that  among  these,  three  alone  were  quite  completed. 
Special  roads  of  considerable  width  led  to  these  last,  ascend- 
ing direct  from  the  bank  of  the  river,  which  near  the  steep 
upper  part  ended  in  steps  cut  out  of  the  rock. 

Benihassan,  however,  is  not  the  only  place  where  we 
became  acquainted  with  the  works  of  the  12th  Dynasty.  At 
Beescheh,  a  little  to  the  south  of  the  great  plain,  where 
the  Emperor  Hadrian,  in  honour  of  his  favourite,  who  was 
there  drowned,  built  the  town  of  Antixoe,  with  its  splendid 
streets,  even  now  partly  passable,  and  encompassed  with 
hundreds  of  columns,  a  narrow  valley  opens  to  the  east, 
where  we  again  found  a  series  of  splendidly  executed  rock- 
tombs  of  the  12th  Dynasty,  most  of  which,  unfortunately, 
were  mutilated  by  recent  quarrying.  In  the  tomb  of  Ki-si- 
Tutliotep  there  is  a  representation  of  the  transport  of  the 
great  Colossus,  which  has  been  already  published  by  EoseUini, 
but  without  the  accompanpng  inscriptions ;  from  these  we 
perceive  that  it  was  formed  of  limestone  (here,  for  the  first 
time,  I  learned  the  hieroglyphic  term  for  this),  and  that  it  was 
13  Egyptian  ells  high,  which  is  about  21  feet.*  A  series  of 
still  older  tombs  are  hewn  into  the  face  of  the  rock  on  the 
southern  side  of  the  same  valley,  but  with  very  few  inscrip- 
tions ;  to  judge  by  the  style  of  the  hieroglj^Dhics,  and  the 
titles  of  the  deceased,  they  belong  to  the  6th  Dynasty. 

Some  hours  farther  to  the  south  there  is  another  group  of 
tombs,  which  also  belong  to  the  6th  Dynasty ;  here,  likewise, 
King  Cheops  is   occasionally  mentioned,  whose  name  we 

*  See  Denkmal.  Abth.  n.,  Bl.  134. 

I 


114  SITJT. 

several  times  met  witli  before,  in  a  hieratic  inscription  in 
Benibassan.  "We  found  tombs  from  the  6th  Dynasty,  though 
with  few  inscriptions,  in  two  other  places  situated,  between 
the  valley  El  Amaexa,  which  contains  the  very  remarkable 
tomb-grottoes  of  King  Bech-en-Aten,  and  Siut.  Perring,  the 
measurer  of  the  Pyramids,  a  short  time  ago  seriously  endea- 
voured, in  an  essay,  to  maintain  the  strange  opinion,  which, 
however,  I  also  met  with  while  in  Cairo,  that  the  monuments 
of  El  Amarna  were  derived  from  the  Hyksos  ;  others,  on  ac- 
count of  their  striking,  though  not  inexplicable  peculiarities, 
would  even  carry  them  back  to  the  time  before  Menes. 
While  still  in  Europe  I  had  recognised  the  builder  of  these 
monuments,  and  some  other  allied  kings,  to  be  antagonistic 
kings  of  the  18th  Dynasty. 

Eock-tombs  of  vast  size  open  on  the  side  of  the  valley 
behind  Siut,  in  which,  even  from  a  distance,  we  recognised 
the  imposing  style  of  the  12th  Dynasty.  Here  also,  un- 
fortunately, many  of  these  splendid  remains  have  been  de- 
stroyed of  late,  as  it  was  found  more  convenient  to  break 
away  the  walls  and  columns  of  the  grottoes,  than  to  hew  out 
building  stones  from  the  rock  itself. 

I  learned  from  Selim  Pascha,  the  Governor  of  Upper 
Egypt,  who  received  us  in  a  most  friendly  manner  in  Siut, 
that  the  Bedouins  had  a  short  time  ago  discovered  some 
alabaster  quarries  in  the  eastern  range  of  mountains,  between 
two  and  three  hours  distant,  the  working  of  which  had  been 
committed  to  him  by  Mohammed  Ali ;  and  I  heard  from  his 
dragoman,  that  in  that  place  also  there  was  an  inscription  on 
the  rock.  I  therefore  determined  to  start  the  following  day, 
accompanied  by  the  two  Weidenbachs,  our  dragoman  and 
Kawass,  on  this  hot  ride,  on  the  Pascha' s  horses,  which  he 
had  sent  to  El  Bosra  for  the  purpose.  "We  found  there  a 
little  colony  of  eighteen  labourers,  thirty-one  souls  altogether, 
in  the  lonely,  sultry,  rocky  defile,  occupied  in  working  the 
quarries.  On  the  side  of  the  rock,  behind  the  tent  of  the 
overseer,  the  name  and  titles  of  the  wife,  so  highly  venerated 
by  the  Egyptians  of  the  first  Amasis,  the  head  of  the  18th 


PA>'OPOLIS.      ABTDOS.  115 

D}TiastT  which  expelled  the  Ilyksos,  were  preserved  in  dis- 
tinct, sharp-cut  hieroglypliics,  the  remains  of  an  inscription 
that  had  been  formerly  longer.  These  are  the  first  alabaster 
quarries  the  age  of  which  is  proved  by  an  inscription.  Not 
far  from  that  place  there  have  been  others  also,  which,  how- 
ever, had  been  worked  out  in  ancient  times.  Above  three 
hundred  blocks  have  been  already  obtained  from  the  one  now 
re-opened  during  the  last  four  months,  the  largest  of  which 
are  eight  feet  long  and  two  feet  thick.  The  Pascha  informed 
me,  through  his  dragoman,  that  on  our  return  I  should  find 
a  slab,  whose  size  and  form  I  might  myself  determine,  of  the 
best  quality  in  the  quarry,  and  which  I  might  accept,  as  a 
token  of  the  pleasure  he  had  derived  from  our  visit.  The 
alabaster  quarries  which  have  hitherto  been  discovered  in 
tills  neighbourhood,  are  all  between  Berscheh  and  Gauata; 
we  might  be  inclined,  therefore,  to  view  El  Bosra  as  the 
ancient  Alabastron,  if  the  passage  in  Ptolemy  could  be  recon- 
ciled with  it.  At  any  rate,  Alabastron  has  certainly  nothing 
to  do  with  the  ruins  in  the  valley  of  El  Amarna,  for  which  it 
has  hitherto  been  taken,  which  does  not  either  agree  with 
the  statement  of  Ptolemy,  and  with  which  it  appears  to  liave 
a  totally  difterent  relation.  The  hieroglyphic  name  of  these 
ruins  frequently  appears  in  the  inscriptions. 

in  the  rocky  chain  of  Gebel  Selin"  there  are  some  more 
vor}^  early  tombs  belonging  to  the  Old  Monarchy,  probably 
to  the  6th  Dynasty,  but  with  few  inscriptions. 

Opposite  to  old  PA^fOPOLis,  or  Chemmis,  we  climbed  up  to 
the  remarkable  rock-grotto  of  Pan  (Chem).  It  was  founded 
by  another  rival  kmg  of  the  18th  Dynasty,  whose  tomb  we 
have  since  visited  in  Thebes.  The  holy  name  of  the  city 
frequently  appears  in  the  inscriptions  here — "  The  Habita- 
tion of  Chem,"  i.  c.  Panopolis.  Whether  the  popular  name 
Chemmis,  now  Echmim,  originated  from  this,  is  perhaps 
doubtful.  I  have  always  found  two  difterent  names  for  Siut, 
Dendera,  Abydos,  and  other  towns ;  the  holy  and  the  popular 
name.  The  first  is  taken  from  the  chief  god  of  the  local 
temple ;  the  second  has  nothing  to  do  with  this.     My  hiero- 

I  2 


116  THEBES. 

glyptic  geograpby  increases  nearly  witli  every  new  monu- 
mental locality.  In  Abydos  we  came  to  tlie  first  of  the 
larger  temple  structures.  The  last  interesting  tombs  of  the 
Old  Monarchy  we  found  at  Qase  e'  Saiat  ;  they  go  as  far 
back  as  the  6th  Dynasty.  In  Dendeea  we  visited  the 
imposing  Temple  of  Hathor,  perhaps  the  best  preserved  in 
all  Egypt. 

"We  spent  twelve  overwhelming  and  astounding  days  in 
Thebes,  which  were  scarcely  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  thread 
our  way  among  the  palaces,  temples,  and  tombs,  whose  royal 
gigantic  splendour  fills  this  wide  plain.  "We  celebrated  the 
birthday  of  our  beloved  king  with  a  feu  de  joie,  and  waving 
of  banners,  with  chorus  songs  and  heartfelt  toasts,  which  we 
pledged  in  a  glass  of  genuine  German  Ehine  wine,  in  the 
jewel  of  aU  the  splendid  buildings  of  Egypt — the  palace  of 
Eamses-Sesostris :  it  was  erected  by  this  greatest  of  the 
Pharaohs  to  "Ammon-Ea,  the  "King  of  the  Gods,"  the 
tutelar  patron  of  the  royal  city  of  Amnion,  situated  on  a 
terrace  of  gentle  elevation,  calculated  to  command  the  wide 
plain  on  both  sides  of  the  majestic  river,  and  was  worthy  of 
himself  and  of  the  god.  I  need  scarcely  say  that  on  such 
an  occasion  we  also  thought  of  you  with  a  full  heart.  "When 
night  came,  we  kindled  a  kettle  of  pitch  above  the  outer 
entrance  between  the  Pylones,  on  both  sides  of  which  our 
banners  were  planted,  and  then  made  a  great  fire  flame  up 
from  the  flat  roof  of  the  Pronaos  (or  vestibule),  which  ex- 
hibited the  beautiful  proportions  of  the  hall  of  columns  in 
splendid  relief;  for  the  first  time  since  thousands  of  years 
we  again  restored  this  to  its  original  destination  as  a  festive 
hall — the  saloon  of  "  panegyrics."*  The  two  mighty  Memnon 
Colossi,  calmly  reposing  on  their  thrones,  were  also  magically 
lighted  up  in  the  distance. 

We  have  reserved  all  great  undertakings  for  our  return ; 
but  it  will  be  difficult  to  select  from  the  inexhaustible  mate- 
rials for  our  particular  object,  and  with  reference  to  what 

*  Panegyrics:  public  religious  assemblies  which  were  periodically 
held  in  Egypt.— Kenrick's  Ancient  Egypt.— Tb. 


TEMPLE  OF  EDFU.  117 

has  been  already  communicated  in  other  works.  On  the 
10th  of  October  we  quitted  Thebes.  HEEiioifTHis  we  saw 
in  passing.  The  great  hall  of  Esxeh  was  several  years  ago 
excavated  down  to  the  foundation  by  order  of  the  Pascha, 
and  afforded  us  a  magnificent  spectacle.  We  remained  three 
days  in  El  Kab,  the  ancient  Eileithyia,  Still  more  won- 
derful than  the  different  temples  of  this  once  mighty  place, 
are  its  rock-tombs,  most  of  which  date  from  the  commence- 
ment of  the  EgyjDtian  War  of  Freedom  against  the  Hyksos, 
and  throw  much  light  on  the  relations  between  the  D>Tiasties 
of  that  period.  Several  distinguished  persons,  buried  there, 
bear  the  strange  title  of  Masculine  K'urse  of  a  Eoyal  Prince, 
by  the  well-known  group  mena,  and  the  determinative  of  the 
female  breast,  in  the  Coptic  tongue  expressed  uoni.  The 
deceased  is  represented  with  the  prince  upon  his  lap. 

The  Temple  of  Enrr  is  also  among  those  which  are  in 
best  preservation ;  it  was  dedicated  to  Horus  and  to  Hathor, 
the  Egyptian  Venus,  who  is  here  in  one  place  called  "  The 
Queen  of  Men  and  Women."  Horus,  as  a  child,  is  repre- 
sented naked,  as  are  all  children  on  the  monuments,  and 
with  his  finger  on  his  mouth.  I  had  before  explained  the 
name  of  Harpokeates  from  it,  which  now  I  have  found 
represented  and  written  here  complete,  as  Hae-pe-cheoti, 
i.e.  "Horus  the  child."  The  Eomans  misunderstood  the 
Egyptian  gesture  of  the  finger,  and  out  of  the  child  who 
cannot  yet  speak,  they  made  the  Grod  of  Silence  who  will 
not  speak.  The  most  interesting  inscription,  hitherto  neither 
noticed  nor  mentioned  by  any  one,  is  on  the  outer  eastern 
wall  of  the  temple  built  by  Ptolemy  Alexander  I.  It 
contains  several  dates,  of  the  kings  Darius,  JS'ectanebus,  and 
of  the  falsely  so-called  Amyrtseus,  and  refers  to  the  landed 
estates  which  belonged  to  the  temple.  The  intense  heat  of  the 
day  we  spent  there  caused  me  to  postpone,  till  our  return,  a 
closer  examination,  and  taking  the  paper  impression  of  this 
wall.*     Gebel  Silsilis  is  one  of  the  places  most  abundant 

*  See  Denkmiil.  Abth.  IV.,  Bl.  38,  39.— A  special  essay  on  these 
inscriptions  is  prepared. 


118  CAXON  OF  PKOPORTIOl^S. 

in  historical  inscriptions,  •vrhicli  are  cTiieflj  connected  with 
the  vast  workings  of  the  sandstone  quarries. 

I  was  rejoiced  to  find  a  third  canon  of  tlie  proportioiis  of 
the  human  body,  in  Ombos,  differing  very  distinctly  from 
both  the  older  Egj^ptian  canons  which  I  had  before  met 
with  in  many  examples.  The  second  canon  is  closely  con- 
nected with  the  first,  and  oldest,  of  the  time  of  the  Pyra- 
mids, from  which  it  difiers  only  in  being  brought  to  greater 
perfection,  and  being  difi'erently  applied.  The  foot,  as  the 
unit,  is  the  foundation  of  both,  this  taken  six  times,  cor- 
responded to  the  height  of  the  body  when  upright ;  but  it 
must  be  observed,  from  the  sole  of  the  foot,  not  as  far  as  the 
crown  of  the  head,  but  only  to  the  top  of  the  forehead.  That 
portion  from  where  the  hair  begins  to  grow  on  the  upper 
part  of  the  forehead,  to  the  crown  of  the  head,  did  not  come 
into  the  calculation  at  all,  and  occupies  sometimes  three- 
quarters,  sometimes  the  half,  sometimes  still  less  of  a  fresh 
square.  The  difference  between  the  first  and  the  second 
canon  chiefly  rests  on  the  position  of  the  knee.  In  the 
Ptolemaic  canon,  however,  the  division  has  itself  been 
altered.  The  body  was  no  longer  divided  into  18  parts, 
as  in  the  second  canon,  but  into  21^  parts,  to  the  top 
of  the  forehead,  or  into  23  parts,  up  to  the  crown  of  the 
head.  This  is  the  division  which  Diodorus  gives,  in  the 
last  chapter  of  his  first  book.  In  the  lower  part  of  the 
body  the  proportions  of  the  second  and  third  canon  remain 
the  same ;  on  the  other  hand,  those  of  the  upper  part  of  the 
body  are  essentially  altered,  the  contours  become  altogether 
more  extravagant,  and  the  previous  beautiful  simplicity  and 
chasteness  of  the  forms,  in  which  consisted  both  its  grand 
and  peculiarly  Egyptian  character,  yielded  to  the  imperfect 
imitation  of  an  uncomprehended  foreign  style  of  art.  The 
proportion  of  the  foot  to  the  length  of  the  body  remains 
the  same,  but  the  foot  is  no  longer  placed  for  the  basis  as 
unit. 

At  AssuAN  we  were  obliged  to  change  our  boat,  on  ac- 
count of  the  Cataracts,  and  for  the  first  time  for  six  months 


PlIILAE.  119 

past,  or  longer,  we  bad  the  home  enjoyment  of  heavy  rain, 
and  a  violent  thunderstorm,  which  gathered  on  the  fartlier 
side  of  the  Cataracts,  crossed  -with  a  mighty  force  the  granite 
girdle,  and  then,  amidst  the  most  violent  explosions,  rolled 
down  the  valley  as  far  as  Cairo,  and  (as  we  have  since  heard) 
covered  it  with  floods  of  water,  such  as  had  been  scarcely 
remembered  before.  So  we  may  say,  with  Strabo  and 
Champollion,  "  In  our  time  it  rained  in  Upper  Egypt." 
Eain  is,  indeed,  so  rare  here,  that  our  guards  never  remem- 
bered to  have  beheld  such  a  spectacle,  and  our  Turkish 
Kawass,  who  is  in  all  respects  perfectly  acquainted  with  the 
country,  continued  to  leave  his  own  tilings  untouched ;  while 
we  long  before  had  been  carrying  our  chests  into  the  tents, 
and  having  them  better  secured,  he  quietly  repeated  ahaden 
moie,  "never  rain,"  a  word  which  since  then  he  has  often 
been  compelled  to  hear,  as  he  was  thoroughly  drenched,  and 
caught  a  violent,  feverish  cold,  for  which  he  was  obliged  to 
wait  patiently  in  Philae. 

The  situation  of  Philae  is  as  charming  as  it  is  interesting 
Dy  its  monuments.  Some  of  the  most  delightful  recollections 
of  our  journey  are  associated  with  our  eight  days'  residence 
on  this  holy  island.  "We  used  to  assemble  before  dinner, 
after  tlie  scattered  work  of  the  day,  on  the  elevated  temple 
terrace,  which  rises  abruptly  from  the  river,  on  the  eastern 
shore  of  the  island ;  we  there  watched  the  shadow  of  the 
temple  (which  is  in  good  preservation,  and  built  of  sharply 
cut,  deep-coloured  glowing  blocks  of  sandstone)  steal  over 
the  river,  and  mingle  with  the  black  volcanic  masses  of 
rock,  towering  above  each  other,  between  which  the  golden 
yellow  sand  pours  into  the  valley  like  streams  of  fire.  The 
island  appears  only  to  have  become  holy  to  the  Egyptians 
at  a  late  period,  for  the  first  time  under  the  Ptolemies. 
Herodotus,  who  during  the  rule  of  the  Persians  ascended  as 
far  as  the  Cataracts,  does  not  mention  Philae  at  all ;  it  was 
at  that  time  inhabited  by  the  Ethiopians,  who  were  also  in 
possession  of  half  of  the  island  of  Elephantine.  The  oldest 
buildings  now  to  be  found  upon  the  island  were  erected  on 


120  INSCEIPTIONS  AT  PHILAE. 

the  soutliern  point  by  N^ectanebus,  tbe  last  king  but  two 
of  Egyptian  origin,  almost  a  hundred  years  after  the  journey 
of  Herodotus.  There  are  no  traces  of  earlier  remains,  not 
even  of  any  that  were  destroyed  or  built  up  into  other  build- 
ings. Many  older  inscriptions  are  to  be  found  upon  the 
large  neighbouring  island  of  Bigeh,  named  in  hieroglyphics 
Senmtjt.  As  early  as  the  Old  Monarchy,  it  was  adorned 
with  Egyptian  monuments ;  for  we  have  found  a  granite 
statue  of  King  Sesurtesen  III.  from  the  12th  Dynasty.  The 
little  rocky  island  KoNOSSO,  named  in  hieroglyphics  Kekes, 
also  contains  very  old  inscriptions,  engraved  upon  the  rock, 
in  which  a  new  and  hitherto  wholly  unknown  King  of  the 
Hyksos  period  is  also  named.  Hitherto  the  hieroglyphic 
name  of  the  island  of  Philae  was  read  Manlak.  I  have  found 
the  name  undoubtedly  more  than  once  written  Hak ;  hence 
with  the  article,  Philak  became  in  the  mouth  of  the 
Greeks  Philai.  The  sign  which  Champollion  read  "  man,'* 
in  other  groups  changes  into  i,  thence  the  expression  I-lak, 
P-i-lak,  Memphitic  Ph-i-lak,  is  now  established. 

We  have  made  a  valuable  discovery  in  the  court  of  the 
great  Temple  of  Isis,  of  two  lilingual  decrees  of  the  Egyp- 
tian priests,  that  is  to  say,  drawn  up  in  the  Hieroglyphic 
and  Demotic  characters ;  they  are  tolerably  rich  in  words, 
and  one  of  them  contains  the  same  text  as  the  decree  of  the 
E^tsetta  stone.  I  have,  at  least,  up  to  the  present  moment, 
compared  the  last  seven  lines,  which  correspond  with  the 
inscription  of  Eosetta,  not  only  in  their  contents,  but  also 
in  the  length  of  each  single  line ;  the  inscription  must  be 
copied  before  I  can  say  more  about  it ;  at  all  events,  it  is  no 
inconsiderable  advantage  to  Egj^tian  pliilology,  if  only  a 
portion  of  the  fragmentary  decree  of  Eosetta  can,  through 
this,  be  completed.  The  whole  of  the  first  portion  of  the 
Eosetta  inscription  which  precedes  the  decree,  is  here  want- 
ing. Instead  of  this,  there  is  a  second  decree  beside  it, 
which  refers  to  the  same  Ptolemy  Epiphanes ;  in  the  intro- 
duction, the  "  Portress  of  Alexander,"  i.  e.  the  town  of 
AJsxandria,  is  mentioned  for  the  first  time,  on  the  menu- 


I>'SCEirTIOJ^S  AT  PnilAE.  121 

ments  which  have  hitherto  become  known.  Both  decrees 
conclude,  like  the  Eosetta  inscription,  with  the  intention  to 
set  up  the  inscription  in  Hieroglyphic,  Demotic,  and  Greek 
characters.  Nevertheless,  the  Greek  is  wanting  here ;  un- 
less, perhaps,  it  was  \\Titten  down  in  red,  and  rubbed  out 
when  Ptolemy  Lathyrus  cut  his  hieroglyphic  inscriptions 
over  the  earlier  ones.* 

The  hierogl}^hic  succession  of  the  Ptolemies,  which  ap- 
pears here,  begins  again  with  Philadelphus  ;  whereas,  in  the 
Greek  text  of  the  Eosetta  inscription,  it  begins  with  Soter. 
Another  very  remarkable  fact  is,  that  Epiphanes  is  here 
called,  the  son  of  Ptolemy  Philopator  and  Cleopatra,  while, 
by  the  historical  accounts,  the  only  wife  of  Philopator  was 
Arsinoe,  and  she  is  besides  so  named  iu  the  Eosetta  inscrip- 
tion, and  on  other  monuments.  She  is  also  certainly  called 
Cleopatra  in  one  passage  of  Pliny,  but  this  might  have  been 
considered  a  mistake  of  the  author,  or  of  the  manuscript,  if 
a  hieroglyphic,  and,  indeed,  an  official  document  did  not 
even  now  present  the  same  change  of  names.  There  are 
now,  therefore,  no  longer  any  grounds  to  place  the  mission 
by  the  Eoman  Senate  of  Marcus  Atilius,  and  Marcus  Acilius 
to  Egypt,  to  negotiate  a  new  alliance  on  account  of  the 
Queen  Cleopatra,  who  is  mentioned  by  Livy,  under  Ptolemy 
Epiphanes,  as  is  done  by  Champollion  Pigeac,  instead  of  under 

♦  The  first  news  of  the  discovery  of  these  important  inscriptions, 
which  had  not  been  noticed  by  tlie  French-Tuscan  expedition,  excited 
some  surprise.  Simultaneously  with  the  more  exact  description  of 
them  in  the  Prussian  Gazette,  a  short  English  notice  of  them  appeared, 
in  which  the  discovery  of  a  second  copy  of  the  Eosetta  inscription  was 
mentioned,  and,  indeed,  in  Meroe.  More  recently,  when  M.  Ampere 
had  brought  an  impression  of  the  inscription  to  Paris,  the  learned 
academician,  M.  de  Saulcy,  denied  that  the  decree  had  anything  to  do 
with  the  Rosetta  mscription,  and  felt  himself  obliged  to  ascribe  it  to 
Ptolemy  Philometor,  I  therefore  took  an  opportunity  to  point  out 
more  accurately,  in  two  letters  to  H.  Letronne  (Rev.  Archeol.,  vol.  iv., 
p.  i.,  &c.,  and  p.  240,  &c.),  as  well  as  in  an  essay,  in  the  Papers  of 
the  German  Oriental  Society  (vol.  i.,  p.  264,  &c.),  that  the  document 
in  question  had  been  drawn  up  in  the  21st  year  of  Ptolemy  Epiphanes, 
and  that  it  contained  a  repetition  of  the  actual  decree  of  the  Rosetta 
inscription,  which  referred  to  Cleopatra,  who  had  meanwhile  been 
elevated  to  the  throne. 


122  PHILAE. 

Ptolemy  Philopator  as  other  authors  relate.  We  must 
rather  assume  now,  either  that  the  wife  and  sister  of  Philo- 
pator bore  both  names,  which,  indeed,  even  then  would  not 
quite  remove  the  difficulties ;  or  that  the  project  mentioned 
by  Appian,  of  a  marriage  between  Philopator  and  the  Syrian 
Cleopatra,  who  afterwards  became  the  wife  of  Epiphanes, 
was  carried  into  effect  after  the  murder  of  Arsinoe,  though 
the  authors  give  us  no  account  of  it.  Here,  naturally,  I 
am  without  the  means  of  making  this  point  perfectly  clear.* 

The  multitude  of  Greek  inscriptions  in  Philae  is  incalculable, 
and  it  will  interest  Letronne  to  hear,  that  on  the  base  of  the 
second  obelisk,  which  still  exists  in  its  original  place  and  posi- 
tion, of  which  only  a  portion  has  travelled  with  the  other  obelisk 
to  England,  I  have  found  the  remains  of  a  Greek  inscription, 
written  in  red,  difficult  indeed  to  decipher,  which,  perhaps,  was 
at  one  time  also  gilt,  similar  to  the  two  last  discovered  upon 
the  base  in  England.  I  have  already  written  to  Letronne,  that 
the  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  of  the  obelisk,  which,  together 
with  the  Greek  one  of  the  base,  I  myself  copied  in  Dorset- 
shire, and  which  I  afterwards  published  in  my  "  Egyptian 
Atlas,"  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  Greek  inscription,  and 
were  not  even  set  up  simultaneously ;  but  it  still  remains  a 
question,  whether  the  inscription  of  the  second  base  was 
not  in  connexion  with  that  of  the  first ;  the  correspondence 
of  the  three  known  inscriptions  certainly  appears  exclusively 
confined  to  themselves. 

The  chief  temple  of  the  island  was  dedicated  to  Isis.  She 
is  called  by  preference  "  The  Lady  of  Philek."  Osiris  was 
only  debs  (Tvuvaos,  which  has  its  peculiar  hieroglyphic  expres- 
sion, and  he  is  only  sometimes  exceptionally  called  "  Lord  of 
Philek ;"  on  the  other  hand,  he  was  "  Lord  of  Ph-i-ueb,  i.  e. 
Abaton,  and  Isis,  who  was  there  o-vwaos,  is  only  exceptionally 

*  The  name  Cleopatra,  instead  of  Arsinoe,  in  the  hieroglyphic  in- 
scription, appears  solely  to  rest  on  an  error  of  the  writer,  which  was 
avoided  in  the  demotic  inscription,  for  here  Arsinoe  stands  correctly. 
The  hieroglyphic  text  of  the  inscription  of  Rosetta  is  also  less  correct 
than  the  demotic. 


EXniOriAK  JOUENEY.  123 

called  "The  Lady  of  Ph-i-ueb."  Even  from  this,  we  may 
infer,  that  the  famous  tomb  of  Gsiris,  on  his  own  island  of 
Phiueb,  was  not  upon  Philek.  Both  places  were  expressly 
designated  by  their  determinatives  as  Islands.  There  is, 
therefore,  no  question  that  the  Abaton  of  inscriptions  and 
authors  was  not  a  particular  place  upon  the  island  of  Philae ; 
it  was  itself  an  iiland.  Diodorus  and  Plutarch  both  say  so, 
in  distinct  terms,  as  they  place  it  irpbs  ^ikais.  Diodorus  ex- 
pressly designates  the  island  with  the  tomb  of  Osiris,  as  a 
peculiar  island,  which,  on  account  of  this  tomb,  was  called 
Upuv  nediov,  '*  the  sacred  plain."  This  is  a  translation  of 
Pn-i-UEB,  or  Ph-ih-ueb  (for  the  h  is  also  found  in  the 
hieroglyphics),  in  the  Coptic  tongue  c|)-iA2-oVHii,  Ph-iah- 
T7EB,  "  the  sacred  field."  This  sacred  plain  was  an  Abaton^ 
inaccessible  except  to  the  priests. 

On  the  Gth  of  November  we  left  tlie  enchanting  island, 
and  began  our  Etiiiopian  journey.  Even  in  Debod,  the  next 
temple  we  came  to  towards  the  south,  in  hieroglyphics  called 
Tahet  (in  Coptic,  perhaps,  TA  ABHT),  we  found  the  sculp- 
tures of  an  Ethiopian  king,  Aekamen  the  Eegamenes,  of  the 
authors,  wlio  reigned  at  the  same  time  as  Ptolemy  Phila- 
delphus,  and  probably  was  in  very  friendly  relations  with 
Egypt.  There  is  great  confusion  in  the  French  work  on 
Champollion's  expedition  (I  have  not  got  Eosellini  at  hand). 
Many  sheets  which  belong  to  Dakkeh  are  attributed  to 
Debod,  and  vice  versa :  we  collected  nearly  sixty  Grreek  in- 
scriptions in  GrERTASSi.  Letronne,  who  knew  them,  through 
Gau,  has  perhaps  already  published  them ;  I  am  eager  to 
learn  what  he  has  made  out  of  yojuoi,  whose  priests  play  an 
important  part  in  these  inscriptions,  as  also  out  of  the  new 

gods,  ^povTTTi^is  and  HovpaeTrpovj/is. 

The  Inscriptions  of  Talmis  offer  a  new  instance  how  in- 
correctly the  Egyptian  names  were  often  comprehended  by 
the  G-reeks,  who  name  the  same  god  Mandiilis,  who  in  the 
hieroglyphic  language  was  distinctly  called  Meeuli,  and  was 
the  local  god  of  Talmis.  It  is  striking  that  the  name  of 
Talmis,  which  is  frequently  found  in  this  temple,  never  ap- 


124  TEMPLES  IN  NTJBIA. 

pears  in  the  rock-temple  of  Bet  el  TJalli,  certainly  of  much 
older  date,  which  is  situated  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood. 
Dekdite,  also  had  a  peculiar  protecting  patron,  the  god 
Petisi,  who  never  appears  anywhere  else,  and  has  also  the 
surname  of  Peschir  Tenthur ;  Champollion's  sheets  are  here, 
also,  in  wonderful  disorder,  since  the  representations  and  in- 
scriptions are  erroneously  combined.  * 

The  Temples  of  Gteep  Hussen  and  Sebua  are  especially 
worthy  of  notice,  because  Eamses  Sesostris,  by  whom  they 
were  built,  appears  here  both  as  a  contemplative  divinity 
and  worshipping  himself  as  such,  with  Phtha  and  Ammon, 
the  two  chief  divinities  of  this  temple.  In  the  first,  he  is 
even  one  time  called  "  Euler  of  the  Grods." 

Champollion  has  already  remarked,  with  justice,  that  in- 
deed all  the  temples  of  the  Ptolemies,  and  of  the  Eoman 
emperors  in  jS'ubia,  were  only  restorations  of  former  sanc- 
tuaries, which,  in  more  ancient  times,  had  been  erected  by 
the  Pharaohs  of  the  18th  and  19th  Dynasties,  and  had  been 
destroyed  by  the  Persians.  Thus  also  the  Temple  of  Psel- 
OHis  was  first  built  by  Tuthmosis  III.  Besides  the  scat- 
tered fragments  of  stone  belonging  to  this  first  building, 
which,  however,  was  not  dedicated  to  Thoth,  as  Champollion 
believes,  but  to  Horns,  and  thus  at  a  later  period  altered  its 
destination;  we  have  found  others,  like^vise,  of  Sethos  I. 
and  Menephthes.  It  also  appears  that  the  axis  of  the  first 
plan  wa«  not  parallel  with  the  river,  like  the  later  one,  but 
similar  to  almost  all  other  temples,  its  entrance  was  towards 
the  river. 

At  the  Temple  of  Koete  the  entrance  door  alone  is  in- 
scribed with  hieroglyphics,  and  those  of  the  worst  style. 
Tet  even  this  small  amount  was  sufficient  to  inform  us  that 
the  sanctuary  was  dedicated  to  Isis,  who  is  named  "  The 
Lady  of  Kerte."  Here  also  we  discovered  some  blocks  that 
had  been  used  in  later  buildings,  which  had  escaped  the 
notice  of  former  travellers;  they  belonged  to  an  ancient 
temple,  erected  by  Tuthmosis  III.,  and  the  foundation  waUs 
may  still  be  recognised. 


MEHENDI.  126 

lu  HiEEASTKAMiNos  we  reaped  the  last  harvest  of  Greek 
inscriptionB.  As  far  as  this  place  Greek  and  Eoman  tra- 
vellers were  protected  by  the  garrison  of  Pselchis,  and  by 
another  strong  position  Mehendi,  which  is  not  given  on  the 
maps,  but  was  situated  some  hours  to  the  south  of  Hier- 
asykarainos.  Peimis  seems  only  to  have  had  a  temporary 
garriflon  after  the  campaign  of  Petronius.  Mehekdi,  whose 
name,  indeed,  seems  only  to  designate  in  Arabic  the  build- 
ings, the  fortress,  is  the  best  preserved  Eoman  camp  that  I 
have  ever  seen.  It  lies  upon  a  tolerably  steep  eminence, 
and  from  that  commands  the  river,  and  a  small  valley,  which 
passes  upwards  from  the  river,  to  the  south  side  of  the 
fortress ;  the  car»avan  road,  also,  here  branches  off  into  the 
desert,  and  does  not  redescend  to  the  river  till  near  Medik. 
The  wall  of  the  town  encloses  a  square,  which,  towards  the 
east,  passes  down  the  hill  a  short  way,  and  measures  175 
paces  from  north  to  south,  and  125  from  east  to  west.  Four 
comer  towers,  and  four  central  towers,  spring  up  at  regular 
intervals  from  the  walls ;  among  the  last,  those  lying  to  the 
north  and  south  were  also  the  gates,  which,  for  greater 
security,  did  not  lead  straight  into  the  town,  but  with  a 
bend.  Tlie  southern  gate,  and  all  the  southern  portion  of 
the  fortress,  which  encompassed  about  120  houses,  are  in 
excellent  preservation.  Immediately  behind  the  gate  you 
enter  a  straight  street,  sixty-seven  paces  long,  which,  with 
but  little  interruption,  is  still  completely  arched  over ;  several 
narrow  side  streets  lead  off  on  both  sides,  and  are  also,  as 
well  as  aU  the  houses  of  that  whole  portion  of  the  town, 
covered  over  ^yiih.  arched  roofs,  made  of  Nile  bricks.  The 
street  leads  to  a  somewhat  large  open  place  in  the  middle  of 
the  town,  near  to  which  was  situated,  upon  the  highest  point 
of  the  ridge  of  the  rock,  the  largest,  and  best  built  house, 
doubtless  that  of  the  commander,  with  a  semi-circular  niche 
at  the  eastern  end.  The  walls  of  the  town  are  built  out  of 
unhewn  stones;  the  gate  alone,  which  supports  a  well- 
constructed  Eoman  arch,  is  built  of  sharply-cut  square 
stones,  amongst  which  several  built  into  it,  have  sculptures 


126  TEMPLE  IN  WADI  SEBTJA. 

of  the  genuine  Egyptian  style,  although  of  late  date;  a 
proof  that  before  the  erection  of  the  fortress,  there  was  an 
Egyptian  or  Ethiopian  sanctuary,  probably  a  chapel  to  Isis. 
We  discovered  a  head  of  Osiris,  and  two  heads  of  Isis,  in  one 
of  which  we  could  still  recognise  the  red-marked  proportion 
square  of  the  third  canon. 

The  last  monument  that  we  visited,  before  our  arrival  in 
Korusko,  was  the  Temple  of  Ammon  in  AVadi  Sebua  (the 
Lion  Valley),  so  called  from  the  row  of  Sphinxes,  which  are 
now  scarcely  visible  above  the  sea  of  sand  which  has  buried 
nearly  the  whole  temple,  as  far  as  it  stood  out  alone.  Even 
the  western  portion  of  the  temple,  hewn  in  the  rock,  is  fiUed 
up  high  with  sand,  and  we  were  compelled  to  summon  the 
whole  crew  of  our  boat  to  open  an  entrance  into  this  part 
of  it.  "We  here  encountered  a  new  and  very  peculiar  com- 
bination of  divine  and  human  nature,  in  a  group  of  four 
divinities.  The  first  of  which  was  called  "  Phtha  of  Eamses, 
in  the  house  of  Ammon;"  the  second,  Phtha,  with  other 
customary  surnames ;  the  third,  Eamses,  in  the  house  of 
Ammon;  the  fourth,  Hathoe.  In  another  inscription, 
"Ammon  of  Eamses,  in  the  house  of  Ammon,"  was  named. 
It  is  difficult  to  explain  this  combination.* 

I  was  no  less  astonished  to  find  a  posterity  of  King 
Eamses-Miamun   in    the    outer  court  of   this   Temple   of 

*  Such  designations  appear  eren  at  an  earlier  period.  Thus,  in 
Thebes,  an  "  Ammon  of  Tuthmosis  (III.)"  is  mentioned.  It  thereby 
appears  tliat  one  of  the  kings  named  was  designated  for  the  newly- 
established  worship  of  these  gods.  Ramses  II.  dedicated  three  great 
rock-temples  in  Lower  Nubia,  at  Derr^  Gerf  Hussen,  and  Sebua,  to 
the  three  greatest  gods  of  Egypt,  Ra,  Phtha,  and  Ammon  (See  my 
Memoir  on  the  earliest  Cycle  of  the  Egyptian  Gods,  in  the  papers  of 
the  Academy  of  Berlin,  1851),  and  named  the  places  founded  there 
simultaneously  after  the  same  gods,  accordingly  in  Greek  Heliopolis, 
Hephaistopolis,  and  Diospolis.  The  same  Eamses  founded  a  fourth 
powerful  and  fortified  position,  Abusimbel,  and  called  it  after  himself 
Eamessopolis,  or  the  Fortress  of  Ramessopolis,  as  he  also  founded 
two  towns  in  the  Delta,  and  called  them  after  his  own  name.  Now  it 
is,  undoubtedl}-,  with  reference  to  these  new  worships,  that  the  gods 
there  adored  were  named  Ammon  of  Ramses,  and  Phtha  of  Ramses. 
The  king  himself  was  Avorshipped  along  with  those  gods,  in  these  par- 
ticular rock-temples,  especially  in  that  of  Abusimbel. 


KonrsKO.  127 

Ammon,  consisting  of  a  hundred  and  sixty-two  cliildren, 
represented  with  their  names  and  titles,  most  of  which, 
indeed,  were  scarcely  legible,  as  they  are  very  much  de- 
stroyed; others  are  covered  with  rubbish,  and  at  present 
could  only  be  estimated  by  the  distances  of  the  spaces. 
Hitherto,  only  twenty-five  sons  and  ten  daughters  of  this 
great  king  were  known.  He  did  not  take  the  two  legiti- 
mate wives  which  appear  upon  the  monuments  simulta- 
neously, but  the  one  after  the  death  of  the  other.  To-day 
we  had  a  visit  from  the  old,  blind,  but  powerful  and  rich 
Hassan  Kaschef,  of  Derr,  who  formerly  was  independent 
regent  of  Lower  Nubia;  he  had  no  less  than  sixty-foiu* 
wives,  of  whom  forty-two  still  remain ;  twenty-nine  sons 
and  seventeen  daughters  are  still  living.  He  has,  probably, 
never  taken  the  trouble  to  reckon  how  many  of  them  he  has 
lost,  but  by  the  usual  proportion  here,  he  must  have  had 
about  four  times  the  number  of  those  living,  therefore  about 
two  hundred  children. 

KoEUSKO  is  an  Arabian  place,  in  the  centre  of  the  land  of 
the  Nubians,  or  Barabra  (plural  of  Berberi),  which  includes 
the  Nile  valley  from  Assuau  to  beyond  Dongola.  They  are 
an  intelligent  and  honest  race  ;  peaceful,  but  of  a  disposition 
anything  but  slavish,  with  well-formed  bodies,  and  a  skin  of 
a  light,  reddish-brown  colour.  The  occupation  of  Korusko 
by  the  Arabs  of  the  race  of  the  Ababde,  who  inhabit  the 
whole  of  the  eastern  desert  from  Assuan  as  far  as  Abu 
Hammed,  is  explained  by  tlie  important  situation  of  the 
place,  being  the  commencement  of  the  great  caravan  road, 
which  leads  direct  to  the  province  of  Berber,  and  cuts  off 
the  great- western  curvatiire  of  the  Nile. 

The  Arabic  tongue — in  which  we  have  now  learnt,  at 
least  to  give  orders  and  to  ask  questions,  indeed,  also  to 
carry  on  a  little  conversation  of  civilities,  or  on  the  news  of 
the  day — had  become  so  familiar  to  our  ears  in  Egypt,  that 
the  Nubian  language  attracted  us,  even  by  its  novelty.  It 
is  divided,  as  far  as  I  have  been  hitherto  able  to  learn,  into 


128  NUBIAIf  LANGITAaE. 

a  northern  and  a  southern  dialect,  which  meet  near  Ko- 
rusko.*  The  language  has  a  distinct  character  from  the 
Arabic,  even  in  its  first  elements  in  the  system  of  conso- 
nants and  vowels.  It  is  much  more  euphonous,  as  it  has 
hardly  any  accumulation  of  consonants,  no  hard  guttural 
sounds ;  it  has  little  sibilance,  and  many  simple  vowels,  dif- 
ferinof  more  distinctlv  from  one  another  than  in  the  Arabic, 
and  generally  parted  by  a  consonant,  thus  again  avoiding  an 
efieminate  accumulation  of  vowels.  It  has  no  accordance, 
either  with  the  Semitic  languages  or  with  the  Egyptian,  in 
any  part  of  the  grammatical  forms,  or  the  radical  words, 
much  less  with  our  own,  and  therefore  surely  belongs  to  the 
original  African  tongue,  without  any  immediate  connexion 
with  the  present  language  of  the  Ethiopian-Egj-ptian  race, 
although  the  people  may  have  been  often  comprehended  by 
the  ancients  under  the  name  of  Ethiopians,  and  were,  per- 
haps, less  strangers  to  them  by  descent.  They  are  not  a 
trading  people,  and  therefore  can  only  reckon  up  to  twenty  in 
their  own  language ;  they  borrow  the  higher  decades  from  the 
Arabic  language,  yet  they  use  a  peculiar  word  for  one  hundred 
— vmil.  The  grammatical  distinction  between  the  genders 
exists  almost  solely  throughout  the  language  in  the  personal 
pronouns  when  they  stand  alone ;  they  make  a  distinction  be- 
tween "  he"  and  "  she,"  but  not  between  "  he  gives"  and  "  she 
gives."  They  conjugate  more  by  additional  actual  flexions,  as 
in  our  languages,  than  by  alteration  of  accent,  and  change  of 
vowel,  as  in  the  Semitic.  They  form  the  ordinals  by  the  addi- 
tion of  ^V^ ;  the  plural,  by  igi ;  they  do  not  possess  a  dual.  The 
connexion  of  the  pronouns  with  the  verb  is  both  prefix  and 
afilx,  but  it  is  simple  and  natural ;  they  distinguish  between 
the  present  and  the  preterite ;  they  express  the  future  by  a 
particle;  they  have  also  a  peculiar  form  for  the  passive 
voice.     The  root  of  the  negation  is  m,  usually  succeeded  by 

*  Compare  passages  in  Letters  XXIV.,  XXVI.,  XX VIII.  A  grammar 
and  vocabulary  of  the  Nuba  language,  as  well  as  a  translation  of  the 
Gospel  of  St.  Mark  into  the  Nubian  tongue,  is  ready  for  publication. 


yrBlAX  LAXGFAGE.  129 

an  n;  perhaps  tlie  only  agreement  more  than  accidental 
with  the  roots  of  most  other  languages.  Their  original 
wealth  of  ideas  is  very  limited.  They  have,  indeed,  peculiar 
words  for  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars ;  but  they  borrow 
terms  from  the  Arabic  for  time,  year,  month,  day,  and  hour ; 
water,  sea,  and  river,  are  all  essi ;  but  it  is  remarkable  that 
they  designate  the  Nile  by  a  particular  word — Tossi.  They 
have  peculiar  words  for  all  native  animals,  tame  and  wild ; 
Arabic  words  for  everything  connected  with  house-building, 
and  even  navigation ;  it  is  only  the  boat  they  themselves  call 
Icuh,  which,  most  likely,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  Arabic 
inerkab.  They  have  only  one  word — heti  (fenti) — for  the 
date-fruit  and  the  date-tree,  which  are  expressed  by  different 
terms  in  Arabic — hellah  and  nacliele.  The  sycamore-tree  they 
call  by  an  Arabic  name;  but  it  is  remarkable,  that  they 
designate  the  sont  (acacia)  tree  by  the  same  word  as  tree 
generally — g'uui.  Spirit,  God,  slave,  the  ideas  of  relation- 
ship, the  different  parts  of  the  body,  weapons,  the  produce 
of  the  field,  and  all  that  belongs  to  the  preparation  of  bread, 
have  Nubian  names  ;  on  the  other  hand,  servant,  friend, 
enemy,  temple,  to  pray,  believe,  read,  is  Arabic.  It  is 
striking  that  they  have  special  words  for  writing,  and  book  ; 
but  not  for  style,  ink,  paper,  letter.  They  call  aU  the 
metals  by  Arabic  names,  with  the  exception  of  iron.  Tliey 
are  rich,  in  the  Berber  tongue ;  jooor,  in  Arabic ;  and,  in 
fact,  they  are  all  rich  in  their  miserable  home,  which  they 
cling  to  like  the  Swiss,  and,  devoid  of  wants,  they  despise 
the  Arabic  gold,  which  they  might  earn  in  Egypt,  where 
their  services  are  much  sought  for,  as  bouse  watchmen,  and 
in  all  confidential  posts. 

We  are  now  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the  camels,  to  com- 
mence our  desert  journey.  TiU  we  reach  Abu  Hammed, 
eight  days  hence,  we  shall  only  once  find  water  fit  to  drink. 
We  shall  travel  four  days  longer  on  camels,  as  far  as  Berber ; 
there,  by  the  arrangement  of  Achmed  Pascha,  we  shaU.  find 
boats  ready  for  us.  We  must  go  to  Kartum,  to  supply 
ourselves  again  with  provisions ;  if  we  may  believe  Linant,  to 


130  LOWEE  yUBIA. 

go  still  higlier  up  as  far  as  Abu  Haras,  and  thence  to  Han- 
dera, in  the  eastern  desert,  will  scarcely  repay  us;  but 
Achmed  Pasclia  has  promised  to  send  an  officer  to  Maudera, 
to  test  once  more  the  statements  of  the  natives. 

I  shall  send  this  report,  with  other  letters,  by  an  express 
messenger  to  Qeneh. 


LETTEE  XYI. 

Korusko,  the  5th  January,  1844. 
It  is  with  no  small  regret  that  I  have  to  inform  you  that 
we  shall,  perhaps,  be  compelled  to  give  up  our  Ethiopian 
journey,  the  second  principal  task  of  our  expedition,  and 
return  to  the  north  from  this  spot.     "We  have  waited,  in 
vain,  since  the  17th  November  for  the  camels,  always  pro- 
mised, but  never  appearing,  that  were  to  take  us  to  Berber, 
and  we  have  still  no  more  prospect  of  seeing  them  than  at 
the  beginning.     I  am  sorry  to  say  that  what  we  heard  on 
our  arrival  is  confirmed  ;  the  Arab  tribes,  who  alone  manage 
the  transport,  are  discontented  with  Mohammed  All's  re- 
duction of  the  charge  from  eighty  to  sixty  piastres  for  each 
camel  from  hence  to  Berber ;  they  have  agreed  among  each 
other  to  send  no  more  camels  here,  and  no  Eirman,  no  pro- 
mises, no  thi-eats,  are  of  any  avail.     A  great  number  of 
chests,  with  ammunition,  destined  for  Chartum,  have  been 
lying  here  these  ten  months  past,  and  they  are  unable  to 
convey  them  any  farther.     We  had  hoped  for  the  assistance 
of  Achmed  Pascha  Menekle,  the  new  governor  of  the  Southern 
Provinces,  as  he  had  been  most  friendly  and  unbounded  in 
his  promises.     The  officer,  who  remained  behind  here  with 
the  ammunition,  received  a  direct  order  from  him  to  detain 
the  first  camels  that  should  arrive,  for  our  use ;  nevertheless, 
we  are  not  at  all  nearer  to  our  object.     The  Pascha  himself 
had  scarcely  means  to  pursue  his  journey  onward,  although 
he  required  but  few  camels.     He  had  brought  some  of  them 


LOAVEil  >UEIA.  131 

with  him  from  tlie  north,  and  he  caused  some  to  be  foreiblv 
driven  together  here.  Notwithstanding  this,  he  was  verv 
ill-provided  on  liis  departure,  and  it  is  said  that  hall'  of  his 
beasts  either  died,  or  fell  sick  in  the  desert. 

On  the  3rd  December,  as  no  camels  had  yet  come,  thougli 
the  Pascha  must  have  passed  the  province  of  Berber,  from 
whence  he  was  to  send  us  the  requisite  number,  I  sent  our 
own  excellent  and  trustworthy  Kawass,  Ibrahim  Aga,  with 
Mohammed  Ali's  Firman,  across  the  desert  of  nine  days' 
journey,  to  Berber.  Meanwhile,  we  went  up  as  far  as  "Wadi 
Haifa,  to  the  second  Cataract,  and  visited  the  numerous 
monuments  which  are  to  be  found  in  this  region,  returning 
here,  three  weeks  afterwards,  with  a  rich  harvest. 

It  is  now  thirty-one  days  since  our  Kawass  set  out  on  his 
journey,  and  a  few  days  ago  I  received  a  letter  from  the 
Mudhir  of  Berber,  by  w^hich  I  learn  that  he  was  still  unable 
to  furnish  me  with  camels,  although,  after  the  amval  of  our 
Kawass,  and  the  reception  of  the  letter  of  the  Mudhir  in  this 
place,  he  had  immediately  despatched  soldiers,  in  order  to 
collect  the  necessary  number  of  sixty  camels.  Thus  they 
are  in  the  same  situation  there,  as  we  here ;  the  authorities 
can  do  nothing  in  opposition  to  the  ill-will  of  the  Arabs. 

Since  the  sudden  death  by  poison,  at  Chartum,  of  Achmcd 
Pascha,  who  had  been  placed  at  the  head  of  the  whole  Sudan, 
and  wlio,  as  it  is  asserted,  has  for  some  time  past  been  en- 
gaged in  a  conspiracy,  in  order  to  make  himself  independent 
of  Mohammed  Ali,  the  Southern  Kingdom  has  been  divided 
into  five  provinces,  and  placed  under  five  Paschas,  who  are 
to  be  installed  in  their  several  offices  by  Achmed  Pascha 
Menekle.  One  of  their  number.  Emir  Pascha,  has  been 
hitherto  Bey  at  Chartum,  under  Achmed  Pascha,  who,  it 
appears,  he  iDetrayed.  Three  others  arrived  at  Korusko  soon 
after  Achmed  Pascha  Menekle.  The  most  powerful  of  them, 
Hassan  Pascha,  went  to  his  province  of  Dongola  by  water, 
as  far  as  Wadi  Haifa ;  he  had  scarcely  any  attendants,  and 
wanted  but  few  camels  to  proceed  on  his  journey.  The 
Second,  Mustafla  Pascha,  who  is  destined  for  Kordofan,  has 

K  2 


132  LOAVEE  ^'l7BIA. 

seized  bj  force  a  mercantile  caravan  returning  from  Berber. 
However,  hj  the  Arabs'  report,  some  of  the  wearied  beasts 
became  unserviceable  when  they  reached  the  well,  which  is 
situated  about  four  days'  joiumey  in  the  desert;  there  he 
found  some  merchants,  whom  he  robbed  of  eight  camels ; 
the  rest  of  this  caravan  did  not  make  its  appearance  here, 
fearing  probably  that  it  would  be  again  detained,  it  has 
taken  another  route  to  Egypt.  The  third  Pascha,  Ferhat,  is 
still  waiting  here  with  us,  and  uses  all  the  means  in  his 
power  to  collect  some  camels  from  the  north  or  the  south 
for  himself.  Hence  our  last  hope  has  vanished  with  respect 
to  this  province,  as  we  are  less  capable  than  he  to  arouse  the 
small  force  of  the  authorities  ;  and  at  this  moment  we  have 
neither  Firman  nor'Kawass  with  us.  Every  one,  and  the 
Paschas  more  than  all,  endeavour  to  console  us  in  the  most 
friendly  manner  from  day  to  day ;  but  meanwhile  the  winter 
is  passing  away,  the  only  season  when  we  can  work  in  the 
upper  country.  In  addition  to  this,  the  Mudhir,  till  now  of 
Lower  Nubia,  with  whom  we  were  on  friendly  terms,  has 
been  complained  of  by  the  Xubian  Sheikh  of  his  province  to 
Mohammed  Ali,  and  has  just  been  recalled  by  him.  This 
part  of  the  country  has,  therefore,  been  temporarily  placed 
under  the  Mudhir  of  Esneh,  whose  deputy  is  a  young,  but 
otherwise  well-disposed  man,  not  however  yet  acquainted 
with  the  province,  so  we  must  expect  still  less  from  him. 

I  have,  therefore,  at  length  made  up  my  mind  for  the  last 
course  which  remains  open  to  me.  I  shall,  myself,  go  to 
Berber  with  Abekeu,  and  a  very  few  camels,  and  leave 
Erbkam  here,  with  the  rest  of  our  party,  and  all  the  baggage. 
There  I  shall  be  better  able  to  see  the  state  of  affairs  on  the 
spot,  and,  by  aid  of  the  Eii-man  and  the  Kawass,  whose  autho- 
rity I  am  much  in  want  of  here,  I  shall  try  what  can  be 
done.  "We  were  received  here,  by  Achmed  Pascha  Menekle, 
■with  the  greatest  courtesy,  and  are  already  assured  of  his 
most  efficient  support,  through  the  interposition  of  his  bod}-- 
physician,  our  countryman  and  personal  friend,  Dr.  Koch. 
Perhaps  money  and  threats,  even  though  late  in  the  day. 


TUE  ^'UBIAX  DESEET.  133 

maj  carry  our  point.  By  mere  chance  I  have  myself  been 
able  to  procure  six  camels.  Two  more  are  still  absolutely 
necessary  for  the  completion  of  our  little  caravan ;  but  the 
deputy  of  the  Mudhir,  with  the  best  will  towards  us,  cannot 
even  procure  these  two  camels.  We  have  already  been 
waiting  three  days  for  them,  and  still  do  not  know  whether 
we  shall  receive  them. 


LETTER  XYII. 

E'  Ddmcr,  the  24th  Januan/,  1844. 

Our  difficulties,  though  at  a  late  hour,  are  terminated. 
I  arrived  here  yesterday  with  Abeken,  still  two  days'  journey 
from  the  Pyramids  of  ^leroe,  and  probably  the  whole  of  our 
camp  also  arrived  yesterday  at  the  southern  extremity  of  the 
Great  Desert  at  Abu  Hammed.  After  my  last  discouraging 
account  from  Berber,  I  set  out  on  the  8th  January,  about 
mid-day,  with  Abeken,  the  dragoman  Jussuf  Scherebieh,  a 
cook,  and  our  little  Kubian  boy  Auad.  We  had  eight 
camels,  two  of  them,  however,  scarcely  in  a  fit  state  to  make 
the  journey,  and  two  asses.  As  the  promised  guide  was  not 
at  hand,  I  compelled  the  Sheikh  of  the  camels,  Achmed,  to 
accompany  us  himself,  as  he  might  be  of  service  to  us,  on 
account  of  his  reputation  among  the  tribes  of  the  Ababde 
Arabs  dwelling  here.  We  had  besides  these,  another  guide, 
Adar,  who  had  been  given  us  instead  of  the  promised  one, 
and  five  camel-drivers ;  and  soon  after  our  departure  several 
other  foot-passengers  joined  our  party,  besides  two  people 
Avith  asses,  who  availed  themselves  of  this  opportunity  to 
return  to  Berber.  AVe  took  with  us  ten  water-skins,  some 
stores  of  rice,  macaroni,  biscuit,  and  cold  meat,  besides  a  light 
tent,  our  coverlets  on  which  to  ride  and  sleep,  the  requisite 
changes  of  linen,  and  a  few  books ;  and,  in  addition,  a  proper 
.supply  of  good  courage,  of  which  I  scarcely  ever  feel  the  want 


134  SHEIXH  ACnilED. 

in  starting  on  a  jonrney.  Our  friends  accompanied  us  a 
short  way  into  tlie  rocky  valley,  which  very  soon  entirely 
concealed  the  neighbouring  banks  of  the  river,  and  its  pleasant 
palm-trees. 

The  valley  ^Yas  both  wild  and  monotonous,  nothing  but 
sandstone  rock,  the  surface  of  which  was  burnt  as  black  as 
coal,  but  in  every  quarry,  and  every  hollow,  this  changed  into 
a  brilliant  golden  yellow ;  from  these  a  multitude  of  streams 
of  sand,  like  streams  of  fire  out  of  black  dross,  trickled  down, 
and  filled  the  valleys.  AYe  were  preceded  by  the  guides  ;  they 
had  simple  folds  of  drapery  round  their  shoulders  and  hips  ;  in 
their  hands  were  either  one  or  two  spears,  made  of  firm,  but 
light  wood,  provided  with  iron  points  and  shafts  ;  a  round, 
or  lightly  carved  shield,  with  a  very  prominent  boss  made  of 
giraffe  skin  covered  their  naked  backs ;  their  other  shields 
were  oblong  in  form,  and  usually  made  of  hippopotamus 
skin,  or  of  the  dorsal  hide  of  the  crocodile.  During  the 
night,  and  often  in  the  daytime  also,  they  bound  sandals 
under  their  feet,  the  thongs  of  which,  not  unfrequently  cut 
out  of  one  piece  with  the  sole,  are  drawn  between  the  great 
toe  and  the  second  toe,  and  then  surround  the  foot  in  the 
manner  of  a  skate. 

Sheikh  Achmed  was  a  magnificent  man,  youthful,  but  tall 
and  noble  in  stature ;  he  had  extremely  supple  limbs,  of  a 
brilliant  brown-black  colour,  his  features  were  very  expres- 
sive of  emotion,  a  brilliant  dark  eye,  which  had  both  a  gentle 
and  sly  look,  and  his  mode  of  speech  was  so  incomparably 
beautiful,  with  such  harmonious  expression,  that  I  liked  to 
have  him  constantly  beside  me,  although  we  had  a  continual 
contest  with  him  in  Korusko,  as  he  was  bound  to  furnish  the 
camels  and  all  appurtenances,  and  on  account  of  circum- 
stances he  neither  would  nor  could  procure  them.  He  gave 
us  a  proof  in  the  desert  of  his  agility  and  the  elasticity  of  his 
limbs,  for  taking  a  long  run  on  the  sandy  ground,  peculiarly 
unfavourable  for  leaping,  he  made  a  bound  of  14-^  feet  in 
width ;  I  measured  the  distance  between  the  footmarks  with 
his  lance,  which  was  rather   more  than  two  metres  long 


THE  XUBIAJS"  DESEET.  135 

(G  feet  7  inches  English),  Adar.  our  second  guide,  alone 
\entured  to  make  the  leap  after  him,  but  he  did  not  nearly 
reacli  the  same  distance. 

The  first  day  we  had  started  early,  about  eleven  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  and  wc  rode  on  till  about  five  ;  we  then  stopped 
lor  an  hour  and  a  half,  and  went  on  again  till  about  half-past 
twelve.  "We  then  pitched  our  tents  on  the  hard  ground, 
and  laid  down  to  sleep,  after  a  march  of  twelve  hours.  The 
liiost  refreshing  thing,  after  these  hot  and  fatiguing  days' 
journeys,  was  our  tea  in  the  evening;  we  were,  however, 
»»bliged  to  habituate  ourselves  to  the  leathery  taste  of  the 
\sat»T,  which  we  perceived  even  through  the  tea  and  cofiee. 
The  second  day  we  were  fourteen  hours  on  our  camels ; 
starting  about  eight  in  the  morning,  we  halted  about  four 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  to  eat  something,  proceeded  on  our 
journey  about  half-past  five,  and  about  half-past  twelve  we 
struck  our  encampment  for  the  night,  having  left  the  hills, 
and  about  ten  o'clock,  with  the  rising  moon,  descended  into 
a  vast  plain.  Hitherto  we  had  not  seen  a  tree,  nor  a  blade 
uf  grass,  not  even  a  creature,  except  some  white  eagles  and 
ravens,  who  fed  upon  the  carrion  of  the  camels  which  had 
iiillcn.  On  the  third  day,  after  setting  off  early  in  the  morn- 
ing, we  met  a  troop  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  camels,  which 
had  been  purchased  by  the  Government,  to  be  sent  into 
Egj'pt.  The  Pascha  is  anxious  to  import  several  thousand 
camels  from  Berber,  that  he  may  thereby,  in  some  measure, 
repair  the  consequences  of  the  cattle-disease  of  last  year.  A 
great  number  had  already  passed  through  Korusko,  without 
our  venturing  to  make  use  of  them,  as  they  are  the  private 
property  of  the  Pascha ;  we  could  not  have  mounted  them 
besides,  as  they  had  no  saddles. 

The  guide  o*f  the  troop,  whom  we  met  to-day,  brought  us 
at  last  the  long  desired  intelligence  that  our  Kawass,  Ibrahim 
Aga,  had  left  Berber  with  sixty  camels,  and  was  already 
marching  quite  close  to  us,  but  on  another  route,  which  led 
across  the  desert  a  little  more  to  the  west.  Sheikh  Achmed 
was  sent  after  him,  that  he  might  bring  us  three  good  camels, 


136  THE  NTJBIAK  DESERT. 

in  place  of  our  feeble  ones ;  and  also  to  gain  some  further 
intelligence  about  bim.  He  said  that  be  sbould  overtake  us 
the  following  nigbt,  or  at  latest  the  second.  I  sent  a  couple 
of  lines  to  Erbkam,  by  tbe  Cbabir  (guide)  of  the  troop.  "We 
baited  about  balf-past  five,  and  remained  all  nigbt,  boping 
to  see  Sbeikb  Acbmed  arrive  sooner.  Towards  evening  we 
saw  tbe  first  scanty  vegetation  of  tbe  desert ;  tbe  yellowisb- 
grey  dry  blades  of  grass,  wbicb  were  bardly  visible  wben 
near,  in  tbe  distance  gave  a  pale  greenisb-yellowisb  colour 
to  tbe  ground,  wbicb  alone  called  my  attention  to  it. 

We  ougbt  to  bave  arrived  tbe  fourtb  day  at  tbe  well  of 
brackisb  water,  fit  bowever  for  tbe  camels  to  drink  ;  but  tbat 
we  migbt  not  basten  on  too  quickly  before  Sbeikb  Acbmed, 
we  terminated  our  day's  journey  as  early  as  four  o'clock, 
about  four  bours  distant  from  tbe  well.  At  lengtb,  about 
mid-day,  we  left  tbe  great  plain  Bahb  bela  Ma  (tbe  River 
wdtbout  Water),  wbicb  unites  witb  tbe  mountain  cbain  of 
El  Bab,  two  days'  journey  in  lengtb,  and  wbicb  we  bad  entered 
coming  out  of  Korusko,  and  we  now  approacbed  otber  cbains. 
Hitberto  we  bad  seen  notbing  but  sandstone  rocks,  both  be- 
neatb  and  around  us  ;  it  was  therefore  really  a  joyful  event, 
wben  looking  down  from  my  tall  camel  upon  tbe  sand,  I  saw 
tbe  first  Plutonic  Eock.  I  immediately  glided  down  from 
my  saddle,  and  broke  off  a  fragment ;  it  was  a  greyisb  green 
stone  of  very  fine  grain,  and  undoubtedly  of  tbe  nature  of 
granite.  Tbe  preceding  cbains  of  mountains  were  also  cbiefly 
composed  of  species  of  porphyry  and  granite  of  different  colours, 
not  unfrequently  associated  witli  broad  veins  of  red  syenite,  such 
as  appears  so  abundantly  on  the  surface  at  Assuan,  and  which 
was  so  extensively  worked  by  tbe  ancient  Egyptians.  Far- 
ther in  tbe  mountains,  quartz  was  sometimes  very  prevalent, 
and  tbe  appearance  was  very  singular  wben,  here  and  there 
at  different  heights,  tbe  snow-white  silicious  veins  appeared 
on  tbe  surface  of  the  black  mountains  issuing  like  a  spring 
from  a  point  in  tbe  mountain,  and  flowing  into  tbe  valley, 
where  its  white  rolled  fragments  spread  out  like  a  lake.  I 
carried  away  witb  me  some  small  specimens  of  tbe  different 


THE  yUBIA>-  DESERT.  137 

kinds  of  rocks.  After  we  had  passed  beliind  a  low  mouutaiQ 
defile  and  a  small  valley,  Bahr'  Hatab  (the  Wood  Eiver,  on 
account  of  the  wood,  -^hicli  is  said  to  grow  somewhat  farther 
away  on  some  neighbouring  mountains),  and  another  valley, 
AVadi  Delah,  inclining  to  the  northern  side  of  the  principal 
mountain  which  succeeds  it,  we  reached  the  rocky  hollow, 
E'  SuFR,  wliere  we  expected  to  find  rain  water,  and  to  re-fill 
our  slirunkcn  water-skins  {girle,pl.  r/erah).  During  one 
month  of  the  year,  about  May,  there  is  usually  some  rain  in 
this  high  mountaiu  of  primitive  rock.  The  huge  granite 
basins  in  the  hollow  valleys  are  then  filled,  and  retain  the 
water  throughout  the  entire  year.  Some  vegetation  was  to 
be  seen  on  this  Plutonic  Rock,  resulting  from  the  rain,  and 
because  the  granite  itself  seems  to  contain  more  fertilising 
matter  than  the  barren  loose  sand,  almost  wholly  composed 
of  small  grains  of  quartz.  In  Wadi  Delah,  which  evidently 
has  water  in  the  rainy  season,  we  came  to  a  loug  continuous 
row  of  Doum  Palms ;  the  circular  form  of  their  leaves,  and 
tlieir  bushy  growth,  has  a  less  bare  appearance  than  the  long 
slender-leaved  date  palm  ;  the  latter  cannot  stand  the  rain, 
and  therefore  cannot  live  in  Berber,  while  the  Doum  Palm 
appears  in  Upper  Egypt  for  the  first  time,  quite  isolated,  and 
the  farther  we  travel  south,  we  see  them  in  greater  numbers, 
larger  in  size,  and  of  more  luxuriant  growth.  If  their  fruit 
drop  ofi"  when  lunupe  and  dry,  the  small  portion  of  pulp 
round  the  stony  kernel  tastes  like  a  coating  of  sugar ;  if  they 
ripen,  the  yellowish  woody  pulp  may  be  chewed;  it  has  a 
good  taste,  and  some  of  their  fruit  had  an  aroma  almost  simi- 
lar to  the  pine-apple.  They  are  sometimes  as  large  as  the 
largest  apples. 

About  four  o'clock  we  pitched  our  camp,  the  camels  were 
sent  into  the  hollow,  situated  behind,  to  the  rain  water,  and 
Abeken  and  I  got  upon  our  asses,  to  accompany  them  to 
these  natural  reservoirs.  Hiding  over  coarse  gravel  and  sharp 
stones  we  penetrated  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  ascending 
defile ;  the  first  large  basins  were  empty,  we  left  our  asses 
and  camels  behind,  clambered  up  the  smooth  granite  sides  of 


138  THE  NXJBIAX  DESEET. 

the  rock,  and  stepped  from  one  basin  to  anotlier  amidst  these 
huge  masses  of  rock.  All  were  empty ;  the  guide  said  there 
must  be  water  in  the  fissure  which  ]aj  farthest  back,  that 
there  it  was  never  exhausted ;  but  even  in  that  spot  not  a 
drop  was  to  be  found,  so  we  were  obliged  to  return  without 
any  success,  as  dry  as  we  came.  The  numerous  herds  of 
cattle,  which  during  the  past  year  had  been  driven  out  of 
the  Sudan  into  Egypt,  had  consumed  it  all.  Only  three  skins 
of  water  had  remained  over  for  our  party,  and  we  were 
therefore  compelled  to  find  out  some  means  to  procure 
more.  Other  cisterns  were  said  to  exist  higher  up  in  the 
mountains  behind  this  defile.  I  was  anxious  to  climb  up 
the  rocks  with  the  guide,  but  he  considered  it  too  dangerous 
an  undertaking.  "We  turned  round,  rode  back  to  the  en- 
campment, and  with  the  setting  sun,  the  camels  were  forced 
to  start  once  more  in  search  of  water  among  the  hills  lying 
to  the  north,  about  an  horn'  distant  from  this  spot.  They 
returned  at  a  late  hour  with  four  skins  fidl ;  the  water  was 
good,  and  pleasant  to  the  taste.  Sheikh  Aclimed,  however, 
did  not  either  return  this  night,  and  we  now  hoped  to  find 
him  at  the  well,  whither  he  might  have  preceded  us  by  the 
southern  road. 

"We  started  soon  after  sunrise,  on  the  fifth  day,  and  pene- 
trated deeper  into  the  great  mountain  chain  of  Eoft,  which 
always  exhibited  tlie  same  rock,  at  first  slaty  in  texture,  then 
more  in  the  form  of  blocks,  afterwards  abounding  in  quartz. 
The  heat  of  the  day  was  more  oppressive  in  the  mountains 
than  in  the  plains,  where  the  north  wind  blowing  almost 
continuously,  produces  greater  coolness.  "With  the  exception 
of  the  diiferent  kinds  of  rock,  there  was  little  around  to  attract 
our  notice.  I  met  with  a  great  ant-hill  in  the  middle  of  the 
barren  desert,  and  I  looked  at  it  for  a  long  time  ;  there  were 
smaller  and  larger  bright  black  ants,  who  were  carrying  all 
the  small  pieces  of  earth  which  they  were  able  to  lift  out  of 
their  building,  so  that  the  coarser  little  stones  alone  re- 
mained, and  formed  solid  walls  ;  the  larger  ants  were  distin- 
guished by  their  heads  being  in  proportion  to  their  size, 


THE  IsTEIAX  DESERT.  139 

twice  as  thick  as  the  others,  and  they  did  not  themselves 
work,  but  led  the  regiment,  and  gave  a  push  to  each  of  the 
fimaller  ants,  who  were  carrying  nothing,  drove  them  for- 
wards, and  kept  them  more  diligently  at  work. 

The  difficulty  to  converse  when  riding  on  the  hard-pacing 
camel  is  so  much  the  greater  because  it  is  not  easy  to  make 
them  keep  the  step  beside  each  other,  as  with  the  horse  or 
ass.  When  upon  a  good  dromedary  (Heggin),  and  travelling 
without,  or  with  but  very  little  baggage,  the  creature  keeps 
iu  a  trot.  This  is  an  easy  pace,  and  is  not  very  fatiguing, 
l)ut  it  is  difficult  to  get  accustomed  to  the  long  step  of  the 
ordinary  baggage-camel,  which  throws  the  high  load  back- 
\\ards  and  forwards.  Yet  even  this  was  alleviated  by  our 
being  sometimes  able  to  dismount  from  our  camels  and  get 
upon  our  asses,  and  we  often  went  on  foot  for  a  considerable 
distance  botli  early  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening. 

I  now  return  to  the  fifth  day  of  our  desert  journey.  "We 
started  about  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  from  the  little 
valley  of  E'  Sufr,  where  we  had  encamped  under  some  gum, 
or  sont-trees,  and  about  half-past  twelve,  after  turning  to 
our  left  into  a  flat  valley  for  the  distance  of  about  half  an 
hour  from  our  road  among  the  hills,  we  reached  the  brackish 
well  in  AVadi  IMurhad.  Here  we  had  accomplished  about 
half  our  desert  journey.  AYe  saw^  some  huts  built  of  small 
stones  and  reeds,  and  near  them  a  couple  of  starved  goats 
Avere  fruitlessly  searching  for  some  pasture  ;  our  black  host 
led  us  into  a  reed  arbour,  where  we  made  ourselves  as  com- 
fortable as  we  could  in  the  shade. 

In  this  rocky  valley  we  had  been  struck  for  some  time  by 
tiie  snow-white  crust  of  IN'atron,  frequently  appearing  above 
tlie  sand  which  makes  the  water  of  the  well  brackish. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  valley,  where  it  divides  into  two 
branches,  the  water  is  to  be  found  between  five  and  six  feet 
beneath  the  surface,  and  has  been  discovered  by  digging 
eight  wells.  The  water  in  the  wells  which  lie  farthest  back, 
is  greenish,  rather  salt,  and  has  a  bad  taste,  which,  however, 
satisfies  the  camels  ;  the  three  in  front,  on  the  contrary,  yield 


140  AEAEDE  AEAES. 

clear  water,  wlilcli  might  very  well  liave  been  drank  by  us  in 
a  case  of  necessity.  There  is  a  government  station  here, 
usually  inhabited  by  six  persons,  but  at  the  present  moment 
four  of  them  had  been  sent  out  on  an  excursion,  and  only 
two  remained  behind.  From  this  spot  there  are  two  roads  to 
Korusko,  a  western  and  an  eastern  one.  Ibrahim  Aga  had 
chosen  the  former  road,  we  the  latter,  and  we  had,  therefore, 
unfortunately  missed  each  other.  Sheikh  Achmed  was  also 
not  to  be  found  here  ;  probably  he  had  not  overtaken  our 
camels  before  the  second  day,  and  we  were  compelled  to  pro- 
ceed on  our  journey  without  him. 

The  Aeabde  Arabs,  with  whom  we  have  now  everywhere 
to  deal,  are  an  honest  and  trustworthy  people,  from  whom 
we  have  less  to  fear  than  from  the  crafty  and  thievish  Fellahs 
in  Egypt.  To  the  north-east  of  their  territory,  the  races  of 
the  BiscHAEi  are  spread  over  the  country,  who  have  a  pecu- 
liar language,  and  are  now  in  bitter  enmity  vdth.  the  Ababde 
Arabs,  because  more  than  two  years  ago  when  they  had  at- 
tacked and  murdered  some  Turkish  soldiers  in  the  little  valley 
where  we  had  spent  the  night,  Hassan  Cbalif,  the  superior 
Sheikh  of  the  Ababdes,  to  whose  protection  the  road  of  com- 
munication between  Berber  and  Korusko  had  been  confided, 
caused  forty  of  the  Bischaris  to  be  put  to  death.  Besides, 
by  aid  of  the  Ababdes,  more  than  four-and-twenty  years  ago, 
Ismael  Pascha  succeeded  in  bringing  his  army  across  the 
desert,  and  taking  possession  of  the  Sudan.  It  is  only  upon 
the  road  that  we  are  now  pursuing  that  guides  are  main- 
tained by  government ;  there  are  none  on  the  longer  road, 
from  Berber  to  Assuan,  which  is,  however,  better  supplied 
with  water,  though  now  but  little  used.  About  half-past 
four  we  rode  away  from  the  well,  after  we  had  inspected 
some  Jia(/}'  melctub  (stones  with  inscriptions)  for  which  we 
inquii'e  everywhere,  viz.,  some  rocks  in  the  neighbourhood,  on 
which,  in  somewhat  modern  times,  a  number  of  horses,  camels, 
and  other  creatures  have  been  roughly  scratched,  similar  to 
what  we  had  already  often  seen  in  I^ubia.  About  half-past 
nine  we  halted  for  the  night,  after  having  quitted  the  high 


THE  yUBIAX  DESEKT.  141 

cliaiu  of  mountains  an  hour  and  a  half  previously.  On  the 
morning  of  the  sixth  day,  vre  crossed  the  -wide  plain  Mir^- 
DEBA,  to  which  another  lofty  chain,  Abu  Sihha,  is  attached, 
at  the  farther  side ;  the  southern  frontier  of  this  plain, 
where  it  inclines  towards  that  chain,  is  called  Abdebab  ;  the 
southern  portion  of  the  large  chain  of  Eoft  lying  behind  us 
is  called  Abu  Se>'ejat. 

About  three  o'clock  we  left  the  plain  behind  us,  and  again 
entered  the  mountain  range,  which,  like  the  others,  is  com- 
posed of  granite.  Half  an  hour  afterwards,  we  halted  for 
our  mid-day's  repose.  In  a  couple  of  hours  we  rode  on 
larther,  and  encamped  towards  midnight,  after  we  had  tra- 
versed another  small  plain,  and  from  the  'stony  range  Adar 
AriB  which  succeeds  it,  entered  a  new  plain,  comprehended 
under  the  same  appellation,  which  extends  as  for  as  the  last 
chain   of  mountains   belonging   to   this   desert   of    Gebel 

G-RAIBAT. 

On  the  following  day,  the  seventh  of  our  journey,  wo 
started  about  half-past  seven  in  the  mornuig,  and  at  length, 
beyond  Gebel  Graibat,  we  reached  the  great  boundless  plain 
of  Adeheuat,  which  we  did  not  quit  again  till  we  arrived  at 
Abu  Hammei).  To  the  south-west  we  now  kept  in  view 
llie  small  hill  El  Faeut  and  the  larger  range  of  Mogead  ;  to 
the  east,  far  distant,  another  mountain  chain,  Abu  Nugaea. 
joins  that  of  Adar  Aiub.  Then  to  the  south-east  there  were 
other  Bischari  chains  of  mountains,  whose  names  were  un- 
Ivnown  to  our  Ababde  guides.  The  commencement  of  the 
c^reat  plain  of  Adererat  was  covered  for  whole  hours  together 
with  beautiful,  pvu-e  quartz,  sometimes  rising  up  out  of  the 
f^and  in  the  form  of  solid  rock,  although  the  predominant 
kind  of  rock  continued  to  be  black  granite,  which  towards 
the  south  was  traversed  by  a  broad  vein  of  red  granite. 
Early  in  the  day  a  small  caravan  of  merchants  passed  us  at 
some  little  distance. 

At  a  very  early  hour  in  the  day  we  saw  the  most 
beautiful  mirages,  both  near  us  and  at  a  distance,  exhibiting 
a  very  deceptive  resemblance  to  lakes  and  rivers,  in  which 


142  LIFE  IN  THE  DESEET. 

the  mountains,  blocks  of  stone,  and  everything  around  is 
reflected,  as  if  in  clear  water.  They  form  a  strange  con- 
trast with  the  hard  arid  desert,  and,  as  it  is  related,  must 
have  often  bitterly  deceived  many  a  poor  wanderer.  When 
we  are  not  aware  that  no  water  can  be  there,  it  is  often 
totally  impossible  to  distinguish  the  semblance  from  the 
reality.  Only  a  few  days  ago,  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
El  Mecheeef,  I  felt  perfectly  certain  that  I  saw  either 
Nile  water  which  had  overflowed,  or  a  branch  of  the  river, 
and  I  rode  up,  but  only  found  Bahr  Scheita??,  "  The  water 
of  Satan,"  as  it  is  called  by  the  Arabs. 

Even  though  the  sand  may  have  obliterated  all  traces  of 
the  caravan  road,  it  cannot  easily  be  missed  daring  the  day,  as 
it  is  sufliciently  marked  by  innumerable  skeletons  of  camels, 
several  of  which  are  always  in  view ;  yesterday  I  counted 
forty-one,  which  we  passed  during  the  last  half  hour  before 
sunset.  We  did  not  lose  one  of  our  own  camels,  although 
they  had  not  rested  long  in  Korusko,  and  had  had  scarcely 
anything  to  eat  or  drink  on  the  road.  My  own  camel,  into 
whose  mouth  I  had  sometimes  put  a  piece  of  biscuit,  used  to 
look  round  in  the  middle  of  the  march  when  it  heard  me 
biting,  or  twist  round  its  long  neck,  till  it  laid  its  head,  with 
its  soft  large  eyes  on  ray  lap,  to  get  something  more. 

About  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  we  stopped  for  about 
two  hours,  and  then  went  on  again  till  about  eleven  o'clock, 
when  we  went  in  search  of  a  place  for  our  night's  encampment 
in  the  great  plain.  The  wind  however  blew  so  violently  that 
it  was  impossible  to  secure  our  tent.  In  spite  of  the  ten  iron 
pegs  which  fasten  it  all  the  way  round,  it  was  three  times 
overthrown,  before  it  was  completely  pitched  ;  we  allowed  it 
therefore  to  remain  as  it  was,  and  laid  ourselves  down  behind 
a  little  wall,  which  the  guide  had  made  out  of  the  saddles 
of  the  camels,  to  protect  us  from  the  wind,  and  we  slept  a  la 
helle  etoile. 

On  the  eighth  day  we  might  have  arrived  at  Abu  Hammed 
late  that  evening,  but  determined  to  halt  for  the  night,  one 
hour  sooner,  that  we  might  reach  the  Nile  by  daylight.    The 


THE  >frBIAX  DESERT.  143 

birds  of  prey  increased  iu  number  as  we  approached  the 
river;  we  frightened  away  about  thirty  vultures  from  the 
fresh  carcase  of  a  camel,  and  only  the  day  before  I  had 
shot  a  white  eagle  in  the  desert,  as  well  as  some  desert  par- 
tridges, that  were  in  search  of  stray  grains  of  Durra*  on 
the  caravan  road.  We  only  saw  the  footsteps  of  beasts  of 
prey,  round  the  skeletons  of  the  camels  ;  they  did  not  disturb 
us  in  tlie  night,  as  they  did  in  the  camp  at  Korusko,  where 
we  killed  a  hyaena,  besides  several  jackals.  Towards  mid- 
day we  met  a  caravan  of  slaves.  The  last  encampment  for 
the  night  before  we  reached  Abu  Hammed  was  iu  a  less  windy 
position,  yet  our  supply  of  charcoal  was  exhausted,  and  our 
people  had  forgotten  to  collect  camels'  dung  on  the  road  for 
fuel ;  therefore,  to  appease  our  thirst,  we  were  obliged  to  be 
contented  to  drink  the  last  brown  water  of  the  skins  unboiled. 
We  could  give  no  more  to  the  asses. 

On  the  16th  January  we  mounted  our  camels  about  lialf-past 
seven  in  the  morning,  and  looked  forth  from  our  high  thrones 
towards  the  Xile.  It  was,  however,  only  visible  a  very  short 
time  before  we  reached  it.  The  river  does  not  cut  through  any 
broad  valley  at  this  spot,  but  flows  in  a  bare,  rocky  channel, 
passing  almost  unperceived  through  the  slightly  elevated  and 
wide  rocky  plain.  On  the  farther  side  of  the  river  the  ground 
had  more  the  character  of  a  plain,  and  some  Doum  Palms 
grew  upon  an  island  that  had  formed  there.  Shortly  before  we 
reached  tlie  bank,  we  met  a  troop  of  150  camels,  which  had  just 
started  from  Abu  Hammed.  A  great  circular  embankment 
of  earth  then  became  visible  with  some  towers  upon  it  like  a 
fortress,  which  had  been  erected  by  the  great  Arab  Sheikh 
Hassan  Chalif,  for  the  government  stores.  A  small  hollow  con- 
tains five  huts,  one  made  of  stones  and  earth,  another  of  trunks 
of  trees,  two  of  mats,  one  of  bus,  or  durra-straw ;  a  more  open 
space  then  spread  before  us  surrounded  by  several  wretched 
houses,  one  of  which  was  prepared  for  our  reception.  A 
brother  of  Hassan  Chalif  who  lives  here  came  out  to  meet 
us ;  he  led  us  into  the  house,  and  proflered  his  services. 
*  Bhorra.     Bolcus  sorghum.     Kenrick,  Anc.  Eg. — Tr. 


144  ABU  HAMMED. 

Some  anqarebs  (reed  bedsteads),  which  on  account  of  the 
creeping  vermin  are  much  in  use  here,  were  brought  within 
doors,  and  we  settled  ourselves  for  the  day,  and  the  following 
night,  for  we  were  obliged  to  allow  the  camels  at  least  so  much 
time  for  repose. 

We  were  surrounded  by  a  great  square  space,  thirty  feet 
wide  on  every  side,  the  walls  were  made  of  stone  and  earth,  two 
thick  trunks  of  trees,  branching  like  a  fork,  supported  a  large 
architrave,  above  which  the  other  joists  were  placed,  which 
were  covered  and  joined  together  by  mats  and  wickerwork. 
It  strongly  reminded  me  of  some  very  ancient  architecture 
which  we  had  seen  represented  in  the  rock-grottoes  of  Beni- 
hassan;  the  columns,  the  network  of  the  ceiling,  through 
which  as  in  that  instance  the  only  light  except  what  was  ad- 
mitted by  the  door  entered  by  a  square  opening  in  the  centre, 
there  was  no  window.  The  door  was  composed  of  four  short 
trunks  of  trees,  of  which  the  uppermost  one  was  exactly  like 
the  ornamented  door-posts  in  the  tombs  of  the  time  of  the 
Pyramids.  We  hung  a  canvas  curtain  before  the  door  to 
protect  us  from  the  -wind  and  dust ;  another  door  led  at  the 
opposite  corner  into  a  side-room,  which  was  arranged  for 
the  kitchen.  It  was  a  windy  day,  and  the  wind  was  dis- 
agreeably charged  with  sand,  so  that  we  went  very  little  out 
of  doors.  But  we  refreshed  ourselves  with  some  pure  and 
fresh  Nile  water,  and  a  meal  of  well-dressed  mutton.  The 
G-reat  Desert  lay  behind  us ;  and  we  were  only  four  days' 
joui'uey  from  El  Mecheref,  the  capital  of  Berber,  during 
which  time  we  should  follow  the  course  of  the  river.  "We 
learned  that  Achmed  Pascha  Menekle  was  in  our  neighbour- 
]iood,  or  that  he  would  soon  arrive,  in  order  to  lead  a  military 
expedition  from  Darner,  a  short  day's  journey  beyond  El 
Mecheref,  up  the  Atbara  to  the  province  of  Taka,  where 
some  of  the  tribes  of  the  Bischaris  had  revolted. 

"When  we  stepped  out  of  doors  the  following  morning,  our 
Arabs  had  all  anointed  themselves  most  beautifully,  and  had 
put  on  clean  clothes  ;  but  what  most  astonished  us,  was  the 
appearance  of  their  magnificent  white  powdered  wigs,  which 


PE0T1^'CE  OF  BEEBER.  145 

gave  quite  a  venerable  appearance  to  their  faces.  To  make 
their  toilet  complete,  they  are  in  the  habit  of  combing  up 
their  great  heads  of  hair  into  a  high  toupie,  which  is 
spriukled  over  with  fine,  flaky,  shining,  white  butter,  like 
powder,  expressly  prepared  for  this  purpose.  But  in  a 
short  time,  when  the  sun  rises  higher,  this  greasy  snow 
melts,  and  the  hair  seems  then  as  if  it  was  covered  with 
innumerable  pearls  of  dew,  till  even  these  gradually  dis- 
appear, and  dripping  over  the  neck  and  shoulders,  spread  a 
gloss  over  the  pliant  darlc  brown  skin,  which  gives  their 
well-built  figures  the  appearance  of  antique  bronze  statues. 

We  started  the  next  morning,  about  eight  o'clock,  with  a. 
fresh  camel,  which  we  had  had  an  opportunity  of  obtaining 
in  exchange  for  a  tired  one.  The  nearer  we  approach  the 
island  of  Meroe,  the  valley  becomes  so  much  the  wider,  and 
more  fertile,  and  the  desert  even  becomes  more  like  a  steppe. 
The  first  station  was  Geg,  where  we  passed  the  night  in  an 
open  space  of  ground ;  the  air  is  very  warm  ;  about  half-past 
five  in  the  afternoon  it  was  still  25^  E.  (87°  Fahr.).  The 
second  night  we  halted  beyond  Abu  IlAscnix,  close  to  a 
village,  which  in  fact  is  not  really  a  station,  as  we  were 
anxious  to  get  through  the  five  ordinary  stations  in  tlio 
space  of  four  days  ;  the  third  night  we  halted  in  the  open 
air,  near  a  cataract  of  the  JS'ile.  On  the  fourth  day  from 
Abu  Hammed  we  removed  somewhat  farther  from  the  river 
into  the  desert,  yet  we  always  remained  on  the  soil  of  the 
ancient  valley,  if  I  may  so  designate  a  yellowish  earth  which 
is  now  no  longer  overflowed  by  the  river,  but  which  was 
turned  up  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  village  directly  from 
beneath  the  sand ;  that  they  might  improve  their  fields  with 
it.  AVe  stopped  in  the  evening  at  the  village  of  El  Choe, 
one  hour  distant  from  El  Mecheref,  and  the  fifth  day  we 
arrived  at  an  early  hour  at  the  capital  of  the  province  of 
Berber. 

I  sent  the  dragoman  forward  to  announce  our  arrival,  and 
to  ask  for  a  house,  which  was  given  up  to  us,  and  we  took 
possession  of  it  immediately.     The  Mudhir  of  Berber  was  in 

L 


146  PEOTINCE  OF  BEREEE. 

Darner,  but  his  Wakil,  or  representative,  visited  us,  and 
soon  after  Hassan  Clialif,  the  principal  Arab  Sheikh,  who 
promised  us  better  camels  to  take  us  to  Damer ;  he  was  re- 
joiced to  hear  some  tidings  of  his  and  our  friends,  Linant 
and  Bonomi,  and  was  much  pleased  in  looking  over  our 
picture  books,  among  which  he  found  likenesses  of  some  of 
his  own  relations  and  ancestors.  We  had  scarcely  arrived, 
before  we  received  news  that  Hassan  Pascha  had  arrived  at 
the  same  time  as  ourselves,  from  a  different  quarter.  He 
had  travelled  from  Korusko  to  his  province  of  Dongola,  and 
now  came  from  Edabbe,  on  the  southern  frontier  of  Dongola, 
right  across  the  desert  to  El  Mecheref,  whither  Em  in,  the 
new  Pascha  of  Chartum,  had  gone  to  meet  him.  This  meet- 
ing caused  us  some  inconvenience  with  respect  to  the 
arrangements  of  our  journey ;  nevertheless,  we  so  far  ad- 
vanced our  object,  that  on  the  following  morning,  the  22nd 
of  January,  soon  after  Hassan  Pascha  had  again  set  out  on 
his  journey,  we  were  also  enabled  to  depart  for  the  south, 
leaving  two  camels  behind,  which  we  did  not  require  any 
longer  as  water-carriers,  and  exchanging  three  others  for 
better  ones. 

"We  rode  away  about  mid-day,  and  stopped  in  the  evening 
at  the  last  village  before  reaching  the  river  Mogran,  the 
ancient  Astaboeas,  which  we  had  to  cross  before  getting  to 
Damee.  It  is  called  on  the  maps  Atbaea,  which  is  evi- 
dently derived  from  Astaboras;  yet  this  name  does  not 
appear  now  to  be  used  for  the  lower,  but  for  the  upper  river, 
beginning  from  the  place  of  the  same  name.  On  the  follow- 
ing morning  we  crossed  the  river  close  to  its  mouth.  Even 
at  this  point  it  was  now  very  narrow  in  its  great  bed,  which 
in  the  rainy  season  is  entirely  filled,  and  two  months  hence 
it  is  only  prevented  from  being  wholly  dried  up  by  a  little 
stagnant  water.  On  the  farther  side  of  the  river  we  entered 
the  (Strabonic)  island  of  Meeoe,  by  which  appellation  the 
land  between  the  Nile  and  the  Astaboras  was  designated. 
Two  hours  more  and  we  arrived  at  Damer. 

The  houses  were  too  wretched  to  receive  us.    I  despatched 


e'  da:mee.  147 

Jussuf  to  Emin  Pasclia,  in  whose  province  we  row  are,  and 
who  has  encamped  in  tents  with  Hassan  Pascha  on  the  bank 
of  the  river.  He  sent  a  Kawass  to  meet  us,  and  invited  us 
to  dismount  and  to  dine  with  them.  I  however  preferred  to 
haye  our  tent  pitched  at  some  little  distance,  and  first  of  all 
to  change  our  travelling  costume.  The  Mudhir  of  Berber 
immediately  visited  us  to  ask  what  we  might  require,  and 
soon  after  Emin  Pascha  sent  a  sumptuous  dinner  for  us  to 
our  tent :  four  well  cooked  dishes,  and,  besides,  a  whole 
sheep  stuifed  with  rice  and  roasted  on  the  spit,  with  a  flat 
cake  of  puff  paste  stuffed  with  meat. 

About  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  about  tlie  time  of 
Asser,  we  announced  that  we  were  going  to  pay  our  visit ; 
just  as  we  were  making  our  arrangements  to  set  out  we 
heard  some  sailors'  songs,  and  saw  two  boats  with  red  flags, 
and  the  crescent,  floating  down  the  river ;  it  was  Achmed 
Pascha  Menekle,  who  was  returning  from  Chartum.  The 
Paschas  and  the  Mudhir  immediately  repaired  to  his  boat, 
and  it  was  late  before  they  separated  ;  our  friend,  Dr.  Koch, 
unfortunately,  was  not  expected  to  arrive  from  Chartiini  for 
two  days  later.  I  had  received  a  letter  from  Erbkam  very 
soon  after  our  arrival,  in  which  he  announced  to  me,  through 
a  passing  Kawass,  that  he  had  left  Korusko  on  the  15th 
January  with  Ibrahim  Aga  ;  he  wrote  from  their  first  night's 
encampment.  The  Kawass  had  ridden  with  incredible  speed 
in  fourteen  days  from  Cairo  to  Berber,  and  he  brought 
Achmed  Pascha  the  permission  which  had  been  earnestly  re- 
quested, to  raise  the  government  charge  for  the  camels  be- 
tween Korusko  and  Berber  from  sixty  to  ninety  piastres 
above  what  it  was  before. 

26fh  January. — The  day  before  yesterday  we  paid  an 
early  visit  to  Achmed  Pascha,  which  he  returned  yesterday. 
He  will  do  aU  in  his  power  to  accelerate  our  journey  on- 
wards. He  communicated  to  us  that,  as  he  had  before  pro- 
mised, he  had  sent  an  officer  from  Abu  Haras  to  Mandera, 
three  days  into  the  desert,  and  had  heard  it  reported  by  him 
that  some  great  ruins  were  still  extant  on  that  spot.  A  letter 

l2 


148  JO■UE^'EY  0^'^VAEDS. 

from  Cbartum,  wliich  we  received  yesterday  from  Dr.  KocL, 
mentioned  the  same  thing,  and  it  was  verbally  confirmed  by 
himself  this  morning.  After  dinner  he  is  going  to  introduce 
US  to  Musa  Bey,  who  has  been  on  the  spot.  At  the  same 
time  he  informed  us  that  he  had  received  some  letters 
addressed  to  us,  and  that  they  were  left  in  Chartum ;  also 
that  the  draughtsman  who  had  been  engaged  from  Bome  had 
arrived  in  Cairo. 

A  boat  is  ready  in  El  Mecheref  for  our  travelling  com- 
panions. I  myself,  however,  intend  to  ride  on  before  with 
Abekeu.  Achmed  Pascha  has  sent  me  word  that  in  an  hour's 
time  a  courier  departs  for  Cairo,  who  will  take  this  letter 
with  him. 

Postscript. — The  glowing  accounts  about  Mandera,  upon 
closer  inquiry,  seem  to  want  confirmation .  It  will  hardly  be 
worth  our  while  to  go  there. 


LETTEE  XYIII. 

On  the  Blue  Eiver,  Province  of  Senndr,  Lat.  13<>, 
2nd  March,  1844. 

To-DAT  we  reach  the  most  southern  limit  of  our  African 
journey.  To-morrow  we  again  turn  towards  the  north  and 
homewards.  We  shall  go  as  far  as  the  neighbourhood  of 
Seeo — a  place  on  the  boundary  between  the  provinces  of 
Sennar  and  Fasokl,  for  our  time  will  not  allow  us  to  do 
more.  Prom  Chartum  I  have  ascended  the  river  as  far  as 
tliis  spot,  with  Abeken  alone.  "We  relinquished  the  desert 
journey  to  Mandera,  the  rather  as  the  eastern  territories  are 
at  present  insecure  from  the  war  in  Taka ;  and  we  now 
employ  the  time,  in  travelling  several  days  farther  across 
Sennar,  to  gain  some  information  about  the  character  of  the 
river  and  the  adjacent  country.  This  journey  is  worth  the 
trouble,  for,  from  Abu  Haras,  situated  at  the  influx  of  the 
Eahad,  between  Chartum  and  Sennar,  the  character  of  the 


JOUEyEY  TO  chaetum:.  149 

whole  country  is  completely  altered  in  its  soil,  vegetation, 
and  animals.  I  then  thought  I  should  like  to  obtain  a  view 
of  the  Xile  valley  itself,  as  far  up  the  river  as  possible,  as 
the  character  of  this  narrow  strip  of  countrj^  has  had  a 
greater  influence  on  the  course  of  history  than  any  other 
epot  in  the  whole  world. 

It  is  impossible,  witliout  incurring  danger,  or  making  pe- 
culiar preparations,  to  travel  up  the  White  Eiver  beyond  a 
few  days'  journey,  as  far  as  the  boundaries  of  Mohamed  All's 
conquests.  After  this,  there  are  the  ScniLLi'KS  on  the 
western  bank,  the  Dinkas  on  the  eastern,  both  native 
negro  nations,  who  are  not  ver}'  friendly  to  Xorthern  guests. 
Tiie  Blue  Eiver  is  navigable  still  farther  up,  and  in  historical 
times,  as  well  as  at  the  present  day,  was  of  much  greater 
importance  than  the  White  Eiver,  as  it  was  the  means  of 
communication  between  the  Xorth,  and  Abyssinia.  I  sliould 
have  liked  to  have  penetrated  as  far  as  the  province  of 
Pasokl,  tlie  last  under  Egyptian  rule  ;  but  it  cannot  be  com- 
bined with  the  calculation  of  our  time.  This  evening,  there- 
fore, we  shall  terminate  our  southern  journey. 

But  I  must  go  back  in  my  reports  to  Damer,  where,  on  the 
27th  January,  I  embarked  with  Abcken  npon  a  boat  belong- 
ing to  ^lusa  Bey,  the  first  adjutant  of  Achmed  Pascha,  who 
politely  placed  it  at  our  disposal.  About  eight  o'clock  in 
the  evening  we  halted  for  the  night  at  the  island  of  Dal 
Haul  AV^e  had  received  a  Kawass  from  Emin  Pascha,  who 
came  here  with  Ismael  Pascha  at  the  time  of  the  conquest  of 
the  countrv,  went  with  Defterdar  Bey  to  Kordofan  (or,  as 
ho  expresses  it,  Kordifal),  then  accompanied  him  on  his 
avenging  march  to  JSchendi,  in  consequence  of  the  murder 
of  Ismael,  and  since  that  time  has,  for  three-and-twenty 
years,  roamed  over  the  whole  of  the  Sudan  in  all  directions. 
He  carries  in  his  head  the  most  complete  map  of  these 
countries,  and  has  a  marvellous  memory  for  names,  direc- 
tions, and  distances ;  so  tliat  I  have  drawn  two  maps  accord- 
ing to  his  statements,  particular  parts  of  which  may  not  be 
without  geographical  interest.     He  has  also  been  in  Mecca, 


150  PYRAMIDS  OF  MEEOE. 

and  therefore  likes  to  be  called  Haggi  Ibrahim  (The  Pilgrim 
Ibrahim).  He  has  great  experience  in  other  matters  also, 
and  will  be  extremely  useful  to  us  from  his  long  and  exten- 
sive knowledge  of  the  country. 

On  the  28th  January  we  halted  about  mid-day  at  an  island 
called  GrOiiEA,  as  we  heard  that  there  were  some  ruins  in 
the  vicinity  which  we  were  anxious  to  see,  "We  were  obliged 
to  go  through  a  shallow  arm  of  the  Nile,  and  to  ride  back  an 
hour  northwards  on  the  eastern  bank.  At  length,  after 
passing  the  villages  of  Motmar  and  El  Akarid,  between  a 
third  village,  Sagadi,  and  a  fourth,  GEy:s-A,  we  found  the  in- 
significant ruins  of  an  ancient  place,  constructed  of  bricks 
and  strewed  over  with  potsherds. 

We  returned  in  the  mid-day  heat,  not  in  the  very  best 
humour,  and  did  not  reach  Begeeatjieh  in  our  boat  before 
sunset,  near  which  the  Pyramids  of  Meroe  arc  situated.  It 
is  singular  that  Cailliaud  does  not  mention  tliis  spot ;  he  only 
speaks  of  the  Pyramids  of  Asstje,  i.  e.  Sue,  or  e'  Sue. 
This  is  the  name  of  the  whole  plain  in  which  the  ruins  of 
the  town  and  Pyramids  are  situated,  and  also  a  single  portion 
of  Beg'erauieh,  which  last,  by  wrong  spelling,  is  called,  in  Hos- 
kins,  Begeomi. 

Although  it  was  already  dark,  I  nevertheless  rode  to  the 
Pyramids  with  Abeken.  They  are  situated  a  short  hour 
inland,  on  the  first  elevation  of  the  low  hills  which  run  along 
in  an  easterly  direction.  The  moon,  which  was  in  its  first 
quarter,  feebly  illuminated  the  plain,  covered  with  stones, 
low  bushes,  and  clumps  of  reeds.  After  a  rapid  ride,  we  at 
length  reached  the  foot  of  a  row  of  Pyramids,  closely 
crowded  together,  which  rose  before  us  in  a  crescent,  as  the 
form  of  the  narrow  elevation  rendered  necessary.  To  the 
right,  a  little  behind,  another  group  of  Pyramids  joined  these  ; 
a  thh'd  lies  more  to  the  south,  and  rather  more  forward  in 
the  plain,  but  too  distant  to  be  seen  by  half  moonlight.  I 
fastened  the  bridle  of  my  donkey-steed  to  a  block  of  stone, 
and  clambered  up  the  first  mound  of  ruins. 

Although  the  individual  Pyramids    are    not    accurately 


PYEAMIDS  OF  ilEKOE.  151 

placed  according  to  the  quarters  of  the  heavens,  as  they  are 
in  Egypt,  nevertheless  all  the  ante-chambers  here  attached  to 
the  Pyramids  themselves  are  turned  away  from  the  river, 
towards  the  east,  doubtless  on  the  same  religious  grounds 
which  induced  the  Egyptians  to  place  the  unattached  temples 
standing  in  front  of  their  Pyramids  also  towards  the  east ; 
therefore,  in  Gizeh  and  Sagara,  towards  the  river,  while  their 
sepulchral  chambers  are  towards  the  west. 

Half  looking,  half  feeling,  I  found  some  sculptures  on  the 
outer  walls  of  the  small  sepulchral  temple,  and  I  also  felt 
figures  and  writing  on  the  inner  walls.  It  occurred  to  me 
that  I  had  the  end  of  a  candle  in  my  saddle-pocket ;  I  lighted 
this,  and  then  examined  several  ante-chambers.  There  I 
immediately  encountered  the  Egyptian  gods,  Osiris,  Isis, 
Nephthys,  Atmu,  &c.,  with  their  names  in  the  known  hiero- 
glyphic character.  I  also  found  the  name  of  a  king  in  the 
first  chamber.  One  of  the  two  Rings  contained  the  emblems 
of  a  great  Pharaoh  of  the  Old  Monarchy,  Sesurtesen  I.,  the 
same  which  had  been  adopted  by  two  later  Egyptian  mo- 
narchs,  and  I  here  found  them,  for  the  fourth  time,  as  the 
Throne-Name  of  an  Ethiopian  king.  The  sculptures  on  the 
remainino^  sides  were  not  completed.  I  found  some  Royal 
Shields  this  evening  also  in  another  ante-chamber,  but  not 
very  legible.  The  inscriptions  and  representations  had  alto- 
gether been  much  damaged.  The  Pyramids  have  also  all  of 
them  lost  their  summits,  as  in  Egypt,  and  many  have  been 
destroyed  down  to  the  ground. 

Our  new  Kawass,  who  did  not  like  to  leave  us  alone  in  the 
night  time,  had  immediately  followed  us.  He  had  a  perfect 
knowledge  of  the  locality,  as  he  had  been  here  a  long  time 
with  Ferlixi,  and  had  assisted  him  in  his  researches  among 
the  Pyramids.  He  showed  us  the  spot  in  which  Eerlini,  in 
1834,  had  found  immured  the  rich  treasure  of  gold  and  silver 
rings. 

I  also  discovered,  the  same  evening,  a  cased  Pyramid,  ac- 
cording to  the  principle  of  the  Egyptian  Pyramids,  which 
were  afterwards  enlarged  by  superimposed  layers  of  stone. 


lOZ  PYRAMIDS  OF  MEEOE. 

According  to  the  inscriptions  and  representations  of  the 
ante- chambers,  these  Pyramids  were  most  of  them  built 
solely  for  kings,  some  of  them,  perhaps,  for  their  wives  and 
children.  Therefore,' their  great  number  indicates  a  tolerably 
long  succession  of  kings,  and  a  well-established  Monarchy, 
which  probably  must  have  remained  in  a  state  of  tranquillity 
for  a  series  of  centuries. 

The  event  of  m.ost  importance  in  this  moon  and  torchlight 
survey,  was  not,  however,  exactly  the  most  cheering.  I  was 
unavoidably  convinced  that  on  this  most  renowned  spot  of 
ancient  Ethiopia,  I  had  nothing  before  me  but  the  remains, 
proportionately  speaking,  of  a  very  late  period  of  art.  Even 
earlier  than  this,  the  drawings  of  Eerlini's  monuments,  which 
I  saw  for  the  first  time  in  Eome,  and  the  monuments  them- 
selves, which  I  had  just  seen  in  London,  impressed  me  with 
the  opinion  that  they  had  been,  indeed,  sculptured  in 
Ethiopia,  but  certainly  not  previous  to  the  first  century 
before  the  birth  of  Christ,  tlierefore  about  the  same  period 
to  which  certain  genuine  Greek  and  Eoman  works  belong, 
which  were  discovered  simultaneously  with  the  Ethiopian 
treasure.  I  must  now  make  the  same  remark  upon  the 
monuments  in  general,  which  are  found  not  only  here  but 
throughout  the  wliole  island  of  Meroe,  as  well  as  of  all  the 
Pyramids  at  Beg'erauich,  and  of  the  temples  of  Ben  jN'aga,  of 
Naga,  and  in  the  AVadi  e'  Sofra  (the  Mesaurat  of  Cailliaud), 
which  we  have  since  then  seen.  The  representations  and 
inscriptions  do  not  leave  the  smallest  doubt  of  this,  and  it 
will  in  future  be  a  fruitless  task  to  endeavour  to  support  the 
favourite  supposition  of  an  ancient,  brilliant,  and  renowned 
Meroe,  whose  inhabitants  were  at  one  time  the  predecessors 
and  the  instructors  of  the  Egyptians  in  civilisation,  by  the 
demonstration  of  monumental  remains  from  that  old  period. 

This  conviction  is  besides  of  no  small  scientific  value,  and 
seems  even  now  to  throw  some  light  on  the  historical  con- 
nection between  Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  the  importance  of  which 
can  be  only  thoroughly  demonstrated  by  the  monuments  of 
Barkal.     There,  I  have  no  doubt,  will  be  found  the  oldest 


JOL'EyET  TO  CHAETUM.  153 

Ethiopian  monuments,  although,  perhaps,  not  earlier  than 
the  period  of  Tahraka,  who  reigned  simultaneously  over 
Egypt  and  Ethiopia  in  the  seventh  century  before  Christ. 

The  next  morning  at  sunrise  "we  rode  back  to  the  Pyramids, 
and  discovered  fifteen  different  kings'  names,  some  of  them, 
however,  in  very  bad  preservation. 

AVe  had  just  completed  our  survey  of  the  two  groups  of 
Pyramids  lying  to  the  north-east,  and  were  riding  on  to  the 
third,  wliich  is  situated  in  the  plain,  not  far  from  the  ruins 
of  the  town,  and  is,  perhaps,  the  oldest  Necropolis,  when  we 
heard  shots  from  the  bank,  and  saw  white  sails  fluttering  over 
the  river.  Soon  afterwards  Erbkam,  the  two  "Weidenbachs, 
and  Franke,  came  walking  across  the  plain,  and  hailed  us 
from  a  great  distance.  AYe  had  not  expected  them  to  arrive 
so  soon,  and,  therefore,  rejoiced  still  more  to  sec  tliem  again. 
We  could  now  pursue  our  journey  to  Chartum  together. 

We  sailed  away  about  two  in  the  afternoon,  and  the  next 
morning  about  ten  o'clock  reached  Schendi.  AVe  pro- 
ceeded in  the  afternoon,  spent  the  night  on  the  island  of 
HoBi,  and  the  following  morning  arrived  at  Be"N"  Naga. 
Here,  we  first  visited  the  ruins  of  two  small  temples ;  the 
one  lying  towards  the  west,  had  Typhonic  pillars,  instead  of 
columns,  but  no  inscription  was  to  be  found  on  the  few 
remains;  in  the  other  temple  to  the  east,  some  sculptures 
were  preserved  on  the  low  remains  of  the  walls  of  the  temple ; 
and  also  some  writing  on  several  circular  fragments  of 
columns,  but  too  little  to  take  away  any  connected  ideas 
from  them.  Had  w^e  made  some  excavations,  we  might  pro- 
bably have  discovered  some  kings'  names,  but  it  was  impos- 
sible to  make  such  an  experiment  till  our  return. 

We  procured  some  camels  for  the  following  day,  and  about 
nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  I  started  with  Abeken,  Erbkam, 
and  Max  AVeidenbach,  for  Xaga.  Such  is  the  name  given 
to  the  ruins  of  a  town  and  several  temples,  which  are  situated 
in  the  eastern  desert,  between  seven  and  eight  hours  distant 
from  the  Nile.  Prom  our  landing-place  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
only  group  of  palm-trees  in  the  surrounding  country,  it  was 


154  JOUENEY  TO  CHAETUM. 

only  one  half  hour  to  the  village  of  Ben  j^'aga,  which  is  in 
"Wadi  Teeesib.  One  hour  eastward  down  the  river  (for  it 
here  flows  in  a  direction  from  west  to  east)  are  the  above- 
mentioned  ruins,  in  Wadi  el  Kiebegax,  near  to  which  we 
had  disembarked  the  previous  day;  we  left  them  now  on 
our  left  hand,  and  rode  in  a  south-easterly  direction  into  the 
desert,  having  here  and  there  some  parched  bushes ;  we  trar 
versed  the  valley  of  El  Kirbegan,  which,  as  far  as  this  point, 
runs  outwards  from  the  river,  in  which  we  found  an  encamp- 
ment of  the  Ababde  Arabs. 

Four  hours  and  a  half  from  Ben  JN'aga  we  came  to  a  single 
hill  in  the  desert  called  Bueeib.  It  was  on  the  water-shed 
between  the  smaller  south-western  Wadis  (so  even  the  flat- 
test depressions  of  the  ground  are  called,  in  which  the  water 
runs  ofl",  and  which  we  should  scarcely  call  valleys)  and  the 
great,  broad  AYadi  Atjateb,  which  we  were  now  descending, 
after  having  left  Buerib  at  a  short  distance  on  our  left.  In 
three  hours  and  three-quarters  from  Buerib  we  arrived  at  the 
ruins  of  Naga. 

It  was  not  till  we  approached  tlie  temple  that  I  solved  the 
enigma,  which  I  had  hitherto  sought  in  vain  to  interpret,  and 
on  which  neither  Cailliaud  nor  Hoskins  could  offer  any  ex- 
planation ;  namely,  how  had  it  been  possible  to  found  and 
to  maintain  a  large  city  in  the  midst  of  the  desert,  so  far  re- 
moved from  the  river.  The  whole  valley  of  Auateb  is  even 
now  cultivated  land.  We  found  it  far  and  wide  covered  with 
the  stubble  of  Durra.  The  inhabitants  of  Schendi,  Ben 
Naga,  Fadnie,  Selama,  Metamme,  consequently  of  both  banks 
of  the  ^ile,  come  as  far  as  this  to  cultivate  the  land  and  to 
gather  in  the  Durra.  The  water  of  the  tropical  rains  suffices 
to  fertilise  this  flat  but  extensive  tract  of  low  ground,  and 
in  ancient  times,  when  more  care  was  bestowed  upon  it,  a 
still  greater  profit  must  liave  been  derived  from  this  region. 
During  the  dry  season  of  the  year  they  must  undoubtedly 
have  had  large  artificial  reservoirs,  such  as  we  found  even 
now,  though  without  water,  near  the  more  remote  ruins  to 
the  north-west  of  iN'aga. 


TEilPLES  OF  XAGA.  155 

The  ruins  stand  on  a  projection  of  a  mountain  range 
several  hours  long,  which  from  them  has  taken  the  name  of 
Gebel  e'  Xaga,  and  stretches  out  from  the  south,  north- 
wards, AVadi  Auateb  passes  along  its  western  side  towards 
the  river.  We  arrived  ahout  half-past  five  o'clock,  after  an 
uninterrupted  ride.  On  the  road  we  saw  the  path  covered 
with  the  marks  of  gazelles,  wild  asses,  foxes,  jackals,  ostriches. 
Lions  are  also  met  with  here,  but  we  did  not  see  any  of  their 
tracks. 

I  visited  the  three  principal  temples  before  nightfall,  all  of 
which  belong  to  a  xery  late  period,  and  do  not  suggest  the 
ideas  of  very  ancient  art,  as  Cailliaud  and  Hoskins  thought 
they  could  recognise.  There  is,  besides,  a  fourtli  temple  by 
the  side  of  the  tliree  principal  temples,  of  EgA-ptian  architec- 
ture, whose  well-joined  arches,  not  unpleasantly  combined 
with  Egyptian  ornaments,  not  only  pre-supposes  them  to  have 
been  erected  when  the  Boman  dominion  extended  over  the 
world,  but  even  that  Eoman  architects  were  on  the  spot. 
This  last  temple  has  no  inscriptions.  "With  respect  to  the 
three  others,  the  two  lying  to  the  south  were  built  by  one 
and  the  same  king ;  in  the  representations  in  both  temples 
he  is  accompanied  by  the  same  queen.  But  a  third  royal  per- 
sonage appears  behind  them  having  a  different  name  in  the 
two  temples.  The  Tlu'one-Shield  of  Sesurtesen  I.  is  again  at- 
tached to  the  name  of  the  king,  although  he  does  not  appear 
to  be  the  same  as  the  King  of  the  Pyramids  of  Sur.  Besides, 
both  those  other  personages  have  assumed  old  Egyptian 
Throne-Shields,  which  might  easily  mislead  us. 

The  third  most  northern  temple  has  sustained  much  injury, 
and  very  little  wTitiug  remains  upon  it,  yet  a  king  is  men- 
tioned on  the  door-posts  who  differs  from  the  builder  of  both 
the  other  temples. 

The  figures  of  the  gods  are  almost  wholly  Egyptian,  but  on 
the  southern  temple  there  is  a  figure  unknown  in  Egypt, 
with  three  lions'  heads  (a  fourth  may  perhaps  be  supposed 
behind)  and  four  arms.     This  may  be  the  barbaric  god  spe- 


156  JOUR>'ET  TO  CHAETUIil. 

ciallj  mentioned  by  Strabo,  whom  the  Meroites  worshipped 
besides  Hercules,  Pan,  and  Isis. 

The  next  morning,  the  2nd  of  February,  we  again  visited 
the  three  temples,  took  some  impressions  on  paper,  and  then 
started  for  the  third  group  of  monuments,  named  by  Cailliaud 
Mesatjeat.  This,  however,  is  a  term  which  is  here  employed 
to  designate  all  the  three  groups  of  ruins,  and  which  only 
means  pictures,  or  walls  furnished  with  pictures.  The  ruins 
of  Ben  ]S'aga  are  called  Mesatjeat  el  Kiebeqax,  because 
they  are  situated  in  "Wad i  el  Kiebegais";  it  appears  that 
the  second  group  only  has  retained  its  old  name  of  Naga, 
or  Mesaueat  e'  Kaga  ;  the  third  group  situated  towards 
Schendi  is  called  jMesaueat  e'  Sofea  from  the  mountain 
basin  in  which  it  lies,  which  is  called  e'  Sofea,  the  table. 

TVe  first  pursued,  for  tlie  space  of  two  hours,  in  a  north- 
erly direction  the  mountain  chain  of  Gebel  e'  Naga,  in  the 
valley  of  Auateb.  Then,  about  half-past  twelve,  we  as- 
cended through  the  first  defile  which  opens  to  the  right,  into 
a  valley  situated  somewhat  higher,  e'  Seleha  ;  it  becomes 
broader  behind  the  first  low  fore-range,  and  is  luxuriantly 
overgrown  with  grass  and  shrubs  ;  after  extending  for  an 
hour  and  a  quarter  in  the  direction  of  S.S.A\^.  to  jS'.N.E.,  it 
opens  on  the  left  hand  into  the  valley  of  Auateb,  and 
straight  on  into  another  smaller  valley,  from  which  it  is 
separated  by  Gebel  Lagar.  It  is  this  small  valley,  which 
from  its  circular  form  is  called  e'  Sofea  ;  here  are  the  ruins 
which  were  also  seen  by  Hoskins,  who  did  not,  however, 
advance  as  far  as  jS'aga.  We  arrived  about  a  quarter  past 
two,  and  had  not,  therefore,  been  quite  four  hours  coming  from 
Naga  to  this  spot.  As  we  only  wished  to  take  a  passing 
hasty  survey,  we  walked  through  the  -R-idely-scattered  ruins 
of  the  principal  building,  which  Cailliaud  held  to  be  a  great 
school,  and  Hoskins  an  hospital;  and  we  saw  in  the  few 
sculptures,  which  are  unaccompanied  by  inscriptions,  that 
here  also  we  had  before  us  monuments  of  a  late  period,  pro- 
bably still  more  recent  than  those  in  Sur  and  Xaga.     "We 


ASSES.      LlOyS.  157 

then  went  to  a  small  temple  in  the  neiglibourhood,  with 
pillars  on  which  are  represented  riders  upon  elephants,  lions, 
and  other  strange  barbarous  scenes.  TTe  looked  at  the 
huge  artificial  cisterns,  now  called  Wot  Mahemur,  which  in 
the  dry  season  must  have  compensated  the  inhabitants  for 
the  want  of  the  river  ;  and  about  four  o'clock  we  returned  to 
Ben  Naga. 

As  we  emerged  from  the  hills,  we  met  great  troops  of  wild 
asses,  which  always  kept  at  a  little  distance  from  us,  as  if  they 
would  invite  us  to  hunt  them.  They  are  of  a  grey  or  greyish- 
red  colour,  with  white  bellies  ;  they  all  have  a  black  stripe 
drawn  distinctly  across  the  back,  and  the  tip  of  the  tail  is  also 
generally  black.  Many  of  them  are  caught  when  young,  but 
they  cannot  then  even  be  used  for  riding  or  carrying  burdens. 
It  is  only  the  next  generation  which  can  be  employed  in  tliat 
manner.  Almost  all  the  tame  asses  in  the  south,  which  come 
from  the  Ass  Cataract  (Schellal  homar)  in  Berber,  are  got 
from  this  wild  breed,  and  have  the  same  colour  and  similar 
marks. 

"VVe  encamped  soon  after  sunset  in  a  plain,  overgrown  with 
bushes.  The  camel-drivers  and  our  Kawass  were  in  great 
terror  of  lions  in  this  desert  till  a  large  fire  was  kindled, 
which  they  kept  most  carefully  alive  throughout  the  night. 
If  a  lion  only  lets  his  voice  be  heard  near  a  caravan,  which 
really  does  sound  deep  and  awful  across  the  wide  desert,  all 
the  camels  run  away  on  every  side  as  if  they  were  mad,  and 
it  is  difficult  to  catch  them  again,  frequently  not  before  they 
have  sustained  and  done  much  injury.  Human  beings  are 
not,  however,  easily  attacked.  A  few  days  ago  a  camel  was 
strangled  by  a  lion  in  our  neighbourhood,  but  on  the  farther 
side  of  the  river.  A  man  who  was  present  saved  himself  on 
the  nearest  tree. 

On  the  3rd  of  February  we  again  set  out  about  seven  in 
the  morning ;  we  left  the  two  Bueribs,  the  great  "  blue"  and 
the  little  '•  red,"  at  a  considerable  distance  on  our  left  hand, 
and  shortly  before  nine  o'clock  arrived  in  the  valley  of  El 
lurbegan,  which  we  followed  for  half  an  hour  in  the  direc- 


158  TAMAJflAT.       CHAETUM. 

tion  of  the  river.  'We  saw  tlie  Mesaurafc  el  Kirbegan  iu  its 
whole  extent  on  our  right,  but  kept  upon  the  hills  till  a  little 
after  eleven,  when  we  arrived  at  Ben  JN'aga,  and  half  an  hour 
afterwards  once  more  at  our  landing-place. 

Two  hours  afterwards  we  continued  our  journey  in  our 
boat.  "We  made,  however,  little  progress  with  a  strong 
adverse  wind,  and  saw  nothing  new,  except  for  the  first  time 
a  hippopotamus  swimming  in  the  water.  The  next  morning 
we  disembarked  on  the  western  bank,  opposite  the  village  of 
Gos  Basabie,  to  see  the  ruins  of  the  walls  of  an  old  fortress, 
with  towers  of  defence,  which  surrounded  the  summit  of  a 
hill.  The  space  enclosed  was  about  300  paces  in  diameter. 
In  the  afternoon  we  approached  the  Schellal  (the  Cataract)  of 
GrEEASCHAB,  the  higher  mountain  ranges  lying  before  us, 
closed  in  upon  each  other,  and  at  length  formed  a  mountain 
hollow,  seemingly  without  any  outlet ;  this  was,  however,  to 
our  surprise,  near  at  hand,  for  we  turned  to  our  left  into  a  nar- 
row defile,  which  widened  into  a  liigh  and  wild  rocky  valley ; 
we  followed  it  for  nearly  an  hour  before  again  emerging  on 
the  other  side  into  another  plain.  The  eruptive  granite 
ranges  of  Qieee  pass  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  river  into 
Eauian,  "the  thirsty  quenched;"  while  to  the  west,  some 
distance  from  the  river,  there  is  Atschax  "the  thirsty," 
also  rising  up  in  a  detached  form. 

The  5th  February  we  landed  about  eleven  in  the  morn- 
ing at  Tamaniat.  Mohammed  Said,  the  former  treasurer  of 
the  late  Achmed  Pascha,  whose  acquaintance  we  had  made 
in  Damer,  had  given  us  a  letter  to  one  of  the  sub-officials 
there,  which  contained  instructions  to  him  to  deliver  to  us 
the  fragment  of  an  inscription  which  had  been  found  in 
Soba.  It  belonged  to  the  centre  of  a  marble  table,  which 
was  inscribed  on  both  sides  with  Grreek  or  Coptic  letters  of 
a  late  period.  The  signs,  which  were  not  difficult  to  read, 
neither  contained  Greek  nor  Coptic  words ;  only  the  name 
retoprio  .  .  could  be  deciphered.  The  same  evening  we 
arrived  in  Chaetum.  This  name  signifies  an  elephant's 
trunk,  and  probably  was  derived  from  the  form  of  the  nar- 


TUEKISn  EEPAST.  159 

row  tongue  of  land  on  whicli  the  town  is  situated,  between 
the  two  Nile  rivers  which  unite  at  this  spot. 

My  first  visit  with  Abeken  was  to  Einiu  Pa«c-ha,  who  had 
reached  Chartum  before  us.  He  received  us  in  a  very 
friendly  manner^  and  would  not  allow  us  to  leave  him  the 
whole  morning. 

A  magnificent  breakfast,  consisting  of  thirty  dishes,  which 
we  partook  of  at  liis  house,  gave  us  a  most  curious  insight 
into  the  secrets  of  the  Turkish  culinary  art ;  as  I  learned 
from  our  highly-fed  Pascha,  it  resembles  the  most  accom- 
plished systems  of  the  latest  French  kitchens,  in  obeying 
the  refined  regulations  of  a  fastidious  taste  in  the  prepara- 
tion and  arrangement  of  food.  Soon  after  the  first  dishes, 
mutton,  roasted  on  the  spit,  is  brought  in,  which  cannot  be 
dispensed  with  at  any  Turkish  meal.  Then  follow  various 
courses  of  dishes  of  meats  and  vegetables,  solid  and  liquid, 
sour  and  sweet,  and  a  certain  repetition  of  changes  is  ob- 
served in  the  successive  dishes,  in  order  to  keep  up  the 
keenness  of  the  appetite.  Pillau,  boiled  rice,  always  forms 
the  conclusion. 

The  external  preparations  for  such  an  entertainment  are 
somewhat  as  follows.  A  great,  round,  metal  tray,  with  a 
flat  border,  about  three  feet  in  diameter,  is  placed  on  a  low 
frame,  and  senses  as  a  table,  round  which  five  or  six  persons 
seat  themselves  on  cushions  or  coverlets ;  the  legs  vanish 
beneath  the  body,  in  the  ample  folds  of  the  dress  ;  as  to  the 
hands,  the  left  must  be  invisible,  it  would  be  quite  improper 
to  let  it  ever  be  seen  during  meals.  The  right  hand  must 
alone  be  active.  No  such  thing  as  a  plate  is  to  be  seen,  no 
more  than  knives  and  forks.  The  table  is  covered  with  deeper 
or  shallower,  covered  or  uncovered  dishes,  which  are  con- 
stantly changed,  so  that  but  a  very  few  morsels  can  be  taken 
from  each.  Particular  dishes,  however,  such  as  roast  meat, 
cold  milk  with  cucumbers,  &c.,  remain  longer  on  the  table, 
and  one  returns  to  them  more  frequently.  Both  before  and 
after  dinner,  the  hands  are  of  course  washed.  A  servant,  or 
slave,  kneeling,  holds   in  one  hand  a  metal  basin,  in  the 


160  CHAETUir. 

middle  of  which  lies  a  piece  of  soap,  in  a  little  projecting 
saucer,  expressly  iised  for  the  purpose ;  with  the  other  he 
pours  water  from  a  metal  pitcher  over  the  hands,  and  a  fine, 
ornamentally  embroidered  towel  hangs  over  his  arm  for 
drying  them. 

After  dinner  the  pipe  is  immediately  presented,  coffee 
handed  round,  and  then  one  may  retire.  The  Turks  are 
in  the  habit  of  making  this  the  period  of  their  mid-day 
repose,  till  Asser.  But  before  we  parted  from  our  host,  a 
number  of  weapons  were  brought,  belonging  to  the  savage 
nations  living  farther  up  the  country,  lances,  bows,  arrows, 
clubs,  and  a  king's  sceptre,  which  he  sent  to  the  boat  for  me, 
as  a  present  to  his  guest. 

We  afterwards  visited  our  countrjanan,  jSTeuba-UEe,  the 
apothecary  of  the  province,  who  has  been  very  unfortunate  : 
a  short  time  since,  he  was  removed  from  his  post  by  the 
late  Achmed  Pascha  ;  but  he  has  now  been  again  appointed 
apothecary  by  Achmed  Pascha  Menekle,  through  the  inter- 
cession of  Dr.  Koch.  We  then  went  to  a  Pole  who  has 
settled  here  —  Hermanovich,  the  head-physician  of  the 
province,  who,  in  consequence  of  an  order  from  the  Pascha, 
offered  us  his  house,  to  which  we  went  the  following  day  ; 
it  had  lately  been  newly  fitted  up ;  there  was  a  garden  be- 
side it,  and  a  great  court-yard,  which  was  very  useful  for 
unpacking  and  repairing  our  chests  and  tents. 

The  next  day  the  Pascha  returned  our  visit.  He  came  on 
horseback.  We  handed  him  coftee,  pipes,  sherbet,  and 
showed  him  some  drawings  and  pictures  from  Egypt,  in 
which  he  was  interested  merely  from  curiosity.  He  is  a 
large,  corpulent  man,  a  Circassian  by  birth,  and  therefore, 
like  most  of  his  countrymen,  better  informed  than  the  Turks 
in  general  I  saw  a  rich  collection  of  all  kinds  of  birds  of 
the  Sudan,  at  the  house  of  a  Syrian,  Ibeahim  Chee  ;  there 
were  about  300  different  species,  and  between  twenty  and 
thirty  choice  specimens  of  each. 

On  one  of  the  following  days,  I  took  a  walk  with  Abeken 
and  Erbkam  to  the  opposite  bank  of  our  tongue  of  land  on  ' 


THE  WHITE  EtTEfi.  161 

tlie  "White  Ettee,  vrhich  we  then  followed  up  to  its  junc- 
tion ^vith  tlie  Blue ;  its  waters  are  in  fact  whiter,  and  have 
a  less  pleasant  taste  than  those  of  the  Blue,  because  at  a 
higher  point  it  flows  slowly  through  several  lakes,  the  stand- 
ing water  of  which  imparts  an  earthy  and  less  pure  taste  to 
it.  I  have  filled  some  bottles  with  the  water  of  the  Blue, 
and  White  Eivers,  which  I  shall  take  away  with  me 
sealed  up. 

On  the  occasion  of  a  more  recent  and  friendly  visit  of  the 
Pascha,  we  met  the  brother  of  the  former  Sultan  of  Kor- 
dofan  (who  was  himself  also  called  Mak  or  Melek)  and  the 
Vizier  of  the  Sultan  Xime  (Tiger)  of  Schendi.  The  latter 
still  lives  in  Abyssinia,  whither  he  fled,  after  having,  in  the 
year  1822,  burned  the  conqueror  of  his  country,  Ismael 
Pascha,  a  son  of  Mohammed  Ali,  and  all  his  officers,  after  a 
nocturnal  banquet  which  he  had  prepared  for  him  in  a 
somewhat  lonely  house. 

On  the  14th,  we  made  an  excursion  up  the  White  Ettee, 
but  were  soon  obliged  to  turn  back,  because  it  has  so  little 
current,  that,  on  account  of  the  north  wind  which  of  late  has 
constantly  been  blowing,  our  return  threatened  to  be  tedious. 
The  banks  of  the  White  Eiver  are  barren,  and  the  few  trees 
which  formerly  stood  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Chartimi  are 
now  cut  down,  and  have  been  used  for  building  or  fuel. 
There  is  a  larger  mass  of  water  in  the  White  Eiver  than  in 
the  Blue,  and  even  after  its  junction  it  preserves  its  course, 
80  that  the  Blue  Eiver  must  be  viewed  as  the  secondary  river, 
but  the  White  as  the  true  Nile.  Their  different  waters  can 
be  distinguished  beside  each  other  for  a  long  time  after  their 
junction. 

On  the  16th  February,  I  sent  for  some  Dinka  slaves, 
to  interrogate  them  about  their  language.  They  were, 
however,  so  dull  of  apprehension,  that  I  could  only  with 
difficulty  get  out  of  them  the  words  for  numbers  up  to  a 
liundred,  and  a  few  separate  pronouns.  The  languages  of 
the  Dinkas  and  the  Schilluks,  who  dwell  several  days'  journey 
distant  up  the  White  Eiver,  the  former  on  the  eastern  bank, 

M 


162  JOrElH"EY  ON  BLUE  BITEE. 

tlie  latter  on  the  western,  are  as  little  known  grammatically 
as  most  of  the  other  languages  of  Central  Africa ;  I  therefore 
requested  the  Pascha  to  procure  me  some  intelligent  persons 
who  were  well  acquainted  with  those  languages.  This  was 
impossible  for  the  present,  but  we  shall  attend  to  it  on  our 
return. 

Meanwhile  our  purchases  and  repaii's  being  completed,  I 
hurried  on  the  departure  as  much  as  possible.  The  house  of 
Hermanovich  will  also  be  at  our  disposal  on  our  return ;  it 
is  built  in  a  convenient  manner,  and  is  very  airy.  I  had  a 
prospect  of  the  oldest  house  in  the  town  from  my  window, 
whose  pointed  straw  roof  peeped  over  our  wall.  These 
pointed  straw  huts,  called  Tukele,  are  the  characteristic 
buildings  of  this  country,  and  are  found  almost  exclusively 
in  the  south.  But  as  Chartum  is  a  new  to-svn,  the  small 
number  of  old  huts  have  disappeared,  with  the  exception 
of  this  one,  and  all  the  houses  are  built  of  unburnt  bricks. 

About  mid-day,  on  the  17th  February,  we  embarked  on 
board  our  boats.  I  sailed  to  the  south  with  Abeken  up  the 
Blue  River,  partly  to  become  acquainted  with  its  natural 
character,  partly  to  view  the  ruins  of  Soba  and  Mandera  ; 
oiu"  other  travelling  companions,  who  had  nothing  to  occupy 
them  farther  up,  sailed  northwards  back  to  Meroe,  in  order 
to  sketch  the  monuments  there. 

The  following  day  we  landed  on  the  eastern  bank,  where 
great  heaps  of  red  bricks,  destined  for  exportation,  proclaimed 
the  vicinity  of  the  ruins  of  Soba.  At  the  present  day,  un- 
burnt bricks  alone  are  made  throughout  the  country,  there- 
fore all  the  ruins  of  burnt  stones  must  have  belonged  to  an 
earlier  period.  This  material  for  building  is  transported  in 
great  quantities  from  Soba  as  far  as  Chartum,  and  beyond  it. 

We  disembarked,  and  had  scarcely  got  beyond  the  thorny 
bushes  nearest  to  the  bank,  when  we  perceived  the  over- 
turned mounds  of  bricks,  covering  a  large  plain,  possibly  an 
hour  in  circumference.  Some  larger  heaps  might  be  the 
remains  of  the  Christian  churches  which  are  described  by 
Selim  of  Assuan  (in  Macrizi),  in  the  tenth  century,  as  mag- 


SOBA.       KAMLIX.  163 

nificentlv  decorated  with  gold,  when  Soba  was  still  the 
capital  of  the  kingdom  of  Aloa.  We  were  shown  the  spot 
where  some  time  ago  a  stone  lion  is  said  to  have  been  dis- 
covered, which  is  now  in  the  possession  of  Churshid  Pascha, 
in  Cairo.  Xo where  could  walls,  nor  the  form  of  buildings,  be 
recognised ;  it  was  only  on  the  mound  to  the  south,  at  a  little 
distance  off,  that  we  found  some  hewn  yellow  blocks  of  sand- 
stone, and  a  low  wall ;  on  another  heap  lay  several  rough 
slabs  of  a  black  slaty  stone. 

Tlie  country  round  Soba,  like  this,  is  flat  both  far  and  wide 
to  the  base  of  the  hills  in  front  of  the  Abyssinian  range,  and 
the  ground,  especially  at  this  season,  is  arid  and  black  ;  the 
denser  vegetation  is  confined  to  the  bank  of  the  river ;  fiir- 
ther  off  tliere  are  nothing  but  single  trees,  now  in  greater, 
now  in  fewer  numbers. 

I  promised  the  sailors  a  sheep,  on  condition  that  we  should 
reach  Kamlin  betimes,  for  there  was  a  strong  wind,  which 
made  us  very  slow  in  our  progress  ;  our  boat,  besides,  is  not 
a  fast  one,  the  sailors  are  inexperienced,  and  from  the  low 
state  of  the  water,  the  boat  easily  sticks  fast  in  the  sand ;  we 
sailed  on  almost  the  whole  night  through,  and  reached 
Kamliu  about  eight  in  the  morning. 

The  ancient  place  of  the  same  name  lies  one  half-hour 
farther  up  the  river,  and  is  composed  of  a  few  huts.  The 
houses  near  which  we  landed  belong  to  a  number  of  factories, 
which  Nurcddin  Effendi,  a  Coptic  Catholic  Egyptian,  who 
went  over  to  Islam,  established,  in  common  with  the  late 
Achmed  Pascha,  more  than  four  years  ago,  and  which  yield  a 
rich  profit.  A  simple,  homely  German,  who  has  never  given 
way  to  the  bad  customs  of  the  East,  bom  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Wiirzburg,  by  name  Bauer,  has  established  a  Soap 
and  Brandy  Manufactory,  of  which  he  takes  the  management 
himself.  A  Sugar  and  Indigo  Factory  is  conducted  by  an 
Arab.  Bauer  has  settled  farther  to  the  south  than  any 
European  we  have  ever  met  with  in  Mohammed  All's  domi- 
nions, and  we  were  rejoiced  to  find  such  a  good  termination 
to  the  long  but  not  very  agreeable  chain  of  Europeans,  most 

m2 


164  KAMLI>'. 

of  tliem  degenerated  in  civilisation,  who  have  preferred  the 
Turkish  government  to  that  of  their  Fatherland.* 

He  has  an  old  Grerman  housekeeper  with  him,  Ursula,  a 
comical,  good-natured  soul,  to  whom  it  was  no  less  a  holiday 
to  receive  G-erman  guests  again,  than  it  was  to  himself  With 
joyful  alacrity  she  rummaged  out  some  European  utensils, 
and  the  only  fork  that  was  still  in  preservation,  and  served 
up  fried  chickens,  saurkraut,  and  some  small  sausages,  with 
excellent  wheaten  bread;  at  last  actually  a  cherry  cake, 
of  baked  European  cherries  (for  our  fruits  do  not  gi-ow 
in  Egypt),  in  short,  a  home  repast  such  as  we  never  ex- 
pected to  see  in  this  Ultima  Thule. 

On  a  pedestal  in  front  of  Bauer's  house  we  found  the 
most  southern  Egyptian  sculpture  which  we  have  met  with  : 
a  sitting  statue  of  Osiris,  with  the  usual  attributes,  carved 
out  of  black  granite  ;  a  portion  of  it  is  mutilated,  and  it  is  of 
a  late  style,  about  2^  feet  high ;  it  had  been  found  in  Soba, 
and  is  not  devoid  of  interest,  being  the  only  monument  of 
Egyptian  art  from  this  town. 

The  European  arrangement  of  Bauer's  rooms  made  a 
strange  impression  on  us,  here  in  the  midst  of  the  black 
population  in  the  south.  A  wooden  Black  Eorest  house- 
clock,  with  weights,  beat  in  regular  time  ;  some  half-broken 
European  chairs  stood  round  the  fixed  table,  a  small  book- 
shelf was  placed  behind  it,  with  a  selection  of  the  Grer- 
man classics  and  historical  works  ;  in  the  corner  the  Turkish 
divan,  which  could  not  be  dispensed  with  even  here.  Above 
the  great  table,  and  beside  the  canopied  bed  in  the  opposite 
corner,  hung  bell-pulls,  which  communicated  with  the  kitchen. 
An  inquisitive  Xesnas  ape  looked  in  at  the  grated  window 
next  the  door ;  and  across  the  little  court-yard  we  saw  the 
busy  Ursula,  in  a  crimson-flowered  gown,  tripping  hither  and 
thither  among  little  naked  black  slave-boys  and  girls,  order- 
ing them  to  do  this  and  that  with  a  somewhat  scolding  voice, 

*  I  have  since  then  received  intelligence  of  the  death  of  Herr  Bauer, 
which  happened  onlv  the  following  year. 


KAMLIX.  165 

and  peeping  into  the  steaming-pots  in  tlie  adjoining  kitchen. 
"We  saw  nothing  of  her  the  whole  morning  ;  not  even  during 
the  excellent  and  savour}-  repast  which  she  had  prepared  for 
us  ;  it  was  only  after  dinner  that  she  presented  herself,  with 
many  curtseys,  to  receive  our  commendations.  She  lamented 
over  the  insufficiency  of  her  cooking  apparatus,  and  vehe- 
mently reproached  Herr  Bauer  because  he  had  no  intentions 
of  leaving  this  detestable,  dirty,  hot  country,  although  he 
had  promised  her  to  do  so  from  one  year  to  the  other.  She 
came  hither  with  Bauer,  and  has  been  eleven  years  in  the 
country,  and  four  years  in  Kamlin.  He  intends  to  return 
to  Germany  in  another  year,  to  settle  in  Styria  or  Thuringia 
with  his  savings,  and,  like  his  father,  to  be  a  peasant  again. 

After  rising  from  table,  the  son  of  Xureddin  Effendi  also 
sent  us  a  Turkish  dinner,  ready  cooked,  of  twelve  to  fifteen 
dishes,  which  however,  alter  our  European  repast,  we  left  to 
the  servants,  ^'e  had  also  seen  the  factories  that  morning, 
and  had  tasted  the  fine  brandy  (called  Marienbad),  which 
Bauer  prepares  chiefly  from  sugar-cane  and  dates.  The 
business  seemed  to  be  in  the  best  order,  and  even  the  cleanli- 
ness, so  unusual  in  this  country,  of  the  rooms,  the  vessels, 
and  utensils,  were  proofs  of  the  soHd  basis  upon  which  this 
factory,  worked  by  slaves  9,lone,  is  conducted.  The  pleasant 
impression  made  upon  us  by  this  visit  was  also  considerably 
increased  by  discovering  that  Bauer  possessed  a  second  piece 
of  the  above-mentioned  marble  inscription,  which  had  been 
discovered  in  the  ruins  of  Soba.  He  presented  me  with  the 
Iragment,  whicli  was  easily  joined  with  the  other  piece, 
though  we  had  still  not  got  the  complete  inscription.  The 
fragment  shows  the  traces  of  twelve  lines  on  the  one  side, 
and  of  nine  on  the  other.  The  characters  can  be  distinctly 
read  here  also ;  but  the  name  iakcjub  is  alone  intelligible. 
It  is  either  very  barbarous  Greek,  or  a  peculiar  language 
formerly  spoken  in  Soba.  In  fact,  we  know,  through  Selim, 
that  the  inhabitants  of  Soba  had  their  sacred  books  in  the 
Greek  language,  but  translated  them  also  into  their  own. 

After  we  had  also  paid  a  visit  to  the  son  of  Xureddin 


166  THE  BAOBAB. 

Effendi,  we  started  with  the  promise  to  call  upon  him  again 
on  our  return. 

From  Kamlin  the  banks  continue  at  an  equal  elevation. 
The  character  of  a  river  valley  is  lost.  There  is  no  longer  a 
deposit  of  black  earth ;  the  precipitous  and  high  banks  con- 
sist of  a  primitive  soil,  and  a  calcareous  conglomerate,  which, 
by  Bauer's  account,  can  be  easily  burnt  into  plaster. 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st  we  came  to  a  considerable 
bend  of  the  river  towards  the  east ;  the  Mind  became,  on  that 
account,  so  unfavourable,  that  our  Kawass  disembarked,  to 
press  into  our  service  people  from  the  neighbourhood  to 
draw  our  boat  along.  I  walked  for  several  hours  along  the 
western  bank,  as  far  as  Aebagi,  a  deserted  village,  built  of 
black  bricks,  but  on  the  remains  of  a  still  older  place,  as  I 
discovered  from  the  walls  of  burnt  bricks.  This  place  was 
formerly  the  chief  centre  of  the  commerce  of  the  Sudan, 
which,  at  a  later  period,  was  transferred  to  Messelemieh. 
Soon  after  this  we  saw  the  two  most  northerly  growing 
Baobabs,  which  here  are  called  Homaea.  These  giant  trees 
of  the  creation  (Adansonia  digitata)  become  more  and  more 
frequent,  south  of  this  spot,  and  at  Sero  they  are  among  the 
common  trees  of  the  country.  One  of  the  stems  which  I 
paced  round,  measured  above  60  feet  in  circumference,  and 
was  certainly  not  one  of  the  largest  of  its  kind,  as  they 
are  still  not  numerous  here.  At  this  season  they  were 
leafless,  and  stretched  out  their  bare  branches  far  above  the 
surrounding  gi^een  trees,  which  looked  like  low  bushes  beside 
them.  I  found  their  fruit,  which  is  called  Gungules,*  here 
and  there  among  the  Arabs  ;  they  resemble  smaU  gourds,  in 
the  form  of  pears,  and  have  a  light  hairy  surface.  If  the 
hard,  tough  shell  is  broken,  a  number  of  kernels  are  found 
inside,  which  are  surrounded  by  a  dry,  sweetish,  sourish 
pulp,  which  is  nevertheless  pleasant  to  the  taste.  The 
leaves  are  digitate. 

*  Russeger  (Reise,  2  Bd.,  2  Thl.,  S.  125)  found  one  specimen  of  this 
tree,  95  feet  in  circumference.  He  is  mistaken  when  he  calls  it  Gan- 
GLEs;  the  tree  is  called  Homara,  and  the  fruit  Gckgules. 


ABr  HAEA8.      THE  EAHAD.  167 

On  the  22nd  of  February  we  arrived  on  the  western  bank, 
at  a  small  \Tllage,  whose  inhabitants,  men,  women,  and 
children,  fled  with  terror  at  our  approach  across  the  sandy 
plain  to  the  wood,  probably  because  they  were  afraid  of 
being,  pressed  to  draw  the  boat  on  farther.  On  the  opposite 
bank  there  was  another  village,  and  from  it  we  saw  a  mag- 
nificent procession  of  men,  dressed  out  in  the  Arabian  and 
Turkish  costume,  march  down  to  the  river  ^dth  some  beau- 
tifully bridled  horses.  It  was  the  Kaschef,  and  the  principal 
Sheikh  of  Abu  Haras,  who  had  heard  about  us  from  Achmed 
Pascha,  as  we  had  intended  to  go  from  this  spot  into  the 
desert  to  Mandera  with  camels  and  guides.  The  horses  were 
intended  for  us,  and  we  therefore  rode  to  the  house  of  the 
Kaschef,  to  make  some  more  inquiries  about  the  antiquities 
of  Mandera  and  Qala.  As  the  desert  road  to  the  shore  of 
the  Ked  Sea  leads  from  here  by  that  place,  we  found  several 
people  who  had  passed  near  it.  However,  by  what  I  gathered 
from  all  the  accounts,  tliere  seem  to  be  only  some  hiUs  in 
the  form  of  a  kind  of  fortress  at  both  these  places,  or,  at 
the  most,  some  roughly -built  walls,  intended  to  protect  the 
caravans,  but  no  ancient  buildings  or  hieroglyphic  inscrip- 
tions. In  Qala  there  might  be  some  camels  and  horses,  also, 
scratched  into  the  rock  by  Arabs  or  other  people,  such  as 
we  have  frequently  seen  in  the  Great  Desert  near  the  well  of 
Mui'had,  and  in  other  places. 

"VVe  therefore  determined  to  relinquish  tliis  desert  journey, 
and  to  go  farther  up  the  river  instead,  that  we  might  become 
acquainted,  as  far  as  our  time  permitted,  with  the  natural 
character  of  tlic  Nile  river,  its  banks,  and  neighbouring  in- 
habitants. 

After  a  short  quarter  of  an  hour  from  Abu  Haras,  we 
came  to  the  mouth  of  the  Eahad,  which,  in  the  rainy  sea- 
son, conveys  a  considerable  mass  of  water  into  the  Nile,  but 
was  now  nearly  dry,  and  had  only  a  little  stagnant  water, 
which  next  month  may  perhaps  also  disappear. 

I  left  the  boat  as  often  as  possible,  to  get  acquainted  with 
the  banlis.     To  go  farther  inland  was  of  itself  interdicted 


168         TEEES  AND  BIEDS  ON  BLUE  HITEE. 

cWefly  by  the  wood,  wLicli  clothes  botli  sides  of  the  rivers 
and  is  nearly  impenetrable.  There,  in  luxuriant  splendour, 
grow  the  shady,  high-domed  tamarind-tree,  the  tower-like 
h6mara' (Baobab),  the  many-branched  gemus  (sycamore-tree), 
and  the  various  kinds  of  the  brittle,  gum-yielding  sont-trees. 
Creeping  plants,  often  the  thickness  of  a  man's  body,  climb 
up  their  branches  like  gigantic  serpents,  in  innumerable 
windings,  to  their  very  summits,  and  down  again  to  the 
ground,  where,  along  with  the  low  shrubs,  they  fill  up  every 
gap  between  the  huge  stems.  In  addition  to  this,  scarcely 
one  of  ten  among  the  trees  or  shrubs  has  not  thorns,  which 
renders  any  attempt  to  penetrate  the  close  thicket  not  only 
dangerous,  but  impossible.  Several  among  them — for  in- 
stance, the  sittere-tree — have  thorns  placed  together  in  pairs, 
and  in  such  a  manner,  that  one  thorn  bends  forwards,  the 
other  back ;  if  any  one,  therefore,  approaches  the  branches 
carelessly,  he  may  be  sure  tliat  his  clothes  will  carry  away 
with  them  some  unavoidable  signs,  not  to  be  obliterated  here 
without  difficulty,  and  then  imperfectly.  Some  other  thorny 
trees  look  extremely  ornamental,  and  growing  in  more  open 
situations,  they  rise  like  slender  young  birches.  "We  dis- 
tinguished two  species  which  are  usually  joined  together,  and 
can  only  be  known  from  one  another  because  the  bark  of  the 
one  stem  is  of  a  brilliant  red  colour  up  to  the  outermost 
little  branches,  like  a  growth  of  blood-vessels,  while  that  of 
the  other  is  of  a  dark  black  colour.  Both  of  them  have 
glistening  long  white  thorns,  which,  with  the  little  green 
leaves,  rise  up  with  a  sharp  outline,  as  if  they  had  been 
painted  with  the  brush. 

Scarcely  one  of  the  birds,  which  frequently  hovered  around 
us  in  large  nuilibers,  were  known  to  me,  even  in  Egypt.  I 
shot  many  of  them,  and  had  them  stuffed  by  our  cook, 
Sirian.  Among  them  were  some  beautiful  silver-grey  falcons 
(suqr  schikl),  guinea-fowls  (gedad  el  wadi),  with  knobs  of 
horn  on  the  nose,  and  blue  lappets  on  both  sides  of  the 
head ;  black  and  white  rhinoceros  birds  (abu  tuko)  with  huge 
beaks ;  some  birds  quite  black,  with  a  bright  crimson  breast 


MOXKETS.      CEOCODILES.  160 

(abu  labba)  ;  large  brown  and  white  eagles  (abn  tok),  one 
of  which,  with  outspread  wings,  measured  six  feet ;  smaller 
brown  eagles,  the  heddja,  and  black  and  white  ones,  whicli 
are  called  rdcliama.  These  last,  which  are  much  more 
numerous  towards  Eg^^t,  are  the  same  which  we  are  in  the 
habit  of  seeing  among  the  hieroglyphics.  On  the  bank  there 
are  also  great  numbers  of  black  and  white  plovers,  furnished 
with  black  curved  spines  on  their  wing-joints,  and  the  long- 
legged,  completely  white,  ahc  iaqr  (cow-birds),  who  are  in 
the  habit  of  grazing  on  the  backs  of  the  buffaloes  and  cows. 

"We  saw  great  bats  frequently  flying  about  in  broad  day- 
light ;  their  long  golden-brown  wings  look  briglit  through 
the  branches,  and  suddenly  they  hang  head  downwards  on 
the  branches  like  great  yellow  pears,  and  can  then  easily  be 
shot.    They  have  long  ears,  and  a  strange  tnunpet-like  nose. 

We  also  hunted  the  Monkeys,  but  from  their  agility  they 
were  very  difiicult  to  reach.  One  day  we  found  an  immense 
tree,  quite  full  of  monkeys;  some  of  them  hastily  came  down 
on  our  approach,  and  fled  to  a  distant  thicket ;  others  hid 
themselves  among  the  foliage,  quite  at  the  top ;  but  some  of 
them  who  considered  both  methods  of  escape  dangerous, 
sprang  with  inconceivably  bold  leaps  from  the  uppermost 
branches  of  the  tall  tree,  Avhich  might  have  been  about  100 
feet  high,  to  the  smaller  trees  standing  near,  whose  thorny 
branches  bent  down  beneath  their  weight  without  letting 
them  fall ;  they  thus  gained  their  end,  and  escaped  my  gun. 

The  Ceocodiles  become  more  numerous  the  farther  south 
we  go.  The  tongues  of  the  sandy  islands  are  often  covered 
with  them.  They  generally  lie  in  the  sun,  close  to  the  edge 
of  the  water,  open  their  mouths,  and  seem  to  sleep,  but  do 
not  allow  any  one  to  approach  them ;  but  even  if  they  are 
hit  by  the  shot  they  immediately  dive  into  the  river.  It  is 
therefore  very  difficult  to  obtain  one.  Our  Kawass  only 
once  made  such  a  good  shot  at  a  young  crocodile,  about  three 
feet  lonor,  that  it  was  unable  to  get  back  to  the  water.  It 
was  brought  to  the  boat,  where  it  lived  for  several  days  after- 
wards, to  the  terror  of  our  little  Nesnas  monkey,  Bachit. 


170  THE  DENDEE. 

It  is  no  less  difficult  to  approach  tlie  Hippopotami,  wliich 
we  have  sometimes  seen  in  great  numbers,  but  with  their  heads 
alone  above  the  water.  Once  only  a  young  hippopotamus  stood 
quite  clear  out  of  the  water  on  a  sandy  island ;  it  allowed  us 
to  come  unusually  near.  The  Kawass  shot,  and  hit  it,  natu- 
rally without  the  ball  penetrating  the  thick  hide,  whereupon 
the  clumsy  creature,  with  its  unshapely  head,  its  fat  belly,  and 
short  elephant  legs,  galloped  oif  in  a  most  comical  manner 
to  reach  the  water  close  beside  him,  and  immediately  disap- 
peared. They  generally  are  in  the  habit  of  coming  on  land 
only  in  the  night,  and  they  do  much  injury  in  the  fields  of 
Durra  and  other  plantations,  by  treading  down  and  devour- 
ing. It  is  not  known  that  a  hippopotamus  was  ever  caught 
alive  here. 

We  saw  no  lions,  but  we  heard  their  roaring  in  the  dis- 
tance throughout  the  starlight  night;  there  is  something 
very  solemn  in  the  deep  and  sonorous  voice  of  this  royal  beast. 

The  24th  of  February  we  came  to  a  second  tributary  river 
of  the  Nile,  the  Dender,  which  is  larger  than  the  Eahad.  I 
went  up  part  of  it  to  see  (which  was  impossible  at  its  mouth) 
whether  the  water  was  still  flowing,  and  farther  up  I  disco- 
vered that,  where  the  still  water  had  collected  into  small 
canals,  certainly  a  very  feeble  current  yet  existed ;  in  the 
rainy  season  the  Dender  must  rise  more  than  twenty  feet,  as 
may  be  seen  by  its  bed  ;  I  found  its  banks  were  cultivated 
with  cotton  bushes,  gourds,  and  other  useful  plants. 

The  heat  is  not  excessive,  in  the  morning  about  eight 
o'clock  it  is  usually  23°  E. ;  about  mid-day  till  about  five 
o'clock,  29°;  and  about  eleven  o'clock  at  night  it  is  22° 
(83|°,  97i°,  81i°  Fahr.). 

We  spend  our  evenings  in  our  boat ;  here  I  make  our  Ka- 
wass, Hagi  Ibrahim,  inform  us  about  the  geography ;  or  I  take 
some  Nubian  sailors  into  my  cabin  to  learn  their  language. 
I  have  already  made  a  long  vocabulary  in  the  Nubian  lan- 
guage ;  comparing  it  with  other  lists  in  Euppel  and  Cailliaud, 
I  found  many  words  in  the  Koldagi  language  spoken  in  the 
southern  territories  of  Kordofan  which  agree  with  them  ; 


DILEB  PALMS.  l7l 

tliis  proves  there  is  an  intimate  connection  between  the  two 
languages.  The  Arabs  are  in  the  habit  of  calling  the  N'ubiaii 
language  lisdn  rotdna,  which  I  at  first  supposed  to  be  its 
actual  name ;  but  it  only  means  a  foreign  tongue  different 
from  the  Arabic.  They  do  not,  therefore,  only  speak  of  a 
Rotdna  Keniis,  Mahass,  Donqolaui,  when  they  mean  to 
designate  the  three  Xubian  dialects,  but  also  of  a  Rotdna 
Dinkaui,  Scliilluk — even  of  a  Eotana  turhi  andfranki,  thus 
likewise  of  Turkish  and  French  ;  i.  e.  of  European  gibberish. 
The  same  error  is  the  cause  of  the  now  received  designation 
of  the  Xubian  as  the  Berber,  and  of  their  language  as  the 
Berber  language  ;  fojo  this  is  not  the  name  of  the  people,  nor 
of  their  language,  as  is  generally  thought,  but  originally 
means  only  the  people  speaking  a  foreign  tongue,  the  Rar- 
haros. 

On  the  25th  of  February  we  disembarked  at  Saba  Doleb  ; 
I  searched  for  ruins,  but  only  found  high  domes  in  the  form 
of  bee-hives,  built  well  and  solidly  of  bricks,  about  20  feet 
higl),  and  closel}' resembling  the  Greek  Thesauri,  constructed 
of  liorizontal  layers,  lapping  over  inwardly.  They  are  tombs 
of  lioly  Ai'ab  Sheikhs  of  a  late  period  ;  the  inhabitants  of  the 
village  could  not  tell  us  the  date  of  their  erection.  Beneath 
the  cupola,  and  in  the  centre  of  the  building,  which  is  be- 
tween 15  and  IS  feet  wide,  there  is  the  long  narrow  tomb  of 
tlie  saint,  surrounded  with  larger  stones,  and  covered  with  a 
number  of  small  stones,  which,  according  to  a  superstition, 
must  necessarily  amount  to  a  thousand ;  I  found  six  domes 
similar  to  these,  most  of  them  half,  some  wholly  fallen  to 
pieces ;  two,  however,  in  very  good  preservation,  which  are 
even  still  visited  ;  a  seventh,  probably  the  most  recent,  was 
built  of  unburnt  bricks. 

At  Wad  Negudi,  a  village  situated  to  the  west  of  the 
Nile,  we  found  the  first  Dileb  Palms,  with  slender  naked 
stems  and  small  bushy  crowns,  resembling,  at  a  distance, 
the  Date  Palm,  but  when  near,  from  their  leaves,  like  the 
Doura  Palm.  Their  fruit  is  round,  like  that  of  the  Doum 
Palm,  but  of  a  larger  size.     These  trees  are  said  to  be  very 


172  CTXOCEPnALUS. 

abundant  on  the  tributary  rivers  towards  the  east ;  but  liere, 
on  the  Nile,  they  are  only  to  be  found  within  a  very  small 
tract  of  land.  The  leaves  are  regularly  divided  like  a  fan 
into  a  great  number  of  connected  folds,  and  the  leaf-stalk 
has  strong  serrated  notches.  The  Eais  of  our  boat,  who  was 
with  me,  sawed  off  another  leaf  with  one  of  these  leaf-stalks ; 
I  had  it  brought  to  the  boat,  to  take  it  away  with  us.  It  is 
divided  iuto  sixty-nine  points,  and  is  five  feet  and  a  quarter 
long,  from  that  part  of  the  stalk  where  the  fan  begins,  al- 
though it  is  still  young,  and  therefore  its  fan  is  still  com- 
pletely closed.  Another  larger  one,  which  had  just  unfolded 
itself,  we  set  up  in  the  boat  as  an  umbrella,  and  sat  beneath 
its  shade.  "We  were  obliged  to  make  a  path  to  those  palm- 
trees  through  gigantic  woods  of  grass,  which  shoot  up  stiff 
and  thick  like  corn-fields,  and  cover  large  plains.  The  points 
of  the  blades  towered  up  five  or  six  feet  above  our  heads,  and 
even  the  tall  camels,  which  are  bred  here,  could  hardly  look 
over  it. 

On  the  26th  February  we  arrived  at  the  village  of  Abu 
EL  Abas,  on  the  eastern  bank.  It  is  a  chief  town  of  this 
district,  and  the  Kaschef  who  lives  here  is  placed  over 
112  villages.  I  there  purchased  a  dog-ape  from  a  Turkish 
Ivawass  for  a  few  piastres.  This  is  the  holy  ape  of  the 
ancient  Egyptians,  the  Cynocephalus,  which  was  dedicated 
to  Thoth  and  the  Moon,  and  appears  as  the  second  among 
the  four  Grods  of  Death.  It  is  interesting  to  me  to  have  a 
creature  about  me  for  some  little  time,  which  I  have  seen 
innumerable  times  upon  the  monuments,  and  thereby  to 
observe  the  faithful  appreliension  and  representation  of  its 
essential  and  characteristic  appearances  in  the  ancient  Egyp- 
tian sculpture.  It  is  remarkable  that  this  ape,  so  peculiar 
to  Egypt  in  ancient  times,  is  now  only  found  in  the  south, 
and  even  there,  it  is  not  very  common.  How  many  species 
of  animals  and  plants,  even  manners  and  customs  of  men, 
with  which  we  become  acquainted  through  the  monuments 
of  EgA^pt,  can  only  now  be  found  in  the  most  southern  parts 
of  ancient  Ethiopia,  so  that  now  many  representations,  for 


SEXXAE.  173 

instance  in  the  tombs  of  Beniliassan,  seem  to  delineate  scenes 
in  this  country  rather  than  in  Egypt.  There  is  no  special 
name  here  for  the  Cynocephalus,  only  the  general  one,  qird 
(large  monkey).  Its  head,  hair,  and  colour,  are  not  unlike 
those  of  a  dog,  and  hence  its  Greek  name.  Sometimes  also 
it  barks  and  snarls  like  a  dog.  It  is  still  young,  and  very 
good-natured,  but  far  more  intelligent  than  Abeken's  pretty 
little  Nesnas  ape.  It  is  extremely  ludicrous  when  it  wishes 
to  get  something  good  to  eat,  which  we  have  in  om'  hands  ; 
it  then  lays  back  its  ears  on  its  head,  and  knows  how  to 
express  the  utmost  deliglit,  but  remains  sitting  quiet  like  a 
good  child,  only  chattering  with  the  lips,  like  an  old  wine- 
bibber.  At  the  siglit  of  the  crocodile,  however,  all  the  hair 
of  its  body  bristled  up ;  it  uttered  piercing  shrieks,  and 
could  scarcely  be  held  down  from  terror. 

On  the  27th  February  we  reached  Sennae,  the  celebrated 
ancient  capital  of  the  Sudan,  whose  king,  before  the  con- 
quest of  the  country  by  Ismael  Pascha,  had  dominion  as  far 
as  Wadi  Haifa,  and  ruled  over  a  number  of  smaller  kings 
who  paid  him  tribute.  One  would  not  suspect,  from  the 
present  aspect  of  the  place,  that  only  a  short  time  since  it 
was  such  a  powerful  royal  residence.  Between  six  and  seven 
hundred  pointed  straw  liuts,  Tukele,  surroimded  the  piles  of 
red-brick  ruins,  where  formerly  the  royal  mansion  stood. 
These  bricks  are  now  employed  for  building  an  abode  for  Soli- 
man  Pascha,  who  is  to  reside  in  Sennar ;  it  was  already  so  far 
complete  that  the  AVakil*  of  the  absent  Pascha  was  able  to 
hold  his  divan  within  it.  We  found  him  there,  just  as  ho 
was  sitting  in  judgment.  Many  other  people.  Sheikhs  and 
Turks,  were  present ;  among  them  the  Sheikh  Sandaloba, 
the  chief  of  the  Arabian  merchants,  and  a  relative  of  the 
Sultana  Nasr,  whose  acquaintance  we  afterwards  made  in 
the  village  of  Soriba,  which  she  makes  her  royal  residence. 
We  paid  a  visit  to  this  distinguished  man  in  his  own  house, 
with  which  honour  lie  seemed  much  gratified.  His  principal 
apartment  is  a  dark,  lofty  hall,  with  a  roof  resting  on  two 

*  TFa^i?,  or  deputy.— Tr. 


174  ABDI^'. 

pillars  and  four  pilasters,  upon  whicli  we  mounted  to  obtain 
a  view  over  the  town. 

Meanwhile  an  anqareb  was  prepared  for  us,  to  sit  upon 
in  the  court-yard;  they  brought  us  mead  (honey  with  water), 
and  led  a  hysena  out  of  the  stable,  here  called  Marafil, 
and  two  young  lions,  the  largest  of  which,  belonging  to 
Soliman  Pascha,  and  two  wethers,  were  taken  to  the  boat,  as 
a  present  from  his  Wakil.  I  had  the  creature  fastened  down 
in  the  hold,  and  as  a  welcome  immediately  received  a  violent 
scratch  on  my  hand  from  his  sharp  claws.  His  body  is  now 
above  two  feet  long,  and  his  voice  has  already  become  a 
strong  tenor.  There  is  a  most  tumultuous  scene  now  every 
morning  on  our,  not  very  large  boat,  when  we  drink  our  tea 
at  an  early  hour  in  front  of  the  cabin  ;  on  each  side  of  the 
door,  a  monkey  is  making  its  merry  leaps,  and  when  the  lion 
is  released  from  the  hold  of  the  vessel,  and  on  the  deck, 
which  is  given  to  him  during  the  day,  we  are  obliged  to 
place  our  cups  and  pitchers  in  safety,  as  he  endeavours  to 
reach  them  with  his  clumsy,  but  already  strong  claws. 

On  the  29th  of  February,  about  nine  in  the  morning,  we 
arrived  at  Abdin.  The  1st  of  March  the  wind  was  un- 
favourable to  us,  and  we  made  very  little  progress,  so  tliat 
we  had  plenty  of  time  at  our  disposal  for  shooting  birds. 
Towards  evening  I  came  to  a  village  romantically  situated 
in  a  creek  formed  by  the  river,  spreading  out  at  this  point. 
Many  huts,  built  of  straw,  extended  their  pointed  roofs  up- 
wards between  the  branches  and  thick  foliage  of  the  trees. 
^Narrow  crooked  paths,  forming  a  real  labyrinth,  led  from 
one  hut  to  the  other,  between  thorns  and  trunks  of  trees ; 
within  the  huts,  and  in  front  of  them,  the  black  famihes 
were  lying,  the  children  playing  by  a  feeble  lamp-light,  I 
asked  for  some  millr,  but  was  told  to  apply  at  an  Arab  village 
in  the  neighboiu-hood,  to  which  I  was  led  by  a  man  armed 
with  a  spear,  the  universal  weapon  of  the  country.  Making 
our  way  through  thin  shrubs  and  tall  grass,  we  reached  the 
large  troops  of  cattle  belonging  to  the  Arabs,  who  had  raised 
their  mat  huts  round  the  pasture  ground.     The  Fellahs  who 


CEOCODILE  EGGS.  175 

have  settled  here  are  much  browner  than  the  wandering 
Arabs,  though  they  are  not  negroes,  but  they  appear  by  race 
to  be  connected  with  the  ]^subian  stock. 

The  2nd  of  ^larcli  we  landed  on  an  island  close  to  the 
eastern  bank.  At  a  short  distance  from  the  landing-place  the 
Kais  discovered  a  broken  crocodile  egg,  at  a  spot  where  there 
was  some  newly  turned  up  ground.  He  dug  down  with  his 
hands,  and  found  forty-four  eggs  lying  beside  each  other  three 
feet  deep  in  the  sand.  They  were  still  covered  with  a  slimy 
ooat,  as  they  had  been  only  laid  the  previous  day  or  during 
the  night.  Crocodiles  prefer  coming  out  of  the  river  on 
a  windy  uight,  they  bury  their  eggs  in  the  ground,  cover  tliem 
over,  and  the  wind  soon  disperses  all  traces  of  the  disturbed 
earth.  A  few  mouths  afterwards  the  young  ones  creep  out. 
The  eggs  are  like  large  goose's  eggs,  but  as  much  rounded  off 
at  both  ends  as  these  are  only  at  the  blunt  end.  I  had  some 
of  them  boiled,  they  are  eatable,  but  have  a  disagreeable  taste ; 
therefore  I  willingly  left  them  to  the  sailors,  who  devoured 
them  with  a  hearty  appetite. 

We  lauded  at  the  forsaken  village  of  Dakela  on  the  eastern 
bank,  from  which  I  proceeded  alone  a  distance  of  about  tlu-ee- 
quarters  of  an  hour  inland.  The  character  of  the  vegetation 
continues  the  same.  The  ground  is  dry  and  level,  the  small 
hills  and  valleys  which  intersect  it  are  not  the  original  forms 
of  the  ground,  but  seem  only  to  have  been  produced  by  rain. 
The  larthest  point  I  aimed  at  was  a  great  tamarind-tree 
which  towered  up  splendidly  from  the  lower  trees  and  bushes, 
and  roimd  which  were  fluttering  a  number  of  green  and  red 
birds  hitherto  unknown  to  me. 

On  my  road,  I  hrst  came  to  a  settlement,  Kumr  beta  Dahela, 
where  the  inhabitants  of  the  vill.ige  I  mentioned  above  are 
accustomed  to  keep  their  villeggiatura.  They  only  remain 
here  during  the  dry  montlis,  and  wander  back  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  rainy  season  to  their  more  solidly  built  village  on 
the  bank  of  the  river.  The  last  village  that  I  reached  is 
called  KoMALi,  a  httle  above  the  place  which  is  marked  Seeo 


176  SULTANA  NASE. 

on  the  map,  and  which  is  situated  at  the  13^  of  north  latitude. 
On  the  hot  and  fatiguing  road  back,  I  was  present  at  a  burial: 
silent  and  serious,  without  sound  or  lamentation,  two  corpses 
wrapped  in  white  cloths  were  borne  by  men  on  anqarebs,  and 
were  laid  in  a  grave  several  feet  deep,  in  the  wood,  close  to 
the  passing  road.  Perhaps  they  had  died  of  the  cholera-like 
plague,  which  we  hear  has  broken  out  with  virulence  in  these 
southern  parts. 

We  would  willingly  have  gone  up,  as  far  as  Fazoql,  into  the 
last  province  in  Mohammed  All's  dominions,  to  become  ac- 
quainted vdth.  the  complete  change  in  the  character  of  the 
country,  which  then  again  occurs,  beginning  at  Eoseres,  and 
exhibiting  so  many  phenomena,  plants  and  animals,  peculiar 
to  the  tropics ;  but  our  time  had  come  to  an  end. 

The  Eais  received  orders  to  lower  the  sails  and  masts  ;  by 
which  the  boat  at  once  lost  its  dignified  appearance,,  and  it 
iloated  down  with  the  current  of  the  river  like  a  wreck. 
Soon  the  agreeable  silence  in  the  vessel,  which  had  hitherto 
hastened  on  as  if  of  its  o^vn  accord,  was  interrupted  by  the 
shrill  and  discordant  singing  of  the  rowers,  struggling  against 
the  wind. 

On  the  4th  of  March  we  again  arrived  at  Sennar,  and 
on  the  morning  of  the  8th  reached  Wed  Medineh.  This 
place  is  almost  as  important  as  Sennar.  A  regiment  of  sol- 
diers is  here  in  garrison  with  the  only  band  of  music  in  the 
Sudan,  and  with  two  cannons.  "We  were  immediately  visited 
by  the  chief  clerk  of  the  regiment,  Seid  Haschim,  one  of  the 
most  distinguished  people  of  the  place,  with  whom  we  had 
formerly  become  acquainted  in  Chartiim. 

We  determined  to  go  from  this  on  a  visit  to  the  Sultana 
Xasr  (Victoria)  in  Soeiba,  which  is  about  an  hour  and  a  half 
inland,  partly  to  learn  something  of  the  character  of  the 
country  farther  removed  from  the  river,  partly  to  gain  some 
notion  of  the  court  of  an  Ethiopian  princess.  Seid  Haschim 
offered  his  dromedaries  and  asses,  and  to  accompany  us  him- 
self on  this  expedition.     We  therefore  set  out  with  him  in 


SULTANA  >'ASB.  177 

the  afternoon  over  the  hot,  black  plain,  ^\here  only  a  few 
trees  were  scattered  here  and  there,  and  soon  got  over  the 
uninteresting  ground  on  our  active  animals. 

Nask  is  the  sister  of  the  most  powerful  and  the  richest 
King  (Melek)  in  the  Sudan,  the  Ideis  Wed  (z.  e.  Welled, 
the  son  or  descendant  of)  Adlax,  who  now  indeed  is  under 
the  supremacy  of  Mohammed  Ali,  but  yet  rules  over  several 
hundred  villages  in  the  province  of  El  Fungi ;  his  title  is 
31ak  el  Qulle,  King  of  the  Qulle  Mountains.  One  of  his 
ancestors  was  called  Adlan,  and  the  whole  family  at  present 
is  named  after  him ;  his  father  was  the  same  Mohammed 
(Wed)  Adlan,  who  at  the  period  of  the  victorious  campaign 
of  Ismael  Pascha,  appropriated  to  himself  the  greater  part  of 
the  power  belonging  to  the  legitimate  but  feeble  Badi,  King 
of  Sennar,  but  who  afterwards,  at  the  instigation  of  a  second 
Pretender,  Eeg'eb,  was  murdered.  When  Ismael  approached, 
and  Eeg'eb  had  fled  with  his  adherents  into  the  Abyssinian 
mountains.  King  Badi  joined  the  children  and  the  party  of 
Moliainined  Adlan,  and  submitted  to  the  Pascha,  who  made 
him  a  JSlieikh  over  the  country,  had  the  murderers  of  Mo- 
hammed Adlan  empaled,  and  bestowed  great  power  and 
riches  on  his  children  Eeg'eb  and  Idris  Adlan.  Their  sister 
oSasr  was  also  treated  with  great  respect,  which  was  still 
more  increased  because  she  was  descended,  on  the  mother's 
side,  from  the  legitimate  royal  house  itself.  On  that  ac- 
count slie  is  also  called  Sultana,  Queen.  Ker  first  husband 
was  Mohammed  Sandaloba,  a  brother  of  Hassan  Sandaloba, 
whom  we  had  visited  in  Sennar.  He  died  a  long  time  ago, 
but  by  him  she  had  a  daughter,  Dauer  (the  Light),  who 
married  a  great  Slieikh,  Abd  el  Qader,  but  she  was  after- 
wards separated  from  him,  and  now  always  resides  with  her 
mother  in  Soriba.  The  second  husband  of  Nasr  is  Mohammed 
Defalla,  the  son  of  one  of  her  father's  viziers.  He  was  just 
then  with  Ahmed  Pascha  Menekle,  on  the  campaign  (  Ghazua, 
out  of  which  the  French  have  made  Razzia)  in  Taka.  But 
even  when  he  is  at  home,  on  account  of  her  noble  birth,  she 
continues  mistress  in  the  house. 


178  SOEIEA.       SULTANA  XASK. 

A  great  preference  for  the  female  sex  seems  to  have  been  a 
very  universal  custom  since  ancient  times  in  these  southern 
countries.  We  must  recollect  how  frequently  we  find  reign- 
ing Queens  of  Ethiopia  mentioned.  In  the  campaigns  of 
Petronius,  Candace  is  well  known,  a  name  which,  according 
to  Pliny,  was  given  to  all  the  Ethiopian  Queens ;  according 
to  others,  only  to  the  mother  of  the  King.  In  the  pictures 
at  Meroe,  also,  we  sometimes  see  very  warlike,  and  doubtless 
reigning,  Queens  represented.  According  to  Makrizi,  the 
genealogies  of  the  Beg'as,  who  I  consider  to  be  the  direct 
descendants  of  the  Meroitish  Ethiopians,  and  the  ancestors 
of  the  present  Bischaris,  were  not  counted  by  the  men,  but  by 
the  women  ;  and  the  inheritance  did  not  go  to  the  son  of  the 
deceased,  but  to  the  son  of  the  sister,  or  of  the  daughter  of 
the  deceased.  In  like  manner,  according  to  Abu-Sela,  among 
the  Nubians,  the  sister's  son  always  had  the  preference  of  his 
own  sou  in  the  succession  to  tlie  throne ;  and,  according  to 
Ibn  Batuta,  the  same  custom  existed  among  the  Messofites, 
a  negro  people  lying  to  the  west.  Even  now  the  household 
and  chief  offices  belonging  to  the  courts  of  several  southern 
princes  are  wholly  filled  by  women.  Ladies  of  distinction 
are  in  the  habit  of  allowing  their  nails  to  grow  an  inch  long, 
as  a  sign  that  their  duty  consists  in  commanding,  and  not  in 
working ;  a  custom  we  have  lately  seen  in  the  representations 
of  the  unshapely  and  corpulent  Queens  of  Meroe. 

When  we  arrived  in  Soeiba,  we  stepped  through  a  pecu- 
liar gate-house  into  the  great  square  court-yard,  which  passes 
round  the  principal  building,  and  then  into  an  open  lofty 
hall,  the  roof  of  which  rested  on  four  pillars,  and  four 
pilasters.  The  narrow  beams  of  the  ceiling  jut  out  several 
feet  above  the  simple  architrave,  and  form  the  immediate 
support  of  the  flat  roof;  the  whole  entrance  reminded 
me  much  of  the  open  fa9ades  of  the  tombs  of  Beni- 
hassan.  In  the  hall  there  stood  some  beautiful  furniture  of 
Indian  work  in  ebony,  some  broad  anqarebs,  with  frames 
for  the  fly-nets.  Magnificent  coverlets  were  immediately 
brought  in,  and  sherbet,  cofiee,  and  pipes  handed  round  ;  the 


S^LTA^'^A  XASE.  179 

vessels  were  made  of  gold  and  silver.  Black  slave  girls  in 
light  white  dresses,  which  are  fastened  round  the  hips,  and 
drawn  over  the  bosom  and  shoulders,  handed  the  refresh- 
ments, and  looked  most  strange  with  their  half-braided,  half- 
combed  wigs.  The  Queen  did  not  however  appear ;  perhaps 
she  shrank  from  showing  herself  to  Christians  ;  we  were  only 
able  to  see  some  women  who  were  standing  behind  a  half- 
opened  door,  which  re-closed,  and  to  whom  we  ourselves  might 
have  been  an  object  of  curiosity.  I  therefore  sent  word  to 
the  Sultana,  through  Seid  Haschim,  that  we  had  come  to  pay 
a  yisit  to  herself,  and  we  now  begged  we  might  be  permitted 
to  pay  our  respects  to  her.  Upon  which,  soon  afterwards,  a 
strong  wooden  door,  cased  with  metal,  which  led  from  the 
inner  chambers  to  the  hall,  opened  wide,  and  Nasr,  with  free 
and  dignified  steps,  walked  in.  She  was  wrapped  in  long, 
finely-woven  linen,  with  coloured  borders,  and  underneath 
she  wore  -wide,  party-coloured  trousers  of  a  darker  hue. 
Tlie  female  household  followed  her,  eight  or  ten  girls  in  white 
dresses,  bordered  with  red,  and  ornamented  sandals.  Nasr 
sat  down  before  us  in  a  friendly  and  natural  manner ;  she 
only  sometimes  drew  her  dress  before  her  mouth  and  the 
lower  part  of  her  face,  an  Oriental  custom  which  is  universal 
in  Egvpt  among  women,  but  which  is  less  practised  in  this 
countrv.  She  replied  to  the  salutations  which  I  addressed  to 
her  through  the  Dragoman,  with  an  agreeable  voice,  but  only 
remained  a  short  time  with  us,  and  then  again  retired  through 
the  same  door. 

We  were  now  permitted  to  see  the  interior  of  the  house, 
with  the  exception  of  her  own  apartments,  which  were  in  a 
small  adjoining  house ;  and  we  got  upon  the  roof  to  have  a 
view  over  the  village.  We  afterwards  took  a  walk  through 
the  place,  saw  the  well,  which  is  lined  w^ith  bricks  to  the 
depth  of  60  feet,  and  supplies  a  lukewarm  water,  which  is 
more  insipid  than  that  of  the  Nile,  from  which  Nasr  always 
has  her  own  drinking  water  fetched.  We  then  turned  back, 
intending  to  start,  but  Nasr  invited  us  to  spend  the  night  in 
Soriba,  as  it  was  already  too  late  to  return  to  Wed  Medineh 

n2 


180  WED  MEDIXEH. 

bj  daylight.  "We  accepted  the  invitatiou,  and  immediately 
a  repast  of  cooked  food  was  brought  in,  which  was  only  a 
preparation  for  the  magnificent  supper.  The  Sultana,  how- 
ever, did  not  allow  herself  to  be  seen  again  the  whole  evening. 
"We  remained  in  the  hall,  and  slept  on  the  same  cool  cushions 
which  had  served  us  during  the  day  as  a  divan.  The  next 
morning,  however,  we  were  invited  to  \dsit  her  in  her  own 
rooms.  She  was  more  willing  to  talk  to-day  than  yesterday, 
had  European  chairs  placed  for  us,  while  her  attendants  and 
slave  girls  squatted  down  round  us.  "We  told  her  about  her 
name-sister,  the  Sultana  Nasr  of  England,  and  exhibited  her 
portrait  to  her  on  an  English  gold  coin,  which  she  regarded 
with  much  curiosity.  Nevertheless,  she  showed  very  little 
desire  to  see  with  her  own  eyes  that  distant  world  beyond 
the  northern  ocean. 

About  eight  o'clock  we  rode  back  to  "Wed  Medineh.  Soon 
after  our  arrival  Se'id  Haschim  received  a  letter  from  Kasr, 
in  which  she  asked  him  confidentially  whether  I  would 
accept  a  little  slave  girl  from  her,  as  a  gift  to  the  stranger. 
I  sent  a  message  to  inform  her  that  this  was  contrary  to  our 
customs,  but  that  there  would  be  no  difiiculty  if,  instead  of 
a  slave  girl,  she  would  select  a  slave  boy ;  and,  after  the  re- 
moval of  some  scruples,  as  this  seemed  to  her  less  becoming, 
she  really  sent  a  little  slave  boy,  who  was  brought  to  me  in 
our  boat. 

He  had  been  the  playmate  of  the  Sultana's  little  grandson, 
the  son  of  her  daughter  Dauer,  and  was  handed  over  to  me 
with  the  name  of  Eehan  (the  Arabic  designation  for  the 
sweet-scented  basilicum) .  I  was  also  informed  that  he  was 
born  in  the  district  of  Makadi,  on  the  frontier  of  Abyssinia, 
which  generally  furnishes  the  most  intelligent  and  faithful 
slaves.  This  district  is  imder  Christian  domination,  and  is 
inhabited  both  by  Christians  and  Mohammedans,  who  are 
separated  into  difierent  villages.  The  former  call  themselves 
jS'azara  (Nazarenes),  or  Amhara  (Amharic  Christians)  ;  the 
latter  Giberta.  Amongst  the  latter,  children  of  their  own 
race,  or  that  of  their  neighbours,  are  frequently  stolen  and 


TVED  MEDINEH.  181 

sold  to  Arabian  slave-dealers;  for  in  the  central  parts  of 
Abyssinia  the  slave  trade  is  strictly  interdicted.  However, 
this  account  of  the  boy  has  since  proved  incorrect,  and  per- 
haps was  only  meant  to  remove  the  obstacle  which  some 
might  find  in  offering  me  a  Christian  boy,  while  on  the  other 
hand  it  would  appear  still  more  doubtful  to  hand  over  to  me 
a  native  Mohammedan.  The  boy  himself  first  communicated 
to  our  Christian  cook,  and  afterwards  to  myself,  that  he  was 
born  of  Christian  parents,  that  he  had  here  for  the  first  time 
received  the  name  of  Eehan,  and  that  his  real  name  was 
Gabre  Mariam,  i.  e.  in  Abyssinian,  "  the  slave  of  Mary." 
He  was  bom  near  Gondar,  the  capital  of  Amhara.  He  ap- 
pears to  have  belonged  to  a  family  of  some  distinction,  for 
the  place  called  Bamba,  which  is  stated  by  Bruce  to  be  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Lake  Tzana,  by  his  accounts  belonged 
to  his  grandfather ;  and  his  father,  who  now  is  dead,  pos- 
sessed many  herds,  which  the  boy  often  drove,  mth  others, 
to  the  pasture.  One  day,  above  three  or  four  years  ago, 
when  on  such  an  expedition,  at  a  considerable  distance  from 
his  dwelling-place,  he  was  stolen  by  some  mounted  Bedouins, 
carried  oft*  to  the  village  of  Waldakarel,  and  then  sold  to 
King  Idris  Adlan ;  by  him  he  was  afterwards  presented  to  his 
sister  IVasr.  He  is  a  pretty  boy,  very  dark,  and  may  be  now 
between  eight  and  nine  years  old ;  but  much  more  advanced 
than  a  child  of  this  age  would  be  with  us.  The  girls  here 
marry  from  eight  years  old  upwards.  He  wears  his  hair  in  a 
peculiar  manner,  in  innumerable  little  braids ;  these  must, 
at  least  once  every  month,  be  re-braided  and  daubed  with 
grease,  by  a  woman  skilled  in  the  art ;  and  his  body  also 
must  from  time  to  time  be  well  rubbed  with  grease.  His 
entire  clothing  consists  in  a  great  white  cloth,  w^hich  he 
binds  round  his  hips,  and  throws  upwards  over  the  shoulders. 
I  call  him  now  by  his  Christian  name,  and  shall  take  him  to 
Europe  with  me. 

Seid  Haschim  did  all  in  his  power  to  keep  us  some  days 
longer  in  AVed  Medineh.  The  first  evening  he  invited  us  to 
his  house,  with  the  Turks  of  most  distinction,  and  had  a 


182  THE  EABABA. 

number  of  dancing-girls  to  show  us  tlie  national  dances  in 
these  parts ;  they  chiefly  consist  in  contortions  of  the  upper 
part  of  the  body  and  the  arms,  similar  to  what  are  repre- 
sented on  the  Egyptian  monuments ;  but  differ  from  the 
Egyptian  dances  of  the  present  day,  which  are  chiefly  limited 
to  very  ungraceful  gestures. 

A  good-natured  and  very  comical  old  man  led  on  the 
dances,  while  he  at  the  same  time  sang  some  Arabic  songs, 
with  a  piercing  but  not  disagreeable  voice,  which  had  refer- 
ence to  the  assembled  company,  or  to  persons  of  repute,  such 
as  Nasr,  Idris  iVdlan,  Mak  (i.  e.  Melek),  Badi,  &c. ;  and  with 
his  left  hand  touched  the  chords  of  a  five-stringed  lyre, 
passing  the  plectrum  over  them  in  time  with  his  right.  His 
instrument  only  embraced  six  tones  of  the  octave.  The  first 
string  on  the  right  hand  had  the  highest  tone,  C,  to  be 
struck  with  the  thumb,  the  string  immediately  succeeding,  the 
lowest  tone,  E;  then  followed  the  third,  F ;  the  fourth,  A; 
the  fifth,  B.  The  instrument  is  called  Eababa,  and  the  per- 
former on  it  Eebabi.  This  man  had  been  instructed  by  an 
old  celebrated  Eebabi  in  Schendi ;  he  had  made  his  instru- 
ment himself,  after  the  model  of  that  belonging  to  his  master, 
and  had  also  acquired  from  him  his  talent  for  making  verses, 
and  tluis  became  the  favourite  black  bard  of  AVed  Medineh. 
All  the  poetry  of  his  songs  had  been  composed  by  himself; 
they  were  sometimes  improvised,  and  whoever  disobliged 
him  or  his  patrons,  would  probably  be  made  the  object  of  his 
satire. 

I  made  him  come  to  me  the  following  morning,  and, 
through  Jussuf,  write  down  four  of  his  poems  in  Arabic : 
one  on  Mohammed,  the  son  of  Mak  Mesa'd,  who  resides  in 
Metammeh  ;  one  upon  King  Nimr,  who  burnt  Ismael 
Pascha,  and  is  still  living  in  Abyssinia ;  a  third  on  jN"asr ; 
and  lastly,  a  song  of  homage  to  pretty  girls.*  It  is  impos- 
sible to  render  these  melodies  in  our  notes.     I  have  only 

*  The  pnems  contain  many  unusual  grammatical  forms  and  ex- 
pressions, and  are  composed  in  a  very  free,  and,  as  it  appears,  in  some 
measure,  incorrect  style. 


J:U>£EAL  CEfiEMOXY.  183 

written  down  a  small  portion  of  tliem,  which  in  some  mea- 
sure approaches  our  mode  of  singing.  They  are  generally 
half  recited,  half  carried  do^vn,  with  qiiivering  tones,  from  the 
highest  notes  to  a  deep  and  long-sustained  tone.  These  are 
their  most  peculiar  characteristics,  but  they  are  quite  incapable 
of  being  noted  down.  Each  verse  contains  four  rhymes ;  the 
voice  is  retained  lightly  on  each  of  them,  on  the  second  more 
than  on  the  first  and  third ;  but  longest  on  the  last  rhyme. 
The  music  always  sinks  at  this  point,  and  the  same  deep 
tone  recurs,  wliich  gives  a  certain  character  to  the  progress- 
ing soDg.  A  particular  recurrence  of  the  melody  may,  in- 
deed, also  be  noticed,  but  this  is  impossible  for  a  European 
ear  to  remember.  I  purchased  the  instrument  from  the 
good-natured  old  man.  He  gave  it  unwillingly,  although  I 
let  him  name  his  own  price ;  and  several  times  after  he  had 
taken  the  money,  and  had  laid  down  his  instrument  for  it,  an 
air  of  anxious  sorrow  came  over  his  expressive  countenance. 
The  following  day  I  bid  him  come  to  me  again.  He  was  de- 
pressed, and  told  me  his  wife  had  given  him  a  sound  beating 
for  having  given  his  instrument  away.  Here  it  is  no  dis- 
grace for  a  man  to  be  beaten  by  his  wife,  but  it  is  so  perhaps 
in  the  reverse  case.  A  woman  who  has  been  beaten  goes  at 
once  to  the  Cadi  to  complain ;  she  then  generally  obtains 
justice,  and  the  husband  is  punished. 

In  Wed  Medinch  we  were  also  present  at  a  funeral  cere- 
mony, which  seemed  a  strange  enough  one  to  us.  A  woman 
liad  died  three  days  before ;  the  day  succeeding  her  death, 
the  third,  the  seventh,  and  several  days  afterwards  are  pecu- 
liarly solemnised.  In  front  of  the  house,  an  hour  before  sun- 
set, above  a  hundred  women  and  children  had  collected,  and 
more  were  constantlv  coming  in,  and  cowered  down  beside 
the  others.  Two  daughters  of  the  deceased  were  present, 
whose  richly  ornamented  and  grease-hesm eared  heads  they 
had  already  strewed  with  ashes,  and  had  rubbed  the  whole  of 
the  upper  part  of  their  bodies  white  with  them,  so  that  their 
eyes  and  mouths  alone  shone  forth  clean,  and,  as  it  were,  set 
into  the  white  mask.     The  women  wore  long  cloths  round 


184  WED  :medixeh. 

their  Lips  ;  the  young  girls  and  children  the  Eahat,  a  girdle 
composed  of  five  strips  of  leather,  hanging  down  close  to- 
gether ;  this  is  usually  bound  round  the  loins  by  a  cord, 
prettily  ornamented  with  shells  and  pearls,  and  it  falls  half- 
way do^vn  the  leg.  There  was  a  great  wooden  bowl  with 
ashes,  which  was  repeatedly  filled  again  with  fresh  ones. 
Female  musicians  cowered  down  close  on  either  side  of  the 
door  uttering  shrill  screams,  which  pierced  our  ears ;  they 
now  clapped  their  hands  together  in  time ;  now  struck  the 
sounding  DAEA-srKA  (a  kind  of  hand  kettle-drum,  called 
here  in  the  Sudan  Daluka)  ;  and  now  beat  with  sticks  on 
some  hollow  gourds  floating  in  tubs  of  water.  The  two 
daughters,  about  eighteen  or  twenty  years  of  age,  and  the 
nearest  relations,  began,  two  and  two,  to  move  at  first 
slowly  towards  the  door  in  a  narrow  passage  between  the 
constantly  increasing  crowds ;  then  suddenly  shrill  screams, 
clapping  of  hands,  and  loud  shrieks  burst  from  them  all 
at  once ;  whereupon  they  turned  round,  and  began  their 
fearfully  contorted  dancing.  Bending  the  upper  part  of 
their  body  in  convulsive  and  strained  twistings  and  turnings, 
and  slowly  balancing  themselves,  they  moved  their  feet  for- 
wards, then  suddenly  threw  their  breasts  upwards  with  vio- 
lence and  their  heads  back  on  their  shoulders,  which  they 
stretched  out  in  all  directions,  and  thus,  with  half-closed 
eyes,  gradually  glided  forwards.  In  this  manner  they  went 
down  a  slight  incline  of  fifteen  and  twenty  paces,  where  they 
threw  themselves  on  the  ground,  covered  themselves  with 
dust  and  earth,  and  tui'ned  back  again  to  re-commence  the 
same  dance.  The  younger  of  the  two  daughters  had  a  beau- 
tiful slight  figure,  with  wonderful  elasticity,  and  when  she 
stood  quietly  erect,  or  was  lying  on  the  ground  with  her 
sunken  head,  her  regular  and  gentle,  though  inanimate  fea- 
tures, even  during  the  dance,  and  the  classical  form  of  her 
body,  was  exactly  like  an  antique  statue.  This  dancing  pro- 
cession was  repeated  over  and  over  again.  Each  of  the 
moiuners  is  compelled  at  least  to  go  through  this  once,  and 
the  nearer  the  relationship  so  much  the  more  frequently  is  it 


ruNEEAL  cere:m:o:>'y.  185 

repeated.  Wlioever  cannot  immediately  force  her  way  up 
to  the  vessel  of  ashes,  takes  them  from  the  head  of  her 
neighbour  to  strew  it  on  her  own  head.  In  front  of  this 
squatting  assembly  some  women  are  cowering,  who  under- 
stand how  to  sob  loudly  and  to  shed  profuse  tears,  which 
leave  long  black  streaks  on  their  white-rubbed  cheeks.  The 
most  striking,  and  the  most  repelling,  part  of  this  spectacle 
is,  that  nothing  is  done  from  unrestrained  sorrow,  but  all 
with  deliberation,  with  a  degree  of  pathos,  and  evidently 
studied;  children  as  young  as  four  and  five  years  old  are 
placed  in  the  procession,  and  if  they  perfonn  the  difficult  and 
unnatural  movements  well,  their  mothers,  who  are  cowering 
behind,  call  out  to  them  taih,  taih — i.  e.  bravo !  well  done ! 
In  the  second  act,  however,  of  this  ceremony,  rendered  pecu- 
liarly stunning  by  its  continual  clapping,  screaming,  and 
shrieking,  all  the  dancers  throw  themselves  into  the  dust, 
and  tumble  down  the  hill ;  but  this  they  also  do  slowly,  and 
with  deliberation,  carefully  drawing  up  their  knees  to  their 
bodies,  to  hold  their  dresses  with  them,  and  also  crossing 
their  arms  ;  they  then  roll  down,  over  knees  and  back.  This 
ceremony  begins  one  hour  before  sunset,  and  lasts  till  night. 

The  unnatural  feeling  pervading  the  whole  proceeding 
makes  an  indescribable  impression,  which  is  rendered  still 
more  disagreeable  by  seeing  nothing  in  all  of  it  but  an  in- 
herited and  perverted  custom,  an  empty  spectacle ;  not  a 
trace  of  individual  truth  and  natural  sentiment  can  be  per- 
ceived in  the  persons  who  participate;  and  yet  the  com- 
parison between  this  and  certain  descriptions  and  repre- 
sentations of  similar  festivals  among  the  ancients,  teaches  us 
to  understand  much,  of  which  judging  by  our  own  manner  of 
life,  we  can  never  form  a  correct  notion,  till  we  have  once 
seen  with  our  eyes  such  caricatures  of  metamorphoses  as  are 
here  and  there  exhibited  in  the  East. 

The  following  day  we  visited  the  hospital,  which  we  found 
very  cleanly,  and  in  good  order ;  it  holds  a  hundred  patients, 
but  there  were  then  only  eight-and-twenty  within  it.  "We 
then  went  to  the  barracks,  in  the  large  court-yard  of  which 


186  WAE  IK  TAKA. 

the  men  are  exercised.  The  commanding  officer  ordered  out 
the  band  of  music,  and  they  played  several  pieces  before  us. 
The  first  was  the  Parisienne,  which  sounded  most  strangely 
in  this  country,  as  well  as  the  succeeding  pieces,  most  of  them 
French,  and  known  to  me ;  they  were,  however,  tolerably 
well  executed.  The  musicians  performed  almost  solely  on 
European  instruments,  and  have  also  admitted  the  name  of 
our  trumpet  into  their  Arabic  musical  language,  but  have 
transferred  it  to  the  drum,  which  they  call  trumheta^  while 
for  the  trumpet  they  have  a  peculiar  name  of  their  own,  nafir  ; 
they  call  their  great  flute  siimdra,  the  small  one  sufdra,  and 
the  great  drum  tabli.  There  were  only  twelve  hundred 
soldiers  present  belonging  to  the  regiment,  which  consists  of 
four  thousand  men,  almost  all  negroes,  whose  black  faces 
staring  out  of  their  white  linen  uniform  and  red-tasselled 
caps,  made  them  look  like  dressed-up  monkeys,  only  much 
more  unhappy  aud  oppressed.  The  negroes  are  incapable  of 
any  military  discipline  and  regular  exertion,  and  generally 
sink  beneath  the  imposed  yoke.  "NYe  did  not,  however, 
suspect  that  these  same  people  would  two  days  afterwards 
rebel  in  a  body,  and  set  off  to  their  hills. 

Emin  Pascha  was  expected  hourly.  But  on  the  13th  I 
received  in  the  morning  a  letter  from  him,  from  Messeleraieh, 
between  four  and  five  hours  distant  from  this  place,  in  which 
he  wrote  that  he  should  not  come  to  Wed  Medineh  before 
the  following  day,  and  hoped  to  find  us  still  there.  He  at 
the  same  time  informed  me  that  the  war  in  Taka  was  over, 
and  that  all  had  submitted.  Several  hundred  natives  had 
been  killed  in  skirmishes  ;  the  morning  before  the  chief  battle, 
all  the  Sheikhs  of  the  tribes  from  Taka  had  come  to  the 
Pascha  to  sue  for  pardon,  which  he  had  granted  them,  on 
condition  that  no  fugitive  should  venture  to  remain  in  the 
great  wood,  which  was  their  chief  place  of  refuge.  The 
following  morning  he  had  the  wood  searched,  and  as  nobody 
was  discovered  in  it,  he  had  it  set  on  fire,  and  entirely  burnt 
to  the  ground.  On  his  journey  back,  he  intends  to  pa&s 
through  the  eastern  districts  to  Katarif,  on  the  Abyssinian 


TAEJE  TILLAGE.  187 

frontier,  and  thence  to  go  to  tlie  Blue  Eiver.  We  had 
scarcely  read  this  news  from  Taka,  when  we  heard  the  sound 
of  cannon  in  front  of  tlie  barracks  announcing  the  victorious 
message  to  tlie  population  round. 

In  another  letter,  which  had  gone  to  Emin  Pascha  instead 
of  me,  Herr  von  ^^agner  gave  me  the  pleasing  intelligence 
that  our  new  companion,  the  painter  Georgi,  had  arrived  from 
Italv,  and  had  already  started  for  Dougola,  where  he  waits 
for  further  orders.  I  shall  wi'ite  to  him  to  come  as  far  as 
Barkal  to  meet  us. 

As  we  were  certain  by  this  letter  of  finding  the  Pascha 
still  in  Messelemieh,  we  started  for  that  place  about  mid-day ; 
and  as  the  town  is  situated  an  hour  and  a  half  distant  from 
the  Nile,  we  made  the  journey  by  land. 

The  boat,  meanwhile,  was  to  follow  us  to  the  harbour  of 
Messelemieh,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  nearest  landing-place  of 
this  most  important  of  the  commercial  towns  of  the  whole 
Sudan.  Besides  Jussuf,  we  took  with  us  the  Kawass  and 
Grab  re  Mariam,  who  sat  behind  me  on  the  dromedary,  where 
there  is  always  left  a  small  place  for  a  servant,  like  a  coach- 
box behind  the  carriage ;  he  sits  on  the  narrow  hinder  part 
of  the  animal,  and  holds  on  to  the  saddle  with  both  his  hands. 
It  was  hot,  and  the  ground  was  parched  up.  The  few  birds 
which  I  saw  were  difi'erent  from  those  which  habitually  in- 
herit the  banks  of  the  river. 

Half-way  we  came  to  Taiba,  a  village  which  is  only  in- 
habited by  FuKAEA  (plur.  of  Fakie).  These  are  the  sages, 
the  holy  men  of  the  people,  a  kiud  of  priest,  without  however 
having  priestly  functions  to  perform ;  they  can  read  and 
write ;  they  do  not  permit  any  music,  dancing,  or  festivals 
among  them,  and  therefore  have  a  great  reputation  for  sanc- 
tity. The  chief  of  this  village  is  the  greatest  Fakir  of  the 
whole  surrounding  neighbourhood.  Every  one  believes  in 
him  like  a  prophet;  whatever  he  predicts,  happens.  The 
late  Achmed  Pascha,  one  month  before  his  death,  caused  him 
to  be  imprisoned.  "  God  will  punish  you  for  this,"  was  his 
answer  to  the  order,  and  one  month  afterwards  the  Pascha 


188  HELLET  e'  SOLIMAiN-. 

died.  He  is  a  very  rich  man,  and  possesses  several  villages. 
We  went  in  quest  of  him,  and  found  liim  in  his  house  at 
dinner ;  about  twenty  people  were  sitting  round  a  colossal 
wooden  bowl,  which  was  filled  with  a  gruel  of  boiled  Durra 
and  milk.  The  bowl  was  pushed  in  front  of  us,  but  we  could 
not  eat  any  of  this  food.  We  amused  ourselves  with  the 
old  Takir,  who  joined  in  our  conversation  with  easy,  friendly, 
and  pleasing  manners,  and  then  inquired  our  names,  and  the 
object  of  our  journey.  Every  one  who  entered,  our  servants 
among  the  number,  approached  him  reverently,  and  touched 
his  hand  with  their  mouth  and  forehead.  The  dignity  of 
Sheikh  is  hereditary  in  his  family ;  his  son  is  looked  up  to 
almost  as  much  as  himself,  and  in  this  way  we  can  understand 
how  a  village  like  this,  when  the  Sheikh  has  once  been  himself 
a  Fakir,  can  become  altogether  a  priest-village.  E'  Damer,  on 
the  island  of  Meroe,  was  formerly  a  Fakir  place  similar  to 
this.  The  inhabitants  of  Taiba,  probably  of  Arabic  race,  call 
themselves  Aeakin.  There  are  a  number  of  such  local 
names  here,  whose  origin  it  is  difficult  to  make  out. 

When  we  had  smoked  out  our  pipes,  we  left  the  congre- 
gation of  holy  men,  and  rode  away.  One  half  hour  before 
we  reached  Messelemieh,  we  came  to  a  second  village  called 
Hellet  e'  Soliman,  where  we  dismounted  at  a  house  which  had 
been  built  by  the  late  Mak,  or  Melek  Kambal,  of  Halfai, 
when  he  married  the  daughter  of  Defalla,  to  whom  the  village 
belonged;  it  now  belongs  to  his  brother's  son,  Mahmud 
welled  Schauisch,  who  has  besides  the  title  of  Melek,  but  is 
really  only  the  guardian  of  Kambal' s  little  son,  Melek  Beshir. 
It  is  easy  to  see  what  is  now  thought  here  of  the  old  re- 
verential title  of  Melek,  or  King.  Mahmut  was  not  at  home, 
as  he  had  accompanied  Ahmed  Pascha  on  his  campaign. 
Nevertheless,  we  were  entertained  in  his  house  according  to 
the  hospitable  custom  of  this  country.  Coverlets  were  spread 
out,  milk  and  fresh  baked  Durra  bread  in  thin  slices, 
which  has  by  no  means  a  bad  taste,  was  brought  in ;  added 
to  this,  another  simple,  but  refreshing  beverage,  aht^eq,  fer- 
mented sourish  Durra  water.     Soon  after  Asser  we  reached 


VASE  AT  SOBA.  189 

Messelemieh.  Emin  Pasclia  received  us  very  kindly,  and  com- 
municated to  us  the  intelligence  tliat  Mohammed  All's  first 
minister,  Boghos  Bey,  whom  I  had  visited  in  Alexandria,  was 
dead,  and  that  Artim  Bey,  a  man  of  elegant  manners,  and  a 
shrewd  politician,  had  been  appointed  in  his  place. 

AVe  declined  the  Pascha's  invitation  to  supper,  and  offer  of 
a  night's  lodging,  and  soon  rode  away  towards  the  river, 
where  we  hoped  to  find  our  boat.  As  it  had  not  yet  arrived^ 
we  spent  the  night  on  anqarebs  in  the  open  air.  We  were 
not  able  to  start  for  Kamlin  till  the  following  morning,  the 
loth  March,  and  reached  it  towards  evening.  The  next  day 
we  spent  agreeably  with  our  countryman,  Herr  Bauer.  On 
the  17th,  having  paid  a  visit  to  Nureddin  Eftendi,  in  Wad 
Eraue,  several  hours  distant  from  Kamlin,  we  arrived  on  the 
following  day  at  Soba,  where  I  immediately  sent  for  one  of 
the  vases  which  had  been  found  in  the  ruins  of  the  ancient 
city,  and  which  was  said  to  be  kept  by  the  brother  of  the 
Sheikh.  After  waiting  a  long  time,  it  was  brought  to  us. 
It  was  an  ancient  vessel  for  incense,  made  of  bronze  in 
filigree  work.  The  sides  of  the  vessel,  which  was  of  a 
roundish  form,  and  about  nine  inches  high,  and  of  similar 
width,  consisted  solely  of  open-work  Arabesques  ;  the  swings 
ing  chains  had  been  fastened  to  the  upper  border  by  three 
little  hooks,  one  of  which,  however,  has  broken  away,  so  that 
the  most  interesting  part  of  the  whole,  an  inscription  running 
round  beneath  the  border,  and  like  the  Arabesques  carved 
a  jour,  in  rather  large  letters,  thereby  is  unfortunately  in- 
complete. This  is  of  peculiar  importance,  as  the  writing  is 
again  in  the  Greek,  or  rather  in  the. Coptic  character,  as  on 
the  stone-tablet ;  but  the  language  is  neither  of  these,  but 
doubtless  the  ancient  vernacular  tongue  of  Soba,  the  capital 
of  the  mighty  Kingdom  of  Aloa.  Short  as  it  is,  it  is  distin- 
guished from  the  stone  inscription  by  containing  the  Coptic 
signs  ^  (sch)  and  'V  (ti),  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the 
latter.  I  purchased  the  vessel  for  a  few  piastres.  This  is 
now  the  third  monument  of  Soba  which  we  take  away  with 
us,  for  I  must  mention,  in  addition,  that  at  the  house  of  Seid 


190  SLAVE  EEYOLT. 

HascMm,  in  "Wed  Medineb,  we  also  saw  a  small  Yenus  "of 
Grreek  workmansbip,  carved  in  pure  style,  and  about  a  foot 
bigb,  wbicb  had  likewise  been  found  in  Soba,  and  was  pre- 
sented to  me  by  its  owner.  At  lengtli,  on  the  19th  March, 
we  again  entered  the  house  of  HeiT  Hermanovich,  in 
Chartum,  later  than  our  original  calculations  had  led  us  to 
expect,  for  which  reason  I  had  already  communicated  our 
delay  to  Erbkam,  in  a  letter  from  Wed  Medineh. 


LETTEE  XIX. 

Chartum,  the  2\st  March,  1844. 
Heee,  for  the  first  time,  we  received  more  exact  intel- 
ligence of  the  military  revolt  in  Wed  Medineh,  which  was  of 
a  most  serious  nature,  ^nd  would  have  infallibly  thrown  us 
into  the  greatest  danger  had  we  remained  two  days  longer  in 
that  town.  All  the  black  soldiers  revolted  while  Emiu  Pascha 
was  residing  there.  The  drill-sergeant  and  seven  white 
soldiers  were  killed  immediately ;  the  Pascha  was  besieged 
in  his  own  house,  which  was  briskly  fired  into ;  his  negotiators 
were  repelled,  and  the  powder  magazine  seized.  All  the 
arms  and  ammunition,  with  the  two  cannons,  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  negroes,  who  then  selected  six  leaders  for  them- 
selves, and  set  out  in  six  divisions  on  the  road  to  Pazoql  to 
take  refuge  in  their  mountains.  The  regiment  in  this  place, 
which  has  about  1500  blacks  in  it,  was  at  once  disarmed,  and 
will  be  kept  within  the  barracks.  The  most  serious  conse- 
quences are  dreaded,  as.  Ahmed  Pascha  Menekle  has  been  so 
inconsiderate  as  to  take  almost  all  the  white  troops  along 
wir.h  him  to  Taka ;  otherwise  I  should  rejoice  at  the  desertion 
of  the  blacks,  as  they  are  treated  in  the  most  revolting 
manner  by  their  Turkish  masters.  Yet  the  insurrection  may 
easily  bring  the  whole  country  into  a  state  of  disorder,  and 
then,  also,  have  an  injurious  influence  on  our  expedition. 
The  blacks  will  undoubtedly  endeavour  on  their  road  to 
draw  over  to  their  own  party  whatever  country  people  they 


CHJLETriT.  191 

meet,  especially  the  troops  of  Soliman  Pascha  in  Sennar,  and 
of  Selim  Pascha  in  Pazoql.  The  whites  are  far  too  few  to  offer 
them  effectual  resistance.  Xews  has  just  arrived  that  between 
five  and  six  hundred  slaves  of  the  late  Ahmed  Pascha,  belonsr- 
ing  to  the  indigo  factory  at  Tamaniat,  a  little  to  the  north  of 
this,  have  fled  with  their  wives  and  children  to  the  Sudan, 
and  intend  to  join  the  soldiers ;  the  same  is  reported  of  the 
factory  at  Kamlin,  so  that  we  necessarily  feel  anxious  about 
our  friend  Bauer,  who  was  not,  indeed,  cruel  as  the  Turks 
are,  but  yet  was  a  strict  master. 

2^tli  March.  —  The  news  is  spread  that  the  troops  in 
Sennar  and  the  people  belonging  to  Melek  Idris  Adlaa,  have 
put  the  negroes  to  the  sword.  It  is  also  said,  that  the  slaves 
of  Tamaniat  have  been  overtaken  by  the  Arnauts,  and  mur- 
dered or  dragged  back,  and  that  the  revolt  in  Kamlin  has 
been  suppressed.  Still  we  cannot  build  much  on  this,  as  the 
intelligence  reached  me  through  our  Kawass  from  the  people 
belonging  to  the  Pascha,  and  the  desire  was  also  expressed 
that  I  should  spread  the  news  still  farther,  and  write  about 
it  to  Cairo, 

Yesterday,  as  we  were  walking  in  the  dusk  of  the  evening, 
in  the  large  and  beautiful  garden  belonging  to  Ibrahim  Cher, 
in  whose  cheerful  and  pleasantly-situated  house  I  write  this 
letter,  we  saw  tall  dark  clouds  of  sand  rise  like  a  wall  on  the 
horizon.  A  ^-iolent  east  wind  has  also  been  blowing  to-night 
ever  since,  and  still  blows,  enveloping  all  the  trees  and  build- 
ings in  a  disagreeable  sandy  atmosphere,  which  almost  takes 
away  our  breath.  I  have  closed  the  window-shutters  firmly, 
and  barricaded  the  door  with  stones,  to  be  in  some  measure 
secured  from  the  first  assault ;  nevertheless,  I  am  constantly 
obliged  to  cleanse  the  sheet  of  letter  paper  from  the  covering 
of  sand  which  is  incessantly  thrown  down  on  it. 

I  returned  in  such  a  tattered  condition  from  my  hunting 
excursion  to  Sennar,  that  I  was  at  length  obliged  to  as- 
sume the  Turkish  costume,  which  I  cannot  now  soon  ex- 
change again.  It  has  its  advantages  for  the  customs  of  this 
country,  especially  for  sitting  on  coverlets,  or  low  cushions ; 


192  SLATE  EEYOLT. 

but  the  Tarbusch,  which  lies  so  flat  upon  the  head,  is  very 
ill-adapted  to  this  sunny  sky,  and  the  fastening  of  the  innu- 
merable buttons  and  hooks  is  daily  a  most  wearisome  trial 
of  patience. 

30^^  March. — We  intend  to  leave  Chartum  as  soon  as  this 
packet  of  letters  is  handed  over  to  the  Pascha.  The  revolu- 
tion is  now  completely  suppressed  in  all  parts.  It  would 
doubtless  have  had  a  far  worse  result  had  it  not,  from  a 
particular  cause,  broken  out  in  Wed  Medineh  several  days 
too  soon.  It  had  been  planned  and  secretly  arranged  for 
a  long  time  past  in  the  whole  of  the  south,  and  was 
not  to  have  broken  out  before  tlie  19th  of  this  month 
simultaneously  in  Sennar,  Wed  Medineh,  Kamlin,  Chartum, 
and  Tamaniat.  The  precipitate  movement  in  Wed  Medineh 
had,  however,  disarranged  the  whole  plan,  and  had  especially 
given  time  to  Emin  Pascha  to  send  messengers  to  Chartum, 
by  which  means  the  negro  soldiers  here  were  consigned  and 
disarmed  before  news  of  the  outbreak  had  reached  their  ears. 
Emin  Pascha,  however,  seems  himself  to  have  been  totally 
helpless.  The  victory  is  said  to  be  solely  due  to  the  courage 
and  presence  of  mind  of  a  certain  Eustan  Effendi,  who  with 
150  devoted  soldiers,  chiefly  whites,  pursued  the  negroes,  who 
were  600  strong,  overtook  them  beyond  Sennar,  and  after 
attacking  them  three  times,  defeated  them,  with  great  loss  of 
life.  Above  a  hundred  of  the  fugitives  have  surrendered, 
and  have  been  taken  to  Sennar  in  irons ;  the  remaining 
number  were  killed  in  the  action,  or  leapt  into  the  river  and 
were  drowned  there. 

But  the  news  arrived  here  at  the  same  time,  that  an  insur- 
rection had  also  broken  out  on  account  of  the  taxes  in  Lower 
JN'ubia,  in  Kalabsche,  and  another  village,  that  both  villages 
had  on  that  account  been  immediately  destroyed  by  Hassan 
Pascha,  who  is  to  come  to  Chartum  in  place  of  Emin  Pascha, 
and  that  the  inhabitants  had  been  killed  or  driven  away. 


TAMA>-IAT.       QIKEE  EAXGE.  193 


LETTEE  XX. 

The  Pyramids  o/Merue,  22nd  April,  1844. 

We  quitted  Chartum  on  the  30tli  March,  towards  evening, 
and  proceeded  half  the  night  by  moonlight. 

The  following  day  we  arrived  at  Tamaniat.  Almost  the 
whole  of  the  large  village  had  disappeared,  and  only  one  vast 
burning  plain  was  to  be  seen.  The  slaves  in  their  revolt  had 
laid  everytliiug  in  ashes,  the  walls  of  the  factory  are  alone 
left  standing.  As  I  had  quitted  the  boat  and  arrived  on  foot, 
I  was  unexpectedly  startled  near  the  still  smoking  ruins  by 
a  liorrible  spectacle,  for  I  suddenly  found  myself  in  an  open 
piece  of  garden,  which  was  completely  covered  by  the  muti- 
lated corpses  of  blacks.  The  greatest  proportion  of  the  slaves 
who  had  been  recaptured  were  here  shot  down  in  masses. 

We  stopped  at  sunset  in  Surie  Abu  Eamle,  before  a  cata- 
ract, which  we  were  unable  to  pass  during  the  night. 

The  1st  of  April  we  again  started  long  before  daybrealv, 
and  thought  we  should  make  a  good  step  in  advance.  But 
the  wind  rose  with  the  sun,  and  as  the  boat  could  not  be 
towed  at  this  point  on  account  of  the  rocky  banks,  a  few 
hours  afterwards  we  were  compelled  to  halt  again,  and  to  lie 
quiet  in  the  heavy,  dense  atmosphere  of  sand.  In  front  of 
us  lay  the  insulated  range  of  Qirre,  detached  from  whicli, 
Aschtan  (the  Tliirsty)  on  our  left  hand,  Eauian  (the  Thirsty 
assuaged)  on  our  right,  stand  forth  from  the  plain  like  watch- 
posts  ;  the  former,  however,  at  a  greater  distance  from  the 
river. 

Eauian  was  only  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  distant 
from  our  boat.  I  set  out  with  my  gun,  traversed  the  bare 
stony  plain,  and  climbed  the  mountain,  during  the  inun- 
dation season  almost  entirely  surrounded  by  water,  for 
wliich  reason  we  were  always  told  that  it  stood  upon  an 
island.  The  rock  of  which  it  is  composed  is  granite,  of  a 
mixed  coarse  and  fine  grain,  w^ith  much  quartz.  On  the  road 
back,  I  passed  the  village  of  Melah,  the  huts  of  which  lie 

o 


IM  BEN  yxG\. 

hidden  behind  large  mounds  of  upturned  earth,  formed  bj 
the  inhabitants  when  they  dig  for  salt  (malh).  A  great  deal 
of  it  is  found  in  the  surrounding  countr}'  (thus  Melah  is  the 
Arabic  translation  of  salt-work,  or  Suiza).  Towards  eveiiing 
we  sailed  on  a  little  farther,  in  the  midst  of  the  range,  and 
lay  to,  in  a  little  rocky  creek.  The  following  day,  also,  we 
made  but  little  progress.  We  saw  some  black  slaves  wander- 
ing about  like  chamois,  on  the  eastern  summits  of  the  wild 
granitic  rocks,  who  have  perhaps  escaped  from  Tamaniat,  but 
their  miserable  life  will  not  probably  be  much  longer  prolonged. 
They  disappeared  immediately  again  behind  the  jagged  sum- 
mits, our  Kawass  having  indulged  in  the  brutal  jest  of  firing 
at  them  in  the  air.  I  climbed  up  the  western  mountains  with 
Abeken ;  they  rise  precipitously  for  about  200  or  300  feet 
from  the  bank.  It  is  evident  here,  by  the  natural  waUs  of 
rock,  to  what  height  the  river  rises  and  deposits  its  mud  at 
high- water.  I  measured  nearly  8  metres  (26  feet  English) 
from  that  point  to  the  surface  of  the  water  at  the  present 
moment,  and  the  river  will  continue  to  sink  about  2  feet 
more. 

From  the  summit  of  the  mountain  we  saw  the  wide  desert 
extending  behind  the  farthest  eminences,  and  soon  after  pass- 
ing Meraui,  we  shall  be  wandering  across  it.  We  quitted 
the  picturesque  range  of  mountains  with  regret,  which  form 
such  an  agreeable  interruption  to  the  flat  banks  of  this  far 
and  wide  level  country. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th  April,  we  at  length  reached 
our  group  of  palm-trees  at  Ben  Naga,  and  immediately 
went  to  the  ruins  in  the  Wadi  el  Kirbegan,  where  we  found 
a  portion  of  a  pillar,  and  several  altars  in  the  south-eastern 
temple  which  had  been  newly- excavated  by  Erbkam;  the 
same  Eoyal  Shields  were  upon  them  as  upon  the  principal 
temples  of  Naga  in  the  desert,  besides  several  others  which 
had  not  previously  appeared.  Of  the  three  altars  that  had 
been  excavated,  the  central  one,  of  very  hard  sandstone,  was 
in  excellent  preservation.  On  the  western  side  there  was  a 
representation  of  the  King,  on  the  eastern,  of  the  Queen,  with 


SCHENDI.  195 

their  names,  and  on  both  the  other  sides  were  two  goddesses. 
On  the  northern  side  the  hieroglyphic  group  of  the  North 
was  also  inscribed,  and  on  the  southern  that  of  the  South. 
Both  the  other  altars  exhibited  the  same  figures.  All  three 
were  still  standing  on  their  original  site,  and  w^re  let  into  a 
smooth  floor,  which  was  composed  of  square  slabs  of  stone 
covered  with  plaster.  Unfortunately  I  had  not  then  the  means 
of  carrying  away  the  best  of  these  altars,  which  weighed  at 
least  50  cwt.,  and  I  had,  therefore,  to  plan  a  special  excursion 
from  Meroe  for  the  purpose. 

On  G-ood  Friday,  the  5th  April,  we  arrived  at  Schendi. 
We  entered  the  widely- scattered  but  depopulated  town, 
saw  the  ruins  of  the  palace  of  King  Nimr,  in  which 
he  had  burnt  Ismael  Pascha,  after  a  nocturnal  festival 
which  he  had  prepared  for  him,  and  many  houses  which 
still  bore  traces  of  the  balls  of  Defterdar  Bey,  who  was 
sent  by  Mohammed  Ali  to  revenge  the  death  of  his  son. 
The  dwelling  of  King  Nimr,  which  now  also  lay  in  ruins, 
used  to  stand  in  the  centre  of  the  town  on  an  artificial  emi- 
nence. The  suburb,  built  for  the  present  military  garrison, 
is  at  a  little  distance  up  the  river,  and  separated  from  the 
town.  We  then  returned  to  the  boat,  which  had  put  in  near 
the  fortress-like  house  of  Churshid  Pascha,  where  the  mili- 
tary commander  now  resides. 

On  the  same  day  we  arrived,  shortly  before  sunset,  at  Beg'e- 
rameh,  and  immediately  rode  to  the  Pyramids,  where  we  once 
more  found  Erbkam  and  the  remainder  of  the  party  safe  and 
sound.  They  have  been  diligently  drawing  in  Naga  and  Wadi 
Sofra,  and  the  rich  costume  of  the  kings  and  gods,  as  well  as 
the  representations  belonging  to  these  Ethiopian  temples  in 
general,  devoid  of  style  indeed,  but  ornamental,  look  very 
well  on  paper,  and  will  make  a  splendid  show  in  our  sketch- 
books. Much  had  been  done  in  this  spot  also,  and  many 
new  things  had  come  to  light  in  clearing  out  the  ante- 
chambers, which  had  been  full  of  rubbish.  Abeken  thought, 
even  during  our  first  visit,  that  he  had  found  the  name  of 

o2 


196 


CANDACE.       OSMAN  BET. 


the  Queen  Kentaki  (Candace). 
tlie  Shield  is  not  written 


Xow,  indeed,  we  see  that 


k< 


but 


whicli  would  read  Kentahebi  ;  nevertheless  it  seems  to  nie 
to  have  meant  that  famous  name,  and  that  the  question- 
able sign  merely  has  been  changed  by  the  ignorant  scribes. 
The  determinative  signs  ^'^  prove,  at  least,  that  it  is 
the  name  of  a  Queen.  The  name  of  Candace  was  known 
even  at  an  earlier  period  as  that  of  a  private  person.  The 
name  of  Eegamenes  is  likewise  found,  and  this  also  written 
sometimes  correctly,  sometimes  with  mistaken  variation. 

We  kindled  Easter  bonfires  on  the  evenings  of  the  suc- 
ceeding holidays.  Our  tents  are  situated  between  two 
groups  of  Pyramids  in  a  small  hollow  of  the  vallej^,  which  is 
everywhere  covered  with  dry  tufts  of  a  woody  grass.  "We 
lighted  this  all  about  us ;  it  blazed  up  high,  and  flung  the 
whirling  flames  upwards  into  the  dark  starry  night.  The 
spectacle  of  fifty  or  sixty  such  fires  burning  at  once  in  the 
valley  was  beautiful ;  they  threw  a  ghost-like  light  on  the 
half-crumbled  Pyramids  of  the  old  kings  ranged  on  the  emi- 
nences round,  and  on  our  airy  tent-pyramids  rising  in  the 
foreground. 

We  were  surprised  on  the  8th  of  April  by  seeing  a  mag- 
nificent cavalcade  of  horses  and  camels,  which  appeared 
within  our  camp.  It  was  Osman  Bet,  who,  as  the  chief  in 
command,  is  leading  back  the  army  of  5000  men  from  Taka. 
The  French  military  surgeon,  Peney,  was  in  his  suite,  besides 
the  Chief  Sheikh  Ahmed  welled  'Auad.  The  troops  had 
encamped  near  Gabuschie,  one  hour  farther  up  the  river,  and 
were  to  pass  through  Beg'erauieh  in  the  evening.     The  visit 


OSMAN  EET.  197 

to  our  camp  had,  however,  another  object,  which  was  soon 
disclosed  in  the  course  of  conversation.     Osman  Bey  was 
desirous  of  making  treasure-diggers  out  of  his  pioneers,  and 
of  ordering  some  battalions  to  come  hither,  to  pull  down  a 
number  of  Pyramids.     The  discovery  of  Terlim  is  still  re- 
membered by  most  people,  and  has  since  that  time  caused 
the  ruin  of  many  Pyramids.     They  were  also  full  of  it  at 
Chartum,  and  more  than  one  European,  besides  the  Pascha 
himself,  imagined  they  might  still  find  treasures  there.     I 
constantly  endeavoured  to  prove  to  them  all,  that  the  dis- 
covery of  Ferlini  was  pure  chance,  that  he  had  not  found 
tlie  gold  rings  in  the  sepulchral  chambers  with  the  mummies, 
where  they  alone  might  reasonably  have  been  searched  for 
with  any  hope  of  success,  but  walled  up  in  the  stone,  in  which 
place  they  had  been  concealed  by  a  whim  of  the  owner.     I 
endeavoured  to  convince  Osman  Bey  of  this  also,  who  even 
offered  me  the  aid  of  his  companies  of  soldiers  to  conduct 
the  work  of  destruction.     I  naturally  declined  this,  though 
perhaps  I  should  have  accepted  it  for  the  sake  of  laying 
open  to  view  the  sepulchral  chambers,  which  necessarily  must 
have  their  entrance  in  front  of  the  P3'ramids  in  the  natural 
rock,  had  I  not  feared  that  here  also  we  might  not  arrive  at 
any  brilliant  result,   and  even  if  our  own  expectations  were 
not  so,  yet  those  of  the  credulous  general  might  be  bitterly 
disappointed.     I  succeeded  in  diverting  him  from  his  idea, 
and  thus  for  the  present,  at  least,  the  existing  Pyramids  have 
been  saved.      The    soldiers  have  departed  without   having 
made  war  on  the  Pyramids. 

I  invited  the  three  gentlemen  to  dine  with  us,  which 
placed  the  old  Sheikh  in  some  embarrassment,  for  he  was 
always  trying  to  cut  the  meat  with  the  back  of  his  knife,  till 
at  length  I  myself  laid  aside  the  European  implements,  and 
began  to  eat  in  good  Turkish  fashion  ;  my  example  was  soon 
followed  willingly  by  the  rest  of  the  company,  especially  by 
our  excellent  dark-skinned  guest,  who  did  not  foil  to  observe 
my  polite   attention.      After   dinner   they   again  mounted 


198  TURKISH  AEMT. 

their  sumptuously-caparisoned  animals,  and  the  procession 
hastened  towards  the  river. 

On  the  9th  of  April,  I  sent  Franke  and  Ibrahim  Aga  to 
Ben  Naga,  with  stone-saws,  hammers,  and  ropes,  to  trans- 
port the  great  altar  to  this  spot.  I  myself  rode  with  Jussuf 
to  Gabuschie,  partly  to  return  the  visit  of  Osman  Bey,  who 
had  intended  to  give  the  soldiers  a  day  of  rest  in  our  neigh- 
bourhood, partly  to  take  advantage  of  the  presence  of  the  dis- 
tinguished Sheikh  Ahmed,  through  whose  interest  I  hoped 
to  procure  boats  to  carry  us  across  the  river,  and  camels  for 
the  desert  journey  that  we  had  in  prospect.  The  army  had, 
however,  already  decamped,  and  had  passed  the  first  places 
on  the  road.  I  therefore  rode  after  them  with  Jussuf  in  a 
brisk  trot,  and  soon  overtook  the  400  Aruauts  who  formed 
the  rear.  They  were  not,  however,  able  to  inform  us  how 
far  Osman  Bey  was  in  advance.  The  Arnauts  are  the 
soldiers  most  dreaded  in  the  whole  country  for  brutality 
and  cruelty,  who  at  the  same  time  are  treated  with  most 
indulgence  by  their  leaders,  because  they  are  the  only 
troops  who  serve  voluntarily,  and  the  only  foreigners  taken 
into  pay.  It  is  but  a  few  months  ago  since  they  were  sent 
to  the  late  Ahmed  Pascha  by  Mohammed  Ali,  under  an 
ofiicer  who  was  peculiarly  feared,  with  the  order,  as  it  is 
said,  to  bring  the  Pascha,  dead  or  alive,  to  Cairo.  The  sud- 
den death  of  the  Pascha  at  all  events  released  him  from  his 
commission.  The  name  of  that  officer  is  Omar  Aga,  but  he  is 
kno  7^n  througli  the  whole  country  by  the  not  very  flattering 
appellation  of  Tomus  Aga  (Commandant  Cochon)  which 
was  once  given  him  by  Ibrahim  Pascha,  and  which,  since 
that  time,  he  liimself  thinks  it  an  honour  to  bear.  His  own 
attendants,  w^hen  we  overtook  his  horses  and  baggage,  and 
inquired  after  their  master,  called  him  by  this  name.  After 
riding  briskly  for  about  five  or  six  hours  in  the  most  op- 
pressive heat,  we  at  length  reached  the  camp  at  the  village 
of  Beida. 

We  had  by  degrees  gone  more  than  half-way  to  Schendi, 


WAE  AVITH  TAKA.  199 

and  were  rejoiced  at  the  near  prospect  of  finding  some  re- 
freshment, after  the  exhaustion  of  the  hot  ride  ;  for  we  had 
iibeady  made  up  our  minds  to  fast,  till  our  return  in  the 
evening,  as  there  was  absolutely  nothing  that  we  could  eat 
in  the  villages  between ;  there  was  not  even  milk  to  be  had. 

Osman  Bey  and  Hakim  Peney  were  as  much  surprised  a& 
delighted  at  my  visit ;  some  bowls  of  Suri  were  immediately 
brought  for  our  refreshment — a  beverage  which  undergoes  a 
slow  and  troublesome  process  of  preparation,  from  half- 
fermented  Durra ;  it  is  an  agreeable  acid,  and,  especially  with 
sugar,  has  a  most  excellent  and  refreshing  taste.  After  our 
breakfiist,  I  went  through  the  camp  with  Peney.  The  tents 
were  pitched  along  the  river  in  the  most  picturesque  variety 
of  groups,  on  a  great  space  of  ground  here  and  there  scat- 
tered over  with  trees  and  thicket,  and  completely  sur- 
rounded by  it.  An  Egyptian  army,  composed  half  of  blacks 
and  half  of  whites,  most  of  them  in  tatters,  returning  in 
forced  marches  from  a  depredatory  expedition  against  the 
poor  natives,  presents,  indeed,  a  verj'  different  aspect  from 
what  we  are  accustomed  to  witness  at  home.  Although  the 
intimidated  population  of  Taka,  for  the  most  part  innocent 
of  individual  revolt,  had  already  sent  messengers  to  the 
Pascha,  to  avert  his  vengeance,  and  moreover,  on  the  ap- 
proach of  the  troops,  had  not  offered  the  slightest  resistance, 
nevertheless,  several  hundred  unarmed  men  and  women,  who 
either  would  not,  or  could  not  fly,  were  murdered  by  that 
notorious  troop  of  Arnauts ;  and  Ahmed  Pascha  caused  a 
number  of  other  men,  who  were  believed  to  have  been  con- 
cerned in  the  insm-rcctiou,  as  they  were  each  led  before  him, 
to  be  beheaded  in  front  of  his  tent.  Then,  after  aU  the 
conditions  that  were  imposed  had  been  fulfilled,  and  the 
heavy  contributions  which  had  been  required  from  them 
under  every  variety  of  pretext  had  been  also  correctly  paid, 
the  Pascha  caused  all  the  Sheikhs  to  assemble  at  once,  as  if 
for  a  fresh  conference,  but  forthwith  had  them  all  put  in 
fetters,  together  with  120  other  people,  and  led  away  as 
prisoners.     The  young  and  strong  men  were  to  be  placed 


200  PEISONEES  TEOM  TAKA. 

among  the  troops,  tlie  women  handed  over  to  the  soldiers  as 
slaves ;  the  Sheikhs  were  reserved  for  punishment  till  a  later 
day. 

This  was  the  glorious  history  of  the  Turkish  campaign 
against  Taka,  as  it  was  related  to  me  by  the  European  eye- 
witnesses. Already  twelve  among  the  forty-one  Sheikhs 
who  were  carried  away,  and  were  nearly  sinking  under  the 
fatigue  of  the  marches,  have  been  shot  on  the  road.  The 
others  were  exhibited  to  me  singly.  Each  of  them  carried 
before  him  the  stem  of  a  tree  as  thick  as  a  man's  arm,  about 
five  or  six  feet  long,  which  terminated  in  a  fork,  into  which 
the  neck  was  fixed.  The  prongs  of  the  fork  were  bound 
together  by  a  cross-piece  of  wood,  fastened  with  a  strap. 
Some  of  their  hands,  also,  were  tied  fast  to  the  handle  of  the 
fork,  and  in  this  condition  they  remain  day  and  night. 
During  the  march,  the  soldier  who  is  specially  appointed  to 
overlook  the  prisoner,  carries  the  end  of  the  pole :  in  the 
night  most  of  them  have  their  feet  also  pinioned  together. 
All  of  them  had  had  their  black  curls  shaven  off.  The 
Sheikhs  alone  still  wore  their  large  head-dress  of  braids  or 
curls.  Most  of  them  looked  very  depressed  and  miserable ; 
they  had  been  the  most  distinguished  of  their  nation,  and 
had  been  accustomed  to  be  treated  by  those  they  com- 
manded, with  the  greatest  reverence.  They  almost  all  spoke 
Arabic,  beside  their  own  language,  and  mentioned  to  me  the 
tribes  to  which  they  severally  belonged.  But  the  most  distin- 
guished of  all  of  them  was  a  Eakir,  who  was  held  sacred ; 
his  word  had  been  regarded  like  that  of  a  prophet  through- 
out the  whole  land,  and,  by  his  oracular  sayings  and  ex- 
hortations, he  had  been  chiefly  instrumental  in  causing  the 
whole  revolution.  He  was  called  Sheikh  Musa  el  Eakib, 
and  was  of  the  tribe  of  the  Mitkenabs.  I  found  him  an  old, 
blind,  broken-down,  hoary  man,  with  a  few  snow-white 
hairs ;  his  body  was  already  more  like  a  skeleton  ;  he  was 
obliged  to  be  raised  up  by  others,  and  was  scarcely  able  to 
hear  and  answer  the  questions  which  were  addressed  to  him. 
His  little,  shrivelled  face,  was  incapable  of  any  new  ex- 


LANGUAGE  OF  TAKA.  201 

pression  corresponding  to  the  present  circumstances.  He 
looked  forwards  with  a  fixed  and  indiiFerent  stare,  and  I  was 
surprised  how  such  a  shadow  could  have  still  exercised  so 
much  influence  on  the  minds  of  his  fellow-countrymen  as  to 
excite  a  revolution.  Yet  it  is  remarkable  that,  both  in 
Egypt  and  everywhere  about  here,  blind  people  have  an 
especial  reputation  for  sanctity,  and  are  held  in  great  re- 
spect as  Prophets. 

After  breakfast  I  had  one  of  the  captured  Sheikhs,  Mo- 
hammed welled  Hammed,  brought  to  the  tent  of  Osman, 
that  I  might  question  him  about  his  language,  of  which  I 
was  still  perfectly  ignorant.  He  was  an  intelligent,  well- 
spoken  man,  who  at  once  took  advantage  of  the  opportunity 
which  I  readily  granted  him,  to  relate  his  history  to  Osman 
Bey  and  Sheikh  Ahmed,  and  to  assure  them  of  his  innocence 
of  the  revolutionary  events.  He  belonged  to  the  tribe  of 
the  Halenka,  from  the  village  of  Kassala.  I  made  him  give 
me  the  lists  of  the  forty-one  Sheikhs  and  their  tribes,  and 
liad  them  written  down.  Six  tribes  had  taken  part  in  tlie 
insurrection — the  Mitkenab,  Halenka,  Keluli,  Mohammedin, 
Sobeh,  Sikulab,  and  Hadenduwa  (plur.  from  Henduwa). 

All  the  tribes  of  Taka  speak  the  same  language;  but  only 
a  few  of  them  also  understand  the  Arabic.  I  suspect  that  it 
is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Bischari  tribes.  It  has  many,  and 
well-distributed  vowels,  and  is  very  euphonous,  as  it  is  with- 
out the  hard  guttural  sound  of  the  Arabs.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  has  a  pecidiar  alphabetical  letter,  which  to  our  ear 
seems  to  stand  between  r,  I,  and  d ;  2.  cerebral  d,  which,  like 
the  Sanscrit,  is  pronounced  by  throwing  back  the  point  of 
the  tongue  upwards. 

After  our  examination  of  the  Sheikh  it  had  become  too 
late  to  set  out  again ;  night  would  have  overtaken  me,  and 
especially  on  camel-back,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  the  dan- 
gerous branches  of  the  thorny  trees.  I  therefore  complied 
with  the  invitation  to  spend  the  night  in  the  camp,  till  the 
rising  of  the  moon ;  Osmnn  Bey  would  then  at  the  same 
time  start   in  the   opposite  direction  with  the   army.     A 


202  CUSTOMS  IN  SOUTHEEIf  PEOYINCES. 

whole  sheep  was  roasted  on  the  spit,  which  we  eat  with  a 
hearty  appetite. 

I  learnt  from  Osman  Bey  about  many  interesting  customs 
of  the  most  southern  provinces,  as  for  the  last  sixteen  years 
he  has  been  living  here  in  the  south,  and  has  an  accurate 
knowledge  of  the  country,  to  the  extreme  limits  of  Mo- 
hammed All's  government.  It  is  still  the  custom  in  Fazoql 
to  hang  a  king  who  is  no  longer  beloved,  which  occurred 
only  a  few  years  ago  to  the  father  of  the  present  reigning 
monarch.  His  relatives  and  ministers  assemble  round  him, 
and  announce  to  liim  that  as  he  no  longer  pleases  the  men 
and  women  of  the  country,  the  oxen,  asses,  and  fowls,  &c., 
&c.,  but  is  detested  by  all,  it  is  better  that  he  should  die. 
Once  upon  a  time,  when  a  king  did  not  wish  to  submit  to 
this  practice,  his  own  wife  and  mother  made  the  most  press- 
ing remonstrances  to  him,  not  to  load  himself  with  still 
greater  disgrace,  upon  which  he  yielded  to  his  fate.  Dio- 
dorus  narrates  exactly  the  same  resignation  to  death  in  those 
who  in  Ethiopia  were  to  die  by  judicial  verdict ;  a  person 
who  had  been  condemned,  and  who  had  at  first  intended  to 
save  himself  by  flight,  had  nevertheless  allowed  himself  to 
be  strangled  without  resistance  by  his  mother,  who  had 
obstructed  him  in  his  design.  Osman  Bey  has  only  lately, 
he  assures  me  himself,  abolished  the  custom  there  of  burying 
old  people  alive,  when  they  become  feeble.  A  pit  used  to  be 
dug  and  a  horizontal  passage  at  the  end  of  it,  and  the  body 
laid  within,  like  that  of  a  dead  person,  firmly  swathed  in 
cloths  ;  by  his  side  they  placed  a  bowl  with  merisa,  fermented 
Durra  water,  a  pipe,  and  a  hoe,  to  cultivate  the  land ;  also, 
according  to  the  wealth  of  the  individual,  one  or  two  ounces 
of  gold,  to  pay  the  ferryman  who  must  convey  the  deceased 
across  the  great  river  which  flows  between  heaven  and  hell. 
The  entrance  is  then  filled  up  with  rubbish.  Indeed,  ac- 
cording to  Osman,  the  whole  legend  of  Charon,  even  with  a 
Cerberus,  appears  still  to  exist  here. 

This  custom  of  burying  old  people  alive  also  exists,  as  I 
afterwards  heard,  among  the  negro  tribes  to  the  south  of 


CUSTOMS  IX  SOL'THEEX  PEOYIilfCES.  203 

Kordofan.  Invalids  and  cripples,  those  especially  who  have 
an  infectious  malady,  are  there  also  put  to  death  in  a  similar 
manner.  The  family  complains  to  the  sick  man,  that  be- 
cause of  him,  no  one  will  come  near  them  any  longer ;  that 
he  himself  is  wretclied,  and  death  would  be  only  a  gain  for 
him;  that  he  would  again  find  his  relations  in  the  other 
world,  and  would  be  in  health  and  happiness  there.  They 
charge  him  with  kind  messages  to  all  the  deceased,  and  then 
hwry  him  either  as  they  do  in  Fazoql,  or  standing  upright  in 
a  pit.  Besides  merisa,  bread,  a  hoe,  and  a  pipe,  he  is  there 
given  a  sword  and  two  pairs  of  sandals,  for  the  deceased 
live  in  the  otlier  world  just  as  they  do  here  on  earth,  only 
in  greater  happiness. 

The  dead  are  buried  with  loud  lamentations,  while  their 
iictions  and  good  qualities  are  extolled.  Nothing  is  there 
known  of  a  river  and  ferryman  of  the  lower  world,  but  tliey 
are  acquainted  A\-ith  the  old  Mohammedan  legend  of  the 
invisible  angel  Asrael,  or  as  he  was  here  called  Osrain.  He 
is  commissioned  by  Grod,  as  they  say,  to  receive  the  souls  of 
the  dead,  and  to  conduct  the  good  to  the  place  of  reward, 
the  bad  to  that  of  punishment.  He  dwells  upon  a  tree,  el 
Segerat  JMohana  (the  Tree  of  Completion),  which  has  as 
many  leaves  as  there  are  living  men.  There  is  a  name  upon 
every  leaf,  and  a  new  one  grows  whenever  a  child  is  born. 
If  any  one  sickens,  his  leaf  fades,  and  should  he  die,  Osrain 
breaks  it  off.  In  former  times  he  used  to  come  in  a  visible 
form  to  those  whom  he  was  going  to  carry  away  from  the 
earth,  and  thereby  put  them  in  a  great  fright.  Since  the 
days  of  the  Prophet  he  has  been  invisible,  for  when  he  came 
to  fetch  the  soul  of  Mohammed,  the  latter  told  him  that  it 
was  not  good  that  he  should  terrify  mankind  by  his  visible 
appearance ;  they  might  then  easily  die  of  fright  without 
having  previously  prayed;  for  he  himself,  although  very 
courageous,  and  a  man  of  enlarged  mind,  had  been  terrified 
by  his  appearance.  The  Prophet,  therefore,  prayed  to  God 
that  he  would  make  Osrain  invisible,  and  the  prayer  was 
heard. 


204< 


OSMAN  EEY. 


Osman  Bey  told  me  that  among  some  otber  tribes  in 
Fazoql,  the  king  was  obliged  to  administer  justice  daily  be- 
neath a  certain  tree.  If  on  account  of  sickness,  or  from  any 
other  mishap,  which  renders  him  unfit,  he  does  not  make  his 
appearance  for  three  whole  days,  he  is  hung  up.  Two  razors 
are  placed  in  the  noose,  and  when  this  is  draAvn  tight,  they 
cut  the  throat  across. 

The  meaning  of  another  of  their  customs  is  quite  obscure. 
At  a  certain  time  of  the  year  they  have  a  kind  of  car- 
nival, where  every  one  does  what  he  likes  best.  Four  minis- 
ters of  the  king  then  bear  him  on  an  anqareb  out  of  his 
house  to  an  open  space  of  ground  ;  a  dog  is  fastened  by  a  long 
cord  to  one  of  the  feet  of  the  anqareb.  The  whole  popula- 
tion collects  round  the  place,  streaming  in  on  every  side. 
They  then  throw  darts  and  stones  at  the  dog,  till  he  is  killed, 
after  which  the  king  is  again  borne  into  his  house. 

Amidst  these  and  other  tales  and  accounts  of  those  tribes, 
which  were  besides  confirmed  by  the  old  Chief  Sheikh  Ahmed, 
we  feasted  on  the  roasted  sheep  in  the  open  air  in  front 
of  the  tent.  [N'ight  was  somewhat  advanced,  and  the  near 
and  distant  camp-fires,  with  the  people  busy  around  them, 
either  squatting  about,  or  walking  up  and  down  between 
groups  of  trees,  had  an  extremely  picturesque  and  unique 
efiect.  Gradually  they  all  became  extinguished,  with  the 
exception  of  the  watch-fire  ;  the  poor  prisoners  scattered 
here  and  there,  had  their  legs  fastened  still  more  tightly 
together,  and  it  became  quieter  in  the  camp. 

Osman  Bey  is  a  strong,  cheerful  man,  with  natural  man- 
ners, and  at  the  same  time  a  strict  and  valued  ofiicer.  He 
promised  to  give  me  a  slight  proof  of  the  discipline  and  good 
order  among  his  soldiers,  whose  external  appearance  did  not 
prejudice  me  very  much  in  their  favour  by  an  unexpected 
reveille.  I  was  sleeping  on  an  anqareb  in  the  open  tent, 
covered  with  a  soldier's  cloak.  About  three  o'clock  in  the 
morning  I  was  awoke  by  a  slight  noise  ;  Osman  Bey,  who  lay 
beside  me  on  the  ground,  got  up,  and  ordered  the  nearest 
drummer  of  the  chief  watch  to  beat  the  reveille.     He  made 


DEPAETUEE  TEOiT  CAMP.  205 

a  few,  short,  interrupted  beats  of  the  drum,  quickly  sinkiug 
again  into  silence.  These  were  immediately  repeated  at  the 
post  of  the  next  regiment,  then  at  the  third,  fourth,  and  fifth,  in 
various,  always  more  distant,  positions  of  the  camp  ;  and  sud- 
denly the  whole  mass  of  5000  men  rose  up  and  stood  to  their 
arms.  Nothing  was  to  be  heard  but  a  soft  whispering  and  rust- 
ling of  the  soldiers,  who  were  rousing  each  otlier,  and  the  faint 
clank  of  the  weapons,  which  were  cautiously  separated  from 
one  another.  I  went  through  the  camp  with  Dr.  Peney, 
who  came  across  to  me  from  the  adjoining  tent,  and  in  a  verv 
few  minutes  we  found  the  whole  army  under  arms,  arranged 
in  ranks,  tlie  officers  marching  up  and  down  in  front.  On 
our  return,  after  we  had  related  to  Osman  Bey  the  wonder- 
fully punctual  execution  of  his  commands,  he  allowed  the 
soldiers  to  separate  again,  and  did  not  give  the  signal  for 
the  breaking  up  of  the  camp  before  four  o'clock.  That  pro- 
duced a  very  different  efiect :  all  were  quiclily  in  movement 
and  activity  ;  the  abominable  gurgling  and  miserable  roar- 
ing of  the  camels  was  heard  above  everything  during  the 
packing  up ;  the  tents  were  taken  down,  and  in  less  than  half 
an  hour  the  army  marched  southwards  with  pipe  and  drum. 
I  started  in  an  opposite  direction.  The  early  morning 
with  the  briglit  moonlight  was  very  refreshing  ;  the  birds 
awoke  with  the  dawn  of  day,  a  cool  wind  rose,  and  we  trotted 
quickly  through  the  thorny  sont-trees.  Soon  after  sunrise 
we  met  a  magnificent  procession  of  well-dressed  men,  and 
attendants,  on  camels  and  asses.  It  was  the  King  Mahmud 
welled  Schauisch,  whose  father,  the  warlike  Schauisch,  King 
of  the  Schaiqies,  is  well  known  in  the  conquering  expedition 
oi  Ismael  Pascha,  to  whom  he  did  not  submit  for  a  long 
time,  and  at  whose  house  in  Hellet  e'  Solimau,  near  Messele- 
mieh,  we  had  stopped  a  few  weeks  ago.  He  had  gone  with 
Ahmed  Pascha  Menekle  to  Taka,  and  followed  the  army  to 
Halfai,  where  he  now  usually  resides.  About  half-past  nine 
we  again  reached  the  Pyramids.  My  camel,  a  young  one, 
and  very  difficult  to  manage,  shortly  before,  took  fright  in  the 
plain,  and  ran  round  in  a  circle  with  me  as  if  it  was  mad;  at 


206  PTEAMIDS  OF  MEEOE. 

length,  stumbUng  over  a  tall  bunch  of  grass,  it  fell  on  one 
knee,  and  hurled  me  far  over  its  head,  happily  without  doing 
me  any  serious  injury. 

On  my  return  I  occupied  myself,  without  interruption, 
with  the  Pyramids  and  their  inscriptions.  I  had  several 
more  chambers  excavated,  and  made  an  exact  description  of 
each  individual  Pyramid.  Altogether,  I  have  found  about 
thirty  different  names  of  Ethiopian  kings  and  queens.  I 
have  certainly  not  yet  been  able  to  bring  them  into  any 
chronological  order,  but  from  a  comparison  of  the  different 
inscriptions,  I  have  learnt  much  about  the  manner  of  the  suc- 
cession, and  form  of  government.  The  King  of  Meeoe  (whose 
name  in  one  of  the  most  southern  Pyramids  is  written  Meetj, 
or  Meetja,)  was  at  the  same  time  first  Priest  of  Amnion ;  if 
his  consort  survived  him,  she  succeeded  him  in  the  govern- 
ment, and  the  male  heirs  to  the  throne  only  took  the  second 
place  beside  her ;  if  the  reverse  happened,  the  son,  as  it 
appears,  succeeded,  who,  even  in  the  lifetime  of  his  father, 
bore  the  royal  shields  and  titles,  and  was  second  Priest  of 
Ammon.  Thus  we  still  see  here  the  domination  of  the 
priests,  which  is  spoken  of  by  Diodorus  and  Strabo,  and  the 
pre-eminence  of  the  worship  of  Ammon,  which  is  even  men- 
tioned by  Herodotus. 

The  inscriptions  on  the  P>Tamids  show  that,  at  the  period 
of  their  erection,  the  hieroglyphic  writing  was  no  longer 
perfectly  understood,  and  that  the  hieroglyphic  signs  were 
often  only  added  as  a  customary  ornament,  without  wishing  to 
express  anything  by  them.  Even  the  kings'  names  are 
thereby  rendered  uncertain,  and  this  for  a  long  time  pre- 
vented me  from  recognising  the  three  royal  personages  who 
built  the  chief  temples  in  Naga,  Ben  Naga,  and  in  "Wadi 
Temed,  and  who  undoubtedly  belonged  to  one  of  the  most 
brilliant  periods  of  the  Merbitic  Monarchy.  I  am  now  con- 
vinced that  the  Pyramids  with  Eoman  arched  ante-chambers, 
in  the  brick- work  of  which  Eerlini  found  the  treasure  con- 
cealed, in  spite  of  slight  alterations  in  the  name,  belonged  to 
the   same  mighty  and  warlike  queen  who  appears  in  Naga 


ETHIOPIAX  lySCEIPTIOXS.  207 

with  her  rich  decorations,  and  her  pointed  nails  almost  an 
inch  long.  By  the  circumstance  of  their  liaving  belonged  to 
a  well-known,  and,  as  it  appears,  the  greatest  of  all  the  queens 
of  Meroe,  who  built  almost  all  the  temples  still  in  tolerable 
preservation  on  the  island,  Ferlini's  jewels  become  infinitely 
more  valuable  for  the  history  of  Ethiopian  art,  in  which 
they  now  occupy  a  fixed  position.  The  purchase  of  that 
remarkable  discovery  is  a  most  important  acquisition  to  our 
museum. 

An  Etldopian-demotic  writing  was  more  in  use  at  that 
period,  and  more  generally  understood  than  hieroglyphics. 
It  was  similar  to  the  Eg}'ptian-demotic  in  its  characters, 
although  consisting  of  a  very  limited  alphabet  of  between 
twenty-five  and  thirty  signs.  The  writing,  like  the  latter,  is 
read  from  right  to  left,  but  is  distinguished  by  a  constant 
separation  of  the  words  by  two  strongly-marked  points.  I 
have  already  found  six-and-twenty  similar  demotic  inscrip- 
tions ;  some  of  them  on  steles  and  libation-tablets  ;  some  of 
them  in  the  ante-chambers  of  the  Pyramids,  over  the  persons 
belonging  to  the  processions,  who  usually  go  to  meet  the 
deceased  king  with  palm-branches;  some  of  them  on  the 
smooth  surfaces  of  the  Pyramids ;  and  indeed  always  in  such 
a  state,  that  they  are  clearly  proved  to  have  belonged  ori- 
ginally to  the  representations,  and  not  to  have  been  added  at 
a  later  period.  On  a  closer  examination  of  this  writing,  it 
will  not  perhaps  be  difficidt  to  decipher,  and  we  should  then 
obtain  the  first  certain  sounds  of  the  Ethiopian  language 
spoken  here  at  that  period,  and  could  decide  on  its  true 
relation  to  the  Egyptian  language,  while  the  almost  perfect 
agreement  between  the  Ethiopian  and  Egyptian  hierogly- 
phics have  hitherto  yielded  no  conclusive  evidence  that  there 
is  an  equal  accordance  between  the  two  languages.  It  seems, 
on  the  contrary,  and  with  respect  to  the  later  Meroitic  period 
may  be  safelv  affirmed,  that  the  hieroglyphics,  as  the  sacred 
monumental  writing,  were  adopted  from  Egypt  without  altera- 
tion, but  also  without  being  perfectly  understood.  The  few 
signs  which  constantly  recur,  prove  that  the  Ethiopian-demotic 


208  ETHI0PIA>'S  or  MEEOE. 

writing  is  purely  alphabetic,  wliich  must  very  much  facilitate 
the  deciphering  of  it.  The  separation  in  the  words  has  per- 
haps been  borrowed  from  the  Eoman  writing.  But  its 
analogy  with  the  Egyptian  development  of  writing  went  still 
further;  for  next  to  this  Ethiopian-demotic  writing  there  is 
an  EtJiiopian- Greek,  at  a  later  period,  which  may  be  per- 
fectly compared  with  the  Coptic,  and  it  has  borrowed  certain 
letters  directly  from  it.  It  is  found  in  the  inscriptions  of 
Soba,  and  in  some  others  on  the  walls  of  the  temple-ruins  of 
"Wadi  e'  Sofra.  We  have  therefore  now,  as  in  the  case  in 
Egypt,  two  modes  of  writing,  which  no  doubt  sprang  up  one 
after  the  other,  and  really  cojitain  the  actual  Ethiopian  dialect 
of  the  country.  It  is  now  usual  to  call  the  ancient  Abys- 
sinian Geez  language  the  Ethiopian,  which,  with  the  charac- 
teristics of  a  Semetic  language  that  has  immigrated  from 
Arabia,  has  only  a  local,  but  no  ethnographic  claim  on  our 
attention.  A  Geez  inscription,  which  1  have  found  in  the 
chamber  of  a  Pyramid,  htis  evidently  been  written  down  at  a 
later  period. 

I  hope  that  we  shall  obtain  many  important  results  from 
studying  the  native  inscriptions,  as  well  as  the  present  living 
languages.  The  Ethiopian  name  comprehended  much  that 
was  dissimilar  among  the  ancients.  The  ancient  population 
of  the  whole  Nile  valley  as  far  as  Chartum,  and  perhaps, 
also,  along  the  Blue  River,  as  well  as  the  tribes  of  the  desert 
to  tiie  east  of  the  Nile,  and  the  Abyssinian  nations,  were  in 
former  times  probably  more  distinctly  separated  from  the 
Negroes  than  now,  and  belonged  to  the  Caucasian  race.  The 
Ethiopians  of  Meroe  (according  to  Herodotus,  the  parent- 
state  of  all  Ethiopia)  were  a  red-brown  people,  similar  to  the 
Egyptians,  but  darker,  as  they  are  at  the  present  day.  The 
monuments  also  prove  this,  on  which  1  have  more  than  once 
found  the  red  colour  of  the  skin  in  the  kings  and  queens  pre- 
served. In  Egypt,  especially  in  the  Old  Monarchy,  before 
the  mixture  with  the  Ethiopian  race,  at  the  period  of  the 
llvksos,  the  women  were  always  painted  yellow;  and  the 
Egyptian  women  even  now,  who  are  blanched  in  the  harem, 


MARtJGA.  209 

incline  to  the  same  colour.  But  red  women  appear  even 
after  the  18th  Dynasty,  and  the  Ethiopian  women  were 
always  so  represented.  It  appears  that  much  Ethiopian 
blood  is  mingled  with  the  nation  of  the  so-called  Barabras, 
so  widely  distributed  at  the  present  day,  and  this  perhaps 
will  also  one  day  appear  still  more  distinctly  from  their  lan- 
guage. This,  no  doubt,  is  the  ancient  Nubian,  and  has  been 
still  retained  in  somewhat  distant  regions  to  the  south-west 
under  tliis  name;  for  the  Nuba  languages  in  and  round 
Kordofan,  as  can  be  proved,  are  partly  related  to  the  Berber 
language.  I  have  also  found  indications  in  the  local  names 
that  this  last,  which  is  only  now  spoken  from  Assuan  to  Dar 
Schaiqieh,  south  of  Dongola,  in  the  Nile  valley,  predomi- 
nated for  a  long  while  also  in  the  province  of  Berber,  and 
still  higher  up. 

Maruga,  Danqeleh,  and  e'  Sue,  are  close  to  the  ruins  of 
the  city  of  Meroe,  and  are  situated  along  the  river  from 
south  to  north ;  all  three  are  comprehended  under  the  name 
of  Begerauieh,  so  that  we  scarcely  ever  hear  anything  but 
this  last  name  mentioned.  Five  minutes  to  the  north  of 
e'  Sur  lies  the  village  of  Qala,  and  ten  minutes  farther  on 
El  Gues,  both  of  which  are  comprehended  under  the  name  of 
Gliabine.  One  hour  down  the  river  there  are  two  other 
villages,  not  far  apart,  called  Maruga,  which  were  deserted 
even  before  the  conquest  of  the  country ;  and  still  more  to 
the  north,  close  to  the  Omarab  Mountains,  which  project 
towards  the  river  on  the  eastern  bank,  there  is  a  third  village 
called  Gebel  (mountain  village)  inhabited  only  by  Fukaras. 
Cailliaud  knew  only  the  most  southern  of  the  three  Marugas, 
situated  near  the  largest  temple-ruins.  He  was  struck  by 
the  name,  on  account  of  its  similarity  with  that  of  Meroe. 
The  similarity  becomes  still  more  evident  when  it  is  known 
that  the  real  name  is  Maru,  since  -ga  is  only  the  universal 
termination  to  names,  and  is  always  either  added  or  omitted, 
according  to  the  grammatical  combination,  for  it  does  not 
belong  to  the  root  of  the  word.  In  the  dialect  of  Ken  us  and 
Dongola  this  termination  is  -Gi;  in  the  dialect  of  Mahass 

P 


210  2fAGA. 

and  Sukkot  it  is  -ga.  When  I  ran  over  the  different  Local 
names  of  the  upper  countries  with  one  of  our  Berber  servants, 
I  learnt  that  in  one  dialect  maro  or  marogi,  in  tlie  other 
maru  or  maruga,  means  "mounds  of  ruins,"  "destroyed 
temples ;"  thus,  for  example,  the  ruins  of  ancient  Syene,  or 
those  on  the  island  of  Philse,  are  called  marogi.  There  is 
another  Berber  word  quite  distinct  from  this,  merua,  which 
is  also  pronounced  meraui,  by  which  all  white  rocks,  white 
stones,  are  designated ;  as,  for  example,  such  a  rock  as  occurs 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Assuan,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the 
Nile,  at  the  village  of  El  Gezii-et.  By  this  it  is  evident  that 
the  apellation  Maruga  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  name  of 
Meroe,  as  a  town  would  not  be  called  when  first  founded  "  ruin 
city."  On  the  other  hand,  the  name  of  Merua,  Meraui  (in 
German,  Weissenfels,  white  rock),  would  be  very  appropriate 
for  a  towTi,  if  its  local  position  gave  occasion  to  it,  as  at 
Mount  Barkal,  but  which,  again,  is  not  really  the  case  here. 


LETTEE  XXI. 

Keli,  opposite  Meroe,  the  29th  April. 
Ebanke  did  not  return  from  his  expedition  to  Ben  Naga 
before  the  23rd  instant.  He  brought  the  altar  here,  on  a 
boat,  in  sixteen  blocks.  All  the  stones  taken  together,  which 
we  must  carry  along  with  us  on  the  difficult  journey  of  six 
or  seven  days  across  the  desert,  form  a  load  for  about  twenty 
camels,  so  that  our  train  will  be  considerably  longer  than 
before.  Unfortunately,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  the 
means  of  transport,  we  have  been  unable  to  take  anything 
away  with  us  from  Naga  in  the  desert,  except  a  Eoman  in- 
scription, mentioned  above,  and  a  great  Clavis  Nilotiea, 
peculiarly  carved.  Some  very  strange  representations  are  to 
be  seen  there ;  among  others,  a  figure  sitting  frontways,  a 
crown  of  rays  over  the  floating  hair,  the  left  arm  raised  at  a 
right  angle,  and  the  fore-finger  and  middle-finger  of  the  hand 


FUXEEAL  IN  KELI.  211 

stretching  upwards,  as  is  represented  in  the  old  Byzantine 
figures  of  Christ.  The  right  hand  holds  a  long  staff  resting 
on  the  ground,  as  John  the  Baptist  usually  holds  it.  This 
figure  is  totally  different  from  the  Egyptian  representations, 
and  no  doubt  is  borrowed  elsewhere,  as  well  as  another  god 
who  frequently  appears,  also  represented  frontwise,  with  a 
richly  curling  beard  ;  he  might  at  first  sight  be  compared  to 
a  Jupiter,  or  Serapis,  in  bearing  and  appearance.  The  mixture 
of  the  religions  had  made  great  progress  at  that  period,  evi- 
dently of  very  late  date,  and  it  would  not  surprise  me  if  it 
should  be  proved  by  later  researches  that  the  Ethiopian  kings 
had  adopted  Christ  and  Jupiter  also,  among  their  various 
kinds  of  gods.  The  god  with  the  three  or  four  lions'  heads 
is  probably  not  a  native  invention,  but  obtained  from  some 
other  quarter. 

On  the  25th  we  crossed  the  Nile  in  boats,  in  order  to  set 
out  on  the  left  bank,  on  our  road  across  the  desert  to  Gebel 
Barkal.  There  seemed  to  be  difficulties  again  about  pro- 
curing camels,  but  my  threat,  that  if  they  would  not  come 
to  a  private  agreement  I  should,  on  the  ground  of  my  Firman, 
settle  the  matter,  not  with  the  Sheikh  but  with  the  Govern- 
ment, had  such  a  rapid  effect,  that,  even  the  following  morn- 
ing, we  were  enabled  to  set  out  with  eighty  camels  from  Gos 
Burri  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  across  the  desert. 

Here,  in  Keli,  I  had  again  an  opportunity  of  witnessing  a 
funeral  ceremony — this  time,  for  a  deceased  Pellah — for 
which  purpose  about  two  hundred  people  had  collected,  the 
men  separate  from  the  women.  The  men  were  seated,  two 
and  two  opposite,  embracing  each  other;  they  laid  their 
heads  on  their  shoulders,  raised  them  up  again,  beat  them- 
selves, clapped  their  hands,  and  wept  as  much  as  they  were 
able.  The  women  moaned,  sang  songs  of  lamentation, 
strewed  themselves  with  ashes,  walked  about  in  procession, 
and  threw  themselves  on  the  ground ;  everything  very 
similar  to  what  we  saw  in  Wed  Medineh,  except  that  their 
dance  more  resembled,  in  its  violent  movements,  that  of  the 
Dervishes.     The  remainder  of  the  inhabitants  of  Keli  sat 

p2 


212  TOMES. 

round  in  groups  under  tlie  shade  of  the  trees,  sighing  and 
lamenting,  with  their  heads  hent  down. 

As  we  were  obliged  to  wait  for  the  camels,  I  once  more 
crossed  over  to  Beg'erauieh,  to  search  for  certain  ruins,  which 
were  said  to  be  situated  somewhat  more  to  the  north.  Starting 
from  El  Gues,  I  arrived  in  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  upon 
my  ass,  at  the  two  villages  of  Maruga,  not  far  removed  from 
each  other.  To  the  eastward  of  the  first,  on  the  low 
eminences  running  along  in  that  direction,  there  are  a  num- 
ber of  mounds  of  tombs,  which  from  a  little  distance  looked 
like  a  group  of  Pyramids  standing  out  from  the  sky.  The 
elevation  turns  backwards,  in  the  form  of  a  crescent,  towards 
the  south,  and  is  covered  with  these  circular-thrown-up 
mounds,  composed  of  black  desert  stone  ;  standing  on  a  large 
mound  in  the  centre  I  counted  fifty-six  of  them. 

rive  minutes  farther  on  in  the  desert  there  is  a  second 
group  of  similar  mounds,  twenty-one  in  number ;  but  many 
others  lie  near  it,  scattered  on  single  small  pieces  of  ground. 
Situated  in  a  still  lower  position,  and  even  within  the  limit  of 
the  thicket,  I  discovered  a  third  group,  to  the  south  of  the 
two  former  ones,  containing  about  forty  tombs,  in  some  of 
which  we  could  still  clearly  recognise  their  original  square 
form.  The  tomb  in  best  preservation  was  between  15  and 
18  feet  wide  on  every  side ;  like  many  others,  it  had  been 
excavated  in  the  centre,  and  had  been  filled  up  with  mud 
deposited  by  the  raio,  in  which  a  tree  was  growing ;  a  great 
square  wall  of  24  paces  enclosing  it  on  every  side,  was  still 
remaining  of  another  tomb,  the  lowest  layers  were  built  up 
solidly  of  small  black  stones,  and  a  mound  seemed  to  have 
been  erected  within,  but  not  in  the  centre.  Another  still 
stronger  circumvallation,  in  good  preservation,  was  not  much 
smaller  in  circumference,  but  appeared  to  have  been  com- 
pletely filled  up  with  a  Pyramid.  JSTothing  was  to  be  seen  of 
an  actual  casing.  The  mounds  continued  still  more  to  the 
south  amidst  the  thicket,  and  altogether  there  might  be 
about  two  hundred  which  could  be  distinguished.  Perhaps, 
also,  they  continue  still  farther  on  the  border  of  the  desert, 


deseut  of  gilif.  2L3 

in  the  direction  of  Meroe,  whither  I  would  have  ridden  back 
liad  I  not  sent  the  boat  too  far  down  the  river,  in  quest  of 
which  I  now  was  obliged  to  hasten.  It  appears,  therefore, 
that  this  was  the  actual  cemetery  of  Merbe,  and  that  pyra- 
midal, or,  in  default  of  smooth  sides,  conical  mounds  of  stones, 
were  the  usual  forms  of  tlie  tombs,  even  of  private  indi- 
viduals, at  that  period. 


LETTEE  XXII. 

Barkal,  the  9tk  May,  1844. 

The  desert  of  Gilif,  which  we  traversed  on  our  road 
hither,  to  cut  off  tlie  great  eastern  bend  of  the  Nile,  derives 
its  name  from  the  principal  mountain  range  which  lies  in  the 
centre  of  it.  On  the  maps  it  is  confounded  with  the  desert 
Bauiuda,  which  bounds  it  to  the  south-east,  and  across 
which  runs  the  road  from  Chartum  to  Ambukol  and  Barkal. 
Our  direction  was  first  due  east  as  far  as  a  well,  afterwards  to 
the  north-west,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Gilif  range  to  the 
great  AVadi  Abu  Dom,  wliich  then  led  us  across  in  the  same 
direction  to  the  western  bend  of  the  Xile. 

Tlie  general  character  of  the  country  here,  is  not  so  much 
that  of  a  desert  as  between  Ivorusko  and  Abu  Hammed,  but 
more  that  of  a  sandy  steppe.  It  is  almost  everywhere 
covered  with  Gesch  (tufts  of  reed-grass),  and  not  unfre- 
quently  with  low  trees,  chiefly  Sont-trees.  The  rains  which 
fall  here  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year,  have  deposited  con- 
siderable masses  of  earth  on  the  low  grounds,  which  might  be 
profitably  cultivated,  and  this  is  sometimes  traversed,  to  the 
depth  of  three  or  four  feet,  by  torrents  occasioned  by  the 
rain.  The  soil  is  yellow,  and  composed  of  a  clayey  sand.  The 
rock  forming  the  subsoil,  and  the  whole  of  the  mountains, 
with  the  exception  of  the  lofty  Gilif  range,  is  a  sandstone. 
The  ground  is  covered  to  a  considerable  extent  with  hard, 
black  blocks  of  sandstone,  the  road  is  generally  uneven,  and 


214  JOUEXET  THROUGH  DESERT. 

undulating.  Numerous  gazelles,  and  large  white  antelopes 
with  only  a  browu  stripe  down  their  backs,  are  to  be  found 
on  these  plains,  which  are  also  frequented  in  the  rainy  season 
by  herds  of  camels  and  of  goats,  on  account  of  the  plentiful 
supply  of  pasture. 

On  the  29th  April  we  left  the  river,  but,  as  is  very  custo- 
mary in  caravans  of  any  considerable  size,  this  was  only  a 
first  start — a  trial  of  our  travelling  powers,  such  as  birds  of 
passage  make  before  their  long  migration.  We  had  only 
been  two  hours  on  the  road  when  the  guide  allowed  the 
restless  swarm  to  encamp  again,  just  beyond  Gros  Burei,  at 
a  little  distance  from  the  river ;  the  camel-drivers  were  with- 
out their  provisions ;  some  single  beasts  were  still  procured, 
others  were  exchanged.  It  was  not  before  the  following  day 
at  twelve  o'clock  that  we  got  into  perfect  order  and  in  full 
march.  We  spent  the  niglit  in  the  Wadi  Abu  Hammed,  at 
which  point  Gebel  Omarda  was  on  our  right  liand. 

The  third  day  we  started  very  early ;  passed  GtEBEL  Qee- 
MANA,  and  arrived  at  the  well  of  Abu  Tleh,  which  took  us  far 
to  the  east,  and  detained  us  several  hours  after  mid-day. 
From  this  point  we  were  seven  hours  traversing  a  wide  plain, 
and  encamped  about  ten  at  night  near  Gebel  Sergen.  The 
2nd  May,  after  proceeding  four  hours,  we  reached  a  district 
well  supplied  with  trees,  to  the  right  of  Gebel  JSTusf,  the 
"  Mountain  of  the  Half,"  which  is  situated  half-way  between 
the  well  of  Abu  Tleh  and  Gaqedul,  as  on  all  these  journeys 
the  wells  are  the  real  indicators  of  the  hour  in  the  desert- 
clock. 

The  Arabs  from  the  district  of  Gos  Burri,  who  are  our 
guides,  belong  to  the  tribe  of  the  'Auadieh ;  they  are  not 
nearly  as  res})ectable  as  the  Ababde  Arabs,  have  a  rapid  and 
indistinct  mode  of  speech,  and  altogether  seem  to  have  very 
little  capacity.  They  may  have  already  intermingled  much 
with  the  Fellahiu  of  the  country,  who  here  call  themselves 
Qaleab,  Homerab,  Gaalin.  There  are  also  some  Schaiqieh 
Arabs  here,  probably  only  from  the  time  of  the  conquest  of 
the  country  by  the  Egyptians  ;  they  carry  shields  and  spears 


EL  GOS.  215 

like  the  Ababde  Arabs.  The  wealthy  Sheikh,  Emin,  of  Gos 
Burri,  had  given  us  his  brother,  the  Fakii-  Fadl  Allah,  as  our 
guide,  and  his  own  son,  Fadl  Allah,  as  overseer  to  his  camels  ; 
but  even  the  best  among  these  people  make  but  a  miserable 
and  starved  appearance  in  comparison  with  our  desert  com- 
panions of  Korusko.  The  order  of  the  day  here  was  as  fol- 
lows :  that  in  general  we  should  start  about  six  in  the  morning, 
and  keep  monng  till  ten  o'clock ;  after  that,  the  caravan 
rested  during  the  mid- day  heat  till  about  three  o'clock,  and 
we  then  proceeded  again  till  about  ten  or  eleven  at  night. 

We  rode  across  the  large  plain  of  El  Gos  the  whole  after- 
noon, so  called,  probably,  from  the  great  sand  dunes,  which 
are  characteristic  of  this  part  of  the  country,  and  which,  more 
especially  towards  the  south,  assume  a  peculiar  form.  They 
are  almost  all  in  the  shape  of  a  crescent,  which  opens  towards 
the  south-west,  so  that  from  the  road  on  our  right  hand  we 
look  into  a  number  of  tunnels,  or  semi-theatres,  whose  pre- 
cipitous walls  of  sand  rise  nearly  ten  feet  from  the  ground, 
while  the  north  wind,  passing  over  the  field  within,  clears  it 
completely  fi-om  the  sand,  wliich  would  gradually  fill  up  the 
cavity.  But  the  rapidity  with  which  this  moveable  sand- 
architecture  alters  its  position  is  manifested  by  the  single 
tracks  on  the  caravan-road,  which  are  frequently  lost  under 
the  very  centre  of  the  highest  sand-hills.  About  eight  o'clock 
in  the  evening  we  left  Gebel  Baeqtjgees  on  our  left  hand, 
and  halted  for  the  night,  about  ten  o'clock,  at  a  short  dis- 
tance from  tlie  Gilif  range. 

The  3rd  May  we  marched  through  the  AYadi  Guah  el 
'alem,  which  is  covered  with  a  great  many  trees,  into  the  heart 
of  the  mountains,  which  are  chiefly  composed  of  porphyritic 
rock,  and  like  all  primitive  mountains,  on  account  of  their 
longer  retention  of  the  precipitated  humidity  and  the  small 
amount  of  rain,  are  more  covered  with  vegetation  than  the 
sandy  plains.  In  three  hours  we  reached  the  "Wadi 
Gaqedul,  thickly  covered  with  Gesch  and  thorny  trees  of 
every  description,  Sent,  Somra,  and  Serha.  We  met  some 
herds  of  camels  and  goats  grazing  here,  especially  near  the 


216  DESEET  OF  GILIF. 

water,  whicli  had  also  attracted  numerous  birds,  among  others 
ravens  and  pigeons.  The  water  is  said  to  be  retained  for  the 
space  of  three  years,  without  any  fresh  accession  in  this  broad, 
low- situated  grotto,  about  300  feet  in  diameter,  surrounded, 
and  for  the  most  part  covered  in,  by  lofty  walls  of  granite.  It 
was,  however,  so  dirty,  and  had  such  an  abominable  smell, 
that  it  was  even  despised  by  my  thirsty  ass.  The  drinkable 
water  is  situated  higher  up  in  the  mountains,  and  is  difficult 
of  access. 

We  here  quitted  the  northerly  direction  into  which  we  had 
been  led  by  the  well,  since  leaving  Gebel  jS'usf,  and  continued 
for  several  hours  very  much  to  the  west  along  the  Gilif  range, 
into  the  Wadi  el  Mehet,  then  traversing  the  perfectly  dry 
bed  of  the  valley  (Chor)  of  El  Ammee,  from  which  the  road 
to  Ambukol  diverges,  we  halted  past  ten  o'clock  at  night  in 
tlie  "Wadi  el  Uee,  which  was  named  by  others  the  Wadi 
Abu  Haeod.  From  this  point,  the  Gilif  range  retreated  for 
some  distance  farther  towards  the  east,  and  only  left  a  succes- 
sion of  sandstone  hills  in  the  foreground,  along  which  we  rode 
the  following  morning.  In  the  W.N.W.  we  saw  other  moun- 
tain ranges,  which  are  no  longer  called  Gilif ;  one  single  two- 
pointed  mountain  among  them,  which  stood  out  from  the 
rest,  was  called  Miglik.  The  great  inlet  of  the  Gilif  chain, 
filled  with  sandstone  rock,  is  two  hours  broad  ;*  the  road  then 
continues  to  lead  in  a  more  northerly  direction,  into  the  midst 
of  the  range  itself,  which  is  here  called  Gebel  el  Mageqa, 
after  the  well  of  Mageqa. 

Before  entering  this  mountain  range,  we  came  to  a  place 
covered  with  heaps  of  stones,  which  might  be  supposed  to  be 
barrows,  though  no  one  lies  bui'ied  beneath  them.  When- 
ever the  date  merchants  come  this  road,  many  of  whom  we 
met  the  following  morning,  with  their  large  round  plaited 
straw  baskets,  their  camel-drivers  at  this  spot  demand  a  trifle 
from  them.  He  who  will  give  nothing,  has  a  cenotaph  such 
as  this  erected  to  him,  out  of  the  surrounding  stones,  as  a  bad 
omen  for  his  hard-heartedness.  We  met  with  a  similar  assem- 
*  About  six  English  miles. — Te. 


TVADI  KALAS.  217 

blage  of  tombs  in  tbe  desert  of  Korusko.  "We  reached  this 
Well  soon  after  nine  o'clock,  but  without  halting  ascended  a 
wild  valley  to  a  considerable  height,  where  we  encamped 
about  mid-day. 

The  whole  road  was  amply  supplied  with  trees,  and  thereby 
offered  an  agreeable  variety.  The  Sont,  or  gum-trees,  were 
rare  here ;  the  Somra  appeared  most  frequently,  which  begins 
to  spread  out  directly  from  the  ground  in  several  strong 
branches,  and  terminates  with  a  flat  covering  of  thinly-scat- 
tered boughs  and  small  green  leaves,  so  that  it  often  forms  a 
completely  regular  inverted  cone,  which  at  this  spot  some- 
times attains  to  about  the  height  of  fifteen  feet.  JSTear  it 
grows  the  Heglik,  with  irregular  boughs  round  the  stem, 
and  single  tufts  of  leaves  and  twigs,  like  the  pear-tree.  The 
thornless  Serha,  on  the  other  hand,  has  all  tlie  branches  sur- 
rounded with  quite  small  green  leaves,  like  moss,  and  the 
ToNDUB  has  no  leaves  at  all,  but  in  their  place  only  small 
green  little  twigs,  growing  zig-zag,  and  almost  as  close  as 
foliage,  while  the  Salame  shrub  .  consists  of  long  flexible 
twigs  covered  with  green  leaves  and  long  green  thorns. 

About  four  o'clock  we  set  out,  and  descended  very  gradu- 
ally from  the  heights.  There  are  also  a  number  of  wells  in 
the  Wadi  Kalas,  with  very  good  rain  water,  about  twenty 
feet  in  depth;  we  pitched  our  encampment  for  the  night 
at  this  spot,  although  we  arrived  there  soon  after  sunset. 
The  animals  were  watered,  and  the  skins  filled.  The  whole 
of  the  plateau  is  well  supplied  with  trees  and  shrubs,  and  in- 
habited by  men  and  animals. 

Our  road  on  the  following  day  preserved  the  same  cha- 
racter, as  long  as  we  were  wandering  between  the  beautiful 
and  rugged  escarpments  of  porphyry.  After  proceeding  a 
couple  of  hours  farther,  we  came  to  two  other  Wells,  also 
called  Kalas,  with  little,  but  good  water=  Prom  this  spot, 
a  road  diverged  in  a  uortli-easterly  direction  to  the  well  of 
Mekoe,  in  the  Wadi  Abu  Dom,  probably  so  called  also  from 
a  white  rock. 

Three  hours  farther,  having  passed   Gebel  Abeak,  we 


218  WADI  QAZAL. 

entered  the  great  Wadi  Abu  Dom,  whicli  we  now  pursued 
in  a  west  north-west  direction.  This  remarkable  valley  passes 
uninterruptedlj  by  the  side  of  a  long  mountain  chain  from 
the  Nile  at  El  Mecheref  to  the  village  of  xlbu  Dom,  which  is 
situated  obliquely  opposite  Mount  Barkal.  When  we  con- 
sider that  the  upper  north-eastern  opening  of  this  valley, 
which  traverses  the  whole  Peninsula  and  its  mountain  ranges, 
lies  nearly  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  Atbara,  which  flows 
into  the  Nile  in  the  same  direction  above  Mecheref,  we  can- 
not help  suspecting  that  once,  though  perhaps  not  in  histo- 
rical times,  there  must  have  been  a  connection  by  water, 
which  cut  off  the  largest  portion  of  the  great  eastern  bend 
of  the  Nile,  now  formed  by  the  rocky  elevated  plateau  at 
Abu  Hammed,  driving  back  the  stream  above  a  degree  and  a 
half  towards  the  south,  contrary  to  its  common  direction. 
The  name  of  the  valley  is  derived  from  the  single  Dom  Palms, 
which  are  here  and  there  found  in  it.  The  mountain  chain, 
which  passes  along  the  north  of  the  valley,  is  completely 
separated  from  the  range,  through  which  we  had  hitherto 
come.  At  the  entrance  of  this  valley  we  left  the  solid  ground 
of  which  the  mountain  is  composed,  and  the  loose  sands  again 
prevailed,  without  however  overpowering  the  stiU  far  from 
scanty  vegetation. 

In  the  afternoon,  after  leaving  on  our  left  hand  a  side 
valley.  Oil  Schebak,  which  contains  well-water,  we  encamped 
for  the  night  as  early  as  nine  o'clock.  The  following  morn- 
ing we  came  to  the  deep  well  of  Hanik,  and  halted  about 
mid-day  at  a  second  well,  which  was  called  Oil  Saiale,  after 
the  tree  of  that  name. 

At  this  spot,  I  left  the  caravan  with  Jussuf,  to  reach 
Barkal  by  a  circuitous  road  by  Nuei,  situated  on  this  side 
of  the  river  somewhat  higher  up.  In  an  hour  and  a  half  we 
arrived  at  some  considerable  ruins  of  a  large  Christian  con- 
vent in  the  AVadi  G-azal,  so  called  from  the  gazelles,  which 
dig  in  great  numbers  for  water  here  in  the  Chor  (bed  of 
the  valley).  The  church  was  built  as  high  as  the  windows 
of  white,  well-hewn  sandstone,  and  above  that  of  unbumt 


cb:ristia.x  COy\ElST. 


219 


bricks.  The  walls  are  covered  with  a  strong  coating  of 
plaster,  and  are  painted  in  the  interior.  The  vaulted  apse 
of  the  three-naved  Basilica  is  situated,  as  usual,  towards  the 
east,  the  entrances  behind  the  western  transept  are  towards 
the  north  and  south ;  all  the  arches  of  the  doors,  the  win- 
dows, and  between  the  pillars,  are  round :  above  the  doors, 
Coptic  crosses  are  frequently  exhibited,  more  or  less  orna- 
mented, whose  most  simple  form    |||l     maj'  be  compared 

with  the  ancient  Egvptian  symbol  of  Life.  The  whole 
church  is  a  genuine  type  of  all  the  Coptic  churches  which  I 
have  seen  in  ruins,  and  I  therefore  add  the  small  ground 
plan  just  as  Erbkam  took  it  down. 


The  building  is  above  eighty  feet  long,  and  exactly  half  as 
broad.  The  outer  wall  to  the  north  has  fallen  in.  The 
cliurch  is  surrounded  by  a  great  court,  whose  walls  of  enclo- 
sure, as  well  as  the  numerous  convent  cells,  some  of  which 
have  vaulted  roofs,  are  built  of  rough  blocks,  and  are  in  good 
preservation ;  the  largest  of  them,  a  dwelling  forty-six  feet 
long,  is  situated  in  front  of  the  western  side  of  the  church, 
and  is  only  separated  from  it  by  a  small  narrow  court ;  no 
doubt  it  belonged  to  the  prior,  and  a  special  side-entrance 
led  from  it  into  the  church.  Two  churchyards  are  situated 
on  the  southern  side  of  the  convent ;  that  to  the  Avest,  about 
forty  paces  removed  from  the  church,  contained  a  number  of 
tombs,  which  consisted  simply  of  a  collection  of  black  stones 
heaped  up  together.  The  eastern  churchyard  was  situated 
nearer  to  the  buildings,  and  was  remarkable  from  possessing 


220  GREEK  A-SH  COPTIC  INSCE1PTI0N3. 

a  considerable  amount  of  tombstones  with  inscriptions,  partly 
in  Greek,  partly  in  Coptic,  which  will  induce  me  to  pay  a 
second  visit  to  this  remarkable  convent  before  we  leave 
Barkal.  I  counted  more  than  twenty  stones  with  inscrip- 
tions, some  of  which  had  sustained  much  injury,  and  about 
as  many  tablets  in  burnt  earth,  with  iuscriptions  scratched 
into  them,  though  most  of  them  were  broken  to  pieces. 
They  contain  the  most  southern  Grreek  inscriptions  which 
have  been  hitherto  known  in  the  Nile  region,  with  the 
exception  of  those  of  Adulis  and  Axum  in  Abyssinia. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Greek  language  following  in  the 
wake  of  Christianity,  and  the  traces  of  which  we  might  have 
ourselves  pursued  in  structural  remains  even  beyond  Soba, 
was  at  one  time  employed  and  understood,  at  least  for  reli- 
gious objects,  by  the  natives  in  the  flourishing  districts,  even 
as  far  as  the  interior  of  Abyssinia ;  nevertheless  these  monu- 
mental inscriptions  (none  of  them,  as  far  as  I  could  see  in  a 
hasty  survey,  in  the  Ethiopian  language)  allow  us  to  infer 
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  convent  were  Greek  Coptics  who 
had  immigrated. 

About  five  o'clock  I  left  my  companions,  who  went  direct 
to  Abu  Dom,  and  I  immediately  set  out  for  Nuei.  "We  soon 
saw  Mount  Baekal  shining  blue  in  tlie  distance ;  it  rises 
singl}^  and  precipitously  from  the  surrounding  plain,  and 
has  a  broad  platform,  and,  by  its  peculiar  form  and  position, 
at  once  attracts  attention  ;  about  six  o'clock  the  Nile  vallev, 
which  is  here  of  considerable  breadth,  lay  spread  out  before  us, 
a  sight  always  longed  for  after  the  desert  journey,  and  which, 
like  the  approaching  misty  coast  after  a  sea  voyage,  keeps 
the  attention  of  the  traveller  in  a  state  of  joyful  expectation. 

Our  road,  however,  now  turned  towards  the  right,  and  led 
among  the  mountains,  which  stretch  out  into  the  plain,  and 
are  still  composed  of  masses  of  porphyry.  "When  we  stood 
directly  in  front  of  Barkal,  I  observed  on  our  left  hand  a 
great  number  of  black  barrows,  either  round,  or  pyramidal  in 
form,  similar  to  those  I  previously  saw  at  Meroe.  It  was 
probably  the  general  cemetery  of  Napata,  which  even  in 
the  time  of  Herodotus  was  the  royal  residence  of  the  Ethio- 


PTllAMIDS  OF  XUEI.  221 

pian  kings,  and  was  situated  on  the  farther  bank;  a  con- 
siderable town  must  therefore  at  one  time  have  been  placed 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  Nile,  which  would  also  explain 
the  position  of  the  Pyramids  of  jS'uki  on  the  same  side  of 
the  river.  Nevertheless,  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover 
any  mound  of  ruins  in  accordance  with  this  surmise.  I 
only  saw  some  similar  to  these,  though  not  of  considerable 
extent,  behind  the  village  of  Duem  and  at  Abu  Dom,  whicli 
were  called  Sanab.  It  was  not  before  half-past  seven 
that  we  arrived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  this  considerable 
group  of  Pyramids,  and  we  quartered  ourselves  for  the  night 
in  the  house  of  the  Sheikh  of  the  village. 

Before  sunrise  I  was  already  at  the  Pyramids,  of  which  I 
counted  twenty-five.  They  are  some  of  them  grander  than 
those  at  Meroe,  but  are  built  of  soft  sandstone,  and,  therefore, 
have  sufiiered  much  from  exposure  to  the  weather ;  only  very 
few  of  them  had  a  portion  of  the  smooth  casing  preserved. 
The  largest  shows,  again,  the  same  structure  in  the  interior 
which  I  have  referred  to  in  the  Pyramids  of  Lower  Egypt ;  a 
smaller  internal  Pyramid  was  enlarged  in  all  its  dimensions 
by  a  superimposed  stone  casing.  In  one  place,  on  the  west 
side,  the  smoothed  upper  surface  of  the  internal  structure 
was  most  clearly  disclosed  beneath  the  well-joined  external 
covering,  which  is  eight  feet  thick.  Little  is  to  be  seen  here 
of  ante-chambers  such  as  there  are  in  Meroe  and  at  the 
Pyramids  of  Barkal ;  I  think  I  have  only  found  the  remains 
of  two ;  the  rest,  if  they  ever  existed,  must  have  been  com- 
pletely demolished,  or  buried  beneath  the  rubbish.  Some  of 
the  Pyramids,  however,  stand  so  immediately  against  each 
other,  that,  on  that  account  alone,  an  ante-chamber,  at  least 
on  the  last  side  where  it  might  have  been  expected,  could 
not  have  existed.  Besides  this,  the  Pyramids  are  generally 
built  quite  massively  of  square  blocks ;  I  could  only  perceive, 
on  the  one  situated  most  to  the  east,  that  it  was  filled 
up  with  black  unhe\vn  stones.  There  is  also  a  truncated 
Pyramid  like  that  of  Dahschur ;  but  here  the  lower,  and  not, 
as  in  that  instance,  the  upper  angle  of  inclination,  must  have 


222  MOUNT  BAEKAL. 

been  the  one  originally  intended,  as  tlie  former  is  scarcely 
sufficient  for  a  series  of  steps.  Although,  unfortunately, 
I  had  been  unable  to  discover  any  inscriptions,  with  the 
exception  of  one  single  small  fragment  of  granite,  yet  much 
seems  to  favour  the  idea  that  this  group  of  Pyramids  is  of  an 
older  date,  while  those  of  Barkal  are  more  recent. 

Soon  after  ten  o'clock  I  reached  Abu  Dom,  where  I 
found  my  companions  already  arrived.  The  w^hole  of  the 
next  day  was  occupied  in  crossing  the  Nile,  and  we  did  not 
reach  Barkal  before  sunset.  Greorgi,  to  my  delight,  had 
arrived  here  some  days  previously  from  Dongola.  We  now 
more  than  ever  require  his  assistance,  because  drawings 
must  be  made  of  whatever  we  meet  with  here.  The  Ethio- 
pian royal  residence  of  King  Taheaka,  who  reigned  at  the 
same  time  in  Egypt,  and  left  buildings  behind  him,  the  same 
who  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah  marched  to  Palestine  against 
Sennacherib,  is  too  important  for  us  not  to  exhaust  it,  if  pos- 
sible, of  its  treasures. 


LETTEE  XXIII. 

Mount  Barkal,  the  28th  May,  1844. 
DuEiNG  the  next  few  days  I  expect  the  arrival  of  the 
transport  boats  which  I  begged  of  Hassan  Pascha,  and  which 
set  off  eleven  days  ago ;  they  are  to  receive  our  Ethiopian 
treasures,  and  to  convey  us  to  Dongola.  The  results  of 
our  researches  here  are  not  without  importance.  Upon 
the  whole,  they  are  quite  confirmatory  of  the  opinion  that 
Ethiopian  art  is  only  a  late  offshoot  from  the  Egyptian.  It 
does  not  commence  under  native  rulers  before  the  time  of 
Tahraka.  The  little  which  is  extant  from  a  still  earlier 
period  belongs  to  the  Egyptian  conquerors  and  their  artists. 
Here,  at  least,  it  is  confined  solely  to  one  temple,  which 
Eamses  the  Great  erected  to  Amen-Ea.  It  is  true  that  the 
name  of  Amenophis  III.   has  been   discovered  on  several 


NAPATA.  223 

of  the  granite  Earns,  as  well  as  on  Lord  Prudhoe's  Lion  in 
London,  but  there  are  good  grounds  to  suppose  that  these 
magnificent  Colossi  did  not  originally  belong  to  a  temple 
here.  They  were  only  brought  here  at  a  later  period,  it 
appears,  from  Soleb,  probably  by  the  Ethiopian  king  whose 
name  is  found  engraved  on  the  breast  of  the  above-mentioned 
lion,  and  which,  from  the  incorrect  omission  of  a  sign,  has 
been  hitherto  read  Amejt  Aseu  in  place  of  Mi  Amen  Asrtj. 

Nevertheless,  I  consider  these  Earns  so  remarkable,  espe- 
cially on  account  of  their  inscriptions,  that  I  have  determined 
to  carry  away  the  best  of  them.  The  fat  wether  probably 
weighs  nearly  150  cwt.  However,  in  the  space  of  three 
sultry  days,  it  has  been  safely  dragged  on  rollers  to  the 
river  bank  by  ninety-two  Fellahs,  and  it  there  waits  for 
embarkation.  Several  other  monuments  besides  are  to 
accompany  us  from  this  spot,  as  we  need  no  longer  fear  their 
weight  since  the  desert  is  behind  us.  I  will  only  mention 
an  Ethiopian  altar,  four  feet  high,  with  the  Shields  of  the 
king  who  erected  it ;  a  statue  of  Isis,  on  whose  plinth  there 
is  an  Ethiopian-demotic  inscription  of  eighteen  lines  ;  another 
also  fi'om  Meraui ;  as  well  as  the  peculiar  monument  bearing 
the  name  of  Amenophis  III.,  which  was  copied  by  Cailliaud, 
and  was  thought  to  be  a  foot,  but,  in  truth,  is  the  lower  por- 
tion of  the  sacred  sparrow-hawk.  All  these  monuments  are 
of  black  granite.* 

The  town  of  Napata,  the  name  of  which  I  have  now  fre- 
quently found  in  hieroglyphics,  and  even  on  the  monuments 
of  Tahraka,  was  situated,  no  doubt,  somewhat  farther  down  the 
river,  near  the  present  town  of  Meeaui,  where  considerable 
mounds  of  ruins  still  testify  to  this.  The  Temples  and  Pyra- 
mids were  alone  situated  near  the  mountain.  This  remark- 
able mass  of  rock  bears  the  name  of  the  "  Sacred  Mount" 

"^  (]    .   in  the  hieroglyphic  inscriptions.     The  god  who 

was  peculiarly  worshipped  here  was  Ammon-Ea. 

*  These  raonuments  are  now  placed  in  the  Egyptian  Museum 
(Berlin)-  See  the  ram  and  sparrow-hawk  in  the  Denkindler  aus  E<ji/pt. 
■und  Ethiop.,  Abih.  III.,  Blait  90. 


224  CLIMATE. 

On  tlie  IStli  of  May  we  accomplished  our  long  intended 
second  visit  to  the  Wadi  G-azal ;  we  took  an  impression  of 
all  the  G-reek  and  Coptic  inscriptions  of  the  cemetery,  and 
carried  away  with  ns  such  as  appeared  in  some  degree 
legible. 

"We  feel  now,  more  than  ever,  what  the  torrid  zone  will  be 
in  the  hot  season  which  we  are  now  approaching.  The  ther- 
mometer generally  rises  after  mid-day  to  37°  and  38°  E. 
(115-117 J°  Fahr.),  and  is  occasionally  even  above  40°  (122° 
Fahr.)  in  the  shade.  I  frequently  found  the  burning  sand  be- 
neath our  feet  as  much  as  53°  (151°  Fahr.)  ;  and  anything  made 
of  metal  can  only  be  laid  hold  of  in  the  open  air  with  a  cloth. 
All  our  drawings  and  papers  are  abundantly  bedewed  with 
drops  of  perspiration.  But  the  most  oppressive  thing  is  the 
hot  wind,  which,  instead  of  cooling  us,  drives  a  regular  fur- 
nace heat  into  our  faces,  and  the  nights  are  not  much  more 
refreshing.  The  thermometer,  towards  evening,  falls  down 
to  33°  (106;^°  Fahr.),  and  by  the  morning  is  as  low  as  28° 
(95°  Fahr.).  Our  only  refreshment  is  in  taking  frequent 
baths  in  the  Nile,  which,  however,  in  Europe,  would  be  con- 
sidered warm  baths.  Between  times  we  have  more  than 
once  had  tempests,  with  violent  storms  of  wind  loaded  with 
sand,  and  even  a  few  drops  of  rain  fell  in  the  midst  of  them. 
Yesterday,  a  gust  of  wind  beat  our  tent  down  to  the  ground, 
and  at  the  same  moment,  owing  to  its  violence,  our  large 
arbour,  built  of  solid  stems  of  trees  and  palm-branches,  fell 
upon  our  heads,  while  we  were  eating  within  it ;  we  could 
scarcely  enjoy  our  dinner  from  the  strong  spicing  of  sand. 
Violent  squalls  and  whirlwinds  seem  to  be  peculiar  to  this 
country,  or  to  this  season,  for  often  we  see  four  or  five  high 
columns  of  sand  rushing  up  at  once  to  the  sky,  at  different 
distances,  like  great  volcanoes.  There  are  few  snakes  here ; 
but,  on  that  very  account,  more  scorpions  and  hideous  great 
spiders,  which  are  dreaded  by  the  natives  even  more  than 
the  scorpions.  "We  now  sleep,  on  account  of  the  venomous 
vermin,  on  anqarebs,  which  we  have  had  brought  out  of  the 
village. 


EXCIIESION  TO  CA.TAEACT  COUNTEr.  225 


LETTEE  XXIY. 

Dongola,  the  I5th  June,  1844. 

Befoee  we  left  Barkal,  I  undertook  another  excursion  of 
three  days  up  the  Nile  to  the  Cataract  country,  which  we 
had  cut  off  by  our  desert  journey.  I  was  anxious  to  become 
acquainted  with  the  character  of  this  district  also,  the  only 
part  of  the  Xile  valley  through  which  we  had  not  travelled 
with  the  caravan.  We  went  by  water  as  far  as  Kasinqar,  and 
spent  the  night  there.  At  this  point  bold  masses  of  granite 
rise  up  majestically,  which  divide  the  river  into  numerous 
islands,  and  impede  the  navigation.  The  following  morning, 
before  the  camels  were  ready,  we  reached,  not  without  diffi- 
culty, the  island  of  Ischischi  ;  it  is  surrounded  by  violent  and 
dangerous  currents.  We  here  found  ruins  of  walls,  and  build- 
ings built  of  bricks,  and  sometimes  of  stones,  both  hewn  and 
unhewn,  by  which  we  may  conclude  there  were  fortifications 
on  the  island  at  different  periods  of  time ;  but  there  were  no 
inscriptions,  except  one  single  one,  consisting  of  a  few  in- 
comprehensible signs. 

We  did  not  mount  our  camels  in  Kasinqar  before  nine 
o'clock,  and  then  rode  along  the  right  bank  between  the 
granite  rocks,  which  leave  but  a  small  space  for  a  scanty 
vegetation.  Almost  all  the  numerous,  though  generally 
small,  islands  refresh  the  eye  by  green  groups  of  trees  and 
cultivated  bits  of  ground,  which  are  cut  up  in  a  variety  of 
ways  by  the  black  rocks.  There  would  be  scarcely  room  in 
this  rocky  channel  for  villages  of  any  considerable  size,  still 
less  sufficient  to  maintain  them.  Those  that  exist  are  distri- 
buted in  houses  standing  singly,  and  small  groups  of  houses 
far  apart,  but  which  bear  one  and  the  same  name  up  to  cer- 
tain frontier  points.  The  village  plot  of  ground  belonging 
to  Kasinqar  terminated  with  a  beautiful  group  of  palm-trees. 
We  then  entered  the  territory  of  Ku'eh,  after  that  followed 
the  long  tract  of  Hamdae,  which  includes  the  island  of 
^Ieeui  or  Meeoe,  which  is  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  extent. 

Q 


226  AEEIVAL  AT  HELLET  EL  BIB. 

Here  also  the  name  is  explained  by  its  appearance.  It  is 
yerj  lofty,  sometimes  forty  feet  above  the  surface  of  the 
water,  but  completely  barren  and  uninhabited  ;  and  with  tlie 
exception  of  the  low  black  rock,  which  at  times  is  covered 
by  the  water,  the  whole  island  is  totally  white.  This  chiefly 
arises  on  account  of  the  dazzling  moving  sands  with  which  it 
is  covered ;  but,  what  is  still  more  remarkable,  the  rock  which 
projects  from  them  is  also  white,  either  on  account  of  great 
veins  of  quartz,  similar  to  w'hat  I  had  observed  in  another  strik- 
ingly white  rock  which  lay  on  our  road  in  the  province  of 
EoBATAT,  and  which  was  called  Hagee  Meeui  by  the  camel- 
drivers,  or  because  the  weathered  granite  had  here  assumed 
this  colour.  The  name  of  the  towTi  of  Meeaui,  near  Barkal, 
is  perhaps  derived  from  the  same  origin ;  in  that  instance 
the  white  rocky  precipices  descending  from  Meraui  to  the 
river,  which,  on  our  departure,  especially  struck  me  by 
their  colour,  must  have  given  occasion  to  it.  On  the  oppo- 
site bank,  Gebel  Kongeli  approaches  close  to  the  river, 
which  is  also  called  Gebel  Merui,  from  the  island,  and  in 
the  same  manner  the  rushing  cataract  a  little  above  the 
island  has  received  the  name  of  Schellal  Merui. 

About  four  o'clock  we  arrived  at  the  ruins  of  HIellet  el 
Bib,  which  in  the  distance  looks  exactly  like  a  castle  of  the 
middle  ages.  It  rises  from  a  low  rock,  whose  ridge  inter- 
sects the  court  and  the  building  itself,  so  that  one  portion  of 
it  looks  like  an  upper  story  to  the  other.  The  whole  struc- 
ture is  composed  of  unburnt,  but  well  and  carefully  made, 
bricks,  which  were  firmly  joined  together  with  a  little  lime, 
and  covered  with  a  coating  of  the  same.  There  are  various 
larger  and  smaller  chambers  in  the  interior,  some  of  them 
furnished  with  semicircular  niches,  and  arched  doors.  The 
walls  on  the  western  side  were  fifteen  feet  high.  The  outer 
wall  of  the  court  was  of  unhewn  stones,  but  carefully  built 
up  to  the  height  of  between  five  and  eight  feet ;  it  embraced 
a  tolerably  regular  square  space,  each  side  of  which  was 
about  sixty-five  paces  long. 

This  small  castle,  ihough  of  considerable  importance  in  this 


BAN.  227 

district,  reminded  us  much,  by  its  niches  and  arched  doors, 
of  the  Christian  architecture  of  the  earlier  centuries,  but  yet 
did  not  seem  to  have  liad  any  rehgious  destination.  Per- 
haps, tlierefore,  it  only  belonged  to  the  flourishing  times  of 
the  powerful  and  warlike  Schaiqieh  tribes,  which,  according 
to  tradition,  are  said  to  have  first  wandered  from  Arabia  into 
these  parts  several  hundred  years  ago.  In  the  time  of  the 
Egyptian  conquest  the  country  was  under  three  Schaiqieh 
princes,  one  of  whom  might  have  resided  here.  The  neigh- 
bourhood, besides,  was  somewhat  more  favoured  by  nature, 
the  banks  more  level,  and  covered  with  thicket,  which  here 
and  there  bordered  some  of  the  land  capable  of  cultivation. 
After  I  had  drawn  out  the  plan  of  the  building  we  started 
on  our  return  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  by  the  light 
of  a  full  moon,  and  we  considerably  shortened  our  journey 
by  taking  the  road  through  the  desert  from  the  island  of 
Saffi.  About  eleven  o'clock  we  halted  for  the  night,  on 
an  open  sandy  spot  of  ground  of  the  great  granite  plain. 
About  five  o'clock  we  again  started  betwixt  moonlight  and 
morning  dawn,  and,  as  early  as  nine,  we  reached  our  boat 
at  Xasinqar. 

Near  this  place  I  met  with  a  new  tree  in  a  small  Wadi, 
which  led  to  the  river.  It  was  called  Ban,  and  is  said  to 
grow  nowhere  in  this  country  except  in  this  Wadi,  called 
after  it  Cnoii  el  Ban,  and  in  one  other  Wadi  near  Meraui.* 
A  strong  stem,  with  a  white  bark,  not  unlike  our  walnut-tree, 
with  some  side  stems  and  branches  just  as  white,  rose 
short  and  knotty  from  the  ground.  Most  of  the  branches 
were  now  bare  ;  only  a  few  of  them  had  foliage,  if  we  choose 
to  call  the  long  green  twigs  collected  in  little  bunches  by 
that  name.     The  fruits  are  long,  roundish,  furrowed  pods, 

*  By  the  pods  and  their  kernels,  which  we  brought  away  with  us, 
Dr.  Klotsch  lias  recognised  the  if oW«^a  Arublca  Persoon  {Hyperanihera 
peregrina  Furskul).  It  seems  that  this  tree  lias  hitherto  only  been 
known  in  Arabia,  and  is  indigenous  there.  The  individual  trees  found 
near  Barkal,  which  are  not  mentioned  by  previous  travellers,  might 
perhaps  have  been  introduced  from  Arabia.  This  is  the  more  pro- 
bable, as  the  immigration  of  those  tribes  of  the  Schaiqieh  Arabs  from 
Hegaz  is  still  testified  in  writing. 

Q2 


228  DEPAETXJEE  FEOM  BAKKAL. 

which  split  into  three  parts,  when  the  black-shelled  nuts  con- 
tained within  (of  the  size  of  small  hazel  nuts),  jfive  to  ten  in 
number,  are  ripe;  the  white  oily  kernel,  sweet  as  a  nut, 
though  also  somewhat  acrid,  is  good  to  eat,  and  is  much 
liked,  but  it  is  more  particularly  used  by  the  inhabitants  in 
the  immediate  neighbourhood  for  pressing  oil  out  of  it.  The 
blossoms  are  said  to  be  yellow,  and  to  grow  in  clusters. 

About  mid-day  the  Sheikh  of  Nuri  came  on  board  our 
boat,  and  I  collected  some  more  information  from  him  about 
the  Cataract  country.  In  the  province  of  Schaiqieh,  and 
the  adjoining  one  of  Moxassir,  eight  separate  cataracts  are 
reckoned  ;  the  first,  Schellal  Gerendid,  at  the  island  of 
Ischischi  ;  then  Schellal  Terai,  at  Ku'eh  ;  Schellal  Merui ; 
Schellal  Dahiik,  at  the  island  of  Uli ;  Schellal  el  Edermieh  ; 
e'  Kabenat  ;  e'  Tanarai  ;  and  Om  Deras.  Afterwards  the 
rocky  country  continues  uninterruptedly  to  El  Kab,  from 
which  point  the  river  has  very  little  fall  as  far  as  Schellal 
Mograt,  in  the  great  bend  towards  Berber. 

At  the  present  day  notliiug  but  Arabic  is  spoken  in  the 
whole  of  this  district ;  but  some  recollection  of  the  earlier 
Nubian  population  has  been  distinctly  retained,  since  even 
now  a  number  of  villages  are  distinguished  from  the  others 
as  Nuha  places.  The  following  were  mentioned  to  me  as 
such,  above  the  province  of  Dongola :  Gtebel  Maqal  and 
ZuMA  on  the  right  bank,  and  near  it  the  island  of  Massaui, 
which  also  still  bears  the  Nubian  name  of  Abeakaeti  ;  then 
upon  the  left  bank  Belled  e'  Nuba,  between  Debbe  and 
Abu  Dom,  Halite  or  Nuei  and  Bellel  ;  opposite  to  these, 
Geef  e'  Schech  and  Kasinqae.  Then  there  is  a  gap  in  the 
statement,  and  it  refers  to  places  up  the  river  to  Chosch  e' 
GuEUF,  a  little  below  the  island  of  Mograt,  to  Salame  and 
Daemali,  two  villages  between  Mecheref  and  Damer  ;  lastly, 
there  is  another  Belled  e'  Nuba  to  the  north  of  Gos  Burri, 
in  the  province  of  Metamme. 

On  the  4th  of  June  we  at  length  left  Barkal,  after  having 
placed  the  Bam  and  the  other  heavy  monuments  on  two 
transport  boats  specially  devoted  to  that  purpose. 


PTRAillDS  or  TANQASSI  AIND  KUEETJ.  229 

We  stopped  the  first  night  in  Abii  Dom,  on  the  left  bank. 
I  had  heard  of  a  Takir  in  this  place,  who  was  said  to  be  in 
possession  of  written  records  about  the  tribes  of  the  Sehai- 
qieh  Arabs.  He  was  an  intelligent,  and,  for  this  country,  a 
learned  man,  who  would  not  indeed  yield  up  to  me  the  few 
slieets  of  his  own  copy  which  he  actually  possessed,  but  im- 
mediately set  to  work  to  transcribe  them  for  me. 

The  following  morniug  we  first  landed  in  Tanqassi, 
situated  an  hour  and  a  half  below  Abu  Dom,  where  we  were 
told  we  should  find  ruins.  A  Fakir  Daha,  who  belonged  to 
the  Korescb,  the  tribe  of  the  Prophet,  accompanied  us  to  the, 
now  at  least  insignificant,  mound  of  bricks.  We  passed  his 
hereditary  sepulchre,  a  small  building  with  a  cupola  that  had 
been  built  by  his  grandfather,  but  had  already  received  in 
addition  to  him,  his  father  and  several  relatives.  From  this 
spot  I  descried  some  mounds  in  the  distance,  which  the 
Eakir  pronounced  to  be  natural.  We,  however,  rode  up  to 
them,  and  a  short  half  hour  from  the  river  found  more  than 
twenty  Pyramids  of  tolerable  size,  now  apparently  only  con- 
sisting of  black  eartli,  but  originally  built  of  Nile  bricks. 
Single  stones  lay  around,  and  on  the  eastern  side,  at  a  short 
distance,  there  were  always  two  small  heaps  of  stones,  which 
seem  to  have  belonged  to  the  ante-chamber,  and  w^ere  per- 
haps connected  with  the  Pyramid  by  brick  walls ;  but  no- 
where could  we  find  hewn  stones,  and  still  less  inscriptions. 

We  also  found  a  field  of  Pyramids  at  Kueeu,  on  the 
farther  bank,  although  but  little  could  be  discovered  of  the 
ruins  of  a  town.  Of  the  two  most  considerable  Pyramids, 
the  largest,  which  still  bears  the  strange  name  of  Qantue, 
was  35  feet  high ;  and  towards  the  south-east  we  saw  the  re- 
mains of  an  ante-chamber.  Twenty- one  smaller  ones  are 
grouped  round  these  two,  four  of  which,  like  the  largest 
Pyramid,  were  entirely  built  of  sandstone,  but  are  now  in 
great  part  demolished ;  others  only  consisted  of  black  field 
stones.  Lastly,  to  the  west  of  all  of  them,  the  ground  plan 
is  still  to  be  seen  of  a  large  Pyramid,  which  was  probably 
once  completely  massive,  and  has  been  on  that  account  de- 


230  PTBAMIDS  OF  ZUMA. 

molislied ;  the  foundations  were  laid  in  the  rock.  It  appears 
that  these  Pyramids  also,  which,  by  their  solid  structure, 
are  quite  distinct  from  those  lying  opposite,  belonged  to  a 
royal  Dynasty  of  Napata,  for  which  reason  the-  absence  of 
any  considerable  ruins  of  a  town  would  be  easier  to  explain 
here  than  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river. 

Three-quarters  of  an  hour  farther  do^Ti  the  river  is  situ- 
ated the  village  of  Zuma,  on  the  right  bank.  Kear  it,  in 
the  direction  of  the  mountains,  there  rises  an  old  fortress, 
with  towers  of  defence,  called  Kaeat  Negil,  whose  front 
walls  were  only  destroyed  and  thrown  down  about  fifty  or 
sixty  years  ago,  when  the  inhabitants  of  Zuma  settled  here. 
The  name  is  derived  from  an  ancient  King  of  the  country, 
Negil,  in  whose  time  the  surrounding  land,  now  dry,  was 
still  within  reach  of  the  Nile,  and  is  said  to  have  been 
fertile. 

The  first  thing  that  I  saw  on  the  road  to  the  fortress  was 
again  a  number  of  Pyramids,  eight  of  which  are  still  20  feet 
high  ;  including  those  which  are  destroyed,  and  which  in 
general  seem  to  have  been  those  which  were  most  massive, 
we  found  above  thirty  ;  the  ancient  stone  quarries  are  still 
to  be  seen  which  furnished  the  material  for  the  Pyramids. 

These  three  fields  of  Pyramids,  that  of  Tanqassi, 
Ktjretj,  and  Zuma,  or  Kaeat  Negil,  whose  sites  were 
paced,  and  carefully  noted  down  by  Erbkam,  are  planted  on 
an  extent  of  ground  of  but  a  few  hours  in  circumference,  and 
indicate  the  existence  of  a  strong  and  flourishing  population 
in  this  district  in  Heathen  times  ;  on  the  other  hand,  in  the 
district  immediately  succeeding  this,  and  more  or  less 
tliroughout  the  whole  province  of  Dongola,  we  found  nume- 
rous remains  of  Christian  churches. 

On  the  7th  of  June  we  visited  three  of  these,  situated  at 
short  distances  from  each  other,  all  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
river.  Two  hours  and  a  half  from  Zuma  we  first  come  to 
Bachit.  Here  the  precipitous  rock  of  the  desert  advances 
close  upon  the  river,  and  bears  a  fortress,  no  doubt  also 
dating  from  Christian  times,  with  eighteen  semicircular  pro- 


CHEISTIA^'  CHITECHES.  231 

jectiug  towers  of  defence.  In  the  interior,  beneath  barren 
heaps  of  rubbish,  there  were  still  the  ruins  of  a  churchy 
which  at  that  time  seems  to  have  everywhere  formed  the 
central  point  of  the  stronghold.  Here  it  was  only  63  feet 
long,  and  the  whole  nave  rested  on  four  columns  and  two 
pilasters ;  nevertheless,  the  plan  corresponded  perfectly  with 
the  general  type. 

The  church  of  IVIagal,  which  is  situated  only  one  half 
hour  farther  on,  must  have  been  considerably  larger,  as  we 
found  beneath  the  ruins  monolithic  granite  columns  13^ 
feet  high  from  below  the  capital,  which  is  separated  from  it, 
and  is  1^  foot  high  and  2  feet  in  diameter  ;  it  appears  to  have 
had  five  naves. 

From  this  point  we  reached  GtEBEL  Deqa  in  one  hour. 
Strong,  massive  walls  again  surrounded  a  Cliristian  fortress, 
which  was  situated  on  the  projecting  sandstone  rock,  and  in 
the  interior  exhibited  the  ruins  of  several  buildings  of  con- 
siderable size  ;  among  them,  those  of  a  small,  tliree-naved 
church,  very  similar  to  the  one  at  Bachit. 

This  is  the  frontier  village  of  the  province  of  Schaiqieh, 
in  the  direction  of  Dongola,  the  last  place  coming  from  the 
south,  whose  inhabitants  speak  Arabic.  Formerly  the 
frontier  of  the  Nubian  population  and  language,  undoubt- 
edlv,  was  as  far  up  as  the  cataracts  above  Barkal.  This 
seems  to  have  occasioned  the  accumulation  of  strong  posts  in 
this  district,  and  probably  also  the  strong  fortification  of  the 
island  of  Ischischi. 

Christianity  penetrated  to  the  Nubians  from  Abyssinia  as 
early  as  the  sixth  century ;  they  were  at  that  time  a  powerful 
people,  till  their  Christian  priest-kings,  in  the  fourteenth 
century,  yielded  to  the  encroachment  of  Islamism.  We 
must  date  the  erection  of  the  numerous  churches  from  those 
days,  the  ruins  of  which  we  have  found  scattered  from  Wadi 
Gaz^l,  northwards,  throughout  the  whole  province. 

The  same  day  we  went  as  far  as  Amb.ukol,  at  the  extre- 
mity of  the  western  bend  of  the  Nile,  and  halted  here  for 
the  night.     The  following  day  we  reached  Tifae,  and  again 


232  OLD  DONGOLA. 

visited  the  ruins  of  an  old  fortress  with  the  remains  of  a 
church. 

On  the  road  we  met  the  boat  of  Hassan  Pascha,  which  was 
on  its  way  to  Meraui.  "We  each  fired  many  salutes  as  a 
mutual  greeting,  and  anchored  beside  each  other.  The 
Pascha  inquired  with  interest  about  the  treasures  which  he 
suspected  existed  in  the  Pyramids  of  Barkal,  and  with  the 
greatest  courtesy  promised  us  all  that  we  could  desire  to 
promote  our  journey  and  its  objects.  After  returning  our 
■\'isit,  we  parted  with  fresh  salutes. 

The  10th  June  we  reached  Old  Dongola,  the  former 
royal  residence  of  this  Christian  kingdom.  The  extensive 
ruins  of  the  town,  however,  now  testify  to  little  more  than 
the  considerable  extent  which  it  once  embraced.  On  a  hill 
in  the  neighbourhood,  which  commanded  an  admirable  pano- 
rama, now  stands  a  mosque.  An  Arabic  inscription  on 
marble  proves  that  it  was  opened  on  the  20  Pabi  el  auel,  of 
the  year  717  (1st  June,  1317),  after  the  victory  of  Safeddin 
Abdallah  e'  Nasir  over  tlie  infidels. 

As  we  have  had  very  little  opportunity  of  improving 
our  monumental  knowledge  since  leaving  Barkal,  and  had 
much  leisure  in  our  boat,  I  employed  myself  specially  during 
this  time  with  a  comparison  and  research,  as  far  as  lay  in  my 
power,  of  the  Nubian  language,  which  is  spoken  in  this  part 
of  the  country.  It  presents  very  remarkable  linguistic  phe- 
nomena, but  does  not  exhibit  the  slightest  similarity  with 
the  Egyptian  language.  My  belief  is,  that  the  whole  race 
penetrated  into  the  Nile  valley  from  the  south-west  at  a  late 
period.  We  have  now  a  servant  from  Derr,  the  capital  of 
Lower  Nubia,  who  speaks  tolerably  good  Italian,  is  animated 
and  intelligent,  and  is  a  great  assistance  to  me  in  acquiring 
a  knowledge  of  his  own  dialect,  the  Mahass.  I  have  some- 
times tormented  him  with  questions  in  the  boat  for  five  or 
six  entire  hours  in  one  day,  for  it  is  no  small  trouble  for  both 
of  us  to  understand  each  other  about  grammatical  forms  and 
inflections.  He  has,  at  any  rate,  at  the  same  time  acquired 
more  respect  for  his  own  language,  here  everywhere  consi- 


NEW  DO-JfGOLA.  233 

dered  bad,  and  inferior  to  the  xlrabie,  and  whicli  it  is  thought 
one  ought  rather  to  be  ashamed  of. 

Yesterday,  after  sailing  three  days  from  Old  Dongola,  we 
at  length  reached  Xew  Dongola,  usually  only  called  by  the 
Arabs  El  Oede  (the  Camp)  ;  we  had  the  great  joy  of  re- 
ceiving here  the  large  packet  of  letters,  whose  arrival  had 
already  been  announced  to  us  on  the  road  by  Hassan  Pascha. 
We  now  look  forward  with  fresh  courage  and  renewed  con- 
fidence to  the  last  difficult  portion  of  our  southern  journey. 
For  from  this  point  we  must  again,  alas !  quit  our  boats,  and 
mount  the  far  more  uncomfortable  ships  of  the  desert.  The 
Cataract  country  before  us  can  only  be  navigated  during  the 
short  season  of  the  highest  flood,  and  even  then  not  without 
danger.  Xevertheless,  our  richly  freighted  stone-boat  must 
undergo  this  dangerous  trial,  as  naturally  it  is  impossible  to 
think  of  transporting  our  Eam  and  the  other  monuments 
from  Barkal  by  land. 

We  shall  besides  be  unable  to  leave  this  as  soon  as  we 
otherwise  should  have  done,  owing  to  the  total  change  in  the 
arrangements  for  our  journey  during  the  next  five  or  six 
weeks.  Yet  we  shall  be  obliged  to  separate  from  our  boat 
of  burden,  as  it  must  seize  the  proper  moments  of  high  water, 
which  first  occurs  a  few  weeks  hence. 


LETTEK  XXY. 

Dongola,  the  23rdJune,  1844. 

Ye  STEED  AY  we  returned  from  an  excursion  of  four  days  to 
the  nearest  cataract,  which  we  were  able  to  reach  by  water. 
We  were  rewarded  far  beyond  our  expectations,  for  we  found 
a  number  of  ancient  Pharaonic  monuments,  the  only  ones 
in  the  whole  province  of  Dongola,  and  some  of  them  of  ex- 
treme antiquity. 

On  the  island  of  Argo  we  discovered  the  first  Egyptian 
sculptures  from  the  Hyksos  period ;  and  at  Keeman,  on  the 


234i  KONGAEA  LANGUAGE. 

right  bank,  the  traces  of  a  town  extending  far  across  the 
plain,  with  an  immense  necropolis  attached  to  it,  in  which, 
two  huge  monumental  tombs  were  distinguished  above  all  the 
others,  one  of  which  was  called  Kerman  (like  the  village),  the 
other  Defufa.  They  are  not  Pyramids,  but  of  an  oblong  form; 
the  first  150  by  66  feet,  the  second  132  by  66  feet  in  extent, 
and  about  40  feet  high,  built  massively  of  good,  solid  unburnt 
bricks  of  A^ile  mud ;  each  provided  with  an  outer  building, 
which  might  have  corresponded  to  the  temples  hi  front  of 
the  Egyptian  Pyramids.  Several  fragments  of  statues  from 
the  best  ancient  style  scattered  round  them,  some,  having 
good  hieroglyphics  upon  them,  testify  their  great  antiquity, 
and  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  oldest  Egyptian  settlement  of 
any  importance  on  Ethiopian  territory  must  have  been  on  this 
spot:  it  was  probably  occasioned  by  the  Egyptian  power 
having  been  driven  back  towards  Ethiopia  during  the  rule  of 
the  Hyksos  in  Egypt.  No  doubt  the  enormous  granite 
quarries  which  we  found  on  the  right  bank,  some  hours  to 
the  north  of  Kerman,  opposite  the  island  of  Tombos,  at  the 
entrance  of  the  Cataract  country,  were  connected  with  this. 
The  inscriptions  on  the  rock  contain  Shields  of  the  I7tli 
Dynasty,  and  an  inscription  of  eighteen  lines,  mentions  the 
second  year  of  Tuthmosis  L 

I  have  also,  here  in  Dongola,  begun  to  study  the  Kong'ara 
language  of  Dar  Eur.  A  negro  soldier,  a  native  of  that 
dreaded  warlike  country,  with  woolly  hair,  and  thick  pro- 
jecting lips,  and  who  we  took  with  us  last  year  from  Korusko 
to  Wadi  Haifa,  as  a  military  attendant,  instead  of  Ibrahim 
Aga,  who  had  been  sent  away,  found  us  out  here  again,  and 
was  given  up  to  me  by  the  Pascha  for  my  studies  in  lan- 
guage. He  promises  well,  but  in  half  an  hour  I  am  obliged 
to  exchange  him  with  the  Nubian.  The  Kong'ara  language  is 
quite  different  from  the  Nubian,  and  in  particular  points 
seems  to  me  to  show  a  stronger  analogy  with  certain  South 
African  languages. 

I  was  rejoiced  here  to  see  the  fortress  built  by  Ehrenberg 


EUIXS  OF  T0W3^S.  235 

in  1822,  which  has  suffered  indeed  by  the  inundations,  but 
still  always  serves  as  a  dwelling  for  the  governor,  now  Has- 
san Pascha.  AVe  shall  also  leave  a  monumental  structure 
behind  us,  for  Hassan  Pascha  has  requested  Erbkam  to  give 
him  the  plan  of  a  powder-magazine,  and  to  seek  out  a  suifc- 
able  site  for  it. 


LETTEE  XXVI. 

Korusko,  the  17 th  August,  1844. 

We  did  not  accomplish  our  departure  from  Dongola  before 
the  2nd  of  July.  AVe  went  slowly  down  the  western  side  of 
the  river.  That  very  day  we  passed  over  extensive  fields  of 
ruins,  the  dim  remains  of  once  flourishing  towns,  whose 
names  have  died  away.  The  first  we  found  were  opposite 
Aegonsene,  others  at  Koi,  and  at  Mosch.  The  following 
day  we  arrived  at  Hannik,  opposite  Tombos,  in  the  pro- 
vince of  Mahas.  Here  the  Cataract  country  begins  imme- 
diately, and  a  fresh  Xuba  dialect,  which  extends  as  far  down 
as  Derr  and  Korusko.  The  Nile,  on  the  whole,  retains  its 
northerly  direction  as  far  as  a  high  mountain,  named  after  a 
former  conqueror,  Ali  Bersi.  Early  on  the  third  day  we 
left  this  on  our  left  hand.  It  is  situated  on  the  sharp  bend 
of  the  river,  from  north-west  to  due  east,  from  which  point  it 
is  usual  to  cut  off  the  largest  portion  of  the  province  of  Mahas 
by  a  desert  road  running  in  a  northerly  direction.  We, 
liowever,  followed  the  turns  of  the  river,  and  dismounted  near 
t  wo  old  castles  on  the  bank,  at  a  grove  of  palm-trees,  under 
whose  shade  we  rested  during  the  sultry  mid-day  hours. 
The  nearest  of  those  castles,  so  romantically  situated  between 
the  fissures  of  the  rock,  I  find  difierently  named  on  every 
map,  as  Eakib  Effendi  (Cailliaud)  ;  Eakir  el  Bint,  from 
Bint,  the  girl  (Hoskins)  ;  Eakir  Bekdee,  from  Bender,  the 
capital  (Arrowsmith).  In  the  dialect  of  this  place,  however, 
it  is  called  Fakie  Eenti,  or,  in  that  of  Dongola,  Eakie  Benti  ; 


236  TEMPLE  AT  SOLE. 

and  it  is  so  named  from  the  palm-trees  at  its  foot,  Fenti, 
Benti,  being  the  names  for  pahn  and  date. 

On  the  4th  of  July  we  got  as  far  as  Sese,  a  hill  which 
bears  the  remnants  of  a  fortress.  Our  servant,  Ahmed, 
from  Derr,  related  to  us  that,  at  the  death  of  every  king,  his 
successor  was  led  up  to  its  summit,  and  there  adorned  with 
a  peculiar  royal  cap.  Castles  like  that  of  Sese,  many  of 
which  we  saw,  far  and  near,  on  the  plateau  beyond  the  river 
district,  indicate  an  early,  numerous,  and  ^Yarlike  population, 
which  has  now  almost  entirely  disappeared.  The  ruins, 
situated  a  quarter  of  an  hour  south  of  Mount  Sese,  are  called 
Sesebi.  Here  stood  an  ancient  temple,  of  which  only  four 
columns  stand  erect,  with  palm  capitals.  They  have  the 
Shields  of  Sethos  I.,  the  most  southern  we  have  met  with 
belonging  to  this  king.  l^Tear  these  temple  remains  are  the 
ruins  of  a  large  town,  on  an  artificially  raised  piece  of 
ground,  of  which  the  regular  encircling  walls  may  still  be  re- 
cognised. 

On  the  6th  July  we  arrived  at  Sole  (Soleb),  where  a 
temple  of  considerable  importance,  and  still  in  good  preser- 
vation, was  erected  by  Amenophis  III.  to  his  own  genius, 
the  deified  Ea->'ec-ma  (Amenophis).*  The  rich  represen- 
tations belonging  to  tliis  temple — the  same  to  which  once  also 
belonged  our  own  Eam  from  Barkal,  and  Lord  Prudhoe's 
Lion — gave  us  materials  for  almost  five  days'  work.  We 
did  not  again  set  ofl"  before  the  11th  July. 

Scarcely  one  hour  to  the  north  of  this  is  situated  Gebel 
DoscHE,  a  sandstone  rock,  projecting  into  the  river,  in 
which,"  on  the  river  side,  a  grotto  is  cut,  which  contains  re- 
presentations of  the  third  Tuthmosis. 

*  The  expression  is,  that  he  has  built  the  Temple  W  ^  -^ 
_  w  ^    O    y]  '•  to  his  living  image  on  earth  Ra-xeb-ma."    The  word 

chent  no  longer  exists  in  the  Coptic  language,  but  is  always  translated 
in  the  Rosetta  inscription  by  eiKcoj/.  The  temple,  and  the  locality 
belonging  to  it,  was  also  named  after  the  king,  but  after  his  Horus 
name,  "  The  Dwelling  of  Scha-em-ma."  From  this  we  may  trace  the 
origin  of  the  Ram  of  Barkal  and  the  Lion  in  the  British  Museum. 


SULPHUR  SPRI>'G.  237 

The  ven'  same  evening  we  arrived  at  SEDEii^aA,  where 
Amexophis  III.  erected  a  small  temple  to  his  own  wife, 
Tii.  In  the  midst  of  the  picturesque  heap  of  ruins,  thrown 
one  above  another,  rises  one  single  column,  which  has  re- 
mained standing.  A  great  necropolis  stretches  out  towards 
the  west. 

On  the  13th  of  July  we  halted  near  a  Schona  (such  is 
the  name  given  to  the  station  store-houses  maintained  by 
government),  opposite  Mount  Abie  or  Qabie,  a  little  below 
the  northern  point  of  the  island  of  Sai.  On  the  other  side 
of  the  river,  not  exactly  opposite,  stands  the  village  of 
Amaea,  and  near  it  the  ruins  of  a  temple.  I  was  not  a  little 
surprised  to  recognise  directly  on  the  columns  (six  of  which 
are  still  preserved)  the  fat  Queen  of  Naga  and  Meeoe,  with 
her  husband.  This  temple  was  built  by  them,  an  important 
testimony  to  the  widely- extended  dominion  of  that  Ethiopian 
Dynasty.  In  the  necropolis  to  the  south  of  the  temple  I 
also  observ^ed  fragments  of  inscriptions  in  the  above-men- 
tioned demotic  Ethiopian  alphabetic  -writing,  such  as  I  had 
also  found  near  Sedeinga. 

The  following  day,  after  having  visited  the  island  of  Sai, 
where  we  had  found  the  scanty  remains  of  a  temple  with  inr 
scriptions  of  Tuthmosis  III.  and  Amenophis  II.,  besides  the 
remains  of  a  town  and  a  Coptic  church,  we  proceeded  farther, 
and  on  the  15th  of  July  reached  Dal,  which  forms  the  fron- 
tier between  the  provinces  of  Sukkot  and  Batn  el  hager 
(Stone-belly)  ;  at  night  we  encamped  at  the  Cataract  of 
Kalfa. 

From  this  point  our  road  passed  near  the  hot  sulphur  spring 
of  Okmeh,  to  which  I  turned  off  from  our  caravan  road  with 
Abeken.  It  led  us  from  the  Schona,  where  we  separated, 
along  the  rocky  bank,  above  an  hour  backwards  to  a  square 
tower,  whicli  has  been  erected  over  the  spring,  and  which  is 
now  called  after  its  builder,  Hammam  seidna  Soliman.  The 
tower,  which  is  9  feet  in  diameter,  and  in  the  inside  4  feet 
wide,  is  now  half  filled  with  sand  and  earth ;  the  stream  of 
water,  about  the  thickness  of  a  man's  wrist,  issues  from  the 


238  TEMPLE  OF  SEMNEH. 

eastern  side  of  the  tower ;  on  the  other  side,  within  the  space 
of  a  square  foot,  sixteen  little  whirlpools  rise  out  of  tlie  sand, 
and  here,  where  the  water  is  hottest,  it  is  not  quite  44°  H. 
(131°  Fahr.).  It  tastes  sulphureous,  and  a  white  substance 
is  deposited  on  the  earth  round  the  spring.  Every  year  the 
river  rises  above  it,  and  even  over  the  tower,  which  stands 
half-way  up  the  river  bank.  The  surface  of  the  water  had 
now  only  risen  to  about  the  height  of  a  man,  and  had  not  yet 
reached  the  spring.  A  rough  hole  is  dug  into  the  rubbish 
for  the  sick  who  come  here,  and  is  covered  with  branches  to 
keep  back  the  stream.  Somewhat  farther  down  the  river 
another  small  spring  of  water  appears,  which  has  a  tempera- 
ture of  40°  E.  (122°  Fahr.)  when  it  issues  from  the  ground. 
The  saying  goes,  that  Okasche,  a  friend  of  the  Prophets, 
was  killed  in  a  campaign  in  the  south,  his  corpse  floated  down 
hither,  and  then  disappeared  in  the  rock  on  the  opposite 
bank ;  there,  even  now,  at  some  distance  up  the  river,  his 
grave  is  shown ;  a  tree  marks  the  spot. 

On  the  17th  July  we  encamped  at  the  temple  of  Semneh. 
The  village  consists  only  of  a  few  straw  huts,  which  are 
shaded  by  some  date  palms,  but  the  number  of  potsherds  in 
the  neighbourhood  prove  that  a  place  of  some  importance 
stood  here  formerly.  The  temple  is  surrounded  with  very 
ancient  fortifications,  of  immense  dimensions ;  its  erection 
dates  even  as  far  back  as  the  Old  Monarchy  under  Sesur- 
tesen  III.,  a  king  of  the  12th  Dynasty.  It  appears  that  this 
king  first  enlarged  the  limits  of  the  Egyptian  Monarchy  as 
far  as  this  point ;  indeed  it  has  been  found  that  at  a  later 
period  he  was  himself  worshipped  in  these  districts  as  a 
divinity  of  the  country.  The  temple  which  Tuthmosis  III. 
erected  here  in  the  New  Monarchy,  is  also  dedicated  to  him, 
and  to  the  god  Tetun.  On  the  right  bank,  also,  at  the 
village  of  Kummeh,  there  are  still  some  old  fortifications,  and 
within  them  a  stiU  larger  temple,  which  was  even  begun  by 
Tuthmosis  II. 

The  most  important  discovery  which  we  made  here,  and 
■which  I  shall  ^  only  mention  briefly,  because  I  am  at  this 


CASTLE  JLT  ABKE.  239 

moment  sending  a  more  detailed  account  of  it  to  Ehrenbero-, 
is  a  number  of  short  rock  inscriptions  which  mark  the  highest 
rises  of  the  Nile  during  a  series  of  years  under  the  govern- 
ment of  Amenemha  III.  (McEKis),  and  of  his  immediate  suc- 
cessors. These  statements  have  in  some  measure  a  historical 
value,  as  they  decidedly  confirm  my  supposition  that  the  Se- 
bekhoteps  followed  immediately  after  the  12th  Dynasty,  and 
they  arc  in  some  measure  peculiarly  interesting  for  the  geo- 
logical history  of  the  Nile  valley  ;  because  they  prove  that 
the  river,  above  4000  years  ago,  rose  more  than  24  feet  higher 
than  now,  and  thereby  must  have  produced  totally  different 
conditions  in  the  inundation  and  in  the  whole  surface  of  the 
ground  both  above  and  below  this  spot.  Our  examination  of 
this  remarkable  locality,  with  its  temples  and  roek-iuscrip- 
tions,  occupied  us  twelve  whole  days.* 

On  the  29th  July  we  went  from  Semneh  to  Abke,  and  the 
following  day  visited  the  old  castle  situated  to  the  north  of  it, 
which  is  called  el  Kenissa,  the  church,  and  formerly  there- 
fore probably  contained  one.  From  the  top  of  this  castle 
we  had  the  most  magnificent  prospect  of  the  chief  cataracts 
of  the  whole  country.  Three  great  fiills  could  be  distin- 
guished from  the  smaller  ones  in  the  broad,  rocky  island 
valley,  and  the  eye  passed  over  several  hundred  islands,  as 
far  as  the  black  mountain  range  on  the  opposite  bank.  But 
towardcs  the  north  the  wide  plain  spread  out,  whicli  extends 
from  "VVadi  Haifa  to  Phila?.  The  succession  of  the  different 
kinds  of  rock  was  most  distinctly  visible  as  we  descended 
from  tlie  last  ridge  of  the  rocks  on  the  banks  into  the  great 
plain,  from  which  some  single  cones  of  sandstone  alone  pro- 
truded, as  if  from  the  bed  of  a  primitive  ocean.  Here  un- 
doubtedly are  the  sources  of  the  everlasting  sand,  which, 

*  This  theory  of  Dr.  Lepsius,  of  the  bed  of  the  Nile  having  been  ex- 
cavated to  a  depth  of  25  feet  in  4000  years,  has  been  examined  by 
Leonard  Horner,  Esq.,  F.R.S.,  in  a  paper  published  in  the  Edinburgh 
PliUosophioal  Journal  for  July,  1850.  Dr.  Lepsius  having  in  a  letter, 
dated  12th  April,  1853,  addressed  to  Mr,  Horner,  expressed  a  wish 
that  that  paper  should  be  reprinted  in  the  present  volume,  it  will  be 
found  accordingly  in  the  Appendix. — Tr. 


240  ABTJ  SIMBEL.      IBRIM. 

driven  by  the  northern  wind  among  the  primitive  mountains, 
rendered  our  road  to  Semneh  very  difficult. 

On  the  1st  of  August  we  left  "Wadi  Halfa  in  three 
boats,  and  from  this  point  again  sailed  through  a  country 
with  which  we  were  already  acquainted.  The  following 
morning  we  came  to  Abf  Simbel,  where  we  spent  nine 
days,  in  order  to  become  perfectly  acquainted  with  the 
copious  representations  on  both  the  rock-temples.  I  long 
searched  in  vain  for  the  remarkable  G-reek  inscription  which 
Leake  had  found  on  one  of  the  four  great  Ramses  Colossi, 
till  I  fortunately  re-discovered  it,  buried  tolerably  deep,  on 
the  left  leg  of  the  second  Colossus  from  the  south.  I  was 
obliged  to  make  a  great  excavation  to  obtain  a  perfect  im- 
pression of  it  on  paper.  I  see  no  reason  why  we  should 
not  take  this  antique  inscription  for  what  it  states  itself 
to  be,  namely,  memoranda  of  the  Greek  mercenaries,  who 
came  hither  with  Psammeticus  I.  in  pursuit  of  the  re- 
bellious warriors.  Beneath  the  other  inscriptions  on  the 
Colossus,  I  also  found  some  Phcenician  inscriptions. 

After  we  had  visited  from  this  point  some  other  rock- 
monuments  on  the  opposite  bank  at  Abahuda  and  Scha- 
TAUi,  we  quitted  Abu  Simbel  on  the  11th  of  July,  and  next 
halted  on  the  right  bank  near  Ibrim,  ancient  Peimis,  the 
name  of  which  I  have  also  found  in  hieroglyphics  written 
P.R.M.  Ibrim  is  situated  on  the  left  bank  opposite  Anibe, 
near  which  we  discovered,  and  made  a  drawing  of,  only  one 
private  tomb  from  the  period  of  the  20th  Dynasty,  but  it  was 
in  good  preservation.  Thence  we  proceeded  to  Deee,  where 
we  got  the  largest  despatch  of  letters  we  have  yet  received, 
so  that  it  was  a  real  holiday  for  us.  With  these  treasures 
we  hastened  past  Am  ad  a  to  this  spot  Koetjsko,  whose  de- 
lightful group  of  palms  had  won  our  hearts  during  our  long, 
though  involuntary,  detention  there  last  year.  "We  have 
fixed  upon  the  present  Sunday  to  celebrate  with  pleasant 
recollections  the  happy  termination  of  our  southern  journey. 
Our  boats  lie  quietly  beside  the  bank. 


GIS.M  II ALFA.  241 


LETTEE  XXYII. 

PJdlce,  the  \st  September,  1844. 

I  AM  only  now  able  to  finish  my  journal  from  Koruskoy 
whence  we  set  sail  on  the  evening  of  the  18th  August  for 
Sebua. 

Erom  this  point,  as  far  as  Philae,  the  valley  is  called  Wadi 
Kenus,  "the  valley  of  the  Beni  Ket^si,"  a  tribe  of  which 
we  read  much  in  the  Arabic  accounts.  The  upper  valley  of 
Korusko,  as  far  as  Wadi  Haifa,  is  called  on  all  the  maps 
Wadi  Nuba,  a  name  which  has  indeed  been  already  used 
by  Burckhardt,  but  which  must  originate  in  some  mistake. 
Neither  our  Nubian  servant,  Ahmed,  a  native  of  the  district 
of  Derr,  nor  the  people  who  are  settled  in  the  country,  are 
acquainted  with  this  name  ;  and  even  Hassan  Kaschef,  above 
seventy  years  of  age,  who  governed  the  country  before  the 
Egyptian  conquest,  could  give  no  answers  to  my  particular 
inquiries  about  this  name.  They  all  agree  in  stating  that 
the  lower  district  has  always  been  called  "Wadi  Kexus. 
Afterwards,  near  Korusko,  follows  the  Wadi  el  Arab,  so 
called  from  the  Arabs  of  the  desert,  w^ho  have  encroached  as 
far  as  this  spot ;  then  Wadi  Ibrim  ;  and  lastly,  AYadi 
Half  A.  But  since  the  conquest  the  official  name  for  the 
whole  province  between  the  two  cataracts  is  GriSM  Halfa, 
the  province  of  Haifa. 

In  Korusko  I  found  a  Bischari,  by  name  Ali,  whose  ani- 
mated and  pleasant  deportment  determined  me  at  once  to 
make  him  my  instructor  in  this  important  language.  He 
was  quite  satisfied  with  my  invitation  for  him  to  accompany 
us,  and  now  every  moment  that  is  at  liberty  is  employed  in 
preparing  a  grammar  and  vocabulary  of  this  language.  He 
comes  from  the  interior  of  the  country,  from  Beled  Ellaqi, 
\\hich  is  eight  days  distant  from  the  Nile,  and  twenty  from 
the  Eed  Sea,  and  gives  a  name  to  the  remarkable  Wadi 
Ellaqi,   which  extends,  without  interruption,   through  the 

R 


242  KALABSCHEH. 

very  midst  of  the  extensive  range  of  country  between  the 
Nile  and  the  Eed  Sea.  He  calls  the  country  of  the  Bischari 
tribes  Edbat,  and  their  language,  Middh  to  Beg'auie,  the 
Beo-'a  language,  from  which  may  be  traced  its  identity  with 
the  language  of  the  mighty  Beg'a  nations,  so  often  men- 
tioned in  the  middle  ages. 

Prom  Korusko  we  next  sailed  to  Sebita,  where  we  spent 
four  davs ;  then  by  Dakke  (Pselchis)  and  Kuban  (Contra 
Pselchis)  to  G'eef  Htjssek,  with  its  rock-temple  dedicated 
by  Eamses  to  Ptah.  This  place  is  frequently  called  by 
earlier  travellers  Giesche,  a  confusion  with  the  village 
situated  on  the  farther  eastern  bank,  which  is  called  by  the 
Arabs  Qiesch,  by  the  ]S'ubians  Kisch  or  Kischiga,  and 
which  is  situated  near  some  considerable  ruins  of  an  ancient 
city  which  bear  the  name  of  Sabaguea.  The  25th  August 
we  spent  in  the  temple  of  Dendue,  first  built  under  the 
Eoman  dominion  ;  and  the  following  day  in  Kalabscheh,  the 
ancient  Talmis,  whose  temple  likewise  contains  only  the 
Shields  of  Caesar  (Augustus).  Talmis  was  for  a  long  time  a 
capital  of  the  Blemtes,  whose  inroads  into  Egypt  gave  the 
Eomans  plenty  of  employment.  On  one  of  the  columns  of 
the  great  outer  court  there  is  engraved  the  interesting  in- 
scription of  Silco,  who  calls  himself  a  ^aaCkldKos  Nov/3a5wi/  Koi 
6'Xcov  TQ)v  Ai^ioTTcov.*  In  it  he  boasts  of  his  victories  over  the 
Blemyes,  who  I  hold  to  be  a  branch  of  the  Meroitic  Ethio- 
pians, the  Bischari  of  the  present  day.  It  seems  that  the 
demotic  Ethiopian  inscriptions,  one  of  which  is  remarkable 
by  its  length,  and  perhaps  forms  a  counterpart  to  the  G-reek 
inscription  of  the  Nubian  King,  can  only  be  ascribed  to 
these  Blemyes.  I  have  discovered  another  very  late  in- 
scription on  the  wall  to  the  back  of  the  temple,  but  in  such 
barbarous  Greek  that  it  is  almost  inexplicable.  I  send  it  to 
Bockh  for  him  to  decipher. 

On  the  30th  August  we  reached  Debot,  and  the  following 
day  Phil^,  where  we  immediately  took  possession  of  the 

*  King  of  the  Noubadoe  and  the  Ethiopians.— Te. 


THEBES.  243 

enchanting  temple-terrace,  which,  since  that  time,  has  been 
our  chief  quarters,  and  will  remain  so  for  several  weeks 
longer.  The  great  temple -buildings,  although  the  most 
ancient  of  them  date  only  as  far  back  as  Nectanebus,  pre- 
sent an  unusual  number  of  hieroglyphic,  demotic,'  and 
Greek  inscriptions,  and,  to  my  surprise,  I  have  also  found 
here  a  whole  chamber  in  one  of  the  pylones  which  contains 
nothing  but  Ethiopian  representations  and  inscriptions. 


LETTEE  XXYIII. 

Thebes^  Qurna,  24th  November,  1844. 
On  the  4th  of  jS'ovember  we  reached  this  last  great  station 
of  our  journey,  and  feel  that  we  have  again  reached  much 
nearer  home.  We  have  selected  a  charming  castle  on  a  rock 
for  our  residence  here,  which  will  certainly  be  protracted  for 
several  months.  It  is  situated  on  a  hill  called  Abd  el  Qfrna, 
and  is  an  ancient  tomb  enlarged  by  brick  buildings,  from 
which  we  overlook  the  whole  Theban  plain  at  one  view.  I 
should  be  afraid  of  being  almost  oppressed  by  the  overwhelm- 
ing number  of  monuments,  if  the  mighty  character  of  the 
ruins  of  this  most  royal  city  of  all  antiquity  did  not  maintain, 
and  daily  renew,  our  interest  to  the  highest  possible  degree. 
While  our  investigations  of  the  numerous  temples,  from  the 
Ptolemaic  and  the  Eoman  period,  immediately  preceding  that, 
had  in  fact  become  almost  fatiguing,  here,  where  the  Homeric 
forms  of  the  mighty  Pharaohs  of  the  18th  and  19th  Dynas- 
ties stand  out  before  me  in  their  dignity  and  splendour,  I  feel 
as  fresh  again  as  at  the  commencement  of  our  journey. 

I  first  had  excavations  made  in  the  renowned  temple  of 
Eamses  Miamun,  lying  at  our  feet,  which  have  led  to  unex- 
pected results.  Erbkam  has  superintended  the  work  with  the 
greatest  care,  and  his  ground  plan  which  is  now  finished  of 
this  most  beautiful  building  of  the  Pharaonic  times,  described 
by  Diodonis  as  the  tomb  of  OSymandyas,  is  the  first  which 

e2 


244  ETHIOPIAN  LAJ^-^GUAGES. 

can  be  called  perfect,  as  it  no  longer  rests  on  arbitrary  resto- 
rations, which  are  too  long  in  the  French  descriptions  and 
too  short  in  those  of  Wilkinson. 

I  have  also  had  excavations  made  in  the  rock-tomb  of  the 
same  Eamses  in  Bab  el  Meluk,  which  was  covered  over  with 
rubbish,  and  which  Eosellini  was  mistaken  in  thinking  un- 
finished ;  several  chambers  have  already  been  opened,  and  if 
fortune  favours  us  we  shall  also  still  find  the  sarcophagus, 
not  indeed  unopened — the  Persians  had  already  taken  care 
of  that — but  perhaps  less  mutilated  than  others,  as  the  tomb 
has  been  closed  up  by  the  river  mud  from  very  ancient  times. 

On  our  journey  from  Korusko  hither,  besides  our  anti- 
quarian labours,  I  was  engaged  with  the  languages  of  the 
southern  countries,  still  so  little  known.  Amidst  these,  three 
may  be  selected  as  being  the  most  widely-distributed ;  the 
Nuba  language,  that  of  the  Nuba  or  Berber  nation ;  the  Kuif- 
GAEA  language,  of  the  negroes  of  Dae,  Fue  ;  and  the  Bega 
language,  that  of  the  Bischaeibas  inhabiting  the  eastern 
portion  of  the  Sudan.  I  have  prepared  the  grammar  and 
vocabulary  of  all  three,  so  fully,  that  whenever  they  are 
published  some  notion  of  these  languages  may  be  obtained. 
The  most  important  of  them  is  the  one  last  mentioned,  be- 
cause, both  with  reference  to  its  grammatical  construction 
and  by  its  position  in  the  development  of  languages,  it 
proves  itself  to  be  a  very  remarkable  member  of  the  Cauca- 
sian stock.  It  is  spoken  by  the  people,  for  which  reason  I 
think  I  can  perceive  that  they  were  once  the  inhabitants  of 
the  flourishing  city  of  Meroe,  and  thus  have  a  peculiar  claim, 
to  be  called  in  a  more  exact  sense  the  Ethiopian  people. 

It  has  furthermore  been  proved,  that  nothing  can  be  dis- 
covered of  a  primitive  Ethiopian  civilisation,  or  indeed  of  an 
ancient  Ethiopian  national  civilisation,  which  is  so  much 
held  up  by  modern  erudition ;  indeed,  we  have  every  reason 
to  deny  this  completely.  "Whatever  in  the  accounts  of  the 
ancients  does  not  rest  on  total  misapprehension,  only  refers 
to  Egyptian  civilisation  and  art,  which  had  fled  in  the  time  of 
the  Hyksos  rule  to  Ethiopia.    The  irruption  of  Egyptian 


THEBES.  245 

power  from  Ethiopia,  at  the  foundation  of  the  new  Egyptian 
Monarchy,  and  its  progress  even  far  into  Asia,  was  mentioned 
in  the  Asiatic,  and  afterwards  in  the  Grreek  traditions,  as  an 
event  which  was  transferred  from  the  Ethiopian  country  to 
the  Ethiopian  nation^  for  no  knowledge  of  a  still  older  Egyp- 
tian Monarchy,  and  of  its  high  but  peaceful  state  of  civilisa- 
tion, had  penetrated  to  the  northern  nations.  I  have  sent 
an  account  of  the  results  of  our  Ethiopian  journey  to  the 
Academy,  and  in  it  I  give  a  cursory  survey  of  the  history  of 
Ethiopia  from  the  first  conquest  of  the  country  by  Sesur- 
tesen  III.  in  the  12th  Manethonic  Dynasty  down  to  the 
most  flourishing  period  of  the  Meroitic  Monarchy  in  the 
first  centuries  of  our  era,  and  then  through  the  middle  ages 
down  to  the  Bischaribas  of  the  present  day,  whose  Sheikhs 
we  saw  in  chains  marching  over  the  ruins  of  what  was  once 
their  capital,  and  passing  in  front  of  the  Pyramids  of  their 
ancient  kings. 


LETTEE  XXIX. 

Thehes,  Qurna,  8th  January,  1845. 

A  snoTiT  time  ago  we  received  the  joyful  intelligence  that 
our  colossal  Eam  and  the  other  Ethiopian  monuments  had 
arrived  safely  in  Alexandria.  We  shall  also  bring  away 
some  valuable  monuments  from  this  spot,  among  them  a 
beautiful  sarcophagus  of  fine  white  limestone,  on  parts  of 
which  are  some  painted  inscriptions,  which  go  back  as  far  as 
the  Old  Monarchy  in  the  first  period  of  the  increasing  great- 
ness of  Thebes.* 

I  have  made  another  conquest  to-day,  which  gives  me 
double  pleasure,  as  it  was  only  effected  with  indescribable 
difficulty,  and  has  brought  out  a  monument  in  the  most  per- 
fect preservation,  which  will  hardly  find  its  equal  in  our 
museums.  A  sepulchral  chamber  with  interesting  represen- 
tations of  kings  of  which  we  have  made  drawings,  opens  out 
*  Denkmal.,  Abth.  II.,  Bl.  245,  246. 


246  PAINTIKG  rN"  EOCK-TOME. 

of  a  deep  pit  which  was  excavated  a  short  time  ago ;  from 
this  a  narrow  passage  leads  still  deeper  into  a  second  chamber, 
which  is  painted  all  over,  just  like  the  other.  The  chambers 
are  hewn  out  of  an  extremely  friable  rock,  which  loosens 
from  the  ceiling  in  large  fragments  at  the  slightest  touch ; 
the  rock-caves  were  therefore  vaulted  in  a  circular  form, 
with  Nile  bricks,  which  were  covered  vrith  stucco,  and  then 
painted.  At  the  side  of  the  inner  door,  on  the  right  hand, 
King  Amenophis  I.  is  represented,  and  on  the  left,  his 
mother  Aahmes-nufee-aei,  who  even  in  later  times  was 
much  worshipped.  Both  are  about  four  feet  high,  painted 
on  the  stucco,  and  the  colours  preserved  as  fresh  as  possible. 
I  was  anxious  to  detach  these  figures  fi'oui  the  wall,  which 
they  entirely  covered  ;  but  for  this  purpose  I  was  compelled  to 
break  through  the  brick  walls  all  round,  and  afterwards  also 
to  take  out  the  bricks  singly  from  behind  the  stucco  with 
the  greatest  care.  This  at  length  we  have  accomplished 
after  great  labour,  We  have  taken  out  the  whole  stucco, 
which  is  only  the  thickness  of  a  finger,  with  the  figures  com- 
pletely uninjured,  and,  placing  it  on  two  slabs  composed  of 
smooth  boards  covered  with  skins,  lipen,  and  paper,  we  raised 
it  from  the  narrow  sepulchral  cave,  which  is  still  half  filled 
with  rubbish. 

"We  have  also,  to  my  great  delight,  got  a  fresh  supply  for 
our  plaster  casts.  A  short  time  ago  5  cwt.  of  plaster  ar- 
rived, forwarded  to  us  by  M.  Clot  Bey,  for  which  we  had 
sent  an  order  to  France,  and  I  have  found  an  Arab  here,  and 
immediately  taken  him  into  my  service,  who  has  at  least  suf- 
ficient knowledge  to  prepare  the  plaster  and  to  make  casts 
from  bas-reliefs. 


LETTEE  XXX. 

Thehes,  the  25th  February ,  1845. 

"We  have  now  been  inhabiting  our  Theban  Acropolis,  on 
the   hill  of  Quma,   above  a   quarter  of  a  year,  every  one 


THEBES.  247 

busily  employed  ia  his  own  way  from  moruing  to  evening,  in 
investigating,  describing,  and  drawing  the  most  valuable 
monuments,  taking  paper  impressions  of  the  inscriptions, 
and  in  making  plans  of  the  buildings  ;  we  have  not  yet 
been  able  to  complete  the  Libyan  side  alone,  where  there 
are  at  least  twelve  temples,  five-and-twenty  tombs  of  kings, 
fifteen  belonging  to  the  royal  wives  or  daughters,  and  a 
countless  number  belonging  to  private  persons,  still  to  be 
examined.  Tlie  eastern  side,  with  its  six-and-twenty  sanctu- 
aries, in  a  certain  degree  of  preservation,  will  however  de- 
mand no  less  time,  and  yet,  more  has  been  done  by  previous 
travellers  and  expeditions  in  Thebes  itself,  especially  by  the 
French-Tuscan  expedition,  than  in  any  other  spot,  and  we 
have  everywhere  only  compared  and  completed  their  labours, 
and  not  repeated  them.  "We  are  also  far  from  imagining  that 
we  have  now  by  any  means  exhausted  the  infinite  number 
of  monuments;  whoever  follows  us  with  new  information, 
and  with  the  results  of  more  advanced  science,  will  also  find 
fresh  treasures,  and  gain  fresh  instruction  from  the  same 
monuments.  I  have  always  had  a  historical  aim  in  view, 
and  this  has  especially  determined  my  selection  of  the  monu- 
ments. Whenever  I  believed  that  I  had  attained  what  was 
most  essential  for  this  end  I  was  satisfied. 

The  river  here  divides  the  broad  valley  into  two  unequal 
halves.  On  the  west  side  it  approaches  close  to  the  precipi- 
tous Libyan  range,  which  there  projects  ;  on  the  eastern  side 
it  bounds  a  wide  fruitful  plain,  extending  as  far  as  Me- 
damot,  a  spot  situated  on  the  border  of  the  Arabian  desert, 
several  hours  distant.  On  this  side  stood  the  actual  town  of 
Thebes,  which  seems  to  have  been  chiefly  grouped  round 
the  two  great  temples  of  Kaenae  and  Ltjqsoe,  situated  above 
half  an  hour  apart.  Karnak  lies  more  to  the  north,  and 
farther  removed  from  the  Nile;  Luqsor  is  now  actually 
washed  by  the  waves  of  the  river,  and  may  even  formerly 
have  been  the  harbour  of  the  city.  The  west  side  of  the 
river  contained  the  necropolis  of  Thebes,  and  all  the  temples 
which  stood  here  referred  more  or  less  to  the  worship  of  the 


248  KAENAK. 

dead ;  indeed,  all  the  inbabitants  of  tbis  part,  wbicb  was 
afterwards  comprebended  bj  tbe  Greeks  under  tbe  name  of 
Me3j:noxia,  seem  to  bave  been  principally  occupied  with 
tbe  care  of  tbe  dead  and  tbeir  tombs.  Tbe  former  extent  of 
tbe  Memnonia  may  be  now  distinguisbed  by  Qurna  and 
Medinet  Habu,  places  situated  at  tbe  nortbern  and  soutbern 
extremities. 

A  survey  of  tbe  Tbeban  monuments  naturally  begins 
witb  tbe  ruins  of  Kaet^ak.  Here  stood  tbe  great  royal 
temple  of  tbe  bundred-gated  Thebes,  which  was  dedicated  to 
Ammon-Ea,  tbe  King  of  tbe  Grods,  and  to  tbe  peculiar  local 
god  of  the  city  of  Amnion,  so  called  after  him  (No-Ammon, 
Diospolis).  Ap,  along  with  the  feminine  article  Tap,  from 
which  tbe  Greeks  made  These,  was  the  name  of  one  par- 
ticular sanctuary  of  Ammon.  It  is  also  often  employed  in 
hieroglyphics  in  the  singular,  or  still  more  frequently  in  tbe 
plural  (^'apu),  as  tbe  name  of  tbe  town;  for  which  reason 
the  Greeks  naturally,  without  changing  tbe  article  along 
witb  it,  generally  used  the  plural  e^^m.  Tbe  whole  history 
of  tbe  Egyptian  Monarchy,  after  tbe  city  of  Ammon  was 
raised  to  be  one  of  the  two  royal  residences  in  tbe  land,  is 
connected  witb  this  temple.  All  Dynasties  emulated  in  tbe 
glory  of  having  contributed  their  share  to  the  enlargement, 
embellishment,  or  restoration  of  this  national  sanctuary. 

It  was  founded  by  their  first  king,  tbe  mighty  SesuetesenI., 
under  the  1st  Tbeban  Eoyal  Dynasty,  the  12th  of  Manetho, 
between  2600  and  2700  B.C.,  and  even  now  exhibits  some 
ruins  in  the  centre  of  the  building  from  that  period,  bearing 
the  name  of  this  king.  During  the  Dynasties  immediately 
succeeding,  which  for  several  centuries  groaned  under  the 
yoke  of  the  victorious  hereditary  enemy,  this  sanctuary  no 
doubt  was  also  deserted,  and  nothing  has  been  preserved 
which  belonged  to  that  period.  But  after  tbe  first  king  of 
the  17th  Dynasty,  Amosis,  in  the  I7th  century  B.C.,  had  suc- 
ceeded in  his  first  war  against  tbe  Hyksos,  his  two  successors, 
Amenophis  I.  and  Tuthmosis  I.,  built  round  the  remains 
of  the  most  ancient  sanctuary  a  magnificent  temple,  witb  a 


TEMPLE   OF  KAEKAK.  249 

great  many  chambers  round  tlie  cella,  and  with  a  broad 
court,  and  pylones  appertaining  to  it,  in  front  of  which  Tut- 
mosis  I.  erected  two  obelisks.  Two  other  pylones,  with  con- 
tiguous court-walls,  were  built  by  the  same  king,  at  a  right 
angle  with  the  temple  in  the  direction  of  Luqsor.  Tut- 
mosis  III.  and  his  sister  enlarged  this  temple  to  the  back 
by  a  hall  resting  on  fifty-six  columns,  besides  many  other 
chambers,  which  surrounded  it  on  three  sides,  and  were  en- 
circled by  one  common  outer  wall.  The  succeeding  kings 
partly  closed  the  temple  more  perfectly  in  front,  partly 
built  new  independent  temples  near  it,  and  also  placed  two 
more  large  pylones  towards  the  south-west,  in  front  of  those 
erected  by  Tuthmosis  I.,  so  that  now  four  lofty  pylones 
formed  the  magnificent  entrance  to  the  principal  temple  on 
this  side. 

But  a  far  more  splendid  enlargement  of  the  temple  was 
executed  in  the  fifteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries  B.C.  by 
the  great  Pharaohs  of  the  19th  Dynasty ;  for  Sethos  I.,  the 
father  of  Eamses  Miamun,  added  in  the  original  axis  of  the 
temple  the  most  magnificent  hall  of  pillars  that  was  ever 
seen  in  Egypt  or  elsewhere.  The  stone  roof,  supported  by 
134  columns,  covers  a  space  of  164  feet  in  depth,  and  320 
feet  in  breadth.  Each  of  the  twelve  central  columns  is  36 
feet  in  circumference,  and  66  feet  high  beneath  the  archi- 
trave ;  the  other  columns,  40  feet  high,  are  27  feet  in  circum- 
ference. It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  overwhelming  im- 
pression which  is  experienced  upon  entering  for  the  first 
time  into  this  forest  of  columns,  and  wandering  from  one 
range  into  the  other,  between  the  lofty  figures  of  ^  gods  and 
kings  on  every  side  represented  on  them,  projecting  some- 
times entirely,  sometimes  only  in  part.  Every  surface,  is 
covered  Avith  various  sculptures,  now  in  relief,  now  sunk, 
which  were,  however,  only  completed  under  the  succes- 
sors of  the  builder;  most  of  them,  indeed,  by  his  son 
Eamses  Miamun.  In  front  of  this  hypostyle  hall  was 
placed,  at  a  later  period,  a  great  hyp^thral  court,  270  by 
320  feet  in  extent,  decorated  on  the  sides  only  with  colon- 
nades, and  entered  by  a  magnificent  pylon. 


250  THEBES. 

The  principal  part  of  the  temple  terminated  here,  com- 
prising a  length  of  1170  feet,  not  including  the  row  of 
Sphinxes  in  front  of  its  external  pylon,  nor  the  peculiar 
sanctuary  which  was  placed  by  Eamses  Miamun  directly 
beside  the  wall  farthest  back  in  the  temple,  and  with  the 
same  axis,  but  turned  in  such  a  manner  that  its  entrance  was 
on  the  opposite  side.  Including  these  enlargements,  the 
entire  length  must  have  amounted  to  nearly  2000  feet, 
reckoning  to  the  most  southern  gate  of  the  external  wall, 
which  surrounded  the  whole  space,  which  was  of  nearl^y  equal 
breadth.  Tlie  later  Dynasties,  who  now  found  the  principal 
temples  completed  on  all  sides,  but  who  also  were  desirous 
of  contributing  their  share  to  the  embellishment  of  this 
centre  of  the  Theban  worship,  began  partly  to  erect  separate 
small  temples  on  the  large  level  space  which  was  surrounded 
by  the  above-mentioned  enclosure-wall,  partly  to  extend 
these  temples  also  externally. 

The  head  of  the  20th  Dynasty,  Eamses  III.,  whose  cam- 
paigns in  Asia,  in  the  fifteenth  century  before  Christ,  were 
scarcely  inferior  to  those  of  his  renowned  ancestors,  Sethos  I. 
and  Kamses  II.,  built  a  special  temple,  with  a  court  of 
columns  and  a  hypostyle  hall,  above  200  feet  long,  which 
now  intersects,  in  a  rather  unsymmetrical  manner,  the  enclo- 
sure-wall of  the  external  court  in  front ;  and  he  founded,  at 
a  little  distance  from  it,  a  still  larger  sanctuary  for  the  third 
person  of  the  Theban  Triad,  Chensu,  the  son  of  Ammon. 
This  last  was  completed  by  the  succeeding  kings  of  his 
Dynasty,  and  the  priest-kings  of  the  21st  Dynasty,  who  added 
to  it  a  magnificent  court  of  columns,  with  a  pylon  in  front. 
In  the  22nd  Dynasty  we  recognise  Scheschenk  I.,  the  war- 
like King  Shishak  of  the  Bible,  who,  about  970  B.C.,  con- 
quered Jerusalem.  His  Asiatic  campaigns  are  celebrated  on 
the  southern  external  wall  of  the  great  temple,  where,  in  the 
symbolic  form  of  prisoners,  he  leads  140  vanquished  towns 
and  countries  before  Ammon.  Among  their  names  there  is 
one  whicli,  not  without  reason,  is  considered  to  be  a  designa- 
tion for  the  kingdom  of  Judaea,  as  well  as  the  names  of 
several  well-known  towns  in  Palestine. 


TEMPLE  OF  KARKAK.  251 

The  two  priests'  Dynasties  mentioned  above,  which  fol- 
lowed immediately  after  the  Eamessides,  were  no  longer  of 
the  Theban  race,  but  proceeded  from  towns  in  Lower  Eg}-pt. 
The  power  of  the  Monarchy  sank  with  this  change ;  and  after 
the  short  23rd  Dynasty,  from  which  period  there  are  still 
some  remains  in  Karnak,  a  revolution  seems  to  have  occurred. 
The  present  lists  of  authors  name  only  one  king  of  the  24th 
Dynasty,  who  has  not  yet  been  re-discovered  on  the  Egyptian 
monuments.  In  his  reign  the  invasion  of  the  Ethiopians 
occurred,  who,  from  the  25th  Dynasty,  Schabak  and  Tah- 
EAKA  (the  So  and  Tirhaka  of  the  Bible),  reigned  in  Egypt  at 
the  commencement  of  the  seventh  century  B.C.  These  kings 
came,  indeed,  from  Ethiopia,  but  governed  completely  in  the 
Egyptian  manner,  and  they  did  not  neglect  to  worship  the 
Egyptian  god-kings.  Their  names  are  found  on  several 
smaller  temples  of  Karnak,  and  on  a  splendid  colonnade  in 
the  great  court  in  front,  which  seems  to  have  been  first 
placed  there  by  Tahraka.  According  to  historical  accounts, 
this  last  king  returned  of  his  own  accord  to  Ethiopia,  and 
left  the  Egyptian  kingdom  to  its  native  rulers. 

The  dispossessed  Saitic  Dynasty  now  returned  to  the 
throne,  and  once  more,  in  the  seventh  and  sixth  centuries, 
developed  all  the  splendour  of  which  this  country,  as  rich 
in  internal  resources  as  in  external  power,  was  capable  of 
producing  under  a  powerful  and  wise  sceptre.  It  opened 
for  the  first  time  a  peaceful  intercourse  between  foreign 
countries  and  Egypt ;  Greeks  settled  amongst  them,  com- 
merce flourished,  and  a  new  and  enormous  amount  of  wealth 
was  accumulated,  such  as  before  had  only  been  attained  by 
the  spoils  of  war  and  tribute.  But  this  was  only  an  artificial 
height  of  glory ;  for  the  pristine  vigour  of  the  nation  had 
long  been  broken,  and  even  art  gave  more  signs  of  luxury 
than  of  intrinsic  value.  The  last  flourishing  period  of  the 
nation  soon  passed  away.  The  country  could  not  withstand 
the  advancing  storm  of  the  Persians.  In  the  year  525  it 
was  conquered  by  Cambvses,  and  trodden  down  with  barbaric 
fanaticism.     Many  monuments  were  destroyed,  and  not  a 


252  THEBES. 

single  sanctuary  nor  wall  was  erected  during  this  period; 
nothing  at  least  has  been  preserved  to  our  time,  not  even 
from  the  long  and  milder  government  of  Daeius  ;  one  temple 
only  in  the  Oasis  of  Kargeh,  or  at  least  sculptures  with  his 
name,  having  been  discovered  from  that  period.  Under 
Darius  II.,  exactly  one  hundred  years  after  the  commence- 
ment of  the  Persian  rule,  Egypt  became,  indeed,  once  more 
independent,  and  we  then  again  find  the  names  of  the  native 
kings  in  the  temples  of  Karnak ;  but  after  three  Dynasties  had 
succeeded  each  other  in  rapid  succession,  during  the  space  of 
sixty-four  years,  it  feU  a  second  time  under  the  dominion  of 
the  Persians,  who  soon  afterwards,  in  the  year  332,  lost  it 
by  the  conquest  of  Alexander  of  Macedon.  Since  then  the 
country  was  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  getting  habituated 
to  foreign  rulers,  it  had  lost  its  independence  jfor  ever,  and 
passed  from  one  hand  to  another,  the  succeeding  ruler  always 
worse  than  the  preceding,  down  to  the  present  day. 

Under  the  Macedonians  and  G-reeks,  Egypt  still  possessed 
sufl&cient  vigour  to  retain  its  religion  and  institutions  in  the 
manner  that  had  been  carried  down  from  ancient  times. 
The  foreign  princes  in  all  respects  took  the  place,  and  fol- 
lowed in  the  footsteps  of  the  ancient  Pharaohs.  Karnak  bears 
testimony  to  this.  'W^'e  here  find  the  names  of  Alexak"dee 
and  Philip  AEiDyEus,  who  preceded  the  Ptolemies  in  re- 
storing that  which  had  been  destroyed  by  the  Persians. 
Alexander  rebuilt  the  sanctuary  behind  the  great  temple ; 
Philip  that  to  the  front :  the  Ptolemies  added  sculptures  to 
it — restored  other  parts,  and  even  erected  entirely  new 
sanctuaries,  at  no  inconsiderable  expense,  though  no  longer, 
indeed,  on  the  grand  scale  of  the  Eg}'ptian  classic  style  of 
the  olden  times.  Even  the  last  epoch  of  declining  Eg}^t, 
that  of  the  Soman  dominion,  is  still  represented  in  Karnak 
by  a  series  of  representations  which  were  executed  under 
C^SAE  Augustus. 

Thus  this  remarkable  spot,  which,  in  the  course  of  twenty- 
five  hundred  years,  had  increased  from  the  small  sanctuary  in 
the  centre  of  the  large  temple  to  a  complete  city  of  temples, 


LUQSOE.  253 

situated  on  a  level  space  a  quarter  of  a  geographical  mile  in 
length,  and  above  2000  feet  in  breadth,  presents  both  an 
almost  uninterrupted  thread  of  events,  and  an  interesting 
scale  of  measurement  for  the  history  of  the  whole  of  the 
!N'ew  Egj-ptian  Monarchy,  from  its  origin  in  the  Old  Mo- 
narchy down  to  its  decline  under  the  Eoman  dominion.  The 
appearance[or  non-appearance  of  the  Dynasties  and  individual 
kings  in  Eg)'ptian  history  is  almost  uniform  with  the  repre- 
sentation of  them  in  and  round  the  temple  of  Karnak. 

Higher  up  the  river  than  Karnak,  where  the  stream, 
which  has  been  divided  by  the  fertile  island  of  Gredideh,  re- 
unites, rises  even  now  to  view  a  second  bright  point  of  the 
ancient  city,  the  temple  of  Luqsoe.  One  of  the  most 
powerful  Pharaohs  of  the  18th  Dynasty,  Amenophis  III., 
who  had  only  built  a  side  temple  in  Karnak,  and  had  added 
but  very  little  to  the  principal  temple,  here  erected  a  so 
much  the  more  splendid  sanctuary  to  Ammon,  which  the 
great  Eamses  enlarged  still  more  by  a  second  magni- 
Hcent  court  in  front,  in  the  direction  of  Karnak.  Por, 
although  a  good  half  hour  distant  from  it,  this  temple  must 
also  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  space  dedicated,  from 
ancient  times,  to  the  great  national  sanctuary.  This  is 
proved  by  a  circumstance  which  otherwise  would  be  difficult  to 
explain :  that  the  temple,  though  situated  close  to  the  bank, 
has  its  entrance,  contrary  to  custom,  away  from  the  river,  and 
directed  towards  Karnak,  with  which  it  was,  besides,  imme- 
diately connected  by  colonnades,  series  of  rams,  and  artifi- 
cially-constructed roads. 

The  ruins  on  the  eastern  bank  terminate  with  Luqsor, 
The  moEuments  of  icestern  Thebes  offer  still  greater  variety, 
as  here  the  subterranean  dwellings  and  palaces  of  the  dead 
are  added  to  those  above  ground.  At  one  time  an  uninter- 
rupted series  of  the  most  splendid  temples  extended  from 
Qurna  as  far  as  Medinet  Habu,  which  nearly  occupied  the 
whole  of  the  narrow  strip  of  desert  between  the  cultivated 
land  watered  by  the  Nile  and  the  foot  of  the  mountain  range. 
The  immense  field  of  the   dead  spreads   out  immediately 


254  THEBES. 

behind  tbese  temples,  where  the  sepulchral  caves,  like  the 
cells  of  bees,  close  beside  each  other,  are  either  dug  in  the 
rock  of  the  plain,  or  hewn  in  the  adjacent  hills. 

Qurna  is  situated  on  the  angle  of  the  Ljbian  range,  pro- 
jecting farther  forward  towards  the  river.  As  the  moun- 
tains here  suddenly  retreat  towards  the  west,  they  form  a 
great  mountain  caiildron,  the  front  part  of  which,  where  it  is 
separated  by  low  hills  from  the  valley,  is  called  El  Asasif.  Be- 
hind, it  is  closed  in  by  lofty,  steep  escarpments  of  rock,  which 
display  their  beautiful  stone  to  the  mid-day  and  morning  sun. 
These  precipitous  declivities  of  the  limestone  range,  which, 
owing  to  their  solid  and  uniform  texture,  are  particularly 
adapted  for  the  finest  sculptures  of  the  rock-tombs,  seem  to 
have  been  produced  by  the  gradual  removal  of  a  bed  of  clay 
beneath  them,  from  the  wearing  effects  of  exposure  to  the 
weather,  and  thus  the  overhanging  masses  are  deprived  of 
their  foundation. 

In  this  rock-creek  are  situated  the  onost  ancient  tombs, 
and  they  belong  to  the  Old  Monarchy.  Their  entrances 
may  be  seen  from  a  distance,  high  up  in  the  rocks  lying  to  the 
north,  exactly  beneath  the  vertical  precipice  which  rises  from 
the  steep  hills  of  rubbish  to  the  summit  of  the  mountain 
ridge.  Their  external  site,  and  the  road  up,  bounded  by  low- 
stone  walls  leading  to  the  entrances  in  a  steep  and  straight 
line  of  several  hundred  feet  from  the  valley,  reminded  me 
directly  of  the  tombs  of  Benihassan,  which  belong  to  the 
same  period.  They  date  from  between  2500  and  3000  B.C., 
under  the  kings  of  the  11th  and  12th  Manethonic  Dynasties, 
the  first  of  which  laid  the  foundation  of  the  mighty  power  of 
Thebes,  and  made  the  to^vn  the  seat  of  the  government  they 
had  rendered  independent  of  Memphis  ;  the  second  elevated 
it  to  be  the  capital  of  the  Monarchy  of  the  whole  country. 

These  grottoes,  of  which  there  are  some  of  a  similar  age  in 
the  adjacent  hills  in  the  foreground,  generally  descend,  in  an 
oblique  angle,  deep  into  the  rock,  but  they  have  neither 
paintings  nor  inscriptions;  it  was  only  the  stone  sarco- 
phagi on  which  peculiar  diligence  was  bestowed.    These  are 


TEMPLE  OF  ^'UMT  AMEN.  255 

usually  formed  of  the  finest  limestone,  and  are  sometimes 
above  nine  feet  long;  they  have  inscriptions,  and  are  de- 
corated with  colours,  both  internally  and  externally,  in  the 
elaborate  and  pure  style  of  that  period,  very  elegantly, 
though  with  a  certain  degree  of  parsimony.  We  are  bring- 
ing away  with  us  one  of  these  sarcophagi,  as  I  mentioned 
once  before.  A  few  days  ago  it  was  safely  carried  down 
into  the  plain,  after  the  pit,  which  had  long  been  com- 
pletely filled  with  rubbish,  had  been  cleared,  and  part  of  the 
solid  rock  itself  had  been  cut  through,  to  obtain  a  shorter 
exit  for  it.  The  occupant  of  the  tomb  was  the  son  of  a 
prince,  and  himself  bore  the  dynastic  appellation  of  the  11th 
Eoyal  Dynasty,  namely,  Xentef. 

In  the  outermost  angle  of  this  rock-cove  is  situated  the 
most  ancient  temple-building  of  "Western  Thebes,  which  be- 
longs to  the  period  of  the  New  Egyptian  Monarchy,  at  the 
commencement  of  its  glory.  One  street,  above  1600  feet 
long,  adorned  on  either  side  with  colossal  rams  and  sphinxes, 
led  from  the  valley  in  a  straight  line  to  an  outer  court,  then, 
by  means  of  a  flight  of  steps  to  another,  whose  front  wall  was 
adorned  with  sculpture,  and  had  a  colonnade  before  it,  and 
finally,  beyond,  by  a  second  flight  of  steps  to  a  granite  gate  in 
good  preservation,  and  to  the  last  temple  court,  which  was 
surrounded  on  both  sides  with  beautifully  decorated  halls 
and  chambers,  and  terminated  behind  with  a  broad  fa9ade, 
placed  along  the  precipitous  rock.  Another  granite  gate,  in 
the  centre  of  this  fa9ade,  leads  at  length  to  the  innermost 
temple-chamber,  which  was  hewn  into  the  rock,  and  had  a 
lofty,  stone-vaulted  roof,  out  of  which  again  opened  several 
smaller  niches  and  chambers,  at  the  sides  and  the  back.  All 
these  chambers  were  covered  with  the  most  beautiful  sculp- 
tures, with  variegated  colours  on  a  grey  ground,  executed  in 
the  finished  style  of  that  period.  This  grand  structure,  be- 
side which  stood  other  series  of  buildings,  now  destroyed, 
seems  to  have  been  originally  connected  with  the  river,  by  a 
street  intersecting  the  whole  valley,  and  beyond,  with  the 
great  temple  of  Karnak,  which  lies  exactly  in  the  same 


256  TKEBES. 

direction ;  I  liave  no  doubt  that  it  was  witH  this  object  that 
the  narrow  rock-gate  was  first  artificially  cut  through  the 
hills  in  front,  across  which  the  temple-street  enters  into  the 
lower  plain.  It  was  a  Queen,  Numt  Amen,  the  elder  sister 
of  Tuthmosis  III.,  who  accomplished  this  bold  plan  of  a 
structural  connection  between  the  two  sides  of  the  valley, 
the  same  who  had  erected  the  two  greatest  obelisks  in  front 
of  the  temple  of  Karnak.  She  never  appears  on  her  monu- 
ments as  a  woman,  but  in  male  attire ;  we  ouly  find  out  her 
sex  by  the  inscriptions.  No  doubt  at  that  period  it  was 
illegal  for  a  woman  to  govern;  for  that  reason,  also,  her 
brother,  probably  still  a  minor,  appears  at  a  later  period  as 
ruler  along  witli  her.  After  her  death,  her  Shields  were 
everywhere  converted  into  Tuthmosis  Shields,  the  femiuine 
forms  of  speech  in  the  inscription  were  changed,  and  her 
names  were  never  adopted  in  the  later  lists  along  with  the 
legitimate  kings. 

There  are  two  peculiar  temples,  both  erected  on  the 
border  of  the  desert  by  Tuthmosis  III.,  who  completed  the 
work  of  his  royal  sister  during  the  long  period  that  he  sat 
alone  upon  the  throne.  Of  these,  the  northern  one  can 
now  only  be  recognised  by  its  ground  plan,  and  by  the  re- 
mains of  its  brick  pylon ;  the  southern  one,  on  the  other 
hand,  at  Medinet  Habu,  is  still  in  good  preservation;  and 
judging  by  some  sculptures,  the  oldest  part  of  the  building 
might  perhaps  have  belonged  to  an  earlier  Tuthmosis,  and 
have  only  been  completed  by  him.  His  second  successor, 
Tuthmosis  IV.,  also  built  a  temple,  which  has  now  almost 
disappeared. 

He  was  followed  by  Amenophis  III.,  in  whose  brilliant 
and  long  reign  the  temple  of  Luqsor  was  built.  To  him 
are  inscribed  the  two  giant  Colossi,  far  out  in  the  fertile 
plain,  near  Medinet  Habu,  which  once  stood  at  the  gates  of 
a  great  temple-building,  but  whose  remains  are  now  for  the 
most  part  buried  beneath  the  crops  of  the  annually  accumu- 
lating soil  of  the  valley.  Perhaps,  also,  a  connecting  street, 
corresponding  with  that  to  the  north,  once  led  from  this 


MEMNON  STATUE.  257 

point  across  the  valley  to  Luqsor,  on  the  opposite  side.     Of 
the  two  Colossi,  the  one  situated  to  the  north-east  was  the  cele- 
brated sounding  statue,  which  the  G-reeks  connected  with 
their  charming  legend  of  the  beautiful  Memnon,  who  every 
morning  at  sunrise  greeted  his  mother,  Aurora,  while  she 
moistened  him  with  her  tears  of  dew  for  his  early  heroic  death. 
This  myth,  as  Letronne  has  shown,  was  only  composed  at  a  late 
period ;  because  the  actual  phenomenon  of  clear  tremulous 
tones  produced  by  the  springing  of  small  particles  of  the  stone 
when  it  became  rapidly  warm  after  being  cooled  during  the 
night,  did  not  become  strikingly  evident  till  fragments  of 
the  statue  had  partly  fallen  inwards  upon  itself,  having  been 
previously  split  by  an  earthquake  which  happened  in  the  year 
B.C.  27.     The  phenomenon  of  cracking  and  sounding  stones  in 
the  desert  and  among  great  fields  of  ruins,  is  not  unfrequent 
in  Egypt ;  but  the  nature  of  the  hard  flinty  conglomerate 
of  which  this  statue  is  composed,  is  peculiarly  favourable  to 
it,  as  is  further  proved  by  the  innumerable  large  and  small 
cracks  now  penetrating  in  all   directions  portions   of  the 
statue,  which   were  described  even   as  late   as  the   Grreek 
period,  and  consequently  were  then  uninjured.     It  is  also 
remarkable  how,  even  now,  several  of  the  pieces  that  have 
split   off,   and   are   only  hanging   loose,   sound  as  clear   as 
metal  if  they  are  struck,  while  others  beside  them  remain 
perfectly  dumb  and  without  sound,  according  as  they  are 
more  or  less  moistened  by  their  reciprocal  positions.     The 
numerous  Greek  and  Eoman  inscriptions  which  are  engraved 
upon  the  statue,  and  which  intimate  the  visits  of  strangers, 
especially  if  they  have  been  so  fortunate  as  to   hear  the 
morning  greeting,  first  commence  in  the  time  of  Nero,  and 
extend  down  to  the  time  of  Septimius  Severus,  from  which 
period  we  may  probably  date  the  restoration  of  the  original 
monolithic  statue.     Since  this  restoration  of  the  upper  por- 
tion in  single  blocks,  the  phenomenon  of  the  sounding  tones 
seems,  if  not  to  have  entirely  ceased,  yet  to  have  become  less 
frequent  and  less  striking.     The  change  of  Amenophis  (who 
even  then,  as  the  inscriptions  inform  us,  was  not  forgotten) 

s 


^58  THEBES. 

into  Memnon  was  probably  chiefly  occasioned  by  tbe  name 
of  this  entire  western  portion  of  Thebes,  Memnonia,  which 
the  Greeks  seem  to  have  explained  by  the  "  palaces  of 
Memnon,"  while  the  name  in  hieroglyphics,  Mennu,  meant, 
speaking  generally,  "  splendid  buildings,  palaces."  At  the 
present  day  the  statues  are  called  by  the  Arabs  Schama  and 
Tama,  or,  both  together,  the  Sanamat,  i.  e.  the  "idols  "  (not 
Salamat).* 

A\^hen  we  came  here  in  tlie  beginning  of  November,  the 
whole  plain,  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  was  overflowed, 
and  formed  one  entire  sea,  from  which  the  Sanamat  rose  up 
still  more  strangely  and  more  solitary  than  from  the  green 
but  yet  accessible  corn-fields.  A  few  days  ago  I  measured 
the  Colossi  and  the  elevation  to  which  the  soil  of  the  Nile 
had  risen  upon  their  thrones.  The  height  of  the  Memnon 
statue,  calculated  from  head  to  foot,  not  including  the  tall 
ornament  on  the  head  which  it  once  bore,  amounted  to  about 
14  metres  28',  or  45  feet  and  a  half,  in  addition  to  which 
the  base  separated  from  it,  a  block  by  itself,  measured  4 
metres  25',  or  13'  7",  of  which  3  feet  were  covered  by  steps 
placed  round.  Thus  the  statues  were  originally  nearly  60  feet 
in  height,  including  the  Pschent,  perhaps  70  feet  above  the 
ground  on  which  the  temple  stood.  Now  the  surface  of  tlie 
valley  is  already  8  feet  above  that  level,  and  the  inundation 

*  They  are  called  Salamat,  "  the  Salutations,"  by  earlier  travellers. 
My  attention  was  called  to  the  correct  pronunciation  of  this  word  by 
our  old  intelligent  guide,  'Auad.    The  alteration  is  very  great  to  the 

i,  ^^ 
Arabs,  because     ^  salam^  solus,  is  pronounced  with  the  dental  sin, 

5^^  V 

.  ^  s'anam,  idolum,  with  the  lingual  s'dd.  The  plural,  which  usually 
1  s  ^(.j  *    ^^^ 

is  expressed  by   UJ  as'ndm,  here  assumes  the  feminine  form  /"jt^^. 

s'anamat.  It  is  impossible  now  to  see  by  the  mutilated  heads  whether 
they  were  masculine  figures.  The  stone  of  which  the  statues  are 
composed  is  a  particularly  hard  quartzose  friable  sandstone  conglo- 
merate, which  looks  as  if  it  was  glazed,  and  had  innumerable  cracks. 
The  frequent  crackling  of  small  particles  of  stone  at  sunrise,  when 
the  change  of  temperature  is  greatest,  in  my  opinion  produced  the 
tones  of  Memnon,  far-famed  in  song,  which  were  compared  to  the 
breaking  of  a  musical  string. 


TEilPLES  OF  SETHOS  AXD  EAAISES.  259 

sometimes  rises  as  far  as  the  upper  edge  of  the  base,  there- 
fore 14  feet  higher  than  it  could  ever  have  risen,  at  the 
period  of  their  erection,  without  reaching  the  temple  itself. 
Now,  if  we  compare  this  fact  with  our  discovery  at  Semneh, 
where  the  surface  of  the  Nile  during  historical  times  has 
sunk  above  23  feet,  it  is  proved,  by  simple  addition,  that  the 
Nile  at  the  Cataracts  fell  from  a  greater  height  by  at  least  37 
feet  between  this  and  Semneh  than  it  does  at  present.* 

Horus,  the  last  King  of  that  great  18th  Dynasty,  had  also 
erected  a  temple  near  Medinet  Habu,  which  has  now,  how- 
ever, disappeared  in  rubbish.  The  fragment  of  a  colossal 
statue  of  the  King,  of  hard  limestone,  almost  like  marble, 
seems  to  point  out  the  position  of  what  was  once  the  en- 
trance to  the  temple,  the  bust  carved  in  the  most  finished 
style,  weighing  several  hundred-weight,  is  intended  for  our 
Museum, 

A  large  portion  of  two  temples  still  exist  from  the  suc- 
ceeding Dynasty ;  they  were  built  by  the  two  greatest  and 
most  renowned  of  all  the  Pharaohs — Sethos  I.  and  his  son 
Eamses  II.  The  temple  belonging  to  the  first  is  the  most 
northern  in  the  series,  and  is  usually  called  the  temple  of 
QuENA,  because  the  old  village  of  Qurna  was  grouped 
round  a  Coptic  church  at  this  spot,  and  was  principally 
situated  in  the  interior  of  the  great  outer  courts  of  the 
temple,  but  which  was  afterwards  deserted  by  the  inhabitants, 
and  exchanged  for  the  rock-tombs  in  the  angle  of  the  moun- 
tain situated  very  near  at  hand. 

Farther  towards  the  south,  between  the  temples  of 
TuTHMOSis  III.  and  lY.,  now  totally  destroyed,  stands  the 
temple  of  Eamses  II.  (Miamtjk),  in  its  structural  arrange- 
ment, and  in  all  its  parts,  perhaps  the  most  beautiful  in  Egypt, 
though  inferior  in  grandeur  of  scale,  and  in  variety  of  inte- 
rest, to  the  temple  of  Karnak.  That  portion  of  the  tempk 
to  the  back  as  well  as  the  lateral  halls,  belonging  to  the 
hypostyle  hall,  have  disappeared,  and  their  original  plan 
could  only  be  explained  by  the  aid  of  careful,  protracted  ex- 
cavations, under  the  direction  of  Erbkam.  All  round  this 
*  See  note,  p.  239. 
s2 


260  THEBES. 

destroyed  portion  of  tlie  temple  tlie  extensive  brick  lialls  are 
visible,  wbich  are  everywhere  covered  with  regular  and 
neatly-built  waggon-vaulted  roofs,  some  of  them  12  feet  wide, 
which  belong  to  the  period  of  the  erection  of  the  temple  itself. 
This  is  indisputably  proved  by  the  stamps,  which  were  im- 
pressed on  every  brick  in  the  royal  factory,  and  which  contain 
the  JSTame-Shields  of  King  Eamses.  That  this  temple,  even 
in  ancient  times,  attracted  much  notice,  we  learn  from  the 
particular  description  of  it,  under  the  name  of  the  Tomb 
OF  OsxMANDYAS,  giveu  by  Diodorus  Siculus,  according  to 
Hecatseus. 

Directly  to  the  right  of  the  temple,  one  of  the  few  indus- 
trious Fellahs  has  laid  out  a  small  vegetable  garden,  which 
affords  us  some  variety  for  our  table,  and  for  that  reason, 
yielding  to  the  intercessions  of  our  good-natured  dark-skinned 
gardener,  as  was  but  just,  it  was  spared  in  our  excavations, 
which  threatened  to  extend  towards  that  side,  although  it  is 
over  the  foundations  of  a  side  temple  hitherto  unnoticed, 
whose  entrance  I  found  opening  into  the  outer  court  of  the 
temple  of  Eamses. 

The  southernmost,  and  best  preserved  of  all  the  splendid! 
buildings  in  the  long  series,  is  situated  in  the  midst  of  the 
ruins  of  the  houses  of  Medi^et  Habtt,  a  Coptic  town,  now 
totally  forsaken,  but  once  of  no  small  importance.  It  was 
founded  by  Eamses  III.,  the  first  KiDg  of  the  20th  Dynasty, 
the  rich  Ehampsinitus  of  Herodotus,  in  the  thirteenth  century- 
before  Christ,  and  on  its  walls  extols  the  great  campaigns  of 
this  King,  by  land  and  by  sea,  which  might  rival  those  of  the 
great  Eamses.  In  the  interior  of  the  second  outer  court  a 
great  church  was  built  by  the  Copts,  the  monolithic  granite 
columns  of  which  are  still  scattered  about.  The  chambers  to 
the  back  are  for  the  most  part  in  a  heap  of  rubbish.  But 
the  far  projecting  sort  of  pylon  building,  in  front  of  the 
temple,  is  of  peculiar  interest ;  it  contained  the  private  apart- 
ments of  the  King,  in  four  stories,  placed  one  above  the 
other.  The  Prince  is  represented  on  the  walls,  in  the  midst 
of  his  family,  conversing  with  his  daughters,  who  are  recog- 
nised to  be  Princesses  by  the  side-plait  of  their  hair;  he 


TOMBS  OF  THE  KINGS.  261 

is  playing  at  drafts,  and  receiving  fruits  and  flowers  from 
them. 

This  building  terminates  the  series  of  large  splendid 
temples  known  under  the  peculiar  appellation  of  Memkonia. 
They  comprise  the  really  flourishing  period  of  the  New 
Monarchy,  for  after  Eamses  III.,  the  external  power,  as  well 
as  the  internal  greatness  of  the  Monarchy  again  declined.  It 
is  only  from  this,  and  the  immediately  succeeding  period, 
that  we  find  the  tombs  of  the  Kings  in  the  rock-Yalleys  of  the 
mountain  range. 

The  entrance  to  these  is  situated  on  the  farther  side  of 
the  promontory  of  Qurna.  The  escarpments  of  the  rock 
there  rise  rugged  and  barren  on  either  side,  rounding  off 
above  to  bare  summits,  and  their  golden  brows  are  partly 
covered  with  coal  black  stones,  as  if  they  had  been  burnt  by 
the  sun.  The  peculiarly  solemn  and  gloomy  character  of 
this  country  always  struck  me  most  vividly  when  I  was 
riding  back  after  sunset  over  the  endless  heaps  of  stony 
rubbish  covering  the  bottom  of  the  valley  to  a  considerable 
height,  and  only  furrowed  by  broad  chasms,  formed  in  the 
course  of  thousands  of  years,  by  sudden  torrents  of  rain, 
which,  though  of  rare  occurrence,  are  not  entirely  unknown, 
as  we  ourselves  have  witnessed.  All  is  mute  and  dead  around ; 
the  rapid  tramps  of  my  little  ass  being  only  interrupted  occa- 
sionally by  the  dull  barks  of  the  jackals,  or  the  gloomy  hooting 
of  the  night-owls. 

After  long  windings,  which  lead  by  circuitous  paths 
almost  immediately  behind  the  lofty  mountain  sides  of  the 
Asasif  valley  described  above,  the  valley  divides  into  two 
branches,  the  one  on  the  right  hand  conducting  to  the  most 
ancient  of  those  tombs.  Only  two  of  these  are  opened,  both 
belonging  to  the  18th  Dynasty:  the  one  dedicated  to 
Amenophis  III.,  the  Memnon  of  the  G-reeks,  the  other  to  a 
rival  King  Ai,  coming  very  soon  after  him,  who  was  not 
admitted  into  the  monumental  lists  of  the  legitimate  kings.* 

*  This  King  Ai  was  previously  a  private  individual,  and  afterwards 
assumed  the  priest's  title  into  his  Koyal  Shield.    He  not  unfrequently 


262  THEBES. 

The  last  is  situated  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  slowly- 
ascending  cleft  in  the  rock ;  the  gi'anite  sarcophagus  of  the 
Eing,  in  the  small  sepulchral  chamber,  has  been  destroyed, 
and  his  name  is  ever}'where  studiously  erased,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  a  few  traces  on  the  walls,  as  well  as  upon  the  sar- 
cophagus. The  other  lies  farther  forward  in  the  valley,  is  of 
greater  extent,  and  covered  with  beautiful  sculptures,  though, 
alas!  much  mutilated  by  time  and  human  hands.  Besides 
these  two  tombs,  there  are  several  more  here  incomplete,  with- 
out sculptures ;  others,  no  doubt,  are  concealed  beneath  the 
high  mounds  of  rubbish,  which  to  clear  away  would  have  occu- 
pied more  of  our  time  and  means  than,  after  mature  conside- 
ration, we  thought  right  to  bestow  on  it.  In  one  place  where 
I  made  them  dig,  following  tolerably  certain  signs,  we  found, 
indeed,  about  ten  feet  beneath  the  rubbish,  a  door  and 
chamber,  but  these  also  without  sculpture.  Some  remains 
of  earthen  vases  were,  however,  brought  to  light  at  the  same 
time,  which  contained  the  name  of  a  king  hitherto  un- 
known. 

The  left  branch  of  the  principal  valley,  which  contains 
the  tombs  of  almost  all  the  Kings  of  the  19th  and  20th  Dy- 
nasties, seems  to  have  been  originally  closed  by  an  elevation 
of  the  bottom  of  the  valley,  and  to  have  been  first  opened 
artificially,  by  a  paved  ascent  to  the  spot. 

Here  we  find  pits  with  wide  openings  not  far  above  the 
bottom  of  the  valley,  on  the  descending  slope  of  the  moun- 
tain, which  pass  doT\^l wards  at  a  somewhat  oblique  angle. 
Where  the  overhanging  rock  has  a  perpendicular  height  of 
12  to  15  feet,  the  sharply-carved  door-posts  of  the  first 
entrance  appear,  which  was  once  provided  with  one  or  two 
great  folding-doors  to  close  it.  There  also  the  painted 
sculptures  generally  commence,  which,  on  suddenly  ap- 
proaching, strike  one  by  the  wonderful  contrast  between 
their  sharp  lines,  brilliant  surfaces,  and  fresh  vivid  colours, 

appears  with  his  wife  in  tlie  tombs  of  Araarna,  as  a  distinguished  and 
peculiarly  highly  venerated  officer  of  King  Amenophis  IV.,  that  puri- 
tanical worshipper  of  the  Sun,  who  changed  his  name  into  that  of 
Bech-en-aten. 


TOMBS  OF  THE  KINGS.  263 

aud  the  jagged  rock  and  rugged  rolled  stones  scattered 
around,  among  which  they  are  placed.  Long  corridors  of 
imposing  height  and  width  now  lead  always  deeper  into  the 
rocky  mountain  range  ;  the  sculptures  on  the  sides,  and  the 
ceiling  also,  continue  in  single  subdivisions,  which  are  formed 
by  the  contraction  of  the  passages  and  by  additional  doors. 
The  King  is  represented  worshipping  before  different  gods, 
and  directs  his  prayers  and  justifications  for  his  earthly  life 
to  them ;  the  peaceful  occupations  of  the  justified  spirits  are 
represented  on  one  side,  the  punishments  of  Hell  for  the 
wicked  on  the  other ;  the  Groddess  of  Heaven  is  represented 
eitended  lengthways  on  the  ceiling,  as  well  as  the  hours  of 
the  day  and  night,  with  their  influences  on  mankind,  and 
their  astrological  signification,  all  accompanied  by  explana- 
tory inscriptions.  Lastly,  we  arrive  at  a  great  vaulted  hall 
of  pillars,  whose  walls  generally  exhibit  the  representations 
on  a  golden  yellow  ground,  for  which  reason  it  also  bore  the 
name  of  the  G-olden  Hall.  This  was  intended  for  the  royal 
sarcophagus,  which  stood  in  the  centre,  and  was  from  six  to 
ten  feet  high.  But  often  if  the  King,  after  the  completion  of 
tlie  tomb,  in  its  first  and  most  necessary  extent,  felt  his 
vigour  still  unimpaired,  and  promised  himself  a  prolonged 
life,  the  central  passage  of  this  hall  of  pillars  was  cut  out  in 
a  still  more  steep  descent,  for  the  commencement  of  a  new 
hall ;  new  corridors  and  lateral  chambers  were  attached, 
sometimes  they  deviated  from  the  first  direction  into  another, 
till  the  King,  for  the  second  time,  fixed  npon  a  goal,  and  ter- 
minated the  building  with  a  second  hall  of  pillars,  almost 
more  spacious  and  splendid  than  the  first ;  smaller  chambers 
on  both  sides  were  then  added  to  this,  if  the  time  still 
allowed,  destined  for  particular  sacrifices  for  the  dead,  till  at 
length  the  last  hour  struck,  and  the  royal  corpse,  having 
undergone  the  process  of  embalming  for  seventy  days,  was 
entombed  in  the  sarcophagus.  It  was  then  closed  up,  in 
such  an  artificial  manner  that  the  colossal  granite  tomb,  as 
the  cover  could  not  be  raised,  was  always  obliged  to  be  de- 


264  THEBES. 

stroyed  by  the  plunderers  of  the  corpses,  who,  at  a  later 
period,  penetrated  into  every  spot. 

The  tombs  of  the  Princesses  also,  which  are  collected 
together  in  a  smaller  valley  behind  Medinet  Habu,  at  the 
southern  end  of  the  Memnonia,  belong  exclusively  to  the 
period  from  the  18th  to  the  20th  Dynasties,  as  well  as  the 
most  important  of  the  innumerable  tombs  of  private  indi- 
viduals, which  extend  over  hill  and  valley,  from  beyond  Me- 
dinet Habu  to  the  entrance  of  the  King's  valley.  The  priests 
of  rank,  and  the  great  officers,  liked  to  have  represented  on 
the  walls  of  their  tombs  their  whole  wealth  in  horses  and 
carriages,  herds,  boats,  and  implements,  as  well  as  their 
hunting-ground  and  fish-ponds,  their  gardens  and  hall,  for 
company,  even  the  artists  and  artisans  they  employed,  ac- 
tively engaged  in  various  ways  ;  all  this  renders  these  tombs 
much  more  interesting  than  those  of  the  Kings,  where  the  re- 
presentations almost  exclusively  refer  to  the  life  after  death. 

Among  the  later  monuments,  the  tombs  from  the  26th 
Dynasty  of  the  seventh  and  sixth  centuries  before  Christ  are 
especially  worthy  of  notice.  The  greatest  proportion  of 
these  are  dug  in  the  flat  ground,  in  the  front  part  of  the 
rocky  creek  between  Qurna  and  the  hill  of  Abd  el  Qurna, 
where  we  reside,  and  they  are  called  specially  El  Asasif. 
The  rocky  plain  alone  afforded  room  at  that  time  for 
sepulchral  buildings  of  any  considerable  size,  and  was 
therefore  employed  for  that  purpose  on  a  vast  scale.  Even 
in  the  distance  a  number  of  lofty  gates  and  walls  built 
of  black  bricks  are  seen.  These  enclosed  great  sunken 
courts  within  an  oblong,  to  Avhich  the  entrance  led  by  im- 
mense arched  pylon  gates,  resembling  at  a  little  distance 
lioman  triumphal  arches.  Stepping  through  this  within  the 
enclosure  wall,  we  look  directly  into  a  court  cut  12  or  15 
feet  deep  into  the  rock,  into  which  we  descended  by  a  stair- 
case. This  uncovered  coui-t  belongs  to  the  largest  sepul- 
chral building  now  accessible  ;  it  was  built  for  a  royal  scribe, 
Petamenap;  is  100  feet  long,  and  74  broad.      Prom  this 


TOMBS  or  PEIYATE  PEESOlfS.  265 

we  stepped  througli  an  outer  hall  into  a  great  rock-chamber, 
having  an  extent  of  from  65  to  52  feet,  supported  by  two 
rows  of  pillars,  with  some  lateral  chambers  and  corridors  on 
either  side ;  then  through  an  arched  entrance  into  a  second 
hall,  from  52  to  36  feet  large,  with  eight  pillars  ;  and  into  a 
third,  31  feet  both  ways,  with  four  pillars  ;  and  lastly,  into  a 
chamber  from  20  to  12  feet  large,  terminating  with  a 
niche.  From  this  chamber,  at  the  head  of  the  first  series  of 
rooms,  a  door  on  the  left  liand  leads  into  an  immense  cham- 
ber ;  and  on  the  right,  another  to  a  continuous  series  of  six 
corridors,  with  two  staircases  of  nine  to  twenty-three  steps, 
and  a  chamber  in  which  a  perpendicular  pit,  44  feet  deep, 
led  at  the  bottom  to  a  small  lateral  chamber.  This  second 
range  of  chambers  and  passages  which  run  at  right  angles 
with  the  first,  amounted  in  its  whole  length  to  172  feet, 
while  the  first,  including  the  external  court,  amounted  to  311 
feet.  Finally,  from  the  chamber  with  the  well,  a  corridor 
turns  off  again  to  the  right,  which  leads  to  a  diagonal  cham- 
ber, extending  altogether  58  feet  in  this  third  direction. 
Eut  before  arriving  at  the  two  staircases  in  the  second 
range,  a  fourth  line  of  passages  again  opened  to  the  right, 
running  on  122  feet  in  one  and  the  same  direction,  to  which, 
on  the  left  hand,  is  attached  a  great  passage  running  round 
in  a  square  60  feet  long  on  every  side,  along  with  other 
lateral  chambers ;  the  central  part  of  which  is  decorated  on 
its  four  sides  like  a  huge  sarcophagus.  The  sarcophagus  of 
the  deceased  rests  also,  in  fact,  in  the  centre  beneath  the 
great  square,  which,  however,  can  only  be  reached  by  means 
of  a  vertical  pit  18  feet  deep,  opening  into  a  fourth  range, 
which  conducts  to  a  horizontal  passage  58  feet  long ;  then  to 
a  third  pit,  through  this  to  more  chambers;  and  lastly, 
through  the  ceiling  of  the  last  to  a  chamber  placed  above  it, 
which  contains  the  sarcophagus,  and  which  is  situated 
exactly  beneath  the  centre  of  the  above-mentioned  square. 
The  whole  of  the  ground  covered  by  this  tomb,  that  of  a 
private  individual,  amounts  accordingly  to  21,600  square 
feet,  and  calculated  with  the  pit  chambers,  to  23,148  square 


266  THEBES. 

feet.*  This  enormous  work  appears  still  more  colossal  if  we 
consider  that  all  the  surface  of  the  walls,  the  pillars,  and  the 
doors  are  covered  from  above  downwards  with  innumerable 
representations  and  inscriptions,  which  astonish  us  still  more 
bj  the  care,  sharpness,  and  elegance  with  which  they  are  exe- 
cuted. 

The  few  remains  which  are  found  from  the  period  of  the 
later  foreign  dominion  are  far  less  important.  We  can  only 
mention  two  small  temples  near  Medinet  Habu  among  those 
erected  under  the  Ptolemies,  and  a  third  at  the  end  of  the 
great  Lake  circumvallation,  which  extends  from  Medinet 
Habu  towards  the  south.  The  oldest  sculptures  in  this  last 
are  from  the  time  of  C^sae  Augtjstus,  yet  the  Cella,  now 
the  only  part  in  good  preservation,  was  built  by  Antoninus 
Pius.  The  outermost  gate  of  the  temple  district  contains 
the  only  representations  found  in  Egypt  of  the  Emperor 
Otho,  the  discovery  of  which  was  once  a  most  joyful  event  to 
ChampoUion  and  Eosellini.  They  had,  however,  overlooked 
the  circumstance  that  on  the  opposite  side  the  name  of  the 
Emperor  Galea,  hitherto  equally  unknown  in  Egypt,  was 
also  to  be  found. 

Even  in  Strabo's  time  ancient  Thebes  had  crumbled  into 
several  villages,  and  Germanicus  'S'isited  it,  as  we  are  doing, 
from  a  thirst  for  knowledge,  and  with  reverence  for  the 
great  antiquity  of  its  monuments,  cognoscendce  antiquitatis, 
as  Tacitus  informs  us.  The  latest  hieroglyphic  imperial 
name  that  I  have  found  in  all  Egypt,  is  that  of  Decitjs 
(a.d.  250)  ;  it  appears  in  a  representation  on  the  temple  of 
Esneh.  A  hundred  years  later  the  holy  Athaxasius  retires 
to  the  Theban  desert  among  the  Christian  hermits  there 
resident.  The  edict  of  Theodosius  against  Paganism  (391) 
divested  the  Egyptian  temples  of  their  last  authority,  and 
greatly  favoured  the  development  of  monkish  and  recluse 
habits,  to  wliich  Egj^tian  Christianity  was  always  peculiarly 
inclined. 

*  The  dimensions  here  stated  have  been  taken  from  Wilkinson, 
Mod.  Eg.  and  Thebes,  vol.  ii.,  p.  220. 


CnillSTIAX  CKTJECHES  AJsD  C02sTEIsTS.  267 

After  that  period  numerous  cliurclies  and  convents  spring 
up  throughout  the  country,  even  in  the  upper  districts  of  the 
Nile  ;  and  the  sepulchral  caves  of  the  desert  become  troglo- 
dytic  habitations  for  an  ascetic  hermit  population.  The  The- 
baic necropolis,  above  all  other  places,  presented  the  greatest 
variety  of  means  to  satisfy  these  new  wants.  Both  the  kings' 
tombs,  as  well  as  the  tombs  of  private  individuals,  were  very 
much  employed  for  Christian  cells,  and  still  bear  traces  on 
their  walls  of  this  new  purpose  to  which  they  were  applied. 
A  letter  of  the  holy  Athanasius,  the  archbishop  of  Alexandria, 
to  the  orthodox  monks  of  Thebes,  still  exists  in  a  tomb  at 
Qurna,  in  beautiful  untial  characters  on  the  white  stucco,  but 
unfortunately  in  a  very  fragmentary"  condition.  It  was  a 
favourite  practice  to  convert  ancient  temples  into  Coptic 
churches  or  convents. 

The  largest  church  seems  to  have  been  erected  in  the  temple 
of  MedinetHabu  (town  of  Habu).  Monolithic  granite  columns 
of  considerable  size  still  cover  the  ground  in  great  numbers,  in 
the  second  outer  court  at  this  spot ;  in  order  to  obtain  room  for 
the  niches  in  the  choir,  an  ancient  Egyptian  pillar  was  taken 
away  on  the  northern  side,  and  a  series  of  doors  from  the 
chambers  which  were  aiTanged  for  the  priests'  cells  were 
broken  through  the  external  wall  of  the  temple  to  the  back. 
The  convent  appertaining  to  it,  called  the  Deb  el  Medinet — 
"belonging  to  a  town" — was  placed  in  the  Ptolemaic  temple 
behind  the  hill  of  Qurnet  Murrai,  situated  close  at  hand. 
Another  chui'ch  stood  in  the  temple  of  Old  Qurna,  and 
the  convent  of  Deb  el  Bachit,  situated  on  the  heights  of 
Qurna,  probably  belonged  to  it.  The  ruins  of  a  third  con- 
vent occupy  the  chambers  of  the  temple  of  the  Queen  Numt- 
amen,  in  the  angle  of  the  Asasif  valley,  and  bear  the  name 
of  Deb  el  Eahbi,  the  northern  convent. 

Such  transformations  of  the  ancient  magnificent  buildings 
were  partly  against,  and  partly  in  favour  of,  their  preser- 
vation. Single  walls  were  frequently  demolished,  or  broken 
through,  to  enable  them  to  make  new  arrangements ;  upon 
others  the  heathen  images  were  destroyed  to  obtain  bare 
walls,  or  at  least,  the   human  figures  and   even  those  of 


2G8  THEBES. 

animals  in  the  inscriptions,  especially  the  heads,  were 
studiously  picked  out,  and  mutilated,  as  high  up  as  the  loftiest 
ceilings.  Not  unfrequently,  however,  the  same  zealous, 
pious  hands  also  served  to  preserve  the  ancient  splendour 
in  a  most  successful  manner,  for  sometimes,  instead  of 
laboriously  destroying  the  representations  with  a  hammer, 
they  preferred  covering  them  over  from  the  top  to  the 
bottom  with  Nile  mud,  which  had  generally  afterwards  an 
additional  white  coating,  in  order  to  receive  the  Christian 
paintings.  In  time  this  Coptic  loam  again  fell  off,  and  the 
ancient  paintings  came  out  once  more,  with  a  brilliancy  and 
surprising  freshness,  which  they  could  hardly  have  retained 
on  uncovered  walls,  exposed  to  the  air  and  sun.  In  the 
niche  of  an  ancient  ceUa  I  found  St.  Peter,  in  the  ancient 
Byzantine  style,  holding  the  key,  and  raising  his  finger,  but 
beneath  the  half-decayed  Christian  casing,  the  cow's  horns 
of  the  goddess  Hathor,  the  Egyptian  Venus,  peeped  forth 
from  behind  the  glory ;  to  her,  originally  was  given  the 
incense  and  sacrifice  of  the  king  who  is  standing  by  her 
side,  which  now  are  off"ered  to  the  venerable  apostle.  I 
have  often  with  my  own  hands  assisted  time  in  the  work  of 
restoration,  and  still  further  loosened  the  stucco,  which  is 
generally  covered  over  with  totally  uuinterestiug  Coptic 
paintings,  tliat  I  might  restore  the  splendid  sculptures  of  the 
Egyptian  gods  and  kings  concealed  beneath  them  once  more 
to  their  older  and  greater  claims  on  our  attention. 

A  great  part  of  the  population  of  Thebes  on  both  sides  of 
the  Nile  is  still  Coptic ;  our  Christian  cook  Sirian  was  born 
here,  and  a  Coptic  woman  of  good  means,  Mustafieh,  who 
lives  at  a  short  distance  from  us,  supplies  us  daily  with  excel- 
lent wheaten  bread.  Eor  a  long  time  past,  however,  the  Arabic 
Mohammedan  population  has  gained  the  upper  hand  here,  as 
throughout  the  country,  and  the  Copts  can  only  oppose  tliis 
by  the  influence  derived  from  ancient  days,  by  their  know- 
ledge of  arithmetic,  and  their  privilege  of  filling  the  most 
important  financial  offices  in  the  country. 

The  small  church  in  which  the  Theban  Christians  are  now 
in  the  habit  of  assembling  every  Sundav.  is  situated  alone  in 


CHURCH  AT  MEDINET  HABU.  2G9 

the  great  ^avelly  plain  to  the  south  of  Medinet  Habu.  It 
has  an  Arabic  cupola,  and  is  surrounded  by  the  wall  of  a 
court.  I  entered  it  a  few  days  ago  from  noticing  that  the 
black  turbans,  which  are  only  worn  by  Copts,  were  proceed- 
ing in  greater  numbers  than  usual  to  the  chapel.  It  was  the 
feast  of  the  holy  Donadeos,  who  had  founded  the  church. 
The  service  was  over.  I  only  found  the  old  priest,  who 
inhabits  and  takes  charge  of  the  church,  inside  with  his 
numerous  family.  The  compartments  were  covered  with  mats  ; 
I  was  shown  the  division  for  the  men  and  women,  the  small 
chapels  decorated  with  variegated  carved  work  attached  to 
it,  the  square  cistern  for  baptisms  and  holy  water.  A  large 
old  Coptic  book  still  lay  open  on  the  reading-desk,  with 
extracts  from  the  Psalms  and  Gospels,  and  an  Arabic  trans- 
ktion  beside  it.  I  asked  the  old  man  whether  he  could  read 
Coptic ;  he  answered  in  the  affirmative,  but  thought  that 
his  children  could  read  better  than  himself,  his  eyes  had 
already  become  feeble.  I  sat  myself  down  upon  the  mat,  and 
the  whole  troop  of  great  and  smaU  yeUow-brown  children 
and  grandchildren  of  the  old  priest  squatted  down  around 
me.  I  asked  the  eldest  lad  to  read  a  little,  and  he  imme- 
diately began  not  to  read,  but  to  sing  with  the  greatest 
fluency — that  is  to  say,  to  chant  in  rough  grumbling  tones. 
I  interrupted  him,  and  asked  him  now  to  read  slowly  in 
his  usual  voice;  he  did  it  with  far  greater  difficulty,  and 
with  many  mistakes,  which  his  younger  brother  sometimes 
corrected  over  his  shoulder;  but  when  I  went  so  far  as  to 
inquire  the  meaning  of  the  individual  words,  he  pointed 
coolly  to  the  Arabic  translation,  and  thought  it  was  ex- 
plained there,  and  wanted  to  read  this  aloud  to  me;  he 
could  tell  me  nothing  as  to  the  single  words,  not  even  about 
the  value  of  the  single  letters  over  the  paragraphs,  nor, 
indeed,  could  the  old  man  have  done  that  at  any  time. 
Aftenvards  I  made  them  show  me  the  other  treasures  in 
the  way  of  books  belonging  to  the  church,  which  were 
immediately  brought  in  a  great  cloth  tied  together  at  the 
four  corners,  containing  some  prayer-books  very  much  worn. 


270  THE  COPTS. 

some  of  them  in  Coptic,  some  in  Arabic.  I  left  a  small 
present  behind  for  the  good  of  the  church,  and  had  rode 
on  a  little  farther,  when  one  of  the  boys  overtook  me,  bring- 
ing me  breathless  a  small  consecrated  kind  of  biscuit  cake, 
stamped  with  a  Coptic  cross  and  a  Greek  inscription, 
which  gift  I  was  obliged  to  repay  by  a  second  bakscJiisch. 
These  are  the  Epigoni,  the  most  genuine,  unmixed  descen- 
dants of  the  old  Pbaraonic  nation  that  once  conquered  Asia 
and  Ethiopia,  and  led  its  prisoners  from  the  north  and 
south  into  the  great  hall  of  Karnak  before  Ammon  ;  in  wliose 
wisdom  Moses  was  educated,  and  with  whose  priesthood  the 
Greek  sages  went  to  school. 

0  Aegypte,  Aegypte  !  religioniim  tuarum  soJce  supererv/nt 
fahulcB,  (sque  incredihiles  posteris,-  solaque  supererunt  verba 
lapidihus  incisa  tua  pui  facta  narrantihus,  et  inhahitahit  Aegyp- 
tum,  Scythes,  aut  Indus,  aut  aliquis  talis,  id  est  vicina  har- 
haria* 

AV^e  now  know  the  meaning  of  this  aliquis  which  Hermes 
Trismegistus  then  knew  not  how  to  explain  ;  it  is  the  Turks, 
who  at  present  dwell  in  the  fields  of  Osiris, 

At  the  foot  of  our  hill,  in  the  direction  of  the  green  plain, 
stands  a  single  group  of  Sont-trees.  which  overshadow  a 
pleasant  reservoir  nicely  lined  witli  stones ;  here  the  sheep 
and  goats  are  daily  brought  to  water,  and  every  evening  and 
morning  the  dark  girls  and  veiled  women  descend  from 
their  rock- caves,  returning  afterwards  with  a  slow  step,  thieir 
tall  water-jugs  on  their  heads ;  a  lovely  picture  from  the 
patriarchal  times.  But  close  to  where  the  refreshing  element 
is  found  there  is  a  bare  white  spot  in  the  middle  of  the 
fertile  plain:  on  this,  two  limekilns  are  erected,  in  which, 
as  often  as  they  are  wanted,  the  very  best  blocks  of  the 
ancient  temples  and  rock-grottoes,  with  their  images  and 

*  Apuleii  Asclepius  sive  dlahgus  Hermetis  Trismegisti,  c.  24.  — ("  Oh 
Egypt  I  Egypt!  fables  alone  of  thy  religion  will  survive,  equally  in- 
comprehensible to  thy  descendants;  and  words  cut  into  stone  will 
alone  remain  telling  of  thy  pious  deeds,  and  the  Scythian,  or  one  from 
the  Indus,  or  some  such  neighbouring  barbarian,  will  inhabit  Egypt.") 


AUABIC  TEXGEAITCE.  27l 

inscriptions,  are  pounded  and  burnt  into  lime,  that  tliey  may 
again  cement  together  other  blocks,  which  are  extracted 
from  these  convenient  and  inexhaustible  stone-quarries,  for 
some  cattle-btaU  or  other  structure  for  government  purposes. 

The  same  day  that  I  visited  the  Coptic  church,  I  was 
deairouis  of  riding  from  that  spot  to  the  village  of  Kom  el 
BiBAT,  which  is  situated  on  the  other  side  of  the  great  lake 
of  llabu,  now  drv.  To  my  no  small  surprise,  my  guide,  the 
excellent  old  'Auad,  who  I  have  engaged  to  be  my  servant 
while  here,  on  account  of  his  great  knowledge  of  the  locality, 
informed  me  that  he  could  not  accompany  me  thither,  he  even 
almost  alirank  from  pronouncing  the  name  of  the  village,  and 
could  not  be  persuaded  to  give  me  any  information  about  it, 
and  about  his  strange  behaviour.  It  was  only  when  I  got 
home  that  I  learnt  the  ground  of  his  refusal  from  others, 
and  afterwards  also  from  himself.  Above  seven  or  eight 
years  ago  a  man  was  killed  in  the  house  of  the  Sheikh  of 
Quma,  to  whose  household  'Auad  then  belonged;  how  it 
happened  is  not  yet  made  out.  In  consequence  of  this  cir- 
cumstance, the  whole  family  of  the  murdered  man  emigrated 
from  this  place,  and  settled  in  Kom  el  Birat.  Ever  since 
the  law  of  vengeance  for  blood  has  hung  over  the  two  families. 
Not  a  single  member  of  that  family  has  from  that  time  trod 
the  ground  of  Qurna;  and  if  'Auad,  or  any  other  individual 
from  the  Sheikh's  house  were  to  be  seen  in  that  village,  any 
one  of  the  injured  family  would  be  justified  in  killing  him 
openly.     This  is  the  ancient  Arabic  custom.* 

I  turn  from  my  wanderings  through  the  ruins  of  the  great 
royal  city,  and  through  the  changes  of  thousands  of  years 
which  have  passed  over  them,  to  our  castle  on  the  detached 
hill  of  Abd  el  Qurna.  Wilkinson  and  Hay  have  rendered 
an  essential  service  to  later  travellers  by  building  up  the 
habitable  rooms,  which,  from  our  being  desirous  of  spending 
a  long  time  in  Thebes,  we  have  profited  by.  A  broad,  con- 
venient road  leads  by  windings  from  the  plain  to  a  spacious 

*  I  did  not  imagrino,  when  I  wrote  this  down,  that  this  crime  of  blood 
would  so  speedily  be  avenged.     See  Letter  XXXIV, 


272  ABD  EL  QTJENA. 

court,  the  left  side  of  which  (the  mountain  side)  is  formed 
by  a  long  shady  colonnade ;  beyond  this  there  are  several 
habitable  rooms.  At  the  end  of  the  court  stands  a  single 
watch-tower,  on  which  the  Prussian  flag  waves,  and  beside  it 
a  small  house  with  two  rooms,  one  above  the  other,  the 
lowest  of  which  I  occupy  myself.  There  is  no  want  of 
accommodation  either  for  the  kitchen  department,  the  ser- 
vants, and  the  asses. 

The  wide,  boundless  prospect  across  the  Theban  plain 
over  the  wall  of  the  court,  low  on  the  inner  side,  but  with  a 
deep  fall  externally,  is  most  beautiful  and  enchanting.  The 
eye  from  this  point,  and  still  more  perfectly  from  the  sum- 
mit of  the  tower,  or  from  the  top  of  the  hill  rising  directly 
behind  our  dwelling,  commands  all,  that  still  remains  of 
Ancient  Thebes.  In  front  of  us  the  splendid  ruins  of  the 
Memnonia,  from  the  angle  of  the  hills  at  Quma  on  our 
left,  to  the  lofty  Pylones,  whicli  tower  up  above  the  mounds 
of  ruins  of  Medinet  Habu  on  our  right;  then  the  green 
meadow  encircled  by  the  broad  Nile,  from  which  the  solitary 
Colossi  of  Amenophis  rise  on  the  right  hand,  and  beyond  the 
river  the  groups  of  temples  at  Karnak  and  Luqsor,  behind 
which  tlie  lower  plain  extends  several  hours  farther  to  the 
clear  outline  of  the  sliglitly  undulating  Arabic  ranges,  which 
every  morning  were  lit  up  by  the  first  rays  of  the  sun  casting 
a  wonderful  richness  of  colouring  over  the  valley  and  rocky 
desert  all  around  us.  There  is  no  other  spectacle  in  the 
world  that  I  can  compare  with  this,  a  scene  which  daily  im- 
presses us  with  fresh  wonders  and  delight ;  but  it  reminds 
me  perhaps  of  the  view,  for  two  years  before  my  window, 
looking  down  from  the  Tarpeian  Eock,  which  comprised  the 
whole  of  Ancient  Eome  from  the  Aventine,  with  the  Tiber 
at  its  foot,  to  the  Quirinal,  and  beyond  that  the  undulating 
Campagna,  with  the  beautiful  profile  of  the  Alban  hills 
(strikingly  like  those  we  now  behold)  in  the  background. 

We  never,  however,  look  out  into  the  distant  country 
without  being  peculiarly  attracted  to  the  silvery  water-high- 
way, and  without  our  eyes  following  the  pointed  sails,  which 


VISIT  rilOM  TRATELLEES.  273 

may  bring  us  letters  or  travellers  from  the  Xortli.  "U^inter 
licre,  as  iu  all  other  places,  is  the  season  of  sociability.  Xot 
a  week  passes  that  we  do  not  see  several  guests  among  us. 
A  stranger's  book,  which  I  have  placed  here  for  future  tra- 
vellers, and  furnished  with  an  introduction,  was  inaugurated 
(ju  New  Year's  Day  by  our  own  signatures.  Since  then 
above  thirty  names  have  been  added,  although  the  book  has 
hitherto  been  kept  exclusively  iu  our  castle,  and  will  only 
be  handed  over  to  our  faithful  castellan  'Auad  on  our  de- 
parture. 

On  Christmas  Eve  we  for  the  third  time  selected  a  palm 
for  our  Christmas-tree.  This  sjTubol,  still  more  beauti- 
ful than  our  fir-tree,  was  decorated  with  lights  and  small 
irifts.     Our  artists  celebrated  the  cheerlul  festival  in  other 

iiaginative  ways,  and  an  illuminated  Christmas  crib,  exe- 
cuted in  the  t}-]^)ical  manner,  and  placed  at  the  end  of  the 
long  rock-passage,  was  most  successful. 

As  it  is  natural  to  expect,  England  is  by  far  the  most 
numerously  represented  among  travellers;  the  French  are 

lOre  rarely  seen,  but  among  their  numbers  I  must  mention 
I  he  well-known  and  amiable  savant  Ampere,  who,  as  he  told 
lue,  intends  to  spend  several  months  in  this  country,  in  order 
lo  make  some  solid  progress  in  his  Egyptian  studies.*  "We 
are  not,  however,  without  some  of  oiu'  Grerman  countrymen, 
and  one  beautiful  Sunday  morning,  at  the  close  of  the  year, 
we  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  Lie.  Strauss,  the  son  of  the 
iourt  chaplain  iu  Berlin,  and  his  cousin  Dr.  EJrafft.  We  were 
just  about  to  begin  our  simple  Sunday  service,  which  ever 
siuce  Abeken,  our  dear  friend  and  former  preacher  of  the 
desert,  has  quitled  us,  1  have  been  in  the  habit  of  conducting 

*  I  have  since  been  informed  (7?^y.  Arch.,  vol.  iv.  p.  82)  that  M 
AmpL-re  ha.i  U-cn  expressly  sent  to  Egypt  by  the  Paris  Academy,  for 
the  purpose  of  cupviii};  tlic  bilingual  inscription  atPhilae,  which  1  have 
noticed  in  mv  letters.  i>ec  above,  p.  121.  The  exceedingly  abridged 
representation  of  the  Demotic  text,  which  was  communicated  by  M,  de 
Pauley  in  the  Jit  cue  ArchtuUHjique,  is  borrowed  from  the  copy  which 
was  taken  back  to  I'aris,  in  wliich,  however,  the  commencement  ot 
tlie  Demotic  lines,  and  along  with  them  the  date  of  the  decree,  arc 
wanting. 

T 


274  DEPAETUEE  TOE  PE>'iySULA  OF  SI>'AI. 

myself.  I  therefore  immediately  resigned  my  place  to  one 
of  these  two  rev.  gentlemen,  which  more  befitted  them  than 
me ;  and  as  it  happened  that  we  had  with  us  the  very  ser- 
mons written  by  the  two  fathers  of  our  dear  guests,  one  of 
these  was  selected  for  a  discourse. 

Messrs.  Seuffeeheld  and  Dr.  Bagge,  from  Frankfort, 
visited  us  almost  simultaneously  with  them,  and  soon  after- 
wards our  friend  Dr.  Sciiledehatjs  from  Alexandria,  with 
the  Austrian  painter  Sattlee,  and  when  Messrs.  Strauss  and 
Krafft  called  on  us  a  second  time,  on  their  journey  back,  they 
met  some  other  guests  here,  Messrs.  TA^nt,  Stamm,  Schwab, 
and  the  Assessor  von  Rohe,  from  Berlin.  This  very  day 
twelve  Germans  (nine  of  them  Prussians)  sat  down  to  dinner 
with  us. 


LETTEE  XXXI. 

On  the  Retl  Sea,  hetici  en  Gebcl  ZcU  and  Tor. 

G<khI  Friday.    The  commencement  of  Spring. 

21  St  March,  1845. 

OuE  vessel  lies  motionless  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  in  sight 
of  the  distant  coast  of  Tor,  which  we  hoped  to  have  reached 
in  the  course  of  last  night.  I  sit  down  to  write  in  order  to 
divest  myself  of  the  annoying  state  of  impatience  necessarily 
resulting  from  an  exceedingly  inconvenient  and  protracted 
calm,  under  a  sultry  mid-day  sim,  in  a  sailing  vessel,  adapted 
only  for  bales  of  goods. 

On  the  20th  of  February-  we  changed  our  abode  in  Thebes 
from  the  western  to  the  eastern  bank,  from  Qurna  to  Kamak. 
We  settled  ourselves  here  in  some  chambers  of  the  great 
royal  temple ;  but  as  I  was  desirous  of  setting  out  on  my 
journey  to  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai  as  soon  as  possible,  I 
limited  myself  for  the  time,  to  merely  taking  such  a  survey 
of  the  monuments  as  was  absolutely  necessary,  in  order  to 
enable  me  to  appoint  the  work  that  was  to  be  done  during 
my  absence. 

The  3rd  of  March  I  set  out  on  my  journey.     The  younger 


QE>T:n.     SEID  HrssE>-.  275 

Weideiibach  accompanied  me,  iu  order  to  give  me  some 
aasiiJtance  in  the  drawings,  which  would  be  absolutely  re- 
quired; besides  him,  I  took  our  Dragoman  Jussuf  along 
with  me,  the  Kawai^s  Ibraliim  Aga,  Gabre  Mariam,  and 
two  additional  servants.  AVe  first  went  down  the  Nile  as 
&r  a»  Qeneh.  After  it  became  dark  and  the  stars  had 
Bsen,  the  conversation,  which  had  hitherto  been  animated, 
ceased,  and,  Ipug  on  the  deck,  I  watched  the  star  of  Isis,' 
the  sparkling  Sothis  (Sirius),  this  Polar  star  of  Egy23tian 
chronok>gy,  aa  it  gradually  ascended  over  our  heads.  Our 
two  oarsmen  were  only  too  musically  inclined,  and  went 
tbrough  their  whole  stock  of  songs,  quivering  them  with 
imiumenible  repetitions,  sometimes  interrupted  by  the  short 
cry  of  >Scherk,  Gharh  (East,  West),  which  was  softly  answered 
by  the  feeble  and  obedient  boy's  voice  of  our  little  steersman. 
Half  waking,  half  dreaming,  we  then  glided  down  the  river 
till  about  midnight,  when  the  Arab  quivering  also  ceased; 
the  strokes  of  the  oar  became  fainter,  and  at  length  the  boat 
was  left  entirely  to  the  waves.  The  rising  of  the  moon  in 
her  K'ust  quarter,  and  dawning  day,  first  aroused  them  to 
reneweil  activity. 

We  arrived  early  in  Qeneh,  where  we  were  very  kindly 
received  in  the  house  of  the  illustrious  Se'id  Hussen.  He  is 
the  important  man  through  whose  hands  all  our  letters  pass, 
both  going  and  coming,  and  Avho  is  thus  highly  deserving  of 
our  gratitude.  He  and  his  two  sons  were  of  great  assistance 
to  ua  in  obtaining  the  innumerable  things  which  were  re- 
quisite for  our  departure  for  the  desert,  which  we  were 
desirous  of  accelerating  as  much  as  possible.  Meanwhile,  I 
was  delighted  with  the  patriarchal  manners  which  prevailed 
iu  this  most  estimable  Arabian  family.  All  business  was 
carried  on  there,  as  it  is  throughout  the  East,  in  public,  and 
most  commonly  in  the  street.  In  front  of  each  house  there 
is  a  long  divan,  another  in  the  room  ;  friends  come  in,  make 
a  short  salutation,  sit  down  almost  unnoticed,  and  business 
goes  on  as  usual.  Guests  of  higher  rank  are  offered  coffee, 
or  the  long  pipe.     Slaves  stand  round,  ready  at  the  slightest 

t2 


276  MA>>EES  or  AEA.EIA>'  rAMILT. 

sign.  Acquaintance  of  inferior  rank  kiss  the  hand  of  the 
master  of  the  house,  even  if  they  are  only  passers  by ;  they 
do  it  all  seriously  and  quietly,  without  the  least  demonstra- 
tion of  feeling,  but  with  the  usual  greetings,  frequently 
murmured  for  a  long  time  from  one  to  another.  If  there  is 
no  more  space  left  on  the  divan,  or  if  it  is  occupied  by  per- 
sons of  higher  rank,  the  new  comer  squats  down  on  the 
ground  beside  it.  Every  one  rises  and  goes  at  his  pleasure, 
and,  what  strikes  us  as  very  singular,  without  any  parting 
words,  though  the  forms  of  greeting  are  so  long.  The 
master  of  the  house,  also,  quits  his  guests  without  any  salu- 
tation, if  the  visitor  is  not  a  person  of  distinction ;  wlien  sucl» 
is  the  case,  he  is  frequently  detained  for  a  long  while  by 
the  monotonous,  and  almost  always  empty,  conversation. 
This  domestic  life  in  the  street,  sucli  as  prevailed  more  or 
less  among  the  ancient  Greeks  and  ]{omans,  and  which  is  so 
fundamentally  difterent  from  the  life  in  our  studies  and 
oiHces,  is  closely  uuited  with  the  Eastern  character  in  gene- 
ral. Individuals  always  deport  themselves  with  propriety 
and  reserve,  but  they  are  compliant,  and  ready  for  anything 
that  occurs.  In  respectable  fandlies,  such  as  this,  there 
also  exists  an  amiable  ri'ligious  feeling,  originating  in  a  true 
and  kindly  disj)osition.  Old  llussen  is  above  seventy,  with 
a  white  beard,  but,  in  spite  of  his  age,  taking  a  lively  interest 
in  all  that  occurs,  and  meeting  ever}'  one  in  a  friendly  man- 
ner. The  two  sons,  who  are  nearly  fifty,  carry  on  the 
business.  They  treat  the  old  man  with  extreme  reverence. 
Both  are  great  smokers,  but  they  never  smoke  in  the  pre- 
sence of  their  father ;  this  would  be  regarded  as  a  want  of 
tlie  respect  which  is  due  to  him ;  they  immediately  lay  aside 
their  pipes  when  he  enters.  In  the  evening  after  supper, 
when  it  would  have  been  too  great  a  privation  to  resign 
them,  the  sons  sit  in  front  of  the  thresliold  to  smoke ;  while 
we,  as  the  guests,  sit  with  the  old  man  in  the  room,  they 
only  take  part  in  the  conversation  through  the  open  door. 

The  evening  before  our  departure  we  visited  a  manufac- 
toiy  of  the  celebrated  Qulleh  (cooling  vessels),  200,000  of 


ARABIAN  HOSPITALITY.  277 

which  are  annually  made  ;  and  also  the  field  from  ^vhIch  the 
cUv  of  which  they  are  made  is  taken.  It  is  only  one  Eeddan 
(160  sijiiare  roods)  in  extent. 

After  spendin^^  a  couple  of  days  at  Qeneh,  we  quitted  it, 
on  the  6th  March,  with  fifteen  camels.  The  first  day  we 
only  rode  three  hours,  as  far  as  the  copious  spring  of  Bib 
AifBAK,  charminijly  situated  between  Palms  and  Nebek- 
trces.*  and  provided  by  Ibrahim  Pascha  with  a  dome-shaped 
buildini^  for  tlu*  caravans.  AVe  also  reached  early  on  the 
followinpf  day  the  second  night-encampment,  at  the  station 
of  Leqeta.  Tlie  ancient  road  to  Kosser  from  Koptos,  the 
prcRont  Quft,  the  mounds  of  which  we  saw  in  the  distance  on 
our  riE:ht  hand,  leads  immediately  to  the  projecting  moun- 
tains of  Kl  (^orn  (the  Horns).  AVe  did  not  descend  into 
the  broad  Kosser  road  until  we  approached  these  mountains, 
and  arter  a  march  of  six  hours  arrived  at  Leqeta  at  the  junc- 
tion of  the  roads  from  Qeneh,  Quft  (Koptos),  Qiis  (the  ancient 
Kcoc  or  ApoUinopoJis  parva),  and  a  fourth  road,  also,  lead- 
int;  direct  Irom  Luqsor  hither.  Five  wells  furnisli  here  a 
supply  of  tolerably  c:ood  water;  two  buildings,  with  domes 
lialf  fallen  down,  are  destined  for  the  reception  of  travellers, 

I  here  noticed  a  trait  of  Arabian  hospitality  which  I  must 
also  mention.  At  our  last  repast  at  Qeneh  a  fresh  draught 
of  the  delicious  Nile  water  was  brought  me  in  an  orna- 
mental izilt  cup,  decorated  with  pious  sayings  from  the 
Koran.  1  was  pleased  with  its  simple  and  yet  agreeable 
form,  the  segment  of  a  sphere,  and  expressed  this  to  old 
Uus94*n,  without  anticipating  the  answer  I  immediately  re- 
ceivod  :— "  The  cup  belongs  to  you."  As  I  had  nothing 
about  me  which  I  could  give  in  return  for  the  gift,  I  went 
away  shortly  after,  declining  the  civility,  and  left  the  cup 
standing  unnoticed.  That  night,  when  I  went  to  rest,  I 
found  it  placed  beside  my  bed,  but  the  following  morning  I 
gave  express  orders  that  it  should  not  be  packed  up. 
We  started  on  our  journey,  and  in  Leqeta,  where  for  the 
Hrat  time  1  opened  my  trav*elling-bag,  my  surprise  was  great 
•  lifiamnus  nabeca,  Wilkinson,  Mod.  Eg.  and  Thebes— Te. 


278  HAMAMAT. 

when  the  first  thing  I  beheld  was  the  cup  carefully  placed 
withm  it.  Gabre  Mariam  had  closed  mj  baggage,  and  in 
reply  to  my  almost  angry  inquiry  how  it  was  that  the  cup 
was  here,  contrary  to  my  order,  he  confessed  that  he  had  been 
obliged  to  place  it  at  the  top,  by  the  express  wish  of  old  Seid 
Hussen.  I  was  now,  indeed,  compelled  to  yield,  and  to 
think  of  some  present  for  him,  on  my  return. 

We  again  started  from  Leqeta  the  same  evening,  and  rode 
three  hours  farther  to  an  old  station,  at  the  Gebel  Maauad, 
very  little  used  now,  and  deficient  in  water.  Our  Arabs, 
from  the  tribe  of  the  Ag'aize,  are  not  so  animated  as  the 
Ababde,  or  Bischariin,  and  their  camels  are  also  inferior. 

After  Gebel  Maauad,  we  entered  the  hilly,  sandy  plain  of 
QsuE  EL  Benat,  and  after  another  pass,  the  plain  of  Kesch- 
EAScni.  At  the  end  of  this,  Gebel  .Abu  Gueii  rises  on  the 
left,  upon  wliich  we  turned  our  backs  and  went  to  the  right, 
round  an  angle  of  rock,  on  the  precipitous  sides  of  which, 
composed  of  sandstone,  1  found  engraved  the  Shields  of 
the  sun-worshipper  Amenophis  IV,,  along  with  his  consort, 
and  over  it  the  Sun,  with  rays  spread  out  like  hands  around 
it.  Their  names,  as  everywliere  else,  were  partly  erased, 
although  tlie  King  had  not  yet  altered  his  name  into  that  of 
Bech-en-atex.  Towards  mid-day  we  entered  the  primitive 
mountain  range,  and  in  tluve-quarters  of  au  hour  arrived  at 
the  well  of  Hamamat. 

There  appears  to  have  been  an  ancient  Coptic  settlement 
here,  and  the  broad  well,  about  80  feet  deep,  lined  with 
stones,  into  whieh  there  is  a  descent  by  a  winding  staircase, 
is  even  now  ascribed  by  the  Arabs  to  the  Xazarenes  (the 
Christians).  The  ancient  stone-quarries,  which  were  onr 
most  immediate  object,  were  situated  another  half  hour  from 
the  well. 

I  pitched  my  head-quarters  here,  in  a  spacious  grotto 
covered  with  Egyptian  and  Greek  inscriptions,  as,  by  a  hasty 
survey,  we  easily  perceived  that  we  should  find  work  which 
would  occupy  us  for  several  days.  The  ancient  Egyptians, 
who  were  great  lovers  and  eminent  connoisseurs  of  remark- 


IIAMAMAT.  279 

able  kinds  of  stone,  had  here  found  a  bed  of  precious  green 
breccia,  and  beside  it,  also,  some  beautiful  dark-coloured 
veins  of  granite,  which  were  worked  as  early  as  the  6tli 
Dynasty,  rather  more  than  B.C.  2000.  There  are  numerous 
menjurial  uiscriptious  en^aved  on  the  surrounding  rocks 
binet'  lluit  perittd.  Among  them  there  are  several  especially 
deseniDg  notice,  from  the  time  of  the  Persian  Government. 
The  hiero^lypliic  shields  of  Cambyses,  Darius,  Xerxes,  Arta- 
xerxea,  are  indeed  abnost  alone  known  in  this  spot ;  and  a 
ro\u  architect  from  the  Dynasty  of  the  Psammeteci, 

ha.>  <  his  whole  pedigree,  no  less  than  twenty-three 

I'amuiee,  wiiu,  without  one  exception,  held  this  important  post, 
and  some  of  them  also,  in  connection  with  high  priestly 
hoQours.  An  ancestral  mother  stands  at  the  bead  of  the 
long  series,  who  must  have  lived  nearly  700  years  before  the 
la^t  link  of  the  chain.  A  groat  number  of  Greek  Proscyne- 
mata,  allow  us  to  infer  that  the  stuue-quarries  were  still  used 
in  the  time  of  the  Greeks  aud  Komans.  For  five  whole 
days  we  were  occupied  from  morning  to  night  with  copying 
and  taking  impressions,  to  the  continual  wonder  of  the  small 
caruNans  which  we  saw  almost  daily  pass  before  us,  as  the 
principal  road  by  wliich  the  pilgrims  of  Upper  Egypt,  and 
a  greal  pari  of  the  Sudan,  pass  to  Kosser  and  Mecca,  leads 
through  this  valley. 

My  original  phui  had  been  to  go  from  Qeneli  to  Kosser, 
and  to  embark  thence  for  Tor.  As  the  voyage,  however, 
i»ccupies  a  great  deal  of  time,  I  was  very  glad  to  learn  in 
C^eueli  that  there  is  also  a  road  from  Ilamamat,  across  the 
mountain  eliain  to  Gebel  Zeit,  nearly  opposite  Tor.  I  there- 
fore determined  to  take  that  road,  difficult,  indeed,  but  in- 
teresting, and  far  shorter.  At  the  same  time  I  sent  a  mes- 
^e^g^•r  in  advance  to  Kosser  to  give  orders  that  a  vessel 
should  start  for  Gebel  Zeit  without  delay,  and  await  us 
there. 

In  Damamal  1  had  also  a  severe  contest  with  the  Arabs, 
who  suddenly  became  apprehensive  of  the  long  road,  but 
little  known  luid  almost  devoid  of  water,  and  who  wanted 


280  GEBEL  rATIRLH. 

rather  to  guide  us  by  Kosser  along  the  coast.  But  as  luv 
principal  object  was  to  visit  certain  ancient  stone-quarries  in 
the  lofty  mountain  range,  I  threatened,  if  they  did  not  keep 
their  word,  to  write  to  the  Pascha,  and  I  made  them  respon- 
sible for  all  the  consequences.  Thus  after  long  capitulations 
I  accomplished  my  plan.  Nevertheless,  it  was  still  very 
nearly  upset,  as,  on  the  evening  before  our  departure,  we 
were  almost  poisoned  by  the  carelessness  of  our  cook,  who 
had  allowed  some  vinegar  to  stand  in  copper  vessels.  How- 
ever, we  recovered  happily  after  a  night  of  great  sufieriug, 
and  on  the  13th  INIarch  started  from  Hamamat. 

"We  had  brought  with  us  six  barrels  full  of  water  from 
Qeneh  ;  the  camel-drivers  were  worse  provided,  and  must 
consequently  have  suftered  much  from  thirst.  l^esides 
SeUm,  our  old  trustworthy  guide  of  the  caravan,  1  had 
brought  with  me  in  addition  a  special  guide  from  Qeneh, 
Selim,  who  was  said  to  bo  well  acquainted  with  the  moun- 
tainous district  between  Hamamat  and  Gebel  Ze'it,  although 
he  had  only  made  the  journey  once  before,  above  twelve  years 
ago;  and  under  his  guidance,  we  got  in  two  days  as  far  as 
GrEBEL  Fatireh.  After  great  labour  and  long  searching,  we 
re-discovered  the  remains  of  the  ancient  colony  of  workmen, 
who  quarried  here  a  beautiful  black  and  white  granite.  From 
this  point,  however,  the  ignorance  of  the  guide  was  mani- 
fested in  many  ways.  On  the  evening  of  the  15th  of  March 
we  arrived  at  a  high  water-shed,  and  were  compelled  to  pass 
the  night  on  the  hard  rocky  ground,  there  being  no  possi- 
bility of  pitching  a  tent.  The  following  day,  Palm  Sunday, 
we  suddenly  came  early  in  the  morning  upon  a  steep  preci- 
pice, which  descends  about  SOO  feet  between  the  two  chains 
of  the  MuNFiEii  mountain  range.  It  seemed  impossible  to 
pass  the  steep  and  dangerous  path  with  a  caravan.  The 
Arabs  one  and  all  protested  in  the  most  decided  manner 
against  attempting  it,  and  poured  forth  the  most  violent 
curses  upon  Selim.  He  was  in  a  difficult  position.  He  had 
evidently  not  known  the  difficulties  of  this  pass ;  the  roads 
that  are  passable,  though  it  is  true  they  are  very  circuitous, 


SFARCII  FOR  AVATEK.  281 

lead  either  by  Xecuel  Delfa,  eastward,  or  by  Schaib  el 
Benat,  westward  of  this  spot.  To  strike  iuto  one  of  these 
two  roads  now,  would  liave  at  least  cost  us  two  more  days, 
and  ha  we  had  already  lost  a  great  deal  of  time  at  Gebel 
Fatlreh,  we  sliould  have  run  iuto  still  greater  danger  of  a 
deficiency  of  water,  as  our  supply  had  been  calculated  very 
exactly,  and  between  Hamamat  and  Gebel  Zeit  we  had  ouly 
the  prospect  of  one  single  spring,  which  was  said  to  be 
eitunti'd  lu-ar  Gebel  Dochan.  I  tlierefore  gave  orders,  and 
carried  my  point  in  spite  of  the  most  violent  protestations 
to  the  contrary,  that  all  the  camels  should  be  unloaded  on 
the  height,  and  that  the  whole  of  the  baggage  should  be 
carried  down  on  tlie  shoulders  of  the  Arabs.  My  own  ser- 
vants had  to  bfgin,  and  we  all  set  to  work  together.  Chests 
and  trunks  were  taken  singly  from  one  point  of  rock  to 
another;  wo  had  most  difiicidty  in  managing  the  great 
water-casks,  which  could  only  be  moved  by  three  or  four 
people  at  once'.  The  unloaded  beasts  were  then  carefully 
led  down,  and  thus  the  bold  enterprise  terminated  success- 
fidlv  witlunit  any  accident  or  injury,  amid  loud  and  fervent 
apiH-als  to  Abd  el  Qader,  the  sacred  patron  of  the  camel. 
After  tliree  toilsome  hours,  all  was  over,  and  the  beasts  were 
again  loaded. 

Sotni  after,  liowever,  we  were  to  encounter  a  far  more 
serious  danger.  1  was  as  usual  riding  in  advance  with  Max 
and  some  of  the  servants,  and  liad  charged  the  caravan  to 
follow  the  footmarks  of  my  ass  in  the  sand.  Towards  mid- 
day we  .saw  Gkuel  DocuAy,  "the  Smoking  Mountain,"  on 
our  left  hand,  rising  deep  blue  beyond  the  Munfieh  chain,  and 
several  hours  afterwanls,  when  we  emerged  from  the  higher 
mountains  into  an  undulating  and  more  open  country,  on  the 
farther  side  (d*  the  wiilc  plain,  and  beyond  the  sea,  we,  for  the 
first  time,  saw  the  distant  mountains  of  Tor,  like  rising  mist, 
situate<l  in  the  third  quarter  of  the  globe,  which  we  were 
now  about  to  enter. 

Soon  after  three  o'clock  we  came  to  two  Bedouin  huts 


282  LOSS  OF  EOAD. 

raade  of  mats,  in  whicli  we  found  a  woman,  and  a  dark-skinned 
boy,  with  beautiful  eyes,  who  gave  us  some  milk.  On  my  in- 
quiring whether  there  were  ancient  walls  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, the  boy  conducted  us  to  a  piece  of  granite  rock,  one 
hour  distant,  standing  isolated,  surrounded  by  a  rough,  but 
well  piled  up,  wall,  about  10  feet  high.  The  square,  in  which 
the  above-mentioned  rock  formed  the  acropolis,  was  70  paces 
long,  and  (50  broad ;  the  entrance  from  the  south  was  furnished 
with  two  circular  bastions ;  and  similar  ones  stood  at  the  four 
corners,  and  in  the  centre  of  the  three  remaining  sides.  In 
the  interior  single  chambers  were  partitioned  off,  and  in  the 
centre  there  was  a  well  of  burnt  bricks,  but  which  was  now 
covered  with  rubbish.* 

According  to  the  statements  of  our  guide,  we  ought  now 
to  have  been  near  the  water  that  was  said  to  be  only  one  half 
day's  journey  distant  from  our  last  night's  encampment.  But 
the  sun  went  down  without  our  having  reached  the  desired 
goal.  By  tlie  dim  liglit  of  the  moon  in  lier  first  quarter,  we 
at  lengtli  turned  into  a  lofty  rock-valley,  which  Selim  assured 
us  would  certainly  lead  to  the  spring.  AVe  ascended  for  a 
long  time  between  bare  granite  precipices ;  the  moon  set,  no 
well  appeared,  and  the  guide  confessed  that  he  had  missed 
the  right  valley.  AVe  were  obliged  to  turn  back.  The  same 
thing  occurred  in  a  second  and  a  tliird  valley  into  which  the 
guide  conducted  us,  who  was  now  evidently  quite  lost,  having 
altered  his  direction  more  than  once.  He  excused  himself 
on  the  plea  of  uncertain  moonlight,  and  assured  us  that  at 
break  of  day  he  would  immediately  discover  the  right  path. 
Nothing,  therefore,  remained  but  to  lie  down  on  the  hard 
ground,  in  our  light  riding-dresses,  to  take  a  short  disturbed 
sleep,  without  eating  or  drinking ;  for  our  water-bottles  had 
long  been  emptied,  and  we  had  each  of  us,  some  time  before, 
devoured  our  small  provision  of  four  biscuits.     Some  camel- 

*  These  places  were  described  for  the  first  time  accurately,  and  in 
an  instructive  manner,  by  Wilkinson.  Journ.  of  the  R.  GeogT.  Soc., 
vol.  ii.,  p.  28,  »S:c. 


LOSS  OF  EOAD,  283 

saddlee  were  our  only  protection  from  the  cold  north  wind. 
Thus,  witli  the  stars  above  and  the  stones  beneath  ns,  we 
placed  our  hopes  in  the  folio\ving  morning. 

With  the  (lawn  ui'  day  we  again  mounted.  My  ass,  who 
had  taken  the  List  scanty  ration  of  water  that  had  been 
nieafiured  out  for  it,  more  than  four-and-twenty  hours  back, 
and  could  not  endure  thirst  like  the  camels,  would  scarcely 
go  a  step  farther.  Seliin,  however,  was  in  good  heart,  and 
thought  we  should  soon  get  back  to  the  right  road.  We 
fouud  innumerabh'  marks  of  camels.  "  Only  a  little  while 
longer,"  exclaimed  the  guide,  "  and  we  shall  be  all  right.'* 
Our  hope  was  again  revived. 

Beautiful  variegated  blocks  of  granite  and  porphyry,  which 
I  saw  lying  among  the  loose  stones,  were  joyful  signs  to  me 
of  the  vicinity  of  the  JMons  porphyrites.  Meanwhile,  the 
broad  valley  into  which  we  had  turned  constantly  became 
narrower,  and  divided  into  two  branches,  the  right  of  which 
we  ascended.  But  this  also  divided  once  more,  and  like  the 
valleys  di'scribed  above,  everything  round  us  led  to  the  sad 
conviction  that  here  we  were  again  upon  the  ^Tong  path;  I 
made  a  halt  t(^  give  some  rest  to  our  tired  animals,  and  sent 
the  s:uide  forward  alone  to  find  out  his  right  road.  Hungry, 
and  above  all,  thirsting  for  a  di-aught  of  water,  we  encamped 
in  the  shadow  of  a  rock-precipice.  "We  were  in  a  critical 
position.  I  had  begun  to  doubt  whether  our  guide  would 
ever  tind  the  spring  in  this  desert  and  uniformly  barren 
mountainous  region.  And  where  was  our  caravan?  Had  it 
fouud  its  way  to  the  water  ?  If,  as  hitherto  had  been  the 
case,  it  had  followed  the  footmarks  of  my  ass,  which  were 
distinguished  singly  among  the  innumerable  tracks  of  camels, 
then  it  was  lost  like  ourselves.  AVe  waited  impatiently  for 
Selim;  he  could  at  least  lead  us  back  to  the  Arab  huts, 
which  we  had  seen  the  previous  day.  But  one  hour  after 
the  other  passed  away  :  Selim  did  not  come.  The  sun  rose 
higher,  and  deprived  us  of  the  narrow  shadow  of  the  moun- 
tain precipice,  beside  which  we  had  halted.  We  sat  silent 
upon  the  burnmg  stones.     We  did  not  venture  to  leave  the 


284  LOSS  or  eo^d. 

spot  for  fear  of  inissing  Selim.  Had  be  met  with  an  acci- 
dent, or  could  he  have  forgotten  himself  so  far  as  only  to 
think  of  his  own  preservation,  and  to  leave  us  to  our  fate, 
which  is  said  to  have  happened  some  years  ago  to  three 
Turks,  in  tliis  same  desert,  who  were  never  seen  again  ?  Or 
was  Selim  too  weary  to  return  back  to  us  ?  He  had  been  on 
foot  almost  all  the  way,  and  must  consequently  be  much 
more  exhausted  than  we  were. 

From  time  to  time  we  mounted  the  nearest  heights,  and 
fired  off  our  guns.  All  in  vain !  We  were  at  length  com- 
pelled to  yield  to  the  cheerless  conviction  that  we  shoidd  not 
see  our  guide  agaiu.  After  waiting  four  hours,  mid-day  had 
arrived,  and  with  it  the  latest  time  to  start,  if  we  could 
still  cling  to  the  faint  hope  of  again  finding  out  the  Arab 
huts,  which  must  be  about  six  hours  distant  from  us.  To 
search  any  longer  for  the  spring  of  water  would  have  been 
madness,  as  even  Selim  had  not  found  it ;  Gebel  Zcit,  where 
our  vessel  lay,  was  two  and  a  half  days'  journey  distant,  and 
the  Nile,  on  the  other  side  of  the  mountain  range,  five  days' 
journey  oft':  the  camels  had  drank  nothing  for  four  days,  and 
the  ass  was  already  completely  exhausted. 

We,  therefore,  started  once  more.  My  companions  had 
done  everything  tliat  I  proposed,  but  I  never  felt  more 
severely  the  responsibility  I  was  under  for  others,  whose  lives 
were  at  stake  with  my  own,  than  when  forming  that  linger- 
ing determination.  It  seemed  foolhardy  to  tliink  of  tra- 
velling witliout  our  guide,  only  directed  by  the  stars,  in  this 
totally  uninhabited  and  barren  mountainous  land,  lost  as  we 
already  w^ere,  and  brought  still  more  out  of  our  right 
direction  by  the  crossed  and  crooked  paths  we  had  piu-sued 
during  the  night ;  nevertheless,  it  was  our  last  resource. 

After  deliberating  for  some  time,  we  determined  to  ride 
back  to  the  principal  valley,  which  we  had  passed  through 
that  morning  so  full  of  hope ;  the  endless  variety  of  bare, 
jagged  mountain  precipices,  however,  and  the  valleys  without 
a  tree  or  bush,  filled  only  with  rubbish  and  loose  stonea, 
leave  such  a  completely  uniform  impression,  that  none  of  U8 


HEJOLN'ING  THE  CAEAYAX.  2S& 

would  ever  have  reco«^ised  this  principal  valley,  had  we  not 
felt  sure  that  we  were  right  by  the  direction  and  probable  dis- 
tance. At  the  outlet  of  this  valley  we  were  obliged  again  to 
enter  the  region  of  the  lower  hills,  between  which,  towards 
the  south,  it  seemed  at  least  there  was  a  possibility  of  finding 
the  Arab  huts,  as  1  had  taken  the  position  of  the  magnet, 
with  reference  to  the  highest  point  of  Dochan,  from  the 
mountain  fortress,  which  was  not  too  far  removed  from  tbat 
spot.  The  huts,  indeed,  were  so  concealed,  that  we  might 
ride  past  them  at  a  short  distance  without  observing  them; 
perhaps,  even  the  mats  might  to-day  be  set  up  in  a  diflerent 
place.  Thus  we  were  lost  in  the  wide,  burning  desert,  with- 
out a  guide,  tormented  by  increasing  hunger  and  thirst,  and 
so  far  as  human  calculation  went,  wholly  in  the  hands  of 
chance.  JSilently  we  descended  in  the  burning,  mid-day 
heat,  each  occupied  with  his  own  reflections,  when  suddenly 
— I  shall  riever  forget  that  moment — two  men  emerged  from 
the  nearest  angle  of  the  rock ;  they  rushed  towards  us,  em- 
braced our  knees,  kissed  our  hands,  offered  us  water  from 
their  pitchers,  and  continued  to  repeat  their  congratulations 
and  salutations  with  touching  joy.  "El  hamdu  I'illah !" 
IVaised  be  (iod  !  sounded  from  all  sides.     "We  were  saved. 

Our  caravan,  from  which  the  two  Arabs  came,  had  as  usual 
followed  our  traces,  and  therefore,  like  us,  got  into  the 
wrong  road ;  but  Ibrahim  Aga,  soon  perceiving  our  error, 
had  halted  early  in  the  day,  and  during  the  night  kindled 
small  llres  on  some  of  the  hills  with  the  scanty  materials 
for  burning  which  had  been  collected  with  difiiculty,  and  he 
liad  almost  lired  off  all  his  powder.  But  the  wind  blew 
towards  the  opposite  quarter,  and  we  heard  none  of  the  sig- 
nals of  our  anxious  comrades.  The  following  morning  they 
had  prc»ceeded  (Miwards,  and  owing  to  Sheikh  Selam's  sur- 
prising knowledge  of  the  locality,  though  he  had  only  once 
been  here  above  tive-and-twenty  years  before,  they  reached 
the  road  to  the  spring.  Nevertheless,  Ibrahim  Aga  made  the 
caravan  encamp  one  hour  before  arriving  at  it,  as  all  traces 
of  us  had  disappeared,  and  anxious  about  our  fate,  he  sent 
patrols  of  Arabs  into  the  mountains  in  search  of  us. 


286  GEBEL  DOCHAN. 

How  strange,  then,  that  during  this  very  quarter  of  an 
hour  we  should  have  again  struck  into  the  great  valley,  where 
we  could  not  fail  to  meet  this  message.  As  we  had  reached 
our  side  valley  over  the  mountain,  no  marks  of  our  beasts 
could  lead  thither,  as  here  these  generally  disappeared  upon 
the  stones ;  had  we  therefore  started  but  a  few  minutes  later, 
they  would  certainly  have  passed  us,  and  had  we  descended  the 
valley  earlier  than  this,  we  should  have  forthwith  bent  our 
steps  to  the  right  towards  the  huts,  and  turned  our  backs  on 
the  caravan,  encamped  far  away  on  our  left  hand. 

About  two  o'clock  we  reached  the  encampment,  which  we 
entered  amidst  universal  cries  of  joy.  The  greatest  surprise 
was  expressed  at  not  finding  Selim  with  us — he  was  given 
up  by  all.  I  would  not,  however,  allow  the  camp  to  break 
up,  but  had  the  camels  at  once  led  alone  to  the  spring.  The 
Arabs  were  again  sent  into  the  mountains  in  search  of  Selim, 
and  I  remained  the  rest  of  tlie  day  (juietly  in  my  tent. 

Towards  evening  some  Arabs  returned  from  the  spring, 
bearing  ^vit]l  them,  upon  a  camel,  Selim,  hardly  in  posses- 
sion of  his  senses,  his  feet  bleeding  and  bound  up.  He  had 
been  found  speechless,  lying  beside  tlie  reservoir  of  water, 
his  mouth  open,  liis  body  swollen  from  having  taken  an  im- 
moderate draught  of  the  water.  How  he  came  there  we 
could  not  immediately  learn,  for  he  answered  none  of  our 
questions.  He  must,  liowever,  have  at  length  found  his  way 
out  of  the  high  mountains  accidentally,  or  by  the  wonderful 
faculty  possessed  by  the  Arab  of  following  tracks.  At  pre- 
sent, perliaps,  it  was  rather  his  fears  of  the  serious  conse- 
quences which  might  ensue  from  the  wretched  trick  he  had 
played  us  which  rendered  him  speechless.  When  he  ob- 
served that  he  had  excited  our  compassion,  he  very  soon 
recovered.  I  no  longer,  however,  retained  him  near  my 
person,  but  for  the  remainder  of  the  journey  took  the  old, 
trustworthy  Sheikh  Selam  as  our  guide  in  front,  and  left  the 
former  behind  with  the  caravan. 

GrEBEL  DocHAN,  the  porphyry  mountain,  our  real  object 
in  this  district,  and  which  had  occasioned  the  whole  enter- 
prise, now  after  all  lay  far  behind  us.     We  had  been  riding 


GEBEL  DOCHAN.  287 

tor  several  hours  continuously  at  its  base,  as  I  had  sus- 
pected even  the  day  before,  in  spite  of  Selim's  assurance 
to  the  contrary,  for  we  liad  incorrectly  fancied  the  spring 
wa»  in  its  neighbourhood.  Xone  of  the  caravan  had  ever 
seen  the  stone-quarries  and  the  remains  of  the  ancient 
colony  of  workmen.  Nevertheless,  I  determined  to  venture 
upon  a  second  attempt  the  following  day,  which  was  suc- 
cessful. 

I  set  out  at  daybreak  with  Max,  the  Sheikh  Sel^m,  and  a 
youn?,  active  Arab.  Tlie  huts  liad  not  been  observed  by  the 
caravan,  and  were  also  situated  too  much  towards  the  east 
for  us.  A\'e  therefore  rode  straight  towards  the  highest 
point  of  tlie  group  of  Dochan.  It  so  chanced,  that  just  as 
we  were  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  river,  we  met  an  Abadi 
from  one  of  the  huts  with  some  camels,  for  which  he  was 
seeking  out  some  pasture  ground.  AVith  his  assistance  we 
soon  attained  our  object. 

AVe  lirst  found  the  large  opening  to  a  well  built  up  with 
unhewn  stones ;  it  was  12  feet  in  diameter,  but  was  now 
fallen  to  pieces  and  filled  up  with  rubbish.  Five  piUars  were 
still  standing  on  the  western  side,  most  likely  formerly  be- 
longing to  a  covered  hall ;  a  sixth  was  demolished.  Three 
hundred  paces  farther  up  the  valley  a  temple,  now  in  ruins, 
was  ewK-ted  on  a  t^ranite  rock  projecting  from  the  left  side 
of  the  valley.  The  walls  were  formed  of  unhewn  stones,  the 
finer  parts  of  the  architecture  were,  however,  very  delicately 
chiselled  out  of  red  granite.  A  staircase  of  twenty  steps  led 
from  the  north  to  the  paved  outer  court,  which  was  sur- 
rounded by  a  wall,  and  in  the  middle  stood  a  rough  granite 
altar.  On  the  left  hand  four  cell-chambers  were  attached  to 
this  court,  the  most  southern  of  which,  however,  had  partly 
fallen  with  its  rock-basis.  Another  small  chamber  had  been 
joined  to  these  as  the  rock  oftercd  space  for  it,  in  which 
stood  a  tolerably  large  altar,  but  also  ^Nithout  inscriptions. 
In  front  of  these  chambers,  in  the  centre  of  the  court,  at  an 
elevation  of  several  feet,  and  with  a  foundation  of  sharply- 
cut  blocks  of  granite,  rose  an  Ionic  portico,  which  consisted 


288  MOIE  MESSAID. 

of  four  monolithic  slender  and  swelling  granite  columnSy 
whose  bases  and  voluted  capitals,  with  the  blocks  of  the 
gables  and  architraves,  lay  scattered  around  in  ruins.  The 
long  dedicatory  inscriptions  mentioned  that  the  temple 
had  been  consecrated  under  the  Emperor  Hadeian  to  Zeus 
Helios  Seeapis,  by  the  Eparch,  Kammius  Martialis.  To 
tlie  left  of  the  well  the  ruins  of  the  town  are  situated  on  an 
elevated  spot.  It  was  in  the  form  of  a  square,  and,  as  usual, 
fortified  A^ath  towers.  In  the  centre  there  was  another  well, 
the  chief  requisite  of  every  station,  built  of  burnt  bricks, 
and  covered  with  a  coating  of  lime.  Eight  rough,  slender, 
granite  pillars  form  the  entrance  to  the  well. 

An  ancient  precipitous  road  leads  to  the  adjoining  moun- 
tain, and  conducts  to  the  porphyry  quarries,  which  were 
situated  immediately  beneath  its  summit ;  they  furnished  the 
beautifid  deep  red  porphyry  which  is  displayed  in  so  many 
monuments  of  the  imperial  time.  Broad  veius  of  it,  which 
were  worked  to  a  considerable  depth,  passed  between  an- 
other kind  of  rock  of  a  blue  colour,  sprinkled  with  white, 
and  a  rock  of  almost  a  red  brick  colour.  AVe  found  five 
or  six  quarries  beside  each  other,  the  largest  about  40  paces 
square.  I  could  nowhere  discover  wedge-holes  for  splitting ; 
on  the  contrary,  the  bluish  rock  immediately  beside  the 
quarry,  which  was  pulverised  nearly  as  fine  as  sand,  seemed 
to  indicate  the  application  of  fire.  In  the  town,  also,  I 
found  lofty  and  peculiar  heaps  of  ashes. 

From  the  quarries  I  ascended  to  the  summit  of  the 
mountain,  afibrdiiig  an  extensive  and  glorious  prospect  over 
the  mountains  in  the  immediate  \icinity  to  the  plain,  which 
declined  rapidly  from  the  hilly  district  to  a  sandy  level  ex- 
tending to  the  sea ;  and  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  blue 
surface  of  the  water,  we  descried  the  lofty  range  of  Tor. 
After  I  had  taken  a  number  of  observations  with  the  compass 
I  re-descended,  and  after  sunset  once  more  reached  our  camp 
at  the  MoiE  Messaii). 

The  19th  of  March  we  crossed  the  plain  to  the  Ex>Ti:D 
mountains,  stretchiug"aloDg  the  sea-coast,  which  we  traversed 


GEBEI  zt:iT.  289 

by  a  valley  nmninnj  diagonally  across  them.  An  abimdnat 
Bpring  hen'  came  to  the  surface,  whose  rippling  waters  ac- 
companied us  for  a  long  T while.  It  might  be  considered 
the  Fons  Tadnos  of  Pliny,  as  its  water  has  only  recently  be- 
come brackish  and  undrinkable,  from  the  bed  of  natron  on 
the  surface.  We  left  the  ruins  of  Abu  Schae,  the  ancient 
My 08  hormos  or  Philofei'as  partus,  on  our  right,  and  en- 
camped on  the  peninsula  of  (ttmscheh,  which  is  called  by 
the  Arabs,  Ki:nBTT,  from  the  sulphur  which  is  there  obtained. 

Yesterday  morning  we  rode  to  the  Bay  of  Gebel  Ze'it,  be- 
tween the  Enned  mountains  and  the  sea-shore.  The  Eange 
of  Tor,  which  floated  before  sunrise  in  a  milky  blue  colour 
over  the  surface  of  the  sea,  stood  out  faintly  from  the  sky ; 
its  outline  only  disappeared  with  the  rising  sun. 

After  mid-day  we  arrived  at  Gebel  Zeit,  the  oil  moun- 
tain. Our  vessel,  which  had  been  appointed  to  meet  us 
from  Kosser,  made  the  voyage  from  thence  in  six  days,  and 
had  already  waited  four  days  for  our  arrival.  The  camels 
were  dismissed  here,  and  returned  the  same  evening. 

One  quarter  of  an  hour  north  of  our  anchorage  were  the 
Zeitieh  ;  such  is  the  name  given  to  five  or  six  pits,  hollowed 
out  in  the  sandy  shore,  or  in  the  rock,  and  which  fill  with 
blackish-brown  naphtha,  like  syrup.  A  few  years  ago  re- 
searches were  set  on  foot  by  Em  Bey,  who  was  in  hopes  of 
finding  coal  beneath,  though  hitherto  they  have  had  no  suc- 
cess. 

Yesterday  evening  it  was  a  perfect  calm.  It  was  only 
during  the  night  that  a  light  wind  rose  from  the  north,  which 
wo  immediately  availed  ourselves  of,  for  setting  sail.  "With 
the  wind  in  our  lavour  we  might  have  accomplished  the  pas- 
sage across  in  one  night ;  but  now  the  day  is  again  drawing 
to  a  close,  and  we  have  not  yet  reached  the  port.  The  ship 
of  burden  scarcely  stirs,  though  the  long  oars  have  been  at 
length  set  in  motion. 

The  sailors  of  this  sea  are  very  different  from  those  on  the 
Kile.     Their  deportment  is  more  reserved,  less  sly  and  sub- 

u 


290  TOE. 

servient.  Their  songs,  which  commence  at  the  first  stroke  of 
the  oar,  consist  of  fragmentary  short  lines,  which  are  sung 
first  by  one,  and  are  taken  up  by  another,  while  the  re- 
mainder utter  short  and  deep  grunting  sounds,  as  an  accom- 
paniment, at  equal  intervals.  The  Rais,  on  an  elevated  seat, 
rows  along  with  the  others.  He  is  a  negro,  as  well  as  several 
others  among  the  sailors,  but  one  of  the  handsomest  and 
strongest  Moors  that  I  ever  saw — a  real  Othello ;  when 
making  his  athletic  movements,  he  rolls  his  yellow-white 
eyes,  shows  his  dazzling  teeth,  and  gives  the  tone  to  the  song, 
leading  it  for  a  length  of  time,  with  a  shriD,  piercing,  but 
sldlful  voice. 


LETTEE  XXXII. 

Convent  on  Mount  Sinai,  the  24ih  March,  1845. 
Easter  Monday. 

On  the  evening  of  Good  Friday  we  landed  in  Tor  by 
moonlight.  The  harbour  is  now  so  much  sanded  up,  that 
our  vessel  was  obliged  to  lie  off  several  hundred  paces,  and 
we  were  landed  in  a  boat.  We  were  met  on  shore  by  the 
old  Greek  Nicola  Janni,  who  had  before  received  Eheen- 
BERGf,  Leon  de  Laborde,  Euppell  Isenbeeg,  and  other 
well-known  travellers ;  and  he  had  favourable  testimonials  to 
produce  of  the  reception  they  had  met  with  from  him.  After 
long  negotiations  TN-ith  the  insolent  Arabs,  who,  when  they 
discovered  we  were  in  a  hurry,  and  that  they  were  indis- 
pensable to  us,  endeavoured  in  all  ways  to  overreach  us,  we 
started  early  the  day  before  yesterday  from  Tor,  limiting 
ourselves  to  what  was  absolutely  necessary  for  the  land 
journey ;  and  we  sent  the  vessel  to  await  us  at  Cape  Abtj 
Zelimeh. 

Our  road  led  in  a  due  northerly  direction  to  the  mouth 
of  Wadi  Hebean,  across  the  plain  of  El  G'e'ah,  which, 
being  five  or  six  hours  broad,  is  situated  between  the  sea 


1 


WADI  HEBRAX.       CONVENT.  291 

aud  mountain.  On  first  starting,  however,  I  made  a  digres- 
sion to  the  hot  springs  of  Gebel  Hammam.  They  are 
situated  at  tlie  southern  end  of  the  isolated  line  of  moun- 
tains, which,  commencing  one  hour  to  the  north  of  T6r, 
extends  to  the  sea-shore.  I  again  met  the  caravan  at  the 
well  of  El  Hai,  which  is  pleasantly  situated,  on  the  direct 
road,  between  gardens  of  palm-trees.  The  ground  gradually 
rises  from  the  sea-coast  to  beyond  this  well.  As  soon  as  we 
got  an  open  prospect  over  the  whole  plain,  and  to  the  lofty 
range  which  descends  towards  the  south-west  in  a  steep  and 
regularly  declining  chain  to  the  extremity  of  the  Peninsula, 
I  took  the  points  of  the  compass,  with  reference  to  all  the 
places  of  any  note,  the  mouths  of  valleys,  and  summits  of 
mountains,  which  the  guides  were  able  to  name.  About 
half-past  five  I  reached  the  foot  of  the  mountain  range. 
Here  already,  at  the  entrance  of  the  valley,  I  observed  the 
first  SiNAiTic  Inscription  on  the  black  blocks  of  stone.  A 
little  farther  on  we  came  to  the  small  piece  of  water  shaded 
by  some  palm-trees,  where  we  spent  the  night. 

Yesterday  we  traversed  the  AYadi  Heeran,  which  sepa- 
rates the  group  of  Serbal  from  the  principal  range  of  Gebel 
Musa,  crossed  over  Nakb  el  Egatji,  which  forms  the 
water-shed  between  the  west  and  east,  and  turning  from 
this  point  southwards,  over  Nakb  el  Hatji,  the  wind-saddle, 
we  reached  the  Convent  on  Easter  Sunday,  as  the  sun  was 
setting.  AYe  were  drawn,  like  other  travellers,  up  the  high 
wall  of  the  fortification,  to  the  entrance,  although  there  is 
another  entrance  through  the  convent  garden,  or  more  level 
ground,  but  which  they  are  only  in  the  habit  of  using  from 
within.  The  ao;ed  and  worthy  prior,  who  is  mentioned  by 
Kobinson,  had  died  that  year  in  Cairo,  and  had  been  replaced 
by  another,  Demetrius  Nicodemus,  who  is  said  to  hold  the 
rank  of  a  bishop. 

As  it  is  a  Greek  convent,  instead  of  Easter  rejoicings  we 
came  to  a  strict  season  of  fasting.  But  independently  of 
that,  the  whole  life  and  habits  of  the  four  priests  and  twenty- 
one  lay  brothers  made  by  no  means  such  an  edifying  im- 

u  2 


292  GEBEL  MUSA. 

pression  as  "we  might  have  expected  to  witness  in  this  spot. 
A  gloomy  spirit  of  wearisome  sloth  and  ignorance  hangs  like 
a  cloud  of  mist  over  their  discontented  countenances.  Yet 
these  fugitives  from  this  world  of  cares  are  wandering 
beneath  an  ever  cheerful  sky  of  moderate  temperature,  are 
alone  able,  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  this  sultry  wilderness,  to 
refresh  themselves  beneath  the  dark  shade  of  the  cypress, 
palm,  and  olive-tree,  and  have  besides  in  their  possession  a 
library  of  1500  volumes,  not  in  the  smallest  degree  consider- 
ing the  best  purpose  for  which  they  are  intended — viz.,  a 
larpciov  \//'ux^?-* 

To-day  we  ascended  Gebel  Musa.  In  my  own  imagina- 
tion, and  by  the  descriptions  of  former  travellers,  it  formed 
the  actual  centre  of  the  whole  range ;  but  this  is  not  the 
case.  Both  in  elevation  and  in  the  planimetrical  projection 
of  the  whole  mass  of  the  primitive  range,  it  forms  part  of 
the  north-eastern  slope.  The  convent  in  a  direct  line  is 
three  times  as  near  the  eastern  border  of  the  range  as  the 
western.  Even  Gebel  Katherin,  situated  immediately  to  the 
south,  is  loftier  than  the  almost  concealed  summit  of  Gebel 
Musa,  which  is  invisible  to  tlie  whole  of  the  surrounding 
country.  Still  higher  mountains  rise  on  the  farther  side  of 
Katherin,  but  in  steps,  as  for  example,  TJm  Eiolin,  Abu 
ScHEGERE,  Qettae,  &c.,  as  far  as  Um  Schomae,  which 
towers  up  over  all  the  others,  and  stands  in  the  centre 
of  the  eastern  and  western  slope  of  the  whole  elevation, 
forming  the  principal  and  most  northern  vertebre  of  the  long 
backbone  of  the  range,  which  passes  down  to  the  south,  and 
determines  the  direction  of  the  whole  Peninsula.  All  the 
way  up  Gebel  Musa,  along  with  the  various  spots  which  are 
connected  with  holy  legends,  was  a  walk  amidst  the  wildest 
and  grandest  natural  features  ;  it  reminded  me  of  being  led 
through  a  castle  of  historical  renown,  where  the  places  of 
rest  and  study,  &c.,  of  some  great  king  are  exhibited. 

On  our  return  from  Gebel  Miisa,  we  ascended  the  actual 

*  "  Medicine  for  the  soul." — Tb. 


IIOREB.  293 

brow  of  the  so-called  Horeb,  which  Eobinsou  regards  as  the 
TRUE  Sinai  instead  of  Gebel  Musa,  which  has  hitherto  been 
viewed  as  such.  "We  passed  several  hermit's  huts  and 
chapels,  till  we  at  length  reached  one,  situated  in  a  rocky 
basin,  behind  which  the  principal  mass  of  Horeb  rises  up 
abruptly  and  grandly.  There  is  no  accessible  road  to  it. 
We  clambered  up,  first  through  a  precipitous  cleft  in  the 
rock,  then  over  the  brows  of  the  rock  towards  the  south. 
About  half-past  five  we  reached  the  summit,  just  above  tlie 
great  plain  of  Eaha,  on  the  immense  round-formed  mountain 
top,  which  has  such  a  grand  appearance  from  the  plain. 
Eobinson  seems  to  have  attempted  this  road  at  first,  but  to 
have  given  it  up  afterwards,  and  mounted  to  the  top  of 
Sessaf,  which  certainly  is  loftier,  but  situated  a  little  to  the 
westward,  and  does  not  project  into  the  plain  as  the  actual 
central  point,  like  the  knob  which  we  ascended.*  Our  com- 
panions, with  the  exception  of  one  active  Arab  boy,  had 
remained  behind,  as  it  was,  in  fact,  a  dangerous  ascent. 
Even  this  site  did  not  allow  me  to  entertain  the  view  that 
Moses  ever  stood  upon  a  rock  that  was  visible  from  this 
valley,  if  the  narrative  is  to  be  understood  in  so  literal  a 
manner.  AVe  did  not  ascend  Gebel  Katherin,  as  it  has  fewer 
historical  claims  even  than  Gebel  Musa. 


LETTER  XXXIII. 

On  tlie  Fed  Sea,  the  eth  April,  1845. 
I  SHALL  employ  our  tranquil  sea  voyage,  which  will  last 
for  several  days  longer,  in  arranging  the  various  materials  I 

♦  These  are  the  exact  words  of  ray  journal,  and  as  they  were  under- 
stood by  Hitter,  p.  578.  In  the  printed  report,  p.  S,  it  might  appear  as  if 
Robinson  had  relinquished  the  ascent  of  the  whole  of  this  part  of  the 
mountain;  in  the  memoir  of  the  Bibliotheca  Sacra,  this  is  mentioned 
as  a  mistake.  But  I  was  only  speaking  of  the  actual  brow  of  the 
mountain  which  projects  into  the  plain,  contrasted  with  ^the  loftier 
point,  though  situated  on  one  side,  which  was  ascended  by  llobmson. 


29i  WADI  e'  scheikh. 

have  coDected  on  the  Peninsula,  and  combining  the  principal 
events  of  this  episode  in  our  journey.  I  shall  send  a  more 
detailed  account  of  it  from  Thebes.*  These  lines,  however, 
shall  be  handed  over  to  Seid  Hussen  in  Qeneh,  and  shall  be 
forwarded  to  the  north  by  the  first  opportunity. 

AVe  left  the  convent  on  the  25th  March,  towards  evening, 
and  passed  downwards  through  the  broad  ^"adi  e'  Scheikh. 
I  selected  this  roundabout  way,  as  formerly,  before  the  wild 
defile  of  Xakb  el  Haul  was  rendered  passable,  this  valley  was 
the  only  way  by  which  the  Israelites,  if  they  were  desirous 
of  marching  to  the  plains  of  Eaha,  could  have  reached  that 
spot.f  We  spent  the  night  in  the  upper  part  of  the  valley, 
near  the  tomb  of  the  holy  Sheikh  Salih,  from  whom  it  re- 
ceives the  name  of  Wadi  e'  Scheikh.  In  the  lower  portion 
of  the  valley  we  first  meet  with  the  manna-yielding  shrubs  of 
Tarfa.j  and  the  Sinaitic  inscriptions  on  the  sides  of  the 
valley  become  more  frequent.  But  before  reaching  the 
outlet  of  the  valley,  we  quitted  it  and  climbed  over  to  our 

*  This  account,  -which  I  addressed  to  H.M.  the  King  of  Prussia, 
vas  printed  while  I  was  still  absent  in  1S46,  under  the  title  of  ^  lieise 
cles  Pro/.  Lepsius  von  Thtben  nach  der  Halbinsel  de^  SinaL,  vom  4  Mdrz 
bis  zuvi  14  April,  1845,"  Btrlin,  with  two  maps — a  general  map  of  the 
Peninsula,  and  a  special  map  of  Serbul  and  Wadi  Firan,  which  Avas 
drawn  by  G.  Erbkam,  from  mv  notes,  or  statements.  This  printed 
pamphlet  has  not  been  published,  but  only  distributed  to  a  few  persons. 
Its  contents,  however,  have  become  better  known,  by  a  translation  into 
English  by  Ch.  H.  Cottrell  ("A  Tour  from  Thebes  to  the  Peninsula 
of  Sinai,"  kc.  London,  1S46),  and  into  French  by  F.  Pergameni 
("  Voyage  dans  la  Presq'ile  du  Sinai,  etc.,  lu  a  la  SociCte'  de  Geogra- 
phie,  seances  du  21  Avril  et  du  21  MaL  Extrait  du  Bulletin  de  la 
Soc.  Geogr.,  Juin,  1847."    Paris). 

t  The  Xakb  el  Haui.  '-the  Saddle  of  Wind,"  is  an  extremely  wild 
and  narrow  mountain  ravine,  the  depths  of  which  are  impassable,  on 
account  of  its  steep  precipices.  The  road  must  have  been  (.'onstructed 
with  great  skill  along  the  western  mountain  precipice,  and  is  in  many 
places  hewn  out  of  the  rock;  in  others,  the  crumbling  ground  has  been 
paved  with  great  flat  stones.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  daring 
path  was  only  made  after  the  erection  of  the  convent,  to  maintain 
closer  connection  with  the  town  of  Pharan,  which,  till  that  time,  could 
only  be  reached  by  the  long  circuitous  route  through  the  Wadi  e' 
Scheikh. 

i  The  Taviarlx  Gallica  manvifera  of  Ehrenberg.  See  Wilkinson, 
Alod.  Eg.  and  Thebes,  ii.,  401.— Tk. 


ASCENT  OF  SEEBAL.  295 

left  into  the  Wjldi  Selaf,  wliich  lower  down  joins  the  Wadi 
e'  Scheikh,  in  order  to  reach  the  foot  of  Sekbal,  hj  the 
shortest  road  from  this.  "We  had  abeadj  frequently  seen  at 
every  opening  on  the  road  the  huge  rocky  summit  rising 
above  the  surrounding  mountainous  district,  and  the  accounts 
^ven  us  by  the  Arabs,  of  the  fertile  and  irrigated  "Wadi 
I^'lrax  at  its  base,  had  long  made  me  desirous  of  becoming 
better  acquainted  with  it.  I  had  resolved  to  ascend  the 
mountain,  and  therefore  made  them  lead  us  into  the  "Wadi 
ItiM,  that  runs  down  from  the  mountain  into  the  Wadi  Selaf, 
which  passes  along  Serbal.  After  riding  upwards  of  an  hour 
in  this  vaUey,  we  came  to  an  old  stone  hut,  which  might 
have  once  sheltered  a  hermit ;  soon  afterwards  we  found 
fiome  Arab  tents,  and  at  a  short  distance  beyond  these, 
several  Sittere-trees,  which  we  selected  for  our  place  of 
encampment. 

On  the  27th  March  we  rose  early  to  ascend  the  mountain 
Derb  e'  Serbal.  The  true  road  to  Serbal  leads  from  "Wadi 
l^'iEAN  through  "Wadi  Aleyat  to  the  mountain.  "We  were 
forced  to  go  round  its  south-eastern  extremity,  and  ascend 
behind  from  the  south,  as  it  would  have  been  far  beyond  our 
powers  to  clamber  up  the  heights  through  the  Eim  ravine, 
which  descends  precipitously,  and  in  a  direct  line  between 
the  two  eastern  summits.  One  quarter  of  an  hour  above 
our  encampment  we  came  to  a  sprmg,  shaded  by  ISTebek, 
ilamada,  and  Palm-trees,  whose  fresh,  pure  water,  was 
walled  rouiid  to  tlie  depth  of  several  feet.  "We  then  climbed 
over  a  small  rib  of  the  mountain,  on  which  there  again 
stood  several  ancient  stone  houses,  down  into  another  branch 
of  the  Kim  valley  (Rim  el  mehasni),  and  in  an  hour  and  a 
half  reached  the  south-eastern  angle  of  the  mountain.  Prom 
this  point  we  pursued  a  paved  road  of  rock,  which  was  even 
sometimes  supported  by  masonry  work.  This  led  us  to  an 
artificial  terrace  and  a  wall  the  remains,  as  it  appeared,  of  a 
house  that  had  been  destroyed,  and  to  a  cool  spring,  shaded 
by  taU  reeds,  a  palm-tree,  and  several  Jassur  bushes*  (from 

•  The  Mori„ya  uptera.  See  Wilkinson's  Mod.  Eg.  and  Thebes,  ii., 
404.— Tk. 


296  ASCENT  or  SEESiX. 

■which  the  Moses  rods  are  cut)  ;  the  whole  mountain  is  here 
overgrown  with  Habak,  and  other  sweet-smelling  herbs.  Some 
minutes  farther  on  we  came  to  several  caves  in  the  rock, 
which  once  served  as  hermit's  cells ;  and  after  wandering  for 
almost  four  hours  we  reached  a  small  plateau  spreading  out 
between  the  summits,  where  we  again  found  a  house  with 
two  rooms.  A  road  led  over  this  level  ground  to  the  edge  of 
the  western  side  of  the  mountain,  which  sinks  at  first  steep 
and  rugged,  then  in  more  gentlj-inclined  wide  ribs,  to  the 
sandy  plain  of  El  G'e'ah,  and  here  disclosed  to  me  across 
the  sea  a  glorious  prospect  of  the  opposite  coast,  and  the 
Egyptian  chaiu  of  mountains  bounding  it.  From  this  point 
the  rock-path  suddenly  descended  along  the  ragged  mountain 
declivity  into  a  wild,  deep  basin,  round  which  the  five  sum- 
mits of  Serb^l  meet  in  a  semicircle,  forming  one  mighty 
crown.  In  the  middle  of  this  basin,  called  Wadi  Si'qelji, 
are  the  ruins  of  an  old  convent,  to  which  the  mountain  path 
leads,  which  unfortunately  we  had  not  time  to  visit.* 

I  therefore  returned  across  the  level  space,  and  then  began 
to  ascend  the  most  southern  of  the  summits  of  Serbal.  When 
I  had  almost  got  to  the  top  of  the  precipitous  height,  I  thought 
I  observed  that  the  second  summit  was  somewhat  higher,  and 
therefore  hastened  down  again,  and  sought  out  a  way  to 
reach  this.  We  passed  a  small  piece  of  water,  and  were 
obliged  to  go  almost  round  the  whole  basin,  till  we  at  length 
succeeded  in  clambering  up  it,  from  the  north-east  side. 
Here,  to  my  astonishment,  between  the  two  points  into  which 
the  summit  is  divided,  I  found  a  small  level  valley,  plenti- 
fully supplied  with  shrubs  and  herbs,  and  from  this  I  first 
ascended  the  one,  then  the  other  point,  and  by  the  assistance 
of  my  guide,  who  was  conversant  with  the  spot,  I  took  the 

*  It  seems  that  this  convent  has  not  been  visited  by  any  very  recent 
travellers.  Even  Burckhardt,  who  calls  it  Sigillye,  did  not  descend  to 
it,  but  heard  that  it  was  well  built,  spacious,  and  also  provided  with  a 
well,  plentifully  supplied  with  water.  (Trav.  in  Syria,  p.  610.)  It  is 
much  to  be  desired  that  more  exact  accounts  could  be  obtained  of  this 
convent,  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  basin  of  Serbal,  as  it  probably 
is  one  of  the  oldest,  at  any  rate  one  of  the  most  important  in  the  Penin- 
sula, as  is  proved  by  the  rock-road  to  it  from  Pharan,  constructed  with 
much  skiU  and  difficulty. 


WADi  riEAX.  297 

points  of  the  compass  with  reference  to  all  the  places  of 
note  which  might  liere  be  surveyed  in  the  wide  horizon. 
For  instance,  I  could  clearly  perceive  how  the  mountain 
summits  beyond  Gebel  Musa  continue  to  rise  higher,  and 
that  the  distant  Um  Schomae  rose  above  all  the  others.  "We 
did  not  set  out  on  our  return  tiU  four  o'clock,  so  that  we 
were  obliged  to  avoid  the  circuitous  road  by  which  we  had 
ascended,  unless  we  were  desirous  of  being  overtaken  by  dark- 
ness. ^,Ve  therefore  determined  to  leap  down,  from  block  to 
block  like  chamois,  and  foUow  the  precipitous  rocky  ravine, 
which  led  almost  in  a  straight  line  to  our  camp  in  Wadi 
3iim,  and  in  two  hours  and  a  half,  with  trembling  knees,  we 
reached  our  tent  by  this  impracticable  path,  the  most  diffi- 
cult and  the  most  fatiguing  that  I  ever  trod  in  the  whole 
course  of  my  life. 

The  following  day  we  proceeded  farther,  and  passing 
through  Wadi  Selaf,  and  the  lowest  part  of  Wadi  e'  Scheikh, 
we  reached  the  Wadi  Fieajk — this  most  precious  jewel  of 
the  Peninsula,  with  its  Palms  and  groves  of  Tarfa,  on  the 
banks  of  a  lovely  rushing  stream,  which,  winding  among 
shrubs  and  flowers,  conducted  us  to  the  old  convent  moun- 
tain of  the  town  of  Puaran,  the  Piean  of  the  present  day. 
Everything  that  we  had  hitherto  seen,  and  what  we  after- 
wards saw,  was  naked,  stony  desert  compared  to  this  fertile 
oasis,  abounding  in  wood  and  water.  For  the  first  time 
since  we  had  left  the  Nile  vaUey,  we  once  more  walked 
un  soft  black  earth,  obliged  to  defend  ourselves  with  our 
arms  from  the  overhanging  leafy  branches,  and  we  heard 
singing  birds  warbling  in  the  thick  foliage.  At  the  point 
where  the  broad  AV'adi  Aleyat,  descending  from  Serbal,  enters 
W^adi  Piran,  and  where  the  valley  spreads  out  into  a  spacious 
level  tract,  there  rises  in  the  centre  of  it  a  rocky  hill  called 
Hereeat,  on  the  summit  of  Vv'hich  are  the  ruins  of  an 
ancient  convent  building.  At  its  foot  stood  once  a  magnifi- 
cent church,  constructed  of  well-hewn  blocks  of  sandstone,  the 
ruins  of  which  are  built  into  the  houses  of  the  town  situated 
on  the  slope  of  the  opposite  mountain. 


298  WADI  FIEAN. 

The  same  evening  I  Trent  up  Wadi  Aleyat,  passing  innu- 
merable rock-inscriptions,  to  a  well,  surrounded  by  Palm  and 
jS'ebek  trees,  where  I  enjoyed  the  entire  prospect  of  the 
majestic  mountain  chain.  Apart  from  all  the  other  moun- 
tains, and  united  into  one  single  mass,  Serbal  rises,  at  first 
'in  a  slope  of  moderate  inclination,  afterwards  in  steep  preci- 
pices, with  chasms,  to  the  height  of  6000  feet  (above  the  sea) . 
Nothing  could  equal  the  scene  when  the  valleys  and  low 
mountains  around  were  already  veiled  in  the  shadows  of 
night,  and  the  summits  of  the  mountain  still  glowed  above 
•the  colourless  grey,  like  a  fiery  cloud  in  tlie  sinking  sun. 

The  following  morning  I  repeated  my  visit  to  Wadi 
Aleyat,  and  completed  my  observations  of  the  whole  of  this 
remarkable  district,  the  principal  features  of  which  I  had 
already  noted  down  from  the  summit  of  Serbal. 

The  most  fertile  district  of  Wadi  Firan  is  enclosed  be- 
tween two  hills  which  rise  from  tlie  centre  of  the  valley  ; 
the  upper  one  of  these  two  is  called  El  Bleb,  the  lower, 
situated  at  the  outlet  of  Wadi  Aleyat,  ^lEiiAiiiiLT  or  Heke- 
EAT.  In  very  ancient  times  the  valley  appears  to  have  been 
closed  in  here,  and  the  waters  rushing  down  from  all  sides, 
even  from  Gebel  Musa,  into  this  basin,  appear  to  have  united 
into  a  lake.  It  is  only  in  this  manner  that  we  can  explain  the 
very  remarlvable  deposit  of  earth,  wliicli  extends  along  the 
sides  of  the  valley  to  between  eiglity  and  a  hundred  feet 
high,  and  no  doubt  it  is  this  remarkable  position  of  Firan, 
as  the  lowest  point  of  a  large  mountainous  district,  which 
occasions  the  imusual  supply  of  water  that  issues  forth  at 
this  point. 

Pirectly  behind  the  convent  hill  we  found  the  narrow  bed 
of  the  valley  as  stony  and  barren  as  the  more  elevated 
valleys,  although  the  brook  was  still  visible  by  our  side  for 
half  an  hour.  The  violent  irruption  of  those  primitive  waters 
permitted  no  more  deposits  of  earth  in  this  spot.  It  was 
only  at  the  next  still  more  decided  bend  of  the  valley,  called 
Eij  Hessue,  that  a  few  more  groups  of  palm-trees  appeared. 
Here  the  brook  disappeared  in  a  cleft  of  the  rock,  as  sud- 


WADI  MOKATTEB.  299 

denly  as  it  had  bur>t  forth  beliind  Bueb,  and  we  did  not  see 
It  ai^ain. 

Alter  being  five  hours  on  the  road,  we  quitted  "Wadi  Firan, 
that  here  turned  otito  the  left  hand  towards  the  sea,  and  we 
emerged  from  the  primitive  mountains  into  a  more  level 
rt^gion  of  sandstone.  The  loftier  range  retreated  towards  the 
north-west,  and  encircled  in  a  great  bow  the  hilly,  sandy 
district  that  we  traversed.  We  next  came  to  the  Wadi 
MoK'ATTKU,  the  "valley  with  inscriptions,"  which  derives 
its  name  from  the  immense  numbers  of  inscriptions  which 
lire  to  be  found  here  in  several  places.  It  is  easy  to  per- 
ceive, that  it  is  those  places  sheltered  from  the  mid-day 
sun,  which  invited  passing  travellers  on  the  road  to  Firan 
to  engrave  their  names  and  short  mottoes  in  the  soft  rock. 
A\'e  took  impressions  on  paper  of  as  many  of  them  as  we 
could  obtain,  or  copied  with  the  pen  those  which  were  less 
adapted  for  an  impression.  We  found  these  inscriptions 
>cattered  singly,  in  the  most  various,  andj  frequently  very 
remote  places  of  the  Peninsula,  and  taking  them  altogether, 
1  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  they  were  engraved  by  the 
inhabitants  of  the  country  during  the  first  centuries  before  and 
after  Christ.  I  sometimes  found  them  cut  oA^er  more  ancient 
(J reek  names,  and  not  unfrequently  Christian  crosses  are 
connected  with  them.  These  inscriptions  are  habitually 
called  SiXAiTic,  which  would  not  be  inappropriate,  if  thereby 
the  wliolc  Peninsula  of  ISinai  was  intended  to  be  designated 
as  the  ppot  where  they  are  found.  But  we  must  observe,  that 
on  Gebel  Miisa  itself,  which  is  regarded  as  Sinai,  very  few 
single  and  short  inscriptions  of  this  kind  have  been  found, 
such  as  those  which,  after  careful  observation,  are  to  be  met 
with  in  almost  all  spots  adapted  to  them,  but  that,  on  the 
contrary,  their  actual  centre  was  rather  Phaka?.',  at  the  foot 

ofSERBAL. 

On  the  31st  of  IMarch  we  again  reached  the  lotty  chain 
which  turns  back  from  the  east,  and  marched  through 
■\\'adi  Qeneh  into  the  small  Wadi  Maghaka,. which  branches 


300  WADI  MAGHAEA. 

off  from  it,  and  in  whicli  the  sandstone  and  primitive  rock 
border  on  one  another.  Here  we  found,  high  up  in  the 
northern  sandstone  precipices,  the  remarkable  Egyptian  rock 
stele  belonging  to  the  earliest  monuments  generally  known 
to  us  among  Egyptian  antiquities.*  As  early  as  the  4th 
Manethonic  Dynasty,  the  same  which  built  the  great  Pyra- 
mids of  Gizeh,  in  Egypt,  more  than  3000  years  before  our 
era,  copper  mines  were  discovered  in  this  wilderness,  which 
were  worked  by  a  colony  of  labourers.  Even  then  the  Penin- 
sula was  inhabited  by  Asiatic,  probably  Semetic  races,  for 
which  reason  we  frequently  see  the  Pharaoh  represented  in 
those  rock-images  as  conqueror  over  the  enemies  of  Egypt. 
Almost  all  the  inscriptions  belong  to  the  Old  Monarchy  ;  we 
only  found  one  from  the  period  when  King  Tnthmosis  III. 
and  his  sister  reigned  together. 

Erom  this  point  I  was  anxious  to  take  the  shortest  road 
to  the  second  place  in  the  Peninsula,  where  there  are  ancient 
Egyptian  monuments,  Saebut  el  Chadem.  But  there  was 
no  direct  road  over  this  lofty  range  to  its  slope  on  the  other 
and  north-easterly  side,  so  we  were  obliged  to  return  to 
"Wadi  Mokatteb,  and  get  across  the  mountains  by  a  very 
circuitous  route  through  "Wadi  Sitteee  and  AVadi  Sich. 
As  we  again  emerged,  we  had  the  immeasurable  plateau  in 
front  of  us,  which  includes  the  whole  of  the  north  of  the 
Peninsula,  and  consists  of  one  single  vast  bed  of  sandstone. 
This,  however,  descends  towards  the  south  by  two  steps,  so 
that  the  prospect  seems  as  if  it  were  bounded  by  two  lofty 
mountain  precipices  retreating  at  about  equal  distances  into 
the  far  distance.  The  descent  nearest  to  the  south,  called 
e'  Tih,  sinks  to  a  flat,  broad  sandy  valley,  Debbet  e'  Eam- 
LEH,  while  the  masses  of  sandstone  rock,  on  this  side,  seem 
to  be  as  high  as  the  general  plateau. 

On  a  terrace  protruding  far  into  the  broad  valley,  which  we 
climbed  with  great  difficulty,  are  the  wonderful  monuments  of 
Saebut  EL  Chadejj:,  which  appear  no  less  so,  even  to  those 
*  Denkmal.,  Abth.  11.,  Bl.  2,  116,  137,  140,  152  ;  III.,  28. 


SABBUT  EL  CHADEM.  301 

who  are  prepared  to  behold  them.  The  oldest  representations 
led  us  also  here  into  the  Old  Monarchy,  but  only  as  far  back 
as  its  last  dynasty,  the  twelfth  of  the  Manethonic  list.  In 
this  period,  under  Amenemiia  III.,  a  small  rock-grotto  was 
excavated,  and  furnished  witli  an  ante-chamber ;  lofty  steles 
were  erected  outside,  at  different  distances,  and  without  any 
determined  arrangement,  the  one  lying  most  remote  being 
a  short  quarter  of  an  hour  distant  on  the  highest  point  of 
the  plateau.  During  the  Xew  Monarchy,  Tuthmosis  III. 
enlarged  the  building  towards  the  west,  and  added  a  small 
pylon  witli  an  outer  court.  The  later  kings  had  built 
an  additional  long  series  of  chambers,  one  in  front  of  the 
other,  in  the  same  direction,  solely,  as  it  appears,  for  the 
purpose  of  protecting  the  memorial  stele  erected  upon  them 
from  the  weather,  especially  from  the  sharp  wind,  often 
loaded  with  sand,  which  has  now  almost  totally  destroyed 
the  ancient  steles,  which  were  even  at  that  time  unpro- 
tected. The  latest  stele  exhibits  the  Shields  of  the  last  kin<j: 
of  the  19th  Dynasty,  therefore  since  that  time,  or  soon  after- 
wards, the  place  was  probably  deserted  by  the  Egyptians. 

The  divinity  who  was  here  peculiarly  worshipped  in  the 
New  Monarchy,  was  HAxnoB,  with  the  epithet  which  is  also 
found  in  the  AVadi  Maghara,  ''  Mistress  of  Mafkat" — i.  e.  of 
the  copper  countrij,  for  mafka  in  hieroglyphics,  as  well  as 
still  in  the  Coptic  language,  meant  "copper."  Therefore 
no  doubt  copper  was  also  obtained  here.  This  was  confirmed 
by  a  peculiar  appearance,  which,  strange  to  say,  seems  to 
have  been  left  unnoticed  by  all  previous  travellers.  To  the 
east  and  west,  namely  of  the  temple,  may  be  seen  great 
mounds  of  slag,  which,  by  their  black  colour,  form  a  strong 
contrast  with  all  that  surrounds  them.  These  artificial  ele- 
vations, the  largest  of  which  is  256  paces  long,  and  from  60 
to  120  broad,  are  situated  on  a  tongue  of  land  forming  a 
terrace  that  projects  into  the  valley ;  they  are  coated  over 
with  a  solid  crust  of  slag  between  4  and  5  feet  thick,  and 
are  covered  to  their  base  with  separate  fragments  of  slag 
to  the  depth  of  12  to  15  feet.      The   ground  shows,  that 


302  OEE-ilAIT  PILQEIMS. 

the  mines  could  not  have  been  situated  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood,  their  site  might,  however,  easily  be  dis- 
covered by  the  ancient  roads,  which  are  still  visible,  leading 
to  the  mountain  range,  but  unfortunately  we  had  not  suffi- 
cient time  to  accomplish  this.  Hence  it  appears  that  this 
open  spot  was  probably  selected  merely  for  smelting  the  ore, 
on  account  of  the  keen  draught  of  wind,  which,  as  we  were 
assured  by  the  Arabs,  is  here  almost  incessantly  blowing. 

The  3rd  of  April  we  rode  on  farther,  visited  the  Wadi 
Nasb,  in  which  we  also  found  the  traces  of  ancient  smelting 
places,  and  the  following  day,  towards  evening,  reached  our 
ship,  which  had  been  waiting  for  us  several  days,  in  the  har- 
bour of  Abu  Zelimeh. 

"We  here,  to  our  no  small  surprise,  found  four  German 
journeymen ;  two  of  them  Prussians,  from  the  district  of  the 
^N'eisse,  in  Silesia.  They  had  started  from  Cairo  with  the 
intention  of  visiting  Sinai,  and  reached  Suez  safely  ;  had  there 
waited  in  vain  for  a  ship,  and  at  length,  like  genuine  modern 
Crusaders,  started  alone  to  attain  their  bold  object.  They 
had  been  told  (liardly  in  good  German)  that  the  way  was 
short,  and  could  not  be  missed,  and  that  there  was  no  want 
of  water.  Possessed  with  this  happy  belief,  their  pilgrim's 
bottle  filled  to  the  brim,  they  entered  the  wilderness.  But 
the  footsteps  of  the  children  of  Israel  had  long  since  disap- 
peared, and  no  pillar  of  smoke  went  before  them.  The  third 
day  they  lost  their  way,  their  bread  was  consumed,  they 
had  missed  the  wells,  had  several  times  been  stopped  by 
Arabs,  and  only  escaped  being  robbed  because  they  possessed 
nothing  worth  robbing;  and  thus  they  certainly  would 
have  been  starved  in  the  wilderness,  had  they  not  looked 
down  from  the  mountains  and  beheld  our  vessel  on  the  coast 
many  hours  distant,  and  fortunately  reached  it  before  our 
arrival.  On  my  inquiring  about  the  trades,  to  perfect  which, 
they  had  undertaken  this  journey  to  the  East,  and  also 
whether  they  hoped  to  find  employment  with  the  mouks  on 
Mount  Sinai,  as  they  had  no  money  Ts-ith  them,  it  appeared 
that  one  was  a  carpenter,  who  was  in  hopes  of  making  him- 


TRUE  POSITION  OF  SINAI.  303 

self  very  useful  there  ;  I  was,  alas  !  compelled  to  inform  him, 
that  he  would  have  to  compete  with  a  lay-brother  iu  that  de- 
partment ;  the  other  was  a  shoemaker,  the  third  a  stocking- 
weaver,  and  the  fourth,  after  some  hesitation,  confessed  that, 
he  was  a  woman's  tailor.  Nothing  remained  but  to  take  these- 
strange  people  along  with  us  in  the  vessel,  although  they  were 
regarded  with  a  jealous  eye  by  the  sailors,  as  we  began  to 
feel  some  scarcity  in  tlie  supply  of  water.  I  landed  them  at 
T6r,  and  arranged  that  some  one  should  accompany  them 
thence  to  the  convent. 

Besides  tlie  remarkable  Egyptian  monumental  sites  of  this- 
copper  country,  and  the  so-called  Sinaitic  inscriptions,  I 
was  chiefly  occupied  during  the  journey  with  geographical 
inquiries  iu  connection  with  the  sojourn  of  the  Israelites  on 
the  Peninsula.  I  think  I  have  arrived  at  some  results  with 
respect  to  this,  deviating,  indeed,  in  essential  points,  from  what 
has  hitherto  been  admitted  ;  but  if  they  are  correct,  they  fur-* 
nish  some  important  features  for  tlie  historical  and  geogra- 
phical bac-kground  of  that  most  important  event  in  the  Old 
Testament.  I  will  here  only  point  out  briefly  some  of  the 
chief  points,  of  which  I  will  say  more  wlien  I  write  from 
Thebes. 

I  became  doubtful,  even  in  the  convent  at  Gtebel  Musa,: 
whether  the  holy  mount  of  the  lawgiving  could  have  been- 
situated  here.  Since  I  have  seen  Seebal  and  Wadi  Firan 
at  its  base,  besides  a  great  part  of  the  rest  of  the  country,  I 
have  become  convinced  that  Serbal  must  be  recognised  as.' 
Sinai,  in  preference  to  the  other.* 

The  monkish  tradition  of  the  present  day  is  of  no  value 
to   the  unprejudiced  inquirer.f    Whoever  has  once  occu- 

*  See  Appendix  B. 

t  I  find  all  whose  judgment  is  of  any  weight  holding  this  same 
opinion.  Robinson,  especially,  has  the  merit  of  having  cleared  away- 
many  old  prejudices  of  this  nature.  But  even  Burckhardt  so  little 
allowed  his  judgment  to  be  guided  by  the  authority  of  tradition,  that 
he  did  not  scruple  to  place  his  reason  for  transposing  the  convent  of-. 
Sinai  to  Gebel  Musa,  rather  on  stratagetical  considerations.  (Trav.  in 
Syria,  p.  609.)  ..•  • 


304  MONKISH  TEADITIOK. 

pied  himself  earnestly  with  such  matters  is  aware  of  this. 
Even  in  Jerusalem  it  is  for  the  most  part  useless,  and 
has  not  the  slightest  weight,  if  unsupported  by  original 
authorities,  how  much  more  so  in  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai, 
where  far  more  remote  questions,  both  as  to  time  and 
place,  are  treated  of.  In  the  long  interval  of  time  be- 
tween the  law-giving  and  the  first  centuries  of  the  Christian 
era,  Sinai  is  only  once  mentioned  in  a  passage  referring  to  a 
later  historical  event,  as  the  "Mount  of  Grod,  Hoeeb,"  to 
which  Elijah  retires.*  It  would,  in  fact,  be  most  strange  if 
the  tradition  had  never  received  an  interruption  during  this 
period,  although  the  population  of  the  Peninsula  had  mean- 
time changed  so  much  that  we  are  no  longer  able  to  point  out 
with  certainty  a  single  Old  Testament  name  for  a  locality ; 
and  even  the  Greeks  and  Romans  were  unacquainted  with 
those  ancient  designations. t  We  are,  therefore,  referred 
solely  to  the  Mosaic  narrative  to  prove  the  correctness  of  our 
present  assumptions. 

We  must  further  premise  with  respect  to  this,  that  the 
general  geographical  conditions  of  the  Peninsula  have  not 
essentially  altered  since  the  days  of  Moses.  Whoever  takes 
refuge  in  the  opposite  supposition,  may  indeed  prove  every- 
thing, but  for  that  very  reason  proves  nothing.  It  is,  how- 
ever, just  as  important  to  bear  in  mind  distinctly  the  his- 
torical conditions  of  the  different  periods,  because  these 
indeed  were  calculated  to  produce  partial  alterations  of  par- 
ticular districts. 

Accordingly,  no  one  will  be  able  to  deny  that  Wadi 
FiEAN,  abounding  at  all  times,  and  therefore  in  the  time  of 
Moses,  in  water,  and  possessing  a  rich  soil,  must,  in  conse- 
quence of  its  incomparable  fertility  and  its  inexhaustible 
rapid  stream,  have  been  the  most  important  and  the  most  de- 

*  1  Kings  xix.  8.— Tr. 

t  The  name  of  Firan,  formerly  Phaean,  is,  indeed,  evidently  the 
same  as  Paran  in  the  Bible;  but  it  is  equally  certain  that  this  name 
has  altered  its  meaning  with  reference  to  the  locality.  All  other  com- 
parisons of  names  cannot  be  in  the  least  depended  on. 


POSITION  OF  ELIM.  305 

sirable  central  spot  of  the  whole  Peninsula.  For  this  wonder- 
ful Oasis,  in  the  centre  of  the  ever  barren  wilderness,  was 
subject  even  then,  as  now,  to  the  general  conditions  of 
the  surface  of  the  ground  in  that  country.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  however  no  less  certain,  that  the  vicinity  of  the 
present  convent  of  Gebel  Musa  was  fonnerly,  in  spite  of 
the  scanty  springs  of  water  also  appearing  on  the  surface 
there,  but  which  merely  moisten  the  ground  immediately 
surrounding  them,  just  as  barren  as  all  the  other  parts  of 
that  mountainous  wilderness,  only  furnishing  sufficient  water 
for  the  inhabitants  of  the  convent  by  means  of  a  draw-well 
dug  into  the  rock  ;*  and  after  more  than  a  thousand  years 
of  artificial  irrigation,  the  most  careful  employment  of  every 
means  of  cultivation  only  enabled  them  to  make  small 
plantations,  such  as  exist  there  at  the  present  time.f  In 
ancient  times  there  was  not  the  slightest  reason  for  making 
that  wilderness  habitable  by  artificial  means,  the  rather  as  it 
was  situated  away  from  the  great  roads  connecting  the  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  Peninsula,  and  formed  an  actual  cul 
Je  sac,  with  only  one  single  entrance  through  the  Wadi 
e'  Scheikh. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  another  spot  in  the  Penin- 
sula which  was  a  position  of  great  importance  long  before 
the  time  of  Moses,  and  even  in  his  days,  but  has  lost  it 
since  that  time :  it  is  the  harbour  of  Abu  Zelimeii.  It 
was  to  this  point  that  the  roads  led  from  the  three  difierent 
mines  that  hitherto  we  have  become  acquainted  with.  They 
proceeded  from  AVadi  Maghaba,  Saebut  el  Chade^i,  and 
Wadi  Xasb.  There  was  no  more  convenient  landing-place 
than  this,  to  connect  Eg^-pt  with  those  colonies ;  indeed,  our 

*  The  smaller  of  the  two  wells  dates  as  far  back  as  the  time  of  the 
foundation  of  the  convent.  The  principal  deep  well,  which  supplies 
the  largest  amount  and  the  best  water,  is  said  lo  have  been  first  dug 
by  an  English  nobleman  in  1760.    (Ritter,  p.  610.) 

t  Burckhardt  also  (Trav.,  p.  504)  observes  distinctly  that  there 
were  no  good  pasture  grounds  near  the  convent,  where  nevertheless 
the  somewhat  numerous  small  springs,  might  have  led  us  to  expect  the 
ground  to  have  been  in  a  moister  condition.  With  respect  to  the  im- 
pression made  on  Bartlett:  see  Appendix  B. 

X 


306:  LOCAL  A2^D  HISTOEICAL  COXDITIOyS. 

sailors  decidedly  affirmed  tbat  it  was  the  best  harbour  on 
the  whole  coast,  not  excepting  that  of  Tor.  The  Egyptians 
were  therefore  compelled  to  provide,  above  all  things,  for 
a  copious  supply  of  water,  in  the  most  immediate  neigh- 
bourhood of  that  spot.  As  this  was  neither  furnished 
by  the  sandy  sea-coast,  nor  by  valleys,  which  had  their 
outlets  here,  wells  no  doubt  were  made  at  the  nearest  spots 
which  offered  a  likelihood  of  yielding  water  from  below 
ground.  Such  a  spot  was  discovered  at  the  lower  outlet  of 
the  "Wadi  Schebekeh  (called  by  others  Taibeh),  where  even 
now,  there  are  a  number  of  Palms,  and  many  other  trees, 
consequently  a  moist  soil,  although  there  is  no  appearance 
of  a  spring.*  This,  therefore,  would  have  been  the  most 
suitable  point  to  dig  for  water,  and  to  make  a  well.  No  one 
now  differs  in  opinion  that  the  place  of  encampment  at  the 
Eed  Sea,  mentioned  after  Elim  in  the  Book  of  Numbers,! 
was  near  Abu  Zelimeh.  In  Exodus  this  statement  is 
omitted,  and  the  twelve  icells  and  seventy  palm-trees  of  Elim: 
are  alone  mentioned.;]:  What,  therefore,  can  be  a  more 
natural  conclusion,  or  indeed  an  almost  unavoidable  one, 
than  that  the  wells  and  palms  of  Elim  were  situated  about  an 
hour  distant  jfrom  the  outlet  of  the  valley  whose  entrance  was 
at  the  harbour  of  Abu  Zelimeh,  and  for  that  very  reason  in 
Exodus,  the  encampment  on  the  sea,  is  related  as  being  not 
specially  separated  from  Elim,  the  watering  station  of  the 
harbour,  which  probably  bore  the  same  name.  According  to 
the  statements  that  have  been  hitherto  admitted,  as  weU  as 
those  of  Eobinson,  the  twelve  wells  of  Elim  were  situated  in 
the  "Wadi  Gthaeaxdel,  by  the  latest  calcidations  §  between 

*  I  was  assured  of  this  unanimously  by  the  Arabs.  (Compare  also 
Burckhardt,  p.  625,  and  Eitter,  p.  769.)  Lord  Lindsay  found  "  a  small 
^yood  of  Tarfa-trees  here,  in  which  blackbirds  were  singing,  and  also 
some  plantations  of  Palm-trees."  It  was  at  the  entrance  of  the  same 
valley  "  where  Seetzen  had  the  pleasure  of  gathering  for  himself,  and 
eating  for  the  first  time,  a  great  deal  of  manna  from  the  bushes  of 
Tarfa ;  he  found  the  ripe  produce  of  the  wild  Caper  shrub  growing  here 
in  profusion,  which  was  as  palatable  to  the  taste  as  table-fruit." 

t  Numbers  xxxiii.  10. — Tr. 

J  Exodus  XV.  27. — Tr. 

§  See  Anpendix  C. 


ELIil.      "WILDEKNESS  OF  Sl>'.  .307 

eight  and  nine  hours  distant  from  the  port,  a  long  day's 
journey,  therefore  useless  for  tlie  supply  of  that  important 
spot.  It  is  not  easy  to  perceive  what  could  have  occasioned 
twelve  wells  to  be  made  precisely  in  Wadi  Gharandel,  where 
even  now  the  brackish  water  of  that  whole  district  appears 
on  the  siu-face  in  somewhat  greater  abundance  than  else- 
where. In  addition  to  this,  we  should  further  be  compelled 
to  transfer  the  station  of  Maea,  which  immediately  pre- 
ceded it,  to  an  insignificant  spring  not  more  than  an  hour  and 
a  half,  or  two  hours  distant  from  "Wadi  Gharandel,  while  the 
succeeding  station  is  assumed  to  be  at  the  distance  of  eight 
hours.  To  me,  it  seems  scarcely  possible  to  doubt  that  the 
first  three  desert  marches  conducted  as  far  as  Wadi  Gha- 
EANDEL,  i.  e.  Maea,  the  fourth,  to  the  harbour  station  of 
Abu  Zelimeh,  i.  e.  Elim. 

It  is  only  in  this  manner  that  we  can  understand  their 
progress,  when  it  is  said,  "And  they  took  their  journey  from 
Elim — and  came  unto  the  wilderness  of  Sin,  which  is  between 
JElim  and  Sinai''*  The  boundary  of  two  provinces  at  Wadi 
Gharandel  would  geographically  be  just  as  inconceivable,  as 
it  is  natural  at  Abu  Zelimeh.  The  liarbour,  with  its  small 
plain  situated  between  the  Xochol  rock  and  Gebel  Hammam 
i'araun,  forms  in  fact,  by  the  rock  protruding  into  the  sea, 
the  most  important  geographical  section  of  the  whole  coast.f 

The  northern  plateau  sinking  uniformly  towards  the  sea 
was  called  the  AYilderness  of  Sue  ;  the  southern  mountainous 
district  rising  higher,  and  soon  passing  into  the  primitive 

♦  Exodus  xvi.  1. — Te. 

f  These  hot  springs  do  not  seem  to  have  been  originally  named 
Hammam  Farauk,  of  Pharaoh,  but  Faran,  from  Pharan.  For 
Edrisi  names  those  places  on  the  coast  Farax  Ahrun,  and  Istachri 
Taran,  which  no  doubt  ought  to  be  called  Farak.  (See  Kitter,  Asien, 
vol.  viii.,  p.  170,  &c.)  Macrizi  also  calls  the  same  spot  BirketFaran. 
(Ritter,  Sinai-halbins,  p.  64.)  The  harbour  district  of  Pharan  was 
probably  called  after  the  town  itself,  though  distant,  and  the  tradition 
of  Pharaoh's  destruction,  so  inapplicable  to  this  spot,  was  perhaps  only 
connected  -with  the  alteration  of  the  name  of  Faran  into  Faraiin.  It 
remains  a  striking  fact  that  the  Arabian  chroniclers,  among  whom 
Macrizi  himself  visited  the  spot,  speak  of  the  town  of  Far^n  as  of  a 
town  on  the  coast. 

x2 


308  MOUNT  SIIfAI. 

rock,  totally  different  in  character,  is  called  the  "Wilderness 
of  Sin.  There  would  be  no  meaning  in  the  remark  that  this 
last  was  situated  heticeen  EHm  and  Sinai,  if  by  this  it  were 
not  meant  that  the  AVilderness  of  Sin  extended  as  far  as 
Sinai,  or  even  farther.  The  next  departure,  therefore,  from 
the  "Wilderness  of  Sin  to  Eaphidim,  is  not  to  be  understood 
as  if  they  had  quitted  this  wilderness  ;  on  the  contrary,  they 
remained  in  it  till  they  reached  Sinai,  whose  name  SiNi,  i.  e. 
"the  Mount  of  Sin,"  was  evidently  first  derived  from  this 
district,  and  for  this  very  reason  should  not  be  sought  for 
beyond  its  limits.  The  same  conclusion  may  be  deduced 
from  the  account  about  the  Manna  which  was  given  to  the 
Israelites  in  the  "Wilderness  of  Sin  ;  for  this  is  first  met  with 
in  the  valleys  in  the  vicinity  of  Firan,  and  appears  as  little  in 
the  sandy  districts  near-  the  sea,  as  in  the  more  elevated 
regions  of  Gebel  Musa.* 

Now,  if  we  already  here  put  the  preliminary  question, 
which  of  the  two  mounts,  Serbal  or  Gebel  Musa,  was  so 
situated  as  to  be  peculiarly  designated  as  Sini,  the  "  Sinic," 
"  the  Mount  of  the  "Wilderness  of  Sin,"  there  cannot  be  a 
moment's  doubt  which  to  select.  Gebel  Musa,  invisible  from 
every  quarter,  almost  concealed  and  buried,t  neither  distin- 
guished by  height,  form,  position,  nor  any  other  peculiarity, 
presented  nothing  which  could  have  induced  the  native  tribes, 
or  the  Egyptians  who  had  settled  there,  to  give  it  the  pecu- 
liar designation  of  the  "  Mount  of  Sin,"  while  Serbal,  attract- 

*  That  portion  of  the  sandy  sea-shore  which  Robinson  regards  as  the 
Wilderness  of  Sin,  produces  no  Tarfa  shrubs,  much  less  manna. 
Compare  Ritter,  p.  665,  &c.,  with  respect  to  the  tracts  of  country 
where  manna  is  found.  It  has  been  already  mentioned  that  Ecsebil'S 
maintains  that  the  Wilderness  of  Sin  extended  as  far  as  Sinai. 
(Sti/,  eprjfios  rj  ^era^v  napaTeivovda  r^s-  'Epvdpas  6aXd(T(Tr]s  kol  ttjs 
eprjpov  2tm.) 

t  Robinson,  i.,  p.  173 — 196.  In  opposition  to  what  Wilson  adduces 
with  respect  to  the  wide  prospect  from  Gebel  Musa,  we  must  consider 
that  necessarily  a  great  many  places  may  be  seen  from  a  point  so  little 
elevated  above  the  immediately  surroimding  country;  from  which 
points,  however,  the  mountain  cannot  be  traced  independently  and 
distinctly  by  the  eye. 


MOUNT  srN'Ai.  309 

ing  the  eve  to  itself  from  all  sides,  and  from  a  great  distance, 
unequivocally  commanding  the  whole  of  the  northern  portion 
of  the  primitive  range,  has  always  been  the  central  point  for 
the  widely-scattered  inhabitants  of  the  country,  and  the  goal 
of  travellers,  not  only  from  its  external  aspect,  but  also  on 
account  of  AVadi  Firan,  situated  at  its  base;  therefore  it 
might  very  appropriately  be  designated  the  "  Mount  of  Sin." 
But  if  any  one  were  to  conclude  from  the  expression  the 
departure  from  the  Wilderness  of  Sin  to  Raphidim,  that  the 
broad  tract  of  sea-shore  to  the  south  of  Abu  Zelimeh,  which 
the  Israelites  were  obliged  to  traverse,  was  alone  called  the 
Wilderness  of  Sin,  which  is  Eobinson's  view  of  the  question,* 
Serbal,  which  commands  and  also  comes  into  immediate  con- 
tact with  this  district,  and  is  accessible  from  this  point  by 
the  old  convent  of  Si'qelji,  might  even  then  have  been  de- 
signated ISIount  Sin,  for  instance  by  the  sailors  on  the  Red 
Sea ;  but  Gebel  Musa,  situated  exactly  on  the  opposite  and 
eastern  side  of  the  great  range,  could  not  possibly  have  been 
named  after  the  western  Wilderness  of  Sin,  nor  have  given 
the  smallest  ground  for  the  statement  that  the  Wilderness 
of  Sin  was  situated  between  Abu  Zelimeh  and  Grobel  Miisa. 
One  other  view  might  still  be  adopted :  for  instance,  that 
the  whole  of  the  primitive  mountain  range — that  is  to  say, 
the  whole  of  the  Peninsula  to  the  south  of  Abu  Zelimeh — 
was  called  the  "  Wilderness  of  Sin,"  and  consequently  in- 
cluded Gebel  Musa.  Even  tliis  would  not  necessarily  pre- 
vent our  assuming  that  Serbfd,  as  the  mountain  best  Ivuowii, 
and  nearest  at  hand,  must  especially  have  appeared  of  more 
importance  to  the  Egyptian  colonists  than  the  southern 
range,  and  might  have  been  distinguished  by  that  name ; 
whilst  in  the  principal  southern  range  Um  Schomar,  as 
the  loftiest  central  point,  would  have  alone  justified  such  a 
distinction,  and  not  the  entirely  subordinate  Gebel  Musa, 
still  less  the  insulated  rock  Sefsaf,  which  is  regarded  as  such 
by  Robinson. 

♦  See  Robinson,  i.,p.  118—196. 


3.10  ilOTJNT  SINAI. 

All 'that  has  been  here  said  about  Slitai  as  the  "  Mount- of 
THE  Wilderness  of  Sin,"  is  also  applicable  to  the  still  more 
remote  question,  which  of  the  two  mountains,  Serbal,  or  G-ebel 
Musa,  possessed  such  qualifications  as  to  have  been  regarded 
by- the  native  tribes  of  the  Peninsula,  even  before  the  great 
event  of  the  Law-giving,  as  a  "  Holt  Mount,"  a  Mount  of 
God.*  For  Moses  drove  the  sheep  of  Jethro  from  Midian 
beyond  the  wilderness  to  the  "  Mount  or  God,  CH0EEB,"t 
and  Aaron  met  him,  on  his  return  to  Egypt,  at  the  Mount 
of  God.J  If  we  maintain  that  the  necessary  centre  of  the 
Sinaitic  population  must  have  been,  at  all  events,  the  Oasis  of 
PiEAN,  we  may  also  suppose  that  those  tribes  founded  a 
sanctuary,  a  common  place  of  woeship,  in  the  vicinity  of 
that  spot,  either  at  the  base,  or,  still  more  naturally,  on  the 
summit  of  the  mountain  which  rises  up  from  that  valley.  § 
This  also  was  the  most  appropriate  place  for  the  meeting 

*  Ewald— Gesch.  des  Volkes  Israel,  ii.,  p.  86— also  assumes  that 
Sinai  was  held  sacred  "  even  before  the  time  of  Moses,  as  a  place  of 
oracles,  and  the  seat  of  the  gods."  Ritter  (see  Appendix  B)  considered 
this  to  be  incompatible. 

f  Exodus  iii.  1. — Tr. 

i  Exodus  iv.  27.— Tr. 

§  This  is  even  proved  to  exist  now  by  Riippell,  who  holds  Gebel  Ka- 
therin  to  be  Sinai.  On  his  journey  to  Abyssinia  (vol.  i.,  p.  127)  he 
relates,  in  the  account  of  his  ascent  of  Serbal  in  the  year  1831,  as  fol- 
lows:— "  On  the  summit  of  Serbal  the  Bedouins  have  collected  small 
stones,  and  placed  them  in  the  form  of  a  circular  enclosure,  and  other 
stones  are  placed  outside  on  the  shelving  rock-precipice,  like  steps,  to 
facilitate  the  ascent.  "SMien  we  arrived  at  the  stony  circle  my  guide 
drew  off  his  sandals,  and  approached  it  ivith  religious  veneration ;  he  then 
recited  a  prayer  within  it,  and  told  me  afterwards  that  he  had  already 
slaughtered  two  sheep  here  as  a  thank-offering,  one  of  them  on  the  oc- 
casion of  the  birth  of  a  son,  the  other  on  regaining  his  health  after  an 
illness.  Prom  a  belief  that  Mount  Serbal  is  connected  with  such  things, 
it  is  said  to  have  been  held  in  great  reverence  hy  the  Arabs  of  the  sur- 
rounding districts  since  time  immemorial;  and  it  must  also  at"  one  time 
have  been  regarded  as  holy  in  certain  respects  by  the  Christians,  as, 
in  the  valley  on  the  south-western  side,  there  are  the  ruins  of  a  great 
convent,  and  of  a  great  many  small  hermit's  cells.  At  all  events,  the 
wild  jagged  masses  of  rock  'in  Serbal,  and  the  isolated  position  of  the 
mountain,  2s  far  more  striking,  and  in  a  certain  degree  more  imposing,  than 
any  other  mountain  group  in  Arabia  Petrcea,  and  for  that  reason  was  pecu- 
liarly calculated  to  be  the  object  of  religious  pilgrimages.  The  highest 
point  of  the  mountain,  or  the  second  pinnacle  of  rock,  proceeding  from 


MOUNT  SINAI.  Ml 

between  Moses,  who  came  from  Midiau  iu  tlie  East,  and 
Aaron,  who  came  from  Egypt.  In  such  a  barren  and  un- 
inliabited  country  there  was  no  occasion  to  searcli  for  any 
peculiarly  secret  and  remote  corner  among  the  mountains 
for  such  an  interview. 

In  addition  to  this,  the  Sinaitic  inscriptions,  which,  as 
mentioned  above,  are  found  in  the  greatest  numbers,  espe- 
cially on  the  roads  to  "W^adi  Eiran,  and  in  Wadi  Aleyat,  which 
leads  up  to  Serbal,  seem  to  indicate  that  in  much  later  times 
also  considerable  pilgrimages  were  undertaken  thither  to 
solemnise  religious  festivals.* 

If  we  now  pass  at  once  to  the  principal  point,  which  must 
appear  as  most  decisive  to  those  who  look  attentively  at  the 
general  conditions  connected  with  the  march  of  the  Israelites, 
it  must  be  allowed  that  if  Moses  desired  to  lead  his  numerous 
people  to  the  Peninsula,  tlie  first  and  chief  task  he  had  to 
))erform,  in  accordance  with  his  wisdom,  and  his  knowledge 
of  the  countr)-,  was  to  maintain  them.  Eor  however  we 
may  explain  the  given  numbers  of  the  emigrants,  which 
according  to  Eobinson  amounted  to  two  millions,  by  Lane's 
account  equal  to  the  present  population  of  Egypt,  we  must 
always  admit  that  there  was  a  very  considerable  mass  of 
people  who  were  suddenly  to  be  maintained  in  the  Sinaitic 
wilderness  without   any   importation  of  provisions.      How 

tlio  west,  on  which  the  Arabs  are  in  the  habit  of  sacrificing,  by  my  ba- 
rometrical measurements  is  6342  French  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
sea." 

*  "With  reference  to  this,  compare  particularly  the  admirable  pam- 
phlet by  Tuch:  Em  uiul  Zwanzig  Sinaitische  Inschrlften.  Leipzig,  1849. 
Tliis  scholar  endeavours  to  prove  from  the  names  of  the  pilgrims  that 
have  been  deciphered,  that  the  authors  of  the  inscriptions  were  native 
heatlien  Arabs,  who  wandered  to  Serbal  to  some  religious  festivals. 
And  he  is  of  opinion  that  pilgrimages  ceased  in  the  course  of  the  third 
century  at  latest.  We  may  also  mention  that  the  name  itself  of  Serbrd, 
wliich 'Rudiger  (in  Wellsted's  Travels  in  Arabia,  vol.  ii.,  last  page) 

derives,  no  doubt  correctly  from  the  Arabic  ^-';<«»  serb,  palmarum 
copia,  and  Baal,  **  the  Palm-grove  {^oivLXiov)  of  Baal,"  refers  to  its 
heathen  worship. 


312  JOTJRNET  OF  THE  ISRAELITES. 

then  can  we  imagine  tliat  Moses  would  not  have  kept  in  view, 
above  all  other  places,  the  onlj  spot  in  the  Peninsula  that 
was  fertile  and  amply  supplied  with  water;  and  that  he 
would  not  have  endeavoured  to  reach  it  by  the  shortest  path ; 
but  that  in  place  of  this,  a  remote  nook  in  the  mountains 
should  have  been  sought  out,  which  at  that  time  could  not 
possibly  have  supplied  the  daily  necessity  of  water  and  other 
nourishment,  even  for  only  2000  emigrants  and  their  belong- 
ings— I  mention  a  high  number  intentionally.  Moses  would 
have  been  wrong  to  have  trusted  here  to  miraculous  aid  from 
Grod ;  for  this  is  never  manifested  until  human  wisdom  and 
human  counsel,  which  is  not  intended  to  be  rendered  super- 
fluous through  it,  can  go  no  further. 

It  appears  to  me  that  we  should  not  relinquish  this  in- 
evitable opinion  respecting  the  position  of  Sinai,  which  is 
opposed  to  the  view  hitherto  entertained,  and  becomes 
stronger  the  longer  we  reflect  upon  it,  and  we  ought  not  to 
disclaim  any  more  particular  historical  consideration  of  this 
wonderful  occurrence,  unless  other  grounds,  as  urgent,  should 
afford  proofs  against  our  mode  of  acceptation.  Let  us  there- 
fore pursue  the  narrative  still  further. 

Erom  Elim,  Moses  reached  Eaphidim  in  a  march  of 
three  days.  Modern  scholars  generally  agree  that  the  march 
from  Abu  Zelimeh  did  not  pass  again  through  the  same 
Wadi  Schebekeh  or  Taibeh  through  which  they  had  de- 
scended, back  to  the  eastern  sandy  plain  of  E'  Eaml,  but 
followed  the  customary  caravan  road  which  leads  to  AYadi 
Eiran.  How  should  Moses  then  have  selected  the  far  longer 
upper  road  devoid  of  water,  or  even  the  still  longer,  and  still 
more  arid,  circuitous  route  along  the  sea-coast  by  Tor  and 
TVadi  Hebran,  instead  of  at  once  entering  the  less  arid 
valleys  of  the  primitive  range  which  abounded  in  manna  ? 

He  was  obliged  therefore  to  go  to  "Wadi  Eiran  ;  no  third 
way  was  possible.  This  is  the  urgent  reason  why  Eaphidim 
(except  by  Eobinson*)  has  almost  as  unanimously  been 
*  Vol.  i.,  p.  193.    See  Appendix  B. 


JOURNEY  OF  THE  ISBAELITES.  313 

transferred  to  Fiean.  It  seems,  however,  impossible  that 
this  oasis,  if  it  was  traversed,  should  not  have  been  once 
mentioned ;  therefore  even  Joscphus,*  Eusebius,t  Jerome,{ 
and,  as  it  appears,  all  the  older  authors  and  travellcrs,§  place 
Eaphidim  near  the  town  of  Phaean.  jS'o  spot  in  the  whole 
land  could  have  been  of  greater  value  for  the  native  tribes 
who  were  menaced  by  Moses  than  these  orchards  of  Pha- 
ran.  We  may,  therefore,  perfectly  conceive  that  Moses  was 
attacked  at  this  very  spot  in  Eaphidim  by  the  Amalekites, 
who  were  about  to  lose  their  most  precious  possession.  He 
repulsed  them,  and  Moses  could  now  first  say  that  he  had 

*  I  thought  I  might  have  been  able  to  deduce  this  indirectly  from 
his  narrative,  Antiqu.,  iii.,  2.  Now  it  seems  to  me  that  there  is  nothing 
that  we  can  extract  about  his  views  from  this  ;  for  which  reason  the 
above  name  should  be  effaced.  Abstractedly  considered,  it  is  verv 
probable  that  he  entertained  the  same  views  us  Eusebius  and  Jerome. 
Compare  note,  p.  316,  and  Appendix  G. 

f  Eusebius,  Hfpt  rZiv  tottlkwv  ovo^i,  etc.,  s.  v.  'Pa(/)i5t'/x,  tottos 
TTJi  cprjixov  napa  to  XcopfjlB  opos,  iv  g)  ex  r^9  nerpas  ippvrjcre  to. 
vhara  Kai  ^kKt^Ot]  6  tottos  neipaap-os.  evda  Kal  TroXe^e?  ^It}(tovs  tov 
ApaXrjK  iyyvi  ^apciv. 

X  Ilieronymus,  de  situ  et  nomin,  etc.,  s.  v.  Raphidim,  locus  in 
dcserto  juxta  montem  Choreb,  in  quo  de  petra  fluxere  aqua?,  cogno- 
nimatusque  est  tentatio,  ubi  et  Jesus  adversus  Amalec  dimicat  prope 
Pharan. 

§  Among  the  older  authors,  Cosmasi  Inclicopleuslea  must  be  especially 
named  here  (about  a.d.  535).  (Topogr.  Christ.,  lib.  v.,  in  the  Coll. 
nov.  patr.  ed.  Montfaucon,  torn,  ii.,  fol.  195.)  E?ra  ttoKlv  nap€vi- 
^akov  fty  ^Pa(l)idiv  (Is  ttjv  vvv  Xeyopevrju  ^apdv.  Antoninus  Placcn- 
tinus,  who  is  placed  about  the  year  GOO  (while  the  learned  Papebroc/i, 
who  published  his  Itinemrium  in  the  Acta  SS.,  month  of  May,  vol.  ii., 
p.  X. — xviii.,  does  not  place  him  earlier  than  the  eleventh  or  twelfth 
century),  came,  as  he  says,  in  civitatem  (which  can  only  be  Pharan)  in 
qua  pugnavit  Moyscs  cum  Amulech :  iibi  est  allure  positum  super  lapides 
illos  (juos  posuerunt  Moyse  orante.  That  the  town  was  enclosed  by  a 
brick  wall  and  valde  sterilis,  instead  of  which  Tuch  (Sinait  Inschr., 
p.  38)  proposes  to  reixd/ertilis.  If  Pharan  is  called  an  Amakkitish  town 
by  Macrizi  (Gesch.  der  Kopten,  uebers.  v.  \Vustenfeld,  p.  116),  then 
this  can  only  indicate  the  same  view  that  Moses  was  attacked  near 
Phakan  by  the  Amalekites,  to  whom  this  district  belonged.  Among 
more  recent  scholars  we  must  especially  mention  Bitter,  as  is  men- 
tioned in  Appendix  B. 


814  JOURNEY  OF  THE  ISRAELITES. 

got  possession  of  tlie  Peninsula.  His  nearest  object  was 
attained.  What  could  have  attracted  hiin  still  farther  from 
this  point  ? 

It  is  also  said,  however,  in  distinct  terms,  that  the  people 
had  arrived  here  at  the  Mount  oe  God  ;  consequently  at 
the  Mount  of  the  Law.  For  it  is  said,  after  the  victory  at 
Eaphidim,  that  Jethro,the  father-in-law  of  MosesinMidian, 
heard  of  all  that  had  happened.  "  And  Jethro,  Moses' 
father-in-law,  came  with  his  sons  and  his  wife  unto  Moses 
into  the  Wilderness,  where  he  encamped  at  the  Mount 
OF  God."*  And  even  before  that,  the  Lord  had  said  to  Moses, 
"  Behold,  I  will  stand  before  thee  there  upon  the  rock  in 
Choree  ;  and  thou  shalt  smite  the  rock,  and  there  shall  come 
water  out  of  it,  that  the  people  may  drink, "f  words  which 
could  only  have  alluded  to  the  wonderful  spring  of  Firan,  as 
has  been  already  supposed  long  before  my  time.J  It  may 
still  further  be  deduced,  that  Moses  really  found  repose  here 
in  Eaphidim,  because  now,  by  the  advice  of  Jethro,  he  orga- 
nises the  hitherto  disorderly  mass  of  people  to  enable  him 
to  govern  them.§  He  selects  tlie  best  qualified  men,  and 
places  them  over  a  thousand,  over  a  hundred,  over  fifty,  and 
over  ten  ;  these  are  appointed  judges  of  smaller  matters  while 
he  only  retains  the  most  important  for  himself. 

All  this  evidently  indicates  that  the  journey  was  past,  and  the 
period  of  repose  had  commenced. 

The  beginning  of  the  following  chapter  (Exodus  xix.  1 — 3) 
certainly  seems  to  contradict  this,  for  it  is  said,  "  In  the 
third  month,  when  the  children  of  Israel  were  gone  forth  out 
of  the  land  of  Egypt,  the  same  day||  came  they  into  the 
wilderness  of  Sinai.  For  they  were  departed  from  Eaphi- 
dim, and  were  come  to  the  desert  of  Sinai,  and  had  pitched 

*  Exodus  xviii.  5. — Tr. 
t  Exodus  xvii.  6.— Tr. 

I  See  below,  the  complete  passage  by  Cosmas.     See  Appendix  G. 

§  Even  the  name  itself,  Raphidim,  /.  e.  the  places  of  repose,  indicate 
that  the  place  was  adapted  for  rest  of  some  duration. 

II  See  Appendix  B. 


MOUNT  SINAI.  315 

in  the  wilderness;  and  there  Israel  camped  before  the 
MouyT,  and  Closes  went  up  unto  God,  and  the  Lord  called 
unto  him  out  of  the  Mountain,"  &c. 

According  to  this,  they  decamped  between  Eaphidim  and 
Sinai.  This  favoured  the  tradition  whicli  believed  that  the 
Mount  of  the  Law  might  be  re-discovered  in  Gebel  Miisa  be- 
yond Firan.  At  the  same  time,  however,  it  was  not  con- 
sidered that  by  admitting  this  we  encounter  much  greater 
contradictions  with  the  text.  In  the  first  place,  the  words 
mention  no  more  than  one  day's  journey,*  not  even  in  the 
Book  of  Xumbers,t  where,  nevertheless,  between  Elim  and 
Kaphidim,  not  only  Alus  and  Daphka,  but  the  Eed  Sea 
(though  tliis  last  was  near  Elim)  are  particularly  men- 
tioned. Erom  Eiran  to  Gebel  INIusa  tliere  were,  however, 
at  least  two  long  days'  journeys,  if  not  more.  The  '•  ]Mount 
OK  God"  has  likewise  been  already  mentioned  in  Eaphi- 
dim,  it  was  there  called  a  rock  in  Ciioeeb  ;  and  it  is  there- 
fore impossible  to  understand  by  the  Mount  of  God  any 
other  than  "  the  !Mount  of  God"  to  which  Moses  drives 
the  sheep  of  Jethro. 

AVe  should,  thus,  be  obliged  to  admit  that  there  were  two 
"  ^founts  of  God  ;"  one,  the  "  Mount  of  God,  Choeeb,"  in 
Kaphidim,  which  would  be  Sebbal,  and  a  "  Mount  of  God, 
Sinai,"  on  whicli  the  law  was  given,  which  woul'd  be  Gebel 
MusA.iJ: 

To  admit  this  would,  however,  in  itself  not  only  be  scarcely 

*  For  that  reason  Robinson  and  others,  vho  do  not  allow  that  any 
positions  of  tlio  encampments  were  omitted,  place  Kaphidim  beyond 
FruAN;  and  although  they  make  the  march  through  the  latter  place, 
tliey  leave  it  either  totally  unmentioned,  or  place  Alus  there.  We 
have  already  mentioned  above  the  objections  to  this  opinion,  which 
have  been  partly  proved  by  Ritter.  On  the  other  hand,  Ritter,  to  re- 
move the  difficuitv,  distinctly  admits  of  an  omission  in  our  present  text. 
(P.  742.) 

t  Numbers  xxxiii.  10 — 14. — ^Tr. 

X  Ritter  (see  Appendix  B)  is  consequently  compelled  to  draw  this 
conclusion ;  which,  in  lact,  seems  to  me  the  most  doubtful  of  all.  The 
present  tradition  diffl-rs  from  this  in  holding  Horeb  and  Sinai  to  be  two 
mounts,  situated  immediately  beside  each  other  but  yet  apart. 


316  MOUKT  SINAI. 

conceivable,  but  most  distinctly  self-contradictory,  inasmuch 
as  it  maintains  that  the  Mount  of  God,  Choeeb,  where 
God  first  appears  to  Moses,  is  even  in  anticipation  desig- 
nated as  the  Mount  of  the  Law  (Exodus  iii.  1 — 12)  ;  that 
further,  the  general  designation,  the  "  Mount  of  God,"  which 
appears  so  frequently  without  a  name  being  appended  (Exodus 
iv.  27,  xviii.  5,  xxiv.  13  ;  Numbers  x.  33),  could  only  have  been 
employed  if  there  were  no  more  than  one  such  Mount ;  and, 
finally,  because  the  name  of  Sinai,  or  Mount  Sinai,  and 
Choeeb,  or  Mount  Choeeb,  are  continually  mentioned  with 
exactly  the  same  meaning  as  Mount  of  the  Law-giving. 

This  evident  difficulty  has  indeed  been  felt  strongly  at  all 
times.*  Josephus  (xint.  iii.  2,  3)  forwarded  his  view  by 
transposing  the  doubtful  commencement  of  the  xix  chapter 
from  its  present  position  after  the  visit  of  Jethro,  to  hefore 
it,  so  that  Moses  does  not  receive  his  family  in  Eaphidim, 
but  in  Sinai.  By  this  means  certainly  the  double  difficulty 
is  avoided ;  on  the  one  hand,  because  two  Mounts  of  God  do 
not  appear,  on  the  other,  that  the  organisation  of  the  people 
does  not  occur  during  the  journey.  He  also  deliberately 
omits  the  statement  that  in  Choeeb  was  situated  the  rock 
which  Moses  strikes  for  the  spring  of  water. 

Modern  scholars  have,  on  the  contrary,  proposed  either 
to  make  Sinai  the  general  name  for  the  whole  of  the  range, 
and  Choreb  the  individual  Mount  of  the  Law-giving,  or  vice 
versa,  Choreb  for  the  more  extended,  and  Sinai  for  the 
limited    designation,t    while   the  tradition   of   the    monks 

*  The  three  possible  ■ways  of  removing  this  diflBculty  have  been 
tried  by  Robinson,  Ritter,  and  Josephus.  The  first,  places  Raphi- 
dim.  near  Gebel  Musa;  the  second,  assumes  there  is  an  omission 
between  Raphidim  and  Sinai,  and  retains  two  Mounts  of  God;  the 
third,  transposes  the  separating  passage,  and  does  not  mention  Horeb 
at  all,  only  Sinai. 

^  t  See  the  manner  in  which  Robinson  combines,  and  weighs  both 
views,  i.,  p.  197,  &.C.  All  those  passages  where  precisely  the  same  is 
said  concerning  Horeb,  as  about  Sinai,  are  opposed  to  the  more  recent 
opinion  that  Horeb  was  the  general  designation  for  the  mountain 
range,  or  for  the  district,  and  that  Sinai  was  the  individual  Mount, 


M0U2?T  SINAI.  317 

refer  both  names  to  diflerent  mountams  situated  immediately 
beside  each  other.*  It  seems  to  me  that  the  comparison 
of  the  individual  passages  admits  of  none  of  these  \'iews ;  in 
my  opinion  it  is  rather  clearly  proved,  by  the  names  of 
Choreb  and  Sinai  being  used  alternately,  but  with  perfect 
equality,  that  loth  designated  one  and  the  same  mountain 
together  with  the  district  immediately  surrounding  it,t  so 

while  not  a  single  passage  requires  us  to  think  of  a  large  extent  of 
ground.  No  mention  is  ever  made  of  a  "  Wilderness  of  Horeb,"  as 
of  the  Wildernesses  of  Slr,  Sin,  Paran,  and  otliers.  We  might 
also  cite  in  favour  of  the  opposite  opinion  Acts  vii.  30  compared 
with  Exodus  iii.  1. 

*  This  view  is  found  already  in  the  above-mentioned  (note,  p.  313) 
Itineraricm  of  Antoninus,  who  places  the  convent  between  Sinai  and 
Horeb.  The  monks'  tradition  of  the  present  day,  that  the  rock  pro- 
jecting into  the  plain  of  liaha  was  Horeb,  is  well  known.  The  arbitrary 
character  of  such  assumptions  is  evident;  nevertheless,  the  latter 
opinion  is  maintained  by  Gesenius  (Thesaur,  p.  517,  Wiener,  and 
others). 

t  St.  Jerome  expressly  says  the  same  thing,  since  he  adds  to  the 
words  of  Eusebius  s.  v.  Choreb  :  Mihi  autem  videtur  quod  duplici 
nomine  idem  mons  nunc  <"^7na,  nunc  Choreb  vocetur.  Even  Josephus 
evidently  considered  both  mountains  to  be  one,  for  wherever  Choreu 
is  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  he  placed  Sinai  instead ;  the  same  is  done 
by  the  author  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  (vii.  30),  and  also  by  Syn- 
ccUus  (Ciiron.,  p.  190),  who  says  of  Elijah,  inopeveTo  ev  X(op^^  rd 
op(i  TjToi  2ivai(o.  (The  following  passage  within  brackets  added  by 
the  author,  April,  1853. — Tr.)  [There  has  been  an  attempt  to  prove, 
from  the  Greek  termination  livaito,  that  Choreb  is  only  meant  to 
designate  here  part  of  the  range  of  Sinai.  However,  the  word  cannot 
be  understood  thus  in  the  sense  of  an  adjective,  as  there  was  no  other 
but  the  Sinaitic  Choreb.  To  opoy  ^lvolov  (Syncell.,  p.  122;  Cosraas,  p. 
195;  ava  peaov  EXet^  Ka\  rov  llvaiov  opovs.  Joseph.  Ant.  Jud.  3,  5: 
avftai  (Mcov<r^f)  npbs  To  2ivalov  ;  compare  the  inscription  on  the  con- 
vent, Appendix  E)  is  used  just  as  much  as  To  opos-  2iva.  But  if,  which 
is  not  the  case,  Choreb  especially  was  only  called  To  ^ivaiov,  not 
To  2ii/a  opof,  we  could  only  infer  the  reverse,  namely,  that  Sinai  must 
have  meant  a  part  of  the  range  of  Choreb.]  Ewald,  especially  among 
modern  scholars,  brings  forward  the  same  opinion  of  the  similarity  of 
the  two  mounts.  He  says  (Gesch.  des.  V.  Isr.,  ii.,  p.  84)  the  two 
names,  Sinai  and  Horeb,  do  not  change  because  they  designated 
points  in  the  same  range,  situated  beside  each  other;  but  the  name  of 
Sinai  is  clearly  the  most  ancient,  for  it  was  used  also  by  Deborah, 
Judges  V.  5,  whereas  the  name  of  Horeb  cannot  be  pointed  out  before 
the  period  of  the  fourth  narrator  (compare  Exodus  iii.  1;   xvii.   6; 


S18  JOUEXET  OF  THE  ISP.AELITES. 

that  Choreb  perhaps  was  the  more  precise  Amalekitish  local 
name,  Sinai  the  more  indeterminate  one,  derived  from  its 
position  in  the  AYilderness  of  Sin. 

But  with  respect  to  the  departure  from  Eaphidim,  many 
might  think  it  A'ery  probable  that  those  words,  which  so 
strikingly  interrupt  the  natural  sequence  of  circumstances 
as  to  have  been  intentionally  transposed  either  by  Josephus,  or 
prior  to  his  time,  did  not  originally  belong  here,  but  were  placed 
at  the  commencement  of  the  account  of  the  Law-giving ;  if,  as 
no  doubt  frequently  occurred,  this  was  to  be  imderstood  by 
itself  alone,  separate  from  all  that  preceded  and  succeeded  it.* 
The. unusual  manner  in  which  they  are  connected,  since  the 
arrival  at  Sinai  is  mentioned  previously  to  the  departure 
from  Eaphidim,  and  the  expression  "  the  same  day,"  which  is 
so  difficult  to  explain,  while  in  the  other  statements  of  time 
a  particular  day  is  mentioned,  would  support  the  suppo- 
sition.f  "WTioever,  however,  may  consider  it  too  bold  to 
assume  that  we  no  longer  possess  tlie  original  composition, 
can  only  explain  the  fresh  departure  to  be  a  last  and  insig- 
nificant removal  of  the  encampment,  such  as  we  were  obliged 
to  admit  to  be  the  case  at  the  departure  from  Elim  to  the 
sea  coast.  This  removal  was  either  while  they  advanced 
from  El  Hessue  (where  they  first  beheld  tlie  water)  towards 
Eiran,  or  from  Eiran  into  the  upper  portion  of  Wadi  Aleyat, 
where  the  camp  might  have  extended  far  and  wide  at  the  foot 
of  the  Mount.+ 

Whoever  endeavours  to  realise  the  whole  progi'ess  of  the 
event,  with  its  essential  and  necessary  characteristics,  can 

xxxiii.  6) ;  but  it  then  becomes  very  prevalent,  as  is  proved  in  Deute- 
ronomy, and  in  the  passages  of  1  Kings  viii.  9;  xix.  8;  Mai.  iv.  4; 
Psalms  cvi.  19,  while  it  says  nothing  against  this  view  when  very 
late  authors  reintroduce  the  name  of  Sinai,  merely  from  their  learned 
acquaintance  with  the  old  books. 

*  If  we  omit  the  two  verses,  Exodus  xix.  1,  2,  the  account,  xix.  3, 
follows  most  naturally  after  xviii.  27.  "  And  Moses  let  his  father-in- 
law  depart,  and  he  went  away  into  his  own  land.  And  Moses  went  up 
unto  God;  and  the  Lord  called  unto  him  out  of  the  mountain." 

t  See  Appendix  D. 
>  t  See  Appendix  B. 


MOUNT  SI>'AI.  319 

only  be  ttatiafied  by  comprehending  it  in  this  manner.  He 
will  not  be  able  to  blind  himself  to  the  conviction  that 
Serbal,  on  account  of  the  oasis  at  its  base,  must  have  been 
the  necessary  object  and  centre  for  the  pouring  in  of  the  new 
people,  and  that  the  wise  Man  of  God,  so  well  acquainted 
with  the  country,  could  never  have  intended  to  lead  the 
multitude  into  a  mountain  enclosure  like  the  plain  at  Gebel 
Musa,  where  they  would  find  no  water,  no  trees  bearing  fruit, 
nor  manna,  and  where  they  would  have  been  more  easily  cut 
oft*  from  all  connection  with  the  other  parts  of  the  Peninsula 
than  anywhere  else.  lie  will  be  compelled  to  acknowledge 
that  the  designation  of  Sinai  as  the  chief  mountain  of  the 
Wilderness  of  Sin,  and  the  sanctity  with  which  it  was  re- 
garded, not  merely  by  the  Israelites,  but  by  the  native  tribes 
of  the  country,  decidedly  points  to  Serbal ;  further,  tliat  the 
Haphidim  defended  by  the  Amalekites  was  undoubtedly 
situated,  together  with  the  spring  of  Moses  in  Choreb,  in  the 
AVadi  Firan  ;  that  consequently  the  Mount  of  God  at  Choreb, 
where  God  appeared  to  Moses,  and  the  Mount  of  God  at 
llaphidim,  where  Moses  is  visited  by  Jethro,  and  organises 
the  people,  could  also  be  no  other  than  Serbal,  from  which, 
finallv,  we  must  as  necessarily  deduce  that  unless  wo  admit 
that  there  were  two  Mounts  of  God,  the  Mount  of  the  Law 
was  also  near  Eaphidim,  and  is  recognisable  in  Serbal,  not 
in  Gebel  Musa. 

In  conclusion,  if  we  now  once  more  look  back  and  observe 
how  the  present  tradition  bears  on  our  account  of  the  event, 
-we  perceive  that  it  refers  at  once  to  the  foundation  of  the 
convent,  by  Justinian,  in  the  sixth  century.*  This,  however, 
was  by  no  means  the  first  church  of  the  Peninsula.  At  a 
far  earlier  period  we  already  find  a  bishopric  in  the  town  of 
Pharan,  at  the  foot  of  Serbal.t  Here  was  the  first  Christian 
centre  of  the  Peninsula,  and  the  church  founded  by  Justinian 
also  remained  dependent  on  this  for  the  space  of  several 
centuries.  The  question  therefore  is,  whether  the  tradition 
*  See  Appendix  E.  t  See  Appendix  F; 


320  MOUNT  SI>^AI. 

wMcli  regards  the  present  Gebel  Musa  as  Sinai  can  be  re- 
ferred to  a  time  prior  to  Justinian.*  The  remoteness  of  that 
district,  and  its  distance  from  frequented  roads  of  communi- 
cation, though  from  its  position  in  the  lofty  range  offering 
sufficient  subsistence  for  the  trifling  necessities  of  the  single, 
scattered  monks,  rendered  it  peculiarly  applicable  for  indivi- 
dual hermits,  but  for  the  same  reason  inapplicable  for  a  large 
people,  ruling  the  laud  for  a  certain  period  of  time,  and  ex- 
hausting all  its  resources.  The  gradually  increasing  hermit 
population  might  have  drawn  the  attention  of  the  Byzantine 
emperors  to  that  particular  district,  and,  as  it  appears,  have 
fixed  the  previously  wavering  tradition  to  that  spot  for  future 
times,  t 

I  have,  indeed,  been  in  need  of  a  learned  foundation  for  what 
I  have  here  said  about  the  position  of  Elim,  Eaphidim,  and 
Mount  Choreb  or  Sinai,  but  this  I  shall  not  be  able  to  sup- 
ply even  in  Thebes ;  it  would,  however,  chiefly  refer  to  the 
history  of  the  earliest  tradition  before  Justinian,  which,  even 
were  it  to  agree  in  all  its  parts  with  tlie  tradition  of  the  pre- 
sent day,  would  still  hardly  suffice  to  decide  anything  con- 
clusively. It  seems  to  me  that  these  questions  will  always 
remain  unsolved,  if  the  elements  which  were  at  my  com- 
mand— namely,  the  Mosaic  account,  a  personal  view  of  the 
locality,  and  acquaintance  with  the  history  of  that  period — 
should  not  be  considered  sufficient  to  explain  tliem.  "We 
shall  only  obtain  a  correct  idea  of  the  whole  of  the  external 
character  of  the  event,  by  simultaneously  observing  these 

*  See  Appendix  G. 

t  Ritter  (p.  31),  Avhen  he  mentions  tliat  Sinai  was  almost  simul- 
taneously regarded  by  tlie  Egyptian,  Cosmas,  to  be  Serbal ;  and  by  the 
Byzantine,  Procopius  to  be  Gebel  Musa;  adds  another  supposition, 
which  I  will  mention  here.  "  Might  there  not,"  he  says,  "  hare,  per- 
haps, existed  a  different  tradition  or  party-view  on  this  matter  in  con- 
vents, and  among  the  monks  at  Constantixople  and  Alexandria, 
Avhich  might  proceed  from  a  jealous  feeling  to  vindicate  the  superior 
sanctity  of  one  or  the  other  locality  ?  It  is  remarkable  that  such 
different  views  of  the  matter  should  be  held  simultaneously  by  the  most 
learned  theologians  of  their  day." 


1 


3§ 


\ 


WWWa 


A- 


J^^=Sii 


'^aC 


13 


KETURX  TO  THEBES.  321 

three  most  essential  sides  of  the  investigation,  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  an  endeavour  to  obtain  an  indifferent  and  equal 
confirmation  of  each  individual  feature  in  the  account  now 
under  our  consideration,  must  necessarily  lead  to  the  wide 
road  of  false  criticism,  which  always  sacrifices  the  compre- 
hension of  the  wliole,  to  the  comprehension  of  the  individual 
part. 


LETTEE  XXXIY. 

Thebes,  Karnak,  the  Ath  of  May. 

On  the  6th  of  April  we  quitted  Tor,  where  we  had  only 
spent  one  night.  During  our  farther  voyage  we  landed 
every  evening  on  the  shelly  and  coralline  coast  of 
Africa,  till,  on  the  10th,  we  arrived  at  Kosser,  where  ex- 
cellent Se'id  Mohammed  of  Qeneh  was  waiting  to  furnish  us 
with  camels  for  our  return  to  Thebes.  In  four  days  we 
passed  over  the  broad  Eossafa  road,  crossing  the  mountain 
range,  passed  Hamamat,  and  on  the  14th  of  April  once  more 
reached  our  Theban  head-quarters. 

AVe  found  ever>'thing  in  the  most  desirable  order  and 
activity ;  but  our  old  and  faithful  castellan,  'Auad,  met  me 
with  a  bandaged  head,  and  saluted  me  in  a  feeble  voice.  A 
short  time  previously  he  had  a  narrow  escape  from  death.  I 
mentioned  in  a  former  letter  that  many  years  ago  he,  together 
with  tlie  whole  house  of  the  Sheikh  of  Qurna,  burdened 
themselves  with  a  crime  of  blood,  which  had  not  yet  been 
expiated.  The  family  of  the  man  who  had  been  killed  in 
Kom  el  Birat,  had,  soon  after  our  departure,  seized  an 
opportunity  when  'Auad  was  returning  home  from  Luqsor 
one  evening  with  a  relation,  to  fall  upon  the  two  unsus- 
picious wanderers.  The  attack  was  more  aimed  at  the  com- 
panion of  'Auad  than  at  himself,  they  therefore  called  out 
to  him  to  go  away;  however,  as  he  did  not  do  this,  but 
vigorously  defended  his  relation,  he  received  an  almost  deadly 
blow  on  his  head  from  a  sharp  weapon,  which  stretched  him 

T 


322  JOTJENEY  TEOM  THEBES  TO  CAIEO. 

insensible  on  tlie  ground ;  the  other  man  was  murdered  and 
thrown  into  the  Nile,  sacrificed  to  the  revenge  for  bloodshed, 
which  had  remained  unsatisfied  seven  years.  Since  that  time 
there  has  been  peace  between  the  families. 

A  longer  account  of  our  Sinai  journey  will  be  despatched 
to-day,  to  which  I  have  also  added  two  maps  of  the  Penin- 
sula, by  Erbkam,  drawn  from  my  notes.  I  now  contemplate 
the  difficult  task  of  finishing  my  account  with  Thebes,  which, 
however,  I  hope  to  accomplish  in  about  ten  or  twelve  days. 


LETTEE  XXXV. 

Cairo,  the  lOth  of  July,  1845. 

The  first  place  we  halted  at  after  we  left  Thebes  on  the 
16th  of  May,  was  Dendeea,  whose  magnificent  temple  is  the 
last  towards  the  North,  and  although  of  later  date,  almost 
confined  to  the  Eoman  period,  it  yet  presented  an  unusual 
amount  of  subjects  for  our  portfolios  and  note-books.  We 
then  spent  nine  additional  whole  days  upon  the  remarkable 
rock-tombs  of  AMAE^'■A,  from  the  time  of  the  fourth  Ameno- 
phis,  that  royal  Puritan  who  persecuted  all  the  gods  of 
Egypt,  and  would  only  permit  the  worship  of  the  sun's  disc. 

As  we  approached  Beni-suef,  we  saw  a  magnificent 
steamer  of  Ibrahim  Pascha's  hastening  towards  us.  We 
hoisted  our  flag,  and  immediately  the  red  Turkish  flag,  with 
the  Crescent,  appeared  on  board  the  steam-boat  in  return 
for  our  salute.  It  then  altered  its  course,  steered  directly 
towards  us,  and  stopped. 

We  were  eager  for  the  news  which  we  were  about  to 
hear :  a  boat  pushed  off",  and  pulled  to  beside  our  ship.  It 
was,  indeed,  a  joyful  surprise  when  I  recognised  my  old 
imiversity  friend.  Dr.  Bethmann,  in  the  fair  Frank  who 
came  on  board,  and  who  had  come  hither  from  Italy  to 
accompany  me  on  my  journey  back  by  Palestine  and  Con- 
stantinople.   Ali  Bey,  the  right  hand  of  Ibrahim  Pascha, 


BEMOYAL  OF  THE  TOMBS.  323 

who  was  steaming  to  l^pper  Eg)-pt,  had  kindly  taken  him 
into  his  vessel,  and  told  me  he  unwillingly  parted  with  his 
agreeable  travelling  eompaDion,  to  whom  he  had  become 
much  attached  even  in  their  short  acquaintance. 

His  presence,  and  the  assistance  he  affords  me,  have  be- 
come still  more  valuable  since  my  other  travelling  com- 
panions have  left  me  beliind  alone.  They  started  from  hence 
yesterday.  "Willingly  indeed  I  would  have  accompanied 
them,  as  to-day  is  the  third  anniversary  of  my  depai'tiu-e 
from  Berlin,  but  the  taking  to  pieces  of  the  P}Tamid  tombs 
still  detains  us.  The  four  workmen,  able  young  men,  who 
were  sent  to  assist  me  from  Berlin,  have  arrived,  and  I  im- 
mediately took  them  with  me  to  the  Pyramids.  We  made 
ourselves  a  lodging  in  a  tomb  which  was  in  a  convenient 
situation.  A  travelling  blacksmith's  forge  was  constructed, 
some  scaffolding  was  raised  for  the  windlass,  and  we  set  to 
work  vigorously. 

The  difficulties  of  the  whole  affair,  however,  rest  still  more 
in  the  petty  jealousies,  by  which  we  are  here  surrounded  on 
every  side,  and  in  the  different  diplomatic  influences,  which  are 
not  unfrequently  rendered  abortive  by  Mohammed  Ali's  dis- 
tinct orders.  Herr  von  AVagner  therefore  considered  it  abso- 
lutely necessary  that  I  should  by  no  means  quit  Egypt  be- 
fore the  transport  and  embarkation  of  the  monuments  was 
completed,  and  I  therefore  sliall  be  obliged  to  wait  here 
patiently  for  several  weeks  longer. 


LETTEE  XXXVI. 

Cairo,  the  l\tk  July,  1845. 
Will  you  permit  me  to  communicate  briefly  some  ideas 
which  have  of  late  considerably  occupied  my  attention.* 

*  This  letter,  which  I  have  had  printed  here  verbatim,  was  addressed 
to  the  General  Director  of  the  Royal  Trussian  Museum,  Privy  Coun- 
sellor of  Legation  von  Olfers.  This  communication  may  perhaps 
serve  to  spread  a  correct  estimation  of  the  fundamental  principles 

A-  o 


324  EGYPTIAN  MUSEUM. 

I  have  never  lost  sight  of  your  wish  to  decorate  the  New 
Museum  in  harmony  with  the  monuments  which  it  contains, 
and  I  hope  that  you  continue  to  entertain  these  views.     I 
liave  had  great  pleasure  in  the  account  Herr  Hertel  has  given 
me  respecting  the  arrangement  of  the  Egyptian  saloons,  and 
■have  heard  from  him  that  the  facing  of  the  columns  is  still 
ill  suspenso.     It  is  very  improbable  that  such  a  favourable 
opportunity  will  ever  recur  of  having  such  means  at  our 
disposal  on  the  first  formation  of  a  museum  as  we  have  in  the 
arrangement  of  this  Egyptian  one,  when  we  shall  be  able  to 
furnish  a  complete  whole,  and  at   the   same   time  offer  to 
■the  public    so  much  that  is  new   and  important  in  plan, 
materials,  and  arrangement.      If   I  remember  rightly,  you 
have  expressed  a  desire  to  form  an  historical  museum,  such, 
in  fact,  as  all  such  museums  should  be,  in  conformity  with 
their  purpose   and   idea,  and  yet  such  as  nowhere   exists. 
This  view,  however,  in  an  Egyptian  museum,  is  at  all  events 
attainable  in  a  degree  which,  even  under  the  most  favourable 
circumstances,  can  be  but  remotely  approached  in  all  other 
museums,  because  in  no  other  nation  can  the  date  of  each 
individual  monument  be  so  precisely  and  surely  presented 
as  in  this,  and  because   no  other  collection  is  distributed 
throughout  so  long  a  period  of  time   (above  3000  years).     I 
therefore  presume  that,  as  a  whole,  you  wish  to  arrange  the 
principal  saloons  historically,   so  far  as  this  can  be  accom- 
plished, and  by  some  method  to  combine  what  belongs  to  the 
Old,  what  to   the   iSew,  and  what   to   the   Greek-Eoman 
Monarchy,  in  such  a  manner  at  least,  that  each  chamber  of 
any  size  should  have  a  definite  historical  character.     I  have 
always  borne  this  in  view  in  forming  the  collection,  although 
I  by  no  means  believe  that  this  principle  should  be  carried 
out  pedantically  in   details.     With  respect  to  the  plaster 
casts  which  you  will  probably  wish  to  incorporate  as  a  whole 
with  the  existing  collection  of  casts,  it  would  be  very  de- 

which  has  guided  the  arrangement  and  decoration  of  the  Egyptian 
Museum,  one  of  the  grandest  and  latest  works  that  have  been  executed 
in  Berlin,  and  which  has  just  been  rendered  accessible  to  the  public. 


EGYPTIAX  MUSEUM.  325 

sirable  to  bave  a  lew  duplicates  made  of  these  for  the  Egyp- 
tian saloons,  for  the  sake  of  rendering  them  complete. 

But  what  especially  induces  me  to  write  from  hence  on 
such  matters,  is  the  notion  that  even  now,  or  perhaps  very 
soon,  you  may  have  made  such  progress  in  the  edifice  as  to  be 
desirous  of  coming  to  a  decision  with  reference  to  the  archi- 
tectonic and  pictorial  decoration  of  the  saloons,  and  in  that  case 
a  few  observations  may  not  perhaps  be  unacceptable  from  me. 

You  will,  no  doubt,  select  Egyptian  architecture  for  the 
Egyptian  saloons ;  this  sliould  by  all  means  be  carried  out 
in  every  part,  and  by  what  I  hear  from  Hertel,  there  is  still 
ample  time  for  this.  I  think,  for  instance,  that  to  produce  a 
general  harmonious  impression  the  architectural  style  of 
ranges  of  columns,  which  is  characteristic  of  difi'erent  periods, 
should  be  retained  in  their  historical  succession  of  series, 
as  well  as  with  all  their  rich  decoration  of  colouring. 

The  coloured  paintings  on  the  walls  are,  however,  tlien  in- 
dispensable. Every  temple,  every  tomb,  every  wall  in  the 
palaces  of  the  Egyptians  was  decorated  from  top  to  bottom 
with  painted  sculptures  or  paintings.  The  first  inquiry  must 
be,  in  what  style  these  paintings  should  be  executed.  They 
might  either  be  free  compositions  in  the  Greek  style,  or 
strictly  Egyptian  representations,  avoiding,  however,  Egyp- 
tian perspective,  therefore  a  kind  of  translation,  some- 
what in  the  manner  of  the  frieze  on  the  wall  in  the 
Musee  Charles  X ;  or,  lastly,  they  might  be  simple  copies 
of  genuine  Egyptian  representations  drawn  by  us,  and  only 
adapted  for  this  particular  purpose.  With  respect  to  the 
first  view,  I  think  that  a  man  like  Cornelius,  if  he  chose 
to  enter  on  such  a  completely  new  field,  would  be  capable  of 
forming  a  beautiful  and  great  work  out  of  such  a  task ;  but 
then,  the  public  would  most  likely  be  much  more  interested 
in  the  master  than  in  the  subject  of  the  representation  derived 
from  a  history  of  which  they  are  still  so  ignorant.  The 
second  method  would  perhaps  deserve  a  trial  it  might  succeed 
once,  in  a  single  case,  and  would  certainly  then  not  be  devoid 
of  interest.  But  I  am  firmly  persuaded  that  a  series  of  any 
length  of  such  bastard  representations  would  not  fulfil  the 


326  EGYPTIAN  MUSEUir. 

requisite  demands,  presupposing,  as  they  would,  a  double 
mastery  of  two  artistic  languages,  and  that  tliey  would  also  be 
decidedly  contrary  to  the  taste  of  the  public.  All  attempts  of 
this  nature  that  I  have  occasionally  seen  have,  in  my  opinion, 
been  completely  unsuccessful,  and  have  appeared  ridiculous  to 
connoisseurs ;  although,  as  I  have  already  said,  I  do  not  believe 
that  such  an  attempt  might  not  succeed  in  an  individual  case, 
if  the  subject  were  carefully  selected.  It  therefore  appears 
to  me,  that  the  third  method  is  the  only  one  left,  although  it 
has  least  pretension ;  but  it  unites  so  many  advantages,  that 
I  believe,  indeed,  it  will  also  meet  with  your  approval. 

There  can  scarcely  be  any  doubt  witb  respect  to  the  sub- 
ject of  the  representations.  They  ought  to  place  before  us  in 
characteristic  features  the  highest  point  of  Egyptian  history, 
civilisation,  and  art,  and  I  was  even  astonished  at  the  great 
number  of  most  suitable  subjects  which  immediately  present 
themselves,  if  we  allow  all  that  has  been  hitherto  disclosed  of 
Egyptian  history  to  pass  before  us.  Merely  to  give  you  a 
hasty  notion  of  this,  I  will  communicate  the  individual  points, 
which  I  wrote  down  when  I  was  still  doubtful  whether  one 
of  the  two  first  modes  of  representation  might  not  be 
executed.  A  more  diffuse  commentary  than  I  can  now  give 
ought  indeed  to  be  appended  to  this,  but  it  only  refers  to 
a  very  preliminary  notion.  The  names  within  brackets 
indicate  where  materials  could  be  found  for  single  compo- 
sitions. 

Pee-histoeical. 
The  elevation  of  the  god  Horus  upon  Osieis'  gods'  throne. 
(Dendera.)     To  be  placed  with  reference  to  the  last 
number. 

Old  MoirAECHT. 
Dyn.  I.  The  removal  of  Menes  from  This,  the  city  of  Osiris. 
Eoundation  of  Memphis,  the  town  of  Phthah  by  Meues. 
Dyn.  ly.  The  Pyramids  built  by  Cheops  and  Chepheen. 
Dyn.  YI.  The  union  of  the  two  crowns  of  Upper  and  Lower 

Egypt  during  the  reign  of  Apappus,  which  lasted  a 

hundred  years. 


EGYPTIAy  MUSEUM.  327 

Dyn.  XII.  The  Temple  of  Ammon  in  Thebes,  the  city  of 
Ammon,  founded  by  Sesuetesen  I.  in  the  12th  Dynasty, 

Immigrating  Hi'KSOs.  (Benihassan.) 

The  Labteinth  and  Lake  M(eeis,  the  works  of  Amenemha 
lU.  of  the  12th  Dynasty. 

Dyn.  XIII.  The  Invasion  of  the  Htksos  into  Lower 
Egypt,  occurring  shortly  after. 

Expulsion  of  the  Egyptian  rulers  to  Ethiopia. 

The  rule  of  the  Hyksos. 

New  Monaecht. 
Dyn.  XYII. — XYIII.  Amenophis  I.  and  the  black  Queen 

Aahmesnefruari. 
Tuthmosis  III.  expels  the  Htksos  from  Abaris.     Jeeu- 

SALEM  founded  by  them. 
Amenophis  III.  Memnon  and  the  sounding  statue. 
Persecution  of  the  Egyptian  gods,  and  introduction  of  the 

worship  of  the  sun,  under  Bech  en  Aten.    (Amarna.) 

King  HoEUS,  the  Eevenger. 
Dyn.  XIX.  Sethos   I.  (Sethosis,  Sesostris.)     Conquest  of 

Canaan.  (Karnak.)     Joseph  and  his  brethren. 
Eamses  II.  the  Great.     Miamun.     War  against  the  Cheta. 

(Eamesseum.) 
The  (brick-making)   Israelites  (Thebes)  build  Pithom  and 

Eamses,  under  Eamses  II. 
Colonisation  of  Geeece  from  Eg}^t. 
Menepthes.     Exodus  of  the  Iseaelites  to  Sinai.    Moses 

before  Pharaoh,      Commencement    of  the  new  Sieius 

peeiod,  B.C.  1322. 
Dyn.  XX.  Eamses  III.  A  battle  from  Medinet  Habu. 
The  king  among  his  daughters.     The  riches  and  luxury  of 

Ehampsinitus.  (Medinet  Habu.) 
Dyn.  XXII.  Scheschenk  I.  (Shishak)  takes  possession  of 

Jerusalem.     (Thebes.) 
Dyn.  XXV.  Sabako,  the  Ethiopian,  rules  in  Egypt. 
Dyn.  XXYI.  Psammeticus,  the  friend  of  the  Greeks,  ele- 
vates art.     Eemoval  of  the  warrior  caste  to  Ethiopia. 


328  EGYPTIAN  MUSEUM. 

Dyn.  XXYII.  Cambtses  rages ;   he  destroys  temples  and 

statues. 
Dyn.  XXX.  jS'ectanebus.  (Philae.) 
Alexandee,  tlie  son  of  Ammon,  conquers  Egypt ;    builds 

Alexandria. 
Ptolemy  Philadelphus  founds  the  library. 
Cleopatea  and  Cjesaeion.  (Dendera.) 
Coronation  of  C^sae  Augustus.  (Philae.) 
Cheist  at  Heliopolis. 

This  selection  would  not,  indeed,  be  so  great,  if  we  had 
only  to  deal  with  existing  representations.  The  Old  Monarchy 
would  first  commence  with  the  4th  Dynasty,  and  would  en- 
tirely omit  the  Hyksos  period,  since  nothing  has  been  pre- 
served before  the  former  period,  or  from  the  time  of  the 
Hyksos. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Egjrptian  conceptions  of  art  might 
be  more  completely  represented,  and  each  single  representa- 
tion would  at  the  same  time  have  a  scientific  interest.  The 
following  provisional  selection  which  occurred  to  me  might, 
liowever,  be  increased,  and  altered  in  all  its  parts  from  the 
ample  supply  of  subjects  in  our  drawings,  which  are  1300  in 
number. 

Mythology. 

1.  The  great  and  minor  gods  ;  the  1st  and  2nd  Dynasty  of 

the  gods.  (Karnak.) 

2.  OsiEis  undertakes  the  government  of  the  lower  world. 

HoEUS  that  of  the  upper.    (Dendera.) 

3.  Triad  of  the  gods  from  This  and  Abydos.     Osiris,  Isis, 

Horus. 

4.  Triad  of  the  gods  from  Memphis.     Phtha,  Pasht,  Im- 

hotep. 

5 .  Triad  of  the  gods  from  Thebe  s  .   Ammon  Ea,  Mut,  Chensu . 

Old  Monaechy. 

King  Chufu  (Cheops)  beheading  his  enemies.    (Peninsula 
of  Sinai.) 


EGYPTIAN  MUSEUM.  329 

Scenes  from  private  life  of  the  4tli  and  5tli  Dynasties.  (Giseh 
and  Saqara.) 

Apappus  unites  the  two  crowns.  (Kosser  road.) 

Sesurtesen  I.,  of  the  12th  Dynasty,  beats  the  Ethiopians. 
(Florence.) 

Scenes  from  private  life  of  the  peaceful  flourishing  period  of 
the  12th  Dynasty.  Asiatic  attendants.  Precursors  of 
the  Hyksos  ;  wrestlers,  games,  a  hunt,  &c.  (Benihassan.) 
The  Colossus  dragged  by  men.  (Berscheh.) 

Immigrating  Hyksos  who  seek  for  protection.  (Benihassan.) 

New  Monaecht. 

The  working  of  the  stone  quarries  of  Memphis.  (Tura.) 
Amenophis  I.  and  Aahmesnefruari.  (Thebes.) 
TuTHMOSis  III.  and  his  sister.  (Thebes ;  Eome.) 
TuTHMOSis  III.     Tribute.     Erection  of  obelisks.  (Thebes.) 
Amenopkis  III.  (]Memnon)  and  his  consort  Tii  before  Am- 

mou  Ea.  (Thebes.) 
March  of  an  Ethiopian  queen  to  Egypt  under  Amentuanch. 

(Thebes.) 
Amenophis  IV.  (Bechenaten),  the  Sun-woeshippee.     His 
procession  with  the  queen  and  four  princesses  drawn  in 
a  chariot  to  the  Temple  of  the  Sun  in  Amarna.  (Grot- 
toes of  Amarna.) 
A  favourite  is  borne  on  the  shoulders  of  the  people  before 
Amenophis  IV.       Distribution  of   wreaths  of  honour 
among  the  w4iole  of  the  royal  family. 
HoEUS  running  to  Ammon.  (Karnak.) 
Sethos  I.  makes  war  upon  Canaan.  (Karnak.) 
Eamses  II.  Battle  against  the  Asiatic  Cheta.  (Eamesseum.) 
The  same  in  the  Tree  of  Life.  (Eamesseum.) 
The  same  triumphant.     Eoyal  procession.  (Eamesseum.) 
Eamses  III.  Battle  against  the  Enbu.  (Medinet  Habu.) 
The  same  among  his  daughters ;  he  plays  with  them.  (Me- 
dinet Habu.) 
Eamses  XII.  Procession  ofgreat  pomp  to  Ammon.  (Qurna.) 
PiscHEM,  the  Priest  King.  (Karnak.) 


330  EGYPTIAN  MITSEITM. 

ScHESCHENK  I.   (SKishak)  brings  the  prisoners  from  Pales- 
tine before  Ammon  (Karnak),  King  of  Judajh. 
Sabako,  the  Ethiopian.  (Thebes.) 
Tahraka,  the  Ethiopian.  (Barkal.) 
PsAMMETicus,  Amasis.  (Thebes.) 
Nectanebus.  (Thebes.) 
Alexakdee.     Philip  Aetd^tjs.  (Thebes.) 
Ptolemy  Philadelphus.  (Thebes.) 
Cleopatra  and  C^esarion.  (Dendera.) 
Coronation  of  C^sar  Augustus.  (Philae.) 
Ethiopian  subjects  from  Merge. 

This  selection  of  representations,  or  one  similar  to  this,  as 
large  as  the  partitions  in  the  walls  permit,  executed  in  the 
strict  Egyptian  classic  style,  with  the  full,  splendid  colouring 
of  the  original,  would  have  the  great  advantage,  beyond  all 
other  methods,  of  giving  the  spectator  some  idea  on  a  great 
scale  of  Egyptian  art ;  the  subjects  would  force  themselves 
on  his  criticism,  and  the  study  of  them,  in  conjunction  with 
the  smaller  and  isolated  original  monuments,  would  be  more 
complete.  Eor,  with  the  exception  of  the  tombs  which  we 
are  now  taking  to  pieces,  and  which  only  offer  the  most 
simple  subjects,  no  monument  is  of  sufficient  size  to  give  a 
notion  of  Egyptian  temples,  and  of  wall  decoration  in 
general,  in  which  grandeur  of  idea  and  dexterity  of  compo- 
sition is  frequently  displayed  with  a  feeling  for  general 
harmony  in  the  distribution  and  arrangement  of  the  whole, 
most  astonishing  to  the  attentive  observer.  Such  a  selection, 
of  what  is  most  beautiful  and  characteristic,  in  large  repre- 
sentations, capable  of  being  easily  surveyed,  would  perhaps 
be  of  more  service  than  any  other  thing  in  imparting  Egyptian 
science  to  a  larger  proportion  of  the  public,  and  at  the  same 
time  offers  the  advantage,  which  is  hardly  sufficiently  con- 
sidered at  the  present  day,  of  averting  all  invidious  criticisms 
of  the  representations  regarded  as  modern  works.  All  hast}- 
critics  would,  by  this  method,  be  referred  to  the  original, 
which  cannot  be  robbed  of  its  most  important  position  in  the 


EGYPTIAN  MUSEUM.  331 

artistic  history  of  the  human  race,  by  a  miserable  journalist. 
They  would  all  learn  that  before  venturing  to  criticise  the 
faithful  copy,  they  must  first  study  the  original,  for  if  we  can 
turn  the  attention  of  those  young  artists  who  have  studied 
for  three  years  to  record  these  things,  I  am  certain  that 
the  classic  purity  of  their  style  will  not  easily  be  attacked. 
The  novelty  of  the  idea,  and  the  effect  on  a  large  scale,  and 
as  a  whole,  could  not  fail  to  make  a  considerable  impression 
on  the  learned  and  unlearned  public,  and  the  series  of  sub- 
jects mentioned  above,  independent  of  their  execution,  would 
afibrd  satisfaction  to  intellectual  men,  and  more  especially 
to  the  King.  Lastly,  in  addition  to  this,  it  might  be  exe- 
cuted at  a  comparatively  small  expense,  on  account  of  the 
perfect  simplicity  of  the  design  and  colouring,  and  because 
all  expenditure  on  the  artistic  composition  has  been  pre- 
viously borne  by  the  ancient  Egyptians  themselves. 

The  representations  should  only  commence  at  a  certain 
height,  according  to  the  manners  of  the  Egyptians,  and  as  is 
most  convenient  to  our  own  purpose,  and  should  rest  on  a 
deep  band  below,  the  colour  of  which  ought  to  be  an  imita- 
tion of  wood  or  stone.  The  lofty  walls  should  probably  be 
partly  divided  one  above  the  other  into  several  sections,  and 
perhaps  the  whole  series  of  the  Egyptian  Pharaohs,  or  their 
Name- Shields  only,  might  be  introduced  in  the  frieze.  The 
ceilings  in  the  ante-chambers  might  be  blue,  with  gold  stars, 
the  usual  representation  of  the  Egyptian  heavens ;  and  in 
the  historical  saloons  there  might  be  the  long  series  of 
^'ultures,  with  outspread  wings,  the  symbol  of  victory,  with 
which  most  of  the  ceilings  of  the  temples  and  palaces  are 
decorated,  in  an  incomparably  splendid  manner.  Finally,  a 
certain  amount  of  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  must  not  be 
absent,  which  are  so  essentially  connected  with  all  Egyptian 
representations,  and  make  a  splendid  impression  in  variegated 
colours.  Modern  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  might  be  easily 
composed  for  the  doors,  and  the  central  stripes  of  the  ceil- 
ings, which  would  refer  in  the  ancient  Egyptian  fashion  to 
the  munificence  of  the  king,  the  locality,  the  period,  and  the 


332  EGTPTIA^^  MUSEUM. 

purpose  of  the  building.  How  magnificent  the  two  Egyptian 
rows  of  columns  would  then  look  in  the  centre  of  all,  with 
their  simplicity  and  rich  colouring ! 

Finally,  another  idea  might  be  carried  out,  perhaps,  in  the 
ante-chambers.  Yiews  of  the  Egyptian  localities  at  the 
present  day  might  be  introduced  upon  the  walls,  to  give  a 
notion  of  the  country  to  a  person  on  first  entering,  and  of 
the  state  of  the  buildings  from  which  the  ancient  monu- 
ments, by  which  they  are  surrounded,  are  taken.  These 
views  might  be  also  arranged  historically,  according  to  the 
principal  places  in  the  different  epochs  of  time.  But  here 
we  must  presume  that  the  spectator  possesses  some  of  the 
historical  knowledge  which  we  may  hope  to  see  generally 
diftused.  On  that  account  it  would  be  more  useful  to 
attempt  a  geographical  sequence,  and  we  might  embrace  the 
views  of  Alexandria,  Cairo,  the  Pyramids  of  Giseh,  Siut, 
Benihassan,  Abydos,  Karnak,  Qurna,  the  Cataracts  of  As- 
suan,  Korusko,  Wadi  Haifa,  Sedeinga,  Semneh,  Dougola, 
Barkal,  Meroe,  Chartum,  Sennar,  and  Sai'but  el  Chadem,  iu 
Arabia  Petrea. 

Besides  all  this,  a  most  rich,  interesting,  and  at  the  same 
time  useful,  selection  of  the  subjects  and  occupations  of 
private  life  might  be  introduced  in  the  lateral  chambers,  all 
of  them  copied  from  the  original,  on  a  large  scale,  by  which 
means  we  might  facilitate  and  excite  botli  an  inviting  and 
effective  mode  of  comprehending  that  portion  of  the  col- 
lection of  antiquities  which  refer  to  private  life. 


LETTEE  XXXVII. 

Jaffa,  :th  October,  1845. 

We  proceeded  rapidly  in  taking  the  tombs  to  pieces  ; 
nevertheless,  as  was  to  be  expected,  the  most  manifold  ob- 
stacles were  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  transport  and  em- 
barkation.    The  export  of  the  whole  collection  of  monuments 


jomyEr  xnr.ouGn  the  delta.  333 

even  then  required  a  special  permit  from  tlie  Viceroy  ;  I 
therefore  set  out  on  the  '29th  of  August  for  Alexandria, 
in  order  to  take  leave  of  Mohammed  Ali,  and  availed  myself 
of  this  opportunity  to  give  an  official  termination  to  our 
mission. 

The  Pascha  received  me  with  his  former  kindness,  and  im- 
mediately issued  the  most  distinct  commands  with  respect  to 
the  export  of  the  collection,  which  he  presented  to  H.M.  our 
King  in  a  special  letter,  which  was  handed  to  me.  As  soon  as 
all  the  preparations  were  accomplished  I  returned  to  Cairo, 
and  there  made  tlie  last  arrangements  respecting  the  trans- 
port of  the  stone-boat  to  Alexandria,  and  then,  on  the 
25th  September,  started  ^^'ith  Bethmann  for  Damietta.  On 
the  road  thither  I  visited  several  ruins  of  towns  in  the  eastern 
part  of  the  Delta,  such  as  those  of  Ateib  (Athribis),  Sajia- 
NTJD  (Sebennytos),  Behcet  el  hager  (Iseum),  but  except 
the  high  mounds  of  rubbish,  composed  of  Nile  mud  and  pots- 
herds, which  generally  indicate  liistorical  sites,  we  everywhere 
found  only  a  few  blocks,  all  that  remained  of  the  ancient 
temples.  In  San,  the  ancient  renowned  Tanis,  whither  I 
made  a  last  excursion  from  Damietta  across  Lake  Menzaleh, 
the  foundation  of  a  temple  of  Ramses  II.  alone  remains,  and 
about  twelve  or  fourteen  small  granite  obelisks,  belonging  to 
the  same  king,  are  preserved,  some  entire  and  some  in  frag- 
ments. 

On  the  1st  of  October  we  went  from  Damietta,  and  em- 
barking in  the  roads  of  Ezbc,  the  following  morning  set  sail 
for  the  Syrian  coast.  We  had  an  almost  incessant  contrary 
wind,  and  cruised  for  a  wliole  day  in  front  of  Ascalon,  situated 
picturesquely  on  lofty  sea  clijSs  ;  we  only  landed  yesterday  in 
the  Holy  Land,  on  the  beach  of  Joppa. 


LETTEE  XXXYIII. 

Nazareth,  9th  November,  1845. 
You  will  not,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  receive  my  last  letter  of 
the  26th  October  from  Jerusalem,  as  the  courier  of  our  consul, 


334  JEEUSALEM. 

Dr.  Schulz,  Iq  whose  cTiarge  I  gave  it,  with  five  other  letters, 
was  attacked  by  robbers  at  Caesarea,  on  the  road  to  Berut, 
maltreated,  and  robbed  of  all  the  despatches,  as  well  as  of  a 
small  amount  of  money  which  he  had  on  his  person.  There 
is  great  disorganisation  in  this  country.  The  Turkish  autho- 
rities, to  whom  the  land  has  been  again  handed  over  by 
Christian  valour,  are  both  lazy,  malevolent,  and  impotent, 
while  Ibrahim  Pascha  knew  at  least  how  to  preserve  order 
and  security,  so  far  as  his  own  government  extended. 

"We  spent  nearly  three  weeks  in  Jerusalem,  part  of  which 
time  I  passed  in  becoming  better  acquainted  with  the  state 
of  religious  matters  at  the  present  day,  a  subject  daily  be- 
coming of  greater  importance  ;  partly  in  makiug  some  antiqua- 
rian and  topographical  researches.  These  delightful  days 
were  rendered  peculiarly  valuable  and  instructive  by  the  ex- 
treme amiability  of  Bishop  Alexander,  who  overtook  us  with 
Abeken  from  Jaffa,  and  was  willing  to  impart  all  that  he 
knew  ;  and  by  tlie  scientific  abihty  of  Dr.  Schulz,  with  whom 
I  had  been  on  terms  of  friendship  since  our  mutual  re- 
sidence in  Paris,  in  the  years  1834  and  1835.  An  excur- 
sion to  Jericho,  the  Jordan,  and  the  Dead  Sea,  and  back  by 
San  Saba,  formed  an  interesting  episode.  My  journal  of  this 
expedition,  which  I  wrote  very  fully,  was,  however,  contained 
in  that  letter,  and  will  probably  never  reappear,  so  that  I  can 
but  imperfectly  restore  it  now. 

The  4.th  of  November  we  left  the  Holy  City.  We  had 
some  difficulty  in  procuring  horses  or  mules  on  account 
of  the  war  the  Pascha  of  Jerusalem  was  carrying  on  with 
Hebron,  which  was  assuming  a  more  serious  aspect.  We 
spent  the  first  night  after  leaving  Jerusalem  in  a  tent  in 
BiKEH.  The  second  day  we  proceeded  byBEXHiN  (Bethel), 
'AiN  EL  HAEAMIEH  (the  Eobbers'  spring),  and  Selun 
(Silo)  to  jN'ablus  (Sichem,  Neapolis),  and  the  same  evening 
ascended  Gtaeizim,  the  holy  mount  of  the  Samaritans,  whose 
remaining  population  (about  70  men,  or  150  souls)  we  be- 
came somewhat  better  acquainted  with  the  following  morn- 
ing.    They  still  continue  to  be  shunned  by  the  Jews,  and 


XAZiJlETH.  335 

have  as  little  communication  with  the  Christians  and  Moham- 
medans. 

On  Garizim  we  saw  the  bare  rocky  surface,  surrounded  by 
some  remains  of  an  ancient  wall,  where  these  Samaei  still, 
as  in  past  ages,  annually  offer  up  the  sacrifice  of  sheep  to 
their  God.  The  following  morning,  after  we  had  visited  the 
Samaritan  place  of  worship,  in  which  we  were  shown  the 
old  Samaritan  manuscript  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  had  seen 
Jacob's  well,  and  Joseph's  tomb  surrounded  by  vine  branches, 
we  rode  on  farther,  with  an  armed  attendant  of  Soliman  Bey's, 
in  whose  house  we  were  lodging,  and  proceeded  first  to  Se- 
BASTiEH  (Sebaste,  the  ancient  Samaria),  where  we  saw  the 
ruins  of  the  beautiful  old  church  from  the  period  of  the  Cru- 
saders, said  to  be  built  over  the  tomb  of  John  the  Baptist. 
We  spent  the  night  in  the  woody  Gennin  (Egennin). 
Tlience  our  road  led  through  the  wide  and  fertile,  but  never- 
theless barren,  plain  of  Jesreel  (Esdraelon),  the  great  bloody 
plain  of  Palestine,  to  Zekin  and  the  beautiful  spring  (Ain 
GuLUT,  Goliath's  spring),  where  Naboth's  vineyard  was 
situated,  and  where  the  whole  house  of  Ahab  was  murdered  ; 
then  to  Gebel  Dah'i,  little  Heemox,  beyond  which  Taboe 
(Gebel  e'  Tub),  distinguished  by  its  cupola-like  form  and 
isolated  position,  rose  up  and  arrested  our  attention,  until  we 
once  more  rode  into  the  mountains  to  Nazaeeth,  beautifully 
situat<?d  in  a  mountain  hollow,  like  an  ampliitheatre.  Yes- 
terday we  made  an  excursion  in  the  morning  from  this  place 
over  Mount  Tabor  to  Tibeeias,  on  Lake  Genezaret,  and 
have  only  just  returned.  In  spite  of  my  endeavours  to  the 
contrary,  we  were  compelled  to  take  a  body-guard  of  armed 
Arabs  with  us  thither,  as  we  did  to  the  Dead  Sea  ;  and  we, 
in  fact,  encountered  various  groups  of  low  Bedouin  rabble  in 
their  picturesque  variegated  costume,  whom  I  should  have 
been  sorry  to  have  met  alone,  most  of  them  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  beautiful  wooded  Tabor,  where  they  were  lying  on 
the  road,  or  riding  past  across  the  plain. 


336  JOTIENET  TO  DAMASCUS. 


LETTEE  XXXIX. 

Smyrna^  1th  December^  1845. 

From  JS'azaretli  we  proceeded  down  the  plain  of  Jeseeel 
to  Mount  Caemel,  where  we  passed  the  night  in  the  mag- 
nificent convent  which  has  been  newlj  erected.  The  follow- 
ing morning  we  descended  from  this  promontory,  command- 
ing the  wide  ocean  and  its  fragrant  coast,  to  Haipha 
(Hepha),  crossed  over  the  bay  to  Acca  (Ako,  Ptolemais), 
and  then  rode  along  the  coast  on  the  damp  sandy  shore, 
keeping  the  mountain  range  constantly  in  view,  and  by  Sue 
(Tyrus)  and  Saida  (Sidon)  to  Beeut  (Berytos),  where  we 
met  with  a  kind  reception  from  the  Prussian  consul-general, 
Herr  von  Wildenbruch. 

On  the  15th  of  November,  we  started  from  Berut  for  Da- 
mascus. I  left  G-abre  Mariam  behind  with  Herr  von  Wil- 
denbruch, and  only  took  \\\i\\  me  my  faithful  Berber,  Ibrahim, 
and  a  Kawass.  The  road,  after  leaving  the  sand-hills  imme- 
diately surrounding  Berut,  rises  directly  up  these  glorious 
mountains,  abounding  in  flowers,  trees,  and  springs  of  water. 
We  crossed  it  nearly  on  the  frontier  between  the  territories 
of  the  Druses  and  the  Maronites.  We  ascended  all  day,  part 
of  the  time  on  terribly  bad  roads  cut  in  the  rock,  and  spent 
the  night  on  this  side  of  the  mountain  ridge ;  we  did  not 
reach  the  summit  till  the  following  morning,  and  now  had  a 
wide  prospect  over  the  fertile  plain  of  the  Leontes,  which 
separates  Libanon  and  Anti-Libanon,  and  which,  with  the 
brief  interruption  of  Gebel  e'  Scheikh  (Hermon),  with  its 
ramJfications  protruding  upwards,  it  forms  one  single  huge 
cleft  through  the  whole  of  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  and  con- 
tinues across  the  Dead  Sea,  as  far  as  the  Grulf  of  Akaba  and 
the  Red  Sea.  We  descended  to  Mekseh,  took  our  breakfast 
on  one  of  its  flat  roofs,  and  intended  to  have  cut  across  from 
this  point,  in  a  south-easterly  direction,  through  the  valley  to 
Megdel  and  Aithi,  but,  in  preference,  we  took  a  circuitous 
road  towards  the  north  to  Zachleh,  which  is  one  of  the 


ZACULEH.      NOAE's  TOMB.  337 

largest  and  most  flourislimg  towns  of  Christian  Libanon. 
( )n  the  road  we  met  a  troop  of  soldiers,  who  were  escorting 
8ome  thousands  of  weapons  on  asses,  which  had  been  taken 
the  previous  day  from  the  inhabitants  of  Zachleh.  The  dis- 
arming of  the  whole  of  Libanon  by  Schekib  EfFendi  had  com- 
menced from  the  south,  and,  as  is  well  known,  was  executed 
with  the  greatest  prejudice  against  the  unfortunate  Chris- 
tians, who  were  miserably  sacrificed  to  a  piece  of  reckless 
commercial  policy.  In  order  to  disarm  Zachleh,  which  is  a 
strong  and  influential  post,  it  had  been  besieged  by  two 
hundred  regular  troops,  some  of  whom  we  still  found  sta- 
tioned there,  and  also  a  countless  multitude  of  Bedouius  had 
been  allowed  to  encamp  in  the  great  valley  of  the  Beqa'a, 
whose  aid  against  the  Christians  they  would  have  availed 
tiiemselves  of  in  case  of  necessity ;  these  last,  however,  had 
again  withdra^NTi.  We  inquired  in  the  town,  which  was  still 
iu  a  state  of  great  excitement,  after  Bishop  Theophilus,  who 
wad  described  to  us  as  both  a  vigorous  and  heroic  champion 
in  the  fight ;  but  unfortunately  he  had  just  set  ofl'  for  Beirut. 
After  we  had  again  departed,  we  met  on  the  road  a  German 
Catliolic  priest,  who  accompanied  us  to  the  adjoining  place, 
Mo'ALLAQiL,  and  told  us  much  of  the  cruelties  whicli  the  Turks 
liad  practised  here,  as  elsewhere,  on  the  miserable  inhabitants. 
Several  hundred  more  muskets  had  been  demanded  than 
really  existed  in  the  whole  place,  and  the  old  Sheikhs,  who 
ought  to  have  supplied  them,  were  cudgelled  till  the  missing 
muskets  had  been  purchased  by  the  inhabitants  at  a  high 
price,  and  with  great  difficulty,  in  the  camp  of  the  Turks 
themselves. 

From  ZacUeh  we  went  to  Keeak,  in  order  to  visit  the 
tomb  of  Xoah  at  that  spot.  We  found  a  long,  narrow 
building,  of  well  joined  square  blocks,  and  beside  it  a  small 
building  with  a  cupola,  surrounded  by  trees,  from  which 
tliere  was  a  beautiful  prospect  of  the  plain,  and  of  Anti- 
Libanon.  Through  a  window,  hung  with  votive  shreds, 
I  saw  a  tomb  built  up  in  the  usual  Oriental  form  within  the 
loug  vaulted  room,  and  I  was  not  a  little  surprised  to  see, 

z 


S38  ANTI-LIBAXO^'. 

through  the  windows  in  the  whole  length  of  the  bunding,  a 
constant  continuation  of  this  same  tomb,  which  seemed  to 
have  neither  a  beginning  nor  an  end.  At  length  the  door- 
keeper arrived,  and,  to  mj  astonishment,  I  was  cominced  that 
the  tomb  was  40  ells  long,  bj  exact  measurement  31  metres 
77'  (131  feet  English),  therefore  somewhat  more  than  40 
ordinary  Egyptian  ells.*  The  case  assumes  an  air  of  pro- 
bability, as  this  measurement  of  the  length  of  JS'oah's  body 
is  exactly  proportionate  to  the  length  of  his  life,  one  thou- 
sand years. 

Erom  Kerak  we  at  length  turned  to  our  right,  into  the 
plain  across  to  Tel  Emdieh,  we  then  turned  to  our  left  into 
a  valley,  which  again  conducted  us  directly  northward,  and 
at  sunset  arrived  at  El  'Aiif,  a  small  village  near  a  spring, 
situated  at  the  upper  end  of  the  valley,  at  a  considerable 
height  above  the  great  plain.  Erom  our  having  followed  the 
circuitous  road  to  Zachleh  and  Kerak,  we  were  somewhat 
beyond  the  day  that  we  had  calculated  on,  and  therefore 
determined,  to  the  disappointment  of  our  mule  driver,  to  go 
on  still  farther  to  Zebedexi,  which  was  said  to  be  situated 
on  the  eastern  decli\^ty  of  Anti-Libanon,  two  hours  from 
hence.  As  none  of  our  people  had  ever  gone  this  road 
across  the  mountains,  we  took  a  guide  with  us,  who  very 
soon  led  us  out  of  our  valley,  which  ascended  towards  the 
north,  between  the  lower  mountains  and  the  principal  ridge, 
and  led  us  up  a  steep,  toilsome,  and  endless  rocky  path  on 
our  right  hand.  The  moon  rose,  hours  passed  on,  and  the 
ardently-desired  Zebedeni  would  never  make  its  appearance. 

*  Burckhardt  must  have  been  mistaken  when  (Trav.  in  Syr.,  p.  5) 
he  states  that  the  tomb  of  Noah  was  only  10  feet  long,  although  the 
same  statement  is  repeated  by  Schubert  (Reise  in  das  Morgenland, 
vol.  iii.,  p.  340).  It  is  well  known  how  frequently  the  number  40  is 
found  employed  by  the  Hebrews  as  an  indeterminate  multiple.  The 
same  custom  seems  to  have  been  peculiar  to  all  Semetic  nations;  it 
may  at  least  be  pointed  out  frequently,  and  at  all  periods,  among 
the  Phoenicians  and  Arabians;  even  the  numerical  words  for  4  and  40 
in  these  languages  indicate  the  universal  idea  of  multitude.  See  my 
Sprachvergleichenden  Abhandlungen,  Berlin,  1836,  p.  104,  139,  and  the 
Chronologie  der  jEgi/pter,   vol.  i.,  p.  15. 


THE  BAEADA.  839 

At  length  we  stood  on  the  precipitous  border  of  another  deep 
valley,  up  which  we  were  compelled  to  clamber  painfully  on 
foot,  for  another  whole  hour,  leading  our  animals;  and  it 
was  not  before  midnight  that  we  reached  Zebedeni,  after  a 
march  of  six  hours.  All  here  were  plunged  in  the  most 
profound  slumber;  we  were  obliged  to  knock  at  several 
houses  to  inquire  our  road  to  the  convent,  where  we  hoped 
to  find  some  shelter.  At  length  we  were  told  that  there  was 
indeed  a  church,  but  no  room  in  the  adjoining  convent  to 
receive  us.  We  therefore  quartered  ourselves  in.  the  last 
house,  which  was  opened  to  us  after  knocking  at  it  for  a 
long  time.  It  only  contained  one  large  room,  but  there  was 
sufficient  space  for  ourselves  and  our  servants,  after  the 
whole  of  the  numerous  famdy  of  men,  women,  and  children, 
had  retired  to  one  comer.  The  people  were,  however, 
friendly  and  courteous,  the  next  morning  received  their 
backshish,  and  took  leave  of  us,  with  an  invitation  to  repeat 
the  \-isit  on  our  return.  We  now  proceeded  down  the 
beautiful  fertile  valley  of  Zebedeni  towards  the  south,  for  an 
hour  and  a  half,  when  we  again  turned  eastward,  into  the 
precipitous  rocky  defile,  where  the  rippling  brook,  beside 
which  we  had  hitherto  been  marching,  swelled  into  a  small 
river,  called  Baeada,  opening  a  path  for  itself,  in  most 
beautiful  and  picturesque  cascades,  through  luxuriant  ver- 
dure, to  the  great  plain  of  Damascus.  We  rode  for  several 
hours  along  its  precipitous  banks,  sometimes  in  the  very 
bed  itself,  till  we  came  to  a  lofty  pointed  arch,  which,  as  a 
bridge,  conducted  us  from  the  left  to  the  right  bank.  Here 
the  road  went  up  the  mountain,  and  disclosed  a  number 
of  ancient  rock-tombs,  opposite  the  continuation  of  the 
steep  rock-precipice  we  had  just  left.  Soon  afterwards  the 
wild  ravine  opened  into  a  broader  valley,  through  which 
the  rushing  river  winds  more  quietly,  passing  several  plea- 
santly situated  villages.  It  had  hitherto  pierced  in  an 
easterly  direction,  through  a  mountain  ridge,  passing  from 
north  to  south,  from  which  it  now  issued  through  a  lofty 
rock-gate.    Two  single  mountain  masses  rose  up  like  mighty 

z2 


340  DAMASCUS. 

pylons  towards  the  east ;  on  the  summit  of  the  one  to  the 
south,  rising  almost  perpendicularly  several  thousand  feet, 
was  a  small  sepulchral  edifice,  surrounded  by  trees.  This 
place  is  worshipped  as  the  tomb  of  Abel,  Nebbi  Habil,  who, 
according  to  tradition,  was  buried  here.  The  summit  is  said 
to  be  almost  inaccessible,  and  so  it  appeared,  at  least  from 
this  side,  we  therefore  omitted  to  investigate  whether  a 
tomb,  40  ells  in  length,  had  been  also  erected  to  the  youth 
Habel.  At  the  foot  of  the  mount  the  ancient  city  of  Abila 
was  formerly  situated,  whose  name  has  probably  given  rise 
to  the  story. 

We  now  quitted  for  several  hours  the  enchanting  valley  of 
the  Barada,  and  rode  over  bare  rocky  plateaus,  till  at  GtEDI- 
DEH  we  again  descended  to  it,  and  rested  a  short  time  upon 
its  bank,  in  the  shadow  of  tall  plane-trees  and  silver  poplars 
of  changing  hue.  At  length  we  once  more  quitted  the 
river,  which  ]iad  become  gradually  fuller,  and  more  rapid, 
hy  the  addition  of  various  brooks,  and  ascending  a  high 
mountain,  we  suddenly  stood  in  front  of  the  illimitable 
plain,  which  lay  spread  out  before  us  unbounded  by  moun- 
tain ranges,  and  covered  like  one  large  garden  with  innu- 
merable leafy  green  trees,  and  intersected  by  roads  and 
streams.  In  the  midst  of  this  garden,  and  immediately  at 
our  feet,  lay  glorious  Damascus,  with  its  cupolas,  mina- 
rets, and  terraces.  We  knew  that  we  were  about  to  see  one 
of  the  most  celebrated  prospects  in  the  world,  but  we  were, 
nevertheless,  astonished,  and  found  our  expectations  siir- 
passed  by  the  magnificent  picture  which,  like  a  stroke  of 
enchantment,  unfolded  itself  before  us  in  the  direction  of  the 
lo'vely  but  narrow  valleys,  alternating  with  barren,  rocky 
deserts.  We  lingered  nearly  an  hour  at  this  point,  which 
has  been  rendered  prominent  by  a  magnificent  dome,  resting 
upon  four  isolated  pillars,  called  Qubbet  e'  Nase,  the  "  vic- 
torious cupola." 

Damascus  is  one  of  the  holiest  and  most  lauded  cities 
of  the  East.  The  prophet  Mohammed  considered  it  thrice 
blessed,  because  the  angels  spread  their  wings  over  the  city, 


DA^iAscrs.  341 

and  at  the  glorious  sight  are  said  not  to  have  taken  pos- 
session of  it  for  this  reason,  that  one  Paradise  only  is  in- 
tended for  man,  and  that  one  he  will  find  in  heaven.  In  the 
Koran,  God  swears  by  the  fig  and  the  olive-tree,  that  is  by 
Damascus  and  Jerusalem,  and  the  Arabian  geographers  call 
it  the  mole  on  the  cheek  of  the  World,  the  plumage  of  the 
peacock  of  Paradise,  the  necklace  of  beauty,  and  among  the 
Sultan's  titles,  "the  Paradise-scented  Dimischk."*  In  ac- 
cordance with  the  legend  of  the  Oriental  Christians,  Adam 
was  here  formed  out  of  the  reddish  earth  of  the  district ;  and 
tradition  places  the  spot  where  Cain  slew  Abel  on  Mount 
Kasitjn,  near  this. 

The  Barada,  which  we  had  followed  from  its  first  source, 
enters  the  great  plain  a  little  south  of  Damascus,  turns  to 
the  left  towards  the  city,  through  which  it  flows  in  seven 
branches,  and  then  passes  into  a  lake.  It  was  the  gold- 
streaming  Chrysorrhoas  of  the  ancients,  the  much-praised 
Farfar  of  the  Eastern  poets.  It  was  this  river  that,  calling 
forth  the  whole  idea  of  Paradise,  gave  at  all  times  to  this 
most  ancient  city — known  even  by  Abraham,  and  conquered 
by  David — its  great  importance.  Damascus  was  formerly 
one  of  the  chief  seats  of  Arabian  literature  and  learning,  and 
a  disciple  of  the  Prophet  is  said  to  have  given  instruction  in 
reading  the  Koran  to  1600  of  the  faithful  at  once  (after  the 
method  of  Joseph  Lancaster)  in  the  great  mosque  of  the 
Ommiads.  The  city  at  first  seemed  but  little  to  correspond 
with  the  glorious  country  surrounding  it.  "We  entered 
streets  of  considerable  breadth,  but  bare,  closed  in  by  low 
houses,  whose  mud  walls  had  small  doors,  and  scarcely  any 
windows.  None  of  the  beautiful  wood-carvings  of  Cairo,  or 
stone  decorations,  were  to  be  seen  on  the  windows  and  doors. 
Some  of  the  mosques  and  fountains  which  we  passed  were 
the  only  exceptions ;  and  the  number  of  single  trees  in  the 
streets  and  in  the  squares  had  a  pleasant  appearance.  Far- 
ther in  the  interior  of  the  city  we  came  to  the  long  bazaar, 

*   See  V.  Hammer,  Geschichte  des  Osmanischen  Reichs,  Div.  ii., 
p.  482. 


342  DAMASCUS. 

consisting  mostly  of  massive  building.  The  well-filled  booths, 
the  abundance  of  fruits  of  every  kind  that  were  heaped  up, 
finally,  the  crowd  of  people,  of  all  ages  and  of  every  descrip- 
tion, in  all  sorts  of  costumes,  and  the  endless  turnings  from 
one  street  into  the  other,  impressed  us  with  the  feeling  that 
we  were  in  a  large  and  wealthy  capital  of  the  East.  "We 
first  rode  to  our  Prussian  consul,  who  was,  however,  pros- 
trated with  fever.  "VVe  therefore  proceeded  still  farther,  to 
an  inn,  lately  established.  Here  also,  as  in  the  consul's 
house,  we  passed  through  a  narrow  door  in  a  plain  outer 
wall  into  a  small  dark  court,  and  out  of  that  into  another 
low  and  angular  passage.  But  then  a  beautiful  spacious 
court  was  disclosed,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  magnificent 
shining  marble  walls,  in  the  centre  of  which  was  a  fountain, 
overshadowed  by  tall  trees.  On  the  farther  side  was  a 
vaulted  niche,  the  entrance-arch  of  which  was  five-and-twenty 
feet  high.  To  this  we  ascended  by  some  marble  steps,  and 
now  found  ourselves  in  a  somewhat  narrow  but  lofty  saloon, 
which  was  open  to  the  court,  and  had  commodious  divans 
placed  along  the  inner  walls.  On  the  left  of  this  niche  was 
the  dining-room;  on  the  right  a  staircase,  by  which  we 
ascended  to  the  rooms  above,  which  we  occupied.  They  were 
wainscoted  all  round,  and  the  walls,  as  well  as  the  ceiling, 
were  adorned  with  a  variety  of  decorations  painted  in  gold 
and  silver.  "We  afterwards  saw  several  more  of  the  finest 
houses  in  Damascus,  all  of  which  appeared  externally  almost 
mean,  but  in  the  interior  displayed  Oriental  splendour  more 
like  a  fairy  tale  than  anything  which  I  have  since  seen  in 
these  countries.  And  occasionally,  even  at  the  present  day, 
they  build  their  houses  in  this  style,  at  least  if  we  may  judge 
by  some  of  these  small  palaces,  which  were  only  erected 
between  ten  and  twenty  years  ago.  There  is  a  lavish  display 
of  marble,  and  other  costly  stones,  in  these  courts,  halls,  and 
rooms,  such  as  with  us  is  only  seen  in  royal  palaces.  The 
beautiful  open  hall,  which  is  always  formed  in  front  simply 
by  a  lofty  arch,  sometimes  appears  on  two,  or  even  three, 
sides  of  the  court,  and  not  unfrequently  has  also  a  small 


DAMASCUS.  348 

fountain  to  itself,  independent  of  the  larger  one,  whicli  is 
never  absent,  and  is  usually  shaded  by  trees,  which  grow  up 
from  the  midst  of  the  slabs  of  marble. 

The  following  day  we  spent  entirely  in  viewing  the  city, 
and  especially  the  rich  bazaars,  in  which  beautiful  silks  em- 
broidered in  gold  and  silver,  splendid  weapons,  and  other 
brilliant  articles  of  Eastern  luxury  are  exposed  for  sale.  "We 
visited  tlie  great  Khan,  with  its  nine  immense  domed  cham* 
hers,  a  kind  of  exchange  frequented  by  the  most  considerable 
merchants ;  then  the  mighty  Mosque  of  the  Ommiads,  re- 
garded as  very  sacred,  whose  Hall  of  Pillars  is  550  feet  long 
and  150  broad.  It  was  formerly  a  Christian  church,  which 
itself  was  said  to  have  been  built  on  the  foundation  of  a 
Eoman  temple  to  Juno.  "We  were  not  permitted  to  enter,  and 
therefore  could  only  survey  it  through  the  numerous  open 
gates,  and  were  even  prevented  from  mounting  on  the  roof  of 
a  neighbouring  house  by  a  fanatical  Mussulman,  so  that  we 
were  obliged  to  defer  doing  so  till  our  return  on  the  following 
day.  "We  were  shown  the  enormous  plane-tree,  thirty-five 
feet  in  circumference,  standing  in  the  middle  of  a  street  near 
a  fountain,  called  after  an  old  Sheikh,  Ali,  who  is  said  to  have 
planted  the  tree.  AV^e  also  stepped  into  the  inviting  coffee- 
houses on  the  cool  bank  of  the  river.  Next  morning  we  rode 
to  the  southern  gate  of  the  city,  called  Bab  Allah,  to  which 
a  street  above  an  hour  long  leads  in  a  direct  line  between 
magnificent  shops,  mosques,  workshops,  and  other  build- 
ings; this  is  probably  the  so-called  "  Straight  -  street" 
(77  pvnT)  rj  xaKovufvrj,  evOe'ia)  iu  which  Saul  dwclt  wheu  he  was 
converted  by  Ananias.     (Acts  ix.  11.) 

On  the  road  we  stopped  at  the  small  cupola  building  which 
is  usually  regarded  as  the  tomb  of  Saladin,  but  which  is  only 
a  place  of  worship  built  to  his  honour  by  Sultan  Selim.  The 
real  tomb  is  said  to  be  twelve  hours  to  the  south  of  Damas- 
cus, near  a  place  called  Gibba  ;  this  was  confirmed  by  the 
Sheikh  whom  we  met  here.  From  Bab  Allah,  the  "  gate  of 
God,"  through  which. the  pilgrims  to  Jerusalem  and  Mecca 


344  DEPAETUEE  FEOM  DAMASCUS. 

pass,  we  rode  to  tlie  left  round  the  city  tliroiigh  the  plea- 
sant gardens  of  olives,  poplars,  mulberries,  and  gigantic 
apricot-trees ;  these  last  produce  those  delicious  apricots 
which,  when  dried,  are  sent  to  all  quarters  of  the  world 
under  the  appellation  of  Misch-misch.  "We  then  came  to  the 
cemetery  of  the  Jews,  where  a  corpse  was  being  lowered  into 
the  grave ;  and,  according  to  the  custom  here,  the  virtues  of 
the  deceased  were  called  to  mind  and  eulogised.  Not  far 
off  is  situated  the  Christian  cemetery,  near  which  the  spot 
is  marked  where  Saul  was  struck  to  the  ground  by  the 
heavenly  vision.  Thence  our  road  led  over  a' small  bridge 
to  the  city  wall,  in  which,  near  a  gate  now  built  up,  we 
were  shown  a  Tsandow  from  which  Paul  was  let  down.  We 
followed  the  wall  as  far  as  a  beautiful  ancient  Eoman  gate 
with  three  entrances,  the  jporta  orientalis,  through  which  we 
came  to  the  house  of  Ananias,  with  the  rock-cave,  which  is 
now  converted  into  a  Latin  chapel.  We  then  rode  through 
the  gardens  of  fruit  and  olive-trees  to  a  neighbouring  village, 
Gob  A,  where  Elisha  crowned  King  Hazael  of  Syria,  and 
where  Elijah  was  fed  by  a  raven  in  a  chamber  of  the  rock. 

On  our  departure  from  Damascus  we  also  visited  Salhieh, 
a  place  in  the  neighbourhood,  the  tomb  of  the  greatest  of  the 
Arabian  mysticists,  the  celebrated  Sheikh  Mohieddin  el 
Aeabi,  and  were  here  also  reminded  of  his  teacher,  Schedeli, 
who  invented  the  beverage  of  coiFee,  and  who  was  in  the  habit 
of  keeping  his  disciples  awake  with  it. 

In  Palestine  we  had  wandered  among  the  tombs  of  Abra- 
ham, Isaac,  and  Jacob,  of  Eebecca,  Leah,  and  Eachel,  of 
Joseph,  David,  Solomon,  and  the  prophets,  of  Christ,  his 
parents  and  disciples.  Here  we  came  to  the  tombs  of  ISToah 
and  Abel,  and  soon  after  to  Seth  also,  and  set  foot  on  the 
fields  of  Paradise,  which  belonged  to  the  first  pair.  What  a 
strange  sensation  to  travel  in  these  regions,  where  tradition 
deals  with  such  materials ! 

We  halted  the  first  night  after  our  departure  in  Suk  el 
Eaeada,   at  the  foot  of  Nebbi  Habil.      Prom  this  point 


EOMAX  I>'SCEIPTIOyS.  345 

we  again  crossed  over  the  old  pointed  arch  bridge,  which, 
like  most  earlj  structures  in  this  country,  is  said  to  have 
been  built  by  the  Empress  Helena;  and  this  time  we  ex- 
amined the  ancient  rock-tombs  somewhat  more  accurately. 
We  reached  them  by  a  difficult  path,  partly  by  an  ancient 
aqueduct  hewn  in  the  rock.  Some  of  these  tombs  were 
planned  in  a  singular  manner,  and  appeared  to  be  very  old ; 
farther  on  followed  several  from  the  Greek  period,  with  bas- 
reliefs  and  gable-ends,  and  some  steles  upon  the  rock,  on 
which  we  were  still  able  to  decipher  some  G-reek  words. 
jN'ot  far  from  this,  up  the  river,  we  found  a  mighty  Eoman 
work,  the  great,  ancient,  now  deserted  high-road  hewn  for  a 
considerable  distance  through  the  living  rock,  and  two  Roman 
inscriptions,  each  in  two  copies,  on  the  flat  lofty  wall  behind. 
The  longer  one  ran  as  follows : — iMPerator  CAEsar  Marcus 

AYEELiuS  A>'TONINVS  |  AVGUStuS  AEMENIACYS  ET  IMPCrator 
CAESar  Lucius  AVEElIus  YEEVS  AYGUStuS  AE  I  MENIACYS 
VIAM  FLYMINIS  |  YI  ABEYPTAM  INTEECISO  |  MONTE  EES- 
TITYEEYNT    PEE    |    lYLium    YEEYM    LEGatum    PEO    PEactore 

PEOYiNciae  |  STEisa  et  amicym  syym  |  impendiis  abile- 
NOEYM.      The   other :  —  peo    salyte   iMPeratoris   AYGusti 

ANTONI     I     NI    et    YEEI     Marcus    YO     I    LYSIYS     MAXIMYS    | 

1  (ceuturio)  LEGionis  xyi  Flaviae  Firmae  |  qyi  opeei  in  | 
STiTiT  Yota  suscepto.* 

Since  that  time  the  rock  has  no  doubt  been  twice  hollowed 
out  and  broken  away  by  the  torrent,  which  has  certainly 
c^reat  force  every  spring ;  for,  in  the  immediate  neighbour- 
hood of  the  second  copy  of  the  two  inscriptions,  the  rock- 
road  is  terminated  by  a  sudden  precipice.  By  four  o'clock 
we  had  mounted  Anti-Libanon,  and  at  Nebbi  Schit,  that  is 
Seth,  we  again  entered  the  great  plain  of  the  Leontes. 
We  immediately  went  in  search  of  the  tomb  of  Nebbi  Schit, 
and  were  not  a  little  surprised  to  find  here  also,  as  at  Nebbi 
Xoeh,  a  solid  ancient  Arabian  building,  with  a  small  cupola 

*  Compare  Krafft,  Topographie  Jerusalems.  Bonn,  1846.  P.  269, 
and  Plate  II.,  No.  33. 


34)6  BALBECK. 

standing  beside  it,  and  within,  a  tomb  forty  ells  long.  It 
was  even  broader  than  that  of  Noah,  because  three  steps  led 
up  to  the  height  of  the  monument  on  either  side,  the  whole 
way  along,  which  in  the  former  case  were  wanting.  By 
bestowing  on  [them  such  an  unusual  size  of  body,  the  legend 
evidently  wished  to  distinguish  these  two  patriarchs  as 
haviug  lived  before  the  Flood,  and  the  number  40,  which  is 
used  so  frequently  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament  as 
an  undetermined  sacred  number,  has  not,  as  is  here  exempli- 
fied, lost  its  application  among  the  Arabs. 

The  same  evening  we  rode  on  two  hours  farther,  to 
Beitan  ;  and  the  following  morning  we  started  before  sun- 
rise for  Balbeck,  the  ancient  Heliopolis,  with  its  celebrated 
ruins  of  the  temple  of  the  Sun.  I  lingered  first  at  the 
ancient  stone-quarries,  in  front  of  which  the  road  passed, 
and  there  measui'ed  a  block  of  building-stone,  which  was 
not  quite  separated  from  tlie  rock ;  it  was  67  feet  long,  14 
feet  broad,  and  13  feet  5  inches  thick.  Many  of  the  walls  in 
the  temple  ruins  in  Balbeck  are  composed  of  similar,  or  not 
much  smaller  blocks.  One  which  I  measured  on  the  spot, 
and  in  its  original  position,  "«-ithout  making  any  particular 
selection,  was  65  feet  4  inches  by  12  feet  3  inches  and  9  feet 
9  inches  large.  They  are,  indeed,  grand  ruins,  but  the  orna- 
mental part  of  the  architecture  is  heavy,  overloaded,  and  some 
in  a  very  barbarous  taste. 

Balbeck  is  associated  with  a  sad  recollection.  As  I  ap- 
proached the  scattered  houses  of  the  village,  immediately 
adjoining  the  ancient  temple  ruins,  my  faithful  servant  Ibra- 
him, who  had  arrived  here  before  us,  met  me  with  the  joy- 
ful intelligence  that  Abeken,  from  whom  we  had  separated 
in  Jerusalem,  had  just  arrived.  I  found  him,  in  fact,  in 
the  house  of  the  venerable  Bishop  Athanasius  situated  close 
at  hand;  but  we  had  scarcety  greeted  each  other,  when 
I  was  informed  that  Ibrahim  was  lying  in  the  road  dying. 
I  hastened  out,  and  found  him  almost  in  the  very  spot 
where  he  had  shortly  before  saluted  me  in  so  friendly  a 


DEE  EL  ah:\iae.  SisT 

manner,  lying  extended  with  the  rattle  in  his  throat ;  his 
ejes  were  already  dim.  It  was  in  vain  that  a  priest  of  the 
neighbouring  convent  endeavoured  to  give  assistance;  in  a 
few  minutes  he  died  before  my  face.  His  death  seems 
to  have  been  occasioned  by  a  chill.  He  was  a  thoroughly 
excellent  man,  with  a  natural  nobleness  of  character  not  often 
found  among  the  Arabs.  I  had  taken  him  with  me  on  my 
journey  to  Nubia  from  Assuan ;  he  wished  of  his  own  accord, 
and  from  his  attachment  to  me,  to  accompany  me  to  Europe, 
and  by  his  knowledge  of  the  Nubian  dialect,  would  have  been 
very  useful  to  me  in  my  studies  of  the  languages  of  the 
Sudan.  I  was  anxious  to  place  a  tombstone  to  his  memory 
at  the  foot  of  Anti-Libanon,  where  he  was  buried  on  the 
declivity  of  the  hill,  beside  a  tree,  but  we  found  no  stone- 
mason who  could  execute  it.  I  therefore  sent  one  to  Balbeck 
from  Berut,  with  an  inscription  as  follows :  — Ibeahimo 
Hassan  Stene  Oeiyndo  seeyo  bene  meeenti  P.  E.. 
Lepsius.     D.  XXI.  Novemb.  mdcccxly. 

This  news  made  a  great  impression  on  Grabre  Mariam  when 
I  communicated  it  to  liim  in  Berut ;  he  wept  bitterly,  for 
they  had  been  excellent  friends. 

Before  we  left  Balbeck,  the  bishop  advised  us  to  take  a 
diiferent  road  from  what  we  intended,  as  intelligence  had 
been  received  that  there  was  much  disturbance  on  the  other 
side  of  Libanon,  and  that  the  population  had  revolted.  But, 
in  fact,  as  the  whole  country  was  in  a  state  of  great  excite- 
ment, and  we  had  notwithstanding  found  no  difficulty,  we 
paid  little  regard  to  his  recommendation,  and  told  him  we 
should  only  pass  through  Christian  districts,  whose  in- 
habitants would  look  upon  us  as  friends.  AVe  quitted  Bal- 
beck shortly  before  sunset,  and  traversed  the  narrow  plain, 
in  order  to  spend  the  night  in  Dee  el  Ahmae,  the  "Eed 
Convent,"  and  the  following  day,  witli  renewed  strength, 
ascend  Libanon  almost  to  its  highest  point,  so  that  we 
might  again  descend  by  the  famous  cedar  forest.  Hitherto 
we  had  been  favoured,  during  our  whole  journey  in  Palestine 


348  DER  EL  AHMAE. 

and  Syria,  with  tlie  most  beautiful  weather.  From  day  to 
day  we  had  been  expecting  increasing  rain,  according  to  the 
calendar  of  the  weather  on  other  years,  and  up  to  the  present 
time  had  only  once  been  drenched — on  our  return  from  the 
Dead  Sea  to  Jerusalem.  The  wide  plain  of  Beqa'a,  which  we 
now  traversed  for  the  second  time,  is  quite  impassable  after 
rain  at  this  season  of  the  year,  and  the  numerous  mountain 
streams  of  Libanon,  so  abounding  in  springs,  generally  swell 
these  to  such  a  degree  that,  with  the  frequent  absence  of 
bridges,  they  can  only  be  crossed  with  extreme  danger.  The 
sky  clouded  over  in  a  threatening  manner  this  evening,  the 
obscurity  of  the  night  was  impenetrable,  and  at  length,  after 
we  had  already  seen  some  of  the  lights  of  Dee  el  Ahmar  in 
the  distance,  we  lost  our  way  on  a  barren  piece  of  ground 
rent  by  rugged  clefts.  At  length,  we  had  hardly  arrived, 
when  the  rain  poured  down  in  torrents.  Here  again  we 
shared  a  large  room  with  the  whole  of  a  Christian  peasant 
family,  but  we  spent  a  most  restless  night.  There  were 
constant  groans  and  lamentations  among  the  women  and 
children,  who  appeared  to  be  sick.  In  a  short  time  the 
incessant  rain  had  soaked  through  the  flat  roof  of  the  house, 
and  trickled  upon  the  beds ;  people  were  now  sent  up  to 
throw  fresh  sand  upon  the  roof,  and  to  ram  it  firm  with 
pieces  of  stone  pillars,  which  are  ready  for  this  purpose  on 
the  top  of  all  the  houses ;  but  this  operation  sent  down  so 
much  lime  and  dirt  upon  us,  that  we  were  at  length  com- 
pelled to  request  they  would  discontinue  this  well-intentioned 
repair.  In  a  small  shed  near  the  door  lay  a  dog  with  a 
numerous  progeny,  whose  bed  seemed  also  to  have  been  in- 
vaded by  the  rain,  for  they  began  to  whine  and  yelp  in  the 
most  wretched  manner.  At  length  our  hosts  were  roused  by 
repeated  loud  knocks,  to  furnish  a  horse  for  a  soldier,  who 
was  carrying  letters  farther  on  at  the  utmost  speed  for  the 
Pascha.  Thus  we  got  no  rest  the  whole  night  through ;  and 
if  an  Arabian  proverb  says,  that  the  king  of  the  fleas  keeps 
his  court  in  Tiberias,  the  holy  city  of  the  Jews,  I  have  now 


LIBAXOX.  349 

every  reason  to  suppose  that  he  has  since  then  transferred 
his  residence  hither  from  that  spot,  where  we  had  found  good 
and  undisturbed  lodf]:infr. 

The  rain  subsided  towards  morning,  and  gave  place  to  a 
thick  mist  wliich,  continuing  still  in  single  large  clouds, 
seemed  sometimes  wholly  to  cut  off  the  ascent  to  the  mountain 
fronting  the  lofty  ridge  of  Libanon,  but  also  often  charmed 
us  by  its  magic  play  with  the  penetrating  light  of  the  cool 
morning  sun  round  the  nearer  and  the  more  distant  wooded 
hills  and  points  of  rock.  When  we  reached  the  first  eleva- 
tions, which  are  separated  from  the  principal  chain  by  a  level 
valley,  we  suddenly  burst  upon  an  indescribably  beautiful  and 
astounding  prospect.  The  sight  of  the  chain  of  Libanon, 
covered  in  its  wliole  extent  and  far  down  with  fresh  dazzlinjr 
snow,  was  a  real  Alpine  landscape  on  the  grandest  scale,  rising 
majestically  above  the  eternal  spring  of  this  blessed  land, 
though  now  indeed  so  miserably  trodden  down  by  the  here- 
ditary enemy  the  Turk.  I  thoroughly  enjoyed  this  unusual 
spectacle,  which  roused  a  true  home-like  joy  in  my  heart,  and 
I  endeavoured  to  imbibe  all  that  I  could  of  the  clear,  white, 
quiet  light.  I  drove  my  little  Egyptian  horse  in  front  of 
me,  which  had  lost  its  rider  in  Balbeck,  and  now  bore  on 
its  back  the  small  possessions  he  had  left  behind  him.  I 
tliought  how,  a  few  days  previously,  I  had  been  enjoying  the 
thoughts  of  seeing  my  good  Ibrahim's  surprise  when  he 
should  pass  through  the  snowy  region  of  Libanon  along  with 
us.  The  deep  parts  of  the  snow  wliich  soon  after  we  were 
obliged  to  ride  through,  did  not  seem  to  annoy  the  ass ;  it 
frequently  stood  still  astonished  in  the  midst  of  the  snow, 
and  no  doubt  viewed  it  all  as  salt,  soft  white  fields  of  which 
it  had  known  near  the  Eed  Sea  and  elsewhere.  "We  rode 
zig-zag  up  the  extremely  steep  mountain  precipice  between 
seven  and  eight  thousand  feet  high.  It  is  not  rocky  at  this 
point,  but  covered  with  earth,  and  terminates  in  a  sharp 
ridge.  "  El  hamdu  I'illah,"  exclaimed  the  old  guide  when 
he  had  attained  the  summit,  and  "  Salam,  salam,"  resounded 
in  one  chorus  of  voices.   "We  had  almost  ascended  the  highest 


350  BSCHEEEEH. 

point  of  Libanon,  but  the  prospect  over  land  and  sea  was  un- 
fortunately hidden  from  us  by  clouds  and  layers  of  mist, 
although  we  had  blue  sky  above  us.  After  a  short  ride 
downwards  from  the  summit,  our  guide  pointed  out  the 
ancient  venerable  forest  of  cedars  at  our  feet  in  a  great  level 
bay  of  the  mountain  range,  from  which  King  Hiram  had 
sent  the  huge  stems  to  Solomon  for  the  building  of  the 
Temple ;  it  looked  as  small  as  a  garden  from  this  lofty  point. 
Por  a  long  while  it  was  considered  the  only  remains  of  those 
ancient  forests,  till,  in  recent  times,  several  more  tracts  of 
cedar  forest  have  been  discovered  in  some  of  the  northern 
parts  of  Libanon.  We  soon  again  lost  sight  of  the  cedars  as 
we  descended  deeper  among  the  layers  of  cloud,  which  ex- 
cluded all  prospect.  Suddenly  the  dark  shade  of  these 
gigantic  trees  rose  like  mountain  spirits,  close  beside  us,  out 
of  the  grey  mass  of  mist.  We  rode  to  the  chapel  of  the 
hermit,  who  usually  presents  the  stranger  here,  with  a  good 
glass  of  wine  of  Libanon,  but  we  found  it  closed ;  just  then 
the  clouds  dissolved  into  a  most  prosaic  rain,  from  which  we 
were  scarcely  able  to  shelter  ourselves  beneath  the  wide  roof 
of  needles  of  the  noble  cedars.  I  foimd  a  beautiful  cedar 
cone  hanging  down  sufficiently  low  for  me  to  break  it  off 
and  take  it  away  with  me  as  a  keepsake.  Single  stems  of 
these  cedars  are  40  feet  in  circumference,  and  90  feet  high ; 
and  as  one  cedar,  which  they  pretend  they  know  to  be  100 
years  old,  is  only  half  a  foot  in  diameter,  the  largest  cedars 
are  stated  to  be  3000  years  old,  which  would  go  back  as  far 
as  the  time  of  Solomon.  The  rain  increased,  and  we  had 
still  several  thousand  feet  to  descend  before  reaching  the 
nearest  village,  Bscheeeeh.  The  lower  we  came,  so  much 
the  more  slippery  and  dangerous  grew  the  narrow,  some- 
times rocky,  sometimes  soaked  footpath,  which  led  along 
the  precipitous  side  of  the  valley  with  an  abrupt  precipice 
to  our  right.  Turning  an  angle  of  rock,  we  at  length 
gained  sight  of  the  night  quarters  we  so  longed  to  reach. 
The  wealthy,  inviting,  and  important  village  of  Bscherreh, 
which  gives  a  name  to  the  whole  district,  is  well  known  from 


BSCHEEEEH.  361 

its  powerful  and  influential,  but  ^\M,  uncontrolled,  and  often 
cruel  iuhabitants. 

The  rain  had  abated,  the  white  houses,  with  their  terrace 
roofs,  between  whicli  a  number  of  silver  poplars,  plane-trees, 
and  c^-presses,  rise  up  singly,  or  in  rows,  were  placed  one 
above  the  other  in  a  semicircle,  on  a  hill  projecting  from  the 
right  side  of  the  ^-alley,  and  shining  after  the  rain,  they 
looked  as  if  they  had  just  emerged  from  a  bath.  Nothing 
was  stirring  in  the  village ;  it  seemed  as  if  it  were  perfectly 
dead.  I  rode  in  advance  of  the  rest  of  our  party,  with  our 
old  guide,  up  a  narrow  path  beside  vineyard  walls,  when  sud- 
denly, at  a  bend  lq  the  road,  a  strong  voice  called  out  to  me, 
and  when  I  looked  up,  over  the  terrace  of  the  vineyard, 
which  was  about  a  man's  height,  to  my  no  small  surprise  I 
saw  about  twenty  muskets  pointed  at  me  and  the  guide. 
He  let  go  the  bridle  of  his  horse,  stretched  out  his  hands 
towards  heaven,  and  shouted  out  to  the  people.  I  hastily 
threw  back  the  cape  of  my  cloak,  in  order  to  show  the 
people  my  European  hat,  and  let  them  see  who  we  w^ere. 
When  they  perceived  that  we  were  but  a  small  party,  and 
that  we  did  not  put  ourselves  in  any  attitude  of  defence, 
they  came  out  in  hundreds  from  behind  the  trees,  surrounded 
us  with  loud  yells,  and  for  a  long  time  would  not  believe  but 
that  we  were  soldiers  in  disguise.  Some  even  struck  at  our 
horses  with  staves,  downwards  from  the  terrace,  while  I  was 
endeavouring  to  explain  to  those  nearest  to  us  who  we  were. 
Others  liad  more  quickly  perceived  their  error ;  they  came 
down  to  the  street,  and  took  my  horse  by  the  bridle.  One 
especially,  an  animated  boy  of  about  fourteen,  with  a  clear 
eye,  beautiful  forehead,  and  ruddy,  fresh  cheeks,  pressed 
forwards  towards  me,  calling  out  in  Italian,  that  we  should 
fear  nothing,  it  was  all  a  mistake,  we  were  their  friends, 
that  I  had  only  to  ride  on  and  dismount  at  the  house  of  his 
brother.  Some  vehement  people  continued  to  accompany 
us,  and  called  out  to  us  from  the  wall,  with  the  most  angry 
gesticulations,  while  the  great  mass  were  already  satisfied, 
and  uttered  a  deafening  cry  of  joy ;  they  fired  off  muskets 


352  BSCHEEEEH. 

in  the  air,  and  now  conducted  us  in  triumph  to  the  vil- 
lage. 

All  were  on  foot  in  Bscherreh,  which  contains  between 
1200  and  1500  inhabitants,  and  there  was  pressing  and 
pusliing  to  kiss  our  hands  and  clothes ;  the  women  began 
their  piercing  shrieks,  clapped  their  hands,  and  danced ;  my 
honest  youth  remained  constantly  by  my  side,  and  thus  step 
by  step  we  made  our  way  through  the  dense  crowd,  whom 
we  now  also  greeted  as  friends,  till  we  arrived  in  front  of  the 
Sheikh's  house,  whose  youngest  brother  was  my  companion 
and  guide.  We  were  led  up  the  stone  staircase,  and  the 
open  hall  in  front,  to  the  spacious  saloon  which  was  to 
shelter  us. 

I  conversed  almost  the  whole  evening  with  the  Sheikh  of 
the  village,  Jusef  Haxna.  Dauie,  a  young  and  handsome 
man,  with  a  serious,  gentle  countenance,  inspiring  confidence. 
His  father  had  fallen  in  the  war,  under  Ibrahim  Pascha,  who 
will  soon  be  invested  here  with  an  odour  of  sanctity,  should 
the  present  abominations  of  the  Turks  last  much  longer. 
Sheikh  Jusef  was  the  eldest  son  of  this  numerous  and 
ancient  family,  in  which  the  dignity  of  Sheikh  is  hereditary. 
He  related  to  me  with  perfect  frankness,  composure,  and 
intelligence,  what  was  now  going  on  among  them,  how  they 
had  resolved  to  supply  the  weapons  which  were  required,  but 
had  retracted  this  determination  when  they  heard  of  the 
disgraceful  manner  in  which  the  Turkish  military  had  be- 
haved in  the  southern  districts ;  thirty-four  villages  had  now 
combined,  and  sworn  in  their  churches  not  to  furnish  the 
weapons,  but  to  use  them  against  the  Turkish  dogs.  "When 
I  asked  him  if  they  had  any  prospect  of  being  able  to  defend 
themselves  successfully  against  a  disciplined  army,  especially 
since  the  death  of  their  common  leader,  Emir  Beschir,  he 
told  me  that  in  Bscherreh  alone  there  were  3000,  and  in  the 
whole  of  the  district  which  had  formed  a  combination  13,000 
armed  men — as  large  a  number  as  the  Turkish  military  in  the 
country.  Besides  this,  they  had  their  mountains,  their  snow 
and  rain,  their  passes  and  lurking  holes,  which  would  render 


WAR  ly  LIB  AXON.  353 

all  the  Tnrkisli  cavalry  and  artillery  useless.  I  uevertlieless 
advised  them  to  apply  to  a  consul  at  Berut,  who  was  friendly 
to  their  cause,  to  solicit  some  mediation,  and  to  avoid  the 
last  extremity.  As  I  afterwards  heard,  this  has  taken  place. 
The  French  consul-general,  Bourre,  has  treated  with  the 
Pascha  on  their  behalf 

But  all  may  have  been  too  late,  and  I  fear  that  the  storm 
of  war  has  long  since  broken  over  my  excellent  hosts  in 
Bscherreh,  and  that  their  wives  and  children  have  been  even 
less  spared  than  those  of  their  weaker  neighbours. 

I  was  rejoiced  to  be  of  some  service  that  evening  to  the 
young  JSheikh,  whose  pleasing  and  composed  deportment  pre- 
possessed me  much  in  his  favour.  I  bound  up  a  wound  for 
him  better  than  was  possible  with  the  means  he  had  at  hand, 
and  provided  him  with  linen  and  lint.  He  told  me  tliat  we 
could  not  set  out  next  day,  for  he  must  prepare  a  feast  for 
us,  roast  a  sheep,  and  show  us  that  he  was  our  friend ;  but  I 
declined  the  invitation,  which  was  made  with  all  sincerity. 

The  following  morning  we  took  a  servant  of  the  Sheikh 
with  us  as  far  as  the  next  village,  Ehden,  which  we  also 
found  in  great  excitement,  but  not  inimical  to  us.  Outposts 
had  been  stationed,  and  the  variegated  costume  of  the  popu- 
lation, tlieir  bright  red  and  yellow  dresses,  looked  at  a  dis- 
tance like  a  spring  flower-garden  among  the  green  trees ; 
they  surrounded  and  questioned  us,  and  even  here  there 
seemed  to  be  divided  opinions  as  to  what  we  were.  One 
young  Amazon  ran  for  a  considerable  distance  beside  us, 
raised  her  finger  in  a  menacing  manner,  and  upbraided  us 
that  we  Franks  did  not  openly  and  vigorously  side  with 
them. 

"We  here  dismissed  our  companion  from  Bscherreh ;  in  his 
place,  a  rider,  on  a  magnificent  fiery  horse,  unasked,  attached 
himself  to  our  party ;  he  politely  saluted  us,  and  keeping  at  a 
certain  distance  never  lost  sight  of  us.  In  about  a  couple  of 
hours  afterAvards,  at  a  more  gentle  inclination  of  the  mountain, 
we  perceived  a  troop  of  armed  people  in  the  field,  who  had 
planted  the  red  banner  of  blood  to  preach  war  and  revolt  far 

2  a 


354  TEIPOLIS. 

away  over  the  plain.  The  patrol  advanced  to  meet  us, 
and  absolutely  refused  our  proceeding  any  farther.  It  was 
only  after  long  negotiations  that,  by  means  of  a  gold  piece 
and  the  intercession  of  our  companion,  who  seemed  to  be 
the  Sheikh  of  a  neighbouring  village,  we  were  granted  free 
passage,  but  the  whole  troop  accompanied  us  down  the  hill. 
When  we  had  passed  the  next  and  last  village,  Zaheea,  our 
attendant  Sheikh  was  obliged  to  employ  serious  threats  to 
get  us  safe  across  the  frontiers  of  the  revolted  district ;  he 
then  accompanied  us  still  farther  down  a  valley,  as  far  as  a 
turn  of  the  rock,  and  then  saluting  us  shortly,  rode  merrily 
back  among  his  mountains.  "We  were  but  a  few  hours  dis- 
tant from  Teipolis,  which  we  reached  shortly  after  sunset ; 
passing  the  grave  Turkish  guards,  who  may  have  possibly  lost 
some  of  their  stupid  indolence,  with  the  prospect  of  a  near 
and  desperate  contest  with  the  courageous  inhabitants  of  the 
mountains. 

In  Tkipolis,  now  called  Tauabltjs,  we  stayed  in  the  Latin 
convent,  which  is  inhabited  and  taken  care  of  by  only  two 
monks.  They  related  to  us  that  the  Christians  of  Libanon 
had  come  to  them  a  short  time  ago,  and  asked  for  their 
spiritual  intercessions,  whereupon  they  had  not  scrupled  to 
dispense  the  holy  sacrament  for  the  space  of  three  days. 
Unfortunately,  the  Maronites  fail  much  less  in  such  spiritual 
intercessions  and  good  wishes  than  in  the  corporal  provi- 
sions of  bread  and  powder,  for  the  Turks  cut  off  their 
supply. 

The  following  morning  we  visited  the  Prussian  American 
consul,  who  inhabits  a  handsome  house,  fitted  up  in  the 
Oriental  style,  and  afterwards  went  to  the  Bazar.  Just  then  a 
large  division  of  Turkish  horsemen,  on  their  road  to  Libanon, 
passed  over  a  beautiful  old  bridge  in  the  centre  of  the  town, 
dressed  in  their  party-coloured,  streaked,  dirty  uniforms,  with 
their  lances  ten  feet  long  adorned  with  black  bunches  of 
ostrich  feathers,  their  small  war  kettle-drums  in  full  beat. 
Towards  noon  we  again  departed,  just  as  the  new  Turkish 
general  entered  by  the  same  gate  from  Berut,  through  which 


BAS-EELIEFS  OT  EAMSE3  II.  355 

Tve  had  ridden  out.  On  the  road  we  met  the  divisions  of  the 
troops  which  had  been  ordered  hither  from  Zachleh.  From 
this  point  our  road  lav  along  the  sea-coast,  and  almost  the 
whole  day  we  heard  the  thunder  of  the  artillery  in  the  ad- 
jacent mountains. 

"We  spent  the  night  in  a  Khan  on  this  side  of  the  promon- 
tory of  Eas  e'  Schekab,  named  after  the  ancient  Seov 
7rp6ao)7rov  ;  no  doubt  because  the  black  mountain,  which 
here  projects  into  the  sea,  assumes  the  exact  form  of  a  bust 
to  those  coming  from  the  north.  The  following  day  we 
came  to  ancient  Btbltjs  (Gebel),  and  then  crossed  over 
the  Adonis  river,  which  still,  after  violent  rain,  is  occa- 
sionally the  colour  of  blood,  mourning  over  the  wounded 
favourite  of  Aphrodite.  Passing  Guneh,  generally  proceed- 
ing along  the  sea,  sometimes  even  in  it,  we  arrived  at  jN^ahe 
EL  Kelb,  the  ancient  Ltcus,  to  the  south  of  which  the  cele- 
brated bas-reliefs  of  Ramses-Sesostris,  and  of  a  later  Assyrian 
king^,  are  engraved  upon  a  rock  projecting  into  the  sea. 
In  spite  of  our  rapid  ride  we  did  not  reach  the  rock-tablets 
till  shortly  after  sunset,  and  we  spent  the  night  in  the  Khan 
beyond. 

The  following  morning  I  investigated  the  sculpture  more 
accurately,  close  to  which  passed  the  very  ancient,  artificial 
road,  which  is  now  destroyed,  and  I  was  rejoiced  to  make  an 
important  acquisition,  for  I  was  enabled  to  decipher  a  date 
in  the  hieroglyphic  inscriptions.  Among  the  three  Egyptian 
representations,  which  all  bear  the  Shields  of  Eamses  IL,  the 
central  one  is  dedicated  to  the  chief  god  of  the  Egyptians, 
Ea  (Helios),  the  southern  one  to  the  Theban  or  Upper  Egyp- 
tian Ammon,  and  the  northern  to  the  Memphitic  or  Lower 

*  The  king  here  represented  is  explained  by  Eawlinson  to  be  the 
son  of  the  builder  of  Khorsabad,  Bel-Adonimseha.  {A  Commentary 
on  the  Cuneiform  Inscr.  of  Babylonia  and  Assyria.  London,  1850, 
p.  70.)  According  to  Layard,  the  same  king  is  found  on  the  buildings 
of  Kuyung'ik,  Nebbi  Yunas,  and  Mossul  (Nineveh,  Lond.,  1849,  p.  142 — 
144);  who  (p.  400)  supposes  that  the  cypress  monument  now  to  be 
seen  in  Berlin  belongs  to  him.  (Compare  Bonomi,  Nineveh  and  its 
Palaces.    London,  1852,  p.  127.) 


356  BEEUT. 

Egyptian  Phtha  ;  this  Eamses  had  also  dedicated  to  tliese 
same  gods  the  three  remarkable  rock-temples  in  Nubia,  at 
Gerf  HussEif,  Sebua,  and  Deee,  no  doubt  because  they 
were  viewed  by  him  as  the  three  chief  representatives  of 
Egypt.  On  the  central  stele,  the  inscription  begins  below 
the  representation,  with  the  date  of  the  2nd  Choiak  of  the 
4th  teae  of  the  eeign  of  King  Eamses  ;  the  Ammon 
stele,  on  the  other  hand,  was  dated  from  the  second,  or  (if  the 
two  strokes  above  were  connected)  from  the  tenth  year ;  at  all 
events,  not  the  same  year  as  the  central  stele,  from  which  we 
might  conclude  that  all  three  representations  referred  to 
different  campaigns. 

"VVe  did  not  leave  the  tomb  of  St.  George  unvisited,  and 
the  church  dedicated  to  him  near  Nahr  el  Kelb  ;  and  as  we 
entered  Beeut  towards  evening,  we  deviated  from  our  path 
to  visit  the  well  where  the  dragon  whicli  he  slew  was  in  the 
habit  of  drinking.  Thus,  on  the  26th  of  November,  we 
ended  our  excursion  to,  and  over  the  mountain  range  of, 
Libanon ;  justly  lauded  from  its  numerous  historical  recol- 
lections, and  its  rare  natural  beauties,  of  which  the  poet  says, 
"  that  it  bears  winter  on  its  head,  spring  upon  its  shoulders, 
autumn  in  its  lap,  but  that  summer  slumbers  at  its  feet  on 
the  Mediterranean." 


EXTEACTS 
FROM  THE  WOPvK  OF  DR.  LEPSIUS 

ENTITLED 

THE  CHRONOLOGY  OF   THE  EGYPTIANS. 

BERLIN,  1849. 

WITH  SPECIAL  REFERENCE  TO 

THE  EXODUS  OF  THE  ISEAELITES. 

REVISED  BY  THE  AUTHOR. 


EXTEACTS  rKO:\I  THE  AUTHOE'S  DEDICATION 

TO  THE 

CHEVALIER   BUNSEK 


My  clironological  work  (the  first  volume  of  which  is  now 
before  you),  starting  from  a  far  more  limited  point  of  view, 
has  a  less  remote  aim  than  your  history^,  and  will  be  at  most 
but  a  supplemental  elaboration  of  the  ideas  originally  laid 
down  in  your  more  comprehensive  plan.  It  is  not  my  task 
to  indicate  the  position  Egypt  occupies  in  the  IIistoet  of 
THE  AVoELD,  but  only  in  its  external  form  in  the  History  of 
Time  ;  it  is  tlierefore  chronological,  not  historical.  But  to 
obtain  the  chronological  basis  was,  with  reason  in  your  opinion 
also,  the  first  and  most  important  point  of  your  inquiry,  be- 
cause upon  this  must  depend  every  extensive  development  of 
history.  You  derived  your  information  directly  from  those 
authors  from  whom  we  learn  the  connection  of  events,  as  a 
whole,  and  in  detail.  I  obtained  mine  from  the  monuments, 
which  establish  the  authenticity  of  the  Greek  account,  fre- 
quently disclose  their  meaning,  and  necessarily  correct,  com- 
plete, and  confirm  their  separate  statements.  The  mutual 
interchanjre  was  intended  to  have  led  to  a  common  result.  If 
formerly  this  was  not  always  tlie  case,  the  interruption  of  our 
intercourse  could  not  but  lead  us  in  many  points  still  farther 
apart.  I  have  never  hesitated  to  express  myself  freely  when 
I  have  differed  from  you,  because  I  well  know  that,  like  me, 
you  alone  regard  the  subject  before  you,  and  are  convinced 
that  truth  is  finally  elicited  only  by  a  distinct  presentation  of 
opposing  possibilities.     In  the  present  investigations,  also,  I 

'  JEgjiptens  Slelle  in  der  Weltgeschichie.  (Egypt's  Place  in  Universal 
History.     Trans,  by  C.  H.  Cottrell.) 


360  THE  authoe's  dedication 

have  yielded  to  this  conviction,  but  on  that  account  have  felt 
it  still  more  obligatory  to  lay  them  first  of  all  before  you,  and 
fulfilling  an  agreeable  duty,  dedicate  them  to  you  as  a  public 
testimony  of  my  gratitude. 

In  this  work  I  have  touched  upon  the  most  various  pro- 
vinces of  archaeology,  and  have  frequently  been  obliged  to 
oppose,  in  essential  points,  the  views  of  men  whom  I  honour 
and  admire  as  the  heroes  of  science,  and  as  unsurpassed 
models  in  criticism  and  true  inquiry.  This  opposition  would 
be  presumptuous  were  it  not  that  these  contested  points  are 
mere  specialities  in  the  wide  domain  over  which  those  men 
rule,  to  refute  which,  even  successfully,  could  not  abate  from 
their  just  fame ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  most  of  them  are 
vital  questions  in  the  solution  of  the  present  undertaking, 
and  closely  connected  with  the  very  substance  of  those  in- 
vestigations, with  which  I  have  especially  endeavoured  to 
render  myself  familiar. 

Had  my  vocation  placed  me  in  a  pohtical  position,  my 
motto  would  have  been  Eeyerence  and  Freedom,  and  with 
EEVEEENCE  and  FREEDOM  (those  are  your  words)  science 
must  also  be  pursued.  Eeverence,  for  everything  that  is 
venerable,  sacred,  noble,  great,  and  approved ;  freedom,  wher- 
ever truth  and  a  conviction  of  it  are  to  be  obtained  and 
expressed.  AVhere  the  latter  is  wanting,  there  fear  and 
hypocrisy  will  exist;  where  the  former,  insolence  and  pre- 
sumption will  luxuriate  in  science  as  in  life. 

The  investigation  of  Egyptian  history  will  gradually  exer- 
cise an  extensive  influence  upon  all  branches  of  archaeology — 
upon  our  whole  conception  of  the  past  history  of  man.  We 
must  therefore  expect  a  reaction  from  all  these  sides.  Some 
of  these  influential  points  have  been  already  vindicated,  partly 
by  you  and  partly  in  the  investigations  now  before  us.  They 
will  not  fail  to  call  forth  an  animated  opposition,  and  at  best 
elicit  discussion,  going  to  tlie  root  of  the  question,  and 
emendation  on  the  part  of  the  learned,  to  whose  opinion  I 
attach  the  greatest  weight. 

That  section  of  my  volume  which  endeavours  to  establish 


TO  THE  CHEYALIEE  BUNSEN.  361 

the  relation  of  the  Egyptian  to  the  Old  Hebrew  Chronology, 
will  meet  with  most  opposition.  Considering  the  intimate 
connection  that  necessarily  subsists  between  the  philological 
and  dogmatical  method  of  examining  the  Biblical  Eecords,  it 
is  perfectly  natural,  that  whenever  a  step  in  advance,  or  an 
error,  strives  to  obtain  a  place  on  the  philological  side, 
theological  interest,  so  much  more  universally  distributed, 
takes  a  part  either  for,  or  against  it.  "Whoever  would  dispute 
its  right  to  do  this,  must  deny  to  theolog}^  in  general  its  cha- 
racter as  a  science.  Tlie  Christianity,  which  derives  its  origin 
and  its  sustenance  from  the  Bible,  is  essentially  and  intrinsi- 
cally wholly  independent  of  all  learned  confirmation.  But  it  is 
the  duty  of  theology,  whose  task  it  is  to  fathom  Christianity  in 
a  rational  manner,  and  prove  its  results,  to  decide  scientifically 
what  are  the  essential  points  in  the  holy  Scriptures  on  which 
it  founds  its  system  of  Christian  belief.  Should  its  true  sup- 
ports not  be  recognised,  but  imaginary  ones  placed  in  their 
stead,  it  will  not  injure  Christianity,  but  the  theological  sys- 
tem, or  that  portion  of  it  which  was  built  on  unstable  ground. 
That  truth  which  is  discerned  by  the  sound  progress  of  any 
science  whatsoever,  cannot  be  hostile  to  Christian  truth,  but 
must  promote  it ;  for  all  truths,  from  the  very  beginning,  have 
formed  a  compact  league  against  everything  that  is  false  and 
erroneous.  Theology,  however,  possesses  no  other  means 
than  every  other  science  to  distinguish  scientifically,  in  any 
department,  between  truth  and  error,  namely,  only  a  reason- 
able and  circumspect  criticism.  AVhatever  is  brought  forward 
according  to  this  method,  can  only  be  corrected,  or  entirely 
refuted,  by  a  still  better  and  more  circumspect  criticism. 

I  believe  that  you,  my  honoured  friend,  and  myself,  have 
only  one  opinion  on  these  points,  I  have  therefore  ventured 
to  refer,  at  the  conclusion  of  this  section,  to  your  excellent 
words,  written  on  an  occasion  snnilar  to  the  present.  It 
seems  to  me,  also,  that  the  practical  religious  meaning,  which 
the  Old  Testament  possesses  for  every  Christian  reader,  is 
very  independent  of  the  dates  of  periods,  the  exact  know- 
ledge of  which  could  only  have  been  known  by  means  of  a 
piu-poseless  inspiration  to  the  authors  and  elaborators  of  those 


362  THE  author's  dedication 

writings,  many  of  whom  lived  several  centuries  later.  Strict 
science  has  also  very  generally  decided  in  this  manner  for  a 
long  time  past,  and  has  not  failed  to  exercise  its  purifying 
reaction  upon  the  dogmatical  comprehension  of  the  matter. 
So  much  the  more  solicitous  am  I,  however,  as  to  whether 
my  views  will  stand  your  examination,  and  the  judgments  of 
other  far  more  competent  investigators  than  myself  in  this 
department,  or  will,  at  any  rate,  meet  your  consideration. 

The  two  numbers,  namely  the  430  years  of  the  sojourn  of 
the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  and  the  480  years  from  the  Exodus  to 
the  building  of  the  Temple,  have  been  entirely  abandoned  by 
me,  but  have  been  the  points  on  which  all  the  most  modem 
investigations  have  rested,  though  they  appear  to  have  been 
quite  unknown,  at  least  not  brought  uuder  the  consideration 
of  all  the  older  scholars,  as  Josephus,  Africanus,  Eusebius, 
Syncellus,  &c-  On  the  other  hand,  I  have  clung  to  the  Le- 
vitical  registers  of  Generations  as  a  far  more  certain  guide ; 
and  thus,  in  place  of  a  chronological  fabric,  which  had  been 
already  long  considered  untenable,  I  immediately  obtained  a 
true  historical  foundation,  and  a  chronology"  bordering,  at 
least,  on  a  perfectly  reliable  one,  as  far  back  as  Abraham,  and 
this  not  only  most  satisfactorily  coincided  with  all  the  other 
historical  relations  in  the  writings  of  the  Old  Testament, 
but  also  with  the  already  established  Manethonic-Egyptinn 
computation  of  time.  The  path  which  I  have  here  taken  is 
by  no  means  new.  Des  Vignolles,  Bockh,  and  Bertheau  had 
already  abandoned  the  number  480  years  ;  you  yourself  de- 
cided against  the  430  years,  and  I  find  the  same  path  pursued 
by  Engelstoft  in  the  most  decided  manner  in  his  interesting 
work,  to  which,  however,  too  little  attention  has  been  paid. 
Other  preparatory  labours  in  the  widely  extended  department 
of  this  literatm'e  may  have  escaped  my  notice,  but,  at  all 
events,  these  opinions  had  hitherto  been  unable  to  make 
themselves  properly  appreciated,  as  is  evident  from  the  latest 
works  of  the  most  important  inquirers  ;  and  first  among  them 
Ewald's  profound  and  acute  history.  Were  it  only  occasioned 
by  this  mode  of  apprehension  being  hitherto  not  sufficiently 
carried  out,  and  requiring  especially  the  essential  confirma- 


TO  THE  CHEYALIEE  BrXSE>'.  363 

tion  of  Egyptian  clironology,  and  should  tlie  new  course  whicli 
I  have  adopted  on  that  account  win  a  more  general  assent,  it 
would  be  no  slight  satisfaction  to  me,  and  would  especially 
afford  me  one  more  guarantee  of  the  genuineness  of  the 
Egyptian  chronology. 

But  the  real  foundation  for  the  Egyptian  computation  of 
time,  according  as,  in  my  opinion,  it  should  he  restored,  is  to 
be  found  in  the  last  section  of  this  volume  in  the  criticism 
upon  the  authorities  which  derive  their  information  from  Ma- 
netho.  This  is  a  detailed  and  complicated  investigation,  and 
the  superabundant  material  which  is  presented,  forms  a  knot 
whicli  the  labour  of  almost  a  thousand  years,  in  place  of  dis- 
entangling, has  only  drawn  still  tighter,  because  the  wrong 
ends  of  the  threads  were  always  pulled.  It  was  first  of  all 
necessary  carefully  to  pursue  these  false  ends  through  all  their 
twistings — I  mean  especially  the  spurious  writings,  and  the 
influences  exercised  by  them,  and  separate  them  distinctly ; 
but  to  recognise  the  true  character  of  the  remaining  genuine 
portion,  and  to  fix  securely  the  few  principal  points.  Besides 
my  own^reparatory  labours,  I  possessed  two  admirable  re- 
searches, upon  which  I  could  still  further  build :  your  own 
work,  and  the  one  by  Bockh  upon  the  Manethonic  Computa- 
tion of  Time.  The  result  of  the  two  investigations,  which 
were  obtained  independently  of  each  other,  and  published 
almost  simultaneously,  deviate  very  much  from  one  another, 
since  you  fix  Menes  more  than  2000  years  later  than  Bockh 
believes  he  is  placed  by  Manetho.  This  discrepancy  must 
be  the  immediate  result  of  the  difference  in  your  fundamental 
views,  which  caused  Bockh  to  regard  the  Manethonic  Dynas- 
ties as  uninterruptedly  consecutive,  you  as  partly  reigning 
contemporaneously.  Bockh  especially  cited  in  support  of  his 
view  the  circumstance,  that  if  we  count  the  Dynasties  ac- 
cording to  the  presentation  of  them  by  Africanus  in  a  con- 
tinuous line,  the  first  year  of  Menes  coincided  very  nearly 
with  tlie  proleptically  calculated  year  of  commencement  of  an 
Egyptian  Sothis  period.  He  treated  the  questions  under 
consideration  with  all  the  learning  and  ingenious  criticism 
which  is  peculiar  to  this  master  in  archaeological  investiga- 


364  THE  ArTHOH'S  DEDICATIOIv^. 

tion,  pointing  out  that  the  slight  deviation  between  the  result 
which  had  been  arrived  at,  and  the  one  expected,  might  be 
removed  by  very  simple  means  ;  and  he  came  to  the  conclu- 
sion, that  this  agreement  was  intentionally  brought  about  by 
the  Egyptian  annalists,  consequently  that  the  Manethonic 
computation  of  time  was  cyclically  invented  or  adapted, 
not  handed  down  by  history.  The  view  that  you  maintain, 
which  differs  very  much  from  this,  you  founded  especially 
upon  the  comparison  of  the  Eratosthenic  lists  with  the  Ma- 
nethonic Dynasties  of  the  Old  Monarchy ;  you  thus  deter- 
mined the  continuous  Monarchical  Dynasties,  Avhose  periods 
you  calculated  by  the  numbers  of  Eratosthenes,  you  espe- 
cially recognised  no  cyclical  element  in  the  Manethonic 
chronology,  and  hence  believed  "the  accounts  of  Manetho 
and  Eratosthenes  to  be  a  historical  tradition,  in  part  the  re- 
sult of  learned  Alexandrian  investigations. 

My  view  corresponds  with  yours  in  all  essential  points. 
That  several  of  the  Dynasties  were  contemporaneous,  ap- 
pears to  me  most  decidedly  attested  ;  and  I  have  been  able 
to  obtain  a  direct,  and,  as  I  believe,  a  genuine  Manethonic 
proof  of  it.  On  the  other  hand,  from  the  beginning  I  have 
never  been  able  to  lay  so  much  stress  upon  the  list  of 
Eratosthenes,  especially  upon  its  individual  names  and 
numbers,  opposed  to  the  IManethonic  statement,  as  appeared 
to  you  justifiable,  owing  to  the  important  information  you 
obtained  from  it  concerning  the  Monarchical  Dynasties. 
This  is  the  principal  reason  why  we  still  differ  so  much  in 
our  determination  of  the  duration  of  the  Old  Monarchy 
down  to  the  entrance  of  the  Hyksos.  A  cyclical  treatment 
of  the  Egyptian  chronology,  which  you  neither  recognised 
in  4;he  History  of  the  Grods,  nor  in  the  History  of  Man, 
which  Bockh,  on  the  other  hand,  believes  he  finds  in  both 
parts,  appears  to  me,  indeed,  capable  of  being  demonstrated, 
but  only  in  the  mythical  history,  before  Menes.  The  result 
of  this  has  been  a  confirmation  of  the  sum  total  of  the 
Manethonic  History  of  Man,  which  is  also  considered 
genuine  by  you,  and  upon  which  I  imagine  I  may  venture 
to  place  the  greatest  weight. 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION 

On  the  previous  Conditions  necessary  for  the  Origin  of  a  Chronology 
among  the  Egyptians,  and  the  Possibility  of  its  Restoration. 

PAGE 

Favourable  Conditions  Ibr  an  early  Egyptian  History  and 

Chronology 3G8— 396 

External  Circumstances  in  favour  of  an  Historical  Development   .  368 — 374 
Influence  of  the  Local  Character  and  Climate  upon  the  Pre- 
servation of  the  ilonuments 368 — 371 

Abundance  of  Building  Stone 371 

Bricks.     Papyrus  used  as  a  Writing  Material  ....  372 

Intellectual  Basis  and  Proofs  of  Historical  Activity  .  .  .  374 — 396 
National  Historical  Sense  of  the  Egyptians  ....  374 — 380 
Earlier  and  more  extended  Habit  of  Writing    ....  377 — 380 

Books.    Libraries 380 

Fame  of  Egyptian  Wisdom  and  Learning  among  the  Greeks      .  382 

Sacred  Writings  of  the  Egyptians 387 

Kemains  of  Historical  Literature 392 

Retrospective  View 397—400 


FIRST  PART  OF  THE  CHRONOLOGY. 

Criticism  upon  the  Authorities. 

The  Hebrew  Tradition 401—493 

Uncertainty  of  the  Hebrew  Numbers    .        .         .        c         .         .401 

The  Exodus  according  to  Manetho 404 

The  Exodus  according  to  Hecataeus  and  Diodorus  .  .  .  408 
The  Exodus  of  the  Lepers  the  same  as  that  of  the  Israelites  .  411 
The  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus  according  to  Manetho  .  .  .  417 
The  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus  according  to  Ptolemy  Mendesius, 

Apion  Josephus 420 

The  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus  according  to  Eusebius       .         .         .  422 
The  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus  accordmg  to  Lysimachus          .         .  423 
Intimations  concerning  the  Time  of  the  Exodus  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment        424 


366  CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

The  Situation  of  Abaris 425 

The  Situation  of  Heroonpolis 434 

The  Situation  of  Ramses 437 

The  Town  of  Eamses  built  by  Ramses- jMiamun  (Ramses  II.)  .  438 
Canal  Connection  between  the  Nile  and  the  Red  Sea  .  .  439 
The  Towns  Pithom  and  Ramses,  on  the  Canal  of  Ramses  II., 

built  in  the  Reign  of  Ramses  II 446 

The  Exodus  of  the  Israelites  later  than  Ramses  II.          .        .  449 
The  Exodus  in  the  year  b.c.  1314  according  to  the  Rabbinical  Chro- 
nology       450 

The  Date  of  the  Exodus  according  to  the  .Jewish  Generations       .  457 
The  Date  of  the  Exodus  according  to  the  Book  of  Judges     ,         .  470 
The  Period  from  Jacob  and  .Joseph  to  Moses        ....  475 — 485 
The  Pharaoh  of  Joseph  in  Herodotus  and  Diodorus  .         .         .  480 

The  Period  from  Abraham  to  Moses 485—492 

Joseph  placed  during  the  Reign  of  Aphophis 487 

End  of  Hebrew  Tradition 492 

The  genuine  Manethonic  Numbers 494 

Retrospective  View 496 

Tables  of  Egyptian  Dynasties 499 


i:nteoduction 


CHROXOLOGY  OF  THE  EGYPTIANS. 


While  the  beginnings  of  Greek  and  Eoman  history,  by 
the  strict  investigations  of  modern  criticism,  have  lost  more 
and  more  of  their  historical  character,  and  while  cautious 
inquirers  consider  it  impossible  to  obtain  a  fixed  date  for 
separate  events,  earlier  than  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries 
before  Christ,  the  history  of  Egypt  treats  of  strictly  historical 
facts,  and  its  chronology  contains  exact  numbers  of  years, 
months,  and  days  in  the  third  and  fourth  millennium  previous 
to  our  era.  This  appears  such  a  palpable  contradiction,  that 
it  is  not  alone  worth  while  on  account  of  the  larger  circle  of 
readers  who  are  more  out  of  the  scope  of  these  investigations, 
but  it  must  also  be  important  to  the  inquirers  in  this  field, 
to  answer  for  themselves  the  preliminary  question,  how  it 
is  possible  to  prosecute  the  history  of  Egypt  so  much  far- 
ther back  than  the  history  of  the  nations  of  the  West  and 
East,  without  denying  the  principles  of  that  criticism  which 
has  pointed  out  limits  to  the  history  of  classical  antiquity, 
and  which  must  justly  be  considered  the  most  valuable  trea- 
sure of  modem  science  ? 

In  order  to  answer  this  question,  we  must  first  call  to 
mind  that  it  has  now  become  a  principle,  derived  from  ex- 
perience, that  the  real  history  of  a  nation,  in  the  strictest 
sense  of  the  word,  never  recedes  much  farther  back  than  its 
oldest  contemporaneous  authorities^  and  this  once  expressed, 
becomes,  from  its  intrinsic  necessity,  self-evident.  This 
principle  applies  both  to  us — since  our  certain  conclusions  in 
historical  investigations  do  not  extend  much  farther  back — 


36S  lyTEODUCTIOy 

and  also  to  the  nations  tbemselves  ;  for  tliey  only  obtain  his- 
torical consciousness  and  historical  experience  when  they 
he,'^in  to  produce  monuments,  especially  written  monuments, 
to  bear  witness  to  posterity  of  what  is  occurring.  Monu- 
ments form  the  dial-plate  of  history ;  until  they  exist,  the 
present  alone  belongs  to  a  nation,  not  the  past — it  exists 
without  a  history.  If  a  nation  loses  its  monuments,  either 
through  its  own  fault  or  through  circumstances,  it  will  be 
unable  to  preserve  its  history,  which  becomes  confused  and 
traditionary,  and  in  place  of  the  purely  historical  account 
which  it  has  lost,  it  obtains,  at  the  best,  another  principle  of 
internal  order  ;  a  poetic-mythological,  as  with  the  Greeks  ;  a 
philosophic-mythological,  as  with  the  Indians ;  or  a  religious 
one,  as  with  the  Israelites ;  but  it  always  loses  its  original 
value  as  a  reproduction  of  a  series  of  real  facts. 

Now  if  we  start  from  this  axiom,  that  the  commencement 
of  everv  true  history  and  chronolog}',  as  it  is  scientifically 
understood  at  the  present  day,  cannot  be  carried  much  far- 
ther back  than  their  oldest  contemporaneous  authorities,  and 
that  we  find  this  confirmed  in  the  nations  of  Europe  and 
Asia  to  the  prejudice  of  their  earliest  histories,  then  it  is 
here  precisely  that  exists  the  marked  superiority  of  the  his- 
tory of  Egvpt  above  all  other  histories.  It  is  because  we 
have  here  sucli  very  early  contemporaneous  autliorities — not 
only  literary,  but  the  most  direct  which  exist,  namely,  monu- 
mental authorities — that  we  possess  the  means  of  obtaining  so 
early  a  history  of  the  Egyptians. 

If,  with  reference  to  this,  we  first  observe  the  local  and 
climatal  conditions  of  Eg^-pt,  we  shall  at  once  perceive  that 
they  aid  in  a  wonderful  manner  in  preserving  all  kinds  of 
monuments  and  other  relics  of  the  earliest  antiquity.  A 
damp  climate  generally  prevails  in  the  more  elevated  and 
northern  parts  of  Asia ;  and  in  the  more  favoured  regions, 
owing  to  a  periodical  rainy  season,  the  extensive  plains  are 
covered  with  a  fertile  soil  and  luxuriant  vegetation  (the 
barren  and  stony  deserts  being  always  deprived  of  any  high 
cultivation),  consequently  all,  even  the  most  solid,  monu- 
ments of  art,  where  we  might  have  hoped  to  find  them  in 


TO  EGYPTIAN  CHEOXOLOGT.  .3G9 

considerable  numbers,  are  overpowered  and  destroyed  by  the 
predominating  vital  power  of  nature,  ever  inimical  to  the 
works  of  man ;  whereas  the  fertility  of  'Egypt,  as  is  well 
known,  is  almost  entirely  independent  of  rain.  This  cer- 
tainly applies  less  to  the  damp  air,  often  pregnant  with  rain, 
along  the  sea-coast,  or  to  the  well-watered  and  marshy  low 
district  of  the  Delta.  But  it  is  principally  for  that  reason 
that  there  are  so  few  remains  of  the  numerous  large  and 
flourishing  towns  of  the  Delta,  and  that  these  are  hardly 
worth  mentioning.  Irregular  heaps  of  ruins  alone  exist  now 
of  Memphis,  tlie  rich  metropolis  of  Lower  Egypt,  reno\vned 
in  the  earliest  and  latest  periods  of  the  Monarchy,  and  of 
Heliopolis,  Sais,  Bubastis,  and  other  important  to^^-ns.  The 
granite  obelisks  in  Alexandria  are  so  corroded  by  the  weather 
that  their  inscriptions  are  hardly  recognisable. 

In  Upper  Egypt,  where  it  scarcely/  ever  rains,  it  is  totally 
different,  especially  with  respect  to  all  the  monuments  which 
are  situated  on  the  borders  of  the  desert,  out  of  reach  of  the 
annual  inundation,  and  this  is  uniformly  the  case  with  the 
iombs,  the  richest  storehouses  for  our  knowledge  of  ancient 
Egyptian  life,  whicli  in  this  country  alone  really  fulfil  their 
true  destination,  by  serving  as  an  asylum  against  destruction 
and  decay.  The  narrow  district  of  the  Nile,  annually  re- 
created, borders  in  its  whole  length  on  the  wide,  rocky,  and 
petrifying  desert.  The  to^^^ls  and  temples  were  therefore 
chiefly  built  on  the  boundary  between  the  two,  partly  not  to 
intrench  upon  the  fertile  ground,  partly  in  order  that  the 
buildings  should  be  upon  a  drier  and  more  secure  founda- 
tion. And  thus,  in  fact,  we  find  the  numerous  temples  and 
palaces  in  wonderful  preservation,  so  far  as  they  are  not 
mutilated  by  the  hand  of  man. 

Even  the  black  bricks  made  of  Xile  mud.  ?.ud  dried  in  the 
sun,  apparently  the  most  perishable  material,  have  not  un- 
frequently  been  preserved  in  the  open  air  for  thousands  of 
years,  in  the  form  in  which  they  were  built  up,  and  with 
their  coating  of  plaster.  A  row  of  great  vaulted  halls, 
built  entirely  of  black  iXile  bricks,  and  partly  covered  in  the 

2b 


370  I>'TEODUCTION 

inside  ^vitli  stucco,  stands  about  the  celebrated  temple  of 
tbe  great  Eamses,  in  Thebes.  They  date  from  the  same 
period  as  the  temple  itself,  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth 
century  before  Christ.  This  is  not  alone  testified  by  the 
architectonic  plan  of  the  building,  but  most  irrefutably  by 
the  bricks  themselves,  which  bear  the  name  of  Eamses- 
Miamun  stamped  upon  them,  as  a  mark  of  the  royal  manu- 
facture. At  that  time,  and  earlier,  during  the  whole  of 
the  18th  and  19th  Dynasties,  it  was  a  \erj  common  prac- 
tice to  line  the  excavated  rock-tombs  with  Nile  bricks, 
and  afterwards  to  paint  upon  the  stucco,  especially  wherever 
the  rock  was  friable,  and  was  therefore  hewn  into  a  vaulted 
roof.  But  the  same  custom  is  sometimes  found  even  in  the 
earliest  period  of  the  Pyramids  of  Memphis.  In  enclosed 
places,  not  only  the  buildiug  material,  but  the  colours,  both 
upon  the  stone  and  upon  the  plaster  covering,  have  almost 
without  exception  retained  their  original  freshness  and  per- 
fection, and  also,  Tevj  frequently,  where  they  have  been  ex- 
posed to  the  open  air. 

The  peculiar  incorruptibility  of  vegetable  and  even  of 
animal  matter  is,  however,  still  more  astonishing.  Our 
museums  are  filled  with  such  remains.  In  the  most  ancient 
tombs  of  Memphis,  a  multitude  of  objects  are  found  made 
of  wood,  such  as  sarcophagi,  chests,  and  boxes  of  all  kinds, 
chairs,  instruments,  small  ships,  lilcewise  grains  of  corn,  and 
dried  fruits,  such  as  pomegranates,  dates,  the  fruit  of  the 
Doum  Palm,  nuts,  almonds,  beans,  grapes ;  also  bread  and 
other  food,  besides  cloth  made  of  bast,  a  texture  of  reeds, 
papyrus,  and  an  incredible  quantity  of  linen.  The  countless 
number  of  mummies,  also,  are  well  known,  which,  though 
taken  out  of  their  tombs,  still  last  for  centuries  with  their 
skin  and  hair ;  also  all  mummified  bodies  of  animals,  with 
their  furs  and  feathers  ;  even  the  iuternal  parts  of  the  human 
body  could  there  be  embalmed  for  ever,  and  are  still  found 
in  vases  expressly  designed  for  that  purpose. 

This  wonderful  conservative  property  belonging  to  aU 
ancient  Egyptian  objects,  depends  therefore  chiefly  upon  the 


TO  EGYPTIAN  CIIEOyOLOGY.  37l 

sky  being  without  rain,  and  the  dry  soil  of  the  non-irrigated 
desert.  But  the  couutnt'  offered  another  marked  advantage 
above  other  lands,  namely,  the  greatest  abundance  of  ma- 
teriah  especiaUy  adapted  for  all  kinds  of  monuments. 

Chief  among  tliese,  is  an  admirable  stone  of  the  most 
varied  quality,  suited  as  well  to  building  of  all  kinds,  as  to 
the  most  delicate  sculpture.  The  mountain  range  which 
flanks  the  valley,  and  follows  the  course  of  the  river  from 
the  Delta  to  beyond  Thebes,  is  composed  of  limestone ;  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  ancient  Memphis,  upon  the  Lybian 
side,  where  the  Pyramids  stand,  it  is  a  solid  nummulitic 
limestone,  more  adapted  for  excavations  in  the  rock,  and 
for  building  stone,  than  for  sculpture  ;  on  the  opposite  side, 
among  the  Arabian  mountains,  it  has  the  finest  grain,  and  is 
of  a  uniform  density,  approaching  almost  to  marble ;  it  is 
capable  of  being  worked  in  any  manner,  and  on  account  of 
the  beautiful  polish  it  takes,  was  used,  among  other  pur- 
poses, for  the  external  covering  of  the  Pyramids,  while  the 
interior  was  made  of  the  Lybian  stone  off  the  ground,  upon 
which  they  were  erected.  The  Theban  range  of  mountains 
is  almost  everywhere  composed  of  rock,  of  such  an  extremely 
fine  quality,  that  the  sepulchral  passages  and  chambers  of 
the  dead,  hewn  out  in  the  living  rock,  most  of  them  several 
hundred  feet  deep,  running  in  various  directions,  were 
capable  of  receinng  everywhere  the  richest  sculptures,  in 
the  most  delicate  bas-reliefs,  directly  upon  the  polished 
surface  of  the  rock.  Beyond  Thebes  there  are  ranges  oi 
sandstone  mountains,  from  Grebel-Selseleh  to  Assuan.  From 
these,  and  especially  from  the  enormous  stone-quarries  of 
Selseleh,  the  architects  as  well  as  the  sculptors  of  the  New 
Monarchy  obtained  their  chief  supply  of  the  most  excellent 
and  durable  fine-grained  sandstone.  Pinally,  the  syenite 
and  granite  of  Assuan  are  still  considered  the  most  beautiful 
and  valuable  of  their  kind,  and  were  also  used  by  the  ancient 
Egyptians  not  only  for  their  monolithic  colossi,  obelisks, 
sarcophagi,  statues  for  entire  small  temples,  &c.,  but  were 
employed   as   a    building   stone,   at    all   periods.      In   the 

2b2 


372  I>'TEODUCTION 

Pyramid  of  Chufu,  the  high  walls,  the  ceiling,  and  floor 
of  the  greatest  sarcophagus  chamber,  are  entirely  made  of 
polished  granite,  and  the  third  Pyramid  of  Mencheres  was 
cased  with  it  up  to  a  certain  height. 

I  shall  here  pass  over  all  the  other  more  valuable  kinds 
of  stone,  particularly  those  of  the  higher  Arabian  moun- 
tains, abundantly  used  in  ancient  Egypt,  each  in  its  own 
way,  especially  the  beautiful  yellow  alabaster,  several  very 
valuable  breccias,  greenstone,  serpentine,  and  the  bluish-red 
porphyry  of  Gebel-Dochau,  which  was  much  employed  at 
a  later  period,  as  they  were  all  reserved  rather  for  pur- 
poses of  luxury.  But  we  must  not  omit  to  mention  here, 
that  the  abundance  of  building  stone  in  this  country  was 
doubled  by  the  ease  of  transport  from  one  end  of  Egypt  to 
the  other,  upon  the  great  water  road  of  the  Kile ;  therefore, 
sandstone  and  granite  were  used  nearly  as  much  at  Thebes, 
and  in  all  that  part  of  the  country  where  limestone  rock 
alone  was  to  be  found  near  at  liand,  as  in  Upper  Egypt, 
where  it  was  hewn. 

Limestone  or  sandstone  have  been  always,  and  in  all  coun- 
tries, the  most  important  material  for  monumental  pro- 
ductions. "Where  this  was  wanting,  or  was  obtained  with 
diificulty,  as  in  Babylon,  or  on  the  Indus,  or  in  the  north  of 
Germany,  earthen  bricks  were  used  as  the  best  substitute,  at 
least  for  building  purposes.  But  in  Egypt  also  they  could 
be  replaced  by  bricks  of  the  best  quality,  since  the  soft, 
clayey  Nile  mud  was  especially  adapted  for  the  latter.  Thus 
the  wary  Egyptians  not  only  did  not  neglect  this  expedient, 
but  made  the  utmost  use  of  it,  and  with  greater  results  than 
anywhere  else,  because  here  it  was  not  required  to  take  the 
place  of  some  better  material,  but  only  preferred  in  those 
cases  where  the  object  itself  made  it  appear  best  adapted. 
This  more  especially  applies  to  great  dykes,  town  walls,  and 
those  temple  enclosures  which  were  to  contain  no  covered 
rooms,  and  no  delicately  constructed  parts  ;  therefore,  even  in 
the  earliest  times.  Pyramids  were  also  built  of  bricks.  They 
were  employed  to  fill  up  the  ground  and  to  make  elevations, 
but  were  more  especially  everywhere  used  where  large  spaces 


TO  EGYPTIAN"  CHEOXOLOGT.  373 

bad  to  be  covered  in,  witbout  incurring  tbe  great  expense  of 
buge  slabs  of  stone,  before  tbe  useful  principle  of  concentric 
8tone-cuttin2:  was  known.  This  occasioned  tbe  remarkably 
earlj  use  of  brick-vaulted  roofs,  along  witb  tbe  imperfect 
stone  arcb,  wbicb  was,  as  it  were,  only  cut  out  of  borizontal 
layers  of  stone.  Hence  arose  tbe  custom,  connected  witb 
tbis,  wbicb  we  bave  already  mentioned,  of  lining  rock-cbam- 
bers  of  crumbling  stone  ^vitb  arcbes  of  JS'ile  bricks.  Tbe  ex- 
ternal layers  of  tbe  brick  buildings  in  Babylon  and  Nineveb 
were  generally  made  of  burnt  bricks,  and  yet  tbey  could  not 
resist  tbe  cHmate  and  time.  In  Egypt,  dried  bricks  alone 
were  everywhere  used ;  owing  to  tbeir  natural  solidity,  and 
to  tbe  climate,  tbey  answered  better  for  tbeir  monumental 
purpose  tlian  tbe  burnt  bricks  of  Babylon,  wbicb  is  still 
proved  by  tbe  numerous  extant  brick  buildings,  witb  tlieir 
stucco  and  tbeir  pictures. 

But  in  tbe  history  of  a  nation,  a  substance  favourable 
to  its  book  literature  is  of  no  less  importance  than  tbe 
material  for  building  and  sculpture.  Egj^Dt  possessed  also 
for  tbis  purpose  an  invaluable  product  of  tbe  country, 
tbe  papyrus  plant,  from  wbicb  tbey  were  able  to  ob- 
tain a  perfect  material  for  writing  upon,  unsurpassed 
throughout  antiquity.  IS'eitber  tbe  skins  of  tbe  lonians, 
nor  the  linen  of  tbe  ancient  Eomans,  nor  tbe  cotton 
atuft'  and  palm  leaves  of  tbe  Indian,  nor  tbe  parchment  of 
Mysia,  are  to  be  compared  witb  tbe  Egyptian  pap3rrus  in 
pliability,  or  in  tbe  power  of  extension,  in  durability  and 
cheapness ;  therefore  its  use  became  gradually  more  widely 
spread,  and  was  preserved  far  down  into  tbe  middle  ages. 
Even  the  later  discovered  paper  of  our  own  time  has  not 
only  retained  tbe  name  of  tbe  ancient  plant,  but,  with  regard 
to  its  material,  can  only  be  looked  upon  as  a  continuation 
and  perfecting  of  tbe  EgN^tian  paper,  since  pressed  fibres  of 
plants  (particularly  of  flax  and  hemp)  bave  proved  to  be  the 
most  suitable  material,  even  up  to  the  present  day.  In 
ancient  times  tbe  papyrus  plant  grew  more  especially  in  tbe 
marshy  ground  of  tlie  iS'ile  Delta,  and  is  only  elsewhere  men- 


37*4  INTRODUCTION 

tioned  by  Pliny  as  growing  near  S}Tacuse,  wliere  to  tliis  day 
it  is  found  in  great  abundance.  Why,  on  the  other  hand,  it 
has  become  almost  entirely  extinct  in  Egypt,  may  be  ex- 
plained by  the  circumstance  that  it  was  artificially  cultivated 
to  an  extent  far  beyond  its  natural  powers  of  growth,  and 
became  therefore,  like  other  plants,  exhausted.  Its  use  may 
be  traced  back  to  the  most  ancient  times  of  Egypt;  the 
papyrus  roll  and  the  writing  apparatus  are  found  upon 
monuments  as  early  as  the  4th  and  5th  Dynasties,  therefore 
between  three  and  four  thousand  years  before  Christ.  But 
this  discovery  of  very  ancient  Egypt,  which  may  perhaps  be 
considered  as  the  most  important,  next  to  the  invention  of 
writing,  only  obtains  its  full  significance  in  history  by  the 
unaltered  preservation  of  those  very  rolls  of  writing  for  thou- 
sands of  years.  Eor  they  not  only  afforded  the  Egyptian 
priests  the  benefit  of  prhneval  uninjured  archives,  but  we 
still  obtain  from  them  the  instructive  contemplation  of  a 
multitude  of  such  original  documents,  written  on  papyrus, 
from  the  prosperous  times  of  the  JMonarchy. 

In  addition,  however,  to  the  external  aid  afforded  by  the 
climate  and  productions  of  Egypt,  for  the  preservation  of  its 
history,  is  to  be  mentioned  tlie  internal  and  more  efficient 
influence  derived  from  the  original  direction  of  the  national 
character — its  historical  sense.  Tliis  can  by  no  means  be 
explained  solely  by  the  reaction  which  the  facility  of  immor- 
talising the  present,  and  the  peculiarly  conservative  nature 
of  the  neighbouring  desert,  might  produce  upon  the  original 
tendency  of  the  national  mind ;  as  little  as  .we  can  interpret 
the  striking  want  of  a  sense  for  history,  among  the  Indian 
people,  by  tlic  less  favourable  locality  of  their  country.  The 
ultimate  foundation  for  such  national  individualities  can 
always  alone  be  sought,  in  the  particular  part  they  are  called 
to  play  in  the  general  history  of  the  world.  But,  on  a 
nearer  examination,  we  can  have  no  doubt  that  such  an  his- 
torical sense  existed  among  the  Egyptian  people  in  an  un- 
usually high  degree,  and  was  cultivated  by  them  in  all  its 
stages. 


TO  EGYPTIAN  CHRONOLOGY.  375 

It  is  first  of  all  demonstrated  by  the  incredible  midtitude 
of  monuments  of  every  kind,  wbicli  Avere  at  all  periods 
erected  by  kings,  and  persons  of  private  fortune.  All  the 
chief  cities  of  Egypt  were  adorned  with  temples  and  pa- 
laces, and  the  other  towns,  frequently  indeed  more  insig- 
nificant places,  with  at  least  one,  often  with  several  sanc- 
tuaries; these  were  filled  with  statues  of  the  gods  and 
kings  of  all  sizes,  composed  of  the  most  valuable  stone, 
and  the  walls  externally  and  internally  were  covered  with 
coloured  sculptures.  To  erect  these  public  buildings,  and 
to  endow  them  splendidly,  was  the  exclusive  privilege  and 
pride  of  kings.  In  their  turn  the  richer  portion  of  the 
people  vied  with  them  in  their  concern  for  the  dead,  by 
erecting  monumental  tombs.  Whilst  with  reference  to  public 
buildings,  the  passion  for  building  among  the  Greeks  and 
Bomans,  in  their  most  prosperous  days,  can  alone  be  placed 
beside  that  of  the  Pharaonic  time,  the  Egyptian  necropoli 
far  surpass  those  of  Greece  and  Eome,  both  in  extent  and  in 
the  number  of  the  monuments,  as  well  as  in  the  richness  of 
their  execution,  especially  in  their  endowment  of  pictures 
and  inscriptions. 

But  next  to  the  multitude  and  splendour  of  these  works, 
tlie  unsurpassed  attention  paid  to  their  durability,  especially 
proves  the  innate  historical  sense  of  the  Egyptians.  That 
they  laid  due  stress  on  the  great  age  of  their  buildings, 
follows  from  the  annalistic  account  of  Manetho,  which  is 
in  no  respect  liable  to  suspicion,  by  which  we  learn  that 
even  Tosortiieos,  the  second  king  of  the  2nd  Dynasty,  a7id 
the  cotemporary  of  Menes,  commenced  budding  with  liewn 

stones  dia  ^ecTTtoi/  \l6u)v. 

And  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  mention  the  great  Pyramids 
of  Memphis,  those  colossal  massive  structures,  which,  solid 
tliroughout,  and  built  of  strong  nicely  joined  hewn  stones, 
are  piled  up  above  the  sepulchral  chambers,  cut  out  of  the 
living  rock,  generally  without  leaving  any  vacant  space,  like 
artificial  rocks  in  the  simplest  form,  as  if  he  who  built  them 
had  been  aware  that,  in  them  he  laid  the  foundation  of  the 


376  iXTROcrcTiox 

future  gigantic  building — the  History  of  Man.  This  may 
equally  refer  to  all  the  other  buildings,  whether  they  are 
destined  for  the  living  or  the  dead ;  the  desire  to  labour  for 
eternity  is  imprinted  upon  all  of  them. 

The  belief  which  was  early  formed  of  a  life  after  death, 
and  of  a  relation  continuing  to  subsist  between  the  soul  and 
the  body,  was  closely  connected  with  this ;  and  along  with 
it  the  exaggerated  care  that  was  bestowed  upon  the  bodies 
of  the  dead,  embalming  them,  and  swathing  them,  and 
shutting  them  up  in  double  and  triple  sarcophagi,  made  of 
the  strongest  wood,  and  the  hardest  stone,  which  were 
buried  in  deep  pits,  and  in  laboriously  excavated  rock-cham- 
bers. Even  in  the  most  peaceful  times  this  nation  appears 
always  to  have  anticipated  the  possibility  of  future  hostile 
invasions,  and  of  barbarous  and  rapacious  races ;  for  that 
reason  they  so  ingeniously  closed  the  large  granite  sarco- 
phagi by  means  of  metal  rods,  which  only  fell  down  into 
the  holes  prepared  for  them  in  the  sides,  at  the  last 
thrust  of  the  cover,  which  was  driven  drawer-like  in,  so  that 
the  sarcophagi  could  only  be  opened  by  the  destruction  of 
the  colossal  masses  of  stone.  They  also  endeavoured  to 
guard  even  the  passage  which  led  to  the  sarcophagi  cham- 
bers by  heavy  stone  trap-doors,  and  by  ingeniously  building 
up  the  walls,  so  as  to  divert  the  attention,  and  to  protect 
them  in  every  other  possible  way  from  inroad  and  desecra- 
tion, i'or  that  reason  many  subterranean  tombs  are  un- 
doubtedly still  hidden  from  ns ;  only  a  few  tombs  of  kings  are 
known,  and  many  important  monuments  will  still  be  dis- 
covered in  the  inexhaustible  necropoli  of  ^lemphis,  Abydos, 
and  Thebes. 

However,  we  already  possess  such  an  abundant  supply  of 
works  of  art,  and  other  things  belonging  to  daily  life,  from 
the  earliest,  down  to  the  latest  times  of  the  Pharaonic  Mo- 
narchy, that  these  in  themselves  alone,  considered  only  ob- 
jectively, would  form  an  extremely  important  source  of 
knowledge  concerning  the  mode  of  life  in  ancient  Eg\'pt. 
The  great  work  of  JS'apoleon,  the  "  Descripion  de  VEgrjpte'' 


TO  EGTPTIAX  CHEOXOLOGY.  377 

has  splendidly  demonstrated  liow  much  in  fact  maj  be  gained 
by  such  an  objective  examination  of  the  monuments  ;  it  con- 
tains matter  that  will  always  deserve  praise,  and  a  rich 
treasure  was  collected  for  the  cause  of  science,  althouo-h 
the  key  to  the  hieroglyphics  had  not  yet  been  discovered, 
and  consequently  all  the  monuments  being  chronologically 
uncomprehended,  or  "wrongly  comprehended,  stood  beside 
each  other,  as  in  a  picture  without  perspective,  on  one  plane 
surface. 

This  very  work,  however,  is  an  evident  proof  of  what  coidd 
not  be  done,  even  with  the  greatest  expenditure  of  means 
and  learning,  without  aid  obtained  from  the  inscriptions. 
The  history  of  the  people  in  all  its  varied  development  re- 
mained dark  and  fabulous  as  before.  It  is  the  same  with 
the  monuments  of  all  nations,  which  have  come  down  to 
us  either  without  any  written  character,  or  with  it  unde- 
ciphered,  like  those  of  our  own  heathen  ancestors,  or  of  the 
aborigines  of  South  America,  or  even  of  the  Babylonians. 
History  profits  very  little  by  them. 

The  Egyptians,  however,  from  the  beginning,  exhibit,  even 
on  this  higher  stage,  their  historical  sense  and  vocation. 
According  to  the  Eg}-ptian  annals,  it  was  the  same  King 
Tosorthros  who  gained  the  highest  reputation  relative  to  the 
perpetuity  of  the  history  of  Egypt  since  his  time,  not  only 
by  the  introduction  of  hewn  building  stones,  but  still  more 
by  the  care  he  bestowed  upon  the  development  of  the 
written  character ;  and  we  see  upon  the  monuments,  at  least 
since  the  time  of  Cheops,  between  three  and  four  thousand 
years  before  Christ,  a  perfectly-formed  system  of  writing, 
and  a  universal  habit  of  writing,  by  no  means  confined  to 
tlie  priesthood.  Even  at  that  time  the  writing  was  no 
longer  merely  monumental ;  tlie  signs,  indeed,  when  they 
were  rapidly  used,  sometimes  approached  the  hieratical 
short-hand.  It  therefore  appears  to  me  undoubted  that, 
even  in  the  time  of  Menes,  in  the  very  commencement  of 
our  Egyptian  history,  the  hieroglyphic  writing  had  been 
long  invented,  established,  and  practised,  which  we  must  of 


378  IXTEODUCTIOX 

course  presuppose  since  we  hold  Menes  to  be  historical; 
for  there  can  be  no  history  without  writing.  From  the 
choice  of  the  pictures  in  hieroglyphics,  and  from  other  rea- 
sons, it  appears  indeed  justifiable  to  suppose,  that  this  won- 
derful picture-writing  of  the  Egyptians  was  formed,  with 
reference  to  its  peculiar  character  in  Egypt  itself,  without 
any  other  influence  from  abroad,  although  they  may  have 
brought  the  first  beginning  of  it  with  them  from  their  origi- 
nal home  in  Asia.  But  that  a  people  should  produce  any- 
thing so  perfect  as  this  system  of  writing,  which  embraces  at 
once  all  the  stages  of  human  writing,  from  the  most  direct 
ideographical  symbolic  writing  through  syllables,  to  the 
equally  direct  notification  of  sound  by  means  of  vowels  and 
consonants,  certainly  indicates  a  long  previous  development. 
The  application,  however,  wliich  the  Egyptians  made  of 
this  early  invention,  from  which  so  much  resulted,  is  of  still 
more  importance.  Eor  they  not  only  employed  it,  as  often 
happens  among  nations  of  much  higher  civilisation,  in  tlie 
most  necessitous  cases,  and  where  it  was  most  immediately 
advantageous,  but  to  an  extent  which  surpasses  everything 
that  we  have  heard  of  elsewhere,  and  which  must  still 
astonish  any  one  who  considers  the  matter  for  the  first  time. 
While  the  Greeks  and  Eomans,  at  the  period  when  they 
were  most  lavish  of  their  writing,  only  placed  a  short  inscrip- 
tion of  a  few  words  on  the  front  of  their  largest  temples  aud 
most  splendid  buildings,  for  which  reason  the  monumental 
style  still  denotes  among  us  a  sliort  laconic  style,  as  seems 
most  suitable  to  the  speaking  stone ;  among  the  Egyptians 
the  temples  Avere  almost  covered  with  inscriptions.  All 
buildings,  wliich  were  erected  to  the  gods,  to  the  kings,  and 
to  the  dead,  had  generally  representations  or  inscriptions 
upon  all  the  walls,  ceilings,  pillars,  architraves,  friezes,  and 
posts — ^inside  as  well  as  outside.  In  place  of  only  giving  the 
most  necessary  information,  the  writing  here  forms  in  itself 
at  the  same  time  an  essential  ornament  of  the  architecture, 
as  is  the  case  also  with  representations  on  a  larger  scale.  The 
variegated  written  columns  on  the  white  or  grey  surfaces,  not 


TO  EGYPTIAN  CHEO'OLOGY.  3/9 

only  express  a  feeling  for  ornamental  drawing,  by  the  great 
variety  in  their  lines,  which  run  backward  and  forward  with 
the  utmost  regularity,  and  satisfy  the  painter's  eye  by  the 
brilliancy  of  the  varied  colours,  but  they  also  excite  the  ob- 
servation of  the  unlearned  by  the  figurative  and  direct  mean- 
ing of  the  written  objects,  taken  from  all  the  natural  king- 
dom, and,  lastly,  the  intelligent  curiosity  of  the  inquirer, 
especially  of  every  cultivated  man,  by  the  peculiar  significa- 
tion of  their  religious  or  historical  purport.  Thus  hiero- 
glyphics becomes  a  monumental  writing^  in  a  sense  and  to  a 
degree  of  perfection,  beyond  any  other  written  character  on 
earth. 

They  liad  also  so  far  overcome  the  technical  difficulty  of 
engraving  these  signs,  both  in  the  most  fragile  and  the 
hardest  kinds  of  stone,  that  it  seems  hardly  to  have  been 
considered  at  all,  though  these  signs  were  not  composed 
of  simple  mathematical  strokes,  like  the  Eoman  or  G-reek 
monumental  \vriting,  or  the  cuneiform  wiiting  of  the  Asiatics, 
but  were  at  the  same  time  writing  and  artistic  drawing. 

Among  the  Egyptians  the  written  character  was  not  alone 
the  constant  and  indispensable  accompaniment  of  archi- 
tecture, and  of  the  larger  representations  upon  the  walls 
of  the  temples,  but  was  placed  with  an  equal  predilec- 
tion upon  all,  even  the  smallest  objects  of  art  and  of  daily 
Hfe.  How  precious  among  other  nations  of  antiquity  are 
those  statues,  vases,  gems,  or  other  objects,  which  bear  upon 
them  inscriptions  with  respect  to  their  origin,  their  owners, 
or  their  intended  use!  This  is  the  universal  practice  in 
Egypt.  There,  no  Colossus  was  so  great,  and  no  amulet  so 
smaU,  that  it  should  not  itself  express  for  what  it  was  de- 
signed by  means  of  an  inscription ;  no  piece  of  furniture  that 
did  not  bear  the  name  of  its  owner.  Not  only  the  temples 
had  their  dedications,  in  which  the  builder  was  named,  and 
the  god  to  whom  it  was  consecrated  by  him,  but  they  were 
considered  of  such  importance  that  a  particular  class  of  in- 
dependent monuments  were  especially  pevoted  to  them,  viz., 
the  obelisks  at  the  entrance  of  the  gates ;  and  besides  this. 


880  INTRODUCTIO' 

every  fresh,  addition  to  the  temple,  every  newly-erected  pillar, 
actually  even  the  restoration  of  separate  representations, 
which  had  been  accidentally  injured  upon  the  old  walls,  had 
a  written  information  respecting  which  of  the  kings  built  it, 
and  what  he  had  done  for  the  enlargement,  embellishment, 
and  restoration  of  the  temple.  "We  sometimes  find  the  name 
of  the  reigning  king  recorded  upon  the  separate  building 
stones,  as  the  stone-cutter's  mark,  and  it  was  usually  stamped 
upon  the  bricks  of  royal  manufacture. 

Finally,  however,  writing  was  employed  among  the  Egj-p- 
tians  in  its  last  and  highest  destination,  as  hooh-icriting  for 
literary  purposes ;  and,  indeed,  as  we  have  already  mentioned, 
from  the  earliest  times,  for  the  use  of  the  papyrus  goes 
thus  far  back,  and  we  frequently  see  upon  the  representa- 
tions from  the  time  of  the  great  Pyramids  of  Memphis,  one 
or  more  scribes  occupied  in  registering  upon  sheets  their 
master's  possessions  in  flocks,  corn,  and  other  treasures. 
We  learn  from  the  historical  accounts  relative  to  the  first 
Dynasties,  which  are  still  preserved,  that  even  at  that  time 
they  possessed  Annals  oftlie  Monarcliy. 

If  we  now  reflect  upon  the  period  from  which  the  ori- 
ginal fragments  of  such  annals  have  come  down  to  us, 
namely,  the  beginning  of  the  New  ^Monarchy,  we  find  tliat 
this  extends  one  thousand  five  hundred  years  farther  back 
than  the  oldest  remains  of  book  literature  in  the  whole  of 
antiquity  put  together.  For  it  is  known  that  the  greater 
proportion  of  our  manuscripts  only  go  back  about  as  far  as 
the  tenth  century  of  our  era  ;  previous  to  this  their  number 
rapidly  diminishes,  and  the  small  fragment  of  a  manuscript 
of  Livy,  which  was  lately  brought  to  Berlin,  and  was  there 
recognised  as  probably  belonging  to  the  first  century  after 
Christ,  may  be  viewed  as  the  earliest  remains  of  a  book 
which  can  be  referred  to  out  of  Egypt ;  even  the  rolls — which 
were  reduced  to  coal  at  Herculaneum — do  not  go  farther 
back ;  whereas  in  Egypt  not  alone  numerous  papyri  have 
been  preserved  from  the  time  of  Ptolemy,  but  a  much  greater 
number  from  the  centuries  previous  to  that  time,  namely 


TO    EGYrTIAX  CDEOyOLOGT.  8S1 

from  the  sixteenth  to  the  thirteenth  century,  some  of  them 
of  extraordinary  length^.  The  greatest  proportion  of  them 
were  deposited  with  the  mummies,  and  therefore  only  contain 
what  relates  to  death  and  a  future  life  ;  but  other  rolls  were 
interred  in  the  tombs  as  the  most  seciu-e  places,  carefidly 
packed  in  particular  vases  or  baskets,  and  they  contain  lau- 
datory songs  upon  kings  or  gods,  historical  annals,  the  ac- 
counts of  the  temple,  that  which  relates  to  the  calendar, 
and  many  other  things  with  reference  to  this  life,  frequently 
contracts,  law-suits,  and  similar  documents  from  the  time 
of  tlie  Greeks,  sometimes  also  with  Greek  translations  or 
additions. 

The  large  number  still  in  preservation  leave  therefore 
no  doubt  concerning  the  remarkable  fact  communicated  by 
Diodorus  I.  49,  on  good  authority,  that  King  Osymandyas, 
?.  e.  Eamses-Miamun,  built  a  library  in  his  temple  at  Thebes, 
as  early  as  the  fourteenth  century  before  Christ.  The  de- 
scription which  he  gives  us  of  tliis  splendid  building  may  still 
be  traced  from  one  chamber  to  the  other  among  its  ruins, 
and  at  the  entrance — behind  which,  according  to  Diodorus, 
the  library  was  situated — Champollion  perceived  on  both 
sides  the  representations  of  Thoth,  the  God  of  AVisdom,  and 
of  Saf,  the  Goddess  of  History ;  then,  behind  the  former,  the 
God  of  Hearing,  and,  behind  the  latter,  the  God  of  Seeing, 
which  significantly  reminded  the  person  wlio  was  entering  of 
the  locality.   Several  hieratical  papyri,  which  we  still  possess, 

are  dated  from  the  Eameseion,  ^  I     (  ©linUD^^^^  I    audit 


is  also  frequently  mentioned  in  the  so-called  Historical 
Papyri.  I  found  in  Thebes  the  tombs  of  two  Librarians  of 
the  time  of  Eamses-]Miamun,  therefore  probably  belonging  to 
the  library  described  by  Diodorus ;  they  are  situated  to  the 
south-west  of  the  palace  of  Eamses,  behind  Der  el  Medinet. 
The  occupants  Avere  father  and  son,  since  this  office  was 
hereditary,  as  most  of  them  were.     The  father  was  called 

>  The  great  Book  of  the  Dead,  at  Turin,  is  upon  a  single  Roll,  57'  3" 
Ehineland  feet  in  length. 


382  IlfTEODUCTION 

JSTeb-nufre,  the  son  Nufre-hetep,  and  they  bore  the  titles  of 


I  lier  sclia'  tu, "  Superior  over  the  Books,"  aud  ^v^vyw^il* 

naa  en  scJia'  tic,  "  Chief  over  the  Books."  In  the  tomb  of 
the  son,  Eamses  sacrifices  to  Amen-Ea,  and  portions  of  two 
statues  of  the  deceased  are  still  scattered  about.  We  have 
good  reason  to  suppose  that  this  library,  of  which  we  have 
incidentally  received  still  further  information,  was  neither 
the  first,  nor  the  only  one,  and  this  is  inferred,  among  other 
things,  because  the  two  gods  above  mentioned  bear  as  one  of 
tlieir  fixed  titles,  not  only  here,  but  upon  other  monuments 
of  all  classes,  the  one  the  Master  and  the  other  the  Mistress 
of  the  Sail  of  Books,  and  that,  consequently,  the  idea  of  gods 
of  libraries  must  have  been  A^ery  familiar  to  the  Egyptians. 

This  also  explains  how,  in  the  earliest  times  of  the  Greek 
dominion,  under  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  it  was  possible  to  fill 
the  library  founded  in  Alexandria  in  the  space  of  a  few  years 
with  400,000^  rolls,  at  a  time  when  there  was  no  precedent 
in  the  Grecian  motherland  except  the  private  collection  of 
Aristotle.  It  is  explained,  when  we  remember  that  Phila- 
delphus found  such  an  abundant  store  already  existing  in  the 
Egyptian  archives  and  libraries.  It  no  longer  seems  anything 
remarkable  when  lamblichus-,  referring  to  a  Seleucus,  tells 
us  of  20,000  hermetic  books,  which  we  must  understand  to 
be  a  rough  computation  of  all  Egyptian  literature ;  the  notice 
does  not  obtain  a  mythological  character  until  the  introduc- 
tion into  it  of  the  cyclical  number  36,525,  which  lamblichus 
quotes  from  Manetho — of  course  from  the  false  one. 

The  fame  of  Egyptian  wisdom^,  which  was  universally  dif- 
fused throughout  the  ancient  world,  was  grounded  upon  an 
abundant  literature,  and  the  stock  of  knowledge  deposited 
therein,  which  increased  from  year  to  year  like  a  well-invested 
capital.     This  fame  was  never  disputed  even  by  the  Greeks 

1  Eitschl.    The  Alexandrian  Libraries.     1838.    P.  32,  &c. 

-  De  Myster.  viii.  1.  According  to  Bockh,  Manetho,  p.  117.  J. 
Firmicus  also  speaks  somewhere  of  20,000  books  of  Hermes.  Compare 
Fabr.  Bih.  gr.  ed.  Harl.  t.  i.  p.  85. 

2  1  Kings  iv.  30;  Acts  vii.  22. 


TO  EGYPTIAN  CnEOXOLOGT.  383 

themselves  ;  possessing  so  mueli  higher  natural  endowments 
than  others,  they  were  more  just  in  this  point  than  many 
of  our  modem  critics,  who  would  rather  consider  the  genius 
of  the  Greeks  as  auto-didactic,  grown  up  in  a  barbarous 
wilderness.  Herodotus  calls  the  Egyptians  "  by  far  the  best 
instructed  people  with  whom  he  has  become  acquainted,  since 
they,  of  all  men,  store  np  most,  for  recollection^  When  the 
Eleians  wished  to  establish  their  Olympian  games,  they  sent 
an  embassy  to  the  Egyptians,  they  being  the  wisest  people  of 
all  the  earth,  to  obtain  their  judgment  and  their  good  advice 
upon  this  great  project^. 

The  distinguished  series  of  celebrated  men^  who  are  said 
to  have  carried  Egj^ptian  -wisdom  to  the  Greeks,  begins  as 
early  as  the  mythical  times.  Danaus  brought  the  first  germ 
of  higher  civilisation  from  Egypt  to  Argos-^,  and  Erectheus, 
King  of  Athens,  was  considered  by  some  an  Egyptian*,  and 
taught  the  Eleusinian  mysteries  according  to  the  manner  of 
the  Eg}^ptians.  The  holy  singers  of  antiquity,  Orpheus^, 
Musaeus^,  Melampus''',  and  Eumolpus^,  thence  acquired 
their  theological  wisdom  ;  and  even  to  Homer^  himself 
Egypt  may  not  have  been  unknown.  The  most  ancient 
artists  of  Greece,  Daedalus^^,  Telecles^^,  and  Theodorus^^, 
are  said  to  have  educated  themselves  in  this  land  of  pri- 
meval art,  and  have  employed  the  Egyptian  canon  of  pro- 
portions.     Lycurgus"^^   and    Solon^*  introduced  into   their 

1  Herod,  ii.  160. 

-  See  the  general  accounts  in  Diodor.  Sic.  i.  69,  96—98;  Plut.  de  Is. 
et  Osir.  c.  X. ;  Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  p.  131 ;  Sylb.  Cedren.  Hist.  comp. 
p.  94  B. 

3  Herod,  ii.  91 ;  vii.  94,  &c.     [Diod.  i.  28.]  ^  Diod.  i.  29. 

^  Diod.  i.  69,  96;  iv.  25.     [Justin.  Mart,  ad  Graec.  c.  xiv.] 

«  Diod.  i.  96.     [Clem.  Protr.  p.  12;  Uireph.  Synes,  p.  421.] 

:  Ibid.  s  Diod.  i.  29. 

9  Diod.  i.  69,  96.  Heliodor.  Aeth.  iii.  14;  Clem.  Div.  i.  p.  130. 
[Justin.  Mart.  c.  xiv.  17.] 

1'^  Diod.  i.  96.  ^^  Diod.  i.  98.  ^-  Ibid. 

13  Diod.  i.  96;  Plut.  de  Is.  et  Osir.  c.  x.  [Plut.  Lye.  i.  p.  41;  F. 
Isocr.  Laud.  Busir.  p.  329.] 

'*  Plato.  Tim.  p.  21 ;  Diod.  i.  69,  96;  Plut.  de  Is.  c.  x.;  Vita  Solon, 
0.  xxvi.     [Justin.  Mart.  c.  xiv.;  Cyrill.  c.  Julian,  i.  p.  15.] 


384  INTEODrCTION 

fatherland  all  the  ^Yise  regulations  they  there  became  ac- 
quainted with ;  and  Herodotus^  especially  tells  us  that  the 
Egyptian  laws  relating  to  the  surveying  of  the  land,  by 
which  every  one  was  obliged  to  declare  to  the  monarch  his 
annual  revenue,  were  transferred  to  Athens  by  Solon,  and 
were  in  use  even  in  his  time.  Cleobulus,  tlie  sage  of  Lindus, 
is  said  also  to  have  visited  Egypt-.  It  signifies  little  how 
much  historical  foundation  there  is  for  these  accounts.  The 
general  direction  taken  by  tradition,  with  reference  to  it, 
proves  even  more  than  separate  facts  could  do,  the  early  and 
late  general  universal  recognition  of  Eg}^tian  wisdom.  It 
was  considered  a  glory  to  participate  in  it. 

But  Egypt  was  especially  regarded  as  a  university  for 
philosophy,  and  for  all  that  could  be  gained  through  science 
and  learning.  "We  therefore  see  philosophers,  mathematicians, 
physicians,  historians,  resorting  to  Eg}'|)t,  each  emulating 
with  the  other,  and  studying  for  many  years  under  Egyptian 
teachers.  Tlie  houses  in  Heliopolis  in  which  Plato  and  the 
mathematician  Eudoxus  had  lived  for  tliirteen  years,  were  still 
shown  to  Strabo^.  The  observatory  of  Eudoxus,  in  which  he 
is  said  to  have  made  certain  observations  of  the  stars,  and  on 
Canobus,  in  particular,  bore  his  name"*  in  the  time  of  Strabo. 
Even  Thales'"'  was  instructed  by  the  Egyptian  priests,  and  as  it 
is  expressly  said,  had  besides  them,  no  other  teachers.  Here  he 
became  acquainted  with  the  division  of  the  year  into  seasons, 
and  into  365  days ;  and  here  also  he  learnt  how  to  take  the 
measurement  of  high  objects,  such  as  the  Pyramids  by  their 
shadow,  at  a  particular  hour  of  the  day^.  Archimedes^  in- 
vented his  celebrated  water  screw  in  Egypt,  and  there  applied 
it,  in  the  establishments  which  were  devoted  to  the  irrigation 

1  ii.  177.  -  Diog.  Laert.  i.  89. 

3  Strab.  xvii  p.  806.  807;  Cic.  de  fin-  ^'-  29;  Diod.  Sic.  i.  96;  Plut. 
dels.  c.  X.  de  genio  Socr.  p.  578;  Clem.  Al.  Strom,  i.  p.  131;  Diog. 
Laert.  iii.  6. 

^  Strab.  ii.  p.  119;  xvii.  p.  807. 

^  Plut.  de  Is.  c.  X.  de  placit  philos.  i.  3  ;  Clem.  i.  p.  130;  Diog. 
Laert  i.  27.  [Theod.  Melit.  Proem,  in  Astr.  c.  xii.;  Cyrill.  c.  Jul.  i. 
p.  15.] 

"  Diog.  Laert.  i.  27;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  17.  '  Diod.  v.  37. 


TO  EGYPTIAN  CHRONOLOGY.  385 

of  the  land.  Pythagoras^  was  a  long  time  in  Egypt,  and  all 
that  -we  know  concerning  the  dogmas  of  this  influential  man 
agrees  with  this  account-.  His  doctrine  of  the  immortality 
of  the  soul,  especially,  is  very  decidedly  referred,  by  Hero- 
dotus, to  'Egypt.  He  says,  "  This  doctrine  is  wrongly  pro- 
nounced hy  certain  GreeTcs,  whom  he  will  not  inention,  a^ 
belonging  'peculiarly  to  them^^^  by  which  he  evidently  has 
Pythagoras  and  his  master  Pherecydes  in  view,  for  it  is  also 
related  of  the  latter  that  he  was  in  Egypt*.  And  it  is  in 
fact  now  sufficiently  known,  from  the  monuments,  that  the 
Eg}'ptians  possessed  from  the  earliest  times  very  distinct 
ideas  about  the  transmigration  of  souls,  and  of  judgment 
after  death^.  The  philosophers  Anaxagorim^,  Bemocritus^ , 
Sphaerus^,  the  mathematician  Oinopidea^,  the  physician 
Chrysippus'^^,  also  Alcaeus^^  and  Euripedes'^^,  are  enume- 
rated among  the  visitors  to  Egypt,  Einally,  the  same  is 
known  of  Hecateus^^,  Herodotus,  Diodorus'^^,  Straho,  and 
many  less  celebrated  Grreeks. 

All  these  men  did  not  merely  desire  to  acquire  a  knoAV- 
Icdge  of  Egypt  as  eye-witnesses,  but  went  there  principally 
to  gain  instruction  from  the  learned  priests  on  particular 
branches  of  knowledge.  This  is  the  light  in  which  those 
historians  regarded  it,  who  give  us  more  detailed  accounts  of 
these  wanderings  of  the  Greek  scholars  to  Egypt^^.  The 
Egyptians  themselves  indeed  valued  it  so  highly  that  the 
priests,  as  Diodorus,  i.  96,  expressly  recounts,  recorded  in 
their  annals  the   visits   of  celebrated  Greeks.      It  thence 

'  Cic.  de  Jin.  v.  29;  Diod.  i.  96;  Strab.  vii.  p.  297;  xiv.  p.  638; 
Plut.  dc  Is.  c.  X.;  Diog.  Laert.  viii,  3,  11;  Clem.  1.  1.  [Justin,  ilart. 
c.  xiv.  19;  Isocr.  Busir.  p.  227.] 

^  Herod,  ii.  81 ;  Diog.  Laert.  viii.  24,  33,  34;  Diosr.  Laert.  viii.  4. 

3  IJerod.  ii.  123;  Diog.  Laert.  viii.  14;  Cic.  Tusc.  i.  16. 

*  Clem.  Alex.  i.  p.  129;  Cedreu.  p.  94,  B.  [Theod,  Melit.  Pr.  in 
Astr.  c.  12.] 

*  See  preface  to  the  Todtenbuche  der  ^Egi/pter,  p.  13,  &c. 

6  Cedren.  p.  94,  B.  '  ])iod.  i.  96;  Diog,  L.  IX.  35. 

«  Diog.  L.  VIL  177.  ^  Diod.  i.  96. 

'°  Diog.  L.  VIL  186;  viii.  87.  "  Strab.  L  ii.  p.  37. 

•2  Diog.  L.  III.  6.  '3  Ikroil.  ii.  143. 

'*  Diod.  i.  44.  '5  _oiod.  i.  69. 

2  C 


386  INTRODUCTION 

arose  that  the  most  distinguished  among  them,  even  the 
individual  teachers,  remained  known  by  name  and  descent, 
and  were  handed  down  to  us^.  These  names  bear  upon 
them  a  genuine  Egyptian  stamp,  and  therefore  offer  no 
grounds  for  any  material  doubt  from  this  side.  Plutarch 
calls  the  teacher  of  Solon,  SoficJiis,  from  Sais ;  of  Pythagoras, 
OnnupMs,  from  Heliopolis ;  and  of  Eudoxus,  Chonuphis, 
from  Memphis.  Clemens  adds  to  these  the  teacher  of  Plato, 
SechmipMs;  all  of  them  names  whose  Egyptian  form  may 
be  easily  restored. 

It  is  evident  that  this  instruction  must  have  contained 
more  than  an  unintelligible  knowledge  of  symbols,  a  petri- 
fied mysticism,  and  empty  dreams,  as  people  have  been 
hitherto  frequently  inclined  to  believe.  Real  knowledge 
and  scientific  experiences  could  only  be  founded  upon  a 
copious  literature,  carefully  fostered  for  many  ages.  Its 
great  treasures  had  indeed  been  long  known  and  envied 
before  the  time  of  the  Ptolemies ;  the  Persians,  under 
Artaxerxes,  carried  off  a  portion  of  them,  together  with  other 
treasures,  from  the  ancient  archives  of  the  temples,  and  only 
restored  them  for  a  high  ransom^.  But  their  contents 
began  for  the  first  time  to  be  better  known,  and  more  per- 
fectly understood,  when  the  translations  appeared,  which 
were  extensively  made  for  the  Greeks^  after  the  time  of  the 
first  Ptolemies.  Strabo,  among  others,  affords  us  a  valuable 
proof  of  this,  where  he  speaks  of  the  thirteen  years'  resi- 
dence of  Plato  and  Eudoxus  in  Egypt^.  "  These  priests  (he 
says)  were  versed  in  astronomy,  but,  mysterious  and  far 
from  communicative,  it  was  only  after  the  lapse  of  time  and 
by  polite  attentions  that  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  in- 
duced to  communicate  some  of  their  doctrines  ;  but  still  the 
most  part  was  kept  concealed  by  these  barbarians.  For  in- 
stance, to  complete  the  perfect  year,  they  added  that  portion 
of  the  day  and  night  which  goes  beyond  the  365  days ; 

*  Plut.  de  Is.  c.  X. ;  de  genio  Socr.  p.  578,  F ;  Clem.  Al.  Str.  i. 
p.  131. 

*  Diod.  xvi.  51 .  »  Sync.  p.  271,  D.  *  xvii.  p.  806. 


to"lgtptian  cheo^'ologt.  387 

neveHJieless,  the  perfect  year  remained  unJtnoicn  to  tlie  GreeJcs, 
as  well  as  many  other  things,  until  the  later  astronomers  learnt 
it  from  the  treatises  of  the  priests,  which  were  translated  into 
Qreelc  ;  and  they  still  refer  to  the  writings  of  the  Egyptians, 
as  icell  as  to  those  of  the  Chaldeans^. 

But,  in  order  to  view  more  distinctly  the  multiplicity  of 
the  Egyptian  branches  of  learning,  I  shall  mention  the  forty- 
two  Hermetic  books,  probably  chieily  sacred,  described  to  us 
by  Clemens  of  Alexandria,  from  a  genuine  ancient  authority^. 
"We  learn  from  it  that  the  ten  first  and  principal  books,  those 
of  the  Prophets,  called  the  Hieratical,  or  Priest  Books,  treated 
of  the  laws  and  the  gods,  namely,  of  the  highest  theological 
education,  which  embraced  at  once  di^^ne  and  human  laws^, 
and  pliilosophy*.  To  this  was  appended,  as  an  immediate 
and  necessary  complement,  the  ten  books  of  the  Stolistes — 
liturgical  in  their  contents — containing  ordinances  about  the 
sacrifice,  and  the  ofiering  of  the  first-fruits,  of  hymns,  prayers, 
processions,  feasts,  &c. 

To  these  twenty  writings,  which  were  in  a  stricter  sense 
sacerdotal,  succeeded  fourteen  others,  treating  of  more 
iecidar  learning,  what  we  should  call  the  eccact  sciences, 
which  were  indeed  indispensable  to  the  priests,  but  in  them- 
selves bore  no  theological  character.  These  also  were  again 
divided  into  two  divisions ;  of  which  the  first,  consisting  of 
ten  books,  belonged  to  the  hierogrammatist^,  and  not  alone 
embraced  the  wide  field  of  hieroglyphics,  i.  e.  writing  and 

'  See  respecting  this,  Letronne.  Translation  of  the  17th  Book  of 
Strabo.  (Ge'ographie  de  Strabon.  t.  i.  Paris,  1819.  p.  390.)  Com- 
pare the  passage  in  Herodot.  ii.  123,  where,  though  not  by  name,  he 
accuses  Pythagoras  and  Pherecydes  of  having  ascribed  to  themselves 
irhat  tliey  had  borrowed  from  the  Egyptians.  The  same  was  related 
by  some  of  Eudoxus.    Diog.  Laert.  viii.  89. 

'  Strum,  vi.  p.  260,  ed.  Sylb.  See  also  Bunsen  JEgyptens  Sielle  in 
der  Weltgesch.,  Bd.  i.  p.  34,  &c.  {EgupCs  Place  in  llnivasal  History, 
book  i.  p.  9.)  H 

3  Aelian.  Hist.  var.  xiv.  34,  says,  that  the  Egyptians  in  ancient  times 
had  priests  as  their  judges. 

*  Clem.  Strom,  i.  p.  131.  ^  [Sacred  Scribe.] 

2  c2 


388  ISTTEODTJCTIOK 

drawing;  but  also  all  that  fell  witMu  the  department  of 
the  measurement  of  space  and  of  geometry,  commencing 
with  the  more  general,  cosmograpliy,  universal  geography, 
the  cliorograpliy  of  Egypt,  and  the  course  of  the  Nile ; 
then,  also  consequent  upon  that,  the  topograpliy  of  the 
temple- sites  ;  and  lastly,  the  most  local  arrangements  of 
the  furniture  of  the  temple,  as  it  were,  or  naograpliy.  The 
remaining  four  books,  the  ast7'oIogical,  more  properly  called 
by  us  the  astronomical,  were  committed  to  a  particular  class 
of  scholars — the  horoscopi,  or  time  seers.  This  portion  of 
their  science,  so  peculiarly  important  to  the  Egyptians,  and 
therefore  kept  distinct  from  the  rest,  entered  into  everything 
that  it  was  necessary  to  be  acquainted  with  for  the  calcula- 
tion of  time,  both  in  detail  and  on  a  large  scale,  therefore 
more  especially  with  the  heavenly  chronometers,  the  stars, 
and  indeed,  above  all,  the  position  of  the  fixed  stars  (and  the 
constellations)  ;  then  the  arrangement  of  the  planets  (and 
their  revolutions),  the  conjunctions  and  phases  of  the  sun 
and  moon ;  lastly,  the  rising  of  the  stars.  The  practical 
purpose  was  indicated  by  the  symbols  of  the  horoscopes,  the 
horologium,  and  the  palm-branch  of  the  years  and  periods. 

After  the  strict  sciences,  there  followed  the  two  books  of 
the  Chanter.  He  represented  the  only  art — at  least,  the 
only  one  which  was  recognised  as  such,  by  its  separate  posi- 
tion— that  of  onusic.  Architecture  and  the  art  of  drawing 
were  practised,  and  even  with  a  feeling  for  art,  but  they  had 
not  emancipated  themselves  as  independent  arts,  from  the 
rule  and  line  condition  of  the  hierogrammatist.  Even  music, 
which  was  apprehended,  and  came  into  the  world  for  the 
first  time  through  the  Greeks,  was  not  considered  by  the 
Egyptians  as  an  independent  art,  in  our  sense  of  the  word, 
neither  could  it  be  regarded  a  science  like  drawing,  as  if  it 
were  equally  an  efflux  of  the  horoscopical  chronology,  to  which 
it  was  externally  attached.  It  was  on  that  account  necessary 
to  keep  them  apart.  We  must,  therefore,  look  upon  the 
chanter  only  as  a  precentor — a  practical  leader  of  the  reli- 


TO  EGYPTIAN  CHEOXOLOGT.  389 

gious  and  festive  songs.  His  two  books  contained  hymns 
to  the  gods,  and  (encomiastic-poetical)  observations  upon 
the  royal  life,  but  only  as  the  subject-matter  of  the  religious 
chorus.  It  cannot  be  known  how  far  real  music  was  here 
brought  into  consideration  ;  but  certainly  the  wSos  had 
nothing  to  do  with  the  theological  purport  of  his  hymns — 
information  concerning  this  must  be  derived  from  the 
prophets  and  the  Stolist. 

The  contents  of  the  last  six  books  were  medicinal,  and 
treated  of  the  structure  of  tlie  body,  of  diseases,  the  organs, 
curatives,  for  the  eyes  especially,  and  of  female  cases.  They 
are  assigned  by  Clemens,  probably  from  a  misunderstanding, 
to  the  FastopTiori,  i.  e.  the  watchers  of  the  temples^. 

This  survey  of  the  forty-two  ancient  sacred  books  deserves 
here  especially,  our  full  consideration,  because  it  brings 
clearly  to  light  an  intelligent,  thoughtful,  general  view  of 

'  The  Pastophori  do  not  appear  in  the  train  of  the  priests,  and  are 
expressly  separated  from  the  priests  (iepety)  by  Porphyrius.  They 
"were,  as  their  name  implies,  the  bearers  of  the  small  sacred  chapels  of 
the  gods  which  formed  the  principal  furniture  of  the  temple.  That  is 
probably  the  reason  why  they  appear  in  the  great  processions,  where 
the  images  of  tlie  gods  were  carried  about,  not  as  priests,  but  as 
umler-officcrs  of  the  temple;  and  they  are,  therefore,  rightly  placed  by 
Porphyrins  along  with  the  veoxopoi,  the  sweepers  of  the  temple,  and 
the  other  servants  of  the  temple  {ynovpyoi).  As  bearers  of  the 
sacred  shrines  they  were  also  their  watchmen,  and,  therefore,  especially 
the  overseers  of  the  temple,  the  watchmen  of  the  temple  ;  therefore 
their  hieroglyphical  sign,  according  to  Horapollo,  i.  41,  is  a  house 
•watchman,  (pvKa^  o'ikov,  because  the  temple  is  guarded  by  him, 
Sia  TO  iTTo  TovTov  (^vXciTTfordai  TO  tepov.  But  what  could  the  temple 
•watchmen  have  had  to  do  with  medicine  ?  There  is  nowhere  even 
the  most  distant  relation  indicated  between  the  pastophori  and  the 
physicians;  indeed,  their  occupations  appear  necessarily  to  exclude 
them.  I  therefore  believe  that  there  is  either  some  fundamental  error, 
or  a  false  reading,  in  the  passage  of  Clemens,  which  cannot  yet  be 
solved.  The  pastophori  were  the  principal  under-oflScers,  and  there- 
fore were  united  by  their  rank  with  the  chanter,  the  lowest  class  of  the 
priests.  Was  this  possibly  the  reason  why  the  books  of  medicine, 
which  succeeded  those  of  the  chanter  in  this  canon,  were  ascribed  to 
them?  There  were  many  more  than  fortj'-two  sacred  books,  and  they 
must  have  all  been  lodged  among  the  archives  of  the  temple,  without, 
however,  being  assigned  to  any  particular  class  of  priests. 


390  INTRODUCTION 

the  universe,  straining  after  inward  perfection  and  con- 
scious arrangement,  and  also  the  necessity  of  giving  this  a 
prominent  form  by  literature,  and  of  introducing  it  practi- 
cally into  life.  Proceeding  from  the  general  to  the  indi- 
vidual, from  the  spiritual  to  the  external,  from  the  theoretical 
to  the  practical,  as  well  in  the  succession  of  the  general  sec- 
tions as  in  the  arrangement  of  the  separate  books,  this  code 
forms  a  defined  whole,  which  we  nowhere  find  repeated 
among  any  of  the  nations  of  antiquity,  not  even  among  the 
Indians.  Unfortunately,  the  ten  first  and  most  important 
books,  which  contained  their  fundamental  ideas  on  religion, 
philosophy,  and  law,  and  therefore  the  highest  and  most 
spiritual  department  of  their  contemplation,  are  not  so  fully 
described  as  the  following  sections,  as  regards  the  detail  of 
their  contents  ;  therefore  the  enumeration  of  the  separate 
branches  of  knowledge  with  which  the  hierogrammatists, 
the  real  scholars,  and  the  horoscopi,  next  to  them,  occupied 
themselves,  and  which  comprehended  the  whole  visible  and 
measurable  world,  is  so  much  the  more  worthy  of  our  notice. 
At  the  same  time  we  must  remember  that  in  the  con- 
struction of  this  canon  there  was  no  intention  of  giving  the 
chief  features  of  an  encyclopaedia  of  their  sciences.  Every 
scientific  purpose  was  necessarily  laid  aside,  only  the 
thoroughly  practical  aim  of  a  sacerdotal  compendium  was 
contemplated,  in  which  learning  only  formed  part  of  the 
education  of  a  priest,  and  merely  occupied  a  third  place  after 
theology  and  the  liturgical  forms,  and  was  only  represeiited 
so  far  as  a  direct  practical  use  could  be  obtained  from  it. 
Philosophy  was  therefore  not  at  all  separated  from  theology ; 
human  law  was  only  an  efflux  of  divine  law.  The  know- 
ledge of  geometry  was  necessary  for  the  surveying  of  the 
land,  the  division  of  the  produce,  the  building  and  decoration 
of  the  temples  ;  the  knowledge  of  astronomy  for  the  calendar 
of  festivals,  and  the  civil  calculation  of  time ;  singing 
formed  a  part  of  the  Liturgy.  jS'or  is  proof  wanting  that  the 
knowledge  and  literature  of  Egypt  far  siirpassed  what  was 
required  by  the  hierarchy,  that  the  thirty-six  or  forty-two 


TO  EGYPTIA^'  CHEO^'OLOGT.  391 

books  were  also  the  earliest  and  original  centre,  to  wliick 
later  progressive  improvements  might  everywhere  attach 
themselves. 

We  frequently  read  in  other  authors  about  the  "  Sacred 
Writings^''  of  the  Egyptians,  or  of  their  Sermetic  books, 
but  it  would  be  wTong  to  refer  all  these  notices  to  the  forty- 
two  books  named  by  Clemens.  It  seems  to  me  by  no  means 
improbable  tliat  the  above-mentioned  precepts  on  the  life  of 
the  king,  in  Diodorus,  which  for  Egj'pt  bear  a  thoroughly 
classical  stamp  on  them,  formed  a  portion  of  the  sacred  law- 
books of  tlie  prophets,  and  that  the  laudatory  song  upon  the 
deceased  king,  mentioned  at  the  end  of  that  passage,  might 
have  been  composed  in  imitation  of  the  eKXoyto-/x6s  /3acrtXtKo5 
^iov,  in  the  last  of  the  thirty-six  books,  and  have  only  been 
employed  in  the  last  case.  But  it  is  not  to  be  supposed 
the  forty-two  books  themselves  contained  separate  laudatory 
songs  on  particular  kings,  although  such  songs,  understood 
in  a  wider  sense,  certainly  belonged  to  the  sacred  books. 

We  read  in  the  same  passage  of  Diodorus,  that  wise  say- 
ings and  actions  of  the  most  distinguished  men  were  read 
aloud  to  the  king  after  the  sacrifice  by  the  hierogrammatist 
from  the  "  Sacred  Books,"  in  rav  Upcov  /3i/3Xtoi/.  We  still  pos- 
sess ancient  pap}Ti  which  contain  proverbs  of  a  similar  kind, 
some  of  them  even  put  into  the  mouths  of  certain  celebrated 
kings  belonging  to  the  Old  Monarchy,  such  as  Amenemha  I., 
the  head  of  the  12th  Dynasty-,  resembling  somewhat  in  their 
form  the  proverbs  of  Solomon.  For  the  sake  of  the  reader, 
and  the  one  who  reads  out  loud,  they  are  divided  by  red  points 
recurring  at  nearly  stated  intervals  into  short  verses,  accord- 
ing to  the  sentences,  like  the  Hebrew  scriptures.  But  these 
could  not  have  belonged  to  the  ten  rolls  of  the  hierogram- 
matists,  nor  to  the  priests'  canon  in  general. 

It  were  more  easy  to  suppose  that  the  first  book  of  the  singer 

'   [Diod.  i.  70,  73,  96.] 

^  1  speak  here  of  the  first  section  of  the  Papyrus  of  Sallier,  No.  2, 
which  is  communicated  in  tlie  Select  Papyri  in  the  hieratic  character^ 
from  the  collection  of  the  British  Museum.    London.  1844.     PI.  x. — xii. 


392  I^TTEODTJCTIOK 

may  have  consisted  of  single  hymns  and  prayers  addressed  to 
particular  divinities,  such  as  we  still  possess  several  instances 
of,  e.  g.  to  Ea,  Amen  Ea,  Mut^,  to  Thoth-,  to  Osiris^,  Atmu^, 
&c.,  yet  probably  it  likewise  only  contained  the  daily  litanies, 
which  belonged  to  every  temple  service,  and  which  were  also 
expressly  mentioned*.  I  can  as  little  agree  with  the  opinion^ 
that  the  great  Book  of  the  Dead  of  the  Egyptians  was  one  of 
the  ten  books  of  the  Stolistes,  although  I  consider  it  to  be  also^ 
a  sacred  book  ascribed  to  Hermes.  Even  its  extent  forbids 
the  former  supposition.  And,  moreover,  it  is  by  no  means  a 
liturgical  book,  which  one  belonging  to  the  Stolistes  must 
have  been,  nor  a  book  of  Eituals,  as  ChampoUion  appears  to 
have  regarded  it,  but  essentially  a  history  of  the  soul  after 
death,  therefore  it  was  placed  in  the  tomb  with  the  deceased. 
The  theological  basis  of  this  work,  however,  was  undoubtedly 
included  in  the  hieratical  books  of  the  prophets. 

Bunseu^  justly  makes  a  distinction  between  the  civil  law- 
book, and  the  sacred  law-books  of  the  prophets.  It  was 
impossible  that  the  regulations  and  precepts  of  the  six  law- 
givers, who  are  mentioned  by  Diodorus^,  could  have  been  re- 
ceived into  the  canon,  this  can  only  be  supposed  of  the  most 
ancient  portion  of  them — the  laws  of  Menes,  which  were 
ascribed  to  Hermes  by  himself,  and  probably  were  the  foun- 
dation both  of  the  religious  and  of  the  civil  law. 

"We  shall  now  more  easily  understand  why  still  less  space 
was  afforded  in  the  canon  of  Clemens  for  the  historical  litera- 

'  I  procured  in  Thebes  a  number  of  such  hymns  for  the  Eoyal 
Museum  at  Berlin.  Several  of  them  were  composed  in  the  reign  of 
King  Ramses  IX.,  in  the  20th  Dynasty.  There  was  a  hymn  to  Amen- 
Ra,  upon  a  roll  of  eleven  pages,  in  the  Egyptian  collection  of  JSIr. 
Sams  in  London,  1839. 

*  Upon  a  wooden  tablet  covered  with  fine  white  chalk,  in  the  British 
Museum. 

3  In  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  c.  128,  134,  139,  &c.  [Plut.  de  Is.  c.  52.] 

*■  Porphvr.  de  ahst.  iv.  8. 

5  Bunsen,  Bd.  i.  p.  55.     {Eg.'s  PI.  m  Un.  Hist.  bk.  i.  p.  28.) 

^  See  my  introduction  to  the  Todtenbtiche  der  j^gypter.  Leipzig, 
1842,  p.  17. 

7  Bd.  i.  p.  47.    (E(/.'s  PL  in  Un.  Hist.  bk.  i.  p.  20.) 

»  i.  94,  95. 


TO  EGTPTIA>^  CHEONOLOar.  393 

tare.  It  presented  neither  a  speculative  nor  a  practical  side 
to  the  object  which  Egyptian  theology  had  in  view,  and  re- 
garded in  this  light,  therefore,  it  must  appear  subordinate. 
But  on  that  account  it  no  less  existed.  This  is  proved  as  well 
by  the  authors^  themselves  as  by  the  original  remains,  which. 
we  still  possess.  Historical  facts  of  aU  kinds,  related  both 
by  means  of  pictures  and  writings,  covered  the  walls  of  the 
temples  in  the  principal  towns;  single  battles  and  whole 
wars  were  described,  with  their  exact  dates,  and  with  all  the 
living  details  of  an  eye-witness,  upon  the  stone  surfaces  of  the 
pylons  and  the  surrounding  walls.  As  long  as  these  lasted, 
the  remembrance  of  those  actions  must  have  remained  li\dng 
and  true  in  the  mind  of  every  cultivated  Egyptian.  And,  in 
fact,  we  find  these  representations  at  a  late  period  used  as  a 
direct  authority  in  history. 

Tacitus-  recounts  to  us  the  visit  of  Germanicus  to  tlie 
"  great  remains  of  ancient  Thehes.  And  Egyptian  inscrip- 
tions icere  stiU  extant  upon  the  enormous  buildings  ichich 
declared  the  former  onches.  One  of  the  most  distinguished 
of  the  priests,  icho  icas  required  to  explain  the  language  of 
the  country,  related,  that  at  one  time  700,000  7nen,  capable 
of  bearing  arms,  dwelt  here,  and  that  King  Ramses  loith  this 
army  had  conquered  Libya,  Ethiopia,  the  Medes  and  Persians, 
the  Bactrians,  and  Scythians,  and  that  he  held  under  his 
dominions  the  countries  of  the  Syrians,  the  Armenians,  and 
the  neighbouring  Cappadocians,  and  thence  to  the  Bithynian 
and  the  Lycian  Sea ;  the  tribute  laid  upon  the  people  ivas  also 
read  aloud,  the  iceight  of  the  silver  and  gold,  the  number  of  the 
weapons  and  horses,  and  the  presents  to  the  temple,  of  ivory 
and  frankincense,  and  how  much  corn  and  other  objects  had 
been  remitted  by  each  nation,  which  was  not  less  than  what 
is  now  imposed  upon  the  people  by  the  might  of  the  Barthians, 
or  the  power  of  the  Bomans.^^ 

This  is  as  strictly  an  historical  notice  from  the  reign  of 

Eamscs  II.,  in  the  fourteenth  century  before  Christ,  as  was 

ever  related  to  us  by  the  Greeks  from  the  life  of  Xerxes  or 

Alexander :  for  we  read  this  statement  now  in  the  present  day 

'   [Tatian.  or.  ad  Grcec.  c.  1.]  ^  Annal.  ii.  60. 


394  IKTEODUCTIOX 

upon  the  same  walls,  before  wliich  Grermanicus  stood  "with 
wonderiug  eyes.  The  Greeks  and  Eomans  seldom  derived 
their  knowledge  from  such  a  direct  source  as  Germani- 
cus  did  here,  and  Tacitus  was  quite  unconscious  that  he  was 
speaking  of  the  same  King  Eamses,  when  shortly  before  he 
related  of  King  Sesostris,  that  the  bird  called  the  Phoenix  ap- 
peared for  the  first  time  in  his  reign.  AVe  stni  read  the 
name  Eamses  upon  the  monuments,  as  the  priest  read  it  to 
Germanicus ;  Sesostris  was  the  name  of  Sethos  I.,  who  was 
so  often  confused  with  his  son  Eamses,  and  was  carried  down 
by  a  Greek  mistake,  siuce  the  time  of  Herodotus  (ceecocic, 
cecococic,  COCCOCTpic). 

"Who  can  well  doubt  that  along  with  such  a  historical 
literature  engraven  in  stone,  which  to  this  day  fills  the 
whole  of  Egypt  from  Alexandria  to  Mount  Barkal,  far  in 
Ethiopia,  a  corresponding  historical  hook  literature  must 
have  existed,  of  course  much  richer  and  more  complete, 
even  though  we  may  not  be  able  at  present  to  point  out  the 
remains  of  it.  But  in  fact  we  still  possess  papyrus  rolls, 
one  of  which  accidentally  refers  to  the  identical  warlike 
deeds  represented,  with  their  annotations,  upon  the  walls 
of  the  Theban  temple.  This  is  one  of  the  important  docu- 
ments which  the  British  Museum  purchased  in  the  year 
1839  from  M.  Sallier,  in  Aix,  after  Champollion  had  already, 
in  the  year  1828,  recognised  and  communicated  several  pas- 
sages in  it  which  related  to  the  war  of  the  great  Eamses 
against  the  people  of  Cheta^.  In  1838  I  found  at  Leghorn, 
in  a  collection  of  Egyptian  antiquities  belonging  to  M. 
D'Anastasi,  a  series  of  papyri  very  similar  to  this,  which 
mention  other  warlike  features  of  that  glorious  period.  They 
appear  to  come  originally  from  the  same  tomb  as  those  of 
Sallier,  since  they  proceed,  partly,  indeed,  from  the  same 

^  Champollion,  Lettres  ecrites  dEgypte  et  de  Nubie,  p.  21,  426. 
After  the  death  of  Champollion,  Salvolini  made  use  of  the  privately 
withheld  papers  of  his  master  for  a  particular  treatise  :  Campagne  de 
Ramses-Ie- Grand  (Sesostris)  contre  les  Schela  et  leurs  allies.  Manuscrit 
hieratique  appurtenant  a  M.  Sallier  a  Aix.  en  Provence.  Notice  sur  ce  MS. 
Paris,  1835,  8. 


TO  EGYPTIAN  CHEONOLOGT.  395 

Bcribe.  Other  similar  pieces  are  found  in  the  Egyptian  col- 
lections at  Turin,  Leyden,  and  Berlin. 

It  is  evident,  partly  from  the  express  date  of  the  author  or 
scribe,  partly  from  the  kings  mentioned  in  the  text,  that 
the  largest  proportion  of  them  belong  to  the  19th  Dynasty. 
The  most  ancient  date  in  the  London  papyrus  is  from  the 
ninth  year  of  the  Great  Eamses  II. ;  the  latest  is  from  the 
first  year  of  King  Set-Xecht,  the  third  successor  of  tlie 
former.  The  Turin  Eoyal  Annals  'also  belong  to  this  or 
the  next  DxTiasty.  Other  papyri  are  certainly  not  older 
than  the  20th  ;  e.  g.  one  of  those  which  I  obtained  in  Thebes 
repeatedly  mentions  the  name  of  Eamses  IX.,  and  is  dated, 
upon  the  reverse  side,  from  the  13th  of  Pachon — the  six- 
teenth year,  probably,  of  this  king. 

Another  of  these  rolls  contains,  on  the  other  hand,  a  por- 
tion of  a  composition  which  belongs  to  the  time  of  Tutmes 
III.,  the  conqueror  of  the  Hyksos  in  the  18th  D>Tiasty ;  a 
roll  in  Turin  treats  of  the  same  king.  We  have  as  little 
reason  to  doubt  that  the  first  paragraph  in  the  Pap.  Sallier, 
No.  1,  pi.  i. — iii.,  which  treats  of  two  kings  at  the  end  of  the 
Hyksos  period,  was  also  composed  in  their  time,  or  soon  after 
their  death. 

Two  remarkable  papyrus  rolls,  which  I  obtained  in  Lon- 
don for  the  Berlin  Museum,  mention  the  first  kings  of  the 
12th  D.ynasty,  Amenemha  I.  and  Sesuetesen  I.  Their 
writing  is  very  different  from  the  rest  of  those  that  I  am 
acquainted  with,  and  they  belong  to  the  very  rare  exceptions 
which,  in  place  of  horizontal  lines,  are  written  in  vertical 
columns,  after  the  manner  of  hieroglyphical  writing ;  so  that 
it  would  not  surprise  me,  if  by  penetrating  more  deeply  into 
the  contents,  the  result  should  be,  that  they  were  composed, 
even  this  very  copy,  during  the  Old  Monarchy.  But  the 
most  ancient  of  all*  the  hieratic  royal  namcG  are  found  in  a 
papyrus  in  my  own  possession^.     Here  the  name  of  Chuftj 

'  I  am  indebted  for  this  valuable  present  to  an  English  lady.  Miss 
Westear,  who  had  deposited  it  a  long  time  ago  in  the  Bodleian  Library^ 
Oxford.    It  contains  nine  sides,  of  which,  unhappily,  the  first  four  are 


396  iNTEODrcTio>- 

(Cheops)  is  frequentlv  mentioned,  also  King  S>'efett  in 
the  3rd  Manethonic  Dynasty,  and  three  other  kings,  who 
probahly  belong  to  the  same  Dynasty.  These  kings  are, 
indeed,  all  cited  as  dead,  but  since  the  whole  of  them  belonged 
to  that  ancient  period,  its  contents  could  hardly  be  placed 
much  later.  Among  a  people  who  were  at  all  times  sur- 
rounded by  so  many  contemporaneous  monuments  and  his- 
torical authorities,  reaching  as  far  back  as  their  first  royal 
Dynasties,  it  must  have  been  generally  much  more  difficult  to 
supplant,  or  essentially  to  alter  the  existing  genuine  history 
of  ancient  times  by  fabulous  tales  and  poetical  inventions  of 
later  times. 

In  spite  of  the  astonishing  number  of  monuments,  and  in 
spite  of  the  rich  literature,  whose  original  remains  are  con- 
firmed by  the  accounts  we  find  in  different  authors,  it  would, 
however,  have  been  impossible  to  the  Egyptians  themselves, 
how  much  more  so  to  us,  to  obtain  a  correct  and  clear  insight 
into  the  course  and  connection  of  their  history,  if  from  its 
commencement  a  chronological  sense  had  not  been  so  early 
developed  among  them.  Witliout  chronology  we  should  ob- 
tain no  history,  even  from  the  most  varied  literature ;  the 
Indians,  especially,  give  us  a  striking  proof  of  this.  History 
first  obtains  a  perfect  self-consciousness  through  chronology. 
With  the  growmg  civilisation  of  a  people,  the  necessity  in- 
creases for  a  sharper  division  of  time  both  in  small  and 
large  periods.  From  the  earliest  era  of  their  history,  the 
Egyptians  have  known  how  to  satisfy  this  necessity,  inherent 
in  every  higher  state  of  civilisation. 

But  a  chronology  which  is  well  arranged  and  established 
must  always  proceed  from  astronomy.  "VVe  cannot  conceive 
the  existence  of  the  former,  in  any  nation,  without  the  latter 
being  to  a  certain  degree  developed.  It  will  not,  therefore, 
appear  superfluous  if  we  enter  here  more  minutely  into  the 

very  much  destroyed.  The  remainder,  also,  is  very  hastily  -written,  and 
is  therefore  difficult  to  deciplier.  It  appears  to  be  poetical,  and  to  be 
addressed  to  a  king,  whose  name  unfortunately  is  lost ;  the  example 
"  of  his  ancestors,"  Chufu,  Snefru  Ser,  &.c.  is  held  up  to  him. 


TO  EGTPTIAX  CHBONOLOGT.  397 

astronomical  knowledge  of  the  Eg^-ptians,  before  we  turn  our 
attention  to  their  computation  of  time.  We  shall  here,  also, 
commence  with  the  information  we  obtain  from  authors,  and 
afterwards  see  how  far  it  is  confirmed  and  completed  by  the 
monuments. 

[Tiie  author  here  proceeds  to  the  astronomical  basis  of 
Egyptian  chronology,  and  the  chronological  knowledge  pos- 
sessed by  the  Egyptians,  and  concludes  his  Introduction  with 
the  following  words :] 

Takinj^  a  retrospective  survey  of  the  path  we  have  hitherto 
pursued  in  our  discussions,  I  believe  I  have  essentially  ful- 
filled the  task  we  undertook  at  the  commencement,  namely, 
to  point  out  the  i^ossihility  of  the  existence  of  such  an  early 
history  of  Egypt. 

AVe  have  seen  how,  contrasted  with  the  most  ancient 
Asiatic  nations,  the  Egyptians  (pre-eminently  favoured  by 
their  climatal  and  geographical  conditions)  were  destined, 
as  it  were  by  nature,  to  be  a  monumental  nation.  These 
external  conditions  correspond  with  the  innate  bias  of  their 
feelings,  which  is  shown  by  the  innumerable  multitude  of 
their  monuments,  and  by  the  extreme  care  they  bestowed 
upon  their  preservation.  From  their  desire  to  retain  the 
fleeting  present,  may  be  explained  the  early  development 
of  their  system  of  writing  (so  rich  and  significant  in  its 
organism,  owing  to  its  important  origin),  as  well  as  the  ex- 
cessive use  which  was  made  of  this  writing,  especially  for 
the  monuments,  beyond  any  other  nations  of  antiquity,  so 
that  it  soon  attained  its  highest  destination  by  its  applica- 
tion to  a  many-sided  book  literature.  "We  have  been  able 
to  refer  to  a  Theban  library  as  early  as  the  fourteenth  cen- 
tury before  Christ,  and  have  found  reason  for  considering  it 
neither  the  most  ancient,  nor  the  only  one  in  Egypt,  It  was 
this  very  ancient  literature  and  hereditary  learning,  which 
a  later  antiquity,  and  more  particularly  the  Greeks,  abun- 
dantly acknowledged,  praised,  sought  out,  and  studied.  Among 
the  various  branches  of  knowledge  we  have  surveyed,  espe- 
cially the  sacred  codes  of  the  priests — the  forty-two  Hermetic 


898  INTRODUCTION 

"books  described  by  Clemens,  we  have  however  particularly 
attempted,  to  indicate  more  closely  from  the  monuments,  the 
early  study  of  astronomy,  because  the  arrival  at  a  more  fixed 
chronology  depends  especially  upon  its  development.  We 
have  likewise  endeavoured  to  point  out  that,  under  the 
favourable  circumstances  of  an  Egyptian  sky,  and  especially 
since  the  introduction  of  the  variable  sun-calendar  (calcu- 
lating as  it  were,  and  forming  periods  for  itself),  astronomy 
was  cultivated  in  the  most  elaborate  and  most  complete 
manner,  and  this  we  have  been  able  partly  to  confirm  by  the 
monuments  of  the  4th  and  12th  Dynasties  of  the  Old  Mo- 
narchy. "We  have  discovered  a  division  of  time,  less  than  an 
hour,  to  the  sixty  times  sixtieth  part  of  a  minute,  and  above 
an  hour  to  the  period  of  36,525  years.  Between  these  there 
were  the  greatest  variety  of  cycles,  such  as  no  other  ancient 
nation,  except  the  Eg}^ptian,  has  been  able  to  produce  in 
equal  perfection.  They  were  acquainted  with  the  civil  hours 
of  day  and  night,  also  with  the  twenty-four  equal  or  equi- 
noctial hours  of  the  complete  day,  vvxBr}l^€pov. 

From  days  they  formed  the  decades,  or  Egyptian  weeks, 
and  from  these  the  thirty-day  month;  they  also  knew 
the  lunar  months,  and  solemnised  the  new  and  full  moon. 
Their  season  consisted  of  four  months.  They  recognised 
as  forms  of  years,  and  carried  out  in  the  calendar,  both 
the  oldest  lunar  year,  as  well  as  the  solar  year  of  365  days, 
and  the  Sirius  year,  which  is  a  quarter  of  a  day  longer.  The 
civil  solar  year,  after  twenty-five  years,  namely  at  the  Apis 
period,  agreed  again  with  the  lunar  year ;  in  the  same  way, 
calculating  by  the  day,  it  agreed  with  the  Sirius  year,  at  the 
lustrum  of  four  years ;  and  in  the  space  of  1461  years,  it 
agreed  completely  with  the  Soihis  period.  The  Phoenix 
period,  of  1500  years,  was  employed  to  make  the  civil  year 
agree  with  the  tropical  year,  which  was  afterwards  divided 
according  to  the  three  seasons  into  three  parts— 500  years 
each.  Finally,  the  Sidereal  year,  or  the  slow  receding  of  the 
echptic  to  the  west,  became  known,  and  it  was  expressed, 
although  with  an  imperfect  comprehension  of  the  direction 


TO  EGTPTIAIN-  CHiaoyOLOGT.  399 

and  Telocity  of  the  movement,  by  its  greatest  astronomical 
period  of  36,525  years. 

"We  have  gained  the  principal  purpose  we  had  in  view  if 
we  have  succeeded  in  pointing  out  that,  in  Egypt,  from  the 
time  of  Menes,  to  whose  reign  the  historical  accounts  go 
back,  there  existed  to  an  extraordinary  degree  all  the  con- 
ditions necessary  for  the  growth  and  the  perfect  development 
of  the  self-conscious  and  historical  life  of  a  nation,  and  for  a 
chronologically-arranged  historical  literature,  formed  by  the 
monuments  and  contemporaneous  records.  These  circum- 
stances have  placed  it  in  our  power  to  investigate  and  restore, 
from  such  early  times,  the  experienced  and  recorded  history 
of  the  Egyptians.  As  far  as  our  present  knowledge  extends, 
the  conditions  that  we  have  named  only  appear  complete 
among  the  most  ancient  Asiatic  and  European  nations  at  a 
much  later  period,  namely,  during  the  last  millennium  before 
Christ,  therefore  an  historical  investigation,  which  refers 
back  as  far  as  that  of  Egypt,  has  hitherto  been  impossible 
with  respect  to  those  nations,  except  so  far  as  in  the  Egyptian 
history  itself  new  points  of  information  may  be  found  respect- 
ing the  oldest  history  of  nations,  not  Egyptian. 

But  it  may  very  possibly  be  imagined  that  we  have  been 
compelled  to  stop  at  the  indication  of  this  jpossibility^  being 
deficient  in  the  means  to  raise  this  historical  treasure  from 
the  depths  in  which  we  behold  it.  "We  can  only  restore 
true  history  with  the  assistance  of  an  historical  literature, 
and  this  must  either  be  contemporaneous,  and  so  far  possess 
in  itself  a  monumental  value,  or  if  it  is  a  later  literature, 
referring  to  what  has  long  gone  by,  it  must  be  accompanied 
by  contemporaneous  and  intelligible  monuments  to  enable 
us  to  prove  and  correct  it  by  them.  Hitherto  we  have 
certainly  possessed  one  of  the  necessary  means  for  the 
restoration  of  the  Pharaonic  history,  namely,  the  Greek 
accounts,  and  extracts  from  an  ancient  Egyptian  historical 
literature.  But  they  remained  useless  and  confused,  because 
the  monuments  and  the  literary  remains  of  the  country 
were  still  mute  and  unintelligible.     However,  since  Cham- 


400  INTEODUCTIO>'. 

pollion's  praisewortliy  deciphering  of  the  hierogljphical 
writing  has  rendered  it  possible  to  make  an  historical  use  of 
the  monuments  of  the  country,  the  second  means  for  his- 
torical investigation  has  been  placed  in  our  hands.  It  was 
now  for  the  first  time  possible  to  gain  some  advantage  from 
the  literary  authorities,  and  to  make  a  critical  examination 
of  them,  which  would  necessarily  demonstrate  the  general 
connection  that  subsists  between  the  monuments.  Only  a 
correct  all-sided  combination  of  the  means  offered  on  both 
sides  can  here  lead  to  the  aim  we  have  in  view. 


THE  HEBREW  TRADITION. 


AVe  can  best  exhibit  the  relation  that  subsists  between 
tlie  Hebrew  and  Egyptian  records,  by  endeavouring  to  deter- 
mine chronologically,  and  by  such  means  as  are  extant,  the 
most  important  point  of  contact  in  the  two  histories — 
namely,  the  Mosaic  period — and  thus  to  prove  the  value  of 
tlie  several  numbers  stated.  We  shall  thereby  perceive  that 
the  Hebrew  accounts,  in  so  far  as  they  are  connected  with 
Egypt,  may  be  held  to  be  of  more  historical  value  than 
several  modem  inquirers  are  inclined  to  accord  to  them,  and 
tliat  they  are  by  no  means  wanting  in  a  fixed  chronological 
principle,  without  which  history  cannot  subsist;  but  that 
a  more  exact  chronology,  which  might  serve  as  a  point  of 
support  to  the  Egyptian,  is  not  to  be  sought  in  them,  and 
it  is  rather  this  last  which  supplies  the  most  certain  chro- 
nological explanation  of  those  times  to  the  history  of 
the  Israelites.  The  genuine  chronological  character  of  the 
Jewish  history  is  pretty  well  acknowledged  by  every  one 
as  far  back  as  the  division  of  the  kingdom,  or  the  building 
of  the  temple,  whereby,  indeed,  the  individual  chronological 
difficulties,  which  frequently  occur  during  this  epoch,  are  not 
considered,  but  only  the  chronological  value  of  those  num- 
bers generally  wliich  form  the  basis  of  these  separate  inves- 
tigations ;  but  the  strictly  chronological  character  of  the 
Hebrew  determinations  of  time  before  this  epoch  is  dis- 
puted, and,  indeed,  in  those  very  numbers  which  contain  in 
themselves  alone  the  threads  of  an  exact  chronology.  A  cri- 
tical examination  of  the  value  of  these  numbers  generally  is 
thus  necessary,  and  therefore  this  discussion  becomes  ap- 
propriate here.     It  is,  in  fact,  of  the  greatest  importance  to 

2d 


402  THE  HEBEEW  TRADITION. 

"US,  because  it  determines  whether  it  be  possible  to  solve 
some  marked  contradictions  which  have  at  all  times  keenly 
engaged  the  attention  of  historians  and  theologians,  and  still 
continue  to  do  so  ;  it  will,  besides,  enable  many  people  to 
decide  upon  the  value  of  the  Manethonic,  consequently  of 
the  Egyptian  chronology  generally,  so  far  as  it  is  made  to 
depend  on  its  agreement  with  the  accounts  obtained  from 
the  oldest  source,  the  only  one  indeed  not  Egyptian,  which 
here,  at  all  events,  admits  of  a  comparison. 

There  are,  especially,  two  numhers  which  have  liitherto 
formed  the  turning  points  of  the  chronology  of  the  Old 
Testament  for  the  Mosaic  period,  because,  passing  over  the 
uncertain  individual  statements,  they  fixed  the  limits  to 
great  spaces  in  time,  and  appeared  to  lay  down  a  rule  for 
more  special  investigations.  I  mean  the  480  years^  which 
are  calculated  to.  be  the  period  between  the  Exodus  and  the 
building  of  the  temple,  and  the  430  years-  for  the  sojourn  of 
the  Israelites  in  Egypt.  Both  numbers  very  early  created 
difficulty,  and  are  partly  modified,  and  partly  refuted  by 
other  statements  of  time  in  the  Old  Testament.  The  4S0 
years  ought  to  correspond  with  the  sum  of  the  individual 
numbers  in  the  Book  of  Judges,  which  last  is,  however,  con- 
siderably greater.  The  genealogies  of  that  same  period 
would,  on  the  other  hand,  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
number  of  years  was  much  fewer.  The  Seventy  themselves 
differ  in  their  statement  of  tlie  number,  since  they  write  440 
in  place  of  480  years ;  and  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles 
(xiii.  20),  450  years  are  calculated  for  the  Judges  only  to 
the  time  of  Samuel;  and  this  again  differs  from  all  other 
statements.  Lastly,  we  find  that  Josephus  also,  even  if  he 
knew  the  number  480,  still  did  not  consider  it  as  binding, 
since  he  never  mentions  it,  but  accepts  different  numbers, 
and  far  higher  ones^,  which,  nevertheless,  do  not  agree  with 
the  Book  of  Judges.  It  thereby  at  least  follows,  that  the 
number  480  by  itself  cannot  claim  any  decided  authority. 

^  1  Kings  vi.  1.  -  Exodus  xii.  40. 

2  Ant.  viii.  3,  1:  592 j  c.  Ap.  ii.  2:  612  years. 


rNCEETAINTT  OF  THE  HEBEEW  ^'^irBEES.      403 

But  there  is  a  still  greater  difference  in  the  acceptation  of 
the  430  years  which  the  Israelites  are  said  to  have  passed 
in  Eg}'pt.  For,  setting  aside  that  in  an  earlier  prophecy^ 
the  round  numher  400  alone  is  given,  the  Seventy  under- 
stand the  whole  statement  to  mean,  not  from  the  entrance 
of  Jacob  into  Egypt,  but  from  the  entrance  of  Abraham 
INTO  Canaak,  and  they  therefore  translate  the  words  in 
Exodus  xii.  40,  "  Now  the  sojourning  of  the  children  of 
Israel,  who  dwelt  in  Egypt,  was  four  hundred  and  thirty 

years  ;  by  t]  de  KaroiKTjais  T&v  vlav  ^la-parjX,  rjv  KarcoKrjo-av  iv 
Tjj  yj)  AiyvTTTa  Koi    (u   yrj  Xapaav,   errj   TCTpaKocria  TpiaKovra  (!N^OW 

the  dwelling  of  the  children  of  Israel,  which  they  dwelt  in 
the  land  of  Eg}-pt  and  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  was  four  hun- 
dred and  thirty  years).  The  Apostle  Paul-  also  reckons  the 
430  years  from  the  promise  of  Abraham,  and  Josephus-^ 
does  the  same,  so  that  for  the  sojourn  in  Egypt,  which  is 
understood  in  the  Hebrew  text,  only  215  years  are  reckoned, 
the  remaining  215  being  assigned  to  the  time  from  Abraham 
to  Jacob.  Lastly,  if  we  compare  the  number  of  generations 
in  this  period,  we  shall  only  find  four  generations  for  the  four 
centuries,  so  that  for  this,  even  half  of  the  time  stated  would 
still  be  fir  too  great. 

•  Finally,  if  we  consider  along  with  these  contradictory 
statements  the  intrinsic  character  of  the  numbers  given  in 
the  original  text,  namely,  the  arithmetical  relation  of  the 
215  years  from  Abraham  to  Jacob,  to  the  430  or  215  years 
from  Jacob  to  Closes,  the  frequent  return  also  of  the  inde- 
terminate number  40,  both  in  the  first'*  and  still  more  in  the 
second  period,  and  lastly  the  nature  of  the  numbers  480  or 
440  as  a  multiple  of  12  or  11  generations  of  40  years  each, 
it  appears  to  me  very  natural  that  either  a  higher  providen- 

1  Gen.  XV.  13;  compare  Ap.  Hist.  7,  6.  *  Gal.  iii.  17. 

3  Ant.  ii.  15,  2;  viii.  3,  1,     Compare  c.  Ap.  i.  33,  where  he  calculates 
170  years  from  Joseph  to  ]Moses. 

*  Isaac  was  40  years  old  wheu  he  married  Eebecca;  Moses  is  40  years 
old  when  he  goes' to  Midian ;  at  80  years  of  age  he  leads  the  people  out 
of  Egypt,  and  dies  at  the  age  of  120. 
2d2 


404  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITIO'. 

tial  meaning,  and  in  spite  of  all  other  opposing  considera- 
tions, the  only  correct  chronological  expression  would  be 
seen  in  this  play  of  numbers,  or  that  this  external  garb  of 
numbers  would  be  regarded  as  unessential  for  the  religious — 
indeed,  in  part,  also,  for  the  historical  import  of  those  narra- 
tions, but  that  in  the  latter  case  all  more  exact  chronological 
investigation  of  this  period  must  be  relinquished. 

The  latter  view  must  gradually  prevail  in  stricter  science. 
A  criterion  was  wanting  in  the  investigation  of  the  Old 
Testament,  which  might  decide  upon  a  definite  choice  among 
its  self-contradictory  statements.  Each  claimed  for  itself  a 
like  authority.  If  we  believe  that  we  may  now  attempt  a 
new  solution  of  the  difficulty,  we  rely  upon  the  fresh  point 
of  view  which  we  can  occupy  for  that  purpose,  since  we 
now  possess  a  positive  scale  that  may  be  relied  on  (indepen- 
dent of  the  investigations  of  the  Old  Testament),  by  which 
we  can  estimate  the  Hebrew  statements,  namely,  the  authen- 
tic history  and  chronology  of  the  Egyptians,  which  more  than 
equals  the  Hebrew  in  point  of  age. 

Now  if  it  should  appear  that  they  can  in  no  way  be  harmo- 
nised, science  would  then,  indeed,  remain  in  its  former  un- 
certainty concerning  the  times  before  Solomon,  and  we  should 
lose  one  of  the  most  important  and  most  acceptable  corrobo- 
rations of  Egyptian  chronology.  But  the  result  of  our  in- 
vestigations is  more  favourable,  since  the  Egyptian  order  of 
time,  resting  upon  perfectly  independent  foundations,  most 
decidedly  determines  that  there  is  a  chronological  principle 
throughout  the  historical  relation  of  the  Old  Testament,  and 
not  an  arbitrary  selection  of  Hebrew  numbers.  By  this 
means  a  firm  foundation  is  given  to  the  critical  examination 
of  the  latter,  and  both  histories  reciprocally  afford  each  other 
a  support  that  cannot  be  shaken. 

"We  must  first  of  all  show  that  the  Egyptian  account  of  the 
expulsion  of  the  Lepees,  given  by  Manetho,  refers  really  to 
the  same  event  as  that  narrated  in  the  Old  Testament,  as  the 
Exodus  of  the  Iseaelites.  "We  shall  afterwards  determine 
the  epoch  which  is  recognised  in  the  Egyptian  tradition,  and, 


THE  EXODUS  ACCOEDIXG  TO  3IAXETH0.  105 

lastly,  attempt  to  show  how  ever}'  other  time  is  in  like  man- 
ner eicludt'd  by  the  historical  purport  of  the  Hebrew  narra- 
tive; that  there  exists,  also,  a  chronological  thread  which 
leads  us  to  the  same  result,  and,  indeed,  that  the  authentic 
tradition  concerning  the  year  of  the  Exodus  has  never  been 
entirely  lost  among  the  Jews.  From  this  fixed  point  we 
shall  tlien  look  back  still  farther  into  the  times  of  Joseph, 
and  the  accounts  of  the  Greeks  appertaining  to  that  period, 
to  which  will  be  added  our  views  regarding  the  visit  of  Abra- 
ham to  Eg}-pt. 

The  following  is  the  account  of  the  Mosaic  events  which 
Josephus  gives  us  from  Manetho,  and  partly  in  the  words 
of  Manetho  himself  i.  After  describing  the  expulsion  of  the 
Hyksos,  whom  Josephus  considered  to  be  the  ancestors  of 
the  Jews,  and  gi^ing  an  account  of  the  kings  who  succeeded 
that  event,  as  far  as  Eampses,  the  son  of  Sethos,  he  continues : 
"  After  he  (Manetho)  had  therefore  related,  in  conformity 
with  his  earlier  narrative,  that  our  ancestors^  (the  Hyksos) 
had  departed  from  Egypt  so  many  years  earlier,  he  then 
sa}'s  that  King  Amenophis,  whom  he  here  inserts,  desired 
to  become  a  beholder  of  the  gods,  like  Horus,  one  of  his  pre- 
decessors. He  communicated  this  desire  to  one  Amenophis, 
son  of  Paapis,  who,  on  account  of  his  wisdom  and  pene- 
tration into  futurity,  was  believed  to  partake  of  the  divine 
nature.  Xow  this  namesake  of  Amenophis  told  him  that  if 
he  cleansed  the  whole  country  of  the  Lepees  and  other 
unclean  people,  he  would  then  be  able  to  behold  the  gods. 
The  king  thereby  rejoiced,  collected  together  all  who  were 
smitten  with  this  bodily  disease,  throughout  the  whole  of  Egypt 
80,000  in  number,  and  cast  them  iuto  the  stone-quarries, 
which  are  situated  east  of  the  Nile,  in  order  that  they  should 
there  work,  apart  from  the  other  Egyptians.  Among  them 
were  some  learned  priests,  who  had  been  attacked  by  the 
leprosy.     But  that  wise  and  prophesying  Amenophis  began 

*  Contra.  Ap.  i.  26. 

2  Manetho  had  only  related  that  the  Hyksos  were  expelled  in  the 
rei^  of  Tuthmosis.  It  is  the  opinion  of  Joseuhus  alone  that  they 
were  the  Jews. 


400  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITION. 

to  fear  the  auger  of  tlie  gods,  for  himself  as  well  as  for  the 
king,  if  they,  the  priests,  were  seen  at  sucli  compulsory 
labour ;  and  he  foretold,  moreover,  that  others  would  hasten 
to  the  assistance  of  the  unclean,  and  would  govern  Egypt  for 
thirteen  years.  He  did  not,  however,  venture  to  express  this 
to  the  king,  but,  leaving  behind  liim  a  written  record,  he 
killed  himself.  Upon  that  the  king  became  very  much 
dejected.  Then  he  (Manetho)  continues  verbatim,  thus: 
*  Kow,  when  these  people  had  suffered  sufficiently  by  the 
hard  work  in  the  stone-quarries,  the  king  yielded  to  their 
entreaty,  and  gave  up  to  them,  for  their  deliverance  and  pro- 
tection, the  town  of  Abaris,  which  had  at  that  time  been  for- 
saken by  the  shepherds  (Ilyksos).  But  this  town,  according 
to  traditions  of  the  gods,  had  always  been  a  Typhonic  town. 
Now,  when  these  people  had  entered  into  this  town,  and 
found  the  place  favourable  for  revolt,  they  appointed  as  their 
leader  a  priest  of  Heliopolis,  by  name  Osarsiph,  and  swore  to 
obey  him  in  all  things.  He  established  as  their  first  law 
that  they  should  worrship  no  gods,  and  that  they  should  not 
abstain  from  those  animals  which,  according  to  the  law,  are 
considered  most  holy  in  Egypt,  but  that  they  might  sacrifice 
and  consume  them  all ;  also,  that  they  should  associate  only 
with  their  fellow-conspirators.  After  he  had  established 
these  and  many  other  laws,  which  were  entirely  opposed 
to  the  Egyptian  customs,  he  commanded  them  all  to  set 
to  work  to  build  up  the  town  walls,  and  to  prepare  them- 
selves for  war  against  King  Menophis.  But,  whilst  he  con- 
sulted some  of  the  other  priests  and  infected  persons,  he 
sent  messengers  to  the  shepherds  who  had  been  expelled  by 
Tethmosis  to  the  town  of  Jerusalem,  and,  after  he  had  let 
them  know  what  had  happened  to  himself  and  to  the  others 
who  had  been  injured  along  with  him,  he  invited  them  to 
make  war  against  Egypt  in  unison  with  his  followers.  He 
would  first  of  all  conduct  them  to  Abaris,  the  town  of  their 
forefathers,  and  amply  provide  the  troops  with  vrhat  they 
required  ;  but,  if  it  were  necessary,  he  would  protect  them, 
and  easily  subject  the  country  to  them.     Greatly  rejoiced, 


THE  rXODUS  ACCOKDIXG  TO  il^yETUO.  407 

they  readily  brought  together  as  many  as  200,000  men,  and 
soon  arrived  at  Abaris.     But  when  Amenophis,  the  Egyptian 
king,  heard  of  the  invasion  of  these  people,  he  was  not  a  little 
disturbed,  for  he  remembered  -what  Amenophis,  the  son  of 
Paapis,  had  prophesied.     He  first  collected  the  Egyptian 
troops,  conferred  with  his  commanders,  desired  those  sacred 
animals  which  are  the  most  honoured  in  the  sanctuaries  to  be 
brought  to  him,  and  commanded  the  individual  priests,  more 
especially  to  conceal  the  images  of  the  gods  most  securely. 
But  he  sent  his  son,  Sethos,  who  was  five  years  old,  and  was 
also  called  Eamesses,  from  Eampses,  the  father  of  Amenophis, 
to  his  friend  (the  King  of  Ethiopia).     He  himself,  indeed, 
went  forward  with  the  remaining  Egyptians,  who  amounted 
to  300,000  fighting  men  ;  however,  when  the  enemy  advanced 
to  meet  him  he  did  not  engage  in  battle,  but  returned  hastily 
to  Memphis,  because  he  believed  he  was  fighting  against 
the  gods.      There  he  carried  ofl"  the  Apis   and  the  other 
sacred  animals  which  had  been  brought  thither,  and  repaired 
innnediatcly  with  the  whole  army  and  the  remaining  bag- 
gage of  the  Egyptians  to  Ethiopia.     The  King  of  Ethiopia 
was,  in  fact,  beholden  to  him ;  he,  therefore,  received  him, 
supplied  his  troops  with  all  the  necessaries  of  life  which 
the  country  aff'orded,  assigned  to  them  as  many  towns  and 
villages   as   would   sufiice   for   the   predetermined  thirteen 
years,  in  which  they  would  be  compelled  to  be  deprived  of 
his  government,  and  even  placed  an  Ethiopian  army  on  the 
borders   of  Egypt  as  a  protection  to  the  people  of  King 
Amenophis.     Thus  it  stood  in  Ethiopia.    But  the  Solymites 
who  had  come  into  the  country,  and  the  unclean  among  the 
Egyptians,  treated  the  people  so  shamefully,  that  the  period 
ot^their  government  appeared  to  all  who  then  beheld  these 
impieties  the  worst  of  times ;  for  they  not  only  burnt  towns 
and   villages,   and   were   not  satisfied  with  plundering  the 
sanctuaries,  and  abusing  the  images  of  the  gods,  but  they 
continually  made  use  of  those  venerated  and  sacred  animals 
which  were  fit  to  be  eaten,  compelled  the  priests  and  prophets 
to  become  their  butchers  and  destroyers,  and  then  sent  them 


408  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITIOK. 

away  destitute.  It  is  said,  however,  that  the  priest  who  gave 
them  a  constitution  and  laws,  who  was  a  native  of  Heliopolis, 
and  called  Osarsiph  (from  the  god  Osiris  in  Heliopolis), 
went  over  to  these  people,  changed  his  name,  and  was  called 
Moses.'  This  and  much  more,  which  for  the  sake  of  brevity 
I  must  omit,  is  what  the  Egyptians  relate  concerning  the 
Jews.  But  Manetho  says  further,  that  Amenophis  after- 
wards returned  out  of  Ethiopia  with  a  great  force,  that  he 
and  his  son  Eampses,  who  had  also  an  army,  gave  battle  to 
the  shepherds  and  the  unclean,  conquered  them,  killed  many, 
and  pursued  the  remainder  to  the  borders  of  Syria.  Manetho 
wrote  this  and  similar  things." 

Next  to  this  Manethonic  account,  we  shall  place  the  Greek 
conception  of  the  matter  as  we  find  it  in  Digdoeus,  xl.  3, 
taken  from  Hecataeus  of  Abdera  (and  also  in  an  earlier  pas- 
sage, xxxiv.  1,  without  his  authority  being  given). 

"  When,"  says  Hecataeus,  "  a  plague  once  broke  out  in 
Egypt,  most  people  believed  that  it  was  a  punishment  sent 
by  the  gods.  For  since  many  strangers  of  divers  races  dwelt 
among  them,  who  practised  very  anomalous  customs,  with 
respect  to  the  sacred  things  and  to  the  sacrifice,  it  came  to 
pass  that  hence  their  own  ancient  worship  of  the  gods 
declined.  Therefore  the  natives  feared  there  would  be  no 
end  to  the  evil,  if  they  did  not  remove  those  who  were  of 
foreign  extraction.  The  foreigners  were  therefore  quickly 
expelled.  The  best  and  the  most  powerful  of  them  united 
together,  and,  as  some  people  say,  were  driven  away  to 
G-reece  and  other  places,  under  distinguished  leaders,  of 
whom  Danaus  and  Cadmus  were  the  most  famous.  But  the 
great  mass  withdrew  to  the  country  which  is  now  called 
Judea,  situated  not  far  from  Egypt,  which  was  at  that  time 
barren  and  uninhabited.  The  leader  of  this  colony  was 
Moses,  who  was  distinguished  by  the  power  of  his  mind, 
and  by  his  courage.  He  captured  the  country,  and  besides 
other  towns,  built  HiEESOLTiiA,  which  has  now  become  so 
famous.  He  also  founded  the  temple,  which  was  so  pecu- 
liarly holy  in  their  eyes,  taught  them  the  worship  and  the 


THE  EXODrS  ACCOEDLS'G  TO  nECATAETJS  AND  DIODORUS.  409 

service  of  the  Deity,  gave  them  la^s,  and  regulated  their 
constitution.  He  divided  the  people  into  twelve  tribes, 
because  this  is  the  most  complete  number,  and  agrees  with 
the  number  of  months  in  the  year.  But  he  set  up  no  image 
of  the  gods,  for  he  did  not  believe  God  had  a  human  form, 
but  that  he  is  one  God,  who  embraces  heaven  and  earth,  and 
is  Lord  of  all  things.  He  regulated  the  sacrifices  and  the 
usages  of  life  very  differently  from  those  of  other  nations ; 
since,  in  consequence  of  the  banishment  which  they  had 
themselves  experienced,  he  introduced  a  misanthropical  mode 
of  life,  hostile  to  strangers." 

The  statement  in  the  earlier  passage  of  Diodoetjs,  xxxiv.  1, 
sounds  far  more  bitter,  where  he  says  "  that  they  (the  Jews) 
alone  among  all  nations  scorn  any  intercourse  with  others^, 
and  look  upon  every  one  as  their  enemy.  Their  forefathers, 
also,  were  driven  out  of  Egypt  as  disgraced  and  hated  by  the 
gods ;  and  in  order  to  cleanse  the  country,  those  attacked 
with  the  white  sickness  and  leprosy  had  been  collected 
together  and  cast  beyond  the  frontiers  as  an  accursed  race. 
But  tlie  expelled  people  had  conquered  the  country  round 
Jerusalem,  had  formed  the  nation  of  the  Jews,  and  trans- 
mitted to  their  descendants  their  hatred  of  mankind.  On 
that  account  also  they  had  adopted  perfectly  anomalous  laws, 
neither  to  eat  with  any  other  people,  nor  to  show  them  any 
kindness."  "  Antioclius  Epiphanes,  after  he  had  conquered 
the  Jews,  entered  into  their  holy  of  holies,  into  which  only 
the  priests  were  admitted ;  ho  there  found  a  stone  image  of 
a  bearded  man,  who  sat  upon  an  ass,  and  held  a  book  in  his 
hand.  He  took  this  for  Moses,  who  had  founded  Jerusalem, 
organised  the  people,  given  them  laws,  and  introduced  the 
disgraceful  and  misanthropical  customs." 

Now  if  we  compare  these  relations,  which  evidently  refer 
to  Egyptian  and  not  to  Jewish  statements,  with  the  repre- 
sentation we  meet  with  in  the  Hebrew  conception  of  the 
matter,  we  cannot  mistake  the  general  agreement  of  the 
most  essential  features. 

1  Compare  Exodus  xxxiv.  12,  13. 


410  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITION. 

Differing  entirely  from  the  former  Exodus  of  tlie  Hyskos, 
the  description  of  which  is  likewise  preserved  to  us  by  Mane- 
tho,  here,  it  is  not  an  open  enemy  who  is  to  be  subdued, 
but  people  of  foreign  descent,  peaceabl}'  dwelling  in  the  land, 
increasing,  however,  to  a  dangerous  extent,  and  who  inspired 
the  Egyptians  with  fear  and  hatred.  It  is  true  that  neither 
Manetho,  nor  any  one  of  the  authors  we  have  named,  ex- 
pressly say  that  the  expelled  people  were  of  a  different  race 
from  the  Egyptians ;  but  the  cause  of  this  may  have  been 
that  the  entrance  of  the  family  of  Jacob  into  the  country 
which  was  so  important  to  the  Jews,  probably  passed  un- 
noticed by  them.  The  influx  of  emigrants  from  the  eastern 
and  north-eastern  Semitic  countries  was  apparently  much 
greater  in  those  flourishing  times  of  tlie  Egyptian  kingdom 
than  it  was  thought  necessary  to  recount  in  the  detached 
history  of  the  house  of  Israel.  The  influence  of  those 
people  from  Palestine  who  had  been  driven  back  under  Tuth- 
mosis,  must  only  have  increased  the  former  importunity  of 
that  people  to  enter  the  blessed  land  of  Egypt.  But  so 
long  as  they  came  singly  and  peacefully,  and  did  not  shrink 
from  entering  into  all  kinds  of  intercourse  and  alliance  with 
the  Egyptians,  they  must  have  been  considered  by  the 
natives  as  belonging  to  the  country — as  Egyptians.  It  is  cer- 
tainly a  mistake  to  suppose  the  Israelites  were  the  only 
strangers  in  Egypt.  They  dwelt  in  the  land  of  G-oshen, 
situated  on  the  eastern  border  of  the  Delta,  but  of  course 
only  a  very  small  body  in  the  midst  of  Egyptians,  and  many 
Philistines  and  Arabians,  from  whom  the  Egyptian  could 
not  distinguish  them.  The  immense  increase  in  their  nimi- 
bers,  of  which  we  read,  is  only  to  be  understood  in  this 
manner.  How  could  there  have  been  so  distinct  a  division 
of  the  one  race  from  their  Semitic  companions,  as  is  usually 
understood,  when  their  chief  men  themselves  frequently  did 
not  shrink  from  mingling  with  the  Egyptians  ? 

Even  Ishmael  had  an  Egyptian  mother  and  an  Egyptian 
wife^.  Joseph  becomes  so  completely  Egyptian  that  he  is 
1  Gen.  xvi.  3:  xxL  21. 


ZXODUS  OF  TUE  ISBAELITES.  411 

able  to  occupy  the  highest  position  under  the  king,  does  not 
eat  at  the  same  table  with  his  brethren,  and  speaks  to  them 
through  an  interpreter.  He  also  takes  an  Eg}'ptian  woman 
as  his  wife^,  even  the  daughter  of  a  Priest  of  Heliopolis ;  and 
Moses  himself  marries  an  Etliiopian-.  The  same  inter- 
mingling between  the  races  is  afterwards  still  more  fre- 
quently mentioned,  without  being  considered  as  anything 
remarkable  or  forbidden,  e.  g.  Leviticus  xxiv.  10 ;  1  Chron. 
ii.  34,  35  ;  and  the  same  with  respect  to  other  foreigners,  the 
Tyrians,  e.  g.  1  Kings  vii.  14.  The  immigrants  also  did  not 
limit  themselves  to  the  land  of  Goshen,  which  had  been  first 
assigned  to  them,  but  ^^  filled  the  land^^  and  appeared  "^o 
grow  greater  and  migTitier  than  the  Egyptians^  That  the 
simple  race  of  Jacob  is  not  here  meant,  but  all  who  had  allied 
themselves  to  it,  as  to  a  powerful  centre,  is  again  made 
evident  in  the  Exodus,  where  it  is  said'^,  ^'■And  a  mixed  mul- 
titude icent  up  also  ivifh  them.''^  There  may  even  have  been 
many  Egyptians  among  the  mixed  multitude ;  indeed  the 
whole  population  continued  to  cling,  even  long  after  the 
Exodus,  so  firmly  to  Egyptian  customs,  and  even  to  the  re- 
ligious practices  of  the  Egyptians,  that  they  were  constantly 
inclined  to  fall  back  again  to  the  old  form  of  worship.  Is  it 
surprising  that  the  Egyptians  should  have  considered  those 
people  as  Egyptians — and  called  them  so  in  their  traditions 
— who,  even  at  the  foot  of  Sinai,  made  an  image  of  the  holy 
bull,  INIneuis,  and  solemnised  it  with  festivities,  thus  proving 
that  the  greater  proportion  of  them  had  adopted  the  Egyp- 
tian religion  ? 

This  was  naturally  the  reason  why  the  Jews  were  so  fre- 
quently viewed  as  an  Egyptian  colony,  e.  g.  by  Strabo^, 
Apion^,  and  others  ;  and  in  this  at  least  there  is  no  contra- 
diction between  the  Egyptian  and  Hebrew  accounts ;  they 
rather  both  assist  in  completing  a  more  perfect  picture. 

*  Gen.  xlL  45.  2  Numb.  xii.  1. 
'  Exodus  xii.  38.     Compare  Numbers  xi.  4. 

*  p.  701),  824. 

5  C.  Ap.  ii.  3.    Compare  Tacit.  Hist  v.  2-    Aethiopum  prolem. 


412  THE  HEBEEW  TSADITIO^'. 

The  emigrating  people  were  described  especially  by  Mane- 
tho,  and  by  all  the  other  Egyptian  traditions,  as  a  race  of 
^^  unclean,  leprous  Egyptians,  godless,  and  hated  hy  God''  It 
is  evident  that  the  people  designated  here  were  of  foreign  ex- 
traction, DiFFEEiXG  rN"  EAiTH,  consequently  godless  settlers 
in  Egypt,  the  shepherd  families,  who,  on  account  of  their 
occupation,  in  remembrance  of  the  old  hereditary  enemy, 
were  hated  by  the  genuine  Egyptians,  especially  by  the  priests, 
"ybr  every  shepJierd  is  an  abomination  tcnto  the  Egyptians'^.'''' 

The  Mosaic  account  also  corroborates  the  opinion  that 
the  leprosy  and  the  lohite  sickness  (Xcvktj,  dXcpas),  which  re- 
sembles it,  were  very  prevalent  in  those  times,  and  particu- 
larly among  the  Jews,  and  that  they  were  most  dangerously 
infectious.  This  is  intimated  by  the  strict  laws  of  separation 
issued  by  Moses  against  those  attacked  by  the  leprosy, 
among  whom,  however,  his  own  sister  Miriam^  is  found; 
also  by  the  miracle  of  Moses,  who  draws  his  own  liand 
out  of  his  bosom  white  as  snow  with  leprosy^,  and  afterwards 
afflicts  the  land  "^^-ith  the  plague  and  with  noxious  boils*, 
and  finally  with  the  sudden  death  of  all  the  first-born.  This 
perfectly  explains  the  Egyptian  account  of  the  universal 
plague  of  the  leprosy,  which  had  more  particularly  broken 
out  among  the  poorer  and  more  uncleanly  settlers,  and 
which  threatened  the  whole  Egyptian  nation^.  To  this  is  to 
be  added  the  belief  of  th6  strict  Egyptians  that  inward  un- 
cleanness  and  godlessness  of  the  heart  must  necessarily  be 
inseparably  connected  with  outward  uncleanness  and  with 
the  leprosy,  the  most  abhorred  of  the  diseases  sent  by  God. 

It  is  said,  by  Manetho,  that  among  these  infected  people 
there  were  some  learned  priests.  Possibly  these  were  of 
the  Egyptian  race,  and  yet  were  cast  together  with  the 
unclean  strangers.      But  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  our 

•  Gen.  xlvi,  34.  2  ^STumbers  xii.  10. 
3  Exodus  iv.  6.  4  Exodus  ix.  3,  9. 

*  The  Persians  also  knew  no  other  way  of  protecting  themselves 
against  tliis  infectious  disease  of  the  Xeirp-q  rj  Xevxi]  than  by  driving  those 
who  Avere  attacked  by  it  out  of  the  town,  and  if  they  were  strangers,  out 
of  the  country.    Herod.  1,  138. 


EXODrS  OF  LEPEES  SAME  AS  OF  ISEAELITES.     413 

assuming  that  these  priests  were  also  of  foreign  descent,  and 
perhaps  themselves  Israelites.  It  is  not,  indeed,  an  im- 
probable assertion,  that  Moses  himself  was  brought  up  as 
a  priest  of  Heliopolis.  It  is  evident  that  Joseph  could  not, 
as  a  Hebrew,  have  been  first  minister  of  Pharaoh,  but  that 
he  must,  at  the  same  time,  have  possessed  both  the  rank, 
learning,  and  outward  consecration  of  the  Egyptian  priests, 
with  whom  he  had  also  united  himself  by  marriage;  and 
that  Moses  likewise,  brouglit  up  in  the  house  of  the  king, 
could  only  be  instructed,  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptian 
priests,  through  the  same  medium  of  outward  fellowship. 
Contrasted  with  the  Egyptian  prophets  and  hierogramma- 
tists,  who  equally  convert  their  staffs  into  serpents,  change 
water  into  blood,  and  fill  the  land  witli  frogs,  he  appears 
before  Pharaoh  only  as  a  wiser,  and  more  highly  endowed 
man,  than  those  sages.  The  name  Osarsipli,  is  of  little  im- 
portance here,  for  even  the  name  of  Moses  is  expressly  de- 
clared to  be  Egyptian,  as  it  could  not  have  been  otherwise. 
But  yet  on  this  very  account  it  is  worthy  of  notice,  because 
it  is  interpreted  as  being  expressly  derived  from  Osiris  at 
Heliopolis.  As  the  principal  god  in  that  place  was  Ea,  i.  e. 
■'HXtos,  the  service  of  Osiris  was  imdoubtedly  most  closely 
united  with  the  holy  sun-bull  of  Osiris^,  the  white  buU 
represented  in  the  paintings  gold^  ^  (j  "^^  Menes,  or 
Mneuis,  the  same  whom  the  people  adored  in  the  desert, 
and  whose  worship  was  even  introduced  into  Palestine  by 
King  Jeroboam  I.,  when  he  was  recalled  from  Egypt'^.  A  par- 
ticular local  worship  in  Heliopolis  had  been  dedicated  to  this 
bull  since  the  time  of  Menes ;  and  this  very  town,  in  which, 
according  to  the  Egyptian  tradition,  Moses  is  said  to  have 
been  the  priest  of  Osiris  (therefore  of  the  golden  calf),  is, 
besides,  always  considered  specially  connected  with  the  Jews. 
Erom  that  town  Joseph  took  his  wife,  and  On— so  Helio- 
polis was  called  by  the  people — according  to  the  Septua- 

*  Plut.  de  Is\  c.  xxxiii. 

a  Champollion,  Pantheon,  pi.  xxxviii. 

3  1  Kings  xii.  2,  2S,  30,  32;  2  Kings  x.  29. 


414  THE  lEEBEEW  TEALIIION. 

gint,  was  even  built  by  tlie  Israelites^.  This  cannot  mean 
that  they  first  founded  the  town,  for  it  had  been  already 
mentioned  as  the  native  town  of  Joseph's  wife,  and  is  also 
named  upon  the  monuments  even  in  the  Old  Monarchy,  and 
in  the  annals  as  early  as  the  time  of  Menes ;  but  it  cannot 
also  be  explained  alone  by  saying  that  Heliopolis  was  pro- 
bably tlie  principal  town  of  the  eastern  province  of  Goshen, 
it  certainly  can  only  be  understood  to  mean  that  the  Israel- 
ites completed  the  elevation  and  damming  off  of  the  town 
against  the  inundations,  of  which  we  shall  say  more  here- 
after. The  Manethonic  account  is  therefore  important  for 
this  reason  also,  that  it  makes  Moses  come  from  Heliopolis, 
and  thence  indicates  his  connection  with  the  golden  bull. 

It  further  follows,  from  the  Egyptian  recital,  that  the 
sudden  persecution  of  the  unclean  people  had  a  special 
cause,  and  this  appears  always  to  proceed  from  the  advice 
which  the  priests  give  the  superstitious  Idngs,  as  to  how  the 
distress  of  the  leprosy,  and  the  degeneration  and  desecra- 
tion of  their  religious  services  were  to  be  remedied.  But  in 
the  desire  not  to  expel  this  whole  race,  but  to  destroy  them 
by  hard  labour  in  the  country  itself,  or  to  let  them  perish  in 
the  desert,  or  even  to  drovrn  them-,  we  at  the  same  time 
perceive  another  reason  for  the  persecution,  namely,  the  fear 
lest  they  should  rise  up  as  open  enemies  of  the  country,  and 
unite  themselves  with  the  banished  shepherds  for  a  new 
subjugation  of  the  land,  a  fear  so  well  founded,  that  what 
was  expected,  was  soon  most  completely  fulfilled.  Here 
again  there  is  the  silent  acknowledgment  that  those  un- 
clean Egyptians  were  principally  of  foreign  extraction,  and 
had  a  natural  bias  to  their  Palestinian  hereditary  enemies, 
whom  they  afterwards  called  to  their  assistance.  And  the 
Mosaic  account  also  exactly  agrees  with  this^ :  "  Let  us 
deal  wisely  with  them,"  says  Pharaoh,  "  lest  they  multiply, 
and  it  come  to  pass  that  when  there  falleth  out  any  war 

1  Exod.  i.  11. 

-  Similar  perhaps  to  the  command  of  Pharaoh  to  drown  the  Hebrew 
"boys. 

3  Exod.  i.  10. 


EXODrS  OF  LEPEES  SAME  AS  OF  ISEAELITES.  415 

tliey  join  also  with  our  enemies,  andjiglit  against  us^  There- 
fore, taskmasters  were  placed  over  the  land,  and  the  people 
tormented  with  building  and  all  kinds  of  hard  service,  to 
which  undoubtedly  the  working  in  the  stone-quarries  had 
reference,  which  is  made  particularly  prominent  in  the 
Egyptian  relation.  The  chief  feature  in  both  recitals  is 
the  design  of  oppression  and  destruction,  by  means  of  ex- 
orbitant taskwork. 

All  accounts  are  also  agreed  upon  the  great  number  of 
the  enemy,  which  had  grown  up  in  the  country,  and  even  if 
only  280,000^  had  departed,  as  the  Egyptians  related,  while 
in  the  Hebrew  accounts  600,000  are  mentioned,  it  was  at 
any  rate  a  great  event,  on  which  the  Eg}^tian  annals  could 
not  possibly  preserve  silence. 

These  are  all  features  of  the  Egyptian  narrative,  which 
place  beyond  doubt  the  identity  of  tliat  iusiuTection  of  the 
Lepers  under  Osarsiph,  with  the  Exodus  of  the  Israelites 
under  Moses,  even  if  we  set  aside  the  far  more  direct,  but 
in  the  view  of  some  perhaps,  on  that  very  account,  less  trust- 
worthy evidence,  which  consists  in  what  is  added  concerning 
the  laws  of  Osarsiph,  that  the  Egyptian  gods  should  no 
longer  be  worshipped,  and  that  they  should  never  again  hold 
intercourse  with  any  other  race,  also  concerning  the  name  of 
Moses  itself,  which  Osarsiph  is  said  to  have  adopted.  Eor  I 
certainly  consider  it  as  more  than  probable  that  the  name  of 
jNIoses  was  not  originally  found  in  the  Egyptian  narrative ; 
that  the  latter  was  only  connected  with  a  rebellious  priest 
Osarsiph,  and  that  Manetho  first  changed  the  name  in  con- 
sequence of  the  comparison  with  the  Hebrew  accounts, 
which  had  been  made  long  before  his  day.  But  this  assump- 
tion only  upholds  still  more  the  age  and  the  independence  of 
the  Manethonic  narrative,  whose  genuine  and  ancient  Egyp- 
tian character  is  besides  apparent  to  the  attentive  reader 
through  all  its  other  parts.  AYith  reference  to  this,  I  shall 
only  mention  the  peculiar  feature  of  beholding  the  gods,  and 

^  This  number,  which  differs  from  the  one  in  the  original,  was  in- 
serted by  the  Author,  April,  1853.— Tr. 


416  THE  HEBEETV  TEADITIOX. 

its  connection  with  an  earlier  king,  further  the  name  of  the 
town  Abaris,  which  was  entirely  lost  in  later  times,  and 
could  not  therefore  have  been  orally  preserved  by  the  people, 
but  must  have  been  taken  from  old  writings.  Also  the  un- 
fortunate and  ignominious  turn  of  the  event  for  the  Egyp- 
tians, the  cowardly  flight  of  the  king  to  Ethiopia,  and  the 
revolting  usage  to  which  the  whole  lower  country,  and  espe- 
cially the  priesthood,  were  exposed  for  thirteen  years,  but, 
above  all,  the  complete  absence  of  all  allusions  and  attacks 
upon  the  Jews  as  such,  sufficiently  proves  that  the  whole 
was  a  simple,  faithful  account  from  the  old  writings.  There- 
fore, when  Josephus,  in  order  to  maintain  his  wholly  unte- 
nable opinion  that  the  Hyksos  were  the  Jews,  asserts  that 
Manetho  did  not  derive  this  narrative  from  genuine  ancient 
sources,  but  that  he  only  relates  incredible  fables,  and  de- 
clares besides  that  Manetho  himself  granted  the  uncertainty 
of  his  account,  when  he  says,  he  will  now  write  what  is  men- 
tioned in  the  tradition  of  the  Jews — ypacjxiv  to.  fivSevofxeva 
Koi  Xeyofieva  nest  ratv  'lovbaitov — (to  write  the  mythical  and 
legendary  accounts  concerning  the  Jews),  this  is  only  one 
more  of  the  forced  and  ingenious  accusations  of  which  his 
controversial  work  is  composed.  The  words  of  Manetho,  as 
they  are  extant,  nowhere  support  this  assertion  of  Josephus, 
except  the  last,  which  are  to  this  purport : — Xeyerat  d'on  rfju 
TToKiTciav  KDLL  Tovs  vofxovs  avTols  Kara^aXofievos  lepevs,  to  yevos 
HXiouTToXtTT^ff,  opofia  '0(rap(ri(P,  dno  tov  iv  'HXtou  ttoXcl  6eov  'Ocripecos, 
(OS  peTejBT]   ds  tovto    to    yevos,    peTeredr]    Tovi'op.a   kol   TrposrjyopevdTj 

M(ov(rris—(It  is  said  that  a  priest  who  founded  their  pohty  and 
laws,  a  HeliopoKtan  by  race,  named  Osarsiph,  when  he  went 
over  to  this  nation  from  the  service  of  the  god  Osiris  in 
Hehopolis,  received  a  change  of  name,  and  was  called  Moses). 
This  contains  the  honest  acknowledgment  of  Manetho  that 
the  ancient  sources  whence  he  derived  his  information  neither 
mention  the  J'eics  nor  Moses,  which  is  confirmed  by  his  own 
narrative.  Therefore  it  was  only  a  Xeyopei/ov  (tradition),  if  it 
were  not  indeed  a  pLv6ev6p.evov  (mere  table),  as  Josephus  adds, 
which  applied  that  account  to  the  Jews.    Manetho  evidently 


EXODUS  OF  LEPEKS  SAME  AS  OF  ISEAELITES.     417 

did  not  intend  to  say  more.  The  account  of  the  banishment 
of  the  Lepers  bears  exactly  the  same  stamp  as  the  earlier 
account  of  the  banishment  of  the  Hjksos,  and  even  an  en- 
tirely superficial  critical  examination  would  only  lead  us  to  con- 
clude, from  the  mention  in  both  accounts  of  the  city  of  Abaris 
(which  at  Manetho's  time  had  long  since  passed  out  of  remem- 
brance), that  he  made  use  of  the  same  ancient  authorities  for 
tlie  one  as  for  the  other.  Therefore,  instead  of  the  reproaches 
of  Josephus,  Manetho  rather  deserves  all  our  gratitude  for 
so  strictly  abstaining  from  introducing  his  own  views,  how- 
ever correct  they  may  have  been,  into  the  long-approved 
historical  relations.  He  leaves  the  decision  in  the  hands 
of  liis  readers.  And  it  seems  to  me  that  we  can  now  make 
ours  upon  good  grounds,  not  depending  upon  his  opinions, 
but  upon  the  documentary  evidence  he  lays  before  us,  to 
the  effect,  namely,  that  the  identity  of  the  two  occurrences, 
recognised  even  before  the  time  of  Manetho,  must  actually 
be  accepted. 

Josephus,  however,  is  equally  groundless  and  frivolous  in 
liis  reproach  to  the  Egyptian  historian,  when  he  asserts  that 
he  has  only  of  his  own  accord  inserted  the  king  here,  under 

W  hum    he   places    the    event  — ' Afxevacf^Lv    da-TroLTja-as    e/i/3oXi/xoi/ 

(iaaiXta — (Having  inserted  Amenophis  as  king),  and  that  he 
has  not  therefore  ventured  to  assign  a  fixed  number  of 
years  to  his  reign.  As  Josephus  before  made  a  great 
confusion  between  the  kings  "A/xcdo-is,  and  Ted^axris,  and  since 
licre  also,  he  has  not  remarked,  that  he  has  named  the  same 
king  once  before  in  a  former  extract  (c.  15)  in  his  right 
place,  and  ascribed  to  him  the  correct  nineteen  years  and 
six  months  as  the  period  of  his  reign,  the  reproach  is  at  once 
removed  from  tho  Egyptian  historian,  and  falls  back  upon 
himself. 

Let  us  now  see  what  place  in  the  Egyptian  annals  is 
assigned  to  the  King  of  the  Exodus.  Here  again  we  are 
first  referred  to  Josephus.  We  shall  investigate  in  its  proper 
place  more  minutelv,  how  far  he  had  the  true  account  of 

2e 


418  THE  HEEEEW  TSADITIOK. 

Manetho  before  him,  or  only  extracts  from  it.  But  it  is 
easy  to  perceive  from  a  cursory  comparison  of  his  extracts, 
which  are  partly  given  verbatim,  and  partly  summarily,  that 
in  the  two  principal  passages  upon  this  portion  of  Egyptian 
history,  he  had  two  different  authorities  before  him,  who,  in 
the  writing  of  the  names,  and  in  certain  details,  somewhat 
differ  from  one  another,  and  thence  caused  no  little  con- 
fusion to  the  inconsiderate  critic. 

If  we  now  place  these  two  authorities  of  Josephus  beside 
one  another,  and  compare  with  them  the  corresponding 
portion  of  the  lists  of  Africanus  and  of  the  monuments,  we 
obtain  the  following  general  view.     (See  next  page.) 

The  first  thing  to  be  remarked  is  that  the  last  column, 
that  of  the  monuments,  is  authentically  determined,  because 
it  is  entirely  borrowed  from  several  monumental  catalogues, 
and  taking  it  in  details,  the  testimony  of  numerous  con- 
temporaneous monuments  puts  it  beyond  a  shadow  of 
doubt.  The  lists  of  the  authors  may  therefore  be  judged 
with  the  greatest  safety,  according  as  they  agree  with  it, 
but  not  the  reverse.  Hence  it  follows,  that  in  the  first  au- 
thority of  Josephus,  either  one  has  been  lost  between  the 
first  and  second  names,  or  the  second  and  third  names  are 
incorrectly  anticipated,  since  they  should  have  come  after 
the  foui'th.  The  numbers  placed  beside  the  reigns  leave  no 
doubt  of  this.  The  last  of  the  two  mistakes  has  evidently 
been  committed  by  Africanus  with  regard  to  the  'AiJLeuco(f)dd ; 
therefore,  in  the  comparative  columns,  the  same  has  also 
been  assumed  to  belong  to  Josephus.  Purthermore,  we 
read  in  the  text  of  Josephus,  chap.  15,  2e6a3aris  koI  'Pafiio-a-ris 
(Sethosis  and  Eameses),  but  we  learn  from  the  context, 
and  chap.  26,  that  we  ought  to  read  6  koI  (who  is  also). 
In  the  second  authority  of  Josephus,  the  addition  6  koI 
'Fajieara-T)^  (who  is  also  Eamcses),  is  entirely  wanting,  which 
is  undoubtedly  correct,  since  neither  the  names  of  these 
two,  or  any  other  kings,  are  seen  in  connection  on  the 
monuments.     The  mistaken  connection  appears  to  have  been 


LISTS  OF  JOSEPHUS  AI^^D  AFEICANUS, 

ri 

;3 

s 

s 

02 

z 

3 

I— < 

1— i 

o 

^2 

l-i 

O 

a 
1 

32 

1 

51 

^ 

^ 

ci 

CO 

^ 

■^ 

02 

iH 

^ 

^ 

d 

d 

d 

D 

ci 

o 

o 

(M 

o 

« 

• 

^ 

r 

<1 

. 

^ 

r—i 

.      i 

w 

P^ 

§■ 

3 

cr- 

f 

r 

< 

b 

S 

. 

!<: 

^lu 

^b 

d 

1 

< 

1 

1 

2^ 

H  " 

rH 

^ 

?i 

CO 

-^ 

o 

W   <! 

« 

. 

d 

sr- 
b 

<. 

r 

to 

ft 

H 

• 

' 

d 

d 
o 

C/l 

3. 

^b 

1- 

->- 
4 

C/l 

1 

oi 

£ 

<5 

w 

D 

' 

, 

S  ^ 

r-3 

(N 

CO 

^ 

XO 

c^ 

; 

W 

S 

^ 

(71 

CO 

72 

C/) 

O 

H5 

fH 

rH 

O 

d 

§: 

o 

iH 

^b 

. 

o 

1- 

a. 

^ 

:S, 

. 

v-i 

o 

C 

^-j 

'"' 

S 

_-i-J 

. 

O) 

C/l 

o 

;£, 

Sir- 
fa 

^ 

2 

<5 
c3 

b 

b 

'I 

< 

< 

b 

i-j. 

CO 

^ 

c; 

cc 

■^ 

o 

419 


2e2 


420  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITIO:S". 

occasioned  by  tlie  confusion  that  existed  at  a  much  earlier 
period,  in  the  ideas  of  the  people,  about  these  two  kings ; 
whereas,  the  surname  of  the  second  Eamses,  Mia^fxov.   is 

evidently  founded   on   the   constant  addition  of  \>>  [1  ^.^^^^ 

Miamun,  on  the  monuments  of  this  king. 

Without  entering  into  further  details,  it  is  now  undeniably 
evident  from  the  same  comparative  list,  that  'Afxevwcfjis,  or 
Mev(o(f)is,  the  third  king  of  the  second  authority  of  Josephus, 
to  whom  the  banishment  of  the  Lepers  was  ascribed,  is  no 
other  than  the  corresponding  'Aixevecfidrjs,  with  20  years,  and 
the  M€vef6r]s  {Meneplithd)  of  the  monuments  ;  lastly,  no  other 
than  the  anticipated  \\fi€vco(f>is,  with  19  years  and  6  months 
of  the  first  authorit}^  of  Josephus,  the  son  of 'Ap/xeVcrT^s  Mia/x/iov, 
with  66  years  2  months,  i.  e.  of  Ramses-Miamun,  whose 
sixty-second  year  appears  upon  the  monuments.  The  King 
of  the  Exodus  therefore  belongs,  according  to  the  Egyptian 
accounts,  to  the  19th  Manethonic  DjTiasty,  and  it  seems  to 
me  impossible  any  longer  to  admit  the  opinion  of  those  who 
believed  him  to  belong  to  the  previous  IStli  Dynasty^.  It 
is  true  that  in  this  Dynasty  we  find  three  different  kings 
named  Amenoplns,  which  caused  the  confusion  with  the 
similarly  sounding  name  Menephthes,  but  none  of  them  have 
a  Eamses  for  a  father,  and  a  Sethos  for  a  son  and  grand- 
father; for  the  two  last  names  never  appear  in  the  18th 
Dynasty. 

"We  find,  indeed,  a  king  of  the  18tli  Dynasty  men- 
tioned in  the  Manethonic  relation  in  Josephus,  viz.  King 
Horns.  But  this  incidental  quotation  contains  so  much  the 
more  an  impartial  and  convincing  proof,  that  the  king  with 
whom  we  are  concerned,  belonged  to  the  19th  Dynasty,  and 
that  the  whole  account  was  taken  from  an  ancient  authority, 
to  whom  the  same  chronological  connection  was  perfectly 
well  known.     It  is  said,  namely,  that  Amenophis  desired  to 

1  Bunsen.  Aegypten.  Bd.  i.  p.  227.  (Tr.  vol.  i.  p.  184.)  But  com- 
pare Bd.  iii.  p.  109,  where  this  opinion  appears  to  be  already  modified. 


TUE  PHARAOH  OF  THE  EXODUS.  421 

become  a  beholder  of  the  gods,  like  one  of  Ms  ancestors,  King 
Horus.  2s  ow  this  notice  is  in  itself  remarkable,  and  testifies 
its  genuine  character,  since  King  Horus  is  not  otherwise 
known  to  us  thi'ough  the  popular  tradition,  probably  because 
he,  like  most  of  the  others,  had  left  no  monuments  behind 
him  which  had  attracted  any  particular  notice  in  Memphis. 
But  with  regard  to  the  time  of  his  reign,  it  is  apparent  that 
he  was  certainly  a  predecessor,  namely,  the  fourth  of  Me- 
nephthes,  but  a  successor  of  all  the  three  Amenophises  of  the 
18th  Dynasty,  which  he  terminated. 

It  is  of  minor  importance  that,  according  to  Diodorus 
(34,  1),  the  banishment  of  the  Jews  is  connected  with  the 
emigration  of  Danaus  to  Grreece,  and  that  this  also  is 
placed,  according  to  the  Egyptian  tradition  at  least,  in  the 
19th  Dynasty.  But  we  thereby  see  that  the  Eg}^tian  tra- 
dition with  regard  to  dates  did  not  deviate  much,  even  when 
it  was  connected  with  foreign  elements. 

If  we  now  compare  the  clear  Egyptian  statements  that  we 
have  cited,  concerning  the  period  of  the  Exodus  with  what  is 
said  about  it  by  the  later,  particularly  the  Jewish  and  Chris- 
tian chronologists,  it  would  be  difiicult  to  comprehend  why 
they  ditfered  so  exceedingly,  if  we  did  not  find  the  funda- 
mental error  fully  explained  in  the  writings  of  Josephus 
against  Apiou,  where  he  asserts  that  the  Jews  were  no  other 
than  the  Hyksos.  The  perfectly  untenable  grounds  for  this 
opinion,  which,  nevertheless,  has  been  shared  even  by  some 
modern  scholars,  although  the  Mosaic  narrative  is  entirely 
contradictory  to  it,  both  as  a  whole  and  in  its  details,  may 
be  gathered  from  Josephus  himself,  since  a  refutation  of 
them  here  would  be  superfluous.  But  Josephus  was  by  no 
means  the  first  who  started  this  opinion.  It  was  already 
held  by  Ptolemy  ME^'DESIUsl  and  Apion-,  perhaps  even 

'  Tatian.  raraen  ad  Grac.  p.  129  (Oxon).  Clemens  Alex.  Strom,  i 
21,  p.  138.     Justin  Martyr  ad  Grsec.  p.  10,  E. 

2  Justin  Martyr.  Africanus  in  Eusebius.  Prcep.  Evang.  x.  10. 
Clemens  Alex. 


422  THE  nEBEEW  TEADITION. 

hj  PoLEMON^.  From  this,  also,  originates  the  other  misim- 
derstanding,  that  it  was  not  TutJimosis,  but  Amosis,  the  first 
king  of  the  17th  Dynasty,  who  drove  away  the  Hyksos ;  and 
therefore  in  Josephus^  the  name  Tedixoio-is  is  inserted  in  place 
of  "AiJuoaLs,  and  in  Syncellus^  both  names  appear  united  as 
"A/icoo-ts  6  Koi  TedficocTLn — (Amosis,  who  is  also  Tethmosis).  The 
reason  of  this  confusion  lay  simply  in  this,  that  Amosis  is 
found  placed  by  Manetho  at  the  head  of  the  Dynasty  which 
immediately  follows  the  Dynasties  of  the  Hyksos ;  he  must, 
therefore,  have  driven  away  the  Hyksos,  who  by  them  are 
understood  to  be  the  Jews. 

"We  find  a  diff'erent  opinion  in  Eusebitjs.  In  his  Mane- 
thonic  list*,  beside  King  CJiencJieres,  therefore  in  the  middle 
between  the  true  Exodus  of  the  Hyksos  and  that  of  the 
Israelites,  he  writes  as  follows: — Kara  tovtov  Mcouo^?  rrjs  e| 
AlyvTTTov  TTopeias  tcov  ^lovBaicov  TfyqaaTo — (During  this  reign 
Moses  conducted  the  journey  of  the  Jews  out  of  Egypt). 
But  the  reason  for  tliis  deviation  from  the  usual  statements 
concerning  the  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus  does  not  here  lie  in 
the  name,  which  perhaps  Eusebius  had  found  somewhere 
mis-stated,  but  in  his  assumption  (to  which  we  shall  after- 
wards return)  that  the  first  year  of  Abraham  was  also  the 
first  year  of  the  16th  Manethonic  Dynasty.  He  only 
counted,  as  he  himself  states,  75  years^  from  this  year  to 
Abraham's  removal  to  Haran,  and  then  the  430  years  of 
bondage  in  Egypt.  By  that  means  he  obtained  the  year  of 
the  Exodus  of  Moses  from  Egypt.  This  happened,  accord- 
ing to  his  Egyptian  list,  in  the  sixteenth  year  of  Chenclieres ; 
consequently,  in  his  annals,  he  entered  the  Exodus  under 
this  king. 

The  most  fabulous  recital  of  the  Exodus  is  in  Lysimachus, 
who  appears  to  have  written  about  the  time  of  Christ's  birth, 

^  Compare  the  passages  of  Justin  and  Africanus. 

2  Contra,  Ap.  i.  15.  ^  p.  63,  B;  123,  D. 

*  Euseb.  Armen.  Canon,  vol.  ii.  p,  105.    Aucher. 

*  According  to  Gen.  xii.  4, 


THE  PHAEAOH  OF  THE  EXODUS.  423 

-liortly  before  Apion.  It  is  not,  therefore,  worth  while  to 
investigate  whether  the  name  of  the  King  Bocchoris,  in  whose 
reign  he  makes  Moses  depart,  was  arbitrarily  imagined,  or 
whether  it  originated  in  some  great  misunderstanding.  His 
romance  appears,  however,  to  have  found  acceptance,  since 
we  again  meet  with  the  fable  of  Lysimachus  in  Tacitus^,  with 
some  new  and  additional  facts.  Tacitus  says,  that  according 
to  some  the  Jews  wandered  to  Palestine  during  the  reign  of 
Isis,  led  by  Hierosolymus  and  Judah ;  according  to  others, 
they  were  descendants  of  the  Ethiopians,  and  departed  during 
the  reign  of  King  Cepheus  ;  but  most  people  said,  that  at  the 
breaking  out  of  a  plague.  King  Bocchoris  had  cleared  the 
land  of  them,  according  to  the  sentence  of  an  oracle. 

But  Josephus  has  rendered  the  narrative  of  Lysimachus 
still  more  confused,  and  by  that  means  has  also  led  astray 
later  scholars.  He  relates,  namely,  as  follows,  in  the  second 
book  of  his  controversy  with  Apion :  "  Manetho  says  that 
the  Jews  wandered  out  of  Egypt  in  the  reign  of  Tethmosis, 
393  years  before  the  flight  of  Danaus  to  Argos ;  but  Lysi- 
iiiachus  makes  it  under  King  Bocclwris,  that  is,  1700  years 
ago ;  ISIolon  and  others  make  it  as  it  seems  best  to  them ; 
but  Apion,  the  one  most  to  be  depended  upon  of  all  of  them, 
placed  the  Exodus  exactly  in  tlie  seventh  Olympiad,  and  in  the 
first  year  of  it,  in  which,  as  he  says,  the  Phoenicians  founded 
Carthage." 

It  was  impossible  that  Josephus  could  place  Bocchoris  1700 
years  before  his  own  time,  for  that  would  make  him  nearly 
cotemporary  with  the  first  kings  of  the  Egyptian  succession, 
whose  names  he  cites,  without,  however,  mentioning  a  Boc- 
choris among  them.  This  king  lived,  rather,  according  to 
Manetho,  about  750,  and  not  about  1650  before  Christ.  If, 
furthermore,  it  is  asserted  that  Apion  placed  the  Exodus  at 
the  Olympiad  7.  1.,  namely,  B.C.  752,  that  is  most  decidedly 
contradicted  by  Clemens  of  Alexandria,  Justin  Martyr, 
and  Africanus,  in  passages  above  referred  to,  who,  on  the 
1  HisU  V.  2. 


42i  THE  HEBREW  TEADITIOX. 

contrary,  agree  in  relating  that  Apion  followed  Ptoleray 
Mendesius,  and  placed  tlie  Exodus  under  Amosis,  therefore 
about  1650  years  before  Christ.  It  is  evident  that  Josephus 
has  here  in  his  careless  way  confused  the  authors  and  the 
.numbers  with  one  another.  He  meant  to  say,  or  ought  to 
have  said,  that  Manetho  fixed  the  Exodus  (not  of  the  Jews, 
indeed,  but  of  the  Hyksos)  393  years  before  Danaus,  i.  e. 
1700  years  before  Josephus,  and  Lysimachus  fixed  it,  during 
the  reign  of  Bocchoris.  The  fabulous  narrator,  Lysimachus, 
could  hardly  have  affixed  any  statement  of  time  to  the  name 
of  Bocchoris,  or  he  would  certainly  have  discovered  his  error  ; 
but  Apion,  the  grammatist  and  liyper-critic,  had  probably 
subjected  tlie  opinion  of  Lysimachus  to  his  own  critical  ex- 
amination, and  reckoned  tliat  if  he  assumed  Bocchoris  to  be 
the  king  under  wliom  the  Exodus  was  made,  he  must  intend 
to  fix  his  date  at  Olympiad  7.  1.  At  any  rate  there  is  no 
doubt  that  tlie  Olympiad  calculation  belonged  to  Lysimachus, 
and  tlie  1700  years  to  the  ^lanethonic  statement.  The  latter 
point  miglit  be  remedied  if  we  could  place  the  words  TovrtoTi 
TTpo  €Ta)u  ^iXtwi'  (TrraKoaioiv  (That  is  ouc  thousand  seven  hun- 
dred years)  after  AavaoO  </)i7^s  (The  flight  of  the  Danai).  But 
we  should  certainly  be  wroui;  to  change  the  number  1700, 
as  Bockh^  has  done,  into  700 ;  or  with  Ewald-  and  Bunsen^, 
to  accuse  Apion  of  the  confusion  of  which  Josephus  alone  is 
guilty. 

If  it  is  therefore  impossible  to  place  the  Exodus  of  Moses, 
regarding  it  from  the  Egyptian  point  of  view — which  has 
been  singularly  misunderstood  by  all  the  ancient  and  modem 
authors  we  have  mentioned — under  any  other  Pharaoh  than 
Menephthes,  the  son  of  the  great  Eamses,  in  the  19th 
Dynasty,  nothing  remains  to  the  opponents  of  this  view 
than  to  attack  the  truth  of  this  statement  from  the  standing 
point  of  the  Hebrew  authorities,  and  to  show  that  there  are 

»  Manetho,  p.  192,  325. 

2  Gesch.  Isr.  ii.  p.  69. 

3  Aegypten,  i.  p.  127,  234.     (Tr.  vol  i.  p.  91.) 


Tiir:  PHARAon  of  the  exodus.  -125 

irrefutable  grounds  in  the  Jlosaic  accounts  which  prove  the 
I'jilsity  of  the  Eg-vptian  annals.  But,  upon  a  closer  considera- 
tion, this  is  so  little  the  case  that,  on  the  contrary,  the 
Hebrew  account  confirms  in  the  most  unequivocal  manner 
the  Manethonic  disposal  of  this  event  in  the  Egyptian  his- 
tory. 

There  are  certainly  very  few  features  in  the  Mosaic  ac- 
count of  the  Exodus  from  which  we  could  obtain  in  a  direct 
manner  any  information  about  the  condition  of  Egypt  at  the 
time  of  its  occurrence.  Whatever  Egyptian  manners  and 
customs  are  occasionally  mentioned,  are  generally  little  cha- 
racteristic of  any  particular  epoch  of  time  ;  greater  events, 
such  as  wars,  change  of  government,  the  erection  of  famous 
buildings,  are  still  less  mentioned,  everything  is  so  exclu- 
sively apprehended  and  rendcjed  in  an  Israelitish  point  of 
view.  The  great  change  which  was  introduced  by  Joseph  in 
the  agrarian  condition  of  the  country  is  almost  the  only  ex- 
ception made  here,  because  it  happens  to  be  so  closely  con- 
nected with  him  personally.  Farther  on  we  shall  consider 
the  historical  inferences  which  may  be  founded  upon  it  con- 
cerning the  time  of  Joseph.  The  complete  absence  of  Egyp- 
tian proper  names,  which  might  so  frequently  be  opportunely 
mentioned,  is  particularly  striking.  iXeither  the  name  of 
the  Pharaoh  in  whose  reign  Abraham  came  into  Egypt,  nor 
ho  of  whom  Joseph  was  the  minister,  nor,  finally,  the  one  in 
whoso  house  Moses  was  brought  up,  or  his  successor,  in 
"whose  reign  he  left  Egypt,  are  mentioned.  This  undoubtedly 
shows  a  total  inditierence  about  chronological  points  of  union 
for  the  special  history  of  the  Israelites  of  those  times,  which 
is  remarkably  opposed  to  the  very  exact  dates,  apparently 
avoiding  all  breaks,  from  which  our  current  chronology  of  the 
Old  Testament  is  summed  up. 

Only  a  few  geographical  names  of  Egyptian  towns  and  lo- 
calities enable  us  to  contemplate,  at  least  in  some  degi-ee,  the 
theatre  of  that  great  event.  But  there  are  two  among  them 
of  peculiar  importance  to  us  here,  because  they  also  throw  a 
light  which  was  much  needed  upon  Egyptian  relations  of 


426  THE  HEBEEAV  TSADITION. 

time,  and  interpret  in  a  remarkable  manner  sundry  accounts 
of  tlie  old  authors. 

It  is  said  in  Exodus  i.  2  :  "  Therefore  they  did  set  over 
them  taskmasters  to  afflict  them  with  their  burdens.  And 
they  built  for  Pharaoh  treasure-cities,  Pithomand  Eaamses." 
The  Hebrew  name  of  the  latter  town  is  DDtt^*n,  and  is 
therefore  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  King  Bamses  in  hiero- 


glyphics, ifl      '•     -^^"^  ^^  ^^  dif&cult  to  believe  that  thia 

king's  name  was  given  to  a  town  before  any  King  Eamses 
had  reigned.  "We  could  not,  therefore,  on  account  of  its 
name,  place  the  building  of  this  town  earlier  than  under  the 
19th  Manethonic  Dynasty,  because  this  dynastic  name  first 
appears  here. 

It  seems  to  me,  that  we  may  now  point  out  the  his- 
torical relation  of  this  town  Ramses,  with  a  particular  King 
jRamses,  among  the  many  kings  of  that  name.  "We  shall, 
then,  for  the  first  time,  learn  the  full  significancy  of  the 
passage.  But  it  wiU  be  necessary  for  this  purpose  to  ex- 
amine more  closely  the  geographical  conditions  at  that  time 
of  the  Isthmus  of  Suez,  which  formed  the  boundary  between 
Eg}^t  and  Asia,  and  was  therefore  the  theatre  of  the 
Exodus. 

Since  the  Israelites  departed  from  Eamses,  this  town  must 
have  been  their  central  point  and  place  of  meeting.  Ac- 
cording to  Manetho,  the  lepers,  as  the  Hyksos  before  them, 
were  finally  driven  out  of  Abaris.  We  might  therefore  be 
inclined  at  first  to  consider  these  two  towns  as  one  and  the 
same.     This  was  also  the  opinion  of  an  old  abbreviator  of 

Eusebius^,  who   says   of  Jacob  ;    Ka\   napoiKei   iv  rrj  'Pafxear]   T^ 

iraXat  ^A^dprj  KoKovixevr) — (And  he  sojourns  in  Eamses,  wliich 
was  formerly  caUed  Abare).  Many  scholars  are  of  the  same 
opinion- ;  Eoziere^  also,  the  great  traveller,  but  who  seldom 

1  Anecd.  grceca,  Paris,  ed.  Cramer,  vol.  ii.  p.  174. 

2  They  are  cited  by  Gesenius.     Thcsaur.  ling.  hebr.  p.  1297. 

3  De  la  giographie  comparee  et  de  Vancien  etat  des  cotes  de  la  mer 
rouge,  in  the  Description  de  VEg.  ed.  Panckoucke,  vol.  vi.  p,  316. 


siTrATio>-  or  AEAurs.  427 

hits  on  the  right  point,  places  Abaris  in  the  spot  where  we 
at  least  believe  we  ought  to  place  Eamses ;  and  the  same 
opinion,  although  given  with  hesitation,  is  found  even  in  the 
masterly  researches  of  D'Anville^.  It  is  still  more  extra- 
ordinarv  that  Ewald"2  holds  Abaris  to  be  JBaal  Zejylion,  and 
therefore  seeks  it  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the 
Eed  Sea. 

The  situation  of  the  town  of  Abaris  can  only  be  decided 
by  the  accounts  of  Manetho;  for  all  other  authors,  who 
mention  this  town,  refer  to  the  same  passages  in  the  work 
of  Manetho,  which  we  find  most  fully  communicated  by 
Joseph us^.  The  first  mention  of  the  town  occurred  in  the 
account  of  the  invasion  of  the  Hyksos,  who  entered  the 
country  from  Syria  about  2100  years  before  Christ,  and 
governed  it  for  many  centuries.  The  easy  success  of  this 
invasion,  owing  to  the  hitherto  unfortified  state  of  the 
eastern  boundary,  immediately  directed  the  attention  of 
Salatis,  the  first  king  of  the  Hyksos,  to  the  necessity  of 
closing  the  gate,  which  had  stood  open  to  them,  against 
every  future  invader.  He  therefore  did  not  delay,  as 
Manetho  relates*,  to  make  use  of  his  experience :  "  He  re- 
sided in  Memphis,  collected  tribute  from  the  Upper  and 
Lower  country,  and  left  garrisons  in  the  most  suitable 
places.  But  he  fortified  the  eastern  boundaries,  especially, 
as  a  precaution  against  the  Asspians,  who  were  at  that 
time  very  powerful,  and  who  might  afterwards  be  desirous 
like  them  to  invade  the  same  kingdom.  Now  he  found  a 
town  particularly  suitable  for  his  purpose,  situated  to  the 
east  of  the  Bulastic  arm  in  the  Sethroitic  'Nome ;  and,  ac- 
cording to  the  old  tradition  of  the  gods,  it  was  named 
Abaeis.  This  he  built  up  and  fortified  with  strong  walls, 
and  placed  as  a  guard  within  a  garrison  of  240,000  armed 
men.  Thither  he  came,  in  the  summer  season,  partly  on 
account  of  the  harvest  and  to  issue  the  pay,  partly  in  order 

'  Memoires  sur  TEg.  p.  126,  -  Gesch.  d.  V.  Isr.  ii.  p.  53. 

'  C.  Apion.  i.  14,  26.  ■*  Joseph,  c,  Ap.i.  14. 


428  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITIOX. 

to  practise  the  garrison  diligently  in  arms  to  the  terror  of 
the  foreigners."  But  when  at  the  termination  of  the  rule 
of  the  Hyksos,  in  the  reign  of  Misphragmuthosis,  these 
liereditary  enemies  were  driven  back  out  of  the  whole 
country,  "  the  king  finally  enclosed  them  in  that  place  called 
Abaris.  It  was  10,000  arura  in  extent,  and  (according  to 
Manetho)  the  Hyksos  surrounded  it  with  a  great  and  strong 
wall."  Since  he  could  not  capture  them  by  a  siege,  he 
came  to  an  agreement  with  them,  and  permitted  them  to  de- 
part with  all  their  property  to  Syria. 

Abaris  is  mentioned  for  the  last  time  at  the  Exodus  of  the 
lepers,  as  we  have  seen  above.  It  is  here  called  an  old  Typhonic 
town,  which  had  been  uninhabited  since  the  departure  of 
the  Hyksos,  and  was  given  up  to  the  unclean  after  they  were 
delivered  from  their  oppression.  But  they  fortify  it  again, 
caU  the  Hyksos  from  Jerusalem  to  their  assistance,  and 
from  this  firm  point  for  many  years  maintain  the  upper 
hand  over  the  feeble  king,  until  he,  vdth  the  aid  of  an 
Ethiopian  army,  drove  them  back  to  the  borders  of  Syria. 

In  these  accounts  there  is  an  explicit  statement  about  the 
geographical  situation  of  Abaris,  which  determines  it  to  have 
been  placed  in  the  Setliroitic  Xome.  For  it  has  been  long 
acknowledged  that  we  should  read  it  so,  instead  of  the  Saitic 
Nome,  as  it  is  in  our  present  text.  This  is  also  shown  by 
the  reading  of  Eusebius,  which,  indeed,  is  still  incorrectly 
written  in  the  Armenian  translation^,  but  evidently  purports 
to  say,  in  nomo  Metliraite  in  place  of  Setliraite,  and  by  many 
other  passages  in  which  this  town,  though  without  a  name, 
is  mentioned  by  Manetho,  and  is  placed  in  the  Sethroitic 
I^^ome^.  But  even  if  this  correct  reading  had  not  been  pre- 
served to  us  by  others,  we  must  still  have  rejected  the  Saitic 
Nome,  because  this  is  situated  in  the  western  part  of  the 
Delta,  while  Abaris  ought  to  be  placed  to  the  east  of  the 
Bubastic  arm  of  the  Nile. 

'  Euseb.  C/tron.  in  Aucher.  vol.  i.  p.  224. 
2  Africanus  in  Syncelius,  p.  61,  B,  ic. 


SITUATION  OF  AEAKIS.  429 

There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  general  situation  of  the 
Sethroitic  Nome,  from  the  statements  of  Strabo^,  and  of 
Ptolemy-,  who  was  bom  in  Egypt.  It  lay  eastward  along 
the  northern  part  of  the  Bubastic,  or  Pelusic  arm  of  the 
Nile.  Its  capital  was  Heracleopolis  Parva,  and  Pelusium, 
from  its  position,  must  also  have  belonged  to  this  !Xome, 
although  this  is  never  expressly  said.  Abaris  must  accord- 
ingly be  situated  there. 

The  object  also  which  was  to  liavc  been  gained,  by  tlie 
original  founding  of  Abaris,  directs  us  to  tliis  province,  and 
to  its  most  north-eastern  portion  in  tlie  neii^hbourhood  of 
Pelusium.  It  was  to  serve  as  a  boundary  fortification  against 
Syria.  In  all  times,  ancient  as  well  as  modern,  there  was  only 
one  military  entrance  from  that  country.  The  road  led  from 
Gaza,  along  the  sea-coast  by  Kaphia  (Hefah),  Khinokolura 
(El  Arisch),  Mons  Casius,  along  the  Lake  of  Scrbon,  to 
Pelusium,  which  is  situated  at  the  moutli  of  the  eastern  arm 
of  the  Nile.  This  part  of  the  Nile,  which  extended  far  out 
towards  the  east,  was  the  first  within  reach ;  therefore, 
although  the  destination  of  most  travellers  lay  considerably 
to  the  south,  the  northern  circuitous  route  by  this  road 
was  rendiTcd  necessary,  and  for  the  march  of  armies  indi'cd 
it  was  quite  unavoidable.  "When  Sesostris  led  home  his  con- 
quering army  from  Asia,  he  returned  by  this  road.  Accord- 
ing to  Herodotus^,  Adt^vai  al  nrjXnfia-ai  (Daphni  of  Pelusium) 
was  the  place  where  his  treacherous  brother  met  him  ;  accord- 
ing to  ^lanetho^  and  Diodorus^,  it  was  Pelusium  itself.  It 
is  said  that  from  this  place  the  same  Sesostris  fortified  the 
eastern  frontiers  as  far  as  Heliopolis*^.  Hither  Sethos,  the 
priest  of  Ptha,  came  to  meet  Sanherib,  because,  as  Herodotus" 
adds,  "  hero  was  the  entrance  into  Eg}-pt."  In  this  neighbour- 
hood, at  the  Pelusaic  mouth,  below  Bubastis,  the  lonians 
and  Carians  brought  hither  by  Psamraeticus  were  stationed 

•  p.  804.  ■  iv.  5.  53.  3  ii.  107. 

*  Jos.  c.  Ap.  i.  15.  ^  i.  57.  c  Diodor.  i.  57. 

■  Ilcrud.  ii.  141. 


430  THE  HEBEEW  THADITION. 

undoubtedly  as  frontier  guards,  at  a  place  which  afterwards 
"bore  the  name  of  2rparo7re8a^.  In  the  strong  town  of  Pelu- 
siiJM,  Psammenitus  waited  for  Cambyses,  and  by  losing 
this  position,  lost  besides  all  Egypt  to  the  Persian  con- 
queror^.  In  later  times,  the  great  Macedonian  entered  by 
Pelusium^.  In  Strabo's  time,  also,  Pelusium,  to  which  point 
according  to  him  Phenicia  extended^,  was  the  frontier  post  in 
the  direction  of  Syria  and  Arabia,  and  the  road  to  Egypt  led 
through  this  "  inaccessible"  country,  not  only  from  Phenicia, 
but  also  from  the  Nabatain  Arabia^.  Ajnru  {Amr.  ehn  el  As) 
also  took  the  same  road  with  his  4000  Arabs,  when  he  con- 
quered Egypt  from  the  side  of  Syria,  a.d.  639,  having  first 
taken  the  strong  town  of  Pelusium  by  a  thirty  days'  siege ; 
even  down  to  the  latest  times,  we  see  the  Egyptian  armies 
marching  to  and  from  Syria  by  this  road. 

It  appears  accordingly  undoubted  that  Abi.ei8,  which 
during  the  time  of  the  Hyksos,  and  in  the  reign  of  Me- 
nephthes,  was  destined  for  the  same  purpose  as  Pelusium  at 
a  later  period,  could  not  have  been  far  removed  from  it  also 
in  point  of  situation.  To  me,  indeed,  it  seems  vcr^'  probable 
that  it  was  the  ancient  name  of  Pelusium.  According  to 
the  accounts  we  receive,  both  towns  were  of  considerable 
extent,  and  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  there  were  several  of 
such  a  description  in  that  neighbourhood.  No  proof  is 
required  to  show  that  UrjKovaiov  was  not,  as  the  Greeks 
imagined,  formed  from  nrjkos,  although  the  Arabs  in  their 
translation  of  Tineh — i.  e.  Lutetia — accepted  the  quibble.  It 
is  much  more  probably  referred  to  the  Philistine  name  Pe« 
listim,  which  is  abeady  proved  in  the  above-mentioned  tradi- 
tion of  its  heros  eponymos  UakaioTivos,  or  UrjkovcrLos.  "We 
must,  therefore,  explain  Pelusium  by  "  Philistine"  or  "  Pa- 
lestine-town."   It  appears  to  me  that  Ewald^  has  successfiilly 

1  Herod,  ii.  154.     Compare  Diod.  L  67. 

2  Herod,  iii.  10,  11.  3   Diod.  xvii.  48.    ArriaiL  iii,  1. 
*  Strab.  p.  756,  760,  781.  s  p.  S03. 

«  Gesch.  des  Volkes  Isr.  i.  p.  451. — cniy,  Abarim,  is  also  a  Pales- 
timan  name.    Numb,  xxrii.  12 :  Deut.  xxxii.  47,  49,  &c. 


JLBABI8  SAME  AS  PELUSIUM.  431 

attributed  a  fciinilar  orii^m  to  the  name  of  the  to)^^l  "'A;i<i^*, 
a&  tlie  "  tatcn  of  the  Ilehreicty  of  the  Abarim.  A  peculiar 
historical  <\  "     "     ', -iteJ  in  this  change  in 

the  nauif.  -:  _.iiions  concerning  the 

histon-  of  the  iftraeiite!!i,  have  demonstrated  that  the  temi 
Hebrew  nation  had  originally  a  far  more  comprehensive 
signification  than  has  been  hitherto  commonly  accepted.  It 
corapriiR'd  the  i  '  -westerly  Semitic  tribes-,  and  ex- 

tended to  the  g:i  pt,  therefore  as  far  as  luir  frontier 

to\^*n.     But  we  -  tiiul  in  these  very  same  countries 

the  immigrated  r .  Philistinks,  who  had  tlriven  back 

the  IlebrewB  from  that  spot.  Ewald^  doeti  not  place  thia 
change  before  the  time  of  the  Judges.  Therefore,  if  our 
town  had  formerly  been  an  advanced  frontier- post  in  tho 
land  of  the  Hebrews,  and  afterward.s  in  tlie  huul  of  tho 
Philistines,  and  was  undoubtedly  each  time  filled  with  a  large 
Semitic  population,  it  may  have  eichanged  its  earlier  name 
*A/3apic,  TTi  lir.  \v  luwn,  for  the  later  Ur^XoiautVy  Philistine- 
town. 

Abari>  ii;i>  incpiently  been  identified  with  Herooij- 
polis,  by  D'Anville*,  Larcher*,  C'hainpollion*,  Gesenius^, 
Jomard®,  and  others.  The  oidy  apparent  reason  which  is 
cited  for  this  opinion  is,  that  Stephanius,  of  Byzantium, 
quotes  the  otherwise  unauthenticated  tradition,  that  Typhon 
waa  struck  with  lightning  at  Heroonpolia ;  and  that  Mauetho 
called  Abaris,  according  to  an  old  tradition,  a  Ty phonic 
towii*.     Tl  1   does  not  at  all  overbalance  the 

distinct   g.  lUMuent  of  Manet  ho,   that   Abaris 

was  situated  in  the  Selhroitic  Xome,  to  which  Hcroonpolis, 

1  T' .    *m.T.,,.i'u,n  of  Larcher  in  Herd.  t.  viii.  p.  62;  Cliainixjllion, 
7  ii.  p.  91;  ami  Gesenius,  thes.  I.  hebr.  p.  1297,  that 

A  1  by  its  sound  with  'Hpto  (sec  below  on  Ik-roonpolis) 

has  not  <  veil  .i  scrabhincc  in  itself,  even  if  it  were  geographically 
admiseible. 

•  Bd.  L  p.  .128.  '  Gesch.  Isr.  Bd.  i.  p.  290,  291. 

•  Mim.  sur  CEo.  p.  124.  ^  Herod,  t.  viii.  p.  02,  429. 

•  LEg.  sur  les'Phar.  t.  ii.  p.  90  '    Thes.  I.  htbr.  p.  1297. 

•  In  hia  map  of  the  Delta.  *  Joseph,  c.  A  p.  i.  26. 


432  THE  HEBREW  TEADITIOX. 

as  we  shall  see,  could  not  belong.  That  tradition,  indeed, 
seems  only  to  be  founded  upon  a  misunderstanding  of  Ste- 
pbanus ;  namely,  upon  tbe  unauthentic  information  that 
'Hpo)  was  also  called  Alfxos.  Greek  tradition^,  namely,  con- 
nected AlfjLos  (not  a  town,  however,  but  the  Thracian  moun- 
tains), as  it  did  other  mountains,  with  Typhon,  and  probably, 
only  on  account  of  its  name,  imagined  that  it  was  here  he 
was  killed,  and  shed  his  blood. 

On  the  other  hand,  this  tradition  about  Typhon  refers  us 
again  to  the  idea  that  Abaris  was  the  most  ancient  name  of 
Pelusium.  Typhon  was  always  considered  as  the  particular 
god  of  the  hereditary  enemy  of  the  Asiatic  Hyksos.'  The 
mythological  evidence  of  this  assertion,  which  is  far  from 
new,  does  not  belong  here.  But  this  was,  perhaps,  the 
reason  why  this  god,  according  to  tradition,  was  also  brought 
into  local  connection  with  tliat  important  point  on  the 
frontier,  tlie  only  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  Osiris  from 
the  land  of  Typliou.  llerodotus  related'-,  probably,  there- 
fore, from  a  native  Egyptian  tradition,  that  it  was  tliere — 
namely,  in  the  Lake  of  Serbonis,  so  dangerous  to  all  tra- 
vellers, which  stretched  out  directly  from  Pelusium  eastwards, 
that  Typhon,  who  was  struck  by  liglitning,  lay  chained ;  and 
others,  also,  make  him  fly  away  from  Jupiter  out  of  Syria,  as 
far  as  Pelusium^. 

But,  perhaps,  another  Typhonic  trace  may  still  be  referred 
to  Pelusium.  It  might  have  been  expected,  namely,  that  the 
town  of  Abaris,  or  Pelusium,  had,  besides  these  signs  which 
were  deduced  from  its  origin  or  from  its  population,  a  real 
Egyptian  name ;  still  more,  because  we  find  that  most  Egyp- 
tian towns  had  a  double  name — the  popular  name  which 
usually  appears  in  the  Coptic  and  Arabic  writings,  and  the 
sacred  name  derived  from  the  local  gods,  which  the  Greeks 
generally,  though  not  always,  retained  in  their  translations. 
TlTjXovaiGv  undoubtedly  answered  to  the  popular  name  of  the 

*  Apollodor.  i.  6,  3.  -  Herod,  iii.  5. 

3  Apollon.  Ehod.  ii.  1215. 


ri:i.rsirM.  -133 

lo\ni.  The  pacred  name,  according  to  report,  coiild  only  be 
derived  from  T^phon.  Now  we  find  the  Nome  to  which 
Pelusium  belongtHl  always  called  ^eSpoit-nj^,  or  "EfdpaiTTji,  not 

'HpoJcXearroXiTT;*,   aS  we  should  have  e3q)ected,  since 'H/>a<cXeovs 

mJXc<  is  cited  as  its  capital.  This  denomination  necessarily 
presupposes  a  town,  which  in  G-reek  would  have  been  IrOptarj^ 
itdpoi,  ifBpatf.  Stephanus,  of  Byzantium,  also  mentions 
such  a  town,  and  calls  it  ^tfpnv.  Perhaps,  instead  of  read- 
ini^  cciopoii,  we  should  read,  ^vith  Salmasius,  cf^.opoii^ 

It  is,  however,  extraordinars',  that  we  should  find  the  to\^-n 
which  gave  its  name  to  a  Xome,  only  once  mentioned.  But 
this  is  explained,  if  we  admit  that  the  denomination  of  the 
Nome  was  taken  from  the  sacred  name  of  a  town,  which 
was  unfamiliar  to  the  Greeks,  as  in  Aiot  TrdXcr,  'HXi'ou  noXn, 
TTni'ov  TToXo'.  If  we  may  now  venture  to  admit,  that  the 
bi'i^'^iiinint^  of  the  name  2(dp(l>,  signitiod  the  L!;od  Srih,  or  Srt^ 
i.  v.  Typlion-,  it  is  not  improbable  that  this  was  the  sacred 
name  of  the  Tjphonic  to\\-n  Pelusium,  which  had  once  been 
of  greater  importance,  and  had  given  the  name  Se^pwmys  to 
the  Nome. 

The  only  reason  which  could  be  employed  against  Abaris 
and  Pelusium  being  identical  places,  and  which  is  really 
given  by  D'Anville  is,  that  it  would  have  been  mentioned  by 
31anetho.  But  this  reason  may  be  used  against  every  other 
town,  and  in  that  case  we  must  suppose  that  the  enormous 
town  had  at^ensards  been  entirely  desertcHl,  and  that  no 
traces  of  its  ruins  remained,  which  is  more  than  improbable. 
It  is  more  likely  that  either  Mauetho  did  not  know  himself 
to  \N  hat  modem  to\^^l  the  ancient  name  ought  to  be  applied, 
which  he  only  met  with  in  old  writings,  or  that  he  mentioned 
it  in  a  passage  which  Josephus  has  not  presened.  For  Jose- 
phus  himself  at  least  su]iposed,  that  by  Abaris,  Pelusium 
was  meant,  as  his  words  show  in  the  29th  chapter,  where  he 

»  [This  rendinp  is  now  adopted  also  by  the  last  eminent  editor  of 
.stophanus,  Moineke  (torn.  i.  p.  559).] 

ci   ^,  Set,  is  the  common  hioroglyphical  name  of  Typhon. 

2f 


434;  THE  HEBEEW  TRADITION. 

even  puts  the  last  name  in  the  mouth  of  Manetho :  rovvav 

TLOv  yap  avTos  etprjKev  as  6  TTois  tov   ^ Afxevacpios  TpiaKOvra  fivpiddas 

excov  els  UrjXovaiov  vnrjvTiaCev — (For,  on  the  Contrary,  he  said 
that  the  son  of  Amenophis,  having  thirty  myriads,  advanced 
to  Felusmm) — and  Chairemon^  had  no  doubt  about  it,  since 
he  does  not  name  Abaris,  but  makes  the  lepers  march  to 
Pelusium. 

Now,  if  it  is  certain  that  Abaris  was  the  ancient  name  for 
Pelusium,  or  at  any  rate  was  situated  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  this  town,  it  is  impossible  at  the  same  time  to  consider  it 
to  be  Heroonpolis ;  but  neither  could  it  be  Eamses.  On 
the  contrary,  both  these  latter  towns  are  brought  into  close 
connection  with  each  other,  even  by  the  Seventy,  since  they 
placed  the  town  of  Heroonpolis  in  the  district  of  Eamses,  in 
which  undoubtedly  the  town  of  Eamses  must  have  been 
situated^. 

Scholars  also  hold  the  most  different  opinions  about  the 
situation  of  Heroonpolis,  it  will  therefore  be  necessary  to 
examine  this  question  next. 

Strabo^  says  that  the  town  was  situated  "  in  the  an^Ie  of 
tlie  Aralian  Gu'lf^''  and  thence  people  concluded  that  it  must 
have  been  situated  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  present  Suez*, 
and  on  that  account  assert  that  the  gulf  itself  was  called  after 
it  koXttos  'upcooTToXiTj]:,^,  CLud  cltos  the  statement  of  Ptolemy^, 
according  to  which  Heroonpolis  is  placed  at  30°  north  lati- 
tude, which  corresponds  nearly  with  the  present  Suez,  These 
reasons  appear  to  be  of  great  importance.  Nevertheless  we 
cling,  without  hesitation,  to  the  opinion  of  those  scholars 
who  place  Heroonpolis  far  more  north,  namely,  on  the 
ancient  Nile  canal,  west  from  Birket  e'  temsah,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  valley  Seba-Biar.  D'Anville  was 
also  of  this  opinion,  though  he  was  not  then  aware  of  the 
ruins  of  ancient  towns  which  are  found  there.     The  French 

1  Joseph,  c.  Ap.  i.  c.  32.  -  Gen.  xlvi.  28.  ^  ^^^  p,  go4. 

*  Roziere,  in  the  Descr.  de  VEg.  vol.  vi.  p.  257,  &c. 

"  Ptolem.  V.  17.  1.  Plin.  H.  N.  V.  11,  §  65. 

®  iv.  5.    According  to  other  manuscripts,  29°  50'. 


SITUATION  OF  IIEKOONrOLIS.  435 

expedition  pointed  out  two  of  them.  Adjoining  Seba-Biar, 
at  the  west  end  of  this  low  district,  lie  the  ruins  which  are 
now  called  Jfidfdr,  and  farther  west  those  of  Ahu-Kesheb^. 
Tlie  latter  are  considered  by  Et.  Quatremere'-,  Champollion^, 
Du  Eois  Aymc*,  and  others,  as  the  remains  of  Heroonpolis. 
r  am  more  in  favour  of  those  at  JTidfdr. 

With  regard  to  the  general  situation  of  Heroonpolis  in 
iliis  countr)',  we  must  next  remark,  that  it  would  be  singular 
if  three  towns,  Arsinoc,  Klysma,  and  Heroonpolis,  had  been 
crowded  together  at  tlie  head  of  the  gulf,  wliik*  the  ruins  of 
two  only  are  to  be  seen.  But  it  is  a  still  more  important 
consideration,  that  we  find  the  meeting  between  Joseph  and 
Jacob  placed  at  Heroonpolis  not  only  by  Josephus^,  but 
also  by  the  Seventy,  who  must  undoubtedly  have  known  the 
situation.  Heroonpolis  existed  in  tlieir  time,  indeed  it  ap- 
jjcars  to  have  been  first  mentioned  by  tliem.  But  it  was 
impossible  that  they  could  have  made  Josepli  go  to  Suez,  if 
he  wished  to  meet  his  father,  who  came  out  of  S}Tia.  It 
must  have  been  situated  on  the  road  from  Syria,  and  they 
undoubtedly  mentioned  it,  because  in  their  time  it  was  the 
capital  of  tliat  province,  which  tliey  considered  to  be  the 
district  of  Goijhen  and  Eamses.  But  the  situation  wliich 
tlie  Itinerarium  Antonini*^  gives  to  the  town  Hero,  which  is 
Heroonpolis,  is  decisive,  since  it  places  it  XXIV.  mille 
passus  from  Thoum,  XVIII.  from  Serapiu,  and  the  latter 
L.  from  Klysma.  But  Et.  Quatremere^  has  most  completely 
pointed  out  that  Klysma  was  situated  at  the  head  of  the 
gulf  opposite  Arsinoe,  as  it  is  marked  in  the  tablet  of  Peu- 
tinger.     But  Thoum,  i.  e.  Fithom,  was  situated  on  the  Nile, 

1  Wilkinson,  Modern  Eijypi  and  Thebes,  vol.  '}.  p.  311,  there  only 
heard  the  name  of  E'  Satfieh,  '-the  Water-wheel;"  but  my  friend  and 
foUow-traveller,  II.  Aboken,  who  was  also  on  the  spot,  confirmed  mo 
in  the  name  whicli  Kobinson  gives  in  his  map  {Aba  Keischeib).  The 
French  scholars,  on  the  contrary,  -write  Abua  Keycheyd. 

•  Man.  siir  CEg.  i.  p.  ICG.  ^  J-'Eg.  sous  les  Phar,  11.  p,  89, 

*  Descr.  de  VEg.  xi.  p.  378,  ^  Antiq.  Jud.  n.  7,  8. 
«  p.  75,  ed.  Tarthev  and  Tinder  (p.  170,  Wess> 

7  Mem.  sur  VEg.  t.'i.  p.  151,  &c. 

2f2 


436  THE  HLEEEW  TEADITIOX. 

in  the  neighbonrhood  of  Bubastis^.  Thereby  the  situation 
of  Heroonpolis  is  placed  somewhere  near  the  aboTe-men- 
tioned  ruins. 

This  was  a  convenient  situation  for  the  capital  of  that  part 
of  the  country  to  which  it  gave  its  name^.  But  the  province, 
which  extended  as  far  as  the  gulf,  might  have  been  suitably 
named  after  it.  The  account  given  by  the  Seventy  also 
agrees  very  well  with  this,  since  the  road  from  the  north  to 
Cairo  still  passes  in  this  neighbourhood^.  But  the  question 
is,  how  can  Strabo,  who  places  Heroonpolis  iu  the  angle  oftlie 
gulf,  be  made  to  accord  with  this  ?  In  consequence  of  these 
different  statements,  Du  Bois  Ayme  believed  lie  was  justified 
hi  the  supposition*,  which  he  has  fully  stated,  that  in  earlier 
times  the  gulf  extended  much  farther  north,  and  filled  up  aU 
the  low  districts  of  the  now  dry  so-caUed  Bitter  lakes,  but 
afterwards  being  covered  by  sand,  withdrew  itself  within  its 
present  shore.  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  necessary  to  believe 
in  such  a  physical  change  ;  and  the  idea  of  it  seems  to  me 
most  completely  set  aside  by  the  remains  of  an  artificial 
canal,  more  than  four  leagues  iu  length,  which  runs  from 
Suez  towards  the  north,  and  which  was  pointed  out  by  the 
French  expedition,  for  no  canal  could  be  cut  where  there  was 
sea ;  the  utmost  that  was  necessary  was  to  render  the  passage 
navigable  when  it  was  filled  up  with  sand.  But  the  opening 
of  this  canal  must  have  had  nearly  the  same  results  as  those 
which  may  be  derived  from  the  belief  iu  the  extended  sea. 
The  wide  basins  of  the  Bitter  lakes  were  filled  by  the  canal, 
as  well  as  the  adjoiuiug  lakes  to  the  north,  and  the  low  dis- 
trict of  Seba-Biar,  which  extends  even  to  the  ruins  of  Muk- 
far.  Here  first  commenced  the  real  Xile  canal,  which  re- 
ceived its  water  from  the  west.     Here  was  the  harbonr,  as 

1  Herod,  ii.  158.  =  PI  in,  H.  N.  V.  ix,  9. 

3  S.  Wilkinson,  Eg.  and  Thebes,  vol.i.  p.  311. 

■*  In  his  Memoire  sur  les  anciennes  liniites  de  la  mer  rouge,  in  the  Descr. 
de  VEg.  t.  xi.  (Pauck.)  p.  371,  &c.;  and  in  the  Notice  sur  k  scjour  des 
Hebreux  en  Egypte,  t.  •siii.  p.  112,  &c. 


siiUAiioN  ur  ii£iioo>"i'uLii.  137 

Strabo  expressly  aaya^,  in  which  they  embarked  for  a  voyage  on 
the  Ked  Sea.  On  account  of  the  natural  and  extensive  shore 
of  tlie  lake,  the  notion  of  a  sea  voyage  was  here  imparted  to 
the  traveller;  and,  therefore,  this  part  artificially  drawn  into 
the  gulf  mighi  naturally  be  called  the  /^^x^^  """"^  tcuXnoVf 
the  innermost  angle  of  the  gulf.  Strabo,  or  Eratosthenes, 
whom  he  cites,  even  says  expressly  in  one  place,  that  ileroon- 
polis  was  situated  on  the  2sile,  that  is  to  say,  on  a  canal  of 
the  Nile,  and  yet  calls  the  town  itself  at  the  same  time  the 
fivx^s  rov  Apa^iov  koXitov  (The  innermost  part  of  the  .Vrabian 
Gulf)2. 

Ptolemy  also  says,  that  the  Trajanic  river  (as  the  canal 
was  called,  which  was  afterwards  cut  from  Babylon)  tlowed 
through  Ileroonpolis.  On  account  of  the  sharp  angle  so  far 
removed  to  the  east,  which  is  formed  here  by  the  Nile  canal 
and  the  extended  gidf,  this  provinci;d  capital  was  particularly 
:ulapted  for  tlie  more  general  geographical  determinations  ot 
those  countries,  for  which  purpose  it  had  been  especially  used 
by  Strabo,  and  earlier,  also,  by  Eratosthenes'^. 

With  regard  to  the  statement  of  numbers  given  by 
Ptolemy,  the  longitude  agrees  very  well  with  our  acceptation, 
and  also  prevents  us  placing  the  town  still  farther  west.  But 
the  latitudes,  according  to  which  'Hpwojj/  ttoXis  would  fall 
under  30'  (others  give  29"  oO),  tlie  /i^x"^"  "^^^  K6\nov  (inner- 
most part  of  the  gulf)  under  29^  50',  and  Apaivuq  under 
29-^  30  (or  29'  10',  also  29°  20),  certainly  contain  an  error, 
wheresoever  we  place  the  /luxo^j  because  Axsinot*,  which 
\vas  undoubtedly  situated  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Suez,  is 
placed  30,  or  even  50',  too  far  south.  It  is,  therefore,  more 
probable,  that  we  ought  only  to  consider  the  distances  of  the 
three  places  from  one  another  as  correctly  fixed,  somewhat 
in  the  order,  29^  50',  29'  50',  29°  10',  exactly  as  they  are 
given  in  the  codex  Mediceus,  but  that  there  is  an  error  easy 
of  explanation  throughout  the  numbers,  by  which  they  have 
all  been  placed  50'  too  far  south.     Eor  the  true  position,  ac- 

'  p.  768.  ■  p.  767.  '  Strabo,  ii.p.  85,  86,  &C. 


438  THE  HEEEEW  TEADITIOX. 

cording  to  other  proofs,  demanded  for  Heroonpolis  (Mukfar), 
and  for  the  fxvxos  (Seba-Biar),  bordering  on  it,  30°  40',  for 
Arsinoe  (not  far  north  of  Suez),  30°. 

Thus  the  statements  of  Ptolemy  also  appear  to  me  to  be 
no  longer  opposed  to  our  acceptation.  We  decide,  there- 
fore, for  Mukfar,  rather  than  for  Abu-Kesheb,  because  the 
first  was  in  reality  situated  close  to  the  /iv^os  of  Seba-Biar, 
while  Abu-Kesheb  lay  about  an  hour  and  a  half  farther  west 
on  the  canal,  and  not  on  the  lake. 

There  is,  besides,  the  additional  reason,  that  we  believe 
we  have  found  in  the  ruins  of  Abu-Kesheb  the  still  more 
ancient  town  of  Bamses,  which  must  have  been  situated 
in  this  neighbourliood,  and  yet  can  hardly  be  tlie  same  as 
Heroonpolis.  The  Seventy  say  that  Heroonpolis  was  situ- 
ated in  the  province  of  Eamses.  Thence  follows  that  in 
their  time  at  least  the  town  no  longer  bore  tiie  name  of 
E-amses.  This  last  name,  moreover,  is  nowhere  found  except 
in  the  Old  Testament.  The  tovra  had  therefore  undoubtedly 
been  already  forsaken  and  forgotten,  and  appears  to  have 
been  exactly  supplanted  and  replaced  by  Heroonpolis,  which 
was  afterwards  built  in  its  neighbourhood ;  whilst  no  reason 
could  be  discovered  wherefore  the  old  Egyptian  name  of 
Bamses  should  have  been  changed  into  the  later  Egyptian 
name  of  Heroonpolis. 

But  that  we  may  really  seek  for  Eamses  in  the  ruins  of 
Abu-Kesheb  is  most  decidedly  confirmed  by  a  monument 
which  was  found  upon  those  very  ruins  as  early  as  the  time 
of  the  French  expedition.  It  is  a  group  of  three  figures  cut 
out  of  a  block  of  granite,  which  represents  the  gods  Ea  and 
Tum,  and  between  them  the  King  Eamses  II.  The  shields 
of  this  the  greatest  ofnhe  Pharaohs  are  repeated  six  times  in 
the  inscriptions  on  the  back^. 

It  was  therefore  King  EAMSES-MiAiirx  who  built  this 

^  The  first  imperfect  copy  is  in  the  Descr.  de  VEg.  Antiq.  vol.  v.  pi. 
29,  Ko.  6 — 8.  The  best  is  given  by  Wilkinson  in  his  Materia  Hiero- 
gli/phica.  Append.  No.  4. 


TUE  TOWy  OF  BJLMSES.  439 

town,  and  was  worshipped  there,  as  is  shown  by  this  monu- 
ment, and  he  it  was  who  gave  his  name  to  the  to\Mi^ ;  for  it 
is  not  easy  to  believe  that  it  was  founded  by  his  grandfather, 
Ramses  I.,  who  only  reigned  about  one  year. 

This  leads  us  to  the  histor}-  of  the  remarkable  canal  on 
which  the  to\N'n  was  built.  It  is  known  that  this  canal  after- 
wards served  to  connect  the  Nile  and  the  Kcd  Sea.  Con- 
cerning this  connection,  we  read  in  Herodotus'-  that  it  was 
first  undertaken  by  Nekos,  who  also  caused  .-Virica  to  be  cir- 
cumnavigated, but  that  it  was  interrupted  before  its  com- 
pletion. Darius  then  took  up  the  work.  The  connection 
actually  existed  in  the  time  of  Herodotus,  as  we  learn  from 
his  words.  The  assertions  of  Aristotle,  Dii)dorus,  Strabo, 
and  Pliny  apj)ear  to  contradict  this,  who  some  of  them  fix 
the  period  of  the  first  plan  of  the  connection  much  earlier 
than  Herodotus,  since  they  ascribe  it  to  Sesostris,  and  some 
make  the  completion  of  the  work  later  than  him,  namely, 
that  it  was  only  finished  in  the  time  of  Ptolemy  Phila- 
delphus. 

Aristotle"*  says  that  both  Sesostris  and  afterwards  Darius 
commenced  the  work,  but  gave  it  up  because  tlie  sea  was 
discovered  to  be  higher  than  the  land,  and  it  was  tlu'refore 
feared  that  the  Nile  water  might  be  spoilt  by  the  rushing  in 
of  the  sea.  Aristotle  does  not  mention  Nekos;  it  therefore 
appears  that  in  his  day  the  connection  which  existed  in  the 
time  of  Herodotus  had  again  ceased. 

AVe  can  thus  understand  why  Diodorus*  ascribes  the  final 
completion  of  the  canal  to  Ptolemy  Piiiladelphus.  He 
makes  no  more  mention  of  Sesostris,  than  Herodotus  did. 
But  accordmg  to  him,  Nekos  as  well  as  Darius  are  prevented 
from  completing  it,  lest  by  that  means  they  should  overflow 

'  Kinp  Ilamses  was  therefore  just  as  much  the  local  god  of  the  town 
Pianiscs,  as  the  pod  Hero  of  the  town  Hero. 
-  ii.  158.     Compare  iv.  42. 
3  Meteorolcpg.  i.  14,  p.  352,  h  (Bekk). 
*  i.  33. 


440  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITIO>'. 

the  country.  This  does  not  weaken  the  testimony  of  Hero- 
dotus concerning  t]ie  existing  connection.  Ptolemy  Phi- 
ladelphus  did  not  only  re-open  the  connections,  but  he  built 
an  artificial  sluice  at  its  extreme  point,  at  Arsinoe,  from 
which  this  canal  received  the  name  of  the  Ptolemaic. 

Strabo^  says,  that  Sesostbis  began  it,  but  desisted,  being 
afraid  of  the  higher  level  of  the  Eed  Sea.  It  was  not 
finished  by  the  son  of  Psammeticus  {HeJcos),  on  account  of 
his  premature  death.  Darius  also  discontinued  the  abnost 
completed  work,  because  he  feared  that  he  should  overflow 
Egypt ;  the  Ptolemies  at  lengtli  finished  the  opening,  and 
made  a  sluice  at  Arsinoe.  By  tliat  means,  the  salt-water  of 
the  Bitter  lakes  became  sweet,  and  abounded  with  fish. 

Of  the  more  ancient  kings,  Pliny^  only  mentions  Sesostbis 
and  DAEirs,  but  he  says  of  Ptolemy  PniLADELPnus,  that  he 
cut  a  canal  100  feet  wide  and  40  feet  deep,  as  far  as  the  Bitter 
lakes,  called  it  amnis  PtolcmcBus,  and  built  Arsinoi'  upcm  it. 
He  discontinued  cutting  the  canal,  being  afraid  of  an  inun- 
dation. 

Lastly,  we  must  again  cite  here  what  has  been  already 
casually  mentioned  in  a  former  place,  tliat  a  Tpaiavos  norufM)^ 
is  named  by  Ptolemy",  which  ran  through  Babylon  and 
Heroonpolis. 

The  contradictions  which  these  diflerent  statements  of  tlie. 
ancient  authors  appear  to  contain,  have  been  frequently 
brought  forward,  but  even  the  full  deliberation  which  Le- 
tronne  has  bestowed  on  this  interesting  subjecf*,  does  not 
appear  to  me  to  have  given  a  perfectly  true  picture  of  the . 
history  of  this  connecting  canal.  It  has  everywhere  been 
forgotten,  that  the  question  is  not  about  07ie,  but  two 
canals. 

The  first  and  the  oldest  canal  was  only  conducted  from 

»  p.  38,  p.  804.     Compare  p.  780. 
-  Hist.  Nat.  vi.  29,  §  165—167. 
^  iv.  5. 

*  L'Isthme  de  Suez,  in  the  Hevite  des  Deux  Jfondes,  livr.  du  15  Juill. 
1841. 


CANAL  BETWtry  5TLE  AJKD  RED  SEA.  441 

the  Nile  to  S^  '      '  ■:i  an  exact  ea:*terly  direction.     Tlud 

(.-anal  was  un  --iit  l>y  H;\!v.!Hd  (Scaoatrui),  lxH:au*e, 

m  lias  becTi   r  ^K)uring  ruins  of  Abu- 

K'<  <^Jii*b,  a  gm:-.      ^       ^     ...     :  irnJ,  which  r\^prv«enta 

king,  and  which  mui^t  have  stood  in  the  temple  of  the 

Letronne.  v  ^    -■      ars  to  have  been  unaware  of  thia 

:njitan«»,  is  tV  r-(»ng.  when  (p.  7)  he  cvjuaidera 

:«.*,  iStrabo,  aiul  Pliny,  that 

lion,  but  did  nut  rt»^lo^c  it, 

as  a  iatiT  tradition,  only  arisen  since  the  tiim*  of  llcrodotun, 

"  '  '-rler  to  enhance  still  more  the  name  of  Sesoajtri*.     This 

.  like  many  others  cut  by  this  king,  had  its  own  par- 

t      .  iP  J   .r;    -t  •;  he  acquired  thereby  a  conaidi  r .'  liiun 

'  ♦   •  -  "       Ikit  if  we  consider  tlie   csjhh    .  iiou. 

>  alfo   paid   to  ship-buildiuj:,  since    he    limt 

'       _  Arabiiin  Gulf  with  war  bhipa^   it  could  not 

have  ap|>eared  to  him  a  very  strange  idea  to  cut  tlirough  the 

narrow  istlimus  between  the  Arabian  Gulf  and  the  iiitter 

Likti?.     The  Egyptians    had  for  ages  jHJssfMsed  the  art  of 

1  u  the  grt»atest  jn^rfection,  and  practised   it   mi»r« 

I  in  the  time  of  St-sostria,  therefore  there  waa 
nothing  eitraonlinar}'  at  that  time  in  the  reasons  given  by 
Aristotle  and  Slrabo  why  the  opening  waa  not  \i'iitured 
upon,  because  it  was  discovered  that   the  lied  Sea  was  too 

Ingb". 

Xekos,  howevpf.  inidertjikes  it,  but   leaves  it  off  again, 

ncronliiii:  !■'    I'  'iirnced  by  an  oracle,  who  t*.»ld 

hiiu  he  workeii  .  urians  (a  danger  whicli  likewise 

has  always  made  the  calculating  Mehemet  Aii  disinclined 
to  the  undertaking),  and  according  to  Strabo,  because  he 
died.  Diodorus  attributes  this  scruple  to  him  in  place  of 
to  St'>M>tns,  but  incorrectly,  because  the  levelling  mujst  Imve 

'   IKtihI.  ii.  102. 

'  The  hcijfht  of  the    '  is  diaeovered  to  be  30  fi>fct  6  inches 

Mvo  the  K'vcl  of  th<-  .' .  in  Soa.     [By  the  very  hitcst  invc«- 

I I  .nations  the  difltToncv  ut  .'"  icvt.  which  wa«  funncriy  accepted,  h&s 
Kin  reiiucftl  to  3  feet.] 


442  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITION. 

been  made  before  the  section  could  have  been  commenced. 
It  was  necessary,  however,  to  dig  througli  a  double  elevation 
of  the  ground,  and  distinct  traces  of  both  these  connecting 
trenches  may  still  be  found  upon  the  careful  map  of  the 
French  engineer,  who  took  the  level  of  this  part  of 
the  country^.  The  first  cutting  which  restored  the  con- 
nection between  Seba-Biar  and  the  Bitter  lakes,  was  insig- 
nificant, and  only  consisted  of  about  7000  metres;  the 
second,  between  the  Bitter  lakes  and  the  sea,  was  the  most 
important,  and  almost  four  times  as  long  as  the  former. 
Kow,  it  is  possible  that  Xekos  undertook  the  first  cutting 
either  with  the  intention  of  fertilising  the  extensive  land 
round  the  Bitter  lakes  by  tlie  pouring  in  of  the  Nile  water, 
or  thus  to  prepare  for  the  second  more  difiicult  cutting. 
"We  can  easily  imagine  that  tlie  idea  of  connecting  the  two 
seas  must  have  been  a  very  natural  one  to  that  same  Nekos, 
who,  according  to  Herodotus-,  caused  Airicu  to  be  circum- 
navigated, and  triremes  to  be  constructed  for  various  enter- 
prises, both  on  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  as  well  as  on  the 
Arabian  Gulf^.  The  opinion  of  Letroime  seems  to  me, 
therefore,  of  little  value,  who  imagined  that  he  first  borrowed 
the  idea  from  the  plan  of  his  cotemporary,  Periaxdeb,  for 
cutting  through  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth.  The  reverse  is 
evidently  a  much  more  probable  supposition,  since  the  Greek 
plan  was  much  more  difiicult  to  accomplish,  was  less  called 
for  by  necessity,  and  was  conceived  at  a  time  in  which, 
probably,  Eg^-ptian  hydraulic  architects  would  have  been 
employed,  since  this  profession  had  flourished  for  ages  in 
Egypt,  but  nothing  similar  to  it  had  been  accomplished  in 
Greece. 

DAEirs  must  have  certainly  cut  through  the  district  be- 
tween the  sea  and  the  Bitter  lakes,  and  thus  have  restored 
the  first  real  connection  by  water,  between  the  sea  and  the 
Kile,  for  it  existed  in  the  time  of  Herodotus,  whatever 

1  Descr.  de  VEg.  Atlas,  pi.  23,  31. 

2  ii.  15S,  iv.  42.  2  Herod,  ii.  159. 


CJL5i.L  BETWEEN  XILE  JLXD  RED  SEA.  113 

Arisl<'l!f,  PI'mI-pi'*.  nr.'l  St^:l^'>  !:>ay  pay  to  tlio  contrary, 
who  again  tran-lVr  th.-  •  M  tnuiiiioii  about  tho  fear  of  an 
inundation  from  Sciiostris  to  Darius.  It  waa  never  possible, 
indet'd,  to  make  a  perfectly  free  connection,  on  account  of 
the  different  height  of  the  water,  and  the  ebb  and  flow  of 
ihb  Hid  Sea.  1  conjecture,  therefore,  that  Darius  con- 
Btructrd  «  ?li!»eo  nt  the  inner  citremity  of  the  mw  canal, 
where  it  -.If  into  the  Bitter  lakes,  in  onlcr  to 

protect  I  rs  and  the  adjacent  fertile  lauds  from 

the  overflowing  sea.  This  was  undoubtedly  the  most  suit- 
ible  point  for  such  a  work,  since  it  would  not  be  so  diflTuult 
fts  immediately  on  the  sea.  The  paiwacf  throutjh,  would  lx> 
'-  1   by  the  level  of  the  sea,  v  with   tho 

<  llow  of  the  tide,  as  must  b  i  a  simple 

siuice. 

But  it  is  in  tlie  monuments  that  wo  again  find  tho 
opinion  most  ct^rtainly  confirmed,  that  a  passage  existed  hero 
OS  early  as  the  times  of  the  Persians.  During  the  French 
expedition,  the  chief  engineer,  De  Itozien*.  discovered,  on  a 
military  excursion  from  Suez,  a  heap  of  ruins  in  a  district 
which  is  not  accurately  defined,  but  which  cannot  have  been 
far  frt)m  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Jiitter  lakes,  upon 
which  were  scattered  the  remains  of  the  statue  of  a  Frrsian 
king,  and  several  fragments  of  cunriform  inscriptions,  all  in 
red  granite^  It  appears  that  no  traveller  has  since  visited 
this  spot*.  But  how  can  the  existence  of  Persian  ruins  in 
this  part  of  tlie  i.'*thinus  be  explained,  if  they  were  not  con- 
ncvted  with  the  oj)eniug  of  the  canal,  situated  there  ?  Jk'- 
eides  this,  tho  largest  portion  of  the  cuneiform  WTitings  men- 
tioned above  contains  precisely  the  name  of  King  JJarius,  fol- 
lowed by  the  addition   vaiya  vas-(arqa),  princrps  viof/nus, 

'  Deter,  de  TEg.  (Panck.)  Ant.  vol.  viii.  p.  27,  &c.  Compare  rol,  v. 
p.  4il,  and  Jomartl.  carte  de  la  Intsse  Eyijpte.  A  copy  of  the  frag- 
ment in  pivcn  in  a  copj^r-i'late.  Ant.  vol.  v.  pi.  29. 

•  [Tlie  sjKJt  lias  now  Uxn  re-(li!»coverc-<l.  and  marked  upon  the  map  of 
tbr  iSocicie  d'Ktudcs  de  risthin.-  di-  Suez.  Travaux  de  la  Brigade 
Frcn^aisc.     llapport  do  ringciiifcur.     Ib47.] 


444  THE  HEEEEW  TEADITIO>'. 

which  is  also  found  in  other  inscriptions,  from  which  we  may 
deduce  with  certainty  that  this  king,  whom  the  image  also 
undoubtedly  represented,  took  an  active  part  here.  At  all 
events  it  was  only  a  narrow  canal,  and  not  constructed  for 
large  ships.  Therefore  it  might  afterwards  be  again  filled  up 
with  sand,  and  fall  into  disuse,  and,  indeed,  be  so  far  forgotten 
that  Aristotle  might  imagine  it  had  never  been  completed. 

Ptolemy  Philadelphus  undertook  its  restoration.  He 
appears  to  have  had  the  magnificent  intention  of  restoring  a 
connection  by  water  between  the  two  seas  for  ships  of  war 
also.  This  alone  explains  the  grand  idea  of  constructing  a 
canal  to  the  Bitter  lakes,  100  feet  wide,  and  40  feet  deep, 
which  would  have  been  quite  unnecessary  for  common  ships 
of  burden.  At  the  same  time  he  constructed  an  artificial 
sluice,  probably  at  the  point  where  the  sea  entered,  wliere  he 
also  built  the  town  Arsinoe.  But  as  Pliny  expressly  says,  he 
only  carried  this  work  from  the  sea  to  the  Bitter  lakes.  It  is 
only  this  canal  that  we  must  undoubtedly  understand  by  the 
TTOTafxos  TlToXefiaios,  amnis  Ptolemccus,  which,  according  to 
Diodorus  and  Pliny,  received  its  name  from  the  second 
Ptolemy.  The  immense  difference  between  this  canal  and 
the  two  northern  ones,  is  visible  in  the  plan  of  the  French 
engineer^,  therefore  it  does  not  even  require  the  ingenious 
explanation  of  Letronne  in  order  to  understand  that  it  was 
impossible  for  Cleopatra,  after  the  battle  of  Actium,  to  cause 
ships  of  war  to  be  brought  from  the  Mediterranean  to  the 
Eed  Sea,  except  by  land. 

"With  reference  to  this  last  work,  Strabo  mentions  the 
Ptolemaic  kings,  this,  connected  with  the  fact  that  the  town 
of  Arsinoe,  since  the  time  of  Strabo,  is  also  mentioned  under 
the  name  KXeoTrarpty,  leads  to  the  supposition  that  one  of 
the  last  Ptolemies,  or  Cleopatra  herself,  completed  the  work- 
ings on  this  canal,  perhaps  the  sluices. 

The  name  ttotuhos  Tpaiavos,  by  which  Letronne  also  un- 

^  Descr.  de  CEy,     Atlas,  pi.  23,  31. 


CANAX  BETWIiy  NILE  JLXD  HT.  4  IG 

detftandB  thewht>i'  Ini:^  way  as  far  ;i:j  ine  &oa^  ua4 

UTidmibte«l)y    !U«  -    tlv    !>:inie    Trora/ior     nroXtfunot. 

f  Arsinor' orthe  5ca;  be 

^'ii  Babylon  and  Ilcroou- 
polis.  This,  tbirelupe,  refers  to  the  caiia),  of  which  traces 
an*  al«o  rtill  cxtoiit,  which  received  ite  water  much  higher  up 
tliau  the  ancient  one  of  Sesostris,  namely,  at  Babylon,  and 
wah  nto  it.  ai!  "    -^'cd  itself  witli 

it  i:  ;r  at  Her 


tioii< 

M  ••.!!.;.!.  1  t 

that  litJ  ila-  K 

till    .  bnt  wii«    • 


hy   which  lAlronne  , 

1.  uUmt  llu-  liiiH-  of  ^ 
ilic  I'orphyry  (luurrits  of  Ctcl»cl  l»tn.linu  ajiji^-iif  Ut  Im^c  Uxu  iK-yu^  i    !. 
i*  not.  howcviT.  n   ■ntficirnt  p-h^'P   tor  ih\*  c*mf'lu*i''>n.     Th.-  <  .i!;al 


rcLVrttJcr  «c  ctiHul  i/u*  uuuU  i/u  iN  </  u  la  tutrr  tic  i^uiiuum  ,  Ua  iuumuj:  y 
ptifuiitrmt  rmc^rf  <1  roj'jfirihiin  >lf  n^ffrrnunne :  c^cst  le  m>mf  '{ur  Ammu  fftt 
el-' A       ■'■  ■  •        -  .  340),  whiix-  At;  •  .  ^ 

aua  lirnt  ifuz  nuutt  ill  .'/ 

n<;:.,:.      .-r  '■   --:'-tr  dc  cc   ,   ., - 

mumtciitioH  » */  et  Its  manfinndstntMl 

aband.nut  U  ;..:  i  '    :         :    .^.  iluit  thi- canal  during 

the  ri»ing  of  liu-  AniU«,  shortly  l^forc  the  Kg^-ptiau  coiuiuest,  hail 
btvn  disiffni'dly  fiU'^-l  up  hy  th<'  K^'j'plians  a.s  an  ininucal  and  iirudontial 
measure,  fur  th  "it  it  was  afterwards  again  filkd  up  ])y 

tJie  CaJiph  111  >!  .lohammet  ben  'Alxiallali  rose  against 

him  at  Mr  '  •   .  ...»    ,    .;  (aeeurding  to  others  TtiT}.     Tlie  yt-ar 

also  of  it-  :i  ai>p<.'ars  to  me  still  doubtful.     Mai^rizi,  iiukcd, 

says  (p.  :  ;  /  juc  le  Trh-Haut  arcorda  fislarnisme  aiix  fu/mmcSy 
ft  que  'Amruu  /jcn  tl-'Ass  Jit  lu  cuntjutte  de  rUginjte,  ce  ytntruL,  d'apris 
Cordre  de  'Omar  ben  al-KhttOithab,  prince  des  Jiaeles,  succupa  de  J\ure 
recreu^tr  le  canal  dans  ri:nn-<  </.  la  v.vrtaitti.  This  famine  year  was 
certaiidy  the  year  18  after  the  flight  of  the  proi)het— i.  e.  x.u.  C;j9. 
'•'  •     "   tlii^  same  year  Egypt  was  also  conqueretl,  and  it  is  not  very 


446  THE  HEBliEW  TEADITIOX. 

This  geographical  digression,  whose  length  may  be  excused 
owing  to  the  peculiar  interest  of  the  subject,  allows  us 
now,  as  it  seems  to  me,  to  judge  confidently  on  two  points, 
which  are  important  in  a  critical  examination  of  the  Exodus 
of  the  Israelites.  From  the  position  of  the  two  towns, 
Abaris  and  Eamses — the  former  situated  on  the  Mediterra- 
nean Sea,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Pelusaic  ann  of  the  Nile, 
the  latter  half  a  degree  more  to  the  south,  and  almost  as 
much  more  west — it  follows  that  the  Israelites,  according  to 
the  Mosaic  accounts,  marched  out  of  a  different  town,  as  well 

probable  that  cutting  the  canal,  ^vhich  would  occupy  six  months,  was 
the  first  and  immediate  undertaking  of  tlie  conqueror,  although  it  was 
imdoubtedly  soon  called  for  by  the  famine  in  Arabia,  which  made  it  ne- 
cessary to  import  provisions  from  Kgypt.  From  the  words  of  Amru 
also,  quoted  above,  there  appears  to  have  been  a  longer  perioil  between 
the  conquest  and  the  cleaning  out  the  canal.  I,  therefore,  think  that  we 
ought  rather  to  follow  the  defined  statement  of  Kl-Kendi,  who  is  cited 
by^Maqrizi  himself  (p.  .'U3),  and  who  wrute  about  880.  He  places  the 
restoration  of  the  canal  five  years  later— namely,  in  the  year  23 ;  j.  c.  G44, 
the  last  year  of  Amru.  For  the  history  of  the  canal,  compare,  besides 
the  treatises  of  Letronne  which  we  have  cited,  what  the  same  scholar 
said  at  a  former  time  in  his  edition  of  the  Dicuil.  1814,  8vo,  p.  10,  &c., 
and  in  his  translation  of  the  17th  book  of  Strabo,  p.  382;  also  ^lan- 
nert,  Geopr.  von  Africa,  Abth.  i.  p,  rjOS,  &c.,  and  Weil,  Gcsch.  der 
ChaUfen,  Bd.  i.  p.  119,  ic;  the  last  of  whom  likewise  places  the  re- 
storation of  the  canal  after  G41. 

The  result  we  have  lurrived  at  with  regard  to  the  whole  history  of  this 
remarkable  connecting  canal  is,  therefore,  briefly,  the  following: 

c.  1350  B.C.  liamscs  II.  {Se^ostris)  digs  the  canal  from  Bubastis  to 
Heroonpolis  (Mukfar,  near  Seba-Biar),  and  with  the  assistance  ot 
the  Israelites  builds  near  it  the  towns  Pithom  and  Ramses. 

c.  600  B.C.  ISeko  appears  to  have  conducted  the  canal  as  far  as  the 
Bitter  lakes. 

_  c.  500  B.C.  Darius,  for  the  first  time,  makes  the  whole  connection, 
since  he  cuts  through  the  elevation  between  the  Bitter  lakes  and  the 
sea. 

c.  350  B.C.  In  the  time  of  Aristotle  the  canal  appears  to  have  fallen 
into  disuse. 

c.  250  B.C.  PtolcmcEus  Philadelphus  digs  a  wide  canal,  amnis  PtolemcBus, 
from  the  sea  to  the  Bitter  lakes,  constructs  an  artificial  sluice,  and 
builds  Arsinoe  on  the  sea. 

c.  100  A.D.  Trajan  opens  a  new  canal,  amnis  Traianus,  from  Babylon 
to  Heroonpolis. 

643  (644)  A.D.  'Omar  re-opens  the  interrupted  connection. 

762  (767)  A.D.  Mohammet  ben  'Abdallah  fills  up  the  canaL 


81TUATI0K  OF  riTUOM.  417 

a«  in  a  different  tiirection,  from  that  taken  by  the  unclean  iu 
the  Manethonic  narration. 

On  the  othiT  haiul,  wc  have  loiinJ  tliat  the  to\ni  of 
Kamses  derivtd  in  nauu-  from  ilie  Kini,'  liamses-Miamun 
(Sesostria),  by  whom  it  was  built,  and  that  the  ancient  Nile 
canal,  on  which  it  waa  situated,  was  constructed,  accordini* 
to  tho  Greek  accounts,  by  Sesostris,  i.  e.  Eamses-Miamun. 
It  isj  evident  that  these  two  work^,  that  of  the  canal  and  that 
of  the  town,  nrr-  «N»nii<oted,  and  nciprocally  corroboralo  each 
other.     Tho   ;  .  was  occasit»iud  by  the  canal   being 

cut.     This  I.  .  will  bo   still  more  apparent  by  two 

other  facts. 

In  the  western  part  of  the  Delta  there  is  a  rfllaije  which 
to  this  day  bears  tho  same  name  as  the  town  wo  arc  speaking 
of,  namely,  liamses.  This  village  al«o,  and  its  name,  an*  of 
ancient  date,  which  is  proved  by  the  mound  of  ruins  at  that 
spot ;  and,  what  is  still  more  important  to  us,  it  is  situated, 
like  the  eastern  liamses,  on  the  border  of  an  ancient  canal^ 
which  was  conducted  from  the  Canopic  ann,  and  brought  tho 
water  of  tho  Nile  to  llermopolis  Parva  (I)amanhur)'.  The 
existence  of  these  ruins  of  Kam.sea  appears  to  me  alono  to 
justify  the  very  probable  supjiosition  that  this  ^^reat  we.xtfrn 
canal  was  also  cut  by  liiiniscs-Miamun,  and  that  the  royal 
constructor  was  worshipped  as  the  epon}'mous  divinity  in 
the  town  which  was  there  built.  It  is  evident  that  tho 
Israelites  would  not  have  been  sent  hither  from  Goshen  in 
onler  to  build  thU  town-. 

Besides  the  eastern  I^amses,  tho  Israelites  also  built  tho 
town  of  PiTiioM.  The  situation  of  this  town  cannot  ea.sily 
be  mistaken.  It  has  been  long  recognised  iu  the  town  of 
noTov/ios,  of  which  Herodotus  speaks  wlien  he  says  that  tho 
eastern  Nile  canal,  whicli  was  conducted  a  little  above  13 u- 

'  .Tomanl,  cttrte  tU  la  basse  Egypte.  WUkinsun^  Mod.  Eij.  and 
TheUx,  i.  p.  187. 

-  It  ia  a  gitat  mistake  if  ChampoUion — L'Eg.  sous  les  Phar.  ii.  p. 
244— <:oDsider8  these  the  ruins  of  the  town  built  hy  the  Israelites. 


•44;8  THE  HEBEEW  TRADITION. 

bastis,  flowed  past  it^,  the  Arabian  town-.  It  was  probably 
situated  opposite  Bubastis  (Tel  Basta),  on  the  border  of  the 
desert,  and  at  the  entrance  of  the  Wadi,  through  which  the 
canal  is  led.  The  ancient  ruins  of  a  to\vn  are  found  there 
under  the  name  of  Tel  el  keUr,  and  the  Itinerarium  An- 
tonini  places  the  town  of  Tlioum,  wliich  has  certainly  been 
properly  recognised  as  the  ancient  town  of  Turn  Ud-Tovyio^, 
exactly  in  that  place,  namely,  upon  the  road  from  Heliopolis 
to  Pelusium,  on  the  edge  of  the  desert  between  Vicus  Judae- 
orum  (Tel  Jehudeh)  and  Tacasartha  (Salhieh  ?).  Now  if 
the  Coptic  translation  in  the  passage  which  is  cited  from 
Gen.  xlvi.  28,  writes  moon  in  place  of  Ilcroonpolis,  as  is 
translated  by  the  Seventy,  it  does  not  mean  that  Pithom  was 
believed  to  be  discovered  in  Heroonpolis,  but  that  it  was 
thought  better  to  fix  the  place  at  which  Joseph  went  to  meet 
Jacob  at  Pithom  rather  than  at  Heroonpolis. 

PiTHOii,  therefore,  was  situated  at  one  end,  and  Eamses  at 
the  other,  of  the  ancient  Nile  canal,  wliich  was  constructed  by 
the  great  Pharaoh,  Eamses-Miamun,  in  the  land  of  Goshen. 
Both  were  founded  in  consequence  of  the  new  canal,  and  their 
direct  connection  in  the  Mosaic  narrative,  as  well  as  the 
statement  that  they  were  built  by  the  Israeliies,  is  most  de- 
cidedly confirmed  by  the  geographical  circumstances  which 
have  been  exhibited.  Taking  it  in  a  general  point  of  view, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Israelites  were  chiefly  set- 
tled in  that  very  country,  namely,  below  Ileliopolis,  in  the 

1  Wilkinson  (J/od  Eg.  p,  319)  misunderstands  the  passage  when  he 
supposes  that  Patumos  -was  situated  at  the  other  end  of  the  canal,  on 
the  Red  Sea.  He  appears  here  to  have  followed  Jomard,  who,  in  his 
map  of  the  Delta,  also  places  it  at  the  head  of  the  bay,  although  he 
places  Pithom  in  the  right  position, 

2  Compare  Steph.  Byz. 

Ud-Tovfios,  Pi-thom,  lll-eou,  means  "the  (namely  the  Temple 
the  Dwelling-place)  of  the  Turn"  of  the  well-known  Egyptian  god 
sjiT-rr  ^^  Y^  ^j,  who  was  much  honoured  exactly  in  this  part  of 
Egypt.  He  is  frequently  found  upon  the  Elaminian  obelisks,  which 
come  from  Heliopolis,  as  well  as  upon  the  monuments  of  Ramses  at 
Abu-Kesheb. 


DATi:  OF  THE  ZXODUS.  HO 

ij.  i^hbourhood  of  Bubastis  (Tel  Bastah)  and  of  the  modern 
Belbea,  where  ruinfl  an?  still  extant  called  Tel  Jfhudeh  ;  and 
the  Itinerarium  Antonini  cites  a  pla^-e  called  Virus  Ju- 
d<rorum,  where,  finally,  the  Jewish  temple  of  Onias  was  built, 
probably  at  the  'o^.'ov  of  Ptolemy ^ 

The  inference  we  have  arrived  at,  that  if  the  Israelites 
built  these  town?,  they  must  have  been  still  in  E^pt  in  the 
reign  of  King  Ramses,  who  founded  them,  and  that  they 
could  not  have  departed  several  centuries  previous,  no  longer 
ref«ts  upon  the  name  of  one  single  tov^ii,  which  might  be  ex- 
plained by  an  accidental  inexactitude  of  the  writer,  or  by  a 
confusion  in  dates^,  but  upon  the  close  connection  of  a  series 
"♦'  facts,  which  reciprocally  support  and  explain  one  another. 

Hence  the  oppression  took  place  more  especially  undiT 
Kanises,  and  the  Exodus  resulting  from  it  under  his  son  and 
sucoi'ssor  ^renephthes.  According  to  the  Mosaic  narrative 
also,  the  Pharaoh  by  whom  the  towns  were  built  waa  a  dif- 
ferent one  from  that  of  tlie  Exodus^.  Moses  only  n»tumed 
from  Midian  upon  hearing  of  the  death  of  the  first,  and  it 
seems  that  the  event  of  the  Exodus  was  dirtvtly  connected 
with  the  change  of  government. 

Another  proof  of  the  correctness  of  our  opinion,  that, 
acci»rding  to  the  history  of  the  Israelites,  as  nvorded  in  tlie 
books  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  Exodus  cannot  be  fixed 
before  the  reign  of  the  second  Ramses,  is  afforded  by  the 
accounts  of  the  settlement  of  the  Jews  in  Palestine.  It  is 
wj-Il  known,  and  most  thorouglily  confinned  by  the  monu- 
nn'iits,  and  the  nearly  contemporaneous  Egj-ptian  papyrus 
rolls,  that  Ramses-Miamuii  attacked  and  conquered  a 
great  part  of  Asia,  and  probably  during  his  whole  reign 
held  under  his  dominion  the  adjoining  lands,  the  penin- 
sula of  Petnra,  and  all  Palestine.  "We  also  see  his  father, 
Sethos  I.,  represented  upon  the  monuments  in  victorious 
warfare   against    the    people    of    Syria,   among   whom   the 

•  jv.  s.  5.3. 

'  C^omparc  Biickh,  Manethoy  p.  203  and  p.  229. 
'  Exod.  ii.  23. 


450  THE  HEBREW  TEADITION. 

Canaanites  are  expressly  named.  These  were  the  most 
glorious  times  in  the  whole  Egyptian  history.  That  they  are 
nowhere  mentioned  in  the  books  of  Joshua  and  Judges, 
while  the  numerous  far  more  transitory  subjugations  of  the 
Israelites  by  the  nations  bordering  upon  them  are  so  fully 
recorded,  appears,  in  fact,  to  be  a  fresh  proof  that  those 
warlike  expeditions  happened  hefore  the  Exodus  of  the 
Israelites^. 

But  it  even  appears  as  if  the  true  epoch  of  Egyptian 
history  in  which  the  Exodus  of  the  Israelites  occurred,  has 
been  preserved  in  late  Jewish  traditions.  I  will  at  least 
bring  forward  one  circumstance  from  Rahhinical  clironology, 
which  deserves,  perhaps,  to  be  followed  up  by  those  who  are 
more  familiar  with  this  literature. 

This  Jewish  chronology,  namely,  deviates  in  a  most  striking 
manner  from  every  other,  and  as  late  as  the  times  of  the 
Persian  kings  it  differs  no  less  than  about  IGO  years  from  the 
recognised  numbers.  The  difierent  authorities  present  few 
deviations  among  themselves.  They  reckon  by  the  years  of 
the  world,  a  mode  of  reckoning  which,  as  Ideler-  also  con- 
siders, most  probably  was  first  discovered,  and  gradually 
introduced,  by  the  Eabbi  Hillel  Hanassi,  in  the  year  344 
after  Christ,  simultaneously  with  the  whole  of  the  present 
arrangement  of  the  year  among  the  Jews.  They  place  the 
Creation  3761  years  before  Christ,  and  till  the  time  of  Joseph 

1  Eamses  III.,  also,  -whose  re\g;n  happened  soon  after  the  Exodus  of 
the  Israelites,  waged  war  with  the  northern  nations,  and  therefore  un- 
doubtpdly  passed  through  Syria  and  Palestine.  But  it  is  not  probable 
that  his  marclies  were  ever  of  any  considerable  duration,  or  were  con- 
nected with  long  periods  of  possession,  so  that  we  may  venture  to 
believe  that  these  transitory  marches  ao;ainst  the  powerful  nations  of 
this  country,  to  whom  the  Jews  did  not  at  that  time  belong,  could  have 
as  yet  little  effect  upon  them,  unless,  indeed,  it  happened,  perhaps, 
when  they  were  themselves  subjugated  by  the  Mesopotamians  or  the 
Moabites.  Such  a  supposition  would  be  still  less  probable  it  the  Jews 
had  departed  as  early  as  tlie  reign  of  TuOmosis  III.,  or  of  Amosis, 
because  in  that  case  that  Egyptian  occupation  of  the  country  would 
have  happened  when  the  Jews  had  already  become  quite  established, 
and  masters  of  the  land. 

2  Handb.  d.  Chron.  i,  p.  569,  578,  580. 


DATE  OF  THE  EXODUS.  151 

they  agree  perfectl J  with  the  customary  mode  of  reckoning 
in  the  llebrew  text.  They  fix  the  Flood  1G50  years  after 
Adam  ;  Abraliam's  birtli  194S  ;  Isaac's  2048  ;  Jacob's  2108; 
Jos^vli's  2109;  Jacob's  march  to  Egypt  223S ;  Joseph's 
(i  '.     It  is  only  whfu  tliey  come  to  Moses  that  they 

i:  V  deviate  about  210  years,  because,  following  the 

precedent  of  Josephus  and  others,  they  reckon  the  400  years 
of  the  sojourn  in  Egypt  from  the  birth  of  laoac,  and  not  from 
the  entnmce  of  Jaeob^  Tliey  fix  the  birth  of  Mosfs  at  23G8, 
and  his  Exodus  at  2448  after  the  Creation. 

Jiut  thin  If  ear  2\\S  of  their  era  corresponds  with  the  year 
131i  [ — 1313]  B.C.-,  and  therefore,  according  to  the  Mane- 
tlionic  chronology,  occurs  in  the  time  of  King  Menephthes, 
who  reigned  nineteen  years,  therefore  the  tame  king  whom 
the  Egyptian  annals  called  the  King  of  the  ExikIus.  Bo- 
sides  this,  the  latter  tell  us  of  a  flight  of  thirteen  years 
which  the  king  made  into  Ethiopia.  If  this  fli;;!it  took 
place,  as  it  probably  did,  in  the  first  or  second  year  after 
the  change  of  government,  he  must  have  returned  and  driven 
away  the  lepers  in  the  fourteenth  or  fifteenth  year  of  hia 
reign.  But  the  year  1314  w  exactly  the  fifteenth  year  of 
Menep/ithrs,  according  to  tlie  Manethonic  calculation. 

This  coincidence  is  certainly  striking,  but  might  possibly 
be  only  accidental,  if  other  circumstances  were  not  added  to 
it.  For  instance,  the  same  Jewish  chronology  places  the 
building  of  the  temple  by  Solomon,  according  to  the 
1  Kings  vi..l,  about  4S0  years  after  the  Exodus,  therefore 
2028  =  834  B.C.,  the  march  of  Shishak  against  Kehoboam 
2000  =  703,  that  of  Zerah  against  Asa  2008  =  704,  tlie  banish- 
ment of  Israel  3205  =  557,  the  destruction  of  the  first  Temple 
by  Nebuchadnezzar  3338=424.  Darius  (Hystaspes)  3400= 
356,  the  building  of  the  second  Temple  3408=354.  These, 
as  well  as  the  intervening  numbers,  which  I  omit  here,  are 

'  Josophus.  Ant.  Jud.  IT.  xv.  2,  calculates  430  years  from  the  en- 
trance of  Abraliaru  into  Can;uiii  to  the  Exodus  of  Moses.  Compare 
VIII.  iii.  1. 

-  [Ideler,  Handbuch  der  Oiron.  i.  p.  507,  543.] 
2  0  2 


452  THE  HEBREW  TRADITION. 

all  of  them  about  165  years  too  late.  But  from  this  place 
the  correct  dates  are  suddenly  restored  ;  Alexander  of 
Macedon  is  placed  3442=320,  therefore  only  sixteen  years 
too  late  ;  his  government  of  the  world,  and  a  march  which  he 
is  said  to  have  made  to  Jerusalem,  3448=314;  his  death 
3454=308,  and  so  forth. 

About  this  time,  the  Jews  being  subject  to  the  Syrian 
government,  adopted  the  Syrian  Era  of  the  ScJeucidce,  which 
was  called  by  them  the  "Era  of  the  Greeks,"  or,  on  account 
of  its  being  used  in  civil  affairs,  "  the  Era  of  Contracts." 
Its  commencement  happens,  as  is  well  kno\vn,  in  the  year 
312  before  Christ,  and  we  find  it  adopted  in  the  Book  of  the 
Maccabees^.  This  era  is  also  mentioned  in  the  rabbinical 
chronology,  and  is  quite  correctly  placed  by  the  more  ancient 
authorities  in  the  year  of  the  world  3450=312  b.c.^  If 
Ganz^,  in  place  of  this,  gives  the  year  3448=314,  it  is 
evidently  either  an  arbitrary  change,  or  perhaps  first  de- 
vised by  him  for  the  sake  of  the  exact  period  of  a  thousand 
years  between  the  Exodus  (2448)  and  the  new  era  (3448). 
This  connection  that  subsisted  between  the  two  numbers 
to  form  a  monarchy  of  atliousand  years'  duration,  was  not  in 

1  Ideler,  Handh.  d.  Chron.  i.  p.  531. 

-  Abraham  ben  David  (about  1161)  saj-s,  in  his  book  Sepher  hakah- 
bala,  col.  33,  b  (Amsterd.):  "The  second  period  begins  from  the 
great  synagogue  of  Simeon  the  Just.  The  Persian  empire  was  de- 
stroyed in  his  time  by  Alexander,  the  King  of  Greece  (Javan).     He 

came  to  Jerusalem in  the  year  40  after  the  building  of  the 

temple and  commanded  that  they   should  commence  the 

reckoning  of  their  contract  from  this  year,  which  is  the  year  1000 
since  their  Exodus  from  Egypt,  and  the  year  3150  since  the  Creation," 
But  he  placed  the  year  of  the  Exodus  at  2448;  therefore  the  year 
34.50  is  properly  the  1003rd,  not  the  1000th,  since  the  Exodus,  K. 
Isaac  Israeli  (about  1250),  in  the  book  ,/esod  Ohm.  Bl,  84,  b,  says, 
'•And  the  Talmud  was  concluded  in  the  year  3949,  according  to  the 
calculation  of  the  world,  which  is  the  year  500  of  the  Contract."  We 
thence  obtain  for  the  commencement  of  the  era  of  the  Contract  the 
year  3450=312. 

*  Semach  David  (written  about  1 592),  p.  60 — 65,  in  the  Latin  transla- 
tion by  Vorst  (Lugd,  Bat.  1644),  cites  several  more  authorities  for  the 
year  3448;  among  them  also  Abraham  ben  David,  but  who,  as  we 
have  seen,  expressly  writes  3450,  in  spite  of  the  mention  of  the  1000- 
yeared  period  since  the  Exodus. 


BABB1>'ICAL  CUBONOLOGY.  153 

fact  Tcn*  remote ;  we  should  only  have  expected  that  the 
number  of  the  Exodus  would  rather  have  been  advanced  two 
years,  in  conformity  with  the  fixed  and  uuiversally  intro- 
duced era  of  the  Seleucidic,  and  not,  on  the  contrary,  that 
the  latter  should  be  sent  so  far  back.  But  the  number  2418 
was  left  standing,  which  still  more  indicates  a  determinate 
selection  of  this  year,  independent  of  a  cyclical  or  arbitrary 
arrangement. 

There  is  proof  also  that  the  Eabbis  did  not  alter  the  com- 
mencement of  the  {Seleucidic  Era,  in  the  circumstance,  that 
it  has  retained  its  correct  place  in  chronology,  in  spite  of  the 
universal  displacement  in  the  chain  of  events.  According  to 
that  displacement,  Alexander  first  began  to  reign  3412  = 
320,  and  died  in  3451=308.  The  beginning  of  the  new 
era,  therefore,  according  to  this,  happened  in  the  reign  of 
Alexander  himself,  who  in  reality  had  been  dead  twenty-one 
years  at  the  time  of  the  battle  of  Gaza,  which  occasioned 
the  new  era.  In  consequence  of  these  contradictions  the 
number  was  retained,  and  the  event  was  changed  to  agree 
with  it,  since  the  introduction  of  the  era  of  kSeleucus  was 
transferred  to  Alexander,  and  connected  with  an  account  of 
his  presence  in  Jerusalem,  which  is  otherwise  only  men- 
tionid  by  Josephus^  and  the  so-called  Barbarus  of  Scaliger-. 

But  the  question  is,  how  we  can  reconcile  the  remarkable 
displacement  of  events  with  the  true  numbers  ?  Iueler  has 
shown  that  we  must  refer  the  first  establishment  of  the  era 
of  the  world,  and  consequently  the  foundation  of  the  whole 
clirouological  system  that  we  are  considering,  to  the  author 
of  the  Moleds,  or  new  moons,  and  particularly  of  the  late 
.Fewish  calendars,  therefore  to  the  Kabbi  Hillel,  in  the  first 
half  of  the  fourth  centur}'.  In  the  time  of  Eusebius,  and 
Theon  of  Alexandria,  people  could  not  possibly  be  so  com- 
pletely ignorant  of  the  history  of  the  last  centuries  before 
Christ,  as  the  rabbinical  chronology  supposed.  It  was  least 
to  be  believed  of  such  a  learned  mathematician,  astronomer, 

'  Ant.  XL  viii.  5. 

-    Thcsaur.  tanpp.  Euseh.  1G58,  torn.  ii.  p.  72. 


45^!  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITION. 

and  cbronologist,  as  we  imagine  the  reformer  of  the  Jewish 
calendar  to  have  been,  who  founded  it  upon  the  nineteenth- 
yeared  cycle  of  Meton  and  Calippus^. 

It  appears  to  me,  therefore,  that  the  following  acceptation 
is  alone  possible,  which  I  would  at  least  recommend  to  the 
closer  examination  of  well-versed  labourers  in  Jewish  anti- 
quities. The  Talmud  contains  very  few  chronological  dates, 
and  nothing  justifies  us  in  the  belief  that  the  learned  Hillel 
had  already  given  a  chronological  view  of  the  events,  as  we 
afterwards  find  them.  But  he  must  have  necessarily  had 
some  resting  points  for  his  technical  chronological  works,  if 
he  desired  to  connect  his  present  with  the  past,  and  even 
with  the  Creation.  It  could  not  have  been  difficult  to  find 
these  resting  points  at  that  time,  eo  soon  after  Africanus ; 
the  best  authorities  were  still  open  to  him.  But  the  Exodus 
from  Egypt  must  have  been  his  most  important  point,  for 
previous  to  that  event  the  numbers  in  the  Pentateuch  were 
clear,  and  without  mistakes.  It  was  only  necessary  for  him 
to  decide  between  the  two  diflerent  views  concerning  the 
period  between  Jacob  and  Moses.  The  numbers  after  the 
Exodus  were  much  more  uncertain,  as  the  calculations  of 
Josephus  have  already  proved.  On  the  other  hand,  the  well- 
known  era  of  the  Seleucidae,  which  was  at  that  time  still  in 
use,  naturally  fomied  another  fixed  point  which  he  could 
not  avoid.  Under  these  circumstances,  every  clever  and 
mathematically  educated  chronologist,  would  be  compelled 
to  connect  the  date  of  the  Exodus  with  the  only  certain  and 
astronomically  verified  Egj'ptian  chronology.  If  the  eea 
of  Xing  Mexephthes,  and  the  exact  year  of  its  commence- 
ment was  familiar  to  the  mathematician,  Theon  of  Alex- 
andria, who  Lived  at  a  later  period,  must  it  not  have  been 
equally  well  known  to  the  astronomer  Hillel  ?  But  nothing 
more  was  necessary  to  determine  the  date  of  the  Exodus, 
which  took  place  under  the  same  King  MenepMTie^ 

J  S.  Ideler,  Handb.  i.  p.  579. 
,.l.-^^  ^^^^  ^'^^^  31S   the  determination  of  Easter,   according  to  the 
diflerent  Christian  calendars,  was  transferred  from  the  Nicene  Council 


HiJBBIXICAL  CHnOXOLOOT.  155 

TVe  should  not  tlierefore  be  surprised  to  see,  even  at 
that  time,  the  perfectly  correct  acceptation  of  the  year 
2448  for  the  Exodus.  It  was,  at  all  events,  impossible 
to  determine  the  year  of  the  Creation  without  having  ob- 
tained the  two  periods  of  the  Seleucidic  Era,  and  of  the 
Exodus. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  ver}'  improbable  that  llillel  set  to 
work  as  Ideler^  imagiues  he  did.  He  says  **  that  llillel 
evidently  started  from  the  beginning  of  the  Seleucidic  Era, 
which  was  at  that  time  still  universally  employed  by  the 
Jews,  the  autumn  of  the  year  B.C.  312.  Reckoning  from 
this  point  backwards,  he  made  the  next  e^KX'h  the  destruction 
of  the  first  Temple,  and  placed  it  only  112  years  earlier  than 
the  Seleucidic  Era,  counting  about  150  years  too  little,  so 
tliat  he  advanced  Nebuchadnezzar  to  the  times  of  Arta- 
lerxes  I.  Whilst  he  thus  went  back  still  farther  to  the 
building  of  the  fmst  Temple,  to  the  Exodus  of  the  Israelites 
out  of  Eg}'pt,  to  the  Flood,  and  to  the  Creation,  following 
partly  the  express  statements  of  time  in  the  Bihle,  partly  hia 
own  explanation  of  it,  he  found  the  beginning  of  the  year, 
3i50  of  the  world,  to  be  the  epoch  of  the  Minjan  schtaroth." 
As  we  said  before,  it  was  perfe<?tly  impossible  for  a  scholar 
of  the  fourth  century  to  make  such  a  gross  mistake  of  nearly 
100  yearri  at  that  late  period.  But  it  is  easily  explained,  if 
w.'  believe  that  alter  the  great  gap  in  Jewish  literature, 
which  commenced  at  the  conclusion  of  the  Talmud,  about  the 
year  500,  and  which  lasted  to  the  eighth  century,  the  Rabbia 
had  adopted  those  few  correct  chronological  periods  fixed  by 
llillel,  and  now  first  undertook  to  fill  up  their  history  of  the 

to  the  Alexandrian  du-onolopists.  S.  du  Cange,  praef.  ad  C/tron.  pasch. 
This  difficult  work  at  once  presupposed  a  careful  consideration  and 
investigation  of  the  diflerent  eras  still  in  use,  but  especially  of  the 
Jewish  computation  of  time,  because  the  feast  of  Kaster  was  con- 
nected with  tlk?  solemnisation  of  the  Jewish  Paschal  feast,  which  was 
instituted  at  the  time  of  the  Exodus  frvm  EyypU  Theretbre  in  those 
days,  when  chronological  studies  were  more  especially  practised,  there 
was  a  particular  cause  for  obtaining  the  true  date  of  tlie  Exodus, 
which,  to  Kgj-ptian  scholars  in  particular,  could  not  have  been  difficult, 
'   Handb.  i.  p.  .'iSl. 


^56  THE  HEBIiEW  TEAD1TI0>''. 

world,  whicli  comprised  5000  years,  according  to  the  state- 
ments of  the  Old  Testament.  In  fact,  we  find  neither  in  the 
Talmud,  nor  even  in  the  first  writings  of  the  rabbis,  which 
succeed  the  Talmud,  e.  g.  in  the  Seder  Olam  Bahah,  one  of 
the  oldest  of  those  writings,  the  full  chronological  details, 
some  extracts  of  which  we  have  seen  above.  It  appears  to 
have  been  first  completed  in  the  twelfth  centurj-,  therefore  in 
the  period  of  a  scientific  barbarism,  which  had  been  long  in- 
troduced. It  was  only  necessary  to  follow  the  numbers  of 
the  Pentateuch  from  tlie  Creation  to  the  Flood,  and  to  the 
Exodus,  in  order  to  obtain  the  given  year  2448=1314.  The 
convenient  number  480  years,  down  to  the  building  of  the 
Temple,  in  the  first  Book  of  Kings,  was  afterwards  immedi- 
ately adopted,  and  the  chronology  of  the  times  of  the  Judges 
adapted  to  it.  But  hereby  the  historical  event  next  follow- 
ing was  at  the  same  time  displaced  to  about  the  IGO — 170 
years  we  have  mentioned,  and  drew  with  it  the  displacement 
of  all  the  succeeding  events.  It  first  became  apparent  at  the 
next  fixed  point,  about  the  year  3450=:312,  that  the  chain  of 
events  was  far  too  long  for  the  stated  intenal,  from  the  build- 
ing of  the  first  to  the  second  Temple.  Therefore,  the  period 
from  the  erection  of  the  second  Temple,  built  under  Darius 
Hystaspes,  to  the  time  of  Alexander,  to  which  was  given  the 
name  of  the  Grecian  Era^,  was  cut  (iown  without  ceremony 
from  184  years  into  34  years.  This  raised  no  obstacle  at 
first,  but  afterwards  occasioned  many  difficulties,  until  these 
also  were  got  rid  of  by  the  simple  expedient  of  taking  Darius 
II.  and  III  for  one  and  tlie  same  person.  Only  thus  can  we 
explain  the  peculiar  phenomena  of  an  entirely  displaced  and 
afterwards  mutilated  clironology,  in  which,  however,  there  ap- 
pears two  fixed  points  alone  correct,  and  which  afibrd  us  at 
the  same  time  the  important,  and  probably  the  most  exact, 
determination  of  the  Exodus  by  a  truly  learned  clironologist 
of  the  fourth  century-. 

J  It  was  also  called  "  the  Era  oi  Alexander:'    Ideler,  Chron.  i.  p.  449. 
-  It  would  be  important  to  iuquire  when  the  year  2448  is  first  men- 
tioned in  Jewish  literature  as  that  of  the  Exodus,  and  which  of  the 


ME  CF  THE  EXODUS.  457 

Viewing  ii,  i.ir.  :ore,  from  this  side,  we  return  to  iln- 
opinion,  that  thf  (rrt-at  stumbling-block  to  the  whole  of  the 
chr'  l  fur  the  Old  Testament  was  the 

nu!;.  wa8  calculated  us  the  period  be- 

tween the  Exodus  and  the  building  of  the  Temple  mentioned 
in  the  first  Book  of  Kings^  As  soon  aB  we  set  this  aside, 
regarding  it  only  aa  a  supplementary  multiple  of  twelve 
.ts  of  40  years  each,  the  Hebrew  and 
-  are  no  longer  opposed  to  each  other 
with  rerertncc  to  ihe  time  of  the  Exodus.  All  llie  other 
intimations  we  meet  with  in  the  Hebrew  accounts,  and  their 
whole  connection,  demand,  on  the  contrary,  precisely  the 
same  time,  which  we  find  unequivocally  stated  in  tlu*  Eiiyptian 
annals  of  Manetho. 

The  question  now  is,  whether  along  with  this  number  i^O, 
to  which  we  can  attribute  no  greater  importance  than  to  the 
simple  number  forti/,  so  often  repeated  in  the  history  of 
Israel  at  that  period,  we  must  also  give  up  as  valueless  every 
other  chronological  measure  of  the  events  immediately  suc- 
ceeding the  Exodus.     But  this  is  so  little  the  case,  that,  on 

Rnbbis  first  clunp  to  this  epocli  in  the  outline  of  history,  wliich  wa« 
at  flr»t  prvib.ihly  (uly  niarkcil  in  the  calendar. 

'  We  havi-  alrcaiiy  »etn  abovi-,  lliat  neither  the  Apostle  I'aul  nor 
Josephujj  ricuj;iiisttl  the  calculation  of  tliL- 4'<()  ye:ir«.  Africanus  jubt 
ti»  Httle,  who  ri-ckonel  74S  years.  (Kouth,  lielii/u.  sacnr,  vol.  ii.  p. 
313,  ff.)  Kuscbius  (reckons  600,  or  even  CIO  years;  I'rap.  F.v.  x.  14, 
compare  Houth  elM-'wlu-re;  but  in  his  Canon  he  calculates  480),  Clemens 
Alexamlr.  {Strom,  p.  380,  I'ott.  567),  Syncellus  (p.  175,  JiiO),  and 
others.  AmouR  modern  scholars,  Des  Vipnoles  {('hnntiJ.  de  VhisL 
saintc,  t.  i.  p.  172)  has  esi)ecially  treated  the  (juestion  in  detail.  He 
finally  dtxidis  uiK>n  the  acceptation,  that  the  i)erio<l  consisted  of  048 
years,  but  that  the  number  4^0  arose  from  a  mistake  intlie  text  (p.  184), 
as  others  Wfore  him  had  declared.  Bck'kh  lastly  says,  tliat  tlic  number 
appears  to  him  to  have  been  inserted  at  a  later  period.  (Manetho,  p. 
190.)  Seviral  otlar  numlxrs  of  the  Old  Testament,  especially  all 
indeterminate  numbers,  as  the  40  and  its  multiplicates,  as  vrell  as 
the  preater  sums,  c.  y.  Kxodus  xii.  40;  Judges  xi.  20:  1  Kings  vi.  1; 
and  in  other  places,  and  the  whole  uninterrupted  chain  of  numbers, 
originating  in  them,  appear  to  me  to  have  been  for  tlie  first  time 
adopted  since  that  early  part  of  the  Old  Testament  was  last  combined 
and  revised,  at  all  events  for  the  first  time  after  the  exile.  The  opinion 
also  ai'opted  by  Bvrtheau  {Itichtcr,  p.  .Jl),  that  this  revision  prtjcetds 
trom  Ezra,  appears  to  me  to  be  rery  probable. 


458  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITION". 

the  contrary,  in  the  true  chronological  scale  which  the 
Mosaic  writings  furnish,  we  find  a  fresh  refutation  of  the 
opinions  hitherto  adopted,  and  a  confirmation  of  the  Egyptian 
statements.  We  look  upon  the  Eegistee  or  Geneeations 
as  this  scale. 

I  am  not  aware  whether  these  numerous  family  records 
have  ever  been  fully  placed  under  one  point  of  view,  and 
estimated  as  a  whole  in  their  great  chronological  significance, 
in  the  same  way  as  they  have  certainly  frequently  been  used 
for  separate  purposes  and  divisions  of  time.  Such  a  survey 
would  very  much  increase  the  importance  of  the  separate 
lists,  and  facilitate  their  application  to  chronological  deter- 
minations. 

It  is  well  known  how  in  the  East  at  all  times,  and  even  to 
this  day,  the  register  of  generations  and  genealogies  is  orally 
transmitted,  with  a  wonderful  fidelity  and  completeness, 
through  the  memories  of  perfectly  illiterate  and  frequently 
even  now  nomadic  races.  The  Arabian  races  are  especially 
noted  for  this,  and  their  historical  recollections  are  often 
almost  entirely  limited  to  this  dry  register.  I  have  met  with 
many  such  pedigrees  in  the  upper  districts  of  the  Nile,  south 
of  the  province  of  Dongola,  among  the  Arabs  who  immigrated 
there  from  the  west,  these  being  the  only  written  remains  of 
their  past,  which  inform  us  of  their  immigration  and  distribu- 
tion in  those  districts.  But  these  lists  of  names  are  still  more 
to  be  depended  upon  among  those  nations  of  antiquit]^-,  who, 
like  the  Egyptians  and  the  Hebrews,  were  a  literary  people, 
and  were  accustomed  to  preserve  in  writing  these  sacred  be- 
quests of  individual  families.  On  the  rock  of  the  Kosser- 
road,  LQ  the  eastern  desert  of  Egypt,  I  found  a  hieroglyphical  in- 
scription belonging  to  the  time  shortly  before  the  first  Persian 
dominion,  in  which  a  chief  architect  of  the  country,  named  Ea- 
numhet,  carries  back  his  direct  ancestors  as  far  as  the  twenty- 
fourth  generation,  to  an  ancestral  mother  Nofratmu,  who, 
according  to  a  rough  calculation,  must  have  lived  about  the 
end  of  the  19th  Dynasty,  therefore  about  the  time  of  Moses. 
^  But  the  Israelites  particularly,  above  all  the  nations  of  an- 
tiquity, appear  to  have  laid  the  greatest  stress  upon  the  re- 


JTWlflTH  GElTERATIOirS.  4o9 

jj'ibter  of  gcnerali  '  •'  names,  and  general  enumeniti«»ns 

uf  tribt^  and  pt-.  The  writings  of  the  Old  Testa- 

ment are  full  of  them,  es])i*eially  all  the  historical  books  ;  and 
the  care  and  exactitude  \i  liich  was  expended  upon  the  general 
preparation  of  these  lists,  is  evident  to  the  reader.  The  pecu- 
liar de>tiny  of  the  Israelitish  people,  firmly  bound  together, 
and  always  separating  themselves  most  rigorously  from 
strmngers,  yet  frequently  transplanted  in  masses  from  one 
country  to  another,  and  settled  amidst  other  nations,  enables 
us  perfectly  to  comprehend  this  universal  attention  to  an  au- 
tlientic  register  of  generations.  We  find  it  stated  that  they 
were  already  twice  numbered^  in  the  desert ;  for  which  pur- 
pose the  whole  people  were  collected  together,  and  were  en- 
tered in  the  registers  of  the  births  "  by  their  generations^ 
after  their  families,  according  to  the  number  of  the  names, 
from  twenty  years  and  upwards,  and  by  their  polls."  On 
their  return  from  exile  it  is  particularly  ob8er%ed  that 
some  of  the  wanderers  could  not  trace  their  geneah»gy^. 
Among  these  were  several  priests'  families,  of  whom  it  is  said, 
"  These  sought  the  register  of  their  generations,  but  it  waa 
not  found,  antl,  therefore,  they  were  rejected  from  the  priest- 
hood'. It  follows  from  this  that  the  priests  of  the  tribe  of 
Levi  were  obliged  by  law  to  preserve  and  continue  the 
register  of  their  generations.  This  law  must  naturally  only 
have  existed  since  the  Exodus,  and,  therefore,  when  Jose- 
phus*  asserts  that  the  High  priests  possessed  written  regis- 
ters of  their  generations,  as  far  back  as  2000  years,  this  is, 
indeed,  connected  with  his  opinion  about  the  early  epoch  of 
the  Exodus  ;  it  shows,  however,  that  they  were  brought  down 
to  his  time,  which  is,  indeed,  also  confirmed  by  the  register 
of  the  generations  of  Jesus  Christ^. 
We  need  no  further  justification,  therefore,  for  placing  gi'cat 

'  Numb.  i.  i>C.  -  Ezra  ii.  59;  Nebemiah  vii.  61. 

'  Ezra  ii.  C2;  Nth.  vii.  64.  ■•  Contra.  Ap.  i.  7. 

^  Gospel  Matth.  i.  2,  &x\;  Luke  iii.  23,  &c.  The  great  diflferences 
between  the  two  penealoj^ies  have  been  considered  in  a  variety  of  ways, 
but.  aa  it  appears,  they  have  not  yet  been  satisfactorily  explained. 
Therefore,  they  do  not  permit  of  any  immediate  chronological  con- 
clusions. 


460  THE  HEBEEW  TRADITION. 

value  upon  the  successive  generations,  and  for  discovering  in 
them  the  true  clironological  thread  for  those  times  during  which 
more  exact  reliahle  statements  are  wanting.  "We  fortunately 
possess  a  whole  array  of  genealogies  for  the  period  between  the 
Exodus  and  the  building  of  the  Temple ;  and,  indeed,  princi- 
pally generations  of  priests,  which  go  back  as  far  as  Levi,  and 
are,  therefore,  from  the  reasons  we  have  stated  above,  the  most 
to  be  depended  upon.  Altogether,  j/??;e  different  generations 
of  the  Levites  may  be  distinguished ;  some  obscurities  have 
crept  into  our  text,  which  probably  happened  at  the  time  it 
assumed  its  present  form,  since  they  are  found  also  in  the 
Septuagiut ;  it  seems,  however,  that  they  may  easily  be  re- 
moved^. 

The  following  is  a  survey  of  the  principal  genealogies,  in 
which  the  Levitical  generations  preserve  the  order  in  which 
they  are  cited,  1  Chron.  vii.-  This  is  preceded  by  the  genea- 
logical succession,  according  to  Josephus,  from  Levi  to  Zadoh^ 
and  by  his  series  of  High  priests  from  Aaron  to  Zadolc. 
Lastly,  there  follows  a  table  of  the  generations  of  Judah. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  have  excluded  other  genealogies; 
e.  g.  the  three  of  Ephraim  ;  Num.  xxvi.  35 ;  1  Chron.  viii. 
20,21,24 — 27^;  because  they  are  evidently  confused,  and 
lead  to  no  result*. 

1  The  removal  of  some  of  tlie  difficulties  indicated  in  the  follovring 
table  are  obvious,  and  may,  therefore,  have  been  expressed  long  before 
me,  in  the  critical-biblical  literature  already  published,  although  I 
am  unable  to  point  it  out.  But  the  aim  we  have  in  view  requires  us 
to  examine  this  subject  somewhat  more  accurately.  I  see,  besides, 
that  Ewald  also,  Gesch.  Isr.  i.  p.  31,  ii,  p.  433,  and  in  other  passages, 
considers  the  two  generations  from  Levi  to  Saul  and  to  Heman,  as 
the  most  complete,  and,  therefore,  all  the  others  as  incomplete. 
"'  According  to  the  Septuagint.  In  the  Hebrew  text,  chap.  v.  &  vi. 
3  [Hebrew  text,  1  Chron.  vii.  20,  21,  24—27.] 

*  It  is  impossible  that  the  descendants  of  Ephraim,  mentioned  in  1 
Chron.  viii.  20, 2 1,  could  have  been  all  killed  at  the  same  time  by  the  men 
of  Gath  (therefore,  in  Palestine),  since  they  include  eight  generations. 
The  march  to  Gath  also,  which  is  mentionecl,  could  not  have  been  from 
Egypt  (Bunsen,  Aeg.  i.  p.  220)  (Tr.  vol.i.  p.  178),  since  they  went  down. 
It  is  equally  impossible  that  Non  and  Jehoshuah  can  be  rightlv  placed 
m  V  27,  since  the  latter  ought  to  stand  in  the  ninth  in  place  of  the 
third  degree  from  Ephraim. 


JEWISU  GENLUATIONS. 


4Cl 


-    I- 


-    t^ 


c:  O  O  O  O  O  C 
::  rt  ro  CO  CO  cc  rc 


>J  ^    =■ 


•    c-    •     •     •     •    o    v>    'C     • 
^  <5    =  -3     =  -3   ^   >  j^^ 


1  r:  'r* 


~   -§1 


•55 


i   5 
h'' 


o  o  o  o  c 

00  cc  oc  cc  ? 


■3  'i'^r'^ 


•^  J-  y  r.  z, 

"o  o'o  o  o  o  o" 

CO  00  CO  CO  CO  00    CO 
CO 


^  2 

<  :'^  4  <  a  P  jr  Z^jr  <  < 
r-i  C4  CO  "^  uo  o  t>i  00  ci  d  -- 


o  o 

00  00 


O  |0  o  o  o   o 

CO  ;C5  CO  cc  cc   c: 


88  5H 


C  r  C  O    COO 


o  o  o  o  o  o 


I"* 


^      I 


1^1 


CO         r-  CI  r:         ^  c 


-^  o  tD  t.>^  CO  ci  d  ^ 


462 


THE  HEBREW  TKADITIOIT. 


V. 

The  Generation  of 

Merari— Mahli. 
1  Chron.  vii.  29  —  30 

1 

i 

1.  Levi 

2.  Merari 

3.  Mahli 

H^  02  P  GG  3  ^ 
rH  C<i  CO  '^*  O  d 

IV. 

The  Generation  of  Elkanah 

— Aniasai. 

1  Chron.  vii.  25—28. 

(  r=  VII.  ) 

1.  [Levi] 

2.  Elkanah 

3.  Amasai  (and) 

oooooooooc 

COCOCOCOCOXCOCOCOC 

1 

'.  '.'z  '■'■'■■■'■  ■ 

:':^ :  ::  ■  :  :  : 

rH  ci  CO  T*;  d  d  i>^  X  ci  d 
1— 1 

III. 

The  Generation  of 

Kohath-Amniinadab. 

1  Chron.  vii.  22 — 24. 

(  =  VI.) 

[Levi] 

Kohath 

Amminadab 

oooooooooo      o 
cocococococccocococo       o 

Korah    .  . 

Elkanah 
Ebiasaph 
Assir  .   . 
Taliath  . 
Uriel  .    . 
Uzziah  . 
Saul    .   . 
(Jonalhai 

rH  CM  CO 

^  ci  CO  -^  io  o  t-  X  c:  o 

1— ( 

II. 

The  Generation  of 

Gershom — Libni. 

1  Chron.  vii.  20,  21. 

(  =  VIII.) 

1.  Levi 

2.  Gershom 

3.  Libni 

1.  (Jahath) 

2.  Ziiiimah 

3.  Joah 

4.  Iddo 
6.  Zerah 
6.  Jeaterai 

I. 

The  Generation  of 

Aaron. 

1  Chron.  vii.  1 — 9, 

50—53. 

Ezra  vii.  2 — 5, 

Levi 
Kohath 
Am  ram 

ooooooooooo 
cococccocococococccoco 

o 
cc 

CO  1 

S  §  -^  -s  ^  ?:;  2  -  5  .-r  -S 

rH  Cq  CO 

rnCMC0^10  0i>XOOrH 

JEWISH  OESERATIONS. 


4ti3 


C  jc   -  -  ^» 

-  5C  5  n 


t 


-  X    -    -• 
i  — C  -^ 

.3 


c  o  o  o  o  o  o 
cc  r:  rt  re  re  ?c  re 


2  IS 

I  c^ 


r3  rt 


.      ,  ^        C- 


7  4  rt  -*  k-e  :r'  t^  x  ri 


1  I 


o    «   u 


H  £'-> 


ce  ?c  rr  re 


w  o  o  o  o  o 
?e  re  CO  73  CO  CO 


•r  i.  3 

t-^  <^  ^ 


.-     S3 


^:^<=:<:r^,  <u:pq 


O  w  t^  X  C5  O  — < 


cooooooocoo 
ceooxccccccoQcoooceco 


•s:  £-^ 


»-•  ei  re       i-h 


is: ;:.;  <:  X  :i:  ^  s:  <;  -y:  ;5  -< 
ei  ce  '*"  ue  -o  t^  x*  d  d  --'  e^i 


ooocoooooo 

8 

cecececococccococcce 

u: 

CO 

« 

^^~^ 

f^-^ 

'.'.  .3^'^  '.'.'.'.  '. 

es  «  ^ 

't^ 

c 

eS 
E 

<?7 

£|  -tElil  :g 

1 

al^ 

-^    r:    r; 

-^  _S  "=-"=  "5  £  J  5  "^  r 

1 

«— 

U 

^;^55r^W>4WEi^^ 

o 

"* 

r-i  C^   7D 

.-I  ei  X  ^  o  d  i>^  X  d  d 

^ 

f— 1 

. 

oooooooooo 

IS 

.    1 

cecececececececcooce 

< 

.    . , 1   .    .    .  ^     .    .     . 

1=0 

b  -i  -^ 

^ 

H 

ii   3 
III. 

> 

£:u 

-*--'.''    -3      X      S      0,      N!      ^  S 

u^i^jrj 

^  ^::ii:i  <:  r^  S3  <q  h^  :^ 

T-i  ej  CO 

i-H  ei  CO  '^J^  o  'O  t^  O)  o  o 

— 

i-H 

434.  THE  HEBllEW  TEADITIOK, 

The  first  column  contains  after  the  patriarchs  from 
Abraham  to  Amram,  the  12  heads  of  the  people,  com- 
mencing with  Moses,  who  appear  to  have  been  regarded  as 
the  representations  of  12  generations  of  40  years  each,  and 
thence  to  have  occasioned  the  calculation  of  480  years. 
Ewald^,  as  well  as  Bertheau^,  gives  another  list,  because,  on 
the  whole,  the  subject  admits  of  no  exactitude  ;  the  common 
acknowledgment  of  the  division  of  the  period  into  twelve 
parts  is  alone  of  importance  to  us.  But  one  (VIII.)  of  the 
genealogies  we  have  quoted  (1  Chron.  vii.  39 — 43'^)  contains 
twelve  generations  of  one  and' the  same  family^.  It  is  pos- 
sible, therefore,  that  this  succession,  rather  than  that  uncer- 
tain division,  gave  occasion  to  the  480  years.  It  was,  bo- 
sides,  distinguished  from  the  others  by  being  continued 
through  Oersliom,  t\\Q  First-horn  of  Levi.  'Bwi  i\ie  principal 
lineage  of  the  Levites  was  that  of  the  high  priests,  who  were 
descended  from  Aaron  and  Kohath  (I.)  ;  this  contains,  as 
well  as  that  of  Mushi  (IX.),  only  11  generations.  This 
might  therefore  be  the  reason  why  the  Seventy  only  reckoned 
440  years^ 

In  the  Chronicles  the  second  succession  of  Levites  is 
closely  connected  with  the  third^.  But  in  the  Hebrew  as 
well  as  in  the  G-reek  text  a  distinct  pause  is  made  at  verse 
22,  after  Jeaterai.  The  author  begins  again :  "  The  son  of 
Kohath;  Amminadah,  his  son;  Korah,  his  son'^;''  and  so  on. 
The  Seventy  even  write  the  plural  viol  KaaB.  A  new  suc- 
cession therefore  undoubtedly  begins  here,  and  we  must  con- 
sider the  portion  from  G-ershom  to  Jeaterai  as  an  incom- 
plete genealogy  inserted  here,  which  evidently  runs  parallel 
to  the  first  part  of  our  eighth  Levitical  series^.     Kohath j  who 

'  Gesch.  Isr.  ii.  p.  371.  =  Buck.  d.  Ficht  p.  xix.  xx. 

3  Heb.  Text,  1  Chron.  vi.  39,  43. 

*  Unless  the  name  of  Jahath,  the  son  of  Gershom,  is  to  be  withdrawn, 
and  Shimei  put  into  its  place,  by  which  means  this  genealogy  also 
would  only  have  eleven  degrees  from  Moses  to  Solomon, 

*  See  above,  p.  402. 

6  De  Wette,  in  his  translation,  makes  no  distinction  in  r.  22. 
-  See  Luther's  German  Trans,  of  Bible.— Tr. 

Tj^^^rJ"^^^^  °^  ^^'''*'  Gersho^n,  Jahath,  Siiva  {ZimmaJi),  Adaiah 
^Jddo),  Zerah  agree.     It  only  differs  in  Ethan  (Joah),   and  Ethni 


THE  JEWISH  GENERATIONS.  465 

succeeds  Jeafeerai,  was  also  a  sou  of  Levi,  and  the  uamcs 
which  follow,  clearly  show  that  it  ought  to  be  the  same  seriee 
as  our  njrih.  That  the  third  aud  siith  series  arc  really 
ideutical  follows  from  the  name  of  the  grandson  of  Kohath 
beiuii  Korah.  which  recurs  in  both,  aud  also  from  the  three 
yuccesaive  names,  Kbiasaph,  Assir,  Tahath,  aL?o  recurring. 
The  eighth  name,  Uzziah,  is  also  undoubtedly  the  same  namo 
as -\zariah  in  the  other  text;  for  the  very  same  change  of 
both  names  is  again  found  aftenvards  in  the  King  of  .ludah, 
the  son  of  Ama/.iali,  wlio  is  called  Azariah  eight  times  in  the 
same  chapter  (2  Kings  x\.)  and  is  ai\envards  tliree  times 
called  by  liis  usual  name,  Uzziah^  1  have  not,  therefore, 
hesitated  to  fill  up  the  two  names  of  Assirand  Elkanah  which 
were  wanting  al\er  Korali-  in  the  suvth  scries,  aij  the  third 
series  is,  on  tlie  whole,  most  to  be  dei)ended  on.  It  haa  un- 
doubtedly been  retained  on  account  of  the  Ixst  luime  of  Saul^ 
whom  we  must  consider  to  be  no  other  than  Kiny  JSaul, 
whose  generation  indeed  is  usually  (I  Sam.  ix.  1)  carried 
back  through  Kish  and  Aphiah,  with  an  interruption,  to 
Benjamin,  but  here  again  also  presents  dilHculties  and  ap- 
pears in  general  to  have  been  disputed. 

But  the  sixth  series  does  not  concludo  in  the  Clironicles 
witli  Joel,  but  is  continued  into  our  seventh,  and  no  text 
ai)i>ears  to  hidicate  that  there  is  a  pause.  Yet  the 
correctness  of  our  division  hero  also,  will  luirdly  be  found 
doubtful.  It  would  be  quite  impossible  to  believe  that 
among  six  genealogies  one  alone  could  have  been  as  long 

(Jeatcrai).  Shiraci  and  Libni  appear  to  be  brothers.  But,  on  tJiat 
account  apain,  tin-  name  of  .Taliatli,  as  above  remarked,  ougljt  to  be 
rubUd  out  of  lK)th  lists,  and  perhaps  be  considered  as  a  common  sur- 
name of  the  brothers.  For  Jahath  appears  in  the  1  Chron,  vii,  43  as 
the  father  of  Shimei,  xxiii.  10  as  the  son  of  Sliimei,  vii,  20  as  the  son 
of  Libni,  but,  xxiii,  8,  not  amonj,'  the  sons  of  Laadan,  who  neverthe- 
less, xxiii,  7,  stands  in  the  place  of  Libni 

'  Gescn.  Thes.  2  Ilebr.  p.  1011. 

■^  The  omission  may  perhaps  be  explained  by  Exodus  vi,  24,  where 
Assir,  f^lkanah,  ami  Abiasapli  literally  appear  beside  one  another  as 
sons  of  Korah,  while  it  Mas  probably  intended  that,  as  his  sons, 
they  should  succeed  one  another. 

2  n 


^QQ  THE  HEBEEW  TRADITION. 

again  as  all  the  others;  for  if  we  omitted  the  two  re- 
stored members  of  the  sixth  series,  we  should  still  retain 
nineteen  members  in  place  of  ten  or  eleven,  as  in  the 
other  genealogies.  We  should  therefore  still  feel  obliged  to 
believe  there  was  a  mistake,  even  though  unable  to  point  it 
out.     But,  upon  a  further  investigation,  it  explains  itself. 

It  is  very  apparent  that  we  have  the  same  genealogies  in 
the  fourth  series  as  in  the  seventh,  although  there  appears  to 
be  several  deviations  in  the  manner  the  names  are  written, 
and  in  some  passages  completely  different  names.  Let  us 
now  see  how  the  fourth  series  is  introduced  in  the  Chronicles. 
The  first  part  of  the  seventh  chapter  (in  the  Hebrew 
text  made  the  sixth)  brings  prominently  forward,  apart  from 
the  other  genealogies,  that  of  the  generations  of  the  high 
priests,  which  goes  back  through  Aaron,  Amram,  and 
Kohath,  to  Levi.  The  generations  of  the  other  Levites  are 
afterwards  designated,  and  indeed  in  two  divisions.  The 
frst  proceeds  from  the  first-lorn  of  the  sons  of  Levi,  in 
which,  nevertheless,  in  the  race  of  Kohath,  Amratn  has 
already  been  removed  from  the  series,  and  Amminadah,  i.  e. 
Izhar,  takes  his  place ;  the  second  goes  upwards  from  the 
three  songsters  of  David,  Heman,  Assaph,  and  Ethan,  as  far 
back  as  the  grandchildren  of  Levi.  The  ancestors  of  Heman 
come  first,  because  a  first-lorn  grandson  of  Levi  stands  at 
the  head,  Izhar,  i.  e.  Amminadal,  whose  generation  was 
therefore  already  mentioned  among  those  of  the  first-born 
grandsons  (III.).  The  ancestors  of  Assaph  and  of  Ethan 
succeed,  because  later-born  grandsons  of  Levi  stand  at  the 
head,  who  are  again  arranged  in  the  succession  of  the  sons  of 
Levi. 

There  is  here  a  strict  and  duly  considered  rule,  which  is 
made  evident  by  the  following  survey : 


TUE  JEWISH   GEXEEATIONS.  467 

Levi. 


1.  (lershom.  \  \  | 

2.  Kohalh.  .3.  Elkanah.  4.  Muari. 


I.  ].  Am  ram. 
1.  Aaron,  2.  Moses. 


Amminadab-Izliar. 
IV. 


III.?o 
II.  1.  Libni.  VI.  i  - 

VIII.  2.  Jahath-Shimci.  ;}.  Ilel  run.     Vli.|  1-^'"=»S''!-    ^'-  I- M^il'li- 
4.  I'zziah.  2.  Aliiinclli.   IX.2.  Muslii. 

This  certainty  presupposes  wliat  has  bct'U  already  a.-^sunifd 
here,  that  Elkanah  was  a  son  of  Levi,  and,  indeed,  the 
TiiiBD  son,  although  in  former  passages  he  is  not  cited  aa 
among  the  sons  of  Levi.  Little  is  proved  by  this  omission, 
for  there  are  many  such  cases,  and  in  this  very  chapter, 
V.  43,  Jahath  is  called  a  son  of  Gershom,  although  in  v.  17 
he  is  not  cited  among  the  sons  of  Gershom^  In  such  cases, 
certainly,  the  conjecture  still  remains  which  we  admitted 
above,  p.  464,  in  the  case  of  Jahath,  that  one  name  has  been 
substituted  for  another,  as,  without  doubt,  occurs  in  many 
cases  ;  and  therefore  some  might  prefer  here  to  suppose 
Elkanah  the  same  person  as  Kohath,  Zuph  (VII.)  as  a  later 
Klkanali  (IV.),  Toah  (VII.)  as  Xahath  (IV.),  Azariah  (VI.)  as 
Uz/.iah  (III.),  Joel  (A^II.)  as  Vashni  (IV.),  Laadan  as  Libni, 
i^e.  Uowever,  this  seems  very  improbable  here.  In  the  chap- 
ter we  allude  to  the  children  of  Gershom-Libni  are  first  stated 
in  tlie  series  of  the  first-bom,  then  the  children  of  Kohath- 
Amminadab,  then  the  children  of  Elkanah-Amasai,  lastly  the 
children  of  Merari-Mahli.     Elkanah  is,  therefore,  evidently 

'  "We  sliould,  perhaps,  also  take  into  consideration  the  preference 
which  is  given  in  the  genealogical  tables  of  the  Old  Testament  to 
three  sons. 

2u2 


468 


THE  HEBREW  TEADITTON. 


also  placed  between  Kohatli  and  Merari,  as  one  of  the  first- 
lorn.  If  EikanaJi,  the  head  of  this  family,  were  no  other 
than  the  Elkanah  previously  mentioned  in  v.  23,  the  son  of 
Assir,  this  whole  genealogy  would  not  belong  here,  which  is 
evident  from  the  arrangement  we  have  given  above. 

But  the  same  arrangement  proves  that  the  first  part  of 
the  genealogy  of  Heman,  our  sijrth  series^,  concludes  ^vith 
the  same  Joel  who  in  the  second  part  in  our  seventh  series 
appears  as  the  father  of  Heman  ;  that,  consequently,  we  have 
to  complete  the  end  of  the  sixth  series  with  the  name  of 
Heman  again ;  in  short,  that  we  have  before  us,  in  place  of 
one  of  double  length,  tico  single  genealogies  of  Heman,  which 
spring  from  his  father  by  difierent  grandfathers^. 

So  much  for  the  generations  of  Levi  from  the  Hebrew 
text.  With  respect  to  the  genealogical  succession  from 
Levi  to  Zadok,  according  to  Josephus,  it  corresponds  with 
our  first  Levitical  series,  but  does  not  entirely  agree  with  it. 
According  to  Josephus,  the  generations  belonging  here  would 
be  as  follows : 

'Aapwi/. 


1.  EXfo^apr/S. 

2.  ^iveecTj^ 


'IS, 


'la)07/7ros. 

BoKKias. 

'lu)^a/xos 

(Meraioth=)  Uapaicudoi. 

Apo0alos. 

(Ahitub=)  'AxiTcofios. 

10.  SaScoKoS. 


'APi(C(pr)S. 

BoVKl. 


'afxapos 


'HXfi. 

'Axt/xeXfxoS-. 
'A/Stti^upos. 


1  The  genealogy  -was  certainly  originally  brought  down  from  father  to 
son;  therefore  the  names  carri-.d  up  from  F.lkanah  to  Heman  precede 
those  from  Kohath  to  Joel  (and  Heman),  although  Kohath  is  the  elder 
brother.     We  follow  the  correct  order. 

2  Azariah  appears  to  have  been  the  true  father  of  JueJ ;  Samuel  was, 
perhaps,  his  father-in-law,  or  his  uncle,  for  although,  1  Sam.  viii.  2, 
Joel  and  Abiah  are  also  stated  to  be  sons  of  Samuel,  our  fourth  genea- 
logy, 1  Chron.  vii.  28,  calls  them  Vashni  and  A'jiali. 


..i^  vLWlan  GENERATIONS.  •W 

But  the  Hebrew  series  U  not  only  supported  by  three  pas- 
sages, but  it  h&s  alao  mure  iuteriiai  probability  than  that  of 
.1   -  For  BoMuir  and  BovkI  seem  to  ditler  but   little, 

Zaduk  and  Abiathar  are  coteniporar},  a  name  ap- 
pears Uj  be  wanting  in  the  series  of  2a3<*«H>$,  which  is  given 
in  the  Hebrew  aeries^ 

In  our  series  of  the  successions  of  the  High  pristtM 
i^mt'tnjs  is  an  interposition,  because  the  pontificate  {laasod 
luiiai'diatcly  from  Kli  t<»  his  grandson. 

I'iic  genepJogy  of  Judah^  which  wc  have  added,  is  at  the 
^an^e  time  the  table  of  the  generation  of  Davui.  It  is  the 
shortest  of  all,  but  ought  not  therefore  to  be  retarded 
with  suspicion.  We  must  place  Hczron  equal  with  Jdosot^ 
;ilthoiigh  ouly  one  generation  is  given  between  hun  and 
Judal),  for  it  is  said  of  hiin  (I  Chron.  ii.  24)  that  he  died  at 
Caleb- Ephratiih,  tluTcfore  after  the  entrance  iiiU.)  Palest  mo, 
and  tliat  his  wife,  Abiidi,  had  a  son  after  his  death.  Thexe- 
fore  there  only  remains  Jtulah  and  Fharez  for  the  Eg^iitian 
time.  This  need  not  surprise  ub,  since  Phartz  was  oidy 
born  to  Judiih  by  Thamar  after  she  had  been  alremly  the 
wife  of  his  sons  ;  Fharrz  is,  therefore,  both  the  son  and  the 
qrauihon  of  Judah.  There  remain  nine  generations^  for  the 
period  from  the  Exodus  to  tlie  building  of  the  Temple  ;  but 
here,  also,  we  know  at  least  concerning  the  hk^t  name,  JJavid, 
that  he  was  the  teventh  son  of  his  father. 

If  we  now  review  the  collected  series  of  our  table,  we  tind 
among  them  right  dillerent  and  complete  series,  namely,  be- 
sides six  tribes  of  Levi,  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  the  series  of 
the  High  priests.  Of  these,  one  contains  12  namen,  three  of 
them  11,  three  10,  and  one  9.  This  gives  as  a  mean  number 
exactly  ten  and  a  half  generations. 

K  we  inquire  the  mean  number  for  the  years  of  a  geneimr 
tion,  we  must  not  tliink  of  the  Hebrew  number  40.     It  is 

>  In  the  scries  of  TA\,  'A;^tTa),3oS  must  stand  in  place  of  'loj^ci/ar^s, 
for  the  ancestors  of  Zadok  and  Achimelcch  were  hoth  named  Ahitub, 
which  nii^ht  at  all  events  easily  produce  confusion.  The  natne 
'loxu<^7^  Boems  to  bo  founded  upon  Icliabod,  the  brother  of  Alutub 
(1  Sam.  iv.  21 ;  xiv.  li). 


470  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITIOy. 

evidentlj  too  high  a  number,  and  was  only  sometimes  con- 
ferred hy  the  Hebrews  on  the  generations,  because  it  had 
been  long  used  by  them  for  undetermined  quantities  as  a 
round  and  sacred  number. 

The  33|rd  years  also  of  the  Egyptian  generations,  accord- 
ing to  Herodotus  (ii.  142),  was  rather  a  subdivision  of  the 
century  than  a  calculation  of  the  real  succession  of  genera- 
tions. The  longest  series,  from  which  we  could  obtain  a 
mean  number,  are  the  series  of  kings.  But  we  can  obtain  no 
scale  even  from  them.  The  kings  of  Judah  only  reigned  on 
an  average  nineteen  years,  those  of  Israel  only  twelve  years. 
Successions  of  reigns  are,  however,  always  shorter  than 
generations,  and  in  J  udah  seven  out  of  twenty  kings  were 
killed,  or  expelled  ;  in  Israel,  fully  half  out  of  twenty.  We 
shall  therefore  approach  much  nearer  the  truth  if  we  adopt 
the  Greek  acceptation^  of  thirty  years  for  a  generation,  in 
which  we  only  follow  most  of  the  modern  scholars. 

Admitting  this,  ten  or  eleven  generations  would  amount 
to  300  or  330  years,  and  if  we  place  Solomon  about  the  year 
1000,  the  genealogies  would  lead  us  to  1300  or  1330  years 
before  Christ,  which  most  perfectly  agrees  with  our  earlier 
results,  since,  according  to  Manetho,  we  believe  we  ought  to 
place  MenepJithes  132S— 1309.  The  Ballinical  date  of  the 
Exodus  is  B.C.  1314,  exactly  between  1300  and  1330,  upon 
which  of  course  no  more  importance  is  to  be  laid  than  is 
allowable  by  the  indeterminate  factors  of  the  calculation.  At 
any  rate  the  whole  discussion  leads  to  this,  that  i\\e  genealogies, 
the  only  trustworthy  although  less  exact  chronological  thread 
of  those  Hebrew  times,  speak  as  decidedly  against  the  calcu- 
lation hitherto  adopted  of  4S0  years,  as  in  favour  of  our 
calculation  of,  about,  300  years.  This  agreement  appears  to 
me  of  the  greatest  importance  in  judgmg  both  the  Eg}-ptian 
as  well  as  the  Jewish  history. 

But  if,  finally,  we  look  at  the  numbers  in  the  Book  of 
Judges,  we  have  already  seen  that,  according  to  the  usual 

;  According  to  Eratosthenes,  Apollodor,  Diodor.  &c.:  see  Larcher, 
Herod,  torn.  vii.  p.  51,  53,  68,  395,  397. 


DATE  OF  TILE  EXODUS.  171 

modt'  of  reckoning,  they  arc  by  no  means  found  to  agreo 
immediately  with  any  other  chronological  acceptation ;  still 
the  dironological  character  of  many  separate  numbers  cannot 
be  misitaken,  and  we  may  at  least  expect  that,  from  our  point 
of  view  also,  a  simple  solution  nuist  present  itself,  ^vhich 
would  release  the  statements  of  numbers  in  the  Book  of 
Judges  from  the  contradictions  in  which,  as  hitherto  inter- 
preted, they  have  stood  ^^-ith  the  ^lanethonic  chronology. 

Buusen^  gives  us  a  survey  of  this  period.  He  compares 
the  "  Time  of  Foreign  Rule  and  Anarchy"  with  the  "  Time 
of  the  Judges  and  of  Peace."  For  the  former  he  puts 
3  J*  -f  111  years,  for  the  latter,  including  the  monarchical 
time  to  the  building  of  the  Temple,  4  x  -f  4-i2  years.  He  consi- 
ders the  first,  less  historical  than  the  last  (p. 212),  and  supposes 
tliat  the  number  4S0  is  perhaps  formed  out  of  the  latter  412. 
At  all  events,  he  believes  we  must  start  from  this  number. 
But  I  should  prefer  an  entirely  different  combination,  which 
promises  to  lead  sooner  to  a  result.  If  we  place  the  un- 
certain and  round  numbers  upon  one  side,  and  the  remain- 
ing on  the  other  side,  we  shall  obtain  the  following  survey* : 

'  Arq.  i.  p.  209—214.     (Tr.  vol.  i.  p.  1G6— 171.) 

-  Two  points  may,  poriiaps,  strike  the  reader  in  the  survey  of  the 
tlirfirent  statements  of  numbers  given  here  from  the  Book  of  Judges, 
u\xm  which  I  will  subjoin  what  follows  in  explanation.  I  have  placc<i 
the  20  years  under  the  Canaanites  to  the  right,  the  20  of  Sampson  and 
Saul  to  the  left;  not  arbitrarily,  but  from  the  fullowin::  reason  :  In 
the  lirst  section  of  tliis  eixich.  which  ends  with  (Jideon,  all  the  numbers 
are  indetcnninate  except  those  exactly  which  relate  to  the  oppressions 
by  other  nations.  This  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  accidental;  why 
shoulil  not  the  times  of  the  oppression  have  been  firmer  fixed  in  the 
memory  than  the  other  divisions  of  time,  the  recollection  of  which  is 
principally  connected  only  with  celebrated  persons?  The  number  20 
d(X'S  not  U'long  to  the  round  numbers;  it  bears  in  itself,  therefore,  the 
probability  of  l»eing  historic;d.  On  the  other  hand,  the  2tJ  years  of 
Sampson  and  Saul  are  in  the  third  division,  in  -which  all  the  remaining 
numlKTs  are  unhistorical,  as  the  eight  preceding  are  all  historical.  The 
person  of  Sampson  is  especially  so  poetically  represented,  that  it  is 
perfectly  adapted  to  its  unchronological  neighbourhood.  It  is  possible, 
also,  that  it  belonged  entirely  to  the  preceding  Philistine  time  of  40 
years,  and  ought  therefore  to  be  quite  omitted.  But  the  20  years  of  Saul 
■was  even  received  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  by  Josephus,  as  a 
round  number,  and  was  therefore  exchanged  with  40.  The  period  of  Saul 
also  was  certainly  not  better  known  than  that  of  David  and  Solomon. 


472 


THE  HEBEEW  TEADITION. 


INDETERMINATE 
NUMBERS. 


40. 


40. 


Years  in  the  Desert. 

Joshua  (25,  according  to  Jo- 

sephus,  A.  J.  V.  1,  29). 
Successors  to  Joshua  (Joshua 

xxiv.  31. 
OthnieLiJudg.  iii.  11). 


80.  Ehud  (Judg.  iii.  30  ;  accord- 
ing to  the  Seventy  40), 
X     Shamgar. 


40.  Deborah    (Judg.    iv.   4)    and 
Barak  (Judg.  v.  1,  31). 

40.  Gideon  (Judg.  viii.  28). 


HISTORICAL  NUMBERS. 


8.  under  Mesopotamia    CJudg. 

iii.  8). 
18.  under  the  Moabites  (Judg. 
iii.  14). 


20.  under  the  Canaanites  (Judg. 
iv.  3.  This  Period  happens^ 
according  to  Judg.  iv.  4,  per- 
haps under  Deborah). 

7.  under  the  Midianites  (Judg, 
vi.  1). 

8.  Abimelech  (Judg.  ix.  22), 
23.  Tula  (Judg.  x.  2). 

22.  Jair  (Judg.  x.  3). 

18.  Philistines  (Judg.  x.  8). 

6.  Jephthah  (Judg.  xii,  7). 

7.  Ibzan  (Judg.  xii.  9). 
10.  Elon  (Judg.  xii.  11). 

8.  Abdon  (Judg.  xii,  14), 

150 


40.  Philistines  (Judg.  xiii.  1). 

20,  Samson  (in  the  time  of  the 
Philistines,  Judg.  xv.  20,  xvi. 
31), 

*  Anarchy  (Judg.  xvii.  6,  xviii. 
1,  xix.  1,  xxi.  25). 

40.  E/i  (1  Sam.  iv.  IS). 

20.  Said  (1  Sam.  vii.  1,  2  ;  com- 
pare iv.  18,  vi.  1 ;  2  Sam  vi. 
3 ;  1  Chron.  xiv.  3.  Accord- 
ing to  Acts  xiii.  21,  Jos.  A,  J. 
VI.  14,  9,  Saul  reigned  40 
years). 

40.  David  (2  Sam.  v.  4,  5 ;  1  Kings, 

ii.  11). 1 

14  times  ar  x  12  years  =  168.  150  +  168  =  318  years. 

T^e  second  point  is,  that  it  might  appear  remarkable  to  see  the  periods 
of  oppression  placed  generally  together  with  those  of  the  separate 
Judges,  whilst  both  classes  are  however  quite  heterogeneous.    I  would 


DATE  OF  THE  EXODUS.  473 

From  this  juxtaposition  alone  we  obtain  a  threefold  divi- 
sion of  the  whole  period.  In  the  first  division  we  see  from  the 
time  of  Joshua  the  determinate  and  indeterminate  numbers 
alternating  almost  regularly  (for  Sh.amgar  appears  to  be  in- 
cluded in  Ehud's  higher  number,  and  therefore  to  have  no 
number  himself),  and  the  historical  numbers  are  certainly 
not  ascribed  here  to  the  separate  personages,  but  to  tlio 
period  of  the  oppression,  therefore  the  whole  time  appears  to 
have  been  one  of  contest  and  startling  revolts,  which,  by 
means  of  a  succession  of  powerful  men,  ends  at  length  in  a 
victorious  assertion  of  their  own  dominion. 

This  second  period  commences  with  Abimelech,  and  is  only 
once  interrupted  by  the  government  of  the  Philistines.  Here 
there  is  a  real  succession  of  events  and  separate  govemmenta, 
and  therefore  no  round  numbers. 

The  third  division  begins  with  a  new,  and,  as  it  appears,  a 
far  longer  oppression  by  the  Philistines,  in  which  the  narra- 
tive of  Sampson  only  forms  a  passing  episode.  It  seems  to 
me  that  the  anarchical  times,  which  are  entirely  omitted  by 
others,  are  connected  with  this  oppression,  and,  although  there 
is  no  date,  that  they  were  of  considerable  duration.  They 
form,  in  a  certain  degree,  the  real  conclusion  of  the  time  of 
the  Judges.  The  new,  the  regal  time,  begins  \\-ith  Eli,  which 
is  always  alluded  to  in  the  time  of  the  anarchy.  Before  the 
time  of  Eli  the  historical  thread  was  broken ;  from  his  time 
it  continues  uninterrupted.  Eli  prepares  the  way  for  the 
kings.  Samuel  grows  up  under  him,  and  his  first  action  after 
the  death  of  Eli  seems  to  have  been  to  anoint  Saul  as  king. 
He  appears  to  have  continued  his  office  of  judge  under  Saul, 
whom  he  has  rather  chosen  as  a  general,  as  he  also  afterwards 
anoints  David  as  king.  This  may  be  the  reason  why  no  time 
is  ascribed  to  him  ;  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  which  was 

have  separated  them,  if  by  that  means  the  result  would  have  been  very 
different.  But  it  is  so  circumstanced,  that  the  mean  number  of  the 
historical  statements,  if  wc  separate  the  periods  of  oppression,  amounts 
to  11  years,  in  place  of  12  years;  therefore  the  total  sum  is  304  years, 
in  place  of  318  years.  But  this  is  the  same  result  to  us;  as  we  cannot 
look  for  an  exact  sum  in  the  calculation,  it  therefore  appeared  more 
suitable,  because  more  prudent,  to  leave  those  statements  in  their  his- 
torical order. 


474  THE  HEBREW  TRADITION. 

taken  as  booty  in  the  conquest  of  Mizpah  by  tbe  Philistines, 
and  was  retained  for  seven  months  (1  Sam.  vi.  1),  was  thus 
brought  to  Kirjath- Jearim,  shortly  before  Saul's  elevation ; 
remained  there  twenty  years  (1  Sam.  vii.  2),  and  was  first 
brought  away  from  that  place  at  the  elevation  of  David  (2 
Sam.  vi.  3),  '"''for  we  inqidred  not  at  it  in  tJie  days  of  SauV^ 
(1  Chron.  xiii.  3). 

If  we  now  add  up  the  historical  numbers,  we  shall  obtain 
150  years,  so  that  there  is  on  an  average  12  years  for  each  of 
the  twelve  governments.  IN'ow  if  we  apply  this  mean  number 
(which  is  best  adapted  to  the  purpose,  and  which  was  also 
that  of  the  kings  of  Israel)  to  the  fourteen  governments,  whose 
numbers  are  uncertain,  we  shall  obtain  168  years,  which,  to- 
gether with  the  150,  gives  318  years.  Now  if  we  count  these 
backward,  beginning  at  Solomon,  about  1000  years  before 
Christ,  we  come  to  the  year  1318  before  Christ,  therefore 
again  under  the  government  of  Pharaoh  Mexephthes. 

AVe  thus  obtain,  also,  from  this  side  a  simple  confirmation 
of  our  former  results.  It  is  at  least  evident,  that  the  numbers 
in  the  Book  of  Judges  can  no  longer  be  employed  as  a  refu- 
tation of  the  Manethonic  calculation.  But  this  agreement 
between  the  chronology  of  the  time  of  the  Judges,  and  the 
genealogies  of  the  Chronicles,  is  of  manifest  importance  to 
Jewish  history. 

As  soon  as  we  may  consider  the  chronological  importance 
of  the  genealogies  established,  we  are  enabled  to  rise  still 
higher  on  the  same  path  in  the  history  of  Israel,  and  to 
obtain  a  chronological  view  concerning  the  period  of  the 
sojourn  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt. 

If  in  the  40  years  of  the  later  generations  we  can  only  per- 
ceive a  chronological  garl,  without  on  that  account  supposing 
that  the  substance  of  the  narratives  are  unhistorical,  still  less 
should  we  see  in  the  hundred  and  more  years  of  the  genera- 
tions from  Abraham  to  Moses,  the  true  chronological  relation 
upon  which  these  perfectly  credible  narratives  are  founded. 
The  whole  array  of  numbers  is  rather,  as  we  have  indicated 
above,  to  be  judged  from  a  perfectly  different  point  of  view, 
the  closer  investigation  of  which  does  not  belong  here. 


PERIOD  TEOM  ABEAHAM  TO  M0SE3.  475 

"WTicn,  for  the  sake  of  judging  the  chronology  of  the  times 
from  Moses  to  Jacob,  and  from  Jacob  to  Abraham,  we  start 
from  the  historical  importance  of  the  genealogies,  this  period 
becomes  extremely  contracted,  and  we  are  led  to  new  his- 
torical comparisons,  which  appear  to  throw  a  clear  liglit  upon 
those  times. 

In  all  registers  of  generations  we  only  find  three  gene- 
rations from  Joseph  or  Levi  to  Moses.  In  the  pedigree  of 
Judah,  indeed,  we  only  saw  tico,  which  was  howeyer  ex- 
plained by  the  unnatural  alliance  of  Thamar.  But  Aaron 
himself,  and  Moses,  on  the  father's  side,  stood  in  the  third 
degree  from  Levi,  but  from  the  maternal  side  in  the  second ; 
for  their  father,  Amram,  the  grandson  of  Leyi,  took  to  wife 
in  Egypt  his  aunt  Jochahed,  the  daughter  of  Leyi  (Exod.  \\. 
20 ;  Num.  xxyi.  59),  who  bore  him  Moses  and  Aaron. 
Thus  one  eyent  explains  and  confirms  another,  and  allows  us 
still  less  to  doubt  the  historical  reality  and  the  natural  rela- 
tions which  tlie  successive  generations  bear  to  each  other. 

Therefore,  unless  we  wish  to  regard  all  the  narratives  of 
those  times,  and  all  the  accounts,  which  afterwards  refer  to 
them,  as  mj-thical  and  unhistorical,  for  which  there  is  not 
the  slightest  ground,  we  must  also  here  separate  the  chrono- 
logical garb  from  the  subject  itself,  and  recognise,  as  a  neces- 
sary conclusion,  that  only  about  ninety  years  intervened  from 
the  entrance  of  Jacob  to  the  Exodus  of  Moses,  and  about  as 
much  from  the  entrance  of  Abraham  into  Canaan,  to  Jacob's 
Exodus'^,  so  that  from  Abraham  to  Moses  only  about  180,  or 
if  we  wish  to  make  the  most  of  it,  215  years  passed,  which 

'  By  the  kind  permission  of  Chevalier  Bunsen  we  are  enabled 
to  give  the  following  note,  which  contains  the  result  he  has  ar- 
rived at  on  this  subject : — Chevalier  Bunsen  agrees  with  Dr.  Lepsius 
in  the  conviction  that  the  arrival  of  the  Israelites  cannot  have  taken 
place  under  the  Hyksos.  On  the  question  whether  they  arrived  before 
or  after  them,  Chevalier  Bunsen  differs  from  Dr.  Lepsius,  since  he 
believes  that  Jacob's  family  came  to  Egypt  at  a  far  earlier  period,  viz., 
in  the  reign  of  Sesurtesen  (Sesostris)  the  Second  (or  Third,  according 
to  some),  in  whose  reign  he  thinks  the  ancient  writers  place  those 
changes  in  the  tenure  of  land  Avhich  the  Bible  ascribes  to  Joseph's 
advice  as  prime  minister.    This  Sesurtesen  (Sesostris)  reigned,  accord- 


476  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITION. 

alone,  according  to  the  present  calculation,  are  reckoned 
from  Abraham  to  Jacob. 

But  even  this  result  is  by  no  means  only  founded  upon 
the  internal  impossibility  of  the  numbers  hitherto  adopted, 
nor  upon  the  genealogies  alone,  but  upon  a  much  more 
general  historical  connection  of  the  events,  as  we  find  them 
both  in  the  Egyptian  and  Israelitish  history  of  those  times. 

All  the  views  hitherto  adopted  from  Josephus,  and  from 
those  who  before  his  day  held  the  same  opinions,  down  to 
the  most  modern  scholars,  must,  on  the  supposition  that  the 
Jews  were  the  Hyksos — which  "we  have  rejected  above  (p. 422), 
as  not  worth  refutation — or  at  least  that  they  departed  with 
them,  and  further  that  they  lived  in  Egypt  from  the  time  of 
Jacob,  215  or  430  years,  necessarily  have  led  them  to  the 
conclusion  that  Joseph  and  Jacob  came  to  Egypt  during  the 
dominion  of  ihe  Hyksos.  But  an  attentive  and  impartial 
consideration  of  the  passages  bearing  upon  this  point,  show 
beyond  doubt  that  this  could  not  be  the  case  according  to 
the  Biblical  accounts,  and  therefore  that  either  this  repre- 
sentation, or  the  accepted  chronolog)',  must  contain  errors. 

"And  Joseph,"  it  says,  Geu.xxxix.  1,  "  was  brought  down 
to  Egypt,  and  Potiphar,  an  officer  of  Pharaoh,  captain  of  the 
guard,  an  Egyptian,  bought  him  of  the  hands  of  the  Ishmael- 
ites,  which  had  brought  him  down  thither." 

Here,  as  in  all  the  other  passages  where  the  Egyptian 
king  is  mentioned,  he  is  called  Pharaoh.  This  is  an  Egyptian 
designation  and  not  a  Semitic  one,  as  we  should  have  ex- 
pected if  the  Semitic  Hyksos^  had  still  ruled  in  Egypt.  In 
that  case  we  should  liave  been  everywhere  compelled  to  ad- 
mit in  this  designation,  throughout  the  history  of  Abraham, 
Jacob,  Joseph,  and  Moses,  an  anachronism  which  cannot  easily 

ing  to  the  tables  of  Bunsen,  about  2650  B.C.,  and  since  he  agrees  with 
Dr.  Lepsius  in  placing  the  Exodus  in  the  reign  of  Menephthes,  1210  b.c, 
he  allows  an  interval  of  1440  years  to  elapse  between  Joseph  and  the 
Exodus,  more  than  fourteen  centuries. — Tr. 

'  They  are  called  by  ^lanetho  ^ot^/tfces  and  Iloi/j-eWs-,  and  fraca.  the 
most  ancient  times  the  north-eastern  neighbours  of  the  Egyptians 
were  never  other  than  Semitic  nation-.  The  unfounded  opinicMi  that 
the  Hyksos  were  the  Scythians  has  been  long  ago  refuted. 


JOSEPH  ly  EGYPT.  477 

find  a  parallel.  The  captain  of  the  king's  body-guard  was 
also  an  Ec/yptian^  as  is  proved  by  his  name  Potiphar,  JS^U'^C^ 
which  i:i  written  by  the  Seventy  ^er6^/JJ^^,  i.  c.  l\tphra. 
Still  an  Egyptian  in  so  important  a  situation  at  a  Semitic 
court  might  as  well  form  an  exceptional  case,  as  the  Hebrew 
Joseph,  according  to  our  opinion,  at  an  Egyptian  court. 
"  And  Pharaoh  took  off  liis  ring  from  his  hand,  and  put  it 
upon  Joseph's  hand,  and  arrayed  him  in  vestures  of  fine 
linen'-,  and  put  a  gold  chain^  about  his  neck.  And  he  made 
him  to  ride  in  the  second  chariot^  which  he  had,  and  they 
cried  before  him,  Bow  the  knee ;  and  he  made  him  ruler 
over  all  the  land  of  EgN-pt.  And  Pharaoh  .<?aid  unto  Joseph, 
I  am  Pharaoh,  and  without  thee  shall  no  man  lift  up  his 
hand  or  foot  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  And  Pharaoh  called 
Joseph's  name  nD173  nSD!?  {^ov6o}i<pavT)x)>  and  he  gave  him 
to  wife  Asenafh,  the  daughter  of  FofipheraJi,  priest  of 
On."  (Gen.  xli.  42,  &c.)  The  fact  that  the  distinctions 
here  conferred  upon  Joseph  are  in  perfect  accordance  with 
Eg}'ptian  manners^,  would  still  not  be  sufficient  to  prove 
that  he  lived  at  an  Egyptian  court,  for  the  Semitic  rulers 
might  possibly  have  brought  with  them  the  same  customs,  or 
might  have  adopted  them.     But  if  such  were  our  belief,  it 

'  Evidently  the  same  name  as  that  of  tlie  Heliopolitan  priest 
y-ET!:-^,  which  only,  being  more  complete,  has  the  «  at  the  end, 
and  which  the  Seventy  likewise  write  Ilfrf^p^.  In  hieroglyphics 
the  name  would  be  ^^  n  ijj  or  ^0  ^  (^  Pet-Ra,  or  with  the  article, 

which  can  also  be  written  in  hieroglyphics,  Pet-Ph-Ra,  i.  e.  "  he  who 
is  consecrated  to  the  sun." 

-  This  was  especially  the  dress  of  the  Egyptian  priests,  as  well  as  of 
the  king  himself,  whose  transparent  upper  garments,  of  fine  linen,  are 
known  by  the  monuments.  Compare  Herod,  ii.  37 ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xix. 
2.  The  elevation  of  Joseph  into  the  most  distin^'ulshed  class,  that  of 
the  priests,  is  shown  by  this  laying  on  of  fine  linen  garments. 

'  Precious  necklaces  and  chains  were  bestowed  by  the  Egyptian 
kings  as  particular  marks  of  distinction.  Several  very  illustrative 
representations  of  this  from  Thebes  and  Tel-el-Amarna  will  be  dis- 
closed in  the  work  of  the  Prussian  Expedition. 

*  At  festive  processions  the  chariot  of  the  queen  used  to  follow  that 
of  the  king,  and  after  it  the  chariot  of  the  princes.  Joseph  was  thus 
treated  like  the  son  of  a  king. 

5  For  other  points  of  comparison,  see  Hengstenberg,  Die  Biicher 
Moses  und  JEgiipten,  ^.  2\ — 76. 


478  THE  HEBREW  TBADITION. 

would  be  impossible  to  combine  with  it  tlie  circumstance 
that  Joseph  received  from  Pharaoh  expressly  an  Egyptian 
name.  Por  even  if  the  older  Hebrew  commentators  have 
attempted  to  derive  the  name  from  the  Hebrew,  these  at- 
tempts have  long  been  rejected  by  modern  scholars^.  AVe 
should  be  able  to  decide  with  more  complete  certainty  about 
the  Egyptian  signification  of  the  name  if  we  found  it  written 
in  hieroglyphics.  It  sounds  in  Hebrew  Zepnet-ponch 
(ZapJmath-phajieach) .  It  appears  to  me  that  the  last  por- 
tion  can  hardly  be  referred  to  any  other  word  than  the 

^     auch,    Coptic  cjoiie    Aue    with  the 

article  n  con?,  the  life;  the  first  part  is  obscure.  Since 
the  Seventy  write  "irovdoixcpavrjx,  it  is  generally  supposed 
that  the  two  first  letters  in  the  Hebrew  text  have  been 
misplaced,  and  that  the  uniting  genitive  — n  (before  the 
labial  — w)  has  been  omitted.  Both  are  possible,  but  not 
probable.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  Seventy  cannot  claim 
any  more  authority  on  this  point  than  any  other  inter- 
preter. It  is  not  surprising  that,  without  understanding 
the  hieroglyphical  writing,  they  were  as  little  capable  as  we 
are  of  explaining  the  old  name  from  the  popular  language. 
But  that  they  ^vrote  "irovd  in  place  of  Zepnet,  or  Zpenf,  seems 
to  prove  that  they  explained  the  name  something  like 
n  CUJUT  u  c|)AN2  creatio  (creator)  vitae. 

But  how  is  it  possible  that  a  Semitic  king,  who,  like  the 
six  in  the  lists  of  the  so-called  shepherd  kings,  must  un- 
doubtedly have  himself  borne  a  Semitic  name,  would  have 
given  Joseph  an  Egyptian  name,  in  order  to  do  him  honour. 

Asenath  is  of  course  an  Egyptian  name  like  that  of  her 
father,  FotipJira,  i.  e.  JPetplira,  and  his  being  called  a  High 
priest  of  On  (Heliopolis)  is  an  additional  and  more  certain 
proof  that  the  Semitic  nation  of  the  Hyksos  were  not  reign- 
ing here,  for  they  would  have  destroyed  all  the  Egyptian 
temples ;  and  they  would  hardly  have  permitted  the  worship 
of  Ba  (Helios)  to  continue  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mem- 

'  Jablonski,  Voc.  ^g.  s.  v.  Psonthomphanech ;  Gesenius,  Thesaur. 
p.  1181. 


JOSEPH  IX  EGYrT.  479 

phis,  whose  High  priest  must  give  his  daughter  to  Joseph  tor 
a  wife,  in  order  to  show  him  particular  honour,  and  to 
naturalise  him  completely. 

It  ia  equally  evident,  from  tlie  meeting  of  Joseph  wiih 
Ilia  brethren,  that  he  lived  at  a  really  Eg^-ptiau  court. 
Distrust  towards  their  Pha'uician  neighbours  was  continu- 
ally kept  alive  among  the  Egyptians,  therefore  it  was  easy 
to  form  a  pretext  to  attack  the  Hebrews.  "  Ye  are  spies, 
to  see  the  nakedness  of  the  land  ye  are  come."  (Gen. 
xliL  9,  12,  14.)  When  the  brethren  talk  among  them- 
selves of  the  act  which  they  perpetrated  against  Joseph, 
they  speak  out  loud  m  the  presence  of  Joseph :  "  They 
knew  not  that  Joseph  understood  them,  for  he  spake  unto 
them  by  an  interpreter.'"  (Gen.  xlii.  23.)  Josepli  had  be- 
come so  completely  an  Egyptian,  and  the  Egj'ptian  language 
was  so  exclusively  spoken  at  the  court  of  Pharaoh,  that  the 
brethren  could  not  conjecture  any  one  was  near  them  who 
understood  their  language. 

When,  therefore,  on  their  second  visit  to  Joseph's  house, 
ihey  were  about  to  take  their  meal,  it  is  said,  "  And  they  set 
for  him  by  himself,  and  for  them  by  themselves,  and  for  the 
Egyptians,  which  did  eat  with  him,  by  themselves :  because 
the  Eyypiians  might  not  eat  bread  with  the  Hebrews,  for  that 
is  an  abomination  unto  the  Egyptians^  (Gen.  xliii.  1^2.) 
The  native  Egyptians  could  never  have  expressed  tliis  horror, 
and  regulated  theii"  manners  accordingly,  under  the  dominion 
of  a  Semitic  reigning  iiimily.  Lastly,  it  is  equally  impro- 
bable tliat  Joseph  would  have  advised  the  immigrating  family 
to  call  themselves  shepherds  in  order  to  obtain  from  Pharaoh 
a  country  set  apart  for  themselves.  "  And  it  shall  come  to 
pass  when  Pharaoh  shall  call  you,  and  shall  say,  What  is 
your  occupation  ?  That  ye  shall  say,  Thy  servant's  trade  hath 
been  about  cattle  from  our  youth,  even  until  now,  both  we, 
and  also  oiu:  fathers ;  that  ye  may  dwell  in  the  land  of 
Goshen;  for  every  shepherd  is  an  abomination  unto  the 
Egyptians."  (Gen.  xlvi.  33.)  If  the  shepherd  people  of 
the  Hyksos  reigned  in  Eg}'pt,  how  could  the  shepherds  be 
an  abomination  to  them  ? 

If  it  is  therefore  evident  that  Joseph  lived  at  au  Egyptian^ 


480  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITION. 

and  not  at  a  Semitic  court,  the  old  tradition  of  the  Jewish 
interpreters  that  Joseph  came  to  Egypt  in  the  reign  of  a 
shepherd  king,  Apophis,  is  entirely  destroyed,  as  well  as  the 
view  taken  by  more  modern  scholars  concerning  the  Hebrew 
chronology  of  that  time. 

But  according  to  Manetho,  the  Exodus  happened  in  the 
reign  of  Menephthes,  and  according  to  all  the  Hebrew 
genealogies,  Jacob's  entrance  could  only  have  happened  90 
or  100  years  earlier.  Therefore  Sethos,  the  father  of  the 
great  Eamses,  must  certainly  be  the  Pharaoh  under  whom 
Joseph  came  into  Egypt.  This  is  most  indubitably  con- 
firmed by  the  unmistakeable  agreement  which  exists  between 
ithe  Hebrew  account  of  the  Pharaoh  of  Joseph,  and  what  is 
related  by  others  of  King  Sethos.  It  is  said  by  the  former, 
*'  And  Joseph  bought  all  the  land  of  Egypt  for  Pharaoh ;  for 
the  Egyptians  sold  every  man  his  field,  because  the  famine 
prevailed  over  them :  so  the  land  hecame  ^haraoli  s.  And  as 
for  the  people,  he  removed  them  to  cities  from  one  end  of  the 
borders  of  Egypt  even  to  the  other  end  thereof.  Only  the 
land  of  the  priests  bought  he  not ;  for  the  priests  had  a  por- 
tion assigned  them  of  Pharaoh,  and  did  eat  their  portion 
which  Pharaoh  gave  them:  wherefore  they  sold  not  their 
lands.  Then  Joseph  said  unto  the  people.  Behold,  I  have 
bought  you  this  day  and  your  land  for  Pharaoh :  lo,  here  is 
seed  for  you,  and  ye  shall  sow  the  land.  And  it  shall  come 
to  pass  in  the  increase,  that  ye  shall  give  the  fifth  part  unto 
Pharaoh,  and  four  parts  shall  be  your  own.  .  .  .  And  Joseph 
made  it  a  law  over  the  land  of  Egypt  unto  this  day,  that 
Pharaoh  should  have  the  fifth  part ;  except  the  land  of  the 
priests  only,  which  became  not  Pharaoh's."  (Gen.  livii. 
20,  &c.) 

"We  find  the  same  great  alteration  in  the  agrarian  condi- 
tions of  the  country,  and  connected  with  it  the  introduction 
of  a  general  ground-tax,  from  which  the  priests  alone  were 
excepted,  ascribed  by  Herodotus  and  Diodoras  to  the  King 
Sesostris-  Sesoosis. 

We  read  iu  Herodotus,  ii.  1081,  that  the  king  intersected 
the  country  with  canals,  because  the  places  which  were  re- 
mote from  the  Nile  sufiered,  when  it  retreated,   froin  a 


JOSErn  ly  egtpt.  481 

Bcarcitv  of  water.  It  appears  from  wliat  has  been  observed 
above,  that  it  was  chiefly  Ramses  who  completed  the  Egvp- 
tian  system  of  canals,  although  it  is  very  probable  that  the 
great  transformation  in  the  condition  of  the  ground  which 
it  occasioned  had  been  already  commenced  by  his  fiither, 
SeiJiosU.  It  is  well  known  that  the  fertility  of  Egypt  alone 
depends  upon  the  proper  and  well-maintained  regulation  of 
the  overflowings.  Since  the  time  of  Moris- Amencmha,  who 
was  the  first  to  bestow  any  considerable  attention  upon  it, 
the  country  liad  degenerated,  owing  to  its  long  foreign  rule, 
and  had  but  just  risen  again  to  complete  independence  under 
the  mighty  Pharaohs  of  the  ISth  Dmasty.  It  is  quite  con- 
ceivable that  such  comprehensive  and  tedious  undertakings 
for  increasing  the  general  prosperity,  as  a  universal  construc- 
tion of  canals,  especially  in  the  Delta,  could  only  have  been 
first  undertaken  by  the  earlier  kings  of  the  19th  Dniasty, 
Sethosi.s  and  Ramses,  who  were  both  of  them  favoured  by 
long  reigns.  Tlierefore  until  that  time,  a  general  tailure  of 
the  crops  and  a  famine  might  have  very  frequently  occurred, 
at  a  low  or  even  a  moderate  rise  of  the  water,  and  perlmps 
happened  for  several  successive  years.  Strabo^  relates  that, 
before  tiie  time  of  the  Prefect  Petronius,  owing  to  the 
water-works  being  neglected,  famine  broke  out  in  Eg}'pt  if 
the  Xile  only  rose  8  ells,  and  14  ells  were  necessary  for  a 
particularly  good  year ;  whereas,  by  his  improvements,  it  was 
only  necessary  for  the  Nile  to  rise  10  ells  to  produce  the 
best  harvest,  and  if  it  rose  but  8  ells  no  scarcity  ensued. 
Pamine  broke  out  in  Egvpt  in  the  Arabian  times  also  Irora 
the  same  reason-.  Thus  the  famine-years  in  the  time  of 
Joseph  may  be  explained  to  have  occiured  in  the  reign  of 
Sethos ;  this  event  may  even  have  called  attention  to  the 
necessity  of  a  better  water  regulation  in  the  country. 

In  the  following  chapter  Herodotus  says,  that  the  King 
Sesostris  ''  divided  the  land  between  all  the  Egyptians  by 
giving  an  equal-sized  square  portion  to  each,  from  which  he 

^  xvii.  p.  788. 
Maqrizi  in  Quatremt-re.     M^m.  ii.  318,  401. 
2i 


482  THE  HEBREW  TEADITIOK. 

afterwards  derived  his  income  by  laying  an  annual  tax  upon 
it.  But  when  the  river  carried  away  a  part  of  any  person's 
portion,  he  showed  it  to  the  king,  who  sent  people  to  inquire 
and  measure  how  much  smaller  the  piece  of  land  had  be- 
come, in  order  that  he  might  pay  the  tax  for  the  remainder 
according  to  the  commands."  This  is  essentially  the  same 
arrangement  which  is  ascribed  to  Joseph,  the  minister  of 
Pharaoh.  Herodotus  had  already^  mentioned  in  an  earlier 
passage  that  the  priests  paid  no  taxes,  but  even  received 
their  daily  sustenance  besides,  exactly  as  it  is  related  in  the 
Mosaic  accounts. 

Diodorus-  says  of  Sesoosis,  that  he  "  divided  the  whole 
country  into  thirty-six  parts,"  which  the  Egyptians  called 
Nomes;  over  these  he  placed  Nomarchs,  who  had  the 
charge  of  the  Eotal  Eevenues,  and  "ruled  everything 
besides  in  their  provinces."  Therefore  here  again  there 
was  an  entirely  new  division  and  government  of  the  coun- 
try, in  which  the  taxes  to  the  king  are  not  forgotten. 
Afterwards  (c.  57)  he  adds  also,  that  he  raised  many  great 
mounds,  and  upon  them  transplanted  the  towns  which  were 
situated  too  low  (^fTWKio-ej/) .  The  fresh  regulations  in  the 
country,  and  especially  the  new  canals,  necessarily  created  a 
great  number  of  towns  and  villages  for  the  management  of 
the  grounds  which  were  portioned  out,  and  were  now  partly 
cultivated  for  the  first  time.  To  this  we  may  most  naturally 
refer  the  remark  in  the  Hebrew  account  that  Pharaoh  "  re- 
moved them  to  cities  from  one  end  of  the  borders  of  Egypt 
even  to  the  other  end  thereof."  (Qen.  xlvii.  21.)  Diodorus 
(c.  56)  also  mentions  the  hard  taskwork  which  thence  became 
necessary,  and  that  in  consequence  of  it  the  "  Babylonian 
prisoners,  who  could  no  longer  bear  the  toilsome  labour,  re- 
belled against  the  king." 

In  the  very  valuable  description  of  the  manner  in  which 
the  Egyptian  administration  had  subsisted  under  the  old^ 
kings  of  the  country,  which  is  drawn  from  the  most  ancient 

*  ii.  37.  =  i.  54.  3  i.  72^  74.    Compare  c.  71. 


josi-rn  IX  EGYPT.  4S3 

sources,  Diodonis  again  mentions  (c.  73,  7-i)  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  Xomes,  and  a  division  of  the  property,  by 
which  one-third  belonged  to  the  priests,  one  to  the  king,  the 
other  to  tlie  warriors  ;  and  how  all  the  cultivators  of  the  soil, 
for  a  small  reward,  only  performed  task-service  for  the  three 
orders  who  possessed  laud.  It  is  here  also  expressly  men- 
tioned, that  the  priests  were  exempt  (dreXets)  from  taxation^. 
But  it  seems  that  it  is  only  from  the  Mosaic  narrative  we 
learn  that  the  universal  statute  of  the  taxes  imposed  on  the 
remaining  possessors  of  the  land  was  fixed  upon  exactly  the 
fifth  part  of  the  produce ;  this  narrative  here,  as  well  as  in 
other  points,  confidently  completes  our  knowledge  of  those 
circumstances. 

Now  if  the  arrangements  we  have  cited,  which  in  fact  so 
essentially  changed  Egypt,  that  their  introduction  could  not 
fail  to  occupy  an  important  place  in  the  monuments  of  that 
time,  and  to  be  thus  handed  down  to  posterity,  were  ascribed  in 
the  Greek  account  to  Sesosteis-Sesoosis,  wc  should,  in  the 
next  place,  be  uncertain  whether  Sethos  or  his  son  Eamses 
was  meant.  It  is  not  in  itself  improbable,  that  works  demand- 
ing so  much  time,  and  the  extensive  alterations  in  the  poli- 
tical circumstances,  might  fully  occupy  two  such  long  reigns 
as  those  of  both  the  kings  mentioned ;  and  of  the  canal 
works  especially,  we  know  that  at  least  two  particular  canals 
of  considerable  importance  were  completed  by  Eamses,  east 
and  west  of  the  Delta,  and  towns  were  built  beside  them. 
But  since  it  can  now  hardly  be  disputed  that  those  events 
could  not  have  taken  place  either  earlier  or  later  than 
under  these  two  reigns,  which  embraced  more  than  a  cen- 
tur}',  it  appears  to  b^  perfectly  justifiable  to  suppose  that 
the  first  and  most  essential  steps  to  this  reform  were  taken 
in  the  reign  of  Sethos,  because,  according  to  the  genealogical 
calculation  of  time  in  the  Bible,  Joseph  must  have  lived  and 
acted  in  the  first  half  of  the  reign  of  Sethosis.  The  succes- 
sion of  kings  in  the  Mosaic  accounts  also  perfectly  agrees 
with  this.  "\Ve  here  read  of  only  tliree  Fharaohs  during 
that  time.     Joseph  came  to  Potiphar  in  Egypt  in  the  reigu 

*  Compare  also  Strabo,  xvii.  p.  787,  upon  the  taxes  to  the  king. 
2i2 


484  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITIOT?". 

of  the  first,  and  rose  bj  liis  wisdom  to  be  first  minister  of 
the  king.  This  Pharaoh  was  Sethosis  I.,  with  whom  the 
Manethonic  lists  begin  a  new  Dynasty.  By  means  of  the 
new  improvements  introduced  and  regulated  by  him,  the 
country  was  saved  from  the  years  of  famine  which  had 
hitherto  been  constantly  dreaded,  and  the  power  of  the  king 
was  increased  and  strengthened. 

"  And  Joseph  died,  and  all  his  brethren,  and  his  whole 
race,"      "jS'ow  there  arose   up    a   new  king   over   Eg^^t, 
which  knew  not  Joseph^."     Sethosis  had  reigned  more  than 
fifty  years,  and  Joseph  must  have   lived  in  the  first  part 
of  his  reign.     It  is   therefore   conceivable  that   the   new 
King  Eamses  II.  knew  nothing  more  of  him,  or  wished  to 
know  nothing  more,  and  therefore  might  not  on  his   (Jo- 
seph's) account  have  favoured  the  rapidly  increasing  popu- 
lation of  the  Israelites  in  EgA'pt.     "We  therefore  see  that  it 
was  incorrect  to  explain  the  words  of  the  account,  which 
are  only  correct  when  taken  in  their  simplest  signification, 
that  a  new  Icing  arose — by  understanding  that  by  this  the 
commencement   of  a  new  royal  house  is  intended  after  a 
long  and  indefinite   period.     The  birth  of  Moses,  and  his 
education  at  the  court  of  Pharaoh,  happened  under  this 
King  Eamses  II.,  and  indeed  in  the  latter  part  of  his  reign 
of  sixty-six  years,  in  which  the  times  of  Joseph  were  still 
more  forgotten,  and  the  hard  oppressions  and  persecutions 
of  the  Jews  prevailed.      This  king,   although  of  a  Theban. 
family,  resided  equally,  and  perhaps  in  those  times,  evea 
more  at  Memphis  than  at  Thebes,  as  the  later  Saitic,  Bubas- 
tic,  and  other  dynasties  also  by  no  means  forsook  the  old 
palace  in  Memphis.     There  exists,  therefore,  no  grounds  for 
imagining  the  youth  of  Moses  to  have  been  spent  at  Thebes 
rather  than  at  Memphis. 

But  when  Moses  had  slain  the  Egyptian,  he  fled  to  Midian. 
"  And  it  came  to  pass  in  process  of  time,  that  the  King  of 
^gyp  died ;  and  the  children  of  Israel  sighed  by  reason  of  the 
bondage^."  The  third  king,  therefore,  succeeded  the  Pha- 
raoh of  the  Exodus,  Mei^ephthes,  the  son  of  the  great 
»  Exodus  18.  2  Exodus  11.  23. 


rzniOD  feom:  AEBJiHi:ii  to  moses.  485 

Eamses,  the  same  under  whom,  aa  we  believe  we  have  pointed 
out,  the  Exodus  really  happened,  and  from  whom  the  new 
Sothid  period,  which  began  in  his  reign,  likewise  received  its 
name. 

If,  in  the  same  manner,  we  go  still  farther  back  in  the 
Hebrew  accounts  from  Joseph  to  Abraham,  we  find  this 
period  also  only  occupied  by  three  generations,  which  would 
fix  it,  according  to  the  views  we  have  exhibited,  to  about  90 
or  100  years. 

According  to  tlie  chronology  hitherto  adopted,  Abraham's 
visit  tu  Eg}'pt  would  also  have  happened  in  the  time  of  the 
Hyksos.  But  this  is  partly  opposed  by  the  same  objections 
which  we  mentioned  when  speaking  of  the  immigration  of 
Jacob.  Abraham  also  comes  to  the  court  of  a  Pharaoh, 
therefore  of  a  native  EgA^Dtiau  ruler,  and,  in  accordance  with 
the  Manethonic  chronology,  the  visit  of  Abraliam  would  have 
happened  under  Tuthmosis  lY.  or  Amenophis  III.,  therefore 
in  the  middle  of  the  18th  Dvnasty,  after  the  Hyksos  had 
been  already  expelled  by  the  17tli  Dynasty,  first  into  the 
lowest  country  of  the  Delta,  and  then  from  their  last  fortress, 
Abaris. 

Therefore  only  about  200  years  had  passed  between 
Abraham's  journey  into  Egypt  and  the  time  of  the  Exodus. 
But  what  gave  occasion  to  the  number  four  hundred  and 
thirty  years,  so  expressly  stated  in  Exodus  xii.  40,  and  which 
appears,  in  comparison  with  the  round  statement  of 
400  years  in  Gen.  xv.  13,  as  more  exact,  and,  at  aU 
events,  not  an  unmeaning  number  ?  We  have  already  ex- 
pressed our  opinion  that  the  round  and  indeterminate 
numbers,  as  well  as  the  larger  calculations,  were  only 
adopted  at  a  later  period  m  the  writings  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. The  number  480  or  440  years  between  the  Exodus 
and  the  building  of  the  Temple  appeared  to  us  to  depend 
upon  a  calculation  of  12  or  11  generations  of  40  years  each. 
But  in  the  430  years  may,  perhaps,  lie  the  first  indication  of 
the  early- conceived  idea  mentioned  above,  that  the  Israelites 
were  the  Hyksos.     Eor  the  number  would,  in  fact,  be  most 


486  THE  HEBEEW  TEADTTION. 

perfectly  explained  if  it  was  referred  to  the  residence  of 
these  Semitic  races  in  Egypt. 

"We  shall,  namely,  point  out,  in  the  second  part  of  the 
chronology,  that  the  long  contest  between  the  Egyptians  and 
the  Hyksos,  mentioned  by  Manetho,  occurred  during  the 
17th  Dynasty  from  Aiiosis  to  Tuthmosis  III.  The  former 
completely  broke  the  foreign  dominion,  and  drove  back  the 
Hyksos  to  the  northern  part  of  the  Delta ;  but  it  was  Tuth- 
mosis  who  first  succeeded  in  sending  them  out  of  their  last 
stronghold  of  refuge,  Abaris.  Thence  arose  the  confusion 
that  has  so  generally  prevailed  concerning  these  two  kings. 
The  one  as  much  as  the  other  might  be  regarded  as  the  con- 
queror of  the  Hyksos.  Manetho  specified  the  whole  time 
of  the  residence  of  the  Hyksos  in  Egypt,  up  to  their  depar- 
ture from  Abaris,  to  be  511  years.  But  it  must  also  have 
appeared  from  his  narrative,  and  have  been  a  fact  specially 
known  to  the  priests  from  their  history,  that  the  real  domi- 
nion of  the  Hyksos  in  Egypt  was  terminated  by  Amosis. 
If  we  now  subtract  the  time  from  Amosis  to  Tuthmosis, 
which  was  80  years,  from  511^,  exactly  four  hundred  and 
ihirty  years  remain  for  the  dominion  of  the  Hyksos  in 
Egypt^.  If,  therefore,  in  the  present  day,  the  opinion  can 
in  any  way  be  maintained  and  defended  that  Abraham  (or 
Jacob)  was  King  Salatis,  and  entered  Egypt  not  as  a  peti- 
tioner, but  as  a  powerful  and  conquering  enemy,  and  that 
his  seed  was  first  conquered  and  driven  away  in  the  time 
of  Moses  by  the  native  kings,  the  relation  of  the  above- 
mentioned  numbers  would  certainly  appear  as  one  of  the 
most  important  proofs  of  it.  It  cannot,  however,  be  argued 
that  an  admission  which  appears,  according  to  our  present 

^  Even  if  we  take  into  account  the  months  also,  subtracting  80 
years  and  8  months  from  510  years  and  10  months,  we  shall  obtain  430 
years  and  2  months. 

_  '  I  do  not,  however,  lay  more  importance  upon  this  agreement  than 
it  deserves.  The  coincidence  of  this  number  with  the  Hebrew  periods, 
originating  in  a  different  manner,  may  certainly  have  first  caused  it  to 
be_  believed  that  the  Hyksos  were  the  Jews.  I  am  the  less  inclined  to 
reject  this  opinion,  as  we  shall  see  below  that  the  Hebrew  number 
may  also  be  explained  in  a  different  manner. 


PERIOD  rnOlI  AEEAHAM  TO  MOSES.  487 

criticism,  perfectly  impossible,  must  have  appeared  equally 
80  in  ancient  times.  An  impartial  apprehension  of  the  pre- 
sent, and  a  faithful  rendering  of  the  past,  was  the  vocation  of 
an  ancient  annalist  or  historian ;  it  is  only  thus  that  they  are 
of  importance  and  worthy  of  consideration  in  our  inquiry. 
Criticism  was  completely  out  of  their  sphere,  historical  aa 
well  as  philological ;  and  when,  nevertheless,  we  do  meet 
with  it,  it  is  generally  very  unsatisfactory,  and  even  from  the 
most  distinguished  writers,  astonishingly  feeble.  The  school 
of  professional  Alexandrian  critics  is  by  no  means  excepted. 
AVe  find  the  most  striking  examples  of  this,  particulariy  in 
the  Christian  chronologists,  who  were  not  wanting  either  in 
abundance  of  authorities,  nor  in  extensive  learning  and  honest 
intentions.  But  we  have  actually  seen,  from  the  example  of 
Josephus,  as  well  as  from  earlier  and  later  authors,  how  the 
opinion  above  mentioned,  of  the  identity  of  the  Ilyksos  with 
the  Jews,  really  gained  admittance  from  various  very  super- 
ficial foundations,  and  yet  Josephus  belonged  undoubtedly  to 
the  most  learned  antiquarians  who  we  can  place  under  our 
observation  here.  AVe  ought  not,  therefore,  to  be  surprised 
even  if  we  find  this  view  again  stated  at  an  earlier  period  in  the 
arrangement  and  combinations  of  the  Hebrew  historical  books; 
and  this  appears,  in  fact,  to  be  very  probable,  by  the  number 
430  years,  which  can  neither  be  applied  to  the  three  genera- 
tions of  Jacob,  nor  to  the  six  from  Abraham  to  Moses. 

The  calculation  also  verifies  itself  still  further.  It  was  an 
early  opinion  that  Joseph  came  to  Eg}'pt  in  the  reign  of  the 
ehepherd  King  Apliophis.  This  is  expressly  said  by  Euse- 
bius  and  Syncellus  ;  and  the  various  changes  in  the  position 
of  Aphophis,  who  is  difterently  placed  both  by  Josephus  and 
Africanus,  appear,  upon  a  closer  investigation,  always  to  origi- 
nate from  the  same  reason,  namely,  in  order  to  place  Joseph 
under  Aphophis.  The  correct  position  of  Aphophis,  according 
to  Manetho,  was  undoubtedly  at  the  end  of  the  16th  Dy- 
nasty, as  we  find  it  stated  by  Africanus^.  Joseph  stood,  ac- 
cording to  the  generations,  exactly  between  Abraham  and 
*  Bockh  is  also  of  this  opinion,  Manetho,  p.  227. 


488  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITI02?'. 

Moses.  According  to  tlie  Eg^^tian  clironolog)^,  the  first  Dy- 
nasty of  the  Hyksos  reigned  259  years,  the  second  251  years, 
therefore  Aphophis,  the  last  king  of  the  1st  Dynasty,  reigned 
in  the  middle  of  th-e  time  of  the  Hyksos.  This  was  probably 
the  first  idea  which  supported  the  opinion  of  the  exact  divi- 
sion of  the  430  years  into  two  equal  halves,  and  the  belief 
that  Jacob  came  to  Egypt  in  the  time  of  Aphophis,  Jacob's 
entrance,  or  the  end  of  the  first  215  years,  accordingly  hap- 
pened in  the  seventeenth  year  of  the  Aphophis ;  Joseph  was 
exalted  by  Pharaoh  9  years  earlier,  therefore  in  the  eighth 
year  of  Aphophis. 

But  the  correct  Egyptian  statement,  that  the  Hyksos  first 
departed  in  the  reign  of  Tuthmosis,  had  been  already  misun- 
derstood in  the  time  of  Josephus.  He  placed  the  Exodus  of 
the  Hyksos  and  of  the  Jews  under  Amosis,  and  made  the  whole 
17th  Dynasty  of  251  years  precede  Amosis.  It  was  impos- 
sible, therefore,  that  he  could  place  Joseph  under  Aphophis. 
He  could  as  little  make  the  entrance  of  Abraham  happen  at 
the  same  time  as  that  of  the  Hyksos,  for  he  gave  511  years  for 
the  residence  of  the  Hyksos,  430  for  that  of  the  Jews.  But 
lie  nowhere  says  either  that  the  Jews  entered  with  the 
Hyksos,  as  they  departed  with  them,  or  that  Jacob  or  Josephus 
came  to  Egypt  in  the  reign  of  Aphophis.  He  appears  rather 
to  have  believed  that  the  first  and  not  the  second  entrance  of 
Ae  Jews  into  Egypt,  therefore  the  entrance  of  Abraham  hap- 
pened in  the  time  of  Aplwpliis ;  and  thus  that  the  tradition, 
which  was  no  doubt  known  to  him,  was  so  to  be  understood. 
He  must,  at  least,  have  thought  that  the  entrance  of  Abraham 
really  took  place  in  the  fii-st  Hyksos  Dynasty,  although,  in- 
deed, not  under  the  last,  but  under  thefourth  king.  Accord- 
ing to  my  opinion,  this  was  the  reason  why  Josephus  made 
Aphophis  thefourth  king  of  the  Dynasty. 

Airicanus,  the  most  faithful  among  the  reporters,  did  not 
admit  aU  these  calculations,  or  seek  to  explain  the  Manethonic 
calculation,  and  to  make  it  agree  with  his  own,  but  let  the 
contradictions  stand,  and  therefore  simply  gave  the  Mane- 
thonic tradition,  even  when  he  did  not  understand  it,  and 


PEBIOD  mOif  ABRAHAM  TO  MOSES.  4S9 

could  not  correct  the  mistakes  which  were  handed  down  to 
him.  We  therefore  find  the  correct  position  of  Aphophia  re- 
tained "by  him. 

Eusebius  on  the  other  hand,  and  his  uncertain  authorities, 
again  wished  to  mediate  and  to  explain.  In  his  account  we 
find  the  first  year  of  the  16th  Dynasty  placed  contempora- 
neous with  the  first  year  of  the  life  of  Abraham,  which  ia 
evidently  an  arbitrary  proceeding,  and  one  that  necessarily 
drew  otlier  changes  along  with  it,  which  are  met  with  plen- 
tifully in  the  numbers  substituted  for  those  of  Manetho. 
His  17th  Dynasty  names  the  four  first  kings  of  the  Mane- 
thonic  16th  Dynasty,  and  Amosis  follows  immediately  after. 
In  order  to  fit  in  again  with  the  later  history,  it  was  neces- 
sary to  abridge  considerably  the  16th  and  17th  Dynasties. 
The  numbers  of  Eusebius,  as  they  appear  in  the  Canon, 
clearly  state  that  he  only  counted  seventy-five  years  from  the 
first  year  of  Abraham  to  his  entrance  into  Canaan  and  Egypt, 
and  again  430  years  from  that  time  to  the  Exodus  of  Moses. 
This  happened,  therefore,  in  the  last  year  of  X/v^fpr;?.  The 
same  is  given  in  the  codex  A  of  Sjiicellus,  p.  72,  D.  If  we 
here  again  calculate  215  years  to  the  entrance  of  Jacob, 
or  224  to  the  exaltation  of  Joseph,  we  arrive  at  his  reign  of 
ApnoPHis,  as  was  intended.  But  in  codex  B,  and  in  the 
Armenian  translation,  the  two  kings,  Athoris  and  Chen- 
cheres,  who  are  correctly  placed  in  the  Eusebian  Canon,  are 
omitted,  and  undoubtedly  by  the  oversight  of  Eusebius  him- 
self, not  of  Syncellus.  Thence  the  Exodus  was  placed  in  the 
reign  of  Achencheres,  in  place  of  Chencheres.  The  simi- 
larity in  the  names  themselves  appears  to  have  led  to  the 
oversight ;  thus  Syncellus  found  the  text.  Kow,  if  we  count 
back  from  Achencheres  215  or  224  years,  we  come  to  Archies, 
the  predecessor  of  Aplwph  is.  Sjnicellus  knew  of  no  better  way 
than  to  transpose  Archies  and  Aphophis,  as  we  find  to  be  really 
the  case  in  tis  text  of  Eusebius,  p.  62,  A ;  this  of  course  can 
no  longer  be  reconciled  with  the  emendations  of  the  codex  A, 
which  were  added  in  a  later  passage  out  of  Eusebius.  No 
doubt  seems  to  be  left  by  this  explanation  of  the  numbers. 


490  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITIOX. 

Lastly,  Sjncellus,  who  follows  the  false  Sothis,  places  the 
Exodus  in  the  last  year  of  Misphbagmfthosis,  calculates 
from  here  backwards  215  years,  and  passing  over  the  2nd 
Hyksos  Dynasty,  which  Sothis  and  Eusebius  had  already 
placed  before  the  1st  Hyksos  Dynasty,  arrives  at  the  fourth 
king  of  the  latter.  Therefore,  as  in  Josephus,  Aphophis  is 
placed  there. 

All  these  circumstances  are  easily  explained  when  the  aim 
and  the  issue  of  the  matter  is  known.  But  the  orierinal 
grounds  why  Aphophis,  the  last  king  of  the  1st  Mane- 
thonic  Hyksos  Dynasty,  was  regarded  as  the  Pharaoh  of 
Joseph  and  Jacob,  is  alone  apparent  by  the  simple  relation 
which  we  have  found  subsisting  between  the  Hebrew  and 
the  Manethonic  numbers. 

I  do  not  believe  that  a  sound  critical  examination  can  con- 
eider  so  many  and  such  universal  agreements  and  confirma- 
tions to  be  accidental,  or  the  result  of  an  artificial  correction, 
which,  at  all  events,  would  of  necessity  be  easily  pointed  out, 
the  more  so  as,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  individual  points, 
my  restoration  of  the  Manethonic  chronology  was  principally 
determined  before  my  journey  to  Egypt. 

We  therefore  believe,  that  by  means  of  a  new  path,  namely, 
the  Manethonic  chronology,  we  have  found  the  key  to  the 
relative  portions  of  time  in  the  Old  Testament,  so  far  a3 
these  are  connected  with  Egypt ;  and  in  an  inverse  manner 
we  may  now  consider  the  agreement  that  subsists  between 
the  chronology  of  the  Hebrew  history  (both  the  true  chro- 
nology represented  in  the  genealogies,  and  the  false  one, 
which  was  afterwards  erroneously  adopted)  and  the  Eg}'ptiau 
numbers  upon  which  the  chronology  was  originally  founded, 
to  be  indeed  strongly  confirmatory  of  the  authenticity  of  these 
last,  as  they  appear  according  to  our  restoration  of  them. 

It  is  very  evident  that  our  carrying  back  the  Old  Testa- 
ment chronology  to  its  natural  relations,  as  far  back  as  Abra- 
ham, must  be  not  merely  of  chronological,  but  of  truly  his- 
torical importance  in  the  highest  meaning  of  the  term.  The 
prolongation  to  above  a  hundred  years,  contrary  to  all  hia- 


PERIOD  rnOM  ABBAHAil  TO  MOSES.  191 

torical  experience,  of  tlie  thirtr-yeared  generations  of  the 
immediate  ancestors  of  Moses,  who  lived  in  the  midst  of  the 
Egyptians,  the  length  of  whose  lives  was  exactly  like  oiir 
own,  must  either  appear  an  intentional  miracle,  or  make  U3 
doubt  the  simple  historical  reality  of  the  persons  themselves, 
and  of  the  events  concerning  them.  The  superhuman  duration 
of  life,  considered  as  a  miracle,  would  appear  to  be  entirely 
without  a  purpose ;  besides,  in  the  Old  Testament  itself  it  is 
never  viewed  as  such.  The  Psalmist^  on  the  contrary, 
considered  as  we  do,  a  life  of  eighty  years  as  a  great  age. 
Therefore  the  most  distinguished,  and  most  earnest  inquirers 
of  the  present  day  were  led  to  the  opinion,  evidently  from 
the  numbers,  that  the  history  of  the  three  patriarchs,  Abra- 
ham, Isaac,  and  Jacob,  was  less  strictly  liistorical,  but  only 
brought  before  the  reader,  as  it  were,  three  representations  of 
long  epochs  of  about  a  century  each-.  It  was  likewise 
necessary  to  regard  the  register  of  generations  in  the  time 
of  the  Judges  as  defective,  and  extremely  shortened,  because 
in  no  other  manner  could  they  fill  up  the  long  period  of  480 
years.  In  order  to  make  this  abbreviation  more  probable, 
tlie  genealogy  of  Hainan  was  referred  to  as  the  only  one 
which  was  presen-ed  perfect^,  while  we,  on  the  contrary, 
consider  it  a  double  one. 

Now  according  to  our  view  of  the  subject,  this  apparently 
80  well-founded  doubt  of  the  real  continuity  of  the  events,  and 
of  tlie  historical  character  of  the  contents,  in  as  far  as  they  de- 
pend upon  the  chronolog}',  entirely  disappears,  and  I  seo  no 
longer  any  reason  to  consider  the  accounts  of  the  great  per- 
sonality of  Abraham,  of  the  non-prominent  activity  of  Isaac, 
the  opulent  life  of  Jacob,  and  the  remarkable  fate  of  Joseph, 
chiefly  as  typical,  and  as  it  were  only  slightly  connected  with 
the  historical  reality*.  For  although  we  must  still  make  a 
considerable  ditference  between  the  character  of  the  history 

'  Ps.  xc.  10. 

'  So  Ewald,  Gesch.  d.  Volks  Israel     Bd.  i.  p.  30,  339  &c.     Bunsen, 
JEgypten,  i.  p.  215,  22.'3.     (Trans,  vol.  i.  p.  171,  181.) 
'  Ewald,  i.  p.  31.     Compare  Bunsen,  i.  p.  220. 
*  Ewald,  i.  p.  354,  387,  &c. 


492  THE  HEBEEW  TEADITIOX. 

of  Israel  before  and  after  the  building  of  the  temple,  yet 
it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  agreement  we  have  pointed  out 
between  the  true  chronological  thread,  as  it  is  represented  to 
us  bj  the  genealogies,  and  the  Egyptian  history,  as  well  as 
the  confirmation  of  so  many  notices  respecting  Egypt,  from 
the  time  of  Moses  and  Joseph,  establish  a  far  greater  his- 
torical character  for  the  Hebrew  accounts,  as  far  back  as 
Abraham,  than  would  have  ever  been  allowed  them  by  a  strict 
criticism,  had  we  been  obliged  to  ascribe  to  the  old  authori- 
ties themselves  the  numbers  which  were  inserted  at  a  later 
period. 

[After  some  notice  concerning  the  times  before  Abraham, 
the  author  concludes  this  section  as  follows  :] 

If,  however,  our  entire  view  of  the  Old  Testament  chro- 
nology, regarding  it  as  founded  upon  accurately  preserved 
dates,  only  so  far  back  as  the  separation  of  the  kingdom,  but 
nevertheless  attached  from  that  epoch  up  to  the  time  of 
Abraham  to  an  evidently  authentic  tliread  of  historically 
reliable  genealogies,  offering,  however,  before  the  Egyp- 
tian period,  only  cyclical  instead  of  historical  numbers  and 
genealogies,  and  mainly  confined  to  Babylonian  sources  and 
traditions — if,  I  say,  this  general  view  of  the  character  of 
the  chronological  data  which  leaves  untouched  the  signifi- 
cance of  their  contents,  should,  on  theological  grounds, 
arouse  scruples  in  the  mind  of  any  one,  I  would  refer  him 
to  the  introduction  which  Bunsen  has  prefixed  to  the  third 
section  of  his  first  book  on  Egypt,  as  full  of  talent  as  of 
meaning,  and  from  which  I  would  more  especially  extract  the 
following  passages^. 

"  Whoever  adopts  as  a  principle  that  chronology  is  a  mat- 
ter of  revelation,  is  precluded  from  giving  eflect  to  any 
doubt  that  may  cross  his  path,  as  involving  a  virtual  aban- 
donment of  his  faith  m  revelation.  He  must  be  prepared, 
not  only  to  deny  the  existence  of  contradictory  statements, 
but  to  fill  up  chasms ;  however  irreconcileable  the  former 
*  P.  204,  206.    (Trans,  by  C.  H.  CottreU,  vol.  i.  p.  161-163.) 


MANETnoyic  cnBO'OLOGT.  493 

may  appear  by  any  aid  of  philology  and  history,  however  un- 
fathomable the  latter.  He  who,  on  the  other  hand,  neither 
believes  in  an  historical  tradition  as  to  the  eternal  eiistonce 
of  man,  nor  admits  an  lii:*torical  and  chronological  element 
in  revelation,  will  either  contemptuously  dismiss  the  in- 
quiry, or,  by  prematurely  rejecting  its  more  difficult  elements, 
fail  to  discover  those  threads  of  the  research  which  lie  be- 
neath the  unsightly  and  time-worn  surface,  and  which  vet 
may  prove  the  thread  of  Ariadne. 

"  The  assumption  that  it  entered  into  the  sclieme  of  Dinne 
Providence  either  to  preserve  for  us  a  chronology  of  the 
Jews  and  their  forefathers  by  real  tradition,  or  to  pronde 
the  later  commentators  with  magic  powers,  in  n'spect  to  the 
most  exoteric  element  of  history,  may  seem  indispensable  to 
some,  and  absurd  to  others.  Historical  inquiry  has  nothing 
whatever  to  do  with  such  idle,  preposterous,  and  often  falla- 
cious assumptions.  Its  business  is  to  see  whether  anjihing 
— and  if  so,  what — has  been  transmitted  to  us.  If  it  fuliU 
this  duty  in  a  spirit  of  reverence  as  well  as  of  liberty,  sooner 
or  later  it  will  obtain  the  prize,  which,  if  the  history  of  the 
last  2(X)0  years  prove  anj-thing  at  all.  Providence  has  refused 
to  both  the  other  systems.'* 

[After  the  two  first  sections  of  The  Criticism  vpon  the 
Authorities,  of  which  the  first,  upon  Herodotus  and  Dio- 
donis,  has  been  omitted  in  tliis  translation,  while  the  second, 
upon  the  Hebrew  tradition,  has  been  strongly  dwelt  upon, 
the  author  proceeds  to  the  third  and  last  section,  which  treats 
of  the  historical  works  of  ]\ranetho  and  the  authorities  which 
refer  to  him.  Now,  although  this  section  contains  the  really 
critical  restoration  of  the  Manethonic  chronology,  considered 
by  the  author  as  the  only  one  to  be  relied  on  in  its  general 
features,  it  has  not  been  considered  compatible  with  the  ob- 
ject of  the  present  work  to  communicate  at  fiill  length  this 
difficult  research,  which  was  only  vrritten  for  the  profound 
investigator.  We  think  it  sufficient  to  give  the  two  pas- 
sages in  which  the  whole  extent  of  the  Manethonic  history, 
down  to  the  second  Persian  conquest,  according  to  a  state- 


494!  THE  GENUINE  MANETHONIC  NUMBEES. 

ment  obtained  from  Manetho  himself,  is  said  to  amount  to 
3555  years,  and  the  connection  is  pointed  out  between  this 
time,  considered  as  strictly  historical,  and  the  cyclically  dis- 
covered History  of  the  Gods.] 

The  number  3555  is,  however,  alone  essential  and  im- 
portant, and,  in  spite  of  all  the  uncertainties  and  revisings 
of  the  text,  there  cannot  be  the  slightest  doubt  about  it.  It 
led  undoubtedly  to  the  termination  of  the  reign  of  Necta- 
nebus  II.  If  we  can,  therefore,  determine  this  end  in  other 
more  certain  ways,  we  need  no  longer  trouble  ourselves 
about  the  calculation  of  Syncellus  ;  since  this,  as  every  one 
allows,  is,  at  all  events,  incorrect.  But  it  cannot  be  doubted 
that  Manetho  knew,  and  correctly  stated,  the  true  year  of 
the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  Ochus,  which  very  likely  happened 
during  his  lifetime. 

The  calculation  of  this  concluding  year  has,  however,  been 
so  fully  and  comincingly  proved  by  Bockh  (p.  125 — 133),  that 
I  consider  it  would  be  superfluous  to  return  to  it  again.  I 
assume  with  hun  that  the  year  3-iO  B.C.  is  perfectly  ascer- 
tained to  be  the  concluding  year  of  the  Egyptian  dominion. 
Calculating  back  from  this  stated  terminating  point  3555 
Egyptian  or  3553  Julian  years,  we  come  to  the  year  3893 
lefore  Christ,  as  thejlrst  of  Menes.  We  consider  this  to  be 
established  as  perfectly  historical,  in  as  far  as  the  Mane- 
thonic  relation  founded  upon  the  annals  of  the  kingdom  may 
generally  be  regarded  as  historically  correct. 

But  long  before  the  cyclical  system  of  the  government  of 
the  gods  could  be  founded  upon  the  Sothis  periods,  which 
were  established  in  the  course  of  history,  Menes  had  already 
been  admitted  into  the  Egyptian  annals,  and  was  maintained 
to  be  the  fixed  chronological  commencement  of  Egyptian 
history,  especially  of  the  history  of  Lower  Egypt.  His 
epoch  could  be  no  more  altered.  "What  happened  before 
his  time  was  ante-historical,  and  might  be  adjusted  to  the 
cyclical  necessities  of  mythologj'.  The  only  historical  fact 
was,  that  other  kings  had  reigned  before  Menes,  and  indeed  in 
This.    In  order  to  distinguish  them  from  the  kter  kings  as 


THE  GENriNE  MAXETHOyiC  >'UMBEn9.  495 

being  ante-historical,  a  designation  was  selected,  which  we 
are  not  yet  acquainted  with  in  hieroglyphics,  but  which  was 
translated  in  Greek  by  N<Kvef,  the  deceased ;  here  also  un- 
doubtedly establishing  the  idea  that  they  were  deceased 
3Iex. 

AVe  may,  however,  certainly  regard  it  as  the  most  welcome 
confirmation  of  the  whole  of  our  restoration  of  the  Mane- 
thonic  chronology,  that  this  ante-historical  Dynasty  of  man 
of  the  ten  Thinitic  kings,  the  invention  of  whom  could  havo 
no  other  aim  than  the  extension  of  the  history  of  man  to  tho 
commencement  of  the  current  Sothis  period,  most  accurately 
indeed  fulfils  the  purpose  that  was  designed.  For  while 
we  add  to  the  first  of  the  3555  Mancthonic  years,  namely,  to 
the  year  3S93  (3892)  B.C.  (Julian),  the  first  of  the  reign  of 
Menes,  the  350  civil  years  of  the  Tliinitic  NtKucr,  the  year 
4242  is-  the  result,  ichich  was,  in  reality^  the  necessarily  ex- 
pected commencement  year  of  the  current  Sothis  period.  This 
immediately  explains  why  the  number  350,  although  it  was 
ante-historical,  and  was  therefore  invented,  is  still  in  itself 
no  cyclical  number,  and  is  in  no  way  related  to  tho  Sothia 
period.  It  could  just  as  little  be  a  Sothic  number  as  tho 
number  3555,  which  it  completed.  But,  on  the  contrary,  it 
thence  proves  both  the  truthfulness  as  well  as  the  historical 
character  of  the  important  and  genuine  Manethonic  number 
3555,  and  further  proves  that  the  establishment  of  tlie  first 
liistorical  year,  or  the  Menes  epoch,  which  is  directly  given 
by  the  number  3555  years,  cannot  first  proceed  from  Mane- 
tho,  but  must  be  at  least  as  old  as  the  invention  of  the 
cyclical  system  of  Eg^i^tian  mythology  inseparably  united 
with  it,  which  no  one  will  or  can  ascribe  first  to  Manetho, 
because  we  have  pointed  out  the  same  numbers  belonging  to 
the  gods  before  his  time.  But  the  establishment  of  the  dis- 
covered Menes  year  must  indeed  be  still  older  than  the  forma- 
tion of  the  whole  cyclical  system,  since  this  is  first  appended 
to  that  nmnbcr,  and  presupposes  it ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Menes 
epoch  designated  hy  Manetho  was  one  tchich  had  been  given 
from  the  beginning,  and  teas  handed  doicn  historically,  and 


496  EETEOSPECTITE  TIEW. 

was  combined  in  the  following  manner,  with  the  cyclical 
system  of  the  history  of  the  gods. 

PERIOD   OF   THE   GODS. 

Gods        13,870  years. 

Deini'-gods 3,650       „ 

17,520      „   =    12  Sothis  periods. 

PERIOD   OF   MAN. 

Ante-Historical  Dynasty  .     .     .     350  years. 

30  Historical  Dynasties     .     .     .3555  „ 
Foreign  dominion  to  the  time  of 

Antoninus 478  „ 


4383      „    =    3  Sothis  periods. 

Thus  the  history  of  the  thirty  Manethonic  Dynasties, 
which  began  with  Menes  and  comprised  .3555  Egyptian 
years,  was  between  two  Sothis  periods,  without  coming  in 
contact  with  them,  an  evident  proof  that  they  were  not 
formed  with  reference  to  the  Sothis  periods. 


In  order  to  take  a  general  survey,  we  shall  now  repeat, 
in  a  few  words,  the  result  of  our  investigations. 

Manetho  apparently  added  himself  to  his  detailed  history, 
which  was  comprised  in  three  Books,  a  Review  of  the 
Dynasties^  in  a  continued  series,  in  the  style  of  the  old 
Egyptian  annals.  These  were  more  often  transcribed  than 
the  work  itself,  which  seems,  indeed,  to  have  been  less 
widely  distributed,  owing  to  this  convenient  compendium. 
Separate  narratives,  however,  from  the  work  itself  have  been 
adopted  by  later  authors,  and  were  thereby  preser^'ed  to  us, 
although  not  without  some  alterations,  after  the  complete 
work  itself  was  lost,  which  must  have  happened  at  an  early 
period,  perhaps  when  the  Alexandrian  library  was  destroyed. 

It  was  at  least  unknown  to  Josephus  in  the  first  century 
of  our  era ;  but  the  more  copious,  and  certainly  chiefly  literal 
extracts  communicated  by  him,  he  has  borrowed  from  other 
works.  Along  with  these,  he  either  himself  combined,  or 
found  combined,  another  partial  list  of  kings,  which  only 


BETEOSPECTIYE  yiEW.  497 

included  the  names  from  Amosis  down  to  Menephthes 
(Amenophis),  and  -which  was  drawn  up  specially  and  solely 
for  the  learned  purposes  of  the  Jews,  at  all  events  before 
the  time  of  Joscphus. 

Theophilus,  Bishop  of  Antioch,  in  the  second  centun-, 
communicated  the  same  list  with  slight  deviations,  and 
probably  not  from  the  writings  of  Josephus. 

The  complete  Dynastic  lists  of  the  Manethonic  work, 
which  by  a  different  method  have  also  themselves  been  pre- 
served, seem  to  have  been  unknown  to  both.  These  were  first 
presen-ed  to  us  by  Africanus  in  the  third  century.  They  had 
undoubtedly  before  this  time  passed  tlirough  sevenil  hands, 
and  assumed  forms  partly  deviating  from  one  another.  Tlie 
partial  Jewish  list  which  we  find  in  Josephus  and  Theophi- 
lus, was  already  adopted,  in  the  time  of  Africanus  (though 
iiardly  by  himself),  in  the  same  series  with  the  others,  as 
one  peculiarly  authenticated,  and  apparently  complete  ;  lie- 
cause  it  contained  no  subdivision  in  itself,  it  was  regarded 
as  one  single  Dynasty,  the  18th,  although  it  really  corre- 
sponded with  the  17th  and  18th  and  half  of  th'e  19th 
Dynasty  taken  together.  Thence  arose  the  confusion  which 
now  exists  here. 

The  necessity  for  an  agreement  between  the  Christian- 
Jewish  and  the  Eg}'ptian  computation  of  time  produced, 
towards  the  end  of  the  third,  or  the  beginning  of  the  fourth 
centur}',  two  spurious  writings  ;  first,  the  Old  Chronicle, 
which  retained  the  Egj^tian  cyclical  point  of  view,  that, 
namely,  of  the  history  of  the  gods,  and  even  extended  it,  yet 
in  such  a  manner  that  the  means  of  reduction  was  sug- 
gested, by  which  these  large  numbers  might  be  compressed 
into  the  period  assumed  as  that  given  by  Moses  for  tlie 
time  since  Adam.  "With  the  same  end  in  view  the  first  15 
Dynasties  of  man  were  transformed  into  15  Generations. 

The  second  spurious  work,  the  Sothis,  professed  to  be 
JNIauethonic;  and  could  do  this  more  easily,  because  a 
long  time  had  elapsed  since  the  genuine  history  had  been 
lost.     This  writing  proceeded  still  further  upon  the  same 

2  K 


498  EETEOSPECTIYE  YIEW. 

road  as  the  Old  Chronicle.  By  means  of  alterations  and 
abbreviations  it  reduced  the  Egyptian  numbers  to  certain 
epochs,  which  were  considered  as  Biblical,  and  on  the  other 
hand  partly  abandoned  the  Cyclical  basis. 

Eusebius,  who  wrote  in  the  fourth  century,  was  deceived 
by  both  these  writings,  and  endeavoured  to  make  their 
statements  agree  with  the  genuine  Manethonic  Dynastic 
lists.  He  had  these  lists  before  him  in  a  form  which  was 
rather  different  from,  and  at  all  events  more  negligently 
drawn  up,  than  that  of  Africanus.  He  followed  it  for  the 
Old  Monarchy,  which  was  almost  entirely  omitted  in  the 
two  spurious  writings.  In  the  New  Monarchy  he  adopted 
principally  the  Dynastic  numbers  of  the  Old  Chronicle.  In 
other  points  he  followed  the  Sothis.  His  numbers  of  the 
gods,  like  those  of  the  spurious  writings,  are  upon  the  whole 
founded  on  the  genuine  Manethonic  numbers,  which  he 
nevertheless  combined  in  a  mistaken  manner. 

In  the  commencement  of  the  fifth  century  the  speculative 
chronologists,  Anianos  and  PAyonoEUS,  laboured  with  subtle 
ingenuity  at  Egyptian  chronology,  but  necessarily  entirely 
failed  in  discovering  the  truth,  because  they  considered  the 
two  spurious  writings  as  the  true  basis.  They  endeavoured 
by  ingenious  arithmetical  calculations  to  bring  the  numbers 
of  the  Old  Chronicle  and  of  the  Sothis  to  agree  more  exactly 
with  their  •  acceptations  of  the  Biblical  chronology,  than  it 
had  been  the  intention  of  these  writings  themselves. 

Lastly,  in  the  eighth  century,  GtEoegius  Stncellus  de- 
livered his  compiled,  but  on  that  very  account  for  us  most  im- 
portant work,  by  which  we  first  became  acquainted  with 
almost  all  the  earlier  authorities.  Through  him  alone  we  pos- 
sess especially  the  most  valuable  basis  for  our  Manethonic 
chronology,  the  Dynastic  lists  of  Africanus.  He  himself 
decided  nevertheless  likewise  in  favour  of  the  two  spurious 
writings,  and  indeed  as  they  were  worked  out  by  Panodorus ; 
upon  this  last  he  founded  his  own  system,  which  therefore  is 
only  so  far  of  value  to  us  as  we  thereby  become  acquainted 
ynth.  his  authorities. 


TABLES  OF  EGYniAX  DY^fASTIES, 

COMPILED  FOR  THIS  TKANSLATION. 


As  many  of  the  readers  of  this  work  may  not  be  acquainted 
with  the  several  Dynasties  wliich  successively  reigned  over 
Egypt,  and  the  approximate  dates  which  have  been  assigned 
to  them,  the  following  Tables  have  been  compiled  for  their 
convenience,  on  the  authority  of  the  Chevalier  Bunscn^  and 
Dr.  Eichard  Lepsius-,  and  of  Kenrick'a  "  Egypt  under  the 
Pharaohs." 

Manetho,  High  Priest  of  the  Temple  of  Isis  at  ISe- 
bennytus,  in  Lower  Egypt,  in  the  reign  of  the  first  Ptolemy, 
the  son  of  Lagus,  surnamed  Soter,  322  to  2S-1  B.C.,  a  man 
of  the  highest  reputation  for  wisdom,  and  versed  in  Greek 
as  well  as  in  Egyptian  lore,  published  various  works  for  tlie 
puqiose  of  informing  the  Greeks.  Although  his  history  is 
lost,  we  have  the  Dynasties  tolerably  entire.  His  excellence 
as  an  historian  is  placed  in  the  clearest  light  by  tlie  monu- 
ments which  are  now  made  accessible  to  us ;  and  the  notices 
concerning  him  transmitted  by  Greek  and  Latin  author.-^, 
are  in  no  respect  contradictory.  The  writers  by  whom  the 
works  of  Manetho  have  been  preserved  to  us,  are  : 

Julius  Africanus,  Bishop  of  Emnijcus,  or  Nicopolis,  in  Juda-a,  a 
man  of  loarninsr,  research,  and  probity,  wlio  wrote  in  the  beginning 
of  the  third  century,  a.  c.  ; 

Eusebius,  Bishop  of  Cesarea,  in  Palestine,  about  a  hundred  years 
later  than  Africanus  ;  and 

Syncellus,  a  Byzantine  monk,  of  the  beginning  of  the  ninth  century. 

The  lists  of  ^NLinetho  comprise  30  Dynasties.  Egyptian 
history  is  divided  into  three  periods — the  Old  Monarcliy, 
which  comprised  13  Dynasties ;  the  Middle  Monarchy, 
whicli  included  the  14th  and  17th  Dynasties  ;  and  the  New 
Monarchy,  which,  commencing  with  the  18th,  ended  with  Nee- 
tanebus,  the  last  of  the  Pharaohs,  339  years  before  Christ. 

"  The  result  of  our  chronological  investigations  (Bunsen  and  Lepsius) 
has  been,  to  carry  us  up  to  the  foundation  of  an  cmjiire  in  Egypt,  and 
to  a  series  of  kings  whose  names  have  not  only  been  registered  and 
transmitted  to  us  by  the  Egyptians  themselves,  but  which  are  now 
legible  on  Egyptian  monuments,  most  of  them  erected  in  the  lifetime 
of  the  kings  whose  names  they  record." — Bunsen. 

'  JEgyptens  Stelle  in  der  "Weltgeschichte.  Hamburg,  1845. 
^  Die  Chronologic  der  ^Eeypter.    Berlin,  1849. 
2^k2 


500 


EGYPTIAN  DYNASTIES. 


EOTPTIAX  DYNASTIES. 


501 


C 

r   i                                         1 

.^ 

w    w 

.X 

v.<» 

X 

^ 

o  o 

H 

rt         — 

•*»  *» 

-^-    ■=       :i 

=1 

> 

*"      i          S 

"^  "2 

K 

-          u                ? 

M 

fe  -•   1- 

12 

S 

■t   i     ? 

it 

■3  ^ 

PS 

< 

lis 

I.  —  *'             ** 

;rtfg 

p: 

I.M    J 

i-i^ 

•=0-5         3 

-^-oU* 

c     ca        n 

aK 

5.C    1  i 

t^" 

< 

l|l^ 

n 

o 

-^^i. 

f=—  > 

'      1         '                                      1 

roxii 
.of 
I.fl) 

son. 

o 

:•  ;t? 

cy    1   5 

p5' 

.  §  ? 

<       1  « 

1  ^ 

E> 

'    ^J3 

c 

-  S 

iisd 

%9 

^  h 

II 

5 

-C 

~    0    n 

c  — 

t-    C 

t*"- 

iZ 

U,  "^  oe 

<                  2 

't:  S 

^  c 

^  c 
r.  _ 

a 

S;  =  i^  ^  >» 

B 

0,*^  « 

>^. 

CrC-/?;:? 

t3 

< 

tei 

•     X— -  -1^  —  ^  -^.-^ 

^  «  5i  =      1 

^ 

.2      1  If  lit 

•=  •=  III 

I   f  1  =  1 

1^  X  ?5  X  ^  ;:i^-«  H  C  c  —  »'-  —  ?^  z'. 

•laorao 

-axiHdKa]^ 

•aNixKYUjaia                -axiHdKaj^ 

1                                       i 

•ilSYKAQ 

> 

^ 

> 

> 

^ 


502 


EaTFTIA^'  DYNASTIES 


ill  i 

'^   'J.   «i  t»         1 

cc 

t-&^  '^ 

1:^-^.1       ^ 

c^ 

■^-•^  •"  c 

3 

3           i 

■ 

i  -^  ""  ^       =i  jzl 
^  =  2  o      g^ 

S  ^  =^  c-^ 

-. 

c  c  ?4;  J^  w  cs 

'^'  <5    p^ 

■ 

D                w 

Sto 

.r 

O 

o  o 

, 

O                 ir3   (M 

oa 

c3.S 

OS                    |C0    ^ 

J^  S  t^ 

C^                 ^Oi   Oi 

-^5 

|-S5 

Kl 

6 

o  c 

S-^B 

. 

2do 

o 

t^ 

—  -* 

00 

, 

S 

CO 

O  O 

Ci 

00  to 

J 

o. 

*- 

« 

(74  (N 

*" 

■;-. 

>> 

1 

^.o 

^                ^ 

.s 

11 
1" 

5 

1   il^ 

S       S  ;;  o 

i  l^r 

1 

&.  - 

Si   . 

O    cc                 O    to 

i-lli       11 

is 

^ 

■ai 

O     H     s 

>» 

<J^<H          <H<Wl 

+3     y)     CO 

i_I               J; 

>-^ 

w°°s 

Hi^^i^  i 

o 

.  ^-  ^  ^' 

l:^ 

e-|  o  g 

^ 

ames  of  t 
in  the  L 
Mancthc 
Eratostl 

1 

O    -                 O    C 

£       5  s            S3 

ti 

^ 

III 

,'       r^ 

^      <  -r           <  tH 

<fj=: 

1 

•xieiao 

ti5  ^  1         -KraaHX 

^_^_^ 

•KTaaHX 

1           . 

i 

;-• 

•iISTK.\(I 

> 

EOTPTLLN  DYNASTIES. 


508 


•=    u  X  -    ^ 


!  ^! 


=  T   r  >^ 


-   i  /-   r  -= 


III 


i  < .«  S  "S.  5  j^ 


I 

! 

^  2 
B 


fi> 


osrs 


o     x:     c 

e«        2        o 
^  —    00  o  ♦* 


rj  .^    cj    "^   •-'  '^ 


-ie 


aS 


;=;     ^  72 


Kioiao 


•xraaHX 


I" 


~  —  — 


c    b    -  ~  — 


5  .=   C  —  —  ' 


•xraaHj, 


•JLlSViHQ         i^ 


504 


EGYPTIAIS'  DYNASTIES. 


1 

1  t 

1 

1 

1 
1 

i 

1 

1 

Sheshonk  I.  takes  Jerusalem  about 
970.  and   many  cities  in  Judtea. 
lie  is  the  Schisehakof  the  Bible. 

i 

i 

j 

1 

1 
1 

Approximate  Dates 

B.C.  of  bPKinnini? 

of  Dynasty. 

3 

(N 

00 

d 

s 

e<5 

Names  of  tho  same  Kin.qs 
in  other  Authors. 

Smcn-Titi 

Pi-Scham 

Nefru-ke-ra 

Menephthah 

Peher-Se-Amen 

Pianch 

Pi-Sciiam-Miamn  II. 

Sesonehis 
Usuken,  Userken, 
Oserkan 

Takiloth 

Pet-subast,  Pet-Pacht 
Oserkna,  Userken 
P-Si-Mut 

1 

Names  of  the  Kings 
in  the  Lists  of 
Manetlio,  or  of 
Eratosthenes, 

Smendes 

Phusemcs 

Nephercheres 

Men(<plithes 

Osochor 

Ph  in  aches 

Phusemes 

Sheshonk  I. 
Osorkon  I. 

Peher 
O.sorkon  II. 
Sheshonk  11. 
Takelet  I. 
Osorkon  III. 
Sheshonk  III. 
Takelet  II. 

Petubastes 
Osorcho 
Psannnus 
Zet,  Sethos 

•c 

1 
■axiYS 

•KlfllHO 

•31IKVX 

1 

•aiiKvx 

X 

Id 

\X 

i         ^ 

1    X 

XXIV. 

EGTPTLLy  DYyASTIES. 


iOo 


^    . 

^i      i 

e  — 

—  -^ 
r:  — 

1" 

5 

■r.  -^ 

< 

i 

J 

ft, 

-1 

s 

3 

c 
s 

1 
1 

1 

c3 

2 

e 

»0 

NainM  of  the  same  Kings 
in  other  Authors. 

-            K 

to     H 

w 

3 

o 

s 

1 

ir"^  "^    ^    r    S    K 

i 

i 
1 

II -1 

ctll 

ill 

>.  22  ^  5  B  .5  5  §  2i  6 
o  ;2     |x-,  ->  <  ;^,  -^.  ci 

•jcioiao 

•KYIJOIUXa 

•ajuvs 

•Kvisa^j 

1 

•aiivs 

•ilSYiLLQ 

> 

1— « 
> 

506 


EaXPTIAN  DYNASTIES. 


'i 

OS 

S 

i^  —  —          (TJOOOt^O 

^ 

oooQO       OTtTteoeo 

32 

^ 

S 

" 

^ 

^ 

(^ 

e3 

S 

eo 

t-l      '• 

H 

2 

h:1 

"3 

X 

Si    :    : 

^ 

O    :    • 

^ 

>>^^ 

g 

9 

li 

1 

Ph 

:2; 

c 

w 
t    o 

c  c  G  •-  3          *  Ph 

3  iC 

1o  = 

2 

1 

00 

eo 

O   00   «3   CI 

S.O  >. 

1 

t 

ioS 

g 

OO                          t^ 

O  00  to  (N 

,   <1 

s^^M           ti 

|d° 

= 

o 

^ 

^?????5 

p^       o             a 

p.  CI 

-^ 

w 

t 

a 

•S  , 
Ms 

^ 

©  o 

»r5»n»^(MOr-^40«ot^ 

s5 

'7 

coO'+G^occao-^'^i-i 

S  s 

£. 

«C>JC^(NC<'^'^'-'-<'^ 

11 

^ 

2^ 

1 


o^ 

Sfl 

Irs 

il 

0<5Q- 

05 

3) 

^  c3 

, 

m.<s  of  tho  K 
in  the  Lists  o 
Manotho,  or  o 
Eratosthenes 

to 

li 

X    3 

(- 
c 

1 

is 

2 

- 

s 

ll 

: 

)  l-H 

1 

^^^^ 

y  5  o-S  f- 

< 

^ 

^ 

^3SS5S?5SS^WC» 

•Ki£)iao 

-aaNTR[ 

•OIIiK 

•NYISHaj 

o 

s 

S 

1 

o 

•iievKid 

1 

r-l 

APPENDIX. 

:A,p.  239.) 


Observations  on  the  Ditfcovcjy,  by  Professor  Lepsius,  o/' 
Sculptured  Marks  on  Bocks  in  the  Kite  Valley  in  yubia ; 
indicating  that,  within  the  historical  period,  the  river  had 
flowed  at  a  higher  level  than  has  been  known  in  Modern 
Times.  By  Leonard  Horner,  Esq.,  F.K.IS.iS.  L.  &  E., 
F.G.S.,  &c.  {This paper  is  here  reprinted^  at  the  request 
0/ Professor  Lepsits.) 

The  recent  archaiological  researches  of  Professor  Lepsius 
ill  Egypt,  and  the  Valley  of  the  Nile,  in  Nubia,  have  given  a 
deserved  celebrity  and  authority  to  his  name,  among  all  who 
take  an  interest  in  the  early  history  of  that  remarkable  por- 
tion of  the  Old  World.  While  examining  the  ruins  of  a 
fortress,  and  of  two  temples  of  higli  antiquity  at  Semne,  in 
Nubia,  he  discovered  marks  cut  in  the  solid  rocks,  and  in  the 
foundation-stones  of  the  fortress,  indicating  that,  at  a  very 
remote  period  in  the  annals  of  the  country,  the  Nile  must 
have  flowed  at  a  level  considerably  above  the  highest  point 
which  it  has  ever  reached  during  the  greatest  inundations  in 
modem  times.  This  remarkable  fact  would  possess  much 
geological  interest  with  respect  to  any  great  river,  but  it 
does  so  especially  in  the  case  of  the  Nile,  Its  annual  inun- 
dations, and  the  uniformity  in  the  periods  of  its  rise  and 
fall,  have  been  recorded  with  considerable  accuracy  for  many 
centuries ;  the  solid  matter  held  in  suspension  in  its  waters, 
slowly  deposited  on  the  land  overflowed,  has  been  productive 
of  changes  in  the  configuration  of  the  country,  not  only  in 
tiiDes  long  antecedent  to  history,  but  throughout  all  history, 

'  From  the  Edinburgh  Philosophical  Journal  for  July,  1850. 


508  APPENDIX. 

down  to  the  present  day.  Of  no  other  river  on  the  earth's 
surface  do  we  possess  such  or  similar  records ;  and,  more- 
over, the  Nile,  and  the  changes  it  has  produced  on  the  phy- 
sical character  of  Egypt,  are  intimately  associated  with  the 
earliest  records  and  traditions  of  the  human  race.  Every- 
thing, therefore,  relating  to  the  physical  history  of  the  Nile 
Valley  must  always  be  an  object  of  interest ;  but  the  dis- 
covery of  Professor  Lepsius  is  one  peculiarly  deserving  the 
attention  of  the  geologist ;  for  he  does  not  merely  record  the 
facts  of  the  markings  of  the  former  high  level  of  the  river, 
but  he  infers  from  these  marks  tliat  since  the  reign  of  Moeris, 
about  2200  years  before  our  era,  the  entire  bed  of  the  Nile, 
in  Lower  Nubia,  must  have  been  excavated  to  a  depth  of 
about  27  feet ;  and  he  further  speculates  as  to  the  pro- 
cess by  which  he  believes  the  excavation  to  have  been 
effected. 

It  will  be  convenient,  before  entering  upon  the  observa^ 
tions  I  have  to  offer  upon  the  cause  assigned  by  Professor 
Lepsius  for  the  former  higher  levels  of  the  Nile  indicated  by 
these  marks,  that  I  should  give  the  description  of  the  dis- 
covery itself,  by  translating  Dr.  Lepsius's  own  account  of  it, 
in  letters  which  he  addressed  to  his  friends,  Professors 
Ehrenberg  and  Bockh  of  Berlin,  from  the  island  of  Philas,  in 
September,  1844^. 

*'  You  may  probably  remember,  when  travelling  to  Dongola  on  the 
Lybian  side  of  the  Nile,  and  in  passing  through  the  district  of  Batn  el 
hagcr,  that  one  of  the  most  considerable  of  the  cataracts  of  the  coun- 
try occurs  near  Semne,  a  very  old  fortress,  with  a  handsome  temple, 
built  of  sandstone,  in  a  good  state  of  preservation ;  the  track  of  the 
caravan  passing  close  to  it,  partly  over  the  4000-year-old  artificial 
road.  The  track  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  river  is  'higher  up,  being 
carried  through  the  hills  ;  and  you  must  turn  off  from  it  at  this 
point  in  order  to  see  the  cataract.  This  Nile-pass,  the  narrowest  with 
which  I  am  acquainted,  according  to  the  measurement  of  Hr.  Erbkam, 
is  380  metres  (1247  English  feet)  broad^;  and  both  in  itself,  and  on 
account  of  the  monuments  existing  there,  is  one  of  the  most  interest- 

^  Bericht  ijber  die  zur  Bekantmachung  geeigneten  Verhandlungen 
der  Konigl.  Preuss.  Akademie  der  Wisseushatteu  zu  Berlin.  Aus 
dera  Jahre,  1844. 

'^  The  breadth  of  the  river  itself.    See  Letter  to  Hr.  Bockh,  p.  27. 


APPENDIX.  509 

;ng  localities  in  the  country,  and  we  passed  twelve  days  in  its  exami- 
nation. 

"The  river  is  here  confined  between  steep  rocky  cliffs  on  both  sides, 
whose  summits  are  occupied  by  two  fortresses  of  the  most  ancient  and 
ijiu<t  massive  construction,  distinguishable  at  once  from  the  numerous 
other  forts,  which,  in  the  time  oi'  the  Nubian  power  in  this  hmd  of 
cliffs,  were  erected  on  most  of  the  larger  islands,  and  on  the  hills  conj- 
mauding  the  river.  The  cataract  (or  rapid)  derives  its  name  of  Semne 
fn-m  that  of  the  higher  of  the  two  fortresses  on  the  western  bank; 
that  on  the  opposite  bank,  as  well  as  a  poor  village  lying  somewhat 
south  of  it,  is  called  Kumme.  In  both  fortresses  the  highest  and  best 
jHJsition  is  occupied  by  a  temple,  built  of  huge  blocks  of  sandstone, 
of  two  kinds  wliich  nmst  have  been  brought  from  a  great  distance 
through  the  rapids;  for,  southward,  no  sandstone  is  found  nearer  than 
(iAtel  Abir,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Aniara  and  the  island  of  Sai 
(between  bO  and  90  English  miles),  and  northward,  there  is  none 
nearer  than  the  great  division  of  tlie  district  at  Wadi  Haifa  (.30  miles 
Hstant). 

••  Both  temples  were  built  in  the  time  of  Tutmosis  III.,  a  king  of  the 
1 '^th  dynasty,  about  lf300  years  before  Christ;  but  the  fortreJ»ses  in 
which  they  stand  are  of  a  more  ancient  date.  The  foundations  of 
these  are  granite  blocks  of  Cyclopian  dimensions,  resting  on  the  rock, 
and  scarcely  inferior  to  the  rock  itself  in  durability.  They  were 
erected  by  the  first  conqueror  of  the  country,  King  Scsurtesen  III.,  of 
the  12th  Dynasty,  in  order  to  command  the  river,  so  easily  done  in  so 
narrow  a  gorge.  The  immediate  successor  of  this  king  was  Ame- 
neniha  III.,  the  Ala-ris  of  the  Greeks:  he  who  accomplished  the  gigantic 
work  of  forming  tlie  artificial  lake  of  Mceris,  in  the  Fixyoum,  and  from 
whose  time — the  most  flourishing  of  the  whole  of  the  old  Egyptian 
kingdom — the  risings  of  the  Nile  in  successive  years,  doubtless  bv 
means  of  regular  markings,  as  indeed  Diodorus  tells,  remained  so  weii 
known,  that,  according  to  Herodotus,  they  were  recorded  in  distinct 
numbers  from  the  time  of  Mocris.  It  appears  that  tliis  provident 
king,  occupied  with  great  schemes  for  the  welfare  of  his  country,  con- 
sidered it  of  great  importance  that  the  rising  of  the  Nile  on  the  most 
southern  border  of  his  kingdom  should  be  observed,  and  the  results 
forthwith  communicated  widely  in  other  parts  of  the  land,  to  prepare 
the  people  for  the  inundations.  The  gorge  at  Semne  offered  greater 
advantages  for  this  object  than  any  other  point;  because  the  river 
was  there  securely  confined  by  precipitous  rocky  cliffs  on  each  side. 
With  the  same  view  he  had  doubtless  caused  Nilometcrs  to  be  fi.xed 
at  Assuan  and  other  suitable  places;  for  without  a  comparison  with 
the-o.  the  observations  at  Semne  could  be  of  little  use. 

'•The  highest  rise  of  the  Nile  in  each  year  at  Soranc,  was  registered 
by  a  mark,  indicating  the  year  of  the  king's  reign,  cut  in  the  granite, 
eitlier  on  one  of  the  blocks  forming  the  foundation  of  the  fortress,  or 
on  the  cliff,  and  particularly  on  the  east  or  right  bank,  as  best  adapted 
for  the  purpose.  Of  these  markings  eighteen  still  remain,  thirteen  of 
them  having  been  made  in  the  reign  of  Mceris,  and  five  in  the  time  of 
his  two  next  successors.  These  last  kings  discontinued  the  observa- 
tions ;  for,  in  the  mean  time,  the  irruption  of  the  Asiatic  pastoral 


5X0  APPENDIX. 

tribes  into  Lower  Egypt  took  place,  and  well-nigh  brought  the  whole 
kingdom  to  ruin.  The  record  is  almost  always  in  the  same  terms, 
short  and  simple  :  Ra  en  Hapi  em  renpe  .  .  .  mouth  or  gate  of  the 
Nile  in  the  year  .  .  And  then  follows  the  year  of  the  reign,  and  the 
name  of  the  king.  It  is  written  in  a  horizontal  row  of  hieroglyphics, 
included  within  two  lines — the  upper  line  indicating  the  particular 
height  of  the  water,  as  is  often  specially  stated— 


^ 


\iii  o  r^A^  a  X  ai^ 


1\yi^ 


"  The  earliest  date  preserved  is  that  of  the  sixth  year  of  the  king's 
reign,  and  he  reigned  42  years  and  some  months.  The  next  following 
dates  are,  the  years  9,  14,  15,  20,  22,  23,  24,  30,  32,  37,  40,  41,  and  43  ; 
and  include,  therefore,  under  this  king,  a  period  of  37  years.  Of  the 
remaining  dates,  that  only  of  the  4th  year  of  his  two  successors  is 
available  ;  all  the  others,  wiiich  arc  on  the  west  or  left  bank  of  the 
river,  have  been  moved  from  their  original  place  by  the  rapid  floods 
which  have  overthrown  and  carried  forward  vast  masses  of  rock.  One 
single  mark  only,  that  of  the  9th  year  of  Amenemha,  has  been  pre- 
served in  its  original  place  on  one  of  the  building  stones,  but  some- 
what below  the  principal  rapid. 

"  We  have  now  to  consider  the  relation  which  these — the  most 
ancient  of  all  existing  marks  of  the  risings  of  the  Nile— bear  to  the 
levels  of  the  river  in  our  own  time.  We  have  here  presented  to  us 
the  remarkable  facts,  that  the  highest  of  the  records  now  legible;  viz., 
that  of  the  30th  year  of  the  reign  of  Amenemha,  according  to  exact 
measurements  which  I  made,  is  8-17  metres  (26  feet  8  inches)  higher 
than  the  highest  level  to  which  the  Nile  rises  in  years  of  the  greatest 
floods;  and  further,  that  the  lowest  mark,  which  is  on  the  east  bank, 
and  indicated  the  15th  year  of  the  same  king,  is  still  4*14  metres  (13 
feet  6^  inches) :  and  the  single  mark  on  the  west  bank,  indicating  the 
9th  year,  is  2-77  metres  (9  feet)  above  the  same  highest  level. 

"  The  mean  rise  of  the  river,  recorded  by  the  marks  on  the  east 
bank,  during  the  reign  of  Moeris,  is  19-14  metres  (62  feet  6  inches) 
above  the  lowest  level  of  the  water  in  the  present  day,  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  statements  of  the  most  experienced  boatmen,  does  not 
change  from  year  to  year,  and  therefore  represents  the  actual  level  of 
the  Nile,  independently  of  its  increase  by  the  falls  of  rain,  in  the 
mountains  in  which  its  sources  are  situated.  The  mean  rise  above 
the  lowest  level,  at  the  present  time,  is  11-84  metres  (38  feet  8  inches); 
and,  therefore,  in  the  time  of  Moeris,  or  about  2200  years  before  Christ, 
the  mean  height  of  the  river,  at  the  cataract  or  rapid  of  Semne,  during 
the  inundation,  was  7-30  metres  (23  feet  10  inches)  above  the  mean 
level  in  the  present  day." 

Such  are  the  facts  recorded  by  Dr.  Lepsiiis ;  and  then 
follow,  in  the  same  letter,  his  views  as  to  the  cause  of  the 
remarkable  lowering  of  the  level  of  the  river. 

"  There  is  certainly  no  reason  for  believing,"  he  says,  "  that  there 


APPENDIX.  511 

has  been  any  diminution  in  the  general  volume  of  water  coming  from 
the  south.  The  great  change  in  the  level  can,  therefore,  only  be  ac- 
counted for  by  some  changes  in  the  land,  and  these  must  also  have 
altered  the  whole  nature  of  the  Nile  Valley.  There  seems  to  be  but  one 
cause  for  the  very  considerable  lowering  of  the  Nile;  namely,  the 
■washing  out  and  excavations  of  the  catacombs  (Ausrcaschen  nnd  Aus- 
holen  der  Katakomben^)  ;  and  this  is  quite  possible  from  the  nature  of 
the  rocks  themselves,  which,  it  is  true,  are  of  a  quality  that  could  not 
well  be  rent  asunder,  and  carried  away  by  the  mere  force  of  the  water, 
but  might  be  acted  upon  directly  by  the  rising  of  the  water-level,  and 
the  consequent  effects  of  the  sun  and  air  on  tlie  places  left  dry,  causing 
cracks,  into  which  earth  and  sand  would  penetrate,  which  would  then 
give  rise  to  still  greater  rents,  until,  at  last,  the  rocks  would  of  them- 
selves fall  in,  by  having  been  hollowed  out,  a  process  that  would  be 
hastened  in  those  parts  of  the  hills  where  softer  and  earthy  beds 
existed,  and  which  would  be  more  easily  washed  away.  But  that,  in 
historical  times,  within  a  period  of  about  4000  years,  so  great  an 
alteration  should  take  place  in  the  hardest  rocks,  is  a  fact  of  the  most 
remarkable  kind — one  which  may  afford  ground  for  many  other  im- 
portant considerations. 

''  The  elevation  of  the  water-level  at  Semne  must  necessarily  have 
affected  all  the  lands  above;  and,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  that  the  level  of 
the  province  of  Dongola  was  at  one  time  higher,  as  Semne  cannot  be 
the  only  place  in  the  long  tract  of  cliffs  where  the  bed  of  rock  has  been 
hollowed  out.  It  is  to  be  conceived,  therefore,  that  not  only  the 
widely-extended  tracts  in  Dongola,  but  those  of  all  the  higher  country 
in  ^Meroe,  and  as  far  up  as  Fasogle,  which,  in  the  present  day,  are  dry 
and  barren  on  both  sides  of  the  river,  and  are  with  difficulty  irrigated 
by  artificial  contrivances,  must  then  have  presented  a  very  different 
aspect,  when  the  Nile  overflowed  them,  and  yearly  deposited  its  fertile 
mud  to  the  limits  of  the  sandy  desert. 

"  Lower  Nubia  also,  between  Wadi  Haifa  and  Assuan,  is  now  arid 
almost  throughout  its  whole  extent.  The  present  land  of  the  valley, 
which  is  only  partly  irrigated  by  water-wheels,  is,  on  an  average,  from 
6  to  12  feet  higher  than  the  level  to  which  the  Nile  now  rises;  and 
although  the  rise  at  Semne  might  have  no  immediate  influence  upon  it, 
yet  what  has  occurred  there  makes  it  more .  than  probable  that  at 
Assuan  there  was  formerly  a  very  different  level  of  the  river,  and  that 
the  cataracts  there,  even  in  the  historical  period,  have  been  consider- 
ably worn  down.  The  continued  impoverishment  of  Nubia  is  a  proof 
of  this.  I  have  no  manner  of  doubt  that  the  land  in  this  lower  part  of 
the  valley,  which,  as  already  stated,  is  at  present  about  10  feet  above 
the  highest  rise  of  the  Nile,  was  inundated  by  it  within  historical  time. 
Many  marks  are  also  met  with  here,  that  leave  no  doubt  regarding  the 
condition  of  the  Nile  Valley  antecedent  to  history,  when  the  river  must 
have  risen  much  higher;  for  it  has  left  an  alluvial  soil  in  almost  all  the 
considerable  bays,  at  an  average  height  of  10  metres  (32  feet  9  inches) 
above  the  present  mean  rise  of  the  river.  That  alluvial  soil,  since  that 
period,  has  doubtless  been  consideraby  diminished  in  extent  by  the 

'  Dr.  Lepsius,  after  he  had  seen  this  paper,  informed  me  that  Kata- 
komben  was  a  misprint  for  Katarakten.— L.  H. 


512 


APPENDIX. 


action  of  rain.  On  the  17th  of  August  Hr.  Erbkam  and  I  measured 
the  nearest  alluvial  hillock  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Korusko,  and 
found  it  6-91  metres  (22  feet  7  inches)  above  the  general  level  of  the 
vallev  and  10*2  6  metres  (33  feet  7  inches)  above  the  present  mean  rise 
of  the' river.  That  rise,  which  at  Semne,  on  account  of  the  greater 
confinement  of  the  stream  between  the  rocks,  varies  as  much  as  2*40 
metres  (7  feet  10  inches)  in  different  years,  varies  at  Korusko  less  than 
1  metre  (3  feet  3  inches). 

"Near  Abusimbel,  on  the  west  bank,  I  found  the  ground  of  the 
temple  fy^O  metres  (21  feet  2  inches)  above  the  higliest  water-level. 
This  temple,  it  is  well  known,  was  built  under  Kameses  the  Great, 
between  1388  and  1322  years  before  Christ,  Near  Ibrim  there 
are,  on  the  east  bank,  four  grottoes  excavated  in  the  vertical  rock 
that  bounds  the  river,  which  belong  partly  to  the  18th  and  partly 
to  tlie  19th  Dynasties;  the  last,  under  Rameses  the  Great,  is  also 
the  lowest,  and  only  2-50  metres  (8  feet  1  inch)  above  the  highest 
inundation;  the  next  in  height  is  2*70  metres  (8  feet  9^  inches)  above 
the  former,  and  was  made  250  years  earlier,  under  Tutmes  III.  Al- 
though I  only  measured  the  present  level  of  the  valley  near  Korusko, 
nevertheless  it  appears  to  me  that,  during  the  Avhole  of  the  new  king- 
dom, that  is,  from  about  1700  years  before  Christ  to  tliis  time,  the  Nile 
has  not  reached  to  the  full  height  of  the  low  land  of  the  valley. 

"  It  is,  however,  conceivable  that,  at  the  time  when  the  present  low 
land  of  the  Nubian  Valley  was  formed,  the  cataracts  at  Assuan  were  in 
a  totally  different  state;  one  that  would,  in  some  degree,  justify  the 
overcharged  descriptions  of  the  ancients,  according  to  whom  they  made 
so  great  a  noise  that  the  dwellers  near  them  became  deaf.  The  damming 
up  of  the  inundation  at  Assuan  could  have  no  material  influence  on 
Egypt,  any  more  than  that  at  Senme,  or  the  land  from  thence  to 
Assuan." 

It  appears,  tlierefore,  from  the  above  statements,  that  at 
the  time  mentioned,  the  Nile,  during  the  inundations,  stood 
26  feet  8  inches  higher  than  the  highest  level  to  which  it 
now  rises  in  years  of  the  greatest  floods ;  and  that,  to  ac- 
count for  this,  Professor  Lepsius  conceives  that,  between 
the  time  of  Moeris  and  the  present  day,  the  bed  of  the  Nile, 
from  a  considerable  distance  above  Semne  to  Assuan,  must 
have  been  worn  down  to  that  extent.  In  the  index  to  the 
volume  of  the  Berlin  Monatsbericht,  in  which  the  letters  of 
Professor  Lepsius  are  inserted,  there  is  the  following  line : — 

"  Nil,  senkung  seines  Bettes  urn  25  Fuss  seit  4000  Jahren" 
''Nile,  sinking  of  its  bed  about  25  feet  (Paris)  within  the  last  4000 
years." 

Eivers  are,  imdoubtedly,  among  the  most  active  agents  of 
change  that  are  operating  on  the  earth's  surface ;  the  solid 
matter  which  renders  their  waters  turbid,  and  which  they 


APPENDIX.  513 

unceasingly  carry  to  the  sea,  aiford  indisputable  proof  of  this 
agency.  But  the  power  of  rivers  to  abrade  and  wear  down 
the  rocks  over  which  they  flow,  and  to  form  and  deepen  their 
own  bed,  depends  upon  a  variety  of  circumstances  not  always 
taken  into  account ;  and  although  the  great  extent  of  that 
power,  in  both  respects,  is  shown  in  the  case  of  many  rivers, 
to  conclude,  as  some  have  done,  from  these  instances,  that  all 
rivers  have  excavated  the  channels  in  which  they  flow,  is  a 
generalisation  that  cannot  be  safely  assented  to.  The  exca- 
vation of  the  bed  of  a  river  is  one  of  those  problems  in 
geological  dynamics  which  can  only  be  rightly  solved  by  each 
particular  case  being  subjected  to  the  rigorous  examination 
of  the  mathematician  and  the  physicist.  The  solid  matter 
which  rivers  carry  forward  is  in  part  only  the  produce  of  their 
own  abrading  power  ;  and  the  amount  of  it  must  be  propor- 
tional to  that  power,  which  is  mainly  dependent  on  their 
velocity  ;  they  are  the  recipients  of  the  waste  of  the  adjoin- 
ing lands  by  other  combined  agencies,  and  the  carriers  of  it 
to  the  lower  districts  and  to  the  sea.  They  often  afford  the 
strongest  evidence  of  the  vast  lapse  of  time  that  must  be  in- 
cluded between  the  beginning  and  close  of  a  geological 
period ;  and,  when  they  flow  through  countries  whose  remote 
political  history  is  known  to  us,  they  supply  a  scale  by 
which  we  may  measure  and  estimate  that  lapse  of  time.  This 
is  especially  so  in  the  case  of  the  Nile. 

AVTien  so  startling  an  hypothesis  as  that  now  referred  to, 
viz.,  that  the  entire  bed  of  so  vast  a  river  as  the  Nile,  for 
more  than  250  miles,  from  Semne  to  Assuan,  has  been  exca- 
vated, within  historical  time,  to  a  depth  of  27  feet,  is  made  by 
a  person  whose  name  carries  so  much  weight  in  one  depart- 
ment of  philosophical  inquiry,  the  statement  involves  such 
important  geological  considerations,  that  it  becomes  the  duty 
of  the  geologist  to  examine,  and  thoroughly  test,  the  sound- 
ness of  the  explanation,  in  order  that  the  authority  of  Pro- 
fessor Lepsius  for  the  accuracy  of  the  facts  observed,  may  not 
be  too  readily  admitted  as  conclusive  for  the  correctness  of 
his  theory  of  the  cause  to  which  they  owe  their  existence. 

2  L 


514  APPEIJ^DIX. 

That  there  has  been  such  an  undoubting  admission,  appears 
from  the  following  passage  in  the  work  of  one  of  the  latest 
writers  on  Nubia : 

"  The  translation  of  the  name  of  this  town  (Aswan)  is  '  the  opening;' 
and  a  great  opening  this  once  was,  before  the  Nile  had  changed  its  cha- 
racter in  Ethiopia,  and  when  the  more  ancient  races  made  this  rock  (at 
the  first  cataract)  their  watch-tower  on  the  frontier  between  Egypt  and 
the  south.  That  the  Nile  has  changed  its  character,  south  of  the  first 
cataract,  has  been  made  clear  by  some  recent  examinations  of  the  shores 
and  m.onuinents  of  Nubia.  Dr.  Lepsius  has  discovered  water-marks  so 
high  on  the  rocks  and  edifices,  and  so  placed  as  to  compel  the  conviction 
that  the  bed  of  the  Nile  has  sunk  extraordinarily  by  some  great  natural 
process,  either  of  convulsion  or  wear.  The  apparent  exaggerations  of 
some  old  writers  about  the  cataracts  at  Syene  may  thus  be  in  some 
measure  accounted  for.  If  there  really  was  once  a  cataract  here,  in- 
stead of  the  rapids  at  the  present  day,  there  is  some  excuse  for  the  re- 
ports given  from  hearsay  by  Cicero  and  Seneca.  Cicero  says,  that 
'the  river  throws  itself  headlong  from  the  loftiest  mountains,  so  that 
those  who  live  nearest  are  deprived  of  the  sense  of  hearing,  from  the 
greatness  of  the  noise.'  Seneca's  account  is:  'When  some  people 
were  stationed  there  by  the  Persians,  their  ears  were  so  stunned  with 
the  constant  roar,  that  it  was  found  necessary  to  remove  them  to  a 
more  quiet  place'.'  " 

The  learned  author  of  an  article  on  Egyptian  Chrono- 
logy and  History  in  the  "  Prospective  Eeview"  for  May, 
1850,  in  referring  to  the  contributions  of  Professor  Lep- 
sius to  Egyptian  history,  says :  "  He  has  discovered  unde- 
scribed  pyramids,  equal  in  number  to  those  known  before  ; 
has  traced  the  Labyrinth,  and  ascertained  its  founder.  Se 
has  detected  inscriptions  on  the  hanJcs  of  the  Nile,  which 
show  that  its  led  has  subsided  many  feet  in  historic  times ^ 
9th  June,  1850. 

In  the  assumption  of  an  excavation  of  the  bed  of  the  river, 
we  have  no  small  amount  of  wear  to  deal  with,  for  the  dis- 
tance from  Semne  to  Assuan,  following  the  course  of  the 
river,  is  not  less  than  250  miles ;  and  if,  as  Professor  Lepsius 
supposes,  the  excavation  extended  to  Meroe,  we  have  a  dis- 
tance, between  that  place  and  Assuan,  of  not  less  than  600 
miles. 

Although  these  records  of  a  former  high  level  of  the  Nile 

*  Miss  Martineau's  Eastern  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  99. 


APPEITDIX.  515 

at  Semne  had  not  been  noticed  by  any  traveller  prior  to  Pro- 
fessor Lepsius,  vre  may  rest  fully  assured  of  the  accuracy  of 
his  statements,  from  the  habitual  care  and  diligence,  and  the 
established  character  for  fidelity,  of  the  observer.  The 
silence  of  other  travellers  may  be  readily  accounted  for  by 
this,  that  none  of  them  appear  to  have  remained  more  than  a 
very  short  time  at  this  spot — not  even  the  diligent  Eussegger 
— whereas  we  have  seen  that  Professor  Lepsius  passed  twelve 
days  in  the  examination  ot  this  gorge  in  the  Nile  Valley. 

The  theory  of  a  lowering  of  the  bed  of  the  river  by  wearing, 
involves  two  main  considerations,  viz.,  the  power  of  the 
stream,  and  the  degree  of  hardness  of  the  rocks  acted  upou. 
The  power  depends  upon  the  volume  and  velocity  of  the  river 
— the  velocity  on  its  depth,  and  the  degree  of  inclination  of 
the  bed :  the  hardness  of  the  rocks  we  can  form  a  tolerable 
estimate  of  when  we  know  their  nature.  To  judge,  therefore, 
of  the  probability  of  the  hypothesis  of  Professor  Lepsius,  we 
must  inquire  into  the  physical  and  geological  features  of  the 
Nile  Valley,  in  Nubia. 

In  the  observations  I  have  now  to  offer,  my  information 
has  been  derived  of  course  entirely  from  the  works  of  other 
travellers,  particularly  those  of  Burckhardt,  Rlippell,  and 
Russegger^,  and  especially  the  latter,  who  travelled  in  Nubia 
in  1837 ;  for  he  not  only  enters  far  more  into  the  details  of 
the  natural  history  of  the  country,  but  he  is  the  only  tra- 
veller in  Nubia  who  appears,  from  previous  acquirements,  to 
have  been  competent  to  describe  its  natural  history  with  any 
degree  of  accuracy — I  refer  more  particularly  to  the  physical 
and  geological  features  of  the  country.  Besides  full  descrip- 
tions in  his  volumes,  he  has  given  a  geological  map  of  Nubia, 
and  also  several  sections,  or  what  may  more  properly  be  called 
vertical  sketches — a  term  that  would,  perhaps,  be  a  more  ap- 
propriate designation  for  all  sections  that  are  not  drawn  to  a 
true  scale,  or  at  least  when  the  proportion  of  height  to  hori- 
zontal distance  is  not  stated. 

'  Reisen  in  Europa  Asien  und  Afrika,  in  der  Jahren  1835,  bis  1841. 
Stuttgart,  1841—1846. 

2l2 


516  APPEXDIX. 

The  Physical  Geography  of  Lower  NubidS. 

Eussegger  informs  us-,  that  he  believes  he  was  the  first 
traveller  who  had  succeeded  in  making  a  series  of  barome- 
trical measurements  along  the  NUe  Yalley,  from  the  Mediter- 
ranean to  Sennaar  and  Kordofan,  and  thence  to  the  lOtli  de- 
gree of  north  latitude.     He  gives  the  following  altitudes, 

above  the  sea  : 

Paris  Feet.      English  Feet. 

The  upper  part  of  the  Cataract  of  Assuan  342  =         364-37 
Korusko,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Nile,  in 

Nubia 450  =         479-43 

Wadi  Haifa 490  =         52200 

New  Dongola 757  =         806-52 

Abu  Hammed 963  =       102600 

I  shall  now  give  the  length  of  the  Nile  along  its  course 

from  Abu  Hammed  to  the  island  of  Philae,  at  the  head  of 

the  cataract  of  Assuan.     I  employ  for  this  purpose  the  map 

in  the  atlas  which  accompanies  the  work  of  liussegger,  which 

bears  the  date  of  1846,  and  which,  doubtless,  was  constructed 

on  the  best  authorities.     He  mentions  a  map  of  General  von 

Prokesch  with  great  praise^.     It  flows : 

German  M.         English  AL 
From  NE.  to  SW.,  from  Abu  Hammed  to 

Meroe,  about 31         =         150 

It  makes  a  curve  between  Meroe  and  Old 

Dongola,  of  about         .         ,         .         .         16         =  77 

It  flows  between  Old  and  New  Dongola, 

from  SE.  to  N\V.,  about      ...         10         =  77 

Then,  with  some  short  windings,  nearly  due 

north  to  the  island  of  Sais,  for  about        30         =         145 
And  from  Sais  to  the  island  of  Philae,  from 

SVr.  to  NE.,  about       ....         63         =         327 

Making  the  whole  length  of  the  course,  from 

Abu  Hammed  to  Philee,  about     .        .161         =         776 

1  With  reference  to  the  object  of  this  paper. 

2  Eeisen,  Bd.  ii.  545. 

3  "  Uber  den  Stromlauf  und  das  zunachst  liegende  Uferland  des 
Nils,  von  der  zweiten  Katarakte  bis  Assuan,  besitzen  wir  erne  vor- 
treffliche  Karte  namlich:"  "Land  zwischen  der  kleinen  und  grossen 
Katarakten  des  Nil.  Astronomisch  bestimmt  und  aufgenomraen  in 
J.  1827,  durch  v.  Prokesch.  Nil  Grundrisse  der  Monumente.  Wien, 
1831."— Reisen,  Bd.  ii.  Thl.  iii.  86. 


ArrEXDix.  ol/ 

Asccudinn^  llie  river,  \ve  have,  between  Phila?  and  Korusko, 
a  distance  of  24  German,  or  115^  English  miles,  and  with- 
out any  rapid,  except  one  near  Kalabsche.  Korusko  being 
115  feet  above  the  head  of  the  cataract  of  Assuan,  at  Phihe, 
we  liave  an  average  fall  of  the  river  between  these  two  places 
of  a  foot  in  a  mile. 

Between  Korusko  and  AVadi  Haifa  there  is  no  rapid.  The 
distance  being  20  German,  or  96^  English  miles,  and  the 
diflcrence  of  altitude  being  42^  feet,  we  have  an  average  fall 
tliroughout  that  part  of  the  river's  course  of  not  more  than 
53  inches  in  a  mile. 

This  very  inconsiderable  fall  need  not  surprise  us  ;  for  the 
average  fall  of  the  Nile  in  Lower  Egypt,  at  the  lowest  water, 
is  little  more  than  one-third  of  that  now  stated.  At  the  time 
of  the  highest  water  the  surface  of  the  Nile,  at  Boulak,  near 
Cairo — that  is,  about  IIG  miles  in  a  direct  line  from  tlie 
coast — is  only  43 "43 7  English  feet  above  the  level  of  the  Me- 
diterranean, and  at  the  time  of  the  lowest  water,  only  1733 
feet.  Thus,  in  the  first  case,  there  is  an  average  fall  of 
about  500  inches;  in  the  second,  of  not  more  tlian  I'SO 
inches  in  a  mile^ 

Between  AVadi  Haifa  and  Dale,  a  distance  of  about  94 
miles,  six  cataracts,  or  schellals,  as  tliey  are  called  in  the 
language  of  the  countr}'-,  are  marked  in  Kussegger's  map. 
And  here,  it  may  be  as  well  to  notice,  that  there  are  no 
cataracts,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,  on  the  Nile ;  no 
fall  of  tlie  river  over  a  precipice ;  all  the  so-called  cataracts 
are  rapids,  where  the  river  rushes  through  rocks  in  its  bed ; 
tlie  rapids  varying  in  their  length  and  degrees  of  inclination. 
AVe  liave  no  measurements  of  their  lengths  or  of  their  falls, 
except  as  regards  the  first  and  second  cataracts.  The  former, 
according  to  Russegger,  has  a  fall  of  about  85  English  feet  in 
a  distance  of  about  8  miles ;  and  he  describes  the  latter  as 
extending  from  5  to  G  stunden  ;  that  is,  from  12  to  14i  miles, 
but  he  does  not  give  the  height.  Speaking  of  the  schellals 
above  Semne,  Eussegger  says,  that  all  may  be  passed  in 
'  Russegger,  Reisen,  Bd.  i.  258. 


518  APPENDIX. 

boats  without  difficulty  for  about  six  -^'eeks,  or  two  montlis 
in  the  year.  This  is  the  case  also  at  the  cataract  or  rapid  of 
Assuau.  But  between  'Wadi  Haifa  and  Dale,  with  some  in- 
considerable spaces  of  free  navigable  water,  in  the  ordinary 
state  of  the  river,  there  is  an  almost  uninterrupted  series  of 
rapids.  We  have  no  measurement  of  the  height  of  Dale 
above  "Wadri  Haifa,  near  to  which  the  second  great  cataract 
of  the  Nile  occurs ;  but  this  is  the  part  of  the  river's  course 
where  the  fall  is  greatest,  and  from  Semne  to  Dale  there  are 
about  4-5  miles  of  this  more  rapid  fall. 

From  Dale  to  Xew  Dongola,  a  distance  of  35  G-erman,  or 
about  168  English  miles,  only  three  rapids  are  marked  on 
Eussegger's  map — the  highest  being  at  Hannek,  about  26 
English  miles  below  New  Dongola.  New  Dongola  being 
806  English  feet  above  the  sea,  and  the  distance  from  that 
place  to  the  rapid  of  Hannek  being  26  miles  only,  we  may 
with  probability  estimate  the  surface  of  the  river  at  the  rapid 
of  Hannek  at  780  feet  above  the  sea.  Now,  "Wadi  Haifa 
being  522  feet,  we  have  a  difference  of  height,  between  these 
two  last-named  places,  of  258  feet ;  and  the  length  of  the 
river's  course  between  them  being  236  miles,  we  have  an 
average  fall  of  13 '12  inches  in  a  mile ;  that  is,  in  the  part  of 
the  river's  course  where  nine  rapids  occur,  in  the  provinces 
of  Batn-el-Hadjar,  Sukkot,  and  Dar-el-Mahass,  where  the 
river  flows  over  granite  and  other  plutonic  rocks  ;  gneiss, 
mica-schist,  and  other  hard  rocks,  which  Eussegger  considers 
to  be  metamorphic.  But  between  Semne  and  the  head  of 
the  second  cataract  at  AVadi  Haifa,  there  is  not  a  continuous 
rapid  stream ;  for  Hoskins  says,  that  about  two  miles  above 
that  cataract,  the  river  has  a  width  of  a  third  of  a  mile,  and, 
when  he  passed  it,  the  water  was  scarcely  ruffled^. 

Erom  the  rapid  of  Hannek  to  Abu  Hammed  the  distance 
is  329  English  miles,  and  the  difference  of  altitude  is  246 
English  feet.  AYe  have  thus  an  average  fall  in  that  distance 
of  9"00  inches  in  a  mile. 

^  Travels  in  Ethiopia,  p.  272. 


APPENDIX.  519 

Thus,  in  the  776  miles  between  Abu  Hammed  and  Philffi, 
we  have  an  average  fall  of  the  Nile 

Of  900  inches  iu  a  mile,  for  a  distance  of  329  miles. 

Of  1312  236     ... 

or  5-30  96     ... 

Of  12-00  115     ... 


Of  the  Breadth,  Depth,  and  Velocity  of  the  Nile,  in  Xubia. 
Our  information  is  very  scanty  respecting  the  breadth  and. 
depth  of  the  river,  either  at  the  time  of  lowest  water  or 
during  the  inundations.  About  two  miles  above  Phila^,  it  ia 
stated  by  Jomard^  to  be  3000  metres,  or  neariy  two  English 
miles  wide.  At  the  second  cataract,  or  rapid  of  Wadi  Haifa, 
it  spreads  over  a  rocky  bed  of  nearly  two  miles  and  a  quarter 
in  width  (2000  klafter)-,  but  contracts  above  the  rapid  to  a 
third  of  a  mile.  Eussegger  also  states,  that  the  Nile,  near 
Boulak,  in  Lower  Egypt,  is  2000  toises,  nearly  two-and-a- 
half  English  miles  in  breadth,  and  yet  that  it  is  considerably 
wider  in  some  parts  of  Southern  Nubia ;  but  Burckhardt 
says  that  the  bed  of  the  Nile  in  Nubia  is,  in  general,  much 
narrower  than  in  any  part  of  Egypt.  Near  Kalabsche,  about 
30  miles  above  Pliila?,  the  river  runs  through  a  gorge  not 
more  than  300  paces  wide,  and  its  bed  is  full  of  granite 
blocks.  It  shortly  afterwards  again  ^N-idens  for  some  dis- 
tance ;  but  near  Sialla,  78  miles  above  Phila?,  it  is  contracted 
by  the  sandstone  hills  on  both  sides  coming  so  near  each 
other,  that  the  river's  bed  is  again  not  more  than  from  250 
to  300  paces  wide.  It  is  about  600  yards  broad  about  two 
miles  above  the  second  cataract  near  "Wadi  Haifa,  but  ia 
again  very  mucli  contracted  in  the  rocky  region  of  Batn-el- 
Hadjar.     At  Aulike  it  is  only  200  paces  broad-^ 

I  have  not  met  with  any  measurements  of  the  depth  of 
the  river  in  any  part  of  its  course  in  Nubia ;  but  Hoskins 

1  Description  de  TEgj-pte. — Separate  Memoir,  entitled  "  Description 
de  Syene  et  des  Cataractes." 

2  Kussegger,  Bd.  ii.  3  Thl.  85.  '  Russegger,  Bd.  ii.  3  Thl.  76. 


520  APPENDIX. 

describes  it  as  being  so  shallow  at  the  island  of  Sais,  327 
miles  above  Philae,  on  the  9th  of  June,  which  would  be  before 
the  commencement  of  the  inundation,  as  only  to  reach  the 
knees  of  the  camels^.  Near  Derr,  about  S6  miles  below  the 
Cataract  of  Wadi  Haifa,  Norden,  in  January,  found  the  river 
so  shallow  that  loaded  camels  waded  through  it,  and  his  boat 
frequently  struck  the  ground.  In  May,  i3urckhardt  found 
the  river  fordable  at  Kostamne,  53  miles  above  Philse ;  and 
Parthey  states,  that  between  Philse  and  the  island  of  Bageh, 
to  the  west  of  it,  the  river  is  so  shallow  before  the  commence- 
ment of  the  inundation,  that  it  may  be  waded  through^. 
Burckhardt  says,  that  from  March  to  June  the  Nile-water, 
in  Nubia,  is  quite  limpid^.  Miss  Martineau,  who  visited 
Nubia  in  December  and  January,  speaking  of  the  river  above 
Philae,  says,  that  it  "  was  divided  into  streamlets  and  ponds 
by  the  black  islets.  A\^here  it  was  overshadowed  it  was  dark- 
grey  or  deep  blue,  but  when  the  light  caught  it  rushing  be- 
tween a  wooded  island  and  the  shore,  it  was  of  the  clearest 
green*."  At  the  second  cataract  she  describes  the  river  as 
"  dashing  and  driving  among  its  thousand  islets,  and  then 
gathering  its  thousand  currents  into  one,  proceeds  calmly  in 
its  course^. 

Although  we  have  no  accurate  measurements  of  the  velo- 
city of  the  Nile  in  Nubia,  we  may  arrive  at  an  approximate 
estimate  of  it  by  comparing  its  faU  with  that  of  a  river  well 
known  to  us. 

I  have  stated  the  fall  of  the  Nile  in  different  parts  of  its 
course  to  be  5-30,  900,  1200,  and  13-12  inches  in  a  mile. 
The  fall  of  the  Thames  from  Wallingford  to  Teddington 
Lock,  where  the  influence  of  the  tide  ends,  is  as  follows : 

1  Travels,  p.  257. 

'  Wanderungen  durch  das  Nilthal,  von  G.  Parthey,  Berlin,  1840.  378. 
Travels,  pp.  9  and  11.  *  Eastern  Life,  i.  10^.  ^  lb.  144. 


APPENDIX. 


;2i 


1 

1  From  Walling-ford  to  Reading:  Bridge 

From  licading  to  Henley  Bridge 

From  Henley  to  Marlow  Bridge 

From  Marluw  to  Maidenhead  Bridge 
Fruin  Maidenliead  to  Windsor  Bridge 

From  Windsor  to  Staines  Bridge 

From  Staines  to  Cliertsey  Bridge 

From  Cliertsey  to  Teddington  Lock .. 

Length 
Course. 

FaU. 

Fall  in 

Inches 

per  Mile. 

Miles.  F. 
lS-0 
9-0 
9-0 
8-0 
7-0 
8-0 
4-6 
13-6 

Feet.  in. 
24-1 
19-3 
12-2 
15-1 
13-6 
15-8 
6-6 
19-8 

15-72 
25-G8 
16-20 
22-32 
23- 16 
23-52 
17-2S 
17-40 

77-4 

125-11    ! 

"  111  general,  the  velocity  may  be  estimated  at  from  half  a 
mile  to  two  miles  and  three-quarters  per  hour  ;  but  the  mean 
Telocity  may  be  reckoned  at  two  miles  per  hour.  In  tlie 
year  1794,  the  late  Mr.  Eennie  found  the  velocity  of  the 
Thames  at  Windsor  two  miles  and  a  half  per  hour^." 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  velocity  of  tlie  Nile  is  pro- 
bably greatly  inferior  to  that  of  the  Thames ;  for  it  appears 
that,  except  during  the  inundation,  for  more  than  half  the 
year  the  depth  is  inconsiderable.  The  average  fall  when 
greatest,  that  is,  including  the  province  of  Batn-el-Iladjar, 
where  the  rapids  chieily  occur,  is  considerably  less  than  that 
of  any  part  of  the  above  course  of  the  Thames;  so  that  there 
must  be  long  intervals  between  the  rapids  where  the  fall 
must  be  far  less  than  13  inches  in  a  mile.  The  breadth  of 
the  Nile  is  vastly  greater ;  but  supposing  the  depth  of  the 
water  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  Thames,  on  account  of 
the  friction  of  the  bed,  the  greater  breadth  would  add  very 
little  to  the  velocity.  If  we  assume  the  average  deptli  of  the 
Thames  in  the  above  distance  to  be  5  feet,  and  that  it  flows 
with  an  average  velocity  of  2  miles  in  an  hour,  and  if  we  as- 
sume the  average  depth  of  the  Nile  in  that  part  of  its  course 
where  the  fall  is  13*12  inches  to  be  10  feet,  when  not  swoUen 

*  Rennie,  Report  on  Hydraulics,  in  the  Fourth  Report  of  the  British 
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  1834,  p.  487. 


^2  APPEKDIX. 

by  the  rise,  the  velocity  would  be  2j  miles  nearly  in  an  houri, 
if  the  fall  were  equal  to  that  of  the  Thames.  "We  shall  pro- 
bably come  near  the  truth,  by  assuming  the  velocity  of  the 
Nile  on  this  part  at  2  miles  in  an  hour.  That  it  must  be 
considerably  less  in  the  other  divisions  of  the  course  I  have 
named,  and  especially  in  that  part  immediately  below  the 
second  cataract,  where  the  average  fall  is  only  5'30  inches  for 
a  distance  of  96  miles,  is  quite  evident. 

The  power  of  a  river  to  abrade  the  soil  over  which  it  flows, 
so  far  as  water  is  by  itself  capable  of  doing  so,  must  depend 
upon  its  volume  and  velocity,  and  the  degree  of  hardness  of 
the  material  acted  upon.  The  power  is  increased  when  the 
water  has  force  enough  to  transport  hard  substances.  But 
even  transported  gravel  has  little  action  on  the  rocks  with 
which  it  comes  in  contact,  when  it  is  free  to  move  in  running 
water,  unless  the  fall  be  considerable,  and,  consequently,  the 
velocity  and  force  of  the  stream  great.  When  stones  are 
firmly  set  in  moving  ice,  they  then  acquire  a  great  erosive 
power,  cutting  and  wearing  down  the  rocks  they  are  forcibly 
rubbed  against ;  but  this  condition  never  obtains  in  Lower 
Nubia,  as  ice  is  unknown  there. 

Geological  Structure  of  Lower  Nubia. 

One  kind  only  of  regularly  stratified  rock  occurs  in  the  776 
miles  from  Abu  Hammed  to  Philse ;  viz.,  a  silicious  sandstone, 
similar  to  that  which  occurs  to  a  great  extent  on  both  sides 
of  the  Nile  in  Upp^r  Egypt,  and  which  Eussegger,  after  a 
very  careful  examination  of  it  there,  considers  to  be  an  equi- 
valent of  the  greensand  of  the  cretaceous  rocks  of  Europe. 
The  tertiary  nummulite  limestone,  so  abundant  in  Egypt, 
has  not  hitherto  been  met  with  in  Nubia. 

The  Nile  fiows  over  this  sandstone  for  nearly  426  miles 
of  the  entire  distance,  but  not  continuously.  At  Abu  Ham- 
med, it  flows  over  granitic  rocks,  and  these  continue  from 

1  I  state  this  on  the  authority  of  my  friend,  W.  Hopkins,  Esq.,  ef 
Cambridge. 


APPENDIX.  523 

that  place  for  about  120  miles.  There  is  then  about  215 
miles  of  the  sandstone,  which  is  succeeded  by  igneous  and 
raetamorphic  rocks,  that  continue  for  195  miles  without  any 
interruption,  except  a  narrow  stripe  of  sandstone  of  about 
15  miles  near  Amara.  It  is  in  this  region  of  hard  igneous 
rocks  that  nearly  all  the  rapids  occur,  between  that  of  Hannek 
and  the  great  or  second  cataract  at  Wadi  Haifa.  From  the 
latter  place  there  is  sandstone  throughout  a  distance  of  about 
19G  miles,  and  then  commences  the  granitic  region  of  the 
Cataract  of  Assuan,  through  winch  the  ^Xile  flows  about  35 
miles.  Thus  we  have  about  350  miles  of  igneous  and  meta- 
morphic  rocks,  and  about  426  of  sandstone. 

The  general  hard  nature  of  the  igneous  and  metamorphic 
rocks,  over  which  the  Nile  flows  for  about  155  miles  above 
Semne,  and  for  about  40  immediately  below  it,  will  be  recog- 
nised by  my  naming  some  of  the  varieties  described  by 
Russegger,  viz.,  granites  of  various,  kinds,  often  penetrated 
by  greenstone  dykes ;  sienite,  diorite,  and  felspar  porph^-riea ; 
gneiss,  and  clay  slate,  penetrated  by  numerous  quartz  veins. 

The  siliceous  sandstone  is  very  uniform  in  its  character ; 
and  in  Xubia,  as  in  Egypt,  the  only  organic  bodies  wliich  it 
has  as  yet  been  found  to  contain,  are  silicified  stems  of  wood. 
Occasionally,  as  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Korusko,  inter- 
stratified  beds  of  marly  clay  are  met  wity . 

When,  therefore,  we  take  into  account  the  hard  nature  of 
tlie  siliceous  sandstone,  the  durability  of  which  is  shown  by 
the  very  ancient  monuments  of  Eg}'pt  and  IN'ubia,  that  are 
formed  of  it,  and  the  still  greater  hardness  of  the  granites 
and  other  crystalline  rocks,  it  is  manifest  that  the  wearing 
action  of  a  river  flowing  over  so  gentle  a  fall,  can  scarcely, 
be  appreciable.  If  the  occasional  beds  of  marh^  clay  occur 
in  the  bank  of  the  river,  they  may  be  washed  out,  and 
blocks  of  the  superincumbent  sandstones  may  fall  down; 
but  such  an  operation  would  have  a  tendency  to  raise  rather 
than  deepen  the  bed  of  the  river  at  those  places  ;  unless  the 
transporting  power  of  the  stream  were  far  greater  than  can 
»  Kussegger,  Bd.  ii.  1  Thl.  569  to  584. 


524  APPENDIX. 

exist  with  so  moderate  a  fall,  especially  in  tliat  part  of  the 
river  below  Semne,  where,  for  96  miles,  it  is  not  more  than 
5-3  inches,  and  for  115  miles  below  that,  not  more  than 
12  inches  in  a  mile.  Even  if  we  suppose  the  river  to  have 
power  to  tear  up  its  bed  for  some  distance  above  Semne  and 
below  it,  as  far  as  the  rapid  of  Wadi  Haifa,  it  is  evident  that 
the  materials  brought  down  would  be  deposited,  except  the 
finest  particles,  in  that  tranquil  run  of  96  miles,  which  may 
be  almost  compared  to  a  canal.  The  drains  in  Lincolnslnre 
are  inclined  5  inches  to  a  mile^  AVlien  the  annual  inunda- 
tions commence,  the  water  of  the  Nile  comes  down  the 
rapid  at  Assuan  of  a  reddish  colour  loaded  with  sand  and 
mud  only ;  whatever  detrital  matter  of  a  larger  and  heavier 
kind  the  Nile  may  have  brought  with  it,  is  deposited  before 
it  reaches  that  point. 

From  all  these  considerations,  therefore,  I  come  to  the 
conclusion,  that  the  bed  of  the  Xile  cannot  have  been  exca- 
vated, as  Professor  Lepsius  supposes,  since  the  date  of  tlie 
sculptured  marks  on  the  rock  at  Semne.  He  says,  "  Es  liisst 
sich  kaum  eine  andere  Ursache  fiir  das  bedeutende  Fallen 
des  Nils  denken,  als  ein  Auswaschen  und  Ausholen  der 
Katakomhen''  By  the  word  Katakomhen-  he  can  only  mean 
natural  caverns  in  the  rock  ;  but  such  caverns  are  rarely,  if 
ever,  met  with  in  sandstones,  and  only  occasionally  in  lime- 
stones. If  the  course  of  the  Nile  were  over  limestone  in- 
stead of  sandstone,  we  could  not  for  a  moment  entertain  the 
idea  of  a  succession  of  caverns  for  200  miles  beneath  its 
bed,  sometimes  two  miles  in  width,  the  roofs  of  which  were 
to  fall  in  ;  and  where  the  igneous  rocks  prevail,  this  explana- 
tion is  wholly  inapplicable. 

But  besides  the  objections  arising  from  the  nature  of  the 
rocks,  and  the  inconsiderable  fall  of  the  river,  there  is  still 
another  difficulty  to  overcome.  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that 
this  lowering  of  the  bed  of  the  Nile,  from  Semne  to  Assuan, 
is  supposed  to  have  taken  place  within  the  last  4000  years. 

j^  Eennie,  Report  cited  above,  p.  422. 
'  See  note,  p.  ."ill. 


Al'PilNDIX.  525 

Between  the  first  cataract  at  Assuan  and  the  second  at  Wadi 
Haifa  thert^re  numerous  remains  of  temples  on  both  banks 
of  the  Nile,  some  of  very  s^reat  antiquity.  "  From  AVadi 
llalla  to  Philie,"  says  Parthey,  "there  is  a  vast  number  of 
Egyptian  monuments,  almost  all  on  the  left  bank  of  the 
river,  and  so  near  the  water  that  most  of  them  are  in  imme- 
diate contact  with  it^"  AVe  may  rest  assured  that  the 
builders  of  these  would  place  them  out  of  the  reach  of  the 
highest  inundations  then  kno^vn.  Although  we  have  many 
accurate  descriptions  of  these  monuments,  the  heights  of 
tlieir  foundations  above  the  surface  of  the  river  are  not  often 
piven  ;  they  are,  however,  mentioned  in  some  instances.  I 
sliall  describe  the  situations  of  some  of  these  buildings  rela- 
tively to  the  present  state  of  the  river's  levels,  :uul  shall 
begin  with  those  on  the  island  of  Phila\ 

This  island,  according  to  the  measurements  of  General  von 
Prokesh,  is  1200  Paris  feet  (1278  English)  in  length,  and 
420  (-tl?)  in  breadth,  and  is  composed  of  granite.  Lancrot 
informs  us,  that,  ''  a  I'epoque  des  hautes  eaux.  Tile  de  Philae 
est  pen  eleve  audessus  de  leur  surface,  mais  lorqu'elles  sont 
abaissees  elle  les  surpasse  de  huit  metres."  It  was  formerly 
surrounded  by  a  quay  of  masonry,  portions  of  which  may  be 
traced  at  intervals,  and  in  some  places  they  are  still  in  good 
preservation.  The  south-west  part  of  the  island  ia  occupied 
by  temples.  According  to  Wilkinson,  the  principal  build- 
ing is  a  temple  of  Isis  commenced  by  Ptolemy  Philadel[)hus, 
who  reigned  from  2S3  to  247  years  before  Christ ;  and  he 
adds,  that  it  is  evident  an  ancient  building  formerly  stood  on 
the  site  of  the  present  great  temple.  Lancrot,  in  referring 
to  this  more  ancient  building,  says  : — "  II  y  a  des  preuves 
certaines  d'une  antiquite  bien  plus  reculee  encore,  puisque 
des  pierres  qui  entrent  dans  la  construction  de  ce  meme 
grand  temple,  sont  des  debris  de  quelque  construction  ante- 
ri.uire."  Kossellini  considers  that  it  was  built  by  Necta- 
uebus.     The  first  king  of  Egypt,  of  the  Sebennite  Dynasty 

'  Parthey,  318. 


526  APPENDIX. 

of  that  name,  ascended  the  throne  374  years  B.C.,  the  second 
and  last  ceased  to  reign  about  350  years  B.c.i      ^ 

Eossellini^  informs  us,  that  on  the  island  of  Bageh,  oppo- 
site to  Philae,  there  are  the  remains  of  a  temple  of  the  time 
of  Amenophis  II.,  and  a  sitting  statue  of  granite  represent- 
ing him.  He  was  a  king  in  the  earlier  years  of  the  18th 
Dynasty,  which,  according  to  the  Chevalier  Bunsen^,  began 
in  the  year  1638,  and  ended  in  1410  B.C. 

GrATJ^,  in  describing  a  temple  at  Debu,  about  12  miles 
above  Philae,  which  he  visited  in  January,  and  consequently 
during  the  time  of  low  water,  states  that  he  discovered  under 
the  sand,  at  the  edge  of  the  river,  the  remains  of  a  terrace 
leading  towards  a  temple. 

A  short  distance  north  of  Kalabsche,  about  30  miles  above 
Philae,  at  Beil-nalli,  Eosselliui^  speaks  of  a  small  temple  in 
the  following  terms  : — "  Among  the  many  memorials  that  still 
exist  of  Eamses  II.,  the  most  important,  in  a  historical  poiat 
of  view,  is  a  small  temple  or  grotto  excavated  in  the  rock !" 
and  Wilkinson  mentions  it  "  as  a  small  but  interesting 
temple  excavated  in  the  rock,  of  the  time  of  Eamses  II., 
whom  Champollion  supposes  to  be  the  father  of  Sesostris 
or  Eameses  the  Great''."  He  was  the  first  king  of  the  19th 
Dynasty,  which  began  in  the  year  1409  B.C.''' 

G-au^  thus  describes  a  monument  at  G-erbe  Dandour : — 
"  La  chaine  de  montagnes  qui  borde  le  Nil  est,  dans  cet  en- 
droit,  si  approchee  du  lit  de  ce  fleuve,  qu'il  ne  reste  que  tres 
peu  d'espace  sur  la  rive.  Cet  espace  est  presque  entiere- 
ment  occupe  par  le  monument,  et  la  riviere,  dans  sea  de- 
bordemens,  arrive  jusqu'au  pied  du  mur  de  la  terrasse." 

1  Russegger,  Reisen,  Bd.  ii.  300  and  320.  Lancrot,  Description  de 
I'Egypte,  Memoire  sur  I'ile  de  Phila?,  15 — 58.  Rossellini,  I  Monumenti 
dell'Egitto  edella  Nubia.  Monumenti  del  Culto,  187.  Wilkinson's 
Thebes  and  General  View  of  Egypt,  466.  Smith's  Dictionary  of 
Greek  and  Roman  Biography,  Arts.  Ptolemy,  Ph.  and  Nectauebus. 

*  p.  187. 

3  iEgyptens  Stelle  in  der  Weltgeschichte.— Drittes  Buch,  122. 

*  Antiquites  de  la  Nubie,  p.  6. 
^  Tome  iii.  parte  ii.  p.  6. 

^  Thebes,  &c.  p.  482.  7  Bunsen,  as  above.  s  p,  9. 


APPENDIX.  527 

Parthey  informs  us  that  the  temple  of  Sebua  is  about  200 
feet  distant  from  the  river,  in  which  distance  there  are  two 
rows  of  sphinxes,  and  that  the  road  between  them,  from  the 
temple,  ends  in  wide  steps  at  the  water's  edge  ;  and  he  adds 
that  Champollion  refers  this  temple  to  the  time  of  Eamcses 
the  Greati. 

It  thus  appears  that  monuments  exist  close  to  the  river, 
some  of  which  were  constructed  at  k^st  1400  years  before 
our  era;  so  tliat  taking  the  time  of  Amenemha  111.  to  be, 
as  Professor  Lepsius  states,  2200  years  B.C.,  the  excavation 
of  the  bed  of  the  Nile  which  he  supposes  to  have  taken  place, 
muat  have  been  the  work,  not  of  4000  years  but  of  800.  11" 
the  erosive  power  of  the  river  was  so  active  in  that  time,  it 
cannot  be  supposed  that  it  then  ceased ;  it  would  surely 
have  continued  to  deepen  the  bed  during  the  following  3000 
years. 

At  aU  events,  the  buildings  on  the  island  of  PhilaB  demon- 
strate that  the  bed  of  the  Xile  must  have  been  very  much  the 
same  as  it  is  now,  2200  years  ago ;  and  even  a  tliousand 
years  earlier  it  must  have  been  the  same,  if  the  foundation  of 
tlie  temple  on  the  island  of  Bageh,  opposite  to  Phila\  be  near 
the  limit  of  the  highest  rise  of  the  Nile  of  the  present  time ; 
so  that  there  could  be  no  barrier  at  the  Cataract  of  Assuan 
to  dam  up  the  Nile  when  they  were  constructed ;  and  thus 
the  deafening  sound  of  the  waterfall  recorded  by  Cicero  and 
Seneca  must  still  be  held  to  be  an  exaggeration. 

The  existence  of  alluvial  soil,  apparently  of  the  same  kind 
as  that  deposited  by  the  Nile,  in  situations  above  the  Cataract 
of  Assuan,  at  a  level  considerably  above  the  highest  point 
which  the  inundations  of  the  river  have  reached  in  modem 
times,  to  which  allusion  is  made  by  Professor  Lepsius,  has 
been  noticed  by  other  travellers,  and  even  at  still  higher  levels 
than  tho^^e  he  mentions.  Whether  that  alluvial  soil  be  iden- 
tical with,  or  only  resembles  the  Nile  deposit,  would  require 
to  be  determined  by  a  close  examination,  and  especially  with 
regard  to  organic  remains,  if  any  can  be  found  in  it.  There 
»  Wanderungen,  &c.  334. 


528 


APPENDIX. 


is  no  eyidence  to  sbow  that  it  was  deposited  during  the  his- 
torical period,  and  it  may  be  an  evidence  of  a  depression  and 
subsequent  elevation  of  the  land  antecedent  to  that  period. 
It  may  not  be  of  fresh-water  origin,  but  the  clay  and  sand, 
or  till,  left  by  a  drift  wliile  the  land  was  under  the  sea.  For 
remote  as  is  the  antiquity  of  Nubia  and  Egypt,  in  relation  to 
the  existence  of  the  human  race,  it  appears  to  be  of  very 
modern  formation  in  geological  time.  The  greater  part  of 
Lower  Egypt,  probably  all  the  Delta,  is  of  post-pliocene  age, 
and  even  late  in  that  age  ;  and  the  very  granite  of  the  Cata- 
ract of  Assuan,  that  of  which  the  oldest  monuments  in  Egypt 
are  formed,  and  which,  in  the  earlier  days  of  geology,  was 
looked  upon  as  the  very  type  of  the  rock  on  which  the  oldest 
strata  of  the  earth  were  founded,  is  said  to  have  burst  forth 
during  the  later  tertiary  period.  "We  learn  from  Eussegger, 
that  the  low  land  which  lies  between  the  Mediterranean  and 
the  range  of  hills  that  extends  from  Cairo  to  the  Eed  Sea  at 
Suez,  and  of  which  hills  a  nummulite  limestone  constitutes  a 
great  part,  is  composed  of  a  sandstone  which  he  calls  a 
"  Meeresdiluvium,"  a  marine  diluvial  formation,  and  con- 
siders to  be  of  an  age  younger  than  that  of  the  sub-appen- 
nines^.  This  sandstone  he  found  associated  with  the  granite 
above  Assuan,  and  covering  the  cretaceous  sandstone  far  into 
Nubia.  It  appears,  therefore,  that,  in  the  later  ages  of  the 
tertiary  period,  this  north-eastern  part  of  Africa  must  have 
been  submerged,  and  that  very  energetic  plutonic  action  was 
going  forward  in  the  then  bed  of  the  sea.  The  remarkable 
fact  of  the  granite  bursting  through  this  modern  sandstone  is 
thus  described  by  Eussegger  : 

"  We  arrived  at  a  plateau  of  the  Arabian  Chain  south-east  of  Assuan. 
It  is  about  200  feet  above  the  bed  of  the  Nile,  and  consists  of  the  lower 
and  upper  sandstone,  which  are  penetrated  by  innumerable  granite 
cones  from  20  to  100  feet  in  height,  arranged  over  the  plateau  in  parallel 
lines,  very  much  resembling  volcanic  cones  rising  from  a  great  cleft. 
The  sandstone  is  totally  altered  in  texture  near  the  granite,  and  has  all 
the  appearance  as  if  it  had  been  exposed  to  a  great  heat.  '  I  cannot 
refrain,' he  says,  'from  supposing  that  the  granite  must  have  burst,  like 

^  Eeisen,  Bd.  i.  s.  273. 


APPENDIX.  529 

a  volcanic  product,  through  long  wide  rents  in  the  sandstone,  and  that, 
in  this  wav,  the  conical  hills  were  formed'.'  " 

An  eruption  of  a  true  granite  during  the  period  of  the  sub- 
appennine  fonnations,  one  possessing  the  same  mineral  striie- 
turt^  as  that  we  know  to  hare  been  erupted  during  the  period 
of  the  palaeozoic  rocks,  would  be  a  fact  of  so  extraordinan^  a 
kind,  that  its  age  would  require  to  be  established  on  the 
clearest  evidence,  and  especially  by  that  of  organic  remains 
in  the  sandstone. 

HaWng  thus  ventured — I  trust  without  any  want  of  the 
respect  due  to  so  eminent  a  person — to  reject  the  liypothesis 
proposed  by  Professor  Lepsius  for  the  liigh  levels  of  the  Nile 
at  Semne,  indicated  by  the  sculptured  marks  ho  discovered, 
it  may  perhaps  be  expected  that  I  should  ofter  another  more 
probable  explanation.  If  in  some  narrow  gorge  of  the  river 
below  Semne,  a  place  had  been  described  by  any  traveller, 
where,  from  the  nature  of  the  banks,  a  p:reat  landslip,  or  even 
an  artificial  dam,  could  have  raised  the  bed  to  an  adequate 
height ;  that  is,  proportionate  to  the  fall  of  the  river,  as  it 
was  more  distant  from  Semne,  a  bar  that,  in  the  course  of  a 
few  centuries,  might  have  been  gradually  washed  away,  I 
might  have  ventured  to  suggest,  such  a  solution  of  the  pro- 
blem. But  without  any  information  of  the  existence  of  such 
a  contraction  of  the  river's  channel,  or  any  exact  knowledge 
of  the  natural  outlets  aud  dams  to  running  water  along  the 
250  miles  of  the  Nile  Valley,  from  Semne  to  Assuan,  it 
would  be  idle  to  offer  even  a  conjecture.  These  marks  are 
unquestionably  very  difficult  to  account  for,  in  the  present 
imperfect  state  of  our  knowledge  of  the  structure  of  that  por- 
tion of  the  Nile  Valley  ;  and  any  competent  geologist,  well 
versed  in  the  questions  of  physical  structure  involved,  who 
may  hereafter  visit  Nubia,  would  have  a  very  interesting  oc- 
cupation in  endeavouring  to  solve  the  difficulty. 
7lh  April,  1850. 

'  Keisen,  Bd.  ii.  1  Thl.  s.  328. 


2m 


530  APPE^'DIX. 

Translation  of  a  Letter  from  Dr.  Lepsius  to  Mr.  Rorner, 
dated  Berlin  the  12th  of  A^pril,  1853. 

Deae  Sie, — I  observe  from  a  letter  of  your  daughter, 
that  she  is  desirous  of  adding  to  her  translation  of  my 
Letters  a  note  upon  the  height  of  the  water  of  the  Nile,  with 
reference  to  your  paper  in  the  "Edinburgh  Philosophical 
Journal."  I  wish  that  you  would  get  reprinted  in  that  note 
the  whole  of  the  small  memoir,  as  it  possesses  great  interest, 
and  abounds  in  data  not  easily  brought  together ;  for  in  that 
case  the  subject  may  probably  be  further  discussed. 

I  will,  at  all  events,  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to 
make  some  remarks,  which  you  may,  if  you  like,  propose  to 
have  introduced  into  the  contemplated  note. 

I  must  first  remark  that  tlie  word  Katahomben  was  en- 
tirely a  typographical  error  for  Katarakten,  as  was  unfor- 
tunately the  case  in  many  other  instances  in  those  things 
which  were  printed  during  my  absence. 

But  in  respect  of  the  explanation  of  the  observed  facts, 
my  views  are  perhaps  less  different  from  yours  than  you 
imagine.  You  imagine  a  natural  or  artificial  barrier  which 
has  broken  down,  but  this  appears  to  me  of  insufficient  mag- 
nitude ;  I  too  imagine  barriers  to  have  existed,  and  natural 
ones,  but  that  there  must  have  been  several  of  them.  I  do 
not,  moreover,  regard  it  as  impossible,  that  at  certain  periods, 
when  the  country  was  in  its  most  fiourishing  condition,  arti- 
ficial dams  may  have  been  constructed  in  order  to  obtain  a 
higher  rise  of  the  water  within  a  particular  space,  such  as 
was  necessary  for  an  overflowing.  But  if  we  imagine  an 
entire  dam  thrown  across  the  river,  this,  if  I  am  not  mis- 
taken, could  only  hold  back  the  current  for  a  very  short 
way,  namely,  where  there  is  a  greater  general  fall.  If,  for 
example,  we  imagine  a  barrier  at  Assuan,  it  would  require  to 
be  several  hundred  feet  high  to  have  any  efiect  on  the 
height  of  the  water  at  Semneh,  and  then  the  whole  valley 
from  Philae  to  Wadi  Haifa  would  be  a  great  lake,  as  it  may 
indeed  have  been  in  geological  time. 

If  we    imagine   a    succession  of  bamers  which  would 


APPENDIX.  531 

be  especially  formed  where  veins  existed  in  the  primitive 
roek,  then  tlie  present  entire  pliysioguomy  of  the  Nile  valley 
seems  to  be  more  easily  explained.  Tlie  river-bed,  amidst 
granitic  or  other  uplieaved  rock,  is  not  level,  like  a  chalk 
or  sandstone  channel,  but  forms  sometimes  lakes,  sometimes 
barriers.  The  force  of  the  swollen  current  at  these  last,  of 
which  there  is  one  at  Semneh  itself,  does  not  act  in  the  mean 
proportion  of  a  space  of  considerable  extent,  but  with  im- 
mense eftects,  exceeding  all  calculation,  especially  when,  in 
addition,  there  is  a  contraction  of  the  sides,  as  at  Semneh. 
lunnediately  below  this  barrier  the  bed  again  spreads  out, 
and  the  rocks  disappear  in  the  current.  The  colossal  rock- 
fragments  on  that  bank,  whose  inscriptions  sometimes  show 
that  above  4000  years  ago  they  were  still  not  broken  loose, 
display  the  Titan  force  of  a  current  thus  hemmed  in,  and 
allow  us  to  conceive  how  at  that  spot  it  gradually  waslied  out 
its  bed,  sometimes  to  a  great  depth,  but  sometimes  also  to  a 
greater  breadth,  which  has  the  same  effect,  and  how  all  that 
is  broken  away,  or  that  during  the  time  of  low  water  splits 
to  a  considerable  depth  in  the  bed  of  the  river  from  tho 
summer  heat,  rolls  away,  until  arrested  by  falling  into  hol- 
lows. But  if  these  single  barriers  are  only  washed  away  in 
the  course  of  thousands  of  years,  then  the  whole  river  must 
receive  an  equable  fall,  and  it  will  never  rise  in  the  very  rocky 
districts,  but  can  only  continue  to  be  still  more  excavated, 
and  will  only  again  deposit  the  heavier  portions  it  bears 
along  with  it,  below  the  cataracts,  where  every  obstruction 
disappears.  The  monuments  can  hardly  be  cited  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  view  of  a  gradual  sinking  of  the  bed  of  the  river 
in  the  higher  districts.  All  of  them  lie  tolerably  far  above 
the  region  of  the  rise  of  the  Nile — for  example,  the  temple  on 
the  island  of  Bigeh,  to  which  there  is  a  considerable  ascent. 
Phila?  has  only  been  built  upon  since  the  time  of  Nectanebus, 
and  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  buildings  of  an  earlier  date. 
The  sinking  of  the  surface  of  the  w^ater  even  at  Phila)  and 
Assuan  must  also  have  been  far  less  than  at  Semneh.  Never- 
theless, special  researches  with  respect  to  the  relative  condition 

2  m2 


532  APPENDIX. 

of  the  ancient  temple  and  rock-inscriptions  to  the  present  sur- 
face of  the  water  would  certainly  be  of  the  greatest  utility. 

Herr  von  Humboldt,  after  reading  some  observations  on 
the  same  subject  by  Wilkinson  in  the  Nouv.  Ann.  des 
Voyages,  i.,  without  recollecting  my  views,  wrote  to  me  as 
follows  : 

"  Breaches  in  dams,  I  imagine,  cause  only  temporary  rises 
of  water,  unless  in  earlier  times  (for  which  I  see  no  reason) 
there  was  a  greater  accumulation  of  water  in  the  valley  of 
the  river,  from  meteorological  causes.  Primeval  conditions, 
where  broad  valleys  were  filled  with  waters,  are  not  appli- 
cable to  periods  when  there  were  inscriptions.  Does  it  not 
seem  to  you  more  probable,  that  the  height  of  the  water 
was  at  one  time  at  a  greater  elevation,  on  account  of  the 
bed  of  the  river  not  having  been  so  much  furrowed  out,  be- 
cause at  an  earlier  period  the  bottom  of  the  river  was  not 
at  c  d,  but  at  ef. 


"  There  are  rivers  whose  beds  are  elevated  and  rendered 
more  shallow  by  deposition,  others  which  furrow  out  their 
bed  ^ui  creusent  un  lit  plus  profondy 

"With  sincere  respect,  your  faithful, 

E.  Lepsius. 

Appendix  B.  (P.  303  and  318.)— The  tradition  of  Gebel 
Musa  being  the  Mount  of  the  Law,  became  gradually 
more  decided  and  exclusive  for  this  view  after  the  time 
of  Procopius  in  the  sixth  century;  mainly,  no  doubt,  on 
account  of  the  church  foimded  at  that  spot  in  the  reign 
of  Justinian.  I  am  not  aware  that  there  are  any  modem 
travellers  and  savants  who  have  thrown  doubts  on  the 
correctness  of  this  assumption.  Xot  even  Burckhardt, 
although  from  the  numerous  inscriptions  on  Serbal  he 
was  led  to  infer  that  that  mountain   might  have   been   at 


APPENDIX.  533 

one   time    incorrectly   regarded   by  the   pilgrims   aa    Sinai. 

The   words   of  this  distinguished  traveller  are  as  follows: 

(Trav.  in  Syr.  p.  609.)      ''It  will  be  recollected  that  no 

inscriptions  ar»»  f«nmd  either  on  fh^  ^founfain  of  Mnst^g,  or  on 

Mui'.nt  St.  <  1  in  the 

I.    ''  I  v.ii:  ^  ,         '  i  to  be 

above  the  rock  from  which  the  water  is  said  to  have 

and   appear  only  to  be  the  work  of  pilgrim.^  who 

i  that  rock.    From  these  circumstances  I  am  persuaded 

th    ■    M^.^'.it    S,  -1,1]    teas    at  '    ' •    of 

^  i  I  J  /  .  / , ,  /  V  ■   id  th'   y  V  ninsu  In  ;  red 

the  mountain   tchrrr   .Vc  oj'  tiir   law; 

though  I  am  etjually  com.  --  /      J"  ^^^  Scrip- 

rr*,  that  the  Israelites  encamped  in  the  Upper  Sinai^  and 

*'    r  Djebel  Mousa,  <      ^'        *   St.  Catherine,  is  the 

It  is  not  at  all  that  the  proximity  of 

iSi'i'ual  Ut    !  ■        "ju- 

tain  to  bf  ,  i-'h- 

icnt    of  the   concent   in  its   present    situation,    ichtch  tca4 

■  '  ''fy  chosen  from  motives  of  security,  may  have  led  to  the 

rrinfj  of  that  honour  to  Djebel  Mousa.     At   present 

'      of  Mount  Simii  nor  those  of  Cairo  con- 

i  :is  the  scene  of  any  of  the  events  of 

nor  have  tlie  Bedouiiis  any  tradition  among 

_^         .^'  it,  but  it  is  possible,  that  if  the  Hyzaniine 

.  niters  were  thoroughly  examined,  some  mention  might  be 

lund  of  this  r      ■  '   ■  :.  which  I  believe  was  never  before 

; sited  by  any  1  traveller." 

^loie    recenth    llu    ivinarkable    book    of   travels   by    E. 

Kg  BIN  SON  furm  a   nuirkid  epoch  in  our  knowledge  of  the 

Peninsula  as  well  as  of  Palestine.     AVith  reference  to  the 

position  of  Sinai,  he  for  the' first  time  especially  urges  the 

favourable  ncinity  of  the  great  plain  of  Baha,  to  the  north 

of  Gebel  Musa,    in  which  there  was  ample  space  for  the 

encampment    of  the   people   of  Israel.    (Palestine,   vol.  i., 

p.  lU,  &.c)     In  his  determination,  however,  of  the  actual 

!Mount  of  the  Law,  he  deviates  from  the  previous  tradition, 

since  he  endeavours  to  prove  that  Moses  did  not  aacend 


634  APPENDIX. 

Gebel  Musa,  but  the  mountain  ridge  jutting  out  from  tlie 
south,  above  the  plain,  -which  is  now  called  Horeb  by  the 
monks,  and  Avhose  highest  point  is  named  Sefsaf.  (Yol.  i. 
p.  176.)  Unfortunately  he  did  not  visit  "Wadi  Firan  and 
the  adjoining  Serbal.  In  a  more  recent  treatise  (Bibl.  sacra. 
vol.  iv.  ]S'o.  xxii.  May,  1849,  p.  381,  &c.)  the  learned  author 
returns  to  the  question  with  reference  to  my  view  of  it,  with 
which  he  had  become  acquainted,  and  in  opposition  he  espe- 
cially mentions  the  arguments  which  he  had  formerly  main- 
tained in  favour  of  Gebel  Sefsaf  He  comprehends  these 
under  the  three  follo^ving  heads,  which  he  extracts  from  the 
Mosaic  narrative,  as  being  eminently  striking,  and  which 
must  therefore  also  now  be  pointed  out :  "  1st.  A  mountain 
summit  overlooking  the  place  where  the  people  stood.  2nd. 
Space  sufficient  adjacent  to  the  mountain  for  so  large  a  mul- 
titude to  stand  and  behold  the  phenomena  on  the  summit. 
3rd.  The  relation  between  this  space  where  the  people  stood 
and  the  base  of  the  mountain  must  be  such  that  they  could 
approach  and  stand  at '  the  nether  part  of  the  mount,'  that 
they  could  also  touch  it ;  and  that  further  bounds  could 
appropriately  be  set  around  the  mount,  lest  they  should  go 
up  into  it,  or  touch  the  border  of  it."  Of  these  three  heads, 
the  first  would  speak  against  Gebel  Musa,  and  not  against 
Serbal.  This  last,  says  Eobinson,  is  excluded  by  the  second 
and  third  head.  JN'ow  with  respect  to  the  second,  I  must 
only  call  to  mind  that  the  encampment  of  the  people  at  Sinai 
is  not  related  in  a  different  manner  from  all  the  previous 
stations.  If,  therefore,  we  take  such  a  circumscribed  view  of 
the  encampment  as  to  believe  that  we  must  provide  for  suffi- 
cient space  foi  the  settlement  of  such  a  great  people,  we 
should  then  have  to  indicate  a  plain  of  Eaha  at  all  the  pre- 
vious stations,  especially  in  Eaphidim  (which  by  almost 
unanimous  opmion  was  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  Serbal), 
because  here  manifestly  they  remained  for  a  considerable 
time,  Moses  was  visited  by  Jethro,  by  his  ad^^ce  divided  the 
■whole  people  into  tens,  and  organised  them  according  to  a 
form  of  law,  from  which  we  should  be  compelled  to  conclude 
that  there,  for  the  first  time,  existed  a  distinct  locality  for  each 


APPENDIX.  535 

individual.  He  who  imagines  a  multitude  of  two  millions  of 
men,  about  as  many  as  the  inhabitants  of  London,  or  of  the 
whole  of  Egypt  at  the  present  day,  placed  in  an  enclosed 
camp  composed  of  tents,  of  which  they  must  have  had  two 
hundred  thousand,  if  we  reckon  one  for  every  ten,  like  a 
huge,  well-arranged  military  camp,  even  to  him  the  plain  of 
Eaha  would  appear  too  small ;  but  he  who  assumes  that  a 
comparatively  small  number  could  assemble  round  the  chief 
quarters  of  Moses,  but  that  all  the  others  must  have  sought 
for  shady  places,  caves  in  the  rock-precipices,  and  the  scanty 
herbage  of  the  adjacent  valleys,  can  as  easily  imagine  the 
camp  to  have  been  placed  in  AYadi  Firan,  or  at  any  other 
station.  Wadi  Firan  besides,  as  far  down  as  El  Hessue, 
even  if  we  only  take  its  most  fertile  portion  (more  inviting 
as  a  settlement  than  any  other  spot),  would  offer,  in  combina- 
tion with  the  broad  Wadi  Aleyat,  just  as  large,  and  at  all 
events  a  far  more  habitable  space,  for  a  combined  encamp- 
ment than  the  plain  of  Eaha.  Indeed,  if  it  be  true  that  we 
can  gain  anything  from  such  single  facts,  such  an  encamp- 
ment would  render  it  still  more  comprehensible  Avhy  the 
people  were  led  out  of  the  camp  towards  God  at  the  foot  of 
the  mountain  in  the  upper  portion  of  AYadi  Aleyat,  in  order 
to  have  a  complete  survey  of  the  mountain.  To  obtain  such 
a  view  would  be  impossible  at  Gebel  Musa,  and  unnecessary 
at  Gebel  Sefsaf.  Eiually,  the  command  not  to  ascend  the 
mountain,  which  is  expressed  still  more  imperatively,  that  no 
one  "should  touch  the  border  of  the  mountain,"  applies  to 
every  mountain,  which  rises  simply  before  the  eyes,  and 
whose  means  of  access  can  be  shut  out  by  a  fence.  Imme- 
diately beyond  the  fence  lies  the  border  of  the  mountain. 

With  reference  to  this  last  point,  Eobinson  appeals  to  my 
own  map  of  Serbal,  and  the  description  of  AVadi  Aleyat,  by 
Bartlett  (Forty  Days  in  the  Desert,  p.  54,59).  It  would 
be  difficult,  however,  to  prove  from  my  map  that  the  people 
could  not  have  spread  themselves  out  at  the  foot  of  the  moun- 
tain, and  Bartlett  seems  to  me  rather  to  share  my  opinion. 
As  this  traveller  is  so  well  known  by  his  descriptions  of  couu- 


636  APPENDIX. 

tries,  whicli  are  both  beautifully  illustrated  and  clearly  and 
graphically  described,  and  as  be  is  just  one  of  the  few  who 
have  examined  the  localities  with  his  own  eyes  in  reference 
to  the  question  started  by  me  without  holding  any  previous 
views  on  the  subject,  it  may  not  be  inappropriate  to  insert 
here  those  words  relating  to  it,  from  a  book  cited  by  Eobin- 
son  in  favour  of  his  own  view  ;  so  much  the  rather,  as  I  could 
not  possibly  have  placed  the  chief  heads  of  the  question  in 
a  more  convincing  point  of  view. 

He  says,  p.  55^ :  "  If  we  endeavour  to  reconcile  ourselves 
to  the  received  but  questionable  system  which  seeks  to  accom- 
modate the  miraculous  with  the  natural,  it  is  impossible,  I  think, 
not  to  close  with  the  reasoning  advanced  in  favour  of  the  Serial. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Moses  was  personally  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  Peninsula,  and  had  even  probably  dwelt  in 
the  vicinity  of  "Wadi  Feu-an  during  his  banishment  from  Egypt; 
but  even  common  report  as  to  the  present  day,  would  point 
to  this  favoured  locality  as  the  only  eit  spot  in  the  whole 
ra/nge  of  tJie  desert  for  the  supply,  either  ivith  'water  or  such 
provisions  as  the  country  afforded,  of  the  Israelitish  host :  on 
this  ground  alone,  then,  he  would  be  led  irresistibly  to  fix 
upon  it,  when  meditating  a  long  sojourn  for  the  purpose  of 
compiling  the  law.  This  consideration  derives  additional 
force  when  we  consider  the  supply  of  wood  and  other  articles 
requisite  for  the  construction  of  the  tabernacles,  and  which 
can  only  be  found  readily  at  "Wadi  Eeiran,  and  of  its  being 
also,  in  all  probability,  from  early  times  a  place  visited  by 
trading  caravans.  But  if  Moses  were  even  unacquainted 
previously  with  the  resources  of  the  place,  he  must  have 
passed  it  on  his  way  from  the  sea-coast  through  the  interior 
of  the  mountains,  and  it  is  inconceivable  that  he  should  have 
refused  to  avail  himself  of  its  singular  advantages  for  his 
'purpose,  or  that  the  host  would  have  consented,  without  a 
murmur,  to  quit,  after  so  much  privation,  this  fertile  and 
well- watered  oasis  for  new  perils  in  the  barren  desert,  or 

*  The  italics  in  the  above  quotation  are  thus  diBtinguished  by  Dr. 
Lepsius,  the  capitals  by  the  author  himself. 


APPENDIX.  537 

that  lie  should,  humanly  speaking,  have  been  able  either  to 
compel  them  to  do  so,  or  afterwards  to  fix  them  in  the  inhos- 
pitable, unsheltered  position  of  the  monkish  Mount  Sinai,  with 
the  fertile  Feiran  hut  one  day's  long  march  in  their  rear. 
Supplies  of  i^ood,  and  perhaps  of  water,  must,  in  that  case, 
have  heen  hr ought  of  necessity  from  the  very  spot  they  had  hut 
just  ahandoned.  We  must  suppose  that  the  Amalekites  would 
oppose  the  onward  march  of  the  Israelites,  where  they  alone 
had  a  fertile  territory  worthy  of  being  disputed,  and  from 
which  Moses  must,  of  necessity,  have  sought  to  expel  them. 
If  it  be  so,  then  in  this  vicinity,  and  no  other,  we  must  look 
for  Eaphidim,  from  whence  the  Mount  of  Grod  was  at  a  very 
short  distance.  We  seem  thus  to  have  a  comhination  of  cir- 
cumstances, which  are  met  idth  nowhere  else,  to  certify  that 
it  was  here  that  Moses  halted  for  the  great  work  he  had  in 
view,  and  that  the  scene  of  the  lawgiving  is  here  before  our 
eyes  in  its  wild  and  lonely  majesty.  The  principal  objection 
to  this  is  on  the  following  ground,  that  there  is  no  open 
space  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  Serbal  suitable 
for  the  encampment  of  the  vast  multitude,  and  from  which 
they  could  all  of  them  at  once  have  had  a  view  of  the 
mountain,  as  is  the  case  at  the  plain  Er  Eahah  at  Mount 
Sinai,  where  Eobinson  supposes,  principally  for  that  reason, 
the  law  to  have  been  given.  But  is  this  ohjection  conclusive  ? 
We  read,  indeed,  that  Israel  '  camped  befoee  the  mount,' 
and  that  '  the  Lord  came  down  in  sight  of  aU  the  people ;' 
moreover,  that  bounds  were  set  to  prevent  the  people  from 
breaking  through  and  violating  even  the  precincts  of  the 
holy  solitude.  Although  these  conditions  are  more  lite-. 
EALLT  fulfilled  at  Er  Eahah,  yet,  if  we  understand  them  aa 
couched  in  general  terms,  they  apply  perhaps  icell  enough  to 
the  vicinity  of  the  Serial.  A  glance  at  the  view,  and  a  re- 
ference to  this  small  rough  map^,  will  show  the  reader  that 
the  main  encampment  of  the  host  must  have  been  in  Wadi 
Eeiran  itself,  from  which  the  summit  of  the  Serbal  is  only 
here  and  there  visible,  and  that  it  is  by  the  lateral  Wadi 
*  Here  follows  a  sketch  of  the  plan. 


538  APPENDIX. 

Aleyat  that  the  base  of  the  mountain  itself,  by  a  walk  of 
about  an  hour,  is  to  be  reached.  It  certainly  struck  me,  in 
passing  up  this  valley,  as  a  very  unfit,  if  not  impracticable 
spot  for  the  encampment  of  any  great  number  of  people,  if 
they  loere  all  in  tents',  though  well  supplied  with  pure  water, 
the  ground  is  rugged  and  rocky — towards  the  base  of  the 
mountain  aAvfully  so ;  but  still  it  is  quite  possible  that  a  cer- 
tain nuniber  might  have  established  themselves  there,  as  the 
Arabs  do  at  present,  while,  as  on  other  occasions,  the  princi- 
pal masses  were  distributed  in  the  surrounding  valleys.  I 
do  not  know  that  there  is  any  adequate  ground  for  believing, 
as  Eobinson  does,  that  because  the  people  were  warned  not 
to  invade  the  seclusion  of  the  mount,  and  a  guard  was  placed 
to  prevent  them  from  doing  so,  that  theeefoee  the  en- 
CAMPMETS"!  ITSELE  prcsscd  closcly  ou  its  borders.  Curiosity 
might  possibly  enough  lead  many  to  attempt  this  even  from 
a  distance,  to  say  nothing  of  those  already  supposed  to  he 
located  in  the  Wadi  Aleyat,  near  the  base  of  the  mountain, 
to  whom  the  injunction  would  more  especially  apply.  Those, 
however,  who  press  closely  the  literal  sense  of  one  or  two 
passages,  should  bear  in  mind  all  the  difficulties  previously 
cited,  and  the  absolute  destitution  of  verdure,  cultivation,  run- 
ning streams,  and  even  of  abundant  springs,  tvhich  characterise 
thefeatfullg  barren  vicinity  of  the  monhish  Si7iai,  where  there 
is  indeed  room  and  verge  enough  for  encampment,  but  no 
EESOTJRCES  WHATEVEE.  If  we  take  up  the  ground  of  a 
CONTINUAL  AND  MiEACULOUS  PEOYisiON /br  all  the  tvants  of 
two  millions  of  people,  doubtless  they  may  have  been  sub- 
sisted there  as  well  as  in  any  other  place ;  otherwise  it  seems 
incredible  that  Moses  should  ever  have  abandoned  a  spot, 
offering  such  unique  advantages  as  Feiran,  to  select  instead 
the  most  dreary  and  sterile  spot  in  its  neighbourhood.^'' 

This  was  the  distinct  impression,  and  one  frankly  offered, 
after  comparing  those  localities  with  the  Biblical  narration, 
by  a  man  who  nevertheless  finally  remains  doubtful  whether, 
in  spite  of  all  the  reasons  cited,  it  would  not  be  more  ad- 
visable to  follow  "  the  other  system,"   in  accordance  with 


APPENDIX.  539 

which  we  must  assume  it  to  be  an  uninterrupted  miracle 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  even  though  this  is  not  ex- 
pressed in  the  Bible  (see  p.  19  of  the  work  cited),  wherebj, 
assuredly,  all  considerations  about  the  most  probable  liuman 
course  of  that  great  historical  event  become  worthless.  The 
author  then  passes  to  some  individual  points,  which  he  him- 
self only  calls  attention  to  as  such ;  in  which  he  deviates 
from  my  mode  of  comprehension,  since,  for  instance,  he  feels 
himself  obliged  to  place  the  attack  of  the  Amalekites  some- 
what farther  down  the  valley  towards  El  Hessue.  The 
various  possibilities  in  the  explanation  of  the  shorter  marches 
oblige  us  always  to  point  out  again,  that  it  is  only  by  taking 
a  view  of  the  most  essential  points  of  the  question,  as  a 
whole,  that  we  can  arrive  at  a  positive  conviction;  this  would 
necessarily  drive  those  objections  into  the  background,  which 
might  arise  from  regarding  it  only  from  any  individual 
point. 

Shortly  after  Eobinson,  in  the  year  1843,  Dr.  John 
"Wilson  travelled  through  Palestine  and  the  Peninsula  of 
Arabia  Petrgsa ;  he  published  his  extensive  travels  {The 
Lands  of  the  Bible,  2  vols.  Edinburgh,  1847),  but  did  not  by 
any  means  attain  the  high  standing  point  held  by  his  learned 
predecessor.  Nevertheless,  I  cannot  but  accord  with  some  of 
the  objections  which  (vol.  i.  p.  222,  &c.)  he  makes  to  Eobin- 
son's  assumption  that  Sefsaf  is  the  Mount  of  the  Law.  He 
coincides  with  the  tradition  in  recognising  the  Mount  of  the 
Law  in  Grebel  MAsa.  In  Serbal,  on  the  contrary,  he  believes 
that  he  recognises  the  Mount  Paran  of  the  Bible  (p.  199), 
which  we  could  only  suppose,  if  we  admit  Mount  Paran  to 
be  another  expression  for  Sinai,  and  if  we  identify  the  last 
with  Serbal.  At  the  close  of  the  second  volume  (p.  764,  &c.) 
the  author  adds  a  note  in  the  Appendix,  in  which  he  guards 
himself  against  my  different  view  as  to  the  position  of  Sinai. 
He  does  not,  however,  here  touch  upon  the  most  essential 
arguments  which  I  have  everywhere  placed  in  the  foregroimd, 
but  only  speaks  of  individual  points,  some  of  which  can  be 
easily  overcome,  and  of  others  which  have  no  influence  on 


540  APPENDIX. 

the  chief  question.  He  places  Daphka.,  which  is  not  once 
mentioned  in  the  principal  account,  and  therefore  assuredly 
must  have  been  a  subordinate  spot,  in  "Wadi  Tiran,  and 
Eaphidim,  "the  places  for  rest,"  in  the  barren  sandy  Wadi 
e'  Scheikh,  because  there  was  no  water  there.  But,  that  I 
may  use  his  own  weapons,  what  has  become  of  the  spring  of 
Moses  ?  "  Few  in  tlie  hingdom  of  Great  Britain  at  least," 
says  the  author,  "  will  be  disposed  to  substitute  the  Wadi 
Feiran,  with  clear  running  water,  for  BepMdim,  where  there 
was  no  water  for  the  people  to  drtak."  I  think  he  wrongs  his 
countrymen  in  making  them  deviate  so  universally  from  the 
almost  unanimous  tradition,  and  reject  as  a  rationalistic  expla- 
nation what  is  admitted  even  by  the  learned  Fathers  of  the 
Church,  who  place  Eaphidim  inFiran,  and  consequently  regard 
the  spring  there  as  belonging  to  Moses;  besides,  independently 
of  H.  Eaetlett,  many  others  of  his  countrymen  have  dis- 
tinctly declared  themselves  in  favour  of  my  view,  which  in- 
cludes this  point,  among  whom  I  may  mention  Mr.  Hogg 
(see  below,  concerning  his  pamphlet  about  this  particular 
point),  the  Eev.  Dr.  Ceolt,  and  the  author  of  the  Pictorial 
Bible.  If  he  is  of  opinion  that  I  had  overlooked  the  fact 
that  the  "Wilderness  of  Sin  and  the  Wilderness  of  Sinai  had . 
different  meanings,  I  refer  hhn  to  my  pamphlet,  p.  47,  where 
precisely  the  opposite  occurs ;  I  have  not  either  left  unno- 
ticed the  words  "  out  of  the  Wilderness  of  Sin"  (p.  39),  which 
has  not  either  been  done  by  Eusebius  nor  St.  Jerome,  who 
equally  make  the  Wilderness  of  Sin  extend  as  far  as  the  Wil- 
derness of  Sinai.  The  fight  with  Amalek,  as  it  is  related  in 
Exodus,  presupposes  a  universal,  obstinate,  and  probably  a  pre- 
pared contest ;  that  the  principal  attack  of  the  front  was  im- 
mediately supported  by  an  attack  of  the  rear-guard  is  not 
excepted,  as  it  is  added  besides  in  Deuteron.  xxv.  18 ;  the 
double  attack  besides  appeared  distinctly  indicated  m  the 

words  i2T"^.1  '^Tl?.^  ^*??P    ^VT^(^T~n  ^°'-  ^^  ''^  °^^5  KoieKoyp-e  o-ovrfiv 

ovpayiau.  At  Elim,  certainly,  twelve  springs  nb'^V  not  wells 
are  mentioned ;  but  this  does  not  alter  the  case,  as  neverthe- 
less we  cannot  imagine  twelve  rushing  springs  like  those  in 


APPENDIX.  5^1! 

the  Wadi  Firan,  but  as  the  author  (vol.  i,  p.  175)  himself 
observes,  only  standing  water  undergrouud,  which  must  be 
specially  dug  for — therefore,  in  fact,  wells.  Their  great 
number  alone  remains  worthy  of  consideration,  from  which 
we  may  conclude  that  it  was  an  important  place.  I  knew 
the  Sheikh  Abu  Zelimeh  very  well ;  but  that  would  not  pre- 
vent the  existence  of  a  connection  between  the  name  and 
the  locality,  although  I  do  not  lay  the  slightest  weight  on 
such  accordance  of  names. 

The  author  omits  some  other  reasons,  which  he  believes 
he  can  prove  in  opposition  to  my  views ;  these  might  per- 
haps have  referred  precisely  to  the  chief  points  of  the  whole 
question,  which  had  hitherto  remained  uncontested.  The 
author  now  perhaps  feels  himself  obliged  to  repeat  his  argu- 
ments, with  reference  to  the  separate  remarks  of  one  of  his 
countrymen,  Mr.  John  Hogg,  who  handled  the  subject  in  a 
very  complete  manner,  and  worked  it  out  still  further,  first 
in  the  Gentleman's  Magazine,  Marcli,  1847,  and  afterwards 
in  the  Transact,  of  the  B.  Soc.  of  Literature,  2  Ser.  vol.  iii. 
p.  183—236  (read  May,  1847,  Jan.  1848),  under  the  title : 
Bemarks  and  Additional  Views  on  Br.  Lepsius's  Proofs  that 
Mount  Serial  is  the  true  Mount  Sinai ;  on  the  Wilderness  of 
Sin ;  on  the  Manna  of  the  Israelites ;  and  on  the  Sinaitic  In- 
scriptions. This  learned  author  combines  the  earliest  testi- 
monies about  the  tradition,  and  from  them  endeavours  to 
prove,  that  before  the  time  of  Justinian  it  was  in  favour  of 
Serbal,  and  not  of  Gebel  Musa.  He  seems,  in  fact,  to  have 
succeeded  in  proving  this,  but  we  shall  return,  to  this  ques- 
tion below. 

Since  then  the  comprehensive  work  of  my  respected 
friend  Carl  Eitter  has  appeared,  which  is  executed  with  his 
usual  mastery  of  the  subject :  Vergleichende  Erdkunde  der 
Sinai- Halhinsel,  von  Paldstina  und  Sgrien,  erster  Bandi 
Berlin,  1848.  Although  he  has  employed  and  worked  out 
all  imaginable  authorities,  from  the  most  ancient  to  those  of 
modern  date,  and  has  formed  a  complete  picture  of  the 
Peninsula  as  a  whole  and  in  details,  with  a  clear  perception 


542  APPENDIX. 

and  steady  baud,  both  in  its  geograpliical  bearing  and  in  the 
historical  relations  of  its  population,  he  has  nevertheless  not 
neglected  the  question  now  under  consideration,  in  which 
geography  and  history  are  more  intimately  connected  than 
in  any  other.  Sinai  is  to  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai  what 
Jerusalem  is  to  Palestine,  and  as  it  is  certain  that  the 
erection  of  the  church  on  Gebel  Musa  in  the  sixth  century, 
from  a  belief  that  it  was  founded  on  the  spot  of  the  lawgiving, 
caused  the  liisto7ical  centre  of  the  Peninsula,  which  previously 
coincided  indisputably  with  the  to\sTi  of  Pharan  and  its  forest 
of  palms  (the  natural  geographical  centre),  to  be  sundered 
for  the  first  time,  and  gradually,  since  the  tenth  century, 
from  this,  and  to  be  removed  several  days'  journey  farther 
to  the  south, — so  it  is  equally  certain  that  the  decision  of 
the  question,  whether  this  was  a  Jirst  or  secoiid  separation 
between  the  historical  and  geograpliical  centre,  must  bear 
most  essentially  on  the  comprehension  and  delineation  of  the 
earliest  history  of  the  Peninsula,  and  might  even  exercise  an 
influence  not  only  on  the  future  form  of  Sinaitic  literature, 
but  even  on  many  relative  conditions  of  the  Peninsula  itself, 
which  are  in  no  small  degree  regulated  by  the  objects  aimed  at 
by  the  constantly  increasing  number  of  travellers.  Eitter's  re- 
presentation was  compelled  at  the  very  outset  to  decide  for 
one  of  these  two  views.  At  the  same  time,  the  new  view,  prof- 
fered at  the  latest  termination  of  the  preliminary  works  of 
merit,  and  in  opposition  to  what  had  been  held  with  implicit 
faith  for  the  last  thousand  years,  and  maintained  with- 
out exception  by  all  recent  writers  of  travels,  now  first  ap- 
peared in  the  form  of  an  occasional  and  necessarily  imperfect 
traveller's  account,  and  might  very  naturally  lay  even  less 
claim  to  a  favourable  hearing,  not  having  hitherto  received 
critical  examination  from  any  quarter,  nor  been  noticed  by 
later  travellers.  Por  this  reason  I  so  much  the  more  value 
the  careful  and  impartial  examination  of  the  grounds  in 
favour  of  Serbal  being  Moimt  Sinai,  for  which  Eitter  has 
granted  a  place  in  his  work. 

He  does  this  at  p  736,  &c.     He  here  rejects  the  opinion 


APPENDIX,  543 

that  the  tradition  of  the  convent  on  Gebel  Musa,  known 
only  since  tlie  sixth  century,  could  have  any  weight  in  form- 
ing a  decision ;  "  the  tradition  of  the  still  older  convent  of 
Serbal,  and  of  the  town  of  Serbal  in  Wadi  Firan,  might  be 
said  to  have  existed  just  as  truly,  but  has  only  been  lost  to 
usJ"  Other  reasons,  therefore,  derived  from  nature  and 
history,  must  speak  in  its  favour.  He  then  cites  the  view 
adopted  by  Eobinson,  who  places  Eaphidim  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  Wadi  e'  Scheikh  ;  but  with  justice  he  places  in 
opposition  to  this,  that  it  then  encroaches  upon  the  farther 
march,  and  would  be  mentioned  ;  and  shortly  afterwards  he 
says,  in  as  convincing  a  manner,  that  we  cannot  then  con- 
ceive how  the  people  could  have  murmured  for  want  of 
water,  already  one  day's  journey  beyond  the  Firan,  which, 
was  so  richly  supplied  with  water,  while  this  can  be  easily 
explained  on  the  long  way  from  Elim,  as  far  as  the 
neighbourhood  of  Firan.  Eitter  therefore  agrees  with  me 
and  the  old  tradition  in  regarding  the  wonderful  brook  of 
Firan  as  the  spring  of  Moses.  He  only  thinks,  if  Moses 
struck  the  spring  out  of  the  rock,  it  must  then  have  been  at 
the  beginning,  and  not  at  the  termination  of  the  present 
brook,  and  he  therefore  transfers  Eaphidim  into  the  upper- 
most portion  of  Wadi  Firan,  whose  fertility  did  not  exist 
before  the  appearance  of  the  spring.  With  respect  to  the 
position  of  the  Mount  of  the  Law^,  he  evades  positive  de- 
cision for  the  time.  "  Already,"  he  says,  "  in  both  the 
almost  contemporaneous  narrators,  Jerome  (Procopius  ?) 
and  Cosmas,  we  see  the  division  of  the  views  entertained  about 
these  localities,  neither  of  which,  even  in  the  most  recent 
double  view,  it  appears  by  decisive  and  sufficient  grounds, 
can  be  preferred,  by  us  at  least,  alone  before  the  others. 
Since  each  of  these  two  modes  of  explanation  of  a  text  so 
indeterminate  in  topographical  respects,  and  of  a  locality 
still  known  so  imperfectly,  can  only  serve  as  Jiypothetical 
prolabilities  in  a  more  exact  interpretation,  allow  me  to 
point  out  cursorily  our  liypotJietical  view  of  this  affair,  which 
will  perhaps  never  be  placed  in  a  perfectly  clear  light." 


544  APPENDIX. 

It  amounts  finally  to  this,  that  the  "Mount  of  Grod," 
where  Moses  was  encamped  when  he  was  visited  bj  Jethro 
in  Eaphidim,  could  liave  in  no  case  meant  the  convent  mouji' 
tain  of  Sinai  {i.  e.  Gehel  Mvsa),  although  this,  on  a  later 
occasion,  is  even  thus  called,  as  that  of  the  true  God,  hut 
from  which  they  at  that  time  under  every  supposition  were  far 
removed,  though  prohally  it  might  have  been  a  designation 
for  the  overtowering  and  far  nearer  Serial  when  they  were 
still  in  the  camp  at "  Eaphidim .' '  He  afterwards  acknowledges 
that  before  the  19th  chapter  there  was  an  interruption  of 
the  connection  with  the  preceding  chapters,  but  seeks  a 
reason  for  this  in  a  gap  in  the  text,  while  I  would  rather 
assume  that  there  was  a  short  interpolation.  Let  the  pro- 
gress of  the  people  from  the  Feiran  valley  into  the  upper 
Talley  of  the  Scheikh,  and  to  Gebel  Musa,  the  true  Sinai,  be 
thrown  into  this  gap.  This  at  first  is  only  called  "  the 
Mount"  (Exodus  xix.  2),  and  becomes  a  "Mount  of  God'* 
for  the  first  time  after  the  lawgiving  (which,  however,  the 
following  verse,  xix.  3,  contradicts),  while  Serbal  might  have 
been  called  "the  Mount  of  God"  from  a  heathen  deity  there 
worshipped.  "  Both  mounts,  the  Mount  of  God  (Serbal)  in 
Eaphidim,  and  the  mount  in  the  Wilderness  of  Sinai,  are 
therefore  just  as  difi'erent  by  name  as  they  appear  removed 
from  each  other  by  the  last  day's  marches  between  both 
places  of  encampment."  He  regards  the  general  natural 
conditions  of  the  country  about  Gebel  Musa  on  account  of 
the  greater  security  and  coolness,  and  from  the  pasture-land 
bearing  a  greater  resemblance  to  the  Alps,  as  more  adapted 
for  a  longer  sojourn  of  the  people.  The  name  of  Hoeeb 
only,  which  is  already  mentioned  in  EAPninni,  might  serve 
as  an  objection,  yet  he  sees  no  sufficient  ground  not  to  ex- 
tend this  name  to  some  of  the  lower  mountains  attached  to 
Serbal  itself,  for  already  Eoi3iyso>",  HE>-GSTEXEERa,  and 
others,  comprehend  it  as  a  general  designation. 

So  far  as  I  know,  this  is  the  first  time  that  it  has  been 
attempted  to  prove  that  there  were  two  Mounts  of  God, 
Serbal  and  Gebel  Musa.     This,  however,   certainly  is  the 


APrENDTX.  515 

nrccssnri/  rcsul/,  fJiough  not  ifct  cxpimscd  hi/ofJirrs,  irJtich  all 
inuat  arrive  at  iv/io  placcIiapJiidini  in  Firdn.  In  tliis,  it  appears 
to  mo,  lies  a  main  proof  with  relereuee  to  the  eritieism  of  the 
text,  that  both  Mounts  of  (uhI  arc  to  bo  recognised  in  Scrhdl. 
Wo  must  not  hiy  too  much  si  ress  on  the  greater  security  of  the 
])laln  of  Ivalia  for  a  "harnessed"  (Exodus  xiii.  18)  army  of 
()()0,()00  men,  after  it  liad  set  firm  footing  in  ilie  hnui,  besides 
Serbal  nuist  have  at  all  tinu^s  olftnvd  an  achnirablt'  phiee  of  re- 
serve. The  eokl  in  Ihe  l\igh  mountain  range,  wliieh,  according 
toliuPPELL  and  liouiNSON,  free/.es  the  walcr  \\\{o  wc  in  the 
convent  (5000  feet  above  the  S(\i)  even  as  hite  as  IVbruary 
(Ivitter,  p.  1.15,  GlH)),  wouUl  have  nUnie  renih^'od  an  open 
encampment  on  tlie  phiin  of  Ivalia  during  ihe  uinter  impos- 
sibh\  for  a  popuhdion  lately  accustomed  \o  the  Kgypiimi 
climate.  .But  with  respect  to  the  vegetation  in  those  dis- 
tricts, which  has  imh'ed  been  ditferently  described  by  diiferent 
travellers,  the  idea  that  not  the  slightest  doubt  existed  as  to 
this  having  been  at  one  time  the  sojourn  o^  ihe  Israelites, 
luay  have  partly  causeil  many  to  presujijiose  ihe  existence  of 
nn)re  hcM-bs  in  the  neighbourhood  than  iIicn-  nutinentarilv 
saw;  ])artly,  no  iloubt,  the  season  ot"thi^  year  occasions  some 
variations.  I  thercM'ore  only  observe  that  I  visitinl  ihe 
Peninsula  about  the  same  time  of  the  year  in  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  iMosaic  narration,  the  Israelites  also  went  thither. 
J\itter,  tiuailv,  has  expressed  his  viinvs  mi  ilie  Sinai  ipu^st  ion 
on  another  occasion  in  a  imindar  essay,  "  The  Peninsula  o'C 
Sinai,  anil  thi^  Path  o(  the  (^hildren  o^  Israel  to  Sinai/'  in 
(he  "bAangi^lit'al  Calemlar,''  Almanack  tor  1852,  pub- 
lished bji  F.  Pipti\  j).  I>1,  i^c.  Here  also  he  places  Ixaphidini 
in  I'^irau,  and  tcaci's  the  Mount  of  God  at  JRaphidim  in 
Sorluil.  Ibit  in  op[iosition  to  the  ideuliiy  o(  Serbal  and 
Sinai,  \\c  hcvo  adduces  principally  tlu>  two  following  rc^ast'ins. 
As  it  has  been  now  provetl  thai  the  so-called  Sinaitic  inscrip- 
tions hav(^  a  Pagan  origin,  and  that  they  indicate  that  Serbal, 
to  which  they  principally  refer,  was  the  "  centre  i^t'an  ancient 
worship,"  then  this  reuiarkabh*  nuiuni.  if  aliwuly  a  hc)lv 
mount  of  the'  idolater,  could  not.  havi^  been  at  the  same  tiuie 

2  N 


646  APPENDIX. 

a  ''  Mount  of  Jeliovali'  (p.  51),  and  furtlier  (p.  52),  "Israel's 
liolj  Mount  of  God  was  not  situated  in  the  territory  of 
Amaiek,  like  Serbal,  but  in  tlie  eastern  and  soutliern  terri- 
tory oi  Midian,  for  it  is  said  expressly  (Exodus  ix.  19),  that 
the  Lord  commanded  Moses  in  Midian  to  go  to  Egypt,  and 
to  lead  the  people  to  sacrifice  to  him  upon  this  Mount  Horeb 
and  Sinai  in  Midian"  (Exodus  iii.  1 — 12).  AVith  respect  to 
these  two  points  however,  the  first,  namely  that  Serbal  was 
also  a  IwJy  mount  for  the  Semitic  people  ruling  over  the 
Peninsula  at  a  later  period,  seems  to  me  a  reason  of  great 
weight  m/«z?owr  of  Serbal- Sinai,  as  indeed  also  already,  he- 
fore  the  lawgiving,  it  was  not  called  "Idol  Mount,"  but 
Mount  of  God  (Exodus  iii.  1,  iv.  27,  xviii.  5),  just  as  much 
as  after  the  lawgiving  (Exodus  xxiv.  13,  1  Kings  xix.  8), 
and  a  heathen  readoption  at  a  later  period  of  the  woi-ship  of 
this  mount  must  certainly  be  less  surprising.  But  that 
Moses  dwelt  with  Jethro  in  Midian,  when  the  Lord  spoke 
to  him,  offers  no  ground  to  place  the  Mount  of  the  Law  in 
Midian,  for  that  is  nowhere  said.  We  only  know  that 
Eaphidim,  where  Moses  was  visited  by  Jethro  out  of  Midian, 
was  situated  in  the  territory  of  the  AmaleTcites,  as  these 
here  made  the  attack.  Eusebius,  who  (s.  v.  'PacpidliJ.,  see 
note,  p.  313)  expressly  places  Eaphidim  and  Choreb  in 
Pharan,  says  (s.  v.  Xtoprj^)  that  this  Mount  of  God  lay  in 
Madian.  In  the  Itinerar.  Antonini,  c.  40,  also,  Pharan  is 
placed  in  Madian. 

I  trust  these  remarks,  in  which  I  tliink  I  have  touched 
upon  all  the  essential  objections  of  the  respected  author,  may 
prove  to  bim  how  high  a  A^alue  I  place  on  each  of  his  argu- 
ments, as  being  those  of  one  who  is  more  competent  to 
judge  in  this  field  than  any  other  person.  Pitter's  long  proved 
acuteness  for  tracing  the  correct  view  of  such  questions, 
would  have  excited  more  consideration  in  me  against  my  own 
view  of  the  subject,  than  all  the  reasons  he  has  adduced, 
which,  taken  singly  at  least,  seem  to  me  refutable,  had  I  not 
in  tJiis  case,  at  any  rate,  had  the  advantage  of  a  personal 
view  of  the  localities,  without  any  preconceived  influence ; 


APPENDIX.  547 

this  miglit  render  my  judgment  of  earlier  narrators  more  in- 
dependent than  could  be  the  case  with  him. 

AppEifDix  C.  (P.  306.) — Eobinson  gives  the  distances 
from  Ayun  Musa  to  the  point  where  Wadi  Schebekeh  and 
Wadi  Taibeh  meet,  vol.  iii.  Div.  ii.  p.  804i ;  these  accord 
with  BuECKHAEDT,  p.  624,  625,  who  also  records  the  more 
remote  points  as  far  as  Wadi  Piran  ;  these  last  are  confirmed 
by  mine,  if  we  calculate  his  circuitous  route  by  Dhafari. 
E/obinson's  calculation,  p.  196,  does  not,  however,  take  into 
consideration  the  circuitous  route,  from  four  to  five  hours 
longer  from  the  Convent,  through  Wadi  e'  Scheikh,  for  Burck- 
hardt  passed  over  the  Nakb  el  Haul  in  eleven  hours  to  Piran, 
while  we  occupied  sixteen,  without  including  the  short  way 
round  through  the  Kteffe  valley.  After  this  the  distances 
stand  thus :  Prom  Ayun  Musa  to  Ain  Hawareh  18  hours 
35  minutes ;  then  to  Wadi  Grharandel,  2  hours  30  mi- 
nutes (not  from  one  hour  and  a  half  to  two  hours  from 
Eobinson's  place  of  encampment  as  it  is  calculated  above, 
p.  307)  ;  to  the  outlet  of  the  valley  near  Abu  Zelimeh,  7 
hours  12  minutes ;  to  the  sea,  1  hour ;  to  Wadi  Schellal,  4 
hours  15  minutes ;  to  Piran,  13  hours  45  minutes ;  to  the 
Convent,  16  hours.  Eobinson  cannot  remove  the  encamp- 
ment in  the  Wilderness  of  Sin  to  a  more  southern  point 
than  the  outlet  of  Wadi  Schellal,  because  the  people  here, 
according  to  him,  stept  forth  out  of  the  Wilderness  of  Sin. 
Por  the  same  reason  he  is  compelled  to  place  Alus  in  Piean. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  my  opinion,  not  alone  is  the  encamp- 
ment at  the  sea  not  different  from  that  at  the  outlet  of  the 
valley  at  Abu  Zelimeh,  but  the  Wilderness  of  Sin  mentioned 
in  the  Book  of  Exodus,  which  extended  as  far  as  Sinai,  and 
ended  with  Eaphidim,  is  also  the  same  as  the  two  stations 
mentioned  in  the  Book  of  Numbers,  Daphka  and  Alus,  and 
therefore  in  the  last  passage  should  as  little  have  been  men- 
tioned as  peculiar  places  of  encampment,  as  the  Eed  Sea.  The 
Wilderness  of  Sin  accordingly,  like  the  Wilderness  of  Sur, 
embraced  three  days'  journey.  The  stations,  and  their  re- 
moteness from  each  other,  stand  therefore  as  follows : 

2n2 


548  APPENDIX. 

According  to  Eobinson. 

three  Stations  from  Ayun  Musa  to  Ain  Hawareh  = 
Marah. 

to  Wadi  Gharandel  =  Elim. 

to  the  Sea. 

to  Wadi  Schellal  =  Wilderness  of  Sin. 

two  Stations  to  Firan  =  Daphka  and  Alus. 

two   Stations  to  tlie  Plain   of  Raha  =  Raphidim 
and  Sinai. 

According  to  my  assumption, 
three  Stations  to  Wadi  Gharandel  =  Marah. 

to  the  Outlet  of  the  Valley  near  Abu  Zelimeh  =  Elim. 

three  Stations  to  Firan,  i.  e.  by  Daphka  and  Alus  to 
Raphidim  at  Sinai. 

It  is  easy  to  imagine  why  the  latter  stations  are  somewhat 
shorter  than  the  first,  on  account  of  the  greater  difficulty  of 
the  road.  According  to  Robinson,  the  fourth  station  would 
be  scarcely  explicable.  Why  did  the  people  murmur  so  near 
the  twelve  springs  of  Elim?  How  would  precisely  that 
strikingly  long  journey  of  more  than  eight  hours,  from  Elim 
to  the  sea,  not  have  been  mentioned  at  all  ?  And  how  was 
it  possible  that  the  days'  marches  should  have  constantly  in- 
creased in  length  amidst  the  lofty  mountains  and  difficult 
ground  ? 

Appendix  D.  (P.  314  and  318.) — The  expounders  of  this 
passage  take  the  words:  >tp'>bffi?n  ti7"TnS.  ^^ In  the  third 
month,^^  as  if  it  were  written,  '•  6ii  the  first  day  of  the  third 
ononth,^^  and  therefore  refer  the  following  "  the  same  day,'"" 
equally  to  the  first  day  of  the  month.  See  GtESENItjs, 
Thesaur.  p.  404,  b:  "tertiis  calendis  post  exitum,"  and 
p.  449,  b:  tertio  novilunio,  i.  e.  calendis  mensis  tertii. 
Ewald,  Gesch.  des  V.  Isr.  ii.  p.  189.  "  The  Bay  (?)  of  the 
third  month  {i.  e.  however  of  the  new  moon,  therefore  the 
first  dayy)  But  the  Seventy  at  all  events  have  not  under- 
stood it  in  this  manner,  as  they  translate :  Too  Se  ixr)vbs  rov 


APPEKDIX.  549 

TpiTov  TT]  rjnepa  ravrr].     It  also  appears  that  the  Jewish  tra- 
dition have  not  comprehended  it  thus,  as  the  Lawgiting, 
which  according  to  Exod.  xix.  11,  15,  occurred  on  the  third 
da  J  after  their  arrival,  is  even  now  solemnised  by  the  Jews 
on  the  fifth  or  sixth  day  of  the  third  month,  simultaneously 
with  the  appointed  harvest-feast,  on  the  fiftieth  day  after  the 
Exodus  (Leviticus  xxiii.  15, 16)  ;  in  accordance  with  this,  the 
arrival  at  Sinai  must  have  happened  on  the  third  day  of  the 
third  month.     We  cannot,  however,  but  perceive,  how  Itnn 
without  addition,  might  here  be  employed  for  neiv  moon's  day, 
although  in  all  other  passages  of  customary  speech  it  had  lost 
this  etymological  signification,  and  only  meant  month  •  even 
in  passages  where  the  new  moon's  day  itself  was  spoken  of, 
as  in  Exod.  xl.  2, 17  ;  Numb.  i.  1 ;  xxxiii.  38,  where  every- 
where tri'nb  inSS  is  especially  added  to  it,  "  on  the  Jirst 
(day)  of  the  month,"  whereas  passages  like  Numb.  ix.  1,  and 
XX.  1,  cannot  naturally  be  cited,  because  here,  there  lies  as 
little  reason  as  in  Exod.  xix.  1,  to  understand  the  Jirst  of  the 
month,  and  the  Seventy  also  do  not  translate,  iv  r]jxepa  fiia,  or 
vov/irjvLa  as  in  the  former  passages,  but  only  in  the  simple 
sense  of  the  words  eV  rw  fjLrjvi  r©  Trpoira.     Our  passage,  Exod. 
xix.  1,  therefore,  would  alone  remain,  from  which  it  would 
be  possible  to  conclude  that  there  was  such  a  double  and 
equivocal  employment  of  li^ih,   because  here  certainly  the 
following  words,  "the  same  day,"  indicate  a  particular  single 
day,  which  particular  day,  nevertheless,  cannot  be  guessed 
from  our  present  text.     But  in  my  opinion  this  is  exactly  an 
additional  and  not  unimportant  reason,  to  assume  either  a 
transposition  or  a  later  insertion  of  these  two  verses.     The 
last  is  also  assumed  by  Ewald,  in  so  far  as  he,  indeed  (Gesch. 
des  V.  Isr.  p.  75),  ascribes  the  account,  xix.  8 — 24,  but  not 
the  two  first  verses,  to  the  oldest  sources.     I  have  already 
mentioned  above  (p.  316)  that  Josephus  (Ant.  iii.  2,  5),  who 
also  does  not  understand  the  words  from  t\\Q  first  day  of  the 
month,  transposes  the  passage,  and  indeed  to  that  very  place 
whither  I,  ignorant  of  this,  had  already  placed  it  in  my 
earlier  printed  account,  p.  48,  namely,  immediately  after  the 


550  APPENDIX. 

hattle  of  the  Amalekites,  to  which  "  the  same  day"  most  na- 
turally refers.  If  this  is  correct,  then  the  original  text  ran 
thus  :  that  the  Israelites  at  Eaphidim,  in  AVadi  Firan,  where 
they  fought  the  battle,  were  not  only  near  Horeb,  but  also 
near  Sinai,  that  is  to  say,  that  both  Mounts  of  God  are  one ; 
and  that,  in  fact,  Moses  first  at  Sinai  received  the  visit  of 
Jethro,  and,  as  appears  most  natural,  first  at  Sinai  organised 
his  people ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  must  be  allowed  that 
Sinai,  or  Horeb,  was  no  other  mountain  than  Sebbal. 

Supposing  that,  in  this  manner,  we  have  correctly  under- 
stood the  original  connection,  it  did  not  first  of  all  require 
any  statement  of  the  month ;  this  would  probably  be  only 
added  upon  the  isolation  of  the  following  section  referring 
to  the  lawgiving.  In  this  case,  only  three  exact  dates  for 
the  journey  could  exist.  The  people  pass  out  from  Eamses 
in  the  first  year,  the  first  montli,  on  the  fifteenth  day;  they 
proceed  from  Elim,  which  is  half-way,  just  one  month  after, 
in  the  first  year,  second  month,  on  the  fifteenth  day.  The 
days  of  rest  at  the  stations  are  unknown,  but  if  we  assume 
that  the  people  proceeded  without  sojourning,  then  they 
came  to  Eaphidim  on  the  third  day  from  Elim  ;  received  the 
water,  and  were  attacked  by  Amalek  on  the  fourth,  fought 
on  the  fifth  till  after  sunset  to  the  commencement  of  the  sixth 
day,  and  on  the  same  sixth  day  (for  the  Hebrew  day  began 
in  the  evening)  encamped  at  Sinai.  This  would  have  been 
in  the  fii'st  year,  in  the  second  month,  on  the  twentieth  day. 
Now  as  the  retreat  from  Sinai  followed  in  the  second  year, 
in  the  second  month,  the  twentieth  day,  then  the  sojourn  at 
Sinai  would  have  lasted  exactly  one  year.  This  coincidence 
was  perhaps  originally  as  little  the  result  of  accident  as  the 
duration  of  just  one  montli  between  the  first  departure  from 
Eamses  and  the  second  from  Elim. 

Appendix  E.  (P.  319.) — Two  inscriptions  in  marble, 
referring  to  the  foundation  of  the  convent,  still  exist,  which 
are  let  into  the  external  wall  fiicing  the  convent-garden,  one 
in  Greek,  the  other  in  Arabic.  Burckhardt  (Trav.  p.  545) 
says  :  "  An  Arabic  inscription  over  the  gate,  in  modern  cha- 


APPElifDIX.  551 

racters,  says  that  Justinian  built  the  convent  in  the  thirtieth 
year  of  his  reign,  as  a  memorial  of  himself  and  his  wife 
Theodora.  It  is  curious  to  find  a  passage  of  the  Koran  intro- 
duced into  this  inscription :  it  was  probably  done  by  a  Mos- 
lem sculptor,  without  the  knowledge  of  the  monks."  The 
Arabic  inscription  is  certainly  over  the  small  door  leading 
into  the  garden.  Ent  if  Burckhardt  saw  it  here,  it  is  incon- 
ceivable that  he  did  not  see  the  Greek  inscription  beside  it, 
let  into  the  wall  with  a  similar  border  and  shelter.  Eobin- 
sox  saw  neither  of  them  (i.  p.  205)  ;  Eicci  caused  the 
Greek  inscription  to  be  copied,  and  from  his  copy  this  has 
been  communicated  and  translated  by  Letiio:n'XE  in  the 
Journ.  des  Sav.  1836,  p.  538,  with  some  slight  deviations. 
But  as  early  as  1823,  another  copy,  which  escaped  Letronne, 
was  published  by  Sir  Er.  Henniker  {JVotes  during  a  Visit  to 
Egypt,  Sfc.  p.  235,  236),  which,  however,  is  very  inaccurate, 
although  it  endeavours  to  render  the  written  characters 
themselves.  The  Arahic  inscription,  as  far  as  I  am  aware, 
is  still  quite  unknown.  I  have  taken  an  impression  of  both 
on  paper,  and  offer  a  faithful  representation  of  them  here. 
The  Greek  runs  thus : 

'Ek  ^aQpoiv  dvqyepbrj  to  lepbv  tovto  jjLovacrrqpiov  tov  2ivaLov  opovs 
iv6a  iXaXrja-ev  6  deos  tco  Mcova-rj  napa  tov  Taireivov  ^acrCkeoiS 
'P(op.aLcov  'lovGTTiviavov  TVpos  citdLov  iJLvrjixoavvov  avTov  kol  r/)?  ov^vyov 
TOV  Qeobapas  eXa,3e  TeXns  peTciTO  TpiaKoaTov  eVos  ti]s  /3ao-tAetas  tov, 
Kai  KaT€(TTr]cr€u  iv  avro)^  r]vovp.^vov  6v6p.aTi  AovXa  ev  eTei  ano  p,ev 
'ASa/x  jTKa  OTTO  de  XpL(rTOV  (pK^ » 

"  This  holy  convent  of  jMount  Sinai,  where  God  spoke  to 
Moses,  was  built  from  the  foundation  by  Justinian,  the  lowly 
king  of  the  Eomans,  in  eternal  remembrance  of  the  same, 
and  of  his  consort  Theodora;  it  was  completed  in  the  thir- 
tieth year  of  his  reign,  and  he  placed  a  chief  in  the  same, 
one  of  the  name  of  Dulas,  in  the  year  6021  smce  Adam,  527 
since  Christ." 

LETEo:^f^^E  read  in  the  second  line  eV  m  Trpoorov  in  place  of 
evBuy  and  in  the  seventh  line  KaTea-rqae  t6v  in  place  of  KUTeo-- 
rrjo-ev.     The  written  characters  indicate  about  the  twelfth  or 


552  APPENDIX. 

thirteenth  century.  As  the  Emperor  Justinian  reigned  from 
527 — 5G5,  it  is  assumed  by  the  writer  that  the  determination 
to  found  the  convent,  and  at  the  same  time  the  appointment 
of  his  abbot  Dulas,  occurred  in  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of 
the  emperor,  although  the  completion  of  the  edifice  is  not 
placed  before  the  thirtieth  year  of  the  same,  i.  e.  556  after 
Christ.  The  year  6021  from  the  creation  of  the  world  cor- 
responds to  the  year  527  after  Christ,  according  to  the 
Alexandrine  era  of  Panodorus  and  Anianus. 
The  Arabic  inscription  is  this : 

(jL«)lljj^-j  (^c  ij^jb  i^^^jjij  J  1,0  jj'  (_^:>Lx-j^,  L_.*AjJkl  .^j^^  S^-H^^ 

"  The  convent  of  Toe  (Mount)  Sina,  and  the  Church  of 
the  Mount  of  the  Interview,  was  built  by  the  dependent  on 
God,  and  hoping  in  the  promise  of  his  Lord,  the  pious  King 
of  the  Greek  Confession,  Justianus  (for  Justinian),  in  re- 
membrance of  himself  and  his  consort  Theodora  to  last  for 
all  times,  iu  order  that  God  might  inherit  the  earth,  and 
who  upon  it :  for  lie  is  tlie  lest  of  tlie  lieirs.  And  the  build- 
ing was  completed  after  thirty  years  of  his  reign.  And  he 
appointed  it  a  chief,  with  the  name  of  Dhulas.  And  this 
happened  after  Adam  6021,  which  corresponds  with  the  year 
527  of  tlie  era  of  the  Lord  Christ." 

The  written  characters  of  the  inscription,  according  to 
the  learned  judgment  of  the  consul.  Dr.  Wetzstein^,  who 
has  also  most  kindly  taken  upon  himself  the  re-writing  and 
translation  of  the  inscription  here  communicated,  indicate 
that  it  did  not  exist  before  the  year  550  of  the  Moham- 
medan era,  which  thus  refers  to  the  period  when  the  Greek 
inscription  was  also  composed.  The  passage  in  the  Koran 
which  BuRCKHAEDT  already  mentions,  is  to  be  found,  Sur. 


21,  V.  18. 


APPENDIX.  553 

Another  large  stone  is  immured  in  the  same  wall,  but 
much  higher  up,  over  a  far  larger  gate,  now  built  up,  at  a 
spot  behind  which  the  kitchen  is  at  present   situated,  the 


ornamental  part  of  which      [^  "jj 


might  lead  us  to 


infer  that  another  still  older  inscription  might  still  exist 
here.  Unfortunately  I  was  unable  to  bring  a  ladder  to  the 
spot  to  examine  the  stone  more  accurately.  It  is  to  be 
hoped  some  future  traveller  may  accomplish  tins. 

Appendix  F.  (P.  319.)— The  history  of  the  Palm-wood  of 
PJiaran  forms  the  central  point  of  the  histor}-  of  the  whole 
Peninsula.  The  accounts  of  it  given  by  the  Greeks  and 
^Romans  furnish  a  new  proof  for  this,  although  their  geogra- 
phical determinations  in  great  measure  have  not  hitherto 
been  correctly  comprehended.  Thus  the  Poseidion  of  Ar- 
temidorus,  Diodorus,  and  Strabo,  is  generally  placed  at  the 
extremity  of  the  Peninsula,  which  is  now  called  Eas  Mo- 
hammed ;  also  by  Gosselin,  Letronne,  and  Grosskurd,  who 
nevertheless  had  already  recognised  the  manifestly  incorrect 
comment  of  the  Strabonic  manuscripts  (p.  776:  tov  ['EXai/iVou] 
yivxov).  As  Poseidion  was  situated  icithin  {ivdorepa)  the 
Gulf  of  Suez,  and  here  the  zvest  coast  of  the  Peninsula  was  to 
be  described,  this  altar  of  Poseidion  therefore  of  necessity  was 
situated  either  at  Eas  Abu  Zelimeh,  the  harbour  of  Faran, 
or  at  Eas  Gehan,  whence  there  was  a  more  southern  and 
shorter  communication  with  Wadi  Piran  through  Wadi 
Dhaghadeh.  That  i\\e  pahn-grove  (^oivlkmv)  of  those  authors 
is  not  to  be  sought  at  Toe,  but  in  the  "Wadi  Piran,  has  been 
already  justly  acknowledged  by  Tuch  (Sinait.  Inschr.  p.  35), 
although  he  still  places  Poseidion  at  Eas  Mohammed  (p.  37). 
It  was  the  Seed  Bal,  the  palm-grove  of  Baal,  from  which  the 
mountain  first  received  its  name.  It  appears,  in  earlier 
times,  while  the  grove  itself  was  still  called  by  the  inhabitants 
Seeb  Bal,  that  the  name  of  Paran  was  especially  employed 
for  the  harbour  at  Abu  Zelimeh,  and  for  a  Pharanitic  settle- 
ment on  the  site  of  ancient  Elim,  near  the  present  Gebel 


554  APPEiroix. 

Hammam  Earaim,  still  alwa}' s  called  Earaj^"  by  the  Arabic 
authors.  (See  note,  p.  307.)  Here  also,  probably,  was  the. 
spot  where  Aeistoi^  landed  under  Ptolemy  Philadelphus, 
and  founded  Poseidiok". 

Artemidorus  (in  Strabo,  p.  776)  and  Diodorus  (3,  42) 
mention  Mapavlrat.,  in  place  of  which  Gosselin,  E.itter,  Tuch, 
and  others,  read  ^apavlrai.  As  the  Maranites,  however,  in- 
habited the  eastern  coast  of  the  Peninsula,  and  are  said  to 
have  been  totally  destroyed  by  the  G-arindaees,  I  cannot  see 
any  support  for  this  supposition.  The  ravine  of  Phaea, 
mentioned  by  Josephus  (Bell.  Jud.  4,  9,  4),  in  Judaea,  does 
not  belong  hither. 

The  name  of  the  Pharanites  on  the  western  coast  of  the 
Peninsula  first  appears  in  Pliny  (H.  N.  37,  40),  for  there  is 
no  reason  to  regard  the  Fliaranitis  gens,  whom  he  places  in 
Aralia  Petrcca,  as  differing  from  the  JPharanifai  of  Ptolemy. 
That  the  northern  station  Phara  (circa  ten  hours  west  of 
Aila)  has  nothing  to  do  on  the  tablet  of  Peutinger  with  the 
Pharanitic  palm-grove,  is  placed  beyond  a  doubt  by  Eitter 
(p.  147,&c.). 

Ptolemy,  in  the  third  century,  is  tlie  first  who  mentions  a 
^lace  called  Pharax  (km/jlt]  ^apdv)  ;  but  on  account  of  the  de- 
tailed comparison  not  agreeing,  the  basis  and  the  connection 
of  his  statements  deviating  widely  from  the  true  conditions, 
they  have  for  that  very  reason  hitherto  remained  in  obscurity. 
His  construction  of  the  Peninsula  becomes  clear  at  once, 
when  we  take  into  account  that  he  has  evidently  taken  the 
blunt  angle  of  the  coast  at  Eas  GIehajS'  (whither  by  his  lati- 
tude he  removes  Cape  Pharan,  instead  of  to  Hammam 
Paraun)  to  be  the  most  southern  point  of  the  Peninsula, 
from  which  the  more  remote  coast  runs  up  again  towards  the 
north-east.  Thereby  the  Peninsula,  according  to  him,  be- 
comes about  50'  too  short,  although  the  longitude  of  his  point 
corresponds  with  the  true  one.  The  real  extremity  (Eas 
Mohammed)  now  corresponds  with  the  point  whither  he 
places  the  bend  of  the  Elanitic  Gulf  (emarpocpr]  tov  'EXaplrov 
koXttov).     T lie  whole  of  the  Elanitic  Gulf  (Gulf  of  Akaba) 


APPENDIX.  555 

contracts  witli  liiin  into  a  small  angle  (/iv^o?)  of  15',  because 
all  is  pushed  too  far  to  the  north.  The  coast  from  the 
"  bend"  as  far  as  "On/?;  in  reality  corresponds  with  that  from 
Has  Fuetak  (the  dKpcorrjpiov  TTjs  rjTTeipov  of  Diodorus  and 
Artemidorus,  in  front  of  which  was  situated  the  island  of 
Phokes)  to  ' Ai2^  Us"EH,  and  his  Elanitic  Grulf,  the  north  part 
of  which  (emaTpocfirj)  he  places  66°  Ion.,  29°  lat.,  now 
assumes  the  form  of  the  gulf  whose  innermost  point  is  now 
marked  by  'Aiijir  UjS"eh.     He  imagines  the  Bay  of  Pharan 

{fJ^vxos  Kara  ^apdv)  to  be  from    Cape  Earan    {aKpcoTrjpiov   ^apdv) 

to  the  inland  town  of  the  same  name,  as  the  angle  of  Elana, 
and  the  innermost  angle  of  Heroonpolis  north  of  Arsinoe. 
Prom  this  same  construction  of  the  Peninsula  it  followed 
that  the  P-aithenes,  who  were  situated  below  the  Pha- 
ranites,  on  the  same  coast  near  Tor  (even  now  called  'Pat^oO), 
are  now  placed  on  the  coast  facing  Arabia  (Trapa  Trjv  opeLvfjv 
rqs  Evdaifiovos  ^Apa/^las),  therefore  on  the  eastern,  in  place  of 
the  western  coast  of  the  Peninsula;  and  finally,  as  the 
natural  result  of  this,  he  makes  the  primitive  chain  of  moun- 
tains extending  from  Paran  to  Pas  Mohammed  (oprj  peXava) 
run  towards  Judsea,  therefore  up  towards  the  north-east,  in 
place  of  down  towards  the  south-east. 

Prom  all  this,  it  is  evident,  that  the  place  Phaean  of 
Ptolemy  is  identical  with  the  well-known  Pharan  in  the 
Wadi  Piran,  and  the  Phoenikon  of  Artemidorus  and  Strabo. 
Still  less  can  we  doubt  that  the  Phaea]S"  of  Eusebius  also 
(s.  V.  'VacjiLdLp),  and  of  Jerome,  which  is  expressly  (s.  v.  ^apdv) 
called  a  town  {rroXi^,  oppiduni),  and  situated  (certainly  some- 
what too  near)  three  days'  journey  from  Aila,  was  the  town 
in  Wadi  Piran,  although  by  a  confasion  with  the  Biblical 
wilderness  of  Paran,  it  is  added  that  the  Israelites  on  their 
way  back  from  Sinai  went  past  this  Pharan.  (Compare 
Pitter,  p.  740.) 

According  to  the  manuscript  of  the  monk  Ammoxitjs 
(Illustr.  Chr.  Martyr  lecti.  triumphi  ed.  Combefis.  Paris, 
1660),  the  town  of  Pharan  was  converted  to' Christianity  in 
the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  by  a  monk  Moses,  born  in 


556  APPEITDIX. 

Pharan  itself,  but  his  narration,  wliicli  is  evidently  an  inven- 
tion, and  belongs  to  about  370,  must  by  no  means  be  em- 
ployed as  an  historical  authority  for  that  period,  and  seems 
to  rest  chiefly  on  some  passages  of  a  romance  of  jSTilus,  which 
was  written  for  an  edifying  object,  and  his  seems  to  have  been 
composed  with  a  similar  intention.  In  jS^ilus,  who  is  placed 
about  390,  but  over  whose  period  and  writings  much  uncer- 
tainty still  hangs,  a  Christian  counsellor  (/3ovXt/)  of  the  town 
of  Pharan  is  mentioned  (Nili  opp.  qusedam,  1539.  4°). 
Soon  after  this,  since  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century,  Le 
Quien,  from  authorities  of  very  unequal  value  indeed 
(Oriens,  Christ,  vol.  iii.  p.  751),  cites  a  list  of  hisJiops  of 
Phaea^t,  who  can  be  followed  down  to  the  middle  of  the 
twelfth  century.  (See  Eeland,  Palaest.  vol.  ii.  p.  220.)  All 
the  monks  of  the  entire  mountain  range  were  subordinate 
to  these  bishops. 

"With  reference  to  the  foundation  of  the  present  convent 
on  Gebel  Musa,  it  is  indeed  ascribed  to  the  Emperor 
Justinian  by  Said  ben  Bateik  (Eutychius),  who  wrote 
about  932 — 953  (D'Herbelot,  s.  v.),  as  well  as  in  the  con- 
vent inscriptions  of  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  centuries, 
which  have  been  communicated  above  ;  but  this  is  most  de- 
cidedly contradicted  by  the  far  more  reliable  testimony,  pecu- 
liarly valuable  here,  of  Peocopius,  who  was  the  cotemjporary 
of  Justinian.  He  says,  in  his  special  treatise  about  the 
buildings  founded  by  Justinian  (Proc.  ed.  Dind.  vol.  iii.  de 
adif.  Just.  p.  326),  that  the  emperor  built  a  cliurcTi  to  the 
mother  of  God,  "  not  upon  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  but 
a  considerahle  way  heloio  it^^  (napa  ttoXv  epepdev^  in  accordance 
with  the  locality,  which  can  only  mean  on  the  intermediate 
space  of  ground  half-way  up  the  mountain,  where  the  chapel 
to  Elijah  now  stands).  Separated  from  this  he  had  also 
erected  a  very  strong  castle  {(ppovpiov)  at  the  foot  of  the 
mountain  (eV  rov  opovs  Trpoiroda),  and  provided  it  with  a  good 
military  guard  to  check  the  incursions  of  the  Saracens  into 
Palestine.  As  Procopius  directly  before  and  afterwards,  as 
well   as   throughout   the   whole    paper,    distinguishes   very 


APPENDIX.  557 

exactly  between  the  convents  and  the  clmrcJies,  and  the  mili- 
tary guard-liouses,  it  is  evident  that,  according  to  him, 
Justinian  did  not  found  the  present  convent  together  with 
his  church.  The  military  castle  was,  however,  probably  at  a 
later  period  employed,  and  rebuilt  into  a  convent.  Besides, 
the  church  founded  by  Justinian  higher  up  the  hill  was  not 
dedicated,  like  the  present  convent  church,  to  St.  Kathaeine 
(see  Le  Quien,  vol.  iii.  p.  1306),  but  to  Mary.  AVhat  is  said 
by  Eutychius  (who  Eobixsox  first  cited,  though  he  placed  him 
somewhat  too  early,  still  in  the  tenth  century),  both  about 
the  building  of  the  convent,  and  in  still  more  direct  contra- 
diction with  Procopius,  about  a  church  built  upon  the 
summit  of  the  mountain,  deserves  therefore  no  more  credit 
than  the  conversation  between  the  emperor  and  the  architect, 
which  is  communicated.  As  little  must  we  ascribe  to  Jus- 
tinian, on  the  statement  of  Ben  Batrik,  the  foundation  of  the 
convents  of  Eateh  (at  Tor)  and  of  Kolzum  (a  hisliop  of 
Clysma,  by  name  Poemes,  is  inserted  at  the  Constantino- 
politan  Council  as  early  as  460  ;  see  Acta  Concil.  ed. 
Harduin,  ii.  696,  786),  as  in  this  case  he  would  undoubtedly 
have  been  mentioned  by  Procopius.  Phaeain"  is  not  men- 
tioned by  Procopius.  On  the  contrary,  he  narrates  (de  bell. 
Pers.  i.  19,  164 ;  de  sedif.  5,  8)  the  important  fact,  that  the 
Saracen  Prince  Abocharagos,  reigning  there,  had  presented 
the  Emperor  Justinian  with  a  large  palm-grove  ((j)oiptKa>va), 
situated  in  the  centre  of  the  land  (eV  tt]  fieo-oyala) .  On  closer 
consideration  of  this  account,  scarcely  a  doubt  can  remain 
that  the  palm-grove  of  Phaean  is  here  understood,  not  the 
place  on  the  coast  ^olvUcov  Kafir),  mentioned  by  Ptolemy 
(vi.  7,  3),  or  a  palm-grove  totally  unknown  to  us,  also  situated 
in  the  midst  of  a  solitary  wilderness,  wholly  unprovided  with 
water.  According  to  Ammonius  and  jS'ilus  all  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Pharan  had  then  become  Christian,  and  a  church  at 
all  events  existed  there ;  thereby  it  is  easier  to  understand 
the  gift  made  by  Abocharagos,  which  Justinian  himself  pre- 
sented to  the  Phylarch  of  the  Palestinian  Saracens.  jS^o 
doubt  the  foundation  of  the  castle  in  the  higher  mountains, 


558  APPENDIX. 

for  watcliing  over  tliose  Saracens,  was  in  connection  with, 
this. 

Next  to  Procopius,  Cosmas  Indicopleustes  is  by  far  the 
most  authentic  authority  of  that  period.  He  was  not  only  both 
a  cotemporary  of  Justinian,  but  likewise  describes  (about  540) 
what  he  himself  saw  upon  the  Peninsula.  His  work  is  the  only 
one  containing  detailed  geography  belonging  to  that  period, 
and  his  unassuming  narration  bears  everywhere  the  marks  of 
unvarnished  truth.  It  is  so  much  the  more  remarkable  that 
he  neither  mentions  a  convent  edifice,  nor  indeed  the  locali- 
ties at  Gebel  Musa,  but  only  Phaka:n",  although  he  had  the 
path  of  the  Israelites  especially  in  view.  (See  below  more  of 
this.)  That  on  the  other  hand  A]S'T0N1NUS  Placentintjs, 
who  is  held  by  others  to  be  the  h.  Antoninus  Martyr,  never- 
theless in  his  Itineraeium  {Acta  Sanctor.  Mxty,  vol.  ii.  p. 
X — xviii),  which  is  placed  by  Hitter  about  600,  should  again 
speak  of  a  convent  at  the  thorn-bush  (Procopius  does  not 
yet  make  mention  of  the  thorn-bush),  between  Horeb  and 
Sinai,  therefore  on  the  site  of  the  present  convent,  appears 
rather  to  lead  us  back  to  the  opinion  so  decidedly  expressed  by 
Papebeoch,  who  first  published  the  Itinerary,  that  this  nar- 
rative, which  has  excited  such  various  considerations,  though  so 
learnedly  defended,  does  not  belong  to  an  earlier  period  than 
the  eleventh  or  twelfth  centuries.  At  all  events,  it  would  be 
very  desirable  if  the  writings  of  Ammonius,  Mlus,  and 
Antoninus,  that  have  been  cited,  and  so  many  others  attri- 
buted to  the  first  Christian  centuries,  were  submitted  to  a  more 
searching  and  connected  criticism  than  has  hitherto  been 
the  case. 

The  earliest  bishop  of  Mount  Sinai  to  whom  we  can 
refer,  is  not  to  be  found  before  the  eleventh  century,  Bishop 
Jorius,  who  dies  1033  (Le  Quien,  iii.  754).  The  name  in 
the  second  Constantiuopolitan  Council  (a.  553),  signed 
Phronimus  episc.  Synnaii  (Acta  Concil.  ed.  Harduin,  vol.  iii. 
p.  53),  or  Stnaitanorum  (p.  206),  and  in  the  fourth  council 
(a.  870),  the  one  named  Constantinus  ep.  Stfai  (Harduin, 
vol.  V.  p.  927),  have  been  incorrectly  brought  hither  (Eitter, 


APPENDIX.  *559 

Abhandl.  der  Berl.  Akad.  1824,   p.  216.     Halbinsel  Sinai, 
p.  96),  as  they  belong  to  Synaus,  or  Synn-aus,  in  Phrygia. 

Appendix  Gt.  (P.  320). — It  must  be  most  absolutely  denied 
that  an  interrupted  and  distinct  tradition  about  the   posi- 
tion of  Sinai  in  the  Peninsula  was  preserved  as  late  as  the 
Christian  times.     The  name  Choreb,  or  Sinai,  appears  even 
at  a  very  early  period  to  have  been  understood  for  the  whole 
of  the  lofty  range  in  the  Peninsula,  which  was  constantly 
regarded  from  a  distance  as  one  single  mountain.     No  one 
before  the  time  of  the   Christian  hermits  attached  any  in- 
terest in  connecting  a  fixed  geographical  notion  with  the 
name  that  had  been  transmitted.     We  only  read  of  Elijah 
that  he  fled  to  the  "Mount  of  God  Choreb,"   and  there 
(1  Kings  xix.  9)  went   into  the  same  cave  (for  it  is  pre- 
supposed that  it  is  known)   in  which  the  Lord  had  already 
appeared  to  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai   (2  Exodus  xxxiii.  22). 
The  native  Arab  tribes  by  degrees  became  so  much  changed, 
that  not  one  of  the  Old  Testament  names  remained  in  its 
original  position.     The   Grreeks  and  Eomans  only  knew  one 
spot  on  the  whole  Peninsula,  the  Palm-wood  of  Pharan,  be- 
cause this  spot  only,  and  the  harbour  leading  to  it,  was  of 
any  importance  since  the  mines  of  that  wilderness  had  been 
exhausted.     Eiran  must  of  necessity  have  been  the  earliest 
central  point  for  the   Christian  hermits  also  ;  that  moun- 
tainous wilderness,  aff'ording  necessary  means  of  sustenance, 
in   the    greatest    retirement,   must    have  appeared    better 
adapted  for  them  than  any  other  district,  since  here  we  also 
find  the  most    ancient    church   of  the    Peninsula.     When 
gradually  the  individual  Biblical  localities  began  to  be  more 
accurately  investigated,    people   had   no    other  means   for 
forming    their  determinations   than  we  possess  now,    and 
besides  understood  far  less  to  employ  these  means,  since  all 
acute  criticism  of  the  Biblical  passages,  which  could  alone 
give    them    information,    at    that   time    lay   far   removed. 
They   understood  the    name    Sinai    as    an   indeterminate 
appellation  for  the  whole  range ;  but  when  they  searched 
for    Sinai    in    a    siugle    mountain,     Seebal    then    must 


560  APPENDIX. 

have  immediately  presented  itself.  Thither  also  points 
all  that  we  read  about  the  matter  in  authentic  writings 
during  the  first  centuries,  but  to  these  the  writing  of  the 
monk  Ammonius  certainly  does  not  belong  in  the  opinion  of 
those  who  examine  accurately,  and  hardly  the  edifying 
romance  of  Nilus.  "What  Josephus  (Ant.  iii.  5)  says  of 
Sinai  (r6  ^lvoIov)  may  very  well  refer  to  Serbal,  at  all  events 
not  to  Gebel  Musa,  as  has  been  already  shown  by  Hogg  (in 
several  passages,  p.  207).  According  to  Eusebius,  Choreb 
and  Haphidim  were  situated  at  Pharan  (eyyvs  ^apdv,  see 
note,  p.  313),  and  Sinai  near  Choreb  (jrapaKeLTai  rw  opn  2iva, 
see  above).  Jerome  (s.  v.  Choreh)  regards  both  mounts  as 
one,  which  he  likewise  places  at  Pharak,  and  consequently 
recognises  in  Serbal.  The  account  by  jSTilus  also,  about 
the  Saracenic  attack  at  Sinai,  either  does  not  belong  to  the 
time  in  which  it  is  placed  (c.  400),  or  refers  to  Serbal,  for 
here  a  cliiircJi  {iKKhrjo-la)  is  frequently  (p.  38,  46)  mentioned, 
which  at  that  time  did  not  exist  at  Gebel  Musa,  and  Nilus, 
that  very  same  night  in  which  the  scattered  slain  had  been 
buried,  goes  down  to  Pharan,  which  would  have  been  impos- 
sible from  Gebel  Musa.  Finally,  Cosmas  Ikdicopleustes, 
who  traversed  the  Peninsula  about  the  year  535,  probably  im- 
mediately before  the  building  of  the  Justinian  church,  passes 
through  Eaithu,  i.  e.  Tor,  which  he  regards  as  Elim,  although 
he  only  found  a  few  palm-trees  there  (the  present  consider- 
able plantations  are,  therefore,  of  more  recent  date),  and 
across  the  present  AYadi  Hebran  to  Eaphidim,  which  is 
now  called  Phara:n".  Here  he  was  at  the  termination  of  his 
Sinai  journey.  From  this  spot  Moses  went  with  the  elders 
"  upon  the  Mount  Choreb,  i.  e.  Sinai,  which  is  about  6000 
paces  (one  mile  and  a  half)  distant  from  Pharan,"  and 
struck  the  water  out  of  the  rock ;  here  also  the  tabernacle 
of  the  congregation  was  built,  and  the  law  was  given; 
thereby  the  Israelites  besides  received  the  Scripture,  and 
had  leisure  to  learn  it  for  their  application ;  thence  we  may 
date  the  numerous  rock-inscriptions  which  are  still  to  be 
found  in  that  wilderness  (especially  at  Serbal).     (Eira  •noKiv 


APPENDIX.  561 

Trapcvepakov  ds  'Pa^idtV,  6i?  tt]u  vvv  KaXovfievTjv  ^apdv'  kol  bLyjrev- 
(TovTOiv  avTcop,  TTopeverat  Kara  Trpocrra^Lv  Beov  6  Mcovaiis  pera  tojv 
TTpea-fSvTepcov  Koi  rj  pa/356?  ev  tt]  x^^P*-  o.vtov,  els  Xcopfj^  to  opos, 
rovTecrriv  iv  t<o  2ivaia,  iyyvs  ovtl  t^?  ^apau  ws  ano  piKioiv  e^* 
(BurckHardt,  Trav.  in  Syr.  p.  611,  when  he  descended  Serbal, 
occupied  two  liours  and  a  half,  from  its  base  to  Wadi  Firan) 
KoX  €K€L  rrara^avLos  ttjv  Trerpav,  eppvrjcrev  vBara  TToAXa  kol  eiruv  6 
\a6s.  —  A-oiTTov  KareXrjXvdoTos  avrov  in  rov  opovs  irpoaraTTeTaL 
ino  Tov  6cov  TTOLelv  ttjv  (tkt]vt]v),  etc.  ( Topograph,  christ.  lib.  v. 
in  the  Coll.  nova  pair.  ed.  JB.  de  Monffaucon,  torn.  ii.  p.  195, 
seq.) 

This  testimony  of  an  unprejudiced  traveller  is  expressed 
with  as  much  distinctness,  as  it  is  worthy  of  confidence  and 
without  suspicion.  At  the  commencement  of  the  sixth  cen- 
tury, therefore,  according  to  this  eye-witness,  it  was  believed 
that  the  law  had  been  given  on  Seebal.  Cosmas  has  so  little 
doubt  about  the  matter,  that  he  does  not  even  mention  the 
southern  range.  Nevertheless,  we  must  admit  that  the 
monkish  population  had  already  spread  over  the  whole  of  the 
mountain  range,  especially  among  the  districts  in  a  sheltered 
situation  about  Gebel  Musa  ;  and  we  need  not  be  surprised 
that  a  different  view  was  formed  among  the  monks  there 
situated,  according  to  which  Moses  turned  to  the  south,  in- 
stead of  towards  the  north,  coming  from  the  height  of  "Wadi 
Hebran  (for  the  idea  that  Elim  was  Eaithu  was  a  fixed  con- 
viction already  cherished  by  the  convent,  prematurely  founded 
there).  Such  changes  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  Chris- 
tian topography.  But  however  closely  Horeb  and  Sinai,  Ea- 
phidim  and  the  Mount  of  the  Law,  appear  in  the  representa- 
tion, it  follows  again  from  this,  that  associated  with  Sinai, 
the  rock  from  which  the  water  flowed  was  moved  farther 
south.  The  monks  were  not  deterred  by  the  verses  at  the 
commencement  of  the  19th  chapter  from  transferring  the 
rock  of  Eaphidim,  and  consequently  Eaphidim  itself,  as  well 
as  the  thorn-bush  of  Horeb,  also  to  Gebel  Musa,  their  new 
Sinai;  there  in  Wadi  Leg'a  (Eobinson,  i.  p.  184)  it  is  still 
shown  for  the  admiration  of  travellers.    Thus  the  unlettered 

2o 


562  AppE^'DIx. 

appreliension  of  the  monks  tliat  Eapliidim  was  situated  at 
Sinai,  approaclied  nearer  to  the  truth  on  this  head  than  the 
more  recent  verbal  criticism. 

The  legate  of  Justinian  now  found  it  appropriate  to  found 
his  castle  in  that  secure  position,  and  to  build  a  church  at 
that  very  spot  for  the  hermits  who  were  dwelling  around  it. 
It  is  quite  conceivable  that  this  alone  would  have  contributed. 
to  attract  many  new  hermits  thither,  and  to  originate  a 
new  view  about  the  position  of  the  [Mount  of  the  Law,  if 
this  had  not  previously  existed.  But  how  both  views  accom- 
modated themselves  to  each  other  during  the  centiu-ies  imme- 
diately succeeding,  we  have  absolutely  no  distinct  proofs.  At 
all  events,  while  Mount  Si^'ai  is  frequently  mentioned  after 
the  foundation  of  the  bishopric  of  Pharan,  we  must  be  guarded 
not  to  understand  it  to  be  G-ebel  Musa,  unless  something 
further  is  said.  Ordinarily,  the  lofty  range  of  the  Peninsula 
seems  in  general  to  be  understood  by  it.  "When,  for  example, 
as  early  as  the  year  536,  therefore  probably  before  the  erec- 
tion of  the  church,  at  the  Concilium  sub  Mena  at  Constanti- 
nople, one  Theonas,  preshyter  et  legatus  S.  Montis  Sinai  et 
deserti  Baitliu  et  S.  ecdesicd  Pharan  (Qeoivas  ekeco  Beov 
TTpea-^vrepos  kol  airoKpicndpio'i  rov  dytov  opovs  2ipd  kol  t^s  iprjfxov 
'Vai6ov  Ka\  Trjs  Kara  ^apav  ayias  eKKk-qaias.  Harduiu,  vol.  ii.  p. 
1281)  is  named,  the  church  of  Pharan,  at  that  time  the 
still  undoubted,  most  important  central  point  and  bishopric 
would  have  been  first  mentioned,  if  the  monks  scattered  over 
the  whole  range  and  the  plain  of  Eaithu  had  not  been  regarded 
more  comprehensive,  and  on  that  account  placed  fii*st.  Le 
QuiEK"  (iii.  p.  753)  mentions  the  Episcopi  JBliaran  sivi  Mo7itis 
Sinai  in  succession,  and,  as  the  earliest  with  the  last  desig- 
nation, the  above-mentioned  Bishop  Jorius  (t  1033).  Since 
then,  and  even  since  Eutychius  (c.  910),  the  designation  of 
the  single  Gebel  Musa,  as  Sinai,  is  indeed  beyond  all  doubt. 


INDEX. 


A, 

Aahmes-nufre-ari,  mother  of  Ameno- 
phis  I.,  246 

Ababde  Arabs,  140, 154 

Abahuda,  \i.llaee  of,  240 

Abaris,  406,  416,  426,  446 

situation  of,  426—434 

same  as  Pelusixim,  431—434 

Abaton,  island  of,  123 

Abbas  Pascha,  45 

Abdebab,  Xnbian  Desert,  141 

Abd  el  Qurna,  liill  of  Thebes,  243,  271 

Abdin,  or  Blue  Nile,  174 

Abeken,  H.,  12,  55,  72,  94,  98,  132,  148, 
153, 159, 160, 194,  237,  273,  346 

Abel's  Tomb,  Palestine,  340 

Abke,  Xubia,  239 

Abir,  or  Qabir  Mount,  237 

Abocharagos,  the  Saracen  Prince,  557 

Abraham,  422,  485 

ben  David,  cited,  452 

Abu  el  Abas,  village  of,  172 

Dom,  town  of,  222,  229 

Hammed,  town  of,  17, 141 

arrival  at,  143 

Haras  at  mouth  of  Rahad,  148, 167 

Haschiu,  pro\ince  of  Berber,  145 

Kesheb,  ruins  of,  435,  iS-i 

Xugara,  mountain  chain  in  Nu- 
bian Desert,  141 

Eoasch,  Pyramids  of,  14, 59,  79 

Schar,  coast  of  Eed  Sea,  289 

Senejat,  mountain  chain  in  Nu- 
bian Desert,  141 

Sihha,  mountain  chain  in  Nubian 

Desert,  141 

Simbel,  temples  of,  20,  240 

Tleh,  Desert  of  Gilif,  214 

Zehmeh,  Gi.ilf  of  Suez,  22,  302,  365, 

547 

Abusir,  Pyramids  of,  13 

stone  inscribed  at,  69 

Sheikh  of,  76 

Abydos.  17,  23,  101,116 

Acca  (Ptolemais',  336 

Achencheres,  Exodus  was  placed  in 
reign  of,  489 

Achmed  Pascha,  129,  147,  160, 163,  187, 
191  198 

'—'  Pascha  Menekle,  130,  147,  205, 

190, 160 

Adar  Auib,141 

Adererat,  plain  of,  141 

AduHs,  town  of,  220 

Aennum  (Philotera),  22 

Africa,  certain  nations  in  Central,  45 


Africanus,  Julius,  cited,  419,  423,487,488 

lists  of,  418 

preserved  the  works 


of  :\Ianetho,  499 
Ag'a'ize  Arabs,  278 
Agamieh,  the  Faium,  97 
Ahmet  Pascha,  45 
Ai,  King,  261 
Ain  Gulut,  Syria,  335 

el  Haramieh,  Syria,  334 

Howareh,  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  547, 

548 

Uneh,  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  555 

Aithi,  Syria,  336 

Akaba,  gulf  of,  554 

Akoris,  position  of  town  of,  105 

Albert,  Prince  of  Prussia,  70 

Alabaster  quarry,  101, 114 

Alabastron,  ancient,  115 

Alexandria,  13, 41 

obelisks  in,  corroded  by 

weather,  42,  369 
Alexander  of  Macedon,  252,  452,  456 
Alexandiian  library,  382, 496 
critics,  487 


Ali,  a  Bischari,  241 

Alluvial  soil  above  Cataract  of  Assuan, 
527 

Aloa,  kingdom  of,  163 

Altars  at  Wadi  el  Kirbesan,  194 

.Utar,  Ethiopian,  223 

Alus,  Peninsvila  of  Sinai,  547,  548 

Amada,  near  Korusko,  20,  240 

Amara,  ^^llage  of,  19,  237 

Amama,  valley  El,  101, 114, 115,  262, 322 

Amasis  I.,  114 

King,  said   to  be  buried  in 

Sphinx,  67 

Ambukol,  Nubia,  231 

Amen-Ea,  382 

hymn  to,  in  Egyptian  "col- 
lection of  Mr,  Sams,  London,  392 

Amenemha  I.,  391,  395 

III.,  15,  20,  91,  239,  301,  527 

Amenophis,  405,  408,  420,  497 

I.,  246,  248 

II.,  237 

III.,  19,  222,  236,  237,  253, 

256,  261,  485 

IV.,  19,  27,  262,  278, 322 


Ammon  Ra,  126,  223,  248 

Ambaric  language  kno^Ti  by  Isenberg, 

39 
Ammonius,  the  Monk,  cited,  555,  557 
Amnis  Ptolemseus,  a  canal,  440,  444 
Amosis,  424,  486,  488,  497 

o2 


56^ 


I^'DEX. 


Ampere,  M..  cited,  121.  278 

Amru  entered  Egypt  with  iOOO  Arabs, 

■ioO 
Anianos.  40S 
Anibe.  village  of,  20,  240 
Aunals  of  the  Monarchy  as  early  as  the 

first  Dynasties,  3S0 
Anti-Lib'anon,  33S 
Autinoe,  ancient,  113 
Antiochus  Epiphaues,  409 
Antoninus  Placentiniis,  55S 
Ants,  larse  black,  13S 
Aphophis,  King,  479,  4S7,  4SS 
Apiou,  cited,  411,  421,  423 
Apis,    the,    taken   by   Ainenophis    to 

Ethiopia,  407 
Apries  '■  Hophre),  inscription  belonging 

to  Temple  of.  43 
Arab,  Ababde,  140, 154 

Ag  aize,  278 

'Auadieh,  214 

Schaigieh,  214,  229 

carele'ssuess  in  cookery,  280 

discontented  with  pay  for  camels, 

130 

explanation  of  term.  76 

family,  manners  of,  27*3 

hospitality,  277 

venseance,  271, 321 

Arabian  Gulf,  4;i4,  437,  441,  442 
races  oniUy  transmit  register 

of  ffenerations,  45S 
Arabic  characters,  25S,  311 
inscription,  550 — 552 

language,  228,  231 

music,  1S2 

Arbagi,  village  of,  166 

Arch,  pointed  and  round,  73,  74 

Archaeology  of  Egypt,  2S 

Archimedes  invented  water-screw  in 

Eg^-pt,  .384 
Architecture  in  Egypt,  383 
Argo,  island  of,  17,  233 
Argonsene,  ruins  of  town  at,  235 
Ariston,  cited,  554 
Aristotle,  cited,  439,  444 
Arnaut  soldiers,  198 
Arsinoe  II.,  109 

town  of,  93,  435,  437,  440,  444 

Art,  canon  of  proportions  in  Egyptian, 

21,  lis,  3S3 

Ethiopian    more     recent    than 

Egyptian,  152 

-"in  Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  IS 

history  of,  in  Egypt,  28 

Artaxerses,  279,  386 
Artemidorus,  553,  554,  555 
Artim  Bey,  189 

Artists  of  Greece,  educated  in  E^vpt, 

383 
Asasif,  valley  of,  254,  264 
Asses  in  Berber,  157 
Astronomy  of  Egyptian  priests,  386 
knowledge  of,  necessary  to 

chronologj-,  396,  398 
Assuan,  20ri04, 118 


Assiian,  granite  rocks  of,  32,  371 

Assur,  plain  of,  150 

Astaboras  river.  146 

Atbara.  province  of  Berber,  146 

Atfeh,  Mle  at.  43 

Athanasius  in  Theban  desert,  266 

Atrib  (Athribis)  iu  Xile  Delta,  333 

Atschan,  range  of,  158, 193 

Auatt'b,  valley  of,  156 

'Auad,  the  guide,  271 

'Auadieh  Arabs,  214 

Arum,  Abyssinia,  220 

Ayur  Musa,  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  547,  543 

B. 

Baal  Zophou,  427 
Bab  Allah,  gate  of  Damascus,  a43 
Bab  el  Meluk,  Thebes,  241 
Babylon,  437,  440,  445 
Babvlonian  prisoners,  482 
Bachit,  village  of,  230 
Baeeh,  temple  of,  526 
Bahiuda,  desert  of.  213 
Bahr-bela-ma.  theFaium,  95,  1.36 

Jussuf,  the  Faium,  15,  92,  96 

'Hatab,  Nubian  desert,  137 

Soheitan.  or  mirage,  142 

Scherkieh,  the  Falum,  94 

Wardaui  (the  Faium),  94 

Balbeck,  346 
Ban-tree,  227 
Baobab-trees,  166 
Barada  river,  339 
Barbarus  of  Scaliser,  453 

Barkal,  Mount,  IS,  220,  222 

Bartlett,  H..  cited.  535 

Barquq,  Sultan,  94 

Batu  el  Hatrer,  province  of,  237 

Basilica  in  AVadi  Gazal,  21S 

Bauer,  Herr,  of  Kamlin,  189,163 

Bech-en-aten  (King  AmenopMs  IT.), 
114,  262,  278 

Bedouin,  the,  86 

explanation  of  term  of,  76 

Beg  a  language,  31.  242,  244 

plain  of,  •■>48 

Beserauieh,  village  of,  17,  150,  152,  195, 
209,  212 

Behbet  el  Hager  (Iseum),  in  Xile  Delta, 
23,  333 

Berber.  Mudhir  of,  131 

Beida,  \-illage  of,  198 

Belbes.  Israelites  were  settled  near,  443 

Beled  Ellaqi.  village  of,  241 

Belled  e'  Nuba,  village  of,  228 

Benihassan,  tombs  of,  16, 101, 110— U3 

Ben  Nasa,  village  of.  153  154, 194 

Beni-Suef,  town  of,  15,  100,  322 

Kensi,  tribe  of,  241 

Berscheh,  village  of,  16, 101,  113,115 

Bertheau,  cited,  464 

Bet  el  UaUi,  temple  of,  124 

Berut  (Bervtos),  Svria,  336,  356 

Bethin  'Bethel),  Syria,  334 

Bethmann,  Dr.,  23,  322 

Biahmu,  monuments  of,  96 


rs-DEx. 


565 


Bigeh,  island  of.  20. 120 

temple  of,  .5:31 

Bir  Ambar.  sprint  of,  277 

Birds,  collection  of,  160 

on  Blue  River,  168 

Bireh.  village  of.  .>a4 

Birket  e"  temsah,  4-^4 

Birqet-el-Qorn.  the  Faium,  15,  &2,  93, 
95.  97 

Biscay,  Bay  of,  37 

Bischariba  people.  2ii 

Bischaris,  the,  !¥) 

Bisehari  language.  241 

Bitter  lakes,  i:yf,  UO,  442,  444 

Bischeh,  the  Faiiim,  97 

Blemves,  the,  242 

Blue  River,  162 

birds,  trees,  monkevs.  ice, 

lfiS,169  '    ■ 

Bocchoris,  King.  42-3 

Bockh,  cited,  lu7,  242.  424,  494 

letter  to,  from  Dr.  Lepsius,  5f>S 

Boghos  Bey,  confidential  minister  of 
Mohammed  Ali,  4<i,  40. 1S9 

Bokty,  the  Prussian  consul,  47 

Bonomi,  J.,  travelline  companion,  12. 35, 
4-5.  56,  57.  9S 

Book  of  the  Dead,  3S1,  392 

Braun,  Herr  Julius.  41 

Bricks  of  Mle  mud,  372 

Bricks,  burnt,  of  Babylon.  373 

Brick-vaulted  roofs,  373 

Britan.  Syria,  34<3 

British  Museum,  394 

Bscherreh,  Svria,  reception  at.  351 

Sheikh  of.  352 

Bubastis,  369,  429,  436,  44S,  449 

Bubastic  arm  of  Nile,  427,  42S 

Bueribs,  the,  154, 157 

Bulaq,  harbour  of  Cairo,  44 

Bunsen.  Chev.,  cited,  aS7,  392,  420,  424, 
471,  492,  499,  526 

last  friend  seen  in  Eng- 
land, 35 

Bujurldis.    See  Firman. 

Burckhardr,  cited.  33S,  532,  551,  561 

Burial  near  Blue  River,  176 

Bunins  alive  in  Fazoql,  202 

Byblus^(Gel>el),  355 


Cailliaud,  cited,  150, 154,155, 209 
Calippus.  cycle  of,  454 
Caesar,  Augustus,  252,  266 
Cairo,  23,  4i— 4*5,  SO 

festival  in.  70 

Cambyses,  251,  279 

Camel,  explanation  of  term,  SI 

drivers,  imposition  of,  216 

Camels,  want  of,  130 

Camp,  attack  on,  at  Saqara,  75 

life  iu  the,  56,  S7 

nieht  in  Egyptian  military,  2W 

Canal  between  Xile  and  Red  Sea,  441 

—44.5 
Xile.  436 


Canal,  Rosetta,  43 

Canals  in  Egypt,  4S3 

Caudace,  Queen,  196 

Canons  of  proportions,  2S,  11«,  3S3 

Canopic  arm  of  Nile,  447 

Carians,  the  frontier  guard  near  Pelu- 

sium.  429 
Carmel.  Mount.  3:36 
Castle  of  Abd  el  Qurna,  243 

Abke.  2:39 

Hellet  el  Bib,  236 

Sese,  236 

Cataract,  second,  131 

countrv,  excursion  to,  225 

of  Kalfa.  237 

Cataracts  in  provinces  of  Schaiqieh  and 

Monassir.  22S 

239 

Cemetery  of  Meroe,  212 

Cepheus^  Kins.  423 

Cliafra  (Cheph%Ten) ,  Pyramid  of,  59 

Chairemon.  cited,  434 

Champion.  M.,  the  Austrian  consul,  45, 

47 
Champollion,  Figeac.  cited,  25,  51,  107, 

110, 112.  119,  120,  124,  266,  527 

cited.3Sl,  394.  4^3!.  4.35 


Chanter,  the  two  books  of,  3S8 
Chartum,  15, 130, 131, 15S,  190,193 
Chemmis,  115 
Cheucheres,  King,  422,  4S9 
Cheops,   writing  on  the  montiments 

since  the  time  of.  37 
(Chufu).  Pvramidof,  48,  59,  72, 

372 
. tablet  on, 

— '- King.  110, 114 

Chephren.    SeeSchafra 

Chor  el  Ammer.  desert  of  Gilif.  216 

Ban,  227 

Choreb.    See  Horeb 

559 

Chorosraphy  of  Egypt,  29 
Choscii  e"  Guriif,  Xuba  village,  228 
Christian  chrouolosists  on  the  i>eriod 

of  the  Exodus,  421 
Christianity  in  Nubia,  231 
Christmas  at  Pvramids,  55 

Thebes.  273 

Chronicle,  old,  497,  49S 
Chronolo2T.  396 

^  Old  Testament,  490, 492 

]yianethonic.  490 

Chronological  character  of  Jewish  His- 

torv.  i<!l 
Chronolosrists,   Jewish  and  Christian, 

421 
Churches  and  convents.  Christian,  230, 

267 
Church,  Coptic,  2S7 

of  Masral,  231 

Churshid  Pascha,  163, 195 
a^-ilisation  of  Egypt  during  the  first 

Dvnasties,  25 
Clavis  Xilotica,  210 


566 


INDEX. 


Clemens  of  Alexandria,  387,  392,  398, 423 
Cleobulus,  sage  of  Liudus,  381 
Cleopatra,  Queen,  44'i 
inscription  referring 

to,  106 
Cleopatra's  Xeedle,  42 
Climate  in  Peniusida  of  Sinai,  545 

224 

— at  Thebes,  103 

Clot  Bey,  M.,  32,  24G 

Clysma  Pocmes,  bishop  of,  557 

Codex  of  Sracellus,  489 

Mediceus,  437 

Computation  of  time,  Egyptian,  497 

Contracts,  era  of  the,  452 

Convent  at  Gebel  3iasa,  291,  305,  556 

in  "Wadi  Gazal,  218 

Copper  mines  in  Peninsula,  22,  300,  301 
Coptic  characters,  27,  94,  109,  117,  123, 

158,  277, 394,  426 

churches,  219,  237,  260 

plan  of,  219 

inscription,  220 

language  eucoiu-aged  by  Lieder's 

exertions,  36 

population  near  Thebes,  268 

school,  3() 

settlement,  278 


Copts,  the,  270 

Corinth,  Isthmus  of,  442 

Cosmas  Indicopleustes,  cited,  31S,  320, 

558,  560 
Costume  in  Cairo,  80 
worn  by  travellers  in  Thebes, 

104 
Crocodiles  of  Blue  River,  169 

eggs,  175 

Crocodilopohs,  remains  of,  15,  97 
Croly,  Rev.  Dr.,  540 
Cuneiform  iusciiptions,  443 
Customs  in  southern  provmces,  202 
Cynocephalus,  172 

D. 

D'Abadie,  cited,  99 
Dahela,  village  of,  175 
Dakkeh  (Pselchis),  17,  20,  242 
Dal,  frontier  village,  237 

Haul,  island  of,  149 

Damascus,  340 

journey  to,  336—340 

Damietta,  23 
Dams  of  Lake  Moeris,  95 
D'Anastasi,  M.,  the  Swedish   consul- 
general,  39, 394 
Darner,  village  of,  133, 146, 147, 149 
Danai,  the  flight  of,  424 
Danaus,  383,  408, 421 
Daugeleh,  village  of,  209 
D'Anville,  cited,  427,  431,  433,  4;>4 
Daphka,  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  540, 547, 548 
Daphni  of  Pelusium,  429 
Darabuka  kettle-drum,  184 
Dar  Fur,  30,  234 

language  of,  244 

Darius,  439,  4i0,  irt2 


Darius  II..  252,  279 

Darmali,  village  of,  228 

Daschiir,  Pyramid  of,  13,  79,98 

Dedications  on  Temples,  379 

Date  of  the  Exodus,  470—474,  449—457, 

490 
Debbet  e'  Ramleh,  plain  of,  300 
Deb6d,  17,  20, 123,  242 
Debu,  temple  at,  526 
Decades,  or  Egyptian  weeks,  398 
Decius,  Emp.,  206 
Defterdar  Bcv,  195 
Defufa,  tomb' of,  2;J4 
Delta  of  the  Nile,  369,  483,  486 
Dender  River,  170 
Dendera,  temple  of,  17,  2S,  101,  110,116, 

322 
Dendur,  temple  of,  17,  20, 12 i,  242 
Der  el  Ahmar,  %'illage  in  Syi-ia,  346 

Bachit,  convent  of,  267 

Bahri,  convent  of,  267 

Medinet,  convent  of,  267,  381 

De  Rozifere,  cited,  443 

Derr,  temple  of,  126,  232,  240,  356 

Desert,  Nubian,  l:'.3, 143 

journey  through,  214 

Derut-Scherif,  15 

Dhafari,  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  547 

Dileb-Palms,  171 

Dimeh,  in  the  Faium,  15, 97 

Dinka  tribes,  149 

language,  161 

Diocletian,  Emp.,  inscription  in  honour 

of,  42 
Diodorus,  cited,  123,  202,  260,  381,  383, 

391,  408,  421,  429,  439,  480,  483,  553,  554 
Diodorus,  Exodus  according  to,  409  . 
Di\ision  of  time,  398 
Doko,  country  of  the,  46 
Dongola,  province  of,  19,  458 

new,  233 

old,  232 


Dom-Palms,  137,  218 
Doseh,  the  trampling,  71 
Dromedary,  explanation  of  term,  81 
pace  of,  139 


Du  Bois  Ayme,  cited,  435, 436 

Durra  grain,  143,  154 

Dynasty,  Elephantine,  collateral,  60 

Dynastic  Lists,  497 

Dynasties,  tables  of  Egyptian,  499,  506 

E. 

Echmim,  inscription  in  rock  grotto  of, 
23, 109, 115 

Edbai,  countrv  of  Bischari  tribes,  242 

Edfu,  temple  of,  17,  20,  117 

Egypt,  archaeology  of,  29 

civilisation  of,  during  first  Dy- 
nasties, 25 

climatal  conditions  of,  368,  369 

famine  in,  481 

geography  and  chorography  of, 

29 

history  of,  367 

history  of  art  in,  27 


INDEX. 


567 


Egypt,  mythology  of,  26 

philo]ogy~^of,  26 

resarded  as  a  university  for  plii- 

losophy,  3Si 

Egyptian  administration  under  the  old 
kings  of  the  country,  482 

Museum  in  Berlin,  views  re- 
specting its  decoration,  324 

gods,  381,  392 

annals.  King  of  the  Exodus  in. 


canon  of  proportions,  383 
chronologies   not  opposed  to 


4i: 


Hebrew,  437 

collection  of  Mr.  Sams,  392 

prophets,  413 


Ehden,  village  of,  353 
Ehrenberg,  his  views  respecting  lumi- 
nosity of  sea,  37 

cited,  234,  239,  290 

Eileithyia,  ancient,  117 

El  Ain  in  Libanon,  338 

Kl  Akarid,  village  of,  150 

El  Ammer,  valley  of,  216 

Elanitic  Gulf.  554 

El  Bosra,  alabaster  quarries  at,  21,  31, 

114, 115 
El  Bueb,  hill  of,  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  298 
El  Chor,  province  of  Berber,  145 
El  Elam,  in  the  Faium,  95, 96 
Elephantine,  island  of,  20 
El  Famt,  hill  of,  Xubian  Desert,  141 
El  Ge'ah,  plain  of,  290,  296 
El  Gos,  plain  of,  215 
El  Gues,  village  of,  212 
El  Hai,  well  of,  291 
El-Harib,  tombs  of,  16 
El  Hessue,  vaUey  of,  298,  318 
El  Hibe,  monuments  of,  23 
El  Kab,  rock  tombs  of,  20, 117 
El  Kenis^e,  castle  of,  239 
El  Orde  (Xew  Dongola),  233 
El  Qorn,  mountains  of,  277 
Elim,  306,  307,  54S,  551,  560 
Elijah,  559 

Eleians,  then-  Olympian  games,  383 
Em  Bey,  289 

Emigrants  from  Semitic  countries,  410 
Emir  Pascha,  131, 146,  159, 186, 189, 192 
Enned  Mountains,  288 
Era  of  the   Greeks  adopted   by    the 

Jews,  452 

—  Grecian,  456 

—  of  Contracts  adopted  by  the  Jews, 
452 

—  of  the  Seleucidae  adopted  by  the 
Jews,  452 

Eratosthenes,  cited,  437 

Erbkam,  G.,  member  of  the  expedition, 
12,  28,  39,  45,  53.  72,  74,  79,  81,  83,  97, 
147,  153,  195,  230,  235,  243,  259 

Erectheus,  King  of  Athens,  383 

Erment  (Hermonthis),  temple  at,  17 

E'  Seleha,  valley  of,  156 

Esneh,  temple  of,  17,  20, 117 

Mudliir  of,  131 


E'  Sofra,  valley  of,  156 

I  E'  Sufr,  vallev  of,  137 

!  E'  Sur,  village  of,  209 

I  Ethiopian  aft  more  recent  than  Egyp- 

j      tian,  152 

: •  civilisation  later  than  Egyp- 

!     tian,  244 

demotic  writing,  207 

■ inscriptions,  31 

'  Ethiopians  of  Meroe,  208 

!  Ethiopia,  flight  to,  407,  416 

I  Et.  Quatremere,  cited,  435 

I  E'  Tih,  descent  of,  300 
Eudoxus,  384,  386 

'  Euergetes  II.,  inscription  referring  to, 

i      105 

,  Eusebian  canon,  489 
Eusebius,  cited,  313,  422,  453,  489,  498, 

499,  555,  500 
Eutychius.    See  Said  ben  Batrik 
Ewald,  cited,  310,  424,  427,  430,  464,  548 
Exodus,  date  of  the,  449—457,  470—474 

according  to  Diodorus,  409 

according  to  Hecataeus,  408 

according  to  Manetho,  405— 

1      407 

I of  the  Hyksos,  preserved  by 

i     Manetho,  410 
of  Israelites,  410,  411 


same  as  expulsion 

of  lepers  related  by  Manetho,  404 

of  lepers  same  as  of  Israelites, 

412—417 

Expedition,  chief  purpose  historical,  24 
French-Tuscan,  24 


Ezbe.  roads  of,  333 
Ezbekieh  square,  in  Cairo,  80 


Fadnie  village,  154 
Fakir  in  Abu  Dom,  229 

of  Taiba,  187 

Daha,  his'sepulchre,  229 

Fenti,  castle  of,  235 


Faium.  the,  14,  92—98 

journey  to,  83 

Fallot  Xile,  521 

Thames,  520 

Falmouth,  scenerj-  about,  36 

Famine  in  Egypt,  481 

Faran  in  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  31,  554 

Fazoql,  customs  in,  202 

Fellah,  explanation  of  term  of,  76 

industrious,  260 

Ferhat  Pascha,  131 

Ferlini,  treasuie found  by,  151, 197 

Fidimin,  village  of,  97 

Finisterre,  cape,  37 

Firan,  in  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  547,  559 

Firman  of  Viceroy,  with  permit  to  the 
Prussian  expedition  to  coUect  Egyp- 
tian moniuneuts,  40,  42 

Fishes,  Egyptian  collection  of,  32 

Fortress  at  Bachit,  231 

of  Karat  Negll,  230 

at  Tifar,  232 


568 


INDEX. 


Frauke,  member  of  the  expedition,  39, 

53,  57,  75. 153,  198,  210 
Franz,  cited,  106 
French -Tuscan  expedition,  24 
French  expedition,  436,  4.38,  44;j 
Frey,  J.,  the  painter,  12,  3.S,  98 
Funeral  ceremony  in  "Wed  Medineh, 

183 

G. 
Ganz,  cited,  452 
Gabre  Mariam,  the  Abyssian  boy,  181, 

187,  275 
Gabuschie,  village  of,  196, 198 
Gaqediil,  in  Desert  of  Gilif,  214 
Garizim,  Mount,  334 
Gau,  cited,  123,  526 
Gauata,  village  of,  101, 115 
Galba,  Emp.,  266 
Gaza,  road  into  Egvpt  from,  429 
G'e'ah,  plain  of,  290,  296 
Gebel.  villasre  of.  209 

Abrak,  217 

Abu  Gueh,  278 

■ Schegere,  292 

Senejat,  141 

Sihha,  141 

Adar  .Viub,  141 

Aschtan.  158 

Barkal,  IS,  220,  222 

Barqugres,  215 

Buerib,  154 

Dah'i,  335 

Deqa,  231 

Uoohau,  32,  281,  286 

red  porphyry  of,  288, 37i 

Dosche,  236 

El  Bab,  136 

Enned,  2S9 

Farut,  141 

Eatireh,  31,' 280 

Graibat,  141 

Hammam,  hot  springs  of,  291 

Katherhi,  292,  293 

Kongeli,  226 

Lagar,  156 

Maauad,  277 

Maqa],  228 

el 3Iageqa,  216 

Mograd,  141 

Musa,  292,  303,  315,  532,  544,  563 

Mount  of  the  Law,  532 

convent  of,  556 


e'  Naffa.  155. 156 

•  Nusf,  214 
Omarda,  214 
Qermana,  214 

•  Qettar,  292 
Rauian,  158 

■  Roft,  138 

■  Sefsaf,  293 

■  Selin,  115 

■  Selseleh,  371 

■  Sereen,  214 

•  Silsilis,  117 
-  e'  Tih,  300 

■  e  Tur,  335 


Gebel  Fm  Riglen,  292 

Um  Schomer,  292,  297 

Zeit,  2S9 

Gedideh,  in  Syria,  340 

Greez  inscription,  208 

Geg,  pro\-ince  of  Berber,  145 

Genealogies,  registers  of,  458,  460 

Generations,  register  of,  458 

Genua,  village  of,  150 

Gennin  (Egennin),  SjTia,  335 

Geography  of  Egypt,  29 

Geological  structure  of  Lower  Nubia, 

522 
Geometry,  the  knowledge  of.  390 
Georgi,  O.,  the  painter,  12.  222, 187 
I  Georgius  Syncellus,  cited,  498 
Gferaschab,  Schellal  of,  158 
Gerbe  Dandour,  monument  at,  526 
Gerf  Hussen,  temples  of,  20,  124,  126, 

242,  356 
Gerf  e'  Schech,  village  of,  228 
Germanicus,  visit  to  remains  of,  ancient 

Thebes,  266,  393 
Gertassi,  in  Ethiopia,  123 
Gesch,  reed  grass,  213 
Gesenius,  cited,  431,  548 
Geziret-el-Qorn,  island  of,  97 
Ghabine,  village  of,  209 
Gharaq  Lake,  98 
Gibba,  in  Syria,  343 
Gibraltar,  38 
Gilif,  desert  of,  213 

Gimscheh,  or  Kebrit,  Peninsula  of,  289 
Girsche,  242 
Gism  Haifa,  241 
Gizeh,  PjTaraids  of,  13,  47,  79 
Goba,  in  Syria,  344 
Gobat,  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  39 
Gods,  Egyptian,  381,  392 
Gomra,  island  of,  150 
Gorata,  near  source  of  Blue  Xile,  99 
Gos  Basabir,  village  of,  158 

I Burri,  village  of,  214 

Goshen,  land  of,  49,  410,  411,  414,  43  , 

448 
Granite  of  Assuan,  371 
Greek  inscriptions,  31, 105, 122, 125,  220, 
240,  550 

philosophers,  385 

Greeks,  era  of  the,  452,  456 
Gulf  of  Akaba,  554 

Arabian,  4:34 

Guneh,  in  Syria,  355 

Gungules,  fruit  of  Baobab-tree,  166 


Habak  herb,  296 

Hadrian,  Emperor,  113,  288 

Haser  Merui,  white  rock  in  Province  of 

Robatat,  226 
H alpha  (Hejiha),  Syria,  336 
Hair,  Arab  mode  of  greasing,  144 
Halfai,  or  Nile,  205 
Haluf,  Nuba  village,  228 
Haraada-trees,  295 
Hamd^b,  district  of,  225 


INDEX. 


569 


Hamitic  languages,  31 

Hammam  Faraun,  in  Peninsula  of  Sinai, 

554 
Seidna  Soliman,  tower  of, 

237 
Hammamat,  quarries  of,  22,  32,  278,  321 
Hammer,  von,  341 
Hannik,  in  province  of  Mahas,  235 
Haram  el  Gizeli,  Pyramids  of,  47 
Hay,  cited,  271 
Hassan  Kaschef,  of  Derr,  127,241 

Pascha,  131,146. 192,  218,  232,235 

Hathor,  temple  to,  in  Dendera,  116 
Heathen  temples  mutilated  by  Chris- 
tians, 267 
Hebrew  Chronologies  not  opposed  to 

Egyptian,  457 

commentators,  477 

numbers,  uncertainty  of,  402 

tradition,  401 

Hecataeus,  of  Abdera.Exodus  according 

to,  408 

cited,  260,  408 

Heglik-tree,  217 

Heliopolis,  46,  369,  384, 406,  408, 413,  414, 

448 
priest  of,  Joseph  marries 

the  daughter  of,  411 

(Balbeck),  346 

Hellet  el  Bib,  ruins  of,  226 

e'  Soliman,  village  of,  188,  205 

Hengstenberg,  cited,  544 
Henniker,  Sir  Fr.,  551 
Heracleopolis  Parv^a,  429 
Hermanovich,  Dr.,  160, 190 
Hermes,  Book  of  the  Dead  ascribed  to, 

392 

Trismegistus,  citation  from,  270 

Hermetic  books,  382,387,  391,397 
Hermonthis,  ancient    (Erment),  near 

Thebes,  117 
Hermopolis  Parva  (Damanhur),  447 
Hero,  same  as  Heroonpolis,  435 
Herodotus,  cited,  119,  383,  384,  429,  432, 

439,  442,  417,  480,  481 
Heroonpolis,  434,  435,  437,  445,  555 

situation  of,  434, 43S 

Hierasykaminos,  inscriptions  of,  125 
Hieroglyphical  inscriptions  on  rock,  458 
Hieroglyphic  writing,  377 
Hieroglyphics,  27,  58,  59,  109,  196,  223, 

236,  377,  381, 382,  413, 420,  426 
Hierogammatist,the,  or  Sacred  Scribe, 

387 
Hiersolymna,  built  by  Moses  according 

to  Hecataeus.  408 
Hieratical,  or  Priest  Books,  387 
Hillel,  the  astronomer,  454 
Hippopotamus,  158 

on  Blue  River.  170 

Historical  book  literature,  394 
literature  necessary  to  resto- 
ration of  true  history,  399 

sense  in  the  Egyptian  cha- 


racter, 374 
Hobi,  island  of,  153 


Hogg,  Mr.  John,  540,  560 
Hopkins,  W„  cited,  522 
Horeb  (Chqreb),  293,  304,  314,  533 
Horner,  L.,  paper  on  bed  of  Nile,  Ap 
pendix,  507 

cited,  239 


Horoscopi,  the,  or  time-seers,  388 
Horus,  King,  259,  405.  420 
Horns,  the  god  at  temple  of  Edfu,  117 
Hospitahty,  Arabian,  277 
Hospital  in  Wed  Medineh,  185 
Hoskins,  150, 154, 155 
Howara,  village  of,  84 
Humboldt,  A.  von,  105,  532 
Hyksos,  the,  395,  406,  421,  476, 472 

time  of,  485 

Exodus  of  the,  410 

banishment  of,  417 

Dynasties  of  the,  488 

invasion  of  the,  427 

endof  rule,  428 


,486 


Hymn  to  Amen-Ra,  in  E.gyptian  col- 
lection of  Mr.  Sams,  London,  392 
Hymns  to  the  God,  389, 392 


lamblichus,     concerning    Hermetic 

books,  382 
Ibrahim  Aga  (Kawass)131,  198,275 
Ibrahim  Cher,  a  Syrian,  house  of,  160 

191 

Hassan,  death  of,  in  SjTia,  346 

Pascha,  47, 101, 198 


Ibrim  (ancient  Primis),  20, 125, 240,  241 
Ideler,  cited,  450,  453 
Illahun,  Pyramid  of,  83,  93 
Indigo  factory  in  Kamlin,  163 
Tamaniat.  191 


Inscription  on  temple  of  Begerauieh,  151 
on  rock  grotto  of  Echmim, 


on  obelisk  of  Heliopolis,  46 
at  Philae,  120,  243 
on  temple  of  Pselchis,  105 
of  Edfu,  117 


at  Konosso,  120 
at  Xaharieh,  43 
on  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  52 
of  Meroe,  206 


42 


at  Soba,  165 
of  Silco,  242 
at  Talmis,  123 
Arabic,  232,  550,  552 
Ethiopian  demotic,  223, 237 
Greek.  240 

in  Gertassi,  123 

on  Pompey's  pillar. 


at  Coptic  church  in 


Wadi  Gazal,  220 

Inscriptions,  30,  245,  379 

modern  hieroglj-phics  com- 
memorative of  Prussian  expedition, 
57 

Greek  and  Coptic,  220 

Greek  and  Egyptian,  278 


670 


INDEX. 


Inscriptious,  hieroglyphic,  114 

Roman,  345 

Sinaitic,  291,  294,  299,  311 

Rock,  239,  560 

in  Uutial  characters,  367 

Ischischi,  Island  of,  225,  231 

Isenberg,  missionary,  39,  47 

Ishmael  had  an  Egyptian  mother,  410 

Isis,  chapel  to,  in  Mehendi,  126 

statue  of,  223 

temple  to,  at  Philse,  120 

Ismael  Pascha,  161, 195,  205 

Israelites,  the,  414,  446,  448, 458 

Exodus  of,  410,  411 

not  the   only  strangers  in 

Egypt,  410 

,  journey  of  the,  305 

,  time  occupied  in  journey  to 

Sinai,  548—550 

Israelitish  people,  destiny  of  the,  459 

Isthmus  of  Suez,  geogi'aphical  condi- 
tions, 426 

Itinerariimi,Aiitonini,  317,  448,  449 

situation  of  Heroonpolis 


given  in,  435 


J. 


Jacob,  meeting  between  Joseph  and, 

435 
JafiFa,  23 

Janni  Nicola,  290 
Jassur  bush,  295 
Jericho,  334 
Jeroboam  I.,  King,  worship  of  sun -bull 

introduced  into  Palestine  by,  413 
Jerome,  St.,  313,  317, 555, 560 
Jerusalem,  39,  334 
Jesreel,  plains  of,  336 
Jewish  calendars,  453 
chronology,  450 

chronologists,  421 

generations,  45S— 470 

history,  chronological  character 

of,  401 

—  hst,  497 

temple  of  Onias,  449 

Jews,  the  account  of,  by  Diodorus,  409 
Jomard,  431 

Jorius,  bishop  of  Mount  Sinai,  558,  562 
Joseph,  410,  413,  435,  481,  483 

in  Egypt,  476—484 

Josephus,  cited,  313,  316,  416,  417,  418, 

423,  424,  427, 433,  459,  460, 476,  487,  497, 

548, 554, 560 

lists  of,  419 

Joshua,  book  of,  450 

Judaea,  foreigners  in  Egypt  fled  to,  408 

Judges,  book  of,  450 

Jussuf,  Dragoman,  133,  275 

Justinian,  convent  built  by  Emperor, 

319,  551,  556,  562 
.  Justin  Martyr,  cited,  423 

K. 

Kafr  el  Batran,  village  of,  76 

Kalabscheh,  17,  20, 192,  242,  526 


Kalfa,  cataract  of,  237 
Kamlin,  163,  189 
Karabel,  rock-picture  of,  24 
Karat  Negil,  fortress  of,  230 
Karnak,  20, 102, 247,  248—253 
Kasingar,  village  of,  225,  227 
Kasuin,  Mount,  341 
Katarif,  village  of,  186 
Kawass,  the,  87 

Ibrahim,  149, 170 


Keli,  funeral  ceremony  in,  211 

Kenes,  island  of,  120 

Kerak,  tomb  of  Noah  at,  337 

Kerman,  village  of,  233 

Kibrit,  Peninsida  of,  289 

Kings  of  Egypt,  succession  of,  26 

Ki-si-Tuthotep,  tomb  of,  113 

Kisch,  or  Kischiga,  village  of,  242 

Klotsch,  Dr.,  cited,  227 

Klvsma,  at  the  head  of  Arabian  Gulf,  435 

Koch,  Dr.,  147, 160 

Koi,  remains  of  towns  at,  235 

Kolzum,  convent  of,  557 

Kom  el  Birat,  village  of,  271,  321 

Kongara  language,  30,  234 

Konosso,  island  of,  20, 120 

Koptos,  ancient  (Quft),  22 

Kordofan,  brother  of  Sultan  of,  161 

Korte,  temple  of,  124 

Korusko,  17,  105, 127, 130,  240 

Kosser,  22,  279,321 

Kosser  road,  hieroglyphical  inscription 

on  rock  of,  458 
Krapf,  the  missionary,  39,  45, 47 
,  on  certain  nations  in  Central 

Africa,  45 
Kteffe  valley,  547 
Kuban  (Contra  Pselchis),  20,  242 
Kuch,  territory  of,  225 
Kum-Ombo,  temple  of,  17 
Kum-Ahmar,  rock-tombs  of,  15 
Kummeh,  village  of,  19,  238 
Kumr  beta  D'ahela,  village  of,  175 
Kungara  language,  244 
Kurru,  Pyramids  of,  229 

L. 

Labyrinth,  arrangement  of,  90 

founder  of,  15 

ruins  of  the,  15,  83 

payment  of  people  for  dig- 
ging trenches  at,  84 

Lake  of  Serbon,  429 

Lakes,  bitter,  436,  440,  442,  444 

Lancrot,  cited,  525 

Language  of  Taka,  201 

Languages,  African,  31 

Larchor,  431 

Leake,  240 

Loq6ta,  village  of,  277 

Le  Quieu,  556, 558, 562 

Leontes,  river,  336 

Lepers,  expulsion  of,  404, 417 

insurrection  under  Osarsiph,416 

Exodus  of,  same  as  of  Israelites, 

412-417 


INDEX. 


571 


Leprosy,  Egyptian,  account  of,  412 
Letter  to  Mr.  Horner  from  Dr.  Lepsius, 

530 
Letronne,  cited,  105,  107,  121, 123,  387, 

440,  442,  444,  445 
Levites,  generations  of,  460 
Levi,  tribe  of,  459 
L'Hote,  cited,  105 
Libanon,  view  of,  349 

war  in,  352 

Library  at  Thebes,  381,397 

Alexandrian,  382, 496 

Lieder,  Herr,  German  missionary,  36, 

47,74 
Limestone,  nummulitic,  mountain  range 

near  Memphis  composed  of,  371 
Linant,  M.,  14,  92,  94,  96 
Lions  in  Berber,  157 
Lion,  young,  174 
Lischt,  Pyramid  of,  64,  83 
Lists,  Jewish,  497 

Dynastic  of  Manetho,  497 

Literature  of  Egypt,  386,  390 

Livy,  fragment  of  a  MS.  of,  380 

Locusts,  swarm  of,  68 

Lorda,  Domingo,  99 

Loss  of  road,  282 

Luqsor,  temple  of,  102,  247,  253 

Lycopolis,  101 

Lycurgus  introduced  Egyptian  customs 

into  Greece,  383 
Lycus.    See  Nahr  el  Kelb 
Lysimachus,  on  the  Exodus,  422, 424 

M. 

Maccabees,  book  of,  452 

Madian,  district  of,  546 

Magal,  church  of,  231 

Mageqa,  well  of,  in  Gilif  mountains,  216 

Mahas,  province  of,  235 

dialect  of,  232 

Mahmud  Welled  Schauisch,  188,  205 

Mahmudieh  canal,  42 

Makrizi,  cited,  178 

Maktaf,  or  basket,  84 

Makrobioten  Apappus  Pepi,  110 

Malta,  38 

Mandera.  in  desert,  130, 162 

Manetho,  cited,  382,  405,  410,  412,  416, 

417,  423,  427,  429,  433, 470,  480,  486, 487, 

494,  496,  499 
Manethonic  chronology,  490,  493,  495 

Dynastic  lists,  498 

Dynasties,  496 

• history,  extent  of,  493 

list  of  Eusebius,  422 

numbers,  the  genuine,  494 

—496,  498 
Manuscripts,  Ethiopian,  99 
Mara,  307, 548 
Maranites,  the,  554 
Marcellinus,  Ammianus,  cited,  79 
Martineau,  Miss,  cited,  514,  520 
Maruga,  villasre  of,  212, 209 
Masr,  or  Cairo,  4A 
Massaui,  island  of,  228 


Matarieh,  village  of,  49 
M&cheref,  village  of,  142, 144 
Medamot,  village  of,  247 
Medik,  village  of,  125 
Medinet  el  Faium,  93,  97 

Habu,  102,  253,  256,  260 

chiu-ch  at,  269 


Madi,  ruins  of,  98 


Ximrud,  town  of,  97 

Mediterranean  Sea,  triremes  on,  442 
Megdel,  in  Syria,  336 
Meharret.    See  Hererat 
Mehemet  Ali,  441 
Mehendi,  Roman  camp  of,  125 
3Ieidum,  Pyramid  of,  64,  83 
Mekseh,  village  of,  336 
Melah  (Arabic  for  salt  work),  194 
Melek  Idris  Adlan,  177, 191 
Memnon  statue,  257 
Memnonia  at  Thebes,  102,  248,  258 
Memphis,  14,  49,  72,  81,  369,  427,  4S4 
P\Tamids  of,  24,  44,  370 


Menephthes  king  during  the  Exodus, 
424,  430,  449,  451,  454,  470,  474,  480,  484 
rock  temple,  at  Surarieh, 


dedicated  to  Hathor  by,  100 
temple  in  Nubia  erected 

by,  124 
Menes,  laws  of,  392 
epoch,  or  first  historical  year, 

495 

hieroglyphic  writings  invented 


in  time  of,  377 

year  of  3893,  B.C. 


494 


Menkera  (Mykerinos),  Pyramid  of,  59 

Menzaleh  Lake,  333 

Merhet,  priest  of  Chufu.  tomb  of,  61, 63 

Meraui,  town  of,  194,  223 

Merde,  derivation  of  term,  210 

district  between  Nile  and  Asta- 

boras,  17,  146 

island  of,  225 

Pyramids  of,  206 

well  of,  217 


Mesam-at,  monuments  of,  156 

el  Kirbegan  (Ben  Naga),  156, 


157 


e'  Naga  (Ben  Naga),  156 
e'  Sofra  (Ben  Naga),  156 


Messaid,  spring  of  water,  288 

Messelemieh,  town  of,  166, 189, 205 

Metamme,  tillage  of,  154 

Meton,  the  cycle  of,  454 

Mice  in  camp,  87 

Migiik,  in  Gilif  range,  216 

Military  band,  186 

Minjau  schtaroth,  epoch  of,  455 

Mirage,  in  Nubian  Desert,  141 

Misphragmuthosis,    end   of  rule   of 

Hyksos,  428,  490 
Mitrahinneh,72 
Mneuis,  holy  biUl,  411, 413 
Mo'alaqa,  Syria,  337 
Mdris-Amenemha,  481 
Mocris  Lake,  92,  95 
dams  of  lake,  95 


572 


INDEX. 


Moeris,  Pyramid  of ,  83 

Mofirad,  mountain  range  of,  141 

IMotrran  River,  146 

]\Ioiiammed  Ali,  39.  40,  333 

Said,  158 

I\roie  Messaid.  spring  of,  288 

]Moleds,  or  new  moons,  453 

Molon,  cited,  423 

IMonarchy,  Old,  395,  414 

Monassir,  cataracts  in  province  of,  228 

Honkeys  on  Blue  River,  169 

Mons  Casius,  429 

■ Claudianus.    See  Gebel  Fatireh 

■ For phy rites.    See  Gebel  Dochan 

Monuments,  368,  375 

age  of  Egyptian,  16 

in  Old  Monarchy.  414 

■ of  Biahmu,  96 

granite,  at  Mount  Barkal, 

223 

Pharonic,  233 

at  Soba.  IS 

at  Thebes,  20 

Monumental  nation,  the  Egj-ptian,  397 

writing,  hierogljT)hics  be- 
come, 379 

Moqattam  Hills.  47 

Mosaic  account  of  Exodus,  425 

Mosch,  town  of,  235 

Moses,  310,  408,  411,  449,  484,  486,  491, 
546 

Mosque  at  Damascus,  343 

at  Old  Dongola,  232 

Motmar,  150 

Mountains  of  Xubian  Desert,  mineral 
character  of,  136 

Mud  of  Nile,  bricks  made  of,  369 

Mudhir  of  Berber,  131 

Esneh,  131 

Miihleisen,  a  missionary,  39,  47 

Mukfar,  ruins  of,  'i;35,  436 

Mulid  e'Xebbi,  festival  of,  70 

]\Ivanmies,  durability  of,  370 

IMuudera,  plain  of,  141 

Munfieh  range,  280 

;Musa  Bey,  148 

3Iusic  not  considered  by  the  Egyptians 
an  independent  art,  388 

Eastern,  85 

Arabic,  182 

Mustafra  Pascha,  131 

Mythology  of  Egypt,  25 

Myos  hormos,  ruins  of,  289 

N. 
Nablus  (Sichem)  Syria,  334 
Naga  in  the  desert,  17, 153, 156,  210 
Kaharieh,  ruins  of  town  near,  43 
Nahrel  Kelb  (Lykos),  22,  355 
Nakb  el  Egaui,  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  291 

Haul,  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  291, 

294,  547 
Names,  holv  and  popular,  for  towns,  115 
Napoleon,  Descrip.  de  l'Egypt,376 
Napata,  town  of,  18,  223 
cemetery  of,  220 


Ferd. 


Narrative,  Mosaic,  contradicts  the  idea 
that  the  Jews  were  the  Hyksos,  421 

Nascimbeni,  engineer  of  the  Viceroy,  93 

Nasr,  Sultana,  176 

Natron,  crust  in  desert  of,  139 

Natural   history,    collection    by 
Werne,  bought  for  Prussia,  42 

Nazareth,  335 

Nebbi  Habil  (tomb  of  Abel),  340 

Schit,  Syria,  345 

Nebek-tree,  277,  298 

Nebuchadnezzar,  455 

Nechel  Delfa,  in  Gebel  Munfieh,  281 

Necropoli,  Egyptian,  375 

Necropolis  of  Thebes,  247 

Nectanebus  120,  243,  525,  531 
II.,  494 


Negro  soldiers,  186 

Nehera-si-Numhotep,  tomb  of,  112 

Nekleh,  Rosetta  arm  of  Nile,  43 

Nekos  begins  to  cut  canal  between  Nile 
and  Red  Sea,  439, 440,  441,  442 

Neos  Dionysos,  Ptolemy  XIII.,  108 

Neslet,  village  of,  98 

Nesnas  ape,  164 

Neubauer,  Herr,  apothecary  at  Char- 
turn,  160 

New  Dongola,  233 

Nile  river,  height  of,  at  Semneh,  19,  20 

gradual  levelling  of  bed,  30 

at  Afteh,  4^ 

waters  of,  44 

crossing  the.  211 

observations  on  rise  of,  239,  259 

between  Thebes  and  Qeneh,  275 

narrow  district  of,  369 

1 mud  bricks  of,  369 

I ease  of  transport  on,  372 

! canal,  436,  448 

upper  districts  of,  458 

rise  of,  related  by  Strabo,  4S1 

breadth,  depth,  and  velocity  in 

Nubia,  519 

fall  of,  521 

Nilomcter,  73 

Nimr,  palace  of  King,  195 

Nilus,  cited,  556,  557,  560 

Noah's  tomb,  327 

Nochol  rock,  307 

Nofratmu,  an  ancestor  of  Ranumhet, 
chief  architect,  458 

Nomarchs,  who  ruled  in  the  Nomes, 
4S2 

Nomes,  Egypt  divided  into,  482,  483 

Nome,   Sethroitic,  Abaris  situated  in, 
427.  431 

Nuba  language.  30,  128,  232,  234 

dialect,  235 

villages,  228 

Nubia,  Lower,  phys.  gcog.  of,  see  Ap- 
pendix, 516 

Lower,  geological  structure  of. 

Appendix,  522 

breadth,    depth,    &c.,    of  Nile, 


Appendix,  519 
temples  in,  124 


IlfDEX. 


;73 


K'ubian  language,  171 

Sheikh,  30 

Nubians,  character  of,  127 

IS'umbers,  genuine  Manethonic,  4Qi~ 

496,  498 

Hebrew,  uncertainty  of,  402 

Nummulitic  limestone  near  Memphis, 

371 
IVumt  Amen,  temple  of,  255 
Nureddin   Eft'endi,  a  Coptic   Catholic 

Egj-ptian,  163, 1S9 
Nuri,  Pyramids  of,  218,  221 
Nus,  hieroglyphic  name  of  town,  112 

O. 

Obelisk  at  Heliopolis,  46 
Obelisks  in  Alexandria,  369 
Ochus,  conquest  of  Egypt  by,  494 
Okmeh,  sulphur-spring  at,  237 
Old  Dongola,  232 
Old  Testament  writings,  459 

chronology,  490,  492 

Old  chronicle,  497,  498 
Olympiad,  the  seventh,  423 

calculation,  424 

Olympian  games,  383 

Omar  Aga,  officer  in  Turkish  army,  198 

Omarab  mountains,  209 

Ombos,  canon  of  proportions  found  in, 

20, 118 
Om  Saiale,  well  of,  218 
Om  Schebak,  valley  of,  218 
On,  same  as  Heliopolis,  113 
Onias,  temple  of,  449 
Osarsiph,  priest  of  Heliopolis,  406,  408, 

413,  416 
Osiris,  tomb  of,  122 

service  of,  413 

statue  of,  at  Kamlin,  164 

Osman  Bey,  chief  in  command  of  army 

against  Taka,  196 
Osymandyas,  King,  381 

tomb  of,  260 

Otho,  Emp.,  266 

P. 
Paapis,  son  of  Amenophis,  405 
Palms,  Dileb,  171 

Doum,  137,  218 

Pachon,  Papyri  dated  13th  of,  395 
Painting  on  Pyramids,  52 

Christian,  over  Heathen  repre- 
sentations, 268 
Paintings  in  Thebes,  246 

on  tomb  in  Benihassan,  111 

Panodorus,  498 

Pauopolis{Chemmis),  rock-grotto  of,115 

Papyrus  rolls,  391,  394,  395 

of  Sallier,  391 

plant,  373,  380 

roll  on  monuments,  374 

Paran,  304,  539 

Parthey,  cited,  520, 525 
Papebroch,  cited,  558 
Pastophori,  the  watchers  of  the  tem- 
ples, 389 


Patriarchs,  the  three,  491 

Paul,  Apostle,  on  number,  403,  480 

Pedigree  of  architect,  279 

Peney,  M.,  French  surgeon,  196 

Petamenap,  tomb  of  the  royal  scribe. 

265 
Pelusiac  arm  of  Nile,  429,  446 
Pelusium,  town  of,  429,  430,  432 
Peninsula  of  Sinai,  climate  of,  545 
Periander,  442 
Period  from  Abraham  to  Moses,  485— 

491 
Perring,  measurement  of  Pyramids  by, 

59 

13,  79,  114 

Petronius,  Prefect,  481 
Phoenikon,  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  555 
Phoenix,  period  of  1500  years,  398 
Phara  ravine,  554 
Pharan,  297,  304,  313,  546,  555,  557 

church  of,  562 

palm-grove  of,  553,  559 

Pharaoh,  413,  480 

of  the  Exodus,  421—425 

the,  of  Joseph,  477 

(Sethosis  I.),  484 


Pharaonic  history,  restoration  of  the, 
399 

Philaj,  island  of,  20, 119,  242,  530,  531 

name  of,  120 

inscriptions  at,  107 

temples  on,  525 

Philotera,  ancient,  289 

Philip  Aridaeus,  252 

Philologj',  Egyptian,  26 

Philosophers  who  visited  Egypt,  385 

Phokes,  island  of,  555 

Physical  Geography  of  Lower  Nubia, 
Appendix,  516 

Pilgrims,  German,  302 

Pipe,  Turkish,  pleasure  of,  104 

Pithom  and  Ramses,   treasure   cities, 
426 

situation  of,  435, 447 

Plague  of  the  leprosy,  Egyptian  account 
of,  412 

Plato,  house  he  inhabited  in  Heliopo- 
lis, 384 

Pliny,  cited,  439,  444 

fable  by,  of  Sphinx,  67 

Plutarch,  cited, 123, 386 

Poems,  Arabic,  182 

Polemon,  cited,  422 

Pompey's  Pillar,  42 

Porphyry,  Gebel  Doch^u,  372 

Poseidion,  town  of,  553 

Potiphar,  an  Egvptian  name,  476 

of  HeliopoHs,  411,  413 

Priests  in  Egypt,  385,  386 

books,  the  hieratical,  387 


learned,  412 

registers  of  their  generations 


459 

Primis,  ancient,  125,  24i0 
Procopius,  cited,  320, 556 


574 


i:S"DEX. 


Prokesch,  Gen.  von,  cited,  625 

Proskynemata,  50,  279 

Prophets,  Egyptian,  413 

the,  387 

Prudhoe,  Lion  of  Lord,  223,  236 

Pruner,  Dr.,  47,  98 

Psahnist,  the,  on  length  of  life,  491 

Psammeticus,  429,  440 

1.,  24<),  inscription  belong- 
ing to  temple  of,  at  ]S'aharieh;  43 

Pselchis,  inscription  at  temple  of,  105 

Ptah-nefru-be-u,  tomb  of,  63 

Ptolemy  Alexander  I.,  temple  built  by, 
117 

,  380,  429,  434,  437,  438 

Mendesius,  cited,  421, 424 

Eupator,  inscription  referring 

to,  107 


525 


Philadelphus,  382,  439,  440, 444, 

the  geographer,  115,  429,  434, 

437,  438,  554 
Ptolemies,  Greek  inscription  about  the, 

107 
Publius,  Prefect,  42 
Pyramid  of  Cheops  (Chufu),  A-iew  from, 

'48,  49,  59.  72,  372 

of  Daschur,  79,  9S 

of  Gizeh,  47,  56,  79,  323 

of  Howara  (Labyrinth),  83 

of  Labyrinth,  90 

of  Menkeres,  372 

Pyramids,  47—65 

age  of,  13 

ascent  of,  48 

view  from  summit  of,  48 

built  of  bricks,  372 

first  visit  to,  47 

remains  of,  13 

structure  of,  65 

supposed  by  Osman  Bey  to 

contain  treasure,  197 

of  Abu  Roasch,  59, 79 

of  Abusir,  69 

of  Beg'erauieh,  195, 150 

of  Lischt  and  Meidum,  64, 


375 


of  lUahun  and  ]\Ioeris,  83 

of  :Merde,  150—152,  206 

of  Memphis,  25,  44,  47—81, 

■  of  Nuri,  221 

of  Rigah,  79 
•  of  Saqara,  6i,  67 

of  Tauqassi  and  Kumi,  229 

of  Zauiet  el  Arrian,  59 

of  Zume,  230 


Pythagoras,  cited,  385 

Q, 

Qala,  village  of.  209 

Qautur,  Pyramid  of,  at  Kurru,  229 

Qasr  Qorun,  town  of,  15,  98 

e'  Saiat,  tombs  at,  16, 116' 

Qeneh,  village  of,  22,  275,  277,  321 


Qirre,  mountains  of,  158, 193 

Qirsch,  village  of,  242 
Qsvu-  el  Benat,  plain  of,  278 
Quarries,  granite,  234 

porphyry,  2SS 

stone,  278 


Qubbet  e'  Nasi',  view  from,  340 
Qurna,  Thebes,  20, 102, 108,  254,  253 
Qurnet  :Murrai,  hill  of,  267 
Queens  preferred  in  Ethiopia,  178 
Quft  (Koptos),  277 
Qulleh,  clay  \vater  bottles,  103 

manufactory  of,  276 

Qus,  ApoUinopolis  parva,  277 


Pa,  ficrure  of  the  god,  438 
PablHs,  453 

Rabbinical  chronology,  450—455 
date  of  Exodus,  470 


Rabbi  Hillel  Hanafisi,  453,  450 
Races  intermingled,  411 
Raha.  plain  of,  293,  545,  548,  553 
Rahad  river,  148, 167 
Rain  in  Upper  Egypt,  119 

Xubian  desert,  137 

Raithenes,  the,  555 

Raithu.    See  Tor 

Ramadan,  Mussulmans'  holy  month,  45 

Ram  of  Barkal,  236,  245 

Rams,  granite,  223 

Rauian,  mountains  of,  158, 193 

Rammius  ?>Iartialis  Eparch,  288 

Ramses  IL  (3Iiamun;.  249,  259,333,  370, 

381,  393,  395. 418,  420,  43S,  441,  446,447, 

449,  481,  483,  4S4 

his  name!inscribed  on  Cleo- 


patra's Xeedle,  42 

statue  of,  72 

temple  of,  in  Thebes,  102, 


243,  259 

temple  of,   near  Kalab- 

scheh,  526 

bas-reliefs  of,  355 

memorial  tablets  of,  22 

III.,  250,  260,  450 

IX.,  395 


town  of,  426, 447 

Rameseion,  3S1 

Ranumhet,  chief  architect,  458 

Raphia(Refah},429 

Raphidim.  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  312,  318, 
540,  545,  548 

Ras  Fui'tak,  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  555 

- —  Gehan,  PeninsiUa  of  Sinai,  553,  554 

Abu  Zelimeh,  Peninsula  of  Sinai, 

553 

Mohammed,  Peninsula  of   Sinai, 

553,  554 

e'  Schekab,  in  SjTna,  355 

Raych,  convent  of,  at  Tor,  557 

Rebaba,  musical  instrument,  182 

Red  Sea,  437,  440 

level  higher  than  Mediterra- 
nean, 441 


INDEX. 


575 


Register  of  generations,  458,  459 
Rennie,  Mr.,  cited,  521,  524 
Representations  at  Xaga  in  the  desert, 

210 
Reschraschi,  plain  of,  278 
Rliinokolura  fEI  Arisch),  429 
Ricci  cited,  551 
Rigah,  Pyramid  of,  79 
Ritter,  Carl,  315,  316,  320,  541,  543,  554, 

558 
his  views  on  position  of 

Sinai,  545,  546 
Rltschl,  382 

Robatat,  province  of,  226 
Robbery  at  Saqara,  72,  75 
Rock-chambers  lined  with  brick,  373 

temple  at  Abu  Simbel,  240 

inscriptions,  560 

Robinson,  E.,  measurements  of  distance 

in  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  547,  548 
cited,  308,  309,  315,  316,  533, 

545,  551 
Roda,  island  of,  73 
Roft,  mountain  chain  of,  138 
Romali,  \illage  of,  175 
Roman  camp' at  Mehendi,  125 

inscription,  345 

Rossafa  road,  321 

Rosellini,  cited,  29,  51,  lOS.  ^44,  266,  525 

Rosetta  canal,  43 

inscription  of,  121 

Royal  revenues,  482 

Roziere,  the  traveller,  426 

Ruins  in  Wadi  el  Kirbesan,  194 

Ruppel,  cited,  290,  310,  545 

Russeger,  cited,  166,  515,  519,  523,  528, 

529 
Rustan  Effendi,  192 


Saba  Doleb,  ^iUage  of,  171 

Sabagura,  niins  of  ancient  city,   20, 

242 
Sacred  Books,  391 
Sa  el  Hasrer,  ancient  Sais,  43 
Sacred  Writings,  391 
Saffi,  island  of,  227 
Sagadi,  \illage  of,  150 
Sai,  island  of,  19,  237 
Said  ben  Batrik,  cited,  556,  562 
Saida  (Sidon),  336 
Sailors  on  Red  Sea,  289 
St.  Athauasius  in  Theban  desert,  266 
St.  George,  tomb  of,  856 
St.  Martin,  cited,  107 
Sais,  ancient,  43,  369 
Saladin's  tomb,  343 
Salamat  (Sanamat),  258 
Salame-tree,  217 

village  of,  228 

Salatis,  King,  486 
Salhieh,  Syria,  344 
Salmasius,  cited,  433 
Sallier,  Papyrus  of,  391,  394 
Samanud  (Sebennytos),  23,  333 


Sami  Bey,  39 

Sams',  Mr.,  Egyptian  collection,  392 

San  (Tanis),  23,  333 

Sanab,  221 

Sand  dunes  in  plain  of  El  Gos,  215 

Sanherib,  429 

Saqara,  64,  72, 81,  86,  89, 103 

PjTamids  of,  10 

Sheikhs  of,  76 

trial  at,  77 


Sarcophagus   of    white   limestone   in 
Thebes,  245 

Sarcophagi,  376 

Sarbut  el  Chadem,    Egyptian  monu- 
ments of,  22,  300,  305 

Saulcy,  M.  de,  121,  273 

Schabak  (So),  King  of  Etliiopia  and 
Egypt,  251 

Schaib  el  Benat,  village  of,  231 

Schaqieh  Arabs,  214,  229 

cataracts  in  province  of,  228 

princes,  227 

pro\ince  of,  231 


Schataui,  village  of,  240 
Schech-Said,  village  of,  16 
Schendi,  town  of,  17,  23, 153, 154, 195 
Scherif  Pascha,  the  minister,  77,  89 
Scheschenk  I.,  250 
Schilluk  tribe,  149 
Schoa,  missionarj'  station  of,  39 
Schomar.    See  Gebel  Um  Schomar 
Schona  government  store-house,  237 
Schrafra  (Chafra),  King,  whether  re 

presented  by  Sphinx,  66 

Pyramid  of,  59,  66 

Schulz,  Dr.,  334 
Sculptiu-es,  Egyptian,  233 
Sea,  sensations  at,  36 

luminous  appearance  on,  37 

Seba-Biar,  valley  of,  434,  438, 441,  445 
Sebastieh  (Samaria),  335 
Sebekhoteps,  the  Kings,  239 
Sebekhotep  I.,  20 
Sebua,  temple  of,  20,  124,  241,  242,  356, 

527 
Sedar  01am  Rabah,  the,  456 
Sedeinga,  temple  of,  19,  237 
Sehfel.  island  of,  20 
Seid  Hussen,  familv  of,  275 

Haschim,  176,  180,  181 

Selajin,  village  of,  97 

Selama,  villaee  of,  154 

Seleucida?,  era  of  the,  452,  453, 455 

Seleucus,  382 

Selim    rascha,     governor    of    Upper 

Eg.>T)t,  101, 114, 191 
Selim  of  Assuan,  cited,  162 

gviide,  280 

Selun(SUo),  Syria,  £34 

Selseleh,  sandstone  mountains  of,  32 

Semitic  king,  47S 

countries,  410 

court,  477 

Hyksos,  476 

Semneh,  19,  238,  529,  531 


0/1 


I^'DEX. 


Semneh,  Nile  at.  30,  239,  529,  531 
Seuumt,  hieroglyphic  name  for  island 

ofEiwh,  120 
Sennar,  capital  of  the  Sudan,  IS,  173, 176 
Septuagint,  -113 
Serapiu,  4435 
Serbal,  Mount,  22,  295,  298,  299, 303,  308, 

532 
Serha-tree,  217 
Sero,  on  frontier  of  Sennar  and  Fasoql, 

148.  175 
Sese,  Mount,  236 
Sesebi,  ruinsof,19,  230 
Sesoosis,  482 
Sesostris  Sesoosis,  480,  483 

481.  394,  429,  439 

Sesurtesen  I.,  2-48,  395 

on  Pyramids  of  Begerauich, 


obelisk  erected  by,  46 
Throne-shield  of,  at    Xaga, 


155 


II.,  112 

III..  120,  23S 

Sesurtesens,  the,  111 

Sethos,  also  called  Ramesses,  407 

priest  of  Ptha,  429 

I.,  15,  48,  236,  249,  259.  394,  449, 

481 
remains  of  temple  erected  by, 

124 
Sethosis.  418, 481 
Sethroitic  Nome,  427,  428.  431 
Seventy,  the,  402,  434,  435,  436,  438,  464, 

476 
Serbon,  lake  of,  429 
Set-Necht,  King,  395 
Sheikh  Achraed,  sheikh  of  camels,  134 
Ahmed  ^Veiled   'Auad,   in   the 

train  of  Osman  Bey,  196 
Sandaloba,  chief  of  the  Arabian 

merchants,  173 
Mohammed  Welled    Hammed, 

prisoner  of  Osman  Bey,  201 
Musa  el  Fakir,  prisoner  of  Osmau 

Bey,  200 

prisoners,  200 

Selam,  2"^0,  2S6 

Jusuf  Hanna  Dahir,  of  Bscher- 

reh,  352 
Sheikhs  of  Saqara  and  Abusir,  76 
Sherif  Pascha,  89,  45 
Shields  on  PjTamids  of  Gizeh,  58 

hieroglvphic,  58,  196 

of  the  Pharaohs,  438 

Sidereal  year.  398 

Silco,  inscription  of,  242 

Sittere-trees,  295 

Sin,  wilderness  of,  308,  540,  547, 548 

Sinai,  Mount,  true  position  of,  22,  303— 

321,542,560,562 
Hitter's  views  respecting,  541— 

546 

departure  for  Peninsula  of,  274 

convent  of,  291,  305 


Sinai,  tradition  of,  559 

Sinaitic  inscriptions,  31,  291,  294,  299, 

311.  545 
Siut,  town  of,  16, 101,  114, 115 
Slave  revolt,  190, 192, 193 
Sluice  at  Arsinoe,  440 
Soba,  capital  of,  kingdom  of  Aloa,  18, 

162, 189 
Solb  (Soleb),  temple  of,  19,  223,  236 
Soldiers,  negro,  1S6 

under  Osman  Bey  in  good  dis- 


cipline, 205 
Snefru,  King.  396 
Sphinx,  excavation  in  front  of,  66 
Sphinxes  at  temple  in  ^yadi  Lebua,  126 
Soliman  Pascha,  191 
Solon,  383 
Solymites,  the,  407 
Soriira-tree,  217 
Sont-trees,  101,  213,  217 
Soriba,  Sultana  Nasr  resident  in,  178 
Soter  I.,  108 
Sothis,  the,  a  spurious  work,  497. 498 

periods,  398, 494,  495, 496 

Statue  of  a  Persian  king,  443 

Stele  between  paws  of  Sphinx,  59 

Stephanus  of  Bvzantium,  4:31,  433 

Stolistes,  the  ten  books  of  the,  387 

Stone  buildings,  371 

Storm  near  PjTamids,  53 

Strabo,  cited.  119,  266,  384,  386,  411,  429, 

430,  434,  4;37,  439,  444,  481 
Structure  of  Pyramids,  221 
Suez,  town  of,  434,  435,  436,  443 

isthmus  of,  426 

Sugar  factory  in  Kamlin,  163 

Suk  el  Barada,  village  of,  in  Syria,  344 

Sukkot,  province  of,  237 

Sulphur-spring  of  Okmeh,  237 

Sur  (Tyrus).  336 

wilderness  of,  307,  547 

Surarieh,  rock  temple  near  village  of, 

15, 100 
Suri,  beveraee  of,  199 
Surie,  Abu  Ramie,  village  of,  193 
Syenite  of  Assuan,  371 
Syncellus,  cited,  489,  490,  494,  499 
Syria,  430,  435, 449 


Table  of  Jewish  generations,  461,  463 

generations  of  Levi  according 


to  Josephus,  468 
—  from  He- 
brew text,  467 

undeterminate  and  historical 


numbers,  472 
Tables  of  Egyptian  Dynasties,  499 
Tabor,  Mount,  335 
Tacitus,  cited,  266,  393,  423 
Tahraka  (Tirhakah),  King,  18, 222,  251 
Taiba,   village    inhabited   by   Fukara 

(Fakirs),  187 
Taka,  war  in,  186, 199 
language  in,  201 


ITTBEX. 


577 


Taka,  tribes  of,  201 

Talmis  (Kalabscheh),  123,  242 

Talmud,  few  chronological  dates,  454 

Tamaniat,  village  of,  158, 193 

Tarn i eh,  village  of,  95,  98 

Tanis  (Tan),  Xile  Delta,  333 

Tanqassi,  Pyramids  of,  229 

Tarablus  (Tripolis),  SjTia,  354 

Tarfa  shrubs,  294, 308 

Tehneh,  monuments  near,  15 

Teirieh,  ruins  near,  M 

Tel  Emdieh,  village  of,  338 

Tel  Jehudeh,  449 

Tel-el-Amarna,  23,  27 

Temple,  building  of  first,  455 

dedications,  379 

at  Amara,  237 

on  island  of  Bageli,  526 

at  Mount  Barkal,  erected  by 

Eamses  II.,  222 

at  Bet  el  Talli,  124 

at  Debu,  526 

of  Edfu,  117 

near  Kalabscheh,  526 

.—  at  Karnak,  248 

of  Korte,  124 


of  Luqsor,  253 

near  Medinet  Habu,  erected 

by  King  Horus,  259 

of  Qurna,  259 

at  Sedeinga,  237 

of  Sesebi,  236 

in  front  of  Sphinx,  52 

at  Solb,  236 

rock  at  Surarieh,  100 

Temples,  Ethiopian  drawings  on,  195 

erected  by  the  Ptolemies,  266 

rock  at  Abu  Simbel,  240 

of  Balbcck,  346 

at  Ben  Xaga,  153 

at  Dendera,  116,  322 

near  Gebel  Dochan,  287 

of   Gerf  Hussen  and  Sebua, 


124 


259 


on  Philse,  120,  243,  525 

at  Xaga,  154, 155 

in  Xubia,  124 

at   Thebes,  102,  116,  243,  255, 


of  Semneh,  238 

Testament,  Old,  402,  404,  438,  490 

Tethmosis,  King,  423 

Thales  instructed  by  EgjiJtian  priests, 
384 

Thames,  fall  of,  between  "Wallingford 
and  Teddington,  520 

Thana,  island  of,  near  Gorata,  in  Ethi- 
opia, 99 

Thebes,  14, 10^-104,  116,  243—274,  370, 
371,  376,  381,  484 

scenery  about,  247 

origin  of  name,  248 

Theodosius,  edict  of,  266 

Theophilus,  Bishop  of  Antioch,  497 

Theon  of  Alexandria,  453 


Theory  of  excavation  of  bed  of  Xile, 

530 
Thinitic  kings,  495 
This,  town  of,  494 
Thoum,  i.  e.  Pithom.  43.5,  448 
Thutmosis    III.,     Cleopatra's    needle 

erected  by,  42 
Tii,  wife  of  Amenophis  III.,  237 
Tifar,  village  of,  231 
Tiberias,  on  Lake  Genezarat,  335 
Tomb  of  Abel,  340 

of  King  Bech-en-Aten,  114 

of  Ki-si-Tutholep,  113 

of  Saladin,  343 

of  Prince  Merhet,  61,  63 

ofXoaH,  .337 

of  Ramses  Miamun,  244 

of  St.  George,  356 

at  Saqara,  72 

Tombos,  island  of,  19,  234 
Tombs  in  Thebes,  245,  254 

in  Zauiet  el  Meitin,  110 

removal  of,  323 

rock,  of  Amarua,  322 

of  Beni  Hassan,  16,  111 

near  El  Ques,  212 

of  the  kings,  261— 263 

of  the  princesses,  264 

of  private  persons,  264 

round  Pyramids,  13 

at  Saba  Uoleb,  171 

Tondub-tree,  217 

Tod,  temple  of,  20 

Tor,  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  22,  274,  290,  560 

Tower  of    Hammam  Seidna   Soliman, 

237 
Tosorthros,  2nd  Dynasty,  375, 377 
Tradition  of  Gebel  Musa,  532 
■ about   position   of    Mount 

Sinai,  304,  559 
Trajanie  river,  name  of  canal  cut  from 

Babylon,  437,  445 
Transmigration  of  souls,  385 
Travellers,  visit  fi'om,  273 
Trees  near  Gilif  mountains,  217 

on  Blue  Eiver,  168 

Tripolis  (Tarablus),  354 
Tuch,  cited,  311 
i  Tukele,  straw  huts,  162, 173 
Tura,  chalk  mountains  of,  32 
Turin,  royal  annals  of,  395 
Turk,  character  of  the,  88 
Turkish  breakfast,  159 

soldiers,  their  uniform,  354 


Tuthmosis  I.,  234,  248,  249 

-  II.,  19,  238 

III.,  24, 124,  236,  237,  238,  249, 

256,  259,  300,  301,  4«6 

lY.,  66, 156,  259,  4S5 

IV.,  stele  of,  between  paws  of 

Sphinx,  59 
Tutmes  III.,  conqueror  of  the  Hyksos, 

ISth  Dynasty,  395 
Typhon,  the  god,  432 
Typhonic  town,  428 


2p 


578 


IXDEX. 


rm  Scliebah,  valley  of,  in  desert  of  Gilif , 

21S 
Vm  Schomar.    See  Gebel 


Yase  at  Soba,  1S9 

Venus,  small  statue  of,  in  Soba,  190 

Vermin,  104 

Vicus  Judajorum  (Tel  Jeliudeh),  4AS,  449 

Village  scene  in  Ethiopia,  174 

Visit  from  travellers,  273 

Vvse,  Colonel  Howard,  13 

AVad  Eraue,  189 

Xegudi,171,l73 

Wadi  Anateb,  154, 155, 156 

Abu  Dom,  213,  218 

Hammed,  214 

Harod,  216 

Alevat,  297,  298,  318 

el  Arab,  241 

Bahr  Hatab,  137 

Delah.  137 

el  Mehet,  216 

Dhaghadeh,  553 

e'  Scheikh,  22, 294,  547 

e'  Sileha,  156 

e'  Sofra,  152, 156 

e'  Sufr,  137, 139 

el  Kirbegan,  154, 156, 157, 194 

el  Uer,  216 

Ellaqi,  241 

Firan,  20,  295,  297,  298,  299,  304, 

kc,  535 

Gazal,  218 

Gaqedul,  215 

Gharandel,  306,  547,  548 

Guah  El  'Alem,  215 

Haifa,  17,  20, 131,  240, 241 

Hcbran,  22,  290, 291,  312 

Ibrim,  241 

Kalas,  217 

Wadi  Kenus,  241 

Leg  a,  561 

:Ma2hara,  22,  300,  305 

:Mo'katteb,  22,  31,  299 

Mui-had,139 

Nasb,  302,  305 

Nuba,  241 

Qeneh,  300 


WadiRim,  295 

Schebekeh,  306,  547 

Schellal,  547,  548 

Sebua,  temple  in,  126 

Selaf,  295,  297 

Selin,  16 

Sieh.  300 

i Siqelji,  296 

1 Sittere,  300 

; Taibeb,  312,  547 

; Teresib,  154 

!  Wagner,   von,    the  Prussian   consul- 

j      general,  39 

i  War  in  Taka,  186 

i  Water,  search  in  Nubian  desert  for,  137 

search  for,  2S1 

i  Watf'r-works  in  Egypt,  481 
I  Wed  Medineh,  176,  ISO 

I slave  revolt  in,  190 

;  Weidenbach,  Ernest,  member  of  the 
'      expedition.  39,  54,  75,  83,  94, 114, 153 
i Max.,  153,  275 

Ernest  and  Max.,  12,  21 

Werne,  Ferd.,  objects  of  natural  history 
!     collected  by,  42 

I H.,  32 

;  Wetzstein.  Dr.,  552 

i  White  River,  161 

i  WUd,  J.,  travelling  companion,.  12,  85, 

I      56, 57 

1  Wilkinson.  Sir  G.,  cited,  29.  93. 108, 112» 

,      244,  266,  271.  2^2,  4:35, 448,  525,  532 

Wilson,  Dr.  John,  cited,  539 
i  Wind,  violent,  in  Chartum,  191 
{  Women,  ancient  Egyptian,  painted  yel- 
I      low,  208 
j  Wot  Mahemut,  157 

Writings,  sacred,  391 


X. 


Xerxes,  279 


Zachleh,  town  in  Libanon,  336 
Zahera,  village  of,  354 
Zani,  on  the  Nile,  98 
Zauiet-el-Arrian,  Pyramids  of,  59,79 

Meitin,  rock-tombs  of,  110 

Zebedeni.  village  in  Anti-Libanon,  S38 
Zeitieh,  the  naphtha  pits,  289 
Zerin,  in  Syria,  335 
I  Zuma,  village  of,  230. 


THE  EXD. 


^ 


C   WHITING,  BEAUFORT  HOLSE,  STEAKD. 


AN- 

ALPHABETICAL    LIST 

OF   BOOKS    CONTAINED    IN 

BOHN'S    LIBRARIES. 


Detailed  Catalogue^  arranged  accordmg  to  the  various 
Libraries,  will  be  sent  on  application. 


ADDISON'S  Works.  With  the 
Notes  of  Bishop  Hurd,  Portrait, 
and  8  Plates  of  Medals  and  Coins. 
Edited  by  H.  G.  Bohn.  6  vols. 
3 J.  (id.  each. 

iESCHYLUS,  The  Dramas  of. 
Translated  into  English  Verse  by 
Anna  Swanwick.  4th  Edition, 
revised,     ^s. 

The  Tragedies  of.  Trans- 
lated into  Prose  by  T.  A.  Buckley, 
B.A.     y.  6d. 

AGASSIZ  ana  GOULDS  Out- 
line of  Comparative  Physi- 
ology. Enlarged  by  Dr.  Wright. 
With  390  Woodcuts.     5j. 

ALFIERI'S  Tragedies.  Trans- 
lated into  English  Verse  by  Edgar 
A.  Bowring,  C.  B.  2  vols.  3^.  dd. 
each. 

ALLEY'S  (Joseph,  R.  N.)  Battles 
of  the  Britis.a  Navy.  Revised 
Edition,  with  57  Steel  Engravings. 
2  vols.     5^.  each. 

AMMIANUS  MARGELLINUS. 
History  of  Rome  during  the 
Reigns  of  Constantius,  Julian, 
Jovianus,  Valentinian,  and  Valens. 


Translated  by  Prof.  C.  D.  Yonge, 
M.A.     Ts.  6d. 

ANDERSEN'S  Danish  Legends 
and  Fairy  Tales.  Translated 
by  Caroline  Peachey.  With  120 
Wood  Engravings.     5^-. 

ANTONINUS  (M.  AxireUus),  The 
Thoughts  of.  Trans,  literally, 
with  Notes  and  Introduction  by 
George  Long,  M.A.     35.  6d. 

APOLLONIUS  RHODIUS. 
•  The  Argonautica.'  Translated 
by  E.  P.  Coleridge,  B.A.     5^. 

APPIAN'S  Roman  History. 
Translated  by  Horace  White, 
xM.A.,  LL.D.  With  Maps  and 
Illustrations.     2  vols.     6s.  each. 

APULEIUS,    The   Works 

Compri-sing  the  Golden  AlSs,  God 
of  Socrates,  Florida,  and  Dis- 
course of  Magic.      55. 

ARIOSTOS  Orlando  Furioso. 
Translated  into  English  Verse  by 
W.  S.  Rose.  With  Portrait,  and  24 
Steel  Engravings.  2  vols.  5^-.  each. 

ARISTOPHANES'  Comedies. 
Translated  by  W.  J.  Hickie.  a 
vols.     5^.  each. 


Aft  Alphabetical  List  of  Booki 


ARISTOTLE'S  Nicomachean 
Ethics.  Translated,  with  Intro- 
duction and  Notes,  by  the  Vener- 
able Archdeacon  Browne.     5.^. 

ARISTOTLE'S  Politics  and 
Ecoaomics.  Translated  by  E. 
Walford,  MA.,  with  Introduction 
by  Dr.  Gillies.     5-f. 

Metaphysics.    Translated  by 

the    Rev.    John    11.    M'Mahon, 
M.A.     55.  " 

History  of  Animals.    Trans. 

by  Richard  Cresswell,  M.A.    55. 

~ Organon;  or,  Logical  Trea- 
tises, and  the  Introduction  of 
Porphyry.  Translated  by  the 
Rev.  O.  F.  Owen,  M.A.  2  vols. 
3 J.  ^d.  each. 

Rhetoric    and    Poetics. 

Trans,  by  T.  Buckley,  B.A      5^. 

ARRIAN'S  Anabasis  of  Alex- 
ander, together  with  the  Indica. 
Translated  by  E.  J.  Chinnock, 
M.A.,  LL.D.  With  Maps  and 
Plans.     55-. 

ATHEN^US.  The  Deipnoso- 
phists;  or,  the  Banquet  of  the 
Learned.  Trans,  by  Prof.  C.  D. 
Yonge,  M.A.    3  vols.     ^s.  each. 

ATLAS  of  Classical  Geography. 
22  Large  Coloured  Maps.  With  a 
Complete  Index.   Imp.  8vo.  'js.  6d. 

BACON'S  Moral  and  Historical 
Works,  including  the  Essays, 
Apophthegms,  Wisdom  of  the 
Ancients,  ""New  Atlantis,  Henry 
VII.,  Henry  VIII.,  Elizabeth, 
Henry  Prince  of  Wales,  Histor)^ 
of  Great  Britain,  Julius  Ccesar, 
and  Augustus  Csesar.  Edited  by 
J.  Devey,  MA.     35.  6d. 

Novum  Organum  and  Ad- 
vancement of  Learning.  Edited 
by  J.  Devey,  M.A.      5.^. 

BALLADS  AND  SONGS  of  the 
Peasanti-y  of  England.  Edited 
by  Robert  Bell.     3 J.  6d. 


BASS'S  Lexicon  to  the   Greek 

Testament.     2s. 

BAX'S  Manual  of  the  History 
of  Philosophy,  for  the  use  of 
Students.    By  E.  Belfort  Bax.    z,s. 

BEAUMONT  and  FLETCHER, 
their  finest  Scenes,  Lyrics,  and 
other  Beauties,  selected  from  the 
whole  of  their  works,  and  edited 
by  Leigh  Hunt.     31.  ()d. 

BECHSTEIN'S  Cage  and 
Chamber  Birds,  their  Natural 
History,  Habits,  Food,  Diseases, 
and  Modes  of  Capture.  Translated, 
with  considerable  additions  on 
Structure,  Migration,  and  Eco- 
nomy, by  H.  G.  Adams.  Together 
with  Sweet  British  Warblers. 
W^ith  43  coloured  Plates  and 
Woodcut  Illustrations,     ^s. 

BECK  MANN  (J.)  History  of 
Inventions,  Discoveries,  and 
Origins  4th  edition,  revised  by 
W.  Francis  and  J.  W.  Griffith. 
2  vols.     3^.  6d.  each. 

BEDE'S  (Venerable)  Ecclesias- 
tical History  of  England.  To- 
gether with  the  Anglo-Saxon 
Chronicle.  Edited  by  J.  A. 
Giles,  D.C.L.     With  Map.     5:r. 

BELL  (Sir  Charles).  The  Ana- 
tomy and  Philosophy  of  Ex- 
pression, as  connected  with 
the  Fine  Arts.  By  Sir  Charles 
Bell,  K.H.     7th  edition,  revised. 

BERKELEY  (George),  Bishop 
of  Cloyne,  The  Works  of. 
Edited  by  George  Sampson.  With 
Biographical  Introduction  by  the 
Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P. 
3  vols.     ^s.  each. 

BION.    See  Theocritus. 

BJORN SON'S    Arne   and   the 

Fisher    Lassie.      Translated  by 
W.  II.  Low,  M.A.     3x.  6d. 
BLAIR'S  Chronological  Tables. 
Revised  and  Enlarged.     Compre- 
hending the  Chronology  and  His- 


Contained  in  Bohn's  Libraries. 


toryof  the  World, from  the  Earliest 
Times  to  the  Russian  Treaty  of 
Peace,  April  1856.  By  J.  Wil- 
loughby  Rosse.     Double  vol.  \os. 

BLAIR'S  Index  of  Dates.  Com- 
prehending the  principal  Facts  in 
the  Chronology  and  History  of 
the  World,  alphabetically  ar- 
ranged ;  being  a  complete  Index 
to  Blair's  Chronological  Tables. 
By  J.  W.  Rosse.    2  vols.    ^s.  each. 

BLEEK,  Introduction  to  the 
Old  Testament  By  Friedrich 
Bleek.  Edited  by  Johann  Bleek 
and  Adolf  Kamphausen.  Trans- 
lated by  G.  H,  Yenables,  under 
the  supervision  of  the  Rev.  Canon 
\'enables.     2  vols.      55.  each. 

BOETHIUSS  Consolation  of 
Philosophy.  King  Alfred's  Anglo- 
Saxon  Version  of.  With  a  literal 
English  Translation  on  opposite 
pages,  Notes,  Introduction,  and 
Glossary,  by  Rev.  S.  Fox,   M.A. 

BOHN'S  Dictionary  of  Poetical 
Quotations.     4th  edition.     6j-. 

Handbooks  of  Athletic 

Sports.  In  8  vols.,  each  con- 
taining numerous  Illustrations. 
1$.  6d.  each. 

I. — Cricket,     Lawn     Tennis, 
Tennis,  Rackets,  Fives, 
Golf. 
II. — Rowing     and      Sculling, 

Sailing,  Swimming. 
III.  — Boxing,  BroadsM'ord, 
Single  Stick, &c..  Wrest- 
ling, Fencing. 
IV. — Rugby  Football,  Associa- 
tion Football,  Baseball, 
Rounders,  Field  ball, 
Quoits,  Skittles,  Bowls, 
Curling.  i 

v.— Cycling,  Athletics,  Skat- 
ing. 
VI. — Practical    Horsemanship, 
including     Riding     for 
Ladies. 
Vn. — Camping  Out,  Canoeing. 
VIII.— Gymnastics,  Indian  Clubs.    | 


BOHN'S  Handbooks  of  Games. 
New  edition.  In  2  vols.,  with 
numerous  Illustrations  31.  6d. 
each. 

Vol.  I.— Table  Games  :— Bil- 
liards, Chess,  Draughts,  Back- 
gammon, Dominoes,  SoHtaire, 
Reversi,  Go-Bang,  Rouge  etNoir, 
Roulette,  E.G.,  Hazard,  Faro. 

Vol.  II.  —  Card  Games  :  — 
Whist,  Solo  Whist,  Poker,  Piquet, 
Ecarte,  Euchre,  Bezique,  Crib- 
bage.  Loo,  Vingt-et-un,  Napoleon, 
Newmarket,  Pope  Joan,  Specula- 
tion, &c.,  &c. 

BOND'S  A  Handy  Book  of  Rules 
and  Tables  for  verifying  Dates 
with  the  Christian  Era,  &c.  Giving 
an  account  of  the  Chief  Eras  and 
Systems  used  by  various  Nations  ; 
with  the  easy  Methods  for  deter- 
mining the  Corresponding  Dates. 
By  J.  J.  Bond.     5.;. 

BONOMI'S  Nineveh  and  its 
Palaces.  7  Plates  and  294  Wood- 
cut Illustrations,     ^s. 

BOSWELL'S  Life  of  Johnson, 
with  the  Tour  in  the  Hebrides 
and  JOHNSONIANA.  Edited  by 
the  Rev.  A.  Napier,  M.A.  With 
Frontispiece  to  each  vol.  6  vols. 
3^^.  6d.  each. 

BRAND'S  Popular  Antiquities 
of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ire- 
land. Arranged,  revised,  and 
greatly  enlarged,  by  Sir  Henry 
Ellis,  K.H.,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  &c.  3 
vols.     5j".  each. 

BREMER'S  (Frederika)  Works. 
Translated  by  Mary  Ilowitt.  4 
vols.     35-.  6d.  each. 

BRIDGWATER    TREATISES. 

Bell  (Sir  Charles)  on  the  Hand. 

With  numerous  Woodcuts.      5^-. 

Kirby  on  the  History,  Habits, 
and  Instincts  of  Animals. 
Edited  by  T.  Rynier  Jones. 
With  upwards  of  100  Woodcuts. 
2  vols.     5J-.  each. 


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books 


Bridgwater  Treatises  rt'n/zwM^t/.       Hxj^kb-'s  Wokks  continued. 


Kidd  on  the  Adaptation  of  Ex- 
ternal Natiire  to  tne  Physical 
Condition  of  Man.     3^.  6d. 

Chalmers  on  the  Adaptation 
of  External  Na  ure  to  the 
Moral  and  InteUectual  Gon- 
stifeation  of  Man.     5^. 

BRINK  (B.  ten).  Early  English 
Literature.  By  Bernhard  ten 
Brink.  Vol.1.  ToWyclif.  Trans- 
lated by  Horace  M.  Kennedy. 
35.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  Wyclif,  Chaucer,  Ear- 
liest Drama,  Renaissance.  Trans- 
lated by  W.  Clarke  Robinson. 
Ph.D.     zs.  bd. 

Vol.  III.  From  the  Fourteenth 

Century  to  the  Death  of  Surrey. 
Edited  by  Dr.  Alois  Brandl. 
Trans,     by     L.     Dora    Schmitz. 

3..  ed. 

Five  Lectures  on  Shake- 
speare. Trans,  by  Julia  Franklin. 
3:r.  ed. 

BROWNE'S  (Sir  Thomas)  Works 
Edited  by  Simon  Wilkin.  3  vols. 
3^.  6d.  each. 

BUCHANAN'S  Dictionary  of 
Science  and  Technical  Terms 
used  in  Philosophy,  Literature, 
Professions,  Commerce,  Arts,  and 
Trades.     6^. 

BURKE'S  Works.  6  vols.  31.  6d. 
each. 
I.  —Vindication  of  Natural  So- 
ciety— Essay  on  the  Sub- 
lime an  1  Beautiful,  and 
various  Political  Miscel- 
lanies. 

II.— Reflections  on  the  French 
Revolution  —  Letters  re- 
laimj;  to  the  Bristol  Elec- 
tion —  Speech  on  Fox's 
East  India  Bill,  &c. 


III. — Appeal  from  the  New  to  the 
Old  Whigs  — On  the  Na- 
bob of  Arcoi's  Debts  — 
The  Catholic  Claims,  iScc. 

IV. — Report  on  the  Affairs  of 
India,  and  Articles  of 
Charge  against  W^arren 
Hastings. 

V. — Conclusion  of  the  Articles  of 
Charge  against  Warren 
Hastings  —  Political  Let- 
ters on  the  American  War, 
on  a  Regicide  Peace,  to 
the  Empress  of  Russia. 

VI. — Miscellaneous  Speeches  — 
Letters  and  Fragments — 
Abridgments  of  English 
History,  &c.  W^ith  a 
General  Index. 

Speeches  on  the  Impeach- 
ment oi  Warren  Hastings  ;  and 
Letters.      With    Index.      2    vols. 


Life.    By  Sir  T.  Prior,    y.  6d. 

each. 

BURNEY  S  Evelina.  By  Frances 
Burney  (Mme.  D'Arblay).  With 
an  Introduction  and  Notes  by 
A.  R.  Ellis.     3J.  6d. 

Cecilia.  With  an  Introduc- 
tion and  Notes  by  A.  R.  Ellis. 
2  vols.     3^.  bd.  each. 

BURN  (R.)  Ancient  Rome  and 
its  Neigabourhood.  An  Illus- 
trated Handbook  to  the  Ruins  in 
the  City  and  the  Campagna,  for 
the  use  of  Travellers.  By  Robert 
Burn,  M.A.  With  numerous 
Illustrations,  Maps,  and  Plans. 
7J-.  6d. 

BURNS  (Robert),  Life  of.  By 
J.  G.  Lockhart,  D.CL.  A 
new  and  enlarged  Edition.  Re- 
vised by  William  Scott  Douglas. 
3^.  6^. 


Contained  in  BoJins  Libraries. 


5 


BURTON'S  (Robert)  Anatomy  of 
Melancholy,  Edited  by  the  Rev. 
A.  R.  Shilleto,  M.A.  With  In- 
troduction by  A.  H.  Bullen,  and 
full  Index.     3  vols.     TyS.  6d.  each. 

BURTON  (Sir  R.  F.)  Personal 
Narrative  of  a  Piigrimaga  to 
Al  Madinah  and  Meccah.  By 
Captain  Sir  Richard  F  Burton, 
K.C.M.G.  With  an  Introduction 
by  Stanley  Lane- Poole,  and  all 
the  original  Illustrations.  2  vols. 
3^.  6d.  each. 

*»*  This  is  the  copyright  edi- 
tion, containing  the  author's  latest 
notes 

BUTLER'S  (Bishop)  Analogy  of 
Religion,  Natural  and  Revealed, 
to  the  Constitution  and  Course  of 
Nature  ;  together  with  two  Dis- 
sertations on  Personal  Identity  and 
on  the  Nature  of  Virtue,  and 
Fifteen  Sermons.     3i-.  6d. 

BUTLER'S  (Samuel)  Hudibras. 
With  Variorum  Notes,  a  Bio- 
graphy, Portrait,  and  28  Illus- 
trations.    5J-. 

or,  further  Illustrated  with  60 

Outline    Portraits.      2   vols.     ^s. 
each. 

C^SAR.  Commentaries  on  the 
Gallic  and  Civil  Wars.  Trans- 
lated by  W.  A.  McDevitte,  B.A. 

CAMOENS'  Lusiad  ;  or,  the  Dis- 
cover} of  India.  An  Epic  Poem. 
Translated  by  W.  J.  Mickle.  5th 
Edition,  revised  by  E.  R.  Hodges, 
M  C.P.     3^.  6d. 

CaRAFAS  (The)  of  Maddaloni. 
Naples  under  Spanish  Dominion. 
Translated  from  the  German  of 
Altred  de  Reumont.     3^-.  6d. 

CARPENTERS     (Dr      V/.    B.) 

Zoology.      Revised    Edition,    by 

W.  S.  Dallas,  F.LS.     With  very 

numerous  Woodcuts.    Vol.1.    6s. 

[  Vol,  II.  out  of  print. 


CARPENTER'S  Mechanical 
Philosophy.  Astronomy,  and 
Horology.     181  Woodcuts.     5^-. 

Vegetable    "Physiology  and 

Systematic  Botany.  Revised 
Edition,  by  E.  Lankester,  M.D., 
&c.  With  very  numerous  Wood- 
cuts.    6i-. 

Animal  Physiology.    Revised 

Edition.  With  upwards  of  300 
Woodcuts.     6j". 

CARREL.  History  of  the 
Counter  -  Revolution  in  Eng- 
land for  the  Re-establishment  of 
Popery  under  Charles  If.  and 
James  II.,  by  Armand  Carrel  ; 
together  with  Fox's  History  of 
the  Reign  of  James  II.  and  Lord 
Lonsdale's  Memoir  of  the  Reign 
of  James  II.     3^.  6d. 

CASTLE  (E.)  Schools  and 
Masters  of  Fence,  from  the 
Middle  Ages  to  the  End  of  the 
Eighteenth  Century.  By  Egerton 
Castle,  M.A.,  F.S.A.  With  a 
Complete  Bioliography.  Illustrated 
with  140  Reproductions  of  Old 
Engravings  and  6  Plates  of 
Swords,  showing  114  Examples. 

CATTFRMOLE'S  Evenings  at 
Haddon  HaU.  W  th  24  En- 
gravings  on  Steel  from  designs  by 
Cattermole,  the  Letterpress  by  the 
Baroness  de  Carabella.     5^. 

CATULLUS,  Tibullus.  and  the 
Vigil  of  Venus.  A  Literal  Prose 
Translation.      5^. 

CELLINI  (Beavenuto).  Me- 
moirs of,  writtrn  by  Himself. 
Translated  by  Thomas  Roscoe. 
3y.  6d. 

CERVANTES'  Don  Quixote  de 
la  Mancha  Motteux's  Trans- 
lation revised.  2  vols.  3;.  6d. 
each. 

Galatea.  A  Pastoral  Ro- 
mance. Translated  by  G.  W.  J. 
Gyll.     35.  6d, 


6 


Aft  Alphabetical  List  of  Books 


CERVANTES'  Exemplary 
Novels.  Translated  by  Walter 
K.  Kelly.     t,s.  6d. 

CHAUCER'S  Poetical  Works. 
Edited  by  Robert  Bell.  Revised 
Edition,  with  a  Preliminary  Essay 
by  Prof.  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.  4 
vols.     ^s.  6d.  each. 

CHESS    CONGRESS   of  1862 

A  Collection  of  the  ( laiaes  played. 
Edited  by  J.  Lowenthal.      55-, 

CHEVREUL  on  Colour.  Trans- 
lated from  the  French  by  Charles 
Martel.  Third  Edition,  viith 
Plates,  5^.  ;  or  with  an  additional 
series  of  16  Plates  in  Colours, 
•js.  6d. 

CHILLI  NT GWORTH'S  Religion 
of  Protestants.  A  Safe  Way  to 
Salvation.      35.  6ci. 

CHINA,  Pictorial,  Descriptive, 
and  Historical.  With  Map  and 
nearly  100  Illustrations.     55-. 

CHRONICLES  OF  THE  CRU- 
SADES. Contemporary  Narra 
lives  of  the  Crusade  of  Richard 
Cceur  de  Lion,  by  Richard  of 
Devizes  and  Geoffrey  de  Vinsauf ; 
and  of  the  Crusade  at  St.  Louis, 
by  Lord  John  de  Joinville.     5^-. 

CICERO'S  Orations.  Translated 
by  Prof.  C.  D.  Yonge,  M.A.  4 
vols.     5J-.  each, 

Letters.  Translated  by  Evelyn 

S.  Shuckbnrgh.    4  vols.    5.?.  each. 
[  I^ols.  I.  and  II.  ready. 

On    Oratory    and    Orators. 

With  Letters  to  (^uintus  and 
Bruius.  Translated  by  the  Rev. 
I.  S.  Watson,  M.A.     ^s. 

On  the  Nature  of  the  Gods, 

Divination,  Fate,  Laws,  a  Re- 
public, Consulship.  Translated 
by  Prol.  C  F).  Yonge,  M.A.,  and 
Francis  Harham.     ^s. 

■ Academics,  De  Finibus,  and 

Tusculan  Questions.  By  Prof. 
Z.  D.  Yonge,  M.A.     5.$-. 


CICERO'S  Offices  ;  or,  Moral 
Duties.  Cato  Major,  an  Essay 
on  Old  Ai^e ;  Lrelius,  an  Essay 
on  Friendship  ;  Scipio's  Dream  ; 
Paradoxes  ;  Letter  to  Quinlus  on 
Magistrates.  Tran.slated  by  C.  R. 
Edmonds.     3^'.  6d. 

CORNELIUS    NEPOS.  — 5^^ 

Justin. 

CLARK'S  (Hugh)  Introduction 
to  Heraldry.  iSth  Edition,  Re- 
vised and  Enlarged  by  J.  R. 
Planche,  Rouge  Croix.  With 
nearly  1000  Illustrations.  5^.  Or 
with  the  Illustrations  Coloured, 
iSs. 

CLASSIC  TALES,  containing 
Rasselas,  Yicar  of  Wakefield, 
CjuUiver's  Travels,  and  The  Senti- 
mental Journey.     2^.  6d. 

COLERIDGE'S  (S.  T.)  Friend. 
A  Series  of  Essays  on  Morals, 
Politics,  and  Religion.     3.^-.  6d, 

Aids  to  Reflection,  and  the 

CONl^'E-SSIONS    OF  AN    INQUIRING 

Spirit,  to  which  are  added  the 
Essays  on  Faith  and  the  Book 
OF  Common  Prayer,     y.  6d. 

Lectures     and    Notes     on 

Shakespeare  and  other  English 
Poets.    Edited  by  T.  Ashe    3.^.  6^/. 

-  Biographia  Literaria ;  to- 
gether with  Two  Lay  Sermons. 
3i.  6d. 

Table- Talk,   and    Omniana. 

Edited  by  T.  Ashe,  I>.A,     p.  6d. 

Miscellanies,  iEsthetic  and 

Literary :  to  which  is  added, 
The  Theory  of  Life  Col- 
lected and  arranged  by  T.  Ashe, 
B.A.     3s.  6d. 

COMTE'S  Positive  Philosophy. 
Translated  and  condensed  by 
Harriet  Martineau.  With  Intro- 
duction by  Frederic  Harrison. 
3  vols.     5,f.  each. 


Contained  in  Bohn^s  Lih^aries. 


COMTE'S    Philosophy    of    the 

Sciences,  being  an  Exposition  of 
the  Principles  of  the  Cows  de 
Philosophie  Positive.  By  G.  H. 
Lewes.     55. 

CONDE'S  History  of  the  Do- 
minion of  the  Arabs  in  Spain. 
Translated  by  Mrs.  Foster.  3 
vols.     3J-.  bd.  each. 

COOPER'S  Biographical  Dic- 
tionary. Containing  Concise 
Notices  (upwards  of  15,000)  of 
Eminent  Persons  of  all  Ages  and 
Countries.  By  Thompson  Cooper, 
F.S.A.  With  a  Supplement, 
bringing  the  work  down  to  1883. 
2  vols.     5j.  each. 

COWPER'S  Complete  Works. 
Edited  by  Robert  Southey.  Illus- 
trated with  45  Engravings.  8  vols. 
3j.  dd.  each. 

I.  to  IV. — Memoir    and    Corres- 
pondence. 
V.  and  VI. — Poetical  Works. 
VII.  and  VIII.  —Translation    of 
Homei's    Iliad    and 
Odyssey. 

COXE'S  Memoirs  of  the  Duke  of 
Marlborough.  With  his  original 
Correspondence.  By  W.  Coxe, 
M.A.,  F.R.S.  Revised  edition 
by  John  Wade.  3  vols.  35-.  6^. 
each. 

* ^  An  Atlas  of  the  plans  of 
Marlborough's  campaigns,  410. 
\os.  6d. 

■ History    of   the    House    of 

Austria  (12 1 8-1 792).  With  a 
Continuation  from  the  Accession 
of  Francis  I.  to  the  Revolution  of 
1848.     4  vols,     T,s.  6d.  each. 

CRAIK^S(G.L.)  Pursuit  of  Know- 
ledge under  Diflaculties.  Illus- 
trated by  Anecdotes  and  Memoirs. 
Revised  edition,  with  numerous 
Woodcut  Portraits  and  Plates.    5.^. 

CRUIKSHANK'S  Three  Courses 
and  a  Dessert;  comprising  three 
Sets    of    Tales,    West    Country, 


Irish,  and  Legal ;  and  a  Melange. 
With  50  humorous  Illustrations 
by  George  Cruikshank.     5^-. 

CRUIKSHANK'S  Punch  and 
Judy.  The  Dialogue  of  the 
Puppet  Show  ;  an  Account  of  its 
Origin,  &c.  With  24  Illustra- 
tions, and  Coloured  Plates,  de- 
signed and  engraved  by  G.  Cruik- 
shank.    5J-. 

CUNNINGHAM'S  Lives  of  the 
Most  Eminent  British  Painters. 
A  New  Edition,  with  Notes  and 
Sixteen  fresh  Lives.  By  Mrs. 
Heaton.     3  vols.     3^.  6d.  each. 

DANTE.  Divine  Comedy.  Trans- 
lated by  the  Rev.  \\.  F.  Gary, 
M.A.     3^.  6d 

Translated  into  English  Verse 

by  I.  C.  Wright,  M.A.  3rd  Edi- 
tion, revised.  With  Portrait,  and 
34  Illustrations  on  Steel,  after 
Flaxman. 

The  Inferno.  A  Literal  Prose 

Translation,  with  the  Text  of  the 
Original  printed  on  the  same  page. 
By  John  A.  Carlyle,  M.D.     55-. 

The  Purgatorio.      A  Literal 

Prcse  Translation,  with  the  Text 
printed  on  the  same  page.  By 
W.  S.  Dugdale.     5^. ' 

DE  COMMINES  (Philip),  Me- 
moirs  of.  Contamingthe  Histories 
of  Louis  XI.  and  (.  harles  VIII., 
Kings  of  France,  and  Charles 
the  Bold,  Duke  of  Burgundy. 
Together  with  the  Scandalous 
Chronicle,  or  Secret  History  ol 
Louis  XI.,  by  Jean  de  Troyes. 
Translated  by  Andrew  R.  Scoble. 
With  Portraits.  2  vols.  t,s.  6d. 
each. 

DEFOE'S  Novels  and  Miscel- 
laneous Works.  \Mih  Prefaces 
and  Notes,  including  those  attri- 
buted to  Sir  W.  Scott.  7  vols. 
3 J.  6d.  each. 

I. — Captain     Singleton,     and 
Colonel  Jack. 


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books 


DEFOfi's  Novels  &c.,  contimied. 
II. — Memoirs    of  a    Cavalier, 
Captain      Carleton, 
Dickory  Cronke,  &c. 
III.— Moll    Flanders,    and    the 

History  of  the  Devil. 
IV. — Roxana,  and  Life  of  Mrs. 
Christian  Davies. 
V. — History  of  the  Great  Plague 
of  London,  1665  ;  The 
Storm  (1703)  ;  and  the 
True-born  Englishman. 
VI.  —  Duncan    Campbell,    New 
Voyage     round     the 
World,     and     Political 
Tracts. 
VII. — Robinson  Crusoe. 

BE  LOLME  on  the  Constitution 
of  England.  Edited  by  John 
Macgregor.     3^.  dd. 

DEMMIN'S  History  of  Arms 
and  Armour,  from  the  Earliest 
Period.  By  Auguste  Demmin. 
Translated  by  C.  C.  Black,  M.A. 
With   nearly   20CO    Illustrations. 

is.  ed. 

DEMOSTHENES'  Orations. 
Translated  by  C.  Rann  Kennedy. 
5  vols.  Vol.  L,  35-.  6d.  ;  Vols. 
II.-V.,  5i-.  each. 

DE  STAEL'S  Corinne  or  Italy. 
By  Madame  de  Stael.  Trans- 
lated by  Emily  Baldwin  and 
Paulina  Driver.     3^-.  6d. 

DEVET?'S  Logic,  or  the  Science 
of  Inference.  A  Popular  Manual. 
By  J.  Devey.     ^s. 

DICTIONARY  of  Latin  and 
Greek  Quotations  ;  including 
Proverbs,  Maxims,  Mottoes,  Law 
Terms  and  Phrases.  With  all  the 
Quantities  marked,  and  English 
Translations.  With  Index  Verb- 
orum  (622  pages).     5^". 

DICTIONARY  of  Obsolete  and 
Provincial  English.  Compiled 
by  Thomas  Wright,  M.A.,  F.S.A., 
&c.     2  vels.     5^.  each. 


DIDRON'S  Christian  Icono- 
graphy :  a  History  of  Christian 
Art  in  the  Middle  Ages.  Trans- 
lated by  E.  J.  Millington  and 
completed  by  Margaret  Stokes. 
With  240  Illustrations.  2  vols. 
5^-.  each. 

DIOQ-ENES  LAERTIUS.  Lives 
and  Opinions  of  the  Ancient 
Philosophers.  Translated  by 
Prof.  C.  D.  Yonge,  M.A.     5^. 

DOBREJL'S  Adversaria.  Edited 
by  the  late  Prof.  Wagner.  2  vols. 
^s.  each. 

D  ODD'S  Epigrammatists.  A 
Selection  from  the  Epigrammatic 
Literature  of  Ancient,  Mediaeval, 
and  Modern  Times.  By  the  Rev. 
Henry  Philip  Dodd,  M.A.  Ox- 
ford. 2nd  Edition,  revised  and 
enlarged.     6s. 

DONALDSON'S  The  Theatre  of 
the  Greeks.  A  Treatise  on  the 
History  and  Exhibition  of  the 
Greek  Drama.  With  numerous 
Illustrations  and  3  Plans.  By  John 
William  Donaldson,  D.D.     5^-. 

DRAPER'S  History  of  the 
Intellectual  Development  of 
Europe.  Byjohn  William  Draper, 
M.D.,  LL.D.     2  vols.     5^-.  each. 

DUN  LOP'S  History  of  Fiction. 
A  new  Edition.  Revised  by 
Henry  Wilson.    2  vols.    5 J.  each. 

DYER  (Dr.  T.  H.).  Pompeii :  its 
Buildings  and  Antiquities.  By 
T.  H.  Dyer,  LL.D.  With  nearly 
300  Wood  Engravings,  a  large 
Map,  and  a  Plan  of  the  Forum. 
is.  6d. 

The  City  of  Rome  :  its  History 

and   Monuments.     With  Illustra- 
tions.    5j-. 

DYER  (T.  F.  T.)  British  Popular 
Customs,  Present  and  Past. 
An  Account  of  the  various  Games 
and  Customs  associated  with  Dif- 
ferent Days  of  the  Year  in  the 


Containea  in  Bohn's  Libraries. 


9 


British  Isles,  arranged  according 
to  the  Calendar.  By  the  Rev. 
T.  F.  Thiselton   Uyer,  M.A.     5^-. 

EARLY  TRAVELS  IN  PALES- 
TINE. Edited  by  Thomas 
Wright,  M.A.  With  Map  of 
Jerusalem.     5^-. 

EBERS'  Egyptian  Princess.  An 
Historical  Novel.  By  George 
Ebers.  Translated  by  E.  S. 
Buchheim.     3^-.  6d. 

EDGE  WORTH'S  Stories  for 
Children.  With  8  Illustrations 
by  L   Speed,     ^s.  6d. 

ELZE'S  William  Shakespeare. 
— See  Shakespeare. 

EMERSON'S    Works.       3   vols. 
T,s.  6d.  each. 
I. — Essays,  Lectures,  and  Poems. 
II. — English  Traits,  Nature,  and 
Conduct  of  Life. 
III.  -  Societyand Solitude — Letters 
and  Social  Aims— Miscel- 
laneous    Papers    (hitherto 
uncollected)  —  May    Day, 
and  other  Poems. 

ELLIS  (G.)  Specimens  of  Early 
English  Metrical  Romances. 
With  an  Historical  Introduction 
on  the  Rise  and  Progress  of 
Romantic  Composition  in  France 
and  England.  Revised  Edition. 
By  J.  O.  Halliwell,  F.R.S.     5.^. 

ENNEMOSER'S  History  of 
Magic.  Translated  by  William 
Howitt.     2  vols.     5.^.  each. 

EPICTETUS.  The  Discourses  of. 
With  the  Encheiridion  and 
Fragments.  Translated  by  George 
Long,  M.A.     5^. 

EURIPIDES.  A  New  Literal 
Translation  in  Prose.  By  E.  P. 
Coleridge,  M.A.    2  vols.    55'.  each. 

EUTROPIUS.— .S'(j^  Justin. 

EUSEBIUS  PAMPHILUS, 
Ecclfesiastical  History  of.  Trans- 
lated by  Rev.  C.  F.  Cruse,  M.A.  5.^. 


EVELYN'S  Diary  and  Corre- 
spondence. Edited  from  the 
Original  MSS.  by  W.  Bray, 
F.A.S.  With  45  Engravings.  4 
vols.     5J-.  each. 

FAIRHOLT'S  Costume  in  Eng- 
land. A  History  of  Dress  to  the 
end  of  the  Eighteenth  Century. 
3rd  Edition,  revised,  by  Viscount 
Dillon,  V.P.S.A.  Illustrated  with 
above  700  Engravings.  2  vols. 
5^-.  each. 

FIELDING'S  Adventures  of 
Joseph  Andrews  and  his  Friend 
Mr  Abraham  Adams.  With 
Cruikshank's  Illustrations.   ;^s.6d. 

History    of    Tom   Jones,    a 

Foundling.  With  Cruikshank's 
Illustrations.    2  vols.    y.  6d.  each. 

Amelia.      With  Cruikshank's 

Illustrations      5^. 

FLAXMAN'S  Lectures  on  Sculp- 
ture. By  John  Flaxman,  R.A. 
With  Portra'it  and  53  Plates.     6s. 

FLORENCE  of  WORCESTER'S 
Chronicle,  with  the  Two  Con- 
tinuations :  comprising  Annals  of 
English  History,  from  the  De- 
parture of  the  Romans  to  the 
Reign  of  Edward  I.  Translated 
by  Thomas  Forester,  M.A.     5^-. 

FOSTER'S  (John)  Life  and  Cor- 
respondence Edited  by  J.  E. 
Ryland.     2  voL.     y.  dd.  each. 

— —  Lectures  delivered  at  Broad- 
mead  Chapel.  Edited  by  J.  E. 
Ryland.     2  vols.     3^.  dd.  each. 

Critical  Essays.     Edited  by 

J.  E.  Ryland.  2  vols.  y.  6d. 
each.   . 

Essays :  on  Decision  of  Cha- 
racter ;  on  a  Man's  writing  Me- 
moirs of  Himself;  on  the  epithet 
Romantic ;  on  the  aversion  of 
Men  of  Taste  to  Evangelical  Re- 
ligion.    2^.  6d. 

Essays  on  the  Evils  of  Popular 

Ignorance  ;  to  which  is  added,  3, 


lO 


An  Alphabetical  List  oj  Books 


Discourse  on  the  Propagation  of 
Christianity  in  India.      3^-.  bd. 

FOSTER'S  Essays  on  the  Im- 
provement of  Time.  With  Notes 
OF  Sermons  and  other  Pieces. 
3..  6^. 

Fosteriana.      Selected  and 

Edited  by  Henry  G.  Bohn.    y.  6d. 

GASPARY'S  History  of  Italian 
Literature.  Translated  by  Her- 
mann Oelsner,  M.A.,  Ph.D. 
Vol.  I.  [Preparing. 

GEOFFREY  OF  MONMOUTH, 
Chronicle  of.  —  See  Six  O.  E. 
Chronicles. 

GESTA  ROMANORUM,  or  En- 
tertaining Moral  Stories  invented 
by  the  Monks.  Translated  by  the 
Rev.  Charles  Swan.  Revised 
Edition,  by  Wynnard  Hooper, 
B.A.     5^. 

GILD  AS,  Chronicles  oi.—See  Six 
O.  £.  C /iron ides. 

GIBBON'S  Decline  and  FaU  of 
the  Roman  Empire.  Complete 
and  Unabridged,  with  Variorum 
Notes.  Edited  by  an  English 
Churchman.  With  2  Maps  and 
Portrait.      7  vols.     y.  6d.  each. 

GILBART'S  History,  Principles, 
and  Practice  of  Banking.  By 
the  late  J.  W.  Gilbart,  F.R.S. 
New  Edition,  revised  by  A.  S. 
Michie.     2  vols.     los. 

GIL  BLAS,  The  Adventtires  of. 
Translated  from  the  French  of 
Lesage  by  Smollett.  With  24 
Engravings  on  Steel,  after  Smirke, 
and  10  Etchings  by  George  Cruik- 
shank.     6s. 

GIRALDUS  CAMBRENSIS' 
Historical  Works.  Translated 
by  Th.  Forester,  M.A.,  and  Sir 
R.  Colt  Hoare  Revised  Edition, 
Edited  by  Thomas  Wright,  M.A., 
f.S.A.     5.. 


GOETHE'S  Works.  Translated 
into  English  by  various  hands. 
14  vols.     35-.  6d.  each 

I.  and  II. — Autobiography   and 
Annals. 
III. —  Faust.      Two     Parts,    com- 
plete.    (Swan  wick.) 
IV. — Novels  and  Tales. 
V. — Wilhelm  Meister's  Appren- 
ticeship. 
VI. —  Conversations    with    Ecker- 
mann  and  Soret. 
VIII. — Dramatic  Works. 
IX.— Wilhelm  Meister's  Travels. 
X. — Tour  in  Italy,   and  Second 
Residence  in  Rome. 
XI. — Miscellaneous  Travels. 
XII. — Early     and     Miscellaneous 
Letters. 

XIII  — Correspondence  with  Zelter. 

XIV  — Reineke  Fox,  West-Eastern 

Divan  and  Achilleid. 

GOETHE'S  Faust  Part  I.  Ger- 
man Text  with  Ilayward's  Prose 
Translation  and  Notes.  Revised 
by  C.  A.  Buchheim,  Ph.D.     5^. 

GOLDSMITH'S  Works.  A  new 
Edition,  by  J.  W.  M.  Gibbs.     5 


vols. 


If.  6d.  each. 


GRAMMONT'S  Memoirs  of  the 
Court  of  Charles  II  Edited  by 
Sir  Walter  Scott.  Together  with 
the  BoscoBEL  Tracts,  including 
two  not  before  published,  &c. 
New  Edition,     ^s. 

GRAY'S  Letters.  Edited  by  the 
Rev.  D.  C.  Tovey,  M.  A. 

[/;/  f  he  press. 

GREEK  ANTHOLOGY.  Trans- 
lated by  George  Burges,  M.A.    5^.-. 

GREEK  ROMANCES  of  HeUo- 
dorus,  Longus,  and  Achilles 
Tatius — viz.,  The  Adventures  of 
Theagenes  &  Chariclea  ;  Amours 
of  Daphnis  and  Chloe  ;  and  Loves 
of  Clitopho  and  Leucippe.  Trans- 
lated by   Rev.    R.    Smith,    M.A. 


Contained  in  Bohn's  Lih. 


7'artes. 


Vi 


GREGORY'S  Letters  on  the 
Evidences,  Doctrines,  &  Duties 
of  the  Christian  Religion.     By 


Dr.  Olinthus  Gregory. 


U. 


GREENE,  MARLOWE,  and 
BEN  JONSON.  Poems  of. 
Edited  by  Robert  Bell      3i-.  dd. 

GRIMM'S  TALES  With  the 
Notes  of  the  Original.'  Tmnslated 
by  Mrs.  A.  Hunt.  With  Intro- 
duction by  Andrew  Lang,  M.A. 
2  vols.     3^.  (>d.  each. 

Gammer  Grethel;  or,  Ger- 
man Fairy  Tales  and  Popular 
Stories.  Containing  42  Fairy 
Tales.  Trans,  by  Edgar  Taylor. 
With  numerous  Woodcuts  after 
(.-eorge  Cruikshank  and  Ludwig 
Grimm.      3^-.  ()d. 

GROSSI'S  Marco  Visconti. 
Translated  by  A.  F.  D.  The 
Ballads  rendered  into  English 
Verse  by  C.  M.  P.     3^-.  6d. 

GUTZOT'S  History  of  tbe  Origin 
of  Representative  Government 
in  Europe.  Translated  by  A.  R. 
Scoble.     35  6^. 

History  of  the  English  Re- 
volution of  1640.  From  the 
Accession  of  Charles  L  to  his 
Death.  Translated  by  William 
Hazlitt.     3^.  dd. 

History  of  Civilisation,  from 

the  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  to 
the  French  Revolution.  Trans- 
lated by  William  Hazlitt.  3  vols. 
3 J.  dd.  each. 

HALL'S  (Rev.  Robert)  Miscel- 
laneous Works  and  Remains. 
Zs.  6d. 

HAR I.WICK'S  History  of  the 
Articles  of  Religion.  By  the  late 
C.  Hard  wick.  Revised  by  the 
Rev.  Francis  Procter,  M.A.     5.s\ 

HAUFF'S  Tales.  The  Caravan— 
The  Sheik  of  Alexandria—  The 
Inn  in  the  SpessarC.  Trans,  from 
the  German  byS.  Mendel.  ^s.Sd. 


HAWTHORNE'S  Tales.     4  vols. 
3^-.  6d.  each. 
I. — Twice-told    Tales,    and    the 

Snow  Image. 
II.-    Scarlet  Letter,  and  the  House 
with  the  .Seven  Ga1)les. 
III. — Transformation  [The  Marble 
Faun],  and  Blithedale  Ro- 
mance. 
IV. — Mosses  Irom  an  Old  Manse. 

HAZLITTS  Table-talk.  Essays 
on  Men  and  Manners.  By  W. 
Hazlitt.     3J-.  6d. 

Lectures  on  the  Literature 

of  the  Age  of  Elizabeth  and  on 
Characters  of  Shakespeare's  Plays. 
3^.  6d. 

Lectures    on    tbe    English 

Poets,  and  on  the  English  Comic 
Writers,     y-  6^- 

The  Plain  Speaker.  Opinions 

on  Books,  Men,  and  Things.  T,s.6d. 

Round  Tab  e.     3^.  dd. 

Sketches  ard  Essays.    t,s  6d. 

The  Spirit  of  the  Age ;    or, 

Contemporary  Portraits.  Edited 
by  W.  Carew  Hazlitt.     y.  bd. 

BEATON'S  Concise  History  of 
Painting.  New  Edition,  revised 
by  Cosmo  Monkhouse.     5^. 

HEGEL'S  Lectures  on  the  Philo- 
sophy of  History.  Translated  by 
J.  Sibree,  M.A. 

HEINE'S  Poems,  Complete. 
Translated  l-y  Edgar  A.  Bowring, 
C.B.     3J-.  ^d. 

Travel-Pjctures,  including  the 

Four  in  the  Harz,  Norderney,  and 
Book  of  Ideas,  together  with  the 
Romantic  Schc^ol.  Translated  by 
Francis  Storr.  A  New  Edition, 
revi.sed  throughout.  With  Appen- 
dices and  Maps.     35.  dd. 

HELP'S  Life  of  Christopber 
Columbus,  tne  Discoverer  of 
America.     By  Sir  Arthur  Helps, 


K.C.B. 


(id. 


12 


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books 


HELP'S  Life  of  Hernando  Cortes, 

and  the  Conquest  of  Mexico.     2 
vols.     3j.  6d.  each. 

Life  of  Pizarro.     -^s.  6d. 

Life  of  Las  Casas  the  Apostle 

of  the  Indies.     2>^.  bd. 

HENDERSON  (E.)  Select  His- 
torical Documen  s  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  including  the  most  famous 
Charters  relating  to  England,  the 
Fmpire,  the  Church,  &c. ,  from 
the  6th  to  the  14th  Centuries. 
Translated  from  the  Latin  and 
edited  by  Ernest  F.  Henderson, 
A. B.,  A.M.,  Ph.D.     5-f. 

HENFRE  ,  'S  Guide  to  English 
Coins,  from  the  Conquest  to  the 
present  time.  New  and  revised 
Edition  by  C.  F.  Keary,  M.A., 
F.S.A.     6s. 

HENRY  OF  HUNTINGDON'S 
History  of  the  English.  Trans- 
lated by  T    Forester,  M.A.     55. 

HENRY'S  ( Matthew)  Exposition 
of  the  Be  ok  01  the  Psalms.     5^^. 

HELIODORUS.  Theagetes  and 
Chariclea.  —  See  Greek  Ro- 
mances. 

HERODOTUS.  Translated  by  the 
Rev.  Henry  Cary,  M.A.     35.  6d. 

Notes  on.  Original  and  Se- 
lected from  the  best  Commenta- 
tors. By  D.  W.  Turner,  M  A. 
With  Coloured  Map       >j. 

Analysis  and  Summary  of. 

By  J.  T.  Wheeler,      ^s 

HESIOD,  CALLIMACHUS,and 
THEOGNIS.  Translated  by  the 
Rev.  J.  Banks,  M.A.      <^s. 

HOFFMAN  NT'S  (E.  T.  ■  .  The 
Serapion  Brethren.  Tr -nslated 
from  the  German  by  Lt. -Col.  Alex. 
Ewing.     2  vols.      T)S.  6d.  each. 

HOGG'S  (Jabez)  Elements  of 
Experimental  and  Natural 
Philosophy.  With  400  Wood- 
cuts,    ^s. 


HOLBEIN'S  Dance  of  Death 
and  B.tle  Cats.  Upwards  of  [50 
Subjects,  engraved  in  facsimile, 
with  Introduction  and  Descrip- 
tions by  Francis  Douce  and  Dr. 
Thomas  Frognall  Dibden.     ^s. 

HOMER'S  Iliad.  Translated  into 
English  Prose  by  T.  A.  Buckley, 
B.A.     Ss. 

Odyssey.     Hymns,  Epigrams, 

and  Battle  of  the  Frogs  and  Mice. 
Translated  into  English  Prose  by 
T.  A.  Buckley,  B.A.     5.^. 

See  also  Cow  PER  and  Pope.  « 

HOOPER'S  (G  )  Waterloo:  The 
Downfall  of  the  First  Napo- 
leon: a  History  of  the  Ca  upaign 
of  18(5.  By  Ge(  rge  Hooper. 
With  Maps  and  Plans.     3^.  6d. 

The    Campaign   ■  f    Sedan : 

The  Downfall  of  the  Second  Em- 
pire, August  -  September,  1870. 
With  General  Map  and  Six  Plans 
of  Battle,     y.  6d. 

HORACE.  A  new  literal  Prose 
translation,  by  A.  Hamilton  Bryce, 
LL.D.     3^.  bd. 

HUGO'S  (Victor)  Dramatic 
Works.  Htrnani — Ruy  Bias — 
The  King's  Diversion.  Translated 
by  Mrs.  Newton  Crosland  and 
F  L.  Slous.     y.  bd. 

'  Poems,  chiefly  Lyrical.  Trans- 
lated by  various  Writers,  now  first 
collecttd  by  J.    H.  L.  Williams. 

y.  bd. 

HUMBOLbT'S  rosmos.  Trans- 
lated by  E  C.  Otte,  B.  H,  Paul, 
and  W.  S.  Dallas,  F.L.S.  5  vols. 
T^s.  bd.  each,  excepting  Vol.  V.  5.^. 

Personal    Narrative    of    his 

Travels  to  the  Equinoctial  Regions 
of  America  during  the  years  1799- 
1804.  Translated  by  T.  Ross.  3 
vols.     5^.  each. 

Views  of  Nature.    Translated 

j       by  E.  C.   Otte  and  H.  G.  Bohn. 
I      5^- 


Contained  in  Bohn's  Libraries. 


i3 


HUMPHREYS'  Coin  CoUectors' 

Manual.  By  H.  N.  Humphreys. 
With  upwards  of  140  Illustrations 
on  Wood  and  Steel.  2  vols.  5^-. 
each. 

HUN  GARY :  its  History  and  Re- 
volution, together  with  a  copious 
Memoir  of  Kossuth,      t^s.  6d. 

HUTCHINSON  (Colonel).  Me- 
moirs of  the  Life  of.  By  his 
Widow,  Lucy  :  together  with  her 
Autobiography,  and  an  Account 
of  the  Siege  of  Laihom  House. 
3^.  6d. 

HUNT'S  Poetry  of  Science.  By 
Richard  Hunt.  3rd  Edition,  re- 
vised and  enlarged.     5^-. 

INDIA  BEFORE  THE  SEPOY 
MUTINY.  A  Pictorial,  De- 
scriptive, and  Historical  Ac- 
count, from  the  Earliest  Times 
to  the  Annexation  of  the  Punjab. 
With  upwards  of  100  Engravings 
on  Wood,  and  a  Map.      <fS. 

INGULPH'S  Chronicles  of  the 
Abbey  of  Croylana,  with  the 
Continuation  by  Peter  of  Blois 
and  other  Writers.  Translated  by 
H.  T.  Riley,  M.A.     5^. 

IRVING'S   (Washington)   Com- 
plete Works.    15  vols.  With  Por- 
traits, &c.     3J.  6d.  each. 
I.— Salmagundi,      Knicker- 
bocker's History  of  New 
York. 
H.— The  Sketch  Book,  and  the 
Life  of  Oliver  Goldsmith, 
in.— Bracebridge   Hall,    Abbots- 
ford  and  Newstead  Abbey. 
IV.— The  Alhambra,  Tales  of  a 
Traveller, 
v.— Chronicle  of  the   Conquest 
of  Granada,    Legends  of 
the  Conquest  of  Spain. 
VI.  &  VII.— Life    and    Voyages   of 
Columbus,  together  with 
the  Voyages  of  his  Com- 
panions. 
VIII. — Astoria,    A    Tour    on    the 
Prairies, 


Irving's  Works  continued. 
XI. — Life  of  Mahomet,  Livesof  the 
Successors  of  Mahomet. 
X. — Adventures  of  Captain  Bon- 
neville, U.S.A.,  Wolfert's 
Roost. 
XL — Biographies    and    Miscella- 
neous Papers. 
XII.-XV.— Life  of  George  Wash- 
ington.    4  vols. 

Life    and    Letters.      By  his 

Nephew,  Pierre  E.Irving.    2 vols. 
3^-.  6d.  each. 

ISOCRATES,  The  Orations  of. 
Translated  by  J.  H.  Freese,  M.A. 
Vol.  I.     5^- 

JAMES'S  (G.  P.  R.)  Life  of 
Paciiard  Coeur  de  Lion.  2  vols. 
T)S.  6d.  each. 

The  Life  and  Times  of  Louis 

XTV.     2  vols,     y,  6d.  each. 

JAMESON'S  (  Mrs.  )  Shake- 
speare's Heroines.  Character- 
istics of  Women :  Moral,  Poetical, 
and  Historical.  By  Mrs.  Jameson. 
3^.  6d. 

JESSE'S  (E.)  Anecdotes  of  Dogs. 
With  40  Woodcuts  and  34  Steel 
Engravings.      5i-. 

JESSE'S  (J.  H.)  Memoirs  of  the 
Court  of  England  during  the 
Reign  of  the  Stuarts,  including 
the  Protectoraie.  3  vols.  With 
42  Portraits.     5^-.  each. 

Memoirs  of  the  Pretenders 

and  their  Adherents.     With  6 
Portraits.      5-^' 

JOHNSON'S  Lives  of  the  Poets. 
Edited  by  Mrs.  Alexander  Napier, 
v.'ith  Introduction  by  Professor 
Hales.     3  vols.     3^.  bd.  each. 

JOSEPHUS  (Flavius),  The  Works 
of.  Whiston's  Translation,  re- 
vised by  Rev.  A.  R.  Shilleto,  M.A. 
With  Topographical  and  Geo- 
graphical Notes  by  Colonel  bir 
C.  W.  Wilson,  K.C.B.  5  vols. 
3^.  6d.  each. 


u 


Alt  Alphabetical  List  oj  Books 


JOYCES  Scientific  Dialogues. 
With  numerous  Woodcuts.      5^. 

JUKES-BROWNE  (A.  J.),  The 
Building  of  the  British  Isles  : 
a  Study  in  Geographical  Evohi- 
tion.  Illustrated  by  numerous 
Maps  and  Woodcuts.  2nd  Edition, 
revised,  ']s.  6d. 

Student's    Handbook     of 

Physical  Geology.  With  nu- 
merous Diagrams  and  Illustra- 
tions. 2nd  Edition,  much  en- 
larged, Js.  6d. 

The  Studect's  Handbook  of 

Historical  Geology.  With  nu- 
merous Diagrams  and  Illustra- 
tions.    6s. 

JULIAN,  the  Emperor.  Contain- 
ing Gregory  Nazianzen's  Two  In- 
vectives and  Libanus'  Monody, 
with  Julian's  extant  Theosophical 
Works.  Translated  by  C.  W. 
King,  M.A.     5^. 

JUSTIN,  CORNELIUS  NEPOS, 
and  EUTROPIUS  Translated 
by  the  Rev.  J.  S.  Watson,  M.A. 

JUVENAL,  PERSIUS,  SUL- 
PICIAandLUCILIUS.  Trans- 
lated by  L.  Evans,  M.A.     5^ 

JUNIUS'S  Letters.  With  all  the 
Notes  of  Woodfall's  Edition,  and 
important  Additions.  2  vols.  T,s.6d. 
each. 

KANT'S  Critique  of  Pure  Reason. 
Translated  by  J.  M.  D.  Meikle- 
john.     5^-. 

Prolegomena  and  Meta- 
physical Foundatior  s  of  Natural 
Science.  Translated  byE.  Belfort 
Bax.     5^. 

KEIGHTLEY'S  (Thomas)  My- 
thology of  Ancient  Greece  and 
Italy.  4th  Edition,  revised  l)y 
Leonard  Schmitz,  Ph.D,  LL.D. 
With  12  Plates  from  the  Antique. 
5^. 


KEIGHTLEY'S  Fairy  Myth- 
ology, illustrative  of  the  Romance 
and  Superstition  of  Various  Coun- 
tries. Revised  Edition,  with 
Frontispiece  by  Cruik^hank.      c^s. 

LA  FONTAINE'S  Fables.  Trans- 
lated into  English  Verse  by  F.lizur 
Wright.  New  Edition,  with  Notes 
by  J.  W.  M.  Gibbs.     3^.  6d. 

LAMARTINE'S  History  of  the 
Girondists.  Translated  by  II.  T. 
Ryde.      3  vols.     2>^.  6d.  each. 

— —  History  of  the  Restoration 
of  Monarchy  in  France  (a  Sequel 
to  the  History  of  the  Girondists). 
4  vols.     3^'.  6d.  each. 

History  of  the  French  Re- 
volution of  1848.     3^.  6d. 

LAMB'S  (Charles)  Essays  of  Elia 
and  Eliana.  Complete  Edition. 
3J.  6d. 

Specimens  of  English  Dra- 
matic Poets  of  the  Time  of 
Elizabeth.     3^-.  6d. 

Memorials    and  I-etters    of 

Charles  Lamb.  By  Serjeant 
Talfourd.  New  Edition,  revised, 
by  W.  Carew  Hazlitt.  2  vols. 
y.  6d.  each. 

LANZI'S  History  of  Painting  in 
Italy,  from  the  Period  of  the 
Revival  of  the  Fine  Arts  to  the 
End  of  the  Eighteenth  Century. 
Translated  by  Thomas  Roscoe. 
3  vols.     35.  6d.  each. 

LAPPENBERG'S  History  of 
England  under  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  Kings.  Translated  by 
B.  Thorpe,  F.S.A.  New  edition, 
revised  by  E.  C.  Otte.  7,  vols. 
3^-.  6d.  each. 

LECTURES  ON  PAINTING, 
by  Barry,  Opie,  Fuseli.  Edited 
by  R.  Wornum.     55". 

LEONARDO  DA  VINCI'S 
Treatise  on  Painting.  Trans- 
lated   by    J.    F.    Rigaud,    R.A., 


Contained  in  Bohn's  Libraries. 


15 


With  a  Life  of  Leonardo  by  John 
William  Brown.  With  numerous 
Plates.     55. 

LELAND'S  Itinerary.    Edited  by 

Laurence  Gomme,  F.S.A.  Vol.  I. 

\In  the  Press. 

LEPSIUS'S  Letters  from  Egypt, 
Ethiopia,  and  the  Peninsula  of 
Sinai  Translated  by  L.  and 
J.  B.  Horner.     With  Maps.     ^s. 

LESSING'S  Dramatic  Works, 
Complete.  Edited  by  Ernest  Bell, 
ALA.  With  Memoir  of  Lessing 
by  Helen  Zimmern.  2  vols. 
Is.  6d.  each. 

Laokoon,   Dramatic   Notes, 

and  the  Representation  of 
Death  by  the  Ancients.  Trans- 
lated by  E.  C.  Beasley  and  Helen 
Zimmern.  Edited  by  Edward 
Bell,  M.A.  With  a  Frontispiece 
of  the  Laokoon  group.     3^".  6d. 

LILLY'S  Introduction  to  Astro- 
logy. With  a  Grammar  of 
Astrology  and  Tables  for  Cal- 
culating Nativities,  by  Zadkiel.  ^s. 

LIVY'S  History  of  Rome.  Trans- 
lated by  Dr.  Spillan,  C  Edmonds, 
and  others.     4  vols.     51.  each. 

LOCKE'S  Philosophical  Works. 
Edited  by  J.  A.  St.  John.  2  vols. 
3^-.  6d.  each. 

Life  and  Letters:     By  Lord 

King.     35-.  6d. 

LOCKHART  (J.  G.)—See  Burns. 

LODGE'S  Portraits  of  Illustrious 
Personages  of  Great  Britain, 
with  P'.iographical  and  Historical 
Memoirs.  240  Portraits  engraved 
on  Steel,  with  the  respective  Bio- 
graphies unabridged.  8  vols.  55. 
each. 

LONGFELLOW'S  Poetical 
Works.  With  24  full-page  Wood 
Engravings  and  a  Portrait,     ^s. 

Prose  V/orks.  With  16  full- 
page  Wood  Engravings.     $s. 


LOUDON'S  (Mrs.)  Natural 
History.  Revised  edition,  by 
W.  S.  Dallas,  F.L.S.  With 
numerous  Woodcut  lUus.     5j-. 

LOWNDES'  Bibliographer's 
Manual  of  English  Literature. 
Enlarged  Edition.  By  H.  G. 
Bohn.  6  vols,  cloth,  5^-.  each. 
Or  4  vols,  half  morocco,  2/.  2s. 

LONGUS.  Daphnis  and  Chloe. 
— See  Greek  Romances. 

LUCAN'S  Pharsalia.  Translated 
by  H.  T.  Riley,  M.A.     55. 

LUCIAN'S  Dialogues  of  the 
Gods,  of  the  Sea  Gods,  and 
of  the  Dead.  Translated  by 
Howard  Williams,  M.A.     $s. 

LUCRETIUS.  Translated  by  the 
Rev.  J.  S.  Watson,  M.A.     5^. 

LUTHER'S  Table-Talk.  Trans- 
lated and  Edited  by  William 
Hazlitt.     3^.  6d. 

Autobiography.  —  See 

MiCHELET. 

MAGHIAVELLI'S  History  of 
Florence,  together  with  the 
Prince,  Savonarola,  various  His- 
torical Tracts,  and  a  Memoir  of 
Machiavelli.     3^-.  6d. 

MALLET'S  Northern  Antiqui- 
ties, or  an  Historical  Account  of 
the  Manners,  Customs,  Religions 
and  Laws,  Maritime  Expeditions 
and  Discoveries,  Language  and 
Literature,  of  the  Ancient  Scandi- 
navians. Translated  by  Bishop 
Percy.  Revised  and  Enlarged 
Edition,  with  a  Translation  of  the 
Prose  Edda,  by  J.  A.  Black- 
well.     5^. 

MANTELL'S  (Dr.)  Petrifactions 
and  their  Teachings.  With  nu- 
merous illustrative  Woodcuts.  6s. 

Wonders  of  Geology.      8th 

Edition,  revised  by  T.  Rupert 
Jones,  F  G.S.  With  a  coloured 
Geological  Map  of  England, 
Plates,  and  upwards  of  200 
Woodcuts.    2  vols.    Ts.  64'  each. 


i6 


An  Alphabetical  List  oj  Books 


MANZONI.  The  Betrothed : 
beint^  a  Translation  of  '  I  Pro- 
messi  Sposi.'  By  Alessandro 
Manzoni.  With  numerous  Wood- 
cuts.    5^. 

MARCO  POLO'S  Travels;  the 
Translation  of  Marsden  revised 
by  T.  Wright,  M.A.,  F.S.A.     5^. 

MARRYAT'S  (Capt.  RN.) 
Master  ma  ii  Ready.  With  93 
Woodcuts      3^-.  6^. 

Mission  ;  or,  Scenes  in  Africa. 

Illustrated  by  Gilbert  and  Dalziel. 
3..  6d. 

Pirate  and   Three   Cutters. 

With  8  Steel  Engravings,  from 
Drawings  by  Clarkson  Stanfield, 
R.A.     3.f.  dd. 

Privateersman.  8  Engrav- 
ings on  Steel.     3^.  6a 

Settlers  in  Canada.  10  En- 
gravings by  Gilbert  and  Dalziel. 
y.  6d. 

Poor  Jack.      With  16  lUus 

trations  after  Clarkson  Stansfield, 
R.A.     3^.  6d. 

Peter  Simple  With  8  full- 
page  Illustrations.     3^.  td. 

Midshipman  Easy.     With  8 

full  page  Illustrations.     3.?.  6d. 

MARTIAL'S  Epigrams,  complete. 
Translated  into  Prose,  each  ac- 
companied by  one  or  more  Verse 
Translations  selected  from  the 
Works  of  English  Poets,  and 
other  sources.     7^.  6d. 

MARTINEAU'S  (Harriet)  His- 
tory of  England,  from  1800- 
1815.     1$.  6d. 

History  of  the  Thirty  Years' 

Peace,  a.d.  1815-46.  4  vols. 
2s.  6d.  each. 

See  Comte'' s  Positive  Philosophy. 

MATTHEW  PARIS'S  ErigUsh 
History,  from  the  Year  1235  t<^ 
1273.  Translated  by  Rev.  J.  A. 
Giles,  D.CL.     3  vols.     5^.  each. 


MATTHEW  OF  WESTMIN- 
STER'S Flowe  s  of  History, 
from  the  begmning  of  the  World 
to  A.D  1307.  Translated  by  C.  D. 
Vonge,  M.A.     2  vols.     5^-.  each. 

MAXWELL'S  Victories  of  Wel- 
lington aud  the  BriUsh  Armies. 
Frontispiece  and  5  Portraits,      ^s. 

MENZEL'S  History  of  Germany, 
f/om  the  Earliest  Period  to  1842. 
3  vols.     3J-  dd  each. 

MICHAEL  ANGELO  AND 
RAPHAEL,  their  Lives  and 
Works.  By  Duppa  and  Quatre- 
mere  de  Quincy.  With  Portraits, 
and  Engravings  on  Steel.     5^-. 

MICHELET'S  Luther's  Auto- 
biography. Trans,  by  William 
Ilazlitt.  With  an  Appendix  (no 
pages)  of  Notes,     y.  6d. 

History  of  the  French  Revo- 
lution from  its  earliest  indications 
to  the  flight  of  the  King  in  1791. 
35.  6d. 

MIGNET'S  History  of  the  French 
Revolution,  from  1789  to  18 14. 
3.-.  6d 

MILL  (J.  S.).  Early  Essays  by 
John  Stuart  Mill.  Collected  from 
various  sources  by  J.  W.  M.  Gibbs. 
3:r   6d. 

MILLER  (Professor).  History 
Philosophically  Illustra!:ed,  from 
the  Fall  f>f  the  Roman  Empire  to 
the  French  Revolution.  4  vols. 
3^-.  6d.  each. 

MILTON'S  Prose  Works.  Edited 
by  J.  A.  St.  John.  5  vols.  3^-.  6d. 
each. 

Poetical  Works,  with  a  Me- 
moir and  Critical  Remarks  by 
James  Montgomery,  an  Index  to 
Paradise  Lost,  Todd's  Verbal  Index 
to  all  the  Poems,  and  a  Selection 
of  Explanatory  Notes  by  Henry 
G.  Bohn.  Illustrated  with  120 
Wood  Engravings  from  Drawings 
by  W.  Harvey.  2  vols.  3<-.  6d. 
each. 


Co7itained  in  Bohns  Libraries. 


17 


MITFORD'S  (Miss)  Our  Village. 
Sketches  of  Rural  Character  and 
Scenery.  With  2  Engravings  on 
Steel.     2  vols.     3J-.  dd.  each. 

MOLIERE'S  Dramatic  Works. 
A  new  Translation  in  English 
Prose,  by  C.  H.  Wall.  3  vols. 
3J".  ()d.  each. 

MONTAGU.  The  Letters  and 
Works  of  Lady  Mary  Wortley 
Montagu.  Edited  by  her  great- 
grandson,  Lord  Wharncliffe's  Edi- 
tion, and  revised  by  W.  Moy 
Thomas.  New  Edition,  revised, 
with  5  Portraits.    2  vols.    5^.  each. 

MONTAIGNE'S  Essays.  Cotton's 
Translation,  revised  by  W^  C 
Hazlitt.  New  Edition.  3  vols. 
IS.  6d.  each. 

MONTESQUIEU'S  Spirit  of 
Laws.  New  Edition,  revised  and 
corrected.  By  J.  V.  Pritchard, 
A.M.      2  vols.     3^.  6^.  each. 

MOTLEY  (J.  L.).  THe  Rise  of 
the  Dutcn  Republic.  A  History. 
By  John  Lothrop  Motley.  New 
Edition,  with  Biographical  Intro- 
duction by  Moncure  D.  Conway. 
3  vols      3J.  6d.  each. 

MORPHY'S  Games  of  Chess. 
Being  the  Matches  and  best  Games 
played  by  the  American  Champion, 
with  Explanatory  and  Analytical 
Notes  by  J.  Lowenthal.     ^s. 

MUDIE'S  British  Birds ;  or,  His- 
tory of  the  Feathered  Tribes  of  the 
British  Islands.  Revised  by  W. 
C.  L.  Martin.  With  52  Figures 
of  Birds  and  7  Coloured  Plates  of 
Eggs.     2  vols. 

NAVAL  AND  MILITARY  HE- 
ROES of  GREAT  BRITAIN ; 
or,  Calendar  or  Victory.  Being  a 
Record  of  British  \'alour  and  Con- 
quest by  Sea  and  Land,  on  every 
day  in  the  year,  from  the  time  of 
William  the  Conqueror  to  the 
Battle  of  Inkermann.  By  Major 
Johns,  R.M.,  and  Lieut.  P.  H. 
Nicolas,  R..M.     24  Portraits.     6s. 


NEANDER  (Dr.  A.).  History 
of  the  Christian  Religion  a  ad 
Church.  Trans,  from  the  (ierman 
byJ.Torrey.    10  vols.   3^.6^.  each. 

Life  of  Jesus  Chnst.  Trans- 
lated by  J.  McClintock  and  C. 
Blumenthal.      3^-.  bd. 

History  of  the  Plaating  and 

Tra  ining  of  the  Christian  Church 
by  the  Apostles.  Translated  by 
J.  E.  Ryland.  2  vols.  3^-.  6a'.  each. 

Lectures  on  the  History  of 

Christian  Dogmas.  Edited  by 
Dr.  Jacobi.  Translated  by  J.  E. 
Ryland.     2  vols.     3^-.  6d.  each. 

Memorials  of  Christian  Life 

in  the  Early  and  Middle  Ages  ; 
including  Light  in  Dark  Places. 
Trans,  by  J.  E.  Ryland.     3J-.  6d. 

NIBELUNGEN  LIED.    The 

Lay  of  the  Nibelungs,  metrically 
translated  from  the  old  German 
text  by  Alice  Horton,  and  edited 
by  Edward  Bell,  M.A.  To  which 
is  prefixed  the  Essay  on  the  Nibe- 
lungen  Lied  by  Thomas  Carlyle. 

NEW  TESTAMENT  (The)  in 
Greek.  Griesbach's  Text,  with 
various  Readings  at  the  foot  of 
the  page,  and  Parallel  References 
in  the  margin  ;  also  a  Critical 
Introduction  and  Chronological 
Tables.  By  an  eminent  Scholar, 
with  a  Greek  and  English  Lexicon. 
3rd  Edition,  revised  and  corrected. 
Two  P'acsimiles  of  Greek  Manu- 
scripts.    900  pages.     55. 

The  Lexicon  may  be  had  sepa- 
rately, price  2s. 

NICOLINI'S  Histoiy  of  the 
Jesuits :  their  Origin,  Progress, 
Doctrines,  and  Designs.  With  8 
Portraits.     5^-. 

NORTH  (R.)  Lives  of  the  Right 
Hon.  Francis  North,  Baron  Guild- 
ford, the  Hon.  Sir  Dudley  North, 
and  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  Dr.  John 
North.  By  the  Hon.  Roger 
North.     Together  with  the  AtUQ. 


i8 


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books 


biography  of  the  Author.  Edited 
by  Augustus  Jessopp,D.D.  3  vols. 
2,s.  6d.  each. 

NUGENT'S  (Lord)  Memorials 
of  Hampden,  his  Party  and 
Times.  With  a  Memoir  of  the 
Author,  an  Autograph  Letter,  and 
Portrait.     5j. 

OCKLEY  (S.)  History  of  the 
Saracens  and  their  Conquests 
in  Syria,  Persia,  and  Egypt. 
By  Simon  Ockley,  E.D.,  Professor 
of  Arabic  in  the  University  of 
Cambridge,      '^s.  6d 

OMAN  (J.  C.)  The  Great  Indian 
Epics :  the  Stories  of  the  Rama- 
YANA  and  the  Mahabharata. 
By  John  Campbell  Oman,  Prin- 
cipal of  Khalsa  College,  Amritsar. 
With  Notes,  Appendices,  and 
Illustrations.     31.  6d. 

ORDERICUS  VITALISE  Eccle 
siastical  History  of  England 
and  Normandy.  Translated  by 
T.  Forester,  ^LA.  To  which  is 
added  the  Chronicle  of  St. 
EvROULT.     4  vols.     5^.  each. 

OVID'S  Works, complete.  Literally 
translated    into    Prose.       3    vols. 

51.  each. 

PASCAL'S  Thoughts.  Translated 
from  the  Text  of  M.  Auguste 
Molinier  by  C.  Kegan  Paul.  3rd 
Edition.     35.  6d- 

PAULI'S  (Dr.  R.)  Life  of  Alfred 
the  Great.  Translated  from  the 
German.  To  which  is  appended 
Alfred's  Anglo-Saxon  Version 
OF  Orosius.  With  a  literal 
Translation  interpaged,  Notes, 
and  an  Anglo-Saxon  C^rammar 
and  Glossary,  byB.  Thorpe.  5^-. 

PAUSANIAS'  Description  of 
Greece.  Newly  translated  by  A.  R 
Shilleto,  M.A.     2  vols.     5^.  each. 

PEARSON'S  Exposition  of  the 
Creed.  Edited  by  E.  Walford, 
M.A.     5J. 


PEPYS'  Diary  and  Correspond- 
ence. Deciphered  by  the  Rev. 
J.  Smith,  M.A.,  from  the  original 
Shorthand  MS.  in  the  Pepysian 
Library.  Edited  by  Lord  Bray- 
brooke.  4  vols.  With  31  En- 
gravings.    5^.  each. 

PERCY'S  Reliques  of  Ancient 
English  Poetry.  With  an  Essay 
on  Ancient  Minstrels  and  a  Glos- 
sary. Edited  by  J.  V.  Pritchard, 
AM.     2  vols.     3  J.  6d.  each. 

PERSIUS.— 6'c'^  Juvenal. 

PETRARCH'S  Sonnets,  Tri- 
umphs and  other  Poems. 
Translated  into  English  Verse  by 
various  Hands.  With  a  Life  of 
the  Poet  by  Thomas  Campbell. 
With  Portrait  and  15  Steel  En- 
gravings.    5J-. 

PHILO  -  JUDiEUS,  Works  of. 
Translated  by  Prof.  C.  D.  Yonge, 
]\LA.     4  vols.      5^.  each. 

PICKERING'S  History  of  the 
Races  of  Man,  and  their  Geo- 
graphical Distribution.  With  An 
Analytical  Synopsis  of  the 
Natural  History  of  Man  by 
Dr.  Hall.  With  a  Map  of  the 
World  and  12  coloured  Plates.  51. 

PINDAR.  Translated  into  Prose 
by  Dawson  W.  Turner.  To  which 
is  added  the  Metrical  Version  by 
Abraham  Moore,     ^s. 

PLANCHE.  History  of  British 
Costume,  from  the  Earliest  Time 
to  the  Close  of  the  Eighteenth 
Century.  By  J.  R.  Planche, 
Somerset  Herald.  With  upwards 
of  400  Illustrations,     ^s. 

PLATO'S  Works.    Literally  trans- 
lated,    with     Introduction      and 
Notes.     6  vols.     5^.  each. 
I. — The    Apology   of    Socrates, 
Crito,  Phaedo,  Gorgias,  Pro- 
tagoras, Ph?edrus,  Thea^tetus, 
Euthyphron,  Lysis.      Trans- 
lated by  the  Rev.  H.  Carey. 


Contained  in  Boluis  Libraries. 


tg 


Plato's  Works  contimud. 
II. — The  Republic,    Timaeus,    and 
Critias.  Translated  by  Henry 
Davis. 

III. — Meno,  Euthydemus,  The 
Sophist,  Statesman,  Cratylus, 
Parmenides,and  the  Banquet. 
Translated  by  (t.  Burges. 

IV. — Philebus,  Charmides,  Laches, 
Menexenus,  Hippias,  Ion, 
The  Two  Alcibiades,  The- 
ages.  Rivals,  Ilipparchus, 
Minos,  Clitopho,  Epistles. 
Translated  by  G.  Burges. 

v.— The  Laws.  Translated  by 
G.  Burges. 

VI.— The  Doubtful  Works.  Trans- 
lated by  G.  Burges. 

Smnmary  and  Analysis  of 

the  Dialogues.    With  Analytical 
Index.  ..By  A.  Day,  LL.D.     51. 

PLAUTUS'S  Comedies.  Trans- 
lated by  H.  T.  Riley,  M.A.  2 
vols.     5^.  each. 

PLINY'S  Natural  HlstoiT- 
Translated  by  the  late  John 
Bostock,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  and  H.  T. 
Riley,  M.A.     6  vols.     55.  each. 

PLINY.  The  Letters  of  Pliny 
the  YouEger.  Melmoth's  trans- 
lation, revised  by  the  Rev.  F.  C 
T.  Bosanquet,  M.A.     5^. 

PLOTINUS,  Select  Works  of. 
Translated  by  Thomas  Taylor. 
With  an  Introduction  containing 
the  substance  of  Porphyry's  Plo- 
tinus.  Es'ited  by  G.  R.  S.  Mead, 
B.A.,  M.R.A.S.     5^. 

PLUTARCH^S  Lives.  Translated 
by  A.  Stewart,  M.A.,  and  George 
Long,  M.A.    4  vols.    3^.  dd.  each. 

Morals.  Theosophical  Essays. 

Translated  by  C.  W.  King,  M.A. 

Morals.       Ethical    Essays. 

Translated    by    the    Rev.    A.    R. 
Shilleto,  M.A.     5^. 


POETRY  OF  AMERICA.  Se- 
lections from  One  Hundred 
American  Poets,  from  1776  to 
1876.     By  W.  J.  Linton,     y  6d. 

POLITICAL    CYCLOPEDIA. 

A  Dictionary  of  Political,  Con- 
stitutional, Statistical,  and  Fo- 
rensic Knowledge  ;  forming  a 
Work  of  Reference  on  subjects  of 
Civil  Administration,  Political 
Economy,  Finance,  Commerce, 
Laws,  and  Social  Relations.  4 
vols.     3^-.  6d.  each. 

POPE'S  Poetical  Works.  Edited, 
with  copious  Notes,  by  Robert 
Carruthers.  With  numerous  Illus 
trations.     2  vols.     5^-.  each. 

Homer's   Iliad.      Edited    by 

the  Rev.  J.  S.  Watson,  MA. 
Illustrated  by  the  entire  Series  of 
Flaxman's  Designs,      i^s. 

Homer's  Odyssey,  v/ith   the 

Battle  of  Frogs  and  Mice,  Hymns, 
&c.,  by  other  translators.  Edited 
by  the  Rev.  J.  S.  Watson,  M.A. 
With  the  entire  Series  of  Flax- 
man's  Designs,     ^s. 

Life,   including   many   of  his 

Letters.  By  Robert  Carruthers. 
With  numerous  Illustrations.     5.^. 

POUSHKIN'S  Prose  Tales:  The 
Captain's  Daughter — Doubrovsky 
—  The  Queen  of  Spades  —  An 
Amateur  Peasant  Girl — The  Shot 
—The  Snow  Storm— The  Post- 
master —  The  Coffin  Maker  — 
Kirdjali — The  Egyptian  Nights- 
Peter  the  Great's  Negro.  Trans- 
lated by  T.  Keane.     3.^.  6d. 

PROPERTIUS.  Translated  by 
Rev,  P.  J.  F.  Gantillon,  M.A., 
and  accompanied  by  Poetical 
Versions,  from  various  sources. 
3^.  6d. 

PROVERBS,  Handbook  of.  Con- 
taining an  entire  Republication 
of  Ray's  Collection  of  English 
Proverbs,  with  his  additions  from 


20 


An  AlpJiabetical  List  of  Books 


Foreign  Languages  and  a  com- 
plete Alphabetical  Indi.'x;  in  which 
are  introduced  large  additions  as 
well  of  Proverbs  as  of  Sayings, 
Sentences,  Maxims,  and  Phrases, 
collected  by  H.  G.  Bohn.     5^-. 

PROVERBS,  A  Polyglot  of 
Foreign.  Comprising  French, 
Italian,  German,  Dutch,  Spanish, 
Portuguese,  and  Danish.  With 
English  Translations  &  a  General 
Index  by  H.  G   Bohn      5^. 

POTTERY  AND  PORCELAIN, 

and  other  Objects  of  Vertu.  Com- 
prising an  Illustrated  Catalogue  of 
the  Bernal  Collection  of  Works 
of  Art,  with  the  prices  at  which 
they  were  sold  by  auction,  and 
names  of  the  possessors.  To  which 
are  added,  an  Introductory  Lecture 
on  Pottery  and  Porcelain,  and  an 
Engraved  List  of  all  the  known 
Marks  and  Monograms.  By  Henry 
G.  Bohn.  With  numerous  Wood 
Engravings,  5^. ;  or  with  Coloured 
Illustrations,  \Os.  6d. 

PROUT'S  (Father)  Rellques.  Col- 
lected and  arranged  by  Rev.  F. 
Mahony.  Copyright  edition  with 
the  Author's  last  corrections  and 
additions.  New  issue,  with  21 
Etchmgs  by  D.  Maclisc,  R.A. 
Nearly  600  pages.     5^. 

QUINTILIAN'S    Institutes  of 

Oratory,    or    Education     of    an 

Orator.     Translated  by  the  Rev. 

.S.  Watson,  M.A.     2  vols.     5^-. 

each. 

RACINE'S  (Jean)  Dramatic 
Works.  A  metrical  English  ver- 
sion. By  R.  Bruce  Boswell,  M.A. 
Oxon.     2  vols.     3J.  6d.  each. 

RANKE'S  History  of  the  Popes, 
their  Church  and  State,  and  espe- 
cially of  their  Conflicts  with  Pro- 
testantism in  the  1 6th  and  17th 
centuries.  Translated  by  E. 
Foster.     3  vols.     3^^.  6d.  each. 


RANKE'S  History  of  the  Latin 
and  Teutonic  Nations,  1494- 
15 14.  Trans,  by  P.  A.  Ash  worth. 
Zs.  6d. 

History  of   Servia   and  the 

Servian  Revolution.  With  an 
Account  of  the  Insurrection  in 
Bosnia.  Translated  by  Mrs.  Kerr. 
3J.  td. 

REUMONT  (Alfred  de).  See 
Carafas. 

RECREATIONS  in  SHOOTING. 

By  '  Craven.'  With  62  Engravings 
on  Wood  after  Harvey,  and  9 
Engravings  on  Steel,  chiefly  after 
A   Cooper,  R.A.     5^. 

RENNIE'S  Insect  Architecture. 
Revised  and  enlarged  by  Rev. 
J.  G.  Wood,  M.A.  With  186 
Woodcut  Illustration*!.     55. 

REYNOLD'S  (Sir  J.)  Literary 
Works.  Edited  byH.W.  Beechy. 
2  vols.      35.  6a.  each. 

RICARDO  on  the  Principles  of 
Pohtical  Economy  ana  Taxa- 
tion. Edited  by  E.  C.  K.  Conner, 
M.A.     5^. 

RICHTER  (Jean  Paul  Friedrich). 
Levana,  a  Treatise  on  Education: 
together  with  the  Autiobiography 
(a  Fragment),  and  a  short  Pre- 
fatory Memoir.     3J,  6d. 

Flower,   Fruit,   and   Thorn 

Pieces,  or  the  Wedded  Lifc.Death, 
and  Marriage  of  Firmian  Stanis- 
laus Siebenkaes,  Parish  Advocate 
in  the  Parish  of  Kuhschnappel. 
Newly  translated  by  Lt. -Col.  Alex. 
Ewing.     y.  6d. 

ROGER  DE  HOVEDEN'S  An- 
nals of  English  History,  com- 
prising the  History  of  England 
and  of  other  Countries  of  Europe 
from  A.  D.  732  to  A.  D.  1201. 
Translated  by  H  T.  Riley,  M.A. 
2  vols.     $s.  each. 


Contained  in  Bo/in's  Libraries. 


21 


ROGER  OF  WENDOVER'S 
Flowers  of  History,  comprising 
the  History  of  England  from  the 
Descent  uf  the  Saxons  to  a.d. 
1235,  formerly  ascribed  to  Matthew 
Paris.  Translated  by  J.  A.  Ciiles, 
D.C.L.      2  vols.     5^.  each. 

ROME  in  the  NINETEENTH 
CENTURY.  1  ontaining  a  com- 
pleie  Account  of  the  Ruins  of  the 
Ancient  City,  the  Remains  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  and  the  Monuments 
of  Modern  Times.  By  C.  A.  Eaton. 
With  34  Sttel  Engravings  2  vols. 
51.  each. 

See  Burn  and  Dyer. 

ROSCOE'S  (W.)  Life  and  Ponti- 
ficate of  Leo  X.  Final  edition, 
revised  by  Thomas  Roscoe.  2 
vols.     3'.  dd.  each. 

Life  of  Lorenzo  de'  Medici, 

called  '  the  Magnificent.'  With 
his  poems,  letters,  dx.  loth 
Edition,  revised,  with  Memoir  of 
Roscoe  by  his  Son.      y.  6d. 

RUSSIA  History  of,  from  the 
earliest  Period,  compiled  from 
the  most  authentic  sources  by 
Walter  K.  Kelly.  With  Portraits. 
2  vols.     35-.  6d.  each. 

SALLUST,  FLORUS,  and  VEL- 
LEIUS  PATERCULUS. 
Translated  by  J.  S.Watson,  M.A. 

SCHILLER'S  Works.  Translated 
by  various  hands.  7  vols.  3J.  6d. 
each  : — 

I. — History  of  the  Thirty  Years' 

War. 
II.— History  of  the  Revolt  in  the 
Netherlands,  the  Trials  of 
Counts  Egmont  and  Horn, 
the  Siege  of  Antwerp,  and 
the  Dii-turbances  in  France 
preceding  the  Reign  of 
Henry  IV. 


Schiller's  Works  continued. 

III. — Don  Carlos,  Mary  Stuart, 
Maid  of  Orleans,  Bride  of 
Messina,  together  with  the 
Use  of  the  Chorus  in 
Tragedy  (a  short  Essay). 
These  Dramas  are  all 
translated  in  metre. 

IV.— Robters  (with  Schiller's 
original  Preface),  Fiesco, 
Love  and  Intrigue,  De- 
metrius, Ghost  Seer,  Sport 
of  Divinity. 

The     Dramas    in    this 
volume  are  translated  into 
Prose, 
V. — Poems. 

VI.  —  Essays,  /Esthetica  1  and  Philo- 
sophical. 
VII.  —  Wallenstein's     Camp,    Pic- 
colomini    and    Death    of 
Wallenstein,  William  Tell. 

SCHILLER  and  GOETHE. 
Correspondence  between,  from 
A.D.  1794- 1805.  Translated  by 
L.  Dora  Schmitz.  2  vols.  35-.  6d. 
each. 

SCHLEGEL'S  (F.)  Lectures  on 
the  Philosophy  of  Life  and  the 
Philosophy  of  Language.  Trans- 
lated by  the  Rev.  A.  J .  W.  Mor- 
rison, M.A.     3^.  6d. 

Lecttires  on  the  History  of 

Literatiire,  Ancient  and  Modern. 
Translated  from  the  German.  ■^s.6d. 

Lecttires  on  the  Philosophy 

of  History.  Translated  by  J.  B. 
Robertson.      3^.  6d. 

Lectures  on  Modern  History, 

together  with  the  Lectures  entitled 
Caesar  and  Alexander,  and  The 
Beginning  of  our  History,  trans- 
lated by  L.  Purcell  and  R.  H, 
Whitetock,     y.  6d. 

Esthetic  and  Miscellaneous 

Works.  Translated  by  E.  J. 
Millington,     3^.  6d, 


25 


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books 


SCHLEGEL  (A.  W  )  Lectures 
on  Dramatic  Art  and  Literature. 
Translated  by  [.  Black.  Revised 
Edition,  by  the  Rev.  A.  J.  W. 
Morrison,  M.A.     y.  6d. 

SCHOPENHAUER  on  the  Four- 
fold Root  of  the  Principle  of 
Sufficient  Reason,  and  On  the 
Will  in  Nature.  Translated  by 
Madame  Hillebrand.     ^s. 

Essays.  Selected  and  Trans- 
lated. With  a  Biographical  Intro- 
duction and  Sketch  of  his  Philo- 
sophy, by  E.  Belfort  Bax.      5.^. 

SCHOUW'S  Earth,  Plants,  and 
Man.  Translated  by  A.  llenfrey. 
With  coloured  Map  of  the  Geo- 
graphy of  Plants.      55. 

SCHUMANN  (Robert).  His  Life 
and  Works,  by  August  Reissmann. 
Translated  by  A.  L.  Alger.    3i^.  ()d. 

Early  Letters.  Originally  pub- 

blished  by  his  Wife.  Translated 
by  May  Herbert.  With  a  Preface 
by  Sir  George  Grove,  D.C  L. 
2s.  6d. 

SENECA  on  Benefits.  Newly 
translated  by  A.  Stewart,  M.A. 
3^.  6d. 

Minor  Essays  and  On  Clem- 
ency. Translated  by  A.  Stewart, 
M.A.      5.r. 

SHAKESPEARE'S  Dramatic 
Art.  The  History  and  Character 
of  Shakespeare's  Plays.  By  Dr. 
Hermann  Ulrici.  Translated  by 
L.  Dora  Schmitz.  2  vols.  3^-.  6d. 
each. 

SHAKESPEARE  (William).  A 
Literary  Biography  by  Karl  Elze, 
Ph.D.,  LL.D.  Translated  by 
L.  Dora  Schmitz.     5J-. 

SHARPE  (S.)  The  History  of 
Egypt,  from  the  Earliest  Times 
till  the  Conquest  by  the  Arab'?, 
A.u.  640.  By  Samuel  Sharpe. 
2  Maps  and  upwards  of  400  Illus- 
trative Woodcuts.  2  vols.  5^.  each. 


SHERIDAN'S  r  r^matic  Works, 
Complete.  W^ith  Li^'e  by  G.  G.  S. 
3..  6d. 

SISMONDI'S  History  of  the 
Literature  of  the  South  of 
Europe.  Translated  by  Thomas 
Roscoe.     2  vols.     35'.  6'/.  each. 

SIX  OLD  ENGLISH  CHRON- 
ICLES:  viz.,  Asser's  Life  of 
Alfred  and  theChroniclesof 
Ethei  werd,  Gildas,  Nennius, 
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  and 
Richard  of  Cirencester. 
Edited  by  J.  A.  Gdes,  D.C.  L.    5-r. 

SYNONYMS  and  ANTONYMS, 
or  Kinnred  Words  and  their 
Oppositea,  Collected  and  Con- 
trasted by  Ven.  C.J.  Smith,  M.A. 
Revised  Edition.     5^-. 

SMITH'S  (Adam)  The  Wealth  of 
Nations.  Edited  by  E.  Belfort 
Bax.     2  vols.     3r.  6d.  each. 

Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments ; 

with  his  Essay  on  the  Eir.st  For- 
mation of  Languages  ;  to  which  is 
added  a  Memoir  of  the  Author  by 
Dugald  Stewart,     y.  6d. 

SMYTH'S  (Professor)  Lectures 
on  Modern  History;  from  the 
Irruption  of  the  Northern  Nations 
to  the  close  of  the  American  Re- 
volution.    2  vols.     3^.  6d.  each. 

Lectures  on  the  French  Re- 
volution.    2  vols.     T)S.  6d.  each. 

SMITH'S  (  Pye )  Geology  and 
Scripture.     2nd  Edition.     5^. 

SMOLLETT'S  Adventures  of 
Roderick  Random.  With  short 
Memoir  and  Bil)liography,  and 
Cruikshank's  Illustrations.    35-.  6d. 

Adventures   of  Peregrine 

Pickle,  in  which  are  included  the 
Memoirs  of  a  Lady  of  Quality. 
With  Bibliography  and  Cruik- 
shank's Illustrations.  2vols.  T,s.6d. 
each. 


Contained  in  Bohns  Libraries. 


23 


SMOLLETT'S  The  Expedition 
of  Humphry  Clinker.  With 
Bibliography  and  Cruikshank's 
Illustrations.     3X.  (>d. 

SOCRATES  (surnamed  Scholas- 
ticus ').  The  Ecclesiastical  His- 
tory of  (a.  d.  305-445).  Translated 
from  the  Greek,     ^s. 

SOPHOCLES.  The  Tragedies  of. 
A  New  Prose  Translation,  with 
Memoir,  Notes,  &c.,  by  E.  P. 
Coleridge.      5^-. 

The  Oxford  Translation.    5^. 

SOUTH  EY'S  Life  of  Nelson. 
With  Facsimiles  of  Nelson's  writ- 
ing, Portraits,  Plans,  and  upwards 
of  50  Engravings  on  Steel  and 
Wood.     5J-. 

Life  of  Wesley,  and  the  Rise 

and  Progress  of  Methodism.     5j-. 

Robert  Southey.     The  Story 

of  his  Life  written  in  his  Letters. 
With  an  Introduction.  Edited  by 
John  Dennis,     y.  6d. 

SOZOMEN'S  Ecclesiastical  His- 
tory. Comprising  a  History  of 
the  Church  from  A.  D.  324-440. 
Translated  from  the  Greek.  To- 
gether with  the  Ecclesiastical 
History  of  Philostorgius,  as 
epitomised  by  Photius.  Trans- 
lated from  the  Greek  by  Rev.  E. 
Walford,  M.A.     5?. 

SPINOZA  S  Chief  Works.  Trans- 
lated, with  Introduction, by  R.H.M. 
Elwes.     2  vols.     5^.  each. 

STANLEY'S  Classified  Synopsis 
of  the  Principal  Painters  of  the 
Dutch  and  Flemish  Schools. 
By  George  Stanley.      5j". 

STARLING'S  (Miss)  Noble  Deeds 
of  Women ;  or,  Examples  of 
Female  Courage,  Fortitude,  and 
Virtue.  With  14  Steel  Engrav- 
ings.    $s. 


STAUNTON'S  Chess  -  Player's 
Handbook.  A  Popular  and  Scien- 
tific Introduction  to  the  Game. 
With  numerous  Diagrams,      ^s. 

Chess  Praxis.    A  Supplement 

to  the  Chess-player's  Handbook. 
Containing  the  most  important 
modern  improvementsin  the  Open- 
ings ;  Code  of  Chess  Laws  ;  and 
a  Selection  of  Morphy's  Games. 
Annotated.      <^s. 

Chess-player's   Companion. 

Comprising  a  Treatise  on  Odds, 
Collection  of  Match  Games,  and  a 
Selection  of  Original  Problems.  5^. 

Chess  Tournament  of  1851. 

A  Collection  of  Games  played  at 
this  celebrated  assemblage.  W^ith 
Introduction  and  Notes.     5.;. 

STOCKHARDT'S  Experimental 
Chemistry.  A  Handbook  for  the 
Study  of  the  Science  by  simple 
experiments.  Edited  by  C.  W. 
Heaton,  F.C.S.  With  numerous 
W^oodcuts.  New  Edition,  revised 
throughout.      5^. 

STRABO'S  Geography.  Trans- 
lated by  W.  Falconer,  M.A., 
and  H.  C.  Hamilton.  3  vols. 
55-.   each. 

STRICKLAND'S  (Agnes)  Lives 
of  the  Queens  of  England,  from 
the  Norman  Conquest.  Revised 
Edition.  With  6  Portraits.  6  vols. 
5^.  each. 

Life  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots. 

2  vols.     5^.  each. 

Lives  of  the  Tudor  and  Stuart 

Princesses.     With  Portraits.     5?. 

STUART  and  REVETT'S  Anti- 
quities of  Athens,  and  other 
Monuments  of  Greece  ;  to  which 
is  added,  a  Glossary  of  Terms  used 
in  Grecian  Architecture.  With  71 
Plates  engraved  on  Steel,  and 
numerous  Woodcut  Capitals.     5^. 


24 


An  Alphabetical  List  of  Books 


SUETONIUS'  Lives  of  the  Twelve 
Caesars  and  Lives  of  the  Gram- 
marians. The  translation  of 
Thomson,  revised  by  T.  Forester. 

SULLY.  Memoirs  of  the  Duke 
of,  Prime  Minister  to  Henry 
the  Great.  Translated  from  the 
French.  With  4  Portraits.  4  vols. 
3J.  6d.  each. 

SWIFT'S  Prose  Works.  Edited 
by  Temple  Scott.  With  a  Bio- 
graphical Introduction  by  the  Right 
Hon.  W.  E.  H.  Lecky,  M.P. 
With  Portraits  and  Facsimiles. 
1 1  vols.     3j.  dd.  each. 

{Vols.  I. -IV.  ready. 
I. — Edited    by    Temple    Scott. 
With  a    Biographical   In- 
troduction   by    the    Right 
Hon.   W.    E.    H.   Lecky, 
M.  P.      Containing  :  —  A 
Tale  of  a  Tub,  The  Battle 
of  the  Books,   and  other 
early  works. 
XL— The  Journal  to  Stella.  Edited 
by  Frederick  Ryland,  M.  A. 
With  2  Portraits  of  Stella, 
and  a  Facsimile  of  one  of 
the  Letters. 
III. &  IV. — Writings  on  Religion  and 
the   Church.       Edited  by 
Temple  Scott. 
V. — Historical    and    Political 
Tracts  (English).     Edited 
by  Temple  Scott 
VHI — Gulliver's  Travels.      Edited 
by  G.   R    Dennis.      With 
Portrait  and  Maps. 
The  order  and    contents  of 
the  remaining  volumes  will 
probably  be  as  follows  :  — 
VI  &Vn.— Historical  and  Pol.tical 
Tracts  (Irish). 
IX. — Contributions    to    the    '  Ex- 
aminer,'  'Taller,'    'Spec- 
tator,' &c. 
X. — Historical  Writings, 
j;  XI. — Literary  Essays  and  Biblio- 
graphy. 


STOWE  (Mrs.H.B.)  Uncle  Tom's 
Cabin,  or  Life  among  the  Lowly. 
Wilh  Introductory  Remarks  by 
Rev.  J.  Sherman.  With  8  full- 
page  illustrations.     3.^.  6d. 

TACITUS.  The  Works  of.  Liter- 
ally translated.     2  vols.     5^.  each. 

TALES  OF  THE  GENII;  or, the 
Delightful  Lessons  of  H  Tam,  the 
Son  of  Asmar.  Translated  from 
the  Persian  by  Sir  Charles  Morell. 
Numerous  Woodcuts  and  12  Steel 
Engravings.     5^-. 

TASSO'S  Jerusalem  Delivered. 
Translated  into  English  Spenserian 
Verse  by  J.  H.  Wififen.  With  8 
Engravings  on  Steel  and  24  Wood- 
cuts by  Thurston.     5^-. 

TAYLOR'S  (Bishop  Jeremy) 
Holy  Living  and  Dying,  with 
Prayers  containing  the  Whole  Duty 
of  a  Christian  and  the  parts  of  De- 
votion fitted  to  all  Occasions  and 
furnished  for  ali Necessities.  35. 6d. 

TEN  BRINK.— 6-^^  Brink. 

TERENCE  and  PH^DRUS. 
Literally  translated  by  H,  T.  Riley, 
M.A.  To  whichis  added,  Smart's 
MeiricalVersionofPh^drus. 

5^ 

THEOCRITUS,  BION,  MOS- 
CHUS,  andTYRTJEUS.  Liter- 
ally translated  by  the  Rev.  J. 
Banks,  M.A.  To  which  are  ap- 
pended the  Metrical  Versions  of 
Chapnian.      5^. 

THEODORET  and  EVAGRIUS. 
Histories  of  the  Church  from  A.D. 
332  to  A.D.  427  ;  and  from  A.D. 
431  to  A.D.  544.  Translated  from 
the  Greek.     5?. 

THIERRY'S  History  of  the 
Conquest  of  England  by  the 
Normans ;  its  Causes,  and  its 
Consequences  in  England,  Scot- 
land, Ireland,  and  the  Continent. 
Translated  by  William  Hazlit.t, 
2  vols.     '^s.  6d.  each- 


Contained  in  Bohn^s  Libraries. 


^5 


THUCYDIDES.     The  Pelopon- 

nesian  "War.  Literally  translated 
by  the  Rev.  H.  Dale.  2  vols. 
1$.  6d.  each. 

An  Analysis  and  Summary 

of.  With  Chronological  Table  of 
Events,  &c.     By  J.   T.  Wheeler. 

THUDICHUM  (J.  L.  W.)  A  Trea- 
tise on  Wines :  their  Origin, 
Nature,  and  Varieties.  With  Prac- 
tical Directions  for  Viticulture  and 
Vinification.  By  J.  L.  W.  Thudi- 
chum,  M.D,,  F.R.C.P.  (Lond.). 
Illustrated.     5^. 

URE'S  (Dr.  A.)  Cotton  Manufac- 
ture of  Great  Britain,  systemati- 
cally investigated.  Revised  Edit, 
by  P.  L.  Simmonds.  With  150 
original  Illustrations.  2  vols.  5^'. 
each. 

Philosophy  of  Manufactures. 

Revised  Edition,  by  P.  L.  Sim- 
monds. With  numerous  Figures. 
Double  volume.     Js.  6d. 

VASARI'S  Lives  of  the  most 
Eminent  Painters,  Sculptors, 
and  Architects.  Translated  by 
Mrs.  J.  Foster,  with  a  Commen- 
tary by  J.  P.  Richter,  Ph.D.  6 
vols.     3J.  6d.  each. 

VIRGIL.  A  Literal  Prose  Trans- 
lation by  A.  Hamilton  Bryce, 
LL.D.,  F.R.S.E.  With  Portrait. 
is.  6d. 

VOLTAIRE'S  Tales.  Translated 
by  R.  B.  Bosweil.  Vol.  I  ,  con- 
taining Bebouc,  Memnon,  Can- 
dide,  L'Ingenu,  and  other  Tales. 
3^.  6d. 

WALTON  S  Complete  Angler, 
or  the  Contemplative  Man's  Re- 
creation, by  Izaak  Walton  and 
Charles  Cotton.  Edited  by  Ed- 
ward Jesse.  To  which  is  added 
an   account  of  Fishing  Stations, 


Tackle,  &c.,  by  Henry  G.  Bohn. 
With  Portrait  and  203  Engravings 
on  Wood  and  26  Engravings  on 
Steel.     5.r. 

Lives  of  Donne,  Hooker,  &g. 

New  Edition  revised  by  A.  H. 
Bullen,  with  a  Memoir  of  Izaak 
Walton  by  Wm.  Dowling.  With 
numerous  Illustrations.     5^. 

WELLINGTON,  Life  of.  By  *  An 
Old  Soldier.'  From  the  materials 
of  Maxwell.  With  Index  and  18 
Steel  Engravings.      5^-. 

Victories  of.    See  Maxwell. 

WERNER'S  Templars  in 
Cyprus.  Translated  by  E.  A.  M. 
Lewis.     3J-.  6d. 

WESTROPP  (H.  M.)  A  Hand- 
book  of  Archaeology,  Egsrptian, 
Greek,  Etruscan,  Roman.  By 
H.  M.  Westropp.  2nd  Edition, 
revised.  With  very  numerous 
Illustrations,     ^s. 

WHITE'S  Natural  History  of 
Selbome,  with  Observations  on 
various  Parts  of  Nature,  and  the 
Naturalists'  Calendar.  With  Notes 
by  Sir  William  Jardine.  Edited 
t)y  Edward  Jesse.  With  40  Por- 
traits and  coloured  Plates,      ^s. 

WHEATLEY'S  A  Rational  lUua- 
tration  of  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer.     t,s.  6d. 

WHEELER'S  Noted  Names  of 
Fiction,  Dictionary  of.  Includ- 
ing also  Familiar  Pseudonyms, 
Surnames  bestowed  on  Eminent 
Men,  and  Analogous  Popular  Ap- 
pellations often  referred  to  in 
Literature  and  Conversation.  By 
W^  A.  Wheeler,  M.A.     i^s. 

WIESELER'S  Chronological 
Sjrnopsis  of  the  Four  Gospels. 
Translated  by  the  Rev.  Canon 
Venables.     ^s.  6d. 


26        AlpJiabetical  List  of  Books  in  Bohn's  Libraries. 


Vn-L-LIAM  of  MALMESBURY'S 
Ciironicle  of  the  Kings  of  Eng- 
land, from  the  Earliest  Period 
to  the  Reign  of  King  Stephen. 
Translated  by  the  Rev,  J.  Sharpe. 
Edited  by  J.  A.  Giles,  D.C.L.    55. 

XENOPHON'S  Works.  Trans- 
lated by  the  Rev.  J.  S.  Watson, 
M.A.,  and  the  Rev.  H.  Dale.  In 
3  vols.     $s.  each. 

YOUNG  (Arthur).  Travels  in 
France  during  the  years  1787, 
1788.  and  1789.  Edited  by 
M.  Betham  Edwards.     3^-.  6d. 


YOUNG  (Arthur).  Tour  in  Ire- 
land, with  General  Observations 
on  the  state  of  the  country  during 
the  years  1776-79.  Edited  by 
A.  W.  Hutton.  With  Complete 
Bibliography  by  J.  P.  Ander- 
son, and  Map.  2  vols.  35.  6d. 
each. 

YULE-TIDE  STORIES.  A  Col- 
lection of  Scandinavian  and  North- 
German  Popular  Tales  and  Tra- 
ditions, from  the  Swedish,  Danish, 
and  German.  Edited  by  B.Thorpe. 
Ss. 


(         27         ) 

NEW    AND     FORTHCOMING     VOLUMES    OF 

BONN'S  LIBRARIES, 


THE  PROSE  WORKS  OF  JONATHAN  SWIFT.  Edited  by 
Temple  Scott.  With  an  Introduction  by  the  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  H. 
Lecky,  M.P.     In  ii  volumes,  3J-.  6d.  each. 

Vol.  I.—'  A  Tale  of  a  Tub,'  '  The  Battle  of  the  Books,'  and  other 
early  works.  Edited  by  Temple  Scott.  With  Int'oduction  by  the 
Right  Hon.  W.  E.  H.  Lecky,  MP.      Portrait  and  Facsimiles. 

Vol.  II.— 'The  Journal  to  Stella.'  Edited  by  F.  Ryland,  M.A. 
With   a  Facsimile  Letter  and  two  Portraits  of  Stella. 

Vols.  Ill  and  IV. — Writings  on  Religion  and  the  Church. 
Edited  by  Temple  Scott.     With  portraits  and  facsimiles  of  title  pages. 

Vol.  V.  —Historical  and  Political  Tracts  (English).  Edited  by 
Temple  Scott.     With  Portrait  and  Facsimiles. 

Vol.  VIII  —Gulliver's  Travels.  Edited  by  G.  R.  Dennis.  With 
the  original  Maps  and  Illustrations. 

THE  LAY  OF  THE  NIBELUNGS.  Metrically  translated  from  the 
Old  German  text  by  Alice  Ilorton,  an  ?  Edited  by  Edward  Bell,  M.A. 
With  the  Essay  on  the  Nibelungen  Lied  by  Thomas  Carlyle.     55. 

GRAY'S  LETTERS.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  D.  C.  Tovey,  M.A.,  author 
of  'Gray  and  his  Friends,'  &c.,  late  Clark  Lecturer  at  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge.     Vol.  I.  {^Shortly. 

CICERO'S  LETTERS.  The  whole  extant  Correspondence.  Trans- 
lated by  Evelyn  S.  Shuckburgh,  M.A.     In  4  vols.     5^.  each. 

[  Vols.  I.  and  II.     cady. 

THE    ROMAN     HISTORY    OF    APPIAN    OF    ALEXANDRIA. 

Translated  by  Horace  White,  MA.,  LL.D.      With  Maps  and   Illus- 
trations.    2  vols.     6.V.  each. 

GASPARY'S  HISTORY  OF  ITALIAN  LITERATURE.  Trans- 
lated by  Hermann  Oelsner,  M.A.,  Ph.D.      Vol.  I.  [/«  the  press. 

THE  GREAT  INDIAN  EPICS.  The  Stories  of  the  Ramayana  and 
the  Mahabharata.  By  John  Campbell  Oman,  Principal  of  Khalsa 
College,  Amritsar.  With  Notes,  Appendices,  and  Illustrations. 
New  Edition,  revised,  3^.  bd. 

LELAND'S  ITINERARY.  Edited  by  Laurerice  Gomme,  F.S.A.  In 
several  volumes.  {Preparing, 


28  ) 

ROYAL   NAVY    HANDBOOKS. 

EDITED    BY 

COMMANDER  C.  N.  ROBINSON,  R.N. 

Profusely  Illustrated.     Crown  8vo.   ^s.  each. 

Now  Ready. 

1.  NAVAL    ADMINISTRATION.       By   Admiral    Sir    R.    Vesey 

Hamilton,  G.C. B.     With  Portraits  and  other  Illustrations. 

2.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  MEN-OF-WAR.     By  Fleet-Engineer 

Reginald  C.  Oldknow,  R.N.     With  6i  Illustrations. 

3.  TORPEDOES  AND  TORPEDO-VESSELS.      By  Lieutenant 

G.  E.  Armstrong,  late  R.N.     With  53  Illustrations. 

4.  NAVAL  GUNNERY,  a  Description  and  History  of  the  Fighting 

Equipment  of  a  Man-of-War.     By  Captain  H.   Garbett,  R.N.     With 
125  Illustrations. 

The  following  Volumes  are  in  preparation. 

5.  THE    ENTRY    AND    TRAINING    OF    OFFICERS    AND 

MEN  OF    THE    ROYAL    NAVY    AND   THE    ROYAL   MARINES. 
By  Lieutenant  J.  N.  Allen,  late  R.N. 

6.  NAVAL  STRATEGY  AND  THE  PROTECTION  OF  COM- 

MERCE.    By  Professor  J.  K.  Laughton,  R.N. 

7.  THE  INTERNAL  ECONOMY  OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR. 

8.  NAVAL  ARCHITECTURE. 

9.  DOCKYARDS  AND  COALING  STATIONS. 

10.  NAVAL  TACTICS. 

11.  NAVAL  HYGIENE. 

12.  THE  LAWS  OF  THE  SEA. 

PRESS    OPINIONS. 

'Commander  Robinson,  whose  able  work,  "The  British  Fleet,"  was  reviewed  in  these 
columns  in  November,  1P94,  has  now  undertaken  the  editing  of  a  series  of  handbooks,  each 
of  which  will  deal  with  one  particular  subject  connected  with  that  great  creation,  the  Royal 
Navy.  Our  national  literature  has  certainly  lacked  much  in  this  respect.  Such  books  as 
have  heretofore  been  produced  have  almost  invariably  been  of  a  character  tou  scientific  and 
echnical  to  be  of  much  use  to  the  general  public.  The  series  now  being  issued  is  intended  to 
obviate  this  defect,  and  when  completed  \\  ill  form  a  description,  both  historical  and  actual,  of  the 
Royal  Navy,  which  will  not  only  be  of  use  to  the  professional  student,  but  also  be  of  interest 
to  all  who  are  concerned  in  the  maintenance  and  efScicncy  of  the  Navy.' — Broad  Arrow. 

'  The  series  of  naval  handbooks  edited  by  Commander  Robinson  has  made  a  most  hopeful 
beginning,  and  may  be  counted  upon  to  supply  the  growing  popular  demand  for  information 
n  regard  to  the  Navy,  on  which  the  national  existence  depends.'— T'zw^f. 

'Messrs.  Bell's  series  of  "Royal  Navy  Handbooks"  promises  to  be  a  very  successful 
enterprise  They  are  practical  and  definitely  Informative,  and,  though  meant  for  the  use  of 
persons  closely  acquainted  with  their  subjects,  they  are  not  SO  discouragingly  technical  as  to 
be  useless  to  the  lay  seeker  after  knowledge,' — Bookman^ 


New  Editions,  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  Qd.  each  net. 

THE     Ai.DlNE     EOITION 

OF    THE 

BRITISH      POETS. 

•This  excellent  edition  of  the  Engrlish  classics,  with  their  complete  texts  and 
scholarly  introductions,  are  something  very  different  from  the  cheap  Tolumew  of 
extracts  which  are  just  now  so  much  too  common.' — St.  James's  Gazette. 

'An  excellent  series.    Small,  handy,  and  complete.'  —Saturday  Review. 


AJkenside.   Edited  by  Rev.  A.  Dyce. 

Beattie.  Edited  by  Rev.  A.  Dyce. 
Edited  by  W.  M.  Rossetti 
Edited  by  G.  A.  Aitken. 


Edited  by  R.  B.  Johnson. 


*Blake. 

*B\irns 
3  vols. 

Butler. 

2  vols. 
Campbell.     Edited    by   His    Son- 
in-Iavr,  the   Rev.   A.    W.    Hill.     With 
Memoir  by  W.   Allingham. 

Ghatterton.     Edited  by  the   Rev. 

W.   W.   Skeat,   M.A.     2  vols. 
Chaucer.   Edited  by  Dr.  R.  Morris, 

with  Memoir  by  Sir  H.  Nicolas.  6  vols. 
Churchill.   Edited  by  Jas.  Hannay. 

2  vols. 
*Colerid.ge.     Edited  by   T.    Ashe, 

B.A.    2  vols. 
Collins.       Edited     by     W.     Moy 

Thomas. 
Cowper.     Edited  by  John  Brucoi 

F.8.A.     3  vols. 
Dryden.     Edited   by    the  Rev.   R. 

Hooper,  M.A.    5  vols. 

Falconer.     Edited  by  the  Rev.  J. 
Mittord. 

Goldsmith.       Revised  Edition  by 

Austin  Dobsun.     With  Portrait. 
*Gray.     Edited    by   J.  Bradshaw, 

LL.D. 
Herbert.     Edited  by  the  Rev.  A.  B. 

Grosart. 
*Herrick.        Edited     by     George 

Saints  bury.     2  vols. 
*Keats.     Edited  by  the  late  Lord 

Houghton. 

*  ihese  volumes  m^'  also  be  bad  bound 
and  bai^it  by  Gleeson  White, 


Sirie  White.  Edited,  with  a 
Memoir,  by  Sir  H.  Nicolas. 

Milton.     Edited  by  Dr.  Bradshavv. 

2  vols. 
Parnell.     Edited  by  G.  A.  Aitken. 

Pope.      Edited  by   G.   R.  Dennis 

With  Memoir  by  John  Dennis.    3  vols 

Prior.  Edited  by  R.  B.  Johnson. 
2  vols. 

Raleigh  and  Woiton.  With  Se- 
lections from  the  Writings  of  other 
CUUR  L'LY  POETS  from  1540  to  1650. 
Edited  by  Van.  Archdeacon  Hannah, 
D.C.L. 

Rogers.     Edited  by  Edward  Bell, 

M.A. 
Scott.      Edited  by    John   Dennis. 

5  volb. 

Shakespeare's  Poems.    Edited  by 

Rev.  A.  Dyce. 
Shelley.      Edited   by    H.    Buxton 

Forman.    5  vols. 
Spenser.     Edited  by  J.  Payne  Col- 

littr.     5  vols. 
Siirrey.     Edited  by  J.  Yeowell. 

Swirt.      Edited    by    tne    Rev.    J. 

Mitford.     3  vols. 
Thomson.     Edited  by  the  Rev.  D. 

0.  Tovey.     2  vols. 
Vaughan.       Sacred    Poems    ana 

rious    Ejaculntioas.      Edited    by    thfi 

Rev.  a.  Lyte. 

Wordsworth.       Edited    by    Prof. 

Dowden.    7  vols. 
Wyatt.     Edited  by  J.  Yeowell. 

Young.  2  vols.  Edited  by  tht 
Rev.  J,  Mitford. 

in  Iruh  linen,  vnth  aesign  in  gold  on  side 
and  gilt  top,  38.  <3<i,  each  uet. 


A^.vA- 


(       30       ) 


THE     ALL-ENGLAND     SERIES. 

HANDBOOKS  OF  ATHLETIC  GAMES. 

The  only  Series  issued  at  a  moderate  price,  by  Writers  who  are  in 
the  first  rank  in  their  respective  departments. 

•  Tlie  best  insti-uctiou  on  games  aud  sports  by  the  best  authorities,  at  the  lowest 
prices.' — Oxford  Mngnzine. 

Small  8vo.  cloth,  Illustrated.     Price  Is.  each. 

Cricket.     By  the   Hon.  and  Kev. 

E.  Lyttelton. 
Lawn    Tennis.      By    H.   W.    W. 

WiLBERFORCE.     With   a  Chapter   for 

Ladies,  by  Mrs.  Hilltakb. 
Tennis  and  Rackets  and  Fives. 

By  Julian  Marshall,  Major  J.  Spens, 

and  Rev.  J.  A.  Arnan  Tait. 

Golf.    By  W.  T.  LiNSKiLL. 
Rowing  "and  Sculling.     By  W.  B. 

WOODGATE. 

Sailing.  By  E .  F.  Knight,  dbl. vol.  2s. 
Swimming.     By  Martin  and  J. 

Racster  Cobbett. 
Camping  out.     By  A.  A.  Macdon- 

ELL.     Double  vol.     2s. 
Canoeing.     By  Dr.  J.  D.  Hayward. 

Double  vol.     2s. 
Mountaineering.     By  Dr.  Claude 

Wilson.     Doidile  vol.    2s. 
Athletics.     By  H.  H.  Griffin. 
Riding.     By  W.   A.   Kerr,    V.C. 

Double  voi.    2s. 

Ladies' Riding.  By  W  A.Kerr.V.C. 
Boxing.    By  B,.  G.  Allanson-Winn. 

With  Prefatorv  Note  by  Bat  Mullins. 
Cycling.   Bv  H.  H.  Griffin, L.A.C., 

N  C.U.,  O.T  C.     With   a  Chapter  for 

Ladies,  by  Miss  Agnes  Wood. 
Fencing.    By  H.  A.  Colmore  Dunn. 


I   Wrestling.     By   Walter   Arm- 

I        STRONG  ('Cross-but.tocker'). 

j  Broadsword      and      Singlestick. 

I       By  R.  G.  Allanson-Winn  and  C.  Phil- 
j        lipps-Wolley. 

j   Gymnastics.      By   A.   F.    Jenkin. 

I        Double  vol.  2s. 

!   Gymnastic  Competition  and  Dis- 
play Exercises.      Compiled   by 
F.  Graf. 
Indian  Clubs.     By  G.  T.  B.  Cob- 
bett and  A.  F.  Jenkin. 
Dumb-bells.     By  F.  Graf. 
Football  —  Rugby     Game.       By 

Harry  Vassall. 
Football — Association  Game.  By 

C.  W.  Alcock.     Revised  Edition. 
Hockey.      By    F.    S.    Creswell. 
(In  Paper  Cover,  6d.) 
j    Skating.      By     Douglas     Adams. 
\        Witli  a  <^hapter  for  Ladies,  by  Miss  L. 
j        Cheetham,   and  a  Chapter  on   Speed 
!        Skating,  by  a  Fen  Skater.    Dbl.  vol.  2.s. 
i   Baseball.     By  Newton  Crane. 
Rounders,  Fieldball,  Bowls, 
Quoits,    Curling,   Skittles,    &c. 
By  J.  M.  Walker  and  C.  C.  Mott. 
Dancing.       By    Edward    Scott. 
Double  vol.     2s. 


THE  CLUB  SERIES  OF  CARD  AND  TABLE   GAMES. 
No  well-regulated  club  or  country  house  should  be  without  this  useful  series  of  books. 
Small  8vo.  cloth,  Illustrated.      Price  Is.  each.  Globe. 


■Whist.  By  Dr.  Wm.  Pole,  F.R.S. 
Solo  Whist,  By  Robert  F.  Green. 
Bridge.     By  Robert  F.  Green. 

[In  the  j)ress. 

Billiards.     By  Major-Gen.  A.  W. 

Drayson,  F.R.A.S.      With   a  Preface 

by  W.  J.  Peall. 
Chess.     By  Robert  F.  Green. 
The   Two- Move  Chess  Problem. 

By  B.  G.  Laws. 
Chess  Openings.  By  I.  Gunsbebq. 
Draughts  aud  Backgammon. 

Reversi  and  Go  Bang. 
By  '  Bkekklky  ' 


Dominoes  and  Solitaire. 

By  '  Berkeley.* 
Bezique  and  Cribbage. 
,  By  *  Berkeley.' 
Ecarte  and  Euchre. 
By  '  Berkeley.' 
i  Piquet  and  Rubicon  Piquet 
I       By  '  Berkeley.' 
1   Skat.     By  Louis  Diehl. 
j  *:^*  A  Skat  Scoriiig-book.     Is. 

j  Round  Games,   including   Poker, 

Napoleon,   Loo,  Vingt-et-un,  &c.      By 
1        Baxter  What. 

j  Parlour  and  Playground  Games. 
By  Mrs.  Laurence  Gomme. 


BELL'S   CATHEDRAL   SERIES, 

3llu3trateC>  /Iftonograpbs  in  IbanOg  Sl3e. 

EDITED   BY 

GLEESON    WHITE    and    E.     F.    STRANGE. 
In  specially  designed  cloth  cover ^  crown  %vo.    \s.  6d.  each. 


Now  Ready, 

CANTERBURY.    By  Hartley  Withers.   3rd  Edition,  revised.    37  Illustrations. 

CHESTER.     By  Charles  Hiatt.     2nd  Edition,  revised.     35  Illustrations. 

DURHAM.     By  J.  E.  Bygate,  A.R.C.A.     44  Illustrations. 

EXETER.    By  Percy  Addleshaw,  B.A.    2nd  Edition,  revised.    35  Illustrations. 

GLOUCESTER.     By  H.  J.  L.  J.  Mass6,  M.A.     49  Illustrations. 

HEREFORD.     By  A.  Hugh  Fisher,  A.R.E.     40  Illustrations. 

LICHFIELD.     By  A.  B.  Clifton.    42  Illustrations. 

LINCOLN.     By  A.  F.  Kendrick,  B.A.     2nd  Edition,  revised.     46  Illustrations. 

NORWICH.     By  C.  H.  B.  Quennell.     38  Illustrations. 

OXFORD.     By  Rev.  Percy  Dearmer,  M.A.     2nd  Edition,  revised.     34  Illus- 
trations. 

PETERBOROUGH.     By  Rev.  W.  D.  Sweeting.     2nd  Edition,  revised. 
51  Illustrations. 

ROCHESTER.    By  G.  H.  Palmer,  B.A.    2nd  Edition,  revised.    38  Illustrations. 

SALISBURY.     By  Gleeson  White.     2nd  Edition,  revised.     50  Illustrations. 

SOUTHWELL.     By  Rev.  Arthur  Dimock,  M.A.     37  Illustrations. 

WELLS.     By  Rev.  Percy  Dearmer,  M.A.    43  Illustrations. 

WINCHESTER.    By  P.  W.  Sergeant.    2nd  Edition,  revised.    50  Illustrations 

YORK.     By  A.  Clutton-Brock,  M.A.     41  Illustrations. 

In  the  Press. 

BRISTOL.     By  H.  J.  L.  J.  Mass6,  M.A. 
ST.  ALBANS     By  Rev.  W.  D.  Sweeting. 


CARLISLE.     By  C.  K.  Elev. 

ST.  PAUL'S.      By  Rev.  Arthur  Dimock, 

M.A. 

RIPON.     By  Cecil  Hali.ett,  B.A. 
ST.  DAVID'S.     By  Philip  Robson, 


CHICHESTER.      By   H.    C.    Corlette, 

A.R.I.  B.A. 
ST.   ASAPH   and   BANGOR.      By   P.  B. 
Ironside  Bax. 


GLASGOW.      By   P.  Macgregor  Chal- 
mers, I. A,,  F.S.A.(Scot.). 


A.  R.I.  B.A. 
ELY.     By  Rev.  W.  D.  Sweeting,  M  A. 
WORCESTER.     By  E.  F.  Strange. 

Uni/orf7i  with  above  Series.     Now  ready. 
ST.  MARTIN'S  CHURCH,  CANTERBURY.  By  the  Rev.  Canon  Routi.edge. 
BEVERLEY    MINSTER.      By  Charles  Hiatt. 
WIMBORNE     MINSTER     and     CHRISTCHURCH     PRIORY.       By    the    Rev.   T. 

Perkins,  M.A. 
TEWKESBURY  ABBEY.     By  H.  J.  L.  J.  Mass^,  M.A. 
WESTMINSTER  ABBEY.     By  Charles  Hiatt. 


'  The  volume.s  are  handy  in  size,  moderate  in  price,  well  illu.strated,  and  wTitten  in  a 
scholarly  spirit.  The  history  of  cathedral  and  city  i.s  intelligently  set  forth  and  accompanied 
by  a  descriptive  survey  of  the  building  in  all  its  detail.  The  illustrations  are  copious  and  well 
selected,  and  the  series  bids  fair  to  become  an  indispensable  companion  to  the  cathedral 
tourist  in  England.' — Times. 

'  We  have  so  frequently  in  the.se  columns  urged  the  want  of  cheap,  well-illustrated  and 
well-written  handbooks  to  our  cathedrals,  to  take  the  place  of  the  out-of-date  publications  of 
local  booksellers,  that  we  are  glad  to  hear  that  they  have  been  taken  in  hand  by  Messrs. 
George  Bell  &  Sons.' — St.  James's  Gazette. 


32 


Oh 


WEBSTER'S 

INTERNATIONAL 

DICTIONARY 

OF   THE  ENGLISH  LANGUAGE, 
,^(M<-        2tis  Pages.        3500  Illustrations. 


PRICES: 

Cloth,  i/.  11^.  6d.',  half  calf,  2/.  2s.',  half  russia,  2/.  5j-.;  full  calf, 
2/.  Sj.  ;  full  russia,  2/.  I2J.;  half  morocco,  with  Patent  Marginal  Index, 
2/.  8j-,  ;  full  calf,  with  Marginal  Index,  2/.  12s.  Also  bound  in  2  vols., 
cloth,  i/.  14^'.  ;  half  calf,  2/.  12s.  ;  half  russia,  2/.  i8j.  ;  full  calf,  3/.  3J.  ; 
full  russia,  3/.  i^s. 

The  Appendices  comprise  a  Pronouncing  Gazetteer  of  the  World, 
Vocabularies  of  Scripture,  Greek,  Latin,  and  English  Proper  Names, 
a  Dictionary  of  the  Noted  Names  of  Fiction,  a  Brief  History  of  the 
English  Language,  a  Dictionary  of  Foreign  Quotations,  Words,  Phrases, 
Proverbs,  &c.,  a  Biographical  Dictionary  with  10,000  names,  &c.,  &c. 


'  We  believe  that,  all  things  considered,  this  will  be  found  to  be  the  best 
existing  English  dictionary  in  one  volume.  We  do  not  know  of  any  work 
similar  in  size  and  price  which  can  approach  it  in  completeness  of  a  vocabu- 
lary, variety  of  information,  and  general  use^^ulness. ' — Guardian. 

'  The  most  comprehensive  and  the  most  useful  of  its  kind.' 

Natio7ial  Observer, 

'  We  recommend  the  New  Webster  to  every  man  of  business,  every 
father  of  a  family,  every  teacher,  and  almost  every  student — to  everybody, 
in  fact,  who  is  likely  to  be  posed  at  an  unfamiliar  at  half-understood  word  or 
phrase.' -5/.  James's  Gazette. 

Prospectuses,^  with  Specimen  Pa^es,  on  Application. 
THE    ONLY    AUTHORISED    AND    COMPLETE    EDITION. 


LONDON  :    GEORGE  BELL  ^  SONS,  YORK  STREET, 

covENT  garden; 

S.  &  S.  I0.99-' 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

305  De  Neve  Drive  -  Parking  Lot  17  •  Box  951388 

LOS  ANGELES,  CALIFORNIA  90095-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library  from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


