The Letter of Aristeas
======================
The Letter of Aristeas, translated by H. St. J. Thackeray (London, 1904), public domain. The Hellenistic account of the Septuagint's legendary origins, with Thackeray's translation and appendix of ancient evidence. Scan via Internet Archive.

Aristeas epistle. English 
The letter of Aristeas 





Waal 


PURCHASED FOR THE 


University of Toronto Library 


FROM THE 


Joseph and Gertie Schwartz 
Memorial Library Fund 


FOR THE SUPPORT OF 


Jewish Studies 





THE 
‘LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH 


WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES 


BY 


H. St. J. THACKERAY, M.A. 


Reprinted from the ‘Jewish Quarterly Review’ and published 
for the Jenish Historical Society of England 


London | 
MACMILLAN AND CO., Luwrep 
NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


1904 


[All rights reserved 1 


Price One Shilling 








THE 
LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH 


WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES 


BY 


H. St. J. THACKERAY, M.A. 


Reprinted from the ‘Jewish Quarterly Review’ and published 
for the Jewish Historical Society of England 


London 
MACMILLAN AND CO., Limrrep 
NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


1904 


[All rights reserved | 

















“OXFORD: HORACE HART 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 


NOTE TO THE PRESENT EDITION 


At the suggestion and through the kind instrumen- 
tality of Mr. Abrahams, joint editor of the ‘Jewish 
Quarterly Review, the present translation of the Letter 
of Aristeas is reprinted from the pages of that journal 
(April, 1903), in the hope that there may be readers 
interested in Septuagint studies who will care to 
possess it in a separate form. 

i St. J.T. 








TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER 
OF ARISTEAS. 


THE celebrated document, of which a new English 
version is here presented to the reader, professes to give 
a contemporary account of the translation of the Penta- 
teuch into Greek in the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus 
(285-247 B.c.). It has long been recognized that the 
letter cannot be contemporary with the events described. 
The writer in various ways betrays his later date. Thus 
he says that the arrangements made at the Alexandrian 
court for the entertainment of foreigners “may still be 
seen in operation” (ὃ 182), and he describes the scrupulous 
care with which “all business used to be transacted by 
these kings” (§ 28), as though he were looking back over 
the history of a long dynasty of Ptolemies. He anticipates 
the incredulity with which his story will be received 
. (δ᾽ 296). He is guilty of some historical inaccuracies, in 
making Demetrius Phalereus the friend and librarian of 
Philadelphus, and in his references to Menedemus (§ 201), 
Theopompus ($314), and Theodectes (ὃ 316). But that 
which chiefly arouses suspicion as to the historical - 
character of the narrative is the apologetic tendency dis- 
played in it. The writer is clearly a Jew of Alexandria, 

B 


2 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


not a heathen courtier as he professes to be, and his main 
object is to magnify the Jewish nation in the eyes of the 
Greek world by narrating the honour bestowed upon it 
by a Greek monarch and the praise accorded to it by 
heathen lips. This apologetic tendency is seen most 
clearly in the long exposition given by Eleazar of “the 
inner meaning of the law” (§171) with regard to clean 
and unclean food—a section which is penned with the 
intention of satisfying the “curiosity” which that law 
had excited ($128), and counteracting fallacious views on 
the subject which still found supporters although they 
had long been exploded ($144). Still, as has been said, 
“a work written with a tendency, with a romantic 
colouring, may nevertheless be trustworthy,’ and the 
problem of sifting the false from the true in this story 
yet awaits solution. 

Recent criticism has set in the direction of rehabilitating 
the story here told, or at any rate a part of it. The numerous 
papyri of the Ptolemaic age which have been unearthed in 
Egypt in recent years have shown that the writer employs 
the titles of court officials and the technical terms connected 
with royal decrees and court usage with strict accuracy. 
The information which he gives with regard to Alexandria 
and the customs and institutions of the Ptolemies may be 
accepted as trustworthy, and may sometimes be used to 
supplement the information supplied by the papyri. 

But the question of the date of the letter is still so far 
from being settled that there is a difference of more than 
two centuries between the earliest and the latest date 
assigned to it. The three dates which critics of the present 
day have suggested are (1) that of Schiirer, who places it 
at about 2co B.¢., i.e. little more than half a century after 
the time when the translation is said to have been made; 
(2) that of Wendland, who sets it between 96 and 63 B.¢., 
rather nearer to the former date ; (3) that of Willrich 
(Judaica, 1900), who, following Graetz, brings it down as 
late as the time of Caligula (after 33 A.D.). It is impossible 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 3 


here to discuss the grounds on which these critics have 
arrived at these widely differing results. Suffice it to say 
that the date assigned by Willrich is almost certainly too 
late, while the evidence afforded by the papyri on some 
minor points tends to show that Schiirer’s date is some- 
what too early. The chief reason which has induced him 
to assign to the work so high an antiquity is the picture 
here presented of the political position of Palestine and its 
relation to Egypt. The fortress of Jerusalem is still in the 
possession of the Jews, Alexandrians are allowed to enter 
the country and its capital without molestation, and “ the 
Jewish people and their high priest appear as almost 
politically independent.’ This, according to Schiirer, pre- 
supposes the period before the conquest of Palestine by the 
Seleucid dynasty in 198 B.c. as the date of writing. A 
further argument in favour of the early date is the sup- 
posed reference of Aristobulus (170-150 B.c.) to the 
Aristeas letter in a passage (ap. Eus. P. 15. xiii. 12. 664 b) 
where he states that the whole law was first translated under 
Philadelphus through the instrumentality of Demetrius 
Phalereus. The authenticity of the passage has, however, 
been disputed. 

On the other hand must be set certain details which 
point to a date not earlier than the middle of the second 
century B.C. Strack’ has shown that, while the honorary 
title ἀρχισωματοφύλαξ, in conjunction with some other title 
such as διοικητής or στρατηγός, is found in the papyri of the 
third century B.¢., the use of the plural τῶν ἀρχισωματοφυ- 
λάκων, which occurs in Aristeas § 40, is not met with before 
about 145 B.c.? A similar instance is that of the phrase 
ἐὰν φαίνηται with no dative following it (Aristeas § 32, see 
my note on the passage), which appears to be unattested 
in the papyri before 163 B.c. Again, some of the names 
of the Seventy (δῷ 47 ff.), such as Jason, are names which 


1 Rhein. Museum, LV, 168 ff. 
* The earliest instance seems to be Tebtunis Papyri, 79. 52 (about 
148 8. ο.). 


Β 2 


4 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


only came into vogue in the Maccabean age. The alleged 
widespread interest in the Jewish law (§ 128) and the 
false views which were in circulation about it (§ 144), the 
pointed reference to a difference between the Greek text 
and the Hebrew in a passage of Exodus (§ 57), and the 
probable allusion to attempts which had been made to 
improve on the rendering of the translators (§ 310)—all 
these appear to indicate a date further removed from the 
age of Philadelphus than that which Schiirer would adopt. 
The writer refers in $31 to Hecataeus of Abdera (who 
lived in the time of Alexander the Great and the first 
Ptolemy), and Wendland has shown! that in the descrip- 
tion of Palestine he has probably made a large use of the 
genuine work of that historian, and not of the spurious 
writings which have been attributed to him. May not the 
picture of Palestine as it existed before the Seleucidean 
conquest have been taken over directly from Hecataeus 
by a writer of a slightly later age ? 

It is not the place here to enter into a discussion of the 
questions to which the letter gives occasion: whether the 
translation was made in the reign of Philadelphus, whether 
it owed its origin to a Greek monarch, or rather, as we 
should expect, to the growing need felt for such a version 
by the Jewish colony at Alexandria, and whether the 
translators were Palestinians or Alexandrians. Neither 
can we dwell on the subsequent accretions to the story, 
according to which the whole of the Old Testament, and 
not the law only, was rendered by the seventy-two trans- 
lators, who worked independently in separate cells, or two 
and two in a cell, and all produced identical versions, 
whereas Aristeas definitely states that the rendering finally 
agreed upon was the result of comparison and conference 
(δ 302). For a discussion of these and kindred questions 
reference may be made to Dr. Swete’s Introduction to the 
O. T. in Greek, an article by Mr. Abrahams in the Jewish 


' In Kautzsch, Apokryphen und Pseudepigraphen, II, τ f. 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 5 


Quarterly Review for January, 1902, Wendland’s text 
(Teubner, 1900) and translation (in Kautzsch, Apokryphen 
und Pseudepigraphen, 1900), and Schiirer (Geschichte des 
Jiid. Volkes*, III, 466-73), where the further literature on 
the subject is given. 

The text used for this translation is that contained in 
the Appendix to Dr. Swete’s Introduction (second edition, 
1902). Constant reference has also been made to the text 
and translation of Wendland, from whom also are taken 
the sections into which the text is divided. The felicitous 
conjectures of Wendland and Mendelssohn have again and 
again brought out the true meaning of the letter. 


H. Sr. J. THACKERAY. 


[THE OCCASION OF THE TRANSLATION AND PRELIMINARY 
PROCEEDINGS.] 


As the story of our interview with Eleazar, the high priest of the 1 
Jews, is a remarkable one, and because thou, Philocrates, hast set thy 
heart, as thou art constantly reminding me’, on learning the object 
and the occasion of our mission, I have endeavoured to give thee 
a clear account of what took place. I know that love of learning 
of thine; and it is indeed man’s highest task “ever to make addition 
to his store of learning and acquirements,”? either by the study 
of history or by actual experience of affairs. For in this way there is 
formed a pure disposition in the soul, which, assimilating what is 
best, and inclining towards that which is all-important, even piety, 
directs its course by the guidance of an unerring rule*. 


' Wendland restores the grammar by reading ὑπομιμνήσκειν, ‘you remind 
me that you are keen to learn.” 

2 These words form an iambic line in the Greek, and are probably 
a quotation from a lost tragedy. Two fragments of Sophocles are very 
similar: ‘‘And we must ever be daily acquiring (knowledge), while it is 
possible to learn better things,” ‘‘ever desire to add something useful 
to thy knowledge” (Fragments 779 and 622 in Dindorf, Poelae Scenici 
Graeci). 

* I have, following Wendland, made τὴν προαίρεσιν the beginning of the 
next sentence, and slightly altered the punctuation, reading διάθεσις" 
ἀναλαβοῦσα τὰ κάλλιστα καὶ κιτιλ, I have taken διοικεῖ to be used in an 
absolute sense, 


6 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


4 Having determined to make a close investigation into things 
divine, we offered our services for an! embassy to the man above- 
named, who, owing to his virtuous character and exalted position, 
is held in high honour both by his countrymen and by the rest of 
the world, and is in possession of [documents of] the greatest service 
to his nation, whether at home or abroad. The object of our mission 
was? the translation of the law of God, because in their country 

4 they have it inscribed on parchment in Hebrew letters. And the 
interest which we displayed*, when an opportunity offered itself, 
in bringing before the king the case of the men who were removed 
to Egypt from Judaea by the king’s father, who was the first possessor 
of the city [of Alexandria] and ruler of Egypt, this also it is worth 

5 while my telling thee. For I am convinced that thou above all men, 
with thy leanings towards the holiness and the sentiments of the men 
who live in accordance with the holy law, wilt gladly listen to the story 
about them which we are proposing to narrate, having but recently 
come over from the island‘ to us, and being anxious to gather any 

6 instructive information. On a former occasion I sent thee a descrip- 
tion of matters in my opinion worthy of record concerning the 
Jewish nation, which we obtained from the high priests, the most 

» learned body in that most learned of countries, Egypt®. It is right 
to communicate such things to thee with thy eagerness to learn what 
may benefit the mind; I would, if possible, impart them to all 


1 Or ‘the embassy,” with Wendland’s reading εἰς τὴν πρὸς τὸν κιτ.λ. 

2 Possibly πρὸς τὴν ἑρμηνείαν κιτ.λ. should be taken with the preceding 
sentence, ‘‘documents of the greatest service... for the translation,” &c. 
(Wendland), 

3 The text is at fault. I have adopted the easiest correction, that of 
Mendelssohn, ἣν δὲ καὶ ἐποιησάμεθα ἡμεῖς σπουδήν. Wendland, keeping ἣν δὴ 
and σπουδῇ, supposes that some words (ἃ δὲ διελέχθημεν) have fallen out 
before λαβόντες. The translation will then run, ‘‘ This embassy we actually 
undertook, and with no little zeal. And our address to the king, when 
an opportunity offered itself, on behalf of the men,” ὅθ. But πρεσβείαν 
seems rather too far off to be taken as the antecedent to ἥν. 

* It is doubtful whether Cyprus or Pharos is intended. A comparison 
of § 301, where ‘the island” clearly means Pharos, suggests the latter. 
But it is difficult, in that case, to understand why Philocrates should need 
a description of events with which he must have already been well 
acquainted. 

5 Possibly the writer wishes to identify himself with the historian 
Aristeas, who wrote a work περὶ Ἰουδαίων, a fragment of which is preserved 
by Eusebius, Praep. Ev., 430d. With the reference to the learning of 
Egypt, ep. Herodotus, II, 4 of γὰρ Ἡλιοπολῖται λέγονται Αἰγυπτίων εἶναι 
λογιώτατοι. 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 7 


who are like-minded with thee, but chiefly to thee; so sincere are 
thy principles, and not only does thy conduct show thee to be my 
brother by birth, but in thy striving after goodness thou art at 
one with us’. For precious gold or any other of the objects that 8 
the vain-glorious hold in honour does not confer the same advantage 
as the training of culture and the study of these subjects. But, 
lest we become tedious by extending our introductory remarks to an 
inordinate length, we will come back to the thread of the narrative. 

Demetrius of Phalerum 2, being keeper of the king’s library, received 9 
large grants of public money with a view to his collecting, if possible, 
all the books in the world; and by purchases and transcriptions 
he to the best of his ability carried the king’s purpose into execution. 
Being asked once in our presence, about how many thousands® fo 
of books were already collected, he replied, ‘‘ More than two hundred 
thousand, Sire: but I will ere long make diligent search for the 
remainder, so that a total of half a million may be reached. And 
I am informed that the Jews also have certain laws which are 
deserving of transcription and a place in thy library.” “ What is 11 
to hinder thee, then,” replied the king, “in this task? For all the 
necessary means are at thy service.” And Demetrius answered, 
“Translation is also required. For in the Jews’ land they use a 
writing of their own (just as Egyptians have their system * of letters) 
as well as a language peculiar to themselves. It is commonly thought 
that they use the Syrian language’, but this is an error: it is 
another dialect.” And when the king had learnt all the facts, he 
gave command that a letter should be written to the high priest 
of the Jews, in order that the proposal above-mentioned might 
be carried into effect. 

And now thought I was the opportunity for introducing a matter 12 
about which I had often made request to Sosibius of Tarentum and 
Andreas, the heads of the body-guard, namely the liberation of 


? By a slight transposition of words (ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸν. τρόπον) the sentence 
is improved (Wendland). It will then run, ‘‘and not only art thou my 
brother by birth, but also in thy character, which in its striving after 
goodness is akin to ours.” 

2 Demetrius lived from about B. c. 345 to about Β. ο. 283. The Jast part 
of his life was spent at the court of Ptolemy Soter, but we are told by 
Hermippus that he was out of favour with Ptolemy Philadelphus, and 
banished by him. He was never the royal librarian, For a discussion as 
to the part which he may have taken in suggesting the translation, see 
Swete, Introd. to 0.T., 18 f.; J.Q. R., Jan., 1902, 338. 

3 Greek, ‘‘ tens of thousands.” 

* Literally, ‘ arrangement.” 5 i.e. Aramaic, 


8 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


the Jews who had been carried away from Judaea by the king’s 
father. For he, after overrunning the whole of Coele-Syria and 
Phoenicia, assisted by good fortune and his own prowess, transplanted 
some and made prisoners of others, terrorizing and reducing the 
whole country to submission. It was on this occasion that he carried 
away more than a hundred thousand persons from the Jews’ country 
13 into Egypt, of which number he armed about thirty thousand picked 
men and settled them in the fortresses in the country. Many Jews 
had already before this entered the country along with the Persian, 
and others had at a still earlier time been sent out as auxiliaries 
to fight in the army of Psammetichus against the king of the 
Ethiopians; but these immigrants were not so large a body as those 
whom Ptolemy, son of Lagus, introduced’. Well, as we said before, 
he selected those who were best fitted by their age for service and 
the strongest, and armed them, but the rest of the multitude, old 
and young, and the women, he handed over [to the soldiers] as 
menials, not of his own free will, but rather compelled thereto by 
the soldiers, in return for the services which they had rendered 
on his campaigns. When, therefore, we found some pretext for their 
release, as has been already explained, we addressed the king some- 
15 What as follows: “It would surely be unreasonable, O king, to let 
ourselves be placed in the wrong by the actual facts. For, as 
the laws which we are proposing not only to transcribe but also 
to translate are binding on all Jews, what reasonable ground shall 
we have for our mission, whilst large numbers of the race continue in 
slavery in thy kingdom? Nay, with a perfect and bounteous heart 
release those who are held fast in miseries, since the same God who 
gave them the law directs thy kingdom, as my careful investigations 
16 have taught me. For the God who seeth and created all things 
Whom they worship is he whom all men worship, and we too, O king, 
though we address him by other names as Zeus and Dis; and by 
these names they of old time not inappropriately signified that he 


1 The immigration of Jews into Egypt in the time of Ptolemy I Soter is 
no doubt historical. He made three expeditions into Syria in 320, 312, 
and 302 B.c. A passage of Hecataeus of Abdera, probably genuine, pre- 
served in Josephus (cont. Ap. I, 186), says that after his victory at Gaza 
many Jews voluntarily returned with him and settled in Egypt. Nothing 
is known of the earlier settlements alluded to. ‘The Persian” seems 
to refer to Cambyses who conquered Egypt in 525 8.c. Psammetichus 
was king of Egypt from about B.c. 671 to 617; he was the first king of 
Egypt to employ Greek mercenaries in foreign campaigns (Hdt. II, 151 ff.). 
Others think that Psammis or Psammetichus II, as he is sometimes called, 
is here intended. He became king of Egypt about 595 B.c., and carried on 
war with Ethiopia (Hdt. II, 159-61), 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 9 


through whom all things receive their life and being, is the director 
and lord of 411}. Outdo, then, all men in magnanimity, and set 
at liberty those who are held in bondage.” The king kept silence 17 
for a brief while, and we inwardly prayed to God to incline his 
mind to a general release. (For the human race, being God’s creation, 
is subject to change and alteration under his hand; and therefore 
I called with many and divers prayers upon him that rules the heart, 
that he might be constrained to fulfil my desire. For I had a good 18 
hope, in bringing forward a proposal concerning the deliverance 
of men’, that God would cause the fulfilment of my desires; for 
when men piously think that they are working for righteousness 
and the furtherance of good deeds, their actions and designs are 
directed by Almighty God.) But the king, raising his head and 
looking at me with a cheerful countenance, said, “How many 19 
thousands dost thou think there will be?” And Andreas, who was 
standing beside him, replied, ‘‘A little over a hundred thousand.” 
“Of a truth,” said he, “it is but a small request which Aristeas makes 
of us.”” But Sosibius and some of the bystanders said, ‘It is indeed 
an action worthy of thy magnanimity to offer the release of these 
men as a thank-offering to the most High God. For, as thou hast 
been most highly honoured by the Almighty and exalted above thy 
forefathers, so is it fitting that thou shouldest make the very highest 
of thank-offerings.” And he, greatly elated, gave orders that [the 20 
redemption money] should be added to the soldiers’ pay: for every 
slave the owner should receive twenty drachmas: a royal decree 
should be issued on the subject, and the lists should be drawn up forth- 
with. So magnificent was his zeal, and thus did God fulfil our whole 
desire, constraining him to liberate not only those who had entered 
the country with his father’s army, but also any who were there 
before, or had since been introduced into the kingdom. It* was | 
pointed out that the donation would exceed four hundred talents. 
And I think that it will not be without use to set down here the copy 21 
of the royal decree. For the munificence of the king, who was 
enabled by God to be the means of deliverance to vast multitudes, 
will thus be made far clearer and more evident. It ran thus:— 

‘By THE KING’S DECREE. All persons who took part in the 


το 


2 


* The two accusative forms of Ζεύς, viz. Ζῆνα and Δία, are here derived 
from ζῇν (to live), and διά (through). This etymology is found in Orphic 
and other writings: see the Orphic fragment quoted by Blass on Acts 
Xvii. 28. 

? Cf. § 292. With this punctuation it is not necessary to read, with 
Mendelssohn, “the men.” 3 Greek, ‘‘tens of thousands.” 

* Possibly the word “although” has fallen out in the MSS. 


Io TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


expedition of our father into the regions of Syria and Phoenicia, 
and invaded the territory of the Jews, and became possessors of 
Jewish slaves, and have brought these over into the city and the 
country, or have sold them to others, likewise also if any such were 
beforetime [in the country] or have since been introduced, the pos- 
sessors shall straightway release them. Compensation shall forthwith 
be paid for every slave twenty drachmas, to the soldiers with their 

23 pay, and to the rest at the royal bank. For we are of opinion that 
the making of these persons prisoners was contrary to the will of 
our father and to justice, and that the spoliation of their country 
and the transportation of the Jews into Egypt were due to the 
recklessness of the soldiery; for the spoil which accrued to the 
soldiers on the field of battle should have sufficed, and that, not 
content with this', they reduced these men to subjection is therefore 

24 Wholly unreasonable. Forasmuch then as we undertake to award 
justice to all men, but chiefly to those who are without reason kept in 
subjection, and do in all things seek after what is right from motives 
of justice and piety towards all, we have decreed that the owners of all 
Jewish persons who are held in bondage anywhere? in any manner 
within the kingdom, shall on receipt of the prescribed sum release 
them: and no one shall in any way be dilatory in arranging for 
these matters, but they shall within three days from the date of 
publication of this decree hand in their lists to those who are set 

25 over this business, and shall also forthwith exhibit the persons. For 
we are resolved that it is expedient for ourselves and for the realm 
that this matter be accomplished. And any who will may give 
information concerning defaulters, on condition that the informer 
shall become owner of the person if found guilty, but the property of 
such persons shall be confiscated to the royal purse *.” 

26 When the decree was submitted to be read over to the king, con- 
taining all the rest with the exception of the words, “Also if any 
such were beforetime [in the country] or have since been introduced,” 
the king himself‘ out of his munificence and magnanimity appended 
this clause, and gave orders to assign a grant of the moneys in a 

27 lump sum to the regimental paymasters and the royal bankers. This 
decision being arrived at, the decree was confirmed within seven 
days: and the donation amounted to over six hundred and sixty ὅ 


1 Kai. 2 Perhaps read “ with any one and.” 

3 Cf. the draft of a royal decree in 3 Macc. iii. 25-28, in which the same 
technical phrases occur (προστετάχαμεν---διειλήφαμεν--- μηνύειν δὲ τὸν βουλό- 
μενον κ.τ.λ.). 

* Reading αὐτός with Josephus. 

δ. Josephus says, ‘‘ over 460 talents.” 





TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS II 


talents. For many children at the breast were also liberated along 
with the mothers. And when the further question was referred, 
whether twenty drachmas should be given for these as well, the king 
ordered that this also should be done. So strictly to the letter did he 
carry out every detail of the resolution. 

And when this business was ended, he ordered Demetrius to submit 
a statement concerning the transcription of the Jewish books. For 
all business used to be transacted by these kings’ by means of 
decrees and with great security, and nothing was done in an offhand 
or casual manner. And therefore have I set down here the copy 
of the memorial, and the copies of the letters, and the number of 
the presents sent, and the nature of each, for every one of these 
excelled in magnificence and technical skill. And the following is a 
copy of the memorial. 

“To the great king [a statement submitted] by Demetrius. In 
obedience to thy order, O king, concerning the books that are 
wanting to complete the library, that these should be added to the 
collection, and that those which have been lost should be duly 
replaced, after making careful inquiry into these matters, I refer the 
following statement to thee. 

“Certain ? books of the Jewish law with some few others are wanting ; 
for these are composed in Hebrew letters and in the Hebrew tongue, 
but have been interpreted ὃ somewhat carelessly and not according to 
their true meaning, according to information supplied by the experts, 
because they have not hitherto received the supervision of royalty. 
And it is necessary that these books should in an emended form 
find a place in thy library, because these laws, in that they are 
divine, are most full of wisdom and faultless. For this reason the 
writers of prose and verse and the host of historians have avoided 
any mention of the books aforesaid, and of the men who have 
lived [and are living]* their lives in accordance with them, because 
the views presented in them have a certain sanctity and holiness, 


1 This is one of several indications in the letter that the writer lived at 
a later age than that which he is describing. 

2 It is not necessary to read τὰ δὲ τοῦ νόμου. Demetrius is made to speak 
indefinitely of certain books, as in § τὸ (‘certain laws’’), where also 
there is no article in the MSS. 

8 If σεσήμανται is correctly rendered, there appears to be a reference 
to an earlier Greek translation of the law than the LXX (cf. § 314). 
Aristobulus (second century B.c.), in a well-known passage refers to such 
a translation (see Swete, Introduction to 0. T. in Greek, p. 1). Σεσήμανται may, 
however, merely mean ‘‘ committed to writing.” The explanation of 
Diels that incorrect vocalization is referred to is ingenious. 

* Perhaps a gloss. 


32 


33 


12 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


as says Hecataeus of Abdera’. Be it then thy good pleasure’, 
O king, that a letter be written to the high priest at Jerusalem, 
bidding him send such men as have lived the best of lives and are 
advanced in years, versed in their country’s law, six from each tribe, 
in order that we may test wherein the more part agree, and so 
obtaining an accurate translation may deposit it in a conspicuous 
place* in a manner worthy of the undertaking and of thy gracious 
will. Fare ever well!”* And when this memorial had been pub- 


1 A contemporary of Alexander the Great and Ptolemy I, and author 
of a history of Egypt. A history of the Jews, attributed to him, and 
often mentioned by Josephus and others, is probably a forgery, though, 
as Schitirer thinks, based on genuine portions of Hecataeus. Wendland 
(Kautzsch, Apokryphen, II, 1 f.) has made it probable by the similarities 
which he has traced between our letter and the first book of Diodorus, 
whose main authority at this point is Hecataeus, that pseudo-Aristeas 
made a very large use of the true Hecataeus, especially in the description 
of Palestine. 

2 "Ἐὰν οὖν φαίνηται. In this little phrase we may have a clue to guide 
us to the date of the letter. In the Papyri we find three formulae: 
(a) εἴ σοι δοκεῖ (ἐάν σοι δόξῃ), (Ὁ) ἐάν σοι φαίνηται, (c) ἐὰν φαίνηται. 1 find, 
after examining several collections of Ptolemaic papyri, that the classical 
phrase (a) is common in the earlier Ptolemaic period, (Ὁ) makes its 
appearance in 252 8.c., but does not occur after 163 8. Ο.; at which date 
(c) first appears, and is common down to 7oB.c. I find no instance of 
the omission of the pronoun before 163 B.c. The evidence may of course 
be upset when more third-century papyri come to light, but it certainly 
looks as if our letter were not earlier than the middle of the second 
century. It should be added that the reading of Β ἐὰν οὖν φανῆταί σοι 
ἔννομον is clearly a correction. The instances in the papyri are: for (a) 
Grenfell (series 2), XIV a (270 or 233 8. 0.), Petrie Pap. (series 2), IV, 5. 2 
(255 B.c.), XII, 13 (241 B.c.), Petrie Pap. (series 1), XXVI (third cent.), 
Petrie Pap. (series 2), XVII, 12 (third cent.), Turin Pap., ITI, 33 (circa 
120 B.c.); for (b) Petrie Pap. (series 2), XX, 2. 3, 9 (252 B.c.), IX, 5 
(241-239 B.c.), I, 20 (third cent.), Brit. Mus. 22. 6 (164 B.c.), 35. 22 (circa 
164 B.C.), 24 (163 B.c.), Paris, 35. 34 (163 B.c.); for (c) Paris, 37. 47 
(163 B.c.), Brit. Mus., 44. 28 (161 B.c.), Paris, τῶν 17 (157 B.C.), 13. 22 
(157 B.C.), 40. 50 (156 B.c.), Grenfell, Erotic Fragment, XV, 4 (146 or 
135 B.C.), Paris, 7. 17 (129 B.c.), Turin Pap., I, 3. 7 (? 120 B.c.), II, 40 
(? 120 B.c.), V, 19(?), VI, 20(?), Grenfell, Erotic Fragment, XXXVIII, 
16 (71 B.c.): to these may be added Letronne Inser. (Philae), XXVI 
(127 B.C.). 

8 i.e. in the Alexandrian library (cf. § 38). It is just possible, however, 
that we should translate ‘‘may make the meaning plain” (cf. § 30, 
ἀμελέστερον . . σεσήμανται). 

* Εὐτύχει, as Mahaffy has shown, is the regular formula at the end of 





TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 13 


sented, the king ordered that a letter should be written to Eleazar on 
these matters, informing him also of the liberation of the captives that 
had taken place. And he likewise presented towards the construction 
of bowls and vials! and a table and cups for libations fifty talents’ 
weight of gold and seventy talents of silver and of precious stones 
a great number (enjoining the treasurers to leave to the craftsmen 
the selection of such materials as they might desire), and of stamped 
money for sacrifices and other purposes as much as a hundred talents. 
And we will describe to thee the construction [of these works of art], 34 
but must first set out the copies of the letters. The tenor of the 
king’s letter was as follows: ‘‘King Ptolemaeus to Eleazar the high 35 
priest greeting and health. Forasmuch as many of the Jews chance to 
have been forcibly removed from Jerusalem by the Persians at the time 
of their power and to have been settled in our country, and others 
have entered Egypt as captives in the train of our father—of these he 36 
enrolled many in the army, giving them higher pay, and in like 
manner from his confidence in those who were already in the 
country he placed under their charge the fortresses which he built, 
that the native Egyptians might? be intimidated by them: and 
we too on inheriting the kingdom meet all men, but chiefly thy 
countrymen, in a very friendly spirit—we, then, have given liberty to 37 
more than a hundred thousand captives, paying their owners the 
value in money which is right, and making good any wrong which 
they have suffered through the violence of the rabble. For we are 
resolved that in this we are doing a pious action, and we hereby 
dedicate a thank-offering to the most high God, who has preserved 
our kingdom in peace and in the highest esteem throughout the 
whole world. And we have further placed in the army those who 
are in the prime of their life, but to such as are qualified for 
attendance on our person, and deserving of confidential posts at 
court, have we assigned offices of state. And since we desire to 38 
confer a favour not on these only, but on all Jews throughout the 
world, and on future generations, it is our royal will that your 
law be translated from the Hebrew, as you call it, into Greek, that 
so these writings also may find a place in our lbrary with the 
other royal volumes. Thou wilt therefore do well and wilt duly 39 
repay our zeal, if thou lookest. out men who have lived honour- 


an address from a subordinate to his superior, and is therefore correctly 
used here. A person addressing his subordinate or his equal uses éppwao 
(so in the letters that follow, §§ 40, 46), 

1 Or “saucers.” 


? I have, following Josephus and Eusebius, omitted the negative which 
stands in the Aristeas MSS. 


Ι4 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


able lives, advanced in years, well versed in the law and able to 
translate, six out of each tribe, that we may discover wherein the 
more part agree: for the inquiry concerns matters of more than 
ordinary import. For we are of opinion that we shall through this 

4° achievement gain great renown. And we have sent on this business 
Andreas, of the chief of the body-guards, and Aristeas, who hold 
honoured places in our court, to confer with thee. They bring with 
them dedicatory offerings for the temple, and for sacrifices and other 
purposes a hundred talents of silver. And shouldest thou also write 
to us concerning any desires of thine, thou wilt be welcome and wilt 
be doing only what friendship requires: and be assured that thy 
wishes will receive instant fulfilment. Farewell.” 

41 In reply to this letter Eleazar wrote much? as follows: “ Eleazar 
the High Priest to king Ptolemaeus, a sincere friend, greeting. Do 
thou fare well and the queen Arsinoe, thy sister, and the children 23, so 
will it be well and we have our desire: we ourselves also are in good 

42 health. On receiving thy letter we greatly rejoiced because of thy 
royal purpose and noble resolve, and we collected the whole people 
and read it to them, in order that they might know thy pious 
reverence for our God. And we also exhibited the vials* which thou 
sentest, twenty of gold and thirty of silver, the five bowls, and a 
table as dedicatory offerings, and the hundred talents of silver for 
the offering of sacrifices and for such repairs as the temple may 

43 require —gifts which were brought by Andreas, who is of those who 
hold an honoured place at thy court, and Aristeas, virtuous and 
cultivated men, who in all ways show themselves worthy of thy high 
principles and righteousness. They have also imparted to us thy 
commissions, and have heard from our lips such replies as befit what 

44 thou hast written. For in all things which are to thy profit, even 
though they be contrary to our natural impulses, will we do thy 
bidding: for this is a mark of friendship and affection. For thou 
too hast in divers manners* done great services to our countrymen 

45 which cannot pass out of mind. We therefore straightway offered 


1 The force of ἐνδεχομένως (which elsewhere seems equivalent to ὅσον 
ἐνδέχεται, ‘‘so far as possible’’) is doubtful. Wendland suggests ‘‘so far 
as he could write Greek,” the writer excusing the use of this language 
by a Jew of Palestine. It does not seem necessary to alter the reading, 
with Diels, to ἐκδεχομένως, ‘ straightway.”’ 

2 The marriage of Ptolemy with his sister Arsinoe II probably took 
place in 278 B.c.; she appears to have been childless, but is said to have 
adopted the children of Arsinoe I (Mahaffy, Empire of the Ptolemies, 137, 
155). 

3. Or “saucers.” * Read κατὰ πολλοὺς τρόπυιυς with Eusebius. 











TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 15 


sacrifices on thy behalf and on behalf of thy sister and thy children 
and thy ‘friends’!, and the whole people prayed that thy under- 
takings might ever prosper, and that Almighty God would preserve 
thy kingdom in peace with honour, and that the transcription of the 
holy law might be to thy profit and carefully executed. And in 46 
the presence of them all we selected virtuous men, advanced in years, 
six from each tribe, whom we are also sending with [the copy of] 
the law. Thou wilt therefore do well, O just king, if thou givest 
orders that, so soon as the transcription of the books be accomplished, 
the men may be restored to us again in safety. Farewell. * And 47 
their names are, of the first tribe, Joseph, Ezekias*, Zacharias, John, 
Ezekias*, Elisha: of the second, Judas, Simon, Samuel‘, Adaius ὅ, 
Mattathias, Eschlemias®: of the third, Nehemiah, Joseph, Theodosius, 
Baseas’, Ornias’, Dakis: of the fourth, Jonathas, Abraius, Elisha, 48 
Ananias, Zacharias*®, Chelkias*: of the fifth, Isaac, Jacob, Jesus, 
Sabbataius °, Simon, Levi: of the sixth, Judas, Joseph, Simon, Zacha- 
rias, Samuel, Selemias: of the seventh, Sabbataius°, Zedekiah, Jacob, 49 
Isaac, Iesias’°, Natthaius: of the eighth, Theodosius, Jason, Jesus, 
Theodotus, John, Jonathas: of the ninth, Theophilus, Abraham, 
Arsamus"!, Jason, Endemias, Daniel: of the tenth, Jeremiah, Eleazar, 50 
Zacharias, Baneas, Elisha, Dathaius’: of the eleventh, Samuel, 
Joseph, Judas, Jonathes, Caleb’’, Dositheus: of the twelfth, Isaelus, 
John, Theodosius, Arsamus, Abietes, Ezekiel: in all seventy-two 
persons.” 


1 A court title. 

2 The names form a postscript to the letter (ὑπογεγραμμένα ἐν τῇ 
ἐπιστολῇ, Jos.). 

3 Possibly one of these names is due to corruption. 

* Σομόηλος here and in § 48: in ὃ 50 Σαμούηλος. 

δ᾽ Either Adaiah (7™y) or Iddo (xvy). 

6 Representing mn>w, which is more correctly represented by Σελεμίας 
in § 48. 

7 Cf. 3 Reg. ii. 46h ’Opveiov . . καὶ Βασά: 2 Reg, iii. 4 A ’Opvias. 

8 The names Zacharias, Chelkias are derived from the list of names in 
the Syriac version of Epiphanius, De mens. et pond., who uses the narrative 
of Aristeas. In the MSS. of Aristeas Χαβρίας stands in place of Zacharias, 
and the sixth name in this tribe has disappeared. 

® Σαββαταῖος occurs, in conjunction with Λευείς, in 1 Esdras ix. 14 (= naw 
Ezra x. 15, Σαβαθαὶ ὁ Aeveirns): Σαββαταίας in τ Esdras ix. 48 A. 

10 Probably =Jesse (Epiphan. »wx). 

“The nearest form in the LXX is ’Apod, 3 Reg. xvi.g A. For the 
termination cf. BadAcapos, τ Esdras ix. 43. 

% Or Thaddaeus, as one MS. reads. 

15. So Epiphanius. The MSS. have Xafed. 


16 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


51 Such, then, was the reply which the king’s letter met with at 
the hands of Eleazar. 


[DESCRIPTION OF THE ROYAL PRESENTS.] 


I will now fulfil the promise which I made to describe the works 
of art. For these were wrought with extraordinary technical skill, 
as the king not only made large contributions, but also exercised 
a constant supervision over the craftsmen, so that they could not 
neglect or slur any of the details. I will first give thee an account of 
the table. Now, the king’s intention was to make this structure 
of gigantic dimensions. However, he gave orders that an inquiry 
should be made of persons in the locality as to the size of the existing 
3 table' which stood in the temple at Jerusalem: and on receiving their 

reports of these dimensions, he inquired further whether the dimen- 
sions of his structure should be larger. Thereupon some of the priests 
and of the people said there was nothing to prevent it. But the 
king replied that, though his wish was to make his gift five times 
as large, yet he doubted whether such a table might not be useless 
54 for the public ministrations. For it was not his desire that his 
offerings should merely be deposited on the spot, but it would afford 
him far greater satisfaction, if the appropriate services were duly 
performed by the proper ministers on the structures which he had 
55 designed. He added that the small scale on which the former works 
were constructed was not due to any lack of gold, but was apparently 
so planned for some definite reason. For had any injunction been 
given 2 [for a larger table], there would have been no lack [of means 
to supply it]: it was not therefore right to surpass or exceed what 
56 had been well designed. At the same time he ordered that the 
utmost diversity of artistic skill should be employed, since all his 
conceptions were on a grand scale, and he had a natural gift for 
comprehending the impression which objects would produce *. And 
whatever details were left unrecorded [in scripture], these he ordered 
[the craftsmen] to beautify, but wherever written directions were 
given, they were to be guided by these in the measurements. 


1 The table of shewbread. 

2 Adopting Mendelssohn’s ingenious emendation ἐπιταγῆς for ἐπὶ τὰ τῆς. 
But the reading of the MSS. may perhaps stand. ‘‘For nothing could 
have been lacking for the existing table.” 

3. Or ‘‘for designing the appearance of objects.” The artistic talent of 
Philadelphus is attested by the historians of his time. Callixenus of 
Rhodes (Athenaeus, V, 36. 203 C) says 6 Φιλάδελφος.. περὶ πάντα ἐσπουδάκει 
τὰ κατασκευάσματα φιλοτίμως. 


σι 
1) 


σι 
Ω. 








TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS I7 


So they fashioned [the table] two cubits in length and a cubit 57 
and a half in height, making the work of pure gold and perfectly 
solid; that is to say, the gold was not overlaid upon other material, 
but the plate of beaten metal was affixed entire’. And they made 58 
a border of an hand-breadth round about, and its ledges of twisted 
work ὦ, with a design of ropes in relief, the chasing being wonderfully 
executed on the three sides. For the ledges were triangular in shape®, 59 
and the work on each side was fashioned upon the same pattern, 
so that, whichever way they were turned, the appearance was the 
same, and while the ledge rested on the border that side of it which 
sloped towards the table was beautifully worked, although the side 
which sloped outwards [alone] met the eye of the spectator. And so 60 
the edge in which the two sloping sides met, and which ran along the 
top, was a sharp one, since, as we have said already, the shape was a 
triangular one [whichever way the ledge was turned|*. And precious 
stones were inlaid in the ledge between the rope-work: set one kind 
beside another they were interwoven in an inimitable manner. And 61 
they were all perforated and securely fastened by golden pins. And at 
the angles the clamps held them? firmly in their places. And slanting 62 


1 Lit. ‘‘ was itself attached” or welded, i.e. to other similar plates of 
gold. The table is in part modelled on the description of the table 
of shewbread in Exod. xxv. 23 ff.; from that passage are taken the 
dimensions, the pure gold, the border of a hand-breadth, and the κυμάτια 
orpentad. The passage is interesting as showing that the writer was aware 
of a remarkable divergence between the Hebrew and Greek texts which 
we find at this point in Exodus. While the Hebrew text says that the 
shewbread table was to be made of acacia wood and overlaid with pure 
gold, the LXX says it was to be “‘gold, of pure gold” (χρυσῆν, χρυσίου 
καθαροῦ). Possibly the LXX text has come from the description of the 
golden shewbread table in Solomon’s temple (1 Kings vii. 48).—The MSS. 
of Aristeas only mention the length and height of Ptolemy’s table. 
Josephus adds the breadth ‘‘one cubit,” as in Exodus, and Wendland 
accordingly inserts πήχεος δὲ τὸ εὖρος into the text of Aristeas. But it 
is noticeable that the breadth of the table in Exodus is there also omitted 
in the Codex Ambrosianus.—Much of the following description is obscure, 
especially as regards the κυμάτια στρεπτά. 

2 Or ‘“‘and its mouldings (or ‘rims’) were made so as to revolve.” The 
words καθ᾽ ὃ ἂν μέρος στρέφοιτο below suggest that the writer took στρεπτά 
in the sense of ‘‘ revolving.” 

3 Reading τρίγωνα with Josephus in place of rpryovia. The table, 
having four legs, was presumably not triangular. 

* These words should perhaps be omitted. 

ΤΟ is doubtful whether the precious stones or the ‘ledges’ are 
intended. 


C 


18 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


upwards from the border and encircling the table there was an 
egg pattern set with precious stones, and elaborately worked with 
a series of flutings', packed closely together round the whole table’. 
63 And beneath the raised work of the stones which formed the egg 
pattern the craftsmen made acrown of fruits of all kinds: projecting 
from it were shown vine-clusters and corn-ears, dates also and apples 
and olives and pomegranates and the like. They worked the stones, 
which had the colour of each species of the aforesaid fruits, to 
resemble those fruits, and then attached them edgeways to the gold 
64 all round the table. And next to the crown the egg pattern was 
worked over again, and the rest of the fluted and relief work, because 
the table was made to be used on either side according to choice ὅ, 
and with such symmetry that the ledges and the border reappeared 
65 on the side nearest the feet. For they made a plate of solid metal, 
four fingers broad, extending along the whole breadth of the table, 
into which the legs could be inserted, these being provided with pins 
and clamps to secure them to the border, in order that either side 
of the table might be used according to choice. This metal plate 
was visible on the surface, as the work was constructed so as to 
66 be reversible. And on the top of the table they worked a meander in. 
relief, with precious stones of divers hues standing out in the middle 
of it, carbuncles and emeralds, and onyx, and the other kinds which 
6, are noted for their beauty. And next to the meander there was 
a wonderful design of open net-work, giving the centre of the 
table the appearance of a lozenge-shaped pattern; and into this 
were inlaid crystal and the so-called electron‘, affording an in- 
68 imitable spectacle to the beholders. And the legs they made with 
lily-shaped capitals, the lilies bending over beneath the table, while 
the parts which met the eye represented the leaves in an upright posi- 
69 tion. The basis of the leg which rested on the ground consisted entirely 
of carbuncle, a hand-breadth [high] and of eight fingers’ breadth, and 
in appearance had the shape of a shoe; upon this rested the whole 
70 plate into which the leg was inserted®. And they represented ivy, 
intertwined with acanthus, growing out of the stone and encircling 
the leg, together with a vine and its clusters (these being worked in 
stone), and reaching to the capital. And the pattern of the four 
legs was the same: all the parts were carefully made and attached, 


1 Or ‘with continuous mouldings.” 

2 Some variation of the egg and dart pattern seems to be meant. 

3. Read aipavra for αἴρωνται in this and the next section (Wendland), 

* Probably ‘‘ amber.” 

5 Literally ‘‘the whole plate of the leg,” apparently that mentioned in 
6 


§ 65. 








TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 19 


and with such consummate skill and craftsmanship as exactly to 
resemble nature, insomuch that if a breath of air blew upon them 
the leaves stirred in their places; so closely was every detail modelled 

to imitate nature. The top of the table they made in three pieces, 71 
as it were a triptych, the pieces being fitted together by dovetailing 
which was secured by pegs in the thickness of the structure, and the 
joinings being rendered invisible and undiscoverable. The thickness 
of the whole table was no less than half a cubit, so that many talents 
went to the whole fabric. For, as the king had determined not 72 
to increase the dimensions at all, he expended all the more upon 
these details ', even as much as would have been required for a table 
on a larger scale; and in accordance with his purpose the whole 
of the work was completed in a marvellous and memorable style, 
and was inimitable in its craftsmanship, in its beauty magnificent. 

As regards the bowls, two of them were wrought in gold, and from 73 
their bases to half way up their sides bore a device of scales in relief, 
and precious stones cunningly set between the scales. Then above 74 
this was a meander, a cubit in height, with raised work of stones 
of divers hues on its surface’, which besides having a beautiful effect 
displayed the most elaborate skill. Over this was a mosaic of inter- 
lacing lozenge-shaped figures extending to the brim and producing 
the appearance of net-work. And in the middle were bosses of 75 
stones of various kinds, arranged alternately, and not less than four 
fingers broad, which completed the beauty of the spectacle. And 
round the crown of the brim were worked lilies with their blossoms 
and interlacing vineclusters. Such was the fashion of the golden 76 
bowls, and they contained over two firkins each. But those of silver 
were made with a smooth surface, and formed a veritable mirror, 
marvellous on account of their very smoothness, which was such 
that anything brought close to them was reflected more clearly than 
in mirrors. But it is impossible to describe the real impression pro- 77 
duced by the completed works of art. For when the vessels were 
finished and were set side by side—that is to say, first a silver bowl, 
then a golden, then another silver and another golden one—the nature 
of the sight was quite indescribable, and those who came to view 
it could not tear themselves from it, so dazzling was the brightness 
and so entrancing the vision. There was variety in the effect of 78 
the spectacle. If one looked at the gold work, it was one of delight 
and astonishment, as the mind took in one by one each detail of 
the execution. And again, when one wished to turn one’s eyes to 
the silver vessels which stood there, all the surrounding objects were 


+ Text and meaning are uncertain. 
? Read ἐν ὑπεροχῇ for ἐνυπῆρχε (Wendland), 
C2 


20 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


reflected, wherever one stood, causing a still greater ecstasy to the 
beholders. So the artistic skill displayed in the works is quite beyond 
description. 

79 And on the golden vials! they engraved vine-wreaths in the centre, 
and round the rims they plaited in relief work a wreath of ivy and 
myrtle and olive, in which they set precious stones. And the rest 
of the relief work they wrought in various patterns, as they zealously 
strove to make everything in a manner worthy of the king’s pre- 

80 eminent position. In a word, there was no such work for costliness 
and artistic skill either in the royal treasuries or in any other. Great, 
interest was shown by the king, who loved to gain a reputation 

81 for the excellence of his designs. For often he would omit to give his 
public audience, and would carefully supervise the craftsmen, to 
see that they executed the works in a manner befitting the place 
to which they were to be sent. And so they were all made in a 
magnificent style, and were worthy of the king who was sending 
them and of the high priest who was the governor of the place. 

82 So excessive was the number of the precious stones (there were not 
less than five thousand, and they were large to boot), and so first-rate 
was all the craftsmanship, that the expenditure upon the precious stones 
and the skilled work amounted to five times the value of the gold. 


[DESCRIPTION OF JERUSALEM AND ITS VICINITY.] 


83 I have given thee this description, as I considered that a record 
of these presents was required. The next portion [of my letter] 
contains an account of our journey to Eleazar. But first I will 
indicate the configuration of the whole country. When we reached 
the district, we beheld the city lying in the centre of the whole 

84 of Judaea upon a mountain which rose to a great height. Upon 
its crest stood the temple in splendour, with its three enclosing walls, 
more than seventy cubits high, their breadth and length corresponding 
to the structure of the edifice. The whole was built with a mag- 

85 nificence and liberality beyond all precedent. The lavish expenditure 
of money was apparent even in the great doorway, and in its frame- 

86 work of door posts, and in the stability of its lintel. And the fashion 
of the curtain bore a very close resemblance to a door’, the woven 
hanging being kept in incessant motion by the current of wind 
underneath. For while the current took its rise from the ground, 
the swell extended to the upper and tauter part of the curtain®: 


1 Or “ saucers.” 2 Reading θυρώσει. 
3 Text and meaning are uncertain. Schmidt’s emendation κατατείνειν 
is adopted. 








TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 21 


and the effect was a beautiful spectacle, from which it was hard 
to tear oneself away. 

And the altar was built of a size in keeping with! the place and with 87 
the sacrifices which were consumed by fire, and the ascent to it was on 
alike scale. The place was approached by a gentle slope from a proper 
regard for decency, and the ministering priests were clad in coats of 
fine linen reaching to the ankles*. And the house looks toward the east, 88 
and its back is turned westwards. And the whole floor is paved and 
slopes away in the right directions, so as to admit of the influx of water, 
with which it is flushed to wash away the blood from the sacrifices, 
For many thousands of cattle are offered on the feast-days. And there 89 
is an unfailing supply of water, because a rich natural spring bubbles 
up within the temple area, and there are also wonderful underground 
reservoirs passing description. These, as was explained to me, ex- 
tended at a distance of five furlongs all round the site of the temple, 
and had innumerable pipes attached to each of them, since the 
channels converge on every side. [It was explained] also how all go 
these were soldered with lead to the ground and the sides*, and 
over them is laid a great mass of plaster, so that everything is made 
secure: and they have numerous outlets at the base of the temple, 
which are invisible to all except the actual ministrants: and in 
this way all the vast accumulation of sacrificial blood is swept away 
in the twinkling of an eye. And, having myself been convinced ΟἹ 
as to the nature of the reservoirs, I will explain how I reached 
that conviction. They led me more than four furlongs out of the 
city, and at a certain place bade me stoop down and listen to the 
rushing noise of the meeting of the waters; thus was the magnitude 
of the receptacles made evident to me, as I have described them‘, 

And the priests’ ministration in its exhibition of physical strength 92 
and in its orderly and silent performance could in no way be surpassed. 
For they all of their own free will undergo labours requiring much 
endurance, and each has his appointed task. And their service is 
without intermission, some [carrying] wood, others [having charge 


1 Read συμμέτρως ἔχουσαν (Mendelssohn), 

2 Exod. xx. 26; xxxix. 2] (LXX xxxvi. 35). Read τῶν λειτουργούντων 
ἱερέων (Mendelssohn). 

* Or ‘‘had their bases and sides of lead.” 

* For these underground cisterns see (Ecclus, 1. 3 ἀποδοχεῖον ὑδάτων) 
Philo the epic poet (second century B.c., ap. Eus., P. £., 453b αἰπὺ δ᾽ dp’ 
ἐκπτύουσι διὰ χθονὸς ὑδροχόοισι σωλῆνες), Tacitus, Hist., V, 12 (fons perennis 
aquae, cavati sub terra montes et piscinae cisternaeque servandis imbribus) and the 
Itinerarium Burdigala Se dian (circa 333 A.D., Palaestinae descriptiones, 
ed. T, Tobler, 1869). - 


22 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


of] oil, others of fine flour, and others of the spices, while others 
again offer the burnt-offerings of the flesh, displaying herein extra- 
93 ordinary power. For they grip with both hands the legs of the 
calves, each animal weighing wellnigh over two talents, and then 
with both hands and with wonderful dexterity fling the beast to 
a considerable height, and never fail to plant it on the altar. - The 
sheep and goats are, likewise, remarkable for their weight and fat. 
For those whose duty it is always select such as are without blemish 
and of exceeding fatness, and then the offering already described is 
94 performed. And there is a place set apart for them to rest, where 
those who are relieved from duty take their seats. And thereupon, 
some of those who have relaxed their toil rise up willingly, without 
95 any order for their ministration being given. And the deepest 
silence prevails, so that one would suppose! that there was not a 
single person in the place, although the ministers in attendance 
number some seven hundred, not to mention the large multitude 
of those who bring their sacrifices to be offered: but everything is 
performed with awe and in a manner worthy of the divine majesty 3, 
96 And when we beheld Hleazar in the course of his ministration, 
and his apparel, and the lustre lent by the wearing of the coat® 
wherewith he is clad and by the precious stones which encircle it, 
we were struck with a great amazement. For there are bells of gold 
around [the border οὔ] his long robe, giving out a peculiar musical 
sound, and on either side of these are pomegranates embroidered 
97 in gay colours, and of a marvellous hue. And he was girt with a 
rich and magnificent girdle*, woven in the fairest colours. And on 
his breast he wears what is called the oracle ὅ, wherein are set twelve 
stones of divers kinds, enclosed in gold, [bearing] the names of the 
heads of the tribes according to their original order, each of them 
98 flashing forth in indescribable fashion its own natural hue, And 
on his head® he has what is called the turban, and over this the 
inimitable mitre, the consecrated diadem, bearing in relief upon 
a plate of gold in holy letters the name of God, set between his 
eyebrows, full of glory. [Such is the raiment worn by him]’ who 
is judged worthy of these things in the public services. And the 
99 general aspect of these things produces terror and discomfiture, 
insomuch that one thinks that one has passed into another sphere 


1 Read ὥστε ὑπολαμβάνειν. ? Literally “ great divinity.” 

8 Exod. xxviii. 4, 31-35. * Thid., 30. 

5 Tbid., 15-21; xxxix. 8ff. The apposition of λίθοι and τὰ ὀνόματα is 
to be explained by Exod. xxviii. 21 of λίθοι ἔστωσαν ἐκ τῶν ὀνομάτων. 

® Exod. xxviii. 36 ff.; Ecclus. xlv. 12. 

7 Some words appear to have fallen out in the Greek, 








TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 23 


outside the world; indeed I confidently affirm that any man who 
witnesses the spectacle which I have described will experience an 
amazement and wonder beyond description, and will be profoundly 
moved in his mind at the sanctity attaching to every detail. 

To obtain an accurate knowledge of everything, we ascended to 100 
the citadel of the city, which lies hard by, and watched the spectacle. 
The citadel is situated on a very lofty spot, and is fortified with 
several towers, which are constructed up to their highest points of 
great blocks of stone, as a defence, so we are informed, to the 
precincts of the temple, in order that, in case of any attack or Io! 
revolution or invasion of an enemy, no one might effect an entrance 
within the walls which surround the house. For there are engines 
for discharging missiles and machines of various kinds on the towers 
of the citadel, and the place commands the enclosing walls aforemen- 
tioned, and the towers are guarded by the most trusted men who have 102 
wrought great achievements in their country’s service. And these 
had orders not to quit the citadel, except on the feast days, and 
then only in turn, nor did they suffer any one to enter. And even 103 
when any injunction was given by their leader’ to admit any 
persons as sightseers, great care was exercised, as was shown in 
our case. For although we were unarmed and only two in number 
they could hardly be brought to admit us to witness the offering 
of the sacrifices. And they said that they were pledged by oaths 194 
to act thus. For they all had sworn, and had of bounden duty and 
for conscience sake fulfilled their bond, that they, although numbering 
five hundred men, would not admit more than five persons at the 
same time; for the citadel was the one protection of the temple, 
and its builder had thus securely fortified its tower of defence. 

The extent of the city is moderate, its circuit being about forty 
furlongs’, to give a rough estimate. And the arrangement of its 
towers and of the thoroughfares which pass out between them 
reminds one of a theatre, the resemblance extending to the cross-streets 
which are seen, some below, and some above, in the usual manner 
[of a theatre]*. For the ground is irregular, as the city is built 


- 


οβ 


1 Apparently the high priest is meant (cf. § 122). 

2 So Timochares (Eus., P. Z., 452b). Hecataeus (Ios., cont. Ap., I, 197), 
whom pseudo-Aristeas is probably following in this description, says the 
cireuit was “ about fifty furlongs (or stadia),” 

3. Reading εἰθισμένως, an emendation suggested by Dr. Redpath, and 
regarding καὶ φαινομένων... ἐπάνωθεν as parenthetical ; εἰθισμένων of the MSS. 
might mean ‘* which are the most frequented.” With the comparison to 
a theatre οἵ, Encyc. Bibl., II, 2412, art, Jerusalem, ‘‘There is, however, a 
second affluent or head of the central Tyropoeon valley on the W. side 


24 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


106 on ἃ mountain. And there are also stair-ways leading to the cross- | 


107 


108 


streets. For some persons take their way along the higher level, 
and others underneath, ‘the distinction in the means of journeying 
being chiefly made’ for the sake of those who are undergoing the 
usual purifications, to prevent them from coming into contact with 
any forbidden thing. 

And it was not without reason that the original founders built 
the city of convenient proportions, but from a wise insight. For 
as the country is extensive and fair, and some parts, namely those 
in Samaria socalled, and those adjoining the country of the Idu- 
maeans, are level plain, while other parts are mountainous, namely 
those adjoining the country of Judaea, the inhabitants must? devote 
their unremitting attention to agriculture and the care of the soil, 
in order that the mountain-dwellers also may thereby obtain 
a fair crop. And in this way cultivation of every sort is carried 
on and an abundant harvest reaped throughout the whole of the 
district above-mentioned. On the other hand, it has been the fate 


of its main course—a kind of dell or theatre-shaped depression extending 
westwards,” a depression which would face a spectator looking westwards 
from the Temple Mount, where the writer of our letter professes to be 
standing. Strabo employs the same comparison in his description of 
Jericho (763 Ἰερικοῦς δ᾽ ἐστὶ πεδίον κύκλῳ περιεχόμενον ὀρεινῇ τινι καί που 
καὶ θεατροειδῶς πρὸς αὐτὸ κεκλιμένῃ), and it is perhaps noteworthy that in 
the same chapter he has the word διαβάθραι of the scaling-ladders used by 
Pompey against Jerusalem. The διεξόδοι (the main streets leading out of 
the city) and the διόδοι (cross-streets) seem to be distinguished: for the 
former cf. Matt. xxii. g τὰς διεξόδους τῶν ὁδῶν, and for the large number of 
the latter cf. the added words in the LXX of Jer. ii. 28 καὶ κατ᾽ ὀριθμὸν 
διόδων τῆς Ἱερουσαλὴμ ἔθυον τῇ Βάαλ. ‘Jerusalem, like other ancient cities, 
was probably divided into quarters by main streets that passed out to the 
country through gates... The principal streets must from the nature of 
the ground have run from north to south, and these must have been 
connected by cross-streets, forming insulae, which were no doubt inter- 
sected by numberless narrow winding lanes” (Smith, Dict. Bibl.*, I, ii. 1593). 
With the word ἀνάκλασις (bending back) we may perhaps compare the 
statement of the same writer that the northern and southern outliers of 
the Mount of Olives ‘‘bend round slightly towards the city, and give the effect 
of ‘standing round about Jerusalem’” (ibid., 1587). 

1 The meaning is doubtful. Wendland, reading διεστηκυίας, interprets 
the passage ‘ especially if they have a long journey to make.” 

2 Restored by conjecture, some words having been lost in the MSS. 
But it is doubtful if Judaea would be used in this restricted sense, and 
Wendland’s reading “namely those in the centre” is perhaps nearer 
the mark. 














TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 25 


of all large and consequently prosperous cities to be thickly populated 
themselves, while they neglect the country, as the thoughts of every 
one are bent on enjoyment, and all men have a natural propensity 

to pleasure’, And this is what happened to Alexandria, a city which r1og 
surpasses all others in size and prosperity. For the country folk 

by migrating to the town and making a long stay there brought the 
tillage of the soil to alow ebb. And so the king, to prevent them 110 
from making a stay, ordered that their visits should not exceed 
twenty days: and he likewise gave written injunctions to the officials, 
that if it were necessary to summon any such persons [to town], they © 
should decide their cases within five days. And as he considered 111 
the matter one of great importance, he established judges with their 
subordinates in every district®, that so the tillers of the soil and 
their directors might not, while making private gain, diminish the 
granaries of the city, I refer to the proceeds of agriculture’, 


1 Cf. Aristot., Eth. N., ii. 8. 8 οἷον αὐτοὶ μᾶλλον πεφύκαμεν πρὸς τὰς ἡδονάς, 
διὸ εὐκατάφοροί ἐσμεν μᾶλλον πρὸς ἀκολασίαν ἢ πρὸς κοσμιότητα. 

2 Κατὰ νομούς (the technical name for the districts into which Egypt 
was divided), not κατὰ vépous. 

* The agricultural class are to be kept on the land and prevented from 
deserting their employment in order to make the large private incomes 
which they could acquire by setting up business in the city. The meaning 
of προστάται (?directors or agents) is doubtful. Possibly we should 
render “the agricultural class who are also the protectors (or backbone) 
of the city,” τῆς πόλεως being taken to refer both to it and to τὰ ταμιεῖα, A 
good deal of light is thrown on the passage by an important papyrus 
document which is assigned to the year 165 B.c. (Paris Papyri, no. 63, 
Notices et Extraits, tom. XVIII, ed. Letronne and Brunet). This document 
contains directions from a superior official in Alexandria to subordinate 
officials explaining the meaning of a previous edict which had been issued 
with regard to agriculture, and had been misunderstood (τῶν πρὸς ταῖς 
πραγματείαις ob κατὰ τὸ βέλτιστον ἐνδεχομένων τὸν τοῦ περὶ THs γεωργίας 
προστάγματος νοῦν). It probably refers to a crisis following a drought, 
and illustrates the importance attaching to the agriculture of the 
country. An explanation of the previous edict is required, because 
some of the military class had, contrary to the intention of the edict, 
been forced to take part in the agricultural labour imposed by it when 
they should have been exempted. Town and country are contrasted as 
in Aristeas. The subordinate officials have ludicrously (παιδαριώδη) sup- 
posed that the citizen class already laden, day and night, with the burden 
of the public services (τοὺς ἐν τῇ πόλει καὶ διὰ νυκτὸς καὶ δι᾿ ἡμέρας ἐν ταῖς 
λειτουργίαις καταπονουμένους) were to be forced to till the ground. Many 
words and phrases in Aristeas find illustration in this papyrus. With 
δι’ ἐγγράπτων διαστολὰς ἔδωκεν cf. in the Papyrus καθότι προδιεστάλμεθα, 
διεστάλμεθα (col. 7), and τηλικούτων διαστολῶν γεγονυίων ὑμῖν καὶ ἐνοπίοις (sic) 


26 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


112 We have been led into this digression by Eleazar's admirable 
exposition to us of the principles to which we have referred. Their 
industry in agriculture is indeed great. For their country is thickly 
planted with olive trees, and is rich in cereal produce and pulse, 
in vines also and honey in abundance; fruit trees of other kinds 
and palms are beyond reckoning with them. And there are cattle 

113 in abundance of all sorts, and rich pastures for them. And so they 
rightly recognized that the [rural] districts needed a dense population, 
and they constructed the city and the villages in correct proportions. 

114 And a great mass of spices, precious stones, and gold is conveyed 
by the Arabs into the district. For the country, besides being suited 
for cultivation, is also adapted for commerce, and the city is skilled in 
many arts, and has no lack of any wares that are carried across 

115 the sea. For it has havens well situated which supply its needs— 
namely, that at Ascalon, and Joppa, and Gaza, as well as Ptolemais 
which was founded by the king’. And it holds a central position 
as regards these places, and is not far distant from them. Thus the 
country enjoys everything in plenty, being well watered on every 

116 side and securely enclosed. And round it there flows the Jordan 
so-called, a river which never runs dry. The country originally 
embraced not less than sixty million acres (although subsequently 
the neighbouring peoples encroached upon it), so that six hundred 
thousand men became possessors of lots of a hundred acres each” 


καὶ διὰ γραμμάτων (col. 2, 35). With πρὸ πολλοῦ ποιούμενος (of the importance 
which the king attached to agriculture), cf. (col. 6, 185) mpd πάντων γὰρ 
ἡγησάμενοι τὴν περὶ τοῦ μέρους τούτου σπουδήν (of the same). It may also he 
noted, in connexion with the word προστάται in Aristeas, that the verb 
προστῆναι is twice used in the papyrus, meaning apparently ‘‘to super- 
intend” or “see to” agricultural work. On the χρηματισταί (or circuit- 
judges) see the Turin Papyri, ed. Peyron, p. 94. 

11,6. Ptolemy Philadelphus, The writer is correct in implying that the 
place received its name of Ptolemais from Ptolemy II (Schiirer, Geschichte*, 
II, 112). Its earlier name was Acco. It is pointed out that Joppa did not 
fall into the hands of the Jews until after 146 B.c., when it was taken by 
Jonathan, and shortly after finally secured by Simon (1 Mace. x. 76; xiv. 
5, 34): Gaza did not belong to the Jews till it was taken by Alexander 
Jannaeus about 96 B.c., while Ascalon and Ptolemais never formed part of 
their territory. In view of the error with regard to the two places last 
named, it is impossible to draw any inference as to the date of the work 
from this passage. Wendland, on account of the allusion to Gaza, dates 
the letter after 96 B.c. 

2 The text is doubtful. Two MSS. read ὑπέβησαν for ἐπέβησαν, and 
Wendland accordingly translates ‘‘(when) the neighbouring peoples 
retired” (i.e. were gradually driven: back by the Israelites), but it is 








TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 27 


And the river, like the Nile, is swollen about the time of harvest', 


and irrigates a large part of the land. But the former discharges 117 


its waters into another river in the district of the people of Ptole 
mais”, while the latter empties itself into the sea. And there are 
other so-called brooks flowing down [into the plain] and embracing 
the parts about Gaza and the region of Azotus. And surrounded as 
the country is by natural defences, invasion is difficult and im- 
practicable for large numbers, because the passes are narrow, being 
flanked by steep cliffs and deep defiles, and the whole mountain-range 
_ which surrounds the entire country is of a rugged character. 

It was further reported that in former days there were copper 
and iron mines in the neighbouring mountains of Arabia. But the 
working of these ceased at the time of the Persian rule, as the over- 
seers of those days spread a false report that the working of them was 
unprofitable and expensive, in order to prevent the country from 
being spoiled for the sake of the mining of the aforesaid places, and 
possibly taken out of their hands as a consequence of the Persian 
overlordship, while by the help of the false report which they had 
spread they found a pretext for entering the district ὅ, 


difficult, with that rendering, to understand the contrast between κατὰ τὸ 
ἀρχαῖον and μετέπειτα. The number 600,000 is taken from Exod. xii. 37 
(the number of Israelites who journeyed from Egypt) ; ef. xxxix. 3 LXX, 
Numb. xi.21. For ἑκατονταρούροις we must read ἑκατοντάρουροι as Mahafty 
pointed out. The word, ‘fa hundred-acre man,” is frequently used in 
the Petrie Papyri of the veterans to whom lots of land in the Fayyum 
were assigned by Ptolemy 11. 

1 Cf. Joshua iii. 15. 

3 Such seems to be the meaning; ‘‘ the district of Ptolemais” is referred 
to in 1 Macc. x. 39. It is useless to attempt to explain the writer’s 
geographical errors. 

8 The meaning of this section is obscure. There is a passage in Agathar- 
chides (second half of the second century B.c.) in his work on the 
Erythraean Sea which appears to have some relation to it. Agatharchides 
describes certain gold mines on the confines of Egypt and Ethiopia 
(Diodorus says they were on the borders of Egypt, Arabia, and Ethiopia), 
the working of which ceased partly owing to the Persian rule: εὕρηται 
μὲν γὰρ ὑπὸ τῶν πρώτων τοῦ τόπου βασιλέων τῶν μετάλλων ἡ φύσις, διέλιπε 
δὲ ἐνεργοῦσα, πότε μὲν Αἰθιόπων ἐπὶ τὴν Αἴγυπτον πλήθους συνελθόντος .... 
πότε δὲ Μήδων καὶ Περσῶν ἐπικρατησάντων (Miiller, Geog. Graec. Min., I, 128, 
§ 29). This description is repeated by Diodorus, III, 12 ff. 


118 


28 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


[ELEAZAR TAKES LEAVE OF THE TRANSLATORS.] 


I have now given thee, dear brother Philocrates, such a summary 
description of these matters as was necessary. The story of the 
translation we will tell in the sequel. Well, the high priest selected 
the men of the best character and the highest culture, such as one 
would expect from their noble parentage. They were men who had 
not only acquired proficiency in Jewish literature, but who had also 
122 given profound study to that of the Greeks. And for this reason 

they were well qualified to be sent on embassies, and undertook this 
office whenever occasion required. And they possessed a great genius 
for conferences and discussions bearing on the law. They cultivated 
the due mean, the best of courses', and while they abjured a harsh 
and uncouth disposition, they were likewise above conceit and the 
assuming of an air of superiority over others, and in conversation 
they condescended? to listen and to give a suitable reply to every 
question. And this bearing they all observed, and it was in such 
conduct that they most desired to outstrip each other, being all 
123 worthy of their leader and of his virtue. And one might see how 
they loved Eleazar, in their unwillingness to be torn from him, 
and he them. For not only did he write to the king on the subject 
of their safe return, but he also earnestly besought Andreas to work’ 
[for the same object], entreating us to assist to the best of our power. 
124 And although we promised to give good heed* to his wishes, he said 
that he was deeply distressed, for he knew how the king in his love of 
goodness considered it the greatest of privileges, wherever he heard 
of any one excelling in culture and wisdom, to send to fetch him 
125 to his court. Indeed, I have been told of a wise saying of his, that 
by having about his person just and prudent men he would possess 
the greatest defence for his kingdom, as friends unreservedly offer 
advice for one’s best interests. And these qualities were assuredly 
126 present in the men whom Eleazar was now sending. And he assever- 
ated on oath that he would not let the men go, if it were any private 
interest of his own which impelled him so to do, but it was only 
for the common benefit to all his countrymen that he was sending 


12 


μι 


1 With this praise of ‘‘the mean” (τὸ μέσον κατάστημα) οἵ, ὃ 223 πλὴν 
ν πᾶσι μετριότης καλόν, and § 256 μετριοπαθῆ καθεστῶτα (in the answer to the 
question, What is philosophy?). The writer clearly favours the Peri- 
patetic school. There is an Aristotelian element in his vocabulary. 

2 Reading παραδεδεγμένοι. 

3 Wendland ‘and us,” reading καὶ ἡμᾶς for ποιῆσαι. 

* Reading εὖ φροντίσειν (Wendland), 








TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 29 


them. For [he added] a good life consisted in the observance of 
the laws, and this end was attained much more by oral communication 
than by reading. From these and similar observations it was clear 
what were his feelings towards them, 


[ELEAZAR’S DISCOURSE ON THE LAW.] 


And it is worth while briefly’ to mention the explanations given 
by him in reply to our inquiries. For I believe that most men have 
some curiosity about the regulations in the law” concerning meats 
and drinks and the animals which are considered unclean. Well, 
when we inquired why, although there was only a single creation, 
some things are considered unclean for food, and some even to the touch 
(for the law is scrupulous in most things, but in these matters it 
is excessively * scrupulous), he began his reply as follows :— 

“Thou seest (said he) the powerful influence of ordinary intercourse 
and association, since through associating with evil persons men 
become perverted and are rendered miserable all their life long, 
whereas, if they consort with the wise and prudent, they pass from 
ignorance and enter on a better life. Our lawgiver, then, in the first 
place defined the principles of* piety and righteousness, and gave 
detailed instructions concerning these, not merely in the form of 
prohibitions but also by positive commands, and showed clearly the 


127 


harmful effects [of disobedience] and the visitations sent by Ged upon » 


the guilty. In the very first place of all he taught that God is one, 
and that his power is made manifest through all things, every place 
being filled with his sovereignty, and that none of the things done in 
secret by men on earth is hidden from him, but whatever a man does, 
aye and that which is yet to be, is manifest in his sight. When he 
had carefully elaborated these points and made them plain, he pro- 
ceeded to show that even if a man should but think of acting basely, 
let alone the doing of the wrong, he could not be hid: thus throughout 
the whole of the law he displayed the power of God. Such then was 
the preface with which he opened, and he showed that all other men 
except our nation consider that there are many gods, although they 


7 Reading διὰ βραχέων. 

2 Cf. Lev. xi; Deut. xiv. 3-20. Compare also the treatment of the same 
subject in the Epistle of Barnabas, § ro. 

* The reading is doubtful. Πάλιν, the reading of Eusebius and most 
MSS., may be right. Cf. its use in compounds like παλιμμήκης, ““ doubly 
long,” παλίνσκιος, ‘thickly shaded,” 

* Or perhaps ‘‘ enjoined,” 


30 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


are themselves far more powerful than those whom they vainly 
135 reverence. For they make effigies of stone and wood', and assert 
that they are images of those who discovered something useful for 
their life, and these they worship, although their senselessness is 
136 obvious. For that any one should be a god in virtue of this, namely 
a discovery, is altogether foolish?: for the inventors but took certain 
created things and put them together and exhibited them in a useful 
137 form, but they did not create the substances themselves: therefore it 
is idle and vain to deify men like themselves. Moreover, there are 
still at the present day many men more inventive and more learned 
than the men of yore, and yet they would never think of worshipping 
them. And the men who have concocted and created these fables 
138 consider that they are the wisest of the Greeks. For what further 
need is there to speak of the rest who are quite sunk in vanity, 
Egyptians and the like, who have put their trust in wild beasts and 
most of the creeping things and vermin, and worship these, and offer 
139 sacrifice to these, whether alive or dead? When, therefore, the law- 
giver, who was fitted by God to know all things, had in his wisdom 
considered everything, he fenced us about with impregnable palisades 
and with walls of iron, to the intent that we should in no way 
have dealings with any of the other nations, pure in body and 
mind, released from vain ideas, reverencing the one Almighty God 
140 above the entire creation. And hence it comes that the priests 
who rule the Egyptians and have closely investigated many things 
and been conversant with the world’, call us ‘men of God,’ a designa- 
tion which does not belong to the rest of mankind, but to him only 
who reverences the true God: but they are men of meat and drink 
141 and raiment *, for their whole nature finds its solace in these things. 
But with our countrymen these things are counted of no worth, but 
their reflections throughout their whole life concern the sovereignty 
142 of God. To the intent, then, that we should not become perverted 
through joining in the pollutions of any® or consorting with base 
persons, he fenced us round on all sides with laws of purification in 
matters of meat and drink and handling and hearing and seeing. 
143 For, speaking generally, all these, if viewed in the light of their 
inward meaning, are alike, being directed by a single power, and in 


1 The treatment of idol-worship and its origin should be compared with 
Wisdom xiii-xv. 

4 Reading εἴ τι and ἀνόητον. 

> Or ‘with literature,” reading γραμμάτων for πραγμάτων (Diels). 

* This, not ‘‘shelter” or “ housing,” is certainly the meaning of σκέπη 
here (cf. the use of σκέπασμα in τ Tim. vi. 8). 

° Or ‘through intercourse with any,” reading συμμισγόμενοι (Wend.). 











TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 31 


every detail there is a profound reason for the things which we abstain 
from using and those of which we make use. And, to give an example, 
I will explain my meaning to thee by touching on one or two points. 
For thou must not be led to follow the rejected view that it was out 
of regard for mice and weasels? or such creatures that Moses drew up 
this code of laws with such exceeding care: no, all these ordinances 
have been solemnly made to promote holy meditation and to build up 
character for the furtherance of righteousness. For all the winged 
creatures, of which we partake, are tame and distinguished by cleanly 
habits, using wheat and pulse for their sustenance, such as doves, 
turtle-doves, locusts?, partridges, geese, and the like. But as touching 
the forbidden winged creatures, thou wilt find that they are wild and 
carnivorous and that they use the power which they possess to oppress 
the remainder of their kind, and that they get their sustenance by 
preying on the aforesaid tame creatures with violence: and not on 
these only, but they also carry off lambs and kids, and do violence to 
dead men and living. By these creatures, then, which he called 
unclean *, the lawgiver signified that those for whom the laws were 
ordained, must be inwardly righteous and oppress no one through 
confidence in their own strength, nor carry off anything by violence, 
but must direct their lives by righteous motives, even as the tame 
creatures among the aforesaid winged things consume the pulse that 
grows on the earth, and do not exercise oppression by destroying 
their kin *, 

“By such injunctions, then, the lawgiver has taught persons of 
understanding to note that they must be just and do nothing by 
violence, nor oppress others through confidence in their own strength. 
For whereas it is not meet even to touch the aforesaid creatures by 
reason of their several natures, what strict precautions must we not 
take to prevent the character from degenerating to a like condition ? 
He has, then, set forth all these rules as to what is permitted us in 
the case of these and the other creatures by way of allegory. For the 
parting of the hoof and the dividing of the claws ὅ symbolize discrimi- 
nation in directing every action to a good end: for the strength 
of the whole body, in order to display itself in action, is dependent 
upon the arms® and legs. He constrains us, then, to do everything 
with discrimination and with a view to righteousness, as he signifies? 
by these symbols. He further [signifies] that we are distinct from 


1 Ley. xi. 29. 2 Lev. xi. 22. 3 Deut. xiv. 19. 

* Perhaps we should read, with Eusebius, ‘ by destroying the inferior 
or kindred creatures.” 

5 Lev. xi. 3 ff. ; Deut. xiv. 6 ff. δ Lit. ‘‘shoulders,”’ 

* The text is doubtful: I read ὃ σημειοῦται. 


144 


145 


146 


148 


149 


32 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


152 all men. For most other men defile themselves by promiscuous 
unions, working great unrighteousness, and whole countries and cities 
pride themselves on these things. For not only do they prostitute 
their males', but they even defile mothers and daughters. But we are 

153 expressly kept apart from these things”. He has further characterized 
the possessor of the aforesaid gift of discrimination as possessing also 
the gift of memory. For ‘“‘all things which part the hoof and chew 

154 the cud*” to thoughtful minds clearly indicate memory. For the 
chewing of the cud* is nothing else but a calling to mind of one’s 
life and existence *: for he considers that life exists by taking food. 

155 And therefore he gives exhortation by this scripture also where he 
says thus, ‘Thou shalt well remember the Lord who wrought in thee 
the great and wonderful things*.” For, when clearly perceived, they 
do appear great and glorious, in the first place the construction of 
the body, and the means for digesting the food, and the distinction 

156 between the several members: but much more do the orderly arrange- 
ment of the senses, the operation and invisible movement of the mind, 
and its rapidity in suiting its action to each several occasion and its 

157 discovery of the arts bear the marks of an infinite wisdom’. And 
therefore he exhorts us to bear in mind, how that the aforesaid things 
are both created and preserved by the power of God. For he has 
appointed every time and place for the continual remembrance of 

158 God, the Almighty and the Preserver. For instance, in our meat and 
drink he bids us first to offer our sacrifice [of prayer] and not till then 
to partake of food. In our clothing, too, he has given us a distinctive 
token to bring [these things] to remembrance *. Likewise also he has 
commanded us to set the oracles upon our gates and doors®, that God 

159 may be had in remembrance ; and he expressly orders that the sign be 


1 Or, with Eusebius, “ have intercourse with males.” 

2 Διαστέλλειν seems here to combine the two senses of ‘‘ to distinguish ”’ 
and ‘‘to command,” with a reference to Lev. xviii. 6 ff. Wendland notes 
that the Egyptian custom of marriage with a sister is purposely passed 
over without remark, 

* Lev. xi. 3. 

* Cf. with the following allegorical explanation the Epistle of Barnabas 
10, 11: Philo, De Concupiscentia 5 : Theodoret, Quaest. in Lev. xi. 189. 

5 Or “constitution,” “structure.” 

6 A combination of Deut. vii. 18 and x. οἵ LXX, ἐν col of the latter verse 
being here interpreted as meaning “in thy body.” Cf. a similar eulogy 
of the human anatomy in Clem., Recog. VIII, 29 ff. 

7 Literally ‘“‘ contain an infinite manner.” 

* Cf. for these ‘“‘ mementoes ” in the dress of an Israelite Schiirer Ὁ, IT, 
483 ff. (Engl. trans, II, 2, 111 ff.). 

® Deut. vi. 7 ff. 





j 








TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 33 


bound round upon the hands, clearly indicating that every action 


must be righteously performed with a remembrance of our condition, 
and above all with a fear of God. And he bids men when lying down 
and when rising up to meditate on the things which God has created, 
considering not in speech only but also in thought the change and 
the impression which passes over them when they fall asleep, and 
the manner of their waking, and how divine, as it were, and incom- 
prehensible is the interchange of these states’. Thou hast now been 


shown the exceeding wisdom of the saying ? concerning discrimination 


and memory, for so we have expounded the parting of the hoof and 
the chewing of the cud. For the laws have not been made at random 
and capriciously, but for the sake of truth and to point out where 
right reason lies. For by his detailed injunctions concerning meat 
and drink and touch, he bids us do and hear nothing at random, and 
not by availing ourselves of the overbearing power of speech have 
recourse to unrighteousness. And in the case of the vermin the same 
principle may be discovered. For the habits of weasel and mouse ὃ 
and of all the like animals expressly named are injurious. For mice 
mar and injure everything not only to get themselves food, but also 
in such a way that anything which they have started injuring becomes 
utterly useless for man. And the weasel tribe is unique, for beside 
the aforenamed habit it has a characteristic which defiles* it: it 
conceives through its ears and gives birth through its mouth®. And 
therefore the like habit of men is unclean; that is to say, whenever 
they have embodied in speech the things which they have received 
through the ear and involved others in ills, they are guilty of gross 
uncleanness, and are themselves utterly tainted with the pollution of 
their impiety. And your king rightly puts such men to death, as we 
are informed.”—And I said, “I suppose that thou speakest of the 
informers: for them indeed he unfailingly submits to tortures and 
painful deaths.”’—And he replied: “ Yes, I speak of them. For the 
practice of lying in wait for men’s destruction is unholy. And our law 
forbids us to injure any whether by word or deed. I have now given 
a brief summary of these matters, and have shown further how every 
regulation has been made with a view to righteousness, and nothing 


1 Cf. §§ 213-16 and 3 Mace. v. 11. 

? We should probably read εὐλογίας, taking the word to mean ‘‘a good 
saying ” (cf. εὐλογεῖν = εὖ λέγειν, § 249). Wendland, adopting this reading, 
would render ‘ reasonableness.” 

5 Lev. Xi. 29. 

* Wendland would correct to μολυντικόν, But λυμαίνεσθαι may bear 
this sense, e. g. in 4 Mace. xviii. 8. 

5 Cf. Ep. Barn. X, δ. 


160 


161 


162 


167 


168 


34 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


has been set down in the scripture at random or of a legendary char- 
acter+, but [all is] to the end that throughout our whole life we may 
in our actions exercise righteousness towards all men, remembering 

169 the sovereignty of God. So then every single word concerning meats 
and the unclean creeping things and vermin tends towards righteous- 
ness and righteous dealings between man and man.” 

tvo To my mind, then, he appeared? to make an excellent defence in 
every particular. He added, moreover, with regard to the calves and 
rams and he-goats that are offered, that men must take these from 
the herds and flocks and sacrifice tame animals, and nothing that 
is wild, that so the offerers of the sacrifices may be conscious of no 
arrogance, while they take to heart the true meaning of the legislator. 
For he that presents the sacrifice makes an offering of the whole 

171 disposition of his soul. I consider, then, that his discourse on these 
matters was worth repeating; and therefore have I been led on, 
knowing thy love of learning, dear Philocrates, to explain to thee 
the solemnity and the inner meaning of the law. 


[RECEPTION OF THE TRANSLATORS AT ALEXANDRIA.] 


172 So Eleazar, when he had offered sacrifice and selected the men and 
made ready many gifts for the king, sent us on our way with a strong 
173 escort *. And when we reached Alexandria, the king was informed of 
our arrival. And Andreas and I, being admitted to the court, gave 
friendly greetings to the king and delivered the letter from Eleazar. 
174 And, since he attached great importance to the reception of the dele- 
gates, he gave orders to dismiss all the other officials and to summon 
175 the men. And this proceeding excited universal surprise, because the 
custom is that those who come on official business* gain access to 
the king’s presence on the fifth day, while envoys from kings or 
eminent cities were hardly admitted to the court within thirty days, | 
But since he considered the new comers worthy of higher honour, 
and rightly estimated the eminent position of him who sent them, he 
dismissed those whom he considered superfluous, and remained walk- 
176 ing to and fro, waiting to greet them on their arrival. And when 
they entered with the gifts which had been sent and the precious ® 
parchments, whereon was inscribed the law in gold in the Jewish 


1 Read μυθωδῶς. 

3 Reading ἐνομίζετο : the MSS. have ἐνόμιζε, “he thought.” 

3. Literally ‘‘ with much security.” 4 Reading χρηματισμόν. 

5 Possibly διαφόροις has come into. the text through dittography of 
διφθέραις. Josephus has no equivalent for it. 














TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 35 


characters, the material being wonderfully prepared, and the joining 
of the several leaves being rendered imperceptible, the king, when he 
saw the men, made inquiry concerning the books. And when they 
had taken the rolls out of their coverings and unrolled the leaves, the 
king after pausing for a long while atid making obeisance some seven 
times, said, “I thank you, friends, and him that sent you still more, 
but most of all do I thank God, whose oracles these are.” And when 
all with one accord and with one voice, both the tiew comers and the 
bystanders, exclaimed, ‘ Well spoken, O king,” he was moved to tears 
- out of the fullness of his joy. For the tension of mind and the exceed- 
ing greatness of the honour where our achievements are successful 
constrain to tears. And when he had ordered them to put the 
rolls! back in their places, then at length did he greet the men 
and say, “It was right, O God-fearing men, first to pay due homage to 
those treasures, for the sake of which I sent for you, and thereafter 
to extend the right hand to you: for that reason have I done this 
first. But I have regarded this day of your arrival as a great day, 
and from year to year shall it be held in honour all our life long *. 
Moreover it happens that our naval victory over Antigonus fell on the 
same day*®. And therefore also it shall be my pleasure to sup with 
you to-day. And all things (he added) of which your customs allow 
you to partake shall be duly prepared for you, and for me with you.” 
And when they had expressed their gratitude, he ordered that the 
best chambers should be given to them in the neighbourhood of the 
citadel, and the banquet made ready. 

So-Nicanor, the lord high steward ‘, summoned Dorotheus, who had 





178 


179 


80 


- 


181 


182 





1 Apparently five rolls or volumes (τεύχη), each containing one book of 
the Pentateuch. 

3 Philo tells us (de vita Mos. II, 7, t40 M.) that in his day there was an 
annual festival on the island of Pharos to commemorate the translation. 

8 Ptolemy Philadelphus was defeated by Antigonus Gonatas in the 
naval battle of Cos (circa 2608.¢.), and Egypt lost the command of the sea 
for several years until Ptolemy defeated Antigonus at Andros about the 
year 245 B.c. See Mahaffy, Emp. of the Ptolemies, pp. 150, 171, 490; Droy- 
sen, Hist. de V Hellénisme, III, 390. Wendland thinks that the defeat of 
Ptolemy at Cos has been transformed by Aristeas into a victory. More 
probably the victory of Andros is referred to. See J. 0. R., XIV, 336. 
Both battles took place long after the death of Demetrius Phalereus. 

* Reading dpyxedéarpos for dpxinrpos, a conjecture made by Letronne. 
Josephus has 6 ἐπὶ τῆς τῶν ἐένων ἀποδοχῆς τεταγμένος. The word dpyedéarpos 
is found on an inscription (6. I. G., 4678); the title ἐδέατρος, originally 
borne by an official who tasted the dishes before the king, was borrowed 
by Alexander from Persia. See Lumbroso, Recherches sur Véconomie polit, de 
l ’ Egypte, 205. 

D2 


36 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


the charge of guests from this nation, and ordered him to make 
preparation for everything. For such was the arrangement decreed 
by the king, and it may still be seen in operation. To every state 
which has its special usages in matters of drink and meat and in its 
mode of reclining, was there a corresponding official in charge: and 
then, whenever any persons visited the reigning king, preparations 
were made in accordance with their customs, in order that they might 
experience no discomfort but live at their ease. And this happened 

183 in the case of these men. For Dorotheus, the patron of visitors from 
this nation, was a most attentive man. He laid out all the coverings 
for the couches which were in his keeping and were set apart for 
receptions of this kind. And he placed the couches in two rows, 
according to the king’s direction: for he had ordered him to make 
half of the men recline at his [right] hand, and the remainder behind ἢ 
his own couch, neglecting no means of showing them honour. 

184 And when they had taken their places, he ordered Dorotheus to per- 
form the customary rites of all his visitors from Judaea. So he 
dispensed with the services of the sacred heralds and ministers of the 
sacrifices and the others who usually offered the prayers, and requested 
one of cur number, Elisha’, a priest advanced in years, to offer 
a prayer. And he, upstanding, uttered this noteworthy prayer: 

185 “May the Almighty God give thee thy fill, O king, of all the good 
things which he has created, and may he grant thee and thy wife 
and children and them that live in harmony with thee unfailing 

186 enjoyment of them all throughout life!” At these words there was 
a burst of applause with shouting and jubilation lasting for some 
while: and thereafter they betook themselves to the enjoyment of the 
feast spread out before them. All the attendance at table was under- 
taken by the staff of Dorotheus, among whom were royal pages " and 
some of those who held places of honour at the king’s court. 





[THE WISE. ANSWERS OF THE TRANSLATORS.] 


187 And after an interval, when an opportunity presented itself, he 
asked him who occupied the first place at table (they had been 
arranged according to age*), how he should preserve his kingdom 


1 As Wendland points out, a person reclining on his left arm would 
turn his back on those who were placed on his left. 

2 The true reading is preserved by Josephus. The Aristeas MSS. call 
him Eleazar. 

5 See Lumbroso, op. cit., 207 ff. 

* Of. Gen. xliii. 33, and Josephus, Ant., XII, 4, 9 (of a guest at the table 
of Ptolemy Epiphanes) ὑποκατακλίνεται. . , καταφρονηθεὶς ὡς παῖς ἔτι τὴν 
ἡλικίαν ὑπὸ τῶν τοὺς τόπους κατὰ τὴν ἀξίαν διανεμόντων. 

















TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 37 


unimpaired to the last. And he, after a brief pause, replied, “In this 188 


way wilt thou best direct it aright, by imitating the never-ceasing 
forbearance of God. Forif thou usest longsuffering and punishest 
such as deserve punishment with greater forbearance than! is due to 
them, thou wilt turn them from wickedness and lead them to repent- 
ance.” 

And the king praised his reply, and asked the next one how 
he should behave in all his actions®. And he replied that if he 
observed justice towards all men, he would act in all things for his 
best interest, with the conviction that every thought is clear to 
God, and that by beginning with the fear of God, he would never 
be disappointed. 

To him too he gave a cordial recognition, and asked another how 
he could keep his friends like-minded with himself. And he said, 
“Tf they see thee taking great forethought for thy subjects: and this 
thou wilt do by observing how God does good to the human race, in 
that he provides them with health and food and all else in due 
season *,” 

He signified his assent and asked the next, how when he held 
his audiences and sat in judgment, he might obtain a good report 
even from such as failed in their suits. And he said, “ If thou showest 
impartiality to all in thy words, and takest no action against the 
offenders in an overbearing or tyrannical spirit. And this thou wilt 
do if thou beholdest the ordering of God’s ways. The deserving have 
their supplications fulfilled, while to such as fail to obtain them the 
harmful nature of their requests is made known through dreams 
or actions, and God does not smite them according to their sins nor 
according to the greatness of his might, but uses-forbearance.” 

And after highly commending him, he asked his neighbour how he 
might be invincible in warfare. And he said, “If he did not put 
his trust in numbers or forces, but always entreated God to direct his 
enterprises, while he conducted all in a spirit of justice.” 

He approved his reply, and asked the next one how he might 
inspire terror into his enemies. And he said, ‘If while possessing an 
abundant supply of arms and forces, he recognized that these were 
powerless to produce any lasting and conclusive result: for God also, 


1 Reading, with Schmidt, ἢ καθώς. The word translated ‘‘ punish” 
properly means to feel or pinch birds to see whether they are worth 
buying (Aristoph., Av., 530). With the last words of the section cf. Rom. 
ii. 4 τὸ χρηστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ εἰς μετάνοιάν σε ἄγει. 

? Or, reading ἕκαστα κάλλιστα With Wendland, ‘‘do everything for the 
best.” 

— § Cf. § 259: also Ps. oxly. 15, civ. 27, Acts xiv. 17, xvii. 25. 


μ 


gl 


μι 


92 


193 


194 


38 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


by granting a reprieve and making but a display of his sovereignty ἢ, 
instils terror into every breast.” 

195 He praised him, and inquired of the next what would be the best 
thing for his life. And he replied, “To recognize that God is supreme 
over all, and that in our best actions it is not we ourselves who direct 
our resolves aright, but God in his sovereignty perfects and guides 
the actions of us all.” 

196 He admitted the wisdom of his words, and asked the next one how 
he could preserve all his possessions unimpaired, and finally deliver 
them to his descendants in the same condition. And he said, “ By 
continual prayer to God to give thee good designs in thy under- 
takings, and by warning thy descendants not to be dazzled by their 
high station or wealth, since it is God who bestows these gifts, and it 
is not on their own account that they have pre-eminence over all.” 

197 He gave his assent thereto, and inquired of him who followed how 
he should bear what befell with equanimity. And he replied, “ By 
taking thought that all men are fashioned by God to partake of the 
greatest evils, as well as good things, and it is not possible for a man 
to escape from experiencing them. But God gives a good courage, 
and one must beseech him [for the same].” 

198 He gave him cordial thanks, and said that all their answers had 
been good. ‘‘And when I have questioned yet one more I will cease 
for the present, in order that we may turn to enjoyment and take our 
ease. And in the following six days I will gain some further know- 

199 ledge from each in turn of those who remain.” Thereupon he asked 
the man, “What is the true aim of courage ?” And he said, “To 
execute in the hour of danger, in accordance with one’s plan, resolu- 
tions that have been rightly formed. But thy resolutions, O king, are 
good, and are all through God’s grace fulfilled to thy profit.” 

200 And when they had all signified their assent with loud applause, 

the king said to the philosophers, many of whom were present, 

“T think that the virtue of these men is extraordinary and their 

wisdom profound, seeing that, with such questions propounded to 

them, they have on the spur of the moment given suitable replies, 
while they all take God for the starting-point of their words.” And 

Menedemus, the philosopher of Eretria’, said, ‘“ True, O king: for, 


20 


μ᾿ 


1 Reading τὰ τῆς δυναστείας with Wendland. He suggests that the want 
of exactness in the parallel between human and divine relations, here 
and elsewhere, may be due to the writer having before him some older 
collection of sayings, to each of which he has appended, not always very 
skilfully, a theological termination. Cf, with the section Wisdom ΧΙ]. 
16-18. 

* Menedemus is said to have died at the court of Antigonus Gonatas 











TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 39 


since the universe is ruled by providence, and these men are right in 
holding that man is a creature of God, it follows that all power and 
beauty of speech has its beginning in God.” 

The king assented thereto, and the speeches came to a close, 

festivity taking their place. And when evening drew in, the banquet 
broke up. 
- On the following day the guests again took their places, and the 
banquet proceeded in the same order. And, when the king thought 
that the time had come to put some inquiries to the men, he questioned 
those who were placed next to the answerers of the previous day. 
He began the discussion with the eleventh (ten having been questioned 
on the previous day), and when silence was established, inquired how 
he could continue to be rich. And after a brief interval he to whom 
the question was addressed said, “ΠῚ he did nothing unworthy of his 
empire or wantonly, and did not expend money on empty and vain 
things, but! by acts of kindness drew his subjects to wish him well: 
for God is the cause of good to all men, and his example must be 
followed.” 

The king commended him, and asked of another how he should 
adhere to the truth. To this he replied, ‘ By recognizing that lying 
brings great disgrace to all men, but chiefly to kings. De as they 
have power to do what they will, what object have they for falsehood ? 
And thou must further take to heart, O king, that God is a lover 
of the truth.” 

He gave this reply his hearty approval, and turning his gaze 
[to another] said, “ What is the teaching of wisdom ?” And the next 
one replied, “ As thou desirest that evils should not befall thee *, but to 
partake of all that is good, thou shouldst act in this spirit to thy 
subjects and to offenders, and shouldst more gently admonish such 
as are virtuous : for God leads all men by gentleness.” 

He commended him, and asked of his neighbour how he might 
be humane. And he said, “ By considering after how long a time 
and through what great sufferings the human race comes to maturity, 
aye and to the birth. And therefore it is wrong to punish with 
slight provocation, or to subject men to injuries, while one recognizes 
that human life consists of pains and penalties. Thou wilt therefore, 
on reviewing everything, be disposed to mercy: for God also is 
merciful.” 


about 277 B.c. It is not known that he ever visited Egypt, and what is 
here recorded of him is doubtless fictitious, 

? Reading τοὺς δὲ ὑποτεταγμένους, and δαπάνην just before. 

* Cf. the Jewish (negative) form of the golden rule (Matt. vii. 12) e. δ. 
in the Didache, i. 2 ὅσα ἐὰν θελήσῃς μὴ γίνεσθαί σοι, Kai σὺ ἄλλῳ μὴ ποίει. 


202 


203 


204 


205 


206 


204 


208 


40 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


209 With a word of approval to him he inquired of the next in order, 
“ What is the most essential characteristic of kingship?” “To keep 
oneself incorruptible,” he replied ; ‘‘ to be sober for the greater part of 
one’s life, to hold righteousness in high esteem, and to make persons 
with these qualities one’s friends: for God also is a lover of righteous- 
ness.” 

210 He applauded him, and said to the next, “Wherein does piety 
consist?’ And he said, “In the conviction that God is working 
in, and has knowledge of all things at all times, and that no 
unrighteous deed or evil action of man can escape his eye: for as God 
doeth good to the whole world, so wouldst thou, by imitating him, be 
void of offence.” 

211 He signified his assent, and said to the next, “ What is the end 
at which kingship should aim?” And he said, “To govern oneself 
aright, and not to be led by wealth and rank to entertain proud and 
unseemly desires, if thou wouldst reason aright’, For thou hast 
all things at command, and they are as nothing?: but God has need 
of nothing and is gentle withal. And let thy thoughts be as becomes 
a man, and aim not at many things, but at those which suffice for thy 
kingly office.” 

21 He commended him, and asked the next one how his deliberations 
might be for the best. And he replied, “If in everything he continually 
set justice before him, and considered injustice to be the annihilation 
of life: for God also always promises the greatest blessings to the 
just.” 

213 He praised him, and inquired of the next in order how he might be 
free from disturbing thoughts in sleep. And he said, “Thy question 
is hard toanswer. For in sleep we cannot bring our true selves into 
play, but are therein at the mercy of sensations in which reason has 

214 no part. For we have an impression on our minds that we see the 
things which pass before us, but we are unreasoning in supposing that 
we are on ship-board and ranging over the sea, or flying through the 
air and passing to other climes, and doing other such things, which 

215 we then suppose to be really taking place*®. But my decision, so far 
as I may form one, is this. Thou shouldst by every means, O king, 
bring thy words and actions to the test of piety, that so thou mayst 
be conscious that in adhering to the path of virtue thou art not 
deliberately conferring any favour in defiance of reason, nor setting 

216 justice aside by a misuse of thy power. For every man’s mind moves 
in sleep among the same things in which his waking hours are chiefly 


1 The last words are perhaps corrupt. 
4 Wendland conjectures ‘‘ of which thou hast need " (ὅσα δέον). 
3 The text is corrupt. I read ἃ κατὰ ταῦθ᾽ ὑπολαμβάνομεν καθεστάναι. 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 41 


spent, but God directs every thought and action which aims at the 
highest both in waking hours and in sleep’. And therefore art thou 
always encompassed with tranquillity.” 

Him too he extolled, and said to the next one, ‘As thou art the 
tenth to answer, when thy reply has been given, we will betake 
ourselves to the banquet.” And he asked, “ How might we do nothing 
unworthy of ourselves?’ And he said, “ Look ever to thy dignity 
and eminence, in order that thy words and thoughts may be in keep- 
ing therewith, knowing that the thoughts and conversation of all thy 
subjects are concerned with thee. For thou must not appear as 
the least of? the actors, for they look to the part which they must 
assume and suit all their actions thereto: but thou art not acting 
a part, but art king indeed, God having given thee the governorship 
of which thy character renders thee worthy.” 

And when the king had graciously applauded loud and long, they 
exhorted the men to take some rest *. And when the turn of these 
men was ended, they betook themselves to the next portion in the 
order of the banquet. 

On the following day the same order was observed, and when 
the king thought that the time was come to put some inquiries 
to the men, he asked the first of those who yet remained to be 
questioned, “What is the highest form of sovereignty?’ And 
he replied, ‘To be master of oneself and not to be carried away 
by one’s impulses. For all men’s minds have some innate proclivity ; 
most men are naturally inclined to eating and drinking and pleasure, 
while kings in virtue of their high station are bent on the acquisition 
of territory *. But moderation in all things is good. Take what God 
gives and keep it, but desire not what is unattainable.” 

He was pleased with his words, and asked his neighbour how he 
might be free from envy. And he, after a pause, said, “ Chiefly by 
considering how it is God who apportions to all kings their glory and 
great wealth, and that no one by his own power® is king: for all men 
desire to partake of this glory, but they cannot, since it is a gift 
of God.” 


1 I should now read θεὸς δέ (in place of ds δέ of the MSS.) and éypnyo- 
péros, The divine name is never wanting in the concluding words of 
each speaker, and κατευθύνειν elsewhere is used actively and generally of 
the guiding hand of God (cf. § 18 a very similar passage). 

2 Or “inferior to the actors.” 

3 Lit. ‘*to sleep.” Possibly there has been some dislocation in the text, 

* Perhaps (reading «ai for κατά with Wendland) ‘‘ while kings are bent 
on the acquisition of territory and great renown.” 

5 Probably παρ᾽ ἑαυτόν should be read with Wendland, 


[Ὁ 


17 


18 


tb 


[Ὁ] 


20 


42 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


225 He commended the speaker at some length, and asked the next one 
how he should despise his foes. And he replied, ‘‘If thou hast 
exercised goodwill towards all men and formed friendships, thou hast 
no need to fear any man. But to be in high favour with all men 
is the very best of good gifts to receive from God 1.” 

226 He assented thereto, and called upon the next one for a reply to the 
question, how he might retain his glory. And he said, ‘If by kind- 
ness and gracious acts thou showest thyself liberal and bountiful 
to others, thou wilt never have lack of glory; but that the aforesaid 
graces may continue to be thine, thou must always entreat God.” 

227 After a kindly word of praise to him he asked another, “'To whom? 
should we show a studied generosity ?’? And he replied, “ All men 
think that such should be shown to those who are well disposed to us, 
but I am of opinion that a keen and open-handed generosity is owing 
to those who dissent from us, that by these means we may bring them 
over to the path of duty and of their own interest. But one must 
entreat God that this end may be attained, since he rules the minds 
of all men.” 

228 He assented thereto, and called upon the sixth man for a reply 
to the inquiry, “ΤῸ whom should gratitude*® be shown?” And 
he replied, “Τὸ parents at all times, since God has given a very great 
commandment concerning the honour due to parents*. And in the 
second place he sets the relations of friend with friend, calling a friend 
as precious as a man’s own soul®. But thou dost well in making all 
men thy friends.” 

229 He gave him a word of commendation, and inquired of the following 
one, “ What is of like value with beauty?” And he said, “ Piety : 
for this is a beauty of the first quality. And its power is love, for this 
is a gift of God. And this dost thou possess, and therein thou hast all 
blessings comprised.” 

230 He applauded his answer very warmly, and asked of the next, how, 
after a failure, he should regain the esteem which he enjoyed before. 
And he replied, “ Failure for thee is impossible, as thou hast sown thy 
favours broadcast, and these cause goodwill to spring up, which is 
mightier than the strongest armour and affords the greatest protec- 

231 tion. But should any fail, they should no longer do those things 
which occasion their failure, but form friendships and act righteously. 
But to be a doer of good deeds and not of the reverse is a gift of 
God.” 


1 The text appears to be corrupt. I suggest tentatively καὶ καλῶν δώρων. 
_ 3 Reading Πρὸς τίνα with Wendland. 

3 Or ‘“‘kindness,” “ consideration.” 4 Exod, xx. 12, 

5 Deut. xiii. 6 (7 Heb.). 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 43 


Well pleased therewith he asked of the next one, how he might be 
free from grief. And he replied, “ By injuring no one, doing good to 
all, and following after righteousness, since its fruits produce freedom 
from grief. But supplication must be made to God, that unforeseen 
accidents may not spring up to our injury, I mean such as deaths, 
diseases, pains, and the like. But, as thou art pious, doubtless no such 
accident will befall thee.” 

He commended him highly, and asked the tenth man, ‘“‘ What is the 
greatest glory?” And he said, “To honour God, and that not with 
gifts or sacrifices, but with purity in the soul and in the devout con- 
viction that all things are fashioned and directed by God in accord- 
ance with his will. And thou art ever of this mind, as all may see 
from thy actions in the past and in the present,” 

Thereupon the king with a loud voice gave them all a hearty 
welcome and a word of praise, the other guests, especially the 
philosophers, joining in the applause. For these men in their con- 
duct and speech far excelled the philosophers, in that they took God 
for their starting-point. And after this the king proceeded graciously 
to drink their healths. 

On the following day the order of the banquet was as before, and 
when the time seemed opportune to the king, he questioned those 
who came next to the men who had already given replies. Of the 
first he asked, “Can wisdom be taught?” And he replied, “The 
soul is through God’s power so adapted as to accept all that is good 
and to reject what is contrary thereto.” 

He assented, and inquired of the next one, “‘ What contributes most 
to health?” And he said, “Temperance. But this cannot be 
attained unless God dispose the mind thereto.” | 

He gave him a kindly word, and asked of the next, how he should 
pay his debts of gratitude to his parents. And he replied, “ By giving 
them no pain. But this is impossible unless God guides the mind to 
what is best.” 

To him also he gave his assent, and inquired of the next in order, 
how he should become an eager listener. And he replied, ‘“ By 
recognizing that it is to thy profit to know all things, so that by 
selecting some one of the things which thou hast heard, and bringing 
it to bear on an emergency, thou mayst counteract the events of 
critical times ' with God’s guidance: for the fulfilment of men’s actions 
rests with him.” 

He commended him, and inquired of the next how he should avoid 
any action contrary to law. He replied thereto, “If thou wilt recog- 


* Text and meaning are doubtful. 


232 


234 


235 


236 


237 


[Ὁ] 


28 


239 


240 


44 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


nize that God gave the lawgivers their ideas to the end that men’s 
lives might be preserved, thou wilt let thyself be led by them.” 

241 He approved his reply, and said to another, “ What advantage does 
kinship’ bring?” And he replied, “The strength of kinship is 
apparent if we consider that we are the losers by the misfortunes 

242 which befall [our kin], and if we suffer as they do (and by such con- 
duct we shall win their esteem and a higher place in their regard, for 
a kindly sympathy * forms of itself an indissoluble [bond] whate’er 
befall), while in their prosperity we should require nothing of theirs, 
but entreat God to give them every blessing.” 

243 He extended a like approval to him as to the others, and asked 
another man, “How is fearlessness produced?” And he said, 
“When the mind is conscious of no wrong-doing, and God directs it 
so that all its counsels are good.” 

244 With a word ofassent to him, he inquired of another how he might 
have right reasoning atcommand. He replied, ‘If he constantly kept 
the misfortunes of men before his eyes, and marked how God takes 
away their prosperity and advances others to glory and honour.” 

245 He gave him his hearty approval, and requested his neighbour for a 
reply to the question, how he might avoid falling into sloth ora life 
of pleasure. He replied, ‘‘ By bearing in mind that thou art ruler of 
a great kingdom and governor of vast multitudes, and so thy mind 
must not be occupied with anything else, but devote its attention to 
their welfare. But thou must ask God that none of thy duties may 
be neglected.” 

246 Him too he commended, and asked the tenth man how he might 
detect persons who were acting deceitfully towards him. To this he 
replied, “ΒΥ observing whether the behaviour of those about thy 
person is gentlemanly, and whether an orderly conduct is preserved at 
receptions and councils and in general intercourse, and by seeing that 
the bounds of propriety are in no way exceeded in congratulations 

247 and in their whole behaviour. But God will guide thy mind, O king, 
to what is best.” The king applauded and praised them all one by 
one, the other guests doing likewise, and they began to make merry *. 

248 On the following day he waited for the right moment and asked 
the next in order, “ What is the grossest negligence?” To this 
he replied, ‘When a man is careless of his children, and does not 
devote every effort to their education. For our prayers to God are 


1 For the ovyyeveis or relatives of the king (a court title) see Lumbroso, 
Recherches sur Véconomie pol. de V Egypte, 189 ff. 

2 Reading ovvepyés. 

5 Or perhaps the literal meaning of μέλπειν ‘to sing”’ is intended : ef. 
Ecclus. xlix. 1 (ὡς μουσικὰ ἐν συμποσίῳ οἴνου), xl. 20, - 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 45 


always not so much for ourselves as for our offspring, that every 
blessing may be theirs. But the desire that our children’ may be 
endued with discretion comes through the power of God.” 

He said that he had spoken well, and asked another how he might 
be a lover of his country. ‘‘By keeping in mind,” he replied, “ that 
it is good to live and die in one’s own land. But to live in a foreign 
country * brings contempt for the poor man, and disgrace for the rich, 
who are suspected of being in exile on account of their misdeeds. If, 
then, thou doest good to all men (as is thy constant habit, since God 
grants thee graciousness towards all) thou wilt prove thyself a lover 
of thy country.” 

After hearing him he inquired of the next one, how he might live 
amicably with a wife. ‘By bearing in mind,” he replied, “that the 
female sex is rash ὃ and energetic in pursuing its desires, and subject 
to sudden changes of opinion through fallacious reasoning, and weak 
by nature: and one must treat them in a rational way and not by 
opposing provoke a quarrel. For life is then guided aright, when the 
steersman knows the port to which he must direct his course. But, 
if God’s help be invoked, life itself is in all things steered aright.” 

He admitted the wisdom of his words, and asked the next one how 
he might be kept free from error. And he said, “By doing every 
action gravely* and with deliberation, and not giving credence to 
slanders, but testing for thyself what is told thee, and pronouncing 
thy own judgment on the petitions submitted, and being guided by 
thy own judgment in granting them, so wouldst thou be free from 
error, O king. But to be of this mind and to live this life is a work 
which demands divine power.” 

He was delighted with these words, and asked the next one how he 
might avoid anger. To this he replied, “ΒΥ bearing in mind that 
thou hast power to do all things, even to inflict sentence of death if 
thou art angry®: and this were unprofitable and grievous that thou 
shouldst deprive many of life because thou art their lord. And where 
all are thy subjects and none resists thee, to what end shouldst thou 
be angry? And thou must know that God orders the whole world 
with gracious kindness and without wrath at all, and thou,” said he, 
‘must follow his example, O king.” 


1 Reading παιδία with Wendland. Perhaps we should adopt his further 
correction τὸ δὲ ἐπιδέσθαι παιδία κ.τ.λ., ‘But to live to see our children 
endued with discretion (or ‘temperance’) is a gift which comes” &e. 

2 Ἡ δὲ ξενιτεία Wendland. Cf. the description of the humiliating life 
of ‘‘the sojourner”’ in Ecclus, xxix. 22-28. 3 Or ‘ impetuous.” 

* Adopting Mendelssohn’s correction ἔφη Σεμνῶς in place of ἔφησεν ‘As. 

5 Reading ἐπιφέρειν, 


249 


to 
σι 
w 


254 


46 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


255 He said that he had answered well, and inquired of him who came 
next, ‘Wherein does sound judgment consist?” “In doing all 
things aright with deliberation,” he replied, “and while forming our 
decisions not neglecting to weigh’ the injurious effects of following 
the opposite view, that so after considering every point we may be 
well advised and our purpose may be fulfilled. But, what is more 
important than all, every resolution of thy will, through the sove- 
reign power of God, find accomplishment, since thou dost practise 
piety.” 

256 He said that he too had answered rightly, and asked another, “What 
is philosophy?” “It is to deliberate well over all contingencies,” 
he replied, “and not to be carried away by one’s impulses, but to 
ponder the injuries which are the outcome of the passions, and to do 
the duty of the moment as it should be done, keeping one’s passions 
under restraint. But we must pray to God that we may give our 
attention to these things.” 

257 Him too he applauded, and asked another how he might meet with 
approbation when living in a foreign country*. “By treating all men 
as thy equals,” he said, ‘‘and behaving rather as the inferior than as 
superior to those among whom thou sojournest. For God accepts the 
lowly disposition, and the human race likewise ὃ deals kindly with the 
humble.” 

258 He gave his assent thereto, and asked another how the structures 
which he raised might endure hereafter. To this he replied “ [that 
they would do so] if his creations were on a great and magnificent 
scale, so that beholders would spare them for their beauty, and if he 
neglected no one who produced such works, and did not compel others 

259 to carry out his requirements without pay. For if he considered how 
God shows great consideration for the human race, supplying them 
with health and keenness of perception and his other gifts‘, he too 
would act in a way corresponding somewhat thereto, by giving men 
the due reward for their labours. For it is the works which are done 
in righteousness which also endure.” 

260 He said that he too had spoken well, and asked the tenth, “ What is 
the fruit of wisdom?” And he replied, “To be conscious of no 

261 wrong-doing, and to live a life of sincerity. For from these things 
thou gainest the highest joy and a tranquillity of soul, most mighty 
king, aye, and good hopes in God, while thou dost govern thy kingdom 
in piety.” 


1 Literally ‘‘comparing,” i.e, with the advantages of the course adopted. 

2 Reading ἐν ξενιτείᾳ with Mendelssohn. 

8 Kowas. Or ‘For it is commonly found that God” &e. Wendland 
(Addenda) suggests καθώς, * Cf. § 190. 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 47 


-And all [the company] after hearing them, expressed their approval 
with loud applause. Thereupon the king in the fullness of his joy 
turned to the drinking of healths. 

On the following day the banquet proceeded in the same order as 
before, and when the time was come the king questioned those who 
yet remained. And to the first he said, ‘‘How should one keep one- 
self from pride?” And he answered, “By preserving an impartial 
attitude and reminding himself constantly that he was a man as well 
as a leader of men. And God putteth down the proud but exalteth 
the meek and humble }.” | 

After a kindly word to him he asked the next in order, “ Whom 
should one take for one’s counsellors?” “Those,” he replied, “who 
have been tried in many matters, and preserve a sincere loyalty to 
thee, and all who share thy principles. But, that these ends may be 
attained, God manifests himself to those who are worthy.” 

He commended him, and asked another, “ What is the most neces- 
sary possession for a king?” ‘The good wishes and love of his 
subjects,” he replied. ‘For by these there is formed an indissoluble 
bond of loyalty. But it is God who causes these things to fall out as 
thou wouldst have them.” 

He commended him highly, and inquired of another, ‘“‘ What is the 
aim of oratory?” And he said, “Τὸ persuade one’s opponent, point- 
ing out his errors by means of the chain of arguments which he has 
formulated?. For in this way wilt thou win over thy hearer, not by 
direct contradiction, but by showing appreciation withal, in order to 
convince him. But persuasion is attained through God's working.” 

He said that he had spoken well, and asked another how, in view 
of the mixture of races within his kingdom, he should live amicably 
with them. ‘‘By adapting thy manner to suit each man,” was his 
reply, “taking righteousness for thy guide, even as thou dost, since 
God grants thee right judgment.” 

He gave him his cordial thanks, and said to the next one, “ For 
what things should one be grieved?” ‘To this he replied, “ For our 
friends’ misfortunes, when we watch their long continuance and 
hopelessness; for reason does not permit us to be grieved for such as 
are dead and released from ills. Yet all men when they are grieved 
think only of themselves and their own advantage. But to escape 
from every ill is possible only through the power of God.” 

He said that he had answered aright, and addressed another with 
the words, ‘How does ill-repute arise?’’ And he replied, “ When 


1 Cf. 1 Sam. ii. 7 f.; Prov. iii. 34; Luke i. 51 ἢ 
2 The meaning is a little doubtful. Wendland translates ‘by a skilful 
arrangement of the arguments.” 


262 


2 


2 


63 


64 


266 


267 


2 


tw 


68 


69 


48 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


pride and unbounded self-confidence lead the way, dishonour and 
ruined reputation follow close on their heels. But all reputation is 
at God’s disposal, who assigns it where he will.” 

2700 His reply also he endorsed, and asked of the next in order, to whom 
he should entrust himself. “To those,” he replied, “who attend 
upon thee out of goodwill, and not from fear or self-interest 1, making 
gain their sole motive. For the former manner is a token of love, but 
the other of illwill and time-serving: for the man who is bent on? 
advancing his own interests has a treacherous nature. But thou hast 
the goodwill of all men, since God gives thee good counsel.” 

He said that he had answered wisely, and said to another, “ What 
preserves a kingdom?” To this he replied, “ Care and watchfulness 
to see that no injury is inflicted by those who are set over the people 
in official positions. And such is thy practice, since God grants thee 
the gift of grave reflection.” 

272 He corroborated his words, and asked another, “ What keeps favour 
and honour secure?” And he said, “ Virtue, for it is the fulfilment 
of good works, and rejects what is base: and even so thou dost pre- 
serve thy perfect bearing towards all—a gift which thou hast from 
God.” 

273 He received his reply graciously, and asked the eleventh (for their 
number exceeded seventy by two), how even in warfare he might 
maintain a peaceful tranquillity of soul. And he gave his opinion 
thus: ‘‘If thou canst reflect that no harm has been done to any of thy 
subjects, and that all will fight for the glory of rendering thee service, 
knowing that even though they lay down their lives thou dost care for 

274 their welfare. For thou never failest to make good the losses of all 
men, such is the kindheartedness which God has given thee.” 

He loudly applauded and expressed his hearty approval to them all, 
and then drank a long draught to the health of each and gave the 
reins to enjoyment ὃ, sharing the men’s society with merriment and 
high elation. 

275 And on the seventh ofthe days the banquet was prepared ona larger 
scale, as many other visitors from the cities‘ were admitted, for a 
great number of ambassadors were in attendance. And when the 
time came the king asked the first of those who had not yet answered, 

276 how he might avoid being deceived. And he said, “ By scrutinizing 
the speaker and his words and the subject of his speech, and by taking 
time and asking the same questions in different forms. But the pos- 


μι 


27 


1 Literally ‘‘ consideration,” either for their own interests, or, it may 
be, ‘‘to gain thy consideration.” 

? Mendelssohn’s conjecture épyara for ὁρᾶται is probably right. 

3 Insert ἐτράπη after τερφθῆναι. * Cf. § 175. 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 49 


session of a keen understanding and the power of passing judgment in 
every case is a good gift of God: and this dost thou possess, O king.” 

The king loudly applauded, and asked another, “ Why do most men 
not embrace virtue?” ‘“ Because,” he replied, “ all men are by nature 
intemperate, and hanker after their pleasures, by reason of which 
things comes unrighteousness and a sea of covetousness. But the 
virtuous state checks those who are drifting into a life of self-indul- 
gence, and bids them prefer temperance and righteousness. But all 
this is under the direction of God.” 

The king said that he had answered well, and asked the next one’, 
“ Whose guidance should kings follow ?” And he said, “'The guidance 
of the laws, that so by righteous dealings they may restore the happi- 
ness of men’s lives, even as thou by stich action hast made an everlasting 
memorial for thyself, through following the divine commandment.” 

He said that he also had spoken well, and asked the next, “ Whom 
should one appoint chief magistrates??” And he said, “" Those who 
have a hatred of wrong and do what is just, imitating thy conduct, to 
the intent that they may ever bein good repute: even as thou dost,” 
he added, ‘‘most mighty king, as God has given thee a crown of 
righteousness *.” 

He loudly signified his approval, and turned his face to the next one 
and said, ‘‘ What persons should one place in command of the forces ?” 
And he replied, ‘‘ Those who are distinguished for bravery and justice, 
and are more anxious for the safety of their men than to gain a victory 
while risking their lives in rash enterprises. For as God does good to 
all, so dost thou, making him thy example, do good to thy subjects.” 

He said that his answer was good, and asked another, “‘ What man is 
deserving of admiration?” And he said, ‘He that is endowed with 
glory and riches and power and yet inwardly regards himself as on an 
equality with all men, even as thou by such action art worthily 
admired, since God grants thee to take heed to these things.” 

To him also he gave his assent, and said to the next, ‘‘ Upon what 
matters should kings spend most of their time?” And he said, ‘In 
reading, and in studying the records of official journeys *, which are 


1 Reading τὸν per αὐτὸν ἠρώτα. 

? The reply and the succeeding question show that στρατηγός is here 
used of a civilian official (the governor of a district of Egypt). See Lum- 
broso, op. cit., 260 ff. 

3. Cf. 2 Tim. iv. 8: the nearest parallel in the LXX is Ecclus. vi. 31 
στέφανον ἀγαλλιάματος. 

* The papyri afford examples of the diaries or acta diurna which officials 
in Egypt had to keep. See an article on ‘Yroprynpariopoi by Wilcken in 
Philologus, LIIT, 80 ff., to which Wendland refers, and cf. § 298 of this 


E 


277 


278 


279 


81 


i) 


282 


50 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


drawn up for the good of kingdoms’, with a view to improving and 
securing the existence of the subjects. And by so doing thou hast 
won a renown which to others is unattainable, since God fulfils thy 
desires.” 

284 To him too he expressed his keen approval, and asked another 
what he should take for his pastimes in his hours of relaxation and 
recreation. And he said, “Τὸ watch plays which are played with 
propriety and to set before one’s eyes scenes from life enacted with 

285 decency and restraint is profitable to one’s life and seemly?. For 
even in these matters some instruction is contained, since often by the 
very least of things some desirable lesson is conveyed. But thou hast 
practised all restraint and carriest thy philosophy into thy actions, 
while thou art honoured by God for thy perfect virtue.” 

286 He was well pleased with these words, and said to the ninth, ‘‘ What 
should be one’s conduct at banquets ?” And he said, “ Thou shouldst 
invite such as are lovers of learning and able to suggest what may be 
useful to the kingdom and to the lives of thy subjects®. No more 

287 harmonious or sweeter music couldst thou find. For these are 
beloved of God, as they have trained their minds in all that is best. 
And such indeed is thy practice, since all thy actions are directed by 
God.” 

288 He was delighted at his words, and inquired of the next one, 
“Which is the best for the people, that a commoner should be set 
over them* as king, or one born of royal blood?” And he said, 
{It is best that] the man® of the noblest nature [should be king]. 

289 For kings born of royal blood are inhuman and harsh towards 
their subjects: and much more is this the case with commoners, 
some of whom after experiencing misery and poverty have come 
into power, and proved themselves more cruel than the unholy 

290 tyrants. But, as I said before, a good disposition which has had the 
advantage of culture is fitted to bear rule, even as thou art a great 
king, not so much because of the pre-eminence given thee by the 
glory of thy rule and by thy wealth, as because thou hast outstripped 


letter. Cf. also Plutarch, Apophthegm. Reg. et Imp., 189 E Δημήτριος ὃ 
Φαληρεὺς Πτολεμαίῳ τῷ βασιλεῖ παρήνει τὰ περὶ βασιλεία; καὶ ἡγεμονίας βιβλία 
κτᾶσθαι καὶ ἀναγινώσκειν" ἃ γὰρ οἱ φίλοι τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν οὐ θορροῦσι παραινεῖν, 
ταῦτα ἐν Tots βιβλίοις γέγραπται. 

1 Perhaps “for kings,” reading τοὺς βασιλεῖς with Mendelssohn. 

3 Adopting Mendelssohn's admirable restoration of the text, βίῳ συμφέ- 
ρον καὶ καθῆκον. 

3. Τὰ χρήσιμα τῇ βασιλείᾳ καὶ τοῖς τῶν ἀρχ. βίοι», corrected by Mendelssohn, 
Cf. on the same topic Ecclus, ix. 16, xxxi (xxxiv). 12 ff. 

* Reading ἐπ᾿ with Mendelssohn. The MSS. have ὑπ᾽, ‘appointed by 
them,” which may be right. ὃ Tov must, I think, be read, 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 51 


all men in gentleness and kindness, since God has conferred these 
gifts upon thee.” 

He commended him at some length", and asked him who was last of 
all, “ What is the greatest achievement in the office of aking?” To 
this he replied, “ If his subjects enjoy continual peace and get speedy 
justice done them when their cases are tried. And these results 
follow when the governor is a hater of evil and a lover of good, and 
regards the saving of a man’s life as a matter of high importance, even 
as thou regardest unrighteousness as the greatest of evils, and by thy 
just government in all things hast made for thyself an imperishable 
renown, since God vouchsafes to give thee a pure mind without any 
taint of evil.” 

When his speech was ended, there was a burst of applause with 
shouting and jubilation lasting for a good while. And when this 
ceased, the king took a goblet and drank a toast * in honour of all his 
guests and the speeches which they had delivered. And in conclusion 
he said, “You have brought me the greatest of blessings by your 
coming, for I have derived great benefit from the doctrine which you 
have laid down to guide me in my kingly office.” And he commanded 
that to each should be given three talents of silver and the slave who 
should hand it to him. And when all [the rest] had unanimously 
expressed their approbation, the banquet became a scene of rejoicing, 
and the king gave himself up to unstinted festivity. 

Now, if I have been too prolix*, dear Philocrates, I pray thee 
to excuse this fault. For I admired beyond measure the way in which 
the men on the spur of the moment were ready with their replies 
which required much meditation‘, and seeing that their interrogator 
had carefully thought out each question, while the respondents one 
after the other had the task of replying thereto, they did indeed 
appear to me and to those who were present, but chiefly to the philo- 
sophers, to deserve our admiration. And I believe that to all into 
whose hands this narrative may come it will appear incredible. 
But to be untruthful in matters which are recorded in public registers 
is not meet: were 1 even to pass over anything, it would be an act of 
impiety where such matters are concerned: no, we describe just what 
took place, scrupulously keeping clear of all error. And to this end, 


1 Possibly the words “during a long time” should be attached to the 
preceding speech. 3 Lit. ‘‘ had it filled.” 

3. Another excellent emendation of Mendelssohn, εἰ πεπλεόνακα τούτοις. 

* Cf. the story told by Diogenes Laertius (II, 111) of Diodorus Cronus, 
who is said to have been given the surname of Cronus by Ptolemy Soter 
because he failed to solve at once a dialectic problem proposed by Stilpo 
when the two philosophers were dining with the king. 


" 


292 


bh 


93 


294 


296 


297 


52 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


after hearing with approval at their own mouth?! their powers of 
speech, I endeavoured to obtain information from those persons who 
record in detail all that takes place at the king’s audiences and enter- 
tainments 3. 

298 For it is the custom, as thou art aware, to have a record kept of all 
that is said and done from the hour® when the king begins to give 
audience until he retires to rest, and the practice is a good and useful 

299 one. ‘The next day, before any audience is given, the minutes of the 
doings and sayings of the previous day are read through, and any 

300 irregularity which has occurred is corrected. We have, then, as 
we said, obtained accurate information on all points from the keepers 
of the public records*,and have set it down here in writing, knowing 
as we did thy love of useful learning, 


[THE TRANSLATION AND ITS RECEPTION. ] 


Now after three days Demetrius took the men with him, and passed 
over the break-water® of seven stadia in length to the island, and 
crossing the bridge proceeded to the northern quarter. There he 
held a session in a house which had been prepared by the sea-shore, 
magnificently built in a situation of perfect stillness, and bade the 
men carry out their work of translation, since all appliances necessary 
for the task had been well provided. And so they proceeded to carry 
it out, arriving at an agreement on each point by comparing each 
others’ work: and the appropriate rendering agreed .on was then 
303 transcribed by Demetrius. And the session used to last until the 

ninth hour, and thereafter they would depart to attend to their bodily 
304 comforts, all their wants being plentifully supplied. Moreover, 
Dorotheus® used every day to make the same arrangements for them 
as were made for the king, for he had the king’s order to do so. And 
every morning they would come to the court, make their salutation 


μι 


20 


bo 


30 


1 Such seems to be the force of the emphatic position of αὐτῶν. 

2 For these court journals see the article of Wilcken mentioned in the 
note on § 283. 

3 MSS. ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἂν ἡμέρας ; Wendland reads ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἂν ἡμέρας (Hpas), Men- 
delssohn corrects ἡμέρας to ὥρας. Probably the original text ran ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἂν 
6 Bac. ἄρξηται, with an ellipse of ὥρας (cf. Luke vii. 45 and Blass, Grammar 
of N. 1. Greek, § 44, 1), and ἡμέρας is an interpolation. 

* Correcting πάντων ἀναγεγραμμένων, with Wendland, to παρὰ τῶν ἀναγε- 
γραμμένων. 

5 For the island of Pharos and the ἑπταστάδιον χῶμα, which formed 
a bridge (yépupa) between the mainland and the island, see the description 
in Strabo, XVII, 6, 792. 6 Of. § 182, 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 53 


to the king, and depart to their own place. And when, as is the 305 
custom of all the Jews’, they had washed their hands in the sea, and 
had offered a prayer to God?, they betook themselves to the reading 
and interpretation of each passage. And I also propounded this 3.8 
question, “ Why do they wash their hands before praying?” And iv 
they explained that it was in token that they had done no wrong, 
since the hands are the means by which every action takes place®: 

in such a beautiful and pious spirit do they make all things symbols 

of righteousness and truth. And so, as we have said already, they 307 
assembled every day in this spot, which the stillness and brilliant 
light rendered so delightful, and carried on their appointed task. 
And so it came about that the translation* was accomplished in 
seventy-two days, as though this coincidence had been intended. / 
And when the work was ended Demetrius assembled the Jewish 308 
people in the spot where the translation had been made and read 

it through to the whole assembly in the presence of the translators; 
who received another’ great ovation from the people in recognition of 
the great services which they had rendered. And they gave a similar 309 
reception to Demetrius, and requested him to deliver a copy of the 
whole law to their rulers. And after the reading of the rolls the 310 
priests and the oldest of the translators and some members of the 
[Jewish] community * and the rulers of the people stood up and said, 
**Forasmuch as the translation has been well and piously executed 
and with perfect accuracy, it is right that it should remain in its 
present form, and that no revision should take place.” And when 311 


1 See Schiirer®, II, 481 ff. (Engl. Trans., II, 2, 109), Edersheim, Life 
and Times of Jesus, ΤΙ, 9 ff. That the Jews in Egypt had the same scruples 
on the subject of hand-washing in the second century B. c. as their Pales- 
tinian brethren had at a later time is attested by the Sibylline Oracles, 
III, sor ff. 

2 Reading ds dy εὔξωνται, in accordance with the usage of ds dy else- 
where in this book. 

* Cf. Aristobulus (ap. Euseb., P. Z., VIII, το, 377 a) Ὥστε ai χεῖρες em 
δυνάμεως vootvra, θεοῦ. καὶ yap ἔστι νοῆσαι τὴν πᾶσαν ἰσχὺν τῶν ἀνθρώπων καὶ 
τὰς ἐνεργείας ἐν ταῖς χερσὶν εἶναι, 

* Literally ‘ transcription.” 

* Kai seems to refer back to the reception previously accorded to them 
by the king. 

* “Although the Jews who lived here [at Alexandria] enjoyed the 
rights of citizenship. .. they nevertheless formed an independent muni- 
cipal community within or co-ordinate with the rest of the city, precisely 
as in the case of Cyrene” (Schiirer’, III, 40, Engl. Trans., II, 2, 244), 
A Cyrenaic inscription of 13 B.¢., quoted by Schiirer, contains the phrase 
τοῖς ἐκ τοῦ πολιτεύματος ἡμῶν Ἰουδαίοις, 


54 TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS - 


all had assented to these words, they! bade them, in accordance with 
their custom, pronounce an imprecation upon any who should revise 
the text by adding to or altering in any way whatsoever or omitting 
anything from what had been written?; and herein they did well, to 
the intent that the work might for ever be preserved imperishable 
and unchanged. 

312 And when word of this also was brought to the king, he greatly 
rejoiced, for it seemed that his purpose had been securely attained. 
And the whole work was read through to him, and he was amazed 
exceedingly at the mind of the lawgiver. And he said to Demetrius, 
“How is it that when such great things have been achieved none of 

313 the historians or poets ever thought of mentioning them?” And he 
said, “ Because the law is holy and has been given by God: and some 
of those who attempted to do so were smitten of God and desisted 

314 from their attempt.”/ For he said that he had heard Theopompus * 
tell how when he was too rashly‘ intending to introduce into his 
history some of the incidents from the law which had previously been 
translated, his mind was deranged for more than thirty days. And 
when the disorder abated he besought God that the cause of the 

315 mischance might be made plain to him. And when it was shown him 
in a dream that his desire to disclose the things of God to common 
men was misguided, he desisted, and thereupon recovered his reason. 

316 ** And I have also been informed by Theodectes®, the tragic poet, that 
when he was intending to introduce into one of his plays something 


? Or, ‘he (Demetrius) bade them.” So the MSS. of Aristeas and 
Eusebius read. 

2 Cf. Deut. iv. 2, xii. 32, and for the imprecation Rev. xxii. 18 f, 

8. Theopompus, the historian, a pupil of Isocrates, lived from about 378 
to 300 B.c. About 305 B.c. he came to Egypt, but was not in favour with 
Ptolemy I, who would have put him to death as a dangerous busybody 
(ὡς πολυπράγμονα), had not his friends interceded for his life (Phot. Cod. 
176). The epithet πολυπράγμων is interesting in view of the statement in 
Aristeas as to his meddling with divine matters (περιεργασάμενος § 315), 
although the incident has probably no foundation in fact. 

* Ἐπισφαλέστερον : cf. Demetrius, de Elocut., 80 (ed. Roberts) διὸ καὶ 
Πλάτων ἐπισφαλές τι δοκεῖ ποιεῖν μεταφοραῖς μᾶλλον χρώμενος, it is ‘a risky 
feature in his style.”” Wendland renders ‘‘when he was intending to 
introduce... some of the incidents from the law which had previously 
been translated in a somewhat misleading way.” The reference is to the 
earlier and less careful translation of portions of Scripture which is said 
‘to have been in existence before the LXX (see on ὃ 30 ἀμελέστερον. .. 
σεσήμανται). 

5 Theodectes, a rhetorician and tragic poet, a contemporary and on one 
occasion a rival of Theopompus, circa 375-334 B.C. 


TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 55 


recorded in the Book’, he was afflicted with cataract of the eyes: 
and suspecting that this was the reason for his mishap, he besought 
God’s mercy, and after many days recovered his sight.” 

The king, when he heard the explanation which Demetrius gave of 3t7 
this matter, as above narrated, made obeisance, and ordered that great 
care should be taken of the books, and that they should be guarded 
with proper awe. He further besought the translators that after 318 
their return to Judaea they would visit him very often. It was but 
right, he added, that they should now be let go, but should they visit 
him, he would in bounden duty treat them as friends, and they would 
meet with the utmost consideration? at his ees And he ordered 319 
preparations to be made for their sending off, and treated the men 
munificently. For to each one he gave three of the finest changes of 
raiment, and two talents of gold, and a side-board® of a talent [in 
weight], and a complete set of cushions for the three couches of 
adiningroom. To EHleazar also he sent by the hands of their escort 320 
ten couches with legs of silver and all the appurtenances thereof and 
a side-board of thirty talents and ten changes of raiment and a purple 
robe and a magnificent crown and a hundred pieces of fine linen 
cloth and vials* and dishes® and two golden bowls as a dedicatory 
offering. And he wrote a letter also requesting him that if any of 321 
the men should choose to return to him he would not prevent them 
from so doing: for he highly valued the company of educated men, 
and preferred a lavish expenditure of his wealth on such persons to 
squandering it on vain things. 

There, Philocrates, thou hast the whole story which I promised thee. 322 
And indeed I believe that thou findest greater pleasure in these 
matters than in the books of the romancers: for thou hast a natural 
inclination to the study of those things which can profit the mind, 
and art at most times occupied therewith. And I will make a further 
attempt to record whatever else is worthy of narration, in order that 
in the perusal thereof thou mayst win the fairest reward for thy 
zealous desire. 


* This seems to be the earliest use of ἡ βίβλος for a collection of sacred 
writings. We have elsewhere βίβλος or βιβλίον διαθήκης (Ecclus. xxiv. 23 ; 
1 Mace. i. 57), τὰ βιβλία τοῦ νόμου (x Mace. i. 56), αἱ ἱεραὶ βίβλοι (Jos.). See 
Ryle, Cunon of 0. T., 290. 

2 Read πολυωρίας, Mahaffy’s correction of πολυδωρίας, and ἕξειν for ἕξει. 

* Κυλίκιον, which is used here and in § 320, ordinarily means ‘a cup,” 
while κυλικεῖον, which Wendland reads in both places, means ‘a side- 
board.” The form κυλίκιον, however, occurs in 1 Mace. xv. 32, where a 
piece of furniture for supporting vessels is clearly intended, and that is 
probably the meaning here, 

* Or “saucers,” ᾿ 5 Or ‘‘cups,” 

















OXFORD : HORACE HART 


PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 














PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 





UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 





BS Aristeas epistle. English 
μι The letter of Aristeas 
A7A4 


1904
