The Man Who Knew Coolidge (Sinclair Lewis, 1928)
==========================================================
Lowell Schmaltz's endless monologue on knowing Coolidge — the comic pendant to Babbitt. Public domain. Sourced from the Internet Archive scan 'manwhoknewcoolid0000sinc' (https://archive.org/details/manwhoknewcoolid0000sinc).

, 
i 


Hh 


oe 


i 


eee 
: m 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Novels by Sinclair Lewis 


OUR MR. WRENN 
THE TRAIL OF THE HAWK 
THE JOB 
FREE AIR 
MAIN STREET 
BABBITT 
MARTIN ARROWSMITH 
MANTRAP 
ELMER GANTRY 
THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


BEING THE SOUL OF LOWELL SCHMALTZ 


* 


SINCLAIR LEWIS 


JONATHAN CAPE 
THIRTY BEDFORD SQUARE 
LONDON 


FIRST PUBLISHED MCMXXVIII 


to 


- L. M. AND AGNES BIRKHEAD 

AND EARL AND EVA BLACKMAN, 

WHO, AS MUCH AS THE AUTHOR, 

HAVE ADMIRED THE PHILOSOPHY 

OF MR. LOWELL SCHMALTZ AND 
OF HIS PASTOR wa > 


Part I 


CONTENTS 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE Page II 


THE STORY BY MACK MCMACK 
YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 

YOU KNOW HOW RELATIVES ARE 
TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 

THE BASIC AND FUNDAMENTAL 
IDEALS OF CHRISTIAN AMERICAN 
CITIZENSHIP 


87 
ISI 
193 
199 


233 


\ 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


vs . * 
ees ; it ea 
nt agi Ni , NG 


PO OF a PE BP PP VT LE TST eS 


Pak ts 


pIRE MAN WHO KNEW 
COOERIDGE 


px? I certainly do enjoy listening to you 
gentlemen and getting your views. That’s 
one of the nice things about being on a Pullman 
like this: you can guarantee that you'll meet a 
lot of regular he-Americans with sound opinions 
and ideas. 

And now let me tell you: the way I look at 
these things — 

I don’t mean to suggest for one second that 
I’ve got any better bean than the plain ordinary 
average citizen, but I’ve given a whole lot of 
attention to politics and such matters and — In 
fact, strikes me that it’s the duty of all the 
better-educated citizens to take an interest in 
the affairs of the State, for what, after all, as a 
fellow was saying to us at the Kiwanis Club the 


1 Mr. Calvin Coolidge was the President of the United 
States of North America from 1923 to 1929. He fulfilled 
many of the soundest American ideals, and he stands, along 
with the Ford motor-car, the Rev. Dr. William Sunday, 
and the Saturday Evening Post, as the symbol of his era. 


II 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


other day —what is the Government but the 
union of all of us put together for mutual 
advantage and protection? 

And me -—why say, I read the political edi- 
torials in the Advocate — that’s the leading paper 
in my town—Zenith—I read ’em like most 
folks read the sporting page. And as a result of 
all this, and certain personal information that I 
can’t disclose the sources of, I’ve come tothe firm 
conclusion — 

Here’s something maybe you gentlemen 
never thought of: 

They can all say all they want to about how 
President Coolidge — good old silent Cal Cool- 
idge! —isn’t maybe as flashy as some of these 
statesmen. Maybe he isn’t as much given to 
shooting off his mouth as certain other public 
figures that I could name.. Maybe he isn’t what 
my daughter would call so “Ritzy” — 

And say, by golly it’s beyond me where the 
young generation of to-day, taking them by 
and large, get all this slang that they pull. 
Why, here just the other day my daughter was 
talking to her brother, and Robby — that’s 
the boy’s name; only fifteen; three years 

I2 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


younger than his sister, but smart’s a whip. 
There’s certainly one up-and-coming kid, if I 
do say so. 

Why say - 

Now I never put him up to it, y’understand. 
The Lord knows I can afford to give him the 
best the land affords, at least to a reasonable 
extent, I mean as much comfort and even 
luxury as is good for him. I’d never made a 
peep about how maybe it’d be a good stunt for 
him to go out and maybe earn a little money on 
the side. But he comes in one evening just 
before supper — before dinner-time, with his hat 
on one side of his head, looking proud as Punch. 

So I says to him, “Well, Robert Living- 
ston —” 

As a matter of fact, his middle name isn’t 
Livingston at all, it’s Otto, but we often call him 
Robert Livingston, jokingly. 

“Well, Robert Livingston,” I says to him, 
“who do you think you are? Thomas Edison 
or Napoleon or somebody? Or maybe Red 
Grange!! Sit down, Mr. Grange, and let me 
hang up your hat.” 


1 A professional athlete renowned circa 1926. 


t3 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 

You know, jokingly. 

Well, he just looks at me — 

I’m afraid if the truth were known the kid is 
pretty gosh-awful fresh, but he’s so darn’ cute 
about it that you can’t get sore at him, the darn’ 
little cuss — just as up-and-coming as I was at his 
age. He just stands and looks at me and sticks 
his hands in his pants-pockets, and then — 

Say, what do you think he went and done? 
He put a record on the Rectophone. 

You know — that’s this new kind of phono- 
graph that reproduces every tone of the human 
voice or music. It’s some kind of new scientific 
‘invention that for a long time the scientists 
couldn’t ever achieve it. But they got it now 
so they don’t miss any of these undertones — or 
overtones or whatever it is—that they used to 
miss by earlier methods of reproduction. It 
costs a lot more than the old-fashioned phono- 
graph, but way I look at it, the best is the 
cheapest in the long run. 

Well, Robby, the little rascal, he goes to work 
and puts on a record, something about “I may 
have been a private in the A.E.F., but believe 
me, I’m a general with the dames.” Then he 


14 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 
says, “Dad,” he says, “in me you behold the 


feline’s robe de nuit. ve gone and ~” 

Mind you, ’s I said, I’d never even suggested 
to him that he get a job out of school-hours and 
earn a little money. I most certainly do believe 
that it’s a mighty fine thing for a boy to do a 
little work, no matter how well fixed his folks 
are, and learn the value of money; learn how 
doggone hard it is to sneak up on ole Mr. Dollar 
and get a strangle-hold on him. 

I swear, a lot of the young folks to-day seem 
to think the Old Man is simply made of money 
and don’t have to sweat for every cent he makes. 
But same time, I hadn’t figured it was time yet 
to explain this to Robby, though maybe that 
was a mistake on my part, and if it was, ’m 
perfectly willing to admit it — confession is good 
for the soul, as they say. 

Maybe I should have drummed it into him 
long ago. I’ve got it on mighty straight inside 
information —in fact one of my best friends is 
acquainted with a man who knows the Rocke- 
fellers intimately —and he tells me that the 
Rockefellers,1 people with all their jack, they 

1 First of the American ducal families. 


15 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


bring their families up to be just as careful of 
money as any of us: zhey don’t let their kids 
run away with the notion that it don’t take any 
trouble to collect the dough. 

Well, this gentleman related a significant little 
incident regarding the Rockefellers that he 
heard personally. Seems he was right there at 
the time. Here was old John D., probably with 
half the money-kings in the world waiting to 
see him, talking to young John D., just as simple 
and quiet as any one of us. And he said, and 
Tve never forgotten his words—in fact. I 
repeated them to Robby that day—the old 
gentleman looked at young John D., and prob’ly, 
I imagine, he put his hand on his shoulder, and 
he looked at him and said, “My doy, waste not, 
want not!” 

Yes, sir! 

But anyway — 

I’m afraid I’m getting a little off the subject 
of Coolidge, and if there’s anything I hate it’s a 
fellow that, if he starts to talk about a subject, he 
can’t stick to it. 

I remember one time we had one of these 
book-authors speaking at the Kiwanis Club, and 

16 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


say, that fellow, maybe he could write all right 
(though at that Id like to see him sit down and 
dictate a letter to some fellow that would make 
him pay his account and yet not make him get 
sore!)—and as I say, I don’t know anything 
about his writing, but when it came to ¢a/king, 
why say, he wandered all round Robin Hood’s 
barn! Shows what a lack of business-training 
does to these fellows that think they’re so gosh- 
awful smart and superior! 

Well, as I say, Robby puts this record on the 
Rectophone—and that’s an instrument you 
gentlemen certainly want to try — and he looks 
at me, and he says, “Well, Dad, I’ve got me a 
job in Zabriskie’s Drug Store for Saturday after- 
noons, and I draw down one and one-half 
bucks for each and every said same!” 

Pretty good, eh? I'll say it is! And him only 
fifteen. 

But what I started to say was: The way that 
kid and his sister torture the English language 
to death just about gets my goat. Here him and 
his sister was talking one time, and he starts kid- 
ding her about some bird she was sweet on, and 
he says, “That guy’s all wet.” 

17 B 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


But she come back at him, quick’s a flash, 
Yeh, he’s wet like a Methodist Sunday 
School!” 

Yes, sir, it beats the cars how this new genera- 
tion takes the Queen’s English like you and I 
was brought up to speak it in the good old- 
fashioned schools where there was some thor- 
oughness and discipline and not just a lot of 
these flashy fads, and they just practically ruin it; 
and as I was saying, if Sister —that’s what we 
often call my daughter — if she was talking about 
Coolidge, she’d probably say he wasn’t “Ritzy.”’ 

Well, if you want to look at it that way, all 
right. Maybe he isn’t as highfalutin as some 
people I could name. But I wonder if any of 
you gentlemen ever thought of this? 

He may not shoot off a lot of fireworks, but 
do you know what he is? He’s sare! 

* 

Yes, sir, Cal is the President for real honest- 
to-God Americans like us. 

There’s a lot of folks that pan him, but what 
are they? You can bet your sweet life he isn’t 
popular with the bums or yeggs or anarchists or 
highbrows or cynics — 


18 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


I remember our pastor saying one time, “A 
cynic is a man who sneers, and a man who sneers 
is setting himself up to tell God that he doesn’t 
approve of God’s handiwork!” No, sir! You 
can bet Coolidge ain’t popular with the Bolshe- 
viks or the lazy boob of a workman that wants 
fifteen bucks a day for doing nothing! No, sir, 
nor with the cocaine fiends or the drunkards or 
the fellows that don’t want the prohibition law 
enforced — 

Not that I never take a drink. What I say 
about prohibition is: 

Once a law has been passed by the duly 
elected and qualified representatives of the 
people of these United States, in fact, once it’s 
on the statute books, it’s there, and it’s there to 
be enforced. There hadn’t ought to be any 
blind pigs or illegal stills. But same time, that 
don’t mean you got to be a fanatic. 

If a fellow feels like making some good home- 
brewed beer or wine, or if you go to a fellow’s 
house and he brings out some hootch or gin that 
you don’t know where he got it and it isn’t any 
of your business, or if you have a business 
acquaintance coming to your house and you 


19 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


figure he won’t loosen up and talk turkey 
without a little spot, and you know a good 
dependable bootlegger that you can depend on, 
why, then that’s a different matter, and there 
ain’t any reason on God’s green earth that J can 
see why you shouldn’t take advantage of it, 
always providing you aren’t setting somebody 
a bad example or making it look like you 
sympathized with law-breaking. 

No, sir! 

But now to come down to the point of my 
story, I hope to be able to give you gentlemen 
an agreeable little surprise. 

I know Coolidge personally! 

Yes, sir; in fact I was a classmate of his! Sure 
as I’m telling you! Dll give you gentlemen an 
inside view of him, not only as I saw him in 
college, but as I’ve studied him at the White 
House! 

When I say I was a classmate of his — 

Well, the fact is that certain unfortunate 
family circumstances, that I needn’t go into and 
that wouldn’t interest you, prevented me from 
completing my college course — 

My father, and a fine, upstanding, cultured 

20 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


gentleman of the old school he was, too, always 
ready with a helping hand for any mortal that 
needed it, a man of Ar standing in his com- 
munity - Fall River, Mass., that was; in fact, I 
was born and brought up in Fall River, which 
is, as you may know, one of the most beautiful 
and enterprising and go-ahead communities in 
the fair State of Massachusetts—he was, in fact, 
the leading corn and feed merchant in all his 
section of Fall River. 

But I’m afraid he put a little too much confi- 
dence in the advice of an alleged friend. 

Fact is, he invested his savings in a perpetual 
motion machine company that had little or no 
value. He died, and it was quite sudden, in 
December of my Freshman year, so I had to go 
back home and take up the burden of helping 
support the family. 

But I certainly got a lot of value out of even 
that comparatively short time at Amherst, and 
the fellows at the Kiwanis Club tell me that they 
can see certain educational advantages in the 
quality of such speeches or motions as I may be 
called upon to deliver at the club, and welcomes 
to the speakers. 

21 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


So it was at college that I was able to get an 
inside view of Cal Coolidge that has maybe 
been denied to even his more intimate associates 
in these later busy years when he has been so 
engrossed in the cares of the nation. 

I don’t suppose I could have been called one 
of Cal’s closest friends in college, but I knew 
him pretty well. In fact, we lived not far from 
each other, and I used to see him frequently. 
I'll admit that I never had any notion that he’d 
climb.to his present high position and inter- 
national and historical fame, but even in those 
days you could see from the way he worked, 
and the way he looked at a thing from all sides 
before he went off half-cocked, that in whatever 
department of life he might choose, he would 
make his mark. And the next time you hear 
one of these birds criticizing Coolidge, you just 
tell ’em chat, will you, from one who knew him 
in the days.when he wasn’t surrounded with 
adulations! 

I can remember just’s well as if it was yester- 
day, Cal and me happened to come out of a 
class together, and I said, ‘“‘Well, it’s going to be 
a cold winter,” and he came right back, “Yep.” 

22 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Didn’t waste a lot of time arguing and dis- 
cussing! He knew! 

And another time: I never could get along any 
too good in Latin. My talent, you might say, 
is more along practical lines. I asked Cal — we 
happened to be going into class together, and I 
asked him, “Say, what’s the Latin for ‘defy’?” 

“Don’t know,” he said. No beating around 
the bush and pretending and four-flushing, but 
coming right out with it, bang! That’s the kind 
of man he is, you take it from one who &zows him! 

Yes, sir, 1 knew the boy and had the greatest 
affection and respect for him, like all of us who 
had the rare opportunity of understanding him! 

And to think that I might not have gotten 
acquainted with him if we hadn’t been chums 
together in one of the smaller colleges! 

I tell you gentlemen, the way I figure it: the 
great, you might say the invincible advantage 
of the smaller educational institutions is that 
they throw the boys together in such intimate 
contact and—as Dr. Frank Crane? says in one 
of his pieces somewhere —they provide that 

1 A clergyman, often known, about 1927, as “‘the Christian 
Voltaire of America.” 


23. 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


close knowledge of human beings .which fits a 
boy for supremacy in the future walks and 
struggles of life. That’s been my experience. 

Still, same time — 

These great modern universities, with their 
laboratories and stadiums and everything — 
They do have an advantage; and fact is, my son 
is preparing to enter the state university. 

But anyway: 

* 

Naturally, considering that I had the privi- 
lege — through no virtue of my own, mind you~ 
of being in my modest way rather chummy 
with Coolidge, Pve watched his rise to world- 
wide fame with peculiar interest, and after he 
became President I often said to my wife, “By 
golly, I'd like to see the boy and just shake 
hands with him again.” 

Not, mind you, because he was President. 
After all, I’ve reached a position where I’m 
just as independent as the other fellow. An 
American citizen doesn’t have to bow down and 
kowtow to anybody, whether it be the President _ 
or a millionaire or Queen Marie of Bulgaria or 
anybody — 

24 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


By the way, Queen Marie made quite a stay 
at Zenith. She stopped over pretty near an 
hour between trains, and say, we certainly 
gave her a good time. The mayor read her an 
address and presented her with a gold-mounted 
polished cow’s-foot combination ink-well, ther- 
mometer, and daily text calendar that [ll bet 
she’s showing the folks in her palace right now. 
But I mean: 

It wasn’t because he was President, as I 
explained to the wife, but — 

“Besides,” I said to her, “just between you 
and me, I bet it would give the boy a real kick, 
after having to associate with ambassadors and 
generals and Frank Kellogg! and all those high- 
up guys, to be able to let down for a minute 
and shake the mitt of a fellow that he used to 
laugh and joke with in the old care-free days 
before we both assumed the responsibilities of 
our present careers.” 

So here about six months ago, when we were 
planning to take a little trip to New York -— 

I had to go to New York to look over a new 
mimeographing machine. You see, I’m in the 


1 A former American cabinet minister. 


25 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


office-supply business, and let me tell you 
gentlemen that though I’m the first to respect 
other professions, though I honour the surgeon 
who can snatch you from the very gates of death, 
the lawyer who can so brilliantly argue your 
case —though personally I always think it’s 
better to settle out of court—or the great 
banker or department-store owner, yet in all 
fairness let me put this to you: 

Who is it that enables these gentlemen to do 
business and get their great ideas across in an up- 
to-date, efficient, time-saving manner? Who is 
it but the office-supply man! Yes, sir, ’m proud 
of my profession, and as a matter of fact I have 
the honour of representing the office-supply 
category in our great Zenith Kiwanis Club! 

Just take filing-cabinets alone! 

I always say, and sometimes the boys laugh at 
me at the Athletic Club, but good-naturedly, 
because I’ve got as fine a lot of friends as any- 
body I know, and believe me, I’m mighty good 
and proud of them, and I tell ’em, “Boys,” I 
say, “excuse me if I get flowery, but you must 
always remember I’m a great reader of Colonel 
Bob Ingersoll — though I’m the first to depre- 

26 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


cate the unfortunate religious ideas and scepti- 
cism that marred that otherwise great philoso- 
pher and public speaker — and probably it’s from 
him that I got the idea of talking without 
having to resort to cheap and vulgar phrases, 
besides being a college man and — 

“Excuse me if I get highfalutin,” I often say 
to them — you know, at lunch at the Athletic 
Club — you know how a lot of fellows will get to 
reminiscing and chewing the rag when maybe 
they ought to be beating it back to their offices 
and getting on the job, but — 

“Maybe you think I’m getting kind of woozy 
about it,” I tell °em, “‘but to me the beauties of 
modern filing-systems, which enable a man to 
instantly and without the least loss of time or 
effort find a letter on which, perhaps, depends 
the closing of an important deal, is in its practi- 
cal way, to say nothing of the physical appear- 
ance of modern up-to-date filing-cabinets, no 
longer mere wooden boxes, but whether in steel 
or fireproofed wood, the finest example of the 
cabinet-maker’s art and imitating perfectly the 
rarest woods — To me,’’ I often tell them, ‘‘these 
filing-systems are in every way as beautiful as 


27 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


the poet’s song, as the flush on the maiden’s 
cheek when she first hears the first whispered 
words of love, or the soft chirp of the mother 
bird at eveningtide, chirping to her birdlings. 
Yes, sir, you bet your sweet life they are, and 
you can laugh all you want to!” 

So as I say, I had to go on to New York to 
look over — 

I usually do my buying in Chicago, but this 
was a new caper that the wholesalers in Chicago 
hadn’t got hold of yet. I’d been working pretty 
hard, and my wife was kind of a little run down 
from the after-effects of the flu — 

And say, God, what a curse that is! I wonder 
if you gentlemen ever stopped to think that 
though the flu is in each individual case so much 
less fatal than diseases like the plague or brain- 
fever, yet considering the number of those 
afHicted with it-and after all, when you look 
at a subject, you’ve got to go into the statistics 
of it — of course naturally an office-supply man 
has great advantages that way, being in the 
business— When you think how many folks get 
flu, it seems like one of the most important of all 
diseases. 


28 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


I tell you, I’m as religious as the next fellow, 
and I never’d for one moment dream of criticiz- 
ing the preachers’ doctrines — let them figure out 
theology and religion, I say, and I’ll stick to the 
office-supply business. But don’t it sometimes 
almost make you question the workings of 
Providence when you see the mysterious way in 
which disease smites down the just withthe unjust? 

Why, my wife went on snivelling and subject 
to constant headaches for more than six weeks 
after the doctor said he’d got her all cured of the 
flu! 

So I said to her, ““Honey,” as I often call her, 
“what say you and me and Delmerine -” 

Delmerine, that’s my daughter’s name. Don’t 
know, by the way, that I’ve introduced myself. 
Lowell Schmaltz is my name — 

Funny! Whole lot of people take Schmaltz 
for a German name, but of course, as a matter 
of fact, when you look into the matter, it isn’t 
- German at all but Pennsylvania Dutch, which 
is almost the same as saying New England 
Yankee and — 

Well, I figured Delmerine could get away all 
tight, because she’s finished high school. 


45 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


I’d asked her if she wanted to go to college — 
I could perfectly well.afford to send her, of 
course — but she thought it overand she felt more 
kind of called to the musical line, and she was 
taking vocal and piano. But I figured she could 
drop them all right for a few days and I said — 

Robby (that’s my son), of course he couldn’t 
get away, because he was in school, but — 

I says to my wife, “Mamie, how'd it strike you 
—Tve simply got to go to New York on a 
business trip and things are kind of slack now, 
and how'd it be if Delmerine and you went 
along and saw the sights and everything?” 

Say, she was tickled pink! She’d never seen 
New York, and of course — 

Not that I’d want to live in the Big Burg. 
What I always say is: New York is a swell hang- 
out for a few days’ visit, and theatres and all 
like that, but when it comes to living there — 
say, I wouldn’t live there if they gave me 
Times Square and threw in Riverside Drive to 
boot. Compared with Zenith — 

And believe me, gentlemen — 

I don’t believe in going around boosting your 
own burg all the time. I don’t suppose Zenith is 


30 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


any better, practically, than Minneapolis or Cin- / 
cinnati or Pittsburgh, say. But it certainly is/ 
one high-class city, and you may or may not 
know that not only do we lead the world in the 
manufacture of loud speakers and overalls, but 
we have, since Lindbergh’s trans-oceanic flight, 
made all the plans and raised quite a lot of the 
money to construct the largest and finest flying- 
field between Chicago and New York, except- 
ing Detroit and Dayton, of course, and we plan 
to have a restaurant at the aerodrome there 
serving short-orders twenty-four hours a day. 
And I must say Mamie and I are pretty well 
fixed there. Believe me, we don’t have to travel 
to get any ideas how to live! Just a couple of 
years ago I finished building a dandy little 
Italian villa-style bungalow, with a Spanish 
mission entrance. We’ve got two bathrooms, 
and a fireplace, and everything fixed up first- 
rate, and in the basement I’ve installed an elec- 
tric washing-machine and a garbage-incinerator, 
and we got something that you don’t find in 
many houses: in both bathrooms I’ve got a slit 
in the wall, right by the stationary bowls, for 
the disposal of safety-razor blades. 


31 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


And say! I’ve got a great plan. Some day 
I’m —I am, by golly, no kid!—sounds crazy, 
but it’d be the greatest luxury you gentlemen 
ever heard of; just think, when you were taking 
a nice, long, lazy hot bath; some day I’m going 
to put a radio in my bathroom! But that’s an 
ideal to be worked out in the future. Maybe 
it'll be my contribution to American progress. 
But still, let that pass, for the moment. As I 
say, we don’t live so bad. 

And of course I drive a Chrysler myself and 
I gave my wife a Chevrolet coop — 

Say, I certainly got a rise out of her. She’s 
one darn’ nice little woman, if I do say so; been 
an Ar wife in every way, even if she does kick 
a little sometimes about my driving too fast. 
Well, here her last birthday I come home and 
I could see she was mouching around skittish 
as a wasp, because ’most always on her birth- 
days ve got something tucked inside my 
pocket for her. 

“Do you know what day this is?” I finally 
says to her, after I'd looked over the paper and 
listened in on the radio a little—though I 
remember there wasn’t anything on then except 


32 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


the daily stock-receipt reports from the Omaha 
packing-yards. 

She brightens up and tries to look kittenish 
and makes out like she doesn’t know, and she 
says, “No, what?” 

“It’s the day —or it will be the evening — of 
the Kid Milligan-Pooch Federstein fight, and 
we better invite in some of the folks and listen 
to the fight on the radio,” I says. 

Well, sir, the poor kid, she certainly did look 
awful’ down in the mouth. I didn’t know 
whether she was going to be plucky, or whether 
she’d bawl me out—I got to admit she does 
sometimes. But she was game and didn’t say 
anything, and pretty soon, ‘long about fifteen, 
maybe twenty minutes, I suggested we go out 
and have alittle walk beforedinner. Well, mean- 
time, you get me, I’d had the fellow bring this 
Chevrolet coop around and park it right in 
front of the house. 

“‘Here’s a nice little car,” I says when I sees 
the Chev. ‘‘Wonder how she runs.” 

And I goes and gets in and starts it! 

Well, sir — You know how women carry on. 
She cusses me out, and she beefs, and she gets 


33 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


on a rampage, and she says, “Why, Lowell 
Schmaltz,” she says, “what do you mean! 
What’ll the owner say?” 

“T’ll bet he’ll do a lot of saying,” I laughs, 
“if he — or she — happens to see me in it!” 

“Why, I never £new you to do a thing like 
that!” she says. “You get right out of that 
car!” 

Say, I had her wild! 

“So that’s how a fellow gets treated, is it?” I 
says, and I pretend to look hurt, and I gets out, 
and then I draws her attention to a little card 
that I’d had tied on the door handle —’d tied 
it on myself, matter of fact—that said, “To 
Mamie on her birthday from Woofums” - 
Woofums — kind of a nut name, but that’s what 
she calls me sometimes when we’re kind of fool- 
ing around. 

Say, maybe she didn’t pretty nearly keel 
over! 

Yes, sir, you bet, both of us have our own cars, 
though mine — 

It ain’t the fault of the Chrysler itself, I’m 
certain of that, certainly a high-grade Ar 
machine, but the garage got to fooling with it, 


= 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


and my car’s got a squeak in it somewhere that 
I, by golly, simply cannot locate; and say, if 
there’s anything gets me wild when I’m driv- 
ing — 

I can stand the big gaff. Why say, when I 
had a tyre blow out on me after only two thous- 
and miles (any of you gentlemen ever try the 
Melps tyre? Well, don’t, that’s my advice to 
you, and believe me, I know; I’ve tried two of 
them, and in my opinion this monkey-business 
they advertise about wrapping the fabric cross- 
wise, or whatever it is, is all the bugs; don’t get 
the result they claim at all) - 

I can stand those big things, but say, even 
the littlest squeak, why say, it simply drives me 
crazy when I’m driving. 

Why, here just last Sunday I was driving the 
family out to a cousin of ours that lives in Elm- 
wood for Sunday dinner, and it was as fine a day 
as you ever saw, but just about the time I began 
to enjoy myself, and I was going past the Seven 
Corners and looking at the new filling-station 
they got there —say, man, I’ll bet that’s one of 
the finest filling-stations in the United States: 
twelve pumps they got, and a comfort station 


35 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


fixed up to look like an old-fashioned log cabin, 
and a supply store with a great big huge enor- 
mous fish-aquarium simply chuck-full of gold- 
fish right in the window. And geraniums. 

And just when I was calling it to Mamie’s 
attention — by golly, all of a sudden that squeak 
started again. 

Well, say, I couldn’t enjoy anything all day. 
After dinner, I took Cousin Ed out for a drive, 
to see if he could locate the squeak, and we 
drove right down through a wood, a park they 
got there, mighty pretty and I’d ’ve enjoyed it 
like the dickens — I always was a great believer 
in Nature — but every time I looked at a tree 
or a nice rustic-style bench or something like 
that, that darn’ squeak would start in again, and 
Cousin Ed — he thinks he’s such a wiz at cars, 
but Lord love you, he couldn’t locate that 
squeak any more’n I could. 

* 

But’s I say: I guess we’re about as well fixed 
as most folks and we certainly don’t have to get 
away from home to enjoy ourselves, but when I 
said to my wife, “TI kind of got an idea you and 
Delmerine might come along with me and give 


36 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


New York the once-over,” she looked like 
somebody’d left her a million dollars. 

And Delmerine she just hollers, “Oh boy! 
T’ll give those Manhattan cabarets a look at a 
live one for once!” 

“And we might stop at Cousin Walter’s in 
Troy, on the way,” I says. 

“Oh no, let’s not,”’ says my wife. 

“But we got to gothere! Ain’t Cousin Walter 
living there?” I says. 

“Well, what of that?” she says. ‘““Haven’t you 
and he always hated each other?” 

“Well, maybe we have,” I says, “but he’s a 
relative, ain’t he? And when you travel you got 
to look up your relatives, ain’t you?” 

Well, make a long story short, we decided to 
stop at Cousin Walter’s for a few days —and 
then — man! —then I springs the big surprise! 

“‘And after New York,” I says, “‘we’ll come 
home by way of Washington, and we'll step in 
and call on the President!” 

“Oh, Papa, we couldn’t do that!” Delmerine 
hollers. 

“Id like to know why not!” I says. “Ain’t 
he and I classmates?”’ 


37 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


“Yes, but maybe he wouldn’t remember 
you,” she says. 

“Now you look here!” I says. “If you think 
for one moment that I wasn’t just as important 
in college as he was, and maybe then some — 
they told me if I could have stayed till spring 
I’d ’ve been in the baseball team— But that 
isn’t the point! Let me tell you right now that 
words like that are an insult not to me, my fine 
young lady, but to the Great Executive him- 
self! 

“What is it that more than any other one 
quality distinguishes leaders of men like Cal? It 
isn’t merely his profound thought, his immoy- 
able courage, his genial and democratic man- 
ners, but it’s the fact that he’s so close a student 
of human nature that he quickly but thoroughly 
studies each man as he meets him, and so never 
can forget him! Understand now,” I says to 
them, “I understand that the President is one 
of the busiest men in the country, what with 
having to sign documents, and shake hands 
with delegations of Elks, and so on, and I cer- 
tainly don’t intend to intrude, but we'll just 
drop in and give him a pleasant surprise — think 


38 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


how many years it is since we’ve seen each 
other! ~ and just shake hands and pass on. And 
you'll be able, Delmerine, to tell your grand- 
children that once you heard the voice of 
Calvin Coolidge!” 

Well, of course, when I made it clear, they 
were tickled to death at the prospect, and so we 
started making plans — personally I was for just 
taking some suit-cases along, but my wife held 
out for the black trunk, and I must say-[’m _ 
always the first to admit it when I’m licked, and 
Mamie certainly won that time! —she pointed 
out I’d have to have my dress-suit in New York 
and it wouldn’t get wrinkled in a wardrobe 
trunk —and now say, while we’re speaking of 
that, [ll bet it’s struck you gentlemen as it has 
me: there’s one of the highest-class and most 
significant of modern inventions that do so 
much to make life happy, the wardrobe trunk, 
and what a lot it adds to ease of travel and seeing 
the world, yes sir, she sure won that time and — 

And just then — 

Say, isn’t it funny how a fellow will remem- 
ber comparatively unimportant details even at a 
critical time! Happened just then that Robby 


39 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


~ that’s my son, he’s only fifteen, and the little 
cuss had started smoking; seems like I’d done 
everything I could to make him stop, but he’s 
such acute little beggar the way he comes back at 
you when you try to bawl him out that I never 
could get a word in edgeways. Well, he comes 
in — 

And besides, I must say I still ain’t sold on 
the idea of cigarettes. 

I think I can with justification call myself 
what ‘you might call a modern, up-to-date 
liberal man. I was the first fellow in my neigh- 
bourhood to put in a radio, and I never did 
believe they ought to have hung Sacco and Van- 
zetti if they were innocent. But when it comes 
to smoking, I still prefer a pipe or a good 
cigar. 

But’s I was saying, he comes in smoking a 
cigarette, and Delmerine — that’s my daughter, 
a girl that I want to tell you gentlemen can in 
my judgment sing just as good right this minute 
as Schuman-Heink or Sophie Tucker or any of 
these famous prima donnas — and she hollers at 
him, “Say, Dad’s going to take us to see Presi- 
dent Coolidge.” 


40 


THE. MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 

And he says, “Gee, whiz! Are you going to 
give him enough warning so he can get away?” 

Well say, maybe I didn’t light into him then! 
I believe in giving kids their freedom, but I’ve 
told Robby time and time again that it’s nice 
language and nice manners that enable a fellow 
to get along in this world, and if he’d study his 
mother and me a little more instead of a lot of 
these smart-aleck cigarette-sucking high-school 
fraternity yahoos, he’d be a lot better off! You 
bet! Every time! ! 

Well, so we decided to go and got started. I 
don’t want to bore you gentlemen with a lot of 
details of our trip. Of course what you want to 
hear about is the inside glimpse of Coolidge and 
the White House that I was privileged to have. 
So ll cut it short and come right down to the 
real meat of the story. 

* 

So we got off on the noon train in about a 
week and — Say, it certainly is remarkable, ain’t 
it, the conveniences of railroad travel to-day — 
in America, I mean, not abroad. A fellow that 
knows every inch of Europe was telling me 
there ain’t a what you might call really comfort- 


41 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


able train in the whole length and breadth of 
the Old Country. But here — 

There I sits in the club car, with every con- 
venience and luxury — soft drinks ( personally I 
always find the Loganberry Highball the best 
drink on a Pullman) — and soft drinks to be had 
just by touching a button, and a regular library 
of free magazines and everything, especially the 
Saturday Evening Post, which is, taking it by 
and large, my favourite magazine, especially 
the advertisements, now that they’ve taken to 
printing em in colours. 

Say! they can keep their old masters; give 
me some of these advertisements! 

Yes sir, it’s wonderful what strides advertising 
has made these last few years. Of course I ad- 
mire the really great and leading American 
authors— Mrs. Rinehart and Peter B. Kyne, 
and Arthur Brisbane: — but I doubt if even 
they can touch the fellows that get up these 
advertisements nowadays. And it was a mighty 
bright idea—I don’t know who started it, but 
this idea of working in a girl with pretty legs 


* Three distinguished writers of fiction of the first quarter 
of the twentieth century in America. 


42 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


in all sorts of ads; not only stocking ads, but 
auto ads, showing her climbing into a car; and 
machinery, showing her giving it the North and 
South, and so on. Yes sir, a fellow that wants 
to understand the United States, all he has to do 
is to study the Saturday Evening Post ads, and 
he’ll see why we’re the most advanced nation 
in the world, and the most individual. 

There’s a lot of sorehead critics of America 
that claim we’re standardized, but — 

Well, to take an example, let me take — well, 
just for an example let me take the fellow that I 
happened to be lunching with before I caught 
this train—just take the differences between 
him and me. We both belong to the Athletic 
Club, we both belong to service clubs, we have 
our places of business in the same block, we 
live within a quarter of a mile of each other, we 
both like golf and a good lively jazz on the 
radio. And yet this fellow and me-—his name 
is Babbitt, G. F. Babbitt, fellow in the real 
estate game — we're as different as Moses and 
Gene Tunney. 3 

1 Another celebrated athlete, much influenced by G. Ber- 
nard Shaw. 


43 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Where these poor devils of Europeans are 
crushed down and prevented from having their 
characters developed by the wide and free initia- 
tive so characteristic of American life, George 
and me can be friendly, yet as different — 

Well, like this, for instance: I drive a Chrys- 
ler, and Babbitt doesn’t. I’m a Congregation- 
alist, and Babbitt has no use whatsomever for 
anything but his old Presbyterian church. He 
wears these big round spectacles, and you 
couldn’t hire me to wear anything but eye- 
glasses— much more dignified, J think. He’s 
got so he likes golf for its own sake, and I’d 
rather go fishing, any day. And—and so on. 
Yes sir, it’s a wonderful thing how American 
civilization, as represented, you might say, by 
modern advertising, has encouraged the, as a 
speaker at the Kiwanis recently called it, free 
play of individualism. ' 

But as I say — 

Make a long story short, we got to Cousin 
Walter’s at Troy all right, and on to New 
York - 

But say, Walt certainly did entertain us in fine 
style —I got to thinking he wasn’t such a bad 

44 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


cuss after all. And he’s got a new house that, 
and I’m the first to admit it, is just as modern 
as mine is! A modern homey home! Vacuum 
cleaner and gas clothes-drier and one of these 
new noiseless electric refrigerators — 

Man, what a convenience that is! I never 
could understand why they make so much fuss 
over Babe Ruth! or even a real scientific pioneer 
like Lindbergh, when we haven’t yet done 
anything to boost the honest-to-God master 
genius that invented the electric refrigerator. 

Think of what itll do! Give you every sort 
of frozen dessert! Get rid of the iceman that 
tracks mud on the back porch! Provide ice- 
water so you can have a refreshing drink night 
or day! What I always say is: these fellows 
can have their big libraries, their blinking art 
galleries, their private pipe organs, their rose 
gardens, but when it comes down to the practi- 
cal things that make home an inspiration and 
_ solid comfort to a real family, give me an electric 
refrigerator! 

And I got to admit that Walt’s radio shades 
mine just the least little bit. And there’s mighty 

1 Another professional football player. 


45 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


few things that indicate a fellow’s social rank 
and progress better than his radio. 

And what an invention shat is! What an 
invention! Talk about miracles — 

Just think of it! Here you sit at home in the 
ole over-stuffed chair, happy as a clam at low 
tide (or is it high tide? - whichever it is). You 
sit there and smoke your pipe and twiddle the 
knob and what do you get? Think of it! Right 
there at home you hear the best jazz music in 
the country, bands in the best hotels in Chicago, 
and that wonderful orchestra at Zion City! 
All the hockey matches right while they’re 
going on! Jokes by the best comedians in the 
country — 

Say, I heard a crackajack over the radio the 
other day. Seems there was a couple of fellows 
sitting chinning in a Pullman, just like we are. 
“Haven’t I met you in Buffalo?” one fellow 
says to the other, and the other says, “I’ve never 
been in Buffalo,” and the first fellow says, 
“Neither have I-must’ve been a couple o’ 
other fellows!’ 

Yes sir! and then think of the instructive lec- 
tures you get on the radio — why say, just the 


46 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


other night I heard that in the eye of the 
ordinary house-fly there are several thou- 
sand, I think it was, separate lenses. Ever know 
that? 

And then the sermons on Sunday morning. 
Why, that alone would make the radio one of 
the most world-revolutionizing inventions the 
world has ever known. 

I tell you, it gives a real spiritual uplift to a 
poor devil that all week, excepting maybe at the 
Kiwanis lunch, he’s had to toil and moil amid 
the dust of busy affairs and forget higher things. 
You bet! I'll never forget one sermon that I 
wouldn’t ever ’ve heard if I hadn’t had the radio, 
it being ’way off in Youngstown, Ohio — Rever- 
end Wayo on how he didn’t want to say that 
every atheist was a bootlegger, but you could 
bet your sweet life every bootlegger was an 
atheist! 

Cute idea for a sermon, eh? and — 

Yes sir, there’s never been anything that 
‘makes for sound internationalism, nothing that 
combats the destructive and malign propaganda 
of the Bolsheviks and pacifists and all like that, 
like the radio, and personally I class it right in 


47 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


with card-catalogues as an inspiration to the 
New Era. 

So as I say, Walt’s radio was every bit as good 
as mine, and we had some dandy drives around 
Troy and a big beer party Sunday evening — 
the only evening we stayed up late—I was 
mighty glad to find that Walt still kept regular 
hours and turned in about ten. 

I tell you there never was a truer saying than 
“Early to bed, early to rise, makes a man 
healthy, wealthy, and wise’ —I’ve certainly 
found it true in my own case —and we drove 
out for a few rounds of golf — 

Now you take golf. By golly, if anybody’d 
told me fifteen years ago that I'd be out on the 
links chasing a little white pill around, I’d ’ve 
told ’em they were crazy, but let me tell you, 
I found one of the best ways to get acquainted 
with customers was to play round with ’em, 
and I saw what a mossback I’d been, and I’ve 
got so I like the game itself a good deal — take 
like my playing there at Troy even when I 
wasn’t making any valuable contacts — and even 
though the weather was pretty chilly and — 

Seems to me that on the whole the weather 


48 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


has gotten warmer than it used to be when we 
were kids. You read in the papers how it hasn’t 
changed materially, but they can say what they 
want to, don’t you remember how doggone 
cold it used to be mornings when we had to get 
up and chase off to school, and now it seems 
like we don’t have any more old-fashioned 
winters — maybe that’s one reason why the kids 
to-day aren’t as self-reliant as we were — 

But to get back to my subject. As I say, I 
certainly did enjoy my stay with Walt as I 
hadn’t expected to, especially his stories, and 
inside information about the War, he was a 
lieutenant in the quartermaster’s corps at Camp 
Devon — wii 

You know, there’s a lot of false ideas about 
the War. I don’t want to criticize General 
Pershing — I know he ranks among the greatest 
generals we’ve ever had, right along with Grant 
and Lee and Israel Putnam, but same time 
what we ought to done, what I’d ’ve done if 
I’d been running things, was to march right 
straight through to Berlin, and make them 
Germans suffer good —suffer like we did. 

I was explaining this to my wife, and she 


49 2 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


says, “Why, Lowell T. Schmaltz,”’ she says, 
“I’m ashamed of you! Don’t we know some 
Germans that are awful’ nice folks?” 

“You don’t know the Germans like I do,” I 
says to her. “They haven’t got any forward- 
looking ideas. They believe in rule by tyranny 
and despotism and compulsion and all that, and 
if they haven’t understood our democratic ideas, 
they ought to ’ve been forced to, that’s what 
they ought to ’ve been!” I told her. “But 
same time you got to hand it to *em—they 
certainly have buckled down to work ever 
since the War. Be a good thing if ovr workmen 
worked like that, ’stead of watching the clock 

and thinking about a raise all the time!” 

_ But make a long story short, we certainly 
enjoyed our stay, and we went on to New 
York. 

I was kind of sore all the time I was in New 
York, though. These damn’ New Yorkers —I 
hope none of you gentlemen come from New 
York — they seem to think they run the nation, 
and what I always say is, as a matter of fact 
they’re the most provincial town in the country! 
Give me Chicago every time. 


“ye 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


You see, when I go to Chicago, in the first 
place I always stay at the Hotel Grand Imperial 
Palace, it’s a nice quiet little place and the clerks 
know me and try to give me a little service, but 
in those big New York hotels, they’re so darn’ 
independent, you’d think they were doing you 
a favour. 

Then when it comes to business — 

In Chicago I usually do the bulk, you might 
say, of my business with Starbright, Horner, 
and Dodd; and Billy Dodd himself looks after 
me, and say, there’s a man that it’s a pleasure 
to do business with, a square-shooter if ever 
there was one, and always got a good story and 
a two-bit cigar for you, and acts like he was 
glad to see you, and he isn’t one of those fellows 
to throw seven kind of cat-fits if maybe a fellow 
is temporarily a little short and wants an exten- 
sion of a couple of days or a month or so. Yes 
sir, and many’s the good lunch I’ve had with 
Billy in the old Palmer House before they tore 
it down, and though of course this new Palmer 
House is you might say a regular palace, still, 
there was kind of an atmosphere about the old 
place, and say, they certainly did know how to 


Si 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


cook steak and fried onions to a turn. Um! 
And oyster stew. But in New York — 

All this darn’ fancy French food, and the 
prices — 

“My God,” I says to one of these smart- 
aleck head-waiters, or maybe he was what they 
call a captain, anyway he was the fellow that 
takes the order and then he hands it on to the 
regular waiter. “My God,” I said to him, 
when I looks at the prices on the bill of fare, 
“T just come in here to eat,” I says. “I don’t 
want to buy the hotel!” 

And just the same way in the business world. 

Why say, the firm that was handling these 
new mimeograph machines, they said they were 
behind on their orders and they couldn’t make 
a delivery right away. Oh, that’s all right, I 
told °em — why couldn’t they fill my order and 
keep some other fellow waiting? 

No sir, they said, they wouldn’t do it. They 
were just naturally arbitrary about it, and when 
I tried to make ’em understand that with the 
class and volume of business that J do, they 
ought to be willing to make some concessions, 
they acted like a bunch of human icicles. 


$2 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Some day I’m going to write a letter to the 
New York newspapers and tell ’em what a real 
he-American from the Middle West thinks 
about their town — 

The noise, and traffic so thick you can’t get 
anywhere, and the outrageous prices and — 

And no home-life. Folks all out in the even- 
ing, hitting it up at these night clubs and every- 
thing. Now you take us, back home, for 
instance. Evenings, except maybe when I have 
to be at the lodge or some Kiwanis committee 
meeting, or maybe Delmerine or Robby are 
at the movies or a party or something, we all 
just settle down around the radio and have a real 
old-fashioned homey time together. But not in 
New York! No sir! I swear, I don’t know what 
the nation’s coming to — 

And too many foreigners — fellows with Wop 
names and Hunky names and Lord knows what 
all —and this corrupt politics — 

Oh say, speaking of politics, if I may inter- 
rupt myself a moment and take the risk of 
straying from my story, I got to tell you what 
I heard at the Kiwanis luncheon just this past 
week, Our congressman, and I think it’s pretty 


53 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


generally conceded even right in Washington 
that he’s got one of the ablest minds in the entire 
House of Representatives, he got back from an 
extensive investigation of the European status 
—spent six weeks in Germany, France, and 
Italy, and he gave it as his measured opinion 
that all these countries are so prosperous now 
that we certainly ought to press for the pay- 
ment of our debt in full! Why, he said that in 
the better class of hotels in those countries, 
you could get just as good food and nearly as 
- expensive as in New York itself! And they 
complaining about being poor! 

But to get back to my story, I didn’t think so 
much of New York, though we did have one 
dandy evening — we ran into some folks from 
home in the hotel lobby, and we all went out to 
a Chink restaurant and threw in some of the 
best chicken chow mein that I ever ate in my 
life, and then we went to a movie that I knew 
was good because I'd seen it in Zenith — Hoot 
Gibson in a crackajack western film. 

But Delmerine, she liked New York, and my 
Lord, how that girl did keep nagging and teas- 
ing and complaining — 

54 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


She wanted to go to one of these night clubs. 
I pointed out to her that all day long while I 
had to work, talking to a lot of different firms, 
she and her mother were free to enjoy them- 
selves — go to a matinee or look over the stores 
and shop a little (though I didn’t encourage 
“em to buy too much — “Why not wait till you 
get back home-the stores there are just as 
up-to-date as New York, far’s I can see,” I 
pointed out to’em). But she kept insisting, and 
her mother mere or less agreed with her, and 
so one night I took ’em to a swell night club 
that was recommended to me by one of the 
bell-boys at the hotel, cute little tad, knew the 
town like a book. 

Well, thinks I, here’s where I havea punkeven- 
ing, but I want to admit that Iwas wrong. Not 
but what it was expensive, and I certainly wouldn’t 
want to go to one of those places more’n once or 
twice a year, but say, that was some place! 

First off, we was all kind of disappointed. We 
drives up to a house in the Fifties, just an ordi- 
nary-looking place, and all dark. 

“This can’t be the place,” I says to the taxi- 
driver. 


55 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


“Sure, this is the joint all right,” he says. 

“Are you sure?” I says. 

“Sure, you bet,” he says. “I’ve driven lots of 
folks here. You just ring that basement bell 
and they'll let you in,” he says. 

Well, I figured he probably knew his busi- 
ness, so my wife and Delmerine and I, we all 
piled out of the taxi, and I went and rang the 
bell at the basement door — well, they call it 
the basement, it was really practically the 
ground floor, but this was one of those houses 
that they got so many of in New York, or used 
to have anyway, though now a lot of ’em are 
being torn down to make way for modern 
apartment houses — greystone houses they call 
em, and you go up a flight of steps from the 
street to the front door, so the door to this 
basement floor, as they call it, was really kind 
of under these steps, practically on the ground 
level, only of course you go down into a kind 
of areaway that’s a step or maybe it might have 
been two steps below the pavement level but 
not more than that if I remember rightly, and 
there was a kind of iron grilled door, but ’s I 
said, there weren’t any lights or anything that 

56 . 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


we could see, and I wondered if the taxi-driver 
could ’ve been right and — 

But I rung the bell and pretty soon, sure 
enough, the door opened, and by golly there 
was a fellow in one of these funny Lord High 
Admiral uniforms, and I says to him, “Is this 
the Nouvelle Desire —’ That was the name of 
the joint I was looking for — “Is this the Nou- 
velle Desire?” I says. 

“Yes, but I haven’t the pleasure of knowing 
your face,” he says— you know, some high- 
falutin’ comeback like that. 

Well, I kidded him along—TI told him it 
wasn’t such a hard face to know when you put 
your mind to it. Delmerine-—she stood right 
back of me, and I must say, maybe it was just 
because she was my girl, but she wore a kind 
of light violet dress and shiny spangles and gold 
slippers, and say, she certainly looked as elegant 
as anybody there that night, and my wife wasn’t 
suchaslouch herself, fora Mid Western girl, and — 

But as I was saying, Delmerine was standing 
right near me, and she kind of whispers to me, 
“Say, you hadn’t ought to kid the servants like 
that.” 

57 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


But I knew this guy in the uniform wasn’t 
any ordinary servant and I wanted to show 
him I was just as used to the Gay Life as any- 
body (of course I was wearing my dress-suit) 
and — 

But anyway, he calls what I figured out to be 
the assistant manager — nice-looking fellow in a 
dress-suit, kind of dark-complected, Italian I 
guess, but a nice-spoken fellow. 

He explained that this Nouvelle Desire was a 
club and they couldn’t let in nobody that didn’t 
belong, but I introduced him to the wife and 
Delmerine, and I explained we come from 
Zenith and was only in town for about a week, 
and I showed him my Elks card, and he looked 
us over good and he said maybe he could fix it 
—the regular membership cost two hundred 
bucks.a head a year but finally he let me have 
a temporary membership for that week for only 
five bucks a head. 

So we got in all safe and — 

Maybe you couldn’t see any lights outside, 
but inside, oh boy! It was fixed up as elegant 
as if it was the Vanderbilts’ ballroom. They'd 
turned the whole parlour floor—that is, the 


58 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


floor above the basement, I guess they had the 
kitchen and all like that on the basement floor — 

And here was a funny thing: this assistant 
manager — he and I got to be quite chummy; 
he told me to call him Nick, and I said he was 
to call me Low, but he said that was against 
the rules—and Nick told me something that 
may surprise you gentlemen as it certainly 
surprised me at the time: he told me that they 
did all their cooking by electricity! 

Then as I say, there was.this kind of ballroom. 
Half-way up, the wall was all red satin or silk 
or something, with a lot of what they call 
Modern Art decoration, or that’s what Nick 
called it —all kinds of zigzags and big flowers 
and everything in gold; and then above that 
the walls was all hung with flowers. I found 
they was artificial flowers, but they looked so 
real you had to touch ’em before you'd believe 
it. And some of the tables was in kind of booths 
fixed up so that they looked like grape arbours 
and all like that. And at the end of the room 
there was some great big yellow marble 
columns — it looked like real genuwine marble, 
though it may not have been — in front of where 


ope 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


the orchestra played — and say, the boys in that 
orchestra certainly were some jazz babies all 
right, all coons but they had a regular high- 
class musical education, Nick told me later, 
and the fellow that played the saxophone — say, 
if they got anybody better’n him in Paul 
Whiteman’s! band, I want to hear him, that’s 
all— Why say, he could make that ole saxo- 
phone sound like a fog horn or a sick cow or 
anything he wanted. 

Well, before we got settled down -—there 
weren’t many folks there yet —- Nick took me 
aside and said they had a regular sure-enough 
old-fashioned bar on the floor above, and he 
thought maybe he could fix it so I could go 
up and get outside of a little real liquor. The 
rules of the club, or so he said anyway, the 
rules of the club made every fellow buy wine 
at his table, and when it comes to fizz, of course 
it’s a grand high-class wine, but it ain’t got the 
authority like hootch, like the fellow says. — 

Well, make a long story short, he went away 
and he fixed it so we could go up to the bar. 

I’d just intended to let Delmerine and her 

1’The Ysaye and Toscanini of America. 


60 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


mother have some ginger ale up there, but seems 
they didn’t stock any soft drinks, and anyway 
Delmerine put up a holler. 

“T want a cocktail,” she says, “and I’ll bet so 
does Mamma, if she tells the truth. Maybe 
we'll never get to another night club again,” 
she says. ‘And besides,” she says, ““you’ve let 
me taste a sip of your cocktail when you’ve had 
"em at home. And think of what my bunch 
will say if I go back home and tell ’em we went 
to a night club and I couldn’t have a cocktail. 
I’m not a kid,” she says. 

Well, anyway, I kicked, and I pointed out 
her mother didn’t want any — my wife’s a great 
believer in prohibition — but her mother, dog- 
gone her, she went and laid right down on me 
and didn’t back me up — just kind of giggled, 
and said she wouldn’t mind one herself, just 
this once. So, make a long story short, we all 
had a cocktail - Mame took a Bronx, and Del- 
merine took a side-car, if I remember rightly, 
and I ordered a Martini and then I said, “By 
golly, I believe I’ll have a Manhattan. Must be 
five years since I’ve had a Manhattan cocktail.” 
And so I had a Manhattan. And then I sneaked 

61 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


in a couple highballs while Mame and the girl 
was in the ladies’ dressing-room, and say, by 
that time I certainly did feel primed for one high 
wide and fancy evening. 

And I want to say that, think what you may 
of New York, we certainly had said evening. 

Nick had fixed us up a nice little table almost 
right next to where they danced. 

We looked around and there was a nice- 
looking lot of people there-—they was just 
coming in. Delmerine was just saying, “Oh, I 
wish we knew somebody here -—I won’t have 
anybody to dance with except you, Papa,” and 
I was informing her that I was regarded as by 
golly just as good a dancer as anybody at the 
Country Club, when- Say, you could ’ve 
knocked me down with a feather! Yes sir, I 
hears a familiar voice, and there stands Sam 
Gierstein of the Mammoth Clothing Company 
of Zenith — fellow I’d often met at the Athletic 
Club. 

Now there’s a whole lot of fellows I’d rather 
seen than Sam. To tell the truth, just between 
ourselves, he hasn’t got any too good a reputa- 
tion for square dealing, and I’ve heard some 

62 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


mighty queer rumours about the way him and 
his lady secretary carry on. But same time — 
you know how it is when you’re away from 
home — especially in a city like New York 
where they’re such a chilly lot of stiffs: familiar 
face sure does look good to you. 

So we invites Sam to sit down, and say, I will 
say one thing for him, he certainly did insist on 
buying his share of wine and then some. And 
he sure could dance. I never did like his looks 
—kind of too dark and good-looking, and big 
black eyes like you don’t really like to see in a 
real he-male, but he certainly did spin Del- 
merine and even the wife around that ole floor 
all right. And me, after I’d got a little cham- 
pagne into my system, I guess I wouldn’t have 
hardly beefed much even if he’d kissed Del- 
merine — 

Not that he did anything like that, you under- 
stand; he acted like a perfect gentleman, you 
understand; and once when I was dancing with 
Mame, and I kind of slipped and almost fell 
down — they had that floor altogether too slip- 
pery for any use — why, it was Sam that grabbed 
me and kept me from falling. 

se ee 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 
Though I don’t like the way he’s been hang- 


ing around the house since we been back in 
Zenith — seems he’s got a wife somewhere only 
they’re separated. Delmerine, she says I’m 
crazy. She says she just discusses music with 
Sam —seems he knows a lot about it. But I 
don’t like her being out late — 

Oh, I guess I’m an old crank. But Del is so 
young, and she thinks she knows everything 
but she’s innocent as a baby, but —- Oh, I’m a 
regular fusser. But anyway, we certainly did 
have one large round time that evening — even- 
ing, huh! Say, we certainly were high-rollers 
for once! I’ll bet it was three o’clock before we 
hit the day. I remember — 

It was kind o’ comic! Here was Mame — 
that’s my wife — supposed to be a good respect- 
able dame, and me, a deacon in the church, and 
us coming down Broadway at three G.m. sing- 
ing “We Won’t Go Home Until Morning!” 

You see, Sam—he’s got the nerve of the 
devil — he picked up a couple from Fort Worth, 
Texas (and maybe she wasn’t some baby; say, 
she had all the regular New York dames there 
beat a mile), and somehow, I don’t exactly 


64 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


remember how, we got acquainted with another 
couple from San José, California, a gentleman 
that was in the fruit-ranching business and his 
wife and son, he took a shine to Delmerine; 
and up in the bar I got talking to a gentleman 
and lady from Kansas City, Missouri -—or it 
may have been Kansas City, Kansas; I can’t 
exactly remember, at this late date—and the 
whole lot of us carried on like we’d always 
known each other, dancing and laughing and 
drinking toasts and singing and drinking and 
cutting up — Say! But I hate to think of what 
it cost me. But as I told my wife, that’s the 
way of it, in New York. 

But I don’t need to tell you gentlemen about 
New York. Probably you know it better’n I do, 
and you want me to sing my little song and get 
it finished and get on to Washington and my 
éxperiences at the White House. Yes sir, the 
less said about New York the better. Money- 
mad, that’s what the New Yorkers are. 

If I wanted to sacrifice other more worth- 
while things, like our home-life and friendships 
and reading worth-while literature, and getting 
in a good fish every summer — And let me tell 


65 E 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


you that they can talk about Canada all they 
want to, but if they can show me any better 
fishing than I get up in Northern Michigan, 
right within you’d hardly call it more’n an over- 
night ride from Zenith, why just let *em show 
it to me, that’s all! 

But the way I look at it, a fellow ought to 
be prosperous for his family’s sake and that of 
his own position in the community, but money- 
making can be overdone, and what I always says 
is: Ideals before Dollars every time. 

* 

So that’s what I think of New York and — 
And then we packed up and went on to Wash- 
ington, and say, Delmerine pretended she didn’t 
care, but she was so excited over the prospect 
of having a chat with the President that she 
couldn’t hardly sit still on the train. Well, so 
was I—hadn’t seen Cal for so many years. I 
got to thinking maybe he might invite us to 
lunch or supper, but still, I knew that was 
unreasonable — having to entertain so many 
people — ambassadors, and officials of the Order 
of Moose, and so on — but I guess I was pretty 
excited just the same. 


66 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


I don’t know how well you gentlemen know 
Washington, but the new station there is very 
handsome and up-to-date in every respect, with 
a great big open space — the Plaza I believe 
they call it —in front; and what I’d never known 
is, you can see the dome of the Capitol right 
from the front of the station. I tell you I got 
a mighty big thrill out of that. 

Well, Mame wanted us to get a room in the 
hotel first and get washed up, but I says, “No, 
sir, we better see the President first and see what 
his plans are; we'll just keep the taxi waiting 
and I don’t care if it costs a dollar and a half; 
*tisn’t often in your life that you’re going to sit 
in with a President of these United States!’’ 

So we got into a taxi and we started off all 
het up, and all of a sudden I says to my wife: 
“Say, do you notice anything funny about this 
taxi?” | 

“Why no,” she says, “I don’t know’s I do; it 
looks all right to me. Why?” 

“Looks all right!’ I says. “I should say it 
does! Do you mean to tell me you don’t 
notice something different about this taxi?” 

“Why no,” she says. 

67 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


“Well, what make of car is it?” I says. 

Of course Delmerine has to horn in. ‘It’s a 
Studebaker, isn’t it?” she says. 

“Oh it is, is it, Miss Smarty!” I says. “My 
God, and me teaching you to drive! It is not a 
Studebaker, and it isn’t a Cadillac, no, and it 
isn’t a flivver either! It’s a Buick. See the 
significance?” 

Well, they both stared at me-couldn’t get 
the idea at all—just like women, even the 
brightest of ’em. 

“Can’t you see?” I says. “Here’s the Buick, 
the biggest-selling six-cylinder car in the 
United States if not in the world. And yet how 
often do you see a Buick taxi? Not very often. 
Ever think of that? Yes sir, it’s a mighty 
peculiar thing, and I’m sure I don’t know why 
itis. At least I’m practically certain it’s a Buick 
of course with a taxi body on it-—I didn’t 
happen to notice the hood, but from the looks 
of the dashboard — Anyway —” 

So I tapped on the window, and the driver — 
he probably thought we were just ordinary 
tourists that wanted to see the town, and we 
were passing some building or other and he 

68 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


just hardly turns his head and he says, “It’s the 
Pensions Building.” (Or it may have been the 
Patent Building —I didn’t pay much attention; 
I was so worked up and excited about seeing 
the President, and I can’t exactly remember 
at this late date.) 

*“No,”’ I hollers to him, “‘what I want to know 
is: isn’t this a Buick taxi?” 

SY¥chy “he says. 

“There!” I says to the girls. “What did I tell 
you!” 

You bet! 

So we came to the White House and — 

Now even you gentlemen that ’ve been to 
Washington and seen the White House may not 
know that the offices, including the President’s 
own private office, are in wings stretching out 
on either side of the old main structure. The 
wings are new, I should think, and they’re so 
low that you wouldn’t hardly notice ’em from 
the street in front — not hardly know they were 
there unless you’d happened, like I was, to be 
privileged to enter ’em. 

So there we came up the avenue to that 
famous old place — 


69 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


I tell you it was a mighty moving thing to 
think of the famous men that had inhabited 
that structure: Grant and McKinley and Hard- 
ing and Garfield and everybody! By golly, as I 
told the Kiwanis when I addressed them about 
my trip, it certainly gave a fellow inspiration. 
For what after all is a greater inspiration than 
the lives of our heroes — 

That reminds me that recently-—why, in 
fact, it was just a couple of nights ago, and a 
neighbour and I were having a little visit, and 
he says to me, “Lowell, who do you think have 
been the greatest heroes of the United States 
since 1900 and the geniuses?” 

Well, a question like that certainly makes a 
fellow think, and him and I, we began making 
lists, and it just happens I’ve still got mine in my 
pocket here, and here’s how I figured out our 
leading intellects: 

Coolidge, Harding, Wilson (though I’m a 
Republican), Ford, Lindbergh, Billy Sunday, 
Pershing, Roosevelt, John Roach Straton,? 
Judge Gary and —- 

1 The Protestant Pope. 

2’The leading Baptist Fundamentalist of America. 


7O 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Now here’s a couple more names that may 
surprise you gentlemen; maybe you never 
looked at it like this. I figure that what you 
might call the arts ought to be represented, and 
I put in Anne Nichols—say, the author of a 
play like “‘Abie’s Irish Rose,”’ that can run five 
years, is in my mind—-maybe it’s highbrow 
and impractical to look at it that way, but the 
way I see it, she’s comparable to any business 
magnate, and besides, they say she’s made as 
much money as Jack Dempsey. 

And here’s a name that may surprise you still 
more: Samuel Gompers! 

Yes, I knew that would surprise you, my 
putting in a man that lots of folks think he 
merely stood for union labour and labour dis- 
turbances and all those kind of Bolshevik activi- 
ties. But it seems that Gompers — a fellow, some 
kind of professor he was, was explaining this 
to us at the Kiwanis Club here just recently — 
Gompers stood right square against labour 
disturbances. He thought that labouring men 
ought to have their rights, and I suppose that’s 
true, but the way he looked at it, he wanted 

1 A famous actor. 


fi 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


employees and employers and the general 
public to join hands in one great brotherhood 
for the glory of the Union and the extension 
of our markets into lands now unfairly mono- 
polized by England and Germany. Yes sir! 

So, as I say, we drove up to the White 
House — 

I’d told the chauffeur to go right up to the 
front door —just like I’d expect Cal Coolidge 
to come right up to my front door, if he came 
to call on me in Zenith. I didn’t understand 
then about the arrangement of the White House. 

But there was some kind of cop at the gate 
and he says, ““What do you want, please?” 

“What do I want, officer?” I says. “What do 
I want? Why, I just want to call on the Presi- 
dent, that’s all!” I says. “I’m an old friend of 
his, that’s all!’’ I says. 

Well, I explains, and he tells me the proper 
caper is to go round to the office entrance, so I 
says all right; I'd be the last, I says to him, as a 
friend of the President, to want to break any 
proper regulations. 

Well, make a long story short, at last there 
we were, in one of the waiting-rooms to the 


72 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


President’s own offices, and a gentleman came 
in — fine-looking gentleman he was, all dressed 
up like Sunday morning, in a cutaway coat 
and striped pants and seems he was practically 
the President’s first main secretary, and I pre- 
sented my wife and Delmerine to him, and I 
explained about the President and me being 
classmates. 

“T know the President’s a busy man, but I’d 
like a look at the old kid,” I tells him, ‘‘and I 
kind of thought I’d like to have my wife and 
daughter shake hands with him.” 

Well sir, he understood perfectly. 

He went right in and saw the President — 
didn’t keep me waiting one minute, ino sir, not 
hardly a minute. 

He came back and said the President was 
awful’ sorry he couldn’t have us come in just 
that second, but, seems he was all tied up with 
an important international conference about — I 
think it was about Geneva he said — and would 
I wait. This secretary was mighty nice, too; 
he didn’t let us sit there like bumps on a log; 
he sat and visited with us, and that’s how I 
had the chance to get the real lowdown on so 


73 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


many of the President’s opinions and activities, 
but I don’t want you gentlemen to give any of 
this stuff to the newspapers. 

I asked this secretary, Mr. Jones his name 
was —I said to him, “‘What does the President 
think about disarmament, Mr. Jones?” 

“Well, it just happens,” he says, “that I can 
tell you in the President’s own words. I heard 
him talking to the Secretary of State,” he says 
— say, maybe that didn’t give me a kick, sitting 
in as it were on a conference between the Presi- 
dent and the Secretary of State! But anyway: 
“T heard him talking to the Secretary,’ Mr. 
Jones told me, “‘and he said, ‘Frank, big navies 
cost a lot of money and in my opinion it would 
be a saving if we could get the different nations 
to reduce them.’ ”’ 

“Well, well, I’m mighty glad to find that out, 
Mr. Jones,” I said, ‘“‘and it confirms my own 
opinion about disarmament. Say, tell me,” I 
says, “how does the President live, in his per- 
sonal life? What does he take for breakfast?” 

Well, Mr. Jones explained that the President 
took a simple breakfast just like the rest of us — 
just some coffee and toast and eggs and porridge 


74 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


and so on. I was mighty proud and glad to hear 
that Cal was unspoiled by all his fame and was 
still just the same simple direct fellow he’d been 
when we were chums. 

“What does the President think of the situa- 
tion in China?” I asked Mr. Jones. 

“Well, I think I can say without violating any 
confidences that contrary to the opinion of cer- 
tain senators, the President feels the situation in 
China is serious and in fact almost critical and 
that — but this mustn’t go any further,” Mr. 
Jones told me, “he feels decidedly that while 
the rights and properties of the Great Powers 
must be safeguarded, yet we must consider 
patiently and fairly the rights of the Chinese 
themselves.” 

“Well, sir, I certainly am interested to hear 
that,” I told him. ‘““There’s no question about 
it. That’s exactly how I feel myself.” 

You see, I’d had a kind of you might call it 
a special opportunity of getting the real inside 

dope about the Chinese situation and the Bol- 
-shevik influence there. I heard a missionary, 
just recently back from the scene of disturbance 


in China, speak at the Wednesday Evening 
: iss 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Supper at our church—the Pilgrim Congre- 
gational Church of Zenith-Dr. G. Prosper 
Edwards is the pastor, very famous pulpit 
orator, you’ve quite probably heard him on the 
radio, tunes in on WWWL every second Sun- 
day morning at eleven-fifteen, very eloquent 
man and a rip-snorting good scholar, too, but 
very liberal. As he always says, he’s more than 
ready to fellowship with any Christian body no 
matter what their differences in theology, pro- 
viding they merely accept the fundamental 
and indisputable elements of Christianity, such 
as the Virgin Birth and the proven fact of 
after-life. 

I tell you how I feel about religion, anyway. 

I’m a Congregationalist myself, and it isn’t 
for one second just because I happened to be 
born one, as one of these smart-aleck infidels was 
trying to prove to me one day, but because 
of my deep reverence for the great leaders of 
our church, like Jonathan Edwards and Roger 
Baldwin —no, come to think of it, he was a 
Baptist, wasn’t he, that Rhode Island guy? 

But anyway: just the same to-day: fellows 
like Newell Dwight Hillis and S. Parkes Cad- 


76 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


man, that during the War they did as much 
to win the struggle for world-wide democracy 
as any soldier, the way they showed up the 
secret plans of Germany to dominate the world 
—and the way Dr. Cadman writes this column 
in the newspapers; say, he knows just about 
everything, and he can clear up your troubles 
about anything, whether it’s an incurable sick- 
ness or who wrote Shakespeare — yes sir, a real 
big typical American leader. 

But same time, way I look at it, the other 
denominations —the Methodists and Baptists 
and Presbyterians and Campbellites — they’re 
all working together to make a greater and 
purer America. 

Our generation, I guess we still got a lot of 
the Old Harry in us. Me, I admit, I smoke and 
sometimes I take a little drink — but never to 
excess; if there’s anything I despise it’s a man 
that can’t hold his liquor — and I do like a nice 
drive on Sunday, and sometimes I cuss a little, 
and I guess I ain’t above looking at a pretty 


1The Protestant Erasmus, but a man of broader culture 
and greater positiveness America was so fortunate as to 
acquire him from England. 


77 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


ankle even yet. But it’s my firm belief - maybe 
you gentlemen never thought about it this way 
— if we'll just support the churches and give the 
preachers a chance, a generation will come which 
won’t even want to do those things, and then 
America will stand forth before the world such 
a nation as has never been seen, yes sir, and 
I’m mighty glad to fellowship with Methodists 
or — 

Not that I think so much of these Christian 
Scientists and Seventh Day Adventists and all 
them, though. They carry things too far, and I 
don’t believe in going to extremes in anything; 
and as for the Catholics—I hope none of you 
gentlemen are Catholics and I wouldn’t want 
this to go any farther, but I’ve always felt the 
Catholics were too tolerant toward drinking and 
smoking and so aren’t, you might say, really 
hardly typically American at all. 

And as to religion in general, they tell me 
_ there’s a lot of smart-aleck highbrows to-day 
that are calling the truth of Christianity in ques- 
tion. Well, I may not be any theologian, but 
I wish I could meet one of these fellows, and 
believe me, I’d settle his hash. 


78 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


“Look here,” Id tell him; “in the first place, 
it stands to reason, don’t it, that fellows speci- 
ally trained in theology, like the preachers, 
know more than us laymen, don’t it? And in 
the second, if the Christian religion has lasted 
two thousand years and is to-day stronger than 
ever — just look, for instance, at that skyscraper 
church they’re building in New York -—is it 
likely that a little handful of you smart galoots 
are going to be able to change it?” 

I guess they never thought of that. Trouble 
with fellows like agnostics is that you simply 
can’t get ’em to stop and think and use their 
minds! 

And what have they got to put in the place 
of religion? Know what the trouble with those 
fellows is? They re destructive and not construc- 
tive! 

But as I was saying, our church has a regular 
Wednesday Evening Supper, before prayer- 
meeting, and say, the ladies of the church 
certainly do serve one of the tastiest suppers 
you ever ate, and for only forty cents —- Ham- 
burg steak with Spanish sauce, or creamed 
chipped beef, or corn beef and cabbage, and 


79 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


sometimes ice cream for dessert, all Ar. And 
they usually have a speaker, and this evening 
I was speaking of, the speaker that spoke on 
China was a missionary, and he gave us the 
real low-down on China, and he told us it was 
fierce the way the Chinks were carrying on, and 
not respecting either their trade treaties — and 
what a damn fool thing that was, because here 
they had a chance to get in contact with 
America and England and get civilized and 
give up worshipping idols— But he showed a 
real’ Christian spirit. He said that even though 
the Chinks had practically kicked him out, he 
believed they ought to have another chance to 
try to run their own country. 

Well, I could see that was fair, and I was 
real interested to see the President agreed 
with his point of view, and then I asked Mr. 
Jones — 

“Mr. Jones,” I said, ‘“what’s the real truth 
about the President’s fishing? Is he a good 
fisherman?” I said. 

“‘He’s one of the best. His catch always com- 
pares favourably with that of any other member 
of the party, when he sets his mind to it, but 

80 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


you must remember that he’s constantly 
weighed down by the cares of state,” Mr. Jones 
said. 

“Yes, I can see that,” I told him, ‘and per- 
sonally, I think it’s a shame for some of these 
newspapers that haven’t got anything better to 
write to make fun of him. Say, another thing,” 
I asked him, “does the President belong to any 
of the service clubs — Rotary and Kiwanis and 
so on?” 

“No, in his position,” Mr. Jones explained 
to me, “in his position he couldn’t hardly dis- 
criminate between them, but I think I’m not 
betraying any secret when I say that the Presi- 
dent has the highest admiration for the great 
service and ideals of all these organizations.” 

Well, I was mighty glad to hear that, and I 
think you gentlemen will be, too, whether you 
belong to’em or not. For after all, what organi- 
zations are doing a greater good and providing 
more real happiness to-day than the service 
clubs, all of ’em, though I myself am a Kiwan- 
ian and I can’t help feeling that maybe our 
own organization has got the edge on the other 
fellows — we aren’t as darned snobbish as these 


81 F 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Rotarians, and yet we aren’t, you might say, as 
common as the Civitans and the Lions and — 
Yes sir! 

Think what these clubs provide. A chance 
for a lot of the most responsible and forward- 
looking men of the community to get together 
once a week, and not only have a high old 
time, with all the dignity of our positions 
checked at the door, calling each other by our 
first names — ‘Think of what that means! Say, 
here’s some high mucka-muck of a judge; for 
that hour or so I call him “Pete,” and slap 
him on the back and kid him about his family, 
and stands to reason that any man enjoys 
having a chance to let down and be human 
like that. 

And then the good we do! Why say, just 
this past year our Zenith Kiwanians have put 
up not less than two hundred and sixty-three 
highway markers within forty miles of Zenith, 
and we gave the kids at an orphan asylum a 
dandy auto ride and free feed. And believe 
me it was one fine ad for the Kiwanians, 
because we took the kids out in trucks, and 
every truck had on it a great big red sign, 

82 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


“Free Outing for the Unfortunate Kiddies, 
Provided Free by Zenith Kiwanis Club.” 

To say nothing of the fine speakers we have 
each week —the mayor and cancer specialists 
and authors and vaudeville artists and every- 
body. And these soreheads that make fun of - 

But be that as it may, I was mighty glad to 
hear the President speak like that and to get 
his real inside view, and so I asks Mr. Jones, 
““What’s, uh — what’s the President’s views on 
taxation, if it isn’t impertinent to ask?” 

Now you gentlemen will be interested to 
learn what Mr. Jones told me, because of course 
that’s one of the most important topics of the day, 
and Jones spoke right up, without hesitation: 

“TI know for a fact,” he told me, ‘“‘that the 
President feels that the burdens of taxation 
should be so equably distributed that they 
shall lay no undue burden on the poor and 
unfortunate, yet at the same time they must 
in no sense be prejudicial to honest business 
interests or cramp the necessary conduct and 
expansion of commerce.” 

And some fly-by-nights claim that the Presi- 
dent isn’t a deep thinker! 

83 


“THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


And then — Delmerine had been on pins and 
needles at the prospect of talking with the Presi- 
dent; couldn’t hardly keep still in her chair. 
Mr. Jones was real nice to her, and I certainly 
was proud of the way one of our home girls 
could answer up to a man in official position 
like that. 

“So you come from Zenith,” he says to her. 
“Do you like it?” 

“Oh, you bet,” she said. “I just think Zenith 
is the nicest city in America. Of course Pd 
rather live in New York, but my, do you know 
we have the finest park system in the United 
States?” 

“Ts that a fact!’’ he says. “No, I didn’t know 
that. And I guess you like to Charleston,” he 
says. “Or have: you gone out for the black 
bottom? Do you like it?” 

“Do I?” she says. “Oh boy! I’d show you, 
but I guess this isn’t hardly the place.” 

“No, I’m afraid it isn’t,” he says, and we all 
four bust right out laughing together — wasn’t 
that a comical idea — to dance the Charleston in 
the President’s offices! 

I was just going to ask Mr. Jones how the 

84. 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


President felt about socialism when there was a 
messenger come out and called him in and he 
was gone about a couple minutes, it couldn’t 
have been more than that, and he come back, 
and say, he did look real sorry. 

“T’ve got terrible news,” he told me. “The 
President was just ready to see you when the 
British ambassador come in with some impor- 
tant business that'll take a couple of hours, 
and then he has to hustle down to the May- 
flower —that’s his yacht-—and be gone maybe 
four-five days, on an important secret confer- 
ence. But he specially sent me to tell you that 
he’s heart-broken he can’t see you, and he 
hopes you'll drop in any time you’re in Wash- 
ington.” 

So you gentlemen can see that it isn’t by 
accident but by real thinking and good fellow- 
ship that President Coolidge — yes, or any other 
president we’ve had recently — maintains his 
position, and I hope I haven’t bored you and 
now I’ll dry up and let some other fellow talk 
and — 

But just to speak of socialism a moment. I’m 
willing to give every man a fair square deal, 


85 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


but when it comes to supporting a lot of loafers, 
the way I look at it is that the constructive, 
practical people like ourselves, who control the 
country, ought, you might say — 


86 


PoAone = Lt 


edd tore dC never Boy. MA CK 
McMACK 


—certainly are too gummy, these cards, and 
besides that, P’Il bet Billy Dodd here, as soon 
as he got through soaking me with the most 
gosh-awful assortment of office supplies you 
ever saw—TI’ll bet he sneaked up here in the 
hotel and marked the whole darn’ pack. Just 
what you’d expect a Chicago guy to do! So 
we'll get a fresh pack and go on with our 
scientific investigation into poker and — 

But say, speaking about coming to Chicago, I 
certainly did have one rotten ole trip from 
Zenith, last night. Now here’s a funny thing 
about me: the first night on a sleeper, I can’t 
hardly sleep at all. 

And yet the time that Mrs. Schmaltz and I 
went away clear out to California last year, great 
big long trip like that, while I couldn’t sleep 
very good the frst night —just kept turning 
over and over, and whenever the train’d stop, 
I’d wake up with a start — 

Now I know you boys are impatient to get 


87 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


on with the game and don’t want to hear any- 
thing about California. I know how it is. Why 
sometimes in the family circle, when we have 
these little heart-to-heart talks that are so valu- 
able in moulding the characters of children — for, 
as the Good Book says, ““The tree is inclined 
as the twig is bent’”’—and while I may tell 
Robby and Delmerine, my children, that it’s 
only things of culture and the mind that matter, 
yet all the time that I’m lecturing ’em, myself 
maybe I’d like to make a duck and get off to a 
poker game! So I simply despise a fellow that 
interrupts a game with a lot of gabble. But I 
did want to speak about California just for a 
second. 

And what a state it is! What a state! 

Now I’m mighty good and proud of my own 
state, Winnemac. It’s a matter of proven facts 
and statistics that next to Michigan, Illinois, 
Ohio, Wisconsin, and possibly New York and 
New Jersey, we have the largest output of 
motor-cars in the United States. And the 
Zenith High School is the largest and finest 
high-school building for any city of equal size 
in the country, and furthermore, by a recent 


88 


DHE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


and very wise enactment of the Board of Educa- 
tion, no teacher is allowed to teach in the school 
unless he = or she, as the case may be — unless 
he proves that at the last election he turned out 
and voted either the Republican or Demo- 
cratic ticket, which give us an unusually large 
percentage of really solid and responsible birds 
among the profs in the school, instead of a lot 
of crazy intelligentzias and lice like that. And 
then of course there’s other states — 

I can well imagine that New York is proud of 
its great cities, manufacturing so many electric 
goods, like such absolutely essential accessories 
to civilization as electric irons, and I can 
imagine that Georgia is proud of the way it’s 
turned from a lazy plantation state with a lot 
of folks just riding horseback into a modern 
industrial centre with as big factories and as 
many machines as Massachusetts. 

And then old Massachusetts itself -what a 
state that is! Right up to date, and yet showing 
their respect for the principles of the Founders 
of the Country by resolutely pinching any or 
all books that by reference to prostitution and 
marital unhappiness and all those things that 


89 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


we grown-up men know exist, yet why increase 
the unhappiness of the world by talking about 
them — 

But I mean: there’s a lot of high-class states 
in the Union, but is there any one of them that 
better combines natural and scenic beauties 
with a high scale of comfortable living than 
California? 

I’ve read quite a lot about the history of Cali- 
fornia—I read clear through an article in the 
Literary Digest that gave all the more important 
facts, and here’s the way I figure out the history 
of the state: 

Of course California has always had a lot of 
high mountains, which, it’s needless to say, were 
there since long before man came to the track- 
less wilds, also, of course, the ocean, but still, in 
the old days, even after the state was settled by 
white and civilized men, there was nobody there 
to advertise them — to, you might say, correlate 
them with the rest of our American life. 

Way I understand it: in the former and 
earlier days, the whole state was just filled with 
a lot of lazy ranchereros, partly descended from 
the Spanish, which of course let them out from 


go 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


the start. You certainly could by no stretch of 
the imagination see the Spanish as contributing 
constructively to Americanization. And then 
around San Francisco there was a lot of these 
artists and painters and all like that, and writers, 
and they just sat around and did nothing con- 
structive, you might say, but just sit around 
and drink a lot of wine and chew the rag and 
do a lot of talking —lot of these fellows like 
Jack London and Frank Norris and Bret Harte 
and Upton Sinclair and Eugene Debs -—no, 
Fugene Field I think his name was. 

But aside from nothing but scenery, what did 
California fave in those days? What did it 
have? 

Here was this great empire that — 

I remember reading the Reverend Dr. Sieffer 
in his remarkable book — and say, there’s a book 
that I want to recommend to you boys. It’s all 
right to read a lot of fiction, and I guess I 
appreciate a rattling good story, say like a 
Western novel where the hero prevents this 
fellow from running off his boss’s stock, as much 
as anybody; but if you’re going to improve 
your mind—and what is after all more char- 


gt 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


acteristic of American life than improving our 
minds? —and if you’re going to improve your 
mind, what a fellow needs is real constructive 
and historical stuff. 

And Reverend Sieffer—I can’t remember 
just what he called his book, and fact is, busy 
like I-am with all my business interests, I don’t 
hardly get time enough to sit down and im- 
prove my mind like I’d like to, but it was a 
book about the Purposes of God as Shown in 
American History. 

And the picture he gave of California in the 
days before it was combined with the main 
streams and currents of American destiny — 
Say, it certainly’d make a fellow stop and 
think. 

Here was this great country. Here was these 
titanic mountains — well, I don’t want to get 
high-falutin and poetic, but as I said in my 
little talk that I gave to the Kiwanis Club on 
my return from California, here was these 
titanic mountains with their snow-crowned tops 
kissing the eternal blue of that vast Western 
sky. And here, as Reverend Sieffer pointed 
out in his book, were those great canyons, 


g2 


THE  STORY* BY MACK McMACK 


stretching their silent but pine-filled depths up 
to the higher and unknown divides. And here 
was vast plains ready for the happy plough of 
civilized man but as yet filled with nothing but 
the howl of the coyote. And here was this great 
big huge long sea-coast with the waves of the 
blue Pacific beating against it but without one 
single solitary real-estate development or even a 
resort to prepare it for the coming and use of 
civilized men. 

And then what happened? What happened! 

Say, to my mind, what happened in Cali- 
fornia, and that within just a few years, mind 
you, is one of the miracles that to a thinking 
man proves that the providence and care of 
_ God has always guided the destinies of the 
American people. 

Some guy —and say, it’s a damn’ shame but 
I don’t suppose his name will ever be known to 
history — some guy in Iowa (or it might have 
been Minnesota or Wisconsin or Illinois or even 
Missouri, yes, or for that matter he might have 
come from Kansas) — but anyway, this fellow, 
he saw that when the great Middle Western 
population had finished their efforts in growing 


93 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


corn and those equally valuable and construc- 
tive efforts in selling supplies to the farmers 
who are, after all, say what you may, the great 
backbone and strength of our nation — he saw 
that it would be the proper caper for these 
gentlemen to retire to that lovely and you 
might say idyllic California coast and there in 
their old age enjoy the fruits of a lifetime of 
arduous and frugal toil. 

And then what happened? What happened! 

All along that barren land, lovely little bun- 
galows began to spring up. Where formerly 
there hadn’t been one single darn’ thing but 
sea-shore and mountain valleys, there sprung up, 
almost overnight you might say, a whole kit 
and bilin’ of dandy little bungalows, and where 
formerly, as Reverend Sieffer says, you couldn’t 
hear a blasted thing but the sullen roaring of 
the breakers on the shore, you could hear 
phonographs going, radios tuned in on Chicago, 
nice jolly normal young folks dancing to the 
sound of jazz, and the sound of Fords and motor 
cars as the folks started off for a nice picnic in 
some canyon. 

Say, you take it from one who’s travelled! 


Sas 


Bites LORY BY MACK McMACK 


I’ve seen it and I know! I’ve seen beauty-spots 
in California where even twenty years ago there 
couldn’t ’ve been hardly a single human being 
in sight — some point of interest filled with holy 
quiet between the eternal hills; and now you'll 
find there, especially on a Sunday, no less than 
maybe a couple hundred cars parked, and all 
the folks out there laughing and talking and 
being neighbourly and swapping news from 
the folks back home in Iowa, and cooking hot 
dogs and wienies and all like that, and looking 
at the scenery. 
* 

What a state! Say, I don’t know where you 
boys were born, and I wouldn’t want to hurt 
anybody’s feelings, but my experience is that 
the cafeterias in Los Angeles are the best in the 
world, bar none! 

Why, I remember one time Mame (that’s my 
wife), Mamie and I went into a place — 

Say, golly, it looked like one of these cathe- 
_ drals! This cafeteria, I mean. 

Say, that place was so high, it must ’ve occu- 
_ pied the first two stories of this building it was 
in—it was a great big skyscraper, in fact the 


95 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


national executive head-quarters of the Funda- 
mentalist and Anti-Evolution Full Bible League, 
so you can imagine what a big structure it was. 
Well sir, this cafeteria occupied the full heighth 
of the first two stories and—and now this’ll 
surprise any of you boys that haven’t been in 
California —the whole interior was in tiles, 
floor, ceiling, and walls. 

Elegant? Why say, those tiles shone so’s it 
almost hurt your eyes! And all the tables, and 
there must ’ve been a thousand of them or 
maybe fifteen hundred, I figured about twelve 
hundred myself and Mame agreed with me, 
was every one of ’em stained a nice neat green, 
and every one had on it —now this was what 
you might call Service, and, mind you, they 
didn’t charge one cent extra for it — every table 
had on it a nice illuminated motto in art print- 
ing. 

I can still remember the one that was on our 
table. It was kind of surrounded by a border of 
poppies and Columbia River salmon, and it said: 


“Welcome, folks! How’s the old Mother 
back home? 


96 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


“We like our Special Onion and Peanut 
Butter Sandwiches, our Fullfruit Vegetarian 
Steak, and our Anti-alcohol Mince Pie, but 
while you’re smacking their flavour, don’t forget 
that maybe your old Mammy back home might 
like to hear from you. 

“And if she comes to join you, just bring her 
around to the Manager here and introduce her, 
and he’ll be glad to blow her, free of charge, on 
her first visit here, to a Welcome Mammy Free 
Feed, to the value of not over forty-seven cents.” 


Pretty damn’ thoughtful, eh? and good ad- 
vertising. 

As I say, here was this elegant place, and they 
had a full orchestra, playing Southern airs, and 
at one end there was a reading and club room 
all with velvet chairs—a kind of an alcove 
railed off with velvet ropes— where you could 
go up after supper and read the home papers — 
they had the papers from Omaha and Hartford 
and Winona and Kalamazoo and all those 
places. And after supper, as you left the place, 
every man was presented with a free cigarette, 
two toothpicks and a copy of the Gospel of 


97 mete 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


St. Mark; and every lady was presented with a 
peppermint candy in a glassy-paper wrapper 
and a free powder puff, all free. 

And did it please the customers? Say, did it! 
Well, you take just for an example — 

Mame and I had just started throwing the 
chow into our faces when all of a sudden I 
hears a fellow at the next table — 

Now mind you, if I hadn’t learned later 
that he was a farmer, J wouldn’t have known 
it, nor anybody else, not even the shrewdest 
observer. Why say, that fellow was dressed in a 
nice neat conservative College Park mixed- 
worsted suit, same as I was, and his wife, and a 
real bright little woman she was, too, she had 
on almost as nice a close-fitting cloche hat as 
Mame herself. But I mean to say: you couldn’t 
have told they was farming folks — fact is, later, 
when I just happened to run into him at my 
garage, he told me that he was in the habit of 
reading the Cosmopolitan and all the best litera- 
ture, just the same as we do in the big cities. 

Well, as I say, this fellow, he kind of leaned 
forward, and he says to me, “Pretty nice place, 
this.” 


98 


Peto LORY BY MACK McMACK 


“It certainly is,” I says. 

“Say,” he says, “while maybe the food itse/f 
don’t taste so good, they certainly got every- 
thing else fixed up about as swell as a man could 
ask for — fixed up to the Queen’s taste, eh?” he 
says. 

“They certainly have,” I says—I could feel 
he was a friendly sort of a cuss and I never was 
a fellow, even with my college training and the 
fact that I know President Coolidge and all, I 
never felt that a fellow ought to high-hat any 
really agreeable fellow that you happen to meet 
along the way, for what, after all, as our pastor 
has on more than one occasion said in our 
church, what are we after all, even the best of 
us, but fellow-pilgrims on that great Highway 
which is Life? 

So I says to him, “They certainly have,” I 
says. ‘‘Stranger here?” I says. 

“Well, kind of, you might say,” he says. 
“Mother and I been coming here to Los for 
quite a few years now, but still, same time, when 
you think it all over,” he says, “when you take 
a great city like this, with all its wonders and 
entertainments,” he says, ‘‘a fellow could be here 


o9 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


quite a few years and still not exhaust all the 
novelties, and particularly,” he says, “in the 
line of religion.” 

The point is, to cut it short, that this gentle- 
man had found a lot of interest in investigating 
the different kind of religions in Los Angeles. 

Say! That guy may have been a farmer, but 
he wasn’t so slow when it come to the real low- 
down on philosophy and religion! Say, he 
could teach me some things I didn’t know! 

He informed me (and I’ve had no reason to 
question his statistics) that this lady prophet, 
this Mrs. Aimee Semple McPherson, had 
increased her membership turnover 1,800 per 
cent. in two years, and that out of all her faith- 
healings, 62°9 per cent. had been successful 
and lasting, as observed by regular conserva- 
tive physicians, over a period of two years, or it 
may have been even more than two years, I 
can’t at the present moment, not having made 
a note of it, be exactly sure about the period 
involved. 

And then-say! He certainly did tell me 
about a lot of new and interesting religions in 


Los Angeles. 


I0o 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


Not that P’'d want to go out for them per- 
sonally, you understand. But he explained that 
there was — oh, God, I can’t hardly remember 
them all, now. But there was this Hindu 
Breathing Cult, where if you just learned how 
to control your breathing you were guaranteed 
to live at least a hundred years. And there was 
the Lost Tribes of Israel Consolidation that 
proved the English were the descendants of 
Moses. And there was the Great Marzipan — no, 
Mazeppa, I think it was, something like that 
anyway —seems he was a guy that could get 
you right into touch with your ancestors and 
also a corker at palmistry — 

But I’m afraid I’m drifting a little from my 
point. Point is that this gentleman and his wife 
both agreed that this cafeteria was better than 
any place they’d ever seen, even in Minnea- 
polis! 

Well, as I say, when I saw this place, I said to 
Mame — 

Not that we had to economize, you under- 
stand. After all, I guess maybe we could ’ve 
stood the gaff at the Ambassador and the Bilt- 
more and those other high-toned Los Angeles 

IOI 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


hotels, maybe stood it better than a lot of these 
movie actors and oil men and all like that in 
dress-suits that try to show a lot of little wrens 
how well heeled they are, but probably next 
morning, back in the ole hall-room, they can’t 
afford nothing more’n coffee and sinkers for 
breakfast! 

We didn’t have to economize, but at the same 
time, as you boys will realize, it’s mighty nice 
to save a quarter now and then, and Mame 
and I had thought when we went to a cafeteria, 
maybe we'd get off cheap. 

But when I saw this place, I says, “Well, 
Mamie,” I says, “I guess here’s where we get 
stuck.” 

You would ’ve thought that, wouldn’t you, 
seeing all that luxury, and my God, maybe 
twenty-five hundred folks all feeding their 
faces at once and a hell of a bang of dishes — 
regular feast of Lucullus, or whoever he was, 
you might say. 

But say — 

What do you think the prices were? I noted 
"em down (of course a fellow in the office- 
supply business, like Billy Dodd here and me, 

102 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 
we simply can’t help becoming scientific) —I 
noted the prices down, while Mame and I was 
going along filling our trays at this cafeteria 
counter, and [I still remember what we paid. 

And remember all this food was high-class 
modern chow made by the best modern machi- 
nery with scientific proportion of the ingredi- 
ents and no hand had ever touched or spoiled it, 

Well, here were some of the prices: Old- 
fashioned Cape Cod Clam Chowder was seven- 
teen cents. And real honest-to-God c/ams in it, 
too! And Old-time Essex Barbecue Roast 
Beef was twenty-three cents, and a great, big 
juicy South Dakota Mammoth Baked Potato 
was only eleven cents, and Mussolini Macaroni 
was twelve, and finally — 

I’m kind of what you might call an epicure, 
and I do like to top off a good feed with some- 
thing spicy, and so I had a Dickens Little Tim 
Old-time Christmas Plum Pudding, and all 
they soaked me for it, with both hard and soft 
sauce and a leaf of real holly on it, was twenty- 
seven cents! And say, I’ve tried all these plum 
puddings, Van Camp and Heinz and all the 
nationally advertised brands, yes sir, I’ve tried 

103 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


the most scientific of ’em, and I’ve never had a 
better one than I got myself surrounded with 
that evening at the cafeteria —the Father Juni- 
pero Serra Mission Inn they called it, by the way. 

Fact, afterward I kind of introduced myself 
to one of the managers, and he told me they 
made this plum pudding up themselves, and 
he claimed they used one and a quarter — well, 
it may have been one and ¢#ree quarters per 
cent., I can’t just exactly remember now — but 
anyway, he claimed they used more citron and 
more raisins in their plum pudding than any 
of the nationally advertised brands, and he told 
me that during the Christmas and_ holiday 
months, that is, from October to March, they 
sold an average of 897 plum puddings a day! 

So you can see what a place ¢hat was! 

And I almost forgot: for every six tables they 
had a free Christian Science literature stand 
with the Monitor and all the rest of ’em right 
there perfectly free for the taking. 

Not that I think much of Christian Science 
myself. Me, I’m a Congregationalist. But still, 
it was pretty nice to be able to take some free 
literature home to your hotel, so’s you could 


104 


fiile pt ORY: BY. MACK McMACK 


read it if you ever got time in between trolley 
rides and going out motoring with folks from 
your home town and the movies and all those 
other pleasures that you find in Los Angeles. 

But I fear I’m getting a little off my sub- 
ject. I didn’t mean to spend so much time on 
California. I just meant to say that I didn’t 
sleep as good last night as I did on my trip to 
California — 

And oh say, there is just one thing more that 
I want to add, if it won’t bore you too much, 
about that Junipero Serra Inn: On each and 
every tray a fellow-—and you don’t have to 
ask him, he just does it voluntarily, without 
any fuss and feathers and nonsense about it, 
which is, of course, the ideal of Service —on 
each and every tray this fellow, and I figured 
he was a Portuguese or maybe a Wop, he 
places, instead of the paper napkins like you get 
in so many of the Eastern cafeterias, he places 
a real cloth napkin, that had printed on it, 
“Take Me Home with You, and When You 
Want an Old-time Time and a Homey Home 
away from Home, Don’t Forget I Came from 
the World-Famed Serra Inn.” 

105 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Pretty cute, eh? 
But as I was saying: 
* 

You boys want to get on with the poker game, 
and so do I, and so I won’t go into any details 
about my adventures in California. I agree with 
Billy that these cards are too gummy, and so 
I'll send down for some more and then we can 
get on with the game. And I guess maybe you 
boys could stand another highball, so we’ll make 
it snappy — 


* 

Hello. Hel/o. Hel-lo! Hey, girlie, I want to 
get hold of one of your bright young bell-boys. 

Oh you will, will you? Well say, Pd rather 
have you come up yourself! 

Oh they do, do they! Well, I ain’t one of 
that kind of guys. 

No, I ain’t! But say, girlie, if you happen to 
get kind of lonesome along about quitting- 
time, you just come up here to 232 and I'll 
introduce you to a few princes. 

Oh, is that so! 

* 
Say, jeeze, these telephone girls are too fresh 


106 


Meco ORY Ss BY <MACK -McMACK 


for any use. ‘That is a kind of a cute kid though, 
that number two. 

Well, as I was saying — 

Say, for God’s sake, ain’t that bell-boy ever 
coming? If J was running a hotel — 

Come in! : 

Oh it’s you, is it, kid! Where you been all 
night? Been out burying a sick grandmother 
at the baseball game? Now listen, son: You 
beat it right down to the drug-store here in 
the hotel and bring us up a nice fresh pack of 
cards—no, by God, we'll make it two packs, 
and the best kind they got! And shoot us up 
two more quarts of White Rock, and make it 
snappy, see? 

* 

Well say, gentlemen, all this time while 
we’ve been waiting for this damn’ bell-boy, ’m 
afraid I’ve been forgetting my duties as a host. 

Say when! That’s what I call a real drink. 
That\| put hair on your chest! 

Say when! Fine! 

Say when! Attaboy! 

So! Now Father Schmaltz will try to get rid 
of his own cold, and maybe the bots and tripho- 

107 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


sus, with a little touch of the old family remedy, 

and while we’re waiting for the fresh cards, Pll 

go on, if it won’t bore you, with what I was 

trying to say when this bell-boy interrupted us: 
* 

Now what I was starting to say was: I heard 
a story, here about a year ago, no, thirteen 
months ago it must be now-—a story that I 
wanted to tell you gentlemen — 

But oh say, before I start that, I want to 
‘explain — 

I felt that Mr. Laks here, I felt he kind of 
wondered about it when I drew two cards, this 
last hand. 

Well, here was the idea, and you may be 
interested in the psychology of it, and as Billy 
Dodd will tell you, there’s no profession where 
you got to use more psychology than in the 
office-supply business. 

Well, when I got this hand I figured that 
Mr. Laks — 

Excuse me, Mr. Laks, for not calling you by 
your first name. I don’t want you for one 
moment to think it’s because I don’t feel 
friendly, but what I feel is: The first time you 

108 


fos POR YoY MACK: McMACK 


meet a guy, you ought to show you know your 
social onions by giving him his proper handle — 
shows you aren’t one of these roughnecks — 
and then after that you can call him Pete or 
Pootch or Fat-ear or whatever his regular nameis. 

But’s I was saying: 

You remember that Simms was dealing. And 
do you know what I got? Well, T’ll tell you. 
When I looked at my hand, I had the deuce of 
diamonds, the seven of spades, the king of 
clubs, the nine of hearts, and the six of — 

Now by golly I can’t remember —and I’m 
ashamed of myself—but I can’t remember 
whether the fifth card was the trey of hearts or 
the trey of diamonds. But anyway, be that as 
it may, the point that I wanted to make clear 
is: I didn’t have so much as one single solitary 
little pair in my whole hand. 

So, thinks I, “Well, Low, you certainly got 
one swell-elegant grove of lemons here.”’ 

It kind of amused me — 

What I always say is, intellect is always im- 
portant, in its place, and industry, and even 
ideals, so long as they are thoroughly practical, 
but what is more important in life than a Sense 

10g 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


of Humour? And whatever faults I may have, 
certainly no one has ever been able to accuse 
me of lacking a Sense of Humour. And so— 

Say, I hate to put Mr. Laks on to this; guess 
maybe it'll cost me a lot of money the rest of — 
this game, but what he may ’ve thought was 
my being tickled by having such a good hand 
wasn’t nothing but my being amused by having 
such a collection of tripe. 

“He thinks,” I thinks, “he thinks I’ve got a 
lallapaloosa here. P11 make him think I got 
three of a kind.” 

So when Simms calls for cards, I discards 
two cards — 

* 

(There are here omitted, by enthusiastic 
request of the entire staff of the publishers, 
two thousand words in which Mr. Lowell 
Schmaltz explains his interesting tactics in the 
rest of the hand. — Eprror.) . 

* 

But as I started saying : 

I certainly do hate conversation during a 
poker game. That’s the trouble with women; 
that’s why it isn’t any fun to play with ’em. 

IIo 


ieee oo ORY BY “MACK McMACK 


You get going on a game, and they want to 
stop and talk about kitchen-mechanics and 
kids and God knows what all. What I always 
say to Mamie is, “If we’re going to ¢a/&, all 
right, we'll ¢a/k, but if we’re playing cards, then 
‘let’s play cards!” 

But considering that we’ve been interrupted 
by having to send out for these new cards, I just 
thought I’d tell you this new story I heard about 
a year ago-—story that a fellow named Mack 
McMack told me one time on a fishing trip. 

Mack is, I may say, about the leading under- 
taker of Zenith, and one of the funniest clowns 
you ever listened to. Well, to make it short, 
Mack told us — 

It seems — the way Mack told it — it seems an 
Englishman and a Jew and an Irishman got 
wrecked on a desert island. Now you boys just 
stop me if you ever heard this one. Well, it 
seems these three fellows — 

But say, before I go on with the story, I 
think you gentlemen might be interested in 
hearing just where it was that I heard it. As I 
say, we were on this fishing trip — 

And I’ve travelled all around, and I certainly 

Ent 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


have seen a lot of the world, but I guess T’ll 
never have a better time than I had on that 
trip. Here’s how it all came about. 

It happened I was attending a meeting of the 
Americanization Committee of the Zenith 
Chamber of Commerce. And say, whatever 
other honours may come to me, I want to tell 
you that T’ll never take greater pride in any- 
thing than in having served on that committee, 
and when the Chamber of Commerce informed 
me that I was appointed to it, well, sir, do you 
know, I felt like saying, “Boys, I don’t know 
that I’m worthy of this honour.” And believe 
me, we certainly have done great work. 

Just think of what real Americanization 
means to the future of our nation and thus to 
the whole world. And we tackled the problem — 

Well, you take this, for example: There was 
a bunch of Hunkies working for the Zenith 
Steel and Machinery Company. ‘They all lived 
near each other down in Shantytown and there 
was some doggone sorehead Bolshevik among 
"em that insisted they keep up all these ridicu- 
lous and uncivilized customs they’d had back 
in Hungary (or is it Jugoslovakia? —- wherever 

112 


Poeeowowu ky BY MACK -McMACK 


it is that Hunkies come from) instead of reach- 
ing outward and upward and grabbing their 
chance to become real Americans. 

Zabo, this fellow’s name was —only I think 
he spelled it S-c-a-b-o, and I often laughed and 
said, “Well,” I said to the committee, ‘“‘this 
fellow certainly has got it spelled right, any- 
way, I said. “He certainly is one scab-oh, all 
right!” 

Well, seems this fellow’s shack was the centre 
for all the disaffection and lack of patriotism 
among that whole Hunky crowd. They’d meet 
there, and drink beer, and talk their own 
language, and dance a lot of fool foreign | 
dances, and seems his wife was actually going 
so far as to get up a Hunky dramatic associa- 
tion and play a lot of these Hunky plays by 
Gorky or whoever this Hunky playwright 
was. 

Well, we certainly put a stop to that, when 
the visiting nurse reported this state of condi- 
tions to us. 

We went to Whitelaw Sonnenshine, the first 
V.P. of the Zenith Steel and Machinery Com- 
pany —and say, there’s certainly one fine, up- 

11g H 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


standing, 100 per cent. American patriot — and 
he agreed with us and got busy at once. First, 
he fired this Zabo, or whatever his name was, 
and then we got the cops to pick up old Scabo- 
vitch on a charge of vagrancy the minute he 
was broke, and so we run him out of town, and 
I hear his wife got a job later as hired girl and 
got over all her damned nonsense, and when 
Scabby got killed in a steel mill in Gary, she 
married a real upstanding American named 
Harry Kahn. 

And say, inside six months, once we removed 
this Bolshevik influence, those Hunks were 
dancing the Charleston just like you and I 
would, and they were reading the tabloid 
papers — maybe we may prefer more highbrow 
newspapers, but for them cattle, the pictures 
put over a message of Americanization they 
couldn’t get no other way — and a couple of ’em 
had bought radios, and they were going to the 
movies, and in general getting so their grand- 
children won’t hardly be distinguishable even 
from yours and mine. 

That’s the kind of work we been doing on the 
committee, and this particular day I was speak- 


114 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


ing of, we were having a meeting to settle the 
question of birth control. 

Now there, gentlemen, is a very vexed ques- 
tion. 

That all of us practise it is, of course, beyond 
dispute. But we’re different, because we are, 
after all, when all is said and done, the rulers of 
this great democratic country. But when it 
comes to a question as to whether the masses and 
the lower classes ought to be allowed to practise 
it, why say, there you get into an involved 
economic problem that.even a college professor 
couldn’t hardly handle. 

In fact, some says one thing and some says 
another, and that’s the way it goes. 

One faction claims that the superior classes 
like ourselves, in fact the great British stock, had 
ought to produce as many kids as possible, to 
keep in control of this great nation and main- 
tain the ideals for which we and our ancestors 
have always stood, while these lower masses 
hadn’t ought to spawn their less intellectual 
masses. But then again, there’s them that hold 
and maintain that now we’ve cut down im- 
migration, we need a supply of cheap labour, 


115 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


and where get it better than by encouraging 
these Wops and Hunks and Spigs and so on to 
raise as many brats as they can? 

Well sir, we certainly had one great old de- 
bate. One side invoked the sacred name of 
Roosevelt, with those undying words of his 
about Race Suicide —and then by golly if the 
other side don’t go and take the very same 
words and prove they meant something just 
opposite! 

I tell you, I guess when it comes to a question 
of practical affairs, like how you’re going to ~ 
have your store windows dressed or whether to 
put on a sale of pencil-sharpeners, I guess ’'m 
about up to the general run and generality of 
thinkers, but this question was just a lee-tle mite 
beyond me. And I could see Joe Minchin felt 
the same, and say, of all the more important 
men of affairs in Zenith, there’s mighty few that 
can hold a candle to Joe Minchin. 

In fact, his name is one that to some extent 
has spread far beyond the local boundaries of 
Zenith, to every street and hamlet in the whole 
length and breadth of the land. Joe—and I’m 
mighty proud to be privileged to call him Joe, 

116 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


and he never fails to call me Low—he’s the 
president of the Little Titan Oil Cleanser Cor- 
poration, and say, if any of you boys haven’t yet 
tried the Little Titan on your car, well, you take 
the tip from me and do s0, that’s all I’ve got to 
say. Naturally I'd always had a great reverence 
for Joe — 
* 

Oh here you are, son! My God, why didn’t 
you take all night to bring up the cards? Got 
the White Rock? Oh you have, have you! 
- Well, I didn’t expect it. Well, here’s a quarter 
for yourself, and you can go out and invest it in 
G.M.C. stock, but be sure to get the preferred. 

Well gentlemen, here’s the new cards, and 
now at last, thank God, we can get on with the 
game. But if you'll grant me just one more 
moment, I’d like to finish this story that Mack 
McMack told me. When you hear it I think 
you'll agree with me that it was worth taking 
out the time even from a poker game. 

* 

Well, as I say, just to get the background of 
the story straight, Joe Minchin and I were both 
on this Americanization Committee, and I could 


a 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


see he got just as bored by this birth-control dis- 
cussion as I did. So I kind of edged up near him 
at the back of the room, and I says, ‘““How these 
birds do like to chew the rag! I like a fellow 
that can say his say and then shut up.” 

“You bet,” he says. “Say, Low,” he says, “I 
don’t think you’ve ever seen my cabin up on 
Lake Misheepagontiluckit, have you?” 

““No, I never have,” I tells him, “but I’ve 
heard of it as one of the slickest and most elabor- 
ate log cabins in the state.” : 

“Well,” he says to me, “I don’t know as it’s 
so much-a-much, but a lot of architects and so 
on, and even the Reverend Elmer Gantry, 
that’s travelled abroad, they’ve told me it 
wasn’t so bad. Say, Low,”’ he says, “I’ve been 
thinking about getting up a little week-end 
fishing party to go up there for the week-end, 
this week-end after next, now it’s getting warm, 
and what do you say about going along?” 

Here was this fellow, Mr. Minchin, making 
all his dough — say, I bet he don’t make one sou 
less’n sixty or maybe seventy thousand dollars 
clear a year, and just as simple and unpreten- 
tious and not feeling he’s one bit better than 


118 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


you or me. Of course I told him I’d be tickled 
to death to come along, providing I could get 
the wife to let me check out, and so I starts off 
with Joe and his party — after, I must admit, a 
kind of a hell of a lot of talkee-talkee with the 
wife about it. 

Now there’s no point in my telling you who 
the other fellows on the party were —in fact I 
just want to tell you the story that Mack 
McMack told me, and then we’ll get back to 
our game. But just to mention them, there was, 
besides Joe Minchin and me, there was Vergil 
Gunch, who’s in the coal and wood business and 
one of the most influential business men in 
Zenith, and say, he’s a great orator, and Depew 
LeVie, the lawyer, a very fine gentleman, 
graduate of the City College of New York - 
only trouble with him is, he’s got such a down 
on the Jews that he makes you tired talking 
about it all the time -and Mack McMack — 

And say now, when you're speaking of fine 
fellows, there’s one of the finest. 

Say, when Mack come into the undertaking 
business, they all just called themselves under- 
takers, but since he’s been after them (because 


11g 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


for all his fun and natural high spirits he’s got 
a mighty serious and idealistic streak in him), 
since he’s been after ’em, and he proved it to 
me by statistics, 51°7 per cent. of them now 
insist on being called morticians. 

And Mack was the first mortician in Zenith 
to put in really fine funeral parlours—or no, 
mortuary apartments I believe they’re now 
called by the leaders of the profession. I saw 
"em — not, thank God, because of any unhappy 
and unfortunate catastrophe in my own little 
family, but because when he opened up, Mack 
gave a reception, and we all went to see how 
lovely and at the same time efficient a funeral 
parlour can be. 

Say, that place was a treat! It must be a 
whale of a comfort to some poor family that has 
got to plant one of its loved ones. The main 
funeral chapel is just like the most elegant 
private drawing-room, great big room with a 
nice fireplace and simple but tasteful pictures 
of scenery and kittens and so on, and lots of 
palms, and two canaries in gilded cages, and 
big fine overstuffed chairs, and a couple of 
brocade davenports long enough so’s you could 

120 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


sleep on ’em—not that you’d want to sleep on 
"em in a place like that, of course — and a little 
anteroom where the bereaved family can sit in 
semi-privacy, fixed up by golly as nice as any 
boudoir, with a nice reading-table and on which 
are the latest Vogue and the Western Christian 
Advocate and the Chiropractic and Abrams 
Method Quarterly and a lot of serious but inter- 
esting magazines like that, and — and now here 
was a mighty touching touch that Mack himself 
thought up — with a pile of nice linen handker- 
chiefs for the bereaved, and all absolutely 
free. 

And then the preacher was to stand in a lovely 
kind of a secluded nook, kind of like an old- 
fashioned sedan chair, I think they used to call 
em, and not stand right out and obtrude on the 
feelings of everybody while giving his last 
words about the deceased. And the coffin, or 
perhaps it would be better to say the casket, 
was to slide out of the back room into the 
chapel-drawing-room on a little electric trolley, 
as if by magic, untouched by human hands, 
thus giving, as Mack himself explained it to 
me, a feeling of awe and mystery. 

I21 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Yes sir, not one thing lacking to soften and 
ameliorate those last sad rites. 

And Mack certainly did give one crackajack 
reception to open those funeral parlours — or 
mortuary parlours. 

After we’d all had a chance to look around, 
and sign the Visitors’ Book, and a mighty neat 
volume, bound in rough calfskin, it was, too, he 
had the Y.M.C.A. quartette there to sing several 
suitable selections, like “Whither Away, O 
Autumn Swallow?” and “Drink to Me Only 
with Thine Eyes,” and then the Reverend Otto 
Hickenlooper of Central Methodist Church 
made some very interesting and thought-pro- 
voking remarks on what science and modern 
American efficiency could do to lessen the pangs 
of unavoidable grief and sorrow, and then 
orange sherbet and a large assortment of 
French pastry was served. 

A high-class affair, in every way, and — 

And pay? 

Say, Mack himself told me that these funeral 
parlours, or mortuary apartment, paid for itself 
in less than seventeen months! 

Why say, every undertakerin town bid for the 

I22 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


funeral of the Reverend Dr. Efflins, that was 
murdered by his hired girl, and Mack got the 
job solely and entirely, even though his prices 
was higher, because the widow appreciated the 
elegance of his funeral parlours. That’s the 
kind of man of affairs he is! 

* 

And then finally the last member of our 
fishing party was no less a person than a pro- 
fessor in the University of Winnemac. You bet! 

We all felt, even Joe Minchin felt, that he was 
kind of a notch above us, but Lord bless you, 
you'd never think it to meet him-—just as 
simple and unaffected and slap-you-on-the- 
back as any of us. 

Professor Baroot, prof of industrial sociology 
in the U, this was, but say, zhat guy, he never 
went at teaching with any of these old-fashioned 
stand-off methods. 

He told me himself, he volunteered it, in 
fact, that he didn’t give more than half of his 
time to teaching, and that because of his subject 
—it was his job to show the students that the 
great American industrial corporations can care 
for their men and prevent accidents and keep 

123 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


clear of anarchists and labour troubles better 
than any small firm —as I say, because of what 
he taught, he was as thick as thieves with a lot 
of managers of big industries, and it was his job 
to keep in with those guys and get them to 
contribute to the University. 

A mighty fine fellow. Belonged to the 
Rotary Club and the American Security League 
and the Klan-or rather he did till the Klan 
got unpopular -and the Moose and the Odd 
Fellows and the Key Men, and he could sing 
a good song or dance a clog, and say, he just 
about made up for all the old crabs on the 
University faculty. ; 

Yes sir, he showed what an up-to-date and 
forward-looking professor can be. Why, he 
looked like a bond salesman! 

So there was the bunch of us — Joe Minchin, 
Prof. Baroot, Vergil Gunch, Mack McMack, 
Depew Le Vie the lawyer, and yours truly, 
thanking you for your order and begging to 
oblige. And that’s how we happened to go off 
together, and that’s how I happened to hear 
this story that Mack told us, and I must hasten 
to finish it, so we can get back to the game. 


124 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


Well, here was the story. As I said, if any of 
you boys have heard it, just stop me. 

Seems there was this Englishman and this 
Irishman and this Jew —they were all a bunch 
of travelling salesmen or something like that. 
Anyway, whatever they were, it happened that 
they were all on a steamer that was sailing on 
the Pacific, and something happened to their 
ship, and anyway it got wrecked, and it was 
wrecked on a desert island, and when these 
three guys come ashore, they found that by 
golly everybody on the ship had been drowned 
except them and a girl they’d all been looking 
at on shipboard — 

Say, Dll never forget the way Mack looked 
at us when he got to that point in the story. 

He didn’t say anything dirty. Naturally, 
Mack being an undertaker, it isn’t proper for 
him to use common or improper language, but 
say, that fellow’s just a natural clown. If he’d 
gone on the vaudeville stage, he’d ’ve made 
_ this Sir Harry Lauder look like seven cents. 
You could just fee/ those three birds were crazy 
about this girl - 

By golly, I certainly did enjoy that story. 

125 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


I’ll never forget the whole background. It was 
one of the greatest nights I ever spent. 

You see, if I may interrupt myself just for a 
second, we arrived at Joe Minchin’s place — it’s 
on Lake Misheepagontiluckit, which is in the 
northern part of the state, about four hours 
from Zenith — 

No, let’s see; it’s less than four hours. I re- 
member we left the Union Station at 2.37 in 
the afternoon; I remember it exactly because 
when I was leaving the house, the wife said I'd 
be late-and by golly she was sore about my 
skipping off and leaving her, and she sounded 
like she’d be tickled to death if I was late — and 
she said, “You'll be late catching the train,” 
and I remember saying, “I will not,” I said; 
“Tve got exactly forty minutes, because the 
train leaves at 2.37, and it’s now exactly three 
or anyway two and a half minutes to two.” So 
I remember we left at 2.37 exactly, and we got 
to Lucknow, which is the station for Lake 
Misheepagontiluckit, at 6.17, and I remember 
that because it was just seventeen minutes after 
six, which makes an easy date to remember. So 
it was less than four hours. 

126 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


But of course we had to take a couple of 
flivvers out to the lake — not taxis, you under- 
stand, because of course this Lucknow was a 
hick town; why say, it was such a rube burg 
that they didn’t have a high school or a restau- 
rant, and they only had one movie theatre and 
six garages, that’s how raw ‘¢hat place was, 
regular jumping-off place — and we had to take 
a brace of flivvers out to Joe’s cabin (if you 
could call a regular palace like that a cadin!) — 
and that must have took us half an hour, and 
so all in all, it was just practically four hours and 
maybe a little more from the Union Station in 
Zenith to his place, to be exact. 

Well, we got in there, and we got ourselves 
a little supper — say, I used to lambaste college 
profs as not being practical, but Doc Baroot was 
the cook, and he took those canned pork and 
beans and added whisky and an egg to ’em, and 
say! man! that was a dish fit to set before a king. 

And some good apple pie with evaporated 
cream on it, and of course plenty of gin and 
hootch to wash it all down. Man, we ate like a 
bunch of dukes! 

Well, by the time we'd fed our faces and 

127 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


washed up the dishes, it was about eight o’clock, 
and Joe says, “Well, say, boys, now we want to 
get a lot of rest and exercise and outdoor life 
while we’re out on this trip, and what say we 
play poker till ten and then quit on the dot and 
get to bed and be up at six to-morrow and hike 
right out for the big gamey denizens of the 
deep?” 

“Fine,” we says; ‘“you bet; we'll hit the hay 
atten. 

So we starts playing there in the big living- 
room — 

Now by golly can you beat that! Can you 
beat it! I haven’t described Joe’s place at all, 
and that was the biggest surprise of all. 

* 

I knew he had a log cabin fixed up all swell, 
but I’d never expected the kind of place we 
found. Logs— yeh, sure, it was built of /ogs, 
but my God! 

Why say, that place would ’ve done the 
Prince of Wales or J. Pierpont Morgan proud. 
Every log was varnished on the outside till it 
shone like a mirror, and every single last log 
had the end of it carved with the name of some 

128 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


movie star. Then under the eaves, both ends, 
there was an elegant wood fretwork imported 
from abroad, carved like vines, with stars and 
crescents and snakes and wood roses all mixed 
up together. 

Then inside, say, that living-room was two 
stories high, with a balcony running along three 
sides of it, and a lot of dandy Navajo rugs and 
college banners and banners advertising the 
Little Titan Oil Cleanser and Rotary banners 
and Coolidge for President banners and all 
like that hanging over the railing of the bal- 
cony —and of course I was especially glad to 
see the Coolidge banners, because, as Billy 
Dodd here knows, Coolidge and I have always 
been great pals, and I’ve had a high old time 
with him in the White House, talking about 
taxation and the situation in China. 

And the furniture — say, Joe may be just one 
of your roughneck business men, but the imagi- 
nation he showed about the furniture in that 
- main living-room, which was also the dining- 
room, was something that just took your 
breath away. 

Say, the fireplace was composed of every 

129 I 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


sort and kind of stone to be found within forty 
miles of Lake Misheepagontiluckit, and also it 
had set into it a lucky horseshoe, and the golf 
ball that Joe won the Fathers and Sons Golf 
Tournament with, and the bottom of a bottle 
of red wine that he’d drunk in Paris—um, 
some of that real honest-to-God parley-voo red 
ink would go pretty good now, but you boys 
don’t want to forget that we still got two com- 
plete bottles of real hootch left, just help your- 
selves and don’t be shy, like the lady organist 
said to the deacon —and then it had, this fire- 
place, it had mortared into it a real genuwine 
cannon ball from Gettysburg, and the first 
dollar Joe ever earned, and the first nail driven 
into the Billy Sunday tabernacle in Zenith — 
which later became the Swiss Skating Rink and 
Boxing Arena—and a piece of iron from a 
radiator in the Vanderbilt mansion in New 
York that Joe was able to secure when the 
mansion was being torn down, and as he told 
me, it’d surprise you if you knew what he had 
to pay the workmen to get it, too! 

And all the rest of the furniture was in 
keeping. 

130 


THE STORY BY MACK McMACK 


One of the chairs was made out of an ancient 
Spanish altar, and one was a genuwine Louis 
Cants chair from some palace or other in 
France that they say Napoleon sat in one time, 
and one was one of these basket chairs with a 
little roof over it that they used to have on the 
seashore, or so they tell me, and one was just 
a rough wooden bench made out of the timbers 
of a cabin in Kentucky that, and Joe has papers 
to prove it, Lincoln used to visit at when he 
was a young man. | 

And all over the room — 

Say, by golly, there was more pictures and 
posters and banners and advertising posters 
than you could shake a stick at, and by golly, 
and now this was something you’d never expect 
in a northern cabin there among the aboriginal 
pines, by golly if he didn’t have a real library, 
with Dr. Eliot’s three-foot shelf of books and 
the complete works of Zane Grey. 

So as I say, we certainly were living off the 
fat of the land, and we settled down to the 
game and — 

* 


Oh by the way, a funny thing happened. It 
isi 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


just happened that along about the fourth hand, 
or it may have been the fifth, I can’t exactly 
remember just at the moment, but I remember 
Mr. LeVie was dealing, and by golly if he didn’t ~ 
deal me four jacks, and as I say, there I sat with 
four jacks pat. Well, I won’t go into what 
happened — 

If there’s anything that bores me, it’s these 
guys that insist on going into a post-mortem 
after each and every game, whether it’s poker 
or bridge — or any other game, for that matter, 
you understand — and insist on explaining just 
why they did this or didn’t do that. I often 
say to Mame, to my wife, “My God, play the 
cards, and let the other fellow draw his own 
conclusions!” But still, this was kind of a funny 
thing. 

This Professor Baroot — or maybe I ought to 
call him Doctor Baroot; I understand he’s a 
Doctor of Philosophy, and they tell me that’s 
a mighty hard degree to get, not like one of 
these Doctor of Laws degrees that they just 
hand out to a bunch of bankers and authors 
and cabinet members and so on so’s to get some 
dough out of ’em, but anyway, whether it’s 

132 


foe Ot ORY “BY “MACK .-McMACK 


hard to get or not, they tell me that no guy, 
no matter how smart he is in a teaching way, 
can ever hope to hit the higher and better- 
paid grades of teaching and research unless he 
can show the bosses at the college that he’s got 
a Ph.D. degree — 

But anyway, this Professor—or Doctor — 
Baroot was watching me, just like Mr. Laks 
was here just recently, and so I pulled a long 
mouth — say, I guess if you’d seen me, you’d 
ve thought Germany had won the war or I'd 
been unable to collect my biggest account. So 
I made up my mind I’d make out like I had a 
bobtailed flush, and fix my mind on that 
thought and put it over — 

Because you can say what you like, and God 
knows I’m a good Congregationalist and not no 
New Thoughter or Theosophist or Sweden- 
borgian or anything like that, but they can 
say what they like, a fellow—I mean if he’s 
developed his own will-power, if a fellow 
concentrates on a self-conscious — subconscious, 
I mean — on a subconscious thought, and deter- 
mines to think it into reality, the other guy is 
going to ge¢ it, see how I mean? 


133 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


So naturally I draws one card, and I look 
disappointed as all hell, like I hadn’t filled my 
flush or straight, and then when the betting 
started, I acts irritated, like I was bluffing, and 
sort of comes in reluctant. But then when 
Mack lays down an ace-high full, and I bangs 
down them four little jackses, count ’em, four — 
say, their faces certainly was a study! 

Well, along about half-past nine, Joe Minchin 
springs a surprise on us. What do you think he 
brings out? What do you think! Nothing less 
than a real, genuwine, old-time bottle of pre- 
war Canadian Club. 

Say! | 
These fellows can talk all they want to | 
about the elegant port and claret and red wine 
and everything that they get abroad, but any 
fellow that zs a fellow, he’d rather let some of 
that liquid gold run down his gullet than all 
the effeminate brands of European and French 
wine, and you take it from me! 

* 

And so — 

Well, of course we’d agreed to quit at ten, 
but at ten the game was just going hot and 


134 


fate ot OR Ya BY MACK MoM ACK 


heavy, and Verg Gunch was losing and he 
said, “You got to give me my chance for re- 
venge,” and we agreed that after all that was 
only fair, and so we agreed to play till midnight 
and then quit and hit the hay. 

Well, somehow or other, I don’t exactly re- 
member the details, at midnight we agreed to 
play till two, and at two we all said that after 
all, hang it, we were tired from our work in 
the city and we needed some recreation, and 
so we'd play till dawn and sleep all next day 
and get in some fishing late in the afternoon. 
So that was agreed. And then we had another 
little feed. 

Say, that fellow, Joe Minchin, he certainly 
is one high roller. 

You gentlemen would be surprised to know 
what he had in the larder there, ready against 
just such an emergency as this—of course it 
wouldn’t have been safe to have left all that 
chow there in an uninhabited cottage if he 
hadn’t had a caretaker, ’way off there in those 
trackless and uninhabited northern wilds, where 
any tramp might come in and help himself, but 
luckily there was a Norsky farmer living not 


E35 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


over a hundred feet away, just across the road, 
his name was Oscar Swanson, great big square- 
head farmer he was, had a son that worked on 
the section gang out of Lucknow, and his 
daughter had gone to business college in Winni- 
waka and was working for a firm of insurance 
agents in Winniwaka, mighty bright successful 
young lady, and Oscar kind of kept an eye on 
Joe’s place, and so he had - . 
Say, it would ’ve knocked you for a loop to 
go into that pantry! Every luxury and neces- 
sity of the table, you might say — all canned, of 
course, but my God! No Roman feast that 
you ever read about or rather, probably, that 
you ever saw in the movies — had anything on 
that. Why say, there was canned chicken, 
and corned-beef hash, and sweet potatoes, and 
chop suey, real regular Chinese style, and 
pickled pigs’ feet, and elegant mackerel, and a 
canned fruit salad that say, I'll bet it’d make 
the eyes of even a French chef bung right out 
—slices of peaches and pears and apples and 
cherries, in fact, two kinds of cherries — say, no 
Chicago hotel could shake you up a better fruit 
salad. 
136 


DHE STORY BY: MACK McMACK 


And he had crackers and real genuwine 
Scranton pretzels, too. Um! And so, as I say, 
we had a swell feed, and it was then, while we 
were sitting around feeding, that Mack McMack 
told us this story that I started to tell you. 

Well! I’m afraid I’ve taken kind of a long 
time getting down to the story itself, but I 
wanted you to understand the background, so 
you’d understand the story better, and it’s kind 
of a funny thing about me: I always did have 
a what the newspapers call a Dramatic Instinct. 

* 

I’ve always had a kind of sneaking feeling 
that I wouldn’t have done so bad as an actor, 
if life hadn’t called me into more serious and 
responsible affairs. Or maybe as a theatrical 
producer or playwright. Why say, when I was 
just a young fellow, trying to get along, as the 
fellow says, there was six or seven of us—or 
no, it must have been more than that; I guess 
in all, first and last, we must have had eleven 
or twelve different young men and ladies in 
the organization at different times, and we 
organized a dramatic organization, but ama- 
teur, you understand, and say, we put on 


137 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


“Charley’s Aunt,” and “Box and Cox,” and 
say, without wishing to hand myself anything, 
I must say I always got the best hand in the 
show —I got the audiences there at the church 
entertainment laughing fit to die. 

Although in some ways I’ve often wondered 
if I wouldn’t ’ve done better as a dramatist. 

Some time when I get time-—of course I 
haven’t got the time for any such nonsense 
now; a man of affairs has got to be concentrated 
and not fritter his ideas away, and in fact, you 
might say, concentrate his energies — but I’ve 
thought that some time I’d try my hand at 
writing a play. 

I’ve got a rip-snorting idea for a dramatic 
comedy play, too. 

It seems this fellow, my hero, he’s an Ameri- 
can travelling abroad in one of these hick old- 
fashioned countries where they haven’t got a 
bathroom or a cake of ice in the whole doggone 
country, but they got more grand dukes and 
all like that than you could shake a stick at. 

Well, seems the Prince of Wales or whatever 
they call him, or prime minister or whatever he 
is that’s heir to the throne, well, there’s a plot 


138 


tt ook ROY auBly “MACK. MeMA CK 


against him and he gets kidnapped, and come 
to find out, this American — he’s a young fellow; 
I'd make him a newspaperman, I guess, though 
Delmerine — my daughter — she thinks he ought 
to be an aviator — well, come to find out, this 
American is the spittin’ image of the fellow that 
gets kidnapped, and by golly they make out 
he’s the fellow that’s missing, and he gets 
crowned! 

And meantime he’s been knocked down to 
the chief princess around there, and she falls for 
him, and she thinks he’s the real High Guy, see 
how I mean? But he won’t marry her because 
he feels that would be playing kind of a dirty 
trick on her — see, you get a lot of complications 
and dramatic problems and so on, that way. 

Well, you get the idea. It’s one that a lot of 
folks have taken a crack at, but here’s where I’ll 
make my play entirely different: 

Most authors, if they were doing that piece, 
they’d leave the poor American there in Uneeda 
or Nabisco or whatever you want to call this 
fool kingdom. And that would be agin all my 
American ideals, besides not being original. So 
what I plan to do is this: 


149 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


He tells the princess what he really is, and 
they by golly chuck all their rank and get 
hitched and come back to America, and he 
makes good on the job and say, wouldn’t that 
make a whale of a what they call a Dramatic 
Contrast — second act you show ’em there in the 
foreign palace, swell-clegant, all right, with 
tapestries and crystal chandeliers and big gilt 
chairs and all like that, but old-fashioned — my 
God, mouldy as a last year’s bird’s nest. 

Then in the last act, you see °em happy’s a 
bug in a rug in a really snappy up-to-date 
modern American mansion. 

At first I thought the scene ought to be in the 
parlour, but here couple of years ago I got 
an entirely new idea. What’s more character- 
istic of American luxury than a real breakfast 
room? Put the scene in the breakfast room, 
with the folks at breakfast! 

Make it a dandy modern sun-parlour, with 
nice light yellow curtains at the windows, and a 
red-tiled floor, and a canary in a Hendryx cage 
just singing his head off, and on the table you 
can see they’ve got an automatic electric toaster 
— this new automatic kind where you don’t have 


140 


wie we LORY, BY MACK McMACK 


to turn over the toast but it does it itself auto- 
matically—and a nice bright shiny electric 
percolator, and they’re passing the comment 
that it certainly is great to be eating real corn- 
flakes and honest-to-God coffee and wafHles 
and sausages and real Vermont maple syrup, see, 
instead of the awful chow they'd be getting in 
Europe — pickles and sauerkraut for breakfast, 
probably, and all like that. 

Well, then, in comes the ambassador from this 
European country, and he says they want the 
hero to come back—they’ll make him sure- 
enough king, but he says, ‘“Nix, not on your 
life — just look around you,” he says, “‘and use 
your own eyes, how’s this for class and real 
sure-enough solid comfort.”’ And so on— you 
know, a lot of discussion back and forth. 

And then, say, if I do say it myself, I certainly 
got one knock-out last curtain. Just when the 
ambassador is arguing his head off —in comes 
the nurse with their little kid, just born! 

But I’m getting entirely away from my sub- 
ject, I’m afraid, and as I said, it was there at 
Joe’s while we were having that little snack that 
Mack finally told this story I started to tell you, 


I4I 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


and I guess it’s up to me to repeat it and then 
shut up and we can get back to the game. 
* 

Well, as I started to say, seems these three 
fellows, this Jew and Mick and Englishman, 
were all wrecked on a desert island, and the 
only other person that was saved was this pretty 
girl, maybe she was a missionary, but say, she 
was a peach. On shipboard they’d all three ~ 
tried to make her, but she was standoffish as all 
get out and wouldn’t talk to ’em, but here 
where they were all sharing a couple of tents, 
she couldn’t very well hand ’em the icy mitt, 
considering they were doing everything for 
her and building up a kind of — oh, a wall or a 
barricade or whatever it is that they always put 
up around your shack in these novels you read 
about people that get wrecked on a desert 
island, to keep off these wild beasts that they 
have on desert islands. 

So she gets pretty chummy with the whole 
bunch of ’em, but she don’t pick any favourites, 
and so one night these three guys and the girl 
are all sitting around the camp-fire, and each of 
the guys tries to pull a line that’d make this 


142 


tue ooh ORY BY. MACK McMACK 


Jane think he was zt — that he was the cat’s left 
auricle. (God, I wish you could ’ve heard Mack 
tell this!) 

So they’re sitting there around the fire, and 
the Englishman, he puts on his monocle, and 
he says to her, ““Hy sy, me deuh, ayn’t it simply 
something grand to think that you and me could 
establish a new dominion of the good old British 
Empire here in these waste places —” 

Say, you'd ’ve laughed fit to split if you could 
have heard the way Mack took off that English- 
man-—just as natural as life—the intonation 
absolutely perfect, and the choice of words and 
everything. And same way when he came to 
take off the Jew and the Irishman. Perfect! 
Say, that fellow certainly is a natural-born 
comedian — whole show right in himself. 

And yet I don’t want any of you boys to 
think that Mack is nothing but a clown. Say, 
when it comes to a time of grief and bereave- 
ment, you can bank on Mack, He'll be as 
sympathetic and serious as any undertaker you 
ever saw. 

I remember he had charge of the finest 
funeral I ever saw —I tell you it was a credit to 


143 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Zenith (and to Mack), that funeral —I’ll bet 
Chicago itself never pulled off a more impres- 
sive and touching funeral. It was a Shriner 
funeral to one of the finest fellows you ever 
met in your life—Ed S. Swanson, the great 
divorce lawyer —- why, they say Ed never took 
a divorce case in his life where he didn’t get a 
favourable verdict, whether there was any 
grounds or not; a real crack lawyer that 4e 
didn’t care what the law was — “I'll make the 
law and you furnish my fee,” he used to say — 
but laughingly, of course, because he was a real 
square straight-shooter. 

And one of the most public-spirited citizens 
in Zenith. 

Why say, he was on the Better Interurban 
Trolley and Transportation Commission that 
got us several extensions of street-car lines to 
the suburbs—and while I guess Ed himself 
profited somewhat by advance knowledge of 
what suburbs these new lines were going to tap, 
still, that was only sensible, after all, when you 
look at it in the right way — somebody had to 
make that profit, didn’t they? And it had 
nothing to do with the fact that he put in some 


144 


Tree opt ORY BY. MACK MeMACK 


mighty good licks on behalf of the body politic, 
and not one cent of pay for his services, you 
understand. 

And he was one of the men most responsible 
for the Board of Education passing the act 
requiring a half-hour of Bible study in every 
school every day, and in forcing every school to 
start the day with prayer and the singing of 
“The Star-Spangled Banner” and the salute to _ 
the flag. 

A fine fellow — one of the kind that makes our 
more progressive cities what they are to-day. 
And in private life, say, Ed was one of the most 
charming hosts you ever met — he’d fix you up 
an old-fashioned whisky cocktail that would just 
about make you see stars, and he could tell a 
smutty story, that bird, good as Mack himeelf, 
pretty near. 

Well, of course the Shriners had to give a guy 
like Ed a bang-up funeral, and Mack ran it, and 
to see Mack then, with his black cutaway coat 
on, and to hear him speak to the unfortunate 
widow, say, you’d ’ve thought he was going to 
bust out crying. But it was a scream! 

Just when he was looking so doggone down in 


145 E 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


the mouth you wanted to boohoo yourself, he 
come over near me in the corner, and he gave 
me the comicalest wink you ever saw, and he 
whispers to me, “Oh, do we get a drink after 
this, dearly beloved brethren and sisters, or do 
we nof? I'll say, fellow-Shriners and relatives, 
that we by God do!” 

So that’s the kind of fellow he was, real all- 
round guy, and so he goes on with that story, 
there that night, and he tells how these three are 
sitting around with this girl, and the English- 
man he says if the girl and him could make a go 
‘of it, they’d by golly start a new department of 
the British Empire. 

And then, as Mack tells it, while the girl’s 
thinking the Englishman wouldn’t be such a 
bad bet, after all, the Irishman speaks up — let’s 
say his name was Mike - Mike he speaks up 
and he says: 

“Now faith and begorra,”’ he says to the girl, 
“now faith and begorra, with the blue eyes of 
yez and the cunning ways of yez, begorra,” he 
says, “‘we could start a revolution in any new 
empire that Sandy here would be afther 
instituting!” 

146 


epost ORY BY ; MACK —MéeMACK 


Well, that gets her pretty good, too, and she 
thinks maybe Mike is a little better on the 
Blarney stone than the Englishman is, and then 
up speaks the Jew, and say — 

But first I want to tell you that poor old Mack 
certainly did have a hard time finishing his 
story. By this time, after we’d eaten, we’d all 
lapped up a pretty fair average amount of 
hootch, and we kept kidding him along and 
interrupting him, and along about here in his 
story, Prof. Baroot — say, he may be an elegant 
high-class scholar, but he’s got just about as 
much pep and ginger and good-fellowship as 
any man you ever met, and he insisted before we 
heard the rest of the story, we ought to go out 
and have a swim. 

No sooner said than done! Yes sir! Just like 
that! 

Off with the old pants and lingerie and into 
the drink, and all acting up — there was enough 
moon still so we could just see, and there we was 
acting up by golly like a bunch of school kids, 
splashing water on each other and ducking each 
other and just generally raising Ned. 

And then we got to singing like a regular 


147 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


barber-shop quartet —- only of course we were 
a sextet—and say, Prof. Baroot certainly did 
make a rip-snorting joke on that word sextet, 
but I'll tell you that later — and we allstood there 
bare-naked as Adam (and my God, what a 
tummy I found Vergil Gunch had been hiding 
out on us!—and maybe I wasn’t so good myself!) 
—and we stood there and sang: 


“Oh joy and oh bliss, 
Home was nothing like this, 


Yip ay-addee ay-yeh.”’ 


And it made us feel fine, getting a little 
exercise like that. 

I tell you, there’s an awful lot of fellows that, 
however intelligent they may be about business, 
don’t realize and comprehend the need of 
exercise. 

That’s one thing to which I attribute my own 
success and the ability to think quickly and dis- 
pose of the day’s rush of business without a lot 
of mental puttering: the fact that I take regular 
exercise. ‘T’here’s scarcely a day goes by that I 
don’t walk from my office to the Zenith Ath- 
letic Club for lunch, and that’s not less than a 

148 


ftPeos RY an MACK  MeMACK 


half a mile each way, and every single Sunday 
from May to November I either have a good 
round of golf or I’m out driving in the fresh 
air. 

So as I say, we all had a good swim that kind 
of cleared our heads up, and we were ready for 
the rest of Mack’s story — about the good one 
that the Jew there on this desert island pulled 
after Mike and his lordship had shot their 
bolts. 

Though I remember, just for a brief second, 
before Mack went on, we got into a kind of a 
discussion that I think might interest you 
gentlemen. 

Somebody happened to mention the Ford, 
and somebody else, I think it was Depew LeVie, 
he turned to Prof. Baroot, and he says, “Say, 
Doc, I’ve got a real scientific question for you. 
Now that Ford’s bringing out this new model 
of his, will it be proper to call that new model 
a flivuer?” 

Well say, that started us off. My God, we 
fought like a Democratic convention! 

Some claimed one thing and some claimed 
the other, and one fellow got sarcastic and said, 


149 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


“But how do you define a flivver, while you’re 
arguing so much about it?” And so it went 
back and forth, and poor Mack, I guess it must 
’ve been all of half an hour before he got back 
to his story. 

So then he goes on. 

Up pipes Mr. Jew, it seems, and fe says — 

He says, uh, “Oy, oy,” he says to the girl, 
“if you and me vos married,” he says, “‘ve’d — 
ve'd —” 

Say now, by golly, that’s funny! I can’t to 
save my life remember just what it was the Jew 
said, and it’s almost the whole point of the 
story! 

Well, never mind. Prob’ly I'll remember it 
later. Anyway, it was a doggone good story, 
and you’d ’ve enjoyed hearing it, and — 

Say, let’s get on with the game! Are we 
playing poker, or aren’t we playing poker! 


150 


PAR RAEI 
YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


ND I tell you, Walt, now we have a chance 
Ato sit down here by ourselves in your den 
and have a real chat — and say, from what I’ve 
seen, I don’t believe there’s a more elegant 
house for its size in Troy, and then of course you 
always were my favourite cousin, and one of the 
few people whose business judgment I’d trust 
and — 

If you can see your way clear to making this 
loan, you'll never regret it. Business hasn’t 
gone quite so good the last six months, as I 
admitted, but now I’ve got the exclusive Zenith 
‘agency for Zenith for these new cash registers — 
and say, what the cash register means, what it 
means to the modern and efficient conduct of 
business; it’s almost, you might say, the symbol 
of modern industry, like the sword is of war — 
now I’ve got that, I can guarantee a big increase 
in turnover, taking one thing with another, and 
I want you to examine the analysis of my busi- 
ness with the greatest care. 

And I certainly do admit all your criticisms, 


ea 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


and I’m going to ponder on ’em and try to 
profit by ’em. 

I’m afraid I do get too kind of talkee-talkee 
during business hours, and maybe waste time _ 
and money. And I admit what you said about 
my college course. It’s perfectly frue: I didn’t 
quit Amherst because my Dad died — fact, he 
didn’t die till nine months after I was fired, and 
it’s true I was dropped for flunking all my col- 
lege courses, as you said — though I thought you 
threw that up to me a little unnecessarily; 
almost hurt my feelings, in fact; don’t know 
that I'd ’ve stood it from anybody but you, 
but of course you always were my favourite 
cousin — 

You see, I don’t go around telling everybody 
that version of the story, because what I figure 
is, what they don’t know won’t hurt ’em none, 
and it’s none of their business. 

But it’s not true, as you kind of hinted 
and suggested, that I didn’t know President 
Coolidge in college. It’s a fact that for some 
years I did have him mixed up with another 
fellow in our class that looked something like 
him, but here some time ago I happened to run 

152 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


into this other fellow, and now I’ve got the two 
of ’em perfectly straight. 

Why, I can remember just as if it was yester- 
day, Cal—as we used to call him—Cal and I 
were going into class together, and I says to 
him, “Cal, old boy,” I said, “what’s the Latin 
for ‘battle’??? And he said —he said — well, he 
gave the word right out, without any hemming 
and hawing and beating around the bush. 

But you’re right, I do kind of get to talking 
too much. Henceforth I’m going to cut it 
short, and you'll never.regret it if you put in 
that loan. 

And I don’t think that even you, with all the 
insight that you show into human nature, quite 
understand how and why it is that in certain 
moods I do run on a good deal. There’s reasons 
for it. In the first place, I’m called on so con- 
stantly for speeches and oratory in Zenith — 
you've never been there and you couldn't 
understand, but — 

Well, you take like this, for instance. I was 
attending a meeting of the Americanization 
Committee of the Zenith Chamber of Com- 
merce, and we were discussing birth control. 


153 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Well, the chairman insisted I make ’em a long 
speech on the subject. 

“Shucks, boys,” I said, “you know just as 
much about it as I do,” but they talked and 
they insisted, and they wouldn’t let me go until 
I’d made a long spiel for *em, summing up the 
arguments on both sides and, you might say, 
kind of clarifying it for *em. See how I mean? 
But you, Walt, you just think of business night 
and day, and prob’ly that’s a more practical way 
to think of it. But I get dragged into all these 
public and influential occasions and get kind of 
into a habit of oratory and philosophy, see how 
I mean? 

And then — 

I hate to say it, and there isn’t another human 
being living, Walt, that Id tell this to, and I 
want you to treat it as strictly confidenital, but — 

The fact is, what really cramps my style is 
my wife. 

* 

That girl — 

And in many ways I’ve got nothing but praise 
for Mamie. She means well, and as far as her 


lights lead her, she does everything she can for 
154 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


me, but the fact is she don’t quite understand 
me, and say, the way she drives me and makes 
demands on me and everything, why say, it 
just about drives me crazy. 

And Delmerine same way. eeeOne the Old 
Man’s made of money! 

And what I’ve done for Mamie - yes, and 
what modern American science has done! 
Think of the advantage of canned goods, of 
delicatessen shops with every delicacy from 
salads to cold turkey, all ready to serve without 
any preparation; of baker’s bread without hav- 
ing to bake bread at home. Think of the elec- 
tric dish-washing machine, reducing the work 
of dish-washing to, you might say, practically 
a minimum, and the vacuum cleaner, and what 
an invention that is!}—no more sweeping, no 
more beating rugs —why say, the preachers can 
talk about these mysteries and all like that, but 
I guess in the vacuum cleaner America has 
added to the world its own mystery, that'll 
last when the columns of the Acropolis have 
crumbled to mere dust! 

And then think of the modern laundries with 
their marvellous machinery. 


155 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


It’s true that they don’t wash the clothes 
quite as good as my old mother used to — fact, 
they simply tear hell out of my handkerchiefs, 
and I always was a man to appreciate a high 
grade of fine linen handkerchief. But still, 
think of the labour-saving. 

And so [ve provided Mame with every 
device to save her labour, so whether it’s a 
question of her telling the maid what to do, or 
during those comparatively rare intervals when 
we haven’t got a hired girl and she has to do 
some of the work herself, she can get it all done 
in a jiffy, you might say, and be free for all the 
pleasures and self-improvement of leisure. She’s 
free to play bridge nearly every afternoon, and 
also to give a lot of attention to her literary club, 
the William Lyon Phelps Ladies’ Book and 
Literary Society, and get a lot of culture. 

Now myself, I’ve always given a lot of atten- 
tion to intellectual matters. Of course I’m right 
up on history—Ive read clear through both 
Wells’s Outline of History, or practically clear 
through it, and also Van Lear’s Story of Man- 
kind, especially studying the illustrations. And 
of course — maybe I’m a little rusty on it now, 


156 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


but as a boy I used to be able to chatter German 
like a native, you might say, as my father often 
talked it to us at home. And now I’m kind of 
specializing on philosophy. I’ve read a lot of 
this Story of Philosophy by—I can’t at the 
moment exactly remember the professor’s name, 
but it gives you the whole contents of all 
philosophy in one book; and while these busi- 
ness cares have for the moment interrupted my 
reading the book, I sebcet to go right on and 
finish it. 

But Mame, she has the opportunity to go 
ahead and knock all my culture into a cocked 
hat. Here recently her club had a very fine 
lecture about the excavation of King Tut’s 
tomb, from a gentleman that had been right 
there on the ground — of course he couldn’t go 
into the tomb, because nobody’s allowed inside 
it except the excavating staff, but he saw the 
place at first hand, and my wife learned a lot 
about Egyptology from him. 

And they’ve had a whole course in dietetics. 
She learned, for example, that the ordinary 
housewife uses more butter in cooking than is 
at all necessary — that while maybe butter may 


57 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


make grub faste a little better, it doesn’t add 
proportionately to the calories or whatever they 
are, and so she learned one way in which to 
economize. And my God, these days, what _ 
with the cost of gasoline and whisky and golf 

balls, a fellow has to economize on something. 

So as I say, she has a chance to lead a free 
life and have a lot of dandy times, because I’ve 
provided her with all the household conveni- 
ences. But who paid for *em? Where did the 
money to pay for ’°em come from? From my 
toil’and efforts, that’s where it came from, and 
do you think I can get her to appreciate that? 
Not for one moment! 

All day long I slave and work to keep her in 
luxury, and then when I come home at night all 
tired out, do I find her ready to comfort me? I 
do not! 

I might as well not have a wife at all. And 
then when I try to make her understand what 
I’ve been doing —like telling her how hard 
I’ve worked to sell a new adding-machine to 
some fellow that didn’t want it and maybe 
didn’t need it, do you think she appreciates it? 
She does not! 

158 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


Why, she always makes out like she wishes I 
was a doctor, or one of those he-lecturers that 
goes around spieling to women’s clubs, or some 
darn’ arty thing like that, and sometimes she 
practically up and says she wishes I could make 
love like one of those Wop counts, or a movie 
actor! 

She says I just think of business and not of 
her. But I notice she’s good and plenty glad to 
grab all the money I bring home from that 
business, all right! 

It was — 

Now I wouldn’t say this to anybody else on 
God’s green earth, and for heaven’s sake don’t 
you ever breathe a syllable of it, even to your 
wife, but I’ve been beginning to think here 
lately that it was all wrong with Mame and me 
right from the beginning! 

Not that I’d ever do anything about it, you 
understand —even though I ave got a lady 
friend in New York, simply a little darling 
and at least twelve years younger than Mame, 
too. But I don’t believe in divorce, and then 
there’s the children to think of, But it was all 
wrong — 


159 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


I’ve learned a lot here lately. I’ve been 
studying and delving into psychoanalysis. Know 
anything about psychoanalysis? 

Well, I do, and say, it certainly is a revela- 
tion. I’ve read almost clear through a manual on 
it—a very authoritative book written by a lady, 
Miss Alexandrine Applebaugh, that’s a great 
authority on the subject, because she studied 
with a man that was a pupil of one of the biggest 
pupils of old Freud, and it was Freud that in- 
vented psychoanalysis. 

Well, now Ill explain what pyschoanalysis is. 
It’s like this: 

Everybody ought to have a rich, full sex-life, 
and all human activities are directed toward 
that. Whenever a guy is doing something, it’s 
directed toward making himself attractive 
sexually, especially if it’s something big and 
important—no matter whether it’s painting a 
picture or putting over a big deal in Florida 
town-lotsor discovering aneweclipseor pitching | 
in a World Series game or preaching a funeral 
sermon or writing a big advertisement or any of 
them things. On the other hand, when fellows 
like us do put over something, we want to be 

160 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


appreciated, and we got a right to expect it, 
and if we don’t get appreciated at home, we 
ought to find new mates, see how I mean? 

Only you get into so doggone many compli- 
cations and trouble and all that maybe it ain’t 
practical, even with a cute girl like this one in 
New York I was speaking about — Ain’t really 
worth it. 

And then there’s a lot in psychoanalysis about 
dreams. All dreams mean you ought to have a 
different kind of a wife—oh, they’re mighty 
important! ; 

And so now you'll understand psychoanalysis 
—as well as anybody does, anyway. 

* 

Well, as I say, now that I’ve mastered psycho- 
analysis, I can see things was all wrong with 
Mame and me from the beginning. 

I was a young fellow, just come to Zenith, 
then, working in a wholesale paper house and 
living in a boarding-house out in the Benner 
Park district, and in those days that district was 
just like a small town. I met a dandy crowd of 
young people at the church and so on, and we 
used to have dances and picnics and sleigh- 

161 L 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


rides and everything —rube stuff, but lots of 
fun. 

Well, Mame — her father was in the roofing 
business, did a pretty good business, too, for 
them days — she was one of the jolliest girls in 
the bunch, but she was awful on the level. 
There was some of the girls in our crowd that 
you could get pretty fresh with—nothing 
wrong, you understand, or not hardly ever, but 
still when you was all cuddled down together 
in the hay on a sleigh-ride, you could hold their 
hands and maybe even pat their knees a little. 

But Mame-—never! No sir! Why say, she 
was so pure and religious that one time at a 
dance when I tried to kiss her, she slapped hell 
out of me! 

So of course that just led me on. Made me 
think she was the living wonder. 

Maybe if I’d known then as much as I know 
now, I’d ’ve known that it isn’t so bad for a girl 
that you’re going to spend your life with, inti- 
mate, you might say, to have a little of the Old 
Nick in her and not be so doggone adverse to a 
little scientific cuddling — within reason I mean, 
of course, you see how I mean? 

162 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


Well, so we got married and she never did get 
so she liked — 

I mean, she hints around sometimes and kind 
of hints that it’s because ’m just a poor plain 
plug American business man that she’s never 
warmed up. But my God, I’ve never had any 
encouragement! I don’t expect I’d ever be any 
Valentino, any way, but how can I even begin 
to learn to show her a good time when she’s 
always acted like she was afraid I woudd try to 
kiss her? 

I tell you, Walt, I’m kind of puzzled. Some- 
times I almost kind of wonder (though I 
wouldn’t want to be quoted) whether with all 
the great things we got in this greatest nation 
in the world, with more autos and radics and 
furnaces and suits of clothes and miles of cement 
pavements and skyscrapers than the rest of the 
world put together, and with more deep learn- 
ing — hundreds of thousands of students study- 
ing Latin and bookkeeping and doctoring and 
domestic science and literature and banking and 
window-dressing — even with all of this, I won- 
der if we don’t lack something in American life 
when you consider that you almost never see an 


163 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


American married couple that really like each 
other and like to be with each other? 

I wonder. But I guess it’s too much for me. 
I just don’t understand — 

* 

But I’m getting away from my subject. To 
return to Mame: 

Aside from her apparently not wanting me 
to be anything whatsomever around the house 
except the guy that pays the bills and carves the 
duck and fixes the furnace and drives her car out 
of the garage so she can go off to a hen bridge- 
party, here lately we’ve got into kind of a bad 
way of quarrelling. 

Well, here’s an example: 

We used to have dogs for quite a while after 
we were married, and I always did like to have 
a good dog round the house. Kind of gives you 
somebody to talk to when you come home and 
there ain’t anybody around — just sits and listens 
while you explain things to him, and looks like 
he understood\ But here about six years ago, just 
at a moment when we didn’t happen to have 
a dog, somebody gave Mrs. Schmaltz— gave 
Mamie, I mean —a very fine expensive cat by 


164 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


name Minnie — not exactly a full-bred Persian, 
I guess, but pretty full-bred at that. 

But at the same time, even appreciating how 
much money she was worth, I never did dike 
that damn’ cat! 

You see, we also had a canary, a very valu- 
able little canary named Dicky, a real genuwine 
Hertz Mountains canary, and intelligent — say, 
there’s those that say a canary isn’t intelligent, 
but I want to tell you that that canary knew me, 
and when I’d stand near the cage he’d chirp 
just like he was talking to me. 

He was a lot of comfort to me, not having a 
dog at that time — I was looking for a high-class 
English setter, and hadn’t been able to find one 
at the price I felt justified in paying. 

Well sir, here was a surprising thing. We fed 
that cat and fed her—Id hate to tot up all the 
money we’ve paid out for milk and meat for 
that cat — but even so, she was bound and deter- 
mined she was going to get at that poor little 
canary. She’d hang around underneath the cage 
and look up at Dicky, absolutely bloodthirsty, 
and one time when somebody (and I always 
thought it was Mame did it herself, too, and not 

Bee 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


the hired girl) -when somebody left a chair 
right practically under the cage, Minnie lep’ up 
on the chair and absolutely did her best to leap 
up and get at the cage. 

Of course Mame and I had words about 
that — 

And then that damn’ cat never would be 
friendly, at least not to me. 

I used to say to Mame, “‘Well, what does the 
fool cat do for its living, anyway? Think we’re 
sent into the world just to loaf around and en- 
joy ourselves and sponge on other people?” I 
says. 

Wouldn’t sit in my lap—no sir, not for a 
minute. I used to get so sore at that cat that I'd 
kick it good and plenty hard, when nobody was 
looking — I showed it its place, by God - and 
still I couldn’t get it to be friendly. 

And we talked a lot about it, about the cat 
and the canary, and one thing often led to 
another — 

You know how it is. 

And when I talked about getting another 
dog, no sir, Mame wouldn’t hear of it — said a 
dog would frighten her ittly, bittly, sweetsy, 

166 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 
bitsy, high-hatting, canary-murdering damn’ 
cat, by God! 

Well, I made up my mind that I was going to 
be master in my own household, but — Oh well, 
things just kind of floated along for several 
months, and I didn’t do anything special about 
buying a dog, and then one day — 

I remember just like it was yesterday. I’d 
been out to the country club for a few holes of 
golf—I remember I was playing with Joe 
Minchin, the machinery king, Willis jams, our 
leading — or certainly one of our leading — hard- 
ware dealers, and fellow named George Bab- 
bitt, the great real-estate dealer. But I was 
driving home alone, and I remember there was 
something wrong —car kept kind of bucking — 
couldn’t exactly figure out what it was, so I 
stops the car right by the side of the road —it 
was late autumn —and I lifts the hood and I’m 
trying to figure out what’s wrong when I hears 
a kind of whining and a whimpering, and I 
looks down, and by golly there’s a nice water 
spaniel — not very old, not more’n say two or 
maybe nearer two and a half years old, sitting 
there and looking up at me so pathetic —say, 

167 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


it was absolutely pathetic. And he held up his 
paw like it’d been hurt. 

“Well, what’s the trouble, old man?”’ I says 
to him. 

And he looks up, so intelligent — By golly, 
I just loved that damn’ tyke! Well, make a long 
story short, I looks at his paw, and way I 
figured it out, he’d cut it on some broken glass 
— but not bad. Fortunately I had some old but 
clean rags there in the door-pocket of the car, 
and so I sat down on the running-board and 
kind, of bound up his paw, and meantime I 
noticed — and a good, high-grade dog he was, 
too—I noticed he didn’t have any collar or 
licence or anything. And when I’d finished, 
doggoned if he didn’t jump up into my sedan 
like he belonged there. 

“Well, who’d you think you are?” I says to 
him. “What are you trying to do, you old hi- 
jacker,” I says to him. ‘Steal my car? Poor old 
Pop Schmaltz with his car stolen,” I says. 

And he just curls up on the back seat and 
wags his tail, much as to say, ‘““You’re a great 
little kidder, but I know which side my meat is 
buttered on.” 


168 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


Well, I looks up and down the road and there 
wasn't anybody in sight that looked like they 
were looking for a dog, and there was only a 
couple of houses in sight, and when I got the 
car to acting Christian again — seems the car- 
burettor needed a little adjusting —I drives to 
both these houses, and ¢hey didn’t know nothing 
about no lost dog. So I says, “Well, don’t like 
to leave old Jackie here —” 

That’s what I named the pup, and that’s what 
I call him to this very day. 

“Td better not leave him here to get run 
over,” thinks I, ‘cand when we get back home, 
I'll advertise and see if I can find his owner.” 

Well, when I got home, Robby — you remem- 
ber my boy, Walt —- Robby was just as crazy 
about having a dog as I was, but Mame gets 
sniffy about how the dog’d scare that damn’ 
cat Minnie of hers. But she let me keep Jackie, 
that’s the dog, out in the garage till I’d adver- 
tised. 

Well, I advertised and I advertised — 

No, come to think of it, I guess it was just 
one ad I put in, because I thinks to myself, 
“Jackie looks to me like a regular man’s dog, 

169 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


and if his owner ain’t keeping a look-out, can’t 
expect me to do all the work!” 

Anyway, never got an answer, and in ‘long 
about a week, Mame wakes up and begins to 
realize, here I am with a dog that ain’t going 
to be buddies with her cat—and say, was she 
right? Say, the first time Minnie comes pee- 
rading out on the lawn to see if she can’t murder 
a few sparrows, Jackie, his paw was well enough 
for that, he takes one look at her, and say, 
honest, you’d ’ve laughed fit to bust; he chases 
her ‘way clean up our elm tree, and keeps her 
there, too, by golly! 

Well, after that, there was a hell of a powwow 
with Big Chief Wife, and no peace-pipe in 
sight. She gets me in the house, away from 
Robby, who’d ’ve backed me up, and she 
rides the wild mustango up and down the 
living-room, and throws her tomahawk into 
the tortured victims, meaning me, and she 
says: 

“Lowell Schmaltz, ve told you, and if I’ve 
told you once, I’ve told you a hundred times, 
that Minnie is a very sensitive and high-bred 
cat, and I will not have her nerves all shattered 


170 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


by being annoyed by a lot of horrid dogs. I 
want you to find the rightful owner of this 
horrid dog and give him back.” 

“Give who back? The owner?’ I says, just 
sitting down and lighting a cigar and trying to 
look like I was amused and there was nothing 
she could do or say that would get my goat. 
And of course I had her there: ‘Give who 
back? The owner?” I says. 

“You know perfectly well and good what I 
mean,”’ she says. “And I want you to find the 
horrid thing’s owner at once!” 

“Fine!” I says. “Sure! Of course all I’ve 
done is to advertise extensively in the 4dvocate- 
Times, which only has more circulation than any 
other two papers in this territory put together — 
or so they claim, and I’ve looked into it and ’'m 
disposed to accept their figures,” I says. “But 
of course that isn’t enough. All right, I'll just 
tuck Jackie under my arm, and start right out — 
Let’s see,” I says, “there’s only about six hun- 
dred thousand people in Zenith and the neigh- 
bouring towns, within perhaps a twenty-eight 
or thirty-mile radius of City Hall, and all Tl 
have to do will be to run around to each of ’em 


171 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


and say, ‘Hey, mister, lost a dog?’ That’s all 
I'll have to do.”’ 

“Well, then, you can take the horrid beast 
out where you found him and leave him there,” 
she says. 

“T can, and I ain’t going to,” I says — flat. 
“T’m not going to have him run over by some 
damn’ fool careless motorist,’ I says. “He’s a 
valuable dog,” I says. 

“He’s horrid—and he’s terribly dirty. I 
never did see such a terribly dirty dog,” she 
says. 

“Oh, sure,” I says. “Of course aside from th 
notorious fact that he’s a water spaniel — and 
water spaniels being, even if they ain’t at 
present as fashionable as cocker spaniels or wire- 
haired terriers or Airedales, merely notoriously 
the cleanest dogs that exist,” I says, ‘aside from 
that, you’re dead right.” 

“But we don’t need a dog anyway,” she says. 

Well say, that kind of got my goat. 

“No,” I says, “sure we don’t. I don’t, any- 
way. Think what I’ve got here to be chummy 
with in the evening. Elegant! This nice, fluffy, 
expensive feline cat, that hates me like hell, that 

172 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


won’t sit in my lap, that cottons to you because 
you got nothing to do all day but stay home and 
petit, while I have to bein my store, working my 
head off — to support a damn’ cat! Fine!” I says. 

But then I got serious, and after some re- 
marks back and forth about how she did have 
things to do, like running the house and look- 
ing after my clothes and Robby and Delmerine 
— you know how any woman can make out like 
she works like a slave — after that I got serious, 
and I says: 

“But seriously,” I says, “when you come to 
look at it in a serious manner, what is a dog? 
What is a dog? What is he but man’s greatest 
friend! Who so unselfish as a dog? Who so wel- 
comes the weary man — yes, or woman, for that 
matter, if she treats °em right!—when they 
come home weary from the day’s labour? ‘To say 
nothing of their being in many lands also useful 
in a practical way in helping to haul carts, also 
as watchmen. 

“You forget,” I told her, “all the wonderful 
things we’ve seen Rin Tin Tin do in the 
movies. Why say, I’ll bet that dog’s salary is 
higher than that of any film-author or even 


173 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


camera-man. But aside from that, think of some 
of the dogs of history. Think of those brave 
Saint Bernard dogs, going out with little barrels 
of brandy under their chins to rescue belated 
travellers in that pass in Germany, or wherever 
it was—though I never could understand,” I 
admits, “why there were so many travellers 
that kept taking a chance and getting belated 
in the snow that the monks had to keep a whole 
corps of dogs running to rescue them all the 
time. But still, that was in old historic times, 
and ‘maybe things were different from now, 
and of course no railroads — 

“But in modern times,” I told her, “I’ve 
heard an anecdote, and I got it mighty straight, 
from a fellow who knew the fellow who was in 
the story, and it seems this fellow was a trapper 
or a miner or a prospector or something like 
that, anyway he had a cabin ’way off in the 
Sierras or some place like that — high moun- 
tains anyway —and seems it was the depth of 
winter, and this fellow’s cabin was all snowed in, 
also the tracks and trails and all were deep 
buried in the snow. 

“Well, seems this fellow had an accident, 


174. 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


slipped down a crevasse or something like that, 
and busted his leg, seriously, but he managed 
to make his way with great difficulty back to 
his cabin where his faithful dog, I never did 
learn the name of the dog, was waiting for him, 
and then as a result of the accident, he fell into 
a kind of fever, I suppose it was, and he lay 
there simply shot to pieces and in great suffer- 
ing, and attended only by this faithful dog, 
who couldn’t, of course, do much to help him, 
but he did his best, and he was a mighty smart, 
clever dog, and the trapper, or whatever this 
fellow was, he trained this dog so’s he’d bring 
a match or a drink of water or whatever it was 
the poor devil needed. 

“But there wasn’t any way of cooking any 
food—it goes without saying that that was 
something the dog couldn’t help him with- 
and the trapper got worse and worse, and he was 
in great pain, and you could see the dog was 
worried about what to do, and then all of a 
sudden, one day, by golly, the dog gives a kind 
of a short quick yelp, and he dives right through 
the cabin window, head on, and he’s gone — 
not one sound from him. : 


175 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


“Well, of course, the poor devil of a trapper, 
he thought his only friend had deserted him, 
and he gave himself up to die, and it was almost 
as bitter as the pain itself to think that he’d been 
deserted by the only friend he had. 

“But all this time, the dog was not idle. He 
goes lickety-split, following the snow-obliter- 
ated trails as if by instinct, "way down an’ 
down and down to the far-distant nearest vil- 
lage and comes up to the doctor’s house, where 
he’d been once several years before with his 
master. 

“Well, the door is slightly ajar, and the dog 
busts in and whines at the feet of the doc, who 
was at dinner. 

““*You get to hell out of here-—how’d you 
ever get in here anyway?’ the doctor says, 
naturally not understanding the situation, and 
he chases the dog out and closes the door, but 
the dog stands there on the doorstep, whining 
and otherwise trying to draw the attention of 
the doctor, till the doctor’s wife begins to think 
something is wrong, and they cautiously let 
the dog in again and try to feed it, but it keeps 
tugging at the doc’s pants-legs and refuses to eat 

176 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


a single morsel, till at last the doc says, ‘Maybe 
I’m needed somewhere, and come to think of it, 
this dog looks like the dog that that trapper had 
back in the mountains when he came here one 
time.’ 

“So anyway, he takes a chance on it —of 
course he hasn’t got any more idea than the 
man in the moon where this fellow lives, but he 
hitches up his cutter, and the dog runs along 
in front of them, picking out the best road, and 
they come to this cabin, hours and hours from 
anywhere, and the doc goes in, and here’s this 
fellow with the fever and busted leg in dire 
need. Well, he tends to him and gets him some 
chow and is all ready to move him to civiliza- 
tion when he thinks of this poor dog that’s 
saved him, and he turns to find him, and the 
poor little tyke has crawled into a corner and 
fallen dead, exhausted by his terrible race for 
life! 

“‘That’s what dogs can do,” I tell her, and 
then I tell her some other absolutely authentic 
anecdotes about dogs and we pass a lot of 
remarks back and forth, and final result is, she 
says all right; she’ll stand my keeping the dog, 

177 <= 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


but he’s got to stay out of the house, and I can 
build him a dog-kennel out beside the garage. 
* 

But you know how things go. One morning 
I gets up early and has breakfast by myself, 
and there’s Jackie whining outside, and I takes 
a chance and lets him in and feeds him, and 
that cat comes marching into the room like 
a Episcopalopian rector leading a procession, 
and Jackie gets one squint at her and chases her 
up on the buffet, and just then Mamie comes 
in and — 

Say, I didn’t stop with no buffet; I didn’t 
stop till I’d reached the top of the Second 
National Bank Tower. But seriously, though 
she certainly give Jackie and me such an earful 
that — 

Well, Joe Minchin had planned a poker party 
for that evening and I hadn’t kind of intended 
to go, but Mame bawled hell out of me so at 
breakfast that later in the day I said I’d go, and 
I went, and I got lit to the eyebrows, if the 
truth be known — say, I was simply ossified. 

So I comes home late, thinking I was both the 
King and Queen of Sheba, and then I got dizzy 

178 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


and just about the time Mame’d thought up her 
adjectives and was ready to describe me for the 
catalogue of domestic sons of guns, I couldn’t 
tarry, oh, no longer —I had to be wending my 
way into the bathroom P.D.Q., and there, say, 
I lost everything but my tonsils. Wow! 

Well, Mame was awful’ nice to me. She 
helped me back into bed, and she bathed my 
forehead, and she got some black coffee for me 
—only what I wanted was a good cyanide of 
potassium cocktail —- and when I woke up in the 
morning she just kind of laughed, and I thought 
I was going to get by without the matrimonial 
cat-o’-nine-tails—I actually thought that, and 
me married over twenty years to her! 

So when my head gets itself reduced to not 
more’n six or seven normal times its ordinary or 
wearing size, and I gets up for breakfast, not 
more’n twenty or twenty-two hours late, and 
she’s still bright and — oh, God, what a blessing! 
— still keeping her trap shut and not telling me 
about salvation, why, I thinks I’m safe, and then 
just when I stagger up from breakfast and 
thinks I'll go down to my store, if I can remem- 
ber where I left my garage last night, why, she 

179 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


smiles brighter’n ever, and says in a nice, sweet, 
cool, Frigidaire voice: 

“Sit down a moment, will you please, Low. 
There’s something I want to say to you.” 

Well — 

Oh, I died with my face to the foemen, I 
tried to take the barricades in one gallant dash, 
like Douglas Fairbanks. I says briefly, “I know 
what you want to say,” I says. “You want to 
say I was lit, last night. Say, that isn’t any 
news. By this time it’s so old and well known 
that you can find it among the problems in the 
sixth-grade arithmetic book,” I says. “Look 
here,” I says, “it wasn’t entirely my fault. It 
was that God-awful bootleg hootch I got at 
Joe’s. It'd been all right if it'd been honest 
liquor.” 

“You were disgusting,” she says. “If my poor 
father and mother hadn’t passed away, and if 
my sister Edna wasn’t such a crank about 
theosophy-that nobody could live with her, 
I'd ’ve left you before dawn, let me tell you 
that.” 

Well, I got sore. I’m not a very bad-tem- 
pered cuss, as you know, but after along about 

180 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


twenty years, this threatening-to-leave-you 
business gets a little tiresome. 

“Fine,” I says. ““You’realways blowing about 
how much you know about clothes. I’ll be 
glad to give you a knock-down to some of the 
big guys at Benson, Hanley and Koch’s,” I 
says, “and probably they’ll make you buyer in 
the ladies’ garments department,” I says, “and 
you won’t have to go on standing for a gorilla 
of a husband like me.” 

And she says all right, by God she’ll do it! 

And we see-saw back and forth, and I kind 
of apologizes, and she says she didn’t mean it, 
and then we really gets down to business. 

“But just the same,” she says, “I’m not going 
to have that dog in the house again! You’ve not 
got the least consideration for my feelings. You 
talk so much about your dear old friends, like 
this horrible Joe Minchin, but you never give 
one moment’s thought to what I need or like. 
You don’t know what the word ‘thoughtfulness’ 
means.” 

“All right, I’ll look it up in the dictionary,” I 
says. “And speaking of thoughtfulness,” I says, 
“when I was going out last night, I found you’d 

181 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


been using my safety razor and hadn’t cleaned 
it, and I was in a hurry and you’d neglected — 
By God,” I says, “when I was a boy, aman 
had his sweaters to himself, without his wife or 
sister calmly up and using ’em, and he had his 
razor to himself, and he had his barber-shop to 
himself —” 

“Yes, and he had his saloons to himself, and 
still has,”’ she comes back at me. “And you talk 
about neglect! It isn’t only me you neglect,” 
she says, ‘“‘when you go and get full of liquor, 
and it isn’t simply the example you set the 
children, but it’s the way you neglect the church 
and religion,” she says. 

“And of course I’m only a deacon in the 
church,” I says. You know — sarcastic. 

“Yes, and you know mighty good and well 
you only took the job because it’d give you a 
stand-in with the religious folks, and every 
Sunday you can, you sneak off and play golf 
instead of going to church. And that morning 
when Dr. Hickenlooper came in from Central 
Methodist and preached for us — that time when 
poor Dr. Edwards was sick and couldn’t preach 
himself —” 


182 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


“Sick? He was sick like a fox,” I told her. 
“He just had a sore throat because he’d been off 
on a lecture trip, shooting his mouth off before 
a lot of women’s clubs to rake in some extra 
dough, when he ought to stayed home here and 
tended to his job.” 

““That’s entirely aside from the question,” she 
says, “and anyway, instead of listening to Dr. 
Hickenlooper like you ought to, you and a 
couple other deacons stayed out in the lobby of 
the church.” 

“Yuh, there’s something to what you say,” I 
told her. “Hickenlooper is a fine man. He’s all 
for charity — providing some rich man provides 
the money for the charity. I don’t believe he’s 
ever smoked a cigar or had a nip of liquor in his 
life. He’s a credit to the Methodist clergy. It’s 
true he does bawl out his wife and his kids all 
the time, and it’s true he nags his secretary all 
day long, but you can’t blame a man that’s busy 
with the Lord’s work for being maybe a little 
irritable. In fact there’s only one trouble with 
the holy man — he’s the worst and most consis- 
tent liar in seven counties! 

I’ve heard him tell as his own experience 


183 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


things I know he read in books, because I’ve 
seen the books. And here’s a story that our own 
pastor, Edwards, told us. Seems Hickenlooper 
met him in front of our church one Monday 
morning, and Hickenlooper says, “Well, Dr. 
Edwards, my brother-in-law heard you preach 
yesterday, and he said it was the best sermon he 
ever heard in his life.’ 

“* ‘Well, that’s nice,’ Dr. Edwards says, “but 
it just happens that I didn’t preach yester- 
day.’ 

“T. guess I’m a kind of a blowhard,” I says to 
Mamie, “‘and in general I’m just a plug business 
man, while Hickenlooper addresses Chautau- 
quas and addresses colleges and addresses 
Methodist conferences and writes articles for the 
magazines and writes lovely books about how 
chummy he and God and the sunsets are, but 
say, if that holy liar knew what poor ordinary 
business men like me really thought about him 
and what they said privately, he’d sneak off to a 
desert and never open his mouth again!” 

* 

Well say, that had Mamie wild—and don’t 

you think for one moment, Walt, that she let 
184 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


me get by without a few interruptions that I 
haven’t put into the story. And what I’ve just 
told you about this Hickenlooper bird —he 
looks like a prize-fighter and talks like a glad- 
hand circus bally-hooer, and he lies like a 
politician — was all straight, and she knew it. 
I’ve donea little lying myself, but I’ve never 
made a three-ring circus of it like him. But 
Mamie had a sneaking kind of admiration for 
him, I guess because he’s big and strong and a 
great baby-kisser and girl-jollier. And she let 
loose on me, and what’ she said — Whee! 

She said I encouraged Robby to smoke. She 
said I never used an ash-tray — always scattered 
my ashes around the house — and I’m afraid she 
had me there. And she said she was sick of 
having my friends around the house all the 
time, and I bawled her out for high-hattin’ ’em, 
and she said something about my driving too 
fast, and I come back with a few short sweet 
words about back-seat driving —she’s the best 
single-handed non-participating Major Sea- 
grove of the entire inhabited world. And — 

And so on. 

And that’s just typical of a few home Board 

185 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


of Directors conferences we been having, and 
I’m pretty sick of it. 

Not but what I’m just as mean as she is, at 
that, I suppose. 

But I did, by God, keep old Jackie! 

But I’m getting sick of the whole business — 

Not, you understand, but what Mame is just 
as nice a pal as you’d want to find, in between 
tantrums. That time we were here and saw 
you and then went on and had our long talk 
with Coolidge in Washington, she was jolly the _ 
whole time. But more and more — 

* 

Say, I don’t know as I ought to tell you 
about this, hardly, but this girl I was speaking 
of in New York — well, she isn’t exactly a girl 
any more, but she’s only thirty-eight and that’s 
seventeen years younger’n I am-— Erica, her 
name is, and say, she’s one of the most talented 
little women I ever met. 

By rights, she ought to be a world-renowned 
portrait-painter, but she’s always run into the 
damnedest hard luck, and just now for a few 
years she’s been working for the Pillstein and 
Lipshutz Christmas and Easter Greeting Card 

186 } 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


Company, where I always get my greeting 
cards. Of course by rights I’m not a stationer 
and I stick right to office supplies, but same 
time, along at these holiday times, I feel it does 
kind of brighten up the business to stock a few 
handsome cards, and pay — say, it brings me in 
hundreds a year. 

Well, Erica designs a lot of cards — darn’ smart 
intelligent girl—does the drawings and the 
poems and the whole thing. Say, you’ve prob- 
ably seen some of her cards. It was her that 
wrote that famous one that had such a big sale - 
the one with the two fellows shaking hands in 
front of an old schoolhouse, and then a lot of 
holly and so on, and the poem: 


“Dear friend, this season of ice and snow 
Does not make love the colder grow, 
But on contrary pries apart 
Wider the cockles of the heart. 


Tis years since we were boys together 
In jolly winter and summer weather, 
Tis years indeed since we have met, 
But our old friendship I'll ne’er forget.” 


Say, it’d surprise you how many of those 


187 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


cards a lot of hard-boiled old business men buy 
to send to fellows they haven’t seen for years. 
I tell you, that fellow Manny Pillstein is a 
genius. Of course there’ve been greeting cards _ 
for years, but he was the first one to put the busi- 
ness on a scientific, nationally advertised basis, 
and really “standardize and Fordize all this 
Holiday Good Will so it’d amount to something. 
They say he’s increased the business 10,000 
per cent. — made it as practical as chain grocery 
stores or even Mother’s Day. 

Well, I met Erica there at his place, and I was 
alone in New York, and I invited her to dinner, 
and I blew her to a nice little feed with a bottle 
of real domestic Chianti. Well, we got to talk- 
ing and telling our ideas and so on, and come to 
find out, poor kid, she was pretty near as lonely 
in New York as I was. 

And then every time I blew into the Big 
Burg —alone-I’d see her, and — 

Now say, her relations and mine was just as 
pure as the driven snow. Maybe Id kiss her 
in a taxicab or something like that, and tell the 
truth I don’t know how far I’d ’ve gone if I’d 
got her off to Atlantic City or something like 

188 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


that, but my God, with my position and my 
responsibilities, both financial and social, I 
didn’t want to get into no complications. To 
tell the truth (and Id never tell another living 
soul but you), one evening I did go up to her 
flat— But only that once! And I got scared, and 
after that I just used to see her at restaurants. 

But be the cause what it may, our relations 
were entirely and absolutely friendly and intel- 
lectual, and know what she told me? 

When I told her what I thought of her work - 
and to me, and [I told’ her so, she’s the best 
greeting-card artist in the country — she told me 
my appreciation was the greatest encouragement 
and the greatest incentive to go onward and 
upward to finer and better art that she’d ever 
received! And let me tell you, I’ve never had 
anything buck me up, in turn, like her apprecia- 
tion of my appreciation. Whereas at home — 

If I try to tell Mame that she plays a good 
mitt of bridge, or that I think she’s got on an 
elegant new dress, or she sang some song at 
some church affair real pretty, or like that, she 
just looks like she was saying, “Who the hell 
ever told you you was a connooser?” 


189 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Oh God, I suppose we’ll always go on, just 
about the same way, but if I was younger — 

Well, I ain’t! 

* 

Well, Walt, I guess it’s getting late and about 
time for us to turn in — you'll have to be in your 
office to-morrow, and I think I’ll take that 
12.18 for home, if I can get a Pullman. 

It’s been a mighty great privilege to have 
this frank talk with you. I certainly will take 
your advice. I’ll try to keep from talking and 
running on so much — you noticed this evening 
at supper I hardly said a word, but just listened 
to your good wife. You bet. I’ve learned my 
lesson. I’m going to concentrate on selling the 
goods, and not discuss subjects and topics all 
the time. 

And I hope you'll give my schedule a mighty 
close once-over and see your way to advance me 
the loan. 

You remember how I’ve always turned to 
you. Remember that month I spent with you 
boys on your granddad’s farm when we were 
‘long about twelve? 

God, what fun that was! Regular idyll, you 

Igo 


YOU KNOW HOW WOMEN ARE 


might say, like a fellow can’t touch again in 
these later care-ridden and less poetic years. 
Remember how we stole those mushmelons 
from that old farmer, and when he got sassy 
about it we went back and smashed all the rest 
of °em? Remember how we hid the alarm-clock 
in the church so it went off during the sermon? 
Remember how we greased the springboard 
so’s that Irish kid slipped on it and almost 
busted his back? Gosh, I had to laugh! 

Oh, those were great days, and you and me 
always did understand ‘each other, Walt, and 
don’t forget that there’s no firm in the world 
could give you better security for the loan. 


IgI 


PART TV 


moO KNOW-HOW RELA-= 
LLY 1S Sa 


ELL, by golly, it’s good to be back. 

How’d everything go, Mame? Say, how’s 
the brake on your car been acting? That’s 
fine. 

Huh? Yuh, sure, ?’m fairly certain Walt’ll 
make the loan. But you know how relatives are. 
I could see he was crazy to make a loan on 
security like I can give him, but he tried to 
pretend like he was holding off, and I had to sit 
around a whole evening listening to his wife and 
him chewing the rag. 

God, how that woman does talk, and say, 
Walt ain’t much better. He insisted on telling 
me all about a fishing trip he’d made, and of 
course I wasn’t interested — 

And curious — say, I never did run into any - 
body as inquisitive as Walt is, but you know 
how relatives are. My God, the questions he 
asked and the hints he threw out? He wanted 
to know whether you and I ever scrapped or 
not — 


rO3 ~ 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Well, just take an example. I happened to 
mention Jackie, and he says, “Does Mame allow 
you to keep him in the house?” 

Well, I just looked at him, and I said, kind of 
cold, “Mame and I have both agreed that the 
house is no place for a dog, for his own sake, and 
that he’s much better off where he is, out in a 
dog-house by the garage.” 

And one thing almost got my goat. He said, 
“Say, on all these trips you make to New York, 
haven’t you ever picked up a nice little piece of 
fluff?” 

Well, I just looked at him, quietly, and I said, 
“Walt,” I said, “I never could see the necessity 
for a man that’s married to the finest little 
woman God ever made to even /oog at any other 
woman. A fellow like that,” I said, “‘he natur- 
ally wants to keep all that’s finest in him for the 
one woman who has consented to share his 
fortunes and keep him happy.” 

And you might remember that I told Walt 
that, too — here the way you hint around some- 
times and wonder if I don’t go taking girls out 
to dinner when I’m in New York. 

And when you consider what I told Walt 


194 


YOU KNOW HOW RELATIVES ARE 


about Jackie, I’m damned if I can see any 
reason why just once in a while you can’t 
shut that cat in the kitchen and allow Jackie in 
the house. But what I’m getting at: I wish you 
could have listened in and heard me when I was 
talking to Walt about you. If you heard some 
men gassing about their wives — 

But let that pass. [ll just tell you briefly 
about the trip. 

I caught the train all right, with three good 
minutes to spare, and I had my dinner on the 
diner —it wasn’t such a bad dinner — I remem- 
ber I had vegetable soup and fried chicken and 
fried potatoes and corn and a wedge of apple pie 
with whipped cream on it-say, I wish you 
could get that Lithuanian to stir her stumps 
and whip some cream for us once in a while — 
my God, what does that girl think we’re paying 
her sixty-five good dollars a month for! — and 
then I went up in the club car and sat down to 
smoke a cigar, and I got to talking to a gentle- 
man, and he’d been reading a book about 
“Microbe Hunters,” and he told me a lot about 
germs and bacteria that was very interesting. 

Did you know that bacteria multiply at the 


195 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


rate of —] think it’s ten thousand an hour — no, 
a million an hour it is, if I remember; anyway, 
at a rate of speed that would simply surprise 
you, and that, you see, explains about a lot of . 
diseases. 

And I got to talking to this gentleman, seems 
he was a lawyer, and he just happened to men- 
tion that he came from Brainerd, Minnesota, 
and I asked him if he happened to know Alec 
Duplex, of Saint Cloud, Minnesota — you 
remember the gentleman that we met in 
California—and say, come to find out, this 
gentleman was a second cousin of Alec’s! 
Can you beat it! 

“Well sir,” I says to him, “the world’s a 
pretty small place after all, isn’t it!” 

Well, along about nine o’clock I thought I’d 
turn in and try to get a good night’s sleep — 
though it’s a funny thing about me; as I may 
have told you, first night on a sleeper I can’t 
hardly sleep at all; but I thought I’d turn in 
and try it, and come to find out, the porter 
had my bed all made up and so I crawled out 
of my clothes and wound my watch and 
crawled in between the sheets — 


196 


YOU KNOW HOW RELATIVES ARE 


But I won’t go into details of the trip — there 
was nothing of especial interest except this re- 
markable coincidence about this gentleman, a 
Mr. McLough his name was, that was a cousin 
of Alec Duplex’s, but say, there was one thing: 

At breakfast in the morning, I thought I’d 
try some buckwheat cakes, and I said to the 
waiter, “I think Tl have some buckwheat 
cakes,” I said. “And syrup.” 

“Sorry, sir, we ain’t got any buckwheat cakes 
this morning,” he says. 

“You haven’t got any buckwheat cakes?”’ I 
says. 

“No sir, there ain’t any buckwheat cakes on 
the menu this morning,” he says, “but we got 
corn cakes.” 

“Well,” I says to him, “if you haven’t got any 
buckwheat cakes —” 


E07, 


BAR LS V. 
fee ita sO, BROADENING 


ELL, I want to tell you, Mrs. Babbitt, and 

I know Mrs. Schmaltz heartily agrees 
with me, that we’ve never enjoyed a dinner 
more — that was some of the finest fried chicken 
I ever tasted in my life—and it certainly is a 
mighty great pleasure to be able to just have 
this quiet evening with you and George. Per- 
sonally, I’m just as glad the Reverend and his 
wife couldn’t come. I: yield to no one in my 
admiration for Reverend Hickenlooper — as you 
say, there’s probably no greater influence for 
Christian manhood in Zenith — but it’s mighty 
nice to be able to have a quiet chin with you and 
George. 

* 

Now, George, about this trip to the Yellow- 
stone you were asking about. 

I don’t know as I can help an old, trained, 
long-distance motorist like you, with your 
wealth of experience, though I never did agree 
with you about not going into low gear in 
descending steep hills, but I guess you’ve got 

299 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


me beat on long-distance motoring, and I’ve 
often said to Mrs. Schmaltz — haven’t I, Mame! 
— that there sure is one thing I envy George F. 
Babbitt for, and that’s the time he drove three 
hundred and sixteen miles in one day, between 
dawn and midnight. But I don’t pretend to 
have that magnificent physical make-up of 
yours, George, and [ve never been able to 
stand more’n two hundred and ninety-eight 
miles in one day’s tour, and, you might say, 
really enjoy it and feel I was relaxing. 

But same time, any helpful information 
that I can give you that may be of help to you 
on your trip, if you decide to make it next 
summer, I’m certainly mighty glad to give you, 
if you find it helpful. 

Now I myself, I didn’t quite get to Yellow- 
stone Park. You know, it’s a funny thing how 
many folks in this man’s town think I drove 
clear from Zenith to Yellowstone Park. Per- 
sonally, I’ve never claimed anything of the 
kind. 

It’s true that when I gave my little talk before 
the West Side Bridge Club about my trip, they 
billed it—and in a brief way the West Side 

200 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


Tidings column of the Evening Advocate spoke 
of it—as an account of a trip clear to Yellow- 
stone Park. 

But it wasn’t a trip clear to Yellowstone Park. 
The fact is, and [ve always been the first to 
acknowledge it, I didn’t get clear to Yellow- 
stone Park but only to the Black Hills, in North 
Dakota. 

The fact is, not only did I want to see the 
scenic and agricultural wonders of Minnesota 
and Wisconsin and Dakota and all like that, 
but Mame has a brother-in-law — I’m sure Mrs. 
Schmaltz will excuse me for speaking of family 
matters, in the presence of old friends like you 
two —and she has this brother-in-law that had 
met with misfortune, and one of the objects of 
our trip was to stop and see if we couldn’t help 
him straighten out his affairs—why say, the 
poor devil was in such stresses and difficult 
straits that he’d actually had to borrow money 
to help him carry on his business, he’s in the 
drug and stationery business. Why say — 

And a mighty fine gentleman he is, and his 
wife is a mighty bright cultured little woman; 
she subscribes to the Ladies’ Home ‘fournal and 

201 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


reads it right through every month. And poor 
old Lafayette — that’s Mrs. Schmaltz’s brother- 
in-law’s name — he was very well educated; he 
not only went through a pharmacy college and 
got his degree, but he also studied cost- 
accountancy by mail. But somehow he just 
couldn’t make a go of it. I guess he was kind 
of a dreamer. When he started his first drug- 
store, he also took an agency for the Florida 
Transplanted Palm and Orange Tree Company, 
and in Dakota he couldn’t hardly sell any palms 
at all — those Swede farmers may be all right as 
farmers, but they ain’t up to the cultural point 
of palms yet. And then later in another town 
he went into partnership with a gentleman that 
had found oil there, and also wanted to start a 
radiator factory — 

And say, that wasn’t such a bad idea as it 
sounded. Of course this was in a town where 
there wasn’t any iron or coal anywheres around, 
and the railroad connections wasn’t very good, 
but still, it was cold as hell — excuse me, Mrs. 
Babbitt — it was awful’ cold in the winter, and 
where do you need radiators as much as where 
it’s cold? But still, things didn’t work out quite 

202 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


right. Come to find out, there wasn’t any oil 
in the oil field, and somehow the radiator 
factory couldn’t seem to compete with the 
trust, and so poor old Lafayette lost money 
almost as fast as he made it. 

So when we drove out to see him — 

You know how bad luck besets the just with 
the unjust, and say, by this time, poor old Lafe 
and his wife were so hard up against it that they 
didn’t even have an automobile! 

And their radio was so old and so cheap 
that they couldn’t hardly get Minneapolis 
on it! 

Well, that'll give you an idea about how 
miserably poor and pursued by ill-fortune they 
were —they lived in Tomahawk City, North 
Dakota. 

Well, so, to make a long story short, Mame 
and I went to see him, and I gave him what 
advice I could, and then we ran on and gave 
the Black Hills the once-over, but we didn’t 
have the time to make Yellowstone Park, but 
still, that was only four, or maybe it might have 
been six or eight hundred miles farther on, so 
I can give you practically a detailed description 

203 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


of the road and stopping-places and so on for 
the whole distance. 
* 

And say, I certainly do recommend your _ 
making the trip. They can say what they want 
to. Some people claim that reading books is 
the greatest cultural influence, and still others 
maintain that you can get the most in the 
quickest split-second time by listening to lec- 
tures, but what I always say is, ““There’s nothing 
more broadening than travel.” 

Well, now you just take this, just for an 
example: When I crossed Minnesota, I found — 
in fact I saw it myself, first-hand —that there 
were as many Swedes as Germans there. And 
funny names—say, they certainly had the 
funniest names! Swanson and Kettleson and 
Shipstead, and all like that —- simply screams. I 
says to Mame, “Well, Mrs. Schmaltz,” I says — 
I often call her that when we’re funning around 
— “Well, Mrs. Schmaltz,” I says, “you wanted 
to get a kick out of this trip, and here you got 
it,” I says, “‘in all these funny names.” 

And all like that. 

We get to thinking, here in Zenith, that every- 

204 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


body, I mean every normal fellow, lives just like 
we do, but out there in Minnesota I found a lot 
of the folks never even heard of our mayor 
here in Zenith — they just talked about Minnea- 
polis and Saint Paul politics! I tell you, travel 
like that gives a fellow a whole new set of 
insights into human character and how big the 
world is, after all, and as our pastor, Dr. 
Edwards, often says, the capacity of the Lord 
for producing new sets of psychological set-ups 
is practically, you might say, absolutely un- 
limited. | 

* 

Well, so I'll give you the main, broad outlines 
of the trip. Considering that it must be about 
two thousand miles from here to Yellowstone — 
Park, naturally I can’t go into details, but just 
suggest the big towns that you want to make 
for, and general cautions about long-distance 
touring if you’re going to do it scientifically. 

* 

Yes, thanks, I'll have a cigar, but I’m not 
drinking anything. Well, make it very mild. 
Fine, that’s fine. After all, as I often tell my 
boy, Robby, since prohibition is a law of the 

205 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


land, we ought to drink nothing at all or only 
very little. That’ll be fine. Whoa-up! Well, 
since you’ve poured it, can’t waste it, eh? Just 
a little siphon. Fine! Attaboy! 

* 

Well, as I say, Pll make it short. We started — 
out for Dakota, just Mame here and me -—the 
children was busy with their schools and study — 

I don’t know if I’ve told you, but Delmerine 
has found she had more kind of talent for 
painting than for music, though to me she’s got _ 
one of the nicest voices I ever heard in so young 
a girl, but she was informed by some of the 
best authorities that she’d do even better at art 
than at music, so she switched to the Art 
Institute, and Robby had to sort of make up 
some extra courses this last summer — 

But not to go into that, the point is that 
Mame and I started off just by ourselves. 

NowI hope Mame will excuse me — she knows 
how I like to kid her now and then — but what 
I mean is, just about when we were ready to 
start, she got an idea it’d be a good idea to 
take along her old Aunt Sarah, that lives out 
here in Rosedale. 

206 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


““Let’s take Aunt Sarah along, and give her a 
good time,” she says. 

“Let’s take who along and do what?” I says. 

“Why, let’s take Aunt Sarah. She hasn’t ever 
been anywhere,” she says. 

“Fine!” I says. “Say, that’ll be just elegant. 
Let’s also and at the same time take along the 
St. Agatha Orphan Asylum, the Salvation 
Army, and the convalescents of the Zenith 
General Hospital,” I says, “so we can have a 
really chummy time.” 

Well, with Mame here, I can’t very well tell 
you all the remarks we passed, but anyway, we 
shoved Aunt Sarah into the discard — say, that 
old girl + ‘iistles through her teeth, and the only 
time she ever was kissed was when Brigham 
Young passed through here ninety-two years 
ago — but by golly, I got to admit it, Mame got 
back at me. 

I’d had a kind of sneaking idea I might work 
in Jackie, our dog—and a mighty fine useful 
dog he is, too— but I had to swap Jackie for 
Aunt Sarah, and so we started off with nobody 
aboard except Mrs. Schmaltz and me. 

Now I know that the first question you'll 

207 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


want to ask me is what kind of an outfit you 
ought to take along on a trip like this. I don’t 
pretend to be any Ammunsun, and if I’ve ever 
found any South Poles, the newspapers forgot 
to tell me about it. But [ll give you my own 
experience for what it’s worth. 

Now about clothes — 

There’s those that maintain a fellow on as 
long and you might call it adventurous trip like 
this had ought to just wear an old suit of regular 
clothes. And there’s those that maintain you 
ought to wear corduroy. Say, many and many’s 
the hour I’ve sat in on debates between these 
two schools. But as for me, say, give me.a nice 
suit of khaki coat and pants, every time. It 
may get dirtier than hell, but it never shows it’s 
dirty, so what difference does it make? 

And Mame the same way. She had specially 
made up for her a nice khaki jacket and breeches, 
and while sometimes she used to worry, and 
ask me if it didn’t make her look the least 
lee-tle bit broad in the hips, I used to say to her, 
“Hell —” Excuse me, Mrs. Babbitt. ‘‘Rats,” I 
said to her, “if you’re comfy in ’em and if you 
find ’em convenient for crawling through 

208 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


barb-wire fences and all like that, whose business 
is it,” I asked her, ‘‘whether some folks think 
it makes you look broad amidships or not!” 

Now, Mamie, don’t you go giving me those 
dirty looks, because remember we’re right in 
the bosom of the family, you might say. 

And now here’s one thing I found mighty 
important. 

Aside from the regular shoes that you wear 
when driving —and they ought to be a good 
stout pair of shoes, because who knows when 
you may want to sneak into an orchard and 
steal some apples, or even go up on a hill to see 
a view, or something like that — you ought to 
take along a pair of easy shoes for the evening 
—also more elegant; show ’em when you arrive 
in one of these hick hotels that you may be 
dressed comfortable for the auto trip, but back 
home you can dress just as good as the next 
fellow, and maybe better. 

Personally, I was awful’ fortunate. I had an 
old pair of pumps, and I had ’em blacked up 
and they looked almost practically as good as 
new. 

Funny, I’ll never forget buying those pumps. 

209 0 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


Here’s the way it happened: 

I was in Chicago, on a business trip, you 
understand, and I happened to be wandering 
along South State Street, in the poorer section, - 
and I come on a bargain sale of shoes and foot- 
wear, and I spotted these pumps, and they 
looked pretty good to me. And the fellow that 
owned the store, but he was a Kike, you 
understand, he come out, and he says — of course 
he spoke practically illiterate—and he says to 
me, “Hey, mister, I vill sell you dem shoes 
cheap” — you know how those fellows talk. 

Well, I just looked at him in a kind of amused 
way, and of course I could see that he could see I 
wasn’t the kind of ignorant bird he was accus- 
tomed to deal with, and I says to him, “Ah, so, 
my friend,” I says, “so you'll sell them to me 
cheap, will you!” 

“Sure,” he says, “you bet; Pll let you have 
dem at a rock-bottoms price.” 

“Well,-friend,” I says to him, “I’m sure 
that’s awful’ nice of you, but what makes you 
think -” And I just kind of laughed. “What 
makes you think,” I said, “that I require any 
such articles of footwear?” 

210 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


“Vell, I can tell dat you’re a gentlemans that 
puts on a dress-suit frequent, and dese is real 
dress-suit shoes,” he says. “(Dey come from the 
bankrupt sale from the real bon-ton élite store 
from Chicago,” he says, “‘in fact from WafHe- 
heim and Spoor, and they’re too good for my 
class of custom,” he says. 

Well sir, just out of idle curiosity, I looked 
"em over, and upon my word, if I didn’t think 
he was telling the truth, for once. Say, them 
pumps, if they was what they looked like they 
was, wasn’t worth one cent less than fifteen 
bucks, or anyway twelve-fifty. Well, of course 
I got kind of all excited inside. I knew then 
just how this Doctor — well, whatever his name 
is that writes for the Saturday Evening Post, I 
knew just how he feels when he finds a first 
edition of Harold Bell Wright for a dollar and 
a quarter and later maybe he’s able to sell it for 
a couple thousand. 

Well, I tried not to look excited, and I said, 
casual, I said to him, ‘“‘Well, brother, they look 
like they were about my size, and [’ll give you 
two bucks for ’em.”’ 

Well, sir, you’d ’ve laughed if you could ’ve 

oat 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


seen him go up in the air. Say, he just clawed 
the air. He hollers and shouts and he claims 
they’re worth five-fifty. You know how these 
doggone foreigners carry on — and say, if you’re 
a student of philosophy you'll realize that their 
actions also indicate an inner spiritual something, 
you might say, that indicates why they can’t 
ever compete with the clear, sure, short-cut 
mentality of the Nordics. He waves his hands 
and — 

Oh, you know. 

But say, I’m afraid I’m drifting away from 
my subject a little. Fact is, I jewed him down, 
and I got ’em for three and a half, and say, they 
fitted like a glove, and I wore ’em at some of the 
finest parties and soirées in Zenith for five years, 
and then when we started on this Western tour, 
they were just the thing to take along to rest 
your feet in the evening. And be sure and take 
something like that — stylish but restful. 

* 

Now as to your auto equipment, George. 

You want to have a Pull-U-Out or some 
other device for getting you out of a mud-hole 
if you get stuck in it. It’s perfectly true that 

212 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


wherever you go now, motor-touring in the 
United States, you find perfect cement roads. 
But sometimes — You know howit is. Here and 
there there’s gaps in the perfect cement high- 
way, and you will get stuck in the mud. 

And of course you want chains along, and 
extra tyres. And what I recommend especially 
is one of these stoves with solid alcohol. When 
you're touring, you get a little tired of restau- 
rants where you can’t get anything but a small 
steak and beef stew; fact is that sometimes you’d 
like a little food, and if you happen to feel 
inclined that way, of course the only thing you 
can do is to cook it for yourself. 

In ’most all these small towns you go into a 
place — well, outside it’s got a big fine illumi- 
nated electric sign with “Eats” or something 
like that on it, so you think it’s going to be a 
snappy up-to-date joint, but you get in and 
you find it’s run by some retired farmer and his 
daughter and the old woman. 

Pop’s principal job is leaning on the cash 
register and annoying a toothpick. He’s too 
busy thinking about what a civilized guy he’s 
become to do any work except play cashier — 

os te 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


with six customers an hour!—or maybe he’s 
admiring all the art treasures in the place — 
the snappy picture of two pears and a lobster, 
and the signs like “Watch Your Hat and Coat,” ~ 
and “No Trust, No Bust,” and “Ham and 
Eggs Country Style, 20%” —country style 
meaning they throw in a piece of Certain-teed 
asphalt-treated toast with the relics. 

Then out in the kitchen is Ma, doing what 
she thinks is cooking. The only thing she don’t 
burn is the drinking-water. And Daughter 
has the idea she’s waiting on table. But Daugh- 
ter ain’t interested in anybody but travelling 
salesmen that she thinks are unmarried — which 
no travelling salesman is since God made little 
apples. And all over the place there’s a nice 
pleasing odour of burnt steak and onions. 

So you sit up on a nice high stool, that’s 
cleaned regular once a day by wiping it off 
with the rag that they use to grease the griddle, 
and you say to Daughter, “Say, could you | 
bring us some corn-beef hash?’ And she looks 
at you like an evangelist looks at a guy that he 
thinks has put a lead quarter in the plate, and 
she says, ‘““The hash is out.” 


214 


TRAVEL 18 SO BROADENING 


And then you think -and you find out you 
ain’t much of a thinker— you'll have a pork 
chop, or maybe a T-bone steak, or some roast 
beef, and then finally you says, kind of irritated, 
“Well, what can we get?” 

“Say,” she says, “don’t get fresh! You can 
have a small steak or you can have ham and 
eggs—only I think the eggs is all out.” 

God! I’ve always held and maintained that 
America is the one and only nation that knows 
how to provide elegant chow, but even a patriot 
like me, sometimes I feel that we get this said 
elegant chow every place in the country except 
three: cities, towns, and farmhouses. 

So you carry along a little stove. 

And then you ought to have a windshield 
spotlight, and a spade, and — 

Baer Ie 

(Here, by request of the publishers, are 
omitted thirty-seven other articles recommended 
by Mr. Schmaltz. —- Ep1ror.) 

Es 

Well, the first day, what with one thing and 
another and packing, we didn’t get off till noon, 
having had a light lunch before starting, and 

215 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 
say, I could ’ve killed that Pole hired girl we 


had at that time —she cooked up some scram- 
bled eggs and never let us know they was ready, 
and they was all cold, and for a fellow that likes _ 
really nice tasty grub, a cold scrambled egg isn’t 
hardly worth eating. 

But anyway, we got away at exactly three 
minutes after twelve — I kind of kept a schedule 
of our timing on this trip, and mileage, and 
daily consumption of oil and gas, and say, if I 
had my figures here, I could show you that we 
got more mileage on Dainty Daisy gas than on 
Samson, with all the Samson claims for power- 
plus. And as I say, we got started kind of late, 
and so we didn’t plan to make much of a run 
that day, but only to Mittewoc, a hundred and 
seventy-five miles. 

I never like to run more than two hundred 
and fifty miles a day. I know you don’t agree 
with me, George, but I feel that when you run 
three hundred or three hundred and fifty, you 
don’t really see all the scenery as thoroughly and 
study the agriculture and other features of the 
country as closely as you might if you just 
jogged along at a nice steady forty-five or fifty 

216 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


miles an hour instead of speeding. But be that 
as it may. We planned to take it easy and not 
get in before seven-thirty. 
Say, that day was a revelation of progress. 
When I first drove that road, it was just a 
plain dirty road running through a lot of un- 
kempt farms, and now every mile or so you’d 
find a dandy up-to-date hot-dog stand — some 
like log-cabins and some like Chinese pagodas 
or Indian wigwams or little small imitations of 
Mount Vernon about ten feet high, and all like 
that, and stocking every known refreshment for 
the inner man—hot dogs and apple pie and 
chewing-gum and cigars and so on and so forth 
—and of course up-to-date billboards all along 
the road to diversify it, and garages maybe every 
five miles, and in every town a dandy free auto 
camp providing free water and wood for the 
tourists. And so many of the farmers quitting 
their old toilsome routine and selling apples and 
cider to the motorists —I asked one of ’em, by 
the way, how he could keep his supply up, and 
come to find out, he didn’t have an apple tree 
on the place — he got ’em all from a grocery store 
in the next town. Oh, motoring certainly has 


Bey 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


made a great and wonderful change in the 
country! 

We didn’t have any special experiences that 
first day —just one or two little incidents. I 
remember there was a fellow, he looked like a 
hobo, he waved his hand and stopped us. 

“Well, my friend, what do you want?” I 
says — he was a shabby-looking cuss. 

“Could you give me a lift?” he says. 

“A lift?” I says. 

“Yuh, I'd like a lift,” he says. 

“*You’ve got two good feet to walk on, haven’t 
you?”’ I says. 

“Yuh,” he says, “but I’m going a long 
ways.” 

“Oh you are, are you!’’ I says. “Look here, 
my friend, let me give you a piece of advice.” 

“I ain’t asking for advice,” he says. “I’m 
asking for a lift.” 

Then of course I got a little sore, him sassing 
me in that uncalled-for fashion, and I says, 
“Well, I might ’ve given you a lift,” I says, “af 
you hadn’t got so fresh, but now— Well, all I 
can say is, if you’d buckle down to business 
and tend to business and earn some money,” I 

218 


TRAVELS IS “SO - BROADENING 


says, ““you’d maybe have an auto of your own, 
and you wouldn’t have to ask people for a lift. 
Good day!” I says, and I drove on. I guess 
maybe that taught him a lesson. “You buckle 
down to work and not waste time asking for a 
lift,” I told him, “and maybe you'll have an 
auto of your own!” 

Then we stopped in a little burg — awful little 
hick hamlet it was; called, if I remember 
rightly, New Paris; and we stopped for an ice- 
cream soda, and when I was parking, I bumped 
just the least little bit into the car ahead of me. 
Didn’t hurt him one little bit, and just bent 
my bumper a little, but my God, to hear the 
other fellow squeal about it, you’d ’ve thought 
I’d smashed his car to pieces and killed his Aunt 
Jenny. Great big rube he was — fellow with no 
dignity. 

Even though I was born and brought up a 
city man, I admire the farmer and honour his 
efforts. What, after all, would we do without 
wheat and corn and flax and barley and radishes 
and so on? But same time, a lot of those hicks 
have no manners or dignity. Like this fellow. 

He rushed right across the sidewalk from 

219 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


where he’d been putting in the afternoon hold- 
ing up the front of the Red Ball Grocery Store, 
I remember it was — and say, that’s one of the 
best chains of grocery stores in the country — 
and he bawls: 

“Hey, you hit my car!” 

“T’m quite aware of the fact,” I says, coldly — 
the big tramp! — if he thought he could frighten 
_ me\ And so I got out, and looked things over, 
and I’d just bumped his spare tyre, on the back, 
the least little bit. 

“Well, what are you going to do about it?” 
he says. 

“What am I going to do about it?” I says. 

“Yes, what’re you going to do about it?” 

“Well, inasmuch and considering as I haven’t 
perpetrated the least damage,” I informed him, 
“it strikes me that probably I’m not going to do 
anything about it.” 

““We’ll see about that!”’ he says. 

“We certainly will!” I says. “You can call 
the officers of the law,” I says, ‘“‘and we'll see 
how they'll adjust matters. And I might just 
call to your attention the fact that you’re not 
parked at the requisite and regulation angle,” I 

220 


TRAVEL I8 SO BROADENING 


says, “and we’ll see what the authorities have to 
say about rhar!” 

Well, of course I was pulling an awful bluff. 
I didn’t know what the parking regulations 
were, at all. But then I figured that probably 
he didn’t, either! And of course I knew that if 
he did call the constabule, by heck, he’d do a 
lot of lying and falsifying and all those kind of 
things that make you so sick when you’re deal- 
ing with a roughneck. But then, I was all pre- 
pared for him —I figured that Id tell the cop I 
was a big city lawyer and knew more about 
motor law than anybody since God was a boy, 
and bluff him out. 

And say, it worked like a charm! 

This fellow positively got white. 

“Well, you ought to be careful,” he grumbles 
— you'd ’ve died to see him trying to crawl out 
of it—and say, that ended the whole matter. 

And what I didn’t tell him, and what I didn’t 
feel called on to tell him, if he couldn’t see it 
himself, was that the way I’d hit his spare tyre — 
something stuck out and I’d smashed hell out of 
his valve stem, so when Mr. Farmer come to put 
it on, he’d have one fine awful time, and served 

221 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


him right for the way he’d talked to me — say, 
many’s the time I’ve laughed when I thought 
about that poor hick, ’way off seventeen miles 
from Nowhere, with a puncture, starting to put _ 
on this tyre! 

So Mame and I went into the drug-store and 
I had a strawberry ice-cream soda, and she, if I 
remember rightly — correct me, Mame, if I’m 
wrong —she had a lemon phosphate, and then 
we drove to the nearest garage, and I had my 
bumper straightened. 

That was a nice garage, too, for such a tiny 
little burg. 

I drove up and tooted my horn, and out 
come a young fellow in overalls, and I said, 
“Say, Cap’n, I hit a mosquito up the road a 
piece, and I wonder if you could straighten my 
bumper.” 

“Sure,” he says. 

“Could you do it right away?” I says. “I’ve 
got a date up the road to meet Gertrude Ederle 
and swim across the Channel with her.” 

“Sure,” he says. You could see (my God, 
think of what it must mean to live in a hog- 
wallow like that and not hardly ever meet any 

222 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


educated people except when they stopped like 
I did!) — you could see he appreciated a little 
real Kiwanis Club kidding. 

And so he got busy, and say, with a jack he 
had that bumper straightened in about ten 
seconds, and so we drove on. 

And those were about all the interesting inci- 
dents, and considering I want to get on and 
outline the whole itinerary for you — 

Oh, there was one little thing. 

We stopped at a farmhouse for a drink of 
water — not water for the radiator, you under- 
stand; isn’t it one of the wonders of modern 
science the way the radiator of a really fine car 
don’t hardly need refilling at all? -I mean just 
for some water to drink. Well, I went up to the 
front door, and some old hag of a farm-wife 
came to the door, and I took off my hat, just as 
polite as if she was an important customer in my 
store, and I says to her, “Madam, I wonder if ray 
wife and I can trouble you for a drink of water.’ 

Well, she stands there and looks at me — by 
golly, I got kind of irritated, discourtesy like 
that to a wayfarer — and she looks at me and she 
. says, ‘“You’re the sixteenth autoist to-day that’s 
223 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


stopped and asked for a drink of water. And 
every time I’ve gone ’way down by the barn, 
to the pump, and brought it. And the last 
person, and she called herself a lady, kicked 
like all get out because she didn’t think the glass 
I brought her was clean enough. And all I 
have to do is to cook and bake and sweep and 
mend and do for four men, and tend the chickens, 
and hoe the garden, and help milk the cows. 
And I’m getting tired of being a free waitress 
for city autoists on top of that!” 

Well, there may have been a certain modicum 
of reason to what she said. 

I tell you, George, I’m always the first to 
open my heart and purse-strings to the call 
of the poor and needy. Why say, here just a 
couple of months ago, we took up a collection 
at the Kiwanis Club to buy a newsboy a suit 
of clothes. But same ¢ime — 

Why do these hicks insist on giving them- 
selves away? Why can’t they try to learn nice 
manners, like you and I do? 

What I'd ’ve liked to do was to give her one | 
quick wallop on the jaw, but I just raised my hat 
again, like I was the Beau of Brummel, and I 

224 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


says, “I am very sorry to have bothered you, 
madam! Good afternoon!” 

And I marched off and never looked back 
once! I'll bet she felt ashamed, and I hope to 
God she did! 

* 

Along about five we stopped to get some hot 
dogs and sauerkraut and coffee at a mighty nice 
little burg, right up to date, all brick pavement 
and snappy little bungalows and a lovely movie 
palace and a new brick armoury and one of the 
highest water-towers we saw on the whole trip 
and a dandy cigar-store called “The Hang- 
out,’ and important industrially, too— big 
cheese factory and a rubber factory — place I’d 
always wanted to see and had heard a lot about 
—it was called Carcassonne. 

And then we hiked on, and we got to Mitte- 
woc at 7.13 on the dot. 

And then, if I can just get Mame to admit it, 
we had the father and mother of a row about 
where we were going to stay that night. 

There was a nice hotel there -—the Ishpem- 
ing Arms -—nice big clean lobby with elegant 
deep leather rocking-chairs, and the brass spit- 

225 P 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


toons shined up like they were tableware — and 
Mame thought we ought to go there. 

But I says to her, “It isn’t a question of 
money,” I says, “I guess I can‘afford the best 
hotels about as well as the next fellow. But it 
never Aurts to save a little money; and besides,” 
I says, “‘it’s half the fun, as well as information, 
of a trip like this to get right down among 
the common, ordinary folks that ride in flivvers,”’ 
I said, ‘‘and T’ve heard they’ve got a dandy 
tourist auto camp here, camping and parking 
space free, and with cottages with bedclothes, 
at a dollar a night,” I said, ‘‘and I vote we try 
it once, and brush up against the common 
people, and if we don’t like it to-night,” I says, 
“we don’t need to try it again.” 

Well, we argued a lot, but Mame is a mighty 
good little sport, if she’ll let me say so in her 
presence, and make a long story short, we 
drove over to the tourist park. 

Well, sir, it was as pretty a place and fixed up 
as swell as you’d want to see anywheres. It was 
right on the bank of the Appleseed River, and 
there was several nice willow trees scattered 
through the grounds, and even, if I remember 

226 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


rightly — correct me if I’m wrong, Mame -— 
there was a nice big oak tree. Of course the 
grounds were just the least little bit dirty, but 
what could you expect, with forty to sixty 
people camping there every night? 

They had a dandy little store, painted in an 
art yellow with a mighty artistic sign, “Ye Olde 
Autoists’ General Store,” that, say, that place 
had every want and necessity for a touring 
party, even with kids along. They carried 
tyres and canvas water buckets and gas and 
canned goods and diapers and lollypops and 
cotton gloves and maps and magazines and 
near-beer and everything you could think of. 

Then there was a lot of marked-out spaces for 
cars and for tents, for those that carried tents, 
and a nice line of outdoor ovens with plenty 
of wood provided free, and dandy shower baths 
in tents, and finally about half a dozen cottages 
for them that didn’t carry tents, and we got one. 
And for a dollar, say, it wasn’t so bad —it had 
a double bed with nice clean linen, and a 
chair. 

So we settled down, and I says to Mame, 
“Let’s make out like we’re just tourists, without 

227 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


a bean to our names,” and she entered right 
into the spirit of the thing, and we bought a 
frying-pan and a stew-pan at the store, and 
some canned stuff, and we had a dandy little 
supper, cooked by Mame’s own fair hands - 
canned vegetable soup, and canned wienies 
(say, did you ever know that wienies are named 
after Ween, a German city?), and fried potatoes, 
and to top it off, some chocolate-almond bars. 

Well, some of the folks had started a big 
camp-fire, and we all sat around it, just like one 
big family, and we sang a lot of old-time songs 
— and what I always say is, these modern songs 
haven’t got the melody and sentiment like 
those old ancient songs have — we sang “After 
the Ball,” and “Daisy, Daisy, Gimme Your 
Answer True,” and ‘Onward, Christian Sol- 
diers,” and ““Toy Land,” and ““Two Little Girls 
in Blue,” and all like that. 

And I got to talking with a lot of different 
folks, and say, hardly more’n forty per cent. 
were up to the Chevrolet class, and yet they 
were as fine a bunch of folks as you’d want to 
meet —I mean, just to idle a few hours away 
with. And I learned a lot of different facts that 

228 


TRAVEL IS SO BROADENING 


I hadn’t known before — say, there’s certainly 
nothing that broadens a fellow like travelling. 

Just for an example, I learned that Chattan- 
ooga, Tennessee —or it might ’ve been Nash- 
ville — but anyway it’s right on a fine river, and 
you can see the mountains from there. And I 
learned that the largest Presbyterian church in 
the country was in Seattle, Washington. And I 
learned that Zion City, Illinois —or is it Wis- 
consin? — this old hang-out of Dowie! — has not 
only a very large lace factory, which of course 
everybody knows, but also one of the largest 
biscuit factories in the country. And I learned 
from a gentleman who was a veterinarian that 
one of the best foods for dogs was cornmeal 
mush cooked up with slivers of meat, thus 
making what they call a balanced ration — for 
dogs, I mean. 

And say, that was a mighty funny thing. 
This veterinarian, Dr. Lepewski, his name was, 
but he explained he was really of German extrac- 


1 The patron saint and model for such organizations as the 
Anti-Saloon League and the Lord’s Day Alliance. Like Mrs. 
Mary Baker Eddy, he preached Divine Healing of all ills 
until his unfortunate death. 

229 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


tion and not one of these Lithuanians or some 
foreign stock like that, he happened to mention 
that about a year ago, or it might have been 
longer than that — this Dr. Lepewski, I may say, - 
wasn’t any of your tin-can flivver tourists, in 
fact he was driving an Oakland, and a high- 
class gentleman in every way, and I guess he 
was just staying at the tourist camp for the 
fun of the adventure, like Mame and me —and 
he said he was in Chicago, here about a year or 
so ago, in a hotel —I think it was the La-Salle, 
but’ it may have been some other hotel — and 
he ran into — I’d just happened to mention that 
I came from Zenith, and he said that in this 
hotel he happened to run into a gentleman from 
Zenith. 

Well, naturally, I was interested right away, 
and I said to him, ‘“‘What was this gentleman’s 
name?” 

“Well, if I remember rightly,” he said to me, 
“his name was Claude Bundy — in the sash 
and blind business. Do you happen to know 
him?” 

“Well sir,” I says to the doctor, “can you beat 
that? Say, it’s a pretty doggone small world 

230 


TRAVEL If SO BROADENING 


after all, isn’t it! No, I don’t happen to know 
Claude himself, but several times I’ve met his 
cousin, Victor Bundy, the lawyer,” I said, “‘and 
I imagine I must know several people who’ve 
known Claude!” 

So that’s how it went — a mighty profitable as 
well as pleasant evening, and Mame and I 
turned in and hit the hay sometime along 
about a quarter to eleven, and we slept pretty 
good, and next morning we rolled out about 
seven and got some breakfast at a little lunch- 
counter near there —- ° 

Eh? 

My Lord, you’re right, Mame! 

It’s eleven-fifteen, and we’ll have to be trot- 
ting along home, and I haven’t even completed 
my account of the trip as far as the Black Hills. 
Well, I'll tell you, George; we’ll get together 
again soon, and I can tell you the rest in half 
an hour. 

I’ve enjoyed the evening a whole lot, and I 
hope what I’ve told you may be helpful — 

And oh, there is one thing I must say before 
we skip. Be sure and carry along a drinking 
cup. Now there’s various kinds. You can get a 

225 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 
small glass in a metal case, or one of these fold- 
ing metal cups, or just a plain enamel-ware 
cup. Now let me tell you in just a brief word 
my experience with each of these - 


232 


Parc 1 a Vil 


se Eiieee Bos itt AND) 
FUNDAMENTAL IDEALS OF 
CHRISTIAN AMERICAN 
CLD EZ N SEP. 


M:* CHAIRMAN, reverend sirs, and friends 
and brothers of the Men’s Club of the 
Pilgrim Congregational Church: 

It is difficult for me to express the pleasure 
and honour I feel in being thus called on as 
your speaker. There ‘is no organization in 
which I have taken a greater pleasure in 
belonging to. While it is true that, due to the 
pressure of my Americanization work and other 
duties, I have not been able to attend the monthly 
Get-Together Supper and Talk as often as I 
would like, let me assure you that it has been 
with a pang that I have missed every supper 
that I have missed. 

I’ve always been a great believer in what the 
Great Bard says: “Brevity is the soul of wit,” 
and I could almost express everything I want 
to say to you in the song in which Bert Hubbard 
has so dramatically led us: 


A338 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


For your friends are my friends, 
And my friends are your friends, 
And the more we get together, 
The happier we’ll be. 


Let me first of all say that I agree most 
heartily with our chairman that it is the greatest 
conceivable pleasure and honour to have with 
us this evening not only Dr. Edwards, our most 
honoured pastor, but also Dr. Otto Hicken- 
looper of Central Methodist Church, and Dr. — 
Elmer Gantry, formerly of Wellspring Metho- 
dist but now so gloriously located in New 
York, and I want to most heartily and enthusi- 
astically join our honoured chairman and -our 
beloved pastor in welcoming these clerical 
gentlemen among us. 

Whatever slight doctrinal, if I may call them 
so, differences there may exist between the 
Methodists and we Congregationalists, there is 
no difference in our aims, and I’m sure that no 
Methodist could appreciate and honour Dr. 
Gantry and Dr. Hickenlooper more than we 
do. 

I doubt if anywheres in the whole length and 


234 


Peo or CITIZENSHIP 


breadth of the land could be found dominies 
with more eloquence, more active devotion to 
institutional Christianity, more exemplary and 
devotional lives, and more courageous and 
scholarly devotion to the exact truth than these 
two gentlemen, and while they come here 
to-night without any preacher’s vests or turned- 
around collars, yet let us remember that how- 
ever influential we business men may be in 
economic affairs, it is thinkers like Dr. Gantry, 
Dr. Hickenlooper, and Dr. Edwards who finally 
determine our philosophy, our ideals, our judg- 
ment in literary and artistic matters, and our 
ethics in business — and that they will continue 
so to control us, thank God, no matter what 
libellous and lying attacks may be made upon 
them by disgruntled ignoramuses who try to 
get a little cheap notoriety by questioning their 
characters! 

I will no further refer to certain filthy books 
and sheets and publications, that love to wallow 
in filth and to sell their souls for a few pitiful 
pennies, and I will answer them by saying that 
these great ministers of the gospel have — and 
their detractors can take it or leave it — these 


a 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


renowned pastors have the spiritual sanction and 
financial support of every man like Lowell 
Schmaltz! 

* 

I’ve wondered sometimes since I chose the 
title of this brief and modest talk that I propose 
to make — ““The Basic and Fundamental Ideals 
of Christian American Citizenship” —if it may 
not sound a little too highfalutin. It isn’t in- 
tended to be. I merely want to outline in a 
simple way the ethics of the New Generation — 
of the New American Era. 

In the old days, preachers were just interested 
in a lot of confused theories; now they are as 
practical and as hail-fellow-well-met as any 
business man. In the old days, business men — 
the men who produce and sell the conveniences 
which make life what it is to-day — were scared 
of and let themselves be influenced by a lot of 
kings, lords, generals, journalists, judges, and a 
lot of impractical people like that. 

But now the New Era has come. Now we can 
breathe a sigh of relief that the old-fashioned 
aristocratic and leisurely nonsense is over, and 
that we live in an age dominated by Henry 

236 


IDEALS OF CITIZENSHIP 


Ford, Woolworth, Marshall Field, Crane, 
Andrew Mellon, Cyrus H. K. Curtis, Pillsbury, 
Ward the titanic baker, the founders of the A. 
& P. groceries, of the United Cigar Stores, and 
of the Liggett and Owl Drug-Stores, Statler, 
John D. Rockefeller, William Randolph Hearst, 
Hart, Schaffner and Marx, Charles Schwab, 
Heinz of the fifty-seven, Swift and Armour, the 
McCormick harvester family, and such other 
rulers of modern industry and commerce — the 
new princes, the new high priests, the creators 
and protectors of a new philosophy and a new 
art. 

I yield to no one in my admiration for the 
America of Abraham Lincoln, Emerson, Poe, 
Nathaniel Hawthorne. But those gentlemen 
lived too early to conceive on the one hand of a 
nation of a hundred and ten million people, 
imposing its ideals and rule on the whole world, 
and on the other hand of standards of living in 
which the radio replaces the parlour organ, an 
electric lamp with an art shade replaces the old 
oil light, and a magazine with two million 
circulation replaces some old dusty calf-bound 
book. 

237 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


If they lived to-day, they would be heart and 
soul with us of the New Era. I can see Lincoln 
as the president of United States Steel, of the 
Paramount Film Company, or the Wrigley— 
Gum Company; I can see Poe as one of the 
leading writers for the Red Book; Emerson as 
president of Columbia or the University of 
Illinois, inspiring twenty thousand students 
with his eloquence; and Hawthorne writing 
ads for the new model Hupmobile. 

But the ethics of this New Era are not yet 
entirely figured out, and I want, in my tiny 
and humble way, to contribute what I can to 
them this evening. 

* 

Certain ideals are universal — honesty, chas- 
tity, and not boozing too much. But there are 
two principles almost entirely developed by and 
peculiar to America of to-day, and these are 
Service and Practicalness! (Or some call it 
Practicality.) 

Now let us take Service. Let me start out by 
defining what I mean by it. | 
Service is imagination. Service is that some- 

thing extra, aside from the mere buying, stock- 


238 


IDEALS OF CITIZENSHIP 


ing, and delivery of goods, that so tickles the 
comfort and self-esteem of a customer that he 
will feel friendly and come back for more. 
Service is, in fact, the poetry, the swell manners, 
the high adventure of business. 

And this is the first time in history that a 
nation has conceived the massive, the daring 
and glittering idea, that you can do more than 
just sell the customer the goods he wants — that 
you can, in fact, tie him to you by that subtle 
form of friendliness known as Service, so that, 
without its really costing’ you much of anything, 
you can make him feel that he’s getting double 
value for his money. 

Service! If the Rotarians and Kiwanians had 
done nothing else, they would have justified 
themselves and made their place secure in 
history for all time by their insistence on the 
value and beauty — the, in fact, if I may without 
sacrilege say so, re/igion of Service. 

Let me give you a few examples of what I 
have known done or have fancied might be done 
in the way of Service. 

Take my own profession, office supplies. 

Say I sell a fellow an adding-machine. Now 


239 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


there’s nothing about the operation of it that 
any bright girl couldn’t learn in half an hour, 
and as to repairs, of course no sensible office 
ever monkeys with them, anyway. But when a_ 
gentleman buys an adding-machine, I ask him 
to send the girl who’s going to operate it 
around for a course of lessons — of course abso- 
lutely free. Then once a week for a month I 
send a fellow to the office to look over the adding- 
machine, to adjust it, and to give further 
instruction in its use to anyone who the boss 
may designate — again all absolutely free. 

Now probably the fellow I send around 
doesn’t know any more about running the ole 
adding-machine than half the folks in the 
office, but that isn’t the point. The point is that 
I thus establish in the bosses of that office a 
feeling of co-operation with me, a feeling of my 
eagerness to give good measure, pressed down 
and running over, as the Good Book says, and 
then when he wants anything further in the 
way of office supplies, he’s the more likely to 
turn to me. That’s Service! 

Or take insurance. 

In the old days, when a bird — when a solici- 

240 


PDEAULS OF CITIZENSHIP 


tor had sold somebody a policy, that ended it, 
and the solicitor never bothered him again. 
But happily a more scientific era has dawned. 
To the really enlightened solicitor, the sale of 
the first policy is merely the beginning. With 
an air of impersonal friendliness, and with an 
especial care to not seem obtrusive, the solicitor 
makes this customer his buddy for life. 

He keeps a file of newspaper clippings show- 
ing every move of his customer — say like death 
in the customer’s family, his election to some 
high position in a lodge, or his wife giving a 
dinner to Soroptimist delegates — and on every 
such occasion he expresses to the customer his 
congratulations. Or condolences, as the case 
may be. 

Of course this has to be done with care. The 
solicitor must make sure whether the customer 
dislikes being bothered or not. If not, he makes 
these approaches in a nice, friendly, chatty, 
gentlemanly telephone conversation, working in 
also some reference to the weather or the World’s 
Series— but never, you understand, directly 
mentioning business, for otherwise it would not 
be Service. But if the fellow is touchy and 

241 Q 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


irritable, the solicitor contents himself with 
nice formal little letters, perhaps suggesting 
that no reply or acknowledgment is needed. 

Then finally, when he feels the prospect is-. 
ripe, when a really rich feeling of personal 
friendship has grown up between them, he 
makes a quick hard touch, and in a surprising 
number of cases is able to put over a new and 
larger policy on him. 

That’s Service — and, like Virtue, it brings its 
reward. 

And so in other businesses. The grocery 
customer will often prefer a second-rate apple 
in a handsome wrapper to a first-rate one care- 
lessly bundled in plain tissue paper. A motorist 
will stand for pretty bad gasoline if the gas- 
station employees wear handsome uniforms, 
greet the customer respectfully, and wipe off 
his windshield free. A man will often put up 
with small rooms, high prices, and even pretty 
poor food if both the reception clerk and the 
manager treat him like a friend, give him a 
warm handshake, and, this most especially, 
learn his name thoroughly and greet him by it 
when he returns a second time. 

242 


BDEAUS OF CITIZENSHIP 


That’s Service! 

And remember that only a low and sordid 
commercialist would look on it as something 
which merely sells more goods — though it cer- 
tainly does that, too. But over and above that, 
it promotes friendliness, good fellowship, 
brotherhood, and thus makes for the millennial 
day when all the world shall be one happy 
Christian fellowship. 

* 

And now the second peculiarly modern and 
American ideal — practicalness. 

Europe has always had its art, its beauty, but 
where we have gone beyond the Old Country 
is that while we want things beautiful — take 
like an elegant new gas stove—they must 
primarily be of use. Let me prove my point by 
going right into the world of professional art 
and sculpture. 

When a European city wants to adorn itself, 
it puts up, if I may judge from a rather wide 
reading, and a study of the pictures in the 
National Geographic Magazine —it puts up in 
its parks a lot of heathen goddesses — which are 
rather suggestive, to say the least —- along with 


243 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


fountains and such things. But we — Well, we 
want to decorate a park, and we decide on a 
statue at once handsome and educative. We 
figure there’s a lot of Spaniards in the city that'll 
be pleased by recognition, so we put up a fine 
bust of Columbus; or we see there’s a bunch of 
naturalized Italians, with perfectly good votes, 
and we recognize them by erecting a monument 
to—to-—well, to Dante. Or we please the 
Germans by a bust of Gerty. And so we kill 
two birds with one stone. 

Or take a more immediate example. Now 
that Christmas is not long over, I guess there’s 
some of us that feel the gift business is a little 
overdone. I have heard gentlemen of my own 
acquaintanceship assert that they felt certain 
department stores almost commercialize the 
sacred holiday. But be that as it may, and it is 
too involved a question for me to go into it on 
. the present occasion, it is an encouraging and 
outstanding fact that year by year gifts tend 
to become more practical. 

I have here a magazine published early in 
December, and therefore largely devoted to 
advertisements with the rosy blush of the 


244 


Pitas 8OF CITIZENSHIP 
holidays upon them. And there in the old 


times there would have been an emphasis on 
impractical things for Christmas—say like 
books, etchings, and fancy smoking-jackets — 
what do we find now? 

First of all, of course, there are many sugges- 
tions for auto accessories as Christmas gifts, as 
is suitable in a country where the chief object 
is to go somewhere quick. Fine! Tyre chains, 
tyre locks, radiator shutters, moto-meters, and 
anti-freeze mixtures done up in handsome holly- 
decorated cans especially for Christmas. 

And then the other practical gifts, suitable to 
gladden the heart of any recipient: pocket 
cigar-lighters, sharpeners for safety razor blades, 
little scales suitable for the bathroom so that 
every one, man, lady, or child, can daily check 
up on his health. And what toys! Real electric 
trains, just like the real article, so that the 
fortunate child who gets one for Christmas 
doesn’t have to do a thing but press a lever and 
the train goes by itself, and the child can just 
sit there and watch it and enjoy himself. What 
fun! 

And all these gift articles mingled in the 

245 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


advertisements with the customary vast store 
of such other luxuries as only America produces. 
Ads of towns in Florida that in less than ten 
years have come in every way to equal if not. 
surpass Venice, Italy. These wonderful new 
ladies’ overshoes with this business, I forget 
what it’s called, but you just pull a business, 
and the whole business slides open without 
buttons or hooks and eyes. Splendid ads of 
sauerkraut, which thus, nationally advertised, — 
rises from its lowly status and takes its place 
alongside of candy and the telephone company. 

And then this: 

Here till just recently both typewriters and 
fountain pens were always in a dull and I might 
almost say sombre black. But now typewriters 
are appearing in a variety of lovely colours, 
suitable to the boudoir as well as the office; and 
as for your fountain pen, you can have it in 
opal, lettuce green, dawn pink, elephant-hide 
grey, La Marquis blue, or any other of a dozen 
tempting hues and shades. 

But in this magazine I found an even greater 
proof of the way in which America combines 
beauty with sheer practicalness. One adver- 

246 


IDEALS OF CITIZENSHIP 


tisement starts out with a letter —I suppose it is 
imaginary, the product of some copy-writer’s 
genius, and yet in this New Era it might quite 
possibly be real—from a young lady who’s 
supposed to be writing to her beau, and she 
says: 


“You are thinking of me, Sweetheart. Even 
as I am thinking of you. Thinking... won- 
dering ...cherishing each precious hour of 
anticipation ... counting the days until... 

“And Christmas is almost here. Perhaps you 
are thinking of a gift for me. Possibly a jewel! 
Yet no greater jewel will I ever crave than that 
of your perfect companionship; nor gift would 
I ask more royal than the honesty of your own 
heart. 

“Let your gift to me be something intimate 
... beautiful ... reminiscent always of the 
Dream Days of Now. 

“And I ask you... let it be practical! 

“Sanctuary for the lovely silks and linens and 
embroidery I am receiving... for the wool 
blankets . . . downy comforters . . . for those 
precious possessions which I now hoard away in 


247 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


closet, trunk, or bureau drawer. A place of 
beauty and fragrance, of convenience and safety, 
where moth and dust will not corrupt nor 
inquisitive fingers delve...it is of this I 
whisper, beloved... 

“Something I have always longed for — that 
every woman has longed for. Something a girl 
would so gladly have from her sweetheart... 
or her husband. aA CEDAR CHEST...” 


Then the advertisement goes on to show pic- 
tutes of the manufacturer’s line of cedar chests. 
And I want to tell you gentlemen that when we 
have reached a point in American advertising 
where we can combine straight selling-talk 
with not only the joyous spirit of the holiday 
season, but also the most delicate intimacies of 
young love, and also a cleverly worked-in 
quotation from Holy Writ, then by thunder we 
have reached a point of practicalness never 
hitherto known in history! 

At last has come the glorious era when every 
noble sentiment, every artistic turn of phrase 
and elegant wording, every instinct of beauty, — 
is no longer forced to run alone and maverick, 


248 


IDEALS OF CITIZENSHIP 
but can rejoicingly take its proper place in 
serving commerce and the merchant kings! 

Or one more example, which I take from 
another magazine of the same festal date, about 
the practical drink for the Christmas feed. Now 
Germany may have its beer, France may rejoice 
in its ruby wine, England may have its — its 
variety of drinks, but we, thank God, have 
freed ourselves from the dreadful thraldom of 
alcohol! 

And why? Because we find that for business 
success alcohol ain’t practical! And yet we find 
ourselves wishing to acknowledge the great 
feast days with suitable vintages. And so our 
manufacturers rush in and perfectly fill the 
gap in an entirely satisfactory manner. Listen 
to this ad, and note the high-class literary 
wording: 


‘A right merrie drink to add new zest to a 
well-cooked Christmas dinner .. . The majes- 
tic turkey has replaced the historic boar’s 
head; the gaily bedecked peacock pie has given 
way to mince; a fine old ginger ale has taken 
the place of the flowing Wassail Bowl which 


249 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


once was passed from hand to hand as “the 
ancient fountain of good feeling where all hearts 
met together.” 

In all the world, there is no beverage so 
appropriate for the Christmas dinner as XXXX 
Ginger Ale! Served in fragile stemware, it 
gleams and sparkles like a rare old wine and 
bids you drink and be merry! Dinner always 
takes on a new zest, a new distinction when 
this fine old ginger ale comes to grace your 
table 


There, gentlemen, is our ringing answer to 
the opponents of prohibition! 


* 


What opportunity in this new and increas- 
ingly practical America for any bright fellow 
to-day! 

Take like Al Smith. Here is a poor boy of 
the city streets, and a Catholic, and yet we have 
permitted him to be Governor of New York. 
Naturally I’m opposed to his being President, 
but I’ve been perfectly willing to see him rise 
as far as he has, and while he’s almost certainly 
never heard of me, if he were here I’d be glad 

250 


IDEALS OF CITIZENSHIP 


to give him the hand and good wishes of Lowell 
Schmaltz! 

What opportunity to-day! What co-opera- 
tion! 

You take, for example, the Community 
Chest. What a colossal and unique American 
institution that is—all of us combining on 
every worthy charity, and refusing to support 
those institutions which our bankers and other 
experts consider unworthy. Why, just this last 
fall — 

There was a young man in the office of a 
friend of mine who refused to contribute one 
red cent to the Community Chest, on the 
frivolous and indeed almost flippant grounds 
that the big men behind the campaign for funds 
—the men who were themselves often the most 
generous givers!—used their large contribu- 
tions as a club with which to keep all radical 
and wrong-thinking charity-workers out of 
jobs with the various institutions. 

So my friend very properly fired this sore- 
head and quietly passed the word around, and 
this young man ~—as you can see, practically a 
socialist in disguise — Well, I shall be very much 

251 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


surprised if he ever finds it possible to get an- 
other decent job in this man’s town! I give that 
just as an example of the way in which, with 
the increasingly solid American organization, 
we can on the one hand assist the aspiring and 
right-thinking young crusader, and on the 
other hand get rid of all anarchists and hammer- 
wielders. 

For we must never forget that even in the 
midst of this, the most luxurious and powerful 
civilization the world has ever known, there are 
always people. who, for some insane reason 
that they themselves couldn’t explain, stiil 
criticize and complain and refuse to climb on 
the band wagon. 

You take this. 

I am reliably informed —though certainly I 
have not sullied my self-respect by reading 
any of them, but I have been informed of their 
contents by criticisms given in various sermons 
— I am informed that during this last year or so 
there have been published two books purporting 
_ to show that George Washington was not the 
great hero we all know him to be but a man 
that smoked, drank, used bad language, and 

262 


IDEALS OF CITIZENSHIP 


flirted. Then there was an alleged biography 
claiming that Henry Ward Beecher was not 
what we all know him to have been—the 
greatest preacher and power for righteousness 
since Martin Luther, and a man of spotless 
righteousness and truth—but instead a man 
whose word and loving friendliness could not 
be relied on. And no less than three disgraceful 
books, two of them novels and one a screed by 
a woman claiming to have known him too 
intimately, have dared to hint that our Martyr 
President, Harding himself, was a dumb-bell 
surrounded by crooks. 

Well, I’ve got an answer for all these authorial 
gentlemen! 

And my answer is that it is not worth the 
while of a serious and busy man of affairs to pay 
the slightest attention to ° notoriety-hunting 
hacks, who creep out of their fetid holes to bay 
the moon, who seek by their filthy and lying 
accusations to keep a foothold in the public eye! 

* 

I see that my allotted time is drawing to a 
close, but, though it does not strictly belong to 
my topic, I want to take this opportunity to 


253 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


tell you briefly something of my conversation 
several months ago with President Coolidge, 
who was, as many of you may know, a great 
chum of mine all through our college days. 

When I arrived at the White House, the 
President was just going off on the Mayflower 
with the British ambassador, as I had failed to 
apprise him of my coming sufficiently in 
advance. So we had a shorter visit than usual, 
but he spoke of certain things on which I know 
you will be glad to get authoritative informa- 
tion. 

‘Mr. President,” I said —he had indicated 
that he wanted me to call him “Cal,” but I 
didn’t feel it to be fitting - “‘Mr. President,” 
I said, “how do you feel about this question 
of decreasing our navy?” 

“Well, Low,” he said, “I think I can put it 
to you in just a few words. While of course he 
is thrice armed that is prepared, as the bard — 
says, yet navies cost a deplorable amount of 
money, and I should be glad to see them 
reduced —so far as it is safe.” 

“Well, how do you feel about taxation?” I 
said. 


254 


IDEALS OF CITIZENSHIP 


“In my opinion,” he said, “while there 
should never be such unjust taxes that the bur- 
den of taxation shall fall unduly on those that 
are compelled to carry on great commercial 
enterprises, which give jobs to all sorts and 
conditions of men, yet equally there must never 
be an intolerable assessment against those that 
for one reason or another are not well off in this 
world’s goods.” 

“And finally,” I said, “if you wouldn’t be 
betraying any state secrets — I should never ask 
you to do that, even though we are old friends,” 
I said — “what do you think about the situation 
in China?” 

I shall never forget how he straightened up 
and his eyes flashed fire, as he shot back at me, 
grimly: 

“In my opinion,” he said, “there is now 
arising a situation where it is necessary to do 
more than merely our obvious duty in safe- 
guarding American rights and properties in 
China. It is the last desire of myself or of my 
advisers to involve ourselves in European 
politics,” he said, “but I stand up and say 
before the world that we do not like the way in 


455 


THE MAN WHO KNEW COOLIDGE 


which, it is alleged, the Bolsheviks tend to 


encourage the Chinese to act in an uncivilized 
manner; and when the proper time comes we 


shall, if necessary, take whatever action may be - 


necessary.” 
* 

So there, gentlemen, you have in the Presi- 
dent’s own words a clear statement of our 
foreign policy. Yet to me it is no more remark- 
able, no more worthy of historical reading, 


than our domestic policy, as to Service and 


Practicalness, which I have just tried to outline. 
And I shall be glad if in my small way I 


have done anything to make clearer to you the 


New Era of American Civilization; to express — 
modestly the motto of Lowell Schmaltz: “Read ~ 


widely, think scientifically, speak briefly, and 
sell the goods!” 


256 


KING ALFRED'S COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


————
