The Divinity of Our Lord (H.P. Liddon, 1867)
==========================================================
Liddon's 1867 Bampton Lectures on the divinity of Christ — the High Church classic of Victorian Christology. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


THE


DJVINITY    OF   OUR   LORD


(Pi)orft0  6j  !5enrg  ^dxx^  Bi66on,

D.D.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,
Late  Canon  Residentiary  and  Chancellor  of  St  Paul's.


-M-


Twovols.  CrownZvo.  3s.6d.each,  Cheap  Edittofty  in  one  vol.  CrownZvo.  5*.
Advent    in    St.    Paul's.      Sexmons  beariog   chiefly  on   the
Two  Coinings  of  our  Lord.

Crown  Svo.    5*.
Cniristmastlds  in  St.  Paul's.    Sermons  bearing  chiefly  on  the
Birth  of  our  Lord  and  the  end  of  the  Year.


Passiontids  Sermons.


Crown  Svo.    5s.


Two  vols.  CrotonZvo.  y.td.each.  Cheap  Edition,  in  one  vol.  Crown  Zfvo.  ss.
Saster    in    St.   Paul's.      Sermons    bearing    chiefly    on    the
Resurrection  of  our  Lord.


Tlie  Xagnifloat.


Crown  Svo.    2s.  6d.
Sermons  in  St.  Paul's,  August,  1889.


Two  vols.  Crown  Svo.  3*.  6d.  each.  Cheap  Edition^  in  one  vol.  Crown  Svo.  5s.
Sermons  Preaclied  before  tbe  University  of  Oxford.

Crown  Svo.    ss.
Sermons  on  Old  Testament  Subjects.

Crown  Svo.

Sermons  on  some  Words  of  Christ.

Small  Svo.     w.  6d. ;  or  in  Paper  Cover^  is.  6d.
Some  Elements  of  Beligion.    Lent  Lecluies.

The  Crown  Svo.  Edition^  ss.,  tnay  still  be  had.

Crown  Svo.    54*.
The  Bivinity  of  our  XK>rd  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ :

being  the  Bampton  Lectures  for  1SS6.

Crown  Svo.    3*.  6rf.
Selections  ftrom'the  Writing*  of  K.  P.  Uddon,  "DJD.

CroTvn  i6mo,    js.
Xaadms   and    Gleaning*   from   the    Writinirs    of   K.  P.

Liddon,  D.D.    Selected  and  Arranged  by  C.  M.  S.

Svo.    25.  6d,
Walter  Kerr  Hamilton,  Bishop  of  Salisbury:  a  Sketch,

with  Sermon.

Crown  Svo.    7s.  6d.

Of  the  Five  Wounds  of  the  Holy  Church.    By  Antonio
RosMiNi.     Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  H.  P.  Liddon,  D.D.

R<^al  32mo.     IS.
Private  Prayers.    By  the  Rev.  E.  B.  PusEY,  D.D.    Edited,


with  a  Preface,


Ltddon,  D.D.


Large  Type,    aimo.     is.
Prayers  for  a  Young  Schoolboy.    By  the  Rev.  E.  B.  Pusey,
D.D.    Edited,  with  a  Preface,  by  H.  P.  Licdon,  D.D.

London  :  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.


^ht  Bibinitj  a{
©jtr  %axh  anh  ^abi0Jtr


EIGHT  LECTURES  PREACHED  BEFORE
THE   UNIVERSITY   OF   OXFORD   IN   THE   YEAR    1866

ON  THE  FOUNDATION  OF  THE  LATE  BBV.  JOHN  BAMPTON,  M.A.

CANON  OF  SALISBURY

BY

H.    p.   LIDDON,   D.D.,   D.C.L.,   LL.D.  Camb.

LATE  CANON  AND  OHANCSLLOR  OP  ST.   PAUL'S,   AND  IBJCLAND  PBOFK8SOR  AT  OXFORD


*Deus  Yerbnm  non  accepit  personam  hominis,  sed  naturam,  et  in  eetemam
Personam  Divinitatis  accepit  temporalem  substantiam  camis.'

S,  Fulg.  de  Fide  ad  Fetrum,  c.  17.


SIXTEENTH  EDITION


LONDON
LONGMANS,     GREEN,     AND     CO.

AND  NEW  YORK,  15  EAST  16th  STEEET

1892


HARVARD  COLLEGE  LIBRARY

BEQUEST  OF

DR.  WILLIAM  L.  RICHARDSON

FEBRUARY  24,  1933


*Wenn  Clirlstus  niclit  wahrer  Gott  ist,  die  mahometanische
Religion  eine  unstreitige  Yerbesserung  der  christlichen  war,  und
Mahomet  selbst  ein  ungleich  grbssrer  und  wtirdigerer  Mann
gewesen  ist  als  Christus.'

Lessing^  Sdmmtl.  Schriften,  Bd.  9,  p.  291.


*Simnl  quoque  cum  beatis  videamus
Glorianter  vultum  Tuum,  Cbriste  Deus,
Gaudium  quod  est  immensum  atque  probum,
Ssecula  per  infinita  saeculorum/

Rhythm.  EccL


'  Ki


EXTEACT

FROM  THE  LAST  WILL  AND  TESTAMENT

OF  THB   LATB

REV.    JOHN    BAMPTON,
CANON  OP  SALISBURY.

—  "I  give  and  bequeath  my  Lands  and  Estates  to  the


"  Chancellor,  Masters,  and  Scholars  of  the  University  of  Oxford
*^  for  ever,  to  haye  and  to  hold  all  and  singular  the  said  Lands  or
''  Estates  upon  trust,  and  to  the  intents  and  purposes  hereinafter
"  mentioned ;  that  is  to  say,  I  will  and  appoint  that  the  Vice-
"  Chancellor  of  the  University  of  Oxford  for  the  time  being  shaU
"  take  and  receive  all  the  rents,  issues,  and  profits  tliereof,  and
''(after  al^  taxes,  reparations,  and  necessary  deductions  made)
"tticu  he  pay  all  the  remainder  to  the  endowment  of  eight
"Divinity  Lecture  Sermons,  to  be  established  for  ever  in  the
"  said  University,  and  to  be  performed  in  the  manner  following :

"  I  direct  and  appoint,  that,  upon  the  first  Tuesday  in  Easter
"  Teim,  a  Lecturer  may  be  yearly  chosen  by  the  Heads  of  Col-
"  leges  only,  and  by  no  others,  in  the  room  adjoining  to  the
"  Printing-House,  between  the  hours  of  ten  in  the  morning  and
"two  in  the  afternoon,  to  preach  eight  Divinity  Lecture
"  Sermons,  the  year  following,  at  St.  Mary's  in  Oxford,  between
« the  commencement  of  the  last  month  in  Lent  Term,  and  the
"  end  of  the  third  week  in  Act  Term.


VI    Extract  from  the  Rev.  John  BamptorCs  Will.

"  Also  I  direct  and  appoint,  that  the  eight  Divinity  Lecture
"Sermons  shall  be  preached  upon  either  of  the  following
"Subjects — ^to  confirm  and  establish  the  Christian  Faith,  and
"to  confute  all  heretics  and  schismatics — upon  the  divine
"authority  of  the  holy  Scriptures — upon  the  authority  of  the
"  writings  of  the  primitive  Fathers,  as  to  the  faith  and  practice
"  of  the  primitive  Church— upon  the  Divinity  of  our  Lord  and
"  Saviour  Jesus  Christ — ^upon  the  Divinity  of  the  Holy  Ghost —
"  upon  the  Articles  of  the  Christian  Faith,  as  comprehended  in
"  the  Apostles'  and  Nicene  Creed.

"  Also  I  direct,  that  thirty  copies  of  the  eight  Divinity  Lec-
"  ture  Sermons  shall  be  always  printed,  within  two  months  after
"  they  are  preached ;  and  one  copy  shall  be  given  to  the  Chan-
"  cellor  of  the  University,  and  one  copy  to  the  Head  of  every
"  College,  and  one  copy  to  the  Mayor  of  the  city  of  Oxford,  and
"one  copy  to  be  put  into  the  Bodleian  Library;  and  the
"  expense  of  printing  them  shall  be  paid  out  of  the  revenue  of
"  the  Land  or  Estates  given  for  establishing  the  Divinity  Lecture
"  Sermons ;  and  the  Preacher  shall  not  be  paid,  nor  be  entitled
"  to  the  revenue,  before  they  are  printed,

"  Also  I  direct  and  appoint,  that  no  person  shall  be  qualified
"  to  preach  the  Divinity  Lecture  Sermons,  unless  he  hath  taken
"  the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts  at  least,  in  one  of  the  two  Uni-
"  versities  of  Oxford  or  Cambridge ;  and  that  the  same  person
"  shall  never  preach  the  Divinity  Lecture  Sermons  twice,"


PREFACE


TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


Perhaps  an  apology  may  be  due  to  the  University  for  the
delay  which  has  occurred  in  the  appearance  of  this  yolume.  If
so,  the  writer  would  venture  to  plead  that  he  undertook  the
duties  of  the  Bampton  Lecturer  at  a  very  short  notice,  and,  it
may  be,  without  sufficiently  considering  what  they  inyolved.
When,  however,  the  accomplished  Clergjrman  whom  the  Uni-
versity had  chosen  to  lecture  in  the  year  1866  was  obliged  by
a  serious  illness  to  seek  a  release  from  his  engagement,  the
vacant  post  was  offered  to  the  present  writer  with  a  kindness
and  generosity  which,  as  he  thought,  obliged  him,  although
entirely  unprepared,  to  accept  it  and  to  meet  its  requirements
as  well  as  he  could.

Under  such  circumstances,  the  materials  which  were  made
ready  in  some  haste  for  use  in  the  pulpit  seemed  to  require
a  close  revision  before  publication.  In  making  this  revision —
which  has  been  somewhat  seriously  interrupted  by  other  duties
— ^the  writer  has  not  felt  at  liberty  to  introduce  alterations
except  in  the  way  of  phrase  and  illustration.  He  has,  however,
availed  himself  of  the  customary  licence  to  print  at  length  some
considerable  paragraphs,  the  sense  of  which,  in  order  to  save
time,  was  only  summarily  given  when  the  lectures  were
delivered.  And  he  has  subjoined  the  Greek  text  of  the  more
important  passages  of  the  New  Testament  to  which  he  has  had
occasion  to  refer ;  as  experience  seems  to  prove  that  very  many


viii  Preface  to  the  First  Edition.

readers  do  not  verify  quotations  from  Holy  Scripture  for  them-
selves, or  at  least  that  they  content  themselves  with  examining
the  few  which  are  generally  thought  to  be  of  most  importance.
Whereas,  the  force  of  the  argument  for  our  Lord's  Divinity,  as
indeed  is  the  case  with  other  truths  of  the  New  Testament,  is
eminently  cumulative.  Such  an  argument  is  to  be  appreciated,
not  by  studying  the  comparatively  few  texts  which  expressly
assert  the  doctrine,  but  that  large  number  of  passages  which
indirectly,  but  most  vividly,  imply  it.

It  is  perhaps  superfluous  to  observe  that  eight  lectures  can
deal  with  little  beyond  the  outskirts  of  a  vast,  or  to  speak  more
accurately,  of  an  exhaustless  subject.  The  present  volume
attempts  only  to  notice,  more  or  less  directly,  some  of  those
assaults  upon  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Divinity  which  have
been  prominent  or  popular  of  late  years,  and  which  have,
unhappily,  had  a  certain  weight  among  persons  with  whom  the
writer  is  acquainted.

Whatever  disturbing  influence  the  modem  destructive  criti-
cism may  have  exerted  upon  the  form  of  the  old  argument  for
the  Divinity  of  Christ,  the  main  features  of  that  argument
remain  substantially  unchanged.  The  writer  will  have  deep
reason  for  thankfulness,  if  any  of  those  whose  inclination  or
duty  leads  them  to  pursue  the  subject,  should  be  guided  by  his
references  to  the  pages  of  those  great  theologians  whose  names,
whether  in  our  own  country  or  in  the  wider  field  of  Catholic
Christendom,  are  for  ever  associated  with  the  vindication  of  this
most  fundamental  truth  of  the  Faith.

Li  passing  the  sheets  of  this  work  through  the  press,
the  writer  has  been  more  largely  indebted  than  he  can  well
say  to  the  invigorating  sympathy  and  varied  learning  of  the
Kev.  W.  Bright,  Fellow  of  University  College ;  while  the  Lidex
is  due  to  the  fiiendly  interest  of  another  Fellow  of  that  College,
the  Kev.  P.  G.  Medd.

That  in  so  wide  and  so  mysterious  a  subject  all  errors  have
been  avoided,  is   much  more  than   the  writer  dares  to  hope.


I


^  *.^


Preface  to  the  First  Edition.  ix

But  at  least  he  has  not  intentionally  contravened  the  clear  sense
of  Holy  Scripture,  or  any  formal  decision  whether  of  the  Undi-
vided  Church  or  of  the  Church  of  England.  May  He  to  the
honour  of  Whose  Person  this  yoltUne  is  devoted,  vouchsafe  to
pardon  in  it  all  that  is  not  calculated  io  promote  His  truth  and
His  glory !  And  for  the  rest,  *  quisquis  haec  legit,  ubi  pariter
certus  est,  pergat  mecumj  ubi  pariter  hsesitat,  quaerat  mecum ;
abi  errorem  suum  cognoscit,  redeat  ad  me ;  ubi  meum,  revocet
me.  Ita  ingrediamur  simul  chaiitatis  viam,  tendentes  ad  Eum
de  Quo  dictum  est,  Quaerite  Faciem  Ejus  semper  V


Chbist  Chuboh,

Ascennon  Day,  1867.


•  S.  Ang.  de  Trio,  k  5.


^    i


PEEFACE


TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.


The  kindly  welcome  given  to  this  yolume,  both  at  home  and
in  America,  has  led  to  a  demand  for  another  edition,  which  has
taken  the  writer  somewhat  by  surprise.  He  has,  however,  availed
himself  of  the  opportunity  to  make  what  use  he  could  of  the  cri-
ticisms which  have  come,  from  whatever  quarter,  under  his  notice.
Some  textual  errors  have  been  corrected.  Some  ill-considered
or  misunderstood  expressions  have  been  modified.  Keferences
to  authorities  and  sources  of  information,  which  were  accidentally
omitted,  have  been  supplied.  To  a  few  of  the  notes  there  has
been  added  fresh  matter,  of  an  explanatory  or  justificatory  cha-
racter. The  index,  too,  has  been  remodelled  and  enlarged.  But
the  book  remains,  it  is  needless  to  say,  substantially  unchanged.
And  if  it  is  now  offered  to  the  public  in  a  somewhat  altered
guise,  this  has  been  done  in  order  to  meet  the  views  of  friends,
who  have  urged,  not  perhaps  altogether  without  reason,  that  *  in
the  Church  of  England,  books  on  Divinity  are  so  largely  adapted
to  the  taste  and  means  of  the  wealthier  classes,  as  to  imply  that
the  most  interesting  of  all  subjects  can  possess  no  attractions  for
the  intelligence  and  heart  of  persons  who  enjoy  only  a  moderate
income.'

Of  the  topics  discussed  in  this  book,  there  is  one  which  has
invited  a  larger  share  of  attention  than  others,  both  from  those
who  share  and  from  those  who  reject  the  Faith  of  the  Church.
It  is  that  central  argument  for  our  Saviour's  Deity,  which  is
based  on  His  persistent  seK-assertion,  taken  in  conjunction  with


Preface  to  the  SeconcU  Edition.  xi

the  sublimity  of  His  Human  character.  The  supreme  importance
of  this  consideration  is  indeed  obyious.     Certainly,  in  the  order
of  historical  treatment,  the  inferences  which  may  he  deduced
from  Prophecy,  and  from  Christ's  supernatural  design  to  found
the  '  Ejngdom  of  Heayen,'  naturally  precede  that  which  arises
from  His  language  ahout  Himself.     But,  in  the  order  of  the
formation  of  conyiction,  the  latter  argument  must  claim  prece-
dence.    It  is,  in  truth,  more  fundamental.     It  is  the  heart  of
the  entire  subject,  from  which  a  vital  strength  flows  into  the
accessory  although  important  topics  grouped  around  it.    Apart
from  Our  Lord's  personal  claims,  the  language  of  prophecy  would
have  been  only  a  record  of  unfulfilled  anticipations,  and  the  lofty
Christology  of  the  Apostles  only  a  sample  of  their  misguided
enthusiasms ;  whereas  the  argument  which  appeals  to  Christ's
claims,  taken  in  conjunction  with  His  character,  is  independent
of  the  collateral  arguments  which  in  truth  it  supports.     If  the
argument  from  prophecy  could  be  discredited,  by  assigning  new
dates  to  the  prophetical  books,  and  by  theories  of  a  cultured
political  foresight ;  if  the  fisdth  of  the  Apostles  could  be  accounted
for  upon  grounds  which  referred  it  to  their  individual  peculiar-
ities of  thought  and  temper ;  there  would  still  remain  the  unique
phenomenon  of  the  sublimest  of  characters  inseparably  linked,  in
the  Person  of  Jesus,  to  the  most  energetic  proclamation  of  self.
In  this  inmost  shrine  of  Christian  Truth,  there  are  two  courses
open  to  the  negative  criticism.     It  may  indeed  endeavour  to
explain  away  Our  Lord's  self-assertion  in  the  interests,  as  it  con-
ceives, of  His  Human  Character.  The  impossibility  of  really  doing
this  has  been  insisted  upon  in  these  lectures.    For  Christ's  self-
assertion  is  not  merely  embodied  in  statements  which  would  be
blasphemy  in  the  mouth  of  a  created  being ;  it  underlies  and
explains  His  entire  attitude  towards  His  disciples,  towards  His
countrymen,  towards  the  human  race,  towards  the  religion  of
Israel.     Nor  is  Christ's  self-assertion  confined  to  the  records  of
one  Evangelist,  or  to  a  particular  period  in  His  ministry.    The
three  first  Evangelists  bear  witness  to  it,  in  different  terms,  yet


xii  Preface  to  the  Second  Edition.

not  less  significantly  than  does  St.  John ;  and  it  belongs  as  truly,
though  not  perhaps  so  patently,  to  Our  Lord's  first  great  discourse
as  to  His  last.  From  first  to  last  He  asserts.  He  insists  upon  the
acceptance  of  Himself.  But  when  this  is  acknowledged,  a  man
must  either  base  such  self-assertion  on  its  one  suiOicient  justifica-
tion, by  accepting  the  Church's  faith  in  the  Deity  of  Christ ;  or
he  must  regard  it  as  fatal  to  the  moral  beauty  of  Christ's  Human
character. — ChriatuSf  si  non  Deics,  non  bonus.

It  is  urged  by  persons  whose  opinions  are  entitled  to  great
respect  that,  however  valid  this  argument  may  be,  its  religious
expediency  must  be  open  to  serious  question.  And  undoubtedly
such  like  arguments  cannot  at  any  time  be  put  forward  without
involving  those  who  do  so  in  grave  responsibility.  Of  this  the
writer,  as  he  trusts,  has  not  been  unmindful.  He  has  not  used  a
dangerous  weapon  gratuitously,  nor,  so  £a.r  as  he  knows  his  own
motives,  with  any  purpose  so  miserable  as  that  of  producing  a
rhetorical  effect.

What,  then,  are  the  religious  circumstances  which  appear  to
warrant  the  employment  of  such  an  argument  at  present  ?

Speaking  roughly,  men's  minds  may  be  grpuped  into  three
classes  with  reference  to  the  vital  question  which  is  discussed  in
these  lectures.

I.  There  are  those  who,  by  God's  mercy,  have  no  doubt  on
the  subject  of  Our  Lord's  Godhead.  To  mere  dialecticians  their
case  may  appear  to  be  one  of  sheer  intellectual  stagnation.  But
the  fact  is,  that  they  possess,  or  at  least  that  they  have  altogether
within  their  reach,  a  far  higher  measure  of  real  *  life '  than  is
even  suspected  by  their  critics.  They  are  not  seeking  truth;
they  are  enjoying  it.  They  are  not  like  Alpine  climbers  still
making  their  way  up  the  mountain  side ;  they  have  gained  the
summit,  and  are  gazing  on  the  panorama  which  is  spread  around
and  beneath  them.  It  is  even  painful  to  them  to  think  of  *  prov-
ing' a  truth  which  is  now  the  very  life  of  their  souls.  In  their
whole  spiritual  activity,  in  their  prayers,  in  their  regular  medita-
tions, in  their  study  of  Holy  Scripture,  in  their  habitual  thoughts


Preface  to  tlie  Second  Edition.  xiil

reepectmg  the  eternal  Future,  they  take  Christ^fi  Divinity  for
granted ;  and  it  never  occurs  to  them  to  question  a  reality  from
-which  they  know  themselves  to  be  continually  gaining  new
streams  of  light  and  warmth  jind  power.

To  such  as  these,  this  book  may  or  may  not  be  of  service.
To  some  Christians,  who  are  filled  with  joy  and  peace  in  be-
lieving, a  review  of  the  grounds  of  any  portion  of  their  faith
may  be  even  distressing.  To  others  such  a  process  may  be
bracing  and  helpful.  But  in  any  case  it  should  be  observed
that  the  foot-notes  contain  passages  from  unbelieving  writers,
which  are  necessary  to  shew  that  the  statements  of  the  text
are  not  aimed  at  imaginary  phantoms,  but  which  also  are  not
unlikely  to  shock  and  distress  religious  and  believing  minds  very
seriously.'  In  such  a  matter  to  be  forewarned  is  to  be  forearmed.

2.  There  are  others,  and,  it  is  to  be  feared,  a  larger  class  than
is  often  supposed,  who  have  made  up  their  minds  against  the
claims  of  Divine  Revelation  altogether.  They  may  admit  the
existence  of  a  Supreme  Being,  in  some  shadowy  sense,  as  an  In-
finite Mind,  or  as  a  resistless  Force.  They  may  deny  that  there
is  any  satisfactory  reason  for  holding  that  any  such  Being  exists
at  all.  But  whether  they  are  Theists  or  Atheists,  they  resent  the
idea  of  any  interference  from  on  high  in  this  human  world,  and
accordingly  they  denounce  the  supernatural,  on  b.'j^riori  grounds.
The  trustworthiness  of  Scripture  as  an  historical  record  is  to
their  minds  sufficiently  disproved  by  the  undoubted  fact,  that  its
claim  to  credit  is  staked  upon  the  possibility  of  certain  extra-
ordinary miracles.  When  that  possibility  is  denied,  Jesus  Christ
must  either  be  pronounced  to  be  a  charlatan,  or  a  person  of
whose  real  words  and  actions  no  trustworthy  account  has  been
transmitted  to  us.

Whichever  conclusion  be  accepted  by  those  who  belong  to
the  class  in  question,  it  is  plain  that  this  book  cannot  hope  to
assist  them.  For  it  treats  as  certain,  facts  of  which  they  deny
even  the  possibility.  It  must  of  necessity  appear  to  them  to
be  guilty  of  a  continuous  petitio  prindpii;  since  they  dispute  its


1


xiv  Preface  to  the  Second  Edition.

fundamental  premises.  If  any  such  should  ever  chance  to  ex-
amine it,  they  would  probably  see  in  it  *  only  another  illustration
of  the  hopelessness  of  getting  "orthodox"  believers  even  to
appreciate  the  nature  and  range  of  the  difficulties  which  are
felt  by  liberal  thinkers/

It  may  be  replied  that  something  should  have  been  done
towards  meeting  those  particular  *  difficulties.*  But,  in  point  of
fact,  this  would  have  been  to  choose  another  subject  for  the  lec-
tures of  1866.  A  few  lectures,  after  all,  can  only  deal  with  some  /
aspects  of  a  great  Doctrine ;  and  every  treatise  on  a  question
of  Divinity  cannot  be  expected  to  begin  ah  ovo,  and  to  discuss  the
Existence  and  the  Personality  of  God.  However  little  may  be
assumed,  there  will  always  be  persons  eager  to  complain  of  the
minimized  'assumption'  as  altogether  unjustifiable;  because  there
are  always  persons  who  deny  the  most  elementary  Theistic  truth.
This  being  the  case,  the  practical  question  to  be  determined  is
this ; — How  much  is  it  advisable  to  take  for  granted  in  a  given
condition  of  faith  and  opinion,  with  a  view  to  dealing  with  the
doubts  and  difficulties  of  the  largest  number  9  The  existence
and  personality  of  God,  and  the  possibility  and  reality  of  the
Christian  Bevelation,  have  been  often  discussed ;  while  the  truth
and  evidential  force  of  miracles  were  defended  in  the  year  1865
by  a  Bampton  Lecturer  of  distinguished  ability.  Under  these
circumstances,  the  present  writer  deliberately  assumed  a  great
deal  which  is  denied  in  our  day  and  country  by  many  active
minds,  with  a  view  to  meeting  the  case,  as  it  appeared  to  him,
of  a  much  larger  number,  who  would  not  dispute  his  premises,
but  who  fail  to  see,  or  hesitate  to  acknowledge,  the  conclusion
which  they  really  warrant.

3.  For,  in  truth,  the  vast  majority  of  our  countrymen  still
shrink  with  sincere  dread  from  anything  like  an  explicit  rejec-
tion of  Christianity.  Yet  no  one  who  hears  what  goes  on
in  daily  conversation,  and  who  is  moderately  conversant  with
the  tone  of  some  of  the  leading  organs  of  public  opinion,  can
doubt  the  existence  of  a  wide-spread  unsettlement  of  religious


Preface  to  the  Second  Edition,  xv

beliefl  People  have  a  notion  that  the  present  is,  in  the  hack-
neyed phrase,  'a  transitional  period,'  and  that  they  ought  to
be  keeping  pace  with  the  general  movement.  Whither  indeed
they  are  going,  they  probably  cannot  say,  and  have  never  very
seriously  asked  themselves.  Their  most  definite  impression  is
that  the  age  is  turning  its  back  on  dogmas  and  creeds,  and  is
moving  in  a  negative  direction  under  the  banner  of  *  freedom.'
They  are,  indeed,  sometimes  told  by  their  guides  that  they  are
hnrrying  forward  to  a  chaos  in  which  all  existing  beliefs,  even
the  fundamental  axioms  of  morality,  will  be  ultimately  sub-
merged. Sometimes,  too,  they  are  encouraged  to  look  hopefully
forward  beyond  the  immediate  foreground  of  conflict  and  confu-
sion, to  an  intellectual  and  moral  Elysium,  which  will  be  reached
when  Science  has  divested  Religion  of  all  its  superstitious  incum-
brances, and  in  which  '  thought '  and  '  feeling,'  after  their  long
misunderstanding,  are  to  embrace  under  the  supervision  of  a
philosophy  higher  than  any  which  has  yet  been  elaborated.
But  these  visions  are  seen  only  by  a  few,  and  they  are  not
easily  popularized.  The  general  tendency  is  to  avoid  specula-
tions, whether  hopeful  or  discouraging,  about  the  future,  yet  to
acquiesce  in  the  theory  so  constantly  suggested,  that  there
is  some  sort  of  necessary  opposition  between  dogma  and  good-
ness, and  to  recognise  the  consequent  duty  of  promoting  good-
ness by  the  depreciation  and  destruction  of  dogma.  Thus,  the
movement,  although  negative  in  one  sense,  believes  itself  to  be
eminently  positive  in  another.  With  regard  to  dogma,  it  is
negative.  But  it  sincerely  affects  a  particular  care  for  morality;
and  in  purifying  and  enforcing  moral  truth,  it  endeavours  to
make  its  positive  character  most  distinctly  apparent.

It  is  easy  to  understand  the  bearing  of  such  a  habit  of  mind
when  placed  fieuse  to  face  with  the  Person  of  Our  Lord.  It  tends
to  issue  practically  (although,  in  its  earlier  stages,  not  with
any  very  intelligent  consciousness)  in  Socinianism.  It  regards
the  great  statements  whereby  Christ's  Godhead  is  taught  or
guarded  in  Scripture  and  the  Creeds,  if  not  with  impatience


xvi  Preface  to  the  Second  Edition.

and  contempt,  at  least  with  real  although  silent  aversion.
Church  formularies  appear  to  it  simply  in  the  light  of  an
incubus  upon  true  religious  thought  and  feeling ;  for  it  is  in-
sensible to  the  preciousness  of  the  truths  which  they  guard.
Hence  as  its  aims  and  actions  become  more  and  more  defined,
it  tends  with  increasing  decision  to  become  Humanitarian.  Its
dislike  of  the  language  of  Nicsea  hardens  into  an  explicit  denial
of  the  truth  which  that  language  guards.  Yet,  if  it  exults  in
being  unorthodox,  and  therefore  is  hostile  to  the  Creed,  it
is  ambitious  to  be  pre-eminently  moral,  and  therefore  it  lays
especial  emphasis  upon  the  beauty  and  perfection  of  Christ's
Human  character.  It  aspires  to  analyse,  to  study,  to  imitate
that  character  in  a  degree  which  was,  it  thinks,  impossible
during  those  ages  of  dogma  which  it  professes  to  have  closed.
It  thus  relieves  its  desire  to  be  still  loyal  in  some  sense  to  Jesus
Christ,  although  under  new  conditions :  if  it  discards  ancient
formularies,  it  maintains  that  this  rejection  takes  place  only
and  really  in  the  interest  of  moral  truth.

Now  it  is  to  such  a  general  habit  of  mind  that  this  book  as  a
whole,  and  the  argument  from  Our  Lord's  self-assertion  in  par-
ticular, ventures  to  address  itself.  Believing  that  the  cause  of
dogma  is  none  other  than  the  cause  of  morality, — ^that  the
perfect  moral  character  of  Jesus  Christ  is  really  compatible
only  with  the  Nicene  assertion  of  His  absolute  Divinity, — ^the
writer  has  endeavoured  to  say  so.  He  has  not  been  at  pains  to
disguise  his  earnest  conviction,  that  the  hopes  and  sympathies,
which  have  been  raised  in  many  sincerely  religious  minds  by  the
so-called  Liberal-religious  movement  of  our  day,  are  destined
to  a  rude  and  bitter  disappointment.  However  long  the  final
decision  between  *  some  faith '  and  *  no  faith '  may  be  deferred,
it  must  be  made  at  last.  Already  advanced  rationalistic  thought
agrees  with  Catholic  believers  in  maintaining  that  Christ  is  not
altogether  a  good  man,  if  He  is  not  altogether  Superhuman.
And  if  this  be  so,  surely  it  is  prudent  as  well  as  honest  to  say
BO.     They  who  do  not  wish  to  break  with  Christ  Our  Lord,


L.


Preface  to  the  Second  Edition.  xvii

and  to  cast  out  His  very  Name  as  evil,  in  the  years  to  come,
will  be  thankful  to  have  recognised  the  real  tendencies  of  an
anti-dogmatic  teaching  which  for  the  moment  may  have  won
their  sympathies.  It  is  of  the  last  importance  in  religious
thinking,  not  less  than  in  religious  practice,  that  the  question.
Whither  am  I  going?  should  be  asked  and  answered.  Such
a  question  is  not  the  less  important  because  for  the  present  all
is  smooth  and  reassuring,  combining  the  reaHty  of  religious
change  with  the  avoidance  of  any  violent  shock  to  old  convic-
tions. It  has  been  said  that  there  is  a  peculiar  fascination  in
the  movement  of  a  boat  which  is  gliding  softly  and  swiftly  down
the  rapids  above  Niagara.  But  a  man  must  be  strangely
constituted  to  be  able,  under  such  circumstances,  so  to  abandon
himself  to  the  sense  of  present  satisfaction  as  to  forget  the  fate
which  is  immediately  before  him.

The  argument  from  Christ's  character  to  His  Divinity  which
is  here  put  forward  can  make  no  pretence  to  originality.  To
the  preE^nt  writer,  it  was  suggested  in  its  entirety,  some  years
ago,  upon  a  perusal  of  Mr.  F.  W.  Newman's  *  Phases  of  Faith.'
The  seventh  chapter  of  that  remarkable  but  saddening  work
yielded  the  analysis  which  has  been  expanded  in  these  lectures,
and  which  the  lecturer  had  found,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  'to
be  serviceable  in  assisting  Socinians  to  understand  the  real  basis
of  the  Church's  faith  respecting  the  dignity  of  her  Head.  It
agrees,  moreover,  even  in  detail,  with  the  work  of  the  great
preacher  of  the  Church  of  France,  to  whose  earnestness  and
genius  the  present  writer  has  elsewhere  professed  himself  to
be,  and  always  must  feel,  sincerely  indebted.

The  real  justification  of  such  arguments  lies  in  a  fact  which
liberal  thinkers  will  not  be  slow  to  recognise  ^.    If  the  moral

*  Do  we  not  however  find  a  sanction  for  this  olass  of  argoments  in  appeals
such  as  the  following?  St.  John  vii.  43  :  *If  G^od  were  your  Father,  ye
would  have  loved  Me.'  St.  John  v.  38:  'And  ye  have  not  His  Word
abiding  in  yon :  for,  whom  He  hath  sent,  Him  ye  believe  not.'  And  is
not  this  smnmaneed  in  the  apostolical  teaching?  i  St.  John  ii.  23 :  'Who-
soever denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father.'    Sach  passages

b


xviii  Preface  to  the  Second  Edition.

sense  of  man  be  impaired  by  the  Fall,  it  is  not  so  entirely  dis-
abled as  to  be  incapable  of  discerning  moral  beauty.  If  it  may
err  when  it  attempts  to  determine,  on  purely  b.  priori  Human
grounds,  what  should  be  the  conduct  and  dispensations  of  God
in  dealing  with  His  creatures,  it  is  not  therefore  likely  to  be
in  error  when  it  stands  face  to  face  with  human  sincerity,  and
humility,  and  love.  At  the  feet  of  the  Christ  of  the  Gospels,  the
moral  sense  may  be  trusted  to  protest  against  an  intellectual
aberration  which  condemns  Him  as  vain  and  false  and  selfish,
only  that  it  may  rob  Him  of  His  aureole  of  Divinity.  *In  the
seventh  chapter  of  the  "  Phases  of  Faith,"  '  I  quote  the  words  of
a  thoughtful  friend,  *  there  is  the  satisfaction  of  feeling  that  one
has  reached  the  very  floor  of  Pandemonium,  and  that  a  rebound
has  become  almost  inevitable.  Anything  is  better  than  to  be
sinking  still,  one  knows  not  how  deeply,  into  the  abyss.'

It  may  be  said  that  other  alternatives  have  been  put  for-
ward, with  a  view  of  forcing  orthodox  members  of  the  Church
of  England  into  a  position  analogous  to  that  in  which  tjie  argu-
ment of  these  lectures  might  place  a  certain  section  of  Lati-
tudinarian  thinkers.  For  example,  some  Boman  Catholic  and
some  sceptical  writers  unite  in  urging  that  either  all  orthodox
Christianity  is  false,  or  the  exclusive  claims  of  the  Church  of
Kome  must  be  admitted  to  be  valid.  Every  such  alternative
must  be  considered  honestly,  and  in  view  of  the  particular
evidence  which  can  be  produced  in  its  support.  But  to  pro-
pound the  present  alternative  between  Rome  and  unbelief,  is
practically  to  forget  that  the  acceptance  of  the  dogmatic  prin-
ciple, or  of  any  principle,  does  not  commit  those  who  accept  it
to  its  exaggerations  or  corruptions ;  and  that  the  promises
of  Our  Lord  to  His  people  in  regard  alike  to  Unity  and  to
Holiness,  are,  in  His  mysterious  providence,  permitted  to  be


appear  to  shew,  that  to  press  an  inference,  whether  it  be  moral  or  doctrinal,
from  an  admitted  truth,  by  insisting  that  the  truth  itself  is  virtually  re-
jected if  the  inference  be  declined,  is  not  accurately  described  as  a  trick  of
modem  orthodoxy.


Preface  to  the  Second  Edition.  xix

truversed  by  the  misuse  of  man's  free-will.  Li  a  word,  the
dilemma  between  Roman  Catholicism  and  infidelity  is,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  very  far  from  being  obviously  exhaustive :
but  it  is  difficult  to  see  that  any  intermediate  position  can  be
really  made  good  between  the  denial  of  Christ's  Human  per-
fection and  the  admission  that  He  is  a  Superhuman  Person.
And  when  this  admission  is  once  fairly  made,  it  leads  by  easy
and  necessary  steps  to  belief  in  His  true  Divinity.

The  great  question  of  our  day  is,  whether  Christ  our  Lord
is  only  the  author  and  founder  of  a  religion,  of  which  another
Being,  altogether  separate  from  Him,  namely,  God,  is  the  ob-
ject ;  or  whether  Jesus  Christ  EUmself,  true  God  and  true  Man,
is,  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Object  of  Christian
faith  and  love  as  truly  as,  ia  history.  He  was  the  Founder  of
Christendom.  Come  what  may,  the  latter  belief  has  been,  is,
and  will  be  to  the  end,  the  Faith  of  His  Church.

May  those  who  are  tempted  to  exchange  it  for  its  modem
rival  reflect  that  the  choice  before  them  does  not  lie  between
a  creed  with  one  dogma  more,  and  a  creed  with  one  dogma  less,
nor  yet  between  a  mediaeval  and  a  modem  rendering  of  the
Gospel  history.  It  is  really  a  choice  between  a  phantom  and
a  reality;  between  the  implied  falsehood  and  the  eternal  truth
of  Christianity;  between  the  interest  which  may  cling  to  a  dis-
credited and  evanescent  memory  of  the  past,  and  the  worship
of  a  living,  ever-present,  and  immaculate  Bedeemer.

Chbist  Church,

Whitsuntide,  1868.


b  2


PREFACE

TO  THE  NINTH  EDITION.

More  than  tliirteen  years  have  elapsed  since  any  alteration
was  made  in  the  text  or  notes  of  this  volume ;  but  some  criti-
cisms, more  or  less  direct,  have  appeared,  of  which  the  writer
has  long  been  anxious  to  take  advantage,  by  correcting  proved
inaccuracies  or  by  the  addition  of  explanatory  matter.  In
doing  this  he  has  found  reason  to  regret  that  it  is  not  possible
to  reconstruct  the  book,  on  a  larger  scale,  without  destroying
its  identity,  and  thus  forfeitiijg  its  place  in  the  series  to  which
it  belongs.  If  he  has  left  some  objections  unnoticed,  this  is
because  he  could  not  afford,  on  the  score  of  space,  to  notice  any
but  such  as  have  enabled  him  to  improve  his  work.  Thus  an
objection  that  passages  of  the  New  Testament  which  assert  our
Lord's  Humanity  had  been  overlooked  will  be  found  to  be
answered  incidentally  by  the  more  complete  Index  of  texts,  for
which  this  edition  is  indebted  to  the  Kev.  J.  O.  Johnston,  M.A.,
of  Keble  College.  Criticisms  which  imply  a  differenca  of  funda-
mental principle  could  not  be  adequately  considered  without
entering  upon  discussions,  any  one  of  which  might  furnish
matter  for  a  separate  treatise*.


Chbist  Church,

Advent,  i88t.


•  See  Note  I,  p.  549.


t
i


PREFACE


TO   THE    THIRTEENTH   EDITION.


TwENTY-THBEB  yesTs  have  passed  since  these  lectures  were
delivered.  Of  late  the  writer  has  heen  asked  more  than  once  by
persons  sitting  loosely  to  the  faith  of  the  Church  of  Qod,  whether
he  would  still  accept  the  responsibility  of  teaching  as  Divine
Truth  the  doctrine  which  they  assert.  Deeply  and  increasingly
conscious  as  he  is  of  the  many  and  grave  imperfections  of  his
work,  he  feels  that  he  can  best  answer  his  questioners  by  pub-
lishing another  edition  of  it.

Of  late  years  we  have  heard  much  of  a  *  New  Eeformation,'
which  is,  it  seems,  in  some  way  to  transform  and  to  reanimate
Christianity.  The  New  Reformation  difFers  from  the  Reforma-
tion of  three  centuries  ago  in  many  respects,  but  especially  in
this, — that  while  the  old  Reformation  endeavoured,  whether
successfuUy  or  not,  to  establish  and  to  enhance  the  authority  of
Holy  Scripture,  the  *  New  Reformation '  proposes  to  emancipate
us,  in  all  serious  senses,  from  that  authority.  In  the  words  of
its  most  enthusiastic  exponent,  it  is  a  'revolt  against  miraculous
beliefs ; '  and  since  Holy  Scripture  from  beginning  to  end  pre-
supposes and  is  replete  with  miracle,  it  is  a  revolt  against  Holy
Scripture.  The  'New  Reformation '  may  consent  to  leave  us  with
a  Bible,  from  which  the  supernatural,  whether  in  the  form  of
miracle  or  of  predictive  prophecy,  has  been  carefully  expurgated :
it  may  leave  us  such  shreds  of  the  Book  of  Qod,  as  can  survive

•  Nineteenth  Century,  March,  1889,  p.  48a


xxii       Preface  to  the  TMrteentk  Edition.

%  eritieiain  wliidi  seta  to  wori:  with  tlie  iirationaT  pGatnLite  tiiat
mil  homd  fide  miraele  is  impoeBible.  This  meagre  aod  tattered
jjragmeiil  of  Holy  Script  ore  is  wortli  little  or  nothing  for  reHgioas
purposes.  The  Old  Testamotft  (^  WellhaQaeii  or  Kncncn,  and
the  New  Testament  as  it  issixes  &om  the  hands  of  F.  C.  Bonr
and  his  pupils,  can  male  scant  prorision  fi>r  the  hnflding  np  of
samts  or  the  conyeraion  of  anncra.  Souls  are  not  to  he  won  to
a  new  Hfe  hf  a  mass  of  literarj  macterial  which,  however  in^
teresting  firom  a  critie's  point  of  Tiew^  is  heficred  hj  its  ex-
ponents to  he  largd  J  compoeed  of  legends-  and  finrgeries.

In  no  respect  does  the  '  Xew  Befomatioii  *  £spla j  its  real
eharaeter  more  dearlj  than  when  it  enays  to  handle  the  Person
of  oar  Adorable  Lord.  He  mnst  not,  it  nrges,  he  *pitt  alone  on
any  non-natnral  pmnade^.'  He  mnst  ccace  to  he  disdi^ni^ed  by
anythii^  that  raises  Him  ahofe  His  hrethren ;  He  mnst  sahmit
in  all  respects,  thoo^  at  the  cost  of  the  narratives  which  tell
ns  anything  trustworthy  ahont  Him,  to  the  conditions  and  laws
of  the  natural  world.  He  must  he  stripped  of  His  miraenlous
Birth,  of  His  Hesnrrection  from  the  grave,  of  thmt  equality  with
the  Father  which  He  could  daim,  without  violence,  as  His  own®.
The  '  Xew  Beformation '  leaTcs  us  in  its  Jesus  of  Nasareth,  an
uncrowned  and  ignorant  Galilean  peasant,  in  whom  neverthe-
less, '  through  aU  human  and  nece^ary  imperfections,'  it  still
strangely  professes  to  recognise  'tbe  natural  leader  of  its  inmost
life^.'  If  the  question  he  asked  how  it  can  detect  so  much  in  him
as  this,  it  replies  that '  history,  led  by  the  blind  and  yet  diyine
instinct  of  the  race,  has  lifted  this  life  from  the  mass  of  Hves ' ;
so  that  'in  it  we  Europeans  see  certain  ethical  and  ^iritual
essentials  concentrated  and  embodied,  as  we  see  the  essen-
tials of  poetry  and  art  and  knowledge,  concentrated  and
embodied  in  other  lives  *.'  But  can  '  we  Europeans '  hope  to
continue  to  see  even  as  much  as  this  if  the  '  New  Beformation '
takes  us  altogether  under  its  charge  and  guidance  t    "Will  men

^  NineUenth  Century,  March,  1889,  p.  48a

•  Phil  iL  6.  ^  Nineitemih  Centwry,  p.  478.  •  Ibid,  p  480^


Preface  to  the  Thirteenth  Edition,     xxiii

not  ask  whether  a  Christ  who  is  not  Divine  and  who  did  not
riEe  from  the  dead,  has  any  moral  right  to  speak  of  himself  in
the  terms  which  are  constantly  employed  hy  the  Christ  of  the
Gbspels  1  And  whether,  if  the  altogether  human  and  erring
Christ  who  is  offered  to  the  world  by  the  '  New  Reformation'
were  to  use  the  language  of  the  Son  of  Mary,  he  would  not  he
speedily  judged  by  the  moral  sense  of  mankind  to  he  neither
humble  nor  veracious  1  And,  if  everything  is  to  be  eliminated
from  the  Gospels  which  is  necessary  in  order  to  accommodate
them  to  the  very  prosaic  level  assigned  to  its  Christ  by  the
'scientific'  criticism,  how  much  of  the  Gospels  will  be  leftt

It  must  be  the  force  of  early  asBociations  rather  than  any
seriously  rational  judgment  which  leads  the  latest  advocate  of
the  '  New  Beformation '  to  denounce,  as  '  merely  wasteful  and
impatient,'  the  '  modem  European  who  persists  in  ignoring  the
practical  value  of  the  exquisite  Christian  inheritance'  which
is  still  offered  him  by  the  destructive  critics.  The  'lAodem
European '  may  surely  ask  what  there  is  to '  waste/  He  asks,  but
in  vain,  whether  anything  is  known  as  certain  about  the  origin
and  the  purpose  of  this  life,  about  the  life  after  death,  about
a  remedy  and  pardon  for  sin,  about  the  Awful  Being  Whom
Christendom  has  hitherto  named  God,  but  for  whom  the  '  New
Beformation '  can  find  no  name '.  He  asks,  in  despair,  upon
what,  amid  the  revolt  against  miracle  in  which  the  '  New  Befor-
mation '  is  chiefly  employed,  he  may  bope  to  fall  back  as  upon
that  which  may  illuminate  his  understanding  and  invigorate  his
will.  And  he  is  told  of  a  '  vast  heritage  of  feeling  which  goes
back  after  all,  through  all  the  overgrowths  of  dream  and
speculation,  to  that  strongest  of  all  the  forces  of  human  life,  the
love  of  man  for  man,  the  trust  of  the  lower  soul  in  the  higher,
the  hope  and  the  faith  which  the  leader  and  the  hero  kindles
amid  the  masses ^*

If  this  is  all  that  the  '  exquisite  Christian  inheritance '  of  the
'  New  Beformation '  has  to  offer,  the  majority  of  men  will  say

'  Nineteenth  Century,  u.  p.  479.  «  Ibid.  480.


xxiv      Preface  to  the  Thirteenth  Edition.

that  they  could  dispense  with  it,  or  that  they  could  discover  all
that  is  worth  having  in  it  for  themselves  elsewhere.  When
there  is  no  longer  any  relic  of  a  claim  to  bridge  over  the  awful
chasm  which  sin  has  opened  between  earth  and  heaven,  or  to
satisfy  any  one  of  the  deeper  needs  of  the  human  soul/  it  is
better,  in  the  interests  of  the  honest  use  of  language,  to  drop
the  phraseology  of  Christian  faith.  Other  names  had  better  be
assigned  to  a  '  Eeformation '  which  reforms  Christianity  out  of
existence,  and  to  an  *  exquisite  Christian  heritage '  which  consists
only  of  such  '  feeling '  as  exists  in  rich  abundance  beyond  the
frontiers  of  Christendom.  Meanwhile  the  destructive  criticism,
though  against  its  will,  does  Christian  Faith  a  service.  It
clears  away  the  brushwood  which  in  many  well-meaning  but
confused  souls,  obscures  the  interval  between  an  infidel  premiss
and  its  real  conclusion :  and  it  exhibits  the  naked  truth  that
between  the  Adoration  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  God,  and  the
rejection  of  Him  altogether,  there  is  no  reasonable  standing-
ground.  "When  this  alternative  is  once  presented  to  a  religious
and  well-ordered  mind,  there  are  profound  moral  instincts — not
to  speak  of  a  higher  assistance  which  comes  from  heaven — ^that
may  be  trusted  to  solve  the  problem.  *  Lord,  lift  Thou  up  the
light  of  Thy  Countenance  upon  us.*

3  Amek  XUodrt,  St.  Paul's,
JEaater  IJve,  1889.


PEEFACE

TO  THE  FOURTEENTH  EDITION.

The  publication  of  Dr.  James  Martineaa's  work  on  the  *  Seat
of  Authority  in  Eeligion/^  is  not  without  significance  in  its
bearing  on  the  strongest  grounds  for  maintaining  the  solemn
Truth  which  is  the  subject  of  these  lectures.  Dr.  Martineau
occupies,  it  is  needless  to  say,  a  unique  position  amoDg  those
who,  while  still  clinging  to  the  Christian  name,  reject  the  very
heart  of  the  Christian  Creed.  His  great  and  varied  accom-
plishments, his  high  character,  and  his  advanced  age,  combine
to  command  the  attention  of  many  among  his  countrymen  who
are  wholly  unable  to  sympathize  with  the  negative  side  of  his
religious  position.  His  Types  of  Ethical  Theory ^  and  his  Study
of  Religion^  although  undesignedly  illustrating  the  fact  that
no  portion  of  truth,  whether  of  Nature  or  Eevelation,  can  be
abandoned  without  more  or  less  impairing  the  presentation  of
such  truth  as  is  still  retained,  do  undoubtedly,  as  a  whole,  place
those  who  have  the  interests  of  morality  and  religion  at  heart
under  real  obligations  to  the  gifted  writer.  To  read  him,  is
inevitably  and  often  to  wish  that  evmh  talis  sit,  noster  esset.

Dr.  Martineau  s  work  on  the  *  Seat  of  Authority  in  Religion '
is  here  referred  to  only  with  reference  to  a  single  feature  of
it,  namely,  his  way  of  dealing  with  the  New  Testament.  The
last  teacher  in  the  Unitarian  body  who  by  his  character  and
general  eminence  at  all  suggests  comparison  with  Dr.  Martineau
is  Channing.     Channing  took  the  Gospel  narrative  as  it  stands

^  London,  Longmans,  1890.


xxvi     Preface  to  the  Fourteenth  Edition.

as  simply  as  any  churchman.  He  had  no  doubt  that  the
Gospels  were  received  in  the  Apostolic  age  as  the  works  of  the
writers  whose  names  they  bear.  He  repudiates  the  theory  that
St.  Paul  or  any  other  Apostle  substituted  for  the  religion
taught  by  Jesus  Christ  a  new  and  essentially  distinct  religion.
He  has  no  quarrel  with  the  miracles  of  the  New  Testament;  he
has  not  a  shadow  of  a  doubt  as  to  the  truth  of  our  Lord's
Hesurrection  from  the  dead.  He  rejects,  as  a  matter  of  course,
the  teaching  of  the  Church  on  the  subject  of  our  Lord's
Divinity ;  but  then  he  takes  the  traditional  Socinian  interpre-
tations of  the  New  Testament,  generally,  for  granted,  and  holds
that  the  Church  has  missed  the  true  sense  of  the  great  passages
to  which  she  appeals  as  warrants  of  the  Nicene  doctrine,  either
by  straining  their  sense  or  overlaying  them  with  glosses  derived
from  later  and  external  sources.

The  New  Socinianism  differs  from  that  of  Channing  in  two
respects.  It  is  nearer  to  the  church  in  its  exegesis ;  it  is  much
fuither  from  her  in  its  general  attitude  towards  the  authority
of  the  New  Testament.  Both  results  are  decidedly  traceable
to  the  influence  of  the  Tubingen  criticism  on  the  more  highly
educated  members  of  the  Unitarian  body ;  and  the  first  symptom
of  it,  at  least  in  England,  was  afforded  by  the  publication,  in
1867,  of  the  late  Mr.  J.  J.  Tayler's  'Attempt  to  ascertain  the
Character  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  '.^  Mr.  Tayler  differed  from  his
Unitarian  predecessors,  alike  in  what  he  affirmed  and  in  what
he  denied.  He  denied  that  St.  John  wrote  the  Fourth  Gospel ;
but  he  affirmed  that  the  Fourth  Gospel  taught  a  Divine  Licar-
nation.  If  he  ^.ccepted  the  Tubingen  arguments  against  the
Apostolic  origin  of  the  Gospel,  he  abandoned  as  no  longer
tenable  the  traditional  Socinian  interpretation  of  it.  *  Did  we
know  Him  [Our  Lord]  through  the  Fourth  Gospel  alone,  we
could  not  doubt  that  the  author  of  that  work  regarded  Him  as
something  more  than  human, — an  Incarnation  of  the  Eternal
"Word.     This   idea  is   so   clearly  expressed  throughout,  that

^  London,  Williams  and  Norgate.


Preface  to  the  Fourteenth  Edition,     xxvii

^^M^H^—— — —    !■       ■■!      Ill  M         ■  ■■■■■■     l»l«l  »^M^— ■■  I  ^— — ^^1— ^^^M^^^^^i^^M^—     IMIIW^W*       II  I  I    I ^1  ■  ^1^—11         I  ■  »

nothing  but  a  foregone  conclusion  and  doctrinal  prepossession
could  have  blinded  any  one  to  the  perception  of  it.  That
Gospel  is  regarded, — and  rightly  by  those  who  admit  its
authenticity — as  a  completion,  from  an  Apostolic  Source,  of  the
inadequate  conceptions  of  the  PerEon  of  Christ  conveyed  by  the
Synoptic  narration.  On  a  point  so  vital  as  this,  no  authority
could  equal  that  of  the  beloved  disciple,  who  leaned  on  the
bosom  of  the  Lord,  and  was  admitted  to  His  inmost  privacy  of
thought;  >

English  scholars,  and  notably  the  late  Bishop  of  Durham,
have  taught  us  what  to  think  about  the  judgment  of  the  school
of  Tiibingen  respeccting  the  origin  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.
But  their  labours  became  the  property  of  the  world  at  too  late
a  date  to  be  read  by  Mr.  Tayler,  and  tSiey  are  not  noticed  by
Dr.  Martineau,  who  apparently  still  accepts  without  reserve  «nd
in  their  most  unmodified  form  the  Tubingen  theories.  When
he  is  discussing  the  doctrinal  import  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,
Dr.  Martineau  can  write  more  strongly, — ^perhaps  at  times
less  guardedly, — than  Mr.  Tayler.  Thus,  he  asserts  that  *in
the  Johannine  view  the  Revealer  is  Himself  one  with  the
Object  revealed,  the  manifested  God,  the  apprehension  of  whom
fulfils  the  meaning  of  tiie  dispensation  and  is  Eternal  life/^
And  after  sununarising  the  peculiarities,  as  he  appreciates
them,  of  this  Gospel,  he  observes  that  they  ^converge  upon  one
result,  viz.  to  make  the  whole  Christian  revelation  consist  in
lending  to  the  world  the  Divine  Personality  of  the  Son,  as  an
object  of  faith,  and  a  power  of  sanctification.*  •  Agsan,  *  Take
away,'  he  writes,  'the  Godhead  of  Christ  as  the  -entire  real
meaning  of  even  His  Ministry  in  Palestine,  and  there  is  not  an
incident  or  a  speech  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  which  does  not  lose
its  significance.'  *  Dr.  Martineau,  it  may  be  justly  urged,  is  not
sufficiently  alive  to  the  recognition  of  Our  Lord's  Manhood  in

^  Tayler,  Attempt  to  Ascertain,  etc.,  p.  i8i.

'  Seat  of  Authority,  p.  441,  comp.  443.

■  Ibid.,  p.  439.  «  Ibid.,  p.  4a6«


xxviii   Preface  to  the  Fourteenth  Edition.

iHe  Fourth  Gospel.  But  forty  years  ago  such  an  admission  as
he  makes  would  have  implied  an  acceptance  of  the  Scriptural,
and  therefore  the  sufficient,  warrant  of  the  Faith  of  the  Church
on  the  subject  of  Our  Lord's  Divine  Person.  It  does  not  imply^
this  in  the  case  of  Dr.  Martineau,  because,  in  his  judgment,  the
Fourth  Gospel  only  represents  'the  point  of  view  of  an
Alexandrian  Christian  in  the  fourth  decade  of  the  second
century/  ^

Mr.  Tayler  had  apparently  taken  it  for  granted  that  in  view  of
the  exegesis  of  the  School  of  Ttibingen,  the  difficulties  of
Socinianism  with  respect  to  the  New  Testament  centred  in  the
Fourth  Gospel,  and  that  the  first  three  Gospels  might  be
accepted  without  prejudice  to  a  Humanitarian  Creed.  'Had
we,'  he  observes,  *  only  the  synoptists,  though  undoubtedly  they
invest  the  person  of  Christ  with  very  extraordinary  powers,,
and  place  Him  in  a  most  intimate  relation  to  God,  we  should
hardly  have  claimed  for  Him  a  nature  higher  than  the  human,
however  wonderfully  endowed/  '  But  Dr.  Martineau  s  critical
and  moral  instincts  could  not  rest  altogether  satisfied  with  this
conclusion;  and  he  sees  clearly  that  the  first  three  Gospels
represent  our  Lord  as  saying  too  much  about  Himself  to  be  con-
sistent with  a  purely  human  ideal  of  excellence.  Besides  this,
he  is  scarcely  less  dissatisfied  with  the  supernatural  incidents
attaching  more  especially  to  our  Lord's  Human  Nature  in  the
first  three  Gospels  than  with  the  distinct  assertion  of  His
Incarnate  Godhead  in  the  fourtL  Accordingly  he  sets  himself
to  strip  off  what  he  terms  the  mythological  element  from  the
narratives  of  the  three  earlier  evangelists,  *It  would/  he  re-
gretfully observes,  '  be  much  easier  to  untwine  the  mythological
attributes  from  the  Person  of  Jesus,  were  it  not  that  the  process
of  investing  Him  with  them  had  begun,  long  before  our  New

^  Seat  of  Authority,  p.  435.  It  should  perhaps  be  added  that  Dr.
Martineau  does  not  conceive  the  identity  of  the  Logos  and  God  to  involve
co-equality.  His  reasoning  on  pp.  431,  43  a  is  hardly  convincing ;  and  the
Church  is  not  concerned  to  deny  a  subordination  ivard  r(${ir.

'  Attempt  to  Ascertain,  etc.,  p.  181.


Preface  to  the  Fourteenth  Edition,     xxix

Testament  books  assumed  tlieir  form/  ^  He  holds  indeed  that
the '  whole  theory  of  Christ's  person ;  that  He  was  the  Messiah;
what  was  the  meaning  of  His  death ;  what  the  range  of  His
kingdom ;  and  when  would  be  the  time  of  His  return  to  take  it
up  was  a  posthumous  and  retrospective  product  worked  out  by
disciples/ '

Indeed  the  most  original,  and  it  may  be  added  the  boldest,  of
Dr.  Martineau's  negations  is  the  opinion  that  'the  Messianic
theory  of  the  Person  of  Jesus  was  made  for  Him,  and  palmed
upon  Him  by  His  followers,  and  was  not  His  own/  *  In  this  he
is  conscious  of  fairly  distancing  some  of  the  least  scrupulous
of  recent  critics ;  who  are  alive  to  the  fieust  that  if  on  such  a
subject  the  three  first  Gospels  are  not  trustworthy,  it  is  difficult
to  assign  to  them,  on  reasonable  grounds,  any  historical  value
whatever.  There  is  of  course  no  pretence  that  the  state  of  the
text  warrants  any  doubt  as  to  the  great  Messianic  passages  :
indeed  Dr.  Martineau  admits  that  the  authors  of  these  Gk)spels,
or  of  the  materials  of  which  they  were  composed,  '  had  long
convinced  themselves  not  only  that  Jesus  was  the  appointed
Messiah,  but  that  He  knew  Himself  to  be  so,  and  gave  sufficient
signs  of  His  authority  as  such/^  How  they  could  all  have
arrived  at  such  a  conviction,  if  it  had  no  basis  whatever  in  our
Lord's  language  and  action ;  how  they  could  have  agreed  to  invent
so  gigantic  and  sustained  a  fiction,  penetrating  their  entire
narratives  through  and  through.  Dr.  Martineau  does  not  at  all
satisfactorily  explain.  But  that  so  acute  and  accomplished  an
author  should  have  committed  himself  to  such  a  paradox  is  in
fact  more  noteworthy  than  the  considerations  by  which  he
attempts  to  support  it.  For  it  shows  that  he  feels  how  much
was  really  involved  in  a  claim  which  Socinian  writers  had

*  Seat  of  Authority,  p.  360.  •  Ibid.

'  Ibid.,  p.  331.  It  ii  difficult  to  understand  how  any  one  who  believes
that  JeBos  of  Nazareth  did  not  even  claim  to  be  the  Meiiiah,  should  still
cling  to  the  name  of  Christian.  Whatever  he  may  believe  about  Jesus,  he
does  not  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ.  Wonld  he  not  be  more  exactly
described  as  a-<  Nazarene '  ?  *  Ibid.,  p.  353.


XXX       Preface  to  the  Fourteenth  Edition.

heretofore  treated  as  consistent  with  the  theory  of  a  merely
human  Christ ;  how  the  outworks,  bo  to  speak,  of  the  great
doctrine  of  Christ's  Divinity  are  traceable  in  the  language  and
action  which  is  appropriate  to  our  Lord's  Self-proclamation  as
the  Messiah;  how  the  prophecies  which  thus  belong  to  Him,
how  the  language  which  He  utters,  how  the  temper  and  bearing
which  befit  Him  in  this  capacity  really  point  to  a  higher  truth
beyond.  The  Messianic  claim  was  indeed  the  first  step  towards
the  announcement  of  our  Lord's  Divinity;  or,  in  Dr.  Mar-
tineau's  phrase,  '  the  identification  of  Jesus  with  the  Messianic
figure '  is  *  the  first  act  of  Christian  mythology.'  ^

There  is  no  necessity  to  attempt  to  measure  the  number  or
extent  of  the  excisions  &om  the  text  of  the  first  three  gospels,
which  would  be  necessaiy  in  order  to  satisfy  the  theory  that  our
Lord  never  claimed  to  be  the  Messiah.  Li  point  of  feust  when
these  excisions  had  been  duly  made,  very  little  indeed  would
remain.  And  this  can  hardly  surprise  us,  since  Dr.  Martineau
himself  reflects  that  'the  theory  of  a  gradual  disclosure  and
advance  of  Messianic  pretension '  on  the  part  of  Jesus  '  was  the
very  theory  of  the  Evangelists  themselves.'*  But  then  the
Evangelists  are  taken  to  have  known  less  of  the  truth  of
the  subject  on  which  they  vnrote  than  does  their  modem  re-
viewer, who  believes  himself  to  be  in  possession  of  a  '  critical
chemistry  which  is  not  without  resources  for  recovering  at  least
some  fragments  of  the  first  faithful  record.'  *  At  the  bidding  of
this  '  chemistry,'  we  must  it  seems,  bid  adieu  not  only  to  the
Nativity  and  the  Resurrection;  to  the  promise  to  Peter,  and
the  prediction  of  the  last  judgment ;  but  even  to  such  moral
and  spiritual  treasures  as  the  invitation,  *  Come  unto  Me  all  ye
weary,  and  I  will  give  you  rest';  since  it  is  truly  felt  that  the
unspeakable  tenderness  of  this  invitation  is  associated  with  an
attitude  on  the  part  of  the  Speaker  which  places  Him  by  impli-
cation outside  and  above  the  circle  of  our  common  humanity  ^

*  Seat  of  Authority,  p.  355.  •  Ibid.,  p.  346,

•  Ibid.,  p.  33a.  *  Ibid.,  p.  383,


Preface  to  the  Fourteenth  Edition,      xxxi

God  employs  many  methods  for  making  His  way  plain  before
the  face  of  man:  and  among  these  methods  are  the  demon-
strations which  He  affords  or  permits  from  time  to  time  of
what  is  involved  in  rejecting  it.  The  sincere  and  able  writer
before  ns  unintentionally  illustrates  the  real  connection  be-
tween the  New  Testament  and  the  doctrine  of  Our  Lord's
Divinity,  when  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  approaches  to  as  well
as  the  statements  of  that  doctrine,  he  finds  himself  obliged
to  tear  the  writings  of  the  Evangelists  to  shreds.  He  thus
teaches  us  that  if  we  would  read  the  gospels  as  they  stand  and
with  our  eyes  open,  we  cannot  but  read  in  their  pages  the  truth
which  was  reasserted  for  all  time  by  the  Catholic  Church  at
Nicsea,  because  it  was  inextricably  bound  up  with  the  first  and
only  trustworthy  record  of  Him  who  is  the  Object  as  well  as  the
Author  of  our  faith*


Chbist  Chubcr,

Bt  P«^«  Pay,  1890W


ANALYSIS  OF  THE  LECTURES.


LECTCJKE  L

THE  QUESTION  BEiFOBB  US.

St.  Matt.  zvL  13.

PAOB

The  Question  before  us  in  these  Lectures  is  proposed  by

our  Lord  Himself,  and  is  a  strictly  theological  one     •       3

Its  import  i.  as  affirming  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  Man       6
2.  as  enquiring  what  He  is  besides        .         .      9

I.  Enduring  interest  of  the  question  thus  raised  even  for

non-believers        •         •        •        •        •        •        •     11


n.  .Three  answers  to  it  are  possibh

1.  The  Humanitarian        •        •        •        •        •  15

2.  The  Arian 16

3.  The  Catholic .17

Of  these  the  Arian  is  unsubstantial,  so  that  prac-
tically there  are  only  two      •        •        •        «  1 7

nL  The  Catholic  answer

1.  jealously  guards  the  truth  of  Christ's  Manhood  18

2.  secures  its  full  force  to  the  idea  of  Qodhead  •  26

ly.  Position  taken  in  these  Lectures  stated      •        •        «  34

Objections  to  the  necessary  discussion —

a.  From  the  ground  of  Historical  JSstheticism    •  34

p.  From  the  ground  of  ^Anti-doctrinaP  Morality  37
y.  From  the  ground  of  Subjective  Pietism  «        •41

Anticipated  course  of  the  argument  «        ^        »        «  43

c


xxxlv  Analysis  of  the  Lectures.

LECTUKE  n.

AKTICIPATIOKS  OF  CHBIST's  DIVINITY  IH  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.

GaL  ilL  8.

Principle  of  the  Organic  Unity  of  Scripture — ^Its  import-
ance in  the  argument 45

L  Foreshadowings^

a.  Indications  in  the  Old  Testament  of  a  Plurality

of  Persons  within  the  One  Divine  Essence  •  49

^.  The  l^eophanies ;  their  import     •        •        •  52
y .  The  Divine  *  Wisdom  *

1.  in  the  Hebrew  Canon    •        •         •        •  60

2.  in  the  later  Greek  Sapiential  Books       •  62

3.  in  Philo  Judaeus 63

Contrast  between  Philo  and  the  New  Testament        •     69
Probable  Providential  purpose  of  Philo's  speculations  •     7 1

II.  Predictions  and  Announcements-*

Hope  in  a  fature,  a  moral  necessity  for  men  and  nations     7  3
Secured  to  Israel  in  the  doctrine  of  an  expected
Messiah 76

Four  stages  observable  in  the  Messianic  doctrine—*

a«  From  the  Protevangelium  to  the  death  of  Moses     79

/3,  Age  of  David  and  Solomon   •        •        •        .80

y.  From  Isaiah  to  Malachi         .         .         ,         .84

d.  After  Malachi 93

Contrast  between  the  original  doctrine  and  the  se-
cularized form  of  it 94

Christ  was  rejected  for  appealing  from  the  debased
to  the  original  doctrine 94

Conclusion :  The  foregoing  argument  illustrated-—

1.  from  the  emphatic  Monotheism  of  the  Old

Testament 95

2.  from  its  frdl  description  of  Christ's  Manhood  .     97

Christ's  appeal  to  the  Old  Testament        •        •        •98^


Analysis  of  the  Lectures.  xxxv

LECTUKE  IIL

ouB  loiid's  woek  in  the  woeld  a  witness  to  his  divinity.

St,  Matt.  xiii.  54-56.

PAOB

L  Our  Lord's  *Plan*  (caution  as  to  the  use  of  the  ex-
pression)         100

Its  substance — ^the   formation  of  a  world-wide  spi-
ritual society,  in  the  form  of  a  kingdom        •         •     1 01

It  is  set  forth  in  His  Discourses  and  Parables  •        .102

Its  two  leading  characteristics—

a.  originality 107

^.  *  audacity' 115

IL  Success  of  our  Lord's  *  Plan ' —

1.  The  verdict  of  Church  history     •        .        .120

2.  Objections  from  losses  and  difficulties,  con-

sidered     123

3.  Internal  empire  of  Christ  over  souls     .         .127

4.  External  results  of  His  work  observable  in

human  society 133

m.  How  to  account  for  the  success  of  our  Lord's  *  Plan'-^

1.  Not  by  reference  to  the  growth  of  other

Keligions 134

2.  Not  by  the  *  causes'  assigned  by  Gibbon       .     137
^.  Not  by  the  hypothesis  of  a  favourable  crisis .     138

which  ignores  the  hostility  both  of  a.  Judaism     139

and  0.  Paganism     141
But  only  by  the  belief  in,  and  truth  of  Christ's  Divinity     147

LECTUEE    IV.

0T7E  LOED's   divinity  AS  WITNESSED  BY   HIS   CONSCIOUSNESS.

St.  John  X.  33.

The  *  Christ  of  history  *  none  other  than  the  *  Christ  of

dogma'     •        • 154

c  2


xxxvi  A  nalysis  of  the  Lectures.

PAOS

A.  The  Miracles  of  the  Gospel  History —

Their  bearing  upon  the  question  of  Christ's  Person  •     155
Christ's  Moral  Perfection  bound  up  with  their  reality     162

B.  Our  Lord's  Self-assertion 163

I.  First  stage  of  His  Teaching  chiefly  Ethical      •         .164

marked  by  a.  silence  as  to  any  moral  defect.        •     165

iS.  intense  authoritatiyeness         •        .169

n.  Second  stage:  increasing  Self-assertion  •         .172

which  is  justified  by  dogmatic  revelations  of  His

Divinity 179

a.  in  His  claim  of  co-equality  with  the  Father  181
/3.  in  His  assertion  that  He  is  essentially  one

with  the  Father 185

y.  in  His  references  to  His  actual  Pre-exist-

ence 189

Ground  of  Christ's  condemnation  by  the  Jews       .  193

m.  Christ's  Self-assertion  viewed  in  its  bearing  upon
His  Human  Character :

His  I.  Sincerity 195

2.  Unselfishness 197

3.  Humility 198

The  argument  necessarily  assumes  the  form  of  a
great  alternative     ••••••    206

LECTUKE    V.

THB  DOCTBIKB  OF   OHBISX'S  DIVINITT  IK  THE  WSITIN6S  OF

8T.  JOHN.

1  St.  John  i.  I-3,

St.  John's  Gospel '  the  battle-field '  of  the  New  Testament     209

L  Ancient  and  modem  objections  to  its  claims     •        •     210

Witness  of  the  second  century         •        •        •        .212

Its  distinctive  internal  features  may  be  explained
generally  by  its  threefold  purpose^

1.  Supplementary  •        •        •        •        •        •221

2.  Polemical  •••••••     222

3.  Dogmatic  •••••••    224


Analysis  of  the  Lectures.  xxxvii

FAOE

n.  It  is  a  Life  of  the  Eternal  Word  made  flesh

Doctrine  of  the  Eternal  Word  in  the  Prologue  .         .228

Manifestation  of  the  Word,  as  possessing  the  Divine
Perfeclions

of  I.  Life 232

2.  Love 233

3.  Light 233

The  Word  identical  with  the  only-begotten  Son        •     235

EEL  It  is  in  doctrinal  and  moral  unison  with—

1.  The  Epistles  of  St.  John      •        •        •        .240

2.  The  Apocalypse 245

lY.   Its  Christology  is  in  essential  unison  with  that  of  the

Synoptists.     Observe —  247

1.  their  use  of  the  title  '  Son  of  God'       •         •     249

2.  their  account  of  Christ's  Nativity        •        «     250

3.  their  report  of  His  Doctrine  and  Work,  and     252

4.  of  His  eschatological  discourses   •         •         .256

Sununary       •         • 257

V,  It  incurs  the  objection  that  a  God-Man  is  philosophi-
cally incredible 258

This  objection  misapprehends  the  Scriptural  and  Ca-
tholic Doctrine  .......     259

Mysteriousness  of  our  composite  nature  illustrative  of
the  Incarnation 267

VI.  St.  John's  writings  oppose  an  insurmountable  barrier

to  the  Theory  of  a  Deification  by  Enthusiasm        •     269

Significance  of  St.  John's  witness  to  the  Divinity  of
Christ        ••••••••     276


C3


xxxviii  Analysis  of  the  Lectures.


LECTUEE    V.L

OUB  LOBD'S   divinity   as   taught   by   ST.  JAMES,    ST.  FETEB,

AND   ST.  PAUL,

Gal.  ii.  9.

PAOl

St.  John's  Cliristology  not  an  intellectual  idiosyncrasy     .  279

The  Apostles  present  One  Doctrine  under  various  forms  •  281
I.  St.  James's  Epistle —

1.  presupposes  the  Christology  of  St.  Paul        •  285

2.  implies  a  high  Christology  by  incidental  ex-

pressions   •     290

n.  St.  Peter—

1.  leads  his  hearers  up  to  understand  "Christ's

true  dignity,  in  his  Missionary  Sermons     .     294

2.  exhibits  Christ's  Godhead  more  fully,  in  his

Epistles 297

in.  St.  Jude's  Epistle  implies  that  Christ  is  God         •    305

IV.  St.  Paul—

1.  form  of  his  Christology  compared  with  that

of  St.  John 306

prominent  place  given  by  him  to  the  truths

a.  of  our  Lord's  true  Mediating  Manhood     306
/3.  of  the  Unity  of  the  Divine  Essence    .     310

2.  Passages  from  St.  Paul  asserting  the  Divinity

of  Christ  in  terms     .         •         •         •         .     314

3.  A  Divine  Christ  implied  in  the  general  teaching

of  St.  Paul's  Missionary  Sermons  .         .328
of  St.  Paul's  Epistles     .         .         .         •     33^

4.  And  in  some  leading  features  of  that  teach-

ing, as  in

a.  his  doctrine  of  Faith         •         •  •345

jS.  his  account  of  Regeneration      .  •     35^

y.  his  attitude  towards  the  Judaizers  •     354

V.  Contrasts  between  the  Apostles  do  but  enhance  the

force  of  their  common  faith  in  a  Divine  Christ      •     356


A i


Analysis  of  the  Lectures.


xxxix


LECTUEE    VII.


THE   HOMOOUSION.


Tit.  i.  9.

Vitality  of  doctrines,  how  tested  •  •  •  •  •
Doctrine  of  Christ's  Divinity  strengthened  by  opposition  .
Objections  urged  in  modern  times  against  the  Homoousion
Real  justification  of  the  Homoousion —

I.  The  ante-Nicene  Church  adored  Christ  •  •  •
Adoration  of  Jesus  Christ

1.  during  His  earthly  Life       •         •  •  .

2.  by  the  Church   of  the  Apostles  after  His

Ascension

Characteristics  of  the  Adoration  of  Christ  in  the
Apostolic  Age —

a.  It  was  not  combined  with  any  worship

of  creatures      •         <         .         .         .

jS.  It  was  really  the  worship  due  to  God   •

y.  It  was  nevertheless  addressed  to  Christ's

Manhood,  as  being  united  to  His  Deity

3.  by  the  post- Apostolic  Church,

in  sub- Apostolic  Age        •         •  •         •

in  later  part  of  Second  Century  •

in  Third  Century     •         •         .  •         •

expressed  by  hymns  and  doxologies  •

and  signally  at  Holy  Communion  •

assailed  by  Pagan  sarcasms        .  •         •

embodied  in  last  words  of  martyrs  •

inconsistently  retained  by  Arians  •
and  even  by  early  Socinians

n.  The  ante-Nicene  Church  spoke  of  Christ  as  Divine

Value  of  testimony  of  martyrs .         •         •         •
Similar  testimony  of  theologians       •
Their  language  not  mere  *  rhetoric '  .         •

Objection  from  doubtful  statements  of  some  ante-
Nicenes      •        •        •


FAGS

360
365

366

371
374


384
385

386


387
388

390
393
396

398
406

411

412

414

414
419

425
426


xl  Analysts  of  the  Lectures.

PAGB

Answer  :  a.  They  had  not  grasped  all  the  intellectual

bearings  of  the  faith .         .         .         .428

/3.  They  were  anxious  to  put  strongly  for-
ward the  Unity  of  God   ' .         .         •431

y.  The  Church's  real  mind  not  doubtful     .     432

in.  The  Homoousion

a.  not  a  development  in  the  sense  of  an  enlarge-
ment of  the  faith  .         .         •         -435
/3.  necessary  i.  in  the  Arian  struggle        •         •443
2.  in  our  own  times      •         •         •     445


LECTUEE   Vm.

BOMB  CONSEQUENCES  OF  THE  DOCTBINE  OF  OTJB  LOBD'S  DIVINITY.

Eom.  viii.  32.

Theologymustbe,  within  limits, 'inferential'.         .         .     449
What  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Divinity  involves        •         "450
I.  Conservative  force  of  the  doctrine—

1.  It  protects  the  Idea  of  Gk)d  in  human  thought,     452

a.  which  Deism  cannot  guard    .  •  .452

i9.  and  which  Pantheism  destroys  •  •     45^

2.  It  secures  the  true  dignity  of  Man  .  •  •459

n.  Illuminative  force  of  the  doctrine —

a.  It  implies  Christ's  Infallibility  as  a  Teacher  .     461
Objections  from  certain  terts    .         •         •     464

1.  St.  Luke  ii.  52  considered         •         •     464

2.  St.  Mark  xiii.  32  considered     .         .     466

A  single  limitation  of  knowledge  in  Christ's
Human  Soul  apparently  indicated    •         •4^7
admitted  by  great  Fathers    •         •         •     468
does  not  involve  Agnoetism  .         •         •     470
nor  Nestorianism  ....     471

is  consistent  with  the  practical  immensity

of  Christ's  human  knowledge     .         •47^
is  distinct  from,  and  does  not  imply  fal-
libility, still  less  actual  error     .         •475

Application  to  our  Lord's  sanction  of  the
Pentateuch 476


\


Analysis  of  tJu  Lectures^  xli

PAOI

iS.  It  explains  the  atoning  virtue  of  Christ's  death     480

7.  It  explains  the  supematural  power  of  the

Sacraments 487

h.  It  in*a(liates  the  meaning  of  Christ's  kingly

office       •••••••    493

ni.  Ethical  fruitfolness  of  the  doctrine^

Objection — that  a  Divine  Christ  supplies  no  standard
for  our  imitation 494

Answer — i.  An  approximate  imitation  of   Christ
securecL        ••••••

cu  by  the  reality  of  His  Manhood       .    494
iS.  by  the  grace  which  flows  from  Him

as  Gk)d  and  Man        •         •         .     495
s«  Belief  in  Christ's  Gk>dhead  has  propa-
gated virtues,  unattainable  by  pagan-
ism and  naturalism —

a.  Purity     •        •        •        •        •    496
fi.  Humiliiy  •        «        •        •     499

7.  Charity    •        •        •        •        •    502

Becapitulation  of  the  argument      •        •        •        •        •     505

Faith  in  a  Divine  Christi  the  strength  of  the  Church
under  present  dangers 506

Conclusion    ••••••«••    508


THE    LECTURES


LECTURE  I.


THE  QUESTION  BEFORE  US.

fThen  Jesus  came  into  the  coaste  of  Casarea  Philippi,  He  ashed  His
disciples,  saying.  Whom  do  men  say  that  I  the  Son  of  Man  am  f  And
they  said.  Some  say  that  Thou  art  John  the  Baptist:  some,  EUas ;
and  others,  Jeremias,  or  one  of  the  Prophets.  He  saith  unto  them,
But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am  /~St.  Matt.  zvi.  13.

Thus  did  our  Lord  propose  to  His  first  followers  the  mo-
mentous question,  which  for  eighteen  centuries  has  riveted  the
eye  of  thinking  and  adoring  Christendom.  The  material  set-
ting, if  we  may  so  term  it,  of  a  great  intellectual  or  moral
event  ever  attracts  the  interest  and  lives  in  the  memory  of
men;  and  the  Evangelist  is  careful  to  note  that  the  question
of  our  Lord  was  asked  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Caesarea  Phi-
lippi. Jesus  Christ  had  reached  the  northernmost  point  of  His
joumeyings.  He  was  close  to  the  upper  source  of  the  Jordan,
and  at  the  base  of  the  majestic  mountain  which  forms  a  natural
barrier  to  the  Holy  Land  at  its  northern  extremity.  His
eye  rested  upon  a  scenery  in  the  more  immediate  foreground,
which  from  its  richness  and  variety  has  been  compared  by
travellers  to  the  Italian  Tivoli ».  Yet  there  belonged  to  this
spot  a  higher  interest  than  any  which  the  beauty  of  merely
inanimate  or  irrational  nature  can  furnish;  it  bore  visible
traces  of  the  hopes,  the  errors,  and  the  struggles  of  the  human
soul.  Around  a  grotto  which  Greek  settlers  had  assigned
to  the  worship  of  the  sylvan  Pan,  a  Pagan  settlement  had
gradually  formed  itself.  Herod  the  Great  had  adorned  the
spot  with  a  temple  of  white  marble,  dedicated  to  his  patron
Augustus ;  and  more  recently,  the  rising  city,  enlarged  and
beautified  by  PhOip  the   tetrarch,  had   received  a  new  name

*  Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine,  p.  397.
[  LECT.  I  ]  B


Where  the  question  was  raised.


which  combined  the  memory  of  the  Caesar  Tiberius  with  that
of  the  local  potentate.  It  is  probable  that  our  Lord  at  least
had  the  city  in  view  ^,  even  if  He  did  not  enter  it.  He  was
standing  on  the  geographical  frontier  of  Judaism  and  Heathen-
dom. Paganism  was  visibly  before  Him  in  each  of  its  two
most  typical  forms  of  perpetual  and  world-wide  degradation.
It  was  burying  its  scant  but  not  utterly  lost  idea  of  an  Eternal
Power  and  Divinity  c  beneath  a  gross  materialistic  nature-
worship  ;  and  it  was  prostituting  the  sanctities  of  the  human
conscience  to  the  lowest  purposes  of  an  unholy  and  tyrannical
statecraft.  And  behind  and  around  our  Lord  was  that  peculiar
people,  of  whom,  as  concerning  the  flesh.  He  came  Himself^,
and  to  which  His  first  followers  belonged.  Israel  too  was
there;  alone  in  her  memory  of  a  past  history  such  as  no
other  race  could  boast;  alone  in  her  sense  of  a  present  de-
gradation, political  and  moral,  such  as  no  other  people  could
feel ;  alone  in  her  strong  expectation  of  a  Deliverance  which
to  men  who  were  'aliens  from'  her  sacred  *  commonwealth '
seemed  but  the  most  chimerical  of  delusions.  On  such  a  spot
does  Jesus  Christ  raise  the  great  question  which  is  before
us  in  the  text,  and  this,  as  we  may  surely  believe,  not  without
a  reference  to  the  several  wants  and  hopes  and  efforts  of  man-
kind thus  visibly  pictured  around  Him.  How  was  the  human
conscience  to  escape  from  that  political  violence  and  from
that  degrading  sensualism  which  had  riveted  the  yoke  of
Pagan  superstition?  How  was  Israel  to  learn  the  true  drift
and  purpose  of  her  marvellous  past  ?  How  was  she  to  be  really
reUeved  of  her  burden  of  social  and  moral  misery  %  How  were
her  high  anticipations  of  a  brighter  future  to  be  explained
and  justified  1  And  although  that  '  middle  wall  of  partition,'
which  so  sharply  divided  off  her  inward  and  outward  life  from
that  of  Gentile  humanity,  had  been  built  up  for  such  high
and  necessary  ends  by  her  great  inspired  iLgiver,  did  not
such  isolation  also  involve  manifest  counterbalancing  risks
and  loss?  was  it  to  be  eternal?  could  it,  might  it  be  *  broken
down '?  These  questions  could  only  be  answered  by  some  further
Revelation,  larger  and  clearer  than  that  already  possessed  by
Israel,^  and  absolutely  new  to  Heathendom,  "fliey  demanded
some  nearer,  fuller,  more  persuasive   self-unveiling  than  any

^  Dean  Stanley  surmises  that  the  rock  on  which  was  placed  the  Temple
of  Augustus  may  possibly  have  determined  the  form  of  our  Lord^s  promise
to  St.  Peter  in  St.  Matt.  xvi.  i8.    Sinai  and  Palestine,  p.  399.

c  Eom.  i.  20.  *  Ibid.  ix.  5.

[lect.


Religion  and  Theology.


which  the  Merciful  and  Abnighty  God  had  as  yet  vouchsafed
to  His  reasonable  creatures.  May  not  then  the  suggestive
scenery  of  Csesarea  Philippi  have  been  chosen  by  our  Lord,
as  well  fitted  to  witness  that  solemn  enquiry  in  the  full  answer
to  which  Jew  and  Gentile  were  aHke  to  find  a  rich  inheritance
of  light,  peace  and  freedom  %  Jesus  *  asked  His  disciples,  saying,
Whom  do  men  say  that  I  the  Son  of  Man  am  V

Let  us  pause  to  mark  the  significance  of  the  fact  that  our
Lord  Himself  proposes  this  consideration  to  His  disciples  and
to  His  Church.

It  has  been  often  maintained  of  late  that  tbe  teaching  of
Jesus  Christ  Himself  differs  fi:om  that  of  His  Apostles  and  of
their  successors,  in  that  He  only  taught  religion,  while  they
have  taught  dogmatic  theology®.

This  statement  appears  to  proceed  upon  a  presumption  that
religion  and  theology  can  be  separated,  not  merely  in  idea
and  for  the  moment,  by  some  process  of  definition,  but  per-
manently and  in  the  world  of  fact.  What  then  is  religion  1
If  you  say  that  religion  is  essentially  thought  whereby  man
unites  himself  to  the  Eternal  and  Unchangeable  Being  ^,  it
is  at  least  plain  that  the  object-matter  of  such  a  religious
activity  as  this  is  exactly  identical  with  the  object-matter
of  theology.  Nay  more,  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  a  re-
ligious life  is  simply  a  life  of  theological  speculation.  K  you
make  religion  to  consist  in  *the  knowledge  of  our  practical
duties  considered  as  God's  commandments «,'  your  definition
irresistibly  suggests  God  in  His  capacity  of  universal  Legis-
lator, and  it  thus  carries  the  earnestly  and  honestly  religious
man  into  the  heart  of  theology.     If  you  protest  that  religion

•  Eaur  more  cautiously  says :  *  Wenn  wir  mit  der  Lehre  Jesu  die  Lehre
des  Apostels  Paulus  zusammenhalten,  so  fallt  sogleich  der  grosse  Unter-
scliied  in  die  Augen,  welcher  hier  stattfindet  zwischen  einer  noch  in  der
Form  ein&t  allgemeinen  Frincips  sich  aussprechenden  Lehre,  und  einem
Bclion  zur  Bestimmtheit  des  Dogina*s  gestalteten  Lehrbegriflf.*  Vorlesungen
iiber  N.  T.  Theologie,  p.  123.  But  it  would  be  diflBcult  to  shew  that  the
*  Universal  Principle  *  does  not  involve  and  embody  a  number  of  definite
dogmas.  Baur  would  not  admit  that  St.  John  xiv.,  xv.,  xvi.  contain  words
really  spoken  by  Jesus  Christ:  but  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  itself  is
guflficiently  dogmatic.     Cf.  St.  Matt.  vi.  4,  6,  14,  26,  30;  vii.  21,  33.

'  So  Fichte,  quoted  by  Klee,  Dogmatik,  c.  3.  With  this  definition  those
of  Schelling  and  Hegel  substantially  concur.  It  is  unnecessary  to  remark
that  thought  is  only  one  element  of  true  religion.

«  So  Kant,  ibid.  This  definition  (i)  reduces  religion  to  being  merely
an  affair  of  the  understanding,  and  (2)  identifies  its  substance  with  that
of  morality.

i]  B  a


Religion  and  Theology.


has  nothing  to  do  with  intellectual  skill  in  projecting  defini-
tions, and  that  it  is  at  bottom  a  feeling  of  tranquil  dependence
upon  some  higher  Power  ^  you  cannot  altogether  set  aside
the  capital  question  which  arises  as  to  the  nature  of  that
Power  upon  which  religion  thus  depends.  Even  if  you  should
contend  that  feeling  is  the  essential  element  in  religion,  still
you  cannot  seriously  maintain  that  the  reality  of  that  to  which
such  feeling  relates  is  altogether  a  matter  of  indiflFerence  >.
For  the  adequate  satisfaction  of  this  religious  feeling  lies  not
in  itself  but  in  its  object ;  and  therefore  it  is  impossible  to
represent  religion  as  indifferent  to  the  absolute  truth  of  that
object,  and  in  a  purely  sesthetical  spirit,  concerned  only  with
the  beauty  of  the  idea  before  it,  even  in  a  case  where  the
reflective  understanding  may  have  condemned  that  idea  as
logically  false.  Religion,  to  support  itself,  must  rest  consciously
on  its  object :  the  intellectual  apprehension  of  that  object  as
true  is  an  integral  element  of  religion.  In  other  words,  religion
is  practically  inseparable  from  theology.  The  religious  Ma-
hommedan  sees  in  Allah  a  being  to  whose  absolute  decrees  he
must  implicitly  resign  himself;  a  theological  dogma  then  is
the  basis  of  the  specific  Mahommedan  form  of  religion.  A  child
reads  in  the  Sexmon  on  the  Mount  that  our  Heavenly  Father
takes  care  of  the  sparrows,  and  of  the  lilies  of  the  field  i,
and  the  child  prays  to  Him  accordingly.  The  truth  upon
which  the  chil^  rests  is  the  dogma  of  the  Divine  Providence,
which  encourages  trust,  and  warrants  prayer,  and  lies  at  the
root  of  the  child's  religion.  In  short,  religion  cannot  exist
without  some  view  of  its  object,  namely,  God ;  but  no  sooner
do  you  introduce  any  intellectual  aspect  whatever  of  God,
nay,  the  bare  idea  that  such  a  Being  exists,  than  you  have
before  you  not  merely  a  religion,  but  at  least,  in  some  sense,,
a  theology'^,

^  'Abhilngigkeitsgefiilil.*  Schleiermaclier's  account  of  religion  has  been
widely  adopted  in  our  own  day  and  country.  But  (i)  it  ignores  the  active
side  of  true  religion,  (2)  it  loses  sight  of  man*s  freedom  no  less  than  of
God*s,  and  (3)  it  may  imply  nothing  better  than  a  passive  submission  to
the  laws  of  the  Universe,  without  any  belief  whatever  as  to  their  Author.

^  Domer  gives  an  account  of  this  extreme  theory  as  maintained  by  De
Wette  in  his  Religion  und  Theologie,  181 5.  De  Wette  appears  to  have
followed  out  some  hints  of  Herder  s,  while  applying  Jacobi  s  doctrine  of
feeling,  as  'the  immediate  perception  of  the  Divine,*  and  the  substitute
for  the  practical  reason,  to  theology.  Cf.  Domer,  Person  Ghristi,  Zw.  Th.
p.  096,  sq^.  J  St.  Matt.  vi.  25-30.

^  Religion  includes  in  its  complete  idea  the  knowledge  and  the  worship
of  God.     (S.Aug,  de  Util.  Ored.  c.  la.  n.  27.)    Cicero  gives  the  limited

[  LBCT.


Place  of  Christ  in  His  own  doctrine.  5

Had  our  Lord  revealed  no  one  truth  except  the  Parental
character  of  God,  while  at  the  same  time  He  insisted  upon
a  certain  morality  and  posture  of  the  soul  as  proper  to  man's
reception  of  this  revelation,  He  would  have  been  the  Author
of  a  theology  as  well  as  of  a  religion.  In  point  of  fact,  besides
teaching  various  truths  concerning  Qod,  which  were  unknown
before,  or  at  most  only  guessed  at,  He  did  that  which  in  a
merely  human  teacher  of  high  purpose  would  have  been  morally
intolerable.  He  drew  the  eyes  of  men  towards  Himself.  He
claimed  to  be  something  more  than  the  Founder  of  a  new
religious  spirit,  or  than  the  authoritative  promulgator  of  a
higher  truth  than  men  had  yet  known.  He  taught  true  religion
indeed  as  no  man  had  yet  taught  it,  but  He  bent  the  religious
spirit  which  He  had  summoned  into  life  to  do  homage  to
Himself^  as  being  its  lawful  and  adequate  Object.  He  taught
the  highest  theology,  but  He  also  placed  Himself  at  the  very
centre  of  His  doctrine,  and  He  announced  Himself  as  sharing
the  very  throne  of  that  God  Whom  He  so  clearly  unveiled.
If  He  was  the  organ  and  author  of  a  new  and  final  revelation,
He  also  claimed  to  be  the  very  substance  and  material  of  His
own  message  ;  His  most  startling  revelation  was  Himself.

These  are  statements  which  will  be  justified,  it  is  hoped,
hereafter  1 ;  and,  if  some  later  portions  of  our  subject  are  for
a  moment  anticipated,  it  is  only  that  we  may  note  the  true  and
extreme  significance  of  our  Lord's  question  in  the  text.  But
let  us  also  ask  ourselves  what  would  be  the  duty  of  a  merely
human  teacher  of  the  highest  moral  aim,  entrusted  with  a  great
spiritual  mission  and  lesson  for  the  benefit  of  mankind  1  The
example  of  St.  John  Baptist  is  an  answer  to  this  enquiry.  Such
a  teacher  would  represent  himself  as  a  mere  <  voice'  crying  aloud
m  the  moral  wilderness  around  him,  and  anxious,  beyond  aught
else,  to  shroud  his  own  insignificant  person  beneath  the  majesty
of  his  message.  Not  to  do  this  would  be  to  proclaim  his  own
moral  degradation;   it  would  be  a  public  confession  that  he


sense  wluch  Pagan  Rome  attached  to  the  word :  '  Qui  omnia  qu8B  ad  cultum
deorum  pertinerent,  diligenter  retractarent  et  tanquam  relegerent,  sunt  dicti
religiosiy  ex  relegendo.*  (Do  Nat.  Deorum,  ii.  a 8.)  Lactantius  gives  the
Christian  form  of  the  idea,  whatever  may  be  thought  of  his  etymology:
'Vinculo  pietatis  obstricti  Deo,  et  religati  sumus,  unde  ipsa  religio  nomen
accepit.'  (Inst.  Div.  iv.  34.)  Beligion  is  the  bond  between  Grod  and  man*s
whole  nature:  in  God  the  heart  finds  its  happiness,  the  reason  its  rule
of  truth,  the  will  its  freedom.
'  See  Lecture  IV.

»]     •


The  'Son  of  Man  I


could  only  regard  a  great  spiritual  work  for  others  as  furnishing
an  opportunity  for  adding  to  his  own  social  capital,  or  to  his
official  reputation.  When  then  Jesus  Christ  so  urgently  draws
the  attention  of  men  to  His  Personal  Self,  He  places  us  in  a
dilemma.  We  must  either  say  that  He  was  unworthy  of  His
own  words  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  ™,  or  we  must  confess
that  He  has  some  right,  and  is  under  the  pressure  of  some
necessity,  to  do  that  which  would  be  morally  insupportable  in  a
merely  human  teacher.  Now  if  this  right  and  necessity  exist,
it  follows  that  when  our  Lord  bids  us  to  consider  His  Personal
rank  in  the  hierarchy  of  beings.  He  challenges  an  answer.
Eemark  moreover  that  in  the  popular  sense  of  the  term  the
answer  is  not  less  a  theological  answer  if  it  be  that  of  the
Ebionitic  heresy  than  if  it  be  the  language  of  the  Nicene  Creed.
The  Christology  of  the  Church  is  in  reality  an  integral  part  of
its  theology;  and  Jesus  Christ  raises  the  central  question  of
Christian  theology  when  He  asks,  *Whom  do  men  say  that  I
the  Son  of  Man  am  1'

It  may  be  urged  that  our  Lord  is  inviting  attention,  not  to
His  essential  Personality,  but  to  His  assumed  office  as  the  Jewish
Messiah ;  that  He  is,  in  fact,  asking  for  a  confession  of  His
Messiahship.

Now  observe  the  exact  form  of  our  Lord's  question,  as  given
in  St.  Matthew's  Gospel ;  which,  as  Olshausen  has  remarked,  is
manifestly  here  the  leading  narrative :  *  Whom  do  men  say  that
I  the  Son  of  Man  ami*  This  question  involves  an  assertion,
namely,  that  the  Speaker  is  the  Son  of  Man.  What  did  He
mean  by  that  designation  %  It  is  important  to  remember  that
with  two  exceptions'*  the  title  is  only  applied  to  our  Lord  in
the  New  Testament  by  His  own  lips.  It  was  His  self-chosen
Name :  why  did  He  choose  it  %

First,  then,  it  was  in  itself,  to  Jewish  ears,  a  clear  assertion  of
Messiahship.  In  the  vision  of  Daniel  '  One  like  unto  the  Son  of
Man®  had  come  with  the  clouds  of  heaven,  ....  and  there  was
given  Him  dominion  and  glory  and  a  kingdom.*  This  kingdom
succeeded  in  the  prophet's  vision  to  four  inhuman  kingdoms,
correspondent  to  the  four  typical  beasts ;  it  was  the  kingdom  of
a  prince,  human  indeed,  and  yet  from  heaven.     In  consequence

"»  Observe  the  principle  involved  in  St.  Matt.  vi.  i-8.
n  Acts  vii.  56;  Rev.  i.  13,  xiv.  14.

**  ttJ3H  113 — &s  wibs  &vdp(&Trov,  LXX.  Dan.  vii.  13,  sqq.  Cf.  Ezek.  i.  26,
and  J.  B.  Carpzovii,  Diss,  de  Filio  Hominis  ad  Dan.  vii.,  in  Thesaurus
Theologico-Philologicus,  p.  887,  sqq.

[  LBCT.


The  '  Son  of  Man!


of  this  prophecy,  the  'Son  of  Man'  hecame  a  popular  and
official  title  of  the  Messiah.  In  the  Book  of  Enoch,  which  Ib
assigned  with  the  highest  probability  by  recent  criticism  to  the
second  century  before  our  eraP,  this  and  kindred  titles  are
continually  applied  to  Messiah.  Our  Lord  in  His  prophecy  over
Jerusalem  predicted  that  at  the  last  day  *  they  shall  see  the  Son
of  Man  coming  in  the  clouds  with  power  and  great  glory  Q.*
And  when  standing  at  the  tribunal  of  Caiaphas  He  thus  ad-
dressed His  judges :  *  I  say  unto  you,  hereafter  shall  ye  see  the
Son  of  Man  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in
the  clouds  of  heaven  ^'  In  these  passages  there  is  absolutely
no  room  for  doubtiug  either  His  distinct  reference  to  the  vision
in  Daniel,  or  the  claim  which  the  title  Son  of  Man  was  intended
to  assert.  As  habitually  used  by  our  Lord,  it  was  a  constant
setting  forth  of  His  Messianic  dignity,  in  the  face  of  the  people
of  Israel  ■.

Why  indeed  He  chose  this  one,  out  of  the  many  titles  of
Messiah,  is  a  further  question,  a  brief  consideration  of  which
lies  in  the  track  of  the  subject  before  us.

It  would  not  appear  to  be  sufficient  to  reply  that  the  title
Son  of  Man  is  the  most  unpresuming,  the  least  glorious  of  the
titles  of  Messiah,  and  was  adopted  by  our  Lord  as  such.  For  if
such  a  title  claimed,  as  it  did  claim,  Messiahship,  the  precise
etymological  force  of  the  word  could  not  neutralize  its  current
and  recognised  value  in  the  estimation  of  the  Jewish  people.
The  claim  thus  advanced  was  independent  of  any  analysis  of  the
exact  sense  of  the  title  which  asserted  it.  The  title  derived  its
popular  force  from  the  office  with  which  it  was  associated.  To
adopt  the  title,  however  humble  might  be  its  strict  and  intrinsic
meaning,  was  to  claim  the  great  office  to  which  in  the  minds
of  men  it  was  indissolubly  attached.

P  Cf.  DiUmann,  Das  Bnoh  Enoch,  1853,  p.  157.  Dillmann  places  the
book  in  the  time  of  John  Hyicanus,  b.o.  130-109.  Dr.  Pusey  would
assign  to  it  a  still  earlier  date.  Cf.  Daniel  the  Prophet,  p.  390,  note  a,  and
391,  note  3.

«  St.  Matt.  Txiv.  30.  »  Ibid.  xxvi.  64.

■  '  Den  Namen  des  vibi  rov  Mp^ov  gebrancht  Jesns  Selbst  auf  eine  so
eigenthtbnliche  Weise  von  Sich,  dass  man  nur  annehmen  kann,  Er  habe  mit
jenem  Namen,  wie  man  auch  seine  Bedeutung  genauer  bestimmen  mag,
irgend  eine  Beziehnng  auf  die  Messiasidee  ausdriicken  wollen.*  Baur,  Das
Christenthum,  p.  37.  Cf.  also  the  same  author's  Yorlesungen  Uber  Neu-
testamentliche  Theolo^e,  p.  76,  sqq.  In  St.  Matt.  x.  33,  xiii.  37-4I1  the
official  force  of  the  tiUe  is  obvious.  That  it  was  a  simple  periphrasiB  for
the  personal  pronoun,  without  any  reference  to  the  office  or  Person  of  the
Speaker,  is  inconsistent  with  Acts  vii.  56,  and  St.  Matt.  xvi.  13.

0


8  The  '  Son  of  Man:

As  it  had  been  addressed  to  the  prophet  Ezekiel  *,  the  title
Son  of  Man  seemed  to  contrast  the  frail  and  shortlived  life  of
men  with  the  boundless  strength  and  the  eternal  years  of  the
Infinite  God.  And  as  applied  to  Himself  by  Jesus,  it  doubtless
expresses  a  real  Humanity,  a  perfect  and  penetrating  community
of  nature  and  feeling  with  the  lot  of  human  kind.  Thus,  when
our  Lord  says  that  authority  was  given  Him  to  execute  judg-
ment because  He  is  the  Son  of  Man,  it  is  plain  that  the  point
of  the  reason  lies,  not  in  His  being  Messiah,  but  in  His  being
Human.  He  displays  a  genuine  Humanity  which  could  deem
nothing  human  strange,  and  could  be  touched  with  a  feeling  of
the  infirmities  of  the  race  which  He  was  to  judge  ".  But  the
title  Son  of  Man  means  more  than  this  in  its  application  to  our
Lord.  It  does  not  merely  assert  His  real  incorporation  with
our  kind ;  it  exalts  Him  indefinitely  above  us  all  as  the  repre-
sentative, the  ideal,  the  pattern  Man  ^c.  He  is,  in  a  special  sense,
the  Son  of  Mankind,  the  genuine  oflPspring  of  the  race.  His  is
the  Human  Life  which  does  justice  to  the  idea  of  Humanity.
All  human  history  tends  to  Him  or  radiates  from  Him.  He  is
the  point  in  which  humanity  finds  its  unity ;  as  St.  Irenseus
says,  He  *  recapitulates '  it  y.  He  closes  the  earlier  history  of
our  race ;  He  inaugurates  its  future.  Nothing  local,  transient,
individualizing,  national,  sectarian,  dwarfs  the  proportions  of
His  world-embracing  Character ;  He  rises  above  the  parentage,
the  blood,  the  narrow  horizon  which  bounded,  as  it  seemed,
His  Human  Life ;  He  is  the  Archetypal  Man  in  Whose  presence
distinctions  of  race,  intervals  of  ages,  types  of  civQization,
degrees  of  mental  culture  are  as  nothing.  This  sense  of  the
title  seems  to  be  implied  in  such  passages  as  that  in  which
He  contrasts  *  the  foxes  which  have  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the
air  which  have  nests,'  with  *  the  Son  of  Man  Who  hath  not
where  to  lay  His  Head  2.'     It  is  not  the  official  Messiah,  as

*  Di>r]a  i.e.  'mortal.*  (Cf.  Gesen.  in  voc.  Di».)  It  is  so  used  eighty-
nine  times  in  Ezekiel.  Compare  Num.  xxiii.  19 ;  Job  xzy.  6,  xxxy.  8.  la
this  sense  it  occurs  frequently  in  the  plural.  In  Ps.  viii.  4,  5  and  Ixzz.  1 7
it  refers,  at  least  ultimately,  to  our  Lord.

"  St.  John  V.  37 ;  Heb.  iv.  15.

*  *  Urbild  der  Menscheit.*  Neander,  Das  Leben  Jesu  Ohristi,  p.  1 30,  sqq.
Mr.  Keble  draws  out  the  remedial  force  of  the  title  as  'signifying  that
Jesus  was  the  very  seed  of  the  woman,  the  Second  Adam  promised  to  undo
what  the  first  had  done.*    Eucharistical  Adoration,  pp.  31-33.

7  Adv.  Hser.  III.  18.  i.  'Longam  hominum  expositionem  in  Se  Ipso
recapitulavit,  in  compendio  nobis  salutem  prsestans.*

*  St.  Matt.  viii.  30 ;  St.  Luke  ix.  58.

[  LECT.


Real  force  of  our  LorcTs  qtiestion.  9

Buch ;  but  ^  the  fairest  among  the  children  of  men/  the  natural
Prince  and  Leader,  the  very  prime  and  flower  of  human  kind,
Whose  lot  is  thus  harder  than  that  of  the  lower  creatures,  and
iu  Whose  humiliation  humanity  itself  is  humbled  below  the
level  of  its  natural  dignity.

As  the  Son  of  Man  then,  our  Lord  is  the  Messiah;  He  is
a  true  member  of  oiir  human  race,  and  He  is  moreoyer  its
Pattern  and  Eepresentative ;  since  He  fulfils  and  exhausts  that
moral  Ideal  to  which  man's  highest  and  best  aspirations  have
ever  pointed  onward.  Of  these  senses  of  the  term  the  first
was  the  more  popular  and  obvious ;  the  last  would  be  discerned
as  latent  in  it  by  the  devout  reflection  of  His  servants.  For  the
disciples  the  term  Son  of  Man  implied  first  of  all  the  Messiah-
ship  of  their  Master,  and  next,  though  less  prominently,  His
true  Humanity.  When  then  our  Lord  enquires  'Whom  do
men  say  that  I  the  Son  of  Man  am  V  He  is  not  merely  asking
whether  men  admit  what  the  title  Son  of  Man  itself  imports,
that  is  to  say,  the  truth  of  His  Humanity  or  the  truth  of  His
Messiahship.  The  point  of  His  question  is  this'. — what  is  He
besides  being  the  Son  of,  Man  1  As  the  Son  of  Man,  Ho  is
Messiah;  but  what  is  the  Personality  which  sustains  the
Messianic  oflice?  As  the  Son  of  Man,  He  is  truly  Human;
but  what  is  the  Higher  Nature  with  which  this  emphatic  claim
to  Humanity  is  in  tacit,  but  manifest  contrast  ?  What  is  He
in  the  seat  and  root  of  His  Being  %  Is  His  Manhood  a  robe
which  He  has  thrown  around  a  Higher  form  of  pre-existent
Life,  or  is  it  His  all  ?  Has  He  been  in  existence  some  thirty
years  at  most,  or  are  the  august  proportions  of  His  Life  only
to  be  meted  out  by  the  days  of  eternity  ?  *  Whom  say  men
that  I  the  Son  of  Man  am?'

The  disciples  reply,  that  at  that  time,  in  the  public  opinion
of  Galilee,  our  Lord  was,  at  the  least,  a  preternatural  personage.
On  this  point  there  was,  it  would  seem,  a  general  consent.  The
cry  of  a  petty  local  envy  which  had  been  raised  at  Nazareth,
*Is  not  this  the  Carpenter's  Son?*  did  not  fairly  represent  the
matured  or  prevalent  opinion  of  the  people.  The  people  did
not  suppose  that  Jesus  was  in  truth  merely  one  of  themselves,
only  endued  with  larger  powers  and  with  a  finer  religious
instinct.  They  thought  that  His  Personality  reached  back
somehow  into  the  past  of  their  own  wonderful  history.  They
took  Him  for  a  saint  of  ancient  days,  who  had  been  re-invested
with  a  bodily  form.  He  was  the  great  expected  miracle-working
Elijah ;  or  He  was  the  disappointed  prophet  who  had  followed


lo  S^.  Peter  s  Confession.

His  country  to  its  grave  at  the  Captivity;  or  He  was  the
recently-martyred  preacher  and  ascetic  John  the  Baptist;  or
He  was,  at  any  rate,  one  of  the  order  which  for  four
hundred  years  had  been  lost  to  Israel ;  He  was  one  of  the
Prophets.

Our  Lord  turns  from  these  pubHc  misconceptions  to  the
judgment  of  that  little  Body  which  was  already  the  nucleus
of  His  future  Church :  *  But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am  1'  St.  Peter
replies,  in  the  name  of  the  other  disciples  *, '  Thou  art  the  Christ,
the  Son  of  the  Living  God.'  Li  marked  contrast  to  the  popular
hesitation  which  refused  to  recognise  explicitly  the  justice  of
the  claim  so  plainly  put  forward  by  the  assumption  of  the  title
*Son  of  Man,'  the  Apostle  confesses,  *Thou  art  the  Christ.'
But  St.  Peter  advances  a  step  beyond  this  confession,  and  re-
plies to  the  original  question  of  our  Lord,  when  he  adds  '  The
Son  of  the  Living  God.'  Li  the  first  three  Evangelists,  as  well
as  in  St.  John,  this  solemn  designation  expresses  something
more  than  a  merely  theocratic  or  ethical  relationship  to  God  ^.
If  St.  Peter  had  meant  that  Christ  was  the  Son  of  God  solely
in  virtue  of  His  membership  in  the  old  Theocracy,  or  by  reason
of  His  consummate  moral  glory  <5,  the  confession  would  have

»  St.  Chrysostom,  in  loc.,  calls  St.  Peter  rh  ffrSfxa  rSov  i.iro<rr6\uv,  6
Tcanaxov  Oepfids,

^  See  Lect.  V.  p.  346,  sqq.

«  The  title  of  'sons'  i&  used  in  the  Old  Testament  to  express  three
relations  to  Grod.  (i)  Grod  has  entered  into  the  relation  of  Father  to  all
Israel  (Deut.  xxzii.  6;  Isa.  bdii.  16),  whence  he  entitles  Israel  'My  son,*
*My  firstborn*  (Exod.  iv.  22,  23),  when  claiming  the  people  from  Pharaoh ;
and  Ephraim,  'My  dear  son,  a  pleasant  child  *  (Jer.  xxxi.  20),  as  an  earnest
of  restoration  to  Divine  favour.  Thus  the  title  is  used  as  a  motive  to
obedience  (Deut.  xiv.  i ) ;  or  in  reproach  for  ingratitude  (Ibid,  xxxii.  5 ;
Isa.  i.  2,  XXX.  I,  9 ;  Jer.  iii.  14) ;  or  especially  of  such  as  were  God's  sons,
not  in  name  only,  but  in  truth  (Ps.  bcoii.  15 ;  Prov.  xiv.  26 ;  and  perhaps
Isa.  xliii.  6).  (3)  The  title  is  applied  once  to  judges  in  the  Theocracy
(Ps.  Ixxxii.  6),  *  I  have  said.  Ye  are  gods,  and  all  of  you  are  children  of  the
Most  High.*  Here  the  title  refers  to  the  name  Elohim,  given  to  the  judges
as  representing  God  in  the  Theocracy,  and  as  judging  in  His  Name  and  by
His  Authority.  Accordingly  to  go  to  them  for  juc^ment  is  spoken  of  as
going  to  Elohim  (Deut.  xvii.  9).  (3)  The  exact  phrase  '  sons  of  Gfod  *  is,  with
perhaps  one  exception  (Gen.  vi.  3),  used  of  superhuman  beings,  who  until
the  Incarnation  were  more  nearly  like  God  than  were  any  of  the  family
of  men  (Job  i.  6,  ii.  i,  xxxviii.  7).  The  singular,  'My  Son,'  'The  Son,'
is  used  only  in  prophecy  of  the  Messiah  (Ps.  ii.  7,  1 2  ;  and  Acts  xiii.  33 ;
Heb.  i.  5,  V.  5),  and  in  wnat  is  believed  to  have  been  a  Divine  manifestation,
very  probably  of  God  the  Son  (Dan.  iii.  25).  The  line  of  David  being  the
line  of  the  Messiah,  culminating  in  the  Messiah,  as  in  David's  One  perfect
Son,  it  was  said  in  a  lower  sense  of  each  member  of  that  line,  but  in  its

[lbot*


Modern  interest  in  the  subject.  1 1

involved  nothing  distinctive  with  respect  to  Jesus  Christ,  no-
thing that  was  not  in  a  measure  true  of  every  good  Jew,  and
that  may  not  he  truer  far  of  every  good  Christian.  K  St.  Peter
had  intended  only  to  repeat  another  and  a  practically  equivalent
title  of  the  Messiah,  he  would  not  have  equalled  the  earlier
confession  of  a  NathanaeH,  or  have  surpassed  the  suhsequent
admission  of  a  Caiaphas  o.  If  we  are  to  construe  his  language
thus,  it  is  altogether  impossible  to  conceive  why  *  flesh  and
blood '  could  not  have  *  revealed '  to  him  so  obvious  and  trivial
an  inference  from  his  previous  knowledge,  or  why  either  the
Apostle  or  his  confession  should  have  been  solemnly  designated
as  the  selected  Eock  on  which  the  Eedeemer  would  build  His
imperishable  Church.

Leaving  however  a  fuller  discussion  of  the  interpretation  of
this  particular  text,  let  us  note  that  the  question  raised  at
Caesarea  Philippi  is  still  the  great  question  before  the  modem
world.  Whom  do  men  say  now  that  Jesus,  the  Son  of  Man,  is  ?

I.  No  serious  and  thoughtful  man  can  treat  such  a  subject
with  indifference.  I  merely  do  you  justice,  my  brethren,  when
I  defy  you  to  murmur  that  we  are  entering  upon  a  merely
abstract  discussion,  which  has  nothing  in  common  with  modem
human  interests,  congenial  as  it  may  have  been  to  those  whom
some  writers  have  learnt  to  describe  as  the  professional  word-
warriors  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries.  You  would  not  be
guilty  of  including  the  question  of  our  Lord's  Divinity  in  your
catalogue  of  tolerabiles  inejytice.  There  is  that  in  the  Form  of
the  Son  of  Man  which  prevails  to  command  something  more
than  attention,  even  in  an  age  so  conspicuous  for  its  boisterous
self-assertion  as  our  own,  and  in  intellectual  atmospheres  as  far
as  possible  removed  from  the  mind  of  His  believing  and  adoring
Church.  Never  since  He  ascended  to  His  Throne  was  He  the
object  of  a  more  passionate  adoration  than  now;  never  did  He
encounter  the  glare  of  a  hatred  more  intense  and  more  defiant :
and  between  these,  the  poles  of  a  contemplation  incessantly  di-
rected upon  His  Person,  there  are  shades  and  levels  of  thought  and
feeling,  many  and  graduated,  here  detracting  from  the  highest

full  sense  only  of  Messiah,  'I  will  be  to  Him  a  Father,  and  He  shall  be  to
Me  a  Son'  (2  Sam.  vii.  14;  Heb.  i.  5;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  27).  The  application
of  the  title  to  collective  Israel  in  Hos.  xi.  I,  is  connected  by  St.  Matthew
(ii.  15)  with  its  deeper  force  as  used  of  IsraeFs  One  true  Heir  and  Eepre-
sentative.  Cf.  Mill,  Myth.  Interp.  p.  330.  Ck>mpare  too  the  mysterious
intimations  of  Prov.  zzz.  4,  Eodus.  li.  10,  of  a  Divine  Sonship  internal  to
the  Being  of  God.
^  St.  John  i.  49.  •  St.  Matt.  xxvi.  63.


1 2  Christ  and  modern  cultttre.

expressions  of  faith,  there  shrinking  from  the  most  violent
extremities  of  blasphemy.  A  real  indifference  to  the  claims
of  Jesus  Christ  upon  the  thoughts  and  hearts  of  men  is  scarcely
less  condemned  by  some  of  the  erroneous  tendencies  of  our  age
than  by  its  characteristic  excellences.  An  age  which  has  a
genuine  love  of  historical  truth  must  needs  fix  its  eye  on  that
august  Personality  which  is  to  our  European  world,  in  point  of
creative  influence,  what  no  other  has  been  or  can  be.  An  age
which  is  distinguished  by  a  keen  aesthetic  appreciation,  if  not  by
any  very  earnest  practical  culture  of  moral  beauty,  cannot  but
be  enthusiastic  when  it  has  once  caught  sight  of  that  incompar^
able  Life  which  is  recorded  in  the  Gospels.  But  also,  an  anti-
dogmatic  age  is  nervously  anxious  to  attack  dogma  in  its  central
stronghold,  and  to  force  the  Human  Character  and  Work  of  the
Saviour,  though  at  the  cost  of  whatever  violence  of  critical  mani-
pulation, to  detach  themselves  from  the  great  belief  with  which
they  are  indissolubly  associated  in  the  mind  of  Christendom.
And  an  age,  so  impatient  of  the  supernatural  as  our  own,  is
irritated  to  the  highest  possible  point  of  disguised  irritability  by
the  spectacle  of  a  Life  which  is  supernatural  throughout,  which
positively  bristles  with  the  supernatural,  which  begins  with
a  supernatural  birth,  and  ends  in  a  supernatural  ascent  to
heaven,  which  is  prolific  of  physical  miracle,  and  of  which  the
moral  wonders  are  more  startling  than  the  physical.  Thus  it  is
that  the  interest  of  modem  physical  enquiries  into  the  laws  of
the  Cosmos  or  into  the  origin  of  Man  is  immediately  heightened
when  these  enquiries  are  suspected  to  have  a  bearing,  however
indirect,  upon  Christ's  Sacred  Person,  Thus  your  study  of  the
mental  sciences,  aye,  and  of  philology,  ministers  whether  it  will
or  no  to  His  praise  or  His  dishonour,  and  your  ethical  specida-
tions  cannot  complete  themselves  without  raising  the  whole
question  of  His  Authority.  And  such  is  Christ's  place  in
history,  that  a  line  of  demarcation  between  its  civil  and  its
ecclesiastical  elements  seems  to  be  practically  impossible  ;  your
ecclesiastical  historians  are  prone  to  range  over  the  annals  of
the  world,  while  your  professors  of  secular  history  habitually
deal  with  the  central  problems  and  interests  of  theology.

If  Christ  could  have  been  ignored.  He  would  have  been
ignored  in  Protestant  Germany,  when  Christian  Faith  had  been
eaten  out  of  the  heart  of  that  country  by  the  older  Kationalism.
Yet  scarcely  any  German  '  thinker '  of  note  can  be  named  who
has  not  projected  what  is  termed  a  Christology.  The  Christ  of
Kant  is  the  Ideal  of  Moral  Perfection,  and  as  such,  we  are  told,

[lect.


Christ  and  recent  philosophy.  i


J


he  is  to  be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  historical  Jesus,
since  of  this  Ideal  alone,  and  in  a  transcendental  sense,  can  the
statements  of  the  orthodox  creed  be  predicated  C  The  Christ
of  Jacobi  is  a  Beligious  Ideal,  and  worship  addressed  to  the
historical  Jesus  is  denounced  as  sheer  idolatry,  unless  beneath
the  recorded  manifestation  the  Ideal  itself  be  discerned  and
honoured  s.  According  to  Fichte,  on  the  contrary,  the  real  in-
terest of  philosophy  in  Jesus  is  historical  and  not  metaphysical ;
Jesus  first  possessed  an  insight  into  the  absolute  unity  of  the
being  of  man  with  that  of  God,  and  in  revealing  this  insight  He
communicated  the  highest  knowledge  which  man  can  possess  \
Of  the  later  Pantheistic  philosophers,  ScheUing  proclaims  that
the  Christian  theology  is  hopelessly  in  error,  when  it  teaches
that  at  a  particular  moment  of  time  God  became  Incarnate,
since  God  is  '  external  to '  all  time,  and  the  Incarnation  of  God
is  an  eternal  fact.  But  Schelling  contends  that  the  man  Christ
Jesus  is  the  highest  point  or  effort  of  this  eternal  incarnation,
and  the  beginning  of  its  real  manifestation  to  men :  '  none  before
Him  after  such  a  manner  has  revealed  to  man  the  Infinite  ^'
And  the  Christ  of  Hegel  is  not  the  actual  Incarnation  of  God
in  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  but  the  symbol  of  His  incarnation  in
humanity  at  large  i.  Fundamentally  differing,  as  do  these  con-
ceptions, in  various  ways,  from  the  creed  of  the  Church  of
Christ,  they  nevei*theless  represent  so  many  e£foi*t8   of  non-

'  Religion  iimerhatt)  der  Grenzen  der  blossen  Vemunft.  Werke,  Bd.  x.
p.  73,  esp.  p.  142.

<  Schrift  von  den  Grottl.  DIngen,  p.  62,  sqq.

"*  Anweisung  zom  seligen  Leben  Vorl.  6.     Werke,  Bd.  ▼.  p.  482.

>  Yorlesongen  tiber  die  methode  des  Akad.  Studien.  Werke,  Bd.  t.
p.  398,  8(|q.

i  Bel.  Phil.  Bd.  ii.  p.  263.  Thif  idea  ib  developed  by  Strauss.  See  his
Glaubenslehre,  ii.  209,  sqq. ;  and  Leben  Jesu,  Auf.  2,  Bd.  ii.  p.  739,  sqq.
'Der  SchlUssel  der  ganzen  Ghristologie  ist,  das  als  Subject  der  Pradikate,
welche  die  Kirche  Ghristo  beilegt,  statt  eines  Individuums  eine  Idee,  aber
eine  reale,  nicht  Kantisch  unwirkliche  gesetzt  wird.  •  .  .  Die  Mensoheit  ist
die  Vereinigung  der  beiden  Naturen,  der  Menschgewordene  Gott . . .  Durch
den  Glauben  an  diesen  Christus,  namentlich  an  Seinen  Tod  und  seine
Anferstehung  wird  der  Mensch  vor  Grott  gerecht,  d.  h.,  durch  die  Belebung
der  Idee  der  Menscheit  in  sich/  &o.  Feuerbach  has  carried  this  forward  into
pure  materialism,  and  he  openly  scorns  and  denonnces  Ghristianity :  Strauss
has  more  recently  described  Feuerbach  as  '  the  man  who  put  the  dot  upon
the  i  which  we  had  found,'  and  he  too  insists  upon  the  moral  necessity  of
rejecting  Ghristianil^ ;  Lebens  und  Gharacterbild  Marklins,  pp.  124,  125,
sqq.,  quoted  by  Luthardt,  Apolog.  p.  301.  Other  disciples  of  Hegel,  such
as  Marheinecke,  Rosenkranz,  and  Gtischel,  have  endeavoured  to  give  to
their  master's  teaching  a  more  positive  direction.

I]


1 4  Christ  and  the  negative  criticism.

Christian  thought  to  do  such  homage  as  is  possible  to  its  great
Object ;  they  are  so  many  proofs  of  the  interest  which  Jesus
Christ  necessarily  provokes  in  the  modem  world,  even  when  it
is  least  disposed  to  own  His  true  supremacy.

Nor  is  the  direction  which  this  interest  has  taken  of  late
years  in  the  sphere  of  unbelieving  theological  criticism  less
noteworthy  in  its  bearings  on  our  present  subject.  The  earlier
Rationalism  concerned  itself  chiefly  with  the  Apostolical  age.
It  was  occupied  with  a  perpetual  analysis  and  recombination
of  the  various  influences  which  were  supposed  to  have  created
the  Catholic  Church  and  the  orthodox  creed.  St.  Paul  was
the  most  prominent  person  in  the  long  series  of  hypotheses
by  which  Rationalism  professed  to  account  for  the  existence
of  Catholic  Christianity.  St.  Paul  was  said  to  be  the  *  author '
of  that  idea  of  a  universal  religion  which  was  deemed  to  be
the  most  fundamental  and  creative  element  in  the  Christian
creed :  St.  Paul's  was  the  vivid  imagination  which  had  thrown
around  the  life  and  death  of  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth  a  halo
of  superhuman  glory,  and  had  fired  an  obscure  Jewish  sect
with  the  ambition  of  founding  a  spiritual  empire  able  to
control  and  embrace  the  world.  St.  Paul,  in  short,  was  held
to  be  the  real  creator  of  Christianity;  and  our  Lord  was
thrown  into  the  background,  whether  from  a  surviving  instinct
of  awe,  or  on  the  ground  of  His  being  relatively  insignificant.
This  studied  silence  of  active  critical  speculation  with  respect
to  Jesus  Christ  might  indeed  have  been  the  instinct  of  reve-
rence, but  it  was  at  least  susceptible  of  a  widely  different
interpretation.

In  our  day  this  equivocal  reserve  is  no  longer  possible.
The  passion  for  reality,  for  fact,  which  is  so  characteristic
of  the  thought  of  recent  years,  has  carried  critical  enquiry
backwards  from  the  consciousness  of  the  Apostle  to  that  on
which  it  reposed.  The  interest  of  modern  criticism  centres
in  Him  Who  is  ever  most  prominently  and  uninterruptedly
present  to  the  eye  of  faith.  The  popular  controversies  around
us  tend  more  and  more  to  merge  in  the  one  great  question
respecting  our  Lord's  Person  :  that  question,  it  is  felt,  is
bound  up  with  the  very  existence  of  Christianity.  And  a
discussion  respecting  Christ's  Person  obliges  us  to  consider
the  mode  of  His  historical  manifestation;  so  that  His  Life
was  probably  never  studied  before  by  those  who  practically
or  avowedly  reject  Him  so  eagerly  as  it  is  at  this  moment.
For  Strauss  He  may  be  no  more  than  a  leading  illustration

[lbct.


Answers  to  Christ^ s  question,  {i)  tAe  Ebionitic.    15

of  the  applicability  of  the  Hegelian  philosophy  to  piirposes
of  historical  analysis;  for  Schen*kel  He  may  be  a  sacred  im-
personation of  the  anti-hierarchical  and  democratic  temper,
which  aims  at  revolutionizing  Germany.  Ewald  may  see  in
Him  the  altogether  human  source  of  the  highest  spiritual  life
of  humanity;  and  Kenan,  the  semi-fabulous  and  somewhat
immoral  hero  of  an  oriental  story,  fashioned  to  the  taste  of
a  modem  Parisian  public.  And  what  if  you  yourselves  are
even  now  eagerly  reading  an  anonymous  writer,  of  far  nobler
aim  and  finer' moral  insight  than  these,  who  has  endeavoured,
by  a  brilliant  analysis  of  one  side  of  Christ's  moral  action,  to
represent  Him  as  embodying  and  originating  aU  that  is  best
and  most  hopeful  in  the  spirit  of  modem  philanthropy,  but
who  seems  not  indisposed  to  substitute  for  the  creed  of  His
Church,  only  the  impatient  proclamation  of  His  Boman  judge.
Aye,  though  you  salute  your  Saviour  in  Pilate's  words.  Behold
the  Man !  at  least  you  cannot  ignore  Him ;  you  cannot  resist
the  moral  and  intellectual  forces  which  converge  in  our  day
with  an  ever-increasing  intensity  upon  His  Sacred  Person;
you  cannot  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  question  which  He  asks
of  His  followers  in  each  generation,  and  which  He  never  asked
more  solemnly  than  now :  *  Whom  say  men  that  I  the  Son  of
Man  am^l'

n.  Now  all  serious  Theists,  who  believe  that  God  is  a
Personal  Being  essentially  distinct  from  the  work  of  His  hands,
must  make  one  of  three  answers,  whether  in  terms  or  in  sub-
stance, to  the  question  of  the  text.

I.  The  Ebionite  of  old,  and  the  Socinian  now,  assert  that
Jesus  Christ  is  merely  man,  whether  (as  Faustus  Socinus  himself
teaches)  supematurally  bom  of  a  Virgin  1,  or  (as  modem
Rationalists  generally  maintain)  in  all  respects  subject  to  or-
dinary natural  laws°^,  although  of  such  remarkable  moral
eminence,  that  He  may,  in  the  enthusiastic  language  of  ethical
admiration,  be  said  to  be  'Divine.*  And  when  Sabellianism
would  escape  from  the  manifold  self-contradictions  of  Patripas-
sianism^,  it  too  becomes  no  less  Humanitarian  in  its  doctrine
as  to  the  Person  of  our  Lord,  than  Ebionitism  itself.  The
Monarchianism   of  Praxeas  or   of  Noetus,   which  denied  the

^  On  recent '  Lives '  of  our  Lord,  see  Appendix,  Note  A.

1  Cbr.  Bel.  Breyissinia  List.  i.  654 :  '  De  Christi  essentia  ita  statue :
Dlum  esse  hominem  in  virginis  utero,  et  sic  sine  vlri  ope  Divini  Spiritils
▼i  concepttun.'

"^  W^;sclieider,  Lutit.  §  lao,  sqq.  >  Gf.  Tertull.  adv.  Prax.  o.  2.

1]


1 6  (2)   The  A  rian  answer.

distinct  Personality  of  Christ  <>  while  proclaiming  H[is  Divinity
in  the  highest  terms,  was  practically  coincident  in  its  popular
result  with  the  coarse  assertions  of  Theodotus  and  ArtemonP.
And  in  modem  days,  the  phenomenon  of  practical  Humani-
tarianism,  disguised  but  not  proscribed  by  very  vehement  pro-
testations apparently  condemning  it,  is  reproduced  in  the  case
of  such  well-known  writers  as  Schleiermacher  or  Ewald.  They
use  language  at  times  which  seems  to  do  the  utmost  justice  to
the  truth  of  Christ's  Divmity :  they  recognise  in  Him  the  perfect
Eevelation  of  God,  the  true  Head  and  Lord  of  human  Mnd ;  but
they  deny  the  existence  of  an  immanent  Trinity  in  the  Godhead;
they  recognise  in  God  no  pre-existent  Personal  Form  as  the
basis  of  His  Self-Manifestation  to  man ;  they  are  really  Monar-
chianists  in  the  sense  of  Praxeas ;  and  their  keen  appreciation
of  the  ethical  glory  of  Christ's  Person  cannot  save  them  from
consequences  with  which  it  is  ultimately  inconsistent,  but  which
are  on  other  grounds  logically  too  inevitable  to  be  permanently
eluded  <i.  A  Christ  who  is  '  the  perfect  Eevelation  of  God,'  yet
who  4s  not  personally  God,'  does  not  really  differ  from  the
altogether  human  Christ  of  Socinus ;  and  the  assertion  of  the
Personal  Godhead  of  Christ  can  only  escape  from  the  profane
absurdities  of  Patripassianism,  when  it  presupposes  the  eternal
and  necessary  existence  in  God  of  a  Threefold  Personality.

2.  The  Arian  maintains  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  existed
before  His  Incarnation,  that  by  Him,  as  by  an  instrument,  the
Supreme  God  made  the  worlds,  and  that,  as  being  the  most
ancient  and  the  highest  of  created  beings.  He  is  to  be  wor-
shipped ;  that,  however,  Christ  had  a  beginning  of  existence
{apxnv  vxrap^eo)?),  that  there  was  a  time  when  He  did  not  exist
(^v  ore  ovK  ?jv) ;  that  He  has  His  subsistence  from  what  once
was  not  (c^  OVK  opTtov  €^€1  T^v  vTrcJoTocrtv  ^J,  and  cannot  therefore

^  'Haec  perversitas,  quae  se  existimat  meram  veritatem  possidere,  dum
unicum  Deum  non  aliks  putat  credendum  quam  si  ipstim  eundemque  et
Patrem  et  Filium  et  Spiritmu  Sanctum  dicat.  Quasi  non  sic  quoque  unus  sit
omnia,  dum  ex  uno  omnia,  per  substanticB  scilicet  unUatemy  et  nihilomintis
custodiatur  oiKovofxias  sacramentum,  quae  imitatem  in  trinitatem  disponit,
tres  dirigens,  Patrem  et  Filium,  et  Spiritum  Sanctum.'    Adv.  Prax.  c.  2.

P  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  v.  38 :  y^iKhv  &v6puvov  yev^aQai  rhv  SwTTipa.  Tert,
de  Praescr.  Haer.  c.  53.  App. ;  Theodoret,  Haer.  Fab.  lib.  ii.  init.

^  Of.  Domer,  Pers.  Christi,  Band  ii.  p.  153.  Schleiermacher,  although
agreeing  with  Schelling  and  Hegel  in  denying  an  immanent  Trinity  in  the
Godhead,  did  not  (Domer  earnestly  pleads)  agree  in  the  Pantheistic  basis  of
that  denial.  P.  C.  ii.  p.  1 21 3.  Compare  Ewald,  G«schichte  Christus',
p.  447,  quoted  by  Domer.

'  Socrates,  i.  5.

f  LECT.


(3)  Answer  of  the  Catholic  Church.         17

be  called  God  in  the  sense  in  which  that  term  is  applied  by
Theists  to  the  Supreme  Being  ■•

3.  In  contrast  with  these  two  leading  forms  of  heresy  stands
that  which  has  ever  been  and  is  the  faith  of  the  whole  Catholic
Church  of  Christ:  *I  believe  in  One  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the
Only-begotten  Son  of  God,  Begotten  of  His  Father  before  all
worlds,  God  of  God,  Light  of  Light,  Very  God  of  Very  God,
Begotten  not  made.  Being  op  one  substance  with  the  Father ;
By  Whom  all  things  were  made  ;  Who  for  us  men  and  for  our
salvation  came  down  from  heaven,  and  was  incarnate  by  the
Holy  Ghost  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  was  made  Man/

Practically  indeed  these  three  answers  may  be  still  further
reduced  to  two,  the  first  and  the  third ;  for  Arianism,  no  less  than
Sabellianism,  is  reaUy  a  form  of  the  Humanitarian  or  naturalist
reply  to  the  question.  Arianism  does  indeed  admit  the  exist-
ence of  a  pre-existent  being  who  became  incarnate  in  Jesus,  but
it  parts  company  with  the  Catholic  belief,  by  %,sserting  that  this
being  is  himself  a  creature,  and  not  of  the  very  Substance  of  the
Supreme  Grod.  Thus  Arianism  is  weighted  with  the  intellectual
dif&culties  of  a  purely  supernatural  Christology,  while  yet  it
forfeits  all  hold  upon  the  Great  Truth  which  to  a  Catholic
believer  sustains  and  justifies  the  remainder  of  his  creed.  The
real  question  at  issue  is  not  merely  whether  Christ  is  only  a
man ;  it  is  whether  or  not  He  is  only  a  created  being.  When
the  question  is  thus  stated,  Arianism  must  really  take  its  place
side  by  side  with  the  most  naked  Deism ;  while  at  the  same  time
it  suggests,  by  its  incarnation  of  a  created  Logos,  the  most  dif-
ficult among  the  problems  which  meet  a  believer  in  the  Hypo-
static Union  of  our  Lord's  Two  Natures.  Li  order  to  escape
from  this  position,  it  virtually  teaches  the  existence  of  two  Gods,
each  of  whom  is  an  object  of  worship,  one  of  whom  has  been
created  by  the  Other ;  One  of  whom  might,  if  He  willed,  anni-
hilate the  other  t.     Thus  in  Arianism  reason  and  faith  are  equally

•  Cf.  further  Waterland,  Defence  of  Some  Queries,  Works  (ed.  Van-
Mildert),  vol.  i.  pp.  402,  403.

*  Waterland,  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  78,  note  f.  Bp.  Van-Mildert  quotes  from
Mr.  Charles  Butler's  lOstorical  Account  of  Confessions  of  Faith,  chap.  x.
sect.  2,  a  remarkable  report  of  Dr.  Clarke's  conference  with  Dr.  Hawarden
in  the  presence  of  Queen  Caroline.  After  Dr.  Clarke  had  stated  his  system
at  great  length  and  in  very  guarded  terms.  Dr.  Hawarden  asked  his  per-
mission to  put  one  simple  question,  and  Dr.  Clarke  assented.  'Then,'  said
Dr.  Hawaitlen,  'I  ask.  Can  God  the  Father  amiihilate  the  Son  and  the
Holy  Ghost  ?  Answer  me  Yes  or  No.'  Dr.  Clarke  continued  for  some  time
in  deep  thought,  and  then  said,  '  It  was  a  question  which  he  had  never

l]  o


i8        The  three  answers  are  practically  two.

disappointed :  the  largest  demands  are  made  upon  faith,  yet  the
Arian  Christ  after  all  is  hut  a  fellow-creature ;  and  reason  is
encouraged  to  assail  the  mysteries  of  the  Catholic  creed  in
hehalf  of  a  theory  which  admits  of  heing  reduced  to  an  irrational
absurdity.  Arianism  therefore  is  really  at  most  a  resting-
point  for  minds  which  are  sinking  from  the  Catholic  creed
downwards  to  pure  Humanitarianism ;  or  which  are  feeling  their
way  upwards  from  the  depths  of  Ebionitism,  or  Socinianism,
towards  the  Church.  This  intermediate,  transient,  and  essen-
tially unsubstantial  character  of  the  Arian  position  was  indeed
made  plain,  in  theory,  by  the  vigorous  analysis  to  which  the
heresy  was  subjected  on  its  first  appearance  by  St.  Athanasius",
and  again  in  the  last  century,  when,  at  its  endeavour  to  make  a
home  for  itself  in  the  Church  of  England,  in  the  person  of
Dr.  Samuel  Clarke,  it  was  crushed  out,  under  Gk)d,  mainly  by
the  genius  and  energy  of  the  great  Waterland.  And  history
has  verified  the  §,nticipations  of  argument.  Arianism  at  this
day  has  a  very  shadowy,  if  any  real,  existence ;  and  the  Churchi
of  Christ,  holding  in  her  hands  the  Creed  of  NicsBa,  stands
face  to  face  with  sheer  Humanitarianism,  more  or  less  disguised,
according  to  circumstances,  by  the  thin  varnish  of  an  admiration
yielded  to  our  Lord  on  aesthetic  or  ethical  grounds.

m.  At  the  risk  of  partial  repetition,  but  for  the  sake  of
clearness,  let  us  here  pause  to  make  two  observations  respecting
that  complete  assertion  of  the  Divinity  of  our  Lord  for  which
His  Church  is  responsible  at  the  bar  of  human  opinion.

I.  The  Catholic  doctrine,  then,  of  Christ's  Divinity  in  no
degree  interferes  with  or  overshadows  the  complemental  truth
of  His  perfect  Manhood.  It  is  perhaps  natural  that  a  greater
emphasis  should  be  laid  upon  the  higher  truth  which  could
be  apprehended  only  by  faith  than  on  the  lower  one  which,
during  the  years  of  our  Lord's  earthly  Life,  was  patent  to
the  senses  of  men.  And  Holy  Scripture  might  antecedently
be  supposed  to  take  for  granted  the  reality  of  Christ's  Manhood,
on  the  ground  of  there  being  no  adequate  occasion  for  full,
precise,  and  reiterated  assertions  of  so  obvious  a  fact.  But
nothing  is  more  remarkable  in  Scripture  than  its  provision  for
the  moral  and  intellectual  needs  of  ages  far  removed  from
those  which  are  traversed  by  the  books  included  in  the  Sacred

considered.*    Mahomed  had  done  so:  Kodwell^s  Kor&n,  p.  541.     On  the
*  precarious  *  existence  of  Grod  the  Son,  according  to  the  Arian  hypothesis,
see  Waterland*8  Farther  Vindication  of  ChrisVs  Divinity,  ch.  iii.  sect.  19.
■  See  Lect.  VIL

[  LKCT.


Reality  of  our  LorcCs  Humanity.  19

Canon.  In  the  present  instance,  by  a  series  of  incidental
although  most  significant  statements,  the  Gbspels  guard  us
with  nothing  less  than  an  exhaustive  precaution  against  the
fictions  of  a  Docetic  or  of  an  Apollinarian  Christ.  We  are
told  that  the  Eternal  Word  vh^^  cycVcro  z,  that  He  took  human
nature  upon  Him  in  its  reality  and  completeness  y.  The  Gospel
narrative,  after  the  pattern  of  His  own  words  in  the  text,
exhibits  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  Man,  while  yet  it  draws  us  on
by  an  irresistible  attraction  to  contemplate  that  Higher  Nature
which  was  the  seat  of  His  eternal  Personality.  The  superhuman
character  of  some  most  important  details  of  the  Gbspel  history
does  not  disturb  the  broad  scope  of  that  history  as  being
the  record  of  a  Human  Life,  with  Its  physical  and  mental
affinities  to  our  own  daily  experience.

The  great  Subject  of  the  Gospel  narratives  has  a  true  human
Body.  He  is  conceived  in  the  womb  of  a  himian  Mother  >.  He
is  by  her  brought  forth  into  the  world  ^;  He  is  fed  at  her
breast  during  infancy  ^.  As  an  Infant,  He  is  made  to  undergo
the  painful  rite  of  circumcision  0.  He  is  a  Babe  in  swaddling-
clothes  lying  in  a  manger  <1.  He  is  nursed  in  the  arms  of
the  aged  Simeon®.  His  bodily  growth  is  traced  up  to  His
attaining  the  age  of  twelve^,  and  from  that  point  to  manhoods.
His  presence  at  the  marriage-feast  in  Cana^,  at  the  great
entertainment  in  the  house  of  Levi  \  and  at  the  table  of  Simon
the  Pharisee  ^ ;  the  supper  which  He  shared  at  Bethany  with
the  friend  whom  He  had  raised  from  the  gravel,  the  Paschal
festival  which  He  desired  so  earnestly  to  eat  before  He  suf-

s  St.  John  i.  14.  Cf.  Meyer  in  loo.  for  a  refatation  of  Zeller*8  attempt
to  limit  0-^^  in  this  passage  to  the  bodily  organism,  as  ezolusiye  of  the
anima  rationalis.

7  St.  John  yiii.  40 ;  i  Tim.  ii.  5.

*  fTvKhA\^  iv  yaoTpl,  St.  Luke  i.  31.  vph  rod  avWri^Briym  abrhy  4p
rp  KotXltj^,  Ibid.  ii.  a  I.  tlpidri  iv  ycurrpl  tx"^^^^  ^^  Uut^fun-Ss  'Aylov,
St.  Matt.  i.  18.  rb  yhp  iv  ahr}  ywpriOtv  4k  Uvt6fi»r6s  4<rr»  'Aylov,  Ibid,
i.  20 ;  Isa.  vii.  14.

*  St.  Matt.  i.  25;  St.  Luke  ii.  7,  ii;  Gal.  iv.  4:  i^air4arti\tv  6  Ocbs
rhy  Tlhv  ainoVf  ytv6fitvov  4k  yvycuKis,

^  St.  Luke  zi.  27 :  fjtdffroi  otf  4B4i\curas,  *  Ibid.  ii.  ai.

*  Ibid.  ii.  1 2  :  Bpi^os  4(nr<ipyayufi4yoy,  Ktiixtvov  4v  rf  (pdryj^,

*  Ibid.  ii.  28  :  Koi  ainhs  4li4l^aT0  ainh  els  rhs  dyKd^as  airov,
'  Ibid.  ii.  40 :  rh  Hh  irou8(ov  riH^avt,

<  Ibid.  ii.  52  :  *Ii)(roGf  vpodKowre  .  .  .  ^Xuc/f.
^  St.  John  ii.  a.

*  St.  Luke  V.  29 :  9oxhf^  fityd\ri»,

k  St.  Luke  vii.  36.  1  St.  John  zii.  j.

l]  0  2


20  Witness  of  Scripture  to  Chris  fs  Human  Body.

fered"^,  the  bread  and  fish  of  which  He  partook  l?efore  the
eyes  of  His  disciples  in  the  early  dawn  on  the  shore  of  the
Lake  of  Galilee,  even  after  His  Kesurrection  J^, — are  witnesses
that  He  came,  like  one  of  ourselves,  ^eating  and  drinking <>.'
When  He  is  recorded  to  have  taken  no  food  during  the  forty
days  of  the  Temptation,  this  implies  the  contrast  presented
by  His  ordinary  habit  P.  Indeed,  He  seemed  to  the  men  of
His  day  much  more  dependent  on  the  physical  supports  of
life  than  the  great  ascetic  who  had  preceded  Him<i.  He
knew,  by  experience,  what  are  the  pangs  of  hunger,  after  the
forty  days'  fast  in  the  wilderness',  and  in  a  lesser  degree,
as  may  be  supposed,  when  walking  into  Jerusalem  on  the
Monday  before  EUs  Passion  b.  The  profound  spiritual  sense
of  His  redemptive  cry,  *  I  thirst,'  uttered  while  He  was  hanging
on  the  Cross,  is  not  obscured,  when  its  primary  literal  meaning,
that  while  dying  He  actually  endured  that  wellnigh  sharpest
form  of  bodily  suffering,  is  explicitly  recognised*.  His  deep
sleep  on  the  Sea  of  Galilee  in  a  little  bark  which  the  waves
threatened  momentarily  to  engulfs,  and  His  sitting  down  at
the  well  of  Jacob,  through  great  exhaustion  produced  by  a
long  journey  on  foot  from  Judsea  ^,  proved  that  He  was  subject
at  times  to  the  depression  of  extreme  fatigue.  And,  not  to
dwell  at  length  upon  those  particular  references  to  the  several
parts  of  His  bodily  frame  which  occur  in  Holy  Scripture  y,
it  is  obvious  to  note  that  the  evangelical  account  of  His
physical  Sufferings,  of  His  Deaths,  of  His  Burial*,  and  of
the  Wounds  in  His  Hands  and  Feet  and  Side  after  His  Eesur-


»  St.  Luke  xxii.  8,  15.  ■  St.  John  xxi.  12,  13.

«  St.  Luke  vii.  34 :  iK-fiKvBfP  6  Tfhs  rod  dyBpt&irov  iffBimv  Kot  iriyuv.
P  Ibid.  iv.  a  :  ovk  t<pay^v  ohZ\v  iv  rcits  ^fi4pai5  ixeiyais*

*  Ibid.  vii.  34 :  IM,  &vBp<eiros  ^dyos  icaL  olvoir^n}!.
'  St.  Matt.  iv.  2  :  Sffrepou  iwciyoure,

'  Ibid.  xxi.  18 :  iirapdyoty  eis  r^v  ir6\iy,  imiycuru

*  St.  John  ziz.  28 :  9i^Q.

■  St.  Matt.  viii.  24 :  ahrhs  8^  indBevBt,

^  St.  John  iv.  6:  6  oly  'iriaovs  KtKoiriaK^s  4k  t^s  SZoiwopiea  4KaJB4(tro
otirws  M  rfi  injyp,

'  T^y  Kf^axiiy,  St.  Luke  vii.  46 ;  St.  Matt,  xxvii.  29,  30 ;  St.  John  xix.
30 ;  rohs  ir6^as,  St.  Luke  vii.  38 ;  ras  x^^P<'^f  St.  Luke  xxiv.  40 ;  ry  5oic-
T{f\(p,  St,  John  viii.  6 ;  rh  (rKeKrj,  St.  John  xix.  33 ;  rh  ySvara,  St.  Luke
zzii.  41 ;  r^y  vKtvphat,  St.  John  xix.  34 ;  rh  (rafia,  St.  Luke  xxii.  IQ,  &c.

■  St.  Luke  xxii.  44,  &c.,  xxiii. ;  St.  Matt,  xxvi.,  xxvii. ;  St.  Mark  xiv.  33,
fieq.,  XV.

*  St.  John  xix.  39,  ao  :  f^Xa$oy  oZy  rh  ffQfUL  rod  'Ii)<roO  icaL  idfi<ray  avrh
6Boylois  /i€T^  r&y  iLpw/xdrofy :  cf.  ver.  42.

[  LBCT.


Wiiness  of  Scripture  to  Christ's  Human  Soul.   21

rection^,  are  so  many  emphatic  attestations  to  the  fact  of
His  true  and  full  participation  in  the  material  side  of  our
common  nature.

Equally  explicit  and  yivid  is  the  witness  which  Scripture
affords  to  the  true  Human  Soul  of  our  Blessed  Lord<>.  Its
general  movements  are  not  less  spontaneous,  nor  do  Its  affections
flow  less  freely,  because  no  sinful  impulse  finds  a  place  in  It,  and
each  pulse  of  Its  moral  and^  mental  Life  is  in  conscious  harmony
with,  and  subjection  to,  an  all-holy  WilL  Jesus  rejoices  in  spirit
on  hearing  of  the  spread  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  among  the
simple  and  the  poor  ^ :  He  beholds  the  young  ruler,  and  forth-
with loves  him  0.  He  loves  Martha  and  her  sister  and  Lazarus
with  a  common,  yet,  as  seems  to  be  impUed,  with  a  discriminating
affection^.  His  Eye  on  one  occasion  betrays  a  sudden  movement
of  deliberate  anger  at  the  hardness  of  heart  which  could  steel
itself  against  truth  by  maintaining  a  dogged  silences.  The
scattered  and  fainting  multitude  melts  l£m  to  compassion  h:
He  sheds  tears  of  sorrow  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus  i,  and  at  the
sight  of  the  city  which  has  rejected  His  Love  K  In  contem-
plating His  approaching  Passion  ^  and  the  ingratitude  of  the
traitor- Apostle  °^,  His  Soul  is  shaken  by  a  vehement  agitation
which  He  does  not  conceal  from  His  disciples.  In  the  garden
of  Grethsemane  He  wills  to  enter  into  an  agony  of  amazement
and  dejection.  His  mental  sufferings  are  so  keen  and  piercing
that  ELis  tender  frame  gives  way  beneath  the  trial,  and  He  sheds


^  St.  John  zz.  37 ;  St.  Luke  xziv.  39 :  tSerc  ria  x*^P^  M^v  mSl  ro^f
fSSas  fiov,  5ri  ahrhs  iyd>  tifii'  i^ri\ai(p4i<raT4  fi§  lad  HeTC*  Zri  irvcvfta  adpKa
Kcd  cffria  oifK  Ix^'  KoBios  ifi^  dempurt  ix"*^^^

«  I  St.  Pet.  iii.  18 :  0ayar»dcb  ii\v  <rapKi,  (worroniBtU  8)  irvt^fiari  iv  f
KoX  ro7s  iv  (pvKoKQ  wv^^fuxo'iy  iropcvdclf  iieiipv^tv.  The  rf)  before  irvtyfiafn  in
the  TextuB  Beceptus  bdng  only  an  insertion  by  a  oopyist,  irvcvfia  here  means
our  Lord's  Human  Soul.  The  clause  iv  $  .* ,  ifc^pu^tu  forbids  here  the
sense  of  irpevfAa  at  Eom.  i.  3.    Ct  p.  517,  note  *;  p.  334,  note  ^

*  St.  Luke  z.  ai :  ^o\Aid<raTO  ry  irvf^/iori,

*  St.  Mark  z.  21 :  6  Sh  *lri<rovs  ii/ifiKftpas  avr$  ^^mjo-ev  ahrSv,

*  St.  Mark  zi.  5.

'  St.  Mark  iii.  5 :  irfpi0\epdfAtvos  alnohs  fier*  opyris,  ovWvxoifiMyos  M  rf
Twp^irei  rrjs  Kop^las  ahrStv,

^  St.  Matt.  iz.  36 :  i<nrX»YXi^i(rBn  -repl  ain&v,

'  St.  John  zi.  33-35 :  *ln<rovs  oZv  &s  tUitv  o&r^v  kKaiovvtw  koUl  rohs  (rvvcA*
BSyras  abrj}  *loviaiovs  KkodoyraSt  ivtfipifi'fia-aro  r^  iryt^fjiari,  kcU  irdp<i^w
koan6v, , . .  'E5<ticpvo-fy  6  *Ii)(roi/s.

^  St.  Luke  ziz.  41 :  *Viii»v  r^v  ir6\w^  ikKawrtv  in^  ethrfl,

*  St.  John  zii.  27 :  vvv  ri  ^n/xh  f^ov  rtrdpoKTM.

™  Ibid.  ziii.  211  6  *hi<rovs  irapdxBn  rf  irytifiart  icai  itxatnip^ifft*


22  Reality  of  Christ^ s  Manhood  not

His  Blood  before  they  nail  Him  to  the  Cross  >>.  His  Haman
Will  consciously  Bubmits  itself  to  a  Higher  Will  o,  and  He  learns
obedience  by  the  discipline  of  pain  p.  He  carries  His  dependence
BtiU  farther,  He  is  habitually  subject  to  His  parents^ ;  He  recog-
nises the  fiscal  regulations  of  a  pagan  state  ' ;  He  places  Himself
in  the  hands  of  His  enemies  ■ ;  He  is  crucified  through  weak-
ness ^.  If  an  Apostle  teaches  that  aU  the  treasures  of  wisdom
and  knowledge  are  hidden  in  Him  ^,  an  Evangelist  records  that
He  increases  in  wisdom  as  He  increases  in  stature  ^.  Conform-
ably with  these  representations,  we  find  Him  as  Man  expressing
creaturely  dependence  upon  God  by  prayer.  He  rises  up  a
great  while  before  day  at  Capernaum,  and  departs  into  a  solitary
place,  that  He  may  pass  the  hours  in  uninterrupted  devotiony.
He  makes  intercession  for  His  whole  redeemed  Church  in  the
Paschal  supper-room  « ;  He  offers  to  Heaven  strong  crying  with
tears  in  Gethsemane^;  He  asks  pardon  for  His  Jewish  and
Gentile  murderers  at  the  very  moment  of  His  Crucifixion** ;  He
resigns  His  departing  Spirit  into  His  Father's  Hands  ^.

'fiius,  as  one  Apostle  teaches.  He  took  a  Body  of  Flesh  d,  and
His  whole  Humanity  both  of  Soul  and  Body  shared  in  the  sin-
less infirmities  which  belong  to  our  common  nature  ®.    To  deny

■  St.  Mark  xiv.  33 :  t^ft^vro  iK0afi$€7(r0ai  Kot  A'Snifioytiv,  icat  Xiyti  ahro7s,
*  Tl€piKifT6s  kffrof  11  ^ifvxh  fJLov  ttts  Oaydrov*  St.  Luke  xxii.  44 :  yfw6fi€Pos  iv
iycovUf  iicT€v4<rT€pop  irpovri^'fro,  iytrero  8^  6  t6p»s  o^rov  &<r€l  Op6/Mfioi  cSL'
fiaros  icara$cdyovr€S  M  riiy  yrjy,    Cf.  Heb.  v.  7.

^  St.  Luke  Txii.  43 :  /x^  t^  04Ki\ixi,  fiov,  &AAA  rb  ahv  yeviffOtt,

P  Heb.  y.  8 :  tlfioBtr  hp*  d»v  firaOe  r^v  ^woKofyr,     Gf.  especially  St.  Matt.

xxvii.  46.  t  St,  Luke  ii.  51 :  ^r  irorturaSfitwos  alnoTs,

'  St.  Matt.  Txii.  ai.    For  our  Lord's  payment  of  the  Temple  tribute,  cf.

Ibid.  xvii.  25,  27.

•  Ibid.  xvii.  22 ;  St.  John  x.  18 :  ohZ^is  aipu  oMiv  [sc.  t^v  ^^^»'  /«w]
At*  ^fiov,  iAX*  ^^  rlOri^i  oMiv  hir*  ifuxurov,

•  2  Cor.  xiii.  4 :  itrraup^  il  iurdtvtias.

•  Col.  ii.  3:  iy  f  fieri  wdifrts  ol  etiaaupol  riis  ffo^tas  icat  r^f  yw^€»s
iir6Kpwpoi,

•  St.  Lnke  ii.  40:  iKparouovro  irptifuiri,  ver.  5  a :  irpoficoirr§  ao<l>l(f.  See
Lect.  Vni.  J  St.  Mark  i.  35.

■  St.  John  xvii.  l :  iinjpt  robs  i^BaXfiobs  ahrov  €ts  rhv  obpotvhr,  icol  etwt,

•  Heb.  V.  7 :  iv  reus  rifiepcuf  rrjs  ffapkhs  avrov,  lieiitrcis  re  lud  iKerripias  . .  •  •
ficriL  Kpavyrjs  Itrxvpas  Koi  9oucp6wv  wpotreviyKas,     St.  Luke  xxii,  42-44.

^  St.  Luke  xxiii.  34 :  irdr€p,  &(p€s  o^roTs*  oi  ykp  otScuri  ri  iroiovffi.  That
this  prayer  referred  to  the  Jews,  as  well  as  the  Boman  soldiers,  is  dear  from
Acts  iu.  17.  ^  c  St.  Luke  xxiii.  46.

•  Col.  i.  22  :  ffJofiari  rrjs  trapKSs,

•  Heb.  ii.  II :  8  t€  yhp  ayidCcov  icol  ol  ayiaCSfiwoi  4^  ivhs  irdyrts,  Ver.  I4 ;
Mf4<rx€  ffopKhs  icoi  cifiaros,  Ver.  17 :  £^ctAc  Karh.  irdyra  rots  iZcKipoTs  dfiow
Briytu,    Ibid.  iv.  15 :  V€W€ipcurfi4po»  H^  ttarb,  vdyra  KiSt  6fioi6rrira,

[lect.


forfeited  by  Its  prerogative  graces.  23

tills  fdndamental  truth,  <  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  Flesh,'
is,  in  the  judgment  of  another  Apostle,  the  mark  of  the  Deceiver,
of  the  Antichrist^.     Nor  do  the  prerogatives  of  our  Lord's
Manhood  destroy  Its  perfection  and  reality,  although  they  do
■andoubtedly  invest  It  with  a  robe  of  mystery,  which  Faith  must
aclmowledge,  but  which  she  cannot  hope  to  penetrate.     Christ's
Manhood  is  not  unreal  because  It  is  impersonal ;  because  in  Him
the  place  of  any  created  individuality  at  the  root  of  thought  and
feeling  and  will  is  supplied  by  the  Person  of  the  Eternal  Word,
Who  has  wrapped  around  His  Being  a  created  Nature  thi'ough
-which,  in  its  unmutilated  perfection.  He  acts  upon  humankind  s.
Christ's  Manhood  is  not  unreal,  because  It  is  sinless ;  because
the  entail  of  any  taint  of  transmitted  sin  is  in  Him  cut  off  by  a
supernatural  birth  of  a  Virgin  Mother ;  and  because  His  whole
life  of  thought,  feeling,  will,  and  action  is  in  unfaltering  harmony
with  the  law  of  absolute  Truth  ^.     Nor  is  the  reality  of  His
Manhood  impaired  by  any  exceptional  beauty  whether  of  out-
ward form  or  of  mental  endowment,  such  as  might  become  One
'fairer  than  the  children  of  menV  and  taking  precedence  of
them  in  all  things  ^ ;  since  in  Him  our  nature  does  but  resume

'  I  St.  John  iy.  a :  kw  vytvfM  %  SfioKoyti  'Iiytrovv  Xpiarhv  iv  <rapK\  iktiXv"
Biira,  ix  rov  Beov  iari,  a  St.  John  7 :  iroAAoi  irXcCi'Oi  tlariKOov  §ls  rhv  K6fffwv,
oi  fi^  bpLoKoiyovvrfs  *Ii)(roSv  "X^urrhv  4px6fifVov  iw  aapKl'  otros  itrruf  6  wKdyos
«al  d  *AvrlxptfrTos»

<  The  kinnroffraffia  of  our  Lord*B  Hitmanity  ii  a  reenlt  of  the  HypOBtatic
Union.  To  deny  it  is  to  assert  that  there  are  Two  Persons  in  Christ,  or  else
it  is  to  deny  that  He  is  more  that  Man.  Compare  Hooker,  Ecd.  Pd.  v.  52.
5,  who  appeals  against  Nestorios  to  Heb.  ii.  16,  oh  yhp  B^iwov  iLyy4Kwv  ^iri-
Xofifidycrai,  &\A^  <nr4pfxaTos  'ABpaitfA  iiriXafifiifrreu  At  His  Inoamation
the  Eternal  Word  took  on  Him  Human  Nature,  not  a  Human  Personality.
Lather  appears  to  have  denied  the  Impersonality  of  our  Lord's  Manhood.
But  see  Bomer,  Person  Christi,  Bd.  ii.  p.  540.

^  The  Sinlessness  of  our  Lord's  Manhood  is  implied  in  St.  Luke  i.  35.
Thus  He  Uhv  6  Uariip  rfylafft  koL  &ir^(rrciAcv  €ls  rhy  KSfffioy,  St.  John  x.  56 ;
and  He  oould  challenge  His  enemies  to  convict  Him  of  sin,  St.  John  viii.  46.
In  St.  Mark  z.  18,  St.  Luke  xviii.  19,  He  is  not  denying  that  He  is  good ;
bnt  He  insists  that  none  should  call  Him  so  who  did  not  believe  Him  to  be
Crod.  St.  Paul  describes  Him  as  rhv  fi^  yv6yra  ajxapriaif,  a  Cor.  v.  ai ;  and
Christ  is  expressly  said  to  be  x^P^^  hfiapriatn  Heb.  iv.  15;  Z<rios,  Akokos,
iLfdavros,  K^xupifTfiivos  &irb  rSov  afjuapTtoXSov^  Heb.  vii.  26 ;  kfKvhs  A/jmixos  K<d
iffiFiXos,  I  St.  Pet.  i.  19 ;  i  &yios  Koi  ^ixaios.  Acts  iii.  14.  Still  more  em-
phatically  we  are  told  that  afictprla  iv  ain^  oIk  tffri,  I  St.  John  iii.  5 ;  while
the  same  truth  is  indirectlv  taught,  when  St.  Paul  speaks  of  our  Lord  as  sent
iv  d/Aouiifiari  <rapKhs  ajEAoprtas,  £^m.  viii.  3.  Mr.  F.  W.  Newman  does  justice
to  the  significance  of  a  Sinless  Manhood,  although,  unhappily,  he  disbelieves
in  It ;  Phases  of  Faith,  p.  141,  sqq.    Cf.  Lect  IY.  p.  167.

*  Ps.  xlv.  3.  ^  Col.  i.  18 :  4v  iro<ri  irporrc^v.


24  Witness  of  the  Church  to  Christ's  true  Manhood.

its  true  and  typical  excellence  as  the  crowning  glory  of  the
visible  creation  of  God  \

This  reality  and  perfection  of  our  Lord's  Manhood  has  been
not  less  jealously  maintained  by  the  Church  than  it  is  clearly
asserted  in  the  pages  of  Scripture.  From  the  first  the  Church
has  taught  that  Jesus  Christ  is  *  Perfect  Man,  of  a  reasonable
Soul  and  Human  Flesh  subsisting/  It  is  sometimes  hinted
that  believers  in  our  Saviour's  Godhead  must  necessarily  enter-
tain some  prejudice  against  those  passages  of  Scripture  which
expressly  assert  the  truth  of  His  Manhood.  It  is  presumed  that
such  passages  must  be  regarded  by  them  as  so  many  difficulties"*
to  be  surmounted  or  evaded  by  a  theory  which  is  supposed  to  be
conscious  of  their  hostilty  to  itself.  Whereas,  in  truth,  to  a
Catholic  instinct,  each  declaration  of  Scripture,  whatever  be  its
apparent  bearing,  is  welcome  as  being  an  unveiling  of  the  Mind
of  God,  and  therefore  as  certainly  reconcileable  with  other  sides
of  truth,  whether  or  no  the  method  of  such  reconciliation  be
immediately  obvious.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  our  Lord's  Humanity
has  been  insisted  upon  by  the  great  Church  teachers  of  antiquity
not  less  earnestly  than  His  Godhead.  They  habitually  argue
that  it  belonged  to  His  essential  Truth  to  be  in  reality  what  He
seemed  to  be.  He  seemed  to  be  human;  therefore  He  was
Human  I*.      Yet  His  Manhood,  so  they  proceed  to  maintain,


*  Ps.  viii.  6-8.     Cp.  Heb.  ii.  6-10.

"*  Thus  *  Examination  of  Bampton  Lecturea,'  p.  250.  The  writer  thinks
that  our  Lord's  words  in  St.  Luke  iv.  18,  19 ;  St.  Matt.  xx.  23 ;  xxiii.  53 ;
St.  John  xiv.  28,  etc.,  are  as  little  to  be  reconciled  with  our  Lord's  true
Grodhead,  as  are  the  passages  in  which  He  claims  to  have  existed  before
Abraham  or  to  be  the  Judge  of  all  men,  with  true  human  goodness,  if,  after
all.  He  be  only  Man.  (See  Lect.  IV.)  Yet  surely  a  discussion  of  the  pro-
perties or  liabilities  of  the  human  body,  which  should  take  no  account  of
the  endowments  of  the  human  mind,  (foes  not  necessarily  deny  their  exist-
ence. Nor  is  it  to  be  placed  on  the  same  moral  level  with  the  language  of
an  adventurer,  who  should  claim  rights  by  hinting  that  he  possessed  powers
and  accomplishments,  to  which  nothing  corresponded  in  sober  fact.

o  St.  Lrenseus,  Adv.  Hser.  v.  i .  3  :  t\h\  it.^  t)v  IkvOpcoiros  i<paivero  livOpoovoSt
oUre  h  ^v  iit^  &Ai)06(as,  ^fietve  irvevixa  0€oO,  iirei  h.6parov  rh  irvev/uo,  oI?t€  aX4*
diia  ris  "fiv  iv  avr^^  oh  yh.p  ^v  ^Kuva  S.ir€p  i<paivero,  Tert.  De  Game  Christi,
cap.  5  :  '  Si  caro  cum  passionibus  ficta,  et  spiritus  ergo  cum  virtutibus  falsus.
Quid  dimidias  mendacio  Christum  ?  Totus  Veritas  est.  Maluit  crede  [non]
nasd  quam  ex  aliqud.  parte  mentiri,  et  quidem  in  Semet  ipsum,  ut  cari^em
gestaret  sine  ossibus  duram,  sine  musculis  solidam,  sine  sanguine  cruentam,
sine  tunic^  vestitam,  sine  fame  esurientem,  sine  dentibus  edentem,  sine
Ungu^  loquentem,  ut  phantasma  auribus  fait  sermo  ejus  per  imaginem
vocis.*  St.  Aug.  De  Div.  Qu.  83.  qu.  14 :  *  Si  phantasma  fuit  corpus  Christi,
fefellit  Christus,  et  si  fefellit,  V«>ritas  non  est.    Est  autem  Veritas  Christus.

[  LECT.


Importance  of  this  truth  to  the  life  of  the  soul.    25

would  have  been  fictitious,  if  any  one  faculty  or  element  of
human  nature  had  been  wanting  to  It.  Therefore  His  Eeason-
able  Soul  was  as  essential  as  His  Bodily  Frame  0.  Without  a
Reasonable  Soul  His  Humanity  would  have  been  but  an  animal
existence  P ;  and  the  intellectual  side  of  man's  nature  would  have
been  unredeemed  Q.  Nor  did  the  Church  in  her  collective  ca-
pacity ever  so  insist  on  Christ's  Godhead  as  to  lose  sight  of  the
truth  of  ffis  Perfect  Manhood.  Whether  by  the  silent  force  of
the  belief  of  her  children,  or  by  her  representative  writers  on
behalf  of  the  faith,  or  by  the  formal  decisions  of  her  councils,
she  has  ever  resisted  the  disposition  to  sacrifice  the  confession
of  Christ's  created  nature  to  that  of  His  uncreated  Godhead '.
She  kept  at  bay  intellectual  temptations  and  impulses  which
might  have  easily  overmastered  the  mind  of  a  merely  human
society.  When  Ebionites  were  abroad,  she  maintained  against
the  Docetse  that  our  Saviour's  body  was  not  fictitious  or  appari-
tional.  When  the  mutterings  of  that  Humanitarian  movement
which  culminated  in  the  great  scandal  of  Paulus  of  Samosata
were  distinctly  audible,  she  asserted  the  truth  of  our  Lord's
Human  Soul  against  Beryllus  of  Bostra  «.  When  Arianism  had
not  as  yet  ceased  to  be  formidable,  she  was  not  tempted  by
Apollinaris  to  admit  that  the  Logos  in  Christ  took  the  place  of
the  rational  element  in  man.  While  Nestorianism  was  still
vigorous,  she  condemned  the  Monophysite  formula  which  prac-
tically made  Christ  an  unincamate  God :  nor  did  she  rest  untO
the  Monothelite  echo  of  the  more  signal  error  had  been  silenced
by  her  assertion  of  the  reality  of  His  Human  Will.

Nor  is  the  Manhood  of  our  Saviour  prized  by  the  Church
only  as  a  revealed  dogma  intellectually  essential  to  the  formal

Non  ergo  phantasma  fuit  Corpus  Ejus.*  Docetism  struck  at  the  very  basis
of  truth,  by  sanctioning  Pyrrhonism.     St.  Iren.  Adv.  Haer.  iv.  33.

•  St.  Aug.  Ep.  187,  ad  Dardan.  n.  4:  'Non  est  Homo  Perfectus,  si  vel
anima  cami,  vel  animse  ipsi  mens  humana  defuerit.*    Confess,  vii.  c.  19.

P  St.  Aug.  De  Div.  Qu.  83,  qu.  80.  n.  i.

«  St.  Cyr.  Alex.  De  3tic.  c.  15.

'  It  may  suffice  to  quote  the  language  of  the  Council  of  Chalcedon,
A.D.  451 :  r4\€iov  rhv  aurhv  4v  ®€6t7}ti  kou  re\€iov  rhv  avrhv  iv  d.vdpoyir6TriTt,
Qehv  a\ri6co5  Koii  &vdpQfirov  iL\rj6ws,  rhv  ahrhv  ix  ^Ifvxvs  \oyiiais  Kcd  (rd>ixaros,
dfjLoo6(nov  Ty  Tlarpl  Karit  r^v  0€<Jt»jto  iccti  dfioovciov  rhv  avrhv  rifuv  Korit  ri)p
kvQptevSrtira,  Karh.  irdvra  Sfioiov  rifuv  x<^P^s  afiaprlas.  Routh,  Opusc.  ii.  78.
When  these  words  were  spoken,  the  cycle  of  possible  conteoversy  on  the
subject  was  complete.  The  Monothelite  question  had  virtually  been  settled
by  anticipation.

■  Socr.  H.  E.  ill.  7:  tlfvlfvxov  ftvou  rhv  ivayOotairfitravra.  Syn.  Best,
anno  244.

I]


26     yesus  Christ  is  God  in  no  equivocal  sense.

integrity  of  the  Creed.  Every  believing  Christian  knows  that
it  touches  the  very  heart  of  his  inner  life.  What  becomes  of
the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  if  the  Manhood
whereby  He  places  Himself  in  contact  with  us  men  is  but
unreal  and  fictitious  )  What  becomes  of  His  Human  Example,
of  His  genuine  Sympathy,  of  His  agonizing  and  world-
redeeming  Death,  of  His  plenary  representation  of  our  race
in  heaven,  of  the  recreative  virtue  of  His  Sacraments,  of  the
*  touch  of  nature'  which  makes  Him,  most  holy  as  He  is,  in
very  deed  kin  with  us  %  All  is  forthwith  uncertain,  evanescent,
unreal.  If  Christ  be  not  truly  Man,  the  chasm  which  parted
earth  and  heaven  has  not  been  bridged  over.  Qod,  as  before
the  Incarnation,  is  still  ayrful,  remote,  inaccessible.  Tertullian's
inference  is  no  exaggeration :  *  Cum  mendacium  deprehenditur

Christi  Caro omnia  quae  per  Camem  Christi  gesta  sunt,

mendacio  gesta  sunt Eversum  est  totum  Dei  opus*.'     Or,

as  St.  Cynl  of  Jerusalem  tersely  presses  the  solemn  argument :

C(  <j>apraa'fJLa  Iju  17  tvav6payinj(TiSf  (fyavraafia  Ka\  ^  aoarqpla  u.

2.  Let  it  be  observed,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  Nicene
assertion  of  our  Blessed  Lord's  Divinity  does  not  involve  any
tacit  mutilation  or  degradation  of  the  idea  conveyed  by  the
sacred  Name  of  God.  When  Jesus  Christ  is  said  by  His  Church
to  be  God,  that  word  is  used  in  its  natural,  its  absolute,  its
incommunicable  sense.  This  must  be  constantly  borne  in  mind,
if  we  would  escape  from  equivocations  which  might  again  and
again  obscure  the  true  point  before  us.  For  Arianism  will
confess  Christ's  Divinity,  i^  when  it  terms  Him  God,  it  may
really  mean  that  He  is  only  a  being  of  an  inferior  and  created
nature.  Socinianism  will  confess  Christ's  Divinity,  if  this  con-
fession involves  nothing  more  emphatic  than  an  acknowledge-
ment of  the  fact  that  certain  moral  features  of  God's  character
shone  forth  from  the  Human  Life  of  Christ  with  an  absolutely
unrivalled  splendour.  Pantheism  will  confess  Christ's  Divinity,
but  then  it  is  a  Divinity  which  He  must  share  with  the  uni-
verse. Christ  may  well  be  divine,  when  all  is  divine,  although
Pantheism  too  may  admit  that  Christ  is  divine  in  a  higher
sense  than  any  other  man,  because  He  has  more  clearly  recog-
nised or  exhibited  'the  eternal  oneness  of  the  finite  and  the
Infinite,  of  God  and  humanity.'  The  coarsest  forms  of  unbelief
will  confess  our  Lord's  Divinity,  if  they  may  proceed  to  add,
by  way  of  explanation,  that  such  language  is  but  the  echo  of

*  Adv.  Marc.  ill.  8,  ■  Oatech.  iv.  9.

[lect.


Christ  is  not  the  god  of  an  Apotheosis.       2  7

an  apotheosis,  informally  decreed  to  the  prophet  of  Nazareth  hy
the  fervid  but  uncritical  enthusiasm  of  His  Church.

No :  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  is  not  to  be  thus  emptied
of  its  most  solemn  and  true  significance.  It  is  no  mere  titular
distinction,  such  as  the  hollow  or  unthinking  flattery  of  a  mul-
titude might  yield  to  a  political  chief,  or  to  a  distinguished
philanthropist.  Indeed  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  by  His  own
teaching,  had  made  such  an  apotheosis  of  Himself  morally
impossible.  He  had,  as  no  teacher  before  Him,  raised,  ex-
panded, spiritualized  man's  idea  of  the  Being  and  Nature  of  the
Great  Creator.  Baur  has  remarked  that  this  higher  exhibition
of  the  solitary  and  incommunicable  Life  of  God  is  nowhere  so
apparent  as  in  that  very  Gospel  the  special  object  of  which  is
to  exhibit  Christ  Himself  as  the  eternal  Word  made  Flesh  ^.
Indeed  God  was  too  vividly  felt  to  be  a  living  Presence  by  the
early  Christians,  to  be  transformed  by  them  upon  occasion  into
a  decoration  which  might  wreathe  the  brow  of  any,  though  it
were  the  highest  human  virtue.  In  heathendom  this  was
naturally  otherwise.  Yet  animal  indulgence  and  intellectual
scepticism  must  have  killed  out  the  sense  of  primary  truths
which  nature  and  conscience  had  originally  taught,  before
imperial  Bome  could  feel  no  difficulty  in  decreeing  temples  and
altars  to  such  samples  of  our  race  as  were  not  a  few  of  the  men
who  successively  flUed  the  throne  of  the  Caesars  y.  The  Church,
with  her  eye  upon  the  King  Eternal,  Immortal,  Invisible  ^
could  never  have  raised  Jesus  to  the  full  honours  of  Divinity,
had  He  been  merely  Man.  And  Christianity  from  the  first  has
proclaimed  herself,  not  the  authoress  of  an  apotheosis,  but  the
child  and  the  product  of  an  Incarnation.

She  could  not  have  been  both.  Speaking  historically,  an
apotheosis  belongs  to  the  Greek  world;    while  half-mimicries

«  Vorlesungen  tlber  N.  T.  Theologie,  p.  354.

7  See  Dollinger,  Heidentliuiu  nnd  Judenthum,  bk.  viii.  pt.  3.  §  a.  The
city  of  Cjzicus  was  deprived  of  its  freedom  for  being  nnwilliiig  to  worship
Augustus  (Tac.  Ann.  iv.  36).  Thrasea  Psetus  was  held  guilty  of  treason
for  refusing  to  believe  in  the  deification  of  Poppsea  (Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  22).
Caligula  insisted  on  being  worshipped  as  a  god  during  his  lifetime  (Sue-
tonius, Gains,  zxi.  22).  On  the  number  of  cattle  sacnficed  to  Donutian,
see  Pliny,  Panegyr.  xi.  The  worship  of  Antinous,  who  had  lived  on  terms
of  criminal  intercourse  with  Hadrian,  was  earnestly  promoted  by  that
Emperor.  Dollinger  reckons  fifty-three  apotheoses  between  Csesar  and
Diocletian,  fifteen  of  which  were  of  ladies  belonging  to  the  Imperial  family.
For  the  discredit  into  which  the  Imperial  apotheosis  fell  among  the  literary
classes,  see  Boissier,  Beligion  Bomaine,  i.  175,  sqq.

»  I  Tim.  i.  17.

A


28  Christ  is  not  God  in

of  the  Incarnation  are  characteristically  oriental.  Speaking  phi-^
losophically,  the  god  of  an  apotheosis  is  a  creation  of  human
thought  or  of  human  fancy;  the  God  of  an  incarnation  is
presupposed  as  an  objectively  existing  Being,  Who  manifests
Himself  by  it  in  the  sphere  of  sense.  Speaking  religiously,
belief  in  an  apotheosis  must  be  fatal  to  the  primary  movements
of  piety  towards  its  object,  whenever  men  are  capable  of  earnest
and  honest  reflection ;  while  it  is  incontestable  that  the  doctrine
of  an  incarnation  stimulates  piety  in  a  degree  precisely  pro-
portioned to  the  sincerity  of  the. faith  which  welcomes  it.  Thus
the  ideas  of  an  apotheosis  and  an  incarnation  stand  towards
each  other  in  historical,  philosophical,  and  religious  contrast.
Need  I  add  that  religiously,  philosophically,  and  historically,
Christianity  is  linked  to  the  one,  and  is  simply  incompatible
with  the  other?

No :  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  is  not  such  divinity  as  Pantheism
might  ascribe  to  Him.  In  the  belief  of  the  Church  Jesus
stands  alone  among  the  sons  of  men  as  He  of  Whom  it  can
be  said  without  impiety,  that  He  is  not  merely  divine,  but
God.  Such  a  restriction  in  favour  of  a  Siogle  Personality,
contradicts  the  very  vital  principle  of  Pantheistic  thought,
Schelling  appropriately  contends  that  the  Indians  with  their
many  incarnations  shew  more  intelligence  respecthig  the  real
relations  of  God  and  the  world  than  is  implied  by  the  doctrine
of  a  solitary  incarnation,  as  taught  in  the  Creed  of  Christendom.
Upon  Pantheistic  grounds,  this  is  perfectly  reasonable ;  although
it  might  be  added  that  any  limited  number  of  incarnations,
however  considerable,  would  only  approximate  to  the  real
demands  of  the  theory  which  teaches  that  God  is  incarnate
in  everything.  But  then,  such  divinity  as  Pantheism  can
ascribe  to  Christ  is,  in  point  of  fact,  no  divinity  at  all.  When
God  is  nature,  and  nature  is  God,  everything  indeed  is  divine,
but  also  nothing  is  Divine;  and  Christ  shares  this  phantom-
divinity  with  the  universe,  nay  with  the  agencies  of  moral
evil  itself.  In  truth,  our  God  does  not  exist  in  the  appre-
hension of  Pantheistic  thinkers;  since,  when  such  truths  as
creation  and  personality  are  denied,  the  very  idea  of  God  is
fundamentally  sapped,  and  although  the  prevailing  belief  of
mankind  may  stfll  be  humoured  by  a  discreet  retention  of
its  conventional  language,  the  broad  practical  result  is  in  reality
neither  more  nor  less  than  Atheism.

You  may  indeed  remind  me  of  an  ingenious  distinction,
by  which  it  is  suggested  that  the  idea  of  God  is  not  thus

[leot.


the  sense  of  Pantheism.  2  9

sacrifieed  in  Pantheistic    systems,   and  on  the   ground  that
although   God  and  the  universe   are  sttbstarUially  identical,
thej  are  not  logically  so.     Logically  speaking,  then,  you  pro-
ceed to  distinguish  between  Qod  and  the  universe.    You  look
out  upon  the  universe,  and  you  arrive  at  the  idea  of  Ood  by
a  doable  process,  by  a  process  of  abstraction,  and  by  a  process
of  synthesis.     In  the  visible  world  you   come  into  sensible
contact  vnth  the  finite,  the  contingent,  the  relative,  the  im-
perfect, the  individual.     Then,  by  a  necessary  operation  of  your
reason,  you  disengage  from  these  ideas  their  correlatives ;  you
ascend  to   a  contemplation   of  infinity,   of  necessity,    of  the
absolute,  the  perfect,  the  universal.     Here  abstraction  has  done
its  work,  and   synthesis  begins.     By  synthesis  you   combine
the  general  ideas  which  have  been  previously  reached  through
abstraction.     These  general  ideas  are  made  to  converge  in  your
brain  under  the  presidency  of  one  central  and  unifying  idea,
which  you  call  Ood.     You  are  careful  to  insist  that  this  god
is  not  a  real  but  an  ideal  being;   indeed  it  appears  that  he
is  so  ideal,  that  he  would  cease  to  be  god  if  he  could  be  supposed
to  become  real.     God,  you  say,  is  the  *  Idea '  of  the  universe ;
the  universe  is  the  *  realization  *   of  God.      The  god  who  is
enthroned  in  your  thought  nvust  have  abandoned  all  contact
with  reality;  let  him  re-enter  but  for  a  moment  upon  the
domain  of  reality,  and,  such  are  the  exigencies  of  your  doctrine,
that  he  must  forthwith  be  compelled  to  abdicate  his  throned
But  meanwhile,  as  you  contend,  he  is  logically  distinct  from
the  universe ;  and  you  repel  with  some  warmth  the  orthodox
allegation,  that  to  identify  him  mbstantiolly  with  the  universe,
amounts  to  a  practical  denial  of  his  existence.

Yet  after  all,  let  us  ask  what  is  really  gained  by  thus
distinguishing  between  a  logical  and  a  substantial  identity?
What  is  this  god,  who  is  to  be  thus  rescued  from  the
religious  ruins  which  mark  the  track  of  Pantheistic  thought?
Is  he,  by  the  terms  of  your  own  distinction,  anything  more
than  an  *  Idea ' ;  and  must  he  not  vary  in  point  of  perfection
with  the  accuracy  and  exhaustiveness  of  those  processes  of
abstraction  and  synthesis  by  which  you  undertake  to  construct
him?  And  if  this  be  so,  is  it  worth  our  while  to  discuss
the  question  whether  or  not  so  precarious  an  'Idea'  was  or
was  not  incarnate  in  Jesus  Christ?  Upon  the  terms  of  the
theory,  would  not  an  incarnation   of  God  be  fatal  to   His

*  Cf.  M.  Garo*8  notice  of  Yacherot*!  La  M^taphysique  et  la  Science,
Id^  de  Dien,  p.  265,  sqq. ;  especially  p.  289,  sqq.


30  Christ  is  not  merely  divine

'logicaV  that  is  to  Hia  only  admitted  mode  of  existence!
or  would  sach  divinity,  if  we  could  ascribe  it  to  Jesus  Christ,
be  anything  higher  than  the  fleeting  and  more  or  less  imperfect
speculation  of  a  finite  brain  f

Certainly  Pantheism  would  never  have  attained  to  so  strong
a  position  as  that  which  it  actually  holds  in  European  as  well
as  in  Asiatic  thought,  unless  it  had  embodied  a  great  element
of  truth,  which  is  too  often  ignored  by  some  arid  Theistic
systems.  To  that  element  of  truth  we  Christians  do  justice,
when  we  confess  the  Omnipresence  and  Incomprehensibility
of  €k)d;  and  still  more,  when  we  trace  the  gracious  con-
sequences of  His  actual  Incarnation  in  Jesus  Christ.  But  we
Christians  know  also  that  the  Great  Creator  is  essentially
distinct  from  the  work  of  His  Hands,  and  that  He  is  What
He  is,  in  utter  independence  of  the  feeble  thought  whereby
He  enables  us  to  apprehend  His  Existence.  We  know  that
all  which  is  not  Himself,  is  upheld  in  being  from  moment
to  moment  by  the  fiat  of  His  Almighty  Will.  We  know  that
His  Existence  is,  strictly  and  in  the  highest  sense,  PersonaL
Could  we  deny  these  truths,  it  would  be  as  easy  to  confess
the  Divinity  of  Christ,  as  it  would  be  impossible  to  deny  the
divinity  of  any  created  being.  If  we  are  asked  to  believe
in  an  impersonal  God,  who  has  no  real  existence  apart  from
creation  or  from  created  thought,  in  order  that  we  may  expe-
rience fewer  philosophical  difficulties  in  acknowledging  our
Lord's  Divinity,  we  reply  that  our  faith  cannot  consent  thus
^propter  vitam  vivendi  perdere  catLsasJ  We  cannot  thus  sacri-
fice the  substance  of  the  first  truth  of  the  Creed  that  we
may  retain  the  phraseology  of  the  second.  We  dare  not  thus
degrade,  or  rather  anniMlate,  the  very  idea  of  God,  even  for
the  sake  of  securing  a  semblance  (more  it  could  not  be)  of
those  precious  consolations  which  the  Christian  heart  seeks
and  finds  at  the  Manger  of  the  Divine  Child  in  Bethlehem,  or
before  the  Cross  of  the  Lord  of  Glory  on  Mount  Calvary.

No:  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  is  not  divinity  in  the  sense  of
Socinianism.  It  is  no  mere  manifestation  whether  of  the  highest
human  goodness,  or  of  the  noblest  of  divine  gifts.  It  is  not
merely  a  divine  presence  vouchsafed  to  the  soul;  it  is  not
merely  an  intercommunion  of  the  soul  and  God,  albeit  main-
tained even  ceaselessly — ^maintained  in  its  fulness  from  moment
to  moment.  Such  indeed  was  the  high  grace  of  our  Lcnrd'g
sinless  Humanity,  but  that  grace  was  not  itself  His  Divinity,
For  a  work  of  grace,  however  beautiful  and  perfect,  is  one  thing :

[lect.


in  the  sense  of  Socinianism.  3 1

an  Uncreated  Divine  Essence  is  another.  Li  the  Socinian  sense
of  the  term,  you  all,  my  Christian  brethren,  are,  or  may  be,
divine ;  you  may  shew  forth  God*s  moral  glory,  if  less  fully,  yet
not  less  truly,  than  did  Jesus.  By  adoption,  you  too  are  sons
of  God ;  and  the  Church  teaches  that  each  of  you  was  made
a  partaker  of  the  Divine  Nature  at  his  baptism.  But  suppose
that  neither  by  act,  nor  word,  nor  thought,  you  have  done  aught
to  forfeit  that  blessed  gift,  do  I  forthwith  proceed  to  profess
my  belief  in  your  divinity  %  And  why  not  1  Is  it  not  because
I  may  not  thus  risk  a  perilous  confusion  of  thought,  issuing
in  a  degradation  of  the  Most  Holy  Name  1  Your  life  of  grace
is  as  much  a  gift  as  your  natural  life ;  but  however  glorious
may  be  the  gift,  aye,  though  it  raise  you  from  the  dust  to  the
very  steps  of  God's  Throne,  the  gift  is  a  free  gift  after  all,  and
its  greatness  does  but  suggest  the  interval  which  parts  the  reci-
pient from  the  inexhaustible  and  boundless  Life  of  the  Giver.

Most  true  indeed  it  is  that  the  perfect  holiness  which  shone
forth  from  our  Lord's  Human  Life  has  led  thousands  of  souls
to  perceive  the  truth  of  His  essential  Godhead.  When  once  it
is  seen  that  His  moral  greatness  is  really  unique,  it  is  natural
to  seek  and  to  accept,  as  a  basis  of  this  greatness.  His  possession
of  a  unique  relationship  to  the  Fountain  of  all  goodness  ^.  Thus
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  leads  us  naturally  on  to  those  dis-

^  '  Je  mehr  sich  so  dem  erkennenden  Glauben  die  Ueberzengnng  von  der
Einzigkeit  der  sittlichen  Hoheit  Cbristi  erschliesst,  deato  natUrlicher  ja
nothwendiger  muss  es  nun  auch  von  diesem  festen  Punkte  aus  demselben
Glauben  werden,  mit  Yerstandniss  Christo  in  das  G«biet  Seiner  Beden  zu
folgen,  wo  Er  Seiner  eigenthlimlichen  und  einzigen  Beziehung  zu  dem  Yater
gedenkt.  Jesu  Heiligkeit  und  Weisheit,  durcn  die  Er  unter  den  sUndigen,
vielirrenden  Menschen  einzig  dasteht,  weiset  so,  <2a  #»«  nicht  kann  noch
wiU  als  rein  subjektives,  menschliches  Produkt  angesehen  werden,  auf  einen
ilbemcttilrlichen  Ursprung  Seiner  Person,  Diese  muss,  um  inmitten  der
Siinderwelt  begreiflich  zu  sein,  aus  einer  eigenthiimlichen  und  wunderbar
schopferischen  That  Gottes  abgeleitet,  ja  es  muss  in  Christus,  wenn  doch
Gott  nicht  deistisch  von  der  Welt  gelrennt  sondem  in  Idebe  ihr  nahe  und
wesentlich  als  liebe  zu  denken  ist,  von  Gott  aus  betraohtet  eine  Incarnation
gottlicher  liebe,  also  gdttlichen  Wesens  gesehen  werden,  was  Ihn  als  den
Punkt  erscheinen  lasst,  wo  Gi>tt  und  die  Menscheit  einzig  imd  innigst
geeinigt  sind.  Freilich,  man  lasst  sich  in  diesem  StUcke  noch  so  oft
durcb  einen  abstracten,  subjectiven  Moralismus  irre  machen,  der  die  Tiefe
des  Ethischen  nicht  ^asst.  Aber  wer  tiefer  blickend  auch  von  einer
ontologischen  und  metaphysiachen  Bedeutung  des  JSthischen  weiss,  dem
muss  die  Einzigkeit  der  Heiligkeit  und  Liebe  Christi  ihren  Grund  in  einer
Einzigkeit  auch  Seines  Wesens  haben,  diese  aber  in  Gottes  Sich  mittheil>
ender,  ofifenbarender  liebe.'  (Domer,  Person  Christi,  Bd.  ii.  pp.  I  an,
i2ia.)

I]


32     Christ  is  not  the  *  inferior  god'  of  Arianism.

courses  in  St.  John's  Gospel  in  which  Christ  unvieils  His
Essential  Oneness  with  the  Father.  But  the  ethical  premiss
is  not  to  be  confased  with  the  ontological  conclusion.  It  is  true
that  a  boundless  love  of  man  shone  forth  from  the  Life  of
Christ;  it  is  true  that  each  of  the  Divine  attributes  is  com-
mensurate with  the  Divine  Essence.  It  is  true  that  *he  that
dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him.'  But  it  is
not  true  that  every  moral  being  which  God  blesses  by  His
Presence  is  God.  The  Divine  Presence,  as  vouchsafed  to  Chris-
tian men,  is  a  gifb  superadded  to  and  distinct  from  the  created
personality  to  which  it  is  accorded:  there  was  a  time  when
it  had  not  been  given,  and  a  time  may  come  when  it  wHl  be
withdrawn.  Such  a  Presence  may  indeed  in  a  certain  secondary
Ben6e  *  divinize '  a  created  person  c,  robing  him  with  so  much  of
moral  beauty  and  force  of  deity  as  a  creature  can  bear.  But
this  blessed  ^  does  not  justify  us  in  treating  the  creature  to
whom  it  is  vouchsafed  as  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  God.  "When
Socinianism  deliberately  names  God,  it  means  equally  with
ourselves,  not  merely  a  Perfect  Moral  Being,  not  merely  Perfect
Love  and  Perfect  Justice,  but  One  Whose  Knowledge  and
Whose  Power  are  as  boundless  as  His  Love.  It  does  not  mean
that  Christ  is  God  in  this,  the  natural  sense  of  the  word,  when
it  confesses  His  moral  divinity;  yet,  beyond  all  controversy,
this  full  and  natural  sense  of  the  term  id  the  sense  of  the
Nicene  Creed.

No :  Jesus  Christ  is  not  divine  in  the  sense  of  Arius.  He
is  not  the  most  eminent  and  ancient  of  the  creatures,  decorated
by  the  necessities  of  a  theological  controversy  with  That  Name
which  a  serious  piety  can  dare  to  yield  to  One  Being  alone.
Ascribe  to  the  Christ  of  Arius  an  antiquity  as  remote  as  you
will  from  the  age  of  the  Incarnation,  place  him  at  a  height
as  high  as  any  you  can  conceive,  above  the  highest  archangel ;
still  what,  after  all,  is  this  ancient,  this  super-angelic  being
but  a  creature  who  had  a  beginning,  and  who,  if  the  Author  of
his  existence  should  so  will,  may  yet  cease  to  be  1  Such  a  being,
however  exalted,  is  parted  from  the  Divine  Essence  by  a
fathomless  chasm ;  whereas  the  Christ  of  Catholic  Christendom
is  internal  to  That  Essence ;  He  is  of  one  Substance  with  the
Father — Sfwova-ios  t6  TLarpi :  and  in  this  sense,  as  distinct  from
any  other.  He  is  properly  and  Hterally  Divine.

This  assertion  of  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  depends  on

"  2  St.  Peter  i.  4 :   Xva  Hiii  ro&rwv   [bc.   iwwyyeXuLdrwv]  y4pri<rB€  0€ias

[  LECT-


The  dodrineimplies  Hypostatic  distinctions  in  tzOD.33

a  truth  beyond  itself.  It  postulates  the  existence  in  Ood  of
certain  real  distinctions  having  their  necessary  basis  in  the
Essence  of  the  Gk)dhead.  That  Three  such  distinctions  exist
is  a  matter  of  Bevelation.  In  the  common  language  of  the
Western  Church  these  distinct  forms  of  Being  are  named  Per-
sons. Yet  that  term  cannot  be  employed  to  denote  Them,
without  considerable  intellectual  caution.  As  applied  to  men,
Person  implies  the  antecedent  conception  of  a  species,  which  is
determined  for  the  moment,  and  by  the  force  of  the  expression,
into  a  single  incommunicable  modification  of  being  d.  But  the
conception  of  species  is  utterly  inapplicable  to  That  One  Supreme
Essence  Which  we  name  God ;  and,  according  to  the  terms  of
the  Catholic  doctrine,  the  same  Essence  belongs  to  Each  of  the
Divine  Persons.  Not  however  that  we  are  therefore  to  suppose
nothing  more  to  be  intended  by  the  revealed  doctrine  than  three
varying  relations  of  God  in  His  dealings  with  the  world.  On  the
contrary.  Bis  Self-Eevelation  has  for  its  basis  certain  eternal  dis-
tinctions in  His  Nature,  which  are  themselves  altogether  anterior
to  and  independent  of  any  relation  to  created  life.     Apart  from

^  So  mnB  the  definition  of  Boethius.  'Persona  est  naturs  rationalis
mdividna  substantia.*  (De  Pen.  et  Duabus  Natoris,  o.  3.)  Upon  which
St. Thomas  observes:  'Conyeniens  est  ut  hoo  nomen  (persona)  de  Deo
dicatnr ;  non  tamen  eodem  modo  qno  dicitur  de  creaturis,  sed  ezcellentiori
mode'  (Smm.  Th.,  i*.  qu.  29.  a.  3.)  When  the  present  use  of  ohiria  and
i)ic6<rroj(Tis  had  become  fixed  in  the  East,  St.  Gregory  Nazianzen  tells  U8  that
in  the  formula  '  /tfa  o^cfo,  rpm  t)iro0T(i(rct9,'  ohiT^  siffnifiee  r^v  ^i)aiv  r^s
0€t6T7iTos,  while  vTroffrdtrtis  points  to  rhs  rwv  rpiQp  tHidrriras,  He  observes
that  with  this  sense  the  Westerns  were  in  perfect  agreement ;  but  he  deplores
the  poverty  of  their  theological  language.  They  had  no  expression  really
equivalent  to  trSffraa-iSf  as  contrasted  with  ovirla,  and  thev  were  therefore
obliged  to  employ  the  Latin  translation  of  irp6(r»irov  that  they  might  avoid
the  appearance  of  believing  in  three  ovirlou,  (Orat.  xxi.  46.)  St.  Augustine
laments  the  necessity  of  having  to  say  '  quid  Tria  sint,  Quae  Tria  esse  fides
vera  pronuntiat.*  (De  Trin.  vii..  n.  7.)  '  Cum  ergo  quseritur  quid  Tria,  vel
quid  Tres,  conferimus  nos  ad  inveniendum  aliquod  speoiale  vel  generale
nom^i,  quo  complectamur  htec  Tria :  neque  occurrit  animo^  quia  excedit
tupereminentia  Divinitatia  usitati  eloquii  facuUatem.^  (Ibid.)  'Ckmi  00-
naretur  humana  inopia  loquendo  proferre  ad  hominum  sensui,  quod  in
secretario  mentis  pro  captu  tenet  de  Domino  Deo  Creatore  suo,  sive  per
piam  fidem,  sive  per  qualemcunque  inteUigentiam,  timuit  dicer e  ires  essen^
tias,  ne  intelli^eretur  in  Hid  Summd  JEqualitate  ulla  diversittu,  Bursus
non  esse  tria  qusedam  non  poterat  dicere,  quod  Sabellius  quia  dixit,  in
haeresim  lapsus  est.  .  .  .  Qusesivit  quid  Tria  diceret,  et  dixit  substantia*
sive  personas,  quihus  nominibus  non  diversitatem  intelliffi  voluit,  sed  singU'
laritatem  noUiU.'  (De  Trin.  vii.  n.  9.)  Cf.  Serm.  cxvii.  7,  ocxv.  3,  ocxliv.
4.  On  the  term  Person,  see  farther  St.  Athan.  Treatises,  i.  155,  note  1
(lib.  Fath.)
I]  D


34        Objectors,  (i)  The  (esthetic  historians.

these  distinctions,  the  Christian  Bevelation  of  an  Eternal  Father-
hood, of  a  true  Incarnation  of  God,  and  of  a  real  communication
of  His  Spirit,  is  but  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  dream «.  These
three  distinct  *  Subsistences  ^^  which  we  name  Father,  Son,  and
Spirit,  while  they  enable  us  the  better  to  understand  the  mystery
of  the  Self-sufficing  and  Blessed  Life  of  God  before  He  sur-
rounded Himself  with  created  beings,  are  also  strictly  compatible
with  the  truth  of  the  Divine  Unity  8.  And  when  we  say  that
Jesus  Christ  is  God,  we  mean  that  in  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,
the  second  of  these  Persons  or  Subsistences,  One  in  Essence
with  the  First  and  with  the  Third,  vouchsafed  to  become
Incarnate.

IV.  The  position  then  which  is  before  us  in  these  lectures  is
briefly  the  following :  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  being  truly  and
perfectly  Man,  is  also,  according  to  His  Higher  Pre-existent
Nature,  Very  and  Eternal  God ;  since  it  was  the  Second  Person
of  the  Ever  Blessed  Trinity,  Who,  at  the  Incarnation,  robed
Himself  with  a  Human  Body  and  a  Human  Soul.  Such  explicit
language  will  of  course  encounter  objections  in  more  than  one
quarter  of  the  modem  world ;  and  if  of  these  objections  one  or
two  prominent  samples  be  rapidly  noticed,  it  is  possible  that,  at
least  in  the  case  of  certain  minds,  the  path  of  our  future  discus-
sion will  be  cleared  of  difficulties  which  are  at  present  more  or
less  distinctly  supposed  to  obstruct  it.

(a)  One  objection  to  our  attempt  in  these  lectures  may  be
expected  to  proceed  from  that  graceful  species  of  literary  activity
which  may  be  termed,  without  our  discrediting  it,  Historicsd
JBlstheticism.  The  protest  will  take  the  form  of  an  appeal  to
the  sense  of  beauty.  True  beauty,  it  will  be  argued,  is  a
creation  of  nature ;  it  is  not  improved  by  being  meddled  with.
The  rocky  hill-side  is  no  longer  beautiftd  when  it  has  been
quarried ;  nor  is  the  river-course,  when  it  has  been  straightened
and  deepened  for  purposes  of  navigation ;  nor  is  the  forest  which

•  Of.  "Wilberforce  on  the  Incamatioiii  p.  15a.

'  '  Subsistentis,  relationes  lubsiBtentes.*  Sum.  Th.  i*.  qu.  29.  a.  a ;  and
qu.  40.  a.  2.

»  This  compatibility  is  e:q)re86ed  by  the  doctrine  of  the  tt^pvx&^vis — the
safeguard  and  witness  of  the  Divine  Unity ;  St.  John  ziv.  1 1 ;  I  Cor.  ii.  1 1 :
the  force  of  which  is  not  impaired  by  St.  John  ziv.  30,  xvii.  ai,  23 ;  i  St.
John  iv.  15,  16,  V.  ao.  This  doctrine,  as  'protecting  the  Unity  of  Gk)d,
without  entrenching  on  the  perfections  of  the  Son  and  the  Spirit,  may  even
be  called  the  characteristio  of  Catholic  Trinitarianism,  as  opposed  to  all
counterfeits,  whether  philosophical,  Arian,  or  oriental.*  Newman's '  Arians,'
p.  190,  1st  ed.    Of.  Athan.  Treatises,  ii.  403,  note  i.

[lect.


The  (Esthetic  historians*  35


lias  been  fenced  and  planted,  and  made  to  assume  the  disciplined
air  of  a  symmetrical  plantation.  In  like  manner,  you  urge,  that
incomparable  Figure  whom  we  meet  in  the  pages  of  the  New
Testament,  has  suffered  in  the  apprehensions  of  orthodox
Christians,  from  the  officious  handling  of  a  too  inquisitive
Scholasticism.  As  cultivation  robs  wild  nature  of  its  beauty,
even  so,  you  maintain,  is  'definition'  the  enemy  of  the  £sdrest
creations  of  our  sacred  literature.  You  represent  *  definition'  as
ruthlessly  invading  regions  which  have  been  beautified  by  the
freshness  and  originality  of  the  moral  sentiment,  and  as  sub-
stituting for  the  indefinable  graces  of  a  living  movement,  the
grim  and  stiff  artificialities  of  a  heartless  logic.  You  wonder  at
the  bad  taste  of  men  who  can  bring  the  decisions  of  Nicsea  and
Ohalcedon  into  contact  with  the  story  of  the  Gospels.  What  is
there  in  common,  you  ask,  between  these  dead  metaphysical
formulse  and  the  ever-living  tenderness  of  that  matchless  Life  f
You  protest  that  you  would  as  readily  essay  to  throw  the  text  of
Homer  or  of  Milton  into  a  series  of  syllogisms,  that  you  would
with  as  little  scruple  scratch  the  paint  from  a  masterpiece
of  Eaffaelle  with  the  intention  of  subjecting  it  to  a  chemical
analysis,  as  go  hand  in  hand  with  those  Church-doctors  who
force  Jesus  of  Nazareth  into  rude  juxtaposition  with  a  world  of
formal  thought,  from  which,  as  you  conceive,  He  is  severed  by
the  intervention  of  three  centuries  of  disputation,  and  still  more
by  all  which  raises  the  highest  forms  of  natural  beauty  above  the
awkward  pedantry  of  debased  art.

Well,  my  brethren,  if  the  object  of  the  Gospel  be  attained
when  it  has  added  one  more  chapter  to  the  poetry  of  human
history,  when  it  has  contributed  one  more  Figure  to  the  world's
gallery  of  historical  portraits,  upon  which  a  few  educated  persons
may  periodically  expend  some  spare  thought  and  feeling ;— if
this  be  so,  you  are  probably  right.  Plainly  you  are  in  pursuit
of  that  which  may  nourish  sentiment,  rather  than  of  that  which
can  support  moral  vigour  or  permanently  satisfy  the  instinct  of
truth.  Certainly  your  sentiment  of  beauty  may  be  occasionally
shocked  by  those  direct  questions  and  rude  processes,  which  are
necessary  to  the  investigation  of  intellectual  truth  and  to  the
sustenance  of  moral  life.  You  would  repress  these  processes ;
you  would  silence  these  questions ;  or  at  least  you  would  not
explicitly  state  your  own  answer  to  them.  Whether,  for  instance,
the  stupendous  miracle  of  the  Eesurrection  be  or  be  not  as  cer-
tain as  any  event  of  public  interest  which  has  taken  place  in
Europe  during  the  present  year,  is  a  point  which  does  not  affecti
i]  P  2


36        Where  and  What  is  Our  Lord  now?

as  it  seems,  the  worth  or  the  completeness  of  your  Christology.
Your  Christ  is  an  Epic ;  and  you  will  suffer  no  prosaic  scholiast
to  try  his  hand  upon  its  pages.  Your  Christ  is  a  portrait ;  and,
as  we  are  all  agreed,  a  portrait  is  a  thing  to  admire,  and  not  to
touch.

But  there  is  a  solemn  question  which  must  he  asked,  and
which,  if  a  man  is  in  earnest,  he  will  inevitably  ask ;  and  that
question  will  at  once  carry  him  beyond  the  narrow  horizon  of
a  literary  SBstheticism  in  his  treatment  of  the  matter  before  us.
. . .  My  brethren,  where  is  Jesus  Christ  now  1  and  what  is  He  %
Does  He  only  speak  to  us  from  the  pages  which  were  traced  by
His  followers  eighteen  centuries  ago  %  Is  He  no  more  than  the
first  of  the  shadows  of  the  past,  the  first  of  memories,  the  first  of
biographies,  the  most  perfect  of  human  ideals  1  Is  He  only  an
Ideal,  after  alii  Does  He  reign,  only  in  virtue  of  a  mighty
tradition  of  human  thought  and  feeling  in  His  favour,  which
creates  and  supports  His  imaginary  throne?  Is  He  at  this
moment  a  really  living  Being  %  And  if  living,  is  He  a  human
ghost,  flitting  we  know  not  where  in  the  unseen  world,  and
Himself  awaiting  an  award  at  the  hands  of  the  Everlasting  1  or
is  He  a  super-angelic  Intelligence,  sinless  and  invested  with
judicial  and  creative  powers,  but  as  fer  separated  from  the
inaccessible  Life  of  God  as  must  be  even  the  first  of  creatures
from  the  everlasting  Creator  %  Does  He  reign,  in  any  true  sense,
either  on  earth  or  in  heaven  1  or  is  His  Regal  Government  in
any  degree  independent  of  the  submission  or  tiie  resistance  which
His  subjects  may  offer  to  it  ?  Is  He  present  personally  as  a  living
Power  in  this  our  world  1  Has  He  any  certain  relations  to  you  %
Does  He  think  of  you,  care  for  you,  act  upon  you  1  Can  He  help
you  %  Can  He  save  you  from  your  sins,  can  He  blot  out  their
stains  and  crush  their  power,  can  He  deliver  you  in  your  death-
agony  from  the  terrors  of  dissolution,  and  bid  you  live  with  Him
in  a  brighter  world  for  ever?  Can  you  approach  Him  now,
commune  with  Him  now,  cling  to  Him  now,  become  one  with
Him  now,  not  by  an  unsubstantial  act  of  your  own  imaginations,
but  by  an  actual  objective  transaction,  making  you  incorporate
with  His  Life  %  Or  is  the  Christian  answer  to  these  most  press-
ing questions  a  weakly  delusion,  or  at  any  rate  too  definite  a
statement ;  and  must  we  content  ourselves  with  the  analysis  of
an  historical  Character,  while  we  confess  that  the  Living  Per-
sonality which  once  created  and  animated  It  may  or  may  not  be
God,  may  or  may  not  be  able  to  hear  us  and  help  us,  may  or  may
not  be  in  distinct  conscious  existence  at  this  moment,  may  or

[legi.


Objectors.  (2)  The  anti-doctrinal  moralists.     37

may  not  have  been  altogether  annihilated  some  eighteen  hundred
yeat«  ago  1  Do  you  urge  that  it  is  idle  to  ask  these  questionB,
since  we  have  no  adequate  materials  at  hand  for  dealing  with
them  %  That  is  a  point  which  it  is  hoped  may  be  more  or  less
cleared  up  during  the  progress  of  our  present  enquiry.  But  if
such  questions  are  to  remain  unanswered,  do  not  ^ut  your  eyes
to  the  certain  consequence.  A  Christ  who  is  conceived  of  as
only  pictured  in  an  ancient  literature  may  indeed  furnish  you
witli  the  theme  of  a  magnificent  poetry,  but  he  cannot  be  the
present  object  of  your  religious  life.  A  religion  must  have  for
its  object  an  actually  Laying  Person :  and  the  purpose  of  the
definitions  which  you  deprecate,  is  to  exhibit  and.assert  the  exact
force  of  the  revealed  statements  respecting  the  Eternal  Life  of
Christ,  and  so  to  place  Him  as  a  Living  Person  in  all  His  Divine
Majesty  and  all  His  Human  Tenderness  before  the  eye  of  the
soul  which  seeks  Him.  When  you  fairly  commit  yourself  to
the  assertion  that  Christ  is  at  this  moment  living  at  all,  you
leave  the  strictly  historical  and  sesthetical  treatment  of  the  Qos-
pel  record  of  His  Life  and  character,  and  you  enter,  whether  it
be  in  a  Catholic  or  in  an  heretical  spirit,  upon  the  territory  of
Church  definitions.  In  your  little  private  sphere,  you  bow  to
that  practical  necessity  which  obliged  great  Fathers  and  Coun-
cils, often  much  against  their  will,  to  taJce  counsel  of  the  Spirit
Who  illuminated  the  collective  Church,  and  to  give  point  and
strength  to  Christian  faith  by  authoritative  elucidations  of  Chris-
tian doctrine.  Nor  are  you  therefore  rendered  insensible  to
the  beauty  of  the  Gospel  narrative,  because  you  have  discovered
that  thus  to  ascertain  and  bear  in  mind,  so  far  as  Revelation
warrants  your  effort,  what  is  the  exact  Personal  dignity  and
what  the  enduring  prerogatives  of  Him  in  Whom  you  have  be-
lieved, is  in  truth  a  matter  of  the  utmost  practical  importance
to  your  religious  life.

(3)  But  the  present  enquiry  may  be  objected  to,  on  higher
groimds  than  those  of  literary  and  sesthetic  taste.  '  Are  there
not,'  it  will  be  pleaded,  '  moral  reasons  for  deprecating  such  dis-
cussions %  Surely  the  dogmatic  and  theological  temper  is  suf-
ficiently distinct  from  the  temper  which  aims,  beyond  everything
else,  at  moral  improvement.  Surely  good  men  may  be  indifferent
divines,  while  accomplished  divines  may  be  fiEilse  or  impure  at
heart.  Nay  more,  are  not  morality  and  theology,  not  merely
distinct,  but  also  more  or  less  antagonistic  interests  %  Does  not
the  entliusiastic  consideration  of  dogmatic  problems  tend  to
divert  men's  minds  from  that  attention  which  is  due  to  the


38    C ha  fining  on  the  study  of  Chrisfs  character,

practical  obligations  of  life  %  Is  not  the  dogmatic  temper,  you
ask,  rightly  regarded  as  a  species  of  "intellectual  ritualian"
which  lulls  men  into  the  belief  that  they  have  true  religion  at
heart,  when  in  point  of  fact  they  are  merely  gratifying  a  private
taste  and  losing  sight  of  honesty  and  sober  living  in  the  in-
toxicating  study  of  the  abstractions  of  controversy?  On  the
other  hand,  will  not  a  high  morality  shrink  with  an  instinctive
reverence  from  the  clamorous  and  positive  assertions  of  the  theo-
logians ?  In  particular,  did  Jesus  Christ  HimseK  require  at  the
hands  of  His  disciples  a  dogmatic  confession  of  belief  in  His
Divinity  ^  1  Was  He  not  content  if  they  acted  upon  His  moral
teaching,  if  they  embraced  that  particular  aspect  of  moral  obli-
gations which  is  of  the  highest  importance  to  the  well-being  of
society,  and  which  we  have  lately  termed  the  Enthusiasm  of
Humanity r  This  is  what  is  urged;  and  then  it  is  added,
*  Shall  we  not  best  succeed  in  doing  our  duty  if  we  try  better
to  understand  Christ's  Human  Character,  while  we  are  careful
to  keep  clear  of  those  abstract  and  transcendental  questions
about  Him,  which  at  any  rate  have  not  promoted  the  cause  of
moral  progress  V

This  language  is  notoriously  popular  in  our  day;  but  the  sub-
stantial objection  which  it  embodies  has  been  already  stated  by
a  writer  whom  it  is  impossible  to  name  without  mingled  admi-
ration  and  sorrow, — admiration  for  his  pure  and  lofty  humanity,
-sorrow  for  the  profound  errors  which  parted  him  in  life  and
in  death  from  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  *Love  to  Jesus
Christ,'  says  William  Channing,  *  depends  very  little  on  our  con-
ception of  His  rank  in  the  scale  of  being.  On  no  other  topic
have  Christians  contended  so  earnestly,  and  yet  it  is  of  secondary
importance.  To  know  Jesus  Christ  is  not  to  know  the  precise
place  He  occupies  in  the  Universe;  it  is  something  more:  it
is  to  look  into  His  mind;  it  is  to  approach  His  soul;  to
comprehend  His  spirit,  to  see  how  He  thought  and  felt  and
purposed  and  loved.  .  .  I  am  persuaded,'  he  continues,  *that
controversies  about  Christ's  Person  have  in  one  way  done
great  injury.  They  have  turned  attention  from  His  character.
Suppose  that,  as  Americans,  we  should  employ  ourselves  in
debating  the  questions,  where  Washington  was  bom,  and  from
what  spot  he  came  when  he  appeared  at  the  head  of  our
armies ;  and  that  in  the  fervour  of  these  contentions  we  should
overlook  the  character  of  his  mind,  the  spirit  that  moved  within

'^  Ecce  Homo,  p.  69,  sqq.

[lsct.


Moral  obligation  of  facing  the  dogmatic  question.  39

him,  . .  .  how  unprofitahly  should  we  be  employed  %  Who  b
it  that  imderstands  Washington  %  Is  it  he  that  can  settle  his
rank  in  the  creation,  his  early  history,  his  present  condition  ?  or
he  to  whom  the  soul  of  that  good  man  is  laid  open,  who  com-
prehends and  sympathizes  with  his  generous  purposes  ^  V

Channing's  illustration  of  his  position  in  this  passage  is  im-
portant. It  unconsciously  but  irresistibly  suggests  that  indif-
ference to  the  clear  statement  of  our  Lord's  Divinity  is  linked
to  a  fundamental  assumption  of  its  falsehood.  Doubtless  Wash-
ington's birthplace  and  present  destiny  is  for  the  Americans
an  altogether  unpractical  consideration,  when  placed  side  by
side  with  the  study  of  his  character.  But  the  question  had
never  been  raised  whether  the  first  of  religious  duties  which
a  creature  should  pay  to  the  Author  and  End  of  his  existence
was  or  was  not  due  to  Washington.  Nobody  has  ever  asserted
that  mankind  owes  to  the  founder  of  the  American  Eepublic  the
tribute  of  a  prostrate  adoration  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  Had  it
occurred  to  Channing's  mind  as  even  possible  that  Jesus  Christ
was  more  than  a  mere  man  who  lived  and  died  eighteen  cen-
turies ago,  he  could  not  have  permitted  himself  to  make  use  of
such  an  illustration.  To  do  justice  to  Chauning,  he  had  much
too  clear  and  fine  an  intellect  to  imagine  that  the  fundamental
question  of  Christianity  could  be  ignored  on  moral  grounds.
Those  who  know  anything  of  his  works  are  aware  that  his  own
opinion  on  the  subject  was  a  very  definite  one,  and  that  he  has
stated  the  usual  arguments  on  behalf  of  the  Socinian  heresy
with  characteristic  earnestness  and  precision.

My  brethren,  all  are  agreed  as  to  the  importance  of  studying
and  copying  the  Human  Character  of  Jesus  Christ.  Whether  it
be  really  possible  to  have  a  sincere  admiration  for  the  Character
of  Jesus  Christ  without  believing  in  His  Divinity,  is  a  question
which  I  shall  not  shrink  from  considering  hereafter  i.  Whether
a  true  morality  does  not  embrace,  as  one  part  of  it,  an  honest
acceptance  and  profession  of  all  attainable  religious  Truth,  is  a
question  which  men  can  decide  without  being  theologians.  As
for  reverence,  there  is  a  time  to  keep  silence,  and  a  time  to
speak.  Reverence  will  assuredly  speak,  and  that  plainly,  when
ralence  would  dishonour  its  Object :  the  reverence  which  is
always  silent  as  to  matters  of  belief  may  be  but  the  drapery
of  a  profound  scepticism,  which  lacks  the  courage  to  unveil
itself  before  the  eyes  of  men.      Certainly  our  Lord  did  not

*  Works,  Tol.  ii.  p.  145.  i  See  Lecture  IV.


40        Moral  relations  of  belief  and  worship.

■  ■■■■■»■  II       IM  I    —     I.      ■  ■■  ■  III  ■»^»^»^l       I  ■   !■     II  I   IIPII  ^  III  I   ■ ■  I  ■■■■I       ^i^— ^— ^^^

Biinself  exact  from  His  first  followers,  as  an  indispensable
condition  of  discipleship,  any  profession  of  belief  in  His  God-
bead.  But  wby  %  Simply  because  His  requirements  are  pro-
portioned to  tbe  opportunities  of  mankind.  He  bad  taugbt
as  men  were  able  to  bear  His  teaching  k.  Although  His
precepts,  His  miracles,  ELis  character,  His  express  language,
all  pointed  to  the  Truth  of  His  Godhead,  the  conscience  of
mankind  was  not  laid  tmder  a  formal  obligation  to  acknow-
ledge It  untU  at  length  He  had  been  'defined 'Ho  be  *the  Son
of  God  with  power,  according  to  the  Spirit  of  Holiness,  by
the  Kesurrection  from  the  dead.'  Our  present  moral  relation,
then,  to  the  truth  of  Christ's  Divinity  differs  altogether  from
that  in  which  His  first  disciples  were  placed.  It  is  a  simple
matter  of  history  that  Christendom  has  believed  the  doctnne
for  eighteen  centuries;  but,  besides  this,  the  doctrine  chal-
lenges at  our  hands,  as  I  have  already  intimated,  a  moral  duty
as  its  necessary  expression  both  in  ^e  sanctuary  of  our  own
thought  and  before  the  eyes  of  men.

Let  us  face  this  aspect  of  the  subject  in  its  concrete  and
every-day  form.  Those  whom  I  now  see  around  me  are  without
exception,  or  almost  without  exception,  members  of  the  Church
of  England.  If  any  here  have  net  the  happiness  to  be  commu-
nicants, yet,  at  least,  my  brethren,  you  all  attend  the  ordinary
Sunday  morning  service  of  our  Church.  In  the  course  of  doing
so,  you  sing  the  Te  Deum,  you  repeat  several  times  the  Gloria
Patri ;  but  you  also  kneel  down,  or  profess  to  kneel  down,  as
joining  before  God  and  man  in  the  Litany.  Now  the  second
petition  in  the  Litany  runs  thus :  '  O  Gk>d  the  Son,  Bedeemer  of
the  world,  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners.'  What  do
you  seriously  mean  to  do  when  you  join  in  that  petition  %  Whom
are  you  really  addressing?  What  is  the  basis  and  ground  of
your  act  %  What  is  its  morality  %  If  Jesus  Christ  is  merely  a
creature,  is  He  in  a  position  to  have  mercy  upon  youl  Are
you  doing  dishonour  to  the  Most  High  by  addressing  Christ
in  these  terms  at  all)  Channing  has  said  that  the  petition,
'  By  Thine  agony  and  bloody  sweat,  by  Thy  cross  and  passion,
Good  Lord,  deliver  us,'  is  appalling^.  On  the  Socinian  hy-
pothesis, Channing's  language  is  no  exaggeration :  the  Litany
is  an  'appalling'  prayer,  as  the  Gloria  Patri  is  an  'appalling'
doxology.    Nor  would  you  escape  from  this  moral  difficulty,

^  St.  John  xvi.  la.  ^  Bom.  i.  4:  rod  6picr04rros  vlov  Btov,

m  Unitarian  Christiamty,  Work^  vol.  ii.  p.  541.

[legt.


Objectors.  (3)  The  unreflecting  pietists.       41

if  tuihappily  you  should  refuse  to  join  in  the  services  of  the
Church.  Your  conscience  cannot  decline  to  decide  in  favour
of  the  general  duty  of  adoring  Jesus  Christ,  or  against  it.
And  this  decision  presupposes  the  resolution,  in  one  sense  or
the  other,  of  the  dogmatic  question  on  which  it  depends.
Christ  either  is,  or  He  is  not  Gk)D.  The  worship  which  is
paid  to  Christ  either  ought  to  be  paid  to  Him,  or  it  ought
to  be,  not  merely  withheld,  but  denounced.  It  is  either
rigorously  due  from  all  Christians  to  our  Lord,  or  it  is  an
outrage  on  the  rights  of  God.  In  any  case  to  take  part  in
a  service  which,  like  our  Litany,  involves  the  prostrate  adora-
tion of  Jesus  Christ,  without  explicitly  recognising  His  right
to  receive  such  adoration,  is  itself  immoral.  If  to  be  true
and  honest  in  our  dealings  with  each  other  is  a  part  of  mere
natural  virtue,  surely  to  mean  what  we  say  when  we  are
dealing  with  Heaven  is  not  less  an  integral  part  of  morality ".
I  say  nothing  of  that  vast  unseen  world  of  thought  and  feeling
which  in  the  soul  of  a  Christian  believer  has '  our  Blessed
Saviour  for  its  Object,  and  the  whole  moral  justification  of
which  depends  upon  the  conception  which  we  form  of  Christ's
'rank  in  the  scale  of  being.'  It  is  enough  to  point  out  to
you  that  the  discussion  in  hand  has  a  practical,  present,
and  eminently  a  moral  interest,  unless  it  be  consistent  with
morality  to  use  in  the  presence  of  God  and  man,  a  language
which  we  do  not  believe,  or  as  to  the  meaning  of  which  we  are
content  to  be  indifferent.

(y)  Once  more.  It  may  be  urged,  from  a  widely  different
quaxter,  that  our  enquiry  is  dangerous,  if  not  to  literary  or
moral  interests,  yet  to  the  spirit  of  simple  Christian  piety.
'  Take  care,'  so  the  warning  may  run,  *  lest,  instead  of  preaching
the  Gospel,  you  should  be  merely  building  up  a  theological
pyramid.  Beware  of  sacrificing  spiritual  objects  to  intellectual
ones.  Surely  the  great  question  for  a  sinner  to  consider  is
whether  or  not  he  be  justified  before  God :  do  not  then  let  us
bury  the  simple  Gospel  beneath  a  heap  of  metaphysics.'

Now  the  matter  to  be  considered  is  whether  this  absolute

■  Bp.  Butler,  Analogy,  ii.  i.  p.  157.  'Christianity,  even  what  Ib  peca*
liarly  so  called,  as  distinguished  from  natural  religion,  has  yet,  somewhat
very  important,  even  of  a  moral  nature.  For,  the  office  of  our  Lord  being
made  known,  and  the  relation  He  stands  in  to  us,  the  obligation  of  reli-
gious  regards  to  Him  is  plainly  moral,  as  much  as  charity  to  mankind  is ;
rince  this  obligation  arises,  before  external  commands,  immediately  out  of
that  His  office  and  relation  itself.'


42   Christian  piety  requires  a  definite  Christology.

•

separation  between  what  is  assumed  to  be  the  *  simple  Gospel*
and  what  is  called  *  metaphysics*  is  really  possible.  In  point  of
£act  the  simple  Gospel,  when  we  come  to  examine  it,  is  neces-
sarily on  one  side  metaphysicaL  Educated  men,  at  least,  will
not  be  scared  by  a  term,  which  a  scarcely  pardonable  ignorance
may  suppose  to  denote  nothing  more  than  the  trackless  region
of  intellectual  failure.  K  the  Gospel  is  real  to  you;  if  you
believe  it  to  be  true,  and  possess  it  spiritually  and  intel-
lectually; you  cannot  but  see  that  it  leads  you  on  to  the
frontier  of  a  world  of  thought  which  you  may  yourselves
shrink  from  entering,  but  which  it  is  not  prudent  to  de-
preciate. You  say  that  the  main  question  is  to  know  that
you  are  justified?  Very  well;  but,  omitting  all  other  con-
siderations, let  me  ask  you  one  question :  Who  is  the  Justifier  ?
Can  He  really  justify  if  He  is  only  Man  1  Does  not  His
power  to  'save  to  the  uttermost  those  that  come  unto  God  by
Him'  depend  upon  the  fact  that  He  is  Himself  Divine?  Yet
when,  with  St.  John,  you  confess  that  He  is  the  Eternal  Logos,
you  are  dealing  quite  as  distinctly  with  a  question  of  *  meta-
physics,' as  if  you  should  discuss  the  value  of  ovo-ia  and  wro-
oTa<rt£  in  primitive  Christian  Theology.  It  is  true  that  such
discussions  will  carry  you  beyond  the  region  of  Scripture
terminology;  but,  at  least  to  a  sober  and  thoughtful  mind,
can  it  really  matter  whether  a  term,  such  as  *  Trinity,'  be  or
be  not  in  Scripture,  if  the  area  of  thought  which  it  covers
be  identical  with  that  contained  in  the  Scripture  statements  ^  %
And,  to  undervalue  those  portions  of  truth  which  cannot  be
made  rhetorically  or  privately  available  to  excite  religious
feeling,  is  to  accept  a  principle  which,  in  the  long  run,  is
destructive  of  the  Faith.  In  Germany,  Spener  the  Pietist  held
no  mean  place  among  the  intellectual  ancestors  of  Faulus  and  of
Strauss.  In  England,  a  gifted  intellect  has  traced  the  'phases'
of  its  progressive  disbelief;  and  if,  in  its  downward  course,  it
has  gone  so  far  as  to  deny  that  Jesus  Christ  was  even  a
morally  righteous  Man,  its  starting-point  was  as  nearly  as
possible  that  of  the  earnest  but  shortsighted  piety,  which  ima-
gines that  it  can  dare  actively  to  exercise  thought  on  the
Christian  Eevelation,  and  withal  to  ignore  those  ripe  decisions
which  we  owe  to  the  illuminated  mind  of  Primitive  Christendom.


•  Sum.  Th.  I*,  qu.  29.  a.  3.  Waterland,  Works,  iii.  65a.  Importance  of
Doctrine  of  H.  Trin.  c.  7.  'The  sense  of  Scripture  i»  Scripture.*  Dr.  Mill's
Letter  on  Dr.  Hampden  s  Bampton  Lectures,  p.  14.     See  Lect.  VIII.

[lect.


Warnings  and  hopes*  43

There  is  no  question  between  ns,  my  brethren,  as  to  the
supreme  importance  of  a  personal  understanding  and  contract
between  the  single  soul  and  the  Eternal  Being  Who  made  and
Who  has  redeemed  it.  But  this  understandmg  must  depend
upon  ascertained  Truths,  foremost  among  which  is  \hat  of  the
Godhead  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  in  these  lectures  an  attempt
will  be  made  to  lay  bare  and  to  re-assert  some  few  of  the
bases  upon  which  that  cardinal  Truth  itself  reposes  in  the
consciousness  of  the  Church,  and  to  kindle  perchance,  in  some
souls,  a  fresh  sense  of  its  unspeakable  importance.  It  will
be  our  object  to  examine  such  anticipations  of  this  doctrine
as  are  found  in  the  Old  Testament  P,  to  note  how  it  is  implied
in  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  %  and  how  inseparable  it  is  from
His  recorded  Consciousness  of  His  Personality  and  Mission  r,
to  trace  its  distinct,  although  varying  assertion  in  the  writings
of  His  great  Apostles',  and  in  the  earliest  ages  of  His
Church^,  and  finally  to  shew  how  intimate  and  important
are  its  relations  to  all  that  is  dearest  to  the  heart  and  faitb
of  a  Christian  '^.

It  must  be  a  ground  of  rejoicing  that  throughout  these
lectures  we  shall  keep  thus  close  to  the  Sacred  Person  of  our
Lord  Himself.  And  if,  indeed,  none  of  us  as  yet  believed
in  His  Godhead,  it  might  be  an  impertinence  on  the  part
of  the  preacher  to  suggest  any  spiritual  advice  which  takes
for  granted  the  conclusion  of  his  argument.  But  you  who,
thank  God,  are  Christians  by  living  conviction  as  well  as  by
baptismal  privilege,  must  already  possess  too  strong  and  too
clear  a  faith  in  the  truth  before  us,  to  be  in  any  sense  de-
pendent on  the  success  or  the  failure  of  a  feeble  human  effort
to  exhibit  it.  You  at  least  will  endeavour,  as  we  proceed,
to  bear  steadily  in  mind,  that  He  of  Whom  we  speak  and
think  is  no  mere  tale  or  portrait  of  the  ancient  world,  no
dead  abstraction  of  modem  or  of  mediaeval  thought,  but  a
living  Being,  Who  is  an  observant  witness  alike  of  the  words
spoken  in  His  Name  and  of  the  mental  and  moral  response
which  they  elicit.  If  we  must  needs  pass  in  review  the  erring
thoughts  and  words  of  men,  let  us  be  sure  that  our  final
object  is  not  a  criticism  of  error,  but  the  clearer  apprehension
and  possession  of  truth.  They  who  believe,  may  by  reason  of
the  very  loyalty  and  fervour  of  their  devotion,  so  anxiously


P  Lect.  n.

«  Lect.  ni.

'Lect.  IV.

•  Lect.  V,  VL

*  Lect.  VII.

•  Lect  Vni.

A

44  Warnings  and  hopes.

and  eagerly  watch  the  fleeting,  earth-bom  mists  which  for
a  moment  have  threatened  to  veil  the  Face  of  the  Sun  of
Eighteousness,  as  to  forget  that  the  true  weal  and  safety
of  the  soul  is  only  assured  while  her  eye  is  persistently  fixed
on  His  imjfierishable  glory.  They  who  have  Imown  the  aching
misery  of  earnest  doubt,  may  perchance  be  encouraged,  like
the  once  sceptical  Apostle,  to  probe  the  wounds  with  which
from  age  to  age  error  has  lacerated  Christ's  sacred  form,  and
thus  to  draw  from  a  nearer  contact  with  the  Divine  Eedeemer
the  springs  of  a  fresh  and  deathless  faith,  that  shall  win  and
own  in  Him  to  all  eternity  the  unclouded  Presence  of  its  Lord
and  God.


[lect.


LECTUEE  n.


ANTICIPATIONS  OF  THE  DOCTRINE  IN  THE  OLD

TESTAMENT.

The  Scripture,  foreseeing  ih<U  God  would  Justify  the  heathen  through
faith,  preached  before  the  Oospel  unto  Abraham^  saying.  In  thee  shall
all  nations  he  blessed, — Gal.  iii.  8.

If  we  endeayoar  to  discover  how  often,  and  by  what  modes
of  statement,  such  a  doctrine  as  that  of  our  Lord's  Divinity
is  anticipated  in  the  Old  Testament,  our  conclusion  will  be
materially  affected  by  the  belief  which  we  entertain  respecting
the  nature  and  the  structure  of  Scripture  itself.  At  first  sight,
and  judged  by  an  ordinary  literary  estimate,  the  Bible  pre-
sents an  appearance  of  being  merely  a  large  collection  of  bete-
rogeneous  writings.  Historical  records,  ranging  over  many
centuries,  biographies,  dialogues,  anecdotes,  catalogues  of  moral
maxima,  and  accounts  of  social  experiences,  poetry,  the  most
tonchingly  plaintive  and  the  most  buoyantly  triumphant,  pre-
dictions, exhortations,  warnings,  varying  in  style,  in  authorship,
in  date,  in  dialect,  are  thrown,  as  it  seems,  somewhat  arbi-
trarily into  a  single  volume.  No  stronger  lie  is  supposed  to
have  bound  together  materials  so  various  and  so  ill-assorted,
than  the  interested  or  the  too  credulous  industry  of  some
clerical  caste  in  a  distant  antiquity,  or  at  best  than  such
uniformity  in  the  general  type  of  thought  and  feeling  as  may
naturally  be  expected  to  characterize  the  literature  of  a  nation
or  of  a  race.  But  beneath  the  differences  of  style,  of  language,
and  of  method,  which  are  undeniably  prominent  in  the  Sacred
Books,  and  which  appear  so  entirely  to  absorb  the  attention
of  a  merely  literary  observer,  a  deeper  insight  will  discover  in
Scripture  such  manifest  unity  of  drift  and  purpose,  both  moral
and  intellectual,  as  to  imply  the  continuous  action  of  a  Single
Mind.  To  this  unity  Scripture  itself  bears  witness,  and  no-
where more  emphatically  than  in  the  text  before  us.  Observe
that  St.  Paid  does  not  treat  the  Old  Testament  as  being  to


46  Principle  of  an  organic  unity  in  Holy  Scripture.

him  what  Hesiod,  for  instance,  became  to  the  later  Greek
world.  He  does  not  regard  it  as  a  great  repertorium  or  store-
house of  quotations,  which  might  be  accidentally  or  feuicifdllj
employed  to  illustrate  the  events  or  the  theories  of  a  later
age,  and  to  which  accordingly  he  had  recourse  for  purposes
of  literary  ornamentation.  On  the  contrary,  St.  Paul's  is  the
exact  inverse  of  this  point  of  view.  According  to  St.  Paul,
the  great  doctrines  and  events  of  the  Gospel  dispensation
were  directly  anticipated  in  the  Old  Testament.  If  the  sense
of  the  Old  Testament  became  patent  in  the  New,  it  was  be-
cause the  New  Testament  was  already  latent  in  the  Old^.
TLpotboiviTa  ^  i\  ypa<P^  ori  ck  niareas  fkKoiol  ra  tOvt)  6  Oc^r,  irpoevrjy^

yekUroTo  r^  *A^/>aa/i.  Scripture  is  thus  boldly  identified  with
the  Mind  Which  inspires  it ;  Scripture  is  a  living  Providence.
The  Promise  to  Abraham  anticipates  the  work  of  the  Apostle ;
the  earliest  of  the  Books  of  Moses  determines  the  argument  of
the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians.  Such  a  position  is  only  intelligible
when  placed  in  the  light  of  a  belief  in  the  fundamental  Unity
of  all  Bevelation,  underlying,  and  strictly  compatible  with  i^
superficial  variety.  And  this  true,  internal  Unity  of  Scripture,
even  when  the  exact  canonical  limits  of  Scripture  were  still
unfixed,  was  a  common  article  of  belief  to  all  Christian  an-
tiquity. It  was  common  ground  to  the  sub-apostolic  and  to
the  Nicene  age ;  to  the  East  and  to  the  West ;  to  the  School
of  Antioch  and  to  the  School  of  Alexandria;  to  mystical  in-
terpreters like  St.  Ambrose,  and  to  literalists  like  St.  Chry-
sostom;  to  cold  reasoners,  such  as  Theodoret,  and  to  fervid
poets  such  as  Ephrem  the  Syrian ;  to  those  who,  with  Origen,
conceded  much  to  reason,  and  to  those  who,  with  St.  Cyril
or  St.  Leo,  claimed  much  for  faith.  Nay,  this  belief  in  the
organic  oneness  of  Scripture  was  not  merely  shared  by  schools
and  writers  of  divergent  tendencies  within  the  Church ;  it  was
shared  by  the  Church  herself  wiiii  her  most  vehement  heretical
opponents.  Between  St.  Athanasius  and  the  Arians  there  was
no  question  as  to  the  relevancy  of  the  reference  in  the  book
of  Proverbs  ^  to  the  pre-existent  Person  of  our  Lord,  although
there  was  a  vital  difference  between  them  as  to  the  true  sense
and  force  of  that  reference.  Scripture  was  believed  to  contain
an  harmonious  and  integral  body  of  Sacred  Truth,  and  each

*  St.  Aug.  Qusest.  in  Ex.  qn.  73 :  'qnanqnam  et  inVetere  NoTnm  lateat,
et  in  Novo  Vetus  pateat.*

^  Prov.  yiii.  2a.  Cf.  St.Athan.  Orat.  c.  Arian.  ii.  44.*  p.  Ii3f  ed.
Bright.

[lect.


Principle  of  an  organic  unity  in  Holy  Scripture.  47

part  of  that  body  was  treated  as  being  more  or  less  directly,
more  or  less  ascertainably,  in  correspondence  with  the  rest.
This  belief  expressed  itself  in  the  world-wide  practice  of  quoting
from  any  one  book  of  Scripture  in  illustration  of  the  mind
of  any  other  book.  Instead  of  illustrating  the  sense  of  each
writer  only  from  other  passages  in  his  own  works,  the  existence
of  a  sense  common  to  all  the  Sacred  Writers  was  recognised,
and  each  writer  was  accordingly  intei'preted  by  the  language
of  the  others.  To  a  modem  naturalistic  critic  it  might  seem
a  culpable,  or  at  least  an  undiscriminating  procedure,  when
a  Father  illustrates  the  Apostolical  Epistles  by  a  reference
to  the  Pentateuch,  or  even  one  Evangelist  by  another,  or  the
dogmatic  sense  of  St.  Paul  by  that  of  St.  John.  And  un-
questionably, in  a  merely  human  literature,  such  attempts  at
illustration  would  be  misleading.  The  different  intellectual
horizons,  modes  of  thought,  shades  and  turns  of  feeling,  which
constitute  the  peculiarities  of  different  writers,  debar  us  from
ascertaining,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  the  exact  sense  of
any  one  writer,  except  from  himself.  In  an  uninspired  lite-
rature, such  as  the  Greek  or  the  English,  it  would  be  absurd
to  appeal  to  a  primitive  annalist  or  poet  with  a  view  to  de-
termining the  meaning  of  an  author  of  some  later  age.  We
do  not  suppose  that  Hesiod  'foresaw'  the  political  doctiines
of  Thucydides,  or  the  moral  speculations  of  Aristotle.  We  do
not  expect  to  find  in  Chaucer  or  in  Clarendon  a  clue  to  or
a  forecast  of  the  true  sense  of  Macaulay  or  of  Tennyson.  No
one  has  ever  imagined  that  either  the  Greek  or  the  English
literature  is  a  whole  in  such  sense  that  any  common  purpose
runs  persistently  throughout  it,  or  that  we  can  presume  upon
the  existence  of  a  common  responsibility  to  some  one  line  of
thought  in  the  several  authors  who  have  created  it,  or  that
each  portion  is  under  any  kind  of  obligation  to  be  in  some
profound  moral  and  intellectual  conformity  with  the  rest.
But  the  Church  of  Christ  has  ever  believed  her  Bible  to  be
throughout  and  so  emphatically  the  handiwork  of  the  Eternal
Spirit,  that  it  is  no  absurdity  in  Christians  to  cite  Moses
as  foreshadowing  the  teaclung  of  St.  Paul  and  of  St.  John.
According  to  the  tenor  of  Christian  belief,  Moses,  St.  Paul,
and  St.  John  are  severally  regarded  as  free  yet  docile  organs  of
One  Infallible  Intelligence,  Who  places  them  at  different  points
along  the  line  of  His  action  in  human  history ;  Who  through
them  and  others,  as  the  ages  pass  before  Him,  slowly  unveils
His  Mind;  Who  anticipates  tibe  fulness  of  later  revelations


48  Scripture  onCyyet  a  record  of  successive  Revelations.

by  the  hints  contained  in  EUs  earlier  disclosures ;  Who  in  the
compass  of  His  boundless  Wisdom  ^reacheth  from  one  end  to
another  mightily,  and  sweetly  ordereth  all  things  ^^

Such  a  belief  in  the  organic  unity  of  Scripture  is  not  fatal
to  a  recognition  of  those  differences  between  its  several  por-
tions, upon  which  some  modem  critics  would  lay  an  exaggerated
emphasis.  When  St.  Paul  recognises  an  organic  connection  be-
tween the  distant  extremities  of  the  records  of  Bevelation,  he
does  not  debar  himself  from  recognising  differences  in  form,
in  matter,  in  immediate  purpose,  which  part  the  Law  of  Moses
from  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament  d.  The  unlikeness
which  subsists  between  the  head  and  the  lower  limbs  of  an
animal  is  not  fatal  to  their  common  share  in  its  nervous
system  and  in  the  circulation  of  its  blood.  Nay  more,  this
oneiiess  of  Scripture  is  a  truth  compatible  with  the  existence
within  its  compass  of  different  measures  and  levels  of  Bevela-
tion.  The  unity  of  consciousness  in  a  human  life  is  not
forfeited  by  growth  of  knowledge,  or  by  difference  of  circum-
stances, or  by  varieties  of  experience.  Novatian  compares
the  unfolding  of  the  mind  of  God  in  Bevelation  to  the  gradual
breaking  of  the  dawn,  attempered  as  it  is  to  the  human  eye,
which  after  long  hours  of  darkness  could  not  endure  a  sudden
outflash  of  noonday  sunlight®.  The  Fathers  trace  in  detail  the
application  of  this  principle  to  successive  revelations  in  Scrip-
ture, first,  of  the  absolute  Unity  of  God,  and  afterwards,  of
Persons  internal  to  that  Unity  *!,  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount
contrasts  its  own  higher  moral  level  with  that  of  the  earlier
dispensation  s.  Ethically  and  dogmatically  the  New  Testament
is  an  advance  upon  the  Old,  yet  both  are  within  the  Unity
of  Inspiration.  Different  degrees  of  light  do  not  imply  any
intrinsic  contrariety.  If  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  points
out  the  moral  incapacity  of  the  Mosaic  Law,  the  Epistle  to
the  Hebrews  teaches  us  its  typical  and  unfailing  significance.
If  Christian  converts  from  Judaism  had  been  *  called  out  of

«  Wifid.  viii.  I.

^  e.  g.  cf.  Gal.  ill.  23-25 ;  Kom.  x.  4 ;  Heb.  viii.  13.

•  Novatian,  de  Trin.  c.  26 :  '  Gradatim  enim  et  per  incrementa  fra^tas
humana  nutriri  debet, . .  periculosa  enim  sunt  qusB  magna  sunt,  si  repentina
smit.  Nam  etiam  lux  solis  subita  post  tenebras  splendore  nimio  insuetis
oculis  non  ostendet  diem,  sed  potius  faciet  csecitatem.'

'  St.  Epiphanius,  Hseres.  74. 10 ;  St.  Gregor.  Nazianzen,  Orat.  zxzi.  n.  36:
^Kfipvaffe  <pavep&s  ^  IloXai^t  rhv  Ilar^pa,  rhv  Ttbp  hfivSpdrfpoy,  Gf.  Knhn,
Dogmatik,  Band  ii.  p.  5.  •

'  St.  Matt.  V.  21,  22,  27,  28,  33,  34;  comp.  Ibid.  zii.  5>8.

[legt.


Earliest  hints  respecting  the  Divine  nature^     49

darkness  into  God's  marvellous  light  h,'  yet  still  *  whatsoever
things  were  written  aforetime,'  in  the  Jewish  Scriptures,  '  were
written  for  the  learning'  of  Christians  \

You  will  have  anticipated,  my  hrethren,  the  bearing  of  these
remarks  upon  the  question  before  us.  There  are  explicit  refer-
ences to  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Divinity  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment, which  we  can  only  deny  by  discrediting  the  historical
value  of  the  documents  which  contain  them.  But  there  are
also  occult  references  to  this  doctrine  which  we  are  not  likely
to  detect,  unless,  while  seeking  them,  we  are  furnished  with  an
exegetical  principle,  such  as  was  that  of  the  organic  unity  of
Scripture,  as  understood  by  the  Ancient  Church.  The  geologist
can  inform  us  from  surface  indications,  where  and  at  what
depths  to  find  the  coal-field  or  the  granite;  but  we  can  all
recognise  granite  or  coal  when  we  see  them  in  the  sunlight.
Let  us  then  first  place  ourselves  under  the  guidance  of  the
great  minds  of  antiquity,  with  a  view  to  discovering  some  of
those  more  hidden  allusions  to  the  doctrine  which  are  found
in  earlier  portions  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures;  and  let
us  afterwards  trace,  however  hastily,  those  clearer  intimations
of  it  which  abound  in  the  later  Messianic  prophecies,  and  which
are  indeed  so  plain,  that '  whoso  runs  may  read  them.'

I.  (a)  At  the  beginning  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  there  appear
to  be  intimations  of  the  existence  of  a  plurality  of  Persons
within  the  One  Essence  of  God.  It  is  indeed  somewhat  remark-
able that  the  full  significance  of  the  two  words  J,  by  which  Moses
describes  the  primal  creative  act  of  God,  was  not  insisted  upon
by  the  primitive  Church  teachers.  It  attracted  attention  in  the
middle  ages,  and  it  was  more  particularly  noticed  after  the  re-
vival of  Hebrew  Letters.  When  Moses  is  describing  this  Divine
action,  he  joins  a  singular  verb  to  a  plural  noun.  Language,  it
would  seem,  thus  submits  to  a  violent  anomaly,  that  she  may
the  better  hint  at  the  presence  of  Several  Powers  or  Persons,
Who  not  merely  act  together,  but  Who  constitute  a  Single  Agent.
We  are  indeed  told  that  this  Name  of  God,  Elohim,  was  borrowed
from  Polytheistic  sources,  that  it  was  retained  in  its  plural  form
in  order  to  express  majesty  or  magnificence,  and  that  it  was
then  united  to  singular  verbs  and  adjectives  in  order  to
make  it  do  the  work  of  a  Monotheistic  Creed  ^.  But  on  the
other  hand,  it  is  confessed  on  all  sides  that  the  promulgation
and  protection  of  a  belief  in  the  Unity  of  God  was  the  central

**  I  St.  Pet.  ii.  9.  i  Rom.  xv.  4.  J  Gen.  1.  i,  D^n^«  «Ti.

*  Herder,  Geist  der  Hebr,  Poesie,  Bd.  i.  p.  48.
n]  E


50    The  inner  Life  of  God  adumbrated  in  Genesis.

and  dommant  object  of  the  Mosaic  literature  and  of  the  Mosaic
legislatioiL  Surely  such  an  object  would  not  have  been  im-
perilled for  no  higher  purpose  than  that  of  amplification.  There
most  haTe  been  a  truth  at  stake  which  demanded  the  risk.  The
Hebrew  language  could  have  described  God  by  singular  forms
such  as  El,  Eloah,  and  no  question  would  have  been  raised  as  to
the  strictly  Monotheistic  force  of  those  words.  The  Hebrew
^guAgd  might  have  *  amplified '  the  idea  of  God  thus  conveyed
by  less  dangerous  processes  than  the  employment  of  a  plural
form.  Would  it  not  have  done  so,  unless  the  plural  form  had
been  really  necessary,  in  order  to  suggest  some  complex  mystery
of  God's  inner  Life,  until  that  mystery  should  be  more  clearly
unveiled  by  the  explicit  Revelations  of  a  later  day  1  The  analo-
gies of  the  language  may  indeed  prove  that  the  plural  form  of
the  word  had  a  majestic  force  ;  but  the  risk  of  misunderstanding
would  surely  have  c'ounterbalanced  this  motive  for  using  it,  un-
less a  vital  need  had  demanded  its  retention.  Nor  will  the
theory  that  the  plural  noun  is  merely  expressive  of  majesty  in
D^nw  ^^a,  avail  to  account  for  the  plural  verb  in  the  words,
'  Let  Us  make  man  K*  In  these  words,  which  precede  the  final
act  and  climax  of  the  Creation,  the  early  Fathers  detected  a
clear  intimation  of  a  Plurality  of  Persons  in  the  Godhead""*.
The  supposition  that  in  these  words  a  Single  Person  is  in  a
dramatic  colloquy  with  Himself,  is  less  reasonable  than  the
opinion  that  a  Divine  Speaker  is  addressing  a  multitude  of  in-
ferior beings,  such  as  the  Angels.  But  apart  from  other  con-
siderations, we  may  well  ask,  what  would  be  the  *  likeness '  or
*  image  *  common  to  God  and  to  the  Angels,  in  which  man  was  to
be  created  ^  1  or  why  should  created  essences  such  as  the  Angels
be  invited  to  take  part  in  a  Creative  Act  at  all )  Each  of  the
foregoing  explanations  is  really  weighted  with  greater  difficulties
than  the  Patristic  doctrine,  to  the  effect  that  the  verb,  *  Let  Us
make,*  points  to'  a  Plurality  of  Persons  within  the  Unity  of  the
One  Agent,  while  the  '  Likeness,'  common  to  All  These  Persons
and  itself  One,  suggests  very  pointedly  Their  participation  in  an
Undivided  Nature.     And  in  such  sayings  as  *  Behold  the  man

^  G^en.  i.  26.  Op.  Dracli,  Deimbme  Lettre  d*un  Babbin  Converti  aux
IsraeliteB  ses  P^es,  Paris,  1827,  p.  26.

«■  Of.  the  references  in  Petavius,  de  Trinitart^e,  ii.  7.  6.

^  'Non  raro  etiam  veteres  reoentioresque  interpretiss,  nt  dt6m  de  angelis
hitelligerent,  theologicis  potius  quam  exegeticis  argmnentis  peimoti  esse
yidoitur;  cf .  .  .  .  Gen.  i.  26,  27,  ex  quo  Samaritani  cum  Abenezra  ho-
mineTn  ad  angelonun,  non  ad  Dei,  similitndinem  creatum  ease  probant.*
GesenioB,  Theeaur.  in  voc.  dt^m,  2.

[lbct.


The  priestly  Blessing.  5 1

is  become  |ike  One  of  Us  0/  used  with  reference  to  the  Fall,  or
'  Gro  to ;  let  Us  go  down  and  there  confound  their  language  p/
uttered  on  the  eve  of  the  dispersion  of  Babel,  it  is  clear  that  an
equality  of  rank  is  distinctly  assumed  between  the  Speaker  and
Those  Whom  He  is  addressing.  The  only  adequate  alternative
to  that  interpretation  of  these  texts  which  is  furnished  by  the
Trinitarian  doctrine,  and  which  sees  in  them  a  preparation  for
the  disclosures  of  a  later  age,  is  the  violent  supposition  of  some
kind  of  pre-Mosaic  Olympus,  the  many  deities  of  which  are  upon
a  level  of  strict  equality  with  each  other  <i.  But  if  this  supposi-
tion be  admitted,  how  are  we  to  account  for  the  presence  of  such
language  in  the  Pentateuch  at  all  t  How  can  a  people,  con-
fessedly religious  and  intelligent,  such  as  were  the  Hebrews,
have  thus  stultified  their  whole  religious  history  and  literature,
by  welcoming  or  retaining,  in  a  document  of  the  highest  possible
authority,  a  nomenclature  which  contained  so  explicit  a  denial
of  the  first  Article  of  the  Hebrew  Faith  t

The  true  sense  of  the  comparatively  indeterminate  language
which  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  Genesis,  is  more  fully  explained
by  the  Priestly  Blessing  which  we  find  to  be  prescribed  for  ritual
usage  in  the  Book  of  Numbers  '.  This  blessing  is  spoken  of  as  a
putting  the  Nmne  of  God  *,  that  is  to  say,  a  symbol  unveiling
£Us  Nature  \  upon  the  children  of  Israel.  Here  then  we  dis-
cover a  distinct  limit  to  the  number  of  the  Persons  Who  are
hinted  at  in  Genesis,  as  being  internal  to  the  Unity  of  God.
The  Priest  is  to  repeat  the  Most  Holy  Name  Three  times.  The
Hebrew  accentuation,  whatever  be  its  date,  shews  that  the  Jews
themselves  saw  in  this  repetition  the  declaration  of  a  mystery  in
the  Divine  Nature.  Unless  such  a  repetition  had  been  designed
to  secure  the  assertion  of  some  important  truth,  a  single  mention
of  the  Sacred  Name  would  have  been  more  natural  in  a  system,
the  object  of  which  was  to  impress  belief  in  the  Divine  Unity
upon  an  entire  people.     This  significant  repetition^  suggesting

•  Gen.  iii.  32.  "noo  imo.    LXX.  its  cfi  ^|  4m»^.
P  Gren.  xi.  7,

4  Klose,  De  polytbeismi  veetigiis  apud  HebrseoB  ante  Moeen,  Getting.
1830,  referred  to  by  Knhn,  Dogmatik,  Bd.  ii.  p.  10.
'  Num.  vi,  23-26.  •  Ibid.  ver.  27.

*  'Nach  der  biblischen  Anscbanimg  nnd  inbesondere  des  A.  T.  ift  tlber-
baupt  der  ZuBammenhang  zwiscben  Name  und  Sacbe  ein  sebr  enger,  imd  ein
ganz  anderer  als  im  modemen  Bewnsstein,  wo  sicb  der  Name  meist  zu  einem
bloss  oonventionellen  Zeicben  abgeschwacbt  bat ;  der  Name  ist  die  Sacbe
aelbst^  Bofem  diese  in  die  Erscbeinung  tritt  und  erkannt  wird,  der  ins  Wort
gefasste  Ausdmck  des  Wesens.*    Konig;  Tbeologie  der  Psalmen,  p.  266.

n]  £  2


5  2  The  vision  of  Isaiah.

without  distinctly  asserting  a  Trinity  in  the  Being  of  God,  did
its  work  in  the  mind  of  Israel.  It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck
with  the  recurrence  of  the  Threefold  rhythm  of  prayer  or  praise,
again  and  again,  in  the  Psalter  u.  Again  and  again  the  poetical
parallelism  is  sacrificed  to  the  practical  and  theological  object  of
making  the  sacred  songs  of  Israel  contain  an  exact  acknowledg-
ment of  that  inner  law  of  God's  Nature,  which  had  been
shadowed  out  in  the  Pentateuch.  And  to  omit  traces  of  this
influence  of  the  priestly  blessing  which  are  discoverable  in  Jere-
miah and  Ezekiel  ^,  let  us  observe  the  crowning  significance  of
the  vision  of  Isaiah  y.  In  that  adoration  of  the  Most  Holy
Three,  Who  yet  are  One  z,  by  the  veiled  and  mysterious  Sera-
phim ;  in  that  deep  self-abasement  and  misery  of  the  Prophet,
who,  though  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  had  yet  seen  with  his  eyes
the  King,  the  Lord  of  Hosts  * ;  in  that  last  enquiry  on  the  part
of  the  Divine  Speaker,  the  very  terms  of  which  reveal  Him  as
One  and  yet  more  than  One  ^ — ^what  a  flood  of  almost  Gospel
light  c  is  poured  upon  the  intelligence  of  the  elder  Church  I  If
we  cannot  altogether  assert  with  the  opponents  of  the  Lutheran
Calixtus,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  so  clearly  contained
in  the  Old  Testament  as  to  admit  of  being  deduced  from  it  with-
out the  aid  of  the  Apostles  and  Evangelists ;  enough  at  least  has
been  said  to  shew  that  the  Old  Testament  presents  us  with  a
doctrine  of  the  Divine  Unity  which  is  very  far  removed  from
the  hard  and  sterile  Monotheism  of  the  Koran.  Within  the
Uncreated  and  Unapproachable  Essence,  Israel  could  plainly
distinguish  the  shadows  of  a  Truth  which  we  Christians  fully
express  at  this  hour,  when  we  'acknowledge  the  glory  of  the
Eternal  Trinity,  and  in  the  power  of  the  Divine  Majesty  worship
the  Unity.'

(/3)  From  these  adumbrations  of  Personal  Distinctions  within
the  Being  of  God,  we  pass  naturally  to  consider  that  series  of
remarkable  apparitions  which  are  commonly  known  as  the  Theo-
phanies,  and  which  form  so  prominent  a  feature  in  the  early
history  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  When  we  are  told
that  God  spoke  to  our  fallen  parents  in  Paradise  <^,  and  appeared

»  Cf.  Ps.  xxix.  4,  5,  and  7,  8 ;  xcvi.  i,  a,  and  7,  8 ;  cxv.  9, 10, 11 ;  oxYiii.
a-4,  and  10-12,  and  15,  16.

*  On  this  subject,  see  Dr.  Pusey's  Letter  to  the  Bishop  of  London,  p.  151.

»  Isaiah  vi.  2-8.  ■  Ibid.  ver.  3.  »  Ibid.  ver.  5.

»»  Ibid.  ver.  8.  «  Heb.  i.  I.

^  Gen.  iii.  8 :  'They  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God  walking  in  the
garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day.'

[lkct.


The  Theophanies.  53


to  Abram  in  his  ninety-mnth  year  %  there  is  no  distinct  intima*
tion  of  the  mode  of  the  Divine  msmifestation.  But  when  '  Je**
hoYsJi  appeared '  to  the  great  Patriarch  by  the  oak  of  Manure  ^,
Abraham  '  lift  np  his  eyes  and  looked,  and  lo,  Three  Men  stood
by  himi^.'  Abraham  bows  himself  to  the  ground;  he  offers
hospitality;  he  waits  by  his  Visitors  under  the  tree,  and  they
eat  \  One  of  the  Three  is  the  spokesman ;  he  appears  to  bear
the  Sacred  Name  Jehoyahi ;  he  is  seemingly  distinguished  from
the  Hwo  angels'  who  went  first  to  Sodom i;  he  promises  that
the  aged  Sarah  shall  have  a  son,  and  that '  all  the  nations  of  the
earth  shall  be  blessed  in  Abraham^.'  With  him  Abraham
intercedes  for  Sodom  ^ ;  by  him  judgment  is  afterwards  executed
upon  the  guilty  city.  When  it  is  said  that  *  Jehovah  rained
upon  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  brimstone  and  fire  from  Jehovah
out  of  heaven  >°,'  a  sharp  distinction  is  established  between  a
visible  and  an  Invisible  Person,  each  bearing  the  Most  Holy
Name.  This  distinction  introduces  us  to  the  Mosaic  and  later
representations  of  that  very  exalted  and  mysterious  being,  the
niiT*  li<^D  or  Angel  of  the  Lord.  The  Angel  of  the  Lord  is  cer-
tainly distinguished  from  Jehovah ;  yet  the  names  by  which  he
is  caJled,  the  powers  which  he  assumes  to  wield,  the  honour
which  is  paid  to  him,  shew  that  in  him  there  was  at  least  a
special  Presence  of  God.  He  seems  to  speak  sometimes  in  his
own  name,  and  sometimes  as  if  he  were  not  a  created  person-
ality, but  only  a  veil  or  organ  of  the  Higher  Nature  That  spoke
and  acted  through  him.  Thus  he  assures  Hagar,  as  if  speaking
in  the  character  of  an  ambassador  from  God,  that  *  the  Lord  had
heard  her  affliction  J^.*  Yet  he  promises  her,  *  I  will  multiply  thy
seed  exceedingly  o,'  and  she  in  return  *  called  the  Name  of  the
Lord  that  spake  unto  her.  Thou  God  seest  me  p.'  He  arrests
Abraham's  arm,  when  the  Patriarch  is  on  the  point  of  carrying
out  God's  bidding  by  offering  Isaac  as  a  sacrifice  <i ;  yet  he  asso-
dates  himself  with  Him  from  Whom  *  Abraham  had  not  with-
held his  son,  his  only  son.'  He  accepts  for  himself  Abraham's
obedience  as  rendered  to  God,  and  he  subsequently  at  a  second
appearance  adds  the  promise,  *  In  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of

•  Gren.  xrii.  1-3 :  'The  Lord  appeared  to  Abram,  and  said  unto  him,
I  am  the  Almighty  God.  .  . .  And  Abram  fell  on  his  face :  and  God  talked
with  him.*  '  Ibid,  xviii.  I .

«  Ibid.  ver.  a.  >»  Ibid.  ver.  8.  •  Ibid.  ver.  17.

i  Compare  Gen.  xviii.  32  and  adx.  i.     LXX.  ^\0ov  8^  oi  ^vo  iyy^Xoi,

•  Gen.  xviii.  10,  18.  '  Ibid.  vers.  23-33.

™  Ibid.  xix.  24  J  cf.  St.  Justin,  Dial.  Tryp.  c.  56.  "  Gen.  xvi.  ii.

•  Ibid.  ver.  10.  P  Ibid.  ver.  13,  «  Ibid.  xxii.  ii,  12.


54  The  Theophanies.


the  earth  be  blessed ;  because  thou  hast  obeyed  My  voice  '.'  He
appears  to  Jacob  in  a  dream,  he  announces  himself  as  '  the  €h)d
of  Bethel,  where  thou  anointedst  the  pillar,  and  where  thou
vowedst  a  vow  unto  Me*.*  Thus  he  was  *the  Lord'  who  ia
Jacob's  vision  at  Bethel  had  stood  above  the  ladder  and  said,  *  I
am  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham  thy  father,  and  the  God  of  Isaac  V
He  was,  as  it  seems,  the  Chief  of  that  angel-host  whom  Jacob
met  at  Mahanaim  ^ ;  with  him  Jacob  wrestled  for  a  blessing  at
Peniel ;  of  him  Jacob  says,  ^  I  have  seen  God  face  to  face,  and
my  life  is  preserved.'  When  blessing  the  sons  of  Joseph,  the
dying  Patriarch  invokes  not  only  *the  God  Which  fed  me  all  my
life  long  unto  this  day,'  but  also  *  the  Angel  which  redeemed  me
from  all  evil  ^.'  In  the  desert  of  Midian,  the  Angel  of  the  Lord
appears  to  Moses  ^  in  a  flame  of  flre  out  of  the  midst  of  a  bush.'
The  bush  remains  miraculously  unconsumed  y.  'Jehovah'  sees
that  Moses  turns  aside  to  see,  and  '  Elohim '  calls  to  Moses  out
of  the  midst  of  the  bush  >.  The  very  ground  on  which  Moses
stands  is  holy;  and  the  Lawgiver  hides  his  face,  'for  he  was
afraid  to  look  upon  God  *.'  The  Speaker  from  the  midst  of  the
bush  announces  Himself  as  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of
Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob  *.  His  are  the  Mercy,  the  Wisdom,
the  Providence,  the  Power,  the  Authority  of  the  Most  High  ^ ;
nay,  all  the  Divine  attributes  c.  When  the  children  of  Israel  are
making  their  escape  from  Egypt,  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  leads
them ;  in  the  hour  of  danger  he  places  himself  between  the  camp
of  Israel  and  the  host  of  Pharaoh  d.  How  deeply  Israel  felt  the
value  of  his  protecting  care,  we  may  learn  from  the  terms  of  the
message  to  the  King  of  Edom  o.  God  promises  that  the  Angel
shall  keep  Israel  in  the  way,  and  bring  the  people  to  Canaan  ^ ;
his  presence  is  a  guarantee  that  the  Amorites  and  other  idola-
trous races  shall  be  cut  off  fi^.  Israel  is  to  obey  this  Angel,  and
to  provoke  him  not ;  for  the  Holy  *  Name  is  in  him  ^.'  Even
after  the  sin  of  the  Golden  Calf,  the  promised  guardianship  of
the  Angel  is  not  forfeited ;  while  a  distinction  is  clearly  drawn
between  the  Angel  and  Jehovah  Himself  i.     Yet  the  Angel  is

'  Gren.  xxii.  i8;  cf.  Heb.  vi.  13,  14.  »  Gen.  rm.  11,  13.

*  Ibid,  xxviii.  13,  "  Ibid,  xxxii.  1.  »  Ibid,  xlviii.  15,  16.

'  Exod.  iii.  i,  2.  ■  Ibid.  ver.  4.  »  Ibid.  ver.  6.

*»  Ibid.  vers.  7-14.  •  Ibid.  vers.  14-16.       *  Ibid.  xiv.  19.

c  Num.  zz.  16.  '  Exod.  xziii.  20 ;  compare  xxxii.  34.

'  Ibid,  xxiii.  23 ;  cf.  Joshua  v.  13-15.
"^  Exod.  xxiii.  21,  la'tpi  nD^  o.

1  Ibid,  xxxiii.  2,  3 :  'I  will  send  an  angel  before  thee  ...  for  I  will  not
go  up  in  the  midst  of  thee ;  for  thou  art  a  stiif-necked  people.*

f  LECT.


The  Theopkanies.  55


expressly  called  the  Angel  of  God's  Presence^ ;  lie  fully  represents
Grod.     God  must  in  some  way  have  been  present  in  hmu    No
merely  created  being,  speaking  and  acting  in  his  own  right,
could  have  spoken  to  men,  or  have  allowed  men  to  act  towards
himself  as  did  the  Angel  of  the  Lord.     Thus  he  withstands
Balaam,  on  his  faithless  errand,  and  bids  him  go  with  the  mes-
sengers of  Balak ;  but  adds,  '  Only  the  word  that  I  shall  speak
unto  thee,  that  thou  shalt  speak.'     As  *  Captain  of  the  host  of
the  Lord,'  he  appears  to  Joshua  in  the  plain  of  Jericho.     Joshua
worships  God  in  him  ^ ;  and  the  Angel  asks  of  the  conqueror  of
Canaan  the  same  tokens  of  reverence  as  had  been  exacted  from
Moses  ™.     Besides  the  reference  in  the  Song  of  Deborah  ^  to  the
curse  pronounced  against  Meroz  by  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  the
Book  of  Judges  contains  accounts  of  three  appearances,  in  each
of  which  we  are  scarcely  sensible  of  the  action  of  a  created  per-
sonality, so  completely  is  the  language  and  bearing  that  of  the
Higher  Nature  present  in  the  Ajogel.    At  Bochim  he  expostu-
lates with  the  assembled  people  for  their  breach  of  the  coyenant
in  failing  to  exterminate  the  Canaanites.     €k)d  speaks  by  him  as
in  ELis  own  Name ;  He  refers  to  the  covenant  which  He  had
made  with  Israel,  and  to  His  bringing  the  people  out  of  Egypt ;
He  declares  thai^  on  account  of  their  disobedience  He  will  not
drive  the  heathen  nations  out  of  the  land  o.     Li  the  account  of  his
appearance  to  Gideon,  the  Angel  is  called  sometimes  the  Angel
of  the  Lord,  sometimes  the  Lord,  or  Jehovah.     He  bids  Gideon
attack  the  Midianite  oppressors  of  Israel,  and  adds  the  promise,
*I  will  be  with  thee.'     Gideon  places  an  offering  bdfbre  the
Angel,  that  he  may,  if  he  wills,  manifest  his  character  by  some
sign.     The  Angel  touches  the  offering  with  the  end  of  his  staff,
whereupon  fire  rises  up  out  of  the  rock  and  consumes  the  offering.
The  Angel  disappears,  and  Gideon  fears  that  he  will  die  because
he  has  seen  *  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  face  to  face  p.*     When  the
wife  of  Manoah  is  reporting  the  Angel's  first  appearance  to
herself,  she  says  that  *A  man  of  God  came'  to  her,  'and  his
countenance  was  like  the  countenance  of  the  Angel  of  God,  very
terrible.'     She  thus  speaks  of  the  Angel  as  of  a  Being  already

^  Exod.  zxziii.  14 ;  compare  Isaiah  Iziii.  9.

1  In  Josh.  yi.  3  the  captain  of  the  Lord's  Host  (cf.  ch.  v.  14)  appears  to
be  called  Jehovah.    But  cf.  Mill,  Myth.  Int.  p.  354.

™  Josh.  V.  13-15;  Exod.  iii.  5 ;  compare  Exod.  xxiii.  23.

*  Judges  y.  23.  ^  Ibid.  ii.  1-5.     See  Keil,  Comm.  in  loc.

P  Judg.  yi.  11-23.  Keil,  Comm.  in  loc.  See  Hengstenbexg,  ChristoL
0.  Test.  vol.  iy.  append,  iii.  p.  293.

°1


56  Who  was  the  'Angel  of  the  Lord'  ?

known  to  Israel.  At  his  second  appearance  the  Angel  bids
Manoah,  who  *  knew  not  that  he  was  an  Angel  of  the  Lord,'  and
offered  him  common  food,  to  offer  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord.  The
Angel  refuses  to  disclose  his  Name,  which  is  'wonderful^.'
When  Manoah  offers  a  kid  with  a  meat-offering  upon  a  rock
unto  the  Lord,  the  Angel  mounts  visibly  up  to  heaven  in  the
flame  of  the  sacrifice.  Like  Gideon,  Manoah  fears  death  after
such  near  contact  with  so  exalted  a  Being  of  the  other  world.
*  We  shall  surely  die,'  he  exclaims  to  his  wife,  *  because  we  have
seen  God  '.*

But  you  ask.  Who  was  this  Angel  ?  The  Jewish  interpreters
vary  in  their  explanations  \  The  earliest  Fathers  answer  with
general  unanimity  that  he  was  the  Word  or  Son  of  God  Himself.
For  example,  in  the  Dialogue  with  Trypho,  St.  Justin  proves
against  his  Jewish  opponent,  that  God  did  not  appear  to  Abra-
ham by  the  oak  of  Mamre,  hefore  the  appearance  of  the  '  three
men,'  but  that  He  was  One  of  the  Three  *.  Trypho  admits  this,
but  he  objects  that  it  did  not  prove  that  there  was  any  God
besides  Him  Who  had  appeared  to  the  Patriarchs.  Justin  re-
plies that  a  Divine  iBeing,  personally  although  not  substantially
distinct  from  the  supreme  God,  is  clearly  implied  in  the  state-
ment that  *the  Lord  rained  upon  Sodom  and  upon  Gomorrah,
brimstone  and  fire  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven'*.'  Trypho
yields  the  point.  Here  it  is  plain  that  St.  Justin  did  not  sup-
pose that  a  created  being  was  called  God  on  account  of  his
mission ;  St.  Justin  believes  that  One  Who  was  of  the  substance
of  God  appeared  to  Abraham^.  Again,  the  Fathers  of  the  first
Synod  at  Antioch,  in  the  letter  which  was  sent  to  Faulus  of
Samosata  before  his  deposition,  state  that  the  'Angel  of  the

«  »«^D,  cf.  Is.  ix.  6.

'  Judges  xiii.  6-22.  Cf.  Keil,  Comm.  m  loc.  Hengst.  nbi  supra.  Vi-
triuga  de  Angelo  Sacerdote,  obs.  vi.  14.

•  Of.  the  authorities  quoted  by  Dntch,  Lettres  d*un  Babbin  Convert!,
Lettre  ii.  p.  169.    On  the  other  side,  Abenezra.,  in  Exod.  iii.  2.

^  With  St.  Justin's  belief  that  the  Son  and  two  Angels  appeared  to  Abra-
ham,  cf.  Tertullian.  adv.  Marc.  ii.  27,  iii.  9 ;  St.  Hil.  de  Trin.  iv.  27.  That
three  created  Angels  appeared  to  Abraham  was  the  opinion  of  St.  Augustine
(De  Oiy.  Dei,  x.  8,  xvi.  29).  St.  Ambrose  sees  in  the  'three  men '  an  adum-
bration of  the  Blessed  Trinity:  'Tres  vidit  et  unum  Dominum  appellavit.*
De  Abraham,  i.  c.  5;  Prudent.  Apotheosis,  28.  This  seems  to  be  the
sense  of  the  English  Church.  See  First  Le^n  for  Evensong  on  Trinity
Sunday.

*»  Gen.  xix.  24.

»  Dial,  cum  liyph.  §  56,  sqq.  On  the  appearance  in  the  burning  bush,
cf.  Ibid.  §  59-61 ;  cf.  too  ch.  127.     Comp.  St.  Justin,  Apol.  i.  c.  63.

[lect.


Opinion  of  the  earlier  Fathers.  5  7

Father  being  Himself  Lord  and  God,  \ixyakr\9  ^vkrjg  Syytkogy,
appeared  to  Abraham,  and  to  Jacob,  and  to  Moses  in  the  burning
bush  '.'  It  is  unnecessary  to  multiply  quotations  in  proof  of  a
fact  which  is  beyond  dispute  \

The  Arian  controversy  led  to  a  modification  of  that  estimate
of  the  Theophanies  which  had  prevailed  in  the  earlier  Church.
The  earlier  Church  teachers  had  clearly  distinguished,  as  Scripture
distinguishes,  between  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  Himself,  as  they
believed,  Divine,  and  the  Fathec  But  the  Arians  endeavoured
to  widen  this  personal  distinctness  into  a  deeper  difference,  a
difference  of  Natures.  Appealing  to  the  often-assigned  ground  ^
of  the  belief  respecting  the  Theophanies  which  had  prevailed  in
the  ante-Nicene  Church,  the  Arians  argued  that  the  Son  had
been  seen  by  the  Patriarchs,  while  the  Father  had  not  been  seen,
and  that  an  Livisible  Nature  was  distinct  from  and  higher  than
a  nature  which  was  cognizable  by  the  senses  ^.  St.  Augustine
boldly  faced  this  difficulty,  and  his  great  work  on  the  Trinity
gave  the  chief  impulse  to  another  current  of  interpretation  in
the  Church.  St.  Augustine  strenuously  insists  upon  the  Scrip-
tural truth d  of  the  Livisibility  of  God  as  God®.      The  Son,

'  This  gloss  of  the  LXX.  in  Is.  ix.  6  was  a  main  ground  of  the  eariy
Patristic  application  of  the  title  of  the  Angel  to  God  the  Son.  'Although
Malachi  foretells  onr  Lord's  coming  in  Uie  Flesh  under  the  titles  of  "the
Lord,"  "the  Angel/'  or  "Messenger  of  the  Covenant,*'  (chap.  iii.  i)  there
is  no  proof  that  He  is  anywhere  spoken  of  absolutely  as  "  tne  Angel/'  or
that  ]l3is  IMyine  Nature  is  so  entitled.'  Dr.  Pusey,  Daniel  the  l^phet,
p.  516,  note  I.  "  Mansi,  Cone.  i.  p.  1035.

•  Compare  however  St.  IrensBus  adv.  Hser.  iv.  7.  §  4 ;  Clem.  Alex.  Psd.
i.  7 ;  Theophilus  ad  Autol.  11.  31 ;  Constit.  Apostol.  v.  20 ;  Tertullian.  adv.
Fraz.  cap.  13,  14,  and  15;  St.  Cyprian,  adv.  Judsos,  ii.  c.  5,  6;  St.Cyr.
Hieros.  Catech.  10 ;  St.  Hil.  de  Trin.  lib.  4  and  5 ;  St.  Chrysost.  Horn,  in
Genes.  42,  48 ;  Theodoret,  Interr.  v.  in  Exod.  (Op.  i.  p.  lai),  on  Exod.  iii.  2.
Of.  some  additional  authorities  given  by  P.  Vandenbroeck,  De  Theophaniis,
sub  Yet.  Testamento,  p.  17,  sqq ;  Bull,  Def.  fid.  Nio.  lib.  i.  0.  i.

^  e.  g.  cf.  Tertullian.  adv.  Marc.  ii.  0.  27.

"  St.  Aug.  Serm.  vii.  n.  4.  The  Arian  criticism  ran  thus:  'fllius  visus
est  patribus,  Pater  non  est  visus:  invisibilis  autem  et  visibilis  diversa
natura  est.'  ^  St.  John  i.  18,  &c.

*  '  Ipsa  enim  natura  vel  substantia  vel  essentia,  vel  quolibet  alio  nomine
appellandum  est  id  ipsum,  quod  Deus  est,  quidquid  illud  est  corporalUer
videri  non  potest,*  De  Trin.  ii.  c.  18,  n.  35.  The  Scotists,  who  opposed
the  general  Thomist  doctrine  to  the  effect  that  a  created  angel  was  the
instrument  of  the  Theophanies,  carefully  guarded  against  the  ideas  that
the  substance  of  Gkxl  could  be  seen  by  man  in  the  body,  or  that  the  bodily
form  which  they  believed  to  have  been  assumed  was  personally  united  to
the  Eternal  Word,  since  this  was  peculiar  to  the  Divine  Incarnation.
(Sootus  in  lib.  ii.  sent.  dist.  8.)     Scotus  explains  that  the  being  who


58  yudgment  of  Si.  Augustine.

therefore,  as  being  truly  God,  was  by  nature  as  invisible  as  the
Father.  If  the  Son  appeared  to  the  Patriarchs,  He  appeared
through  the  intermediate  agency  of  a  created  being,  who  repre<^
sented  Him,  and  through  whom  He  spoke  and  acted  f.  If  the
Angel  who  represented  Him  spoke  and  acted  with  a  Divine
authority,  and  received  Divine  honours,  we  are  referred  to  the
force  of  the  general  law  whereby,  in  things  earthly  and  heavenly,
an  ambassador  is  temporarily  put  in  the  place  of  the  Master  who
accredits  himcr.  But  Augustine  further  warns  us  against  at-
tempting  to  say  positively.  Which  of  the  Divine  Persons  mani*
fested  Himself,  in  this  or  that  instance,  to  Patriarchs  or  Prophets,
except  where  some  remarkable  indications  determine  our  con-
clusion very  decisively^.  The  general  doctrine  of  this  great
teacher,  that  the  Theophanies  were  not  direct  appearances  of  a
Person  in  the  Godhead,  but  Self-manifestations  of  God  through
a  created  being,  had  been  hinted  at  by  some  earlier  Fathers  i,

eutwneM  a  bodily  form,  need  only  be  'intrinseous  motor  corporis ;  nam  trmc
Msumit,  id  est  ad  se  sumit,  quia  ad  operationes  propriae  fiibi  ezplendas
utitur  illo  sicut  instrumento.*  ^Ibid.  Scholion  i.)

'  '  Proinde  ilia  omnia,  quae  Patribus  visa  sunt,  cum  Deus  illis  secundum
Buam  disponsationem  temporibus  congruam  prsesentaretur,  per  creaturam
facta  esse,  manifestum  est  .  . .  Sed  jam  satis  quantum  existimo  .  .  .  de-
monstratum  est,  .  •  .  quod  antiquis  patribus  noetris  ante  Inbamationem
Salvatoris,  cum  Deus  apparere  dicebatur,  voces  ills  ao  species  corporales  per
angeloi  facts  sunt,  sive  ipsis  loquentibus  vel  agentibus  aliquid  ez  personft
Dei,  sicut  etiam  prophetas  solere  ostendimus,  sive  assumentibut  ex  crecUurd
quod  ipsi  non  essent,  ubi  Deus  figurat^  demonstraretur  hominibus;  quod
genus  significationum  nee  Prophetas  omisisse,  multis  ezemplis  docet  Scrip-
tura.'    De  Trin.  iii.  11,  n.  a  2,  27.

s  '  Sed  ait  aliquis :  cur  ergo  Scriptum  est,  Dixit  Dominus  ad  Moysen ;
et  non  potiiis.  Dixit  angelus  ad  Moysen?  Quia  cum  verba  judicis  praca
pronuntiat,  non  scribitur  in  G^stis,  ille  pneco  dixit;  sed  Ule  judex;  sic
etiam  loquente  prophets  sancto,  etsi  dicamus  Propheta  dixit,  nihil  alind
quam  Dominum  dixisse  intelligi  volumus.  £t  si  dicamus,  Dominus  dixit ;
prophetam  non  subtrahimus,  sed  quis  per  eum  dixerit  admonemus.'  De
Trin.  iii.  c.  11,  n.  23.

1^  'Nihil  aliud,  quantum  existimo,  divinorum  sacramentorum  modesta  et
oauta  consideratio  persuadet,  nisi  ut  temerb  non  dicamus,  Qusnam  ex  Trini-
tate  Persona  cuilibet  Patrum  et  Prophetarum  in  aliquo  corpore  vel  simili-
tndine  corporis  apparuerit,  nisi  cum  continentia  lectionis  aliqua  probabilia
oircumponit  indicia.  .  .  .  Per  subjeotam  creaturam  non  solum  FiHum  vd
Spiritum  Sanctum,  sed  etiam  Patrem  corporali  specie  sive  similitndine  mor-^
talibuo  sensibus  significationem  Sui  dfure  potuisse  credendum  est.*  De
Trin.  ii.  c.  18,  n.  35.

i  Compare  St.  Lrenseus  adv.  Haer.  iv.  20,  n.  7  and  24:  'Yerbum  na>
turaliter  quidem  invisibile,  palpabile  in  hominibus  factum.'  Origen  (Horn,
xvi.  in  Jerem.)  speaking  of  the  vision  in  Exod.  iii.  says,  'God  was  here
beheld  in  the  AngeL*

[lect.


Had  the  Theophanies  a  purpose?  59

and  was  insisted  on  by  contemporary  and  later  writers  of  the
highest  authority^.  This  explanation  has  since  become  the
predominant  although  by  no  means  the  exclusive  judgment  of
the  Church  ^ ;  and  if  it  is  not  unaccompanied  by  considerable
difficulties  when  we  apply  it  to  the  sacred  text,  it  certainly
8eems  to  relieve  us  of  greater  embarrassments  than  any  which  it
creates  ™.

But  whether  the  ante-Nicene  (so  to  term  it)  or  the  Augustinian
line  of  interpretation  be  adopted  with  respect  to  the  Theophanies,
no  sincere  believer  in  the  historical  trustworthiness  of  Holy
Scripture  can  mistake  the  importance  of  their  relation  to  the
doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Divinity.  If  the  Theophanies  were  not,
as  has  been  pretended,  mythical  legends,  the  natural  product  of
the  Jewish  mind  at  a  particular  stage  of  its  development,  but
actual  matter-of-fact  occurrences  in  the  history  of  ancient  Israel,
must  we  not  see  in  them  a  deep  Providential  meaning  9  Whether
in  them  the  Word  or  Son  actually  appeared,  or  whether  God
made  a  created  augel  the  absolutely  perfect  exponent  of  His
Thought  and  Will,  do  they  not  point  in  either  case  to  a  purpose
in  the  Divine  Mind  wliich  would  only  be  realized  when  man  had
been  admitted  to  a  nearer  and  more  palpable  contact  with  God
than  was  possible  under  the  Patriarchal  or  Jewish  dispensations  )
Do  they  not  suggest,  as  their  natural  climax  and  explanation,
some  Personal  Self-unveiling  of  God  before  the  eyes  of  His
creatures  %  Would  not  God  appear  to  have  been  training  His
people,  by  this  long  and  mysterious  series  of  communications,  at
length  to  recognise  and  to  worship  Him  when  hidden  under,  and
indissolubly  one  with  a  created  nature  %  Apart  from  the  specific
circumstances  which  may  seem  to  have  explained  each  Theophany
at  the  time  of  its  taking  place,  and  considering  them  as  a  series
of  phenomena,  is  there  any  other  account  of  them  so  much  in

^  St.  Jerome  (ed.  Yall.)  in  Galat.  iii.  19 :  'Quod  in  omni  Veteri  Testa,
mento  ubi  ang^us  primum  visus  refertur  et  postea  quasi  Deus  loquens
inducitur,  angedus  quidem  verb  ex  ministris  pluribus  quicunque  est  visus,  sed
in  illo  Mediator  loquatur,  Qui  dicit ;  Ego  sum  Deus  Abraham,  etc.  Neo
tnirum  si  Deus  loquatur  in  angelis,  cum  etiam  per  angelos,  qui  in  hominibus
sunt,  loquatur  Deus  in  prophetis,  dicente  Zaccharill :  et  ait  angelus,  qui
loquebatur  in  me,  ac  deinceps  inferente ;  hsec  dicit  Deus  Omnlpotens.'  Cf^
St.  Greg.  Magn.  Mag.  Moral,  xxviii.  a  ;  St.  Athan.  Or.  iii.  c.  Arian.  §  14.

*  The  earlier  interpretation  has  been  more  generally  advocated  by  English
divines.  P.  Yandenbroeck's  treatise  already  referred  to  shews  that  it  still
has  adherents  in  other  parts  of  the  Western  Church.

"*  See  especially  Dr.  Pusey,  Daniel  the  Prophet,  p.  515,  note  ao ;  p.  516,
sqq.


6o        Doctrine  of  the  Kochmak  or  Wisdom.

harmony  with  the  geseral  Bcope  of  Holy  Scripture,  ae  that  they
were  Buccessive  lessoDs  addreBBed  to  the  eye  and  to  the  ear  of
ancient  piety,  in  anticipation  of  a  coming  Incarnation  of
Oodt

(y)  Thifl  preparatory  service,  if  we  may  Tonture  so  to  term  it,
which,  had  been  rendered  to  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Divinity
hy  the  TheophanieB  in  the  world  of  senBe,  was  seconded  by  the
upgrowth  and  development  of  a  belief  respecting  the  Divine
Eocbmah  or  WiBdom  in  the  region  of  inspired  ideas.

t.  The  'Wisdom'  of  the  Jewish  Scriptures  is  certainly  more
than  a  human  endowment  <■,  and  even,  as  it  would  seem,  more
than  an  Attribute  of  God.  It  may  naturally  remind  us  of  the
Archetypal  Ideas  of  Plato,  bat  the  resemblance  is  scarcely  more
than  superficial.  The  '  Wisdom '  is  hinted  at  in  the  Book  of
Job.  In  a  well-known  passage  of  majestic  beauty.  Job  replies  to
his  own  question,  Where  shall  the  Wisdom  "  be  found  I  He  re-
preeents  Wisdom  as  it  exists  in  Ood,  and  as  it  is  communicated  in
the  highest  form  to  man.  In  God  '  the  Wisdom '  is  that  Eternal
Thought,  in  which  the  Divine  Architect  ever  beheld  His  fixture
creation  P.  In  man,  Wisdom  Ib  seen  in  moral  growth ;  it  is  '  the
fear  of  the  Lord,'  and  'to  depart  from  evili.'  The  Wisdom  is
here  only  revealed  as  underlying,  on  the  one  ude,  tlie  laws  of  the
physical . universe,  on  the  other,  those  of  man's  moral  nature.
Certainly  as  yet,  '  Wisdom '  is  not  in  any  way  represented  as
pereonal ;  but  we  make  a  great  step  iu  passing  to  the  Book  of
Proverbs.  In  the  Book  of  Proverbs  the  Wisdom  is  co-eternal
with  Jehovah ;  Wisdom  assiats  Him  in  the  work  of  Creation  ;
Wisdom  reigns,  as  one  specially  honoured,  in  the  palace  of  the
King  of  Heaven ;  Wisdom  is  the  adequate  object  of  the  eternal
joy  of  God ;  God  possesses  Wisdom,  Wisdom  delights  in  God.

"  TTio  irord  no3n  is,  of  oourse,  niad  in  thii  Xama  wnn.    It  ii  Bp[JJ«d  to

piled  Bkill  in  makicg  priestly  Testmenta  (Eiod.  zzviii.  3),  or  sacred
ire  generally  (Ibid.  zxxi.  6  andzziTi.  1,  3)1  to  fidelit;  to  knovn  tratli

iv.6;  cf.xzzii.6);  togreiitictelle(itiiBlaocompliBliineTita<Dan. i.  17).
m  wu  typicaUj  c^n  :  hia  '  Wisdom '  waa  exhibited  in  moral  pene-
i  trad  ladginent  (l  KJDgBJii.  38,  x.  4,  sqq.)  ;  in  the  knovlsdge  of  many
ts,  speoiall  J  of  tbe  vorlu  of  God  in  the  natnnl  world  (Ibid,  i v.  33,  34);
knowled^  of  Vftrious  poemn  and  manmH,  wliich  he  had  either  00m-

or  which  he  remembered  (Ibid,  iv,  33 ;  Prov.  i.  l).  Wisdom,  u
micatedto  men,  included  BomettmeB  Bupeni&tiira]  powen  (Dan.  v.  it),
edallj  moral  virtue  (Ps.  nxvii.  30, 11.  6 ;  Ftot.  x.  31 ) ;  andpiety  to
Pb.  cxi.  10).  Id  Ood  rraurm  ia  ^gher  than  any  of  these;  He  alime
illy  po«en«B  It  (Jobxii,  li,  13,  xxviii.  li,  sqq.).
)b  ixviii.  1 3.  no3nn.  c  Ibid.  vers.  13-37.  «  Ibid.  tw.  a8.
[lbct.


The  ^Wisdom  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.     6i

'Jehovah  (says  TVisdom)  posseesed  Me  in  the  beginning  of  His  way,
Before  HIb  works  of  old.
I  was  set  up  from  everlasting.
From  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth  was.
When  there  were  no  depths,  I  was  brought  forth ;
When  there  were  no  fountains  abounding  with  water.
Before  the  mount&ins  were  settled,
Before  the  hiUs  was  I  brought  forUi :
While  as  yet  He  had  not  made  the  earth,  nor  the  fields^
Nor  the  highest  part  of  the  dust  of  the  world.
When  He  prepazed  the  heavens,  I  was  there :
When  He  set  a  compass  upon  the  fiice  of  the  depth :
When  He  established  the  clouds  above :
When  He  strengthened  the  fountains  of  the  deep :
When  He  gave  to  the  sea  His  decree.
That  the  waters  should  not  pass  His  commandment  s
When  He  appointed  the  foundations  of  the  earth :
Then  I  was  by  Him,  as  One  brought  up  with  Him :
And  I  was  daoly  His  Delight,  rejoicing  always  before  Him ;
Rejoicing  in  the  habitable  part  of  His  earth ;
And  My  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men  V

Are  we  listening  to  the  language  of  a  real  Person  or  only  of  a
poetic  personification  %  A  group  of  critics  defends  each  hypo-
thesis ;  and  those  who  maintain  the  latter,  point  to  the  picture
of  FoUy  in  the  succeeding  chapter  ■•  But  may  not  a  study  of
that  picture  lead  to  a  very  opposite  conclusion )  Folly  is  there
no  mere  abstraction,  she  is  a  sinful  woman  of  impure  life, '  whose
guests  are  in  the  depths  of  hell.*  The  work  of  Folly  is  the  very
work  of  the  Evil  One,  the  real  antagonist  of  the  Divine  Koch-
mah«  Folly  is  the  principle  of  absolute  Unwisdom,  of  consum-
mate moral  Evil.  Folly,  by  the  force  of  the  antithesis,  enhances
our  impression  that  Hhe  Wisdom'  is  personal.  The  Arians
understood  the  word  *  which  is  rendered  *  possessed '  in  our  Eng-
lish Bible,  to  mean  '  created,'  and  they  thus  degraded  the  Wisdom
to  the  level  of  a  creature.  But  they  did  not  doubt  that  this
created  Wisdom  was  a  real  being  or  person  ^.     Modem  critics

V  Frov.  viii.  23-31.  For  Patristic  expositions  of  this  passage,  see  Peta-
vins,  de  Trin.  ii.  i.

•  Prov.  ix.  13-18.

^  The  Arians  appealed  to  the  LXX.  reading  ^ktktc  (not  iKT-fiffaro),  On
jcrlC^ty  as  meaning  any  kind  of  production,  see  Bull,  Def.  Fid.  Nic.  lib.  ii.
c.  6,  sec.  8.  In  a  note  on  Athan.  Treatises,  ii.  342,  Dr.  Newman  cites
Aquila,  St.  Basil,  St.  Gregory  Nyss.  and  St.  Jerome,  for  the  sense  iKT-fia-aro,

™  As  Kuhn  summarily  observes :  '  Das  war  liberhaupt  nicht  die  Frage  in
christlichen  Alterthum,  ob  hier  von  einem  Wesen  die  Bede  sei,  das  war
allgemein  anerkannt,  sondem  von  welcher  Art,  in  welchem  Yerhaltnicts  zu
Grott  es  gedacht  sei.*    Dogmatik,  ii.  p..  29,  note  (2).


62   The  *  Wisdom'  in  the  later  Sapiential  Books.

know  tliat  if  we  are  to  be  guided  by  the  clear  certain  sense  of
the  Hebrew  rootle,  we  shall  read  *  possessed,'  and  not  *  created,*
and  they  admit  without  difficulty  that  the  Wisdom  is  uncreated
by,  and  co-eternal  with  the  Lord  Jehovah.  But  they  resolve
Wisdom  into  an  impersonal  and  abstract  idea  or  quality.  The
true  interpretation  is  probably  related  to  these  opposite  mistakes,
as  was  the  Faith  of  the  Church  to  the  conflicting  theories  of  the
Arians  and  the  Sabellians.  Each  error  contributes  something  to
the  cause  of  truth ;  the  more  ancient  may  teach  us  that  the
Wisdom  is  personal ;  the  more  modem,  that  it  is  uncreated  and
co-eternal  with  God.

2.  But  even  if  it  should  be  thought,  that '  the  personified  idea
of  the  Mind  of  God  in  Creation,'  rather  than  the  presence  of  '  a
distinct  Hypostasis  y,*  is  all  that  can  with  certainty  be  discovered
in  the  text  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs ;  yet  no  one,  looking  to  the
contents  of  those  sacred  Sapiential  Books,  which  lie  outside  the
precincts  of  the  Hebrew  Canon,  can  well  doubt  that  sometiung
more  had  been  inferred  by  the  most  active  religious  thought  in
the  Jewish  Church.  The  Son  of  Sirach,  for  instance,  opens  his
great  treatise  with  a  dissertation  on  the  source  of  Wisdom.
Wisdom  is  from  all  eternity  with  God ;  Wisdom  proceeds  from
God  before  any  finite  thing,  and  is  poured  out  upon  all  His
Works  2.  But  Wisdom,  *  thus  created  from  the  beginning  before
the  world,*  and  having  an  unfailing  existence  *,  is  bidden  by  God
to  make  her  *  dwelling  in  Jacob,  and  her  inheritance  in  Israel  ^.*
Wisdom  is  thus  the  prolific  mother  of  all  forms  of  moral  beauty*^ ;
she  is  given  to  all  of  God's  true  children  d ;  but  she  is  specially
resident  in  the  holy  Law,  *  which  Moses  commanded  for  an
heritage  unto  the  congregations  of  Jacob  ®.'  In  that  beautifhl
chapter  which  contains  this  passage.  Wisdom  is  conceived  of  as
all-operative,  yet  as  limited  by  nothing ;  as  a  physical  yet  also  as
a  spiritual  power ;  as  eternal,  and  yet  having  definite  relations  to
time ;  above  all,  as  perpetually  extending  the  range  of  her  fruitful

*  ThiB  both  in  Hebrew  and  (with  one  exception)  in  Arabic.  Cf.  Gresenins,
Theeaurus,  in  nop  and  Ui.  So,  too,  the  Syr.  yA  o.  Neither  Gren.  ziv.  19
nor  Deut.  xxxii.  6  require  that  n:p  should  be  translated  'created,*  still  lesa
Ps.  czxxix.  1 3,  where  it  means  '  to  have  rights  over.*  Gresenius  quotes  no
other  examples.  The  current  meaning  of  the  word  is  'to  acquire*  or
'possess,*  as  is  proved  by  its  certain  sense  in  the  great  majority  of  oases
where  it  is  used.

T  So  apparently  DoUinger,  Heidenthum  und  Judenthum,  bk.  x.  part  iii.
sec.  2.

■  EocluB.  i.  i-io.  •  Ibid.  xxiv.  9.  *»  Ibid.  vers.  8-12.

«  Ibid.  vers.  13-18.  *  Ibid.  •  Ibid.  ver.  23.

[lect.


The  '  Wisdom'  and  the  '  Word'  63

self-manifestation^.  Not  to  dwell  upon  language  to  the  same
effect  in  Baruch  sr,  we  may  observe  that  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom
the  Sophia  is  more  distinctly  personal  \  If  this  Book  is  less
prominently  theocratic  than  Ecclesiasticus,  it  is  even  more  ex-
plicit as  to  the  supreme  dignity  of  Wisdom,  as  seen  in  its  unique
relation  to  God.  .Wisdom  is  a  pure  stream  flowing  from  the
gloory  of  the  Almighty  * ;  Wisdom  is  that  spotless  mirror  which
reflects  the  operations  of  God,  and  upon  which  He  gazes  as  H«
works  ^ ;  Wisdom  is  the  Brightness  of  the  Everlasting  Light  ^ ;
Wisdom  is  the  Tery  Image  of  the  Goodness  of  Gk>d  °^.  Material
symbols  are  unequal  to  doing  justice  to  so  spiritual  an  essence  :
*  Wisdom  is  more  beautiful  tban  the  sun,  and  above  all  the  order
of  the  stars ;  being  compared  with  the  light  she  is  found  before
itV  *  Wisdom  is  more  moving  than  any  motion:  she  passeth
and  goeth  through  all  things  by  reason  of  her  pureness  <>.'  Her
sphere  is  not  merely  Palestine,  but  the  world,  not  this  or  that
age,  but  the  history  of  humanity.  All  that  is  good  and  true  in
human  thought  is  due  to  her :  *  in  all  ages  entering  into  holy
souls  she  maketh  them  friends  of  God  and  prophets  P.'  Is  there
not  here,  in  an  Alexandrian  dress,  a  precious  and  vital  truth
sufficiently  familiar  to  believing  Christians  )  Do  we  not  already
seem  to  catch  the  accents  of  those  weighty  formulsB  by  which
Apostles  will  presently  define  the  pre-existent  glory  of  their
Majestic  Lord  %  Yet  are  we  not  steadily  continuing,  with  no
very  considerable  measure  of  expansion,  in  that  very  line  of
sacred  thought,  to  which  the  patient  servant  of  God  in  the
desert,  and  the  wisest  of  kings  in  Jerusalem,  have  already,  and
so  authoritatively,  introduced  us  %

3.  The  doctrine  may  be  traced  at  a  stage  beyond,  in  the
writings  of  Philo  Judaeus.  We  at  once  observe  that  its  form  is
altered ;  instead  of  the  Wisdom  or  Sophia  we  have  the  Logos  or
Word.  Philo  indeed  might  have  justified  the  change  of  phrase-
dogy  by  an  appeal  even  to  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  In  the
Hebrew  Books,  the  Word  of  Jehovah  manifests  the  energy  of

'  Cf.  eepeoially  Ecclus.  mv.  5-8,  io-i8,  25-28,  and  i.  14-17.

>  Compare  Baruch  iii.  14,  15,  29-32,  35,  36,  and  the  remarkable  verse  37.
^  Liicke,  who  holds  that  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  and  in  Ecclesiastictis

there  is  merely  a  personification,  sees  a  '  dogmatic  hypostatizing '  in  Wisd.
vii.  22,  sqq.  Of.  too  Dahne,  Alezandrinische  Beligiousphilosophie,  ii.  I34,&0.

*  Wisd.  vii.  25.

*  Ibid.  26 :  tffOTrpov  kKriXiBcoroy  ttjs  rov  Btov  ivtpytlas,

>  Ibid.  aira^a(rua  ffxarhs  iX^ioVf  compare  '^eh,  i.  3.

™  Ibid.  cMv  T^s  iLyad^TTiros  rod  ©eoC,  compare  2  Cor.  iv.  4,  Col.  i.  15.
»  Ibid,  ver,  29.        •  Ibid.  ver.  24,  compare  ver,  27.        p  Ibid.  ver.  27,


64  The  *  Wisdom  and  the  '  Word!

God :  He  creates  the  heavens  ^ ;  He  governs  the  world  >".  Ac-
cordingly, among  the  Palestinian  Jews,  the  Chaldee  paraphrasts
almost  always  represent  God  as  acting,  not  immediately,  but
through  the  mediation  of  the  Memra  »  or  Word.  In  the  Greek
Sapiential  Books,  the  Word  is  apparently  identical  with  the
Wisdom  * ;  but  the  Wisdom  is  always  prominent,  the  Word  is
rarely  mentioned^.  Tet  the  Logos  of  Ecclesiasticus  is  the
organ  of  creation  ▼,  while  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom  the  Logos  is
clearly  personified,  and  is  a  minister  of  the  Divine  Judgment  ^.

«  Pb.  Ecriii.  6.  vnrv  nm,  '  Ps.  cxlvii.  15 ;  lea.  Iv.  11.

*  WTD^  or  mm.  ThuB  on  Hosea  i.  7,  *I  will  save  them  by  the  Lord
their  God,'  the  Chald.  Paraphr.  runB,  'I  will  redeem  them  by  the  Word
Jehovah  their  €rod.*

*  Thus  in  Ecclus.  zst.  3  the  (roipia  Qcov  nses  the  language  which  might
be  expected  of  the  xSyos  Qtov,  in  saying  that  she  came  forth  from  the  Mouth
of  the  Most  High.  In  chap.  i.  5  irrj^  atxfnas  \6yos  B€ov  (om  Tisch.)  is  prob-
ably spurious.  In  the  Book  of  Wisdom  cro^ia  is  identified  on  the  one  side
wiUi  the  Sryiov  irvev/xa  irou^ticLs  (chap.  i.  4,  5),  and  the  irvtvfxa  Kvpiov  (ver.  7) ;
xv&ffia  and  <ro<f^la  are  united  in  the  expression  TvcS/ta  co^fos  (vii.  7 ;  compare
ix.  17).  On  the  other  side  troipla  and  the  \6yos  are  both  instruments  of
creation  (Wisd.  ix.  i,  a ;  for  the  irv^vfxa,  cf.  Gen.  i.  a,  and  Ps.  xxxiii.  6),
they  both  'come  down  from  heaven*  (Ibid.  ver.  10,  and  xviii.  15,  and  the
irvcv/xo,  ix.  17),  and  achieve  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from  Egypt  (cf.  xviii.
15  with  X.  15^20).  The  representation  seems  to  suggest  no  mere  ascription
of  identical  functions  to  altogether  distinct  conceptions  or  Beings,  but  a
real  inner  essential  unity  of  the  Spirit,  the  Word,  and  the  Wisdom.  'Es  ist
an  sich  eine  und  dieselbe  gottliche  Elraft,  die  nach  aussen  wirksam  ist,  aber
es  sind  verschiedene  Beziehungen  und  Arten  dieser  Wirksamkeit,  womach
sie  Wort,  Geist,  Weisheit  Gottes  gennant  wird.'  Kuhn,  p.  27.  That  the
•Kvevfia  really  pointed  to  a  distinct  Hypostasis  in  God  became  plain  only  at
a  later  time  to  the  mind  of  His  people.  On  the  relations  of  the  mm  nT\
the  rrosn,  and  the  mpr»  "Qi  to  each  other,  see  Kuhn,  p.  24.

*  Kuhin  has  stated  the  relation  of  the  'Wisdom,*  'Word,'  and  'Spirit*  to
God  and  to  each  other,  in  the  Sapiential  Books,  as  follows :  '  Die  XJnter-
scheidung  Grottes  und  Seiner  Offenbarung  in  der  Welt  ist  die  Folie,  auf  der
sich  ein  innerer  XJnterschied  in  Grott  abspiegelt,  der  TJnterschied  Grottes  nam-
lich  von  Seinem  Worte,  Seiner  Weisheit.  Diese,  wiewohl  sie  zunachst  bloese
Eigenschaften  und  somit  Sein  an  Sich  seiendes  Wesen,  oder  Ejrafte  und
Wirksamkeiten  Gottes  nach  aussen,  somit  dasselbe  Wesen,  sofem  Es  Sich  in
der  Welt  manifestirt,  ausdrilcken,  erscheinen  sofort  tiefer  gefasst  als  etwas
fiir  sich,  unter  dem  Gesichtspunkt  eines  eigenen  gottlichen  Wesens,  einer
gottlichen  Person.  Unter  einander  verhalten  sie  sich  aber  so,  dass  einers^ts
Wort  und  Greist,  desgleichen  andrerseits  Wort  und  Weisheit  Gottes  theils
unterschieden,  theils  aber  auch  wieder  wesentlich  gleichbedeutend  genommen
sind,  so  dass  ausser  dem  Hauptunterschiede  Gottes  von  Seinem  Andem  noch
ein  weiterer,  der  XJnterschied  dieses  Andem  von  einem  Dritten  hinzuzukom-
men,  zugleich  aber  auch  die  Identitat  des  ihnen  (unter  Sich  und  mit  Grott)
gemeinsamen  Wesens  anged^utet  zu  sein  scheint.*  Lehre  von  Grottl.
Dreieinigkeit,  p.  23.

▼  Eodus.  xliii.  a6.  »  Wisd.  xviii.  15.

[lect.


opposite  elements  in  the  mind  of  P kilo.       65

In  Philo,  however,  the  Sophia  falls  into  the  background  7,  and
the  Logos  is  the  symbol  of  the  general  doctrine,  for  other  reasons
perhaps,  but  mainly  as  a  natural  result  of  Philo's  profound  sym-
pathy with  Stoic  and  Platonic  thought.  If  the  Book  of  Wisdom
adopts  Platonic  phraseology,  its  fundamental  ideas  are  continuous
with  those  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  ".  Philo,  on  the  contrary,
is  a  hearty  Platonist ;  his  Platonism  enters  into  the  very  marrow
of  his  thought.  It  is  true  that  in  Philo  Platonism  and  the
Jewish  Bevelation  are  made  to  converge.  But  the  process  of  their
attempted  assimilation  is  an  awkward  and  violent  one,  and  it
involves  the  great  Alexandrian  in  much  involuntary  self-contra-
diction. Philo  indeed  is  in  perpetual  embarrassment  between
the  pressure  of  his  intellectual  Hellenic  instincts  on  the  one  side,
and  the  dictates  of  his  religious  conscience  as  a  Jewish  believer
on  the  other.  He  constantly  abandons  himself  to  the  currents
of  Greek  thought  around  him,  and  then  he  endeavours  to  set
himself  right  with  the  Creed  of  Sinai,  by  throwing  his  Greek
ideas  into  Jewish  forma.  If  his  Logos  is  apparently  moulded
after  the  pattern  of  the  vov^  ^<ri\iK6g  iv  r^  rov  Ai^s  <f)v(rti — ^the
Begal  Principle  of  Intelligence  in  the  Nature  of  Zeus — ^with
which  we  meet  in  the  Philebus  of  Plato*,  Philo  doubtless  would
fain  be  translating  and  explaining  the  niiT  '\21  of  the  Hebrew
Canon,  in  perfect  loyalty  to  the  Faith  of  Israel.  The  Logos  of
Philo  evidently  presupposes  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  Ideas ;  but
then,  with  Philo,  these  Ideas  are  something  more  than  the

7  Philo  distingnlslies  between  Wisdom  and  Philosophy :  Philosophy  or
wise  living  is  the  al&Te  of  Wisdom  or  Science ;  <ro<l>la  u  imtrrinjir)  Otlofv  koI
hvdpairlvcDV  Koi  rwv  roinuv  curi&y  (Cong.  Qu.  Erud.  Grat.  §  I4,  ed.  Mangey,
torn.  i.  p.  550).  Philo  explains  Ezod.  zxiy.  6  allegorically,  as  the  basis  of  a
distinction  between  Wisdom  as  it  exists  in  men  and  in  God,  t^  dtiov  y4yos
hfityhs  Ko)  $Kparoif  (Quis  Iter.  Div.  Hser.  §  38,  i.  p.  498).  Wisdom  is  the
mother  of  the  world  (Quod  Det.  Potiori  Insid.  §  16,  1.  p.  ao2) ;  her  wealth
is  without  limits,  she  is  like  a  deep  well,  a  perennial  fountain,  Ac.  But
Philo  does  not  in  any  case  seem  to  personify  Wisdom ;  his  doctrine  of
Wisdom  is  eclipsed  by  that  of  the  Logos.

"  Yacherot  (£cole  d*Alexandiie,  vol.  i.  p.  154,  Introd.)  says  of  Wisdom
and  Ecdesiasticus :  'Ces  monumens  renferment  peu  de  traces  des  id^
Gr^cques  dont  ils  semblent  avoir  pr^^^  Tinvasion  en  Orient.*  Ecclesiasticus
was  written  in  Hebrew  under  the  High-Priesthood  of  Simon  I,  b.o.  303-284,
by  Jesus  the  Son  of  Sirach,  and  translated  into  Greek  by  his  grandson,  who
came  to  reside  at  Alexandria  under  Ptolemy  Euergetes.

•  Plat.  Philebus,  p.  30.  'There  is  not,'  says  Professor  Mansel,  'the
slightest  evidence  thiebt  the  Divine  Beason  was  represented  by  Plato  as
having  a  distinct  personality,  or  as  being  anything  more  than  an  attribute
of  the  Divine  Mind.'  Cf.  art.  Philosophy,  in  Kitto's  Cyd.  of  Bibl.  litera^
ture,  new  ed.

n]  r


66    Relation  of  Philo^s  Logos  to  his  theosophy.

models  after  which  creation  is  fashioned,  or  than  the  seals  which
are  impressed  upon  concrete  forms  of  existence  ^.  The  Ideas  of
Philo  are  energizing  powers  or  causes  whereby  God  carries  out
His  plan  of  creation  «.  Of  these  energetic  forces,  the  Logos,  ac-
cording to  Philo,  is  the  compendium,  the  concentration.  Fhilo's
Logos  is  a  necessary  complement  of  his  philosophical  doctrine
concerning  God,  Philo  indeed,  as  the  devout  Jew,  believes  in
God  as  a  Personal  Being  Who  has  constant  and  certain  dealings
with  mankind ;  Philo,  in  his  Greek  moods,  conceives  of  God  not
merely  as  a  single  simple  Essence,  but  as  beyond  Personality^
beyond  any  definite  form  of  existence,  infinitely  distant  from  all
relations  to  created  life,  incapable  of  any  contact  even  with  a
spiritual  creation,  subtilized  into  an  abstraction  altogether  tran-
scending the  most  abstract  conceptions  of  impersonal  being.  It
might  even  seem  as  if  Philo  had  chosen  for  his  master,  not  Plato
the  theologian  of  the  Timseus,  but  Plato  the  pure  dialectician  of
the  Eepublic.  But  how  is  such  an  abstract  God  as  this  to  be
also  the  Creator  and  the  Providence  of  the  Hebrew  Bible  %  Cer-
tainly, according  to  Philo,  matter  existed  before  Creation  d ;  but
how  did  God  mould  matter  into  created  forms  of  life  %  This,
Philo  will  reply,  was  the  work  of  the  Logos,  that  is  to  say,  of
the  ideas  collectively.  The  Philonian  Logos  is  the  Idea  of
ideas « ;  he  is  the  shadow  of  God  by  which  as  by  an  instrument
He  made  the  worlds^;  he  is  himseK  the  intelligible  or  Ideal
World,  the  Archetypal  Type  of  all  creations.  The  Logos  of
Philo  is  the  most  ancient  and  most  general  of  created  things  ^ ;

^  Gf.  Philo,  de  Mundi  Opif.  §  44,  torn.  i.  p.  30 ;  L^is  Allegor.  i.  §  9,
torn.  i.  p.  47.

^  De  Monarchic,  i.  §  6,  torn.  ii.  p.  219 :  6vofid(ov<ri  9h  cArks  oIk  i.ith  cko'
wov  Ttv^s  ruv  trap*  tiuv  VbiaSf  iireiSij  fKourroy  tS>v  6vr<av  tSunroiova'i,  rh  iroKTa
rdrrova'ai,  Koi  rh  Airetpa  koI  iiSpurTa  Koi  &(rx^M<^'''«''Ta  trfparovtrcu  lad  trepiopi'
Civifou  Kol  (rxnf^flCovffat  fcal  <rvv6\ws  rh  x^'^pov  eis  rh  Jkixeivov  fi€dctpfi4)C6fi€vau
Comp.  the  remarkable  passage  in  De  Vict.  Offer.  §  13,  torn.  ii.  p.  a6i.

^  In  one  passage  only  does  Philo  am)ear  to  ascribe  to  God  the  creation  of
matter.  De  Somn.  i.  §  13,  torn.  i.  63a.  If  so,  for  once  his  Jewish  con-
science is  too  strong  for  his  Flatonism.  But  even  here  his  meaning  is  at
best  doubtful.    Of.  Dollinger,  Heid.  und  Judenth.  bk.  x.  pt.  3,  §  5.

•  De  Mundi  Opif.  §  6 ;  i.  p.  5 :  iUa  r&v  I8ewv  6  Beov  \&yos.

'  Legis  Allegor.  iii.  31 ;  i.  p.  106 :  CiCMfc  0€ov  8i  6  \6yos  cArov  i<rr»  f
Kaddirep  opydvtp  irpotrxpv^dfjLtvos  iKofffiovoUi,  De  Monarch,  ii.  §  5  >  torn.  ii.
225 ;  De  Oherub.  §  35,  torn.  i.  p.  162.

«  De  Mundi  Opif.  §  6,  i.  p.  5 :  ^  apx^rtmos  ff^paefis,  Zr  ^ofiev  etvcu  kS^/iop
vorrrhvy  avrhs  &y  ^ri  rh  kpx^wov  vapdJSeiyfia  ...  6  j9coO  xSyos.  The  \6yQS
is  dissociated  from  the  irapdSuyfia  in  De  Gonf.  ling.  o.  ziy.  i.  414.

^  Legis  Allegor.  iii.  61,  i.  p.  121 :  Koi  6  \6yos  8i  rod  Btov  inecpdjfu  ircafr6s
iirri  rov  K6<rfjL0v,  icol  irp^afi^aros  Kol  ^cyiKc^raros  ray  0(ra  yeyoyt,

[  LECT.


Is  the  Logos  of  Pkilo  personal  ?  67


he  is  the  Eternal  Image  of  God  * ;  he  is  the  band  whereby  all
things  are  held  together  k;  he  fills  all  things,  he  sustains  all
things  \    Through  the  Logos,  Qod,  the  abstract,  the  intangible,
the  inaccessible  Grod,  deals  with  the  world,  with  men.    Thus  the
Logos  is  mediator  as  well  as  creator  ^\  he  is  a  high-priest  and
intercessor  with  Qod ;  he  interprets  God  to  man ;  he  is  an  am-
bassador from  heaven!^.     He  is  the  god  of  impeifect  men,  who
cannot  ascend  by  an  ecstatic  intuition  to  a  knowledge  of  the
supreme  God  ^ ;  he  is  thus  the  nutriment  of  human  souls,  and  a
source  of  spiritual  delights  P.     The  Logos  is  the  eldest  angel  or
the  archangel  <i ;  he  is  God's  Eldest,  His  Firstborn  Son  ^ ;  and
we  almost  seem  to  touch  upon  the  apprehension  of  that  sublime,
that  very  highest  form  of  communicated  life,  which  is  exclusive
of  the  ideas  of  inferiority  and  of  time,  and  which  was  afterwards
so  happily  and  authoritatively  expressed  by  the  doctrinal  formula
of  an  eternal  generation.     But,  as  we  listen,  we  ask  ourselves
one  capital  and  inevitable  question :  Is  Philo's  Logos  a  personal
being,  or  is  he  after  all  a  pure  abstraction  %    Philo  is  silent ;  for
on  such  a  point  as  this  the  Greek  and  the  Jew  in  him  are  hope-

t  De  Gonf.  Ling.  §  a8,  i.  437.  'Although,*  layi  Philo,  'we  are  not  in  a
position  to  be  considered  tiie  Sons  of  GU>d,  yet  we  may  be  the  children  r^i
iuBlov  cIkSvos  avrov,  \6rfOv  rov  Upwrdrov,

^  De  Plantat.  §  2,  I.  33 X  •  8c(r/iby  yiip  ahrlof  Af^ierov  rov  irayrhs  6  ytvirff
eras  iiroUi  irar'fip,

^  De  Mundoy  §  2,  ii.  p.  604 :  rh  6x^p<&TaT0P  lud  fitfiaiiraTOP  fyucfut  r&p
Z\eoy  4ariv,  Ohros  hirh  tw¥  fi4(rcov  M  rh  ir4para  K<d  iiwh  rwv  &Kpwv  tls  fiiva
roBcis  hoXix^lu  rhv  r^f  <p6ir€us  ^pSfiov  &^ti}toi',  <rwdywv  irdvra  r^  fi4p7j  icol
crtplyyeoy.

»  Quia  Rer.  Div,  H»r.  $  4a,  i.  p.  501 :  t$  8i  iipxayy^^V  f^  irptirfivrdr^
Xiy<p  Scfipeby  i^cdperoy  I8»fecv  6  rcb  5Xa  y%wii<ras  irwr^py  Xva  fi€d6ptos  ffria  rh
y€y6fi€vor  huucplvn  rod  irtwonnK6ros,

"  Ibid. :  6  8*  ahrhs  lK4rris  fiiv  itrri  rod  Ovrirov  letipalvovros  id  irphs  rh
J&j^Baprov^  vpcarfivriis  8i  rod  Ttytfiivos  irphs  rh  M\koov»  Of.  De  Scmmiis,  §  37,
i*  653;  1^0  Migr.  Abraham.  §  18,  i.  45a.  De  Gigant.  §  XX :  ^  kpxi^p^t
Kiyos,

•  Legis  Allegor.  iii.  §  73,  L  128 :  oZros  [bo.  h  X<fyo$*J  yhp  iifi&v  r&y  kreKur
tiv  ctri  Ochs,  rwv  l\  (TwpStv  koI  r^XtUiV,  6  irpQros,  i.  e.  Grod  Himself.  Of.  §  3a
and  §  33,  i.  107.

P  Ii^;is  Allegor.  iii.  §  59^  i.  lao :  *Op$y  rTJs  r^xvs  rpo<piiv  oXa  iffrt ;  ASyos
eco9  avvexhs*  ^ouciDs  Zp6ai^,  Cf.  also  §  6a.  De  Somniis,  §  37,  i.  691 :  r^
7^^  tvri  rov  delov  Xiyov  ^6firi  avv^x^s  fitff  ip/iris  jcal  rd^€9»s  <p€pofi4yri,  irdma
8ii  irdvrtcv  ivax^iTai  Koi  evippcdvu,

4  De  Gonf.  Xdng.  §  a8,  i.  437 :  k^v  firiHifm  iiivroi  rvyxdvip  ris  &{t^xp<a»9
&v  vihs  0€ov  irpoffar/opei/^aQai,  <nrovlia(4rw  KOtrfiutrOtu  Karh,  rhv  irpwrAyovop  oh»
rov  A6yov,  rhv  SyytXop  -Kptafi^aroy  &5  ipxdyy^Xoy  voXv^wfiov  {ncdpxoyra,

'  De  Gonf.  ling.  §  14,  i.  414 :  rovrop  fikv  yhp  trpttrfiirarou  vlhp  6  rSv
tvrtov  iiyiretXt  Uariip,  hp  kripmOi  vpwrirfovov  wpSfiaa^,

n]  V  a


68  Philo^s  indecision.


lessly  at  issue.  Philo's  whole  system  and  drift  of  thought  must
have  inclined  him  to  personify  the  Logos ;  hut  was  the  personified
Logos  to  he  a  second  Gk>d,  or  was  he  to  he  nothing  more  than  a
created  angel  1  If  the  latter,  then  he  would  lose  all  those  lofty
prerogatives  and  characteristics,  which,  platonically  speaking,  as
well  as  for  the  purposes  of  mediation  and  creation,  were  so  en-
tirely essential  to  him.  If  the  former,  then  Philo  must  break
with  the  very  first  article  of  the  Mosaic  creed ;  he  must  renounce
his  Monotheism.  Confronted  with  this  difficulty,  the  Alexandrian
wavers  in  piteous  indecision ;  he  really  recoils  before  it.  In  one
passage  indeed  he  even  goes  so  far  as  to  call  the  Logos  a  '  second
Gods,'  and  he  is  accordingly  ranked  by  Petavius  among  the
forerunners  of  Arius.  But  on  the  whole  he  appears  to  fall  back
upon  a  position  which,  however  fatal  to  the  completeness  of  his
system,  yet  has  the  recommendation  of  relieving  him  from  an
overwhelming  difficulty.  After  all  that  he  has  said,  his  Logos  is
really  resolved  into  a  mere  group  of  Divine  ideas,  into  a  purely
impersonal  quality  included  in  the  Divine  Being  *,   That  advance

•  Fragment  quoted  from  Euseb.  Prsep.  Evang.  lib.  vii.  c.  13  in  Phil.  Oper.
ii.  625 :  OvriThy  yhp  ovSev  aireiKOViffd^vou  irphs  rhv  avoardrto  ical  irareoa  r&t^
1i\av  iZiivaro,  oiKKk  vphs  rhv  Sflrrepov  Behv,  Bs  itrrtv  Ik^Ivov  ASyos,  Bat  the
Logos  is  called  OeSs  only  iv  Karaxfyfltreu     Op.  i.  655.

*  That  Philo'e  Logos  is  not  a  distinct  Person  is  maintained  by  Domer,
Person  CJhristi,  Einleitung,  p.  23,  note  i.  44,  sqq.  note  40 ;  by  Dollinger,
Heid.  und  Judenthmn,  bk.  z.  p.  iii.  §  5 ;  and  by  Burton,  Bampton  Lectures,
note  93.  The  opposite  opinion  is  that  of  Gfrorer  (see  his  Philo  und  die
Jiidisch-Alezandiinische  Theologie),  and  of  Llicke  (see  Professor  Hansel,  in
Kitto's  Encycl.,  art.  Philosophy,  p.  526,  note).  Professor  Jowett,  at  one
time,  following  Gfrorer,  appears  to  find  in  Philo  'the  complete  personification
of  the  Logos,*  although  he  also  admits  that  Philo's  idea  of  the  Logos  'leaves
us  in  doubt  at  last  whether  it  is  not  a  quality  only,  or  mode  of  operation  in
the  Divine  Being.*  (Ep.  of  St.  Paul,  i.  p.  510,  2nd  ed.)  He  hesitates  in-
deed to  decide  the  question,  on  the  ground  that  'the  word  "person**  has
now  a  distinctness  and  unity  which  belongs  not  to  that  age.*  (p.  485.)  Surely
the  idea  (at  any  rate)  of  personality,  whether  distinctly  analyzed  or  no,  is
a  primary  element  of  all  hunian  thought.  It  is  due  to  Professor  Jowett  to
call  attention  to  the  extent  (would  that  it  were  wider  and  more  radical  I)  to
which  he  disavows  Gfrorer*s  conclusions.  (Ibid.  p.  454,  note.)  And  I  quote
the  following  words  with  sincere  pleasure :  '  The  object  of  the  Grospel  is  real,
present,  substantial, — an  object  such  as  men  may  see  with  their  eyes  and
hold  in  their  hands.  .  .  .  But  in  Philo  the  object  is  shadowy,  distant,  indis-
tinct ;  whether  an  idea  or  a  fact  we  scarcely  know.  .  .  .  Were  we  to  come
nearer  to  it,  it  would  vanish  away.*  (Ibid.  p.  413,  ist  ed. ;  p.  509,  2nd  ed.,
in  which  there  are  a  few  variations.)  A  study  of  the  passages  referred  to  in
Mangey*s  index  will,  it  is  believed,  convince  any  unprejudiced  reader  that
Philo  did  not  know  his  own  mind ;  that  his  Logos  was  sometimes  imper-
sonal and  sometimes  not,  or  that  he  sometimes  thought  of  a  personal  Logos,
and  never  believed  in  one.

[lect.


Philo  and  the  New  Testament.  69

toward  the  recognition  of  a  real  Hypostasis, — so  steady,  as  it
seemed,  so  promising,  so  fruitful, — is  but  a  play  upon  language,
or  an  intellectual  field-sport,  or  at  best,  the  effort  which  pre-
cedes or  the  mask  which  covers  a  speculative  failure.  We  were
tempted  perchance  for  a  moment  to  believe  that  we  were  listen-
ing to  the  master  from  whom  Apostles  were  presently  to  draw
their  inspirations;  but,  in  truth,  we  have  before  us  in  Philo
Jndseus  only  a  thoughtful,  not  insincere,  but  half-heathenized
believer  in  the  Bevelation  of  Sinai,  groping  in  a  twilight  which
he  has  made  darker  by  his  Hellenic  tastes,  after  a  truth  which
was  only  to  be  disclosed  in  its  fulness  by  another  Bevelation,
the  Eevelation  of  Pentecost.

This  hesitation  as  to  the  capital  question  of  the  Personality  of
the  Logos,  would  alone  suffice  to  establish  a  fundamental  dif-
ference between  the  vacillating,  tentative  speculation  of  the
Alexandrian,  and  the  clear,  compact,  majestic  doctrine  concern-
ing our  Lord's  Pre-existent  Godhead,  which  meets  us  under  a
somewhat  similar  phraseological  form  ^  in  the  pages  of  the  New
Testament.  When  it  is  assumed  that  the  Logos  of  St.  John  is
but  a  reproduction  of  the  Logos  of  Philo  the  Jew,  this  assump-
tion overlooks  fundamental  discrepancies  of  thought,  and  rests
its  case  upon  occasional  coincidences  of  language  ^.  For  besides
the  contrast  between  the  abstract  ideal  Logos  of  Philo,  and  the
concrete  Personal  Logos  of  the  fourth  Evangelist,  which  has
already  been  noticed,  there  are  even  deeper  differences,  which
would  have  made  it  impossible  that  an  Apostle  should  have  sat
in  spirit  as  a  pupil  at  the  feet  of  the  Alexandrian,  or  that  he
shoidd  have  allowed  himself  to  breathe  the  same  general  re-
ligious atmosphere.  Philo  is  everywhere  too  little  alive  to  the
presence  and  to  the  consequences  of  moral  evil  v.     The  history

■  On  the  general  question  of  the  phraseological  coincidences  between
Fhilo  and  the  writers  in  the  New  Testament,  see  the  passages  quoted  in
Professor  Hansel's  article  'Philosophy*  (Kitto's  Encyd.),  already  referred
to.  I  could  sincerely  wish  that  I  had  had  the  advantage  of  reading  that
article  before  writing  the  text  of  these  pages.

^  ' Gfrorer/  Professor  Jowe^t  admits,  'has  exaggerated  the  resemblances
between  Philo  and  the  New  Testament,  making  them,  I  think,  more  real
and  less  verbal  than  they  are  in  fact.'  (Ep.  of  St.  Paul,  i.  iL54,  note.)  '  II
est  douteux,'  says  M.  E.  ^Yacherot,  'que  Saint  Jean,  qui  n  a  jamais  visits
Alexondrie,  ait  oonnu  les  livres  du  philosophe  luif.*  Histoire  Critique  de
r^le  d'Alexandrie,  i.  p.  aoi.  And  the  limited  circulation  of  the  writings
of  the  theosophical  Alexandrians  would  appear  from  the  fact  that  Philo
himself  appears  never  to  have  read  those  of  his  master  Aristobulus.  0£
Valkenaer,  de  Aristobulo,  p.  95.

^  See  the  remarks  of  M.  E.  de  Pressensd,  J^sus-Ghrist,  p.  1 1  a.


70      Contrasts  between  Philo  and  the  Gospel.

of  Israel,  instead  of  displaying  a  long,  earnest  struggle  between
the  Goodness  of  God  and  the  wickedness  of  men,  interests  Philo
only  as  a  complex  allegory,  which,  by  a  versatile  exposition,
may  be  made  to  illustrate  various  ontological  problems.  The
priesthood,  and  the  sacrificial  system,  instead  of  pointing  to
man's  profound  need  of  pardon  and  expiation,  are  resolved  by
him  into  the  symbols  of  certain  cosmical  facts  or  theosophio
theories.  JPhilo  therefore  scarcely  hints  at  the  Messiah,  al-
though he  says  much  concerning  Jewish  expectations  of  a
brighter  future ;  he  knows  no  means  of  reconciliation,  of  re-
demption ;  he  sees  not  the  need  of  them.  According  to  Philo,
salvation  is  to  be  worked  out  by  a  perpetual  speculation  upon
the  eternal  order  of  things ;  and  asceticism  is  of  value  in  assist-
ing man  to  ascend  into  an  ecstatic  philosophical  t'everie.  The
profound  opposition  between  such  a  view  of  man's  moral  state,
and  that  stem  appeal  to  the  humbling  realities  of  human  life
which  is  inseparable  from  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  His
Apostles,  would  alone  have  made  it  improbable  that  the  writers
of  the  New  Testament  are  under  serious  intellectual  obligations
to  Philo.  Unless  the  preaching  which  could  rouse  the  con-
science to  a  keen  agonizing  sense  of  guilt  is  in  harmony  with  a
lassitude  which  ignores  the  moral  misery  that  is  in  the  world ;
unless  the  proclamation  of  an  Atoning  Victim  crucified  for  the
sins  of  men  be  reconcilable  with  an  indifference  to  the  existence
of  any  true  expiation  for  sin  whatever ;  it  will  not  be  easy  to
believe  that  Philo  is  the  real  author  of  the  creed  of  Christendom.
And  this  moral  discrepancy  does  but  tally  with  a  like  doctrinal
antagonism.  According  to  Philo,  the  Divinity  cannot  touch  that
which  is  material :  how  can  Philo  then  have  been  the  teacher  of
an  Apostle  whose  whole  teaching  expands  the  truth  that  the
Word,  Himself  essentially  Divine,  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt
among  us  %  Philo's  real  spiritual  progeny  must  be  sought  else-
where. Philo's  method  of  interpretation  may  have  passed  into
the  Church ;  he  is  quoted  by  Clement  and  by  Origen,  often  and
respectfully.  Yet  Philo's  doctrine,  it  has  been  well  observed,  if
naturally  developed,  would  have  led  to  Dbcetism  rather  than  to
Christianity  3C;  and  we  trace  its  influence  in  forms  of  theo-
sophic  Gnosticism,  which  only  agree  in  substituting  the  wildest
licence  of  the  metaphysical  fancy,  for  simple  submission  to  that
historical  fact  of  the  Incarnation  of  God,  which  is  the  basis
of  the  Gospel.

«  Domer,  Person  Christi,  i  57  (Einleit.).

[lect.


k


Real  function  of  the  Alexandrian  theosophy.    71

But  if  Fhilo  was  not  St.  John's  master,  it  is  probable  that  his
writings,  or  rather  the  general  theosophio  movement  of  which
they  are  the  most  representative  sample,  may  have  supplied
Bonae  contemporary  heresies  with  their  stock  of  metaphysical
material,  and  in  IJiis  way  may  have  determined,  by  an  indirect
antagonism,  the  providential  form  of  St.  John's  doctrine.    Nor
can  the  general  positive  value  of  Philo's  labours  be  mistaken,  if
he  is  viewed  apart  from  the  use  that  modem  scepticism  has
attempted  to  make  of  particular  speculations  to  which  he  gave
such  shape  and  impulse.     In  making  a  way  for  some  leading
currents  of  Greek  thought  into  the  heart  of  the  Jewish  Bevela-
tion,  hi^erto  wellnigh  altogether  closed  to  it,  Philo  was  not
indeed  teaching  positive  truth,  but  he  was  breaking  down  some
intellectual  barriers  against  its  reception,  in  the  most  thought-
ful portion  of  the  human  family.    In  Philo,  Greek  Philosophy
almost  stood  at  the  door  of  the  Catholic  Church ;  but  it  was
Greek  Philosophy  endeavouring  to  base  itself,  however  precari-
ously, upon  the  authority  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.    The  Logos
of  Philo,  though  a  shifting  and  incomplete  speculation,  may  well
have  served  as  a  guide  to  thoughtful  minds  from  that  region  of
unsettled  enquiry  that  surrounds  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  a
Divine  Beason,  to  the  clear  and  stnmg  faith  which  welcomes  the
full  Gk>spel  Eevelation  of  the  Word  made  flesh.*   Philo's  Logos,
while  embodying  elements  foreign  to  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  is
nevertheless  in  a  direct  line  of  descent  from  the  Inspired  doc-
trine of  the  Wisdom  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs;    and  it  thus
illustrates  the  comprehensive  vigour  of  the  Jewish  Bevelation,
which  could  countenance  and  direct,  if  it  could  not  absolutely
satisfy,  those  fitful  guesses  at  and  gropings  after  truth  which
were  current  in  Heathendom.    If  Philo  could  never  have  created
the  Christian  Doctrine  which  has  been  so  freely  ascribed  to  him,
he  could  do  much,  however  unconsciously,  to  prepare  the  soil  of
Alexandrian  thought  for  its  reception ;  and  from  this  point  of
view,  his  Logos  must  appear  of  considerably  higher  importance
than  the  parallel  speculations  as  to  the  Memra,  the  Shekinah,
the  doctrine  of  the  hidden  and  the  revealed  God,  which  in  that
and  later  ages  belonged  to  the  tradition  of  Palestinian  Judaism  y.

y  Compare  Domer,  Person  Christi,  Emleit.  p.  59,  on  the  Adam  Kadmon,
and  p.  60,  on  the  Memra»  Shekinah,  and  Metatron.  'Zu  der  Idee  einer
Incarnation  des  wirklich  G&ttlichen  aber  haben  es  alle  diese  Theologmnene
insgesammt  nie  gebracht.'  They  only  involTe  a  parattatic  appearance  of
Grody  are  symbok  of  His  Presenoe,  and  are  altogether  impersonal ;  or  if
personal  (as  the  Metatron),  they  are  clearly  conceiyed  of  as  created


72     Relevancy  of  the  foregoing  considerations.

^Providence,'  says  the  accurate  Neander,  'had  so  ordered  it^  that
in  the  intellectiial  world  in  which  Christianity  made  its  first
appearance,  many  ideas  should  be  in  circulation,  which  at  least
seemed  to  be  closely  related  to  it^  and  in  which  Christianity
conld  find  a  point  of  connection  with  external  thought^  on  which
to  base  the  doctrine  of  a  God  revealed  in  Christ*.'  Of  these
ideas  we  may  well  believe  that  the  most  generally  diffused  and
the  most  instromental  was  the  Logos  of  Alexandria,  if  not  the
exact  Logos  of  Philo.

It  is  possible  that  snch  considerations  as  some  of  the  fore-
going, when  viewed  relatively  to  the  great  and  vital  doctrine
which  is  before  us  in  these  lectures,  may  be  objected  to  on  the
score  of  being  '  feoicifuL'  Nor  am  I  insensible,  my  brethren,  to
the  severity  of  such  a  condemnation  when  awarded  by  the
practical  intelligence  of  T<lng1i«hinftTi,  Still  it  is  possible  that
such  a  criticism  would  betoken  on  the  part  of  those  who  make
it  some  lack  of  wise  and  generous  thought.  'Fanciful,'  after
all,  is  a  relative  term ;  what  is  solid  in  one  field  of  study  may
seem  fanciful  in  another.  Before  we  condemn  a  particular  line
of  thought  as  *  fanciful,'  we  do  well  to  enquire  whether  a  pene-
tration, a  subtlety,  a  versatility,  I  might  add,  a  spirituality  of
intelligence,  greater  than  our  own,  might  not  convict  the  con-
demnation itself  of  an  opposite  demerit,  which  need  not  be  more
particularly  described.  Especially  in  sacred  literature,  the  im-
putation of  &ncifulne8s  is  a  rash  one ;  since  a  sacred  subject-
matter  is  not  likely,  h  priori^  to  be  fedrly  amenable  to  the
coarser  tests  and  narrower  views  of  a  secular  judgment.  It
may  be  that  the  review  of  those  adumbrations  of  the  doctrine
of  our  Lord's  Divinity,  in  which  we  have  been  engaged,  is  rather
calculated  to  reassure  a  believer  than  to  convince  a  sceptic.
Christ's  Divinity  illuminates  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  but  to  read
them  as  a  whole  by  this  light  we  must  already  have  recognised
the  truth  from  which  it  rstdiates.  Yet  it  wordd  be  an  error  to
suppose  that  the  Old  Testament  has  no  relations  of  a  more
independent  character  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Godhead.  The
Old  Testament  witnesses  to  the  existence  of  a  great  national
belief  the  importance  of  which  cannot  be  ignored  by  any  man
who  would  do  justice  to  the  history  of  human  thought.     And

peraonalitiefl.    This  helps  to  ezplam  the  fact  that  during  the  first  three  cen-
turies the  main  attacks  on  our  Lord^s  Godhead  were  of  Jewish  origin.     Ct
Domer,  ubi  sup.  note  14.    On  the  Babbinical  ascription  of  Divine  attributes
to  the  Metatroii,  as  higher  than  all  angels,  see  Bralch,  Hannonie,  ii.  p.  417.
«  Kirchen  G^hichte,  i.  3,  p.  989.

[lect.


Nations  must  have  hope  in  a  Future.        73

we  proceed  to  ask  whether  that  belief  has  any,  and  what,  bear-
ing upon  the  £edth  of  Catholio  Christendom  as  to  the  Person  of
her  Lord.

n.  There  is  then  one  element,  or  condition  of  national  life,
with  which  no  nation  can  dispense.  A  nation  must  have  its  eye
upon  a  future,  more  or  less  defined,  but  fairly  within  the  appa-
rent scope  of  its  grasp.  Hope  is  the  soul  of  moral  vitality;  and
any  man,  or  society  of  men,  who  would  live,  in  the  moral  sense
of  life,  must  be  looking  forward  to  something.  You  will  scarcely
suspect  me,  my  brethren,  of  seeking  to  disparage  the  great  prin-
ciple of  tradition ;— that  principle  to  which  the  Christian  Church
owes  her  sacred  volume  itself,  no  less  than  her  treasure  of  formu-
lated doctrine,  and  the  structural  conditions  and  sacramental
sources  of  her  life ; — ^that  principle  to  which  each  generation  of
human  society  is  deeply  and  inevitably  indebted  for  the  accumu*
lated  social  and  political  experiences  of  the  generations  before  it.
Precious  indeed,  to  every  wise  man,  to  every  association  of  true-
hearted  and  generous  men,  must  ever  be  the  inheritance  of  the
past.  Yet  what  is  the  past  without  the  future!  What  is
memory  when  unaccompanied  by  hopet  Look  at  the  case  of
the  single  soul.  Is  it  not  certain  that  a  life  of  high  earnest  pur-
pose will  die  outright,  if  it  is  permitted  to  sink  into  the  placid
reverie  of  perpetual  retrospect,  if  the  man  of  action  becomes  the
mere  'laudator  temporis  acti'?  How  is  the  force  of  moral  life
developed  and  strengthened  t  Is  it  not  by  successive  conscious
efforts  to  act  and  to  suffer  at  the  call  of  duty  t  Must  not  any
moral  life  dwindle  and  fade  away  if  it  be  not  reaching  forward
to  a  standard  higher,  truer,  purer,  stronger  than  its  own  %  Will
not  the  struggles,  the  sacrifices,  the  self-conquests  even  of  a
great  character  in  bygone  years,  if  they  now  occupy  its  whole
field  of  vision,  only  serve  to  consummate  its  ruin  t  As  it  doat-
ingly  fondles  them  in  memory,  will  it  not  be  stiffened  by  conceit
into  a  moral  petrifaciion,  or  consigned  by  sloth  to  the  successive
processes  of  moral  decomposition  1  Has  not  the  Author  of  our
life  so  bound  up  its  deepest  instincts  and  yearnings  with  His
own  eternity,  that  no  blessings  in  the  past  would  be  blessings  to
us,  if  they  were  utterly  unconnected  with  the  future  %  So  it  is
also  in  the  case  of  a  society.  The  greatest  of  all  societies  among
men  at  this  moment  is  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  Is  she  sus-
tained only  by  the  deeds  and  writings  of  her  saints  and  martyrs
in  a  distant  past,  or  only  by  her  reverent  trustful  sense  of  the
Divine  Presence  which  blesses  her  in  the  actual  present  I  Does
she  not  resolutely  pierce  the  gloom  of  the  future,  and  confidently


74         Nations  must  have  hope  in  a  Future.

reckon  upon  new  atm^lea  end  trimnphe  on  earth,  and,  beyond
these,  apon  a  liome  in  Heaven,  wherein  ehe  will  eiijoy  rest  and
victory, — a  rest  that  no  troable  can  disturb,  a  victory  titat  no
reverse  can  forfeit  1  Ib  not  the  same  law  familiar  to  us  in  this
place,  ae  it  affects  the  well-being  of  a  great  educational  institu-
tionf  Here  in  Oxford  we  feel  that  we  cannot  rest  upon  the
varied  efforts  and  the  accninnlated  credit  even  of  ten  centmies.
We  too  have  hopes  embarked  in  the  years  or  in  the  centuries
before  us ;  we  have  duties  towards  them.  We  differ,  it  may  be,
even  radically,  among  onrselves  as  to  the  direction  in  whidi  to
look  for  our  academical  fiitnre.  The  hopes  <A  some  of  us  are
the  fears  of  others.  This  project  would  fain  banish  from  our
system  whatever  proclsims  that  God  had  really  spoken,  and  that
it  is  man's  duty  and  bappinesa  gladly  and  submissively  to  wel-
come His  message ;  while  that  scheme  would  endeavour,  if  pos-
sible, to  &shioQ  each  one  of  our  intellectual  workmen  more  and
more  strictly  after  the  type  of  a  believing  and  fervent  Christian.
The  practical  difference  is  indeed  profound ;  but  we  are  entirely
agreed  as  to  the  general  necessity  for  looking  forward.  On  both
sides  it  is  understood  that  an  institution  which  is  not  straggling
upwards  towards  a  higher  future,  must  resign  itself  to  the  con-
viction that  it  is  already  in  its  decadence,  and  must  expect

Nor  is  it  otherwise  with  that  association  of  men  which  we

call  a  nation,  the  product  of  race,  or  the  product  of  circom-

Btances,  the  product  in  any  case  of  a  Providential  Will,  Which

welds  into  a  common  whole,  for  the  purposes  of  united  action

and  of  reciprocal  influence,  a  larger  or  smaller  number  of  human

beings.     A  nation  must  have  a  future  before  it ;  a  future  which

can  rebuke  its  despondency  and  can  direct  its  enthusiasm ;  a

future  for  which  it  will  prepare  itself ;  a  future  which  it  will

aspire  to  create  or  to  control.    Unless  it  would  barter  away  the

vigorous  nerve  of  true  patriotism  for  the  feeble  pedantry  of  a

BOuIlesB  archeeology,  a  nation  cannot  fall  back  altogether  upon

the  centuries  whidi  have  flattered  its  ambition,  or  which  have

material  well-being.     Something  it  must  propose

object  to  be  compassed  in  the  coming  time  ;  some-

I  as  yet  beyond  it.    It  will  enlarge  its  frontier ;  or

M  its  conuuercial  reBonrces ;  or  it  will  extend  its

onization  ;  or  it  will  erect  its  overgrown  colonies

snt  and  friendly  states ;  or  it  will  bind  the  severed

livided  race  into  one  gigantic  nationality  that  shall    .

lOt  subdue,  the  nations  around.    Or  perchance  its

[  LKCT.


A  Future  necessary  to  the  Chosen  People.     75

attention  will  be  concentrated  on  the  improvement  of  its  social
life,  and  on  the  details  of  its  internal  legislation.  It  will  extend
the  range  of  civil  privileges;  it  will  broaden  the  basis  of
government ;  it  will  provide  additional  encouragements  to  and
safeguards  for  public  morality;  it  will  steadily  aim  at  bettering
the  condition  of  the  classes  who  are  forced,  beyond  others,  to
work  and  to  suffer.  Thankful  it  may  well  be  to  the  Author  of
all  goodness  for  the  enjoyment  of  past  blessings ;  but  the  spirit  of
a  true  thankfulness  is  ever  and  very  nearly  allied  to  the  energy
of  hope.  SeK-complacent  a  nation  cannot  be,  unless  it  would
perish.  Woe  indeed  to  the  country  which  dares  to  assume  that
it  has  reached  its  zenith,  and  that  it  can  achieve  or  attempt  no
more !

Now  Israel  as  a  nation  was  not  withdrawn  from  the  operation
of  this  law,  which  makes  the  anticipation  of  a  better  future
of  such  vital  importance  to  the  common  life  of  a  people.  Israel
indeed  had  been  cradled  in  an  atmosphere  of  physical  and
political  miracle.  Her  great  lawgiver  could  point  to  the
event  which  gave  her  national  existence  as  to  an  event  unique
in  human  history  *.  No  subsequent  vicissitudes  would  obliterate
the  memory  of  the  story  which  Israel  treasured  in  her  inmost
memory,  the  story  of  the  stem  Egyptian  bondage  followed
by  the  triumphant  Exodus.  How  retrospective  throughout
is  the  sacred  literature  of  Israel  I  It  is  not  enough  that  the
great  deliverance  should  be  accurately  chronicled;  it  must
be  expanded,  applied,  insisted  on  in  each  of  its  many  bearings
and  aspects  by  the  lawgiver  who  directed  and  who  described
it;  it  must  be  echoed  on  from  age  to  age,  in  the  stem
expostulations  of  Prophets  and  in  the  plaintive  or  jubilant
songs  of  Psalmists.  Certainly  the  greater  portion  of  the
Old  Testament  is  history.  Israel  was  guided  by  the  contents
of  her  sacred  books  to  live  in  much  grateful  reflection  upon
the  past.  Certainly,  it  wi^s  often  her  sin  and  her  condemnation
that  she  practically  lost  sight  of  all  that  had  been  done  for
her.  Yet  if  ever  it  were  permissible  to  forget  the  future,
Israel,  it  should  seein,  might  have  forgotten  it.  She  might
have  closed  her  eyes  against  the  dangers  which  threatened
her  from  beyond  tiie  Lebanon,  from  beyond  the  Eastern  and
the  Southern  desert,  frt)m  beyond  the  Western  sea,  from
within  her  own  borders,  from  the  streets  and  the  palaces
of  her  capital.     She .  might  have  abandoned  herself  in  an

•  Deut.  iv.  34.


76     Israel's  Future,  not  secular  but  religious,

ecstasy  of  perpetuated  triumph  to  the  Toices  of  her  poets
aod  to  the  rolls  of  her  historiaDs.  But  there  was  One  Who
had  loved  Israel  as  a  child,  and  had  called  Hie  iolant  people
out  of  Egypt,  and  had  endowed  it  vdtfa  His  Name  and  His
Law,  and  had  so  fenced  its  life  around  by  protective  iustitutionB,
that,  as  the  ages  passed,  neither  strange  manners  nor  hostile
thought  Bhoold  avail  to  corrupt  what  He  bad  bo  bountifully
given  to  it.  Was  He  forgetful  to  provide  for  and  to  direct
that  instinct  of  expectation,  without  which  as  a  nation  it
could  not  live  t  Had  He  indeed  not  thus  provided,  Israel
might  have  struggled  with  vain  energy  after  ideals  sach  as
were  those  of  the  nations  around  her.  She  might  have  spent
herself,  like  the  Tyrian  or  Sidonian  merchant,  for  a  large
commerce ;  she  might  have  watched  eagerly,  and  fiercely,  like
the  Cilician  pirate  Dr  like  the  wild  sons  of  the  desert,  for
the  spoils  of  adjacent  civilizations ;  she  might  have  essayed
to  combine,  after  the  Greek  pattern,  a  discreet  measure  of
sensuality  with  a  great  activity  of  the  speculative  intellect;
she  might  have  fared  as  did  the  Babylonian,  or  the  Persian,
or  the  Soman ;  at  least,  she  might  have  attempted  the  estab-
lishment  of  a  world-wide  tyranny  around  the  thrOne  of  a
Hebrew  Belehazzar  or  of  a  Hebrew  Nero.  Nor  is  her  history
altogether  free  from  the  disturbing  influence  of  such  ideals
as  were  these;  we  do  not  forget  the  brigandage  of  the  days
of  the  Judges,  or  the  imperial  state  and  prowess  of  Solomon,
or  the  commercial  enterprise  of  Jehoshaphat,  or  the  union
pf  much  intellectual  activity  with  low  moral  effort  which
marked  more  than  one  of  the  Rabbinical  schools.  But  the
life  and  energy  of  the  nation  was  not  really  embarked,  at
least  in  its  beat  days,  in  the  pursuit  of  these  objects ;  their
attractive  influence  was  intermittent,  transient,  accidental.
The  expectation  of  Israel  was  steadily  directed  towards  a
future,  the  lustre  of  which  would  in  some  real  sense  more
than  eclipse  her  glorious  past.  That  futnre  was  not  sketched
bv  the  vain  imaeinings  of  popular  aspirations ;  it  was  unveiled
the  people  by  a  long  series  of  authoritative
These  announcements  did  not  merely  point
ton  of  a  new  state  of  things ;  they  centred
upon  a  coming  Person.  God  Himself  vouch-
le  instinct  of  hope  which  sustained  the  national
losen  people ;  and  Israel  lived  for  the  expected

sides  being  a  civil  polity,  was  a  theocracy ;


as  required  by  its  belief  in  God  and  sin.      7  7

she  was  not  merely  a  nation,  she  was  a  Church.  In  Israel
religion  was  not,  as  with  the  peoples  of  pagan  antiquity,  a
mere  attribute  or  function  of  the  national  life.  Heligion  was
the  very  soul  and  substance  of  the  life  of  Israel ;  Israel  was
a  Church  encased,  embodied  in  a  political  constitution.  Hence
it  was  that  the  most  truly  national  aspirations  in  Israel  were  her
religious  aspirations.  Even  the  modem  naturalist  critics  can-
not fail  to  observe,  as  they  read  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  that
the  mind  of  Israel  was  governed  by  two  dominant  convictions,
the  like  of  which  were  unknown  to  any  other  ancient  people.
God  was  the  first  thought  in  the  mind  of  Israel.  The  existence,
the  presence  of  One  Supreme,  Living,  Personal  Being,  Who
alone  exists  necessarily,  and  of  ELimself ;  Who  sustains  the
life  of  all  besides  Himself;  before  Whom,  all  that  is  not
HimseK  is  but  a  shadow  and  vanity;  from  Whose  sanctity
there  streams  forth  upon  the  conscience  of  man  that  moral
law  which  is  the  light  of  human  life;  and  in  Whose  mercy
all  men,  especially  ^e  afficted,  the  suffering,  the  poor,  may,
if  they  will,  find  a  gracious  and  long-suffering  Patron, — this
was  the  substance  of  the  first  great  conviction  of  the  people
of  Israel.  Dependent  on  that  conviction  was  another.  The
eye  of  Israel  was  not  merely  opened  towards  the  heavens;  it
was  alive  to  the  facts  of  the  moral  human  world.  Israel  was
conscious  of  the  presence  and  power  of  sin.  The  '  healthy  sen-
suality,' as  Strauss  has  admiringly  termed  it^,  which  pervaded
the  whole  fabric  of  life  among  the  Greeks,  had  closed  up  the
eye  of  that  gifted  race  to  a  perception  which  was  so  familiar  to
the  Hebrews.  We  may  trace  indeed  throughout  the  best  Greek
poetry  a  vein  of  de^p  suppressed  melancholy  ^ ;  but  the  secret

^  See  Luthardt,  Apologetische  Voiirage,  vorl.  vii.  note  6.  The  expresdoii
occurs  in  Schubart^s  Leben,  ii.  461.  Lathardt  quotes  a  venr  characteristic
passage  from  Goethe  (vol.  xzx.  Winckelmann,  Antikes  Heidnisches,  pp.
10-13)  to  the  same  effect :  'If  the  modem,  at  almost  every  reflection,  casts
himself  into  the  Infinite,  to  return  at  last,  if  he  can,  to  a  limited  point ;  the
ancients  feel  themselves  at  once,  and  without  further  wanderings,  at  ease
(mly  within  the  limits  of  this  beautiful  world.  Here  were  they  placed,  to
this  were  they  called,  here  their  activity  has  found  scope,  and  their  passions
objects  and  nourishment.*  The  'heathen  mind,*  he  says,  produced  'such  a
condition  of  human  existence,  a  condition  intended  by  nature,*  that  'both  in
the  moment  of  highest  enjoyment  and  in  that  of  deepest  sacrifice,  nay,  of  ab-
solute ruin,  we  recogfnise  the  indestructibly  healthy  tone  of  their  thought.*
Similarly  in  Strauss  Leben  Marklin*s,  1 851,  p.  137,  Marklin  says,  'I  would
with  all  my  heart  be  a  heathen,  for  here  I  find  truth,  nature,  greatness.*

c  See  the  beautiful  passage  quoted  from  Lasaulx,  Abhandlung  iiber  den
Sinn  der  OSdipus-sage,  p.  10,  by  Luthardt,  ubi  supra,  note  7.    Gf.  also


78  A  Deliverer  from  sin  suggested  by  the  Ritual.

of  this  subtle,  of  this  inextinguishable  sadness  was  unknown
to  the  accomplished  artists  who  gave  to  it  an  involuntary  ex-
pression, and  who  lavished  their  choicest  resources  upon  the
ofb-repeated  effort  to  veil  it  beneath  the  bright  and  graceful
drapery  of  a  versatile  light-heartedness  peculiarly  their  own.
But  the  Jew  knew  that  sin  was  the  secret  of  human  sorrow.
He  could  not  forget  sin  if  he  would ;  for  before  his  eyes,  the
importunate  existence  and  the  destructive  force  of  sin  were
inexorably  pictured  in  the  ritual.  He  witnessed  daily  sacrifices
for  sin ;  he  witnessed  the  sacrifice  of  sacrifices  which  was
offered  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  and  by  which  the  *  nation  of
religion,'  impersonated  in  its  High  Priest,  solemnly  laid  its  sins
upon  the  sacrificial  victim,  and  bore  the  blood  of  atonement  into
the  Presence-chamber  of  God.  Then  the  moral  law  sounded  in
his  ears ;  he  knew  that  he  had  not  obeyed  it.  If  the  Jew  could
not  be  sure  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  really  effected  his
reconciliation  with  God;  if  his  own  prophets  told  him  that
moral  obedience  was  more  precious  in  God's  sight  than  sacrificial
oblations ;  if  the  ritual,  interpreted  as  it  was  by  the  Decalogue,
created  yearnings  within  him  which  it  could  not  satisfy,  and
deepened  a  sense  of  pollution  which  of  itself  it  could  not  relieve ;
yet  at  least  the  Jew  could  not  ignore  sin,  or  think  lightly  of  it,
or  essay  to  gild  it  over  with  the  levities  of  raillery.  He  could
not  screen  from  his  sight  its  native  blackness,  and  justify  it  to
himseK  by  a  philosophical  theory  which  should  represent  it  as
inevitable,  or  as  being  something  else  than  what  it  is.  The
ritual  forced  sin  in  upon  his  daily  thoughts ;  the  ritual  inflicted
it  upon  his  imagination  as  being  a  terrible  and  present  fact ;
and  so  it  entered  into  and  coloured  his  whole  conception  alike  of
national  and  of  individual  life.  Thus  was  it  that  this  sense  of
sin  moulded  all  true  Jewish  hopes,  all  earnest  Jewish  antici-
pations of  the  national  future.  A  future  which  promised
political  victory  or  deliverance,  but  which  offered  no  relief  to
the  sense  of  sin,  would  have  failed  to  meet  the  better  aspirations,
and  to  cheer  the  real  heart  of  a  people  which,  amid  whatever
unfaithfulness  to  its  measure  of  light,  yet  had  a  true  knowledge
of  God,  and  was  keenly  alive  to  the  fact  and  to  the  effects  of
moral  evil.  And  He  Who,  by  His  earlier  revelations,  had  Him-
self made  the  moral  needs  of  Israel  so  deep,  and  had  bidden  the

Dollinger,  Heid.  und  Jnd.  bk.  ▼.  pt.  i,  $  2 ;  Abp.  Trench,  Huls.  Lectturee,
^*  3>  P*  305;  also  Comp.  H.  xvii.  446;  Od.  xi.  489,  xviii.  130;  Eoiip.
nippol.  190,  Med.  1224,  Fragm.  No.  454,  808.  r

[leot.


First  period  of  Messianic  prophecy.  79

liopes  of  Israel  rise  so  High,  Youchsafed  to  meet  the  one,  and  to
offer  a  plenary  satisfieuition  to  the  other,  in  the  doctrine  of  an
expected  Messiah.

It  is  then  a  shallow  misapprehension  which  represents  the
Messianic  belief  as  a  sdrt  of  outlying  prejudice  or  superstition,
incidental  to  the  later  thought  of  Israel,  and  to  which  Chris-
tianity has  attributed  an  exaggerated  importance,  that  it  may
the  better  find  a  basis  in  Jewish  history  for  the  Person  of  its
Founder.  The  Messianic  belief  was  in  truth  interwoven  with
the  deepest  life  of  the  people.  The  promises  which  formed  and
fed  this  belief  are  distributed  along  nearly  the  whole  range  of
the  Jewish  annals ;  while  the  belief  rests  originally  upon  sacred
traditions,  which  carry  us  up  to  the  yery  cradle  of  the  human
fsonily,  although  they  are  preserved  in  the  sacred  Hebrew  Books.
It  is  of  importance  to  inquire  whether  this  general  Messianic
belief  included  any  definite  convictions  respecting  the  personal
rank  of  the  Being  Who  was  its  object.

In  the  gradual  unfolding  of  the  Messianic  doctrine,  three
stages  of  development  may  be  noted  within  the  limits  of  the
Hebrew  Canon,  and  a  fourth  beyond  it.  (a)  Of  these  the  first
appears  to  end  with  Moses.  The  Protevangelium  contains  a
broad  indeterminate  prediction  of  a  victory  of  humanity  <^  over
the  Evil  Principle  that  had  seduced  man  to  his  £ftll.  The  ^  Seed
of  the  woman '  is  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head^  With  the  lapse
of  years  this  blessing,  at  first  so  general  and  indefinite,  is  nar-
rowed down  to  something  in  store  for  the  posterity  of  Shem^,
and  subsequently  for  the  descendants  of  Abrahams.  In  Abra-
ham's Seed  all  the  £unilies  of  the  earth  are  to  be  blessed.
Already  within  this  bright  but  generally  indefinite  prospect  of
deliverance  and  blessing,  we  begin  to  discern  the  advent  of  a
Personal  Deliverer.  St.  Paul  argues,  in  accordance  with  the
Jewish  interpretation,  that  '  the  Seed '  is  here  a  personal  Mes-
siah 1^  ;  the  singular  form  of  the  word  denoting  His  individu-
ality, while  its  collective    force    suggests  the  representative


'  So  two  of  the  Targmns,  wlucb  nevertheleBs  refer  the  fulfilment  of  the
proxnise  to  the  days  of  the  King  Messiah.  The  singular  form  of  the  col*
lective  noun  would  here,  as  in  Gten.  xxii.  i8,  have  be^  intended  to  suggest
an  individual  descendant.

*  Gren.  iii.  15 ;  cf.  Rom.  xvi.  ao ;  Gral.iv.  4;  Heb. ii.  14;  I  St.  Johniii.  8.

'  Gen,  ix.  26.  t  Ibid.  xxii.  18.

^  Gal.  iii.  16.  See  the  Babbinical  authorities  quoted  by  Wetstein,  in
loc.  On  the  objection  raised  from  the  ooUectlYe  force  of  <nrtpfjM,  eL  Biiiiop
EllicotL  in  loc.


8o         Second  period  of  Messianic  prophecy.

character  of  His  Human  Nature.  The  characteristics  of  this
personal  Messiah  emerge  gradually  in  successive  predictions.
The  dying  Jacob  looks  forward  to  a  Shiloh  as  One  to  Whom  of
right  belongs  the  regal  and  legislative  authority*,  and  to  Whom
the  obedient  nations  will  be  gathered.  Balaam  sings  of  the  Star
That  will  come  ^ut  of  Jacob  and  the  Sceptre  That  will  rise  out
of  Israel^.  This  is  something  more  than  an  anticipation  of  the
reign  of  David :  it  manifestly  points  to  the  glory  and  power  of
a  Higher  Koyalty.  Moses  1  foretells  a  Prophet  Who  would  in  a
later  age  be  raised  up  from  among  the  Israelites,  like  unto  him-
seK.  This  Prophet  accordingly  was  to  be  the  Lawgiver,  the
Teacher,  the  Ruler,  the  Deliverer  of  Israel.  If  the  prophetic
order  at  large  is  included  in  this  prediction  ii^,  it  is  only  as  being
personified  in  the  Last  and  the  Greatest  of  the  Prophets,  in  the
One  Prophet  Who  was  to  reveal  perfectly  the  mind  of  God,  and
Whose  words  were  to  be  implicitly  obeyed.  During  this  primary
period  we  do  not  find  explicit  assertions  of  the  Divinity  of
Messiah.  But  in  that  predicted  victory  over  the  Evil  One ;  in
that  blessing  which  is  to  be  shed  on  all  the  families  of  the  earth ;
in  that  rightful  sway  over  the  gathered  peoples ;  in  the  absolute
and  perfect  teaching  of  that  Prophet  Who  is  to  be  like  the  great
Lawgiver  while  yet  He  transcends  him, — ^must  we  not  trace
a  predicted  destiny  which  reaches  higher  than  the  known  limits
of  the  highest  human  energy  %  Is  not  this  early  prophetic  lan-
guage only  redeemed  from  the  imputation  of  exaggeration  or
vagueness,  by  the  point  and  justification  which  are  secured  to  it
through  the  more  explicit  disclosures  of  a  succeeding  age  1

(3)  The  second  stage  of  the  Messianic  doctrine  centres  in  the
reigns  of  David  and  Solomon.  The  form  of  the  prophecy  here
as  elsewhere  is  suggested  by  the  period  at  which  it  is  uttered.
When  mankind  was  limited  to  a  single  family,  the  Hope  of  the
future  had  lain  in  the  seed  of  the  woman :  the  Patriarchal  age
had  looked  forward  to  a  descendant  of  Abraham ;  the  Mosaic  to
a  Prophet  and  a  Legislator.     In  like  manner  the  age  of  the

*  Gen.  xlix.  lo.  On  the  reading  n^tJ  see  Pusey,  Daniel  the  Prophet,
p.  252.  The  Bense  given  in  the  text  is  supported  by  Targum  Onkelos,
Jerusalem  Targum,  the  Syr.  and  Arab,  versions,  possibly  by  those  of  Aquila
and  Symmachus  (but  see  Field,  Orig.  Hexapl.  tom.  i.  p.  70) ;  while  TtXX.
cws  &y  iK^  rh.  aTroK€ifx4va  avrw,  Vulg.  '  donee  veniat  Qui  mittendus  est.*

^  Num.  zxiv.  17.    See  J.  H.  Willemeri  Diss,  in  Thesaur.  Theol.  Philolog.,

p.  363.

1  Deut.  xviii.  18,  19;  see  Hengstenberg's  Christologie  des  A.  T.  vol.  i.
p.  90 ;  Acts  iii.  22,  vii.  37 ;  St.  John  i.  21,  vi.  14,  zii.  48,  49.

»  Cf.  Deut.  xvui.  15.

[lect.


Witness  of  the  Messianic  Psalms.  8 1

Jewish  monarchy  in  its  hloom  of  youth  and  prowess,  was  bidden
fix  its  eye  upon  an  Ideal  David  Who  was  to  be  the  King  of  the
future  of  the  world.  Not  that  the  colouring  or  form  of  the
prophetic  announcement  lowered  its  scope  to  the  level  of  a
Jewish  or  of  a  human  monarchy.  The  promise  of  a  kingdom  to
David  and  to  his  house /or  ewfr"^^  a  promise  on  which,  we  know,
the  great  Psalmist  rested  at  the  hour  of  his  deatho,  could  not  be
fulfilled  by  any  mere  continuation  of  his  dynasty  on  the  throne
of  Jerusalem.  It  implied,  as  both  David  and  Solomon  saw,
some  Superhuman  Eoyalty.  Of  this  Royalty  the  Messianic
Psalms  present  us  with  a  series  of  pictures,  each  of  which
illustrates  a  distinct  aspect  of  its  dignity,  while  all  either  imply
or  assert  the  Divinity  of  the  King.  In  the  second  Psalm,  for
instance,  Messiah  is  associated  with  the  Lord  of  Israel  as  His
Anointed  Son  P,  while  against  the  authority  of  Both  the  heathen
nations  are  rising  in  rebellion  <i.  Messiah's  inheritance  is  to  in-
clude all  heathendom' ;  His  Sonship  is  not  merely  theocratic  or
ethical,  but  Divine".  All  who  trust  in  Him  are  blessed;  all
who  incur  His  wrath  must  perish  with  a  sharp  and  swifb  de-
struction*.    In  the  first  recorded  prayer  of  the  Church  of

n  3  Sam.  vii.  i6  (Ps.  Izzxix.  36,  37 ;  St.  John  xii.  34),  'From  DavidV
address  to  Grod,  after  receiving  the  message  by  Nathan,  it  is  plain  that
David  nnderstood  the  Scm  promised  to  be  t£e  Messiah  in  Whom  his  house
was  to  be  established  for  ever.  But  the  words  which  seem  most  expressive
of  this  are  in  this  verse  now  rendered  very  unintelligibly  "and  is  this  the
manner  of  man?"  whereas  the  words  DIMH  nn^n  DHTt  literally  signify  "and
this  is  (or  must  be)  the  law  of  the  man,  or  of  the  Adam,**  i.e.  this  promise
must  relate  to  the  law,  or  ordinance,  made  by  Grod  to  Adam  concerning  the
Seed  of  the  woman,  the  Man,  or  the  Second  Adam,  as  the  Messiah  is  ex-
pressly called  by  St.  Paul,  i  Cor.  xv.  45-47.'— Kennicott,  Bemarks  on  tiie
Old  Testament,  p.  115.  He  confirms  this  interpretation  by  comparing
I  Chron.  xvii.  17  with  Bom.  v.  14.

*  a  Sam.  xxiii.  5.

P  Ps.  ii.  7.  See  J.  Frischmuthi  Dissert,  de  Messift  Dei  Filio  ad  Ps.  ii.
in  Thesaur.  Theol.-Philolog.  p.  571.  «  Ps.  ii.  a.

'  Ps.  ii.  8,  9.  Cf.  St.  Aug.  cent.  Faustum  Man.  xiii.  7:  'Dabo  Tibi
gentes  hsereditatem  Tuam  . .  Quod  genti  Judsorum  in  quA  regnavit  David
non  esse  concessum,  Ghristi  autem  nomine  longe  lateque  omnes  gentes  occu-
pante,  nemo  dubitat  esse  completum.*  •  Ps.  ii.  *J»

*  Ps.  ii.  la.  See  Dr.  Pusey's  note  on  St.  Jerome's  rendering  of  ns  lpt»,
Daniel  the  Prophet,  p.  478,  note  2  :  '  It  seems  to  me  that  St.  Jerome  pre-
ferred the  rendering  "tiie  Son,*'  since  he  adopted  it  where  he  could
explain  it  [viz.  in  tiie  brief  commentary],  but  gave  way  to  prejudice  in
rendering  "  adore  purely.** '  Cf.  also  BepUes  to  Essays  and  Beviews,  p.  98.
Also  Delitzsch  Psalmen,  i.  p.  15,  note.  '  Dass  ni  den  Artikel  nicht  vertragt,
dient  auch  im  Hebr.  ofter  die  Indetermination  ad  amplijlcandum  (s.  Flei-
scher zu  Zamachschari's  Gold.  Halsbandem  Anm.  2..S.  i.  f.)  indem  sie
n]  G


82     Divine  Royalty  of  Messiah  in  the  Psalms.

Christ^,  in  St.  Paul's  sermon  at  Antioch  of  Pisidia^,  in  the
argument  which  opens  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews^,  this  Psalm
is  quoted  in  such  senses,  that  if  we  had  no  Babbinical  text-
books at  hand,  we  could  not  doubt  the  belief  of  the  Jewish
Church  respecting  ity.  The  forty-fifth  Psalm  is  a  picture  of  the
peaceful  and  glorious  union  of  the  King  Messiah  with  His
mystical  bride,  the  Church  of  redeemed  humanity,  Messiah  is
introduced  as  a  Divine  King  reigning  among  men.  His  form  is
of  more  than  human  beauty ;  His  lips  overflow  with  grace ;
God  has  blessed  Him  for  ever,  and  has  anointed  Him  with  the
oil  of  gladness  above  His  fellows.  But  Messiah  is  also  directly
addressed  as  God;  He  is  seated  upon  an  everlasting  throne >.
Neither  of  these  Psalms  can  be  adapted  without  exegetical  vio-
lence to  the  circumstances  of  Solomon  or  of  any  other  king  of


durch  die  in  ihr  li^ende  Unbegrenztheit  die  Einbildungskraffc  zur  Yergros-
serung  des  so  ausgedrlickten  Begriffs  auffordert.  Ein  arab.  Ausleger  wtirde
an  u.  St.  erklaren :  ''Ktisset  einen  Sohn,  und  was  fiir  einen  Sohn  I*"  See
J.  H.  Willemeri  de  Osculo  Fihi  ad  Ps.  ii.  Diss,  in  Thesaur.  Theol.-Philolog.,
p.  583.

"  Acts  iv.  25, 26.  ^  Ibid.  xiii.  33.  «  Heb.  i.  5 ;  cf.  Bom.  i.  4.

7  The  Chaldee  Targum  refers  this  Psalm  to  the  Messiah.  So  the  Beresldth
Babba  Aben-Ezra,  D.  Kimchi,  Talm.  Tr.  Succah.  fol.  52,  &c.  The  in-
terpretation was  changed  with  a  view  to  avoiding  the  pressure  of  the  Chris-
tian arguments.  'Our  masters/  says  B.  Solomon  Jarchi,  'have  expounded
[this  Psalm]  of  King  Messiah ;  but,  according  to  the  letter,  and  for  famish-
ing answer  to  the  Minim  [i.e.  the  Christian  "heretics**],  it  is  better  to
interpret  it  of  David  himself.*  Quoted  by  Pearson  on  art.  2,  notes;
Chandler,  Defence  of  Christianity,  p.  212;  Pocock,  Porta  Mosis,  note,
p.  307.     See  too  Dr.  Pye  Smith,  Messiah,  vol.  i.  p.  197.

>  Dr.  Pusey  observes  that  of  those  who  have  endeavoured  to  evade  the
literal  sense  of  the  words  addressed  to  King  Messiah  (ver.  6),  '  Thy  throne,
O  Grod,  is  for  ever  and  ever,*  'no  one  who  thought  he  could  so  construct  the
sentence  that  the  word  Blohim  need  not  designate  the  being  addressed,
doubted  that  JElohim  signified  Grod ;  and  no  one  who  thought  that  he  could
make  out  for  the  word  JElohim  any  other  meaning  than  that  of  "€rod,**
doubted  that  it  designated  the  being  addressed.  A  right  instinct  ptrevented
each  class  firom  doing  more  violence  to  granmiar  or  to  idiom  than  he  needed,
in  order  to  escape  the  truth  which  he  disliked.  If  people  thought  that  they
might  paraphrase  "Thy  throne,  O  Judge**  or  "Prince,**  or  "image  of  God,
or  "who  art  as  a  God  to  Pharaoh,**  they  hesitated  not  to  render  with  ns
"  Thy  throne  is  for  ever  and  ever.*'  If  men  think  that  they  may  assume
such  an  idiom  as  "Thy  throne  of  God**  meaning  "Thy  Divine  throne^**  or
"  Thy  throne  is  God  **  meaning  "  Thy  throne  is  the  uirone  of  God,**  they
doubt  not  th)a,t  Elohim  means  purely  and  simply  God.  ...  If  people  could
persuade  themselves  that  the  words  were  a  parenthetic  address  to  €k)d,  no
one  would  hesitate  to  own  their  meaning  to  be  "Thy  throne,  O  God,  is  for
ever  and  ever.**  *  Daniel  the  Prophet,  pp.  470,  471,  and  note  8.  Bev.  v.  13.
Cf.  Delitzsch  in  loc.

[legt.


Divine  Royalty  of  Messiah  in  the  Psalms.     83

ancient  Israel ;  and  the  New  Testament  interprets  the  picture  of
the  Eoyal  Epithalamium,  no  less  than  that  of  the  Royal  triumph
over  the  insurgent  heathen,  of  the  one  true  Ejbg  Messiah^.
In  another  Psalm  the  character  and  extent  of  this  Messianic
Soyereignty  are  more  distinctly  pictured  \  Solomon,  when  at
the  height  of  his  power,  sketches  a  Superhuman  Ejbig,  ruling
an  empire  which  in  its  character  and  in  its  compass  altogether
transcends  his  own.  The  eztremest  houndaries  of  the  kingdom
of  Israel  melt  away  before  the  gaze  of  the  Psalmist.  The  new
kingdom  reaches  '  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  flood  unto  the
world's  end  ^.'  It  reaches  from  each  frontier  of  the  Promised
Land,  to  the  remotest  regions  of  the  known  world,  in  the
opposite  quarter.  From  the  Mediterranean  it  extends  to  the
ocean  that  washes  the  shores  of  Eastern  Asia  ;  frt)m  the
Euphrates  to  the  utmost  West.  At  the  feet  of  its  mighty
Monarch,  all  who  are  most  inaccessible  to  the  arms  or  to  the
influence  of  Israel  hasten  to  tender  their  voluntary  submission.
The  wild  sons  of  the  desert^,  the  merchants  of  Tarshish  in  the
then  distant  Spain^,  the  islanders  of  the  Mediterranean',  the
Arab  chiefs^^,  the  wealthy  Nubians^,  are  foremost  in  proffering
their  homage  and  fealty.  But  all  kings  are  at  last  to  fall  down
in  submission  before  the  Buler  of  the  new  kingdom ;  all  nations
are  to  do  Him  service  K  His  empire  is  to  be  co-extensiye  with
the  world :  it  is  also  to  be  co-enduring  with  time^.  His  empire
is  to  be  spiritual ;  it  is  to  confer  peace  on  the  world,  but  by
righteousness  \  The  Ejuig  will  Himself  secure  righteous  judg-
ment "a,  salvation  A,  deliverance  <>,  redemption  p,  to  His  subjects.
The  needy,  the  afficted,  the  friendless,  will  be  the  especial
objects  of  His  tender  care  <i.  His  appearance  in  the  world  will
be  like  the  descent  of  ^  the  rain  upon  the  mown  grass';'  the  true
life  of  man  seems  to  have  been  killed  out,  but  it  is  yet  capable
of  being  restored  by  Him.  He  Himself,  it  is  hinted,  will  be  out
of  sight ;  but  His  Namt  will  endure  for  ever ;  His  Name  will
*  propagate";'  and  men  shall  be  blessed  in  Him*,  to  the  end  of
time.  This  King  is  inmiortal ;  He  is  also  all-knowing  and  all-
mighty.    *  Omniscience  alone  can  hear  the  cry  of  every  human

•  Heb.  i.  8.  ^  Ps.  Imi.  •  Ibid.  ver.  8.

*  Pb.  Ixxii.  9,  D*^.  •  Ibid.  ver.  lo.  '  Ibid.

«  Ibid.  ^  Ibid.  MD.  *  Ibid.  ver.  1 1.

*  Ibid.  VOT.  17.  ^  Ibid.  ver.  3.  "  Ibid.  vers.  2,  4.
°  Ibid.  vers.  4,  13.             ®  Ibid.  ver.  la.  p  Ibid.  ver.  14.

«  Ibid.  vers.  12,  13.  '  Ibid.  ver.  6 ;  cf.  2  Sam.  xxiii.  4.

•  Pa.  Ixxii  17.  *  Ibid.

n]  .        G2


84  Third  period  of  Messianic  prophecy.

lieart ;  Omnipotence  alone  can  bring  deliyerance  to  every  hnman
sufferer  V  Look  at  one  more  representation  of  this  Royalty,
that  to  which  onr  Lord  Himself  referred,  in  dealing  with  his
Jewish  adyersaries^.  David  describes  his  Great  Descendant
Messiah  as  his  '  Lord  7/  Messiah  is  sitting  on  the  right  hand  (^
Jehovah,  as  the  partner  of  His  dignity.  Messiah  reigns  upon  a
throne  which  impiety  alone  could  assign  to  any  human  monarch ;
He  is  to  reign  until  His  enemies  are  made  His  footstool ';  He  is
ruler  now,  even  among  His  unsubdued  opponents  *.  Li  the  day
of  His  power,  His  people  offer  themselves  willingly  to  His
service;  they  are  clad  not  in  earthly  armour,  but  'in  the
beauties  of  holiness  h.'  Messiah  is  Priest  as  well  as  King  ^ ;  He
is  an  everlasting  Priest  of  that  older  order  which  had  been
honoured  by  the  father  of  the  fedthful.  Who  is  this  everlasting
Priest,  this  resistless  King,  reigning  thus  amid  His  enemies
and  commanding  the  inmost  hearts  of  His  servants)  He  is
David's  Descendant ;  the  Pharisees  knew  that  truth.  But  He
is  also  David's  Lord.  How  could  He  be  both,  if  He  was  merely
human)  The  belief  of  Christendom  can  alone  answer  the
question  which  our  Lord  addressed  to  the  Pharisees.  The  Son
of  David  is  David's  Lord,  because  He  is  God;  the  Lord  (rf
David  is  David's  Son,  because  He  is  God  Licamate  \

{y)  These  are  but  samples  of  that  rich  store  of  Messianic
prophecy  which  belongs  to  the  second  or  Davidic  period,  and
much  more  of  which  has  an  important  bearing  on  our  present
subject.  The  third  period  extends  from  the  reign  of  Uzziah  to
the  close  of  the  Hebrew  Canon  in  MalachL  Here  Messianic
prophecy  reaches  its  climax :  it  expands  into  the  fullest  par-
ticularity of  detail  respecting  Messiah's  Human  life ;  it  mounts
to  the  highest  assertions  of  His  Divinity.  Isaiah  is  the  richest
mine  of  Messianic  prophecy  in  the  Old  Testament®.     Messiah,


V  Daniel  the  Prophet,  p.  479.

*  St.  Matt.  rrii.  41-45 ;  Pb.  ex.  i,  ^  Ps.  ex.  1.  ■  Ibid.
»  Pb.  ex.  3.                    *»  Ibid.  ver.  3.                    ®  Ibid.  ver.  4.

^  On  Pb.  ex.  see  Pusey  on  Daniel,  p.  466,  sqq.  Delitzseli,  PseJmen  ii.
p.  639.  Martini,  Pugio  Fidei,  p.  iii.  e.  3,  sqq.  For  evidence  of  later
Jewish  attempts  to  parry  the  Christian  argument  by  interpreting  the  psalm
of  Hezekiah,  see  St.  Just.  Mart.  Dial,  cum  Tryph.  33,  83 ;  Tertull.  adv.
Marcion,  v.  9 :  of  Zerubbabel,  St.  Chrysos.  Expos,  in  Ps.  cix.

•  With  reference  to  the  modem  theory  (Kenan,  Vie  de  Jesus,  p.  37,  &c.
&c.)  of  a  'later  Isaiah,*  or  'Great  Unknown,'  living  at  the  time  of  the
Babylonish  Captivity,  and  the  assumed  author  of  Is.  xl.-lxvi.,  it  may  suffice
to  refer  to  Dean  Payne  Smith's  valuable  volume  of  University  Sermons
on  the  subject.  When  it  is  taken  for  granted  on  ^  priori  grounds  that  bond

[leot.


Anticipations  of  Messiah  in  the  prophets.     85

especially  designated  as  'the  Servant  of  G(od,'  is  the  central
figure  in  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah.  Both  in  Isaiah  and  in
Jeremiah,  the  titles  of  Messiah  are  often  and  pointedly  ex-
pressive of  His  true  Humanity.  He  is  the  Fruit  of  the  earth  ^ ;
He  is  the  Bod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse  s ;  He  is  the  Branch  or
Sprout  of  David,  the  Zemach  \  He  is  called  by  God  from  His
mother's  womb^;  God  has  pat  His  Spirit  upon  Him  J.  He  is
anointed  to  preach  good  tidings  to  the  meek,  to  bind  up  the
broken-hearted,  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captive  ^.  He  is  a
Prophet;  His  work  is  greater  than  that  of  any  prophet  of
IsraeL  Not  merely  will  He  come  as  a  Bedeemer  to  them  that
turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob  \  and  to  restore  the  preserved
of  Israel  ""^ ;  He  is  also  given  as  a  Light  to  the  Gentiles,  as  the
Salvation  of  God  onto  the  end  of  ^e  earth  n.  Such  is  His
Spiritual  Power  as  Prophet  and  Legislator  that  He  will  write
the  law  of  the  Lord,  not  upon  tables  of  stone,  bat  on  the  heart
and  conscience  of  the  true  Israel  ^.  In  Zechariah  as  in  David
He  is  an  enthroned  Priest  P,  but  it  is  the  Elingly  glory  of
Messiah  which  predominates  throughout  the  prophetic  repre-
sentations of  this  period  %  and  in  which  His  Superhuman  Nature
is  most  distinctly  suggested.  According  to  Jeremiah,  the  Branch


)S(2epTediotioii  of  itricily  fatme  events  is  impossible^  the  Bible  predictions  must
either  be  resolved  into  the  far-sighted  anticipations  of  genius,  or,  if  their
acxmracy  is  too  detailed  to  admit  of  this  explanation,  they  must  be  treated  as
being  only  historical  accounts  of  the  events  referred  to,  tlirown  with  whatever
design  into  the  form  of  prophecy.  The  predictions  respecting  Cyrus  in  the
latter  part  of  Isaiah  are  too  explicit  to  be  reasonably  regarded  as  the  results
of  natural  foresight ;  hence  the  modem  assumption  of  a  '  later  Isaiah  *  as
their  real  author.  '  Supposing  this  assumption,*  says  Bishop  Ollivant^  '  to
be  tnie,  this  later  Isaiah  was  not  only  a  deceiver,  but  also  a  witness  to  his
own  fraud ;  for  he  oonstanUy  appeals  to  prophetic  power  as  a  test  of  truth,
maidng  it,  and  spedfically  the  prediction  respecting  the  deliverance  of  the
Jews  by  Cyrus,  an  evidence  <^  the  foreknowledge  of  Jehovah,  as  distin-
guished froim  the  nothingness  of  heathen  idols.  And  vet  we  are  to  suppose
that  when  this  fraud  was  first  palmed  upon  the  Jewish  nation,  they  were
BO  simple  as  not  to  have  perceived  that  out  of  his  own  mouth  this  false
prophet  was  condemned  I  — Charge  of  Bishop  of  Uandaff,  1866,  p.  99>
note  b.  Comp.  Delitzsch,  Der  F^phet  Jesaia,  p.  23,  and  his  discussion
<^the  question  in  the  introduction  to  chapters  xl-lxvi.  Smith*s  Diet.  Bible,
art.  'Isaiah.'  '  Isa.  iv.  3.  »  Ibid.  xi.  i.

^  Jer.  xxiii.  5 ;  xxxiii.  15,  Zech.  iii.  8,  vi.  la.

'  Isa.  xlix.  I.  i  Ibid.  xlii.  i.  *  Ibid.  Ixi.  i,

*  Ibid.  lix.  ao ;  cf.  xii.  3.         ■  Isa.  xlix.  6.  "  Ibid.

•  Jer.  xxxi.  31-35.    See  J.  Frischmuthi  de  Foedere  Novo  ad  Jer.  xxxi,
Dis.  in  Thesaur.  Theol.-Philolog.  p.  855,  860.

^  Zech.  vi.  13.  4  See  Ezek.  xxxiv.  33,  34;  Hos.  iii.  5,  &c.


86    Divine  Royalty  of  Messiah  in  the  prophets.

of  Bighteousness,  who  is  to  be  raised  up  among  the  posterity  of
David,  is  a  King  who  will  reign  and  prosper  and  execute  judg-
ment and  justice  in  the  earthy  According  to  Isaiah,  this
expected  King,  the  Boot  of  Jesse,  'will  stand  for  an  ensign  of
the  people;'  the  Geiitiles  will  seek  Him;  He  will  be  the
rallying-point  of  the  world's  hopes,  the  true  centre  of  its  govern-
ment •.  *  Kings  will  see  and  arise,  princes  als<f  will  worship  *  ;*
in  deep  religious  awe,  *  kings  will  shut  their  mouths  at  Him  ^^
Bighteousness,  equity,  swift  justice,  strict  faithfulness,  will
mark  His  administration  ▼;  He  will  not  be  dependent  like  a
human  magistrate  upon  the  evidence  of  His  senses ;  He  will  not
judge  after  the  sight  of  His  eyes,  nor  reprove  after  the  hearing
of  His  ears"^ ;  He  will  rely  upon  the  infallibility  of  a  perfect  moral
insight.  Beneath  the  shadow  of  His  throne,  all  that  is  by  nature
savage,  proud,  and  cruel  among  the  sons  of  men  will  learn  the
habits  of  tenderness,  humility,  and  love  >.  '  The  wolf  also  shall
dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the
kid ;  and  the  calf  and  the  young  Hon  and  the  fatling  together ;
and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them/  The  reign  of  moral  light  y,
of  spiritual  graces,  of  innocence,  of  simplicity,  will  succeed  to
the  reign  of  physical  and  brute  forced.  Tflie  old  sources  of  moral
danger  will  become  harmless  through  His  protecting  presence
and  blessing ;  *  the  sucking  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the
asp,  and  the  weaned  child  shall  put  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice'
den* ;'  and  in  the  end  *  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge
of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea  ^.'  Daniel  is  taught
that  at  the  'anointing  of  the  Most  Holy'  —  after  a  defined
period — Gbd  will  *  finish  the  transgressions,'  and  *  make  an  end
of  sins,'  and  'make  reconciliation  for  iniquity,'  and  'bring  in
everlasting  righteousness  c.'  Zechariah  too  especially  points  out
the  moral  and  spiritual  characteristics  of  the  reign  of  King
Messiah.  The  founder  of  an  eastern  dynasty  must  ordinarily
wade  through  blood  and  slaughter  to  the  steps  of  his  throne,
and  must  maintain  his  authority  by  force.  But  the  daughter  of
Jerusalem  beholds  her  King  coming  to  her,  'Just  and  having
salvation,  lowly  and  riding  upon  an  ass.'  '  The  chariots  are  cut
off  from  Ephraim,  and  the  horse  from  Jerusalem ;'  the  King
'  speaks  peace  unto  the  heathen ;'  the  '  battle-bow  is  broken ;'


'  Jer.  xxiii.  5 ;  m.  8,  9.  •  Ifl».  xi.  10.  *  Ibid,  xlix.  7.

■  Isa.  lii.  15.  ▼  Ibid.  xi.  4,  5.  ^  Ibid.  ver.  3.

*  Ibid.  vers.  6-8.  ^  Ibid.  Ix.  i,  2,  19,  20.        •  Ibid.  Ixv.  16.

»  Ibid.  xi.  8.  ^  Ibid.  ver.  9.  «  Daa.  ix.  34.

[liECT.


Messiah  is  to  win  the  world  by  His  sufferings.   87

and  yet  His  dominion,  extends  ^  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the
river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  <!.'

In  harsh  and  utter  contrast,  as  it  seems,  to  this  represen-
tation of  Messiah  as  a  Jewish  King,  the  moral  conqueror  and
ruler  of  the  world,  there  is  another  representation  of  Him  which
belongs  to  the  Davidic  period  as  well  as  to  that  of  Isaiah.
Messiah  had  been  typified  in  Dayid  persecuted  by  Saul  and
humbled  by  Absalom,  no  less  truly  than  He  had  been  typified
in  Solomon  surrounded  by  all  the  glory  of  his  imperial  court.
If  Messiah  reigns  in  the  forty-fifth  or  in  the  seyenty-second
Fsahns,  He  suffers,  nay  He  is  pre-eminent  among  the  suffering,
in  the  twenty-second.  We  might  suppose  »that  the  suffering  Just
One  who  is  described  by  Dayid,  reaches  the  climax  of  anguish ;
but  the  portrait  of  an  archetypal  Sorrow  has  been  eyen  more
minutely  touched  by  the  hand  of  Isaiah.  In  both  writers,  how-
ever, the  deepest  humiliations  and  woes  are  confidently  treated
as  the  prelude  to  an  assured  victory.  The  Psalmist  passes,  from
what  is  little  less  than  an  elaborate  programme  of  the  historical
circumstances  of  the  Crucifixion,  to  iln  announcement  that  by
these  unexampled  sufferings  the  heathen  will  be  converted,  and
all  the  kindreds  of  the  Gentiles  will  be  brought  to  adore  the
true  Ood^.  The  Prophet  describes  the  Servant  of  God  as
*  despised  and  rejected  of  men';*  His  sorrows  are  viewed  with
general  satisfaction ;  they  are  accounted  a  just  punishment  for
His  own  supposed  crimes^.  Yet  in  reality  He  bears  our  in-
firmities, and  carries  our  sorrows^ ;  His  wounds  are  due  to  our
transgressions ;  His  stripes  have  a  healing  virtue  for  us  ^.  His
sufferings  and  death  are  a  trespass-offering  i;  on  Him  is  laid  .
the  iniquity  of  all  ^.  If  in  Isaiah  the  inner  meaning  of  the
tragedy  is  more  fiilly  insisted  on,  ^he  picture  itself  is  not  less
Tiyid  than  that  of  the  Psalter.  The  suffering  Servant  stands
before  His  judges;  'His  Visage  is  so  marred  more  than  any
man,  and  His  Form  more  than  the  sons  of  menl ;'  like  a  lamb  o^,
innocent,  defenceless,  dumb,  He  is  led  forth  to  the  slaughter ;
*He  is  cut  off  from  the  land  of  the  living  n.'     Yet  the  Prophet

^  Zech.  iz.  9,  10.  J.  Frisohmnthi,  De  Meesift  Bege  Sionis  Bias,  in
Thesanr.  Theol.-Philolog.  p.  1016.

*  Pb.  zzii.  1-2 1 y  and  27.  PhillipB,  on  Fb.  xzii.,  argues  that  the  Meflaianio
wnse  is  'the  tme  and  only  true*  sense  of  it.  See  J.  Frisohmuthi,  De
Measia  manuum  et  pedum  perforatione  ad  Ps.  zzii.  17,  Diss,  in  Thesaur.
Theol-Philolog.,  p.611.

'  laa.  liu.  3.  «  Ibid.  ver.  4.  »»  Ibid.

*  Ibid.  ver.  5.  i  Ibid.  ver.  12.  *  Ibid.  ver.  6.

*  Ibid.  lii.  14.  »  Ibid,  liu  7  •  Ibid.  ver.  8.


88  Significance  of  the  theory  of  a  double  Messiah.

pauses  at  His  grave  to  note  that  He  '  shall  see  of  the  travail  of
His  soul  and  shall  be  satisfied  <>,'  that  God  '  will  divide  Kim  a
portion  with  the  great,'  and  that  He  will  Himself*  divide  the  spoil
with  the  strong/  And  all  this  is  to  follow  '  because  He  hath
poured  out  His  soul  unto  death  p.*  His  death  is  to  be  the  con-
dition of  His  victory;  His  death  is  the  destined  instrument
whereby  He  will  achieve  His  mediatorial  reign  of  glory.

Place  yourselves,  brethren,  by  an  eflFort  of  intellectual  sym-
pathy in  the  position  of  the  men  who  heard  this  language
while  its  historical  fulfilment,  so  familiar  to  us  Christians,
was  as  yet  future.  How  self-contradictory  must  it  have
appeared  to  them,  how  inexplicable,  how  full  of  paradox!
How  strong  must  have  been  the  temptation  to  anticipate
that  invention  of  a  double  Messiah,  to  which  the  later  Jewish
doctors  had  recourse,  that  they  might  escape  the  manifest
cogency  of  the  Christian  argiunentQ.  That  our  Lord  should
actually  have  submitted  Himself  to  the  laws  and  agencies
of  disgrace  and  discomfiture,  and  should  have  turned  His
deepest  humiliation  into  the  very  weapon  of  His  victory,  is
not  the  least  among  the  evidences  of  His  Divine  power  and
mission.  And  the  prophecy  which  so  paradoxically  dared  to
say  that  He  would  in  such  fashion  both  sufPer  and  reign,
assuredly  and  implicitly  contained  within  itself  another  and
a  higher  truth.  Such  majestic  control  over  the  ordinary  con-
ditions of  failure  betokened  something  more  than  an  extraor-
dinary man,  something  not  less  than  a  distinctly  Superhuman
Personality.  Taken  in  connection  with  the  redemptive  powers,
the  world-wide  sway,  the  spiritual,  heart-controlling  teaching,
so  distinctly  ascribed  to  Him,  this  prediction  that  the  Christ
would  die,  and  would  convert  the  whole  world  by  death,  pre-
pares us  for  the  most  explicit  statements  of  the  prophets
respecting  His  Person.  It  is  no  surprise  to  a  mind  which
has  dwelt  steadily  on  the  destiny  which  prophecy  thus  assigns
to  Messiah,  that  Isaiah  and  Zechariah  should  speak  of  Him
as  Divine.     We  will  not  lay  stress  upon   the   fact,  that  in

«  Isa.  Uii.  II.  P  Ibid.  ver.  12.    Compare  also  Isa.  hdii.  i.

4  See  Hengstenberg^B  account  of  the  Jewish  interpretations  of  Isaiah
lii.  13-liii.  12,  Christolog.  vol.  ii.  pp.  310-319  (Clarke  s  trans.),  and  'The
Fifty-third  Chapter  of  Isaiah  according  to  the  Jewish  Interpreters :  by
Dri"ver  and  Neubauer,  with  Introduction  by  E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.  Oxford
and  Leipzig,  1876.'  Dr.  Payne  Smith  on  Isaiah,  p.  172.  The  theoiy  of
a  second  Messiah  was  elaborated  later  than  the  second  century,  but  before
the  fifth.    Pusey,  Univ.  Serm.  p.  144.

[lect,


Divinity  ascribed  in  terms  to  the  Messiah.     89

Isaiah  the  Bedeemer  of  Israel  and  of  men  is  constantly  asserted
to  be  the  Creator',  Who  by  Himself  will  save  His  people".
Significant  as  such  language  is  as  to  the  bent  of  the  Divine
M^d,  it  is  not  properly  Messianic.  But  in  that  great  pro-
phecy \  the  fall  and  true  sense  of  which  is  so  happily  suggested
to  us  by  its  place  in  the  Church  services  for  Christmas  Day,
the  '  Son '  who  is  given  to  Israel  receives  a  fourfold  Name.  He
is  a  Wonder-Counsellor,  or  Wonderful,  above  all  earthly  beings ;
He  possesses  a  Nature  which  man  cannot  fathom ;  and  He
thus  shares  and  unfolds  the  Divine  Mind  u.  He  is  the  Father
of  the  Everlasting  Age  or  of  Eternity  ▼.  He  is  the  Prince
of  Peace.  Above  all,  He  is  expressly  named,  the  Mighty  God  ^.
Conformably  with  this  Jeremiah  calls  Him  Jehovah  Tsidkenu  >,


»  lea.  xliv,  6;  xlviii.  la,  13,  17,

■  Ibid.  xlv.  31-34;  Hob.  i.  7:  of.  Bom.  ziv.  ii;  Phil.  ii.  10;  Isa.
zzzT.  4,  zl.  3,  9,  10.  *  Isa.  iz.  6.

^  pv  Mbc.  These  two  words  must  clearly  be  oonneoted,  although  they
do  not  stand  in  the  relation  of  the  HiU%»  conatructus.  Gen.  xvi.  13.  ^rv
designated  the  attnbate  here  concerned,  vhc  the  superhuman  Possessor
of  it.  ▼  ir  «3H,  Bp.  Lowth's  Transl.  of  Isaiah  in  loo.

*  This  is  the  plain  literal  sense  of  the  words.  The  habit  of  oonstrulng
Tiis'^  as  'strong  hero,*  which  was  oonmion  to  Gesenins  and  the  older
rati(mali8t8,  has  been  abandoned  by  later  writers,  such  as  Hitzig  and  Knobel.
Hitzig  observes  that  to  render  n^m'TM  by  'strong  hero*  is  contrary  to  the
USU9  loquendi.  *bH,*  he  aigues,  'is  always,  even  in  such  passages  as
Gen.  xzzi.  39,  to  be  rend^«d  "God.**  In  all  the  passages  which  are
quoted  to  prove  that  it  means  "princeps,"  "potens,**  the  forms  are,*  he  says,
*to  be  derived  not  from  bw,  but  from  !w,  which  properly  means  "ram,"
then  "leader,**  or  "prince"  of  the  flock  of  men.*  (See  the  quot.  in  Hengst.
Christ,  ii.  p.  88,  Clarke's  transl.).  But  while  these  later  rationalists
recognise  the  true  meaning  of  the  phrase,  they  endeavour  to  represent
it  as  a  mere  name  of  Messiah,  indicating  nothing  as  to  His  possessing  a
Divine  Nature.  Hitzig  contends  that  it  is  applied  to  Messiah  *  by  way
of  exaggeration,  in  so  far  as  He  possesses  divine  qualities ;  *  and  Knobel,
that  it  belongs  to  Him  as  a  hero,  who  in  His  wars  with  ^the  Gentiles
will  shew  that  He  possesses  divine  strength.  But*does  the  word  '£1'
admit  of  being  applied  to  a  merely  human  hero?  'El,*  says  Dr.Pusey,
'the  name  of  Grod,  is  nowhere  used  absoluteUf  of  any  but  Grod.  The  word
is  used  once  relatively,,  in  its  first  i^pellative  sense,  the  mighty  of  the
nations  (Ezek.  xxzi.  ii),  in  regard  to  Nebuchadnezzar.  Also  once  in  the
plural  (Ezek.  zzxii.  31).  It  occurs  absolutely  in  Hebrew  325  times,  and
in  every  place  is  used  of  Grod.*  Daniel,  p.  483.  Can  we  then  doubt  its
true  force  in  the  present  passage,  especially  when  we  compare  Isa.  x.  21,
where  11x1'^  is  applied  indisputably  to  the  Most  High  Grod  ?  Cf.  Dditzsch,
Jesaia,  p.  155.  On  the  whole  passage  see  J.  Frischmuthi,  De  Proeopo-
graphic  Messise  ad  Esai.  ix.  6,  Diss,  in  Thesaur.  Theol.-Philolog.  p.  754.

'  Jer.  zxiii.  5,  6.  This  title  is  also  applied  by  Jeremiah  to  Jerusalem
in  the  Messianic  age,  in  other  words,  to  the  Christian  Church.  Jer.  xzxiii.


go         Divinity  of  Messiah  in  the  prophets.

as  Isaiah  had  called  Him  Emmanuels.  Micah  speaks  of  HIe
eternal  pre-existence  2,  as  Isaiah  had  spoken  of  His  endless
reign  A.  Daniel  predicts  that  His  dominion  is  an  everlasting
dominion  that  shall  not  pass  away^.  Zechariah  terms  Him  the
Fellow  or  Equal  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  <^;   and  refers  to  His


15,  16.  The  reason  is  not  merely  to  be  found  in  the  doee  fellowship
of  Christ  with  His  Church  as  taught  by  St.  Paul  (Eph.  y.  23,  30),
who  even  calls  the  Church,  Christ  (i  Cor.  xii.  la).  Jehovah  Tsidkenu
expresses  the  great  fact  of  which  our  Lord  is  the  author,  and  Christendom
the  result.  That  fact  is  the  actual  gifb  of  Grod*s  justifying;  sanctifying
righteousness  to  our  weak  sinful  humanity.  As  applied  to  the  Church
then,  the  title  draws  attention  to  the  reality  of  the  gifb ;  as  applied  to
Christ,  to  the  Person  of  Him  through  Whom  it  is  given.  It  cannot  be
paralleled  with  names  given  to  inanimate  objects  such  as  Jehovah  l^Hssi,
nor  even  with  such  personal  names  as  Jehoram,  Jehoshaphat,  and  the
like.  In  these  cases  there  is  no  ground  for  identifying  the  kings  in
question  with  the  Exalted  Jehovah,  or  with  Jehovah  the  Judge.  The
title  before  us,  of  itself,  may  not  necessarily  imply  the  Divinity  of  Christ ;
it  was  indeed  given  in  another  form  to  Zedekiah.  Its  real  force,  as  applied
to  our  Lord,  is  however  shewn  by  other  prophetic  statements  about  Him,
just  as  He  is  called  Jesus,  in  a  fundamentally  distinct  sense  from  that
which  the  word  bore  in  its  earlier  applications.  But  cf.  Pye  Smith,
Messiah,  i.  371,  sqq.  Hengst.  Christ,  ii.  415,  sqq.  Beinke,  Mesaianischen
Weissagungen,  iii.  510,  sqq.  Critici  Sacri,  vol.  4,  p.  5638.  J.  Erischmnthi
de  Nomine  MessisB  glorioso  ad  Jer.  xxiii.  6,  Diss,  in  Thesaur.  TheoL-
Phildoff.  p.  83a.  D.  Kimchi  in  loc.,  Talm.  in  Tr.  Baba  Batra»  foL  79;
Midrae£.  Thehillim  in  Ps.  xxL    Pearson  on  Creed,  ii.  181,  ed.  1833.

7  Isa.  vii.  14 ;  St.  Matt.  i.  33.  like  Jehovah  Tsidkenu,  Emmanuel  does
really  suggest  our  Lord*s  Divine  Person,  as  Isa.  ix.  6,  would  alone  imjdy.
That  rx&rs  means  a  literal  virgin,  that  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  is  to
be  sought  for  only  in  the  birth  iii  our  Lord,  and  that  this  announcement
of  God  s  mighty  Salvation  in  the  future,  might  well  have  satisQad  Ahax
that  the  lesser  help  against  the  two  kings  in  the  immediate  present  would
not  be  wanting,  are  points  well  discussed  by  Hengstenberg,  Christ,  ii.  43-66.
Beinke,  Weissagung  von  der  Jungfirau  una  von  Lnmanuel,  Mtinster,  1848.
Even  if  it  were  certain  that  the  Name  Emmanuel  was  in  the  first  instance
given  to  a  child  bom  in  the  days  of  Ahaz,  it  would  still  be  true  that
'then  did  God  in  the  highest  sense  become  with  us,  when  He  was  seen
upon  earth.'  St.  Chrys.  in  Isa.  ch.  vii.  s.  6,  quoted  by  Hengst.  Christol.  ubi
supra.  See  too,  Smith's  Diet,  of  Bible,  art.  'Isaiah,*  i.  p.  879;  Dr.  Payne
Smith,  Proph.  of  Isaiah,  pp.  21-27.  C.  Lochner,  De  loco  dassico  ad
Esai.  vii.  14.    Diss,  in  Thesaur.  Theol.-Philolog.,  p.  691.

"  Mio.  V.  2,  cf.  verse  4.  See  Chandler's  Defence  of  Christianity,  p.  134;
Mill  on  Mythical  Interpr.  p.  318 ;  Pusey,  Minor  P^phets,  in  loc

*  Isa.  ix.  6.    But  see  also  Mic.  iv.  7.

^  Dan.  vii.  14.

0  Zech.  xiii.  7.  Vi^xy^  does  not  mean  only  an  associate  of  any  kind,  or
a  neighbour.  'The  word  rendered  "  My  fellow  "  was  revived  by  Zechariah
fix>m  the  language  of  the  Pentateuch.  It  was  used  eleven  times  in  Leviticus,
and  then  was  disused.    There  is  no  doubt  then  that  the  word,  being

fliEOT.


A  ttitude  of  the  negative  criticism.  9 1

Xncamation  and  still  more  clearly  to  His  Passion  as  being  that
of  Jehovah  HimseK^.  Haggai  implies  His  Divinity  by  fore-
telling that  His  presence  mil  make  the  glory  of  the  second
temple  greater  than  the  gloiy  of  the  first «.  Malachi  points
to  Him  as  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  as  Jehovah,  Whom  Israel
was  seeking,  and  Who  would  suddenly  come  to  His  temple  ^1  as
the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  v.

Bead  this  language  as  a  whole ;  read  it  by  the  light  of  the
great  doctrine  which  it  attests,  and  which  in  turn  Uluminates
it,  the  doctrine  of  a  Messiah,  Divine  as  well  as  Human ; — ^all
is  natural,  consistent,  full  of  point  and  meaning.  But  divorce
it  £rom  that  doctrine  in  obedience  to  a  foregone  and  arbitrary
placitum  of  the  negative  criticism,  to  the  effect  that  Jesus
Christ  shall  be  banidbed  at  any  cost  from  the  scroll  of  prophecy ;
— how  fidl  of  difficulties  does  such  language  forthwiUi  become,
how  overstrained  and  exaggerated,  how  insipid  and  disappoint-
ing! Doubtless  it  is  possible  to  bid  defiance  alike  to  Jewish
and  to  Christian  interpreters,  and  to  resolve  upon  seeing  in
the  prophets  only  such  a  sense  as  may  be  consistent  with
the  theoretical  exigencies  of  Naturalism.  It  is  possible  to
suggest  that  what  looks  like  supernatural  prediction  is  only
a  clever  or  chance  farsightedness,  and  that  expressions  which
literally  anticipate  a  distant  histoiy  are  but  the  exuberance  of
poetry,  which,  from  its  veiy  vagueness,  happens  to  coincide
with   some  feature,  real  or  imagined,  of  the  remote  future.

leviyed  out  of  LevitictLB,  is  to  be  understood  m  in  Leviticus ;  but  in
Leviticus  it  is  used  strictly  of  a  feUow-man,  one  who  is  as  himself.
Ley.  vi.  a,  xviii.  20,  xix.  11,  15,  17,  xxiv.  \%  xxv.  14,  15,  17.  .  .  The  name
designates  not  one  joined  by  friendship  or  covenant,  or  by  any  voluntary
act,  but  one  united  indissdubly  by  common  bonds  of  nature,  which  a  man
may  violate,  but  cannot  annihilate.  .  . .  When  then  this  title  is  applied
to  the  relation  of  an  individual  to  Grod,  it  is  dear  that  That  Individual  can
be  no  mere  man,  but  must  be  one  united  with  Grod  by  an  Unity  of  Being.
The  "Fellow"  of  the  Lord  is  no  other  than  He  who  said  in  the  Gospd,
"I  and  My  Father  are  One.**'  Pusey,  Danid,  pp.487,  488.  Hengst.
Christ,  iv.  pp.  108-iia.

^  Zech.  ii.  10-13,  ^*  i>*  '3*  ^>  10;  St.  John  zix.  34,  37;  Bev.  i.  7.
See  Frischmuth's  Dissertations,  'De  vili  et  abjecto  xxz  argenteorum
pretio  quo  Salvator  noster  Messias  a  Judseis  sestimatus  fuit,*  and  'De
Messid  Gonfizo,*  in  Thesaur.  Theol.-Philolog.  p.  1031,  104a.  Pusey,  Univ.
Serm.  185^-1873,  p.  143.

«  Hag.  ii.  7,  9.  See  J.  Frischmuthi  de  Glorift  Templi  secundi.  .Diss,  in
Thesaur.  Theol.-PhiloW.  p.  994.

'  Mai.  iii.  I.  See  J.  Fnsc^uthi,  De  Angelo  Foderis.  Diss,  in  Thesaur*
Theol.-Philolog.  p.  1058.

'  Mai.  iv.  a.


92         Last  Period  of  Messianic  pr^hecy.

It  is  poBBible  to  avoid  any  firank  ackuowledgmeDi  of  'Caa  im-
posing spectacle  presented  by  convei^ing  and  consentient  lines
of  pr^tbecy,  and  to  refuse  to  consider  tlw  prophetic  atteruice^
except  in  detail  and  one  by  one;  as  if  forsooth  Messianio
prophecy  were  an  intellectnal  enemy  whose  forces  must  be
divided  by  the  criticism  that  would  conquer  it.  It  is  posuble,
alasl  even  for  accomplished  scholarehip  so  fretfully  to  carp
at  each  instance  of  pure  prediction  in  the  Bible,  to  nibble
away  the  beauty  and  dim  the  lustre  of  each  leading  utterance
with  such  perserering  industry,  as  at  length  to  persoade  itself
that  the  predictive  element  in  Scripture  is  insigui^cantly  smaJI,
or  even  tiiat  it  does  not  exist  at  all.  That  modem  criticism
of  this  temper  should  refuse  to  accept  the  prophetic  witness
to  the  Divinity  of  the  Messiah,  is  more  to  be  regretted  than.
to  be  wondered  at.  And  yet,  if  it  were  seriously  supposed
that  such  criticism  had  succeeded  in  blotting  out  all  reference
to  the  Qodbead  of  Christ  from  the  pages  of  ^e  Old  Testament,
we  should  still  have  to  encounter  and  to  explain  that  massive
testimony  to  the  Heesianio  beliefs  which  lives  on  in  the  Rab-
binical literature ;  since  that  literature,  whatever  be  the  date
of  particular  existing  treatises,  contains  traditions,  neither  few
nor  indistinct,  of  indjsputable  antiquity.  From  that  literatoro
it  is  clear  that  the  ancient  Jews  believed  the  expected  Messiah
to  be  a  Divine  Person  i.  It  cannot  he  pretended  that  this
belief  came  from  without,  from  the  schools  of  Alexandria,  or
Irom  the  i^achiag  of  Zoroaster.  It  was  notoriously  based  upon
the  language  of  the  Prophets  and  Psalmists.  And  we  of  to-
day, even  with  our  improved  but  strictly  mechanical  apparatus
of  grammar  and  dictionary,  can  scarcely  undertake  to  correct
the  early  unprejudiced  interpretation  of  men  who  read  the

i-iij  m—i L  ^^jj  ^j.  jgj^  jjg  much  instinctive  insight  into

F  its  archaic  language,  and  of  its  older  forms
of  feeling,  as  an  Englishman  in  this  generation

e  Book  of  Barach  wa*  e:q>aoded  into  its  prwent  ftvm  A
a  earlier  Hebrew  document,  written  probably  by  Barnd
oneut  muBt  be  partly  qoaliiBed.    BaiDcb  iii.  35-37;  <£

inical  oonception  of  the  Fenon  of  Measiah,  see  Kartani,
iii.  Dist.  3,  cap.  I  ;  1.  {  6  ad  fin.  \  8.  With  reference
tackg  npoD  the  value  of  Hartini's  <atstioDB  &om  Jewish
The  Book  of  Tobit,'  ed,  bj  A.  Neubauer,  Oif.  1878,
ompare  alga  Schbttgen,  Hone  Hebraioai,  torn  ii,  lib.  I,
rheaia  3 ;    Drach,    Harmnma,   &c,,  pt.  ),  c   I.  tom,  ii.

[lkct.


Popular  degradation  of  the  Messianic  Ideal.    93

can  command  when  lie  applies  himself  to  the  study  of  Shake-
speare or  of  Milton.

(d)  The  last  stage  of  the  Messianic  doctrine  begins  only  after
-the  close  of  the  Hebrew  Canon.  Among  the  Jews  of  Alexandria,
tlie  hope  of  a  Messiah  seems  to  have  fallen  into  the  background.
This  may  have  been  due  to  the  larger  attractions  which  doctrines
sxich  as  those  of  the  Sophia  and  the  Logos  would  have  possessed
for  Hellenized  populations,  or  to  a  somewhat  diminished  interest
in  the  future  of  Jewish  nationality  caused  by  long  absence  from
Palestine,  or  to  a  cowardly  unwillingness  to  avow  startling  reU-
gous  beliefJB  in  the  face  of  keen  heathen  critics^.  The  two  latter
motires  may  explain  the  partial  or  total  absence  of  Messianic
aUusions  from  the  writings  of  Philo  and  Josephus ;  the  former
will  account  for  the  significant  silence  of  the  Book  of  Wisdom.
Among  the  peasantry,  and  in  the  schools  of  Palestine,  the  Mes-
sianic doctrine  lived  on.  The  literary  or  learned  form  of  the
doctrine,  being  based  on  and  renewed  by  the  letter  of  Scripture,
was  higher  and  purer  than  the  impaired  and  debased  beHef  which
gradually  established  itself  among  the  masses  of  the  people.  The
popular  degradation  of  the  docixine  may  be  traced  to  the  later
poHtical  circumstances  of  the  Jews,  acting  upon  the  secular  and
materialized  element  in  the  national  character.  The  Messianic
belief  as  has  been  shewn,  had  two  aspects,  corresponding  re-
spectively to  the  political  and  to  the  religious  yearnings  of  the
people  of  Israel.  If  such  a  faith  was  a  relief  to  a  personal  or
national  sense  of  sin,  it  was  also  a  relief  to  a  sense  of  political
disappointment  or  degradation.  And  keen  consciousness  of
political  feivour  became  a  dominant  sentiment  among  the  Jewish
people  during  the  centimes  immediately  preceding  our  Lord's
Incarnation.  With  some  fitful  glimpses  of  national  life,  as  under
the  Asmoneans,  the  Jews  of  tiie  Eestoration  passed  from  the
yoke  of  one  heathen  tyranny  to  that  of  another.  As  in  succes-
sion they  served  the  Persian  monarchs,  the  Syrian  Qreeks,  the
Idumsean  king,  and  the  Boman  magistrate,  the  Jewish  people
cast  an  eye  more  and  more  wistfully  to  the  political  hopes  which
might  be  extracted  from  their  ancient  and  accepted  Messianic
belief.  They  learned  to  pass  more  and  more  lightly  over  the
prophetic  pictures  of  a  Messiah  robed  in  moral  majesty,  of  a
Messiah  relieving  the  woes  of  the  whole  human  family,  of  a

^  Yet  in  Tobit  xiy.  6,  7,  the  reference  to  the  conversion  of  the  heathen
world  belongs  to  the  highest  religions  hopes  of  Messianic  prophecy.  Ps.
xxii.  37.    l£e  book  is  placed  by  Ewald  at  B.C.  350,  and  may  be  earlier.

"3


94    Christ  claimed  to  be  the  Messiah  of  prophecy.

Mesaiab  suffering  torture  and  Bbame  in  the  cause  of  tratli.  They
dwelt  more  and  more  eagerly  apou  the  pictures  of  Hia  world-
wide oonqaeei  aad  imperial  sway,  and  they  construed  tbose
promises  of  coming  triumph  in  the  most  earthlj  and  eecnlar
sense ;  they  looked  for  a  Jewish  Alexander  or  for  a  Jeirish
Csesar.  ITie  New  Teetament  exhibits  the  popular  form  of  the
Meaaiamo  doctrine,  ae  it  lay  in  the  minds  of  Galileans,  of
Samaritans,  of  the  men  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  plain  how  deeply,
when  oar  Lord  appeared,  the  hope  of  a  Deliverer  had  sunk  into
the  heart  both  of  peasant  and  townsman  ;  yet  it  is  equally  plain
how  earthly  was  the  taint  which  had  passed  over  me  popnlar
apprehension  of  this  glorious  hope,  since  its  first  full  proclamation
in  the  days  of  the  Prophets.  Doubtless  there  were  saints  like
the  aged  Simeon,  whose  eyes  longed  sore  for  the  Divine  Christ
foretold  in  the  great  age  of  Hebrew  prophecy.  But  generally
speaking,  the  piety  of  the  enslaved  Jew  bad  become  little  else
than  a  wrong-headed  patriotism.  His  religious  expectations  had
been  taken  poseession  of  by  his  civic  pasaiona,  and  were  liable  at
any  moment  to  be  placed  at  the  service  of  a  purely  political
agitation.  Israel  as  a  theocracy  was  sacrificed  in  hie  thought  to
Israel  as  a  state  ;  and  he  was  wiUing  to  follow  ai^  adventurer
into  the  wilderness  or  across  the  Jordan,  if  only  there  was  a
remote  prospect  of  bringing  the  Messianic  predictions  to  bear
against  the  hated  soldiery  and  police  of  Eome.  A  religious
creed  is  always  impoverished  when  it  is  degraded  to  serve
political  pturposes ;  and  belief  in  the  Divinity  of  Messiah  na-
turally waned  and  died  away,  when  the  highest  functions
attributed  to  Him  were  merely  those  of  a  successful  general  or
of  an  able  statesman.  The  Apostles  themselves,  at  one  time,
looked  mainly  or  only  for  a  temporal  prince;  and  the  people,
who  were  willing  to  hail  Jesus  as  King  Messiah,  and  to  conduct
Him  in  royal  pomp  to  the  gates  of  the  holy  city,  had  so  lost
raght  of  the  r^  eminence  which  Messiahship  involved,  that
when  He  claimed  to  be  God,  they  endeavoured  to  stone  Him
for  blasphemy,  and  this  claim  of  His  was  in  point  of  fact  the
crime  for  which  their  leaders  persecuted  Him  to  .death*.

And  yet  when  Jesus  Christ  presented  Himself  to  the  Jewish
people,  He  did  not  condescend  to  sanction  the  misbelief  of  the
time,  or  to  swerve  from  the  tenor  of  the  ancient  revelation.  He
claimed  to  satisiy  the  national  hopes  of  Israel  by  a  prospect
which  would  identify  the  future  of  Israel  with  that  of  the  world.

'  Cf.  Leet,  rv.  pp.  193, 194.

[lscz.


IzTebrew  Monotheism^  a  foil  to  Messiafis  Divinity.  95

Se  professed  to  answer  to  the  full,  unmutilated,  spiritual  ex-
pectations of  prophets  and  of  righteous  men.  They  had  desired
to  see  and  had  not  seen  Him,  to  hear  and  had  not  heard  Him.
Xfong  ages  had  passed,  and  the  hope  of  Israel  was  still  unfulfilled.
Psalmists  had  turned  back  in  accents  wellnigh  of  despair  to  the
great  deliverance  from  the  Egyptian  bondage,  when  the  Lord
brake  the  heads  of  the  dragons  in  the  waters,  and  brought  foun-
tains out  of  the  hard  rock.  Prophets  had  been  assured  that  at
last  the  vision  of  ages  should  <  speak  and  not  lie,'  and  had  been
bidden  <  though  it  tarry,  wait  for  it,  because  it  will  surely  come,
it  will  not  tarry.'  Each  victory,  each  deliverance,  prefigured
Messiah's  work;  each  saint,  each  hero,  foreshadowed  some
separate  ray  of  His  personal  glory ;  each  disaster  gave  strength
to  the  mighty  cry  for  His  intervention :  He  was  the  true  soul
of  the  history,  as  well  as  of  the  poetry  and  prophecy  of  Israel.
And  so  much  was  demanded  of  Him,  so  superhuman  were  the
proportions  of  His  expected  actions,  that  He  would  have  dis-
appointed the  poetry  and  history  no  less  than  the  prophecy  of
Israel  had  He  been  merely  one  of  the  sons  of  men.  Yet  when
at  last  in  the  fulness  of  time  He  came,  that  He  might  satisfy
the  desire  of  the  nations.  He  was  rejected  by  a  stiff-necked
generation,  because  He  was  true  to  the  highest  and  brightest
anticipations  of  His  Advent.  A  Christ  who  had  contented
himself  with  the  debased  Messianic  idea  of  the  Herodian  period,
might  have  precipitated  an  insurrection  against  the  Roman
rule,  and  might  have  antedated,  after  whatever  intermediate
struggles,  the  fall  of  Jerusalem.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  claimed
to  be  the  Divine  Messiah  of  David  and  of  Isaiah;  and  there-
fore He  died  upon  the  cross,  to  achieve,  not  the  political  en-
franchisement of  Palestine,  but  the  spiritual  redemption  of
humanity.

I.  Permit  me  to  repeat  an  observation  which  has  already
been  hinted  at.  The  several  lines  of  teaching  by  which  the
Old  Testament  leads  up  to  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Divinity,
are  at  first  sight  apparently  at  issue  with  that  primary  truth
of  which  the  Jewish  people  and  the  Jewish  Scriptures  were
the  appointed  guardians.  '  Hear,  O  Israel,  the  Lord  our  God
is  one  Lord  ™.*  That  was  the  fundamental  law  of  the  Jewish
belief  and  polity.  How  copious  are  the  warnings  against  the
surrounding  idolatries  in  the  Jewish  Scriptures  ^  I     With  what


Dent.  vi.  4 ;  cf.  ibid.  iv.  35,  zzzii.  39 ;  Pb.  xcvi.  5 ;  Isa.  xlii.  8,  xliii.
3,  xliv.  6,  8,  xlv.  5,  6,  18,  ai,  aa,  xlviii.  11,  la;  Wisd.  xii.  13;

\\      '    '  -         -        -    ^


10-13:  , ^      ^

Ecdus.  i.  8.  n  Dout.  iv.  16-18.


96     The  Divinity  of  Messiah  is  implied  in  tke

varied,  what  delicate,  what  incisive  irony  do  the  sacred  "writers
lash  the  pretensions  of  the  most  gorgeous  idol-worships,  ivhile
guarding  the  solitary  Majesty  and  the  unshared  prerogatives
of  the  God  of  Israelii  «The  specific  distinction  of  Judaism,'
says  Baur,  '  marking  it  off  from  all  forms  of  heathen  relig'ious
belief  whatever,  is  its  purer,  more  refined,  and  monotheistic
conception  of  God.  From  the  earliest  antiquity  downwards,
this  was  the  essential  basis  of  the  Old  Testament  religion  p.*
And  yet  this  discriminating  and  fundamental  truth  does  but
throw  out  into  sharper  outlme  and  relief  those  suggestions  of
personal  distinctions  in  the  Godhead;  that  personification  of
the  Wisdom,  if  indeed  the  Wisdom  be  not  a  Person;  those
visions  in  which  a  Divine  Being  is  so  closely  identified  with  the
Angel  who  represents  Him ;  tiiose  successive  predictions  of  a
Messiah  personally  distinct  from  Jehovah,  yet  also  the  Saviour
of  men,  the  Lord  and  Ruler  of  all,  the  Judge  of  the  nations,
Almighty,  Everlasting,  nay,  One  Whom  prophecy  designates  as
God.  How  was  the  Old  Testament  consistent  with  itself  how
was  it  loyal  to  its  leading  purpose,  to  its  very  central  and
animating  idea,  unless  it  was  in  truth  entrusted  with  a  double
charge ;  unless,  besides  teaching  explicitly  the  Creed  of  Sinai,
it  was  designed  to  teach  implicitly  a  fuller  revelation,  and  to
prepare  men  for  the  Creed  of  the  day  of  Pentecost  1  If  indeed
the  Old  Testament  had  been  a  semi-polytheistic  literature ;  if
in  Israel  the  Divine  Unity  had  been  only  a  philosophical  specu-
lation, shrouded  from  the  popular  eye  by  the  various  forms
with  which  some  imaginative  antiquity  had  peopled  its  national
heaven ;  if  the  line  of  demarcation  between  such  angel  ministers
and  guardians  as  we  read  of  in  Daniel  and  Zechariah,  and  the
High  and  Holy  One  Who  inhabiteth  eternity,  had  been  indistinct
or  uncertain ;  if  the  Most  Holy  Name  had  been  really  lavished
upon  created  beings  with  an  indiscriminate  profusion  that  de-
prived it  of  its  awful,  of  its  incommunicable  value  Q, — ^then
these  intimations  which  we  have  been  reviewing  would  have
been  less  startling  than  they  are.  As  it  is,  they  receive  promi-
nence from  the  sharp,  unrelieved  antagonism  in  which  they  seem
to  stand  to  the  main  scope  of  the  books  which  contain  them.
And  thus  they  are  a  perpetual  witness  that  the  Jewish  Revela-
tion is  not  to  be  final ;  they  irresistibly  suggest  a  deeper  truth

•  Ps.  cxv.  4-8 ;  Isa.  xxxvii.  19,  xliv.  9-20,  xlvi.  5  sq. ;  Jer.  ii.  27,  a8,
X.  3-6,  8-10,  14,  16;  Hab.  ii.  18,  19;  Wisd.  xiii.  xiv.
P  Christenthum,  p.  17;  cf.  Lect.  I.  26.
q  On  the  Benses  of  £lohim  in  the  Old  Testament,  see  Appendix,  Note  B.

[lect.


fulness  of  prophecy  respecting  His  Manhood.    97


-which  is  to  break  forth  fix)m  the  pregnant  simplicity  of  God's
earlier  message  to  mankind;  they  point,  as  we  know,  to  the
Prologue  of  St.  John's  Gospel  and  to  the  Council  chamber  of
Nicaea,  in  which  the  absolute  Unity  of  the  Supreme  Being  will
be  iidly  exhibited  as  harmonizing  with  the  true  Divinity  of
Him  Who  was  thus  announced  in  His  distinct  Personality  to
the  Church  of  Israel.

2.  It  may  be  urged  that  the  Old  Testament  might  con-
ceivably have  set  forth  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Godhead  in
other  and  more  energetic  terms  than  those  which  it  actually
employs.  Even  if  this  should  be  granted,  let  us  carefully  bear
in  mind  that  the  witness  of  the  Old  Testament  to  this  truth  is
not  confined  to  the  texts  which  expressly  assert  that  Messiah
should  be  Divine.  The  Human  Life  of  Messiah,  His  super-
natural birth,  His  character.  His  death,  His  triumph,  are  pre-
dicted in  the  Old  Testament  with  a  minuteness  which  utterly
defies  the  rationalistic  insinuation,  that  the  argument  from
prophecy  in  favour  of  Christ's  claims  may  after  all  be  resolved
into  an  adroit  manipulation  of  sundry  more  or  less  irrelevant
quotations.  No  amount  of  captious  ingenuity  will  destroy  the
substantial  fact  that  the  leading  features  of  our  Lord's  Himian
manifestation  were  announced  to  the  world  some  centuries
before  He  actually  came  among  us.  Do  I  say  that  to  be  the
subject  of  prophecy  is  of  itself  a  proof  of  Divinity  1  Certainly
not.  But  at  least  when  prophecy  is  so  copious  and  elaborate,
and  yet  withal  so  true  to  the  facts  of  history  which  it  predicts,
its  higher  utterances,  which  lie  beyond  the  verification  of  the
human  senses,  acquire  corresponding  significance  and  credit.
If  the  circumstances  of  Christ's  Human  Life  were  actually
chronicled  by  prophecy,  prophecy  is  entitled  to  submissive
attention  when  she  proceeds  to  assert,  in  whatever  terms,  that
the  Christ  Whom  she  has  described  is  more  than  Man.

It  must  be  a  robust  and  somewhat  coarse  scepticism  which
can  treat  those  early  glimpses  inta  the  laws  of  God's  inner
being,  those  mysterious  apparitions  to  Patriarchs  and  Lawgivers,
those  hypostatized  representations  of  Divine  Attributes,  above
all,  that  Divinity  repeatedly  and  explicitly  ascribed  to  the  pre-
dicted Kestorer  of  Israel,  only  as  illustrations  of  the  exuberance
of  Hebrew  imagination,  only  as  redundant  tropes  and  moods  of
Eastern  poetry.  For  when  the  destructive  critics  have  done
their  worst,  we  are  still  confronted  by  the  fact  of  a  consider-
able literature,  indisputably  anterior  to  the  age  of  Christianity,
and  foretelling  in  explicit  terms  the  coming  of  a  Divine  and

n]     ;        •  H


98     Christ,  and  ike  Sacred  literature  of  Israel,

HnmaD  Saviour.  We  cannot  be  insenEible  to  the  eigmficance  of
this  broad  and  patent  fact.  Those  who  in  modem  days  have
endeavonred  to  eBtabliah  an  absolute  power  over  the  conduct
and  lires  of  their  fellow-men  have  found  it  ueceesary  to  spare
no  pains  in  one  department  of  political  effort.  They  have  en-
deavoured to  '  inspire,'  if  they  could  not  BUpprese,  that  powerful
agency,  which  both  for  good  and  for  evil  moulds  and  Lnforma
popu^  thought.  The  control  of  the  press  from  day  to  day  is
held  in  our  times  to  be  among  the  highest  exerciseB  of  despotic
power  over  a  civilized  community ;  and  yet  the  sternest  despot-
ism will  in  vain  endeavour  to  recast  in  its  own  favour  the  verdict
of  history.  History,  as  Bhe  points  to  the  irrevocable  and  ud-
changing  past,  can  be  won  neither  by  violence  cor  by  blandiah-
mente  to  silence  her  condemnatioas,  or  to  lavish  her  approvals,
or  in  any  degree  to  unsay  the  evidence  of  her  chronicles,  that
she  may  subserve  the  purpose  aud  establish  the  claimi  of  some
aspiring  potentate.  But  He  Who  came  to  reign  by  love  as  by
omnipotence,  needed  not  to  put  force  upon  the  thought  and
speech  of  His  contemporaries,  even  could  He  have  willed  to  do
so ".  For  already  the  literature  of  fifteen  centuries  had  been
enlisted  in  His  service ;  and  the  annals  and  the  hopes  of  an
entire  people,  to  say  nothing  of  the  yearnicgs  and  gnesees  of  the
world,  had  been  moulded  into  one  long  anticipation  of  Himself.
Even  He  could  not  create  or  change  the  past ;  but  He  could
point  to  its  unchanging  voice  as  the  herald  of  His  own  claiioa
and  destiny.  His  language  would  have  been  folly  on  the  lips  of
the  greatest  of  the  sons  of  men,  but  it  does  no  more  than  simple
justice  to  the  true  mind  and  constant  drift  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment. With  His  Hand  upon  the  Jewish  Canon,  Jesus  Christ
could  look  opponents  or  disciples  in  the  face,  and  bid  them
'Search  the  Scriptures,  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal
life,  and  they  are  they  which  testify  of  Me.'

■  lamnUre.


LECTURE  m.


OTJB  LORD'S  WORK  IN  THE  WORLD  A  WITNESS  TO

HIS  DIVINITY.

Whence  hath  This  Man  this  Wisdom,  and  these  mighty  works  t  Is  not  This
the  carpenter's  Son  t  is  not  Sis  mother  called  Mary  7  and  His  brethren,
James,  and  Joses,  and  Simon,  and  Judas  i  And  His  sisters,  are  they  not
aU  wUA  us  !     Whence  then  hath  This  Man  all  these  things  t

St.  Matt.  xiii.  54-56.

A  scEPnOAL  prince  once  asked  bis  chaplain  to  give  him  some
clear  evidence  of  the  truth  of  Christianity,  but  to  do  so  in  a  few
words,  because  a  king  had  not  much  time  to  spare  for  such
matters.  The  chaplain  tersely  replied,  *The  Jews,  your  majesty.*
The  chaplain  meant  to  say  that  the  whole  Jewish  history  was  a
witness  to  Christ.  In  the  ages  before  the  Incarnation  Israel
witnessed  to  His  work  and  to  His  Person,  by  its  Messianic  be-
lief by  its  Scriptures,  by  its  ritual,  by  its  rabbinical  schools.  In
the  ages  which  have  followed  the  Incarnation,  Israel  has  wit-
nessed to  Him  no  less  powerfully  as  the  people  of  the  dispersion.
In  all  the  continents,  amid  all  the  races  of  the  world,  we  meet
with  the  nation  to  which  there  clings  an  unexpiated,  self-impre-
cated guilt.  This  nation  dwells  among  us  and  around  us
Englishmen ;  it  shares  largely  in  our  material  prosperity ;  its
social  and  civil  life  are  shaped  by  our  national  institutions ;  it
Bends  its  representatives  to  our  tribunals  of  justice  and  to  the
benches  of  our  senate :  yet  its  heart,  its  home,  its  future,  are
elsewhere.  It  still  hopes  for  Him  Whom  we  Christians  have
found;  it  still  witnesses,  by  its  accumulating  despair,  to  the
truth  of  the  creed  which  it  so  doggedly  rejects.  Our  rapid  sur-
vey then  of  those  anticipations  of  our  Lord's  Divinity  which  are
furnished  by  the  Old  Testament,  and  by  the  literature  more  im-
mediately dependent  on  it,  has  left  untouched  a  district  of  history
fruitful  in  considerations  which  bear  upon  our  subject.  But  it
must  suffice  to  have  hinted  at  the  testimony  which  is  thus
indirectly  yielded  by  the  later  Judaism ;  and  we  pass  to-day  to  a
m]  H  2


lOO  Our  Lord's  ^plan'  of  founding

topic  which  is  in  some  sense  continuous  with  that  of  our  last
lecture.  We  have  seen  how  the  appearance  of  a  Divine  Person,
as  the  Saviour  of  men,  was  anticipated  by  the  Old  Testament ;
let  us  enquire  how  far  Christ's  Divinity  is  attested  by  the  phe-
nomenon which  we  encounter  in  the  formation  and  continuity  of
the  Christian  Church.

I.  When  modem  writers  examine  and  discuss  the  proportions
and  character  of  our  Lord's  *plan,*  a  Christian  believer  may
rightly  feel  that  such  a  term  can  only  be  used  in  such  a  connec-
tion with  some  mental  caution.  He  may  urge  that  in  forming
an  estimate  of  strictly  human  action,  we  can  distinguish  between
a  plan  and  its  realization ;  but  that  this  distinction  is  obviously
inapplicable  to  Him  with  Whom  resolve  means  achievement,  and
Who  completes  His  action,  really  if  not  visibly,  when  He  simply
wills  to  act.  It  might  further  be  maintained,  and  with  great
truth,  that  the  pretension  to  exhibit  our  Lord's  entire  design  in
His  Life  and  Death  proceeds  upon  a  misapprehension.  It  is  far
from  beiDg  true  that  our  Lord  has  really  laid  bare  to  the  eyes  of
men  the  whole  purpose  of  the  Eternal  Mind  in  respect  of  His
Incarnation.  Indeed  nothing  is  plainer,  or  more  upon  the  very
face  of  the  New  Testament,  than  the  limitations  and  reserve  of
His  disclosures  on  this  head.  We  see  enough  for  faith  and  for
practical  purposes,  but  we  see  no  more.  Amid  the  glimpses
which  are  offered  us  respecting  the  scope  and  range  of  the  In-
carnation, the  obvious  shades  off  continually  into  mystery,  the
visible  commingles  with  the  unseen.  We  Christians  know  just
enough  to  take  the  measure  of  our  ignorance ;  we  feel  ourselves
hovering  intellectually  on  the  outskirts  of  a  vast  economy  of
mercy,  the  complete  extent  and  the  inner  harmonies  of  which
One  Eye  alone  can  survey.

If  however  we  have  before  us  only  a  part  of  the  plan  which
our  Lord  meant  to  carry  out  by  His  Incarnation  and  Death,
assuredly  we  do  know  something  and  that  from  His  Own  Lips.
If  it  is  true  that  success  can  never  be  really  doubtful  to  Omni-
potence, and  that  no  period  of  suspense  can  be  presumed  to
intervene  between  a  resolve  and  its  accomplishment  in  the
Eternal  Mind ;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  part  of  our  Lord's
gracious  condescension  that  He  has,  if  we  may  so  speak,  entered
into  the  lists  of  history.  He  has  come  among  us  as  one  of  our-
selves; He  has  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  and  has  been
found  in  fashion  as  a  man.  He  has  despoiled  Himself  of  His
advantages ;  He  has  actually  stated  what  He  proposed  to  do  in
the  world,  and  has  thus  submitted  Himself  to  the  verdict  of


the  'Kingdom  of  Heaven  or  'of  God!      ioi

man's  experience.  His  own  Words  are  our  warrant  for  compar-
ing them  with  His  Work ;  and  He  has  interposed  the  struggles
of  centuries  between  His  Words  and  their  fulfilment.  He  has  so
shrouded  His  Hand  of  might  as  at  times  to  seem  as  if  He  would
court  at  least  the  possibilities  of  failure.  Putting  aside  then  for
the  moment  any  recorded  intimations  of  Christ's  Will  in  respect
of  other  spheres  of  being,  with  all  their  mighty  issues  of  life  and
death,  let  us  enquire  what  it  was  that  He  purposed  to  effect
within  the  province  of  human  action  and  history.

Now  the  answer  to  this  question  is  simply,  that  He  proclaimed
Himself  the  Founder  of  a  world-wide  and  imperishable  Society.
He  did  not  propose  to  act  powerfully  upon  the  convictions  and
the  characters  of  individual  men,  and  then  to  leave  to  them,
when  they  believed  and  felt  alike,  the  liberty  of  voluntarily
forming  themselves  into  an  association,  with  a  view  to  reciprocal
sympathy  and  united  action.  From  the  first,  the  formation  of  a
society  was  not  less  an  essential  feature  of  Christ's  plan,  than  was
His  redemptive  action  upon  single  souls.  This  society  was  not
to  be  a  school  of  thinkers,  nor  a  self-associated  company  of  enter-
prising fellow-workers ;  it  was  to  be  a  Kingdom,  the  kingdom
of  heaven,  or,  as  it  is  also  called,  the  kingdom  of  God^.  For
ages  indeed  the  Jewish  theocracy  had  been  a  kingdom  of  God
upon  earth  ^.  God  was  the  one  true  King  of  ancient  Israel.
He  was  felt  to  be  present  in  Israel  as  a  Monarch  living  among
His  subjects.  The  temple  was  His  palace;  its  saciifices  and
ritual  were  the  public  acknowledgment  of  His  present  but  in-
visible Majesty.  But  the  Jewish  polity,  considered  as  a  system,
was  an.  external  rather  than  an  internal  kingdom  of  God.
Doubtless  there  were  great  saints  in  ancient  Israel ;  doubtless
Israel  had  prayers  and  hymns  such  as  may  be  found  in  the
Psalter,  than  which  nothing  more  searching  and  more  spiritual
has  been  since  produced  in  Christendom.  Looking  however  to
the  popular  working  of  the  Jewish  theocratic  system,  and  to
what  is  implied  as  to  its  character  in  Jeremiah's  prophecy  of  a
profoundly  spiritual  kingdom  which  was  to  succeed  it^,  may  we
not  conclude  that  the  Royalty  of  God  was  represented  rather  to

*  /ScuriXcfa  rwv  ovpav&v  occurs  thirty-two  times  in  St.  Matthew*B  Gospel,
to  which  it  is  peculiar ;  fiaatXela  rod  BeoO  five  times.  The  latter  term  occurs
fifteen  times  in  St.  Mark,  thirty-three  times  in  St.  Luke,  twice  in  St.  John,
seven  times  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  In  St.  Matt.  ziii.  43,  xxvi.  39,  we
find  ri  jSao-tXefa  rod  narp6s.  Our  Lord  speaks  of  ri  fiaaiXila  ^  ifi^  three  times,
St.  John  xviii.  36.  ^  St.  Matt.  xxi.  43.

•  Jer.  TTxi.  31-34,  quoted  in  Heb.  viii.  8-11.

in]


I02     Laws  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven^  as  given

the  senses  than  to  the  heart  and  intelligence  of  at  least  the  mass
of  His  ancient  subjects  %  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  announced  a
new  kingdom  of  God ;  and,  by  terming  it  the  Kingdom  of  Glod,
He  implied  that  it  would  first  fully  deserve  that  sacred  name,  as
corresponding  with  Daniers  prophecy  of  a  fifth  empire  \  Let
us  moreover  note,  in  passing,  that  when  using  the  word  *  king-
dom,* our  Lord  did  not  announce  a  republic.  Writers  who  carry
into  their  interpretation  of  the  Gospels  ideas  which  have  been
gained  from  a  study  of  the  Platonic  dialogues  or  of  the  recent
history  of  France,  may  permit  themselves  to  describe  our  Lord
as  Founder  of  the  Christian  republic.  And  certainly  St.  Paul,
when  accommodating  himself  to  political  traditions  and  aspira-
tions which  still  prevailed  largely  throughout  the  Boman  world,
represents  and  recommends  the  Church  of  Christ  as  the  source
and  home  of  the  highest  moral  and  mental  liberty,  by  speaking
freely  of  our  Christian  *  citizenship,'  and  of  our  coming  at  baptism
to  the  *  city'  of  the  living  God  ®.  Not  that  the  Apostle  would
press  the  metaphor  to  the  extent  of  implying  thieit  the  new
society  was  to  be  a  spiritual  democracy ;  since  he  very  earnestly
taught  that  even  the  inmost  thoughts  of  its  members  were  to  be
ruled  by  their  Livisible  King  *".  This  indeed  had  been  the  claim
of  the  Founder  of  the  kingdom  Himself « ;  He  willed  to  be  King,
absolutely  and  without  a  rival,  in  the  new  society;  and  the
nature  and  extent  of  His  legislation  plainly  shews  us  in  what
sense  He  meant  to  reign.

The  original  laws  of  the  new  kingdom  are  for  the  most  part
set  forth  by  its  Founder  in  His  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  After  a
preliminary  statement  of  the  distinctive  character  whicji  was  to
mark  the  life  and  bearing  of  those  who  would  fully  correspond
to  His  Mind  and  Will  \  and  a  further  sketch  of  the  nature  and
depth  of  the  influence  which  His  subjects  were  to  exert  upon
other  men  \  He  proceeds  to  define  the  general  relation  of  the
new  law  which  He  is  promulgating  to  the  law  that  had  preceded
it  \  The  vital  principle  of  His  legislation,  namely,  that  moral
obedience  shall  be  enforced,  not  merely  in  the  performance  of  or
in  the  abstinence  from  outward  acts,  but  in  the  deepest  and  most

*  Dan.  vii.  9-15.

•  Phil.  iii.  ao ;  j\ii.5i)v  yhp  rh  wo\lr€vfia  4v  obpavots  6wdpxtt,  Cf.  Acts  xxiii.
I :  T€yro\lr€Vfiai  r<j?  Bc^.  Phil.  i.  27  •  ^^^s  rod  ehayytKtov  wo\trt^ff$t,
Heb.  ziii.  14.  '  In  Heb.  xi.  10,  zii.  aa,  ir6\is  apparently  embraces  the  whole
Church  of  Christ,  visible. and  invisible;  in  Heb.  xi.  16,  ziii.  141  it  is  re-
stricted  to  the  latter.  '  a  Cor.  x.  5.  '  St.  Matt,  xxiii.  8.

^  Ibid.  V.  i-ia.  *  Ibid.  vers.  13-16.  *  Ibid.  vers.  17-ao.

[lect.


in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  1 03

secret  springs  of  thought  and  motive,  is  traced  in  its  application

to  certain  specific  prescriptions  of  the  older  Law  ^ ;  while  other

ancient  enactments  are  modified  or  set  aside  by  the   stricter

pnritj°>,  the  genuine  simplicity  of  motive  and  character  u,  the

entire  unselfishness  o,  and  the  superiority  to  personal  prejudices

and  exclusiveness  p  which  the  New  Lawgiver  insisted  on.     The

reqiiired  life  of  the  new  kingdom  is  then  exhibited  in  detail ;  the

duties  of  almsgiving^  of  prayer',  and  of  fieisting",  are  successively

enforced ;  but  the  rectification  of  the  ruling  motive  is  chiefly

insisted  on  as  essentiaL     Li  performing  religious  duties,  God's

Will,  and  not  any  conventional  standard  of  human  opinion,  is  to

be  kept  steadily  before  the  eye  of  the  soul.     The  Legislator

insists  upon  the  need  of  a  single,  supreme,  unrivalled  motive  in

thought  and  action,  unless  all  is  to  be  lost.     The  uncorruptible

treasure  must  be  in  heaven ;  the  body  of  the  moral  life  will  only

be  full  of  light  if  *  the  eye  is  single ;'  no  man  can  serve  two

masters  ^.     The  birds  and  the  flowers  suggest  the  lesson  of  trust

in  and  devotion  to  the  One  Source  and  End  of  life ;   all  will

really  be  well  with  those  who  in  very  deed  seek  His  kingdom

and  His  righteousness  u.     Charity  in  judgment  of  other  men  ',

circumspection  in  communicating  sacred  truth  7,  confidence  and

constancy  in  prayer  2,  perfect  consideration  for  the  wishes  of

others  S  yet  also  a  determination  to  seek  the  paths  of  difficulty

and  sacrifice,  rather  than  the  broad  easy  ways  trodden  by  the

mass  of  mankind  b; — these  features  will  mark  the  conduct  of

loysd  subjects  of  the  kingdom.     They  will  beware  too  of  false

prophets,  that  is,  of  the  movers  of  spiritual  sedition,  of  teachers

who  are  false  to  the  truths  upon  which  the  kingdom  is  based  and

to  the  temper  which  is  required  of  its  real  children.     The  false

prophets  will  be  known  by  their  moral  unfruitfulness^',  rather

than  by  any  lack  of  popularity  or  success.  Finally,  obedience  to

the  law  of  the  kingdom  is  insisted  on  as  the  one  condition  of

safety;   obedience d,  —  as  distinct  fi:om  professions  of  loyalty;

obedience, — which  will  be  found  to  have  really  based  a  man's

life  upon  the  immoveable  rock  at  that  solemn  moment  when  all

that  stands  upon  the  sand  must  utterly  perish^.

Such  a  proclamation  of  the  law  of  the  kingdom  as  was  the

•  St.  Matt.  v.  ai-30.  ■■  Ibid.  vera.  31,  33.  »  Ibid.  vera.  33-37.

•  Ibid.  vera.  38-42.  ^  Ibid.  vera.  43-47.  *  Ibid.  vi.  1-4.
'  Ibid.  vera.  5-8.  ■  Ibid.  vera.  16  18.  *  Ibid.  ver.  24.
■  Ibid.  vera.  25-34.  *  Ibid.  vii.  1-5.  ^  Ibid.  ver.  6.

"  Ibid.  vera.  7-11.  •  Ibid.  ver.  12.  *»  Ibid.  vera.  13,  14.

•  Ibid.  vera.  15-20.  *  Ibid.  vera.  21  -23.  •  Ibid.  vera.  24  27.

in]


1 04     The  Kingdom  both  visible  and  invisible.

Sermon  on  the  Mount,  already  implied  that  the  kingdom  would
be  at  once  visible  and  invisible.     On  the  one  hand  certain  out-
ward duties,  such  as  the  use  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  and  fasting,
are  prescribed^;  on  the  other,  the  new  law  urgently  pushes  ita
claim  of  jurisdiction  far  beyond  the  range  of  material  acts  into
the  invisible  world  of  thought  and  motive.    The  visibility  of  the
kingdom  lay  already  in  the  fact  of  its  being  a  society  of  men,
and  not  a  society  solely  made  up  of  incorporeal  beings  such  as
the  angels.     The  King  never  professes  that  He  will  be  satisfied
with  a  measure  of  obedience  which  sloth  or  timidity  might  con-
fine  to  the  region  of  inoperative  feelings  and  convictions ;  He
insists  with  great  emphasis  upon  the  payment  of  homage  to  His
Invisible  Majesty,  outwardly,  and  before  the  eyes  of  men.     Not
to  confess  Htm  before  men  is  to  break  with  Htm  for  ever  8 ;  \\
is  to  forfeit  His  blessing  and  protection  when  these  would  most
be  needed.     The  consistent  bearing,  then,  of  His  loyal  subjecti^
will  bring  the  reality  of  His  rule  before  the  sight  of  men ;  but,
besides  this.  He  provides  His  realm  with  a  yisible  government,
deriving  its  authority  from  Himself,  and  entitled  on  this  account
to  deferential  and  entire  obedience  on  the  part  of  His  subjects.
To  the  first  members  of  this  government  His  commission  runs
thus : — '  He  that  receiveth  you,  receiveth  Me  *^.'    It  is  the  King
Who  will  Himself  reign  throughout  all  history  on  the  thrones
of  His  representatives ;  it  is  He  Who,  in  their  persons,  will  be
acknowledged  or  rejected.  In  this  way  His  empire  will  have  an
external  and  political  side ;  nor  is  its  visibility  to  be  limited  to
its  governmental  organization.     The  form  of  prayer  ^  which  the
King  enjoins  on  His  subjects,  and  the  outward  visible  actions  by
which,  according  to  His  appointment,  membership  in  His  king-
dom  is  to  be  begun  J  and  maintained  \  make  the  very  life  and
movement  of  the  new  society,  up  to  a  certain  point,  visible.
But  undoubtedly  the  real  strength  of  the  kingdom,  its  deepest
life,  its  truest  action,  are  veiled  from  sight.     At  bottom  it  is  to
be  a  moral,  not  a  material  empire ;  it  is  to  be  a  realm  not  merely
of  bodies  but  of  souls,  of  souls  instinct  with  intelligence  and  love.
Its  seat  of  power  will  be  the  conscience  of  mankind.  Not  *  here'
or  '  there '  in  outward  signs  of  establishment  and  supremacy,  but
in  the  free  conformity  of  the  thought  and  heart  of  its  members
to  the  Will  of  their  Unseen  Sovereign,  shall  its  power  be  most

'  St.  Matt.  vi.  9-13,  16.  «  Ibid.  x.  32  ;  St.  Luke  xii.  8.

^  St.  Matt.  X.  40 ;  comp.  St.  Luke  x.  16.       *  St.  Matt.  vi.  9-13.

J  Ibid,  xxviii.  19 ;  St.  John  iii.  5.

^  St.  Luke  xxii.  19 ;  i  Cor.  xi.  24;  St.  John  vi.  53.

[  LECT.


Parables  of  the  Kingdom.  1 05

clearly  recognised.  Not  as  an  oppressive  outward  code,  but  as
an  inward  buoyant  exhilarating  motive,  will  the  King's  Law
mould  the  life  of  His  subjects.  Thus  the  kingdom  of  God  will
be  found  to  be  *  within '  men  1 ;  it  will  be  set  up,  not  like  an
earthly  empire  by  military  conquest  or  by  violent  revolution,  but
noiselessly  and  *  not  with  observation™.'  It  will  be  maintained  by
weapons  more  spiritual  than  the  sword.  '  If,'  said  the  Monarch,
*  My  kingdom  were  of  this  world,  then  would  My  servants  fight,
but  now  is  My  kingdom  not  from  hence  >>.'

The  charge  to  the  twelve  Apostles  exhibits  the  outward
agency  by  which  the  kingdom  would  be  established  o ;  and
the  discourse  in  the  Bupper-room  unveils  yet  more  fully  the
secret  sources  of  its  strength  and  the  nature  of  its  influence  p.
But  the  '  plan '  of  its  Founder  with  reference  to  its  establish-
ment in  the  world  is  perhaps  most  fully  developed  in  that
series  of  parables,  which,  from  their  common  object  and  from
their  juxtaposition  in  St.  Matthew's  Oospel,  are  commonly
termed  Parables  of  the  Kingdom.

How  various  would  be  the  attitudes  of  the  human  heart
towards  the  'word  of  the  kingdom,'  that  is,  towards  the
authoritative  announcement  of  its  establishment  upon  the
earth,  is  pointed  out  in  the  Parable  of  the  Sower.  The  seed
of  truth  would  fall  from  His  Hand  throughout  all  time  by
the  wayside,  upon  stony  places,  and  among  thorns,  as  well  as
upon  the  good  ground  Q.  It  might  be  antecedently  supposed
that  within  the  limits  of  the  new  kingdom  none  were  to  be
looked  for  save  the  holy  and  the  faithful.  But  the  Parable
of  the  Tares  corrects  this  too  idealistic  anticipation ;  the  king-
dom is  to  be  a  field  in  which  until  the  final  harvest  the
tares  must  grow  side  by  side  with  the  wheat'.  The  astonishing
expansion  of  the  kingdom  throughout  the  world  is  illustrated
by  'the  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  indeed  is  the  least  of

*  St.  Luke  xvii.  ai,  "»  Ibid.  ver.  20.  "  St.  John  xviii.  36.

•  St.  Matt.  X.  5-43.  P  St.  John  xiv.  xv.  xvi.
«  St.  Matt.  xiii.  38,  19-23.

'  St.  Matt.  xiii.  24-30,  36  43.  'In  catholic^  enim  ecdesift,  quse  non  in
80U  Africft  sicut  pars  Donati,  sed  per  omnes  gentes,  siout  promissa  est,
dilatator  atque  diffunditur,  in  universo  mundo,  sicut  dioit  Apostolus,  fruc-
tificans  et  crescens,  et  boni  sunt  et  mali.*  St.  Aug.  Ep.  208,  n.  6.  'Si
boni  sumus  in  ecclesi&  Christi,  frumenta  sumus ;  si  mali  sumus  in  ecdesift
Christi,  palea  sumus,  tamen  ab  are4  non  recedimos.  Tu  qui  vento  tenta-
tionis  foris  volasti,  quid  est  Triticum  non  tollit  Yentus  ex  areft.  Ex  eo
ergo,  ubi  es,  agnosce  quid  es.  In  Ps.  Ixx.  (Vulg.)  Serm.  ii.  n.  12.  Civ.
^ei,  i.  35,  and  especially  Ketract.  ii.  18.

m]


I  o6  Parables  of  the  Kingdom.

all  seeds,  but  when  it  is  grown  it  is  the  greatest  among  herbs  ■.*
The  principle  and  method  of  that  expansion  are  to  be  observed
in  the  action  of  *  the  leaven  hid  in  the  three  measures  of  meal  *.'
A  secret  invisible  influence,  a  soul-attracting,  soul-subduing
enthusiasm  for  the  King  and  His  work,  would  presently  pene-
trate the  dull,  dense,  dead  mass  of  human  society,  and  its
hard  heart  and  stagnant  thought  would  expand,  in  virtue  of
this  inward  impulse,  into  a  new  life  of  light  and  love.  Thus
the  kingdom  is  not  merely  represented  as  a  mighty  whole,  of
which  each  subject  soul  is  a  fractional  part.  It  is  exhibited
as  an  attractive  influence,  acting  energetically  upon  the  inner
personal  life  of  individuals.  It  is  itself  the  great  intellectual
and  moral  prize  of  which  each  truth-seeking  soul  is  in  quest,
and  to  obtain  which  all  else  may  wisely  and  well  be  left  behind.
The  kingdom  is  a  treasure  hid  in  a  field  u,  that  is,  in  a  line
of  thought  and  enquiry,  or  in  a  particular  discipline  and  mode
of  life;  and  the  wise  man  will  gladly  part  with  all  that  he
has  to  buy  that  field.  Or  the  kingdom  is  like  a  merchant-man
seeking  *  goodly  pearls^;'  he  sells  all  his  possessions  that  he
may  buy  the  *  one  pearl  of  great  price.'  Here  it  is  hinted  that
entrance  into  the  kingdom  is  a  costly  conquest  and  mastery
of  truth,  of  that  one  absolute  and  highest  Truth,  which  is
contrasted  with  the  lower  and  relative  truths  current  among
men.  The  preciousness  of  membership  in  the  kingdom  is
only  to  be  completely  realized  by  an  unreserved  submission
to  the  law  of  sacrifice  ;  the  kingdom  flashes  forth  in  its
full  moral  beauty  before  the  eye  of  the  soul,  as  the  merchant-
man resigns  his  all  in  favour  of  the  one  priceless  pearl.  In
these  two  parables,  then,  the  individual  soul  is  represented
as  seeking  the  kingdom;  and  it  is  suggested  how  tragic  in
many  cases  would  be  the  incidents,  how  excessive  the  sacrifices,
attendant  upon  '  pressing  into  it.'  But  a  last  parable  is  added
in  which  the  kingdom  is  pictured,  not  as  a  prize  which  can
be  seized  by  separate  souls,  but  as  a  vast  imperial  system,
as  a  world-wide  home  of  all  the  races  of  mankind^.  Like
a  net^  thrown  into  the  Galilean  lake,  so  would  the  kingdom
extend  its  toils  around  entire  tribes  and  nations  of  men;
the  vast  struggling  multitude  would  be  drawn  nearer  and
nearer  to  the  eternal  shore ;  until  at  last  the  awful  and  final

■  St.  Matt.  xiii.  31,  33.  •  *  .Ibid.  ver.  33.  ■  Ibid.  ver.  44.

^  Ibid.  vers.  45,  46.

^  So  in  Rev.  xi.  15  :   iy4v€ro  4  ficurtK^la  rov  kSt^mv  rov  Kvplov  ^fi&p  koI
rod  Xpiffrov  avToO.  »  St.  Matt.  xiii.  47-50.

[lect.


Two  characteristics  of  the  ^platC  of  Jesus  Christ.  107

separation  would  take  place  beneath  the  eye  of  Absolute  Jus-
tice; the  good  would  be  gathered  into  vessels,  but  the  bad
would  be  cast  away.

The  proclamation  of  this  kingdom  was  termed  the  Gospel,
that  is,  the  good  news  of  God.  It  was  good  news  for  mankind,
Jewish  as  well  as  Pagan,  that  a  society  was  set  up  on  earth
wherein  the  human  soul  might  rise  to  the  height  of  its  original
destiny,  might  practically  understand  the  blessedness  and  the
awfalness  of  life,  and  might  hold  constant  communion  in  a
free,  trustful,  joyous,  childlike  spirit  with  the  Author  and
the  End  of  its  existence.  The  ministerial  work  of  our  Lord
was  one  long  proclamation  of  this  kingdom.  He  was  per-
petually defining  its  outline,  or  promulgating  and  codifying
its  laws,  or  instituting  and  explaining  the  channels  of  its
organic  and  individual  life,  or  gathering  new  subjects  into
it  by  His  words  of  wisdom  or  by  His  deeds  of  power,  or
perfecting  and  refining  the  temper  and  cast  of  character  which
was  to  distinguish  them.  When  at  length  He  had  Himself
overcome  the  sharpness  of  death.  He  opened  this  kingdom  of
heaven  to  all  believers  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  His  ministry
had  begun  with  the  words,  *  Repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of
heaven  is  at  hand  J ;'  He  left  the  world,  bidding  His  followers
carry  forward  the  frontier  of  His  kingdom  to  the  utmost  limits
of  the  human  family  z,  and  promising  them  that  His  presence
within  it  would  be  nothing  less  than  co-enduring  with  time  *.

Let  us  note  more  especially  two  features  in  the  *plan'  of
our  Blessed  Lord.

(a)  And,  first,  its  originality.  Need  I  say,  brethren,  that
real  originality  is  rare  1  Li  this  place  many  of  us  spend  our
time  very  largely  in  imitating,  recombining,  reproducing  existing
thought.  Conscious  as  we  are  that  for  the  most  part  we  are
only  passing  on  under  a  new  form  that  which  in  its  substance
has  come  to  us  from  others,  we  honestly  say  so;  yet  it  may
chance  to  us  at  some  time  to  imagine  that  in  our  brain  an
idea  or  a  design  has  taken  shape,  which  is  originally  and  in
truth  our  own  creation —

'Libera  per  yacunin  posui  vestigia  princeps;
Non  aliena  meo  press!  pede^.*

Those  few,  rapid,  decisive  moments  in  which  genius  consciously
enjoys  the  exhilarating  sense  of  wielding  creative  power,  may

»  St.  Matt.  IV.  17.  ■  Ibid,  xxviii.  19 ;  St.  Luke  xxiv.  47 ;  Acts  i.  8.

*  St.  Matt,  xxviii.  20.  ^  Hor.  £p.  i.  19.  ai.    '


io8      'Originality^  of  our  Lord^s  'plan,  as

naturally  be  treasured  in  memory;  and  yet,  even  in  these,
how  hard  must  it  be  to  verify  the  assumed  fact  of  an  absolute
originality  1  We  of  this  day  find  the  atmosphere  of  human
thought,  even  more  than  the  surface  of  the  earth,  preoccupied
and  thronged  with  the  results  of  man's  activity  in  times  past
and  present.  In  proportion  to  our  consciousness  of  our  real
obligations  to  this  general  stock  of  mental  wealth,  must  we
not  hesitate  to  presume  that  any  one  idea,  the  immediate  origin
of  which  we  cannot  trace,  is  in  reality  our  ownl  Suppose
that  in  this  or  that  instance  we  do  believe  ourselves,  in  perfect
good  faith,  to  have  produced  an  idea  which  is  really  entitled
to  the  merit  of  originality.  May  it  not  be,  that  if  at  the  right
moment  we  could  have  examined  the  intellectual  air  around
us  with  a  sufficiently  powerful  microscope,  we  should  have
detected  the  germ  of  our  idea  'floating  in  upon  our  personal
thought  from  without  c  r  We  only  imagine  ourselves  to  have
created  the  idea  because,  at  the  time  of  our  inhaling  it,  we
were  not  conscious  of  doing  so.  The  idea  perhaps  was  suggested
indirectly;  it  came  to  us  along  with  some  other  idea  upon
which  our  attention  was  mainly  fixed;  it  came  to  us  so  dis-
guised or  so  undeveloped,  that  we  cannot  recognise  it,  so  as
to  trace  the  history  of  its  growth.  It  came  to  us  during  the
course  of  a  casual  conversation ;  or  from  a  book  the  very  name
of  which  we  have  forgotten ;  and  our  relationship  towards  it
has  been  after  all  that  of  a  nurse,  not  that  of  a  parent.  We
have  protected  it,  cherished  it,  warmed  it,  and  at  length  it
has  grown  within  the  chambers  of  our  mind,  until  we  have
recognised  its  value  and  led  it  forth  into  the  sunlight,  shaping
it,  colouriBg  it,  expressing  it  after  a  maimer  strictly  our  own,
and  believing  in  good  faith  that  because  we  have  so  entirely
determined  its  form,  we  are  the  creators  of  its  substance  d
At  any  rate,  my  brethren,  genius  herself  has  not  been  slow  to
confess  how  difficult  it  is  to  say  that  any  one  of  her  triumphs
is  certainly  due  to  a  true  originality.  In  one  of  his  later
recorded  conversations  Goethe  was  endeavouring  to  decide
what  are  the  real  obligations  of  genius  to  the  influences  which
inevitably  affect  it.  *  Much,'  said  he,  *  is  talked  about  originality ;
but  what  does  originality  mean  1  We  are  no  sooner  bom  than
the  world  around  begins  to  act  upon  us;  its  action  lasts  to
the  end  of  our  lives  and  enters  into  everything.     All  that  we

0  This  illustration  was  suggested  to  me,  some  years  ago,  by  a  well-known
Oxford  tutor.  It  is  developed,  with  his  usual  force,  by  F^ix,  J^sus-Ghiist^
p.  laS.  ^  Bautain,  ]6tude  sur  Tart  de  parler  en  public.

[lkct.


^aranteed  by  the  isolation  of  His  early  Life.    109

can  truly  call  our  own  is  our  energy,  our  vigour,  our  will.  If
I,'  he  continued,  *  could  enumerate  all  that  I  really  owe  to
the  great  men  who  have  preceded  me,  and  to  those  of  my
own  day,  it  would  be  seen  that  very  little  is  really  my  own.
It  is  a  point  of  capital  importance  to  observe  at  what  time  of
life  the  influence  of  a  great  character  is  brought  to  bear  on  us.
Lessing,  Winkelmann,  and  Kant,  were  older  than  I,  and  it
has  been  of  the  greatest  consequence  to  me  that  the  two  first
powerfully  influenced  my  youth  and  the  last  my  old  age«.'
On  such  a  subject,  Goethe  may  be  deemed  a  high  authority,
and  he  certainly  was  not  likely  to  do  an  injustice  to  genius,
or  to  be  guilty  of  a  false  humility  when  speaking  of  himself.

But  our  Lord's  design  to  establish  upon  the  earth  a  kingdom
of  souls  was  an  original  design.  Bemark,  as  bearing  upon  this
originality,  our  Lord's  isolation  in  His  early  life.  His  social
obscurity  is,  in  the  eyes  of  thoughtful  men,  the  safeguard  and
guarantee  of  His  originality.  It  is  not  seriously  pretended,
on  any  side,  that  Jesus  Christ  was  enriched  with  one  single
ray  of  His  thought  from  Athens,  from  Alexandria,  from  the
mystics  of  the  Ganges  or  of  the  Indus,  from  the  disciples  of
Zoroaster  or  of  Confucius.  The  centurion  whose  servant  He
healed,  the  Greeks  whom  He  met  at  the  instance  of  St.  Philip,
the  Syro-phoenician  woman,  the  judge  who  condemned  and  the
soldiers  who  crucified  Him,  are  the  few  Gentiles  with  whom
He  is  recorded  to  have  had  dealings  during  His  earthly  life.
But  was  our  Lord  equally  isolated  from  the  world  of  Jewish
speculation  ?  M.  Benan,  indeed,  impatient  at  the  spectacle  of
an  unrivalled  originality,  suggests,  not  without  some  hesitation,
that  Hillel  was  the  real  teacher  of  Jesus  *"•     But  Dr.  Schenkel

•  Conversations  de  Goethe,  trad.  Delerot,  torn.  ii.  p.  342,  quoted  in
the  Bev.  des  Deux  Mondes,  15  Oct.  1865.

'  'Hillel  fut  le  vrai  mattre  de  J^sus,  s*il  est  permis  de  parler  de  maltre
qnand  il  g'agit  d'une  si  haute  originality.*  Vie  de  J^us,  p.  35.  As  an
instance  of  our  Lord's  real  independence  of  Hillel,  a  single  example  may
suffice.  A  recent  writer  on  '  the  Talmud  *  gives  the  following  story.  *  One
day  a  heathen  went  to  Shammai,  the  head  of  the  rival  academy,  and  asked
bim  mockingly  to  convert  him  to  the  law  while  he  stood  on  one  leg.  The
iiate  master  turned  him  from  the  door.  He  then  went  to  Hillel,  who  gave
liim  that  reply — since  so  widely  propagated — "Do  not  unto  another  what
thou  wouldest  not  have  another  do  unto  thee.  This  is  the  whole  law:
the  rest  is  mere  commentary." '  Quarterly  Review,  Oct.  1867,  p.  441.  art.
*The  Talmud.*  Or,  aS  HilleVs  words  are  rendered  by  Idghtfoot:  'Quod
tibi  ipsi  odiosum  est,  proximo  ne  feceris:  nam  hsec  est  tota  lex.*  Hor.
Hebr.  in  Matt.  p.  129.  The  writer  in  the  Quarterly  Review  appears  to
assume  the  identity  of  HilleVs  saying  with  the  precept  of  our  Blessed  Lord,

m]


no      ^Originality'  of  our  Loi^d's  'planl  as

will  tell  us  that  this  suggestion  rests  on  no  historical  basis
whatever  ?,  while  we  may  remark  in  passing  that  it  is  at  issue
with  a  theory  which  you  would  not  care  to  notice  at  length,
but  which  M.  Eenan  cherishes  with  much  fondness,  and  which
represents  our  Lord's  *tone  of  thought'  as  a  psychological
result  of  the  scenery  of  north-eastern  Palestine  \  The  kindred
assumption  that  when  making  His  yearly  visits  to  Jerusalem
for  the  Feast  of  the  Passover,  or  at  other  times,  Jesus  must
have  become  the  pupil  of  some  of  the  leading  Jewish  doctors
of  the  day,  is  altogether  gratuitous.  Once  indeed,  when  He
was  twelve  years  old,  He  was  found  in  a  synagogue,  hard  by
the  temple,  in  close  intellectual  contact  with  aged  teachers
of  the  Law.  But  all  who  hear  Him,  even  then,  in  His  early
Boyhood,  are  astonished  at  His  understanding  and  answers;
and  the  narrative  of  the  Evangelist  implies  that  the  occurrence
was  not  repeated.  Moreover  there  was  no  teaching  in  Judsea
at  that  era,  which  had  not,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  expression,
a  sectarian  colouring.  But  what  is  there  in  the  doctrine  or
in  the  character  of  Jesus  that  connects  Him  with  a  Pharisee
or  a  Sadducee,  or  an  Herodian,  or  an  Essene  ^  type  of  education  t
Is  it  not  significant  that,  as  Schleiermacher  remarks,  'of  all
the  sects  then  in  vogue  none  ever  claimed  Jesus  as  representing

St.  Matt.  vii.  12  ;  St.  Luke  vi.  31.  Yet  in  truth  how  wide  is  the  interval
between  the  merely  negative  rule  of  the  Jewish  President  (which  had
already  been  given  in  Tobit  iv.  15),  and  the  potitive  precept — ^va  tuf  $4krir§
tya  ftoiwffuf  hyuv  01  AvOptatroit  oUrw  Kol  i^/ticts  iroictre  ainois — of  the  Divine
Master.  On  Gibbon's  citation  from  LKKsrates  of  a  precept  equivalent  to
Hillel*s,  see  Archbishop  Trench,  Huls.  Lect.  p.  157.  Hillel  said  that  there
would  be  no  Messiah,  since  the  promise  and  its  fulfilment  belonged  to  the
time  of  Hezekiah ;  Westcott,  Introd.  p.  1 23.      *

'  'Ganz  unbewiesen  ist  es/  Schexikel,  Gharakterbild  Jesu,  p.  39,  note.
When  however  Dr.  Schenkel  himself  says,  '  Den  Einblick,  den  Er  [sc.  Jesus]
in  das  Wesen  und  Treiben  der  religiosen  Kichtungen  und  Parteiungen
seines  Volkes  in  so  hohem  Masse  befass,  hat  Er  aus  personlicher  Wahmeh-
mung  und  unmittelbarem  Verkehr  mit  den  Hauptem  und  Yertreiem  der
versdiiedenen  Paiteistandpunkte  gewonnen*  (ibid.),  where  is  the  justifi-
cation of  this  assertion,  except  in  the  Humanitarian  and  Naturalistic  theciy
of  the  writer,  which  makes  some  such  assumption  necessary  t

^  Yie  de  J4sub,  p.  64:  'Une  nature  ravissante  contribuait  k  farmer
oet  esprit.*  Then  follows  a  description  of  the  flowers,  the  animals,  the
insects,  and  the  mountains  (p.  65),  the  farms,  the  £ruit-gardens,  and  the
vintage  (p.  66),  of  Northern  Galilee.  M.  Benan  concludes,  'cette  vie
contente  et  facilement  satisfaate  .  .  se  spiritualisait  en  r^ves  ^th^r^  en
une  sorte  de  mysticisme  po^tique  confoncUnt  le  ciel  et  la  terre.  •  .  .  Toute
Thistoire  du  Christianisme  naissant  est  devenue  de  la  sorte  une  d^dease
pastorale.*  p.  6j,

i  Milman,  Bist.  Christ,  i.  p.  153,  note  x.

[liECT.


guaranteed  by  the  isolation  of  His  early  Life.    1 1 1

it,  none  branded  Him  with  the  reproach  of  apostasy  from  its
tenets  J  ? '     Even  if  we  lend  an  ear  to  the  precarious  conjecture
that  He  may  have  attended  some  elementary  school  at  Nazareth,
it  is  plain  that  the  people  believed  Him  to  have  gone  through
no  formal  course  of  theological  training.     *  How  knoweth  TMs
Man  letters,  haying  never  learned^)'  was  a  question  which
betrayed  the  popular  surprise  created  by  a  Teacher  Who  spoke
with  the   highest  authority,  and  Who  yet  had   never  sat  at
the  feet  of  an  accredited  doctor.     It  was  the  homage  of  public
enthusiasm   which  honoured   Him  with  the   title   of  Kabbi ;
sinee  this  title  did  not  then  imply  that  one  who  bore  it  had
been  qualified  by  any  intellectual  exercises  for  an  official  teaching
position.     Isolated,  as  it  seemed,  obscure,  uncultivated,  illiterate,
the  Son  of  Mary  did  not  concern  Himself  to  struggle  against
or  to  reverse  what  man  would  deem  the  crushing  disadvantages
of  His  lot.     He  did  not,  like  philosophers  of  antiquity,  or  like
the  active  spirits  of  the  middle  ages,  spend  His  Life  in  perpetual
transit  between  one  lecturer  of  reputation  and  another,  between
this  and  that  focus  of  earnest  and  progressive  thought.     He
was  not  a  Ooethe,  continually  enriching  and  refining  his  con-
ceptions by  contact  with  a  long  succession  of  intellectual  friends,
reaching  from   Lavater  to  Eckermann.      Still   less  did    He,
during  His  early  Manhood,  live  in  any  such  atmosphere  as
that  of  this  place,  where  interpenetrating  all   our  differences
of  age  and  occupation,  and  even   of  conviction,  there   is  the
magnificent  inheritance  of  a  common  fund  of  thought,  to  which,
whether  we  know  it  or  not,  we  are  all  constantly  and  inevitably
debtors.     He  mingled  neither  with  great  thinkers  who  could
mould  educated   opinion,  nor  with  men  of  gentle  blood  who
could  give  its  tone  to  society;   He  passed  those  thirty  years
as  an  under-workman  in  a  carpenter's  shop ;  He  lived  in  what
might  have  seemed  the  depths  of  mental  solitude  and  of  social
obscurity ;  and  then  He  went,  forth,  not  to  foment  a  political
revolution,  nor  yet  to  found  a  local  school  of  evanescent  sen-
timent, but  to  proclaim  an  enduring  and  world-wide  Kingdom
of  souls,  based  upon  the  culture  of  a  common  moral  character,
and  upon  intellectual  submission  to  a  common  creed.

Christ's  isolation,  then,  is  the  guarantee  of  His  originality;
yet  had  He  lived  as  much  in  public  as  He  lived  in  obscurity,
where,  let  me  ask,  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  anticipated  as  a
practical  project  in  the  ancient  world  %  What,  beyond  the  inter-

^  Leben  Jesu,  vori.  xvi.  ^  St.  John  vii.  15.

ml


112     Who  could  have  suggested  Christ's  'plan?

change  of  thought  on  moral  subjects,  has  the  kingdom  proclaimed,
by  our  Lord  in  common  with  the  philosophical  schools  or  coteries
which  grouped  themselves  around  Socrates  and  other  teachers
of  classical  Greece  1  % '  These  schools,  indeed,  differed  from,  the
kingdom  of  heaven,  not  merely  in  their  lack  of  any  pretensions
to  supernatural  aims  or  powers,  but  yet  more,  in  that  they  only
existed  for  the  sake  of  a  temporary  convenience,  and  that  their
members  were   bound  to   each   other  by  no  necessary  ties™.
Again,  what  was  there  in  any  of  the  sects  of  Judaism  that  could
have  suggested  such  a  conception  as  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?
Each  and  all  they  differ  from  it,  I  will  not  say  in  organization
and  structure,  but  in  range  and  compass,  in  life  and  action,  in
spirit  and  aim.     Or  was  the  kingdom  of  heaven  even  traced  in
outline  by  the  vague  yearnings  and  aspirations  after  a  better
time,  which  entered  so  mysteriously  into  the  popular  thought  of
the  heathen  populations  in  the  Augustan  age  ^  %  Certainly  it  was
an  answer,  complete  yet  unexpected,  to  these  aspirations.     They
did  not  originate  it ;  they  could  not  have  originated  it ;  they
primarily  pointed  to  a  material  rather  than  to  a  moral  Utopia,
to  an  idea  of  improvement  which  did  not  enter  into  the  plan  of

*  Mr.  Lecky  makes  an  observation  upon  the  originality  of  our  Lord's  moral
teaching,  considered  generally,  which  is  well  worthy  of  attention.   Rational-
ism in  Europe,  i.  p.  338.     *  Nothing  too,  can,  as  I  conceive,  be  more  er-
roneous or  superficial  than  the  reasonings  of  those  who  maintain  that
the  moral  element  in  Christianity  has  in  it  nothing  distinctive  or  peculiar.
The  method  of  this  school,  of  which  Bolingbroke  may  be  regard^  aa  the
type,  is  to  collect  from  the  writings  of  different  heathen  writers,  certain
isolated  passages  embodying  precepts  that  W^ere  inculcated  by  Christianity ;
and  when  the  collection  had  become  very  large  the  task  was  supposed  to  be
accomplished.  But  the  true  originality  of  a  system  of  moral  teaching  depends
not  so  much  upon  the  elements  of  wluch  it  is  composed,  as  upon  the  mamier
in  which  they  are  fused  into  a  symmetrical  whole,  upon  the  proportionate
value  that  is  attached  to  different  qualities,  or,  to  state  the  same  thing  by
a  single  word,  upon  the  type  of  character  that  is  formed.     Now  it  is  quite
certain  that  the  Christian  type  differs,  not  only  in  degree,  but  in  kind  from
the  Pagan  one.*     This  general  observation  might  legitimately  include  the
vital  differences  which  sever  all  merely  human  schemes  of  moral  association
and  co-operation  from  that  of  the  Founder  of  the  Christian  Church.    See
also  Tulloch  on  The  Christ  of  the  Gospels,  p.  190.

"  This  point  is  well  stated  in  Ecce  Homo,  p.  91,  sqq.  The  writer  ob-
serves that  if  Socrates  were  to  appear  at  the  present  day,  he  would  fonn
no  society,  as  the  invention  of  printing  would  have  rendered  it  unnecessary.
But  the  formation  of  an  organized  society  was  of  the  very  essence  of  the
Work  of  Christ.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  recognise  the  fulness  with  which  this
vital  truth  is  set  forth  by  one  from  whom  serious  Churchmen  must  feel
themselves  to  be  separated  by  some  deep  differences  of  belief  and  principle.

»  Virgil,  Eel.  iv.,  Ma^  vi.  793,  and  Suetonius,  Vespasianus,  iv.  5.

[lect.


Its  ^originality^  substantial^  not  verbal.     113

theEoonder  of  the  new  kingdom.  But  you  ask  if  the  announce-
ment of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  oar  Lord  was  not  really  a
continuation  of  tiie  announcement  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by
St.  John  the  Baptist  ?  You  might  go  further,  and  enquire,  whether
this  proclamation  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  not  to  be  traced
up  to  the  prophecy  of  Daniel  respecting  a  fifkh  empire  1  For  the
present  of  course  I  waive  the  question  which  an  Apostle  ®  would
have  raised,  as  to  whether  the  Spirit  That  spoke  in  St.  John  and
in  Daniel  was  not  the  Spirit  of  the  Christ  Himself.  But  let  us
enquire  whether  Daniel  or  St.  John  do  anticipate  our  Lord's
plan  in  such  a  sense  as  to  rob  it  of  its  immediate  originality.
The  Baptist  and  the  prophet  foretell  the  kingdom  of  heaven.
Be  it  sa  But  a  nam«  is  one  thing,  and  the  vivid  complete
grasp  of  an  idea  is  another.  We  are  accustomed  to  distinguish
with  some  wholesome  severity  between  originality  of  phrase  and
originality  of  thought.  An  intrinsic  poverty  of  thought  may  at
times  succeed  in  formulating  an  original  expression;  while  a
true  originality  will  often,  nay  generally,  welcome  a  time-
honoured  and  conventional  phraseology,  if  it  can  thus  secure
currency  and  acceptance  for  the  truth  which  it  has  brought  to
light  and  which  it  desires  to  set  forth  p.  The  originality  of  our
Lord's  plan  lay  not  in  its  name,  but  in  its  substance.  When
St.  John  said  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  at  hand  4,  when
Daniel  represented  it  as  a  world-wide  and  imperishable  empire,
neither  prophet  nor  Baptist  had  really  anticipated  the  idea ;  one

•  I  St.  Peter  i.  ii.

p  Pascal,  Pens^es,  art.  vii.  9  (ed.  Havet.  p.  133):  'Qti*on  ne  dise  pai
que  je  n^ai  rien  dit  de  nouveau ;  la  dispodtion  des  mati^res  est  nouvelle.
Qnand  on  joue  k  la  paume,  c^eet  une  m6me  balle  dont  on  joue  Tun  et  Taittre ;
nuds  Tun  la  place  mieox.  J'aimerais  autant  qu*on  me  dit  que  je  me
suis  servi  des  mots  anciens.  Et  comme  si  les  mdmes  pens^es  ne  formaient
pas  nn  autre  corps  de  discours  par  une  disposition  diff^rente,  aussi  bien  que
les  monies  mots  forment  d'antres  pens^es  par  leur  difft^rente  disposition.*  •

4  The  teaching  of  St.  John  Baptist  centred  around  three  points  :  (i)  the
call  to  penitence  (St.  Matt.  iii.  a,  8-10 ;  St.  Mark  i.  4 ;  St.  Luke  iii.  3,
10-14) ;  (2)  the  relative  greatness  of  Christ  (St.  Matt.  iii.  1 1-14 ;  St.  Mark  i.
7 ;  St.  Luke  iii.  16 ;  St.  John  i.  15,  a6,  37,  30-34) ;  (3)  the  Judicial  (o5  ri
irr6ov  iv  rfj  y(€tp\  avrov,  St.  Matt.  iii.  13  ;  St.  Luke  iii.  17)  and  Atoning  (tit
6  atfivhs  TOW  0€ov,  6  o^ptov  r^v  afiofnUiy  rod  K6fffioVy  St.  John  i.  39,  36)  Work
of  Christ.  In  this  way  St.  John  corresponded  to  prophecy  as  preparing  the
way  of  the  Lord  (St.  Matt.  iii.  3 ;  St.  Mark  i.  3 ;  St.  Luke  iii.  4 ;  St.  John  i.
33 ;  Isa.  zl.  3) ;  but  beyond  naming  the  kingdom,  the  nature  of  the  prepara-
tion required  for  entering  it,  the  supernatural  greatness,  and  two  of  the
functions  of  the  King,  St.  John  did  not  anticipate  our  Lord's  disclosures.
St.  John's  teaching  left  men  quite  uninformed  as  to  what  the  kingd<Hn  of
heaven  was  to  be  in  itself,
ni]  I


1 14  Notes  of  ^ originality^  in  our  LorcCs  ^planl

furmahed  the  name  of  a  coming  system,  the  other  a  measure  of
its  greatness.  But  what  was  the  new  institution  to  be  in  itself;
what  were  to  be  its  controlling  laws  and  principles ;  what  the
animating  spirit  of  its  inhabitants  ;  what  the  sources  of  its  life ;
what  the  vicissitudes  of  its  establishment  and  triumph  1  These
and  other  elements  of  His  plan  are  exhibited  by  our  Lord  Him-
self, in  His  discourses,  His  parables.  His  institutions.  That
which  had  been  more  or  less  vague,  He  made  definite ;  that  which
had  been  abstract.  He  threw  into  a  concrete  form ;  that  which  had
been  ideal,  He  clothed  with  the  properties  of  working  reality;
that  which  had  been  scattered  over  many  books  and  ages,
He  brought  into  a  focus.  If  prophecy  supplied  Him  with  some
of  the  materials  which  He  employed,  p»ophecy  could  not  have
enabled  Him  to  succeed  in  combining  them.  He  combined  them
because  He  was  Himself;  His  Person  supplied  the  secret  of
their  combination.  His  originality  is  indeed  seen  in  the  reality
and  life  with  which  He  lighted  up  the  language  used  by  men
who  had  been  sent  in  earlier  ages  to  prepare  His  way;  but
if  His  creative  thought  employed  these  older  materials,  it  did
not  depend  on  them.  He  actually  gave  a  practical  and  ener-
getic form  to  the  idea  of  a  strictly  independent  society  of
spiritual  beings,  with  enlightened  and  purified  consciences,
cramped  by  no  national  or  local  bounds  of  privilege,  and  destined
to  spread  throughout  earth  and  heaven  ^     When  He  did  this,

'  Guizot,  Essence  de  la  Religion  chr^tienne,  p.  307:  'Je  reprends  cee
deux  grands  piincipes,  ces  deux  grandes  actes  de  J^sus-Christ,  Tabolition  de
tout  privilege  dans  les  rapports  des  hommes  ayec  Dieu,  et  la  distinction  de
la  vie  religieuse,  et  de  la  Vie  civile ;  je  les  place  en  regard  de  tons  lee  fidtB,
de  tons  les  ^tats  sociaux  ant^rieurs  k  la  venue  de  J^sus-Clirist,  etjtf  nepuis
dSoouvrir  cL  ces  caracthres  essentiels  de  la  religion  chritienne,  aucunefiUa^
tion,  aucune  origine  humaine.  Partout,  avant  J^sus-Christ,  les  religions
^taient  nationales,  locales,  ^tablissant  entre  les  peuples,  les  classes,  lee  in-
dividus,  des  distances  et  des  in^galit^s  ^normes.  Partout  aussi  avant  J^os-
Christ,  la  vie  civile  et  la  vie  rdligieuse  ^taient  confondues  et  s'opprimaient
mutuellement ;  la  religion  ou  les  religions  ^taient  dee  institutions  inoorpor^
dans  r^tat,  et  que  IMtat  r^glait  ou  iSprimait  selon  son  int^rSt.  Dans  Tuni-
versalit^  de  la  foi  religieuse,  et  Tindependance  de  la  soci^t^  religieuse,  je
suis  constraint  de  voir  des  nouveaut^s  sublimes,  des  Eclairs  de  la  lumi^re
divine  I'  Even  Ghanning,  who  understates  our  Lord's  'plan,*  is  alive  to  the
originality  and  greatness  of  that  part  of  it  which  he  recognises ;  Works,  ii.
57.     '  The  plans  and  labours  of  statesmen  sink  into  the  sports  of  children,

when  compared  with  the  work  which  Jesus  announced The  idea  of

changing  the  moral  aspect  of  the  whole  earth,  of  recovering  all  nations  to
the  pure  and  inward  worship  of  the  one  God,  and  to  a  Spirit  of  Divine  and
fraternal  love  (our  Lord  proposed  much  more  than  this),  was  one  of  which
we  meet  not  a  trace  in  philosopher  or  legislator  before  Him.    The  human

[lbct.


Boldness  of  the  'plan^  of  ^esus  Christ.     115

-  —

prophets  were  not  His  masters ;  they  had  only  foreshadowed
His  work.  His  plan  can  be  traced  in  that  masterful  com-
pleteness Mid  symmetry,  which  is  the  seal  of  its  intrinsic
originality,  to  no  sonrce  beyond  Himself.  Well  might  we  ask
"with  His  astonished  countrymen  the  question  which  was  indeed
prompted  by  their  jealous  curiosity,  but  which  is  natural  to  a
very  different  temper,  •  Whence  hath  this  Man  this  wisdom  V  ■

(i3)  And  this  opens  upon  us  the  second  characteristic  of  our
liord's  plan,  I  mean  that  which  in  any  merely  human  plan,  we
should  call  its  audacity.  This  audacity  is  observable,  first  of  all,
in  the  fact  that  the  plan  is  originally  proposed  to  the  world  with
what  might  appear  to  us  to  be  such  hazardous  completeness.
The  idea  of  the  kingdom  of  God  issues  almost  '  as  if  in  a  single
jet^*'  and  with  a  fully  developed  body  from  the  thought  of  Jesus
Christ.  Put  together  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  the  Charge  to
the  Twelve  Apostles,  the  Parables  of  the  Kingdom,  the  Discourse
in  the  Supper-room,  and  the  institution  of  the  two  great  Sacra-
ments, and  the  plan  of  our  Saviour  is  before  you.  And  it  is
enunciated  with  an  accent  of  calm  unfaltering  conviction  that
it  will  be  realized  in  human  history.

This  is  a  phenomenon  which  we  can  only  appreciate  by  con-
trasting it  with  the  law  to  which  it  is  so  signal  an  exception.
Generally  speaking,  an  ambitious  idea  appears  at  first  as  a  mere
outline,  and  it  challenges  attention  in  a  tentative  way.  It  is  put
forward  enquiringly,  timidly,  that  it  may  be  completed  by  the
suggestions  of  friends  or  modified  by  the  criticism  of  opponents.
The  highest  genius  is  always  most  keenly  alive  to  the  vicissitudes
which  may  await  its  own  creations ;  it  knows  with  what  difl&culty
a  promising  project  is  launched  safely  and  unimpaired  out  of  the
domain  of  abstract  speculation  into  the  region  of  practical  human
life.  Even  in  art,  where  the  materials  to  be  moulded  are,  as
compared  with  the  subjects  of  moral  or  political  endeavour,  so
much  under  command,  it  is  not  prudent  to  presume  that  a  design
or  a  conception  will  be  carried  out  without  additions  or  without

mind  had  given  no  promise  of  this  extent  of  yiew We  witness  a

vastness  of  purpose,  a  grandeur  of  thought  and  feeling,  so  original,  so
superior  to  the  workings  of  all  other  minds,  that  nothing  but  our  familiarity
can  prevent  our  contemplation  of  it  with  wonder  and  profound  awe.'

»  See  F^lix,  J^us-Ohrist  et  la  Critique  Nouvelle,  pp.  127-133 ;  Bushnell,
Nature  and  the  Supernatural,  pp.  337-8.  Keim  has  exaggerated  the  in-
fluence of  Pharisaism  upon  the  language  and  teaching  of  our  Lord,  which
only  resembled  Pharisaism  as  being  addressed  to  the  Jewish  mind  in  terms
which  it  understood.    GeschichHiche  Christus,  pp.  18-22.       •

*  Pressens^,  J^us-Christ,  p.  325.

m]  .  13


1 1 6      Chris  fs  'plan  *  complete  from  the  first.

curtailments.  In  this  place  we  all  have  heard  that  between  the
dtapia  and  the  ytvtais  of  art  there  may  be  a  fatal  interval.  The
few  bold  strokes  by  which  a  Kaffaelle  has  suggested  a  new  fona
of  power  or  of  beauty,  may  never  be  filled  up  upon  his  canvas*
The  working-drawings  of  a  Phidias  or  a  Michael  Angelo  may
never  be  copied  in  stone  or  in  marble.  As  has  been  said  of  S.  T.
Coleridge,  art  is  perpetually  throwing  out  designs  which  remain
designs  for  ever ;  and  yet  the  artist  possesses  over  his  material,
and  even  over  his  hand  and  his  eye,  a  control  which  is  altogether
wanting  to  the  man  who  would  reconstruct  or  regenerate  human
society.  For  human  society  is  an  aggregate  of  human  intelh-
gences  and  of  human  wills,  that  is  to  say,  of  profound  and  mys-
terious forces,  upon  the  direction  of  which  under  absolutely  new
circumstances  it  is  impossible  for  man  to  calculate.  Accordingly,
social  reformers  tell  us  despondingly  that  facts  make  sad  havoc
of  their  fairest  theories ;  and  that  schemes  which  were  designed
to  brighten  and  to  beautify  the  life  of  nations  are  either  forgotten
altogether,  or,  like  the  Kepublic  of  Plato,  are  remembered  only
as  famous  samples  of  the  impracticable.  For  whenever  a  great
idea,  affecting  the  well-being  of  society,  is  permitted  to  force  its
way  into  the  world  of  facts,  it  is  liable  to  be  carried  out  of  its
course,  to  be  thrust  hither  and  thither,  to  be  compressed,  exag-
gerated, disfigured,  mutilated,  degraded,  caricatured.  It  may
encounter  currents  of  hostile  opinion  and  of  incompatible  facts,
upon  which  its  projector  had  never  reckoned  ;  its  course  maybe
forced  into  a  direction  the  exact  reverse  of  that  which  he  most
earnestly  desired.  In  the  first  French  Revolution  some  of  the
most  humane  sociological  projects  were  distorted  into  becoming
the  very  animating  principles  of  wholesale  and  extraordinary
barbarities.  In  England  we  are  fond  of  repeating  the  political
maxim  that  *  constitutions  are  not  made,  but  grow ;'  we  have  a
proverbial  dread  of  the  paper-schemes  of  government  which  from
time  to  time  are  popular  among  our  gifted  and  volatile  neigh-
bours. It  is  not  that  we  English  cannot  admire  the  creations  of
political  genius ;  but  we  hold  that  in  the  domain  of  human  life
genius  must  submit  herself  to  the  dictation  of  circumstances,
and  that  she  herself  seems  to  shade  off  into  erratic  folly  when
she  cannot  clearly  recognise  the  true  limits  of  her  power.

Now  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  was  in  the  true  and  very  highest
sense  of  the  term  a  social  reformer;  yet  He  fully  proclaimed
the  whole  of  His  social  plan  before  He  began  to  realize  it.  Had
He  been  merely  a  '  great  man,'  He  would  have  been  more  pru-
dent.    He  would  have  conditioned  His  design ;  He  would  have

[lect.


No  evidence  of  change  in  our  Lord's  'plan^    117

tested  it;  He  would  have  developed  it  gradually;  He  would
have  made  trial  of  its  working  power ;  and  then  He  would  have
re-fashioned,  or  contracted,  or  expanded  it,  before  finally  pro-
posing it  to  the  consideration  of  the  world.  But  His  actual
course  must  have  seemed  one  of  utter  and  reckless  folly,  unless
the  event  had  shewn  it  to  be  the  dictate  of  a  more  than  human
wisdom.  He  speaks  as  One  Who  is  sure  of  the  compactness  and
faultlessness  of  His  design ;  He  is  certain  that  no  human  obstacle
can  baulk  its  realization.  He  produces  it  simply  without  effort,
without  reserve,  without  exaggeration ;  He  is  calm,  because  He
is  in  possession  of  the  future,  and  sees  His  way  clearly  through
its  tangled  maze.  There  is  no  proof,  no  distant  intimation  of  a
change  or  of  a  modification  of  His  plan.  He  did  not,  for  instance,
first  aim  at  a  political  success,  and  then  cover  His  failure  by
giving  a  religious  turn  or  interpretation  to  His  previous  mani-
festoes ;  He  did  not  begin  as  a  religious  teacher,  and  afterwards
aspire  to  convert  His  increasing  religious  influence  into  political
capital.  No  attempts  to  demonstrate  any  such  vacillation  in
His  purpose  have  reached  even  a  moderate  measure  of  success  ™.
Certainly,  with  the  lapse  of  time,  He  enters  upon  a  larger  and
larger  area  of  ministerial  action ;  He  developes  with  majestic
assurance,  with  decisive  rapidity,  the  integral  features  of  His
work ;  His  teaching  centres  more  and  more  upon  Himself  as  its
central  subject ;  but  He  nowhere  retracts,  or  modifies,  or  speaks
or  acts  as  would  one  who  feels  that  he  is  dependent  upon  events
or  agencies  which  he  cannot  control  ^.  A  poor  woman  pays  Him

*  Br.  Schenkel,  in  his  Oharakterbild  Jesu,  represents  our  Lord  as  a  pious
Jew,  who  did  not  assume  to  be  the  Messiah  before  the  scene  at  Osesarea
Philippi.  Kap.  xii.  §  4»  p.  138  :  '  Dadurch,  dass  Jesus  Sich  nun  wirklioh  zu
dem  Bekenntnisse  des  Simox^  bekannte,  trat  er  mit  eiuem  Schlage  aus  der
verworrenen  und  verwirrenden  Lage  heraus,  in  welche  Er,  durch  die  Unklar-
heit  seiner  Jtlnger  und  den  Meinungstreit  in  seiner  Umgebung  gebracht
war.  Ein  Stichwwt  war  jetzt  gesprochen.'  This  theory  is  obliged  to
reject  the  evangelical  accounts  of  our  Lord's  Baptism  and  Temptation,  and
to  distort  from  their  plain  meaning  the  narratives  of  our  Lord  s  sermon  in
the  synagogue  at  Nazareth  (St.  Luke  iv.  16),  of  His  call  of  the  twelve
AposUes,  and  of  His  claim  to  forgive  sin.  See  the  excellent  remarks  of
M.  Pressens^,  Jesus-CHirist,  pp.  326,  327.

*  Channing,  Works,  ii.  55.  *  We  feel  that  a  new  Being,  of  a  new  order  of
mind,  is  taking  part  in  human  affairs.  There  is  a  native  tone  of  grandeur
and  authority  in  His  teaching.  He  speaks  as  a  Being  related  to  the  whole
human  race.  A  narrower  sphere  than  the  world  never  enters  His  thoughts.
He  speaks  in  a  natural  spontaneous  style  of  accomplishing  the  most  arduous
and  important  change  in  human  affairs.  This  unlaboured  manner  of  ex-
pressing great  thoughts  is  particularly  worthy  of  attention.  You  never
hear  from  Jesus  that  swelling,  pompous,  ostentatious  language,  which

m]


1 18       Boldness  of  Christ's  plan,  considered

ceremonial  respect  at  a  feast,  and  He  simply  aimoiuiGeB  that
the  act  will  be  told  as  a  memorial  of  her  throughout  the  world.  1*;
He  bids  His  Apostles  do  aU  things  whatBoeTer  He  had  com-
manded them ' ;  He  promises  them  His  Spirit  as  a  Guide  into
all  necessary  truth " :  but  He  inveata  them  with  no  snch  dia-
cretionary  powers,  as  might  imply  that  His  design  would  need
revisloQ  under  possible  circomstances,  or  could  be  capable  erf
improvement.  He  calmly  toma  the  glance  of  His  thought  upon
the  long  and  chequered  future  which  lies  clearly  displayed  before
Him,  and  in  the  immediate  foreground  of  which  is  his  own
hnmiliating  Death  t>.  Other  founders  of  systems  or  of  societies
have  thanked  a  Hndly  Providence  for  ebroading  from  their  gaze
the  vicissitudes  of  coming  time ;


but  the  Son  of  Man  speaks  aa  One  Who  sees  beyond  the  most
distant  posaibilities,  and  Who  knows  full  well  that  His  work  is
indestructible.  'The  gates  of  hell,'  He  calmly  observes,  'shall
not  prevail  against  it^;'  'Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,
but  My  words  shall  not  pass  away^.'

Nor  is  the  boldness  of  Christ's  plan  Jess  observable  in  its
actual  Eubstauce,  than  in  the  &ct  of  Its  original  production  in
snch  completeness.  Look  at  it,  for  the  moment,  from  a  political
point  of  view.  Here  is,  as  it  seems,  a  Galilean  peasant,  sur-
rounded by  a  few  followers  taken  like  Himself  from  the  lowest
orders  of  society ;  yet  He  deliberately  proposes  to  rule  all
human  fought,  to  make  Himself  the  Centre  of  all  human
affectiona,  to  be  the  Lawgiver  of  humanity,  and  the  Object
of  man's  adoration  '.    He  founds  a  spiritual  society,  the  thought

almost  Deceasarily  spiiiira  from  an  attempt  to  surtuti  a  oliaraciter  abor*
DDT  powerg.  He  titlka  of  Hin  glories,  as  one  to  whom  they  were  familiar. . . .
He  speaks  of  saving  and  judging  the  world,  of  drawing  all  men  to  Hinuelf,
and  of  giving  everlsating  life,  as  we  speak  of  the  ordinary  poweis  wluch

'  St.  Matt.  zivi.  13  ;  St.  Mark  ziv.  9.

■  St.  Matt,  nviii.  JO.  ■  St.  John  rri.  13,

;  St.  Mark  viii.  31.  •  Hor.  Od.  iii.  19.  19.

t.  •  Ibid.  xxiv.  35.

>  and  the  Sapematoral,  p.  332,  '  To  Jesus  alone,  th«
enter,  it  happens  .  .  .  that,  having  tiever  aeen  a  map
rhole  life,  or  heard  the  name  of  half  the  great  nationi
B,  oomiag  ont  of  Hia  shop,  a  scheme  as  much  vaster
lan  that  of  Alexander,  aa  it  proposes  more,  and  what
evolent.'

[  LECT.


\


as  a  religious  and  social  enterprise*         119

and  heart  and  activity  of  which  are  to  converge  upon  His
Person,  and  He  tells  His  followers  that  this  society  which
He  is  forming  is  the  real  explanation  of  the  highest  visions
of  seers  and  prophets,  that  it  will  emhrace  all  races  and  extend
throughout  all  time.  He  places  Himself  before  the  world  as
the  true  goal  of  its  expectations,  and  He  points  to  His
proposed  work  as  the  one  hope  for  its  future.  There  was  to
be  a  universal  religion,  and  He  would  found  it.  A  universal
religion  was  just  as  foreign  an  idea  to  heathenism^as  to  Judaism.
Heathenism  held  that  the  state  was  the  highest  form  of  social
life;  religious  life,  like  family  life,  was  deemed  subordinate
to  political  interests.  Morality  was  pretty  nearly  dwarfed  down
to  the  measure  of  common  political  virtue;  sin  was  little  else
than  political  misdemeanour ;  religion  was  but  a  subordinate
fonction  of  national  life,  differing  in  different  countries  according
to  the  varying  genius  of  the  people,  and  rightly  liable  to  being
created  or  controlled  by  the  government.  A  century  and  a
half  after  the  Incarnation,  m  his  attack  upon  the  Church,
Celsus  ridicules  the  idea  of  a  universal  religion  as  a  manifest
folly  ^ ;  yet  Jesus  Christ  has  staked  His  whole  claim  to  respect
and  cond&dence  upon  announcing  it.  Jesus  Christ  made  no
concessions  to  the  passions  or  to  the  prejudices  of  mankind.
The  laws  and  maxims  of  His  kingdom  are  for  the  most  part
in  entire  contradiction  to  the  instincts  of  average  human  nature ;
yet  He  predicts  that  His  Gospel  will  be  preached  in  all  the
world,  and  that  £inally  there  will  be  one  flock  and  One  Shepherd
of  men*.  *Go,'  He  says  to  His  Apostles,  ^make  disciples
of  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  Name  of  the  Father,
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  teaching  them  to
ohserve  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you;  and,
lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world  k.*
He  founds  a  world-wide  religion,  and  He  promises  to  be  the
present  invigorating  force  of  that  religion  to  the  end  of  time.
Are  we  not  too  accustomed  to  this  language  to  feel  the  full
force  of  its  original  meaning  1  How  startlingly  must  it  not
have  fallen  upon  the  ears  of  Apostles  I  Words  like  these  are
not  accounted   for  by  any  difference  between   the  East  and

'  The  Stoio  'cosmopolitaniBin*  (Sir  A.  Grant's  Ethics  of  Aristotle,
▼ol.  i.  355 ;  Merivale  on  Conversion  of  Boman  Empire,  p.  60)  did  not
amonnt  to  a  religion.

^  Origen.  contr.  Gelsnin,  ii.  46.

*  St.  John  X.  16.  Christ  and  His  Apostles  were  to  hegisn  to  preach  to
Israel.    St.  Matt.  zr.  24,  x.  5,  6.  ^  St.  Matt,  zxviii.  191  so.

m]


120  Realisation  of  our  Lor£s  'plan'

the  West,  between  ancient  and  modem  modes  of  speech.  Thef
will  not  bear  faonest  tranfilation  into  auj  modem  phrase  that
vould  enable  good  men  to  nse  them  now.  Can  we  imagine
Euch  a  command  aa  that  of  our  Lord  upon  the  lips  of  the
best,  of  the  wiseet  of  men  whom  we  have  ever  known  1  Would
it  not  be  simply  to  imagine  that  goodness  or  wisdom  bad  been
escbanged  for  the  follj  of  an  intolerable  presumption )  Such
language  as  that  before  as  is  indeed  folly,  unless  it  be  some-
thing else ;  unless  it  be  proved  by  the  event  to  have  been  the
bigbeEt  wisdoD),  the  wisdom  of  One,  Whose  ways  are  not  onr
ways,  nor  His  thoughts  our  thoughts'.

II.  But  has  the  plan  of  Jesus  Christ  been  carried  out  1  Does
the  kingdom  of  heaven  exist  on  eortb )

(i.)  The  Church  of  Christ  is  the  living  answer  to  that
question.  Boileau  says  somewhere  that  the  Church  is  a  great
thought  which  every  man  ought  to  study.  It  would  be  more
practical  to  say  that  the  Church  is  a  great  &ct  which  evoty
man  ooght  to  measure.  Probably  we  <3iristiaQB  are  too  fami-
liarized with  the  blessed  presence  of  the  Church  to  do  justice
to  her  as  a  world-embracing  institution,  and  as  the  nurse
and  guardian  of  our  moral  and  mental  life.  Like  the  air
we  breathe,  she  bathes  our  whole  being  with  influences  which
we  do  not  analyse ;  and  we  hold  her  cheap  in  proportion
to  the  magnitude  of  her  unostentatious  service.  The  sun  rises
on  us  day  by  day  in  the  heavens,  and  we  heed  not  bis  surpassing
beauty  until  our  languid  sense  is  roused  by  some  observant
astronomer  or  artist.  The  Christian  Churth  pours  even  upon
those  of  us  who  love  her  least,  floods  of  intellectual  and  moral
light;  and  yet  it  is  only  by  an  occasional  intellectual  effort
that  we  detach  ourselves  sufficiently  from  the  tender  monotony
of  her  influences,  to  understand  how  intrinsically  extraordinary
is  '  the  double  fact  of  her  perpetuated  existence  and  of  her
continuous  expansion.

Glance  for  a  moment  at  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church
from  the  days  of  the  Apostles  until  now.  What  is  it  but  a
history  of  the  eradual,  unceasing  self-expansion  of  an  institution
t  hour  of  its  existence,  deliberately  aimed,
now,  at  the  conquest  of  the  world  "I  Com-
tch  sought  refuge  and  which  prayed  in  the
srusalem,  with  the  Church  of  which  St.  Fanl

hnell.  Nature  and  the  Supemotiira],  pp.  131-133;

1-139-

Aota  i.  8,  ii.  16  i  St.  Mark  ivi.  jo.

[lect.


Continuous  growth  of  the  Church.         121


is  the  pioneer  and  champion  in  the  latter  portion  of  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles,  or  with  the  Church  to  which  he  refers,  as  already
making  its  way  throughout  the  world,  in  his  Apostolical
Epistles ».  Compare  again  the  Church  of  the  Apostolical  age
with  the  Church  of  the  age  of  Tertullian.  Christianity  had  then
already  penetrated,  at  least  in  some  degree,  into  all  classes  of
Boman  society  o,  and  was  even  pursuing  its  missionary  course  in
regions  far  beyond  the  frontiers  of  the  empire  p,  in  the  forests  of
Germany,  in  the  wilds  of  Scythia,  in  the  deserts  of  Africa,  and
among  the  unsubdued  and  barbarous  tribes  who  inhabited  the
northern  extremity  of  our  own  island.  Again,  how  nobly  con-
scious is  the  Church  of  the  age  of  St.  Augustine  of  her  world-
wide mission,  and  of  her  ever-widening  area  I  how  sharply  is
this  consciousness  contrasted  with  the  attempt  of  Donatism  to
dwarf  down  the  realization  of  the  plan  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the
narrow  proportions  of  a  national  or  provincial  enterprise  <i !
In  the  writings  of  Augustine  especially,  we  see  the  Church  of
Christ  tenaciously  grasping  the  deposit  of  revealed  unchanging
doctrine,  while  liturgies  the  most  dissimilar,  and  teachers  of
many   tongues  r,    and    a    large   variety  of  ecclesiastical   cus-

^  Rom.  i.  8,  X.  18,  XV.  18-21 ;  Col.  i.  6,  23 ;  cf.  i  St.  Peter  i.  i,  &c.

*  Tert.  Apol.  37 :  *  Hestemi  sumus,  et  vestra  omnia  implevimus,  urbes,
iBsulas,  castella,  municipia,  conciliabula,  castra  ipsa,  tribus,  decurias,  pala-
tiam,  senatom,  forum,  sola  vobifl  reliuquimus  templa.*  Cf.  de  Bos&i,  Boma
Sotteranea^  i.  p.  309.

P  Tert.  adv.  Judaeos,  c.  7:  'Jam  Getulorum  varietates,  et  Mamx)rmn
multi  fines,  Hispaniarum  omnes  termini,  et  Galliarum  diversse  nationes,  et
'BfitaiMiorwn  inacceasa  Somanis  loca,  Christo  vero  subdita  et  Sarmatarnm,
et  Bacomm,  et  Germanormn,  et  Scytharmn,  et  abditarmn  multarum  gentium
et  provinciarum,  et  insularum  multarum  nobis  ignotarum,  et  quee  enumerare
minus  possumus.  In  quibus  omnibus  locis,  Cluisti  nomen,  Qui  jam  venit,
r^[nat,  utpote  ante  Quem  omnium  civitatum  portse  sunt  apertae.*

4  St.  Aug.  Ep.  xlix.  n.  3 :  '  Quserimus  ergo,  ut  nobis  respondere  non
graveris,  quam  causam  forte  noveris  qu&  factum  est,  ut  Christus  amitteret
hsereditatem  Suam  per  orbem  terrarum  dififusam,  et  subito  in  solis  AMs,  nee
ipsis  omnibus  remaneret.  Etenim  ecdesia  Catholica  est  etiam  in  AMc&  quia
per  omnes  terras  eam  Deus  esse  voluit  et  pradixit.  Pars  autem  vestra,  quae
Bonati  dicitur,  non  est  in  omnibus  illis  locis,  in  quibus  et  literee  et  sermo
et  facta  apostolica  cucurrerunt.'  In  Ps.  Ixxxv.  n.  14:  'Christo  enim  tales
maledicunt,  qui  dicunt,  quia  periit  ecclesia  de  orbe  terrarum,  et  remansit  in
sola  Afric^.*  Compare  S.  Hieron.  adv.  Lucifer,  tpm.  iv.  pt.  ii.  p.  398  :  '  Si
in  Sardinia  tantum  habet  [ecclesiam  Christus]  nimium  pauper  factus  est.*
And  St.  Chrys.  in  Col.  Hom.  i.  n.  2  ;  in  i  Cor.  Hom.  xxxii.  n.  i.

'  In  Ps.  xliv.  (Vulg.)  Enarr.  n.  24 :  *  Sacramenta  doctrinse  in  Unguis
omnibus  variis.  Alia  lingua  Afra,  alia  Syra,  alia  Grseca,  alia  Hebrsea^  alia
i^  et  ilia ;  faciunt  istas  linguae  varietatem  vestis  reginse  hujus ;  quomodo
autem  onmis  vanetatis  vestis  in  unitate  concordat^  sio  et  omnes  linguse  ad
imamfideuu*


122     Actual  area  and  prospects  of  the  Church.

toms  8,  find  an  equal  welcome  within  her  comprehensive  bosom.
Yet  contrast  the  Church  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  with
the  Church  of  the  middle  ages,  or  with  the  Church  of  our  own
day.  In  the  fourth  and  even  in  the  fifth  century,  whatever  may
have  been  the  activity  of  individual  missionaries,  the  Church
was  still  for  the  most  part  contained  within  the  limits  of  the
empire ;  and  of  parts  of  the  empire  she  had  scarcely  as  yet
taken  possession.  She  was  still  confronted  by  powerful  sections
of  the  population,  passionately  attached  for  various  reasons  to
the  ancient  superstition:  nobles  such  as  the  powerful  Sym-
machus,  and  orators  like  the  accomplished  Libanius,  were  among
her  most  earnest  opponents.  But  it  is  now  scarcely  less  than  a
thousand  years  since  Jesus  Christ  received  at  least  the  outward
submission  of  the  whole  of  Europe ;  and  from  that  time  to  this
His  empire  has  been  continually  expanding.  The  newly-dis-
covered continents  of  Australia  and  America  have  successively
acknowledged  His  sway.  He  is  shedding  the  light  of  His
doctrine  first  upon  one  and  then  upon  another  of  the  islands  of
the  Pacific.  He  has  beleagured  the  vast  Afiican  continent  on
either  side  with  various  forms  of  missionary  enterprise.  And
although  in  Asia  there  are  vast,  ancient,  and  highly  organized
religions  which  are  still  permitted  to  bid  Him  defiance,  yet
India,  China,  Tartary,  and  Kamtchatka  have  within  the  last
few  years  witnessed  heroic  labours  and  sacrifices  for  the  spread
of  His  kingdom,  which  would  not  have  been  unworthy  of  the
purest  and  noblest  enthusiasms  of  the  Primitive  Church.  Nor
are  these  efforts  so  fruitless  as  the  mling  prejudices  or  the  lack
of  trustworthy  information  on  such  subjects,  which  are  so  com-
mon in  Western  Europe,  might  occasionally  suggest  ^,

Already  the  kingdom  of  the  Redeemer  may  be  said  to  em-
brace three  continents ;  but  what  are  its  prospects,  even  if  we

'  Ep.  liy.  ad  Januar.  n.  2 :  'Alia  vero  [sunt]  qusB  per  loca  teiramm
regionesque  variantur,  sicuti  est  quod  alii  jejunant  sabbato,  alii  non ;  alii
quotidi^  communicant  Corpori  et  Sanguini  Domini,  alii  certis  diebus  ao-
cipiunt;  alibi  nuUus  dies  prsetermittitur,  quo  non  ofTeratur,  alibi  sabbato
tantum  et  dominico,  alibi  tantum  dominico;  et  si  quid  aliud  hujusmodi
animadverti  potest,  totum  hoc  genus  rerum  libercu  hahei  observationes :  nee
disciplina  ulla  est  in  his  melior  gravi  prudentique  Christiano,  quam  ut  eo
modo  agaty  quo  agere  viderit  ecclesiam,  ad  quam  forte  devenerit.  Quod
enim  neque  contra  fidem,  neque  bonos  mores  esse  convincitur,  indifferenter
est  habendum  et  propter  eorum,  inter  quos  vivitur,  societatem  seryandum
est.*

^  As  to  the  Russian  Missions,  see  Boissard,  l&glise  de  Bussie,  tom.  i.
pp.  100-104;  Voices  from  the  East,  by  Rev.  J.  M.  Neale,  London,
Masters,  1859,  pp.  81-113.

[  LBCT.


^.)^-    •M^m.    ^_ Jl ,  1  ?SHH^^^^^^^^^»^i^MHB^i««HVHaaHi^B^H99pB^Hpi


\


Objection;  Losses  and  divisions  of  Christendom.  123

measure  them  by  a  strictly  human  estimate  1  Is  it  not  a  simple
matter  of  fact  that  at  this  moment  the  progress  of  the  human
i*ace  is  entirely  identified  with  the  spread  of  the  influence  of  the
nations  of  Christendom  %  What  Buddhist,  or  Mohammedan,  or
Pagan  nation  is  believed  by  others,  or  believes  itself,  to  be  able  to
affect  for  good  the  future  destinies  of  the  human  race  ?  The
idea  of  a  continuous  progress  of  humanity,  whatever  perversions
that  idea  may  have  undergone,  is  really  a  creation  of  the
Christian  faith.  The  nations  of  Christendom,  in  exact  pro-
portion to  the  strength,  point,  and  fervour  of  their  Christianity,
seriously  believe  that  they  can  command  the  future,  and  in-
stinctively associate  themselves  with  the  Church's  aspirations
for  a  world-wide  empire.  Such  a  confidence,  by  the  mere  fact
of  its  existence,  is  already  on  the  road  to  justifying  itself  by
success.  It  never  was  stronger,  on  the  whole,  than  it  is  in  our
own  day.  If  in  certain  districts  of  European  opinion  it  may
seem  to  be  waning,  this  is  only  because  such  sections  of  opinion
have  for  the  moment  rejected  the  empire  of  Christ.  Their
aberrations  do  not  set  aside,  they  rather  act  as  a  foil  to  that
general  belief  in  a  moral  and  social  progress  of  mankind  wliich
at  bottom  is  so  intimately  associated  with  the  belief  of  Christian
men  in  the  coming  triumph  of  the  Church.

(2.)  But  long  ere  this,  my  brethren,  as  I  am  well  aware,  you
have  been  prepared  to  interrupt  me  with  a  group  of  objections.
Surely,  you  will  say,  this  representation  of  the  past,  of  the
present,  and  of  the  future  of  the  Church  may  suffice  for  an  ideal
picture,  but  it  is  not  history.  Is  not  the  verdict  of  history  a
different  and  a  less  encouraging  one  %  First  of  all,  do  Church
annals  present  this  spectacle  of  an  ever-widening  extension  of
the  kingdom  of  Christ  %  What  then  is  to  be  said  of  the  spread
of  great  and  vital  heresies,  such  as  the  mediaeval  Nestorianism,
through  countries  which  once  believed  with  the  Church  in  the
One  Person  and  two  Natures  of  her  Lord  "  %  Again,  is  it  not
a  matter  of  historical  fact  that  the  Church  has  lost  entire  pro-
vinces both  in  Africa  and  in  the  East,  since  the  rise  of  Moham-
medanism? And  are  her  losses  only  to  be  measured  by  the
territorial  area  which  she  once  occupied,  and  from  which  she
has  been  beaten  back  by  the  armies  of  the  alien  %  Has  she  not,
by  the  controversies  of  the  tenth  and  of  the  sixteenth  centuries,
been  herself  splintered  into  three  great  sections,  which  still  con-
tinue to  act  in  outward  separation  from  each  other,  to  their  own

*  See  Gibbon,  Decl.  and  Fall,  ch.  xlvii.


1 24      Losses  and  divisions  of  Christendom.

extreme  mutual  loss  and  discouragement,  and  to  the  immense
and  undisguised  satisfaction  of  all  enemies  of  the  Christian
name  %  Are  not  large  bodies  of  active  and  earnest  Christians
living  in  separation  &om  her  communion?  Do  not  our  mis-
sionary associations  perpetually  lament  their  failures  to  achieve
any  large  permanent  conquests  for  Christ?  Once  more,  is  it
not  a  matter  of  notoriety  that  the  leading  nations  of  Christian
Europe  are  themselves  honeycombed  by  a  deadly  rationalism,
which  gives  no  quarter  in  its  contemptuous  ^et  passionate  on-
slaughts on  the  faith  of  Christians,  and  which  never  calculated
more  confidently  than  it  does  at  the  present  time  upon  achieving
the  total  destruction  of  the  empire  of  Jesus  Christ  1

My  brethren,  you  do  a  service  to  my  argument  in  stating
these  apparent  objections  to  its  force.  The  substance  of  your
plea  cannot  be  ignored  by  any  who  would  honestly  apprehend
the  matter  before  us.  You  point,  for  instance,  to  the  territorial
losses  which  the  Church  has  sustained  at  the  hands  of  heretical
Christians  or  of  Moslem  invaders.  True  :  the  Church  of  Christ
has  sustained  such  losses.  But  has  she  not  more  than  redressed
them  in  other  directions?  Is  she  not  now,  in  India  and  in
Africa,  carrying  the  banner  of  the  Cross  into  the  territory  of
the  Crescent  %  You  insist  upon  the  grave  differences  which  form
a  barrier  at  this  moment  between  the  Eastern  and  the  Western
Churches,  and  between  the  two  great  divisions  of  the  Western
Church  itself.  Your  estimate  of  those  differences  may  be  a
somewhat  exaggerated  one.  The  renewed  harmony  and  co-
operation of  the  separated  portions  of  the  family  of  Christ  may
not  be  so  entirely  remote  as  you  would  suggest.  Yet  we  must
undoubtedly  acknowledge  that  existing  divisions,  like  all  ha-
bitual sin  within  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  Church,  are  a
standing  and  very  serious  violation  of  the  law  of  its  Founder.
Nor  is  this  disorder  summarily  to  be  remedied  by  our  ceding  to
the  unwarrantable  pretensions  of  one  section  of  the  Church,
which  may  endeavour  to  persuade  the  rest  of  Christendom,  that
it  is  itself  co-extensive  with  the  whole  kingdom  of  the  Saviour.
The  divisions  of  Christ's  family,  lamentable  and  in  many  ways
disastrous  as  they  are,  must  be  ended,  if  at  all,  by  the  warmer
charity  and  more  fervent  prayers  of  believing  Christians.  But
meanwhile,  do  not  these  very  divisions  afford  an  indirect  illus-
tration of  the  extraordinary  vitality  of  the  new  kingdom  ?  Has
the  kingdom  ceased  to  enlarge  its  territory  since  the  troubled
times  of  the  sixteenth  century  ?  On  the  contrary,  it  is  simply  a
matter  of  fact  that,  since  that  date,  its  ratio  of  extension  has

[  LECT.


Strength  and  weakness  of  modern  unbelief.     125

been  greater  than  at  any  previous  period.  The  philosopher  who
supposes  that  the  Church  is  on  the  point  of  dying  out  because
of  her  divisions  must  be  strangely  insensible  to  the  higher  con-
victions which  are  increasingly  prevailing  in  the  minds  of  men.
And  the  confessions  of  failure  on  the  part  of  some  of  our
missionaries  are  certainly  balanced  by  many  and  thankful  nar-
ratives of  great  results  accomplished  under  circumstances  of  the
utmost  discouragement.

But  you  insist  most  emphatically  upon  the  spread  and  upon
the  strength  of  modem  rationalism.     You  say  that  rationalism
is  enthroned  in  the  midst  of  civilizations  which  the  Church  her-
self has  formed  and  nursed.     You  urge  that  rationalism,  like
the  rottenness  which  has  seized  upon  the  heart  of  the  forest  oak,
must  sooner  or  later  arrest  the  growth  of  branch  and  foliage,
and  bring  the  tree  which  it  is  destroying  to  the  ground.     Now
we  cannot  deny,  what  is  indeed  a  patent  and  melancholy  fact,
that  some  of  the  most  energetic  of  the  intellectual  movements
in  modem  Europe  frankly  avow  and  enthusiastically  advocate
an  explicit  and  total  rejection  of  the  Christian  creed.    Yet  it  is
possible  to  overrate  the  importance  and  to  mistake  the  true  sig-
nificance of  this  recent  advance  of  unbelief*  Of  course  Christian
faith  can  be  daunted  or  surprised  by  no  form  or  intensity  of
opposition  to  truth,  when  there  are  always  so  many  reasons  for
opposing  it.    We  Christians  know  what  we  have  to  expect  from
the  human  heart  in  its  natural  state ;  while  on  the  other  hand
we  have  been  told  that  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against
the  Church  of  the  Bedeemer.    But,  in  speculating  on  the  future
destinies  of  the  Church,  as  they  are  affected  by  rationalism,  this
hopeful  confidence  of  a  sound  faith  may  be   seconded  by  the
calm  estimate  of  the  reflective  reason.     For,  first,  it  may  fairly
be  questioned   whether   the   publicly   proclaimed  unbelief  of
modem  times  is  really  more  general  or  more  pronounced  than
the  secret  but  active  and  deeply  penetrating  scepticism  which
during  considerable  portions  of  the  middle  ages  laid  such  hold
upon  the  intellect  of  Europe  ^.    Yet  the  mediaeval  sceptics  can-
not be  said  to  have  permanently  hampered  the  progress  of  the
Church.    Again,  modem  unbelief  may  be  deemed  less  formid-
able when  we  steadily  observe  its  moral  impotence  for  all  con-
structive purposes.      Its  strength  and  genius  lie  only  in  the
direction  of  destruction.      It  has  shewn  no   sort  of  power  to
build  up  any  spiritual  fabric  or  system  which,  as  a  shelter  and  a

'  Cf.  Newman,  Lectures  on  University  Subjects,  pp.  296,  297;  Milman,
Latin  Christianity,  vi.  444.     See  too  St.  Ansekn,  Cur  Deus  Homo,  i.  4.


126  UniflUffUndedgnaUy  Uu  servant  of UuCharck.

dieaflme  fbf- tLe  beari«  and  Hfvsaf  men,  an  take  the  jdice  <rf
tint  -mMirk  h  mAx  to  ^xitot.  IiMTu^g  aaa^  of  tbe  deepest,
■wt  Iegtt:D»1e^  Mid  BMCt  meisdkxbk  needs  <tf  the  hnm&n
MNtl  ntl^T  iinMiitfifJ  modan  mi>ii4irf  em  nenr  tekDr  Iwpe
pemtauentJjtoestaLli^kpcpiLbr'icligivirfliitmaiiitj'.'  I^db
the  foTt«  of  he  mteUecttoi  cmet  npoD  revealed  dogma  is  ctai'
ttmull;  being  laokEii  far  tlv  conscioaaien,  that  it  cannot  long
p^"'*?'!!  the  grtmrd  viiich  it  maj  seem  to  itc^  ftv  the  moment
to  have  woo.  Ita  higfaeft  ^McnlMiTe  enei^  is  more  tlian
coonterhalaneed  by  the  moral  paver  of  sane  fanmfale  teacher  of
a  postiTe  creed  Jbr  vhran  pofsblv  it  entertaina  nothing  less
than  a  sorerHgn  cmttonpt.  Thirdlv,  nnbelief  resembles  soci&l
or  political  pereecotion  in  this,  that,  inditectlj,  it  does  an
inevitable  serrke  to  the  Faith  vhicfa  it  attacks.  It  fimes
earnest  believers  in  Jcsua  Christ  to  minim  rm  ■)!  differences
which  are  len  than  fandameiitaL  It  compels  Christian  men  to
re^rtam  with  a  strong  hand  all  exaggeration  of  existijig  motivee
for  a  divided  action.  It  obliges  ChristianE,  Btanetimes  in  spite
of  themselves,  to  iroil  fade  by  aide  for  their  insulted  Lotd.
Thus  it  not  onlf  creates  freshened  sTmpathies  between  tem-
porarily severed  branches  of  the  Chorcli ;  it  draws  towsrd  the
Chnrch  herself,  with  an  increasinglj  powerfnl  and  comprehensne
attraction,  many  of  those  earnestly  believing  men,  who,  as  is  the
case  with  nombers  among  our  nonconformist  brethren  in  tbis
Gonntry,  already  belong,  in  St.  Angngtine's  langosge,  to  the  soak
although  not  to  the  body,  of  the  Catholic  Communion.  Idstif,
it  unwittingly  contributes  to  augment  the  evidential  strengtb  of
Christianity,  at  the  very  moment  of  its  aisault  upon  Christdtn
doctrine.  The  fierceness  of  man  turns  to  the  praiee  of  Jesm
Christ,  by  demonstrating,  each  day,  each  year,  each  decade  of
years,  each  century,  the  indestructibility  of  Hia  work  in  tk
world  ;  and  unbelief  Tolnntarily  condemns  itself  to  the  task  of
maintaining  before  the  eyes  of  men  that  enduring  tradition  of
an  implacable  hostility  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  which  it  i^
the  glory  of  our  Savioiir  so  eicplicitly  to  have  predicted,  and  w
consistently  and  triumphantly  to  have  defied.

M.  Angnste  Comte,  m  his  later  life,  to  eliborste  a  kind
itioiul  and  Ksthetiial  sppeadaee  to  the  Pocitivist  7lii'
enBe  of  this  trnth.  M,  Comte  nowever  does  not  ^pev
'  large  eectioD  of  the  PocitiTiBb  school  with  hnn  in  thii
But  a  like  poverty  of  moral  and  Bpiiitual  proviDoci
I  IB  observable  in  rationalistic  eyatems  which  atop  iwj
ral  godleuneu  of  the  Potdtive  Fhiloeophy.

[lect.


Intensity  of  our  Lord's  work  in  souls.      127

(3.)  For  these  and  other  reasons,  modem  unbelief,  although
formidable,  will  not  be  deemed  so  ftdl  of  menace  to  the  future  of
the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  as  may  sometimes  be  apprehended  by
the  nervous  timidity  of  Christian  piety.  This  will  appear  more
certain  if  from  considering  the  extent  of  Christ's  realm  we  turn
to  the  intensive  side  of  His  work  among  men.  For  indeed  the
depth  of  our  Lord's  work  in  the  soul  of  man  has  ever  been  more
wonderful  than  its  breadth.  The  moral  intensity  of  the  life  of
a  sincere  Christian  is  a  more  signal  illustration  y  of  the  reality  of
the  reign  of  Christ,  and  of  the  success  of  His  plan,  than  is  the
territorial  range  of  the  Christian  empire.  '  The  King's  daughter
is  all  glorious  within.'  Christianity  may  have  conferred  a  new
sanction  upon  civil  and  domestic  relationships  among  men ;  and
it  certainly  infused  a  new  life  into  the  most  degraded  society
that  the  world  has  yet  seen^.  Still  this  was  not  its  primary
aim ;  its  primary  efforts  were  directed  not  to  this  world,  but
t<ythe  next*.  Christianity  has  changed  many  of  the  outward
aspects  of  human  existence;  it  has  created  a  new  religious
language,  a  new  type  of  worship,  a  new  calendar  of  time.  It
has  furnished  new  ideals  to  art ;  it  has  opened  notning  less  than
a  new  world  of  literature ;  it  has  invested  the  forms  of  social
intercourse  among  men  with  new  graces  of  refinement  and
mutual  consideration.  Yet  these  are  but  some  of  the  superficial
symptoms  of  its  real  work.  It  has  achieved  these  changes  in
IJie  outward  life  of  Cliristian  nations,  because  it  has  penetrated
to  the  very  depths  of  man's  heart  and  thought ;  because  it  has
revolutionized  his  convictions  and  tamed  his  will,  and  then
expressed  its  triumph  in  the  altered  social  system  of  that
section  of  the  human  race  which  has  generally  received  it.   How

7  2  Thess.  i.  ii,  12,  where  the  Apostle's  prayers  for  the  moral  and
apiritual  growth  of  the  ThessaLonians  are  offered  Sn-ws  ^v5o|(£(r0i}  rb  tvo\ujL
Tov  Kvpiov  rjfiay  'l7j<roi/  iv  vfjuv,

■  St.  Aug.  Ep.  cxxxviii.  ad  Marcellin.  n.  15:  'Qui  doctrinam  Christi
adversam  dicunt  esse  reipublicse,  dent  exercitum  talem,  quales  doctrina
Christi  esse  milites  jussit,  dent  tales  provinciales,  tales  maritos,  tales  con-
juges,  tales  parentes,  tales  filios,  tales  dominos,  tales  servos,  tales  reges,  tales
judices^  tales  denique  debitorum  ipsius  fisd  redditores,  et  exactores,  quales
esse  prsecipit  doctrina  Christiana,  et  audeant  earn  dicere  adversam  esse  rei-
publicse,  imm6  verb  non  dubitent  eam  confiteri  magnam,  si  obtemperetur,
salutem  esse  reipublicse.*

»  St.  Hieronymus  adv.  Jovin.  lib.  ii.  tom.  iv.  pars  ii.  p.  200,  ed.  Martian :
'  Nostra  religio  non  irvKr^v,  non  athletam  (St.  Jerome  might  almost  have  in
his  eye  a  certain  well-known  modem  theory)  non  nautas,  non  milites,  non
fossores,  sed  sapieutise  erudit  sectatorem,  qui  se  Dei  cultui  dedicavit,  et  scit
cur  oreatuB  sit,  cur  versetur  in  mundo,  quo  abire  festinet.'

m]


128      Intensity  of  our  LoriTs  work  in  souls.

eomplete  at  this  moment  is  the  reign  of  Christ  in  the  soul  of
a  sincere  Christian !    Christ  is  not  a  limited.  He  is  emphaticaUy
an  abeolnte  Monarch.  Yet  His  mle  is  welcomed  by  His  subjects
with  more  than  that  enthusiasm  which  a  free  people  can  feel  for
its  elected  magistracy.     Every  sincere  Christian  bows  to  Jesus
Christ  as  to  an  Intellectual  Master.     Our  Lord  is  not  merely
listened  to  as  a  Teacher  of  Truth ;  He  is  contemplated  as  the
absolute  Truth  itself.  Accordingly  no  portion  of  His  teaching  is
received  by  true  Christians  merely  as  a  '  view/  or  as  a  '  tenta-
tive system,'  or  as  a  *  theory,*  which  may  be  entertained,  dis-
cussed, partially  adopted,  and  partially  set  aside.     Those  -who
deal  thus  with  Him  are  understood  to  have  broken  with  Chris-
tianity, at  least  as  a  practical  religion.     For  a  Christian,  the
Words  of  Christ  constitute  the  highest  criterion  and  rule  of  truth.
All  that  Christ  has  authorized  is  simply  accepted,  all  that  He
has  condemned  is  simply  rejected,  wifli  the  whole  energy  of  the
Christian  reason.  Christ's  Thought  is  reflected,  it  is  reproduced,
in  the  thought  of  the  true  Christian.     Christ's  authority  in  the
sphere  of  speculative  truth  is  thankfully  acknowledged  by  the
Christian's  voluntary  and  unreserved  submission  to  the  slightest
known  intimations  of  his  Master's  judgment.     High  above  the
claims  of  human  teachers,  the  tremendous  self-assertion  of  Jesus
Christ  echoes  on  from  age  to  age, — '  I  am  the  TruthV     And
from  age  to  age  the   Christian  mind  responds  by  a  life-long
endeavour  '  to  bring  every  thought  into  captivity  unto  the  obe-
dience of  Christ^.'  But  if  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord  of  the  Christian's
thought,  He  is  also  Lord  of  the  Christian's  affections.     Beauty
it  is  which  provokes  love;    and  Christ  is  the  highest  Morsd
Beauty.    He  does  not  merely  rank  as  an  exponent  of  the  purest
morality.    He  is  absolute  Virtue,  embodied  in  a  human  life,  and
vividly,  energetically  set  forth  before  our  eyes  in  the  story  of
the  Gospels.  '    As  such,  He  claims  to  reign  over  the  inmost
affections  of  men.     As  such,  He  secures  the  first  place  in  the
heart  of  every  true  Christian.     To  have  taken  the  measure  of
His  Beauty,  and  yet  not  to  love  Him,  is,  in  a  Christian's  judg-
ment, to  be  self-condemned.     '  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  Anathema  Maranatha  <i.'     And  ruling
the   affections   of  the  Christian,  Christ   is   also  King   of  the
sovereign  faculty  in  the  Christianized  soul ;  He  is  Master  of  the
Christian  will.     When  He  has  tamed  its  native  stubbornness,
He  teaches  it  day  by  day  a  more  and  more  pliant  accuracy  of

^  St.  John  xiv.  6.  «  a  Cor.  x.  5.  *  i  Cor.  xvi.  22.

[lect.


*  Christ  is  Christianity^  129

movement  in  obedience  to  Himself.  Nay,  He  is  not  merely  its
rule  of  action,  but  its  very  motive  power ;  each  act  of  devotion
and  self-sacrifice  of  which  it  is  capable  is  but  an  extension  of
the  energy  of  Christ's  Own  moral  Xife.  *  Without  Me,'  he  says
to  His  servants,  *  ye  can  do  nothing  ® ;'  and  with  St.  Paul  His
servants  reply,  *I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  Which
strengtheneth  Me^.'

This  may  be  expressed  in  other  terms  by  saying  that,  both
intellectuaUy  and  morally,  Christ  is  Christianity  8.  Christianity
is  not  related  to  our  Lord  as  a  philosophy  might  be  to  a  philo-
sopher, that  is,  as  a  moral  or  intellectual  system  thrown  off  from
bis  mind,  resting  thenceforward  on  its  own  merits,  and  implying
no  necessary  relation  towards  its  author  on  the  part  of  those
who  receive  it,  beyond  a  certain  sympathy  with  what  was  at
one  time  a  portion  of  his  thought  \  A  phUosophy  may  be  thus
abstracted  altogether  from  the  person  of  its  originator,  with
entire  impunity.  Platonic  thought  woidd  not  have  been
damaged,  if  Plato  had  been  annihilated ;  and  in  our  day  men
are  Hegelians  or  Comtists,  without  believing  that  the  respective
authors  of  those  systems  are  in  existence  at  this  moment,  nay
rather,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  while  deliberately  holding  that
tbey  have  ceased  to  be.  The  utmost  stretch  of  personal  alle-
giance, on  the  part  of  the  disciple  of  a  philosophy  to  its  founder,
consists,  ordinarily  speaking,  in  a  sentiment  of  devotion  '  to  his
memory.'  But  detach  Christianity  from  Christ,  and  it  vanishes
before  your  eyes  into  intellectual  vapour.  For  it  is  of  the
essence  of  Christianity  that,  day  by  day,  hour  by  hour,  the
Cbristian  should  live  in  conscious,  felt,  sustained  relationship  to
tbe  Ever-living  Author  of  his  creed  and  of  his  life.  Christianity
is  non-existent  apart  from  Christ ;  it  centres  in  Christ ;  it
radiates,  now  as  at  the  first,  from  Christ.  It  is  not  a  mere
doctrine  bequeathed  by  Him  to  a  world  with  which  He  has
ceased  to  have  dealings ;  it  perishes  outright  when  men  attempt
to  abstract  it  fi-om  the  Living  Person  of  its  Founder.  He  is  felt
by  His  people  to  be  their  Living  Lord,  really  present  with  them
now,  and  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  The  Christian  life
springs  fi-om  and  is  sustained  by  the  apprehension  of  Christ
present  in  His  Church,  present  in  and  with  His  members  as  a
ffvcvjiui  (oKmoiovvK     Christ  is  the  quickening  Spirit  of  Christian

•  St.  John  XV.  6.  i  Phil.  iv.  13 ;  of.  i.  19.

'  See  Newman,  Grammar  of'Assent,  p.  457.
^  Lnthardt,  Grundwahrheiten  des  Chnstenthums,  p.  227:   'Er  ist  der
Mialt  seiner  Lehre.*  »  i  Cor,  xv.  45.


1 30    Is  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  a  dead  letter  ?

humanity ;  He  lives  in  Christians ;  He  thinks  in  Christians ;
He  acts  through  Christians  and  with  Christians ;  He  is  indis-
solubly  associated  with  every  movement  of  the  Christian's  deepest
life.  '  I  live,*  exclaims  the  Apostle,  *  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  Hveth
in  me  J.'  This  felt  presence  of  Christ  it  is,  which  gives  both  its
form  and  its  force  to  the  sincere  Christian  life.  That  life  is  a
loyal  homage  of  the  intellect,  of  the  heart,  and  of  the  will,  to
a  Divine  King,  with  Whom  wiU,  heart,  and  intellect  are  in  close
and  constant  communion,  and  &om  Whom  there  flows  forth,
through  the  Spirit  and  the  Sacraments,  that  supply  of  light,  of
love,  and  of  resolve,  which  enriches  and  ennobles  the  Christian
soul.  My  brethren,  I  am  not  theorizing  or  describing  any
merely  ideal  state  of  things ;  I  am  but  putting  into  words  the
inner  experience  of  every  true  Christian  among  you ;  I  am  but
exhibiting  a  set  of  spiritual  circumstances  which,  as  a  matter  of
course,  every  true  Christian  endeavours  to  realize  and  make  his
own,  and  which,  as  a  matter  of  fe^st,  blessed  bo  God !  very  many
Christians  do  realize,  to  their  present  peace,  and  to  their  eternal
welfare.

Certainly  it  is  not  uncommon  in  our  day  to  be  informed,  that
Hhe  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is  a  dead  letter  in  Christendom/
In  consequence  (so  men  speak)  of  the  engrossing  interest  which
Christians  have  wrongly  attached  to  the  discussion  of  dogmatic
questions,  that  original  draught  of  essential  Christianity,  the
Sermon  on  the  Mount,  has  been  wellnigh  altogether  lost  sight
of.  Perhaps  you  yourselves,  my  brethren,  ere  now  have  repeated
some  of  the  current  commonplaces  on  this  topic.  But  have  you
endeavoured  to  ascertain  whether  it  is  indeed  as  you  say  f  Yon
remark  that  you  at  least  have  not  met  with  Christians  who
seemed  to  be  making  any  sincere  efforts  to  turn  the  Sermon  on
the  Mount  into  practice.  It  may  be  so.  But  the  question  is,
where  have  you  looked  for  them  %  Do  you  expect  to  meet  them
rushing  hurriedly  along  the  great  highways  of  life,  with  the
keen,  eager,  self-asserting  multitude  %  Do  you  expect,  that  with
their  eye  upon  the  Beatitudes  and  upon  the  Cross,  they  will
throng  the  roads  which  lead  to  worldly  success,  to  earthly
wealth,  to  temporal  honour  %  Be  assured  that  those  who  know
where  moral  beauty,  aye,  the  highest,  is  to  be  found,  are  not
disappointed,  even  at  this  hour,  in  their  search  for  it.  Until
you  have  looked  more  carefully,  more  anxiously  than  has
probably  been  the  case,  for  the  triumphs  of  our  Lord's  work  in

iGflLii.ao.

[lect.


Is  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  a  dead  letter?    131

Christian  booIs,  you  may  do  well  to  take  upon  trust  the  testi-
mony of  others.  You  may  at  least  be  sufficiently  generous,  aye,
and  sufficiently  reasonable,  to  believe  in  the  existence  at  this
present  time  of  the  very  highest  types  of  Christian  virtue.  It  is
a  simple  matter  of  fact  that  in  our  day,  multitudes  of  men  and
women  do  lead  the  life  of  the  Beatitudes ;  they  pray,  they  fast,
they  do  alms  to  their  Father  Which  seeth  in  secret.  These  are
Christians  who  take  no  thought  for  the  morrow.  These  are
Christians  whose  righteousness  does  exceed  that  worldly  and
conventional  standard  of  religion,  which  knows  no  law  save  the
corrupt  public  opinion  of  the  hour,  and  which  inherits  in  every
generation  the  essential  spirit  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees.
These  are  Christians  who  shew  forth  the  moral  creativeness  of
Jesus  Christ  in  their  own  deeds  and  words;  they  are  living
witnesses  to  His  solitary  and  supreme  power  of  changing  the
hmnan  heart*  They  were  naturally  proud;  He  has  enabled
them  to  be  sincerely  humble.  They  were,  by  the  inherited
taint  of  their  nature,  impure ;  He  has  in  them  shed  honour  upon
the  highest  forms  of  chastity.  They  too  were,  as  in  his  natural
state  man  ever  is,  suspicious  of  and  hostile  to  their  fellow-men,
nnless  connected  with  them  by  blood,  or  by  country,  or  by  interest.
But  Jesus  Christ  has  taught  them  the  tenderest  and  most
practical  forms  of  love  for  man  viewed  simply  as  man ;  He.  has
inspired  them  with  the  only  true,  that  is,  liie  Christian,  huma-
nitarianism.  Think  not  that  the  moral  energy  of  the  Christian
hfe  was  confined  to  the  Church  of  the  first  centuries.  At  this
moment,  there  are  millions  of  souls  in  the  world,  that  are  pure,
humble,  and  loving.  But  for  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  these
millions  would  have  been  proud,  sensual,  selfish.  At  this  very
day,  and  even  in  atmospheres  where  the  taint  of  scepticism  dulls
the  hrightness  of  Christian  thought,  and  enfeebles  the  strength
of  Christian  resolution,  there  are  to  be  found  men,  whose  intel-
ligence gazes  on  Jesus  with  a  faith  so  clear  and  strong,  whose
affection  clings  to  Him  with  so  trustful  and  so  warm  an  embrace,
whose  resolution  has  been  so  disciplined  and  braced  to  serve
•Qim  by  a  persevering  obedience,  that,  beyond  a  doubt,  they
would  joyfully  die  for  Him,  if  by  shedding  their  blood  they  could
hetter  express  their  devotion  to  His  Person,  or  lead  others  to
know  and  to  love  Him  more.  Blessed  be  God,  that  portion  of
His  one  Fold  in  which  He  has  placed  us,  the  Church  of  England,
has  not  lacked  the  lustra  of  such  lives  as  these.  Such  assuredly
was  Ken ;  such  was  Bishop  Wilson ;  such  have  been  many  whose
names  have  never  appeared  in  the  page  of  history.   Has  not  one


132  Social  results  of  Christianity.

indeed  quite  lately  passed  from  among  us,  the  boast  and  glory  of
this  our  University,  great  as  a  poet,  greater  still,  it  may  be,  as
a  scholar  and  a  theologian,  greatest  of  all  as  a  Christian  saint  ?
Certainly  to  know  him,  even  slightly,  was  inevitably  to  know
that  he  led  a  life  distinct  from,  and  higher  than,  that  of  common
men.  To  know  him  well,  was  to  revere  and  to  love  in  him  the
manifested  beauty  of  his  Lord's  presence ;  it  was  to  trace  the
sensibly  perpetuated  power  of  the  Life,  of  the  Teaching,  of  the
Cross  of  Jesus  ^.

4.  On  the  other  hand,  look  at  certain  palpable  effects  of  our
Lord's  work  which  lie  on  the  very  face  of  human  society.  If
society,  apart  from  the  Church,  is  more  kindly  and  humane  than
in  heathen  times,  this  is  due  to  the  work  of  Christ  on  the  hearts
of  men.  The  era  of  *  humanity '  is  the  era  of  the  Licamation.
The  sense  of  human  brotherhood,  the  acknowledgment  of  the
sacredness  of  human  rights,  the  recognition  of  that  particular
-stock  of  rights  which  appertains  to  every  human  being,  is  a  cre-
ation of  Christian  dogma.  It  has  radiated  from  the  heart  of  the
Christian  Church  into  the  society  of  the  outer  world.  Chris-
tianity is  the  power  which  first  gradually  softened  slavery,  and
is  now  finally  abolishing  it.  Christianity  has  proclaimed  the
dignity  of  poverty,  and  has  insisted  upon  the  claims  of  the  poor,
with  a  success  proportioned  to  the  sincerity  which  has  welcomed
her  doctrines  among  the  different  peoples  of  Christendom.  The
hospital  is  an  invention  of  Christian  philanthropy  ^ ;  the  active
charity  of  the  Church  of  the  fourth  century  forced  into  the  Greek
language  a  word  for  which  Paganism  had  had  no  occasion.  The
degradation  of  woman  in  the  Pagan  world  has  been  exchanged
for  a  position  of  special  privilege  and  honour,  accorded  to  her
by  the  Christian  nations.  The  sensualism  which  Pagans  mistook
for  love  has  been  placed  under  the  ban  of  all  true  Christian
feeling ;  and  in  Christendom,  love  is  now  the  purest  of  moral
impulses ;  it  is  the  tenderest,  the  noblest,  the  most  refined  of
the  movements  of  the  soul.  The  old,  the  universal,  the  natural
feeling  of  bitter  hostility  between  races,  nations,  and  classes  of
men  is  denounced  by  Christianity.  The  spread  of  Christian
truth  inevitably  breaks  down  the  ferocities  of  national  prejudice,
and  prepares  the  world  for  that  cosmopolitanism  which,  we  are
told,  is  its  most  probable  future*    International  law  had  no  real

^  The  author  of  the  Christian  Year  had  passed  to  his  rest  during  the
interval  that  elapsed  between  the  delivery  of  the  second  and  the  third  of
these  lectures,  on  March  29,  1866.

i  Hallam's  Middle  Ages^  chap.  iz.  part  i.  vol.  ii.  p.  365,

[leot.


J


Perpetuity  of  the  Church.  133

existence  until  the  nations,  tanght  by  Christ,  had  begun  to  feel
the  bond  of  brotherhood.  International  law  is  now  each  year
becoming  more  and  more  powerful  in  regulating  the  affairs  of  the
civilized  world.  And  if  we  are  sorrowfully  reminded  that  the
prophecy  of  a  world-wide  peace  within  the  limits  of  Christ's
kingdom  has  not  yet  been  realized ;  if  Christian  lands,  in  our
day  as  before,  are  reddened  by  streams  of  Christian  blood ;  yet
the  utter  difldain  of  the  plea  of  right,  the  high-handed  and
barbarous  savagery,  which  marked  the  wars  of  heathendom,  have
given  way  to  sentiments  in  which  justice  can  at  least  obtain
a  hearing,  and  which  compassion  and  generosity,  drawing  their
inspirations  from  the  Cross,  have  at  times  raised  to  the  level  of
chivalry.

But  neither  would  any  improvements  in  man's  social  life,  nor
even  the  regenerate  lives  of  individual  Christians,  of  themselves,
have  realized  our  Lord's  '  plan '  in  its  completeness  ^.  His  design
was  to  found  a  society  or  Church ;  individual  sanctity  and  social
amelioration  are  only  effects  radiating  from  the  Church.  The
Church  herself  is  the  true  proof  of  His  success.  After  the  lapse
of  eighteen  centuries  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  here,  and  it  is
still  expanding.  How  fares  it  generally  with  a  human  under-
taking when  exposed  to  the  action  of  a  long  period  of  time  %  The
idea  which  was  its  very  soul  is  thrown  into  the  shade  by  some
other  idea ;  or  it  is  warped,  or  distorted,  or  diverted  from  its
true  direction,  or  changed  by  some  radical  corruption.  In  the
end  it  dies  out  from  among  the  living  thoughts  of  men,  and
takes  its  place  in  the  tomb  of  so  much  forgotten  speculation,  on
the  shelves  of  a  library.     Within  a  short  lifetime  we  may  follow

™  A  reviewer,  who  naturally  must  dissent  from  parts  of  the  teaching  of
these  lectures,  but  of  whose  generosity  and  fairness  the  lecturer  is  deeply
Bennble,  reminds  him  that  '  Our  Lord  came  to  carry  out  the  counsel  of  the
Eternal  Father ;  and  that  counsel  was,  primarily,  to  establish,  through  His
sacrificial  death,  an  economy  of  mercy,  under  which  justification  and  spiritual
and  eternal  life  should  be  realized  by  all  who  should  penitently  rely  on  Him.*
St.Johniii.  i6,  "vi.  38-40.  Undoubtedly.  But  this  'economy  of  mercy'
included  the  establishment  of  a  world-embracing  church,  within  which  it  was
to  be  dispensed.  Col.  i.  10-14.  Our  Lord  founded  His  Church,  not  by  way
of  achieving  a  vast  social  feat  or  victory,  but  with  a  view  to  the  needs  of  the
human  sou^  which  He  came  from  heaven  to  save.  Nevertheless  the  Church
^ not  related  to  our  Lord's  design  as  an  'inseparable  accident.'  It  is  that
design  itself  viewed  on  its  historical  and  social  side ;  it  is  the  form  which,
80  far  as  we  know.  His  redemptive  work  necessarily  took,  and  which  He
^S^i&Beif  founded  as  being  the  imperishable  result  of  His  Incarnation  and
l>eath.  St.  Matt.  xvi.  18.  Of.  Wesleyan-Methodist  Magazine,  Dec.  1867,
p.  1086.


/


1 34  How  to  account  for  the  success  of  Christ's  ^plaJt!

many  a  popular  moral  impulse  from  its  cradle  to  its  grave.
From  the  era  of  its  young  enthusiasm,  we  mark  its  gradual
entry  upon  the  stage  of  fixed  habit ;  from  this  again  we  pass  to
its  day  of  lifeless  formalism,  and  to  the  rapid  progress  of  its  de-
cline.    But  the  Society  founded  by  Jesus  Christ  is  here,  still
animated  by  its  original  idea,  still  carried  forward  by  the  moral
impulse  which  sustained  it  in  its  infancy.     If  Christian  doctrine
has,  in  particular  branches  of  the  Church,  been  overlaid  by  an
encrustation  of  foreign  and  earthly  elements,  its  body  and  sub-
stance is  untouched  in  each  great   division  of  the  Catholic
Society;  and  much  of  it,  we  rejoice  to  know,  is  retained  by  com-
munities external  to  the  Holy  Fold.     If  intimate  union  with  the
worldly  power  of  the  State  (as  especially  in  England  during
the  last  century)  has  sometimes  seemed  to  chill  the  warmth  of
Christian  love,  and  to  substitute  a  heartless  extemalism  for  the
spiritual  life  of  a  Christian  brotherhood ;  yet  again  and  again
the  flame  of  that  Spirit  Whom  the  Son  of  Man  sent  to  *  glorify  *
Himself,  has  burst  up  from  the  depths  of  the  living  heart  of  the
Church,  and  has  kindled  among  a  generation  of  sceptics  or  sen-
sualists a  pure  and  keen  enthusiasm  which  confessors  and  martyrs
might  haye  recognised  as  their  own.     The  Church  of  Christ  in
sooth  carries  within  herself  the  secret  forces  which  renew  her
moral  vigour,  and  which  will,  in  God*s  good  time,  visibly  re-
assert  her  essential  unity.     Her  perpetuated  existence  among
ourselves  at  this  hour  bears  a  witness  to  the  superhuman  powers
of  her  Founder,  not  less  significant  than  that  afforded  by  the
intensity  of  the  individual  Christian  life,  or  by  the  territorial
range  of  the  Christian  empire.  '

III.  The  work  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  world  is  a  patent  fact,
and  it  is  still  in  full  progress  before  our  eyes.  The  question
remains.  How  are  we  to  account  for  its  success  %

I.  If  this  question  is  asked  with  respect  to  the  ascendancy
of  such  a  national  religion  as  the  popular  Paganism  of  Greece,
it  is  obvious  to  refer  to  the  doctrine  of  the  prehistoric  mythus.
The  Greek  religious  creed  was,  at  least  in  the  main,  a  creation  of
the  national  imagination  at  a  period  when  reflection  and  ex-
perience could  scarcely  have  existed.  It  was  recommended  to
subsequent  generations,  not  merely  by  the  indefinable  charm  of
poetry  which  was  thrown  around  it,  not  merely  by  the  antiquity
which  shrouded  its  actual  origin,  but  by  its  accurate  sympathy
with  the  genius  as  with  the  degradations  of  the  gifted  race  which
had  produced  it.  But  of  late  years  we  have  heard  less  of  the
attempt  to  apply  the  doctrine  of  the  mythus  to  a  series  of  well-

[lect.


Not  parallel  to  the  Success  of  false  religions.  135

ascertained  liistorical  events,  occurring  in  the  mid-day  light  of
history,  and  open  to  the  hostile  criticism  of  an  entire  people.
The  historical  imagination,  steadily  applied  to  the  problem,  re-
fuses to  picture  the  unimaginable  process  by  which  such  stupen-
dous 'myths'  as  those  of  Uie  Gospel  could  have  been  festooned
around  tiie  simple  history  of  a  humble  preacher  of  righteousness  ^.
The  early  Chnstian  Church  does  not  supply  the  intellectual
agencies  that  could  have  been  equal  to  any  such  task.    As
Rousseau  has  observed,  the  inventor  of  such  a  history  would
have  been  not  less  wonderful  than  its  Subject  <> ;  and  tiie  utter
reversal  of  the  ordinary  laws  of  a  people's  mental  development
would  have  been  itself  a  miracle.     Nor  was  it  to  be  anticipated
that  a  religion  which  was,  as  the  mythical  school  asserts,  the
^creation  of  the  Jewish  race,'  would  have  made  itself  a  home,  at
the  very  beginning  of  its  existence,  among  the  Greek  and  the
Roman  peoples  of  the  Western  world.     If  however  we  are  re-
ferred to  the  upgrowth  and  spread  of  Buddhism,  as  to  a  pheno-
menon which  may  rival  and  explain  the  triumph  of  Christianity,
it  may  be  sufficient  to  reply  that  the  writers  who  insist  upon  this
parallel  are  themselves  eminently  successful  in  analysing  the
purely  natural  causes  of  the  success  of  Qakya-Mouni.      They
dwell  among  other  points  on  the  rare  delicacy  and  fertility  of
the  Aryan  imagination  p,  and  on  the  absence  of  any  strong
counter-attraction  to  arrest  the  course  of  the  new  doctrine  in
Central  and  South-eastern  Asia.    Nor  need  we  fear  to  admit,
that)  mingled  with  the  darkest  errors.  Buddhism  contained
elements  of  truth  so  undeniably  powei^  as  to  appeal  with
great  force  to  some  of  the  noblest  aspirations  of  tiie  soul  of
iDan<i.    But  Buddhism,  vast  as  is  the  population  which  professes
it,  has  not  yet  made  its  way  into  a  second  continent ;  while  the
religion  of  Jesus  Christ  is  to  be  found  in  every  quarter  of  the
globe.    As  for  the  rapid  and  widespread  growth  of  the  religion
of  the  False  Prophet,  it  may  be  explained,  partly  by  the  practical


°  Lnthardt,  Grnndwahrheiten  des  Christenthtuns,  p.  234.


Benit  pluB  ^tonnant  que  le  h^roe.'

'  Of.  on  this  point  the  interesting  Essay  of  M.  Taine,  Etudes  Critiques^
P.331.

^  Cf.  Saint-Hilairey  Le  Bonddha  et  sa  Religion,  pp.  142-148.  Tet  M.
St.Hilaire  describeB  Baddhism  as  presenting  *nn  spiritnalisme  sans  &me,
une  vertn  sans  devoir,  nne  morale  sans  liberty,  nne  charity  sans  amour,  un
nionde  sans  nature  et  sans  Dieu.'    lb.  p.  182.

m]


1 36  Success  of  false  religions  and  of  Christianity.


genins  of  Mohammed,  partly  by  the  rare  qualities  of  the  Arab
race.     If  it  l^d  not  claimed  to  be  a  new  revelation,  Moham-
medanism might  have  passed  for  a  heresy  adroitly  constructed
out  of  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Scriptures.    Its  doctrine  re-
specting Jesus  Christ  reaches  the  level  of  Socinianism  ^ ;  and,  as
against  Polytheism,  its  speculative  force  lay  in  its  insistance  upon
the  truth  of  the  Divine  Unity.     A  religion  which  consecrated
sensual  indulgence  could  bid  high  for  an  Asiatic  popularity
against  the  (Siurch  of  Christ;   and  Mohanuned  delivered  the
scymetar,  as  the  instrument  of  his  apostolate,  into  the  hands  of
a  people  whose  earlier  poetry  shews  it  to  have  been  gifted  with
intellectual  fire  and  strengtii  of  purpose  of  the  highest  order.
But  it  has  not  yet  been  asserted  that  the  Church  fought  her
way,  sword  in  hand,  to  the  throne  of  Constantine ;  nor  were  the
first  Christians  naturally  calculated  to  impose  their  will  forcibly
upon  the  civilized  world,  had  they  ever  desired  to  do  so.     Still
less  is  a  parallel  to  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  to  be  found  in  that
of  Confucius.     Confucius  indeed  was  not  a  warrior  like  Moham-
med, nor  a  mystic  like  ^kya-Mouni;  he  appealed  neither  to
superior  knowledge  nor  to  miraculous  power.     Confucius  col-
lected, codified,  enforced,  reiterated  all  that  was  most  elevated  in
the  moral  traditions  of  China ;  he  was  himself  deeply  penetrated
with  the  best  ethical  sentiments  of  Chinese  antiquity".     His
success  was  that  of  an  earnest  patriot  who  was  also,  as  a  patriot,
an  antiquarian  moralist.     But  he  succeeded  only  in  China,  nor
could  his  work  roll  back  that  invasion  of  Buddhism  which  took
place  in  the  first  century  of  the  Christian  era.     Confucianism
is    more    purely    national    than    Buddhism    and    Mohamme-
danism;   and  in  this  respect   it  contrasts  more  sharply  with
the  world-wide  presence  of  Christianity.     Yet  if  Confucianism  is
unknown  beyond  the  frontiers  of  China,  it  is  equally  true  that
neither  Buddhism  nor  Mohammedanism  have  done  more  than
spread  themselves  over  territories  contiguous  to  their  original
homes.     Whereas,  almost  within  the  first  century  of  her  exist-
ence, the  Church  had  her  missionaries  in  Spain  on  one  hand,
and,  as  it  seems,  in  India  on  the  other ;  and  her  Apostle  pro-
claimed that  his  Master's  cause  was  utterly  independent  of  all
distinctions  of  race  and  nation*.     In  our  own  day,  Christian
charity  is  freely  spending  its  energies  and  its  blood  in  efforts  to

'  See  Kor&n,  gura  3.    The  fiumly  of  Imran.  ed.  Bodwell,  pp.  428-9.

*  Gf.  Max  Mtiller,  Chips  from  a  German  Workshop,  yd.  i.  p.  308.

*  CoL  iii.  II ;  Bom.  i.  14.

[lect«


■>


Gibbons  account  of  the  success  of  Jesus  Christ.  137

carry  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  into  regions  where  He  has  been
80  stoutly  resisted  by  these  ancient  and  highly  organized  forma
of  error.  Yet  in  the  streets  of  London  or  of  Paris  we  do  not
hear  of  the  labours  of  Moslem  or  Buddhist  missionaries,  instinct
with  any  such  sense  of  a  duty  and  mission  to  all  the  world  in  the
name  of  truth,  as  that  which  animateB,  at  this  very  hour,  those
heroic  pioneers  of  Christendom  whom  Europe  has  sent  to  Delhi
ortoPekin^.

2.  From  the  earliest  ages  of  the  Church,  the  rapid  progress
of  Christianity  in  the  face  of  apparently  insurmountable  diffi-
culties, has  attracted  attention,  on  the  score  of  its  high  evidential
value  ▼.  The  accomplished  but  unbelieving  historian  of  the  De-
cline and  Fall  of  the  Koman  Empire  undertook  to  furnish  the
scepticism  of  the  last  century  with  a  systematized  and  altogether
wAwal  account  of  the  spread  of  Christianity  ^.  The  five  *  causes '
which  he  instances  as  sufficient  to  explain  the  work  of  Jesus
Christ  in  the  world  are,  the  *  zeal  *  of  the  early  Christians,  the
*  doctrine  of  a  future  life,'  the  *  miraculous  powers  ascribed  to
the  primitive  Church,'  the  *  pure  and  austere  morals  of  the  first
Christians,'  and  'the  union  and  discipline  of  the  Christian
republic'  But  surely  each  of  these  causes  points  at  once  and
irresistibly  to  a  cause  beyond  itself^.  If  the  zeal  of  the  first
Christians  was,  as  Gibbon  will  have  it,  a  fanatical  habit  of  mind
inherited  from  Judaism,  how  came  it  not  merely  to  survive,  but
to  acquire  a  new  intensity,  when  the  narrow  nationalism  which
provoked  it  in  the  Jew  had  been  wholly  renounced  %  What  was
it  that  made  the  first  Christians  so  zealous  amid  surrounding
lassitude,  so  holy  amid  encompassing  pollution?  Why  should
the  doctrine  of  a  life  to  come  have  had  a  totally  different  effect

*  We  are  indeed  told  that  'if  we  were  to  judge  from  the  history  of  the
last  thousand  years,  it  would  appear  to  shew  tl^t  the  permanent  area  of
Christiamty  is  conterminous  with  that  of  Western  dvilization,  and  that  its
doctrines  could  find  acceptance  only  among  those  who,  by  incorporation
into  the  Greek  and  Latm  races,  nave  adopted  their  system  of  life  and
jnorals.*  International  Policy,  p.  508.  The  Anglo-Positivist  school  how-
ever is  careful  to  explain  that  it  altogether  excludes  Bussia  from  any  share
in  'Western  civilization;*  Bussia>  it  appears,  is  quite  external  to  'the
West.*    Ibid.  pp.  14-17,  58,  95,  &c.

^  St.  Justin.  Dialog,  cum  l^ryph.  117,  121;  St.  Irenseus,  adv.  Hser.  i.
c.  10,  §  2 ;  Tertull.  adv.  Judaos,  vii ;  Apolog.  37 ;  Orig.  contr.  Celsum,
i.  26,  ii.  79.    Cf.  Freppel,  Examen  Critique,  p.  no.

*  No  reader  of  Gibbon  will  be  misled  by  the  sarcasm  of  the  opening
paragra{>hs  of  Ded.  and  Fall,  o.  xv.  Would  that  Gibbon  had  really  sup-
posed himself  to  be  describing  only  the  'secondary  causes  *  of  the  progresB
of  Ghiistianity.  «  Edipse  of  FaiUi,  p.  186.

m]


138    Recent  theory  of  the  success  of  our  Lord.

when  proclaimed  by  the  Apostles  from  any  which  it  had  had
when  taught  by  Socrates  or  by  Plato,  or  by  other  thinkers  of  the
Pagan  world  )  How  came  it  that  a  few  peasants  and  tradesmen
could  erect  a  world-wide  organization,  sufficiently  elastic  to
adapt  itself  to  the  genius  of  races  the  most  various,  sufficiently
uniform  to  be  everywhere  visibly  conservative  of  its  unbroken
identity  %  11  the  miracles  of  the  early  Church,  or  any  one  of
them,  were  genuine,  how  can  they  avail  to  explain  the  naiwral'
ness  of  the  spread  of  Christianity  ?  If  they  were  all  false,  how
extraordinary  is  this  spectacle  of  a  moral  triumph,  such  as  even
Gibbon  acknowledges  that  of  Christianity  to  be,  brought  about  by
means  of  a  vast  and  odious  imposition !  Gibbon's  argument  would
have  been  more  conclusive  if  the  *  causes'  to  which  he  points
could  themselves  have  been  satisfactorily  accounted  for  in  a
natural  way.  As  it  was,  the  historian  of  Lausanne  did  an  in-
direct service  to  Christendom,  of  that  kind  for  which  England
has  sometimes  been  indebted  to  the  threatening  preparations  of
a  great  military  neighbour.  Gibbon  indicated  very  clearly  the
direction  which  would  be  taken  by  modem  assailants  of  the
hith ;  but  he  is  not  singular  in  having  strengthened  the  cause
which  he  sought  to  ruin,  by  furnishing  an  indirect  demonstration
of  the  essentially  supernatural  character  of  the  spread  of  the
Gospel.

3.  But  you  remind  me  that  if  the  sceptical  artillery  of  Gibbon
is  out  of  date,  yet  the  *  higher  criticism '  of  our  day  has  a  more
delicate,  and,  as  is  presumed,  a  more  effective  method  of  stating
the  naturalistic  explanation  of  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the
world.  Jesus  Christ,  you  say,  was  bom  at  a  time  when  the
world  itself  forced  victory  upon  Him,  or  at  least  ensured  for
Him  an  easy  triumph  y.  The  wants  and  aspirations  of  a  worn-
out  civilization,  the  dim  but  almost  universal  presentiment  of
a  coming  Kestorer  of  mankind,  the  completed  organization  of  a
great  world-empire,  combined  to  do  this.  You  urge  that  it  is
possible  so  to  correspond  to  the  moral  and  intellectual  drift  of
a  particular  period,  that  nothing  but  a  perverse  stupidity  can
escape  a  success  which  is  all  but  inevitable.  You  add  that  Jesus
Christ  *  had  this  chance '  of  appearing  at  a  critical  moment  in

y  Kenan,  Les  Apdtres,  pp.  303,  303.  M.  Renan  is  of  opinion  that  'la
conversion  du  monde  aui  id^es  juives  (!)  et  chr^tiennes  ^tait  inevitable;*
Ms  only  astonishment  is  tliat  '  cette  conversion  se  soit  fait  si  lentement  et  si
tard.*  On  the  other  hand,  the  new  faith  is  said  to  have  made  'de  proche  en
proche  d*itonnantes  progi^s'  (Ibid.  p.  215) ;  and,  with  rdference  to  Antioch,
*  o»  ^Stonne  des  progrfes  accomplis  en  si  peu  de  temps.'    Ibid.  p.  236.

[lbct.


IVas  our  Lord's  triumph  due  to  yudaism  ?  139

the  history  of  humanity;  and  that  when  the  world  was  ripe  for
His  religion,  He  and  His  Apostles  had  just  adroitness  enough
not  to  be  wholly  unequal  to  the  opportunity.  The  report  of  His
teaching  and  of  His  Person  was  carried  on  the  crest  of  one  of
those  waves  of  strange  mystic  enthusiasm,  which  so  often  during
the  age  of  the  Caesars  rolled  westward  from  Asia  towards  the
capital  of  the  world ;  and  though  the  Founder  of  Christianity,  it
is  true,  had  perished  in  the  surf,  His  work,  you  hold,  in  the
nature  of  things,  could  not  but  survive  Him.

(fl)  In  this  representation,  my  brethren,  there  is  a  partial
truth  which  I  proceed  to  recognise.  It  is  true  that  the  world
was  weary  and  expectant ;  it  is  true  that  the  political  fabric  of
the  great  empire  afforded  to  the  Gospel  the  same  facilities  for
self-extension  as  those  which  it  offered  to  the  religion  of  Osiris,
or  to  the  fable  of  Apollonius  Tyanseus.  But  those  favourable
circumstances  are  only  what  we  should  look  for  at  the  hands  of
a  Divine  Providence,  when  the  true  religion  was  to  be  introduced
into  the  world ;  and  they  are  altogether  unequal  to  account  for
the  success  of  Christianity.  It  is  alleged  that  Christianity  cor-
responded to  the  dominant  moral  and  mental  tendencies  >  of  the
time  so  perfectly,  that  those  tendencies  secured  its  triumph.
But  is  this  accurate  %  Christianity  was  cradled  in  Judaism ;
but  was  the  later  Judaism  so  entirely  in  harmony  with  the
temper  and  aim  of  Christianity  %  Was  the  age  of  the  Zealots,  of
Judas  the  Gaulonite,  of  Theudas,  likely  to  welcome  the  spiritual
empire  of  such  a  teacher  as  our  Lord  *  ?  Were  the  moral  dispo-
sitions of  the  Jews,  their  longings  for  a  political  Messiah,  their
fierce  legalism,  their  passionate  jealousy  for  the  prerogatives  of
their  race,  calculated — ^I  do  not  say  to  further  the  triumph  of
the  Church,  but — ^to  enter  even  distantly  into  her  distinctive
spirit  and  doctrines  ?  Did  not  the  Synagogue  persecute  Jesus
to  death,  when  it  had  once  discerned  the  real  character  of  His
teaching  %  It  may  be  argued  that  the  favourable  dispositions  in
question  which  made  the  success  of  Christianity  practically
inevitable  were  to  be  found  among  the  Hellenistic  Jews  ^.  The
Hellenistic  Jews  were  less  cramped  by  national  prejudices,  less
strictly  observant  of  the  Mosaic  ceremonies,  more  willing  to
welcome  Gentile  proselytes  than  was  the  case  with  the  Jews  of
Palestine.     Be  it  so.     But  the  Hellenistic  Jews  were  just  as

■  Benaa,  Les  Apdtres,  c.  19,  pp.  366,  sqq,
*  Freppel,  Examen  Critique,  p.  1 14.
^  Benan,  Les  Apdtres,  c.  6,  p.  113.

m]


140  JVas  Christ's  triumph  due  to  Jewish  sympathy  ?

opposed  as  the  Jews  of  Palestine  to  the  capital  truths  of  Chris-
tianity. A  cmcified  Messiah,  for  instance,  was  not  a  more  wel-
come doctrine  in  the  synagogaes  of  Corinth  or  of  Thessalonica
than  in  those  of  Jerusalem.  Never  was  Judaism  broader,  more
elastic,  more  sympathetic  with  external  thought,  more  disposed
to  make  concessions,  than  in  Philo  Judseus,  the  most  representa-
tive of  Hellenistic  Jews.  Yet  Philo  insists  as  stoutly  as  any
Palestinian  Eabbi  upon  the  perpetuity  of  the  law  of  Moses.  As
long,  he  says,  as  the  human  race  shall  endure,  men  shall  carry
their  offerings  to  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  <^.  Indeed  in  the  first
age  of  Christianity  the  Jews,  both  Palestinian  and  Hellenistic,
illustrate,  unintentionally  of  course,  but  very  remarkably,  the
supernatural  law  of  the  expansion  of  the  Church.  They  perse-
cute Christ  in  His  members,  and  yet  they  submit  to  Him  ;  they
are  foremost  in  enriching  the  Church  with  converts,  after  en-
riching her  with  martyrs.  Wherever  the  preachers  of  the  Gospel
appear,  it  is  the  Jews  who  are  their  fiercest  persecutors  ^ ;  the
Jews  rouse  against  them  the  passions  of  the  Pagan  mob,  or
appeal  to  the  prejudice  of  the  Pagan  magistrate®.  Yet  the
synagogue  is  the  mission-station  from  which  the  Church's  action
originally  radiates ;  the  synagogue,  as  a  rule,  yields  their  first
spiritual  conquests  to  the  soldiers  of  the  Cross.  In  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles  we  remark  on  the  one  hand  the  hatred  and  opposi-
tion with  which  the  Jew  met  the  advancing  Gospel,  on  the  other,
the  signal  and  rapid  conquests  of  the  Gospel  among  the  ranks  of
the  Jewish  population  *".  The  former  fact  determines  the  true
significance  of  the  latter.  Men  do  not  persecute  systems  which
answer  to  their  real  sympathies ;  St.  Paul  was  not  a  Christian

*  De  Monarchic,  lib.  ii.  §  3,  ii.  324 :  l^  %cov  yap  rh  hvBp^wv  yivos  9ah
liivu,  &€2  kcCL  al  •Kp6(ro^oi  rov  icpov  (pu\axOilO'ovrcu  avvdMiycovliouffcu  wcurrl  t^
K6(rfi<t>:  quoted  by  PreppeL

^  How  far  St.  JPaiil  thought  that  Judaism  contributed  to  the  triumph  of
the  Ghurch  might  appear  from  1  Thess.  ii.  15,  16.  Compare  Acts  xiii.  50,
^^'  5f  I9»  xvii.  5,  13,  xviii.  12,  zix.  9,  zzii.  21,  22.

•  Benan,  Lea  Apdtres,  p.  143 :  *Ce  qu'il  importe,  en  tout  cas,  de  remar-
quer,  c^est  qu*k  l*^poque  oh.  nous  sommes,  les  pers^uteurs  du  GbristianiBme
ne  sont  pas  les  Bomains ;  ce  sent  les  Juifs  orthodoxes.  .  .  G'^tait  Borne,
ainsi  que  nous  Tavons  d^jk  plusieurs  fois  remarqu^,  qui  empdchait  le
Judai'sme  de  se  livrer  pleinement  k  ses  instincts  d'intol^rance,  et  d*^touffer
les  d^veloppements  libres  qui  se  produisaient  dans  son  sein.  Toute  dimi-
nution del  autorit^  juive  ^tait  un  bienfait  pour  la  secte  naissante.'  (p.  251.)
See  Martyr.  St.  Polyc.  o.  13.

'  Acts  vi.  7.  This  one  text  disposes  of  M.  Benan's  assertion  as  to  the
growth  of  the  Church,  that  'les  orUiodoxes  rigides  B*y  pr6taient  peu.*
Apdtres,  p.  113.

[lect.


Was  Christ's  triumph  due  to  Pagan  aspirations?  141

at  heart,  and  without  intending  it,  before  his  conversion.  TOie
Church  triumphed  in  spite  of  the  dominant  tendencies  and  the
fierce  opposition  of  Judaism,  both  in  Palestine  and  elsewhere ;
she  triumphed  by  the  force  of  her  inherent  and  Divine  vitality.
The  process  whereby  the  Gospel  won  its  way  among  the  Jewish
people  was  typified  in  St.  Paul's  experience ;  the  passage  from
the  traditions  of  the  synagogue  to  the  faith  of  Pentecost  cost
nothing  less  than  a  violent  moral  and  intellectual  wrench,  such
as  could  be  achieved  only  by  a  supernatural  force,  interrupting
the  old  stream  of  thought  and  feeling  and  introducing  a  new
one.

(/3)  But  if  success  was  not  forced  upon  the  Christian  Church
by  the  dispositions  and  attitude  of  Judaism ;  can  it  be  said  that
Paganism  supplies  us  with  the  true  explanation  of  the  triumph
of  the  Gospel  ?  What  then  were  those  intellectual  currents,
those  moral  ideals,  those  movements,  those  aspirations,  discovery-
able  in  the  Paganism  of  the  age  of  the  Ceesars,  which  were  in
such  effective  alliance  with  the  doctrine  and  morality  of  the  New
Testament  %  What  was  the  general  temper  of  Pagan  intellect,
but  a  self-asserting,  cynical  scepticism  )  Pagan  intellect  speaks
in  orators  like  Cicero  «,  publicly  deriding  the  idea  of  rewards  and
punishments  hereafter,  and  denying  the  intervention  of  a  higher
Power  in  the  affairs  of  men  ^ ;  or  it  speaks  in  statesmen  like
Caesar,  proclaiming  from  his  place  in  the  Boman  senate  that  the
soul  does  not  exist  after  death  i ;  or  in  historians  like  Tacitus,
repudiating  with  self-confident  disdain  the  idea  of  a  providential
government  of  the  world  J ;  or  in  poets  like  Horace,  making
profession  of  the  practical  Atheism  of  the  school  of  Epicurus,  it
is  bard  to  say,  whether  in  jest  or  in  earnest  ^ ;  or  in  men  of
science  like  Strabo*  and  Pliny  "a,  maintaining  that  religion  is
a  governmental  device  for  keeping  the  passions  of  the  lower
orders  under  restraint,  and  that  the  soul's  immortality  is  a  mere
df  eam  or  nursery-story.     *  Unbelief  in  the  official  religion,*  says

<  Cicero  however,  in  his  speculative  moods,  was  the  'only  Boman  who
undertook  to  rest  a  real  individual  existence  of  souls  after  death  on  philo*
Bophical  grounds.'    Bollinger,  Heidenthum  und  Judenthum,  bk.  viii.  $  3.

^  Cic.  pro  Quentio,  c.  61 ;  De  Kat.  Deor.  ill.  33 ;  De  Off.  iii.  28 ;  De
Bivin.  ii,  17.

*  Sallust.  Catilin.  50-52.

1  Tacitus,  Ann.  xvi.  33,  vi.  2 a.    Yet  see  Hist.  i.  3,  iv.  78.

*  Hor.  Sat.  i.  5,  100,  sq. ;  of.  Lucret.  v.  83,  vi.  57,  sq.  5  M11mftH|  Hist
ChriBt.  i.  41.

^  Geogr.  i.  c.  2 ;  cf.  Polyb.  Hist.  Gen.  vi.  56.

«  Plin.  vii.  55.

m]


142    Moral  characteristics  of  the  Pagan  world

M.Eenan,  'was  prevalent  throughout  the  educated  class.  The
very  statesman  who  most  ostentatiously  upheld  the  public  wor-
ship of  the  empire  made  very  amusing  epigrams  at  its  expense".'
What  was  the  moral  and  social  condition  of  Boman  Paganism  t
Modem  unbelief  complains  that  St.  Paul  has  characterized  the
social  morality  of  the  Pagan  world  in  terms  of  undue  severity  <>.
Yet  St.  Paul  does  not  exceed  the  specific  charges  of  Tacitus,  of
Suetonius,  of  Juvenal,  of  Seneca,  that  is  to  say,  of  writers  who,
at  least,  had  no  theological  interest  in  misrepresenting  or  exagge-
rating the  facts  which  they  deplore  p.  When  Tacitus  summarizes
the  moral  condition  of  Paganism  by  his  exhaustive  phrase

*  corrumj>ere  et  corrumjn*  he  more  than  covers  the  sorrowing
invective  of  the  Apostle.  Indeed  our  modem  historian  of  the
Apostolic  age,  who  sees  nothing  miraculous  in  the  success  of  the
GospeH,  has  himself  characterized  the  moral  condition  of  the
Pagan  world  in  teims  yet  more  severe  than  those  of  the  Apostle
whom  he  condemns.  According  to  M.  Benan,  Home  under  the
Caesars  'became  a  school  of  immorality  and  cruelty';'  it  was  a

*  very  hell  ■  ;*  *  the  reproach  that  Home  had  poisoned  the  world
at  large,  the  Apocalyptic  comparison  of  Pagan  Home  to  a  proeti-

»  Benan,  Les  Apdtres,  pp.  340,  341.

**  Ibid.  p.  309,  note  i :  'L'opinion  beanconp  trop  s^y^  de  Saint  Paul
(Bom.  i.  34  etsuiy.)  s'explique  de  la  mSme  mani^re.  Saint  Paul  ne  connait'
gait  pas  la  haute  tociStS  Eomaine,  Ce  sont  Ik,  d^ailleurs,  dd  ces  inyectivei
comme  en  font  les  pr^dicateurs,  et  qu*il  ne  faut  jamais  prendre  k  la  lettre.'
Bo  the  Satires  of  Juyenal  lead  us  to  suppose  that  if  St.  Paul  had  'known
the  high  society  of  Home/  he  would  haye  used  a  less  emphatio  language?
And  is  it  a  rule  with  preachers,  whether  Apostolic*  or  post-Apostolio^  not  to
mean  what  they  say  P

P  Juyenal,  Sat.  i.  87,  ii.  37,  iii.  62,  yi.  293.  Seneca»  Epist.  xcyii. ;  De
Benefic.  i.  9,  iii.  16.  Tacitus,  Hist.  i.  a ;  (Jerm.  xix.  See  other  quotations
in  Wetstein,  Noy.  Test,  in  loc.  It  may  be  that  Tacitus,  in  his  affection  for
the  old  regime  of  the  republic,  was  tempted  to  exaggerate  the  sins  (^ihe
empire,  and  that  Juyenal  dwelt  upon  the  yices  of  the  ci^ital  with  somewhat
of  the  narrow  prejudice  of  proyincialism.  Still,  after  allowing  for  this,  thero
is  a  groundwork  of  fact  in  these  representations  which  amply  justifies
St.  Paul.

4  Benan,  Les  Apdtres,  p.  366 :  'Tel  ^tait  le  monde  que  les  missionaires
Chretiens  entreprirent  de  conyertir.  On  doit  ymr  maintenant,  oe  me  semUe,
qu*une  telle  entreprise  ne  fut  pas  une  folie,  et  que  sa  r^ussite  ne  fnt  pas  nn
miracle.'

'  Ibid.  p.  305.

*  Ibid.  p.  310 :  '  L*e8prit  de  yertige  et  de  cruaut^  ddbordidt  alors,  et  faisait
de  Bome  un  yeritable  enfer.*  P.  317 :  *  A  Bome,  il  est  yrai,  tons  les  vices
s'affichaient  ayec  un  cynisme  r^voltant ;  les  spectacles  surtout  ayaient  intro-
duit  une  affreuse  corruption.'  This  statement  is  not  an  exaggeration.  See
Bollinger,  Heidenthum  und  Judenthum,  bk.  ix.  pt.  ii.  §  3,  4*  pp.  704-721.

[lect.


contrasted  with  the  teaching  of  the  Gospel.    143

tnte  who  had  poured  forth  upon  the  earth  the  wine  of  her
immoralitieB,  was  in  many  respects  a  just  comparison  ^'  Nor
was  the  moral  degradation  of  Paganism  confined  to  the  capital
of  the  great  empire.  The  provinces  were  scarcely  purer  than
the  capital.  Each  province  poured  its  separate  contrihution  of
moral  filth  into  the  great  store  which  the  increasing  centraliza-
tion of  the  empire  had  accumulated  in  the  main  reservoir  at
Borne ;  each  province  in  turn  received  its  share  of  this  recipro-
cated corruption  ^.  In  particular,  the  East,  that  very  portion
of  the  empire  in  which  the  Gospel  took  its  rise,  was  the  main
source  of  the  common  infection  ^.  Antioch  was  itself  a  centre
of  moral  putrefaction^.  Egypt  was  one  of  the  most  corrupt
countries  in  the  world;  and  the  same  account  might  be  given
generally  of  those  districts  and  cities  of  the  empire  in  which  the
Church  fijTst  made  her  way,  of  Greece,  and  Asia  Minor,  and
Homan  Africa,  of  Ephesus  and  Corinth,  of  Alexandria  and  Car-
thage. '  The  middle  of  the  first  century  of  our  era  was,  in  point
of  fact,  one  of  the  worst  epochs  of  ancient  history  >.'

But  was  such  an  epoch,  such  a  world,  such  a  'civilization'
as  this  calculated  to  'force  success'  on  an  institution  like
*the  kingdom  of  heaven,'  or  on  a  doctrine  such  as  that  of
the  New  Testament )  If  indeed  Christianity  had  been  an  '  idyll'
or  'pastoral,'  the  product  of  the  simple  peasant  life  and  of
the  bright  sky  of  Galilee,  there  is  no  reason  why  it  should

*  Les  Apdtres,  p.  335 :  'lie  reproche  d^avoir  empoiBonn^  la  terre,  Taasi*
milation  de  Borne  k  une  oourtiflaiie  qui  a  vers^  au  monde  le  vin  de  son  im-
morality ^tait  juste  k  beaucoop  d*^gards.*  Yet  M.  Benan  is  to  little  caref^
about  contradicting  himself  that  he  elsewhere  says,  '  Le  monde,  k  I'^poque
Bomaine,  aocompkt  un  progr^  de  morality  et  subit  une  decadence  identi-
fique.*  (p.  336.)  The  nature  of  this  progress  seems  to  have  been  somewhat
Epicurean:  'Le  monde  s'assouplissait,  perdait  sa  rigeur  antique,  aoqu^rait
<ie  la  mollesse,  et  de  la  sensibiUt^.'  (p.  318.)

*  Ibid.  p.  326 :  '  La  province  valait  mieuz  que  Home,  ou  plutdt  les  €1^
ments  impurs  qui  de  toutes  parts  s^amassaient  k  Bome,  comme  en  un  ^goiit,
avaient  form^  Ik  un  foyer  d'infection,*

^  Ibid.  p.  305  :  '  Le  mal  venait  surtout  de  rOrient»  de  oes  flatteum  de  bas
^tage,  de  ces  hommes  infUmes  que  V&gypie  et  la  Syrie  envoyaient  k  Bome.'
P.  306 :  'Les  plus  choquantee  ignominies  de  Tempire,  teUes  que  Tapoth^oee
de  Vempereur,  sa  divinisation  de  son  vivant,  venaient  de  I'Orient,  et  surtout
de  TEgypte,  qui  ^tait  alors  un  des  pays  les  plus  oorrumpus  dei'univers.'

*  Ibid.  p.  318 :  *'LAl6g^ret4  Syrienne,  le  charlatanisme  Babylonien,  toutes
les  impostures  de  TAsie,  se  oonfondant  k  cette  limite  des  deux  mondes  avaient
fiut  d'Antioche  la  capitale  du  mensonge,  la  sentine  de  toutes  les  infamies.'
P.  319:  'L'avilissementdesftmesy^t^teffiroyable.  Lepropredeoesfotferg
de  putrif action  morale^  t^ui  ^amener  Umtu  le$  raeei  au  mime  niveau,'

»  Ibid.  p.  343.

m]


1 44  The  Spirit  of  Paganism  and  Jesus  Crucified.

•

not  have  attracted  a  momentary  interest  in  literary  circles,
although  it  certainly  would  have  escaped  from  any  more  serioufl
trial  at  the  hands  of  statesmen  than  an  unaffected  indifference
to  its  popularity.  But  what  was  the  Gospel  as  it  met  the
eye  and  fell  upon  the  ear  of  Homan  Paganism  \  *  We  preach,*
said  the  Apostle,  'Christ  Crucified,  to  the  Jews  an  offence,
and  to  the  Greeks  a  folly  y.*  *  I  determined  not  to  know  any-
thing among  you  Corinthians,  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him
Crucified  z.*  Here  was  a  truth  linked  inextricably  with  other
truths  equally  *  foolish'  in  the  apprehension  of  Pagan  intellect,
equally  condemnatory  of  the  moral  degradation  of  Pagan  life.
In  the  preaching  of  the  Apostles,  Jesus  Crucified  confronted  the
intellectual  cynicism,  the  social  selfishness,  and  the  sensualist
degradation  of  the  Pagan  world.  To  its  intellect  He  said,
*  I  am  the  truth  * ;'  He  bade  its  proud  self-confidence  bow  be-
fore His  intellectual  Koyalty.  To  its  selfish,  heartless  society,
careful  only  for  bread  and  amusement,  careless  of  the  agonies
which  gave  interest  to  the  amphitheatre.  He  said,  *A  new
commandment  give  I  unto  you,  that  ye  love  one  another,
as  I  have  loved  you^.'  Disinterested  love  of  slaves,  of  bar-
barians, of  political  enemies,  of  social  rivals,  love  of  man  as
m^n,  was  to  be  a  test  of  true  discipleship.  And  to  the  sen-
suality, so  gross,  and  yet  often  so  polished,  which  was  the
very  law  of  individual  Pagan  life.  He  said,  'K  any  man  will
come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross
daily,  and  follow  Me®;'  'If  thine  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it
out  and  cast  it  from  thee ;  it  is  better  for  thee  that  one  of
thy  members  should  perish,  and  not  that  thy  whole  body
should  be  cast  into  helH.'  Sensuality  was  to  be  dethroned,
not  by  the  negative  action  of  a  prudential  abstinence  from
indulgence,  but  by  the  strong  positive  force  of  self-mortification.
Was  such  a  doctrine  likely,  of  its  own  weight  and  without
any  assistance  from  on  high,  to  win  its  way  to  acceptance  • !
Is  it  not  certain  that  debased  souls  are  so  far  from  aspiring
naturally  towards  that  which  is  holy,  elevated  and  pure,  that

y  I  Cor.  i.  23 :  jnu^t  8i  icrip^<rofity  Xpitrrhv  4aroBupovfi4vov,  'lovSo/ots  fihf

*  I  CJor.  ill  a  :  od  7^^  kKpiva  rod  el^^vai  ri  iy  6fi7v,  c2  fi^i  *Iij<row  XpurrhWf
KoiH  rovrov  i<rravp(ofi4vop.  »  St.  John  xiv.  6.

^  Ibid.  xiii.  34.  •  St.  Matt.  xvi.  24 ;  St.  Mark  viii  34.

^  St.  Matt,  xviii.  9 ;  St.  Mark  ix.  47.

*  M.  Benan  himself  observes  that  'la  degradation  des  ftmes  en  Egypte
y  rendait  rares,  d'aillenrs,  les  aspirations  qui  ouvrirent  partoat  (!)  ao
christianisme  de  si  faciles  acc^.'    Lee  Apdtres,  p.  284.

[l£CT.


'.


A  ttitude  of  Pagan  society  towards  the  Church,  145

they  feel  towards  it  only  hatred  and  repulsion  ?  Certainly  Rome
was  unsatisfied  with  her  old  national  idolatries;  but  if  she
turned  her  eyes  towards  the  East,  it  was  not  to  welcome
the  religion  of  Jesus,  but  the  impure  rites  of  Isis  and  Serapis,
of  Mithra  and  Astarte.  The  Gospel  came  to  her  unbidden,
in  obedience  to  no  assignable  attraction  in  Eoman  society,
but  simply  in  virtue  of  its  own  expansive,  world-embracing
force.  Certainly  Christianity  answered  to  the  moral  wants
of  the  world,  as  it  really  answers  at  this  moment  to  the
true  moral  wants  of  all  human  beings,  however  unbelieving
or  immoral  they  may  be.  The  question  is,  whether  the  world
BO  clearly  recognised  its  real  wants  as  forthwith  to  embrace
Christianity.  The  Physician  was  there;  but  did  the  patient
know  the  nature  of  his  own  malady  sufficiently  well  not  to
view  the  presence  of  Ihe  Physician  as  an  intrusion  ?  Was  it
likely  that  the  old  Roman  society,  with  its  intellectual  pride,
its  social  heartlessness,  and  its  unbounded  personal  self-indul-
gence, should  be  enthusiastically  in  love  with  a  religion  which
made  intellectual  submission,  social  unselfishness,  and  personal
mortification,  its  very  fundamental  laws  %  The  history  of  the
three  first  centuries  is  the  answer  to  that  question.  The
kingdom  of  God  was  no  sooner  set  up  in  the  Pagan  world
than  it  found  itself  surrounded  by  all  that  combines  to  make
the  progress  of  a  doctrine  or  of  a  system  impossible.  The
thinkers  were  opposed  to  it:  they  denounced  it  as  a  dream
of  folly  f.  The  habits  and  passions  of  the  people  were  opposed
to  it :  it  threatened  somewhat  rudely  to  interfere  with  them.
There  were  venerable  institutions,  coming  down  from  a  distant
antiquity,  and  gathering  around  them  the  stable  and  thoughtful
elements  of  society :  these  were  opposed  to  it,  as  to  an  audacious
innovation,  as  well  as  from  an  instinctive  perception  that  it
might  modify  or  destroy  themselves.  National  feeHng  was
opposed  to  it :  it  flattered  no  national  self-love ;  it  was  to
be  the  home  of  human  kind ;  it  was  to  embrace  the  world ;
and  as  yet  the  nation  was  the  highest  conception  of  associated
life  to  which  humanity  had  reached.  Nay,  religious  feeling
itself  was  opposed  to  it ;  for  religious  feeling  had  been  enslaved
by  ancient  falsehoods.    There  were  worships,  priesthoods,  beliefs,

'  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  44:  'Kepressa  in  pnesens  ezitiabilis  snperstltio  rursiui
enunpebat.'  Suetonius,  Claudins,  xxv. ;  Nero,  xvi. :  *  Ghristiam,  genus
lioiimiTim  snperstitionis  novse  ao  malefics.*  Celsus  apud  Origenem,  iii.  17.
CeUng  compared  the  Church's  worship  of  our  Lord  with  the  Egyptiaa
warship  of  cats,  orooodilee,  &c.

m]  L


146  TheChurch  triumphsthroughpersistent  suffering.

in  long-established  possession;   and  they  were   not  likely  to
yield  without   a  struggle.      Picture  to  yourselves  the    days
when  the  temple  of  the  Capitoline  Jupiter  was  still  thronged
with   worshippers,  while   o^n  the  Eucharist  could  only  be
celebrated  in  the  depths  of  the  Catacombs.     It  was  a  time
when  all  the  administrative  power  of  the  empire  was  steadily
concentrated  upon  the  extinction  of  the  Name  of  Christ.    What
were  then  to  a  human  eye  the  future  prospects  of  the  kingdom
of  God  ?     It  had  no  allies,  like  the  sword  of  the  Mahommedan,
or  like  the  congenial  mysticism  which  welcomed  the  Buddhist,
or  like  the  politicians  who  strove  to  uphold  the  falling  Paganism
of  Kome.     It  found  no  countenance  even  in  the  Stoic  moral-
ists ?;   they  were  indeed  among  its   fiercest  enemies.      If,  as
M.  Renan  maintains,  it  ever  was  identified  by  Pagan  opinion,
with  the  costus  illicUi,  with  the  collegia  illicita,  with  the  burial-
clubs  of  the  imperial  epoch ;   this  would  only  have  rendered
it  more  than  ever  an  object  of  suspicion  to  the  government^.
Between  the   new  doctrine  and  the   old  Paganism  there  was
a  deadly  feud ;    and  the  question  for  the  Church  was  simply
whether  she  could  suffer  as  long  as  her  enemies  could  perse-
cute.    Before  she  could  triumph  in  the  western  world,  the  soil
of  the  empire  had  to  be  reddened  by  Christian  blood.  Ignatius
of  Antioch  given  to  the  lions  at  Home  ^ ;  Polycarp  of  Smyrna

«  Dollinger,  Heidenth.  nnd  Judenth.,  bk.  ix.  pt.  a.  §  6.  has  some  very
interesting  remarks  on  the  characteristics  of  the  later  Stoicism.  It  was
a  recoil  fr^m  the  corruption  of  the  time.  '  Wie  die  Aerzte  in  Zeiten  grosser
Krankheiten  ihre  besten  Studien  machen,  so  batten  auch  die  Stoiker  in
dem  allgemein  herrschenden  Sittenverderben  ihren  moralischen  Blick
gescharfb.*  p.  729.  Seneca*s  knowledge  of  the  hmnan  heart,  the  pathos
and  solemnity  of  M.  Aurelins,  the  se&-control,  patience,  and  self-denying
courage  preached  by  Epictetus  and  Arrian,  are  fully  acknowledged.  Bat
Stoicism  was  virtue  upon  paper,  unrealized  except  in  the  instance  of  a
few  coteries  of  educated  people.  It  was  virtue,  affecting  Divine  strength
in  the  midst  of  human  weakness.  Nothing  could  really  be  done  for
humanity  by  '  diesen  selbstgeialligen  Tugendstolz,  der  alles  nur  sich  selbst
verdanken  wollte,  der  sich  der  Gottheit  gleich  setzte,  nnd  bei  aller  men-
Bchlichen  Grebrechlichkeit  doch  die  Sicherheit  der  Gottheit  fiir  sich  in
Anspruch  nahm.'  (Sen.  Ep.  53.)  Stoicism  had  no  lever  with  which  to
raise  man  as  man  from  his  degradations:  and  its  earlier  expositors  even
prescribed  suicide  as  a  means  of  escape  from  the  miseries  of  Ufe,  and  from
a  sense  of  moral  failure.  (Doll,  ubi  supra,  p.  728 ;  comp.  Sir  A.  Grant^s
Ethics  of  Arist.  vol.  i.  p.  272.)  Who  can  marvel  at  its  instinctive  hatred
of  a  religion  which  proclaimed  a  higher  code  of  Ethics  than  its  own,  and
which,  moreover,  possessed  the  secret  of  teaching  that  code  practically  to
all  dajBses  of  mankind  ?

>»  Les  Apdtres,  pp.  355,  361,  362.  »  A.  n.  107.

[lect.


Chris  fs  Person  the  stay  of  the  suffering  Church.  147

condemned  to  the  flames  J ;  the  martyrs  of  Lyons  and  Vienne,
and  among  them  the  tendei*  Blandina  \  extorting  by  her  for-
titude the  admiration  of  the  very  heathen ;  Perpetua  and
Felicitas  at  Carthage  *  conquering  a  mother's  love  by  a  stronger
love  for  Christ  "*  ; — ^these  are  but  samples  of  the  *  noble  army'
which  vanquished  heathendom.  *Plures  efficimur,'  cries  Ter-
tullian,  spokesman  of  the  Church  in  her  exultation  and  in
her  agony,  *quoties  metimur  a  vobis;  semen  est  sanguis
Christianorum  i^.'  To  the  heathen  it  seems  a  senseless  ob-
stinacy; but  with  a  presentiment  of  the  coming  victory,  the
Apologist  exclaims,  *Illa  ipsa  obstinatio  quam  exprobatis,
magistra  est  <>.'

Who  was  He  That  had  thus  created  a  moral  force  which  could
embrace  three  centuries  of  a  protracted  agony,  in  the  confidence
that  victory  would  come  at  last  Pi  What  was  it  in  Him,  so
fascinating  and  sustaining  to  the  thought  of  His  followers,  that
for  Him  men  and  women  of  all  ages  and  ranks  in  life  gladly
sacrificed  all  that  is  dearest  to  man's  heart  and  nature  ?  Was  it
only  His  miracles  %  But  the  evidential  force  of  miracle  may  be
easily  evaded.  St.  John's  Gospel  appears  to  have  been  written
with  a  view  to  furnishing,  among  other  things,  an  authoritative
explanation  of  the  moral  causes  which  actually  prevented  the
Jews  from  recognising  the  significance  of  our  Lord's  miracles.
Was  it  simply  His  character?  But  to  understand  a  perfect
character  you  must  be  attracted  to  it,  and  have  some  strong
sympathies  with  it.  And  the  language  of  human  nature  in  the
presence  of  superior  goodness  is  often  that  of  the  Epicurean  in
the  Book  of  Wisdom:  *Let  us  lie  in  wait  for  the  righteous,
hecause  he  is  not  for  our  turn,  and  he  is  clean  contrary  to  our

doings He  was  made  to  reprove  our  thoughts ;   he  is

grievous  unto  us  even  to  behold ;  for  his  life  is  not  like  other
men's,  his  ways  are  of  another  fashion  <i.'  Was  it  His  teaching  %
True,  never  man  spake  like  this  Man;  but  taken  alone,  l^e
highest  and  holiest  teaching  might  have  seemed  to  humanity  to
be  no  more  than  '  the  sound  of  one  that  had  a  pleasant  voice,

J  A.D.  169.  *  A.  D.  177.

^  A.n.  202.  B>  So  Dionysia  in  Alexandria;  Bus.  H.  E.  yi.  41.

»  Apol.  o.  50,  •  Ibid.

J*  M.  Benan  observes  scornfully,  *B  n*y  a  pas  eu  beancoup  de  martyrs
tr^s-intelligents.'  Apdtres,  p.  382.  Possibly  not,  if  intelligence  is  but
another  name  for  scepticism.  Certain  it  is  that  martyrdom  requires  other
and  higher  qualities  than  any  which  mere  intelligence  can  supply.

*  Wisd.  ii.  12,  15.

m]  La


148  Christendom  implies  the  Divinity  of  Christ.

and  could  play  well  upon  an  instrument.'  His  Deatli  %  Certainly
He  predicted  that  in  dying  He  wofdd  draw  all  men  unto  Him ;
but  Who  was  He  That  could  thus  turn  the  instrument  of  His
humiliation  into  the  certificate  of  His  glory  %  His  Eesurrection  ?
His  Eesurrection  indeed  was  emphatically  to  be  the  reversal  of
a  false  impreBsion,  but  it  was  to  4ness  to  a  truth  beyond  itself ;
our  Lord  had  expressly  predicted  that  He  would  rise  from  the
grave,  and  that  His  Resurrection  would  attest  His  claims'.
None  of  these  things  taken  separately  will  account  for  the  power
of  Christ  in  history.  In  the  convergence  of  all  these ;  of  these
majestic  miracles ;  of  that  Character,  which  commands  at  once
our  love  and  our  reverence ;  of  that  teaching,  so  startling,  so
awful,  so  searching,  so  tender ;  of  that  Death  of  agony,  encircled
with  such  a  halo  of  moral  glory ;  of  that  deserted  tomb,  and  the
majestic  splendour  of  the  Bisen  One ; — a  deeper  truth,  underlying
all,  justifying  all,  explaining  all,  is  seen  to  reveal  itself.  We
discern,  as  did  the  first  Christians,  beneath  and  beyond  all  that
meets  the  eye  of  sense  and  the  eye  of  conscience,  the  Eternal
Person  of  our  Lord  Himself.  It  is  not  the  miracles,  but  the
Worker;  not  the  character,  but  its  living  Subject;  not  the
teaching,  but  the  Master ;  not  even  the  Death  or  the  Resurrec-
tion, but  He  Who  died  and  rose,  upon  Whom  Christian  thought,
Christian  love.  Christian  resolution  ultimately  rest.  The  truth
which  really  and  only  accounts  for  the  establishment  in  this  our
human  world  of  such  a  religion  as  Christianity,  and  of  such  an
institution  as  the  Church,  is  the  truth  that  Jesus  Christ  was
believed  to  be  more  than  Man,  the  truth  that  Jesus  Christ  is
what  men  believed  Him  to  be,  the  truth  that  Jesus  Christ
is  God«.

It  is  here  that  we  are  enabled  duly  to  estimate  one  broad
feature  of  the  criticism  of  Strauss.  Both  in  his  earlier  and
scientific  work,  published  some  thirty  years  ago  for  scholars,  and
in  his  more  recent  publication  addressed  to  the  German  people,
that  writer  strips  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  of  all  that  makes  Him
superhuman.  Strauss  eliminates  from  the  Gospel  most^f  Christ's
discourses,  all  of  His  miracles.  His  supernatural  Birth,  and  His
Resurrection  from  the  grave.  The  so-termed  '  historical '  resi-
duum might  easily  be  compressed  within  the  limits  of  a  newspaper
paragraph,  and  it  retains  nothing  that  can  rouse  a  moderate
measure,  I  do  not  say  of  enthusiasm,  but  even  of  interest.     And

^  St.  Matt.  xii.  39 ;  Bom.  i.  4.

>  Cf.  MilmaDy  Hist.  Christ,  i.  50;  Pusey,  Uniy.  Sermoncfy  1859-1872,
p.  28.

[lsct.


J


The  Christ  of  Strauss^  and  Christendom.     149

yet  few  minds  on  laying  down  either  of  these  unhappy  books
can  escape  the  rising  question :  '  Is  this  hero  of  a  baseless  legend,
this  impotent,  fallible,  erring  Christ  of  the  "  higher  criticism,"  in
very  deed  the  Founder  of  the  Christian  Church  ? '  The  difficulty
of  accounting  for  the  phenomenon  presented  by  the  Church,  on
the  supposition  that  the  *  historical '  account  of  its  Founder  is
that  of  Dr.  Strauss,  does  not  present  itself  forcibly  to  an  Hege-
lian, who  loses  himself  in  h  priori  theories  as  to  the  necessary
development  of  a  thought,  and  is  thus  entranced  in  a  sublime
forgetfulness  of  the  actual  facts  and  laws  of  human  life  and  his-
tory.    But  here  M.  Benan  is  unwittingly  a  witness  against  the
writer  to  whom  he  is  mainly  indebted  for  his  own  critical  appa-
ratus. The  finer  political  instinct,  the  truer  sense  of  the  necessary
proportions  between  causes  and  effects  in  human  history,  which
might  be  expected  to  characterize  a  thoughtful  Frenchman,  will
account  for  those  points  in  which  M.  Benan  has  departed  from
the  path  traced  by  his  master.    He  feels  that  there  is  an  impass-
able chasm  between  the  life  of  Jesus  according  to  Strauss,  and
the  actual  history  of  Christendom.     He  is  keenly  alive  to  the
absTirdity  of  supposing  that  such  an  impoverished  Christ  as  the
Christ  of  Strauss,  can  have  created  Christendom.     Although
therefore,  as  we  have  seen,  he  subsequently  *  endeavoui  s  to  account
for  the  growth  of  the  Church  in  a  naturalistic  way,  his  native
sense  of  the  fitting  proportions  of  things  impels  him  to  retouch
the  picture  traced  by  the  German,  and  to  ascribe  to  Jesus  of
Nazareth,  if  not  the  reality,  yet  some  shadowy  semblance  of
Divinity  1*.     Hence  such  features  of  M.  Benan's  work  as  his
concessions  in  respect  of  St.  John's  Gospel.     In  making  these
concessions,  he  is  for  the  moment  impressed  with  the  political
absurdity  of  ascribing  Christendom  to  the  thought  and  will  of  a
merely  human  Christ.     Although  his  unbelief  is  too  radical  to
allow  him  to  do  adequate  justice  to  such  a  consideration,  his
indirect  admission  of  its  force  has  a  value,  to  which  Christian
believers  will  not  be  insensible.

But  a  greater  than  M.  Benan  is  said  to  have  expressed  the
common-sense  of  mankind  in  respect  of  the  Agency  which  alone
can  account  for  the  existence  of  the  Christian  Church.  If  the
first  Napoleon  was  not  a  theologian,  he  was  at  least  a  man  whom
vast  experience  had  taught  what  kind  offerees  can  really  produce
a  lasting  effect  upon  mankind,  and  under  what  conditions  they
niay  be  expected  to  do  so.     A  time  came  when  the  good  Provi-

*  In  his  later  work,  Les  Apdtres.  *  Vie  de  J^us,  pp.  250,  426,  457.


1 50    opinion  of  Napoleon  tlie  First  respecting  the

dence  of  Gml  had  cbfkmed  dowa  that  great  but  ambitious  spirit
to  the  rock  of  St.  Heleoa;  and  the  conqueror  of  civilized  Europe
had  leisure  to  gather  up  the  results  of  his  unparalleled  life,  and
to  aBcertain  nrith  an  accuracy,  not  often  attainable  by  monarchs
or  warriora,  his  own  true  place  in  hiBtory.  When  converBing,
as  was  his  habit,  about  the  great  men  of  the  ancient  world,  and
comparing  himself  with  them,  he  tnmed,  it  ie  said,  to  Coimt
Montholon  with  the  enquiry, '  Can  you  tell  me  who  JesiiB  Christ
was!'  The  question  was  declined,  and  Napoleon  proceeded,
'  Well,  then,  I  will  tell  you.  Alexander,  CseBar,  Charlemagne,
and  I  myself  have  foimded  great  empires ;  but  upon  what  did
these  creations  of  our  genius  depend  1  Upon  force.  JesuB  atone
founded  His  empire  upon  love,  and  to  this  very  day  milliona

wouhj   die  for  Him I  think  I  understand  something  of

human  nature ;  and  I  tell  you,  all  these  were  men,  and  I  am  a
man :  none  else  is  like  Him ;  Jesus  Christ  was  more  than  man.
. .  I  have  inspired  multitudes  with  such  an  enthasiastic  devotion
that  they  would  have  died  for  me, . .  hut  to  do  thie  it  was  neces-
sary that  I  should  be  vtsibli/  present  with  the  electric  infiaence
of  my  looks,  of  my  words,  of  my  voice.  When  I  saw  men  and
spoke  to  them,  I  lighted  up  the  flame  of  self-devotion  in  their
hearts. ,  .  ,  Christ  idone  has  succeeded  in  eo  raising  the  mind  of
man  towards  the  Unseen,  that  it  becomes  insensible  to  the
harriers  of  time  and  space.  Across  a  chasm  of  eighteen  hundred
years,  Jesus  Christ  makes  a  demand  which  is  beyond  all  others
difficult  to  satisfy ;  He  asks  for  that  which  a  philosopher  may
often  seek  in  vain  at  the  hands  of  his  iriends,  or  a  father  of  hu
children,  or  a  bride  of  her  spouse,  or  a  man  of  his  brother.  He
asks  for  the  human  heart ;  He  will  have  it  entirely  to  Himself.
He  demands  it  unconditionally;  and  forthwith  His  demand  is
granted.  Wonderful  I  In  defiance  of  time  and  space,  the  soul  of
man,  with  all  its  powers  and  faculties,  becomes  an  annexation
to  the  empire  of  Christ.  AH  who  sincerely  believe  in  Him,  ex-
perience that  remarkable  supernatural  love  towards  Him.  This
phenomenon  is  unaccountable ;  it  is  altogether  beyond  the  scope
of  man's  creative  powers.  Time,  the  great  destroyer,  is  powerless
to  extinguish  this  sacred  flame;  time  can  neither  exhaust  its
strength  nor  put  a  limit  to  its  range.  This  is  it  which  strikes
me  most ;  I  have  often  thought  of  it.  This  it  is  which  proves
to  me  quite  convincingly  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  \'

d  froBX  the  paeeages  quoted  by  Luthardt,  Apolo-
253  :  and  Eersier,  Serm,  p,  334.   The  same  con-
ally  by  Chauvelot,  DirimtS  du  Christ,  pp.  11-13,
[  LECT.


witness  of  our  LorcCs  work  to  His  Divinity.  1 5 1

Here  surely  is  the  common-sense  of  humanity.  The  victory
of  Christianity  is  the  great  standing  miracle  which  Christ  has
wrought.  Its  significance  is  enhanced  if  the  miracles  of  the
New  Testament  are  rejected  *,  and  if  the  Apostles  are  held  to
have  received  no  illumination  from  on  highy.  Let  those  in
our  day  who  believe  seriously  that  the  work  of  Christ  may  be
accounted  for  on  natural  and  human  grounds,  say  who  among
themselves  will  endeavour  to  rival  it.  Who  of  our  contem-
poraries will  dare  to  predict  that  eighteen  hundred  years  hence
his  ideas,  his  maxims,  his  institutions,  however  noble  or  philan-
thropic they  may  be,  will  still  survive  in  their  completeness  and
in  their  vigour  %  Who  can  dream  that  his  own  name  and  history
win  be  the  rallying-point  of  a  world-wide  interest  and  enthu-
siasm in  some  distant  age)  Who  can  suppose  that  beyond
the  political,  the  social,  the  intellectual  revolutions  which  lie
in  the  future  of  humanity,  he  will  himself  still  survive  in  the
memory  of  men,  not  as  a  trivial  fact  of  archceology,  but  as  a
moral  power,  as  the  object  of  a  devoted  and  passionate  afiEection?

Paris. 1863 ;  in  a  small  brochure  attribated  to  M.  le  Pasteur  Bersier,  and
published  by  the  Beliglous  Tract  Socie^,  Napoleon,  Meyrueis,  Paris,  1859 ;
by  M.  Auguste  Nicolas,  in  his  J^tudes  f  hiloeophiaues  sur  le  Ghristianisme,
Brnxelles,  1849,  torn.  ii.  pp.  352-356 ;  and  by  tne  Chevalier  de  Beauteme  in
bis  Sentiment  de  Napol^n  sur  le  Chrlstianisme,  ^t.  par  M.  Bathild  Bouniol,
Puis  1864,  pp.  87-118.  In  the  pre&ce  to  General  Bertrand*s  Gampagnes
d^Egypte  et  de  Sjrie,  there  is  an  allusion,  to  some  reported  conversations  of
Napoleon  on  the  questions  of  the  existence  of  Gon  and  of  our  Lord*s  Divinity,
whicb,  the  General  says,  never  took  place  at  all.  But  M.  de  Montholon,
wbo  with  General  Bertomd  was  present  at  the  conversations  which  are
Koorded  by  the  Chevalier  de  Beauteme,  writes  from  Ham  on  May  30, 1841,
to  tbat  autiior :  '  J*ai  lu  avec  un  vif  int^r^  votre  brochure ;  Seniimewb  ds
Napoleon  tur  la  DivinitS  de  Jisw-Christ,  et  je  ne  pense  pas  au*il  soit
possible  de  mieux  exprimer  les  croyances  religieuses  de  Vempereur.  Senti-
ment de  Napoleon,  Avertissem.  p.  viii.  Writing,  as  it  would  seem,  in
ignorance  c€  this  testimony,  M.  Nicolas  says :  '  Cit^  plusieurs  fois  et  dans
des  drconstances  solenneUes,  ce  jugement  passe  g^n^ralement  pour  his«
torique.*    Etudes,  ii.  p.  352.  note  (i).

^  'Se  il  mondo  si  rivolse  al  cristianesmo
Diss*  io,  senza  miracoli,  quest*  uno
E  tal,  che  gli  altri  non  sono  il  centesmo;
Che  tu  entrasti  povero  e  digiuno
In  campo,  a  seminar  la  buona  pianta>
Che  fu  gik  vite,  ed  ora  h  fattapruno.*

Dante,  Paradiso,  xxiv.  106-111.
'  '  Apres  la  mort  de  J^us-Christ,  douze  pauvres  picheurs  et  artisans  en-
treprirent  d'instruire  et  de  convertir  le  monde.  .  .  .  le  succ^  fiit  prodigieux
•  •  • .  Tous  les  Chretiens  couraient  au  martyre,  tons  les  peuples  couraient  au
baptlme;  Thistoire  de  ces  premiers  temps  ^tait  «»  prodige  continueV
^Qssean,  B^ponse  au  Boi  de  Pologne,  Paris,  1829,  Discours,  pp.  64,  65.

m]


152     The  redeemed  soul  awns  a  Divine  Saviour.

What  man  indeed  that  still  retains,  I  will  not  say  the  faith  of  a
Christian,  but  the  modesty  of  a  man  of  sense,  must  not  feel  that
there  is  a  literally  infinite  interval  between  himself  and  that
Majestic  One,  Who,  in  the  words  of  Jean  Paul  Bichter, '  bemg
the  Holiest  among  the  mi^iy,  and  the  Mightiest  among  the
holy,  has  lifted  with  Hi«  pierced  Hand  empires  off  their  hinges,
has  tnmed  the  stream  of  centuries  out  of  its  channel,  and  still
goyems  the  ages  >  %  *

The  work  of  Jesus  Christ  is  not  merely  a  fact  of  history,  it  is
a  Cetct,  blessed  be  Grod !  of  individual  experience.  If  tiie  world
is  one  scene  of  His  conquests,  the  soul  of  each  true  Christian  is
another.  The  soul  is  the  microcosm  within  which,  in  all  its
strength,  the  kingdom  of  Qod  is  set  up.  Many  of  you  know,
from  a  witness  that  you  can  trust,  Christ's  power  to  restore  to
your  inward  life  its  original  harmony.  You  are  conscious  that
He  is  the  fertilizing  and  elevating  principle  of  your  thought,  the
purifying  principle  of  your  affections,  the  invigorating  principle
of  your  wills.  You  n^d  not  to  ask  the  question  *  whence  hath
this  Man  this  wisdom  and  these  mighty  works  9'  Man,  you  are
weU  assured,  cannot  thus  from  age  to  age  enlarge  the  realm  of
moral  light,  and  make  all  things  new ;  man  cannot  thus  endow
frail  natures  with  determination,  and  rough  natures  with  tender-
ness, and  sluggish  natures  with  keen  energy,  and  restless  natures
with  true  and  lasting  peace.  These  every-day  tokens  of  Christ^s
presence  in  His  kingdom,  of  themselves  answer  the  question  of
the  text.  If  He  Who  could  predict  that  by  dying  in  shame  He
would  secure  the  fulfilment  of  an  extraordinary  plan,  and  assure
to  Himself  a  world-wide  empire,  can  be  none  other  than  the
Lord  of  human  history;  so  certainly  the  Friend,  the  Teacher,  the
Master  Who  has  £ikthomed  and  controlled  our  deepest  life  of
thought  and  passion,  is  welcomed  by  the  Christian  soul  as  some*
thing  more  than  a  student  exploring  its  mysteries,  or  than  a
philanthropic  experimentalist  alleviating  its  sorrows.  He  is
hailed,  He  is  loved,  He  is  worshipped,  as  One  Who  possesses  a
knowledge  and  a  strength  which  human  study  and  human  skill
hH  to  compass;  it  is  felt  that  He  is  so  manifestly  the  true
Saviour  of  the  soul,  because  He  is  none  other  than  the  Being
Who  made  it.

'  Jean  Paul:    'Ueber  den  Gott  in  der  Geechichte  nnd  im  Leben.*
Sammtl.  Werke,  zzziii.  6 ;  Stiim.  p.  194.


[lsct.


LECTURE  IV.


OUB  LOED'S  DIVINITY  AS  WITNESSED  BY  HIS

CONSCIOUSNESS.

7^  Jews  answered  Him,  saying.  For  a  good  work  we  stone  Thee  not;  hut
for  hlasphemy :   and  because  thai  Thou,  being  a  Man,  makest  Thyself
God. — St.  Johk  x.  33.

It  is  common  with  some  modem  writers  to  represent  the  ques-
tions at  issue  between  the  Faith  and  its  opponents,  in  respect  of
the  Person  of  our  Lord,  as  being  substantially  a  question  between
the  *  historical  spirit*  and  the  spirit  of  dogmatism.     The  dog-
matic temper  is  painted  by  them  as  a  baseless  but  still  powerful
superstition,  closely  pressed  by  the  critical  enquiries  and  negative
conclusions  of  our  day,  but  culpably  shutting  its  eyes  against  the
advancing  truth,  the  power  of  which  nevertheless  it  cannot  but
instinctively  feel,  and  clinging  with  the  wrong-headed  obstinacy
of  despair  to  the  cherished  but  already  condemned  formulae  of
its  time-honoured  and  worn-out  metaphysics.     Opposed  to  it,
we  are  told,  is  the  *  historical  spirit,'  young,  vigorous,  fearless,
truthful,  flushed  with  successes  already  achieved,  assured  of  suc-
cesses yet  to  come.   The  *  historical  spirit  *  is  thus  said  to  repre-
sent the  cause  of  an  enlightened  progress  in  conflict  with  a  stupid
and  inmioral  conservatism.     The  *  historical  spirit  *  is  described
as  the  love  of  sheer  reality,  as  the  longing  for  hard  fact,  deter-
mined to  make  away  with  all  *  idols  of  the  den,*  however  ancient,
venerated,  and  influential,  in  the  sphere  of  theology.    The  *  his-
torical spirit '  accordingly  undertakes  to  *  disentangle  the  real
Person  of  Jesus  from  the  metaphysical  envelope  *  within  which
theology  is  said  to  have  *  encased  *  Him.    The  Christ  is  to  be
rescued  from  that  cloud-land  of  abstract  and  fanciful  speculation,
to  which  He  is  stated  to  have  been  banished  by  the  patristic  and
scholastic  divines ;  He  is  to  be  restored  to  Christendom  in  mani-
fest subjection  to  all  the  actual  conditions  and  laws  of  human
liifitory.    <  Look,*  it  is  said,  *  at  that  figure  of  the  Christ  which
you  see  traced  in  mosaics  in  the  apsis  of  a  Byzantine  church,

IV]


154    The  Christ  of  dogma  and  the  ChHst  of  his  fory.

Th&t  CountenEisce  npoD  which  you  gaze,  with  ite  rigid,  unalter-
able outline,  with  ite  calm,  gtrong  mien  of  uuaseailable  majesty ;
that  Form  from  wliicb  there  has  been  stripped  all  the  historic
circumstance  of  life,  all  that  belongs  to  the  changes  and  chaJices
of  our  mortal  condition ;  what  is  it  bat  an  artistic  equivalent
and  symbol  of  the  Catholic  dogma )  Elevated  thus  to  a  world
of  unfading  glory,  a&d  tbxoned  in  an  imperturbable  repose,  the
Byzantine  Chrietos  Fantocrator  must  be  viewed  as  the  espresaion
of  an  idea,  rather  than  as  the  transcript  of  a  fact.  A  r«rtain
interest  may  be  allowed  to  attach  to  such  a  representation,  from
ite  illostrating  a  particular  stage  in  the  development  of  religious
donght.  But  the  "  historical  spirit "  must  create  what  it  can
consider  a  really  "historical"  Christ,  who  will  be.  to  the  Christ  of
St.  Athanasiiia  and  St.  John  what  a  Bembrandt  or  a  Knbens  is
to  a  Giotto  or  a  Cimabtie.'  If  the  illustration  be  objected  to,  at
any  rate,  my  brethren,  the  aim  of  the  so-termed  'historical'
school  is  sufficiently  plain.  It  proposes  to  fashion  a  Christ
who  is  to  be  aesthetically  gracefol  and  majestic,  but  strictly
natural  and  human.  This  Christ  will  be  emancipated  from  the
bandages  which  '  snpematuralism  baa  wrapped  around  the  Pro-
phet of  Nazareth.*  He  will  be  divorced  from  any  idea  of  incar-
nating essential  Godhead ;  but,  as  we  are  assured.  He  will  still
be  something,  aye  more  than  the  Christ  of  the  Creed  has  ever
been  yet,  to  Chnstendom.  He  will  be  at  once  a  living  man,  and
the  very  ideal  of  humanity;  at  once  a  being  who  obeys  the  in-
vincible laws  of  nature,  lilie  ourselves,  yet  of  moral  proportions
so  mighty  and  so  unrivalled  that  his  appearance  among  men
shall  adequately  account  for  the  phenomenon  of  an  existing  and
still  expanding  Church.

Accordingly  by  this  representation  it  is  intended  to  place  ns
in  a  dilemma,  '  You  must  choose,'  men  seem  to  say,  '  between
history  and  dogma ;  you  must  choose  between  history  which  can
be  venfied,  and  dogma  which  belongs  to  the  sphere  of  inaccessible
abstractions.  You  must  make  your  choice ;  since  the  Catholio
dogma  of  Christ's  Divinity  is  pronounced  by  the  higher  criticism
to  be  irreconcileable  with  the  historical  reality  of  the  Life  of
Jesus.'  And  in  answer  to  that  challenge,  let  us  proceed,  my
brethren,  to  choose  history,  and  as  a  result  of  that  choice,  if  it
may  be,  to  maintain  that  the  Christ  of  history  is  either  the  God
Whom  we  believers  adore,  or  that  He  is  far  below  the  assumed
moral  level  of  the  mere  man,  whose  character  rationalism  still,
professes   to   respect  in  the   pages   of  its

("leot.


The  Catholic  dogma  really  historical.      155

For  let  us  observe  that  the  Catholic  doctrine  has  thus  much
in  its  favour : — ^it  takes  for  granted  the  only  existing  history  of
Jesus  Christ.  It  is  not  compelled  to  mutilate  or  to  enfeeble  it,
or  to  do  it  critical  violence.  It  is  in  league  with  this  history;  it  is
at  home,  as  is  no  other  doctrine,  in  the  pages  of  the  Evangelists.

Consider,  first  of  all,  the  general  impression  respecting  our
Lord's  Person,  which  arises  upon  a  survey  of  the  miracles
ascribed  to  Him  in  all  the  extant  accounts  of  His  Life.  To  a
thoughtful  Humanitarian,  who  believes  in  the  preternatural
elements  of  the  Gospel  history,  our  Lord's  miracles,  taken  as
a  whole,  must  needs  present  an  embarrassing  difficulty.  The
miraculous  cures  indeed,  which,  more  particularly  in  the  earlier
days  of  Christ's  ministry,  drew  the  eyes  of  men  towards  Him,  as
to  the  Healer  of  sickness  and  of  pain,  have  been  *  explained,*
however  unsatisfactorily,  by  the  singular  methods  generally  ac-
cepted among  the  older  rationalists.  A  Teacher,  it  used  to  be
argued,  of  such  character  as  Jesus  Christ,  must  have  created  a
profound  impression;  He  must  have  inspired  an  entire  confi-
dence ;  and  Uie  cures  which  He  seemed  to  work  were  the  imme-
diate results  of  the  impression  which  He  created ;  they  were  the
natural  consequences  of  the  confidence  which  He  inspired.  Now,
apart  from  other  and  many  obvious  objections  to  this  theory,  let
UB  observe  that  it  is  altogether  inapplicable  to  the  *  miracles  of
power,'  as  they  are  frequently  termed,  which  are  recorded  by
the  three  first  Evangelists,  no  less  than  by  St.  John.  *  Miracles
of  this  class,'  says  a  freethinking  writer,  '  are  not  cures  which
could  have  been  effected  by  the  influence  of  a  striking  sanctity
acting  upon  a  simple  faith.  They  are  prodigies ;  they  are,  as  it
seems,  works  which  Omnipotence  Alone  could  achieve.  In  the
case  of  these  miracles  it  may  be  said  that  the  laws  of  nature  are
simply  suspended.  Jesus  does  not  here  merely  exhibit  the
power  of  moral  and  mental  superiority  over  common  men ;  He
upsets  and  goes  beyond  the  rules  and  bounds  of  the  order  of  the
universe.  A  word  from  His  mouth  stills  a  tempest.  A  few
loaves  and  fishes  are  fashioned  by  His  Almighty  hand  into  an
abundant  feast,  which  satisfies  thousands  of  hungry  men.  At
His  bidding  life  returns  to  inanimate  corpses.  By  His  curse  a
fig-tree  which  had  no  fruit  on  it  is  withered  up  *.'     The  writer

*  Schenkel,  Charakterbild  Jesu,  p.  ai.  Dr.  Schenkel  concludes:  'Sonst
erschemt  Jesus  in  den  drei  ersten  Evangelien  durcligangig  als  ein  wahrer,
innerhalb  der  Grenzen  mensclilicher  Beschrankung  sich  bewegender  Mensch ;
durch  Seine  Wunderthatigkeit  werden  diese  Grenzen  durchbrocben ;  All-
naachtswunder  sind  mensdblich  nicht  mehr  begreiflich.*

n]


156  The  Resurrection^  and  the  truth  of  Christianity .

proceeds  to  argue  that  such  miracles  must  be  expelled  from  any
Life  of  Christ  which  'criticism'  will  condescend  to  accept.  They
belong,  he  contends,  to  that  Horrent  of  legend,'  with  which,
according  to  the  rationalistic  creed,  Jesus  was  surrounded  after
His  Death  by  the  unthinking  enthusiasm  of  His  disciples  ^.  But
then  a  question  arises  as  to  how  much  is  to  be  included  within
this  legendary '  torrent.'  In  particular,  and  above  aU  else,  is  the
Resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  grave  to  be  regarded  as  a
part  of  its  contributions  to  the  Life  of  Christ  1  Here  there  is  a
division  among  the  rationalizing  critics.  There  are  writers  who
reject  our  Lord's  miracles  of  power.  His  miraculous  Conception,
and  even  His  Ascension  into  heaven,  and  who  yet  shrink  from
denying  that  very  fundamental  fact  of  all,  the  fact  that  on  '  the
third  day  He  rose  from  the  dead,  according  to  the  Scriptures  o.'
A  man  must  have  made  up  his  mind  against  Christianity  more
conclusively  than  men  are  generally  willing  to  avow,  if  he  is  to
speculate  with  M.  Eenan  in  the  face  of  Christendom,  as  to  the
exact  spot  in  which  *  the  worms  consumed  the  lifeless  body'  of
Jesus  \  This  explicit  denial  of  the  literal  Resurrection  of  Jesus
from  the  grave  is  not  compensated  for  by  some  theory  identical
with,  or  analogous  to,  that  of  Hymenseus  and  Philetus®  respecting
the  general  Resurrection,  whereby  the  essential  subject  of  Christ's
Resurrection  is  changed,  and  the  idea  of  Chri^tianity,  or  the  soul
of  the  converted  Christian,  as  distinct  from  the  Body  of  the  Lord
Jesus,  is  said  to  have  been  raised  from  the  dead.  For  such  a
denial,  let  us  mark  it  well,  of  the  literal  Resurrection  of  the
Human  Body  of  Jesus  involves  nothing  less  than  an  absolute  and
total  rejection  of  Christianity.  All  orthodox  Churches,  all  the
great  heresies,  even  Socinianism,  have  believed  in  the  Resurrec-
tion of  Jesus.  The  literal  Resurrection  of  Jesus  was  the  cardinal

^  ScLenkel,  Charakterbild  Jesn,  p.  21 :  'Dass  ein  Lebensbild,  wie  das«
jenige  des  Erlosers,  bald  nach  dessen  irdischem  Hinscheiden  von  einem
peichen  Sagenstrom  umflossen  wurde,  liegt  in  der  Natur  der  Sache.*  It
may  be  asked — Why?  If  these  legendary  decorations  are  the  inevitable
consequences  of  a  life  of  devotion  to  moral  truth  and  to  philanthropy,  how
are  we  to  explain  their  absence  in  the  cases  of  so  many  moralists  and
philanthropists  ancient  and  modem  ?

^  Of.  Hase,  Leben  Jesn,  p.  381,  compared  with  p.  367.

^  Les  Apdtres,  p.  38 :  '  Pendant  que  la  conviction  in^ranlable  des  Apdtres
se  formait,  et  que  la  foi  du  monde  se  pr^paralt,  en  quel  endroit  les  vers
consumaient-ils  le  corps  inanim^  qui  avait  ^t^,  le  samedi  soir,  d^pos^  au
sdpulcre  ?  On  ignorera  toujours  ce  detail ;  car,  naturellement,  les  traditions
chr^tiennes  ne  peuvent  rien  nous  apprendre  lli^dessus.*

•  3  Tim.  ii.  18 :  "Cficyaios  Kcd  ^l\riTos,  oXrives  irepl  t^v  &A.^0€iav  ^(rrSxV"
<rav,  \4yoyris  r^v  hviarcurw  ^5i;  ytyovivai,     I  Tim.  i.  30.

[lect.


The  Resurrection,  and  other  Christian  miracles,  157

fact  upon  which  the  earliest  preachers  of  Christianity  based  their
appeal  to  the  Jewish  people^.  St.  Paul,  writing  to  a  Gentile
Church,  expressly  makes  Christianity  answer  with  its  life  for  the
literal  truth  of  the  Resurrection.  *  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  then
is  our  preaching  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also  vain.  .  .  Then  they
also  which  are  fallen  asleep  in  Christ  are  perished  g.'  Some
modem  writers  would  possibly  have  reproached  St.  Paul  with
offering  a  harsh  alternative  instead  of  an  argument.  But  St.
Paul  would  have  replied,  first,  that  our  Lord's  honour  and  credit
were  entirely  staked  upon  the  issue,-  since  He  had  foretold  His
Resurrection  as  the  'sign'  which  would  justify  His  claims^;
and  secondly,  that  the  fact  of  the  Resurrection  was  attested  by
evidence  which  must  outweigh  everything  except  an  h  priori
conviction  of  the  impossibility  of  miracle,  since  it  was  attested  by
the  word  of  more  than  two  hundred  and  fifty  living  persons  who
had  actually  seen  the  Risen  Jesus  \  As  to  objections  to  miracle
of  an  dt  jyriori  character,  St.  Paul  would  have  argued,  as  most
Theists,  and  even  the  French  philosopher,  have  argued,  that  such
objections  could  not  be  urged  by  any  man  who  believed  seriously
in  a  living  God  at  alii.     But  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  Resur-

'  Acts  i.  22,  ii.  24,  32,  iii.  15,  iv.  10,  v.  30,  x.  40,  xiii.  30,  33,  34,  xvii.  31.

«  I  Cor.  XV.  14,  18.  ^  St.  Matt.  xii.  39,  40.

*  I  Cor.  XV.  6 :  "Eiretra  &<f>0ri  ivdvu  vevraKoo'lois  6.B€\<f>dis  iipdva^,  4^  &y  ol
irXeiovs  fi€Pov<riv  tcos  Apriy  riyhs  Bh  Kcd  iKoifx-fiOriffav.  It  is  quite  arbitrary  to
say  that  *  the  Resurrection  with  Paul  is  hy  no  means  a  human  corporeal  re*
Burrection  as  with  the  Evangelists/  that  'his  &<t>67}  K^fxoi  implies  no  more
than  a  flash  and  a  sound,  which  he  interpreted  as  a  presence  of  Christ.*
(Westm.  Bev.  Oct.  1867,  p.  529.)  On  this  shewing,  the  (^pBrj  %ixavi  in  St.
Luke  xxiv.  34  might  similarly  be  resolved  into  an  illusion.  The  iupdKOfiev
of  St.  John  XX.  25  might  be  as  unreal  as  the  edpcuca  of  i  Cor.  ix.  T,  Con-
trast with  the  positive  tone  of  i  Cor.  xv.  6  the  measured  hesitation  of
2  Cor.  xii.  2.  It  is  also  a  mere  assumption  to  say  that  a  'palpable  body*
could  not  be  seen  at  once  by  500  persons ;  and  the  suggestion  that  St.  Paul's
own  belief  in  'a  continued  celestial  life  of  Christ/  and  in  the  moral  resur-
rection of  Christians  was  'afterwards  materialized*  into  'the  history  of
a  bodily  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  the  expectation  of  a  bodily  resurrection
of  mankind  from  the  grave,*  is  nothing  less  than  to  fasten  upon  the  Apostle
the  pseudo-spiritualistic  error,  against  which  in  this  chapter  he  so  pas-
sionately contends.  On  this  subject,  see  'The  Resurrection  of  Jesus
Christ,*  by  R.  Macpherson,  D.D.,  pp.127,  34^  J  Pressens^,  Jesus  Christ,
pp.  660-665.

i  '  Dieu  peut-H  faire  des  miracles,  c'est  It  dire,  peut-H  d^roger  aux  lois,
qu*Il  a  ^tablies?  Cette  question  s^rieusement  trait^e  serait  impie,  si  elle
n*^tait  absurde.  Ce  serait  faire  trop  d'honneur  k  celui,  qui  la  resoudrait
negativement,  que  de  le  punir ;  il  suffirait  de  Tenfermer.  Mais  aussi,  quel
homme  a  jamais  ni^,  que  Dieu  ptlt  faire  des  miracles  ?  *  Rousseau,  liOttres
Sorites  de  la  Montagne,  Lettre  iii.

IT]


L


158    Christ's  miracles  how  related  to  His  Divinity.

rectionbe  admitted  to  be  afoct,it  is  paerile  to  objectto  the  other
miracles  of  JeeoB,  or  to  any  other  ChriEtlaa  miracles,  provided
they  be  sofficieDtly  attested.  To  have  admitted  the  BtnpesdoDS
tmth  that  Jesas,  after  predicting  that  He  would  be  put  to  a  vio-
lent death,  and  then  rise  from  the  dead,  waa  actnally  bo  killed,
and  then  did  actually  so  rise,  must  incapacitate  any  thoughtful
man  for  objecting  to  the  superoatoral  Conception  or  to  the  Ascen-
Bion  into  heaven,  or  to  the  more  Btrilring  wonders  wrought  by
Jesus,  on  any  such  ground  as  that  of  intrinsic  improbabiHty.  The
Eesurrection  has,  as  compared  with  the  other  miracolous  occnr-
rences  narrated  in  the  Gospels,  all  the  force  of  an  &  forHori
ai^oment ;  they  follow,  if  we  may  use  the  term,  naturally  from
it ;  they  are  fitly  complemental  incidents  of  a  history  in  which
the  Beaurrection  has  already  made  it  plain,  that  we  are  dealing
with  One  in  Whose  case  our  ordinary  experience  of  the  limits
and  conditions  of  human  power  is  altogether  at  fault.

But  if  the  miracles  of  Jeeus  bo  admitted  in  the  block,  as  by  a
'  rational '  believer  in  the  Resurrection  they  must  be  admitted ;
they  do  point,  as  I  have  said,  to  the  Catholic  belief,  as  distinct
from  any  lower  conceptions  respecting  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ.
They  differ  from  the  miracles  of  prophets  and  Apostles  in  that,
instead  of  being  answers  to  prayer,  granted  by  a  Higher  Power,
they  manifestly  flow  forth  from  the  majeatic  Life  resident  in  the
Worker'^.  And  instead  of  presenting  ao  many  ' diflicalties '
which  have  to  be  surmounted  or  set  aside,  they  are  in  entire
harmony  with  that  representation  of  our  Saviour's  Peraonal
glory  which  is  embodied  in  the  Creeda,  St.  John  accordingly
calls  them  Christ's  'works,'  meaning  that  they  were  just  such
acts  as  might  be  expected  from  Eim,  being  such  as  He  was.
For  our  Lord's  miracles  are  something  more  than  evidences  that
He  was  the  organ  of  a  Divine  revelation.  They  do  not  merely
secure  a  deferential  attention  to  Hie  disclosures  respecting  tlie
nature  of  God,  the  duty  and  destiny  of  man.  His  own  Person,
mission,  and  work.  Certainly  they  have  this  properly  evidential
force;  He  Himself  appealed  to  them  as  having  it'.  But  it
would  be  difficult  altogether  to  accoont  for  their  form,  or  for
their  varietiea,  or  for  the  times  at  which  they  were  wrought,  or
for  the  motives  which  were  actually  assigned  for  working  them,
on  the  supposition  that  their  value  waa  only  evidential.  They
are  like  the  kind  deeds  of  the  wealthy,  or  the  good  advice  of  the

ite  II.     CliHBtdui  Kemem-
■  St.  Join  s.  38.

[lbct


Thdr  value  not  merely  evidential.  159

wise ;  they  are  like  that  debt  of  charity  which  is  due  fironl  the
possessors  of  great  endowments  to  suffering  humanity.     Christ
as  Man  owed  this  tribute  of  mercy  which  His  Godhead  had
rendered  it  possible  for  Him  to  pay,  to  those  whom  (such  was
His  love)    He  was  not   ashamed  to  call  His  brethren.     But
besides  this,  Christ'B  miracles  are  physical  and  symbolic  repre-
sentations  of  His  redemptive  action  as  the  Divine  Saviour  of
mankind.     Their  form   is   carefully   adapted  to   express  this
action.     By  healing  the  palsied,  the  blmd,  the  lame,  Christ
clothed  with  a  visible  form  His  plenary  power  to  cure  spiritual
diseases,  such  as  the  weakness,  tiie  darkness,  the  deadly  torpor
of  the  soul.     By  casting  out  devils  from  the   possessed,  He
pointed  to  His  victory  over  the  principalities  and  powers  of  evil,
whereby  man  would  be  freed  from  their  thraldom  and  restored
to  moral  liberty  ™,     By  raising  Lazarus  from  the  corruption  of
the  grave.  He  proclaimed  Himself  not  merely  a  Revealer  of  the
Resurrection,  but  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life  itself.     The
drift  and  meaning  of  such  a  miracle  as  that  in  which  our  Lord's
'Ephphatha '  brought  hearing  and  speech  to  the  deaf  and  dumb
is  at  once  apparent  when  we  place  it  in  the  light  of  the  Sacra-
ment of  baptism  J*.    The  feeding  of  the  five  thousand  is  remark-
able as  the  one  miracle  which  is  narrated  by  all  the  Evangelists ;
and  even  the  least  careful  among  readers  of  the  Gospel  cannot
fail  to  be  struck  with  the  solemn  actions  which  precede  the
wonder-work,  as  well  as  by  the  startling  magnificence  of  the
result.    Yet  the  permanent  significance  of  that  extraordinary
scene  at  Bethsaida  Julias  is  never  really  understood,  until  our
Lord's  great  discourse  in  the  synagogue  of  Capernaum,  which
immediately  follows  it,  is  read  as  the  spiritual  exposition  of  the
physical  miracle,  which  is  thus  seen  to  be  a  conmientary,  pal-
pable to  sense,  upon  the  vital  efficacy  of  the  Holy  Communion  o.

°>  St.  Matt.  zii.  a8 ;  St.  Luke  xi.  20.

»  St.  Mark  viii.  34,  35.

•  Compare  St.  Jolm  vi.  26-59 ;  and  observe  the  correBpondence  between
the  actions  described  in  St.  Matt.  xiv.  19,  and  xzvi.  26.  The  deeper  Lutheran
commentators  are  noticeably  distinguished  from  the  Oalvinistio  ones  in  re*
cognising  the  plain  Sacramental  reference  of  St.  John  vi.  53,  sqq.  See  Stier,
'Keden  Jesu,  in  loc. ;  Olshausen,  Comm.  in  loc. ;  Kahnis,  H.  Abendmahl,
p.  104,  sqq.  For  the  ancient  Church,  see  St.  Quys.  Horn,  in  loc. ;  Tertull.
Be  Orat.  6;  Clem.  Alex.  Psedagog.  I.  vi.  p.  123 ;  St.  Cyprian,  Be  Oratione
Dominicajj).  192  ;  St.  Hilary,  De  Trin.  viii.  14,  cited  in  Wilb.  H.  Euch.
P*  199.  The  Church  of  England  authoritatively  adopts  the  sacramental
interpretation  of  the  passage  byher  use  of  it  in  the  Exhortation  at  the
time  of  l^e  celebration  of  the  Holy  Communion.  'The  benefit  is  great,
IV]


i6o     The  mysteries  of  our  Lord's  earthly  Life

In  our  Lord*s  miracles  then  we  have  before  us  something
more  than  a  set  of  credentials ;  since  they  manifest  forth  His
Mediatorial  Glory.  They  exhibit  various  aspects  of  that  re-
demptive power  whereby  He  designed  to  save  lost  man  from  sin
and  death ;  and  they  lead  us  to  study,  from  many  separate  points
of  view,  Christ's  majestic  Personality,  as  the  Source  of  the  various
wonders  which  radiate  from  it.  And  assuredly  such  a  study  can
have  but  one  result  for  those  who  honestly  believe  in  the  literal
reality  of  the  wonders  described ;  it  must  force  upon  them  a
conviction  of  the  Divinity  of  the  worker  p.


if  with  a  tru6  penitent  heart  and  lively  faith  we  receive  that  Holy  Sacra-
ment :  for  fh^n  we  spiritually  eat  the  Flesh  of  Christ  and  drink  His  Blood ;
then  we  dw^  in  Christ  and  Christ  in  us ;  we  are  one  with  Christ  and
Christ  with  us.*    Cf.  too  the  *  Prayer  of  Humble  Access.'

P  It  may  be  urged  that  Socinians  have  been  earnest  believers  in  the
Besurrection  and  other  preternatural  facts  of  the  Life  of  Christ,  while  ex-
plicitlv  denying  His  Godhead.  This  is  true ;  but  it  is  strictly  true  only  of
past  tmies,  or  of  those  of  our  contemporaries  who  are  more  or  less  inacces-
sible, happily  for  themselves,  to  the  intellectual  influences  of  modem
scepticism.  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  modem  Socinian  of  high  edu-
cation who  believed  in  the  literal  truth  of  all  the  miraculous  incidents
recorded  in  the  Grospels.  This  is  not  merely  a  result  of  modem  objections
to  miracle ;  it  is  a  result  of  the  connexion,  more  clearly  felt,  even  by  sceptics,
than  of  ol(^  between  the  admission  of  miracles  and  the  obligation  to  admit
attendant  dogma.  In  his  Essay  on  Channing,  M.  Kenan  has  given  ezpression
to  this  instinct  of  modem  sceptical  thought.  'B  est  certam,'  he  observes^
'que  si  Tesprit  modeme  a  raison  de  vouloir  une  religion,  qui,  sans  exdure  le
sumaturel,  en  diminue  la  dose  autant  que  possible,  la  religion  de  Channing
est  la  plus  parfaite  et  la  plus  ^pur^e  qui  ait  paru  jusqu'ici.  Mais  est-ce  li
tout,  en  v^rit^,  et  quand  le  symbole  sera  r^duit  k  croire  k  Dieu  et  an  Christy
qu'y  aura-t-on  gagn^p  Le  scepticisme  se  tiendra-t'il  pour  satisfait?  La
foimule  de  l*univers  en  sera-t-eUe  plus  complete  et  plus  daire  ?  La  destin^
de  Thomme  et  de  Thumanit^  moins  impenetrable  ?  Avec  son  symbole  ^ur^
Channing  ^vite-t-il  mieux  que  les  th^ologiens  catholiques  les  objections  de
Tincr^didite  ?  Hdas!  non.  H  admet  la  n^surrection  de  jesus-Christ,  et
n*admet  pas  sa  Divinity ;  il  admet  le  Bible,  et  n*admet  pas  Tenfer.  H  d^ploie
toutes  les  susceptibilit^s  d*un  scholastique  pour  ^tablir  centre  les  IVinitaares,
en  quel  sens  le  Christ  est  fils  de  Dieu,  et  en  quel  sens  il  ne  Test  pas.  Or,  ti
Von  accords  qu'il  y  a  eu  une  JExUtence  rSelle  et  miraculeuse  d'un  hout  a
Vautre,  pourquoi  ne  pas  franchement  Vappeler  Divine  t  L'un  ne  demande
pas  un  plus  grand  effort  de  croyance  que  Tautre.  £n  v^rite,  dans  oette
voie,  il  n*y  a  que  le  premier  pas  qui  coute ;  il  ne  faut  pas  marchander  avec
le  sumaturel ;  la  foi  va  d*une  seule  pi^e,  et,  le  sacrifice  accompli,  il  ne  sied
pas  de  r^clamer  en  detail  les  droits  dont  on  a  fut  une  fois  pour  toutes
rentibre  cession.*  Etudes  d'Histoire  Religieuse,  pp.  377,  378.  Who  would
not  rather,  a  thousand  times  over,  have  been  Channing  than  be  M.  Benan  ?
Yet  is  it  not  dear  that,  half  a  century  later,  Channing  must  have  believed
much  less,  or,  as  we  may  well  trust,  much  more,  than  was  believed  by  the
minister  of  Federal-street  Chapel,  Boston  ?

[lsgt.


imply  that  His  Person  is  Superhuman.     i6i

But  the  miracles  which  especially  point  to  the  Catholic  doc-
trine as  their  justification,  and  which  are  simply  incumbrances
blocking  up  the  way  of  a  Humanitarian  theorist,  are  those  of
which  our  Lord's  Manhood  is  itself  the  subject.     According  to
the  Gospel  narrative,  Jesus  enters  this  world  by  one  miracle,  and
He  leaves  it  by  another.     His  human  manifestation  centres  in
that  miracle  of  miracles,  His  Resurrection  from  the  grave  after
death.     The  Besurrection  is  the  central  fact  up  to  which  all
leads,  and  from  which  all  radiates.     Such  wonders  as  Christ's
Birth  of  a  Virgin-mother,  His  Resurrection  from  the  tomb,  and
His  Ascension  into  heaven,  are  not  merely  the  credentials  of  our .
redemption,  they  are  distinct  stages  and  processes  of  the  re-
demptive work  itself.    Taken  in  their  entirety,  they  interpose  a
measureless  interval  between  the  Life  of  Jesus  and  the  lives  of
the  greatest  of  prophets  or  of  Apostles,  even  of  those  to  whom  it
was  given  to  still  the  elements  and  to  raise  the  dead.    To  expel
these  miracles  from  the  Life  of  Jesus  is  to  destroy  the  identity
of  the  Christ  of  the  Gospels ;  it  is  to  substitute  a  new  Christ
for  the  Christ  of  Christendom.     Who  would  recognise  the  true
Christ  in  the  natural  son  of  a  himian  father,  or  in  the  crucified
prophet  whose  body  has  rotted  in  an  earthly  grave  %  Yet  on  the
other  hand,  who  will  not  admit  that  He  Who  was  conceived  of
the  Holy  Ghost  and  bom  of  a  Virgin-mother,  Who,  after  being
crucified,  dead,  and  buried,  rose  again  the  third  day  from  the
dead,  and   then  went  up  into  heaven  before  the  eyes  of  His
Apostles,  must  needs  be  an  altogether  superhuman  Being  %  The
Catholic  doctrine  then  is  at  home  among  the  facts  of  the  Gospel
narrative  by  the  mere  fact  of  its  proclaiming  a  superhuman
Christ,  while  the  modem  Humanitarian  theories  are  ill  at  ease
among  those   facts.     The  four  Evangelists,   amid   their   dis-
tinguishing peculiarities,  concur  in  representing  a  Christ  Whose
Life  is  encased  in  a  setting  of  miracles.     The  Catholic  doctrine
meets  these  representations  more  than  half-way;  they  are  in
sympathy  with,  if  they  are  not  admitted  to  anticipate,  its  as-
sertion.  The  Gospel  miracles  point  at  the  very  least  to  a  Christ
Who  is  altogether  above  the  range  of  human  experience ;  and
the  Creeds  recognise  and  confirm  this  indication  by  saying  that
He  is  Divine.     Thus  the  Christ  of  dogma  is  the  Christ  of
liifitory:    He  is  the  Christ  of  the   only  extant  history  which
describes  the  Founder  of  Christendom  at  all.     He  may  not  be
the  Christ  of  some  modem  commentators  upon  that  history ;
hut  these  commentators  do  not  affect  to  take  the  history  as  it
has  come  down  to  us.     As  the  Gospel  narratives  stand,  they
iv]  M


1 62  Can  our  LorcPs  miracles  be  denied  or  ignored?

present  a  block  of  difficiilties  to  Humanitarian  theories ;  and
these  difficulties  can  only  be  removed  by  mutilations  of  the
narratives  so  wholesale  and  radical  as  to  destroy  their  sub-
stantial interest,  besides  rendering  the  retention  of  the  fragments
which  may  be  retained,  a  purely  arbitrary  procedure.  The
Gospel  narratives  describe  the  Author  of  Christianity  as  the
Worker  and  the  subject  of  extraordinary  miracles ;  and  these
miracles  are  such  as  to  afford  a  natui*al  lodgment  for,  nay,  to
demand  as  their  correlative,  the  doctrine  of  the  Creed.  That
doctrine  must  be  admitted  to  be,  if  not  the  divinely  authorized
explanation,  at  least  the  best  intellectual  conception  and  resume
of  the  evangelical  history.  A  man  need  not  be  a  believer  in
order  to  admit,  that  in  asserting  Christ's  Divinity  we  make  a
fair  translation  of  the  Gospel  story  into  the  language  of  abstract
thought ;  and  that  we  have  the  best  key  to  that  story  when  we
see  in  it  the  doctrine  that  Christ  is  God,  unfolding  itself  in  a
series  of  occurrences  which  on  any  other  supposition  seem  to
wear  an  air  of  nothing  less  than  legendary  extravagance.

It  may — ^it  probably  will — ^be  objected  to  all  this,  that  a  large
number  of  men  and  women  at  the  present  day  are  on  the  one
hand  strongly  prepossessed  against  the  credibility  of  all  miracles
whatever,  while  on  the  other  they  are  sincere  *  admirers '  of  the
moral  character  of  Jesus  Christ.  They  may  not  wish  explicitly
and  in  terms  to  reject  the  miraculous  history  recorded  in  the
Gospels ;  but  still  less  do  they  desire  to  commit  themselves  to
an  unreserved  acceptance  of  it.  Whether  from  indifference  to
miraculous  occurrences,  or  because  their  judgment  is  altogether
in  suspense,  they  would  rather  keep  the  preternatural  element
in  our  Lord's  Life  out  of  sight,  or  shut  their  eyes  to  it.  But
they  are  open  to  the  impressions  which  may  be  produced  by  the
spectacle  of  high  ethical  beauty,  if  only  the  character  of  Christ
can  be  disentangled  from  a  series  of  wonders,  which,  as  tran-
scending all  ordinary  human  experience,  do  not  touch  the  motives
that  compel  their  assent  to  religious  truth.  Accordingly  we  arc
warned,  that  if  it  is  not  a  piece  of  spiritual  thoughtlessness,  and
even  cruelty,  it  is  at  any  rate  a  rhetorical  mistake  to  insist  upon
a  consideration  so  opposed  to  the  intellectual  temper  of  the
time.

This  is  what  may  be  urged :  but  let  it  be  observed,  that  the
objector  assumes  a  point  which  should  rather  have  been  proved.
He  assumes  the  possibility  of  putting  forward  an  honest  picture
of  the  Life  of  Jesus,  which  shall  uphold  the  beauty,  and  even  the
perfection  of  His  moral  character,  while  denying  the  historical

[lsct«


Our  Lord's  references  to  His  Person.      163

reality  of  His  miracles,  or  at  any  rate  while  ignoring  them.
Whereas,  if  the  only  records  which  we  possess  of  the  Life  of
Jesos  are  to  be  believed  at  all,  they  make  it  certain  that  Jesus
Christ  did  claim  to  work,  and  was  Himself  the  embodiment  of,
startling  miracles^.  How  can  this  fact  be  dealt  with  by  a  modem
disbeliever  in  the  miraculous  %    Was  Christ  then  the  ignorant
victim  and  promoter  of  a  crude  superstition  )     Or  was  He,  as
M.  Benan  considers,  passive  and  unresisting,  while  credited  with
working  wonders  which  He  knew  to  be  merely  thaumaturgic
tricks  I*  I    On  either  supposition,  is  it  possible  to  uphold  Him  as
(the  moral  ideal  of  humanity,'  or  indeed  as  the  worthy  object  of
any  true  moral  enthusiasm  I     We  cannot  decline  this  question ;
it  is  forced  upon  us  by  the  subject*matter.    A  neutral  attitude
towards  the  miraculous  element  in  the  Gospel  history  is  impos-
sible.   The  claim  to  work  miracles  is  not  the  least  prominent
element  of  our  Lord's  teaching ;  nor  are  the  miracles  which  are
said  to  have  been  wrought  by  Him  a  fanciful  or  ornamental
appendage  to  His  action.    The  miraculous  is  inextricably  inter-
woven with  the  whole  Life  of  Christ.     The  ethical  beauty,  nay
the  moral  integrity  of  our  Lord's  character  is  dependent,  whe-
ther we  will  it  or  not,  upon  the  reality  of  His  miracles.  It  may
be  very  desirable  to  defer  as  far  as  possible  to  the  mental  pre-
possessions of  our  time ;  but  it  is  not  practicable  to  put  asunder
two  things  which  Qod  has  joined  together,  namely,  the  beauty  of
Christ's  character  and  the  handjide  reality  of  the  miracles  which
He  professed  to  work.

But  let  us  nevertheless  follow  the  lead  of  this  objection  by
tnming  to  consider  what  is  the  real  bearing  of  our  Lord's  moral
character  upon  the  question  of  His  Divinity.  Li  order  to  do
this,  it  is  necessary  to  ask  a  previous  question.  What  position
did  Jesus  Christ,  either  tacitly  or  explicitly,  claim  to  occupy  in
His  intercourse  with  men  )  What  aUusions  did  He  make  to  the
subject  of  His  Personality  I    You  wiU  feel,  my  brethren,  that  it

^  Ecce  HomOi  p.  43 :  '  On  the  whole,  miracles  play  so  important  a  part
in  Christ's  scheme,  that  any  theoinr  which  would  represent  Uiem  as  due
entirely  to  the  imagination  o(  His  rollowers  or  of  a  later  age,  destroys  the
credibUitj  of  the  documents,  not  partially,  but  wholly,  and  leaves  Christ
a  personage  as  mythical  as  Hercules.*

^  Of.  Vie  de  J^sus,  p.  365 :  '  H  est  done  permis  de  croire  qu*on  lui  imposa
la  reputation  de  thaumaturge,  qu'il  n*y  risUta  pen  heaucoupf  mais  qu*il  ne
fit  rien  non  plus  pour  y  aider,  et  qu  en  tout  cas,  il  sentait  la  vanity  de
ropinion  k  cet  ^gard.  Ce  serait  manquer  k  la  bonne  m^ode  historique
d'ecouter  trop  ici  nos  repugnances.*  See  M.  Benan*s  account  of  the  raising
of  Lazarus,  ibid.  pp.  361,  363.
IY]  Ma


1 64  Fifsi  stage  of  Christ's  teaching,  mainly  ethical.

is  impossible  to  overrate  the  Bolenm  importaDce  of  Bucli  a  point
as  this.  We  are  here  toucbiitg  the  very  heart  of  our  great
Bubject :  we  have  penetrated  to  the  inmost  shrine  of  ChriBtian
truth,  when  we  thus  proceed  to  examine  those  words  of  the
Gospels  which  exhibit  the  consciousness  of  the  Fonnder  of
Christianity  respecting  His  rank  in  the  scale  of  being,  ^tli
what  awe,  yet  with  what  loving  eagemeEs,  most  not  a  Christian
enter  on  such  an  examination !

No  reader  of  the  Gospels  can  fail  to  see  that,  speaking  gene-
rally, and  without  reference  to  any  presumed  order  of  the  events
and  sayings  in  the  Gospel  history,  there  are  two  distinct  stages
or  levels  in  the  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.

1.  Of  these  the  first  is  mainly  concerned  with  primary  fimda-
mental  moral  truth.  It  is  in  substance  a  call  to  repentance,  and
the  proclamation  of  a  new  life.  It  is  summarized  in  the  words,
'  Bepent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand  '.'  A  change
of  mind,  both  respecting  self,  and  respecting  Qod,  was  necrasaiy
before  a  man  could  lead  the  new  life  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.
In  a  previous  lecture  we  have  had  occasion  to  consider  the  king-
dom of  heaven  as  the  outline  or  plan  of  a  world-wide  institution
which  was  to  take  its  place  in  history.  But  viewed  in  ita  relation
to  the  life  of  the  soul,  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  is  the  home  and  the
native  atmosphere  of  a  new  and  higher  order  of  spiritual  exist-
ence. This  new  life  is  not  merely  active  thought,  such  as  might
be  stimulated  by  the  cross-questioning  of  a  Socrates ;  nor  is  it
moral  force,  the  play  of  which  was  limited  to  the  single  soul  that
possessed  it.  It  is  moral  and  mental  life,  having  God  and  men
for  its  objects,  and  accordingly  lived  in  an  organized  society,  as
the  necessary  counterpart  of  its  energetic  action.  Of  this  stage
of  our  Lord's  preaching,  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is  the  most
representative  document.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  preaches
penitence  by  laying  down  the  highest  law  of  holiness.  It  con-
trasts the  externalized  devotion,  the  conventional  and  worldly
religion  of  the  time,  created  and  sanctioned  by  the  leading  cur-
rents of  public  opinion,  and  described  as  the  righteousness  of  the
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  with  a  new  and  severe  ideal  of  morahtf,
embodied  in  the  new  law  of  Christian  perfection.  It  stimulates
and  regulates  penitence,  by  proposing  a  new  conception  of
blessedness ;  by  contrasting  the  spirit  of  the  new  law  with  the
literalism  of  the  old ;  by  exhibiting  the  devotional  duties,  the
ruling  motives,  the  characteristic  temper,  and  the  special  dangers

"St.Matt.iv.  17.

[lict.


No  confession  of  personal  shortcomings.     165

of  the  new  life.  Incidentally  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  states
certain  doctrines,  such  as  that  of  the  Divine  Providence,  with
great  explicitness  ^ ;  but,  throughout  it,  the  moral  element  is
predominant.  This  great  discourse  quickens  and  deepens  a
sense  of  sin  by  presenting  the  highest  ideal  of  an  inward  holi-
ness. In  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  our  Lord  is  laying  broad
and  deep  the  foundations  of  His  spiritual  edifice.  A  pure  and
loving  heart;  an  open  and  trustful  conscience;  a  freedom  of
communion  with  the  Father  of  spirits ;  a  love  of  man  as  man,
the  measure  of  which  is  to  be  nothing  less  than  a  man's  love
of  himself;  above  all  a  stem  determination,  at  any  cost,  to  be
true,  true  with  God,  true  with  men,  true  with  self; — such  are
the  pre-requisites  for  genuine  discipleship ;  such  the  spiritual
and  subjective  bases  of  the  new  and  Absolute  Beligion ;  such
the  moral  material  of  the  first  stage  of  our  Lord's  public
teaching.

In  this  first  stage  of  our  Lord's  teaching  let  us  moreover  note
two  characteristics.

(a)  And  first,  that  our  Lord's  recorded  language  is  absolutely
wanting  in  a  feature,  which,  on  the  supposition  of  His  being
merely  human,  would  seem  to  have  been  practically  indispensable.
Our  Lord  does  not  place  before  us  any  relative  or  lower  standard
of  morals.  He  proposes  the  highest  standard ;  He  enforces  the
absolute  morality.  '  Be  ye  therefore  perfect,'  He  says,  *  even  as
your  Father  Which  is  in  Heaven  is  perfect  ^.'  Now  in  the  case
of  a  human  teacher  of  high  moral  and  spiritual  attainments,
what  should  we  expect  to  be  a  necessary  accompaniment  of  this
teaching  )  Surely  we  should  expect  some  confession  of  personal
unworthiness  thus  to  teach.  We  should  look  for  some  trace  of
a  feeling  (so  inevitable  in  this  pulpit)  that  the  message  which
must  he  spoken  is  the  rebuke,  if  not  the  condemnation,  of  the
man  who  must  speak  it.  Conscious  of  many  shortcomings,  a
human  teacher  must  at  some  time  reUeve  his  natural  sense  of
honesty,  his  fundamental  instinct  of  justice,  by  noting  the  dis-
crepancy between  his  weak,  imperfect,  perhaps  miserable  self,
and  his  sublime  and  awful  message.  He  must  draw  a  line,  if  I
may  so  speak,  between  his  official  and  his  personal  self ;  and  in
his  personal  capacity  he  must  honesUy,  anxiously,  persistentiy
associate  himself  with  his  hearers,  as  being  before  God,  like  each
one  of  themselves,  a  learning,  struggling,  erring  soul.  But  Jesus
Christ  makes  no  approach  to  such  a  distinction  between  Himself

♦  St.  Matt.  vi.  35-33.  •  Ibid.  v.  48.

IV]


1 66  The  sense  of  sin  commonly  quickened  by  sanctity.

tiud  His  message.  He  bida  men  be  like  Ood,  and  He  gives  not
the  faintest  hint  that  any  trace  of  unlikeness  to  God  in  Himself
obliges  Him  to  accompany  the  delivery  of  that  precept  with  a
protestation  of  His  own  personal  unworthiness.  Do  you  say
that  this  is  only  a  rhetorical  style  or  mood  derived  by  tradition
from  the  Hebrew  prophets,  and  natural  in  any  Semitic  teacher
who  aspired  to  succeed  them  %  I  answer,  that  nothing  is  plainer
in  the  Hebrew  prophets  than  the  clear  distinction  which  is  con-
stantly maintained  between  the  moral  level  of  the  teacher  and
the  moral  level  of  His  message.  The  prophetic  ambassador
represents  the  Invisible  King  of  Israel ;  but  the  holineaa  of  the
King  is  never  measured,  never  compromised  by  the  imperfec-
tions of  His  representative.  The  prophetic  writings  aboond  in
confessions  of  weakness,  in  confessions  of  shortcomings,  in
confessions  of  sin.  The  greatest  of  the  prophets  is  permitted
to  see  the  gloiy  of  the  Lord,  and  he  forthwith  exclaims  in  agony,
*  Woe  is  me  1  for  I  am  undone ;  because  I  am  a  man  of  unclean
lips,  and  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  lips :  for
mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of  Hosts  *.'

But  the  eilence  of  Jesus  respecting  any  such  sense  of  personal
unworthiness  has  been  accounted  for  by  the  unrivalled  closeness
of  His  life-long  communion  with  Qod.  Is  it  then  certain  that
the  holiest  souls  are  least  alive  te  personal  sin  1  Do  they  whose
life  of  thought  ia  little  less  than  the  breath  of  a  perpetual  prayer,
and  who  dwell  continuously  in  the  presence-chamber  of  the  King
of  kings,  profess  themselves  insensible  to  that  taint  of  sin,  from
which  none  are  altogether  free  1  Is  this  the  lesson  which  we
learn  from  the  language  of  the  best  of  the  servants  of  Ood  1  My
brethren,  the  very  reverse  is  the  case.  Those  who  have  lived
nearest  to  God,  and  have  known  most  about  Him,  and  have  been
most  visibly  irradiated  by  the  light  of  His  conntenance,  have
been  foremost  to  acknowledge  that  the  '  burden '  of  remaining
imperfection  in  themselves  was  truly  '  intolerable.'  Their  eager
protestations  have  often  seemed  to  the  world  to  be  ei&er  the
exaggerations  of  ianaticism,  or  else  the  proof  of  a  more  than
ordinary  wickedness.  For  blemishes  which  might  have  passed
unobserved  in  a  spiritual  twilight,  are  lighted  op  with  torturing
clearness  by  those  searching,  scorching  rays  of  moral  truth,  that
stream  from  the  bright  Sanctity  of  Ood  upon  the  soul  that
beholds  It.  In  that  Presence  the  holiest  of  creatures  must  own
with  the  Psalmist^ '  Thoa  hast  set  our  misdeeds  before  Thee,  and

[lkct.


Significance  ofChrisfs  sense  of  perfect  sinlessness.  167

our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of  Thy  countenance^/  Such  self-
accusing,  broken-hearted  confessions  of  sin  have  been  the  utter-
ances of  men  the  most  conspicuous  in  Christendom  for  holiness
of  life ;  and  no  true  saint  of  Gk)d  ever  supposed  that  by  a  con-
stant spiritual  sight  of  God  the  soul  would  lose  its  keen  truthful
sense  of  personal  sinfulness.  No  man  could  presume  that  this
sense  of  sinfulness,  as  distinct  from  the  sense  of  unpardoned
guilt,  would  be  banished  by  close  communion  with  Qod,  unless
his  moral  standard  was  low,  and  his  creed  imperfect.  Any  such
presumption  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  a  true  sight  of  Him
Whose  severe  and  stainless  beauty  casts  the  shadow  of  failure
upon  all  that  is  not  Himself,  and  Who  charges  His  very  angels
with  moral  folly.

Yet  Jesus  Christ  never  once  confesses  sin;  He  never  once
asks  for  pardon.  Is  it  not  He,  Who  so  sharply  rebukes  the
self-righteousness  of  the  Pharisee  \  Might  He  not  seem  to  ignore
all  human  piety  that  is  not  based  upon  a  broken  heart  I  Does
He  not  deal  with  human  nature  at  large  as  the  true  prodigal,  who
must  penitently  return  to  a  Father's  love  as  the  one  condition  of
its  peace  and  bliss)  Yet  He  Himself  never  lets  fall  a  hint.  He
Himself  never  breathes  a  prayer,  which  implies  any,  the  slightest
trace,  of  a  personal  remorse y.  From  no  casual  admission  do  we
gather  that  any,  the  most  venial  sin,  has  ever  been  His.  Never
for  one  moment  does  He  associate  Himself  with  any  passing
experience  of  that  anxious  dread  of  the  penal  future  with  which
His  own  awful  words  must  needs  fill  the  sinner's  heart.  If  His
Soul  is  troubled,  at  least  His  moral  sorrows  are  not  His  own,
they  are  a  burden  laid  on  Him  by  His  love  for  others.  Nay,
He  challenges  His  enemies  to  convince  Him  of  sin.  He  declares
positively  that  He  does  always  the  will  of  the  Father  z.  Even
when  speaking  of  Himself  as  Man,  He  always  refers  to  eternal
life  as  His  inalienable  possession.  It  might,  so  perchance  we
think,  be  the  illusion  of  a  moral  dulness,  if  only  He  did  not
penetrate  the  sins  of  others  with  such  relentless  analysis.  It
might,  we  imagine,  be  a  subtle  pride,  if  we  did  not  know  Him
to  be  so  unrivalled  in  His  great  humility  \     This  consciousness

«  Ps.  xc.  8.  Perowne  observes  that  no  New  Testament  writer  ever  ap-
plies Old  Testament  confessions  of  sinfulness  to  Jesui  Christ.  Psalms,  i.
p.  54*    Gf.  Modey,  Lectures,  p.  125.

y  Heb.  vii.  37,  where  toCto  can  only  refer  to  iJxip  rnv  tov  ^oow  &ycul>4ptw:
cf.  ZirioSf  &KCUCOS,  k.t.A.,  ver.  26.

■  St.  John  viii.  46,  ibid.  ver.  29,  cf.  ver.  26 ;  cf.  Lect.  I.  p.  23.  note  h.

*  HoUard,  Caractbre  de  J^sus-Christ,  p.  150.  Cf.  also  UUmann,  SUnd-
loeigkeity  Th.  I.  Kap.  3.  $  4.     The  frivolous  objections  to  our  Lord*s

rv]


1 68  Authoritative  character  of  Christ's  teaching.

of  an  absolute  sinlessness  in  such  a  Soul  as  that  of  Jesus  Christ,
points  to  a  moral  elevation  unknown  to  our  actual  human  expe-
rience. It  is,  at  the  very  least,  suggestive  of  a  relation  to  the
Perfect  Moral  Being  altogether  unique  in  human  history  ^,

sinlessness  wHich  are  urged  from  St.  Luke  ii.  41-52,  St.  Matt.  zxi.  13-17,
and  17-33,  and  from  His  relation  to  Judas,  are  discussed  in  this  'work,
Th.  III.  Kap.  I .  §  4.  This  interesting  writer  however,  while  asserting  non
peccdsse  of  our  Lord,  falls  short  of  Catholic  truth  in  denying  to  Him  the
*  non  posse  peccare.*  The  objections  advanced  by  M.  F.  Pecant  in  his  Lb
Christ  et  la  Conscience,  1859,  are  plainly  a  result  of  that  writer^s  Hmnani-
tarianism.  Our  Lord's  answers  to  His  Mother,  His  cursing  the  barren  fig-
tree.  His  sending  the  devils  into  the  herd  of  swine.  His  driving  the  money-
changers from  the  temple,  and  His  last  denunciations  against  the  Pharisees,
present  no  difficulty  to  those  who  see  in  Him  the  Lord,  as  well  as  the  Son
of  Mary,  the  Maker  and  Owner  of  the  world  of  nature,  the  Seaorcher  and
Judge  of  human  hearts.     Gf.  also  note  0.

*>  Cf.  "Mjc.  F.  W.  Newman,  in  his  Phases  of  Faith,  p.  143 :  *  We  hare  a
v^7  imperfect  history  of  the  Apostle  James ;  and  I  do  not  know  that  I
oould  adduce  any  fact  specifically  recorded  concerning  him  in  disproof  of  his
absolute  moral  perfection,  if  any  of  his  Jerusalem  disciples  had  chosen  to  set
up  this  as  a  dogma  of  religion.    Yet  no  one  would  blame  me  as  morose,  or
indisposed  to  acknowledge  genius  and  greatness,  if  I  insisted  on  believing
James  to  be  frail  and  imperfect,  while  admitting  that  I  knew  almost  nothing
about  him.    And  why  ?  Singly  and  surely,  because  we  know  him  to  be  a
man :  that  suffices.    To  set  up  James  or  John  or  Daniel  as  my  model  and
my  Lord ;  to  be  swallowed  up  in  him,  and  press  him  upon  others  as  a  mii-
versal  standard,  would  be  despised  as  a  self-degrading  idolatry,  and  resented
as  an  obtrusive  favouritism.    Now  why  does  not  uie  same  equally  apply
if  the  name  Jesus  be  substituted  for  these  ?  Why,  in  defect  of  all  other
knowledge  than  the  bare  fact  of  his  manhood,  are  we  not  unhesitatingly  to
take  for  granted  that  he  does  not  exhaust  all  perfection,  and  is  at  best  only
one  amongst  many  brethren  and  equals  ?  *   The  answer  is  that  we  have  to
choose  between  believing  in  Christ's  moral  perfection,  and  ccmdemning  Him
of  being  guilty  either  of  spiritual  blindness  or  hypocrisy  (see  Ullmann,  ubi
sup.) ;  and  that  His  teaching,  His  actions,  and  (Mr.  Newman  will  allow  as  to
add)  His  supernatural  credentials,  taken  together,  make  believing  Him  to  be
sinless  the  easier  alternative.  But  Mr.  Newman's  remark!^  are  of  substantial
value,  as  indirectly  shewing,  from  a  point  of  view  much  further  removed  from
Catholic  belief  than  Socinianism  itself,  how  steadily  a  recognition  of  our
Lord's  moral  perfection  as  Man  tends  to  promote  an  acceptance  of  the  truth
that  He  is  God.     'If,'  says  Mr.  Newman,  'I  were  already  convinced  that
this  person  [he  means  our  Lord]  was  a  great  Unique,  separated  from  all
other  men  by  an  impassable  chasm  in  regard  to  his  physical  origin,  I  (for
one)  should  be  much  readier  to  believe  that  he  was  unique  and  unapproach'
able  in  other  respects ;  for  all  Grod's  works  have  an  internal  harmony.     It
could  not  be  for  nothing  that  this  exceptional  personage  was  sent  into  the
world.    That  he  was  intended  for  head  of  the  human  race  in  one  or  more
senses,  would  be  a  plausible  opinion;  nor  should  I  feel  any  incredulous
repugnance  against  believing  his  morality  to  be,  if  not  divinely  perfect,
yet  separated  from  that  of  conmion  men  so  far  that  he  might  he  a  Ood  to
us,  just  as  every  parent  is  to  a  young  child.'    Ibid.  p.  142.

[lkct.


His  claim  to  revise  the  Sinaitic  Revelation.     1 69

(j8)  The  other  characteristic  of  this  stage  of  our  Lord*s  teach-
ing is  the  attitude  which  He  at  once  and,  if  I  may  so  say,
naturally  assumes,  not  merely  towards  the  teachers  of  His  time,
hut  towards  the  letter  of  that  older,  divinely-given  Revelation
which  they  preserved  and  interpreted.  The  people  early  remarked
that  Jesus  '  taught  as  One  having  authority,  and  not  as  the
Scrihes  c.*  The  Scribes  reasoned,  they  explained,  they  balanced
argument  against  argument,  they  appealed  to  the  critical  or
verifying  faculty  of  their  hearers.  But  here  is  a  Teacher,  Who
sees  truth  intuitively,  and  announces  it  simply,  without  con«
descending  to  reconunend  it  by  argument.  He  is  a  Teacher,
moreover,  not  of  truth  obvious  to  all,  but  of  truth  which  might
have  seemed  to  the  men  who  first  heard  it  to  be  what  we  should
call  paradoxical.  He  condemns  in  the  severest  language  the
doctrine  and  the  practice  of  the  most  influential  religious  au-
thorities among  His  countrymen.  He  takes  up  instinctively  a
higher  position  than  He  assigns  to  any  who  had  preceded  Him
in  Israel.  He  passes  in  review,  and  accepts  or  abrogates  not
merely  the  traditional  doctrines  of  the  Jewish  schools,  but  the
Mosaic  law  itself.  His  style  runs  thus :  '  It  was  said  to  them
of  old  time, . . .  but  I  say  unto  you  d.*

Here  too  it  is  necessary  to  protest  against  statements  which
imply  that  this  authoritative  teaching  of  Jesus  was  merely  a
continuation  of  the  received  prophetical  style.  It  is  true  that
the  prophets  gave  prominence  to  the  moral  element  in  the
teaching  of  the  Pentateuch,  that  they  expanded  it,  and  that  so
far  they  anticipated  one  side  of  the  ministry  of  Jesus  Himself.
But  the  prophets  always  appealed  to  a  higher  sanction;  the
prophetic  argument  addressed  to  the  conscience  of  Israel  was
ever,  *  Thus  saith  the  Lord.'  How  significant,  how  full  of  im-
port as  to  His  consciousness  respecting  Himself  is  our  Lord's
customary  phrase,  *  Verily,  I  say  unto  you  ®.'  What  prophet  ever
set  himself  above  the  great  Legislator,  above  the  Law  written  by
the  finger  of  God  on  Sinai  ?  What  prophet  ever  undertook  to
ratify  the  Pentateuch  as  a  whole,  to  contrast  his  own  higher
morality  with  some  of  its  precepts  in  detail,  to  imply  even
remotely  that  he  was  competent  to  revise  that  which  every
Israelite  knew  to  be  the  handiwork  of  Qod  1  What  prophet  ever

•  St.  Matt.  vii.  39.

^  Ibid.  V.  37.     For  the  translation  of  roTr  ii^x^^h  "^  Archbishop
Trench  on  Auth.  Vers,  of  New  Testament,  p.  79.

*  d/&V  ^^»,  K,r.\.  occurs  forty-nine  times  in  the  Synoptic  GUwpels;  in
St.  John  &/iV>  V^i'i  twenty-fiye  times.

IV]


170  W^y  Christ  provoked  unfriendly  scrutiny .

thns  implicitly  placed  himeelf  on  a  line  of  equality,  not  ^th
Moses,  not  with  Abraham,  but  with  the  Lord  Ood  Himself  I  So
momentous  a  claim  requires  explanation  if  the  claimant  be
only  human.  This  impersonation  of  the  source  of  moral  law
must  rest  upon  some  bads  :  what  is  the  basis  on  which  it  rests  t

In  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  Jesus  Christ  does  not  deign  to
justify  His  lofty  critical  and  reviaionary  attitude  towards  the
ancient  Law.  He  neither  explains  nor  exaggerates  His.power
to  review  the  older  revelation,  and  to  reveal  new  truth.  He
simply  teaches;  He  abrogates,  He  establishes,  He  sanctions,  He
unfolds,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  in  a  tone  which  implies  that
His  right  to  teach  is  not  a  matter  for  discussion.

It  was  inevitable  that  the  question  should  be  asked,  anzioiisly,
earnestly,  fiercely,  '  Who  is  This  Teacher ) '  I  gay,  it  was  inevitr
able,  for  if  you  teach  the  lowest  moral  truth,  in  the  humblest
sphere,  your  right  to  do  so  will  sooner  or  later  be  called  in
question.  To  teach  moral  truth  is  to  throw  down  a  challenge
to  human  nature,  human  nature  being  such  as  it  actually  is,
that  is  to  say,  conscious  of  more  or  less  disloyalty  to  the  moral
light  which  it  already  possesaes,  and  indisposed  to  become  re-
sponsible for  knowledge  of  a  yet  higher  standard  of  moral  truth,
tie  existence  of  which  it  may  already  suspect.  Accordingly  the
challenge  which  is  thus  made  is  generally  met  by  a  sharp  counter-
scrutiny  into  the  claims,  be  they  personal  or  official,  of  the
teacher  who  dares  to  make  it.  This  penalty  of  teaching  can
only  be  escaped  either  in  certain  rare  and  primitive  conditions
of  society,  or  else  when  the  teacher  fails  to  do  his  duty.  Mis-
sionaries have  described  savage  tribes  whose  sense  of  ignorance
was  too  sincere,  and  who  were  too  grateful  for  knowledge,  to
take  umbrage  at  the  practical  bearings  of  a  new  doctrine.  Foeis
have  sung  of  ancestors

'  Qui  pneceptdcem  soncd  volnere  parentii
Ssaelooo'.'
Generally  speaking,  however,  an  immunity  from  criticism  is  to
be  secured  by  signal  inefBciency,  feebleness,  or  disloyalty  to  prin-
ciple, on  the  part  of  the  teacher.  A  teacher  of  morals  may  have
persuaded  his  conscience  that  the  ruling  worldly  opinion  of  his
time  can  safely  be  regarded  as  its  court  of  final  appeal.  He  may
have  forced  his  thought  to  shape  itself  with  prudent  docility  into
those  precise  conventionalities  of  expression  which  are  understood
to  mean  nothing,  or  which  have  lost  their  power.     In  such  •


'  Jnv.  vii.  309,


[lbcl


Why  Christ  provoked  unfriendly  scrutiny.    171

case  too  it  may  happen  that  the  total  failure  to  achieve  moral
and  spiritual  victories  will  not  necessarily  entail  on  the  teacher
complete  social  or  professional  obscurity,  while  it  will  certainly
protect  him  against  any  serious  liability  to  hostile  interference.

Picture  to  yourselves,  on  the  contrary,  a  teacher  who  is  not
merely  under  'the  official  obligation  to  say  something,  but  who  i»
morally  convinced  that  he  has  something  to  say.     Imagine  one
wbo  believes  alike  in  the  truth  of  his  message  and  in  the  reality
of  his  mission  to  deliver  it.     Let  his  message  combine  those
moral  contrasts  which  give  permanency  and  true  force  to  a
doctrine,  and  which  the  Gospel  alone  has  combined  in  their  per-
fection.   Let  this  teacher  be  tender,  yet  searching ;  let  him  win
the  hearts  of  men  by  his  kindly  humanity,  while  he  probes,  aye
to  the  quick,  their  moral  sores.  Let  him  be  uniformly  calm,  yet
manifestly  moved  by  the  fire  of  repressed  passion.     Let  him  be
stem  yet  not  unloving,  and  resolute  without  sacrificing  the
elasticity  of  his  sympa&y,  and  genial  without  condescending  to
be  the  weakly  accomplice  of  moral  mischief.     Let  him  pursue
and  expose  the  latent  evil  of  the  human  heart  through  all  the
mazes  of  its  unrivalled  deceitfalness,  without  sullying  his  own
purity,  and  without  forfeiting  his  strong  belief  in  the  present
capacity  of  every  human  being  for  goodness.     Let  him  *  know
what  is  in  man,'  and  yet,  with  this  knowledge  clearly  before
bim,  let  him  not  only  not  despair  of  humani^,  but  respect  it,
nay  love  it,  even  enthusiastically.  Above  all,  let  this  teacher  be
perfectly  independent.     Let  him  be  independent  of  the  voice  of
the  multitude ;  independent  of  the  enthusiasm  and  promptings
of  his  disciples ;  independent  even  when  face  to  face  witii  the
hitter  criticism  and  scorn  of  his  antagonists ;  independent  of  all
saye  God  and  his  conscience.     Li  a  word,  conceive  a  case  in
which  moral  authority  and  moral  beauty  combine  to  elicit  a
amnltaneous  tribute  of  reverence  and  of  love.     Clearly  such
a  teacher  must  be  a  moral  power ;  and  as  a  consequence,  his
claim  to  teach  must  be  scrutinized  with  a  severity  proportioned
to  the  interest  which  he  excites,  and  to  the  hostility  which  he
cannot  hope  to  escape  provoking.     And  such  a  Teacher,  or
rather  much  more  than  this,  was  Jesus  Qirist  our  Lord.

Nor  is  this  all.  The  scrutiny  which  our  Lord  thus  necessarily
enconntered  from  without  was  responded  to,  or  rather  it  was
anticipated,  by  self-discovery  from  within.  *  The  soul,*  it  has
been  said,  *  like  the  body,  has  its  pores  ;*  and  in  a  sincere  soul
ibe  pores  of  its  life  are  always  open.  Listinctively,  uncon-
sciously, and  whether  a  man  will  or  not,  the  insignificance  or


172       Second  stage  of  our  Lord' s  TeacMng.

the  greatness  of  the  iimer  life  always  reveals  itself.  In  onr
Lord  this  self-revelation  was  not  involuntary,  or  accidental,  or
forced  ;  it  was  in  the  highest  degree  deliberate.  He  knew  tlie
thoughts  of  those  abont  Him,  and  Ue  anticipated  their  ex-
pression. He  placed  beyond  a  doubt,  by  the  most  explicit
etatements,  that  which  might  have  been  more  than  saspected,  if
He  had  only  preached  the  Sermon  on  the  Monnt.

n.  It  is  characteristio  then  of  what  may  be  termed  tba
second  stage  of  our  Lord's  public  teaching,  that  He  distinctly,
repeatedly,  energetically  preaches  Himself.  He  does  not  leave
men  to  draw  inferences  about  Himself  firom  the  power  of  His
moral  teaching,  or  irom  the  awe-inspiring  nature  of  EEis  miracles.
He  does  not  content  Himselfwith  teaching  primary  moral  truths
.  concerning  God  and  our  duties  towards  God  and  towards  one
another.  He  does  not  bequeath  to  His  Apostles  the  task  (^
elaborating  a  theory  respecting  the  Personal  rank  of  their
Master  in  the  scale  of  being.  On  the  contrary.  He  Himself
persistently  asserts  the  real  character  of  Hib  position  relatively
to  Qod  and  man,  and  of  His  consequent  claims  upon  the  tbongfat
and  heart  of  mankind.  Whether  He  employs  metaphor,  or  plain
unmetaphorical  assertion,  His  meaning  is  too  dear  to  be  mis-
taken. He  speaks  of  Himself  as  the  Light  of  a  darkened  vorld^
as  the  Way  by  which  man  may  ascend  to  heaven'',  aa  the  Truth
which  can  really  satisfy  the  cravings  of  the  soul',  as  the  Lile
which  must  be  imparted  to  all  who  would  live  in  very  deed,  to
all  who  would  re^y  live  for  everi.  Life  is  resident  in  Him  in
virtue  of  an  undefined  and  et«mal  communication  of  it  from  the
Father^.  He  is  the  Bread  of  Lifel.  He  is  the  Living  Bread
That  came  down  &om  heaven  °> ;  believers  in  Him  will  feed  on
Him  and  will  have  eternal  life".  He  points  to  a  living  water  of
the  Spirit,  which  He  can  give,  and  which  will  quench  the  thirst


■  St.  John  viii.  I  a ;  't-fA  ilfu  t&  ^t  tsv  irJir>u>v*  h  in^miVur  ^/ul  d&  fi9)

ii  Ibid.  ziv.  6 :  'Et^  fim  h  hUs.

■  Ibid. ;  'Eyif  d^  .  ,  ,  q  hXifiim.    Mark  ziii.  31 1  i  sipsFic  inl  4  t3  'V
AtiVoiTtti"  ol  SI  \i701  fiou  06  fill  ■wofiKSuei.  ^nfiKtlmmnia,  Tiach.]

i  St.  John  jdv.  6 :  'Evt  (l^i  .  .  .  .  i  fortj.

*  Ibid.  T.  16 :  fiffrtp  -jif  h  nirri)|>  f^tt  foiJ)y  ir  Joury,  offnii  Hun  aal  rf

'  Ibid.  vi.  31; :  'E-yii  iifii  6  lEprot  t^i  fui^i.     Ibid.  ver.  4S.
■■  Ibid,  ver,  51  :  "Eyii  ilfu  b  tpros  i  Cwr  i  ix  tdB  olpjiiimO  intTaMs.
0  Ibid.  TOT.  47  :  A/i^f  l^h'  ^^1*  if"',  i  rurrtiav  lis  i/tt,  tx*'  C"^'  oUi'uk
Ibid,  V,  40 :  06  9Am  i\tttt>  xpit  fit,  Tm  (u^r  txv*-

[lect.


Forms  of  our  LorcTs  Self-assertion.        1 73


of  souls  that  drink  ito.  All  who  came  before  Him  He  cha-
racterizes as  haying  been,  by  comparison  with  Himself,  the
thieves  and  robbers  of  mankind  p.  He  is  Himself  the  One  Good
Shepherd  of  the  souls  of  menQ ;  He  knows  and  He  is  known  of
His  true  sheep "".  Not  only  is  He  the  Shepherd,  He  is  the  very
Door  of  the  sheepfold ;  to  enter  through  Him  is  to  be  safe^.
He  is  iJie  Vine,  the  Life-tree  of  regenerate  humanity*.  All  that
is  truly  fruitful  and  lovely  in  the  human  family  must  branch
forth  from  Him« ;  all  spiritual  life  must  wither  and  die,  if  it  be
severed  from  His^.  He  stands  consciously  between  earth  and
heaven.  He  claims  to  be  the  One  Means  of  a  real  approach  to
the  Invisible  God :  no  soul  of  man  can  come  to  the  Father  but
through  Him  7.  He  promises  that  all  prayer  offered  in  His
Name  shall  be  answered:  *If  ye  ask  anything  in  my  Name  /
will  do  it^,'  He  contrasts  Himself  with  a  group  of  His  country-
men as  follows :  *  Ye  are  from  beneath,  I  am  from  above ;  ye
are  of  this  world,  I  am  not  of  this  world*.*  He  anticipates  His
Death,  and  foretells  its  consequences :  *  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from
the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Myself^.'  He  claims  to  be
the  Lord  of  the  realm  of  death ;  He  will  Himself  wake  the
deeping  dead ;  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  His  voice  <' ;
nay,  He  will  raise  Himself  from  the  deadd.  He  proclaims,  *  I
am  the  Besurrection  and  the  Life®.'  He  encourages  men  to  trust


°  St.  John  iv.  14 :  %t  V  %»  vtp  4ic  rod  t9aros  oZ  iyi»  H^ffw  atnf,  ob  fi^
it^ffti  tis  rhv  cuSovou
P  Ibid.  X.  8 :  irAmes  Hffoi  vph  ifiov  ^\0oVf  KK4irrai  tla\  Ktii  X^trrcd,
4  Ibid.  ver.  1 1 :  'Eyei  tlfii  6  voifiiiv  6  Ka\6s,     Ibid.  ver.  14.
'  Ibid.  VCT.  14 :  yivdaiTKw  rh.  ^/lUk,  koI  '^lyJ^xrKOfxai  6irb  rwv  4ficoy.

*  Ibid.  ver.  9 :  '£7(6  elfu  ^  Oi^pa*  9i'  ifiov  idp  ru  tiir4\dif,  o-wd^o-croi*

*  Ibid.  xv.  I :  'Eyc^  tlfii  ^  AfirtKos  ri  &A./}0ii^.

*  Ibid.  ver.  5 :  6  fi4vcop  iv  ifiol  ic&ycb  4p  a^^,  oZros  <p4pu  Koprhp  voX^v
8ti  -xupls  iftov  oil  ZlpoffBk  voiup  ov94p,

X  Ibid.  ver.  6:   ihy  t*>4i  ra  fuipp  ip  ifuli,  4fi>Ji0ri  l|«  &$  rh  Kkrjfia,  Kcd
ii'npd'^ri'
'  Ibid.  ziv.  6 :  o&9cU  tpx*^^  'P^'  "^^^  llar4pa,  et  fi^i  8c*  ifiolu,
'  Ibid.  ver.  14 :  ^(£y  ri  cMiffifr^  ip  rf)  opSfxari  fuw,  4y^  voffifftt,

*  Ibid.  viii.  23 :  bfxeis  iK  r&p  ttirv  4<rr\,  4yi»  4k  rStp  &p»  tlfil'  bfi€is  4ic  rod
K6(rnov  roiinov  4ar^,  4yit  oIk  tlfil  4k  rov  KStr/xou  ro{nou,

^  Ibid.  zii.  33  :  ic&y^  4hp  {n\fca6ca  4k  rTjs  y^s,  vdpras  4\K6<r»  vphs  4ftMn6p,
'  Ibid.  V.  28,  29 :  ilpx^ttt  &pct,  4p  ^  ir&prts  ol  4p  ro7s  fiprifieiots  iiKoitrovrai

T^f  ^toyyjs  cunov,  jcol  4KTrop€6(roPTCu,    Ibid.  vi.  39,  xi.  25.
^  Ibid.  ii.  19 :  X^ffare  rhv  vabv  rovrov,  koI  4v  rpurlv  r}fi4pcus  4y€p&  ahr6v.

Ibid.  X.  18 :   4\ov<ricw  lxo»  Seipau  aan-ftp  \r^p  ^xhp  imv\^  kolL  4^oualay  lx«

^iXip.Xafiuv  tUrrfiP.

*  Ibid.  xi.  25 :  'Eyc^  cl/ii  ri  kvJurraffis  koI  ^  C<v4*
IT]


1 74      Persistency  of  Christ's  Self-assertion.

in  Him  as  they  trust  in  God^;  to  make  Him  an  object  of  faith
just  as  they  believe  in  Grod«;  to  honour  Him  as  tiiey  honour
the  Father^.  To  love  Him  is  a  necessary  mark  of  the  childreD
of  God :  *  If  God  were  your  Father,  ye  would  have  loved  Mei.*
It  is  not  possible,  He  rules,  to  love  God,  and  yet  to  hate  Him-
self :  *  He  that  hateth  Me,  hateth  My  Father  also  J.'  The  proof
of  a  true  love  to  Him  lies  in  doing  His  bidding :  ^  If  ye  love
Me,  keep  My  commandments  V

Of  this  second  stage  of  our  Lord's  teaching  the  most  re-
presentative document  is  the  Discourse  in  the  supper-roonu
How  great  is  the  contrast  between  that  discourse  and  the
Sermon  on  the  Mount  I  In  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  which
deals  with  questions  of  human  character  and  of  moral  obligation,
the  reference  to  our  Lord's  Person  is  comparatively  indirect.
It  lies,  not  in  explicit  statements,  but  in  the  authority  of  His
tone,  in  the  attitude  which  He  tacitly  assumes  towards  the
teachers  of  the  Jewish  people,  and  towards  the  ancient  Law.
In  the  last  discourse  it  is  His  Person  rather  than  His  teaching
which  is  especially  prominent ;  His  subject  in  that  discourse  is
Himself.  Certainly  He  preaches  Himself  in  His  relationship  to
His  redeemed ;  but  still  He  preaches  above  all  and  in  all.  Him-
self. All  radiates  from  Himself  all  converges  towards  Himself
The  sorrows  and  perplexities  of  His  disciples,  the  mission  and
work  of  the  Paraclete,  the  mingling  predictions  of  suffering  and
of  glory,  are  all  bound  up  with  tiie  Person  of  Jesus,  as  mani-
fested by  Himself.  In  those  matchless  words  all  centres  so  con-
sistently in  Jesus,  that  it  might  seem  that  Jesus  alone  is  before


'  St.  John  xiv.  i :  y}^  rapaur<r4(rB»  ifiup  ^  KopZla*  rrnrrtCcrt  els  rh^  Bc^
Kid  els  ifit  vifrreitcrf,  St.  Aug.  Tr.  67.  in  Joann. :  '  Consequens  est  enim  nt
si  in  Demn  creditis,  et  in  Me  credere  debeatis,  quod  non  esset  'conseqnena»
si  Christus  non  esset  Dens.*  St.  John  xvi.  33 :  ravra  Xeh.dKrjiea  ifuvt  tra  ip
ifiol  elpiivriv  ix')'^^*  ^^  '*'V  f^^^^M^  9\l^iM  cjcre*  [$x^^i  Tisch.]  &A\&  dapcetrif
iyiff  veviieriKa  rhv  K6irixov,

'  Ibid.  vi.  29 :  rovr6  Iffn  rh  tpyov  rov  OeoO,  Xva  immltniTe  els  %v  a»e
(TTCcAcv  iKeivos,  Ibid.  ver.  40 :  rovro  ydp  iffrip  rh  B4\rjfxa  rov  IlarpSs  fUN#*
Iva  iras  6  Beupav  rhp  Tidy  Koi  irurre^v  els  ahrhv,  txr}  C^^  ai^tov.  Ibid,
ver.  47 :  6  'Kurre{foiv  els  ifi^,  ^X5'  C^^^  aldviov,  Gf.  Acts  xzvi.  18 :  rov  Kafiea
avrohs  Afpeviv  afiapricov,  icol  n^7)poy  iv  ro7s  riyuurfxevots,  vicrei  rg  els  ifie,

^  St.  John  y.  23 :  Iva  irdines  rin&tri  rhv  tihp,  KoBits  rifi&ffi.  rhy  Itaripa,

*  Ibid.  viii.  42 :  el  6  &ehs  Turiip  i/i&y  ^v,  iiyavare  hy  ifi4t  Ct  Ibid,
xvi.  27.

i  Ibid.  zv.  23 :  J  ifi^  fiurSy,  icol  rhy  Uaripa  fAov  fiurei,

^  Ibid.  xiv.  15:  4hy  i.ymroir4  fie,  rets  ivro\hs  rhs  i/i^s  rrip4iwre,  .2  St.
John  6 :  koI  aSrri  iarly  ^  ikydmi,  %va  vepiwar&fiey  icar&  rhs  ivroK^  atn-ov,

[iJECT,


The  claim  to  judge  all  mankind.  175

us ;  alone  in  the  greatness  of  His  supramundane  glory ;  alone
in  bearing  His  burden  of  an  awful,  fathomless  sorrow.

It  will  naturally  occur  to  us  that  language  such  as  that  which
has  just  been  quoted  is  mainly  characteristic  of  the  fourth
Gospel ;  and  you  will  permit  me,  my  brethren,  to  consider  the
objection  which  may  underlie  that  observation  somewhat  at
length  in  a  future  lecture  1.  For  the  present  the  author  of
*Ecce  Homo*  may  remind  those  who,  for  whatever  reasons,
refuse  to  believe  Christ  to  have  used  these  words,  that  *we
cannot  deny  that  He  used  words  which  have  substantially  the
same  meaning.  We  cannot  deny  that  He  called  Himself  King,
Master,  and  Judge  of  men ;  that  He  promised  to  give  rest  to  the
weary  and  the  heavy-laden ;  that  He  instructed  His  followers  to
hope  for  life  from  feeding  on  His  Body  and  His  Blood  "^Z

Indeed  so  entirely  is  our  Lord's  recorded  teaching  penetrated
by  His  Self-assertion,  that  in  order  to  represent  Him  as  simply
teaching  moral  truth,  while  keeping  Himself  strictly  in  the  back-
ground of  His  doctrine,  it  would  be  necessary  to  deny  the  trust-
worthiness of  all  the  accoimts  of  His  teaching  which  we  possess.
To  recognise  the  difference  which  has  been  noticed  between  the
two  phases  of  His  teaching  merely  amounts  to  saying  that  in  the
former  His  Self-proclamation  is  implied,  while  it  is  avowed  in
the  latter.  For  even  in  that  phase  of  Christ's  teaching  which
the  three  first  Evangelists  more  particularly  record,  the  public
assumption  of  titles  and  functions  such  as  those  of  King,
Teacher,  and  Judge  of  the  human  race,  implies  those  statements
about  Himself  which  are  preserved  in  the  fourth  Gospel.

Consider,  for  instance,  what  is  really  involved  in  a  claim  to
judge  the  world.  That  Jesus  Christ  did  put  forward  this  claim
must  be  conceded  by  those  who  admit  that  we  have  in  our  hands
any  true  records  of  Him  whatever.  Some  who  reject  that  account
of  the  four  Gospels  which  is  given  us  by  the  Catholic  Church,
may  perhaps  consent  to  listen  to  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Francis  W.
Kewmari.  *I  believe,'  says  that  writer,  'that  Jesus  habitually
spoke  of  Himself  by  the  title  Son  of  Man,  [and]  that  in  assum-
ing that  title  He  tacitly  alluded  to  the  seventh  chapter  of  Daniel,
and  claimed  for  Himself  the  throne  of  judgment  over  all  mankind.
I  know  no  reason  to  doubt  that  He  actually  delivered  in  sub-
Btance  the  discourse  in  the  twenty-fifth  chapter  of  St.  Matthew"/


^1


*  See  Lecture  V.

»  Ecce  Homo,  p.  177.     Cf.  also  Mill,  Myth.  Interpret,  p.  59.
»  Phases  of  Faith,  p.  149 ;  cf.  St.  Matt.  xxy.  31-46.


1 76     Force  of  the  claim  to  be  Universal  yudge.

That  our  Lord  advanced  this  tremendous  claim  to  be  the  Judge
of  all  mankind  is  equally  the  conviction  of  foreign  critics,  who
are  as  widely  removed  as  possible  from  any  respect  whatever  for
the  witness  of  the  Church  of  Christ  to  Holy  Writ  <>.  But  let  us
reflect  steadily  on  what  Christ  is  thus  admitted  to  have  said  about
Himself  by  the  most  advanced  representatives  of  the  destructive
criticism.  Christ  says  that  He  will  return  to  earth  as  Judge  of  all
mankind.  He  will  sit  upon  a  throne  of  glory,  and  will  be  attended
by  bands  of  obedient  angels.  Before  Him  will  be  gathered  all  the
nations  of  the  world,  and  He  will  judge  them.  In  other  words,
He  will  proceed  to  discharge  an  office  involving  such  spiritual
insight,  such  discenMent  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the
heart  of  each  one  of  the  millions  at  His  feet,  such  awful,  unshared
supremacy  in  the  moral  world,  that  the  imagination  recoils  in
sheer  agony  from  the  task  of  seriously  contemplating  the  assump-
tion of  these  duties  by  any  created  intelligence.  .  He  will  draw
a  sharp  trenchant  line  of  eternal  separation  through  the  dense
throng  of  all  the  assembled  races  and  generations  of  men.  He
will  force  every  individual  human  being  into  one  of  the  two
distinct  classes  respectively  destined  for  endless  happiness  and
endless  woe.  He  will  reserve  no  cases  as  involving  complex  morpl
problems  beyond  His  own  power  of  decision.  He  will  sanction
no  intermediate  class  of  awards,  to  meet  the  neutral  morality  of
souls  whom  men  might  deem  ^  too  bad  for  heaven,  yet  too  good
for  hell.'  If  it  should  be  urged  that  our  Lord  is  teaching  truth
in  the  garb  of  parable,  and  that  His  words  must  not  be  taken
too  literally,  it  may  be  answered  that,  supposing  this  to  be  the
case  (a  supposition  by  no  means  to  be  conceded),  the  main  features,
the  purport  and  drift  of  the  entire  representation  cannot  be  mis-
taken. The  Speaker  claims  to  be  Judge  of  all  the  world.  "When-
ever, or  however,  you  understand  Hint  to  exercise  His  function,
Christ  claims  in  that  discourse  to  be  nothing  less  than  the  Uni--
versal  Judge.  You  cannot  honestly  translate  His  language  into
any  modem  and  prosaic  equivalent,  that  does  not  carry  with
it  this  tremendous  claim.    Kor  is  it  relevant  to  observe  that


•  Banr,  Vorlestmgen  liber  N.  T.  Theologie,  p.  109:  'Bass  Jesus  Sich
Selbst  als  den  kUnftigen  Bichter  betrachtete,  nnd  ankilndigtei  lasst  sich  anch
nach  dem  Evangelium  Matthaus  nioht  in  Zweifel  ziehen.  Fasst  man  die
Lehre  nnd  Wirksamkeit  Jesu  auch  nnr  nach  dem  sittlichen  Gesichtsponki
auf,  unter  welchen  sie  der  Bergrede  nnd  den  Parabeln  zufolge  zu  stellen
ist,  so  gehort  dazn  wesentlioh  auch  die  Bestimmnng,  da»9  He  der  absolmte
Mctatstah  zur  BewriheiUtng  des  sittlichen  Werthee  dee  Thune  und  Ver*
haUent  der  Mewchen  itt*

[lect.


Demands  of  Christ  upon  the  human  soul.     177

Messiah  had  been  pictured  in  prophecy  as  the  Universal  Judge,
and  that  in  assuming  to  judge  the  world  Jesus  Christ  was  only
claiming  an  official  consequence  of  the  character  which  He  had
previously  assumed.  Surely  this  does  not  alter  the  nature  of
the  claim.  It  does  indeed  shew  what  was  involved  in  the
original  assertion  that  He  was  the  Messiah;  but  it  does  not
shew  that  the  title  of  Universal  Judge  was  a  mere  idealist
decoration  having  no  practical  duties  attached  to  it.  On  the  con-
trary, Jesus  Christ  asserts  the  practical  value  of  the  title  very
deliberately;  He  insists  on  and  expands  its  significance;  He
draws  out  what  it  implies  into  a  vivid  picture.  It  cannot  be
denied  that  He  literally  and  deliberately  put  Himself  forward  as
Judge  of  all  the  world ;  and  the  moral  significance  of  this  Self-
exaltation  is  not  affected  by  the  fact  that  He  made  it  as  a  part
of  His  general  Messianic  claim.  If  He  could  not  claim  to  be
Messiah  without  making  it.  He  ought  not  to  have  claimed  to  be
Messiah  unless  He  had  a  right  to  make  it.  It  may  be  pleaded
that  He  Himself  said  that  the  Father  had  given  Him  authority
to  execute  judgment  because  He  is  the  Son  of  Man  p.  But  this,
as  has  already  been  shewn,  means  simply  that  He  is  the  Uni-
versal Judge  because  He  is  Messiah.  True,  the  chosen  title  of
Messiahship  implies  His  real  Humanity;  and  His  Human  Nature
invests  Him  with  special  fitness  for  this  as  for  the  rest  of  His
mediatorial  work.  But  then  the  title  Son  of  Man,  as  implying
His  Humanity,  is  in  felt  contrast  to  a  higher  Nature  which  it
suggests.  He  is  more  than  human;  but  He  is  to  judge  us,
because  He  is  also  Man.  On  the  whole  it  is  impossible  to  reflect
steadily  on  this  claim  of  Jesus  Christ  without  feeling  that  either
such  a  claimi  ought  never  to  have  been  made,  or  that  it  carries
us  forward  irresistibly  to  a  truth  beyond  and  above  itself.

In  dealing  with  separate  souls  our  Lord's  tone  and  language
are  not  less  significant.  We  vdll  not  here  dwell  on  the  fact  of
His  forgiving  sinsQ,  and  of  transmitting  to  His  Church  the  power
of  forgiving  them^*.  But  it  is  clear  that  He  treats  those  who
come  to  Him  as  literally  belonging  to  Himself,  in  virtue  of  an
existing  right.     He  commands,  He  does  not  invite,  discipleship.

P  St.  John  V.  27.

'  St.  Matt.  ix.  6 ;  St.  Mark  ii.  lo.  M.  Salvador  represents  in  our  own
day  the  Jewish  feeling  respecting  this  claim  of  our  Lord.  *  Voilk  pourquoi
les  doctetips  se  recriferent  de  nouveau  en  entendant  le  Fils  de  Marie  s'arroger
^  lui-m6me,  et  transmettre  k  ses  d^^gn^s  le  droit  du  pardon :  ils  y  voyident
nne  autre  mani^re  de  prendre  la  place  de  Dieu.*  J^uB-Christ,  torn.  ii.  p.  83.

'  St.  Matt.  xvi.  19 ;  St.  John  xx.  33.


178     Demands  of  Christ  upon  the  human  soul.

To  Philip,  to  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  to  the  rich  young  man.  He
says  simply, '  Follow  Me*.'   In  the  same  spirit  His  Apostles  are
bidden  to  resent  resistance  to  their  Master's  doctrine :  '  When  ye
come  into  an  house,  salute  it.     And  if  the  house  be  worthy,  let
your  peace  come  upon  it :  but  if  it  be  not  worthy,  let  your
peace  return  to  you.     And  whosoever  shall  not  receive  you,
nor  hear  your  words,  when  ye  depart  out  of  that  house  or  city,
shake  off  the  dust  of  your  feet.     Verily  I  say  unto  you.  It  shall
be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrha  in  the
day  of  judgment,  than  for  that  city*.'  And  as  His  message  is  to
be  received  upon  pain  of  eternal  loss,  so  in  receiving  it,  men  are
to  give  themselves  up  to  Him  simply  and  unreservedly.     No
rival  claim,  however  strong,  no  natural  affection,  however  legiti-
mate and  sacred,  may  interpose  between  Himself  and  the  soul  of
His  follower.     *  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  Me
is  not  worthy  of  Me ;  and  he  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more
than  Me  is  not  worthy  of  Me ^ ;'  'If  anjr  man  come  to  Me,  and
hate  not  his  father,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and  children,  and
brethren,  and  sisters,  yea,  and  his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be  My
disciple  ^.'     Accordingly  He  predicts  the  painful  severance  be-
tween near  relations  which  would  accompany  the  advance  of  the
Gospel :  *  Suppose  ye  that  I  am  come  to  give  peace  on  earth  t
I  tell  you,  Nay ;  but  rather  division  :  for  from  henceforth  there
shall  be  five  in  one  house  divided,  three  against  two,  and  two
against  three.     The  father  shall  be  divided  against  the  son,  and
the  son  against  the  father ;  the  mother  against  the  daughter,
and  the  daughter  against  the  mother ;  the  mother  in  law  against
her  daughter  in  law,  and  the  daughter  in  law  against  her  mother
in  law  y.'     And  the  Gospel  narrative  itself  famishes  us  with  a
remarkable  illustration  of  our  Lord's  appllication  of  His  claim.
'  He  said  unto  another.  Follow  Me.     But  he  said.  Lord,  suffer
me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father.   Jesus  said  unto  him.  Let  \h!^
dead  bury  their  dead :  but  go  thou  and  preach  the  kingdom  of
God.     And  another  also  said,  Lord,  I  will  follow  Thee ;  but  let
me  first  go  bid  them  farewell,  which  are  at  home  at  my  house.
And  Jesus  said  unto  him.  No  man,  having  put  his  hand  to  the
plough,  and  looking  back,  is  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  God  2/

It  is  impossible  to  ignore  this  imperious  claim  on  the  part
of  Jesus  to  rule  the  whole  soul  of  man.     Other  masters  may


■  St.  Matt.  iv.  19,  viii.  22,  ix.  9,  xix.  21 ;  St.  Mark  ii.  14 ;  St.  Luke  v.  27;
St.  John  i.  43,  X.  27.  *  St.  Matt.  x.  12-15.  *  VcfA.  37.

»  St.  Luke  xiv.  26.  7  Ibid.  xii.  51-53.  »  Ibid.  ix.  59-62.

[lect.


Christ^  s  claims  intolerable^  if  He  be  only  Man.  1 79

demand  a  man's  active  energies,  or  his  time,  or  his  parse,  or
his  thought,  or  some  large  share  in  his  affections.     But  here  is
a  claim  on  the  whole  man,  on  his  very  inmost  self,  on  the
sanctities  of  his  deepest  life.     Here  is  a  claim  which  altogether
sets  aside  the  dearest  ties  of  family  and  kindred,  if  perchance
they  interfere  with  it.     Does  any  who  is  merely  man  dare  to
advance  sach  a  claim  as  this  9    If  so,  is  it  possible  that,  believing
him  to  be  only  a  fellow-creature,  we  can  listen  to  the  claim  with
respect,  with  patience,  without  earnest  indignation  f  Do  not  our
souls  belong  only  and  wholly  to  Him  Who  made  them  t   Can  we
not  bury  ourselves  out  of  the  sight  and  reach  of  every  fellow-crea-
ture, in  the  hidden  recesses  of  the  spirit  which  we  carry  within  t
Can  we  not  escape,  if  we  will,  from  all  eyes  save  One,  from  all
wills  save  One,  from  all  voices  save  One,  from  all  beings  excepting
Him  Who  gave  us  life  t  How  then  can  we  listen  to  the  demand
which  is  advanced  by  Jesus  of  Nazareth  %    Is  it  tolerable  if  He
is  only  man  t    If  He  does  indeed  share  with  ourselves  the  great
debt  of  creation  at  the  hand  of  God ;  if  He  exists,  like  ourselves,
from  moment  to  moment  merely  upon  sufferance ;  or  rather,  if
He  is  upheld  in  being  in  virtue  of  a  continuous  and  gratuitous
ministration  of  life,  supplied  to  Him  by  the  Author  of  all  life ;
is  it  endurable  that  He  should  thus  assume  to  deal  with  us  as
His  own  creatures,  as  beings  who  have  no  rights  before  Him,
and  whom  He  may  conmiand  at  will  9    Doubtless  He  speaks  of
certain  souls  as  given  Him  by  His  Father*;  but  then  He  claims
the  fealty,  the  submission  of  all.     And  even  if  souls  are  only
'given'  to  Christ,  how  are  we  to  account   for   this  absolute
gift  of  an  immortal  soul  to  a  human  Lord  ?    What,  in  short,
is  the  real  moral  justification  of  a  claim,  than  which  no  larger
conld  be  urged  by  the  Creator  %    How  can  Christ  bid  men  live
for  Himself  as  for  the  very  End  of  their  existence  %  How  can  He
rightly  draw  towards  Himself  the  whole  thought  and  love,  I  do
not  say,  of  a  world,  but  of  one  single  human  being,  with  this
imperious  urgency,  if  He  be  indeed  only  the  Christ  of  the  Hu-
manitarian teachers,  if  He  be  anything  else  or  less  than  the
supreme  Lord  of  life  1

It  is  then  not  merely  an  easy  transition,  it  is  a  positive
moral  relief  to  pass  from  considering  these  statements  and
claims  to  the  declarations  in  which  Jesus  Christ  explains  them
by  explicitly  asserting  His  Divinity.  For  although  the  solemn
Bentences  in  which  He  makes  that  supreme  revelation  are  com-

•  St.  John  X.  29.

IV]  N  2


1 80     Christ  reveals  His  Godhead  to  the  Apostles.

paratiyely  few,  it  is  clear  that  the  truth  is  latent,  in  the  entire
moral  and  intellectual  posture  whidi  we  have  been  considering,
unless  we  are  prepared  to  £all  back  upon  a  fearful  alternative
which  it  will  be  my  duty  presently  to  notice.

Every  man  who  takes  a  public  or  stirring  part  in  life  may
assume  that  he  has  to  deal  with  three  different  classes  of  men.
He  must  face  <his  personal  friends,  his  declared  opponents,  and
a  large  neutral  body  which  is  swayed  by  turns  in  the  opposite
directions  of  friendliness  and  opposition.*  Towards  each  of  these
classes  he  has  varying  obligations;  and  from  their  different
points  of  view  they  form  their  estimate  of  his  character  and
action.  Now  our  Lord,  entering  as  He  did  perfectly  into  the
actual  conditions  of  our  human  and  social  existence,  exposed
Himself  to  this  triple  scrutiny,  and  met  it  by  a  correspon(fingly
threefold  revelation.  He  revealed  His  Divinity  to  His  disciples,
to  the  Jewish  people,  and  to  His  embittered  opponents,  the  chief
priests  and  Pharisees.

Bearing  in  mind  His  acceptance  of  the  confessions  of  Na-
thanael^  and  of  St.  Peter  c,  as  well  as  His  solemn  words  to
Nicodemus<i,  let  us  consider  His  language  in  the  supper-room  to
St.  Philip.  It  may  have  been  Philip's  restlessness  of  mind,  taking
pleasure,  as  men  will,  in  the  mere  starting  a  religious  difficulty
for  its  own  sake ;  it  may  have  been  an  instinctive  wish  to  find
some  excuse  for  escaping  from  those  sterner  obligations  which,
on  the  eve  of  the  Passion,  discipleship  would  threaten  presently
to  impose.  However  this  was,  Philip  preferred  to  our  Lord  the
peremptory  request,  *  Lord,  shew  us  the  Father,  and  it  sufficeth
us.'  Well  might  the  answer  have  thrilled  those  who  heard  it.
*Have  I  been  so  long  time  with  you,  and  yet  thou  hast  not
known  Me,  Philip?  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father;
and  how  sayest  thou  then.  Shew  us  the  Father  1  Believest  thou
not  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  Me  « %  *  Now
what  this  indwelling  really  impUed  is  seen  in  our  Lord's  answer
to  a  question  of  St.  Jude.  St.  Jude  had  asked  how  it  was  that
Christ  would  manifest  Himself  to  His  servants,  and  not  to  the
world.  Our  Lord  replies  that  the  heavenly  revelation  is  made
to  love ;  but  the  form  in  which  this  answer  is  couched  is  of  the
highest  significance.  *  If  a  Man  love  Me,  he  will  keep  My  words;
and  My  Father  will  love  him,  and  We  will  come  unto  him,  and
make  Our  abode  with  him^.'     *  We  will  come  unto  him  and

*»  St.  John  i.  49.  •  St.  Matt.  xvi.  16.  *  St.  John  iii.  18.

•  St.  John  xiv.  9,  lo ;  Williama  on  Study  of  the  Gospels,  p.  403.
'  St.  John  xiv.  23.

[lect.


Christ  reveals  His  Godhead  to  the  Jewish  people.  i8 1

make  Our  abode  I  *  Reflect :  Who  is  This  Speaker  That  pro-
mises to  dwell  in  the  soul  of  man  ?  And  with  Whom  does  He
associate  Himself?  It  may  be  true  of  any  eminent  saint,  that
'  God  speaks  not  to  him,  as  to  one  outside  Himself ;  that  God  is
in  him;  that  he  feels  himself  with  God;  that  he  draws  from  his
own  heart  what  he  tells  us  of  the  Father ;  that  he  lives  in  the
bosom  of  God  by  the  intercommunion  of  every  momenta.'  But
such  an  one  could  not  forget  that,  favoured  as  he  is  by  the  Divine
Presence  illuminating  his  whole  inner  life,  he  still  lives  at  an
immeasurable  distance  beneath  the  Being  Whose  condescension
has  so  enriched  him.  In  virtue  of  his  sanctity,  he  would  surely
shrink  with  horror  from  associating  himself  with  God ;  from
promising,  along  with  God,  to  make  a  dwelling-place  of  the
souls  that  love  himself;  from  representing  his  presence  with
men  as  a  blessing  co-ordinate  with  the  presence  of  the  Father ;
from  attributing  to  himself  oneness  of  will  with  the  Will  oip
God ;  from  implying  that  side  by  side  with  the  Father  of  spirits,
he  was  himself  equally  a  ruler  and  a  helper  of  the  life  of  the
souls  of  men.

The  most  prominent  statements  however  which  our  Lord
made  on  the  subject  of  His  Divinity  occur  in  those  conversations
with  the  Jews  which  are  specially  recorded  in  the  fourth  Gospel.
Our  Lord  discovers  this  great  truth  to  the  Jewish  people  by
three  distinct  methods  of  statement.

(a)  In  the  first  place,  He  distinctly  places  Himself  on  terms
of  equality  with  flie  Father,  by  a  double  claim.  He  claims  a
parity  of  working  power,  and  He  claims  an  equal  right  to  the
homage  of  mankind.  Of  these  claims  the  former  is  implicitly
contained  in  passages  to  which  allusion  has  been  already  made.
We  have  seen  that  it  is  contained  in  the  assumption  of  a  judicial
authm^ty  equal  to  the  task  of  deciding  the  final  condition  of
every  individual  human  being.  Although  this  office  is  delegated
to  and  exercised  by  our  Lord  as  Man,  yet  so  stupendous  a  task
is  obviously  not  less  beyond  the  reach  of  any  created  intelligence
than  the  providential  government  of  the  world.  In  like  manner,
this  claim  of  an  equality  in  working  power  with  the  Father  is
inseparable  from  our  Lord's  statements  that  He  could  confer


'  Quoted  in  Dean  Stanley^s  Lectures  on  the  Jewish  Church,  part  ii.
p.  i6i,  from  Benan  (Vie  de  J^us,  p.  75),  who  is  speaking  of  our  Lord.
M.  Benan,  in  using  this  language,  is  very  careful  to  explam  that  he  does
not  mean  to  assert  that  our  Lord  is  God :  *  J^sus  n*^nonce  pas  un  moment
Tid^e  sacrilege  (1)  qu*il  soit  Dieu.*    Ibid.

IV  ]


i82     Our  Lord's  claim  to  work  on  the  Sabbath

animal  life  \  and  that  the  fatiire  reBtoration  of  the  whole  hnnun
race  to  life  wotild  be  effected  bj  an  act  of  Hia  villi.  Theee
statements  w^re  made  by  oar  Lord  after  healing  the  impotent
man  at  the  pool  of  Bethesda.  They  are  in  fact  deductions  &om
a  previous  and  more  compreheneive  one.  Our  Lord  had  healed
the  impoteot  man  on  the  Sabbath  day  aJid  had  bidden  bim  take
up  his  bed  and  walk.  The  Jews  saw  an  iniraction  of  the  Sab-
bath, both  in  the  command  given  to  the  impotent  man,  and  in
the  act  of  healing  him.  They  sought  to  slay  our  Lord ;  but  He
justified  Himself  by  saying,  '  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I
workJ.'  'Therefore,'  continues  the  Evangelist,  'the  Jews  sougbt
the  more  to  kill  Him,  because  E'e  not  only  had  broken  the  Sab-
bath, but  said  also  that  God  was  His  Own  Father,  making  Him-
self equal  with  God  It.'    Now  the  Jews  were  not  mistaken  as  to

"  St.  Jolin  V.  1 1 :  i  TQii  ntj  ttkn  (•">'""<•  The  quickening  ths  dead  ii
a  special  atciibute  of  God  (Pent.  »nriL  39;  1  Saia.  ii  6).  If  oar  Lmd'i
power  of  qiuckening  whom  He  would  had  referred  only  to  the  moral  life  »f
man,  the  statemenC  would  not  have  been  lees  aig;iiificant.  To  radae  a  aool
from  iniritual  death  is  at  leoat  as  great  a  miracle,  and  aa  atiictly  proper  M
God  Aimiglit  J,  aa  to  raise  a  dead  body.  But  the  f<iia*olT)(rit  hare  in  queedon,
if  moral  in  ver.  35,  ia  physical  in  ver.  !8;  oor  Lord  is  allading  to  His  recentlj-
performed  miracle  aa  an  illustration  of  Hie  power.     Ibid.  vers.  8,  o.

^  St.  Jchn  T.  zS,  3g :  ipx^m*  ^p^  ^^  $  irAvres  ol  ir  to7i  fivttfieiots  djcoi*-
a'i>f^ni  T^f  ipaiVT}S  ajrrQUj  Kol  ixirope&iTiH'Tcu,  ol  tA  irira3il  rotftirayrts,  tis  iifi-

i  St.  Joim  T.  17;  i  noTS(i;iDii  'cat  tpri  ii>yiCfTiu,  xayii  IpyiCa/icu.  *Wie
der  Vater  aeit  Anbeginn  nicht  aufgehoct  habe,  zimi  Eeil  der  Welt  zti
wirken,  Bondem  immer  fortwirke  bis  zur  ietzigea  Stnnde,  eo  mit  Nothwen-
digkeit  imd  Becht,  ongeachtet  deg  Sabbathagesetzes,  aQch  Er,  als  der  Sohi,
Welcher  ale  Solcber  in  dieaer  Seiner  Wirkaiunkeit  nicht  dem  Sabbaths-
gesetza  onterthan  eein  kann,  sondem  Eerr  dea  Sabbaths  ist.'  (St.  Matt.
lii.  8  :  St.  Maik  ii.  :3.)     Meyer  in  loc.

^  St.  John  V.  18  :  nuT^jm  ISiay  fA^^t  riv  Ochv,  Xaoy  lauriv  tiii£>>  t^  e<$.
M.  Salvador  points  out  the  abiding  eigniGcance  of  our  Lord's  language  ia
the  (pinion  of  his  co-religioniets.  'Si  Ton  ne  s'attaquaitqu'auz  traditiona  el
inteipr^tatioDB  abueives,  cMtait  s'en  prendre  a  la  jni^sprudence  do  jour,  am

A — 1. — .  — ,  I == .  (.'^tait  ueer  simplement  du  droit  commun  en  Isiael,

oe.  Maia  ei  Ton  se  mettaJt  au  deBBoa  da  I'ingtitutitn
me  J^ua  devant  lea  doctenrs,  on  se  proclanuut  le
ith,  dans  ce  cas,  entre  drcontus,  c'^tait  attaquer  a  b
IS  pierres  anguluree;  c'^tait  imposar  au  grand  Sacri-
'e  entendre  une  voii  acmeatrice  1  enfin  cMtait  s'^ever
InifB,  on  ioul-aumoins  te  pretendre  son  6gai,  Aussi
b  vient  a  Tappui  da  cettc  diatinction,  et  ajouta  tuie
gin^rale  dea  quatrea  £vangilea.  "  Les  Juifc,"  dit
I  et  ^vangffiate  Jean,  "ne  poursuivirent  pas  j^oi,
riottdt  lee  ordonnances  relatives  au  sabbath.  On  Ini
cette  autre  raison;  qu'il  se  faisait  ^gal  a  Dicu.'"
ii.  pp.  80,  Si.


involves  His  true  Divinity.  183

our  Lord's   meaning.     They  knew  that  the   Everlasting  God

*  neither  rests  nor  is  weary ;  *  they  knew  that  if  He  could  slumber
but  for  a  moment  the  universe  would  collapse  into  the  nothing-
ness oat  of  which  He  has  summoned  it.    They  knew  that  He

*  rested  on  the  seventh  day '  from  the  creation  of  new  beings ;
but  that  in  maintaining  the  life  of  those  which  already  exist,  He
'  worketh  hitherto.*     They  knew  that  none  could  associate  him-
self as  did  Jesus  with  this  world-sustaining  energy  of  God,  who
was  not  himself  God.     They  saw  clearly  that  no  one  could  cite
God*s  example  of  an  uninterrupted  energy  in  nature  and  provi-
dence as  a  reason  for  setting  aside  God's  positive  law,  without
also  and  thereby  claiming  to  be  Divine,    It  d^d  not  occur  to  them
that  our  Lord's  words  need  have  implied  no  more  than  a  resem-
blance between  His  working  and  the  working  of  the  Father,   If
indeed  our  Lord  had  meant  nothing  more  than  this,  He  would
not  have  met  the  objection  urged  by  the  Jews  against  His  break-
ing the  Sabbath.    It  would  have  been  no  argument  against  the
Jews  to  have  said,  that  because  God's  incessant  activity  is  ever
working  in  the  universe,  therefore  a  holy  Jew  might  work  on
Tminterruptedly,  although  he  thereby  violated  the  Sabbath  day.
With  equal  reason  might  it  have  been  urged,  that  because  God
sees  good  to  take  the  lives  of  His  creatures,  in  His  mercy  no  less
than  in  His  justice,  therefore  a  religious  man  might  rightfully
put  to  death  His  tempted  or  afflicted  brother.    The  Sabbath  was
a  positive  precept,  but  it  rested  on  a  moral  basis.     It  had  been
given  by  God  Himself.     Our  Lord  claims  a  right  to  break  the
Sabbath,  because  God's  ever  active  Providence  is  not  suspended
on  that  day.    Our  Lord  thus  places  both  His  Will  and  His  Power
on  the  level  of  the  Power  and  Will  of  the  Father.     He  might
have  parried  the  Jewish  attack  by  saying  that  the  miracle  of
healing  the  impotent  man  was  a  work  of  God,  and  that  He  was
Himself  but  the  unresisting  organ  of  a  Higher  Being. .  On  the
Socinian  hypothesis  He  ought  to  have  done  so.     But  He  repre-
sents the  miracle  as  His  own  work.     He  claims  distinctly  to  be
Lord  of  nature,  and  thus  to  be  equal  with  the  Father  in  point  of
operative  energy '.    He  makes  the  same  assertion  in  saying  that
'whatsoever  things  the  Father  doeth,  those  things  the  Son  also
doeth  in  like  manner  ^.'     To  narrow  down  these  words  so  as  to
make  iliem  only  jefer  to  Christ's  imitation  of  the  moral  nature

^  St.  Cyril.  Alex.  Thesanms,  p.  324.

™  St.  John  V.  19 :   &  7^  &v  iKeiros  iroip,  ravra  Ktd  d  Tihs  dfxoiws  iroicl.
Cf.  viii.  28.
IV]


1 84     The  Son  is  to  be  honoured  as  the  Father.

of  God,  is  to  take  a  liberty  with  the  text  for  which  it  affords  no
warrant ;  it  is  to  make  void  the  plain  meaning  of  Scripture  by  a
sceptical  tradition.  Our  Lord  simply  and  directly  asserts  that
the  works  of  the  Father,  without  any  restriction,  are,  both  as  to
their  nature  and  mode  of  production,  the  works  of  the  Son.
Certainly  our  Lord  insists  very  carefully  upon  the  truth  that
the  power  which  He  wielded  was  derived  originally  from  the
Father.  It  is  often  difficult  to  say  whether  He  is  speaking,  as
Man,  of  the  honour  of  union  with  Deity  and  of  the  graces  which
flowed  from  Deity,  conferred  upon  His  Manhood ;  or  whether,
as  the  Everlasting  Son,  He  is  describing  those  natural  and
eternal  Gifts  which  are  inherent  in  His  Godhead,  and  which  He
receives  from  the  Father,  the  Fountain  or  Source  of  Deity,  not
AS  a  matter  of  grace  or  favour,  but  in  virtue  of  His  Eternal
Generation.  As  God,  *the  Son  can  do  nothing  of  Himself,'  and
this,  '  not  from  lack  of  power,  but  because  His  Being  is  insepar-
able from  That  of  the  Father  ».*  It  is  true  of  Christ  as  Gk>d  in
one  sense — it  is  true  of  Him  as  Man  in  another — that  *  as  the
Father  hath  life  in  Himself  so  hath  He  given  to  the  Son  to
have  life  in  Himself.*  But  neither  is  an  absolute  harmony  of
the  works  of  Christ  with  the  Mind  and  Will  of  the  Father,  nor  a
derivation  of  the  Divine  Nature  of  Christ  Itself  from  the  Being
of  the  Father  by  an  unbegun  and  unending  Generation,  destruc-
tive of  the  force  of  our  Lord's  representation  of  His  operative
energy  as  being  on  a  par  with  that  of  the  Father.

For,  our  Lord's  real  sense  is  made  plain  by  His  subsequent
statement  that  *the  Father  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto
the  Son ;  that  all  should  honour  the  Son  even  as  they  honour
the  Father  o.'  This  claim  is  indeed  no  more  than  He  had
already  advanced  in  bidding  His  followers  trust  Him  and  love
Him.     The  obligation  of  honouring  the  Son  is  deflned  to  be  just

n  Euthym.

•  St.  John  V.  a  a,  33.  Meyer  in  loc. :  *  In  dem  richtenden  Sohne  enohemt
der  beauftragte  StelVoertreter  des  Vaters,  und  er  ist  »n  so  fern  (also  inmier
relativ)  zu  ehren  toie  der  Vater.*  But  if  the  honour  paid  to  the  Son  be
merely  relative,  if  He  be  merely  honoured  as  an  Ambassador  or  del^ated
Judge,  then  men  do  not  honour  Him  09  they  honour  the  Father ;  they  pay
the  Father  one  kind  of  honour,  namely  adoration,  and  they  pay  the  Son
a  totally  distinct  kind  of  honour, — ^possibly  respect.  If  this  had  been  our
Lord's  meaning,  would  He  not  either  have  omitted  Ka0ciis,  or  used  two
different  verbs  to  express  what  is  due  from  all  men  to  the  Father  and  to  the
Son  respectively?  Moses  was  'as  a  God  unto  Pharaoh,'  and  Qod's  ambas-
sador and  judge  among  the  children  of  Israel.  Does  he  therefore  claim
that  all  men  should  honour  Moses  even  as  they  honour  Jehovah  ?

[lect.


Christ  claims  to  be  One  with  the  Father.    185

as  stringent  as  the  obligation  of  honouring  the  Father.  What-
eyer  form  that  honour  may  take,  be  it  thought,  or  language,  or
outward  act,  or  devotion  of  the  affections,  or  submission  of  the
will,  or  that  union  of  thought  and  heart  and  will  into  one
complex  act  of  self-prostration  before  Infinite  Greatness,  which
we  of  the  present  day  usually  mean  by  the  term  *  adoration,'
such  honour  is  due  to  the  Son  no  less  than  to  the  Father.  How
fearful  is  such  a  claim  if  the  Son  be  only  human ;  how  natural,
how  moderate,  how  just,  if  He  is  in  very  deed  Divine  I

(j3)  Beyond  this  assertion  of  an  equal  operative  Power  with
the  Father,  and  of  an  equal  right  to  the  homage  of  mankind,  is
our  Lord's  revelation  of  His  absolute  oneness  of  Essence  with
the  Father.  The  Jews  gathered  around  Him  at  the  Feast  of
Dedication  in  the  Porch  of  Solomon,  and  pressed  Him  to  tell
them  whether  He  was  the  Christ  or  not  p.  Our  Lord  referred
them  to  the  teaching  which  they  had  heard,  and  to  the  miracles
which  they  had  witnessed  in  vain  <i ;  but  He  proceeded  to  say
that  there  were  docile  and  faithful  souls  whom  He  terms  His
*  sheep,'  and  whom  He  *knew,*  while  they  too  understood  and
followed  Him^  He  goes  on  to  insist  upon  the  blessedness  of
these  His  true  followers.  With  Him  they  were  secure;  no
power  on  earth  or  in  heaven  could  'pluck  them  out  of  His
Hand^'  A  second  reason  for  the  blessedness  of  His  sheep
follows :  *  My  Father  which  gave  them  Me  is  a  Greater  Power
(^fifoi/)  than  all :  and  no  man  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  My
Father's  Hand  *.'  Li  these  words  our  Lord  repeats  His  previous
assurance  of  the  security  of  His  sheep,  but  He  gives  a  different
reason  for  it.  He  had  represented  them  as  '  in  His  own  Hand ; '
He  now  represents  them  as  in  the  Hand  of  the  Almighty  Father.
How  does  He  consolidate  these  two  reasons  which  together
assure  His  *  sheep'  of  their  security  1  By  distinctly  asserting
His  own  oneness  with  the  Father :  *  I  and  My  Father  are  One
Thing !»,'  Now  what  kind  of  unity  is  that  which  the  context
obliges  us  to  see  in  this  solemn  statement  %  Is  it  such  a  unity
as  that  which  our  Lord  desired  for  His  followers  in  His  in-
tercessory prayer ;  a  unity  of  spiritual  communion,  of  reciprocal
love,  of  common  participation   in   an  imparted,   heaven-sent

P  St.  John  X.  33,  33.  «  Ibid.  ver.  35.

'  Ibid.  ver.  37.  •  Ibid.  ver.  38.

*  Ibid.  ver.  39.

*  Ibid.  ver.  30 :  'Ey^  /col  h  nar^p  tv  iffficp.  For  a  full  explanation  of
this  text  see  Bishop  Beveridge's  noble  sermon  on  the  Unity  of  Christ  with
God  the  Father,  Works,  vol.  ii.  Serm.  xxv.    See  also  note  D.

IV]


1 86    Christ's  Oneness  with  the  Father ^  essential.

Nature^ I  Is  it  a  unity  of  design  and  co-operation,  §uch  as
that  which,  in  varying  degrees,  is  shared  by  all  true  workers  for
God  ^  1  How  would  either  of  these  lower  unities  sustain  the
ftdl  sense  of  the  context,  which  represents  the  Hand  of  the  Son
as  one  with  the  Hand — ^that  is,  with  the  Love  and  Power — of
the  Father,  securing  to  the  souls  of  men  an  effectual  preservation
from  eternal  ruin  ?  A  unity  like  this  must  be  a  dynamic  unity,
as  distinct  from  any  mere  moral  and  intellectual  union,  such  as
might  exist  in  a  real  sense  between  a  creature  and  its  God.
Deny  this  dynamic  unity,  and  you  destroy  the  internal  con-
nexion of  the  passage^.  Admit  this  dynamic  unity,  and  you
admit,  by  necessary  implication,  a  unity  of  Essence.  The  Power
of  the  Son,  which  shields  the  redeemed  from  the  foes  of  their
salvation,  is  the  very  Power  of  the  Father ;  and  this  identity  of
Power  is  itself  the  outflow  and  the  manifestation  of  a  Oneness
of  Nature.  Not  that  at  this  height  of  contemplation  the  Person
of  the  Son,  so  distinctly  manifested  just  now  in  the  work  of
guarding  His  redeemed,  melts  away  into  any  mere  aspect  or
relation  of  the  Divine  Being  in  His  dealings  with  His  creatures.
As  St.  Augustine  observes  on  this  text,  the  '  unum  *  saves  us
from  the  Charybdis  of  Arianism ;  the  *  sumus '  is  our  safeguard
against  the  Scylla  of  Sabellius.  The  Son,  within  the  incom-
municable unity  of  God,  is  still  Himself;  He  is  not  the  Father,
but  the  Son.  Yet  this  personal  subsistence  is  in  the  mystery  of
the  Divine  Life  strictly  compatible  with  Unity  of  Essence ; — the
Father  and  the  Son  are  one  Thing.

'  Litellexerunt  Judsei,  quod  non  intelligunt  Ariani.'  The  Jews
understood  our  Lord  to  assume  Divine  honours,  and  proceeded
to  execute  the  capital  sentence  decreed  against  blasphemy  by

^  As  in  St.  John  xvii.  ii,  22,  33.  ^  i  Cor.  lii.  8.

*  Meyer  in  Joh.  x.  29 :  *  Der  Vater  in  dem  Sohne  ist  und  wirkt,  nnd
daher  dieser,  als  Organ  und  Trager  [He  is,  of  course,  much  more  than  this]
der  gottlichen  Thatigkeit  bei  Ausfiihrung  des  Messianischen  Werks,  nicht  ge-
schieden  von  Gott  [i.e.  the  Father]  nicht  ein  zweiter  ausser  und  neben  Gott
ist,  soudem  nach  dem  Wesen  jener  Gremeinschaft  Eins  mit  Gott,  Gottes
Hand  ist  daher  seine  Hand  in  der  VoUziehung  des  Werkes,  bei  welchem
Er  Gottes  Macht,  Liebe  u.  s.  w.  handhabt  und  zur  Ausfiihrung  bringt.
Die  Einheit  ist  mithin  die  der  dynamischen  Gemeinschaft,  womach  der
Vater  im  Sohne  ist,  und  doch  grosser  als  der  Sohn,  [i.e.  as  man,]  weil  Er
ihn  geweiht  und  gesandt  hat.  Die  Arianische  Fassung  von  der  ethischen
Harmonie  gentigt  nicht,  da  die  Argumentation,  ohne  die  Einheit  der  Macht
(welche  Clurys.  Euth.  Zig.  u.  V.  auch  Liicke  mit  Recht  urgiren)  zu  ver-
stehen,  nicht  zutreffen  wiirde.'  This  interpretation  is  remarkable  for  its
scholarly  fairness  in  a  writer  who  sits  so  loosely  to  the  Catholic  belief  in
our  Loras  Godhead  as  Meyer.

[lkct.


'**■
*


Our  Lord' s  reference  to  Psalm  Ixxxii.  6.     187

the  Mosaic  law  y.    His  words  gave  them  a  fair  ground  for  saying
that  *  being  Man,  He  made  Himself  God  z/     Now  if  our  Lord
had  been  in  reality  only  Man,  He  might  have  been  fairly  ex-
pected to  say  so.     Whereas  He  proceeds,  as  was  often  His  wont,
to  reason  with  His  opponents  upon  their  own  real  or  assumed
grounds,  and  so  to  bring  them  back  to  a  point  at  which  they
were  forced  to  draw  for  themselves  the  very  inference  which  had
just  roused  their  indignation.     With  this  view  our  Lord  points
out  the  application  of  the  word  Elohim,  to  the  wicked  judges
under   the   Jewish   theocracy,   in    the   eighty-second   Psalm*.
Surely,  with  this  authoritative  language  before  their  eyes,  His
countrymen  could  not  object  to  His  calling  Himself  the  Son  of
God.     And  yet  He  irresistibly  implies  that  His  title  to  Divinity
is  higher  than,  and  indeed  distinct  in  kind  from,  that  of  the
Jewish  magistrates.     If  the  Jews  could  tolerate  that  ascription
of  a  lower  and  relative  divinity  to  the  corrupt  officials  who,
theocratically  speaking,  represented  the  Lord  Jehovah  ;  surely,
looking  to  the  witness  of  His  works,  Divinity  could  not  be
denied  to  One  Who  so  manifestly  wielded  Divine  power  as  did
Jesus  ^.     Our  Lord's  argument  is  thus  b,  mtnori  ad  majus;  and
He  arrives  a  second  time  at  the  assertion  which  had  already
given   such  ofPence   to    His   countrymen,  and  which  He   now
repeats  in  terms  expressive  of  His  sharing  not  merely  a  dy-
namical but  an  essential  unity  with  the  Father :  *  The  Father  is
in  Me,  and  I  in  Him  c.'     Wliat  the  Father  is  to  the  Son,  the
Son  is  to  the  Father.     The  context  again  forbids  us  to  compare
this  expression  with  the  phrases  which  are  often  used  to  express
the  indwelling  of  God  with  holy  souls,  since  no  moral  quality  is
here  in  question,  but  an  identity  of  Power  for  the  performance
of  superhuman  works.     Our  Lord  expresses  this  truth  of  His
wielding  the  power  of  the  Father,  by  asserting  His  identity  of
Nature  with  the  Father,  which  involves  His  Omnipotence.    And
the  Jews  understood  Him.     He  had  not  retracted  what  they
accounted  blasphemy,  and  they  again  endeavoured  to  take  His
lifed

It  will  probably  be  said  that  the  Church's  interpretation  of
Christ's  language  in  the  Porch  of  Solomon  is  but  an  instance  of
that  disposition  to  materialize  spiritual  truth,  which  seems  to  be

y  St.  John  X.  31.         ■  Ibid.  ver.  33  :  ^b,  &v0pa>nos  &v^  iroich  a^avThy  ©eJi*.
•  Ps.  Ixxxii.  6.

^  St.  John  X.  37,  38.     Of.  Perowne,  Psalms,  ii.  92.
^  St.  John  X.  38  :  4v  ifiol  6  IloT^p,  Koy^  4v  avr^,
^  Ibid.  ver.  39  :  i^iirovy  olv  vdKi.v  avThv  ir((i(rat«
IV  ]


1 88  WAy  Chrisi's  oneness  wtik  the  Father  is  essential,

BO  unhappily  natural  to  the  mind  of  man.  '  WLat  groBsneas  (rf
apprehension,'  it  will  be  orged,  ■  is  here  I  How  can  you  tbns
confound  language  which  merely  asBertB  a  EUetained  intercom-
munion between  a  holy  soul  and  God,  with  those  hard  formal
echolafitio  aEsertiona  of  an  identity  of  eBsencet'  Bat  it  is
obvious  to  rejoin  that  in  cases  like  that  before  us,  language
must  be  morally  held  to  mean  what  it  is  imderstood  to  mean  by
those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  After  all,  language  is  designed
to  convey  thought ;  and  if  a  speaker  perceives  that  his  real  mind
has  not  been  conveyed  by  one  statement,  he  is  bound  to  correct
the  deficiencies  of  that  statement  by  another.  Had  our  Lord
been  speaking  to  populations  accustomed  to  Pantheistic  modes
of  thinldiig,  and  insensible  to  the  fundamental  distinctness  of
the  TTncreated  from  all  forms  of  created  life,  His  assertion  <rf
His  oneness  with  the  Father  might  perhaps  have  passed  for
nothing  ntore  than  the  rapture  of  a  subjective  ecstasy,  in  which
the  consciousness  of  the  Speaker  had  been  so  raised  above  ita
ordinary  level,  that  He  could  hyperholically  describe  His  sensa-
tions as  Divine,  Had  our  Lord  been  an  Indian,  or  an  Alex-
andrian, or  a  Qerman  mystic,  some  such  interpretation  might
have  been  reasonably  afGxed  to  His  language.  Had  Christ  been
a  Christian  instead  of  the  Author  of  Christianity,  we  might,
after  carefully  detaching  His  words  from  their  context,  have
even  supposed  that  He  was  describing  the  blessed  experience  of
roillions  of  believers ;  it  being  certain  that,  since  the  Incarnation,
the  soul  of  man  is  capable  of  a  real  union  with  the  All-holy
God.  Undoubtedly  writers  like  St.  Augustine,  and  many  irf
later  date«,  do  speak  of  the  union  between  God  and  the  Chris-
tian in  terms  which  signally  illustrate  the  loving  condesceQBion
of  God  truly  present  in  holy  souls,  of  God's  gift  (^  Himself  to
His  redeemed  creatures.  But  the  belief  of  these  writers  re-
specting the  Nature  of  the  Most  High  has  placed  the  phrases
of  their  mystical  devotion  beyond  the  reach  of  a  possible
'ud  our  Lord  was  addressing  earnest
ive  to  the  essential  distinction  between
r  and  the  life  of  the  creature,  and  re-
le  Divine  prerogatives.  The  Jews  did
's  claim  to  be  one  with  the  Father  in
itual,  or  mystical  sense.     Christ  did  not

Of  his  teaching  respecting  the  unioD  between
[tare  ia  a  good  auinmaiy  in  Ullmann'a  Kefonnen
.  ii.  pp.  139-149,  Clarke's  trwul.

[lect.


Christ  conscious  ofhavingexistedbefore  His  birth.  1 89

encourage  them  so  to  understand  it.  The  motive  of  their
indignation  was  not  disowned  by  Him.  They  believed  Him  to
mean  that  He  was  Himself  a  Divine  Person ;  and  He  never
repudiated  that  construction  of  His  language.

(y)  In  order  however  to  determine  the  real  sense  of  our
Saviour's  claim  to  be  One  with  the  Father,  let  us  ask  a  simple
question.  Does  it  appear  that  He  is  recorded  to  have  been  con-
Bcious  of  having  existed  previously  to  His  Human  Life  upon  this
earth  %  Suppose  that  He  is  only  a  good  man  enjoying  the  highest
degree  of  constant  spiritual  intercommunion  with  God,  no  refer-
ences to  a  Pre-existent  Life  can  be  anticipated.  There  is  nothing
to  warrant  such  a  belief  in  the  Mosaic  Kevelation,  and  to  have
professed  it  on  the  soil  of  Palestine  would  simply  have  been
taken  by  the  current  opinion  of  the  people  as  a  proof  of  mental
derangement.  But  believe  that  Christ  is  the  Only-begotten  Son
of  God,  manifested  in  the  sphere  of  sense  and  time,  and  clothed
in  onr  human  nature ;  and  some  references  to  «  consciousness
extending  backwards  through  the  past  into  a  boundless  eternity
are  only  what  would  naturally  be  looked  for  at  His  hands.

Let  us  then  listen  to  Him  as  He  is  proclaiming  to  His
countrymen  in  the  temple,  *  If  a  man  keep  My  saying.  He  shall
never  see  death  V  The  Jews  exclaim  that  by  such  an  announce-
ment He  assumes  to  be  greater  than  Abraham  and  the  prophets.
They  indignantly  ask,  *  Whom  makest  Thou  Thyself  1  *  Here  as
elsewhere  our  Lord  keeps  both  sides  of  His  relation  to  the
Eternal  Father  in  full  view:  it  is  the  Father  that  glorifies  His
Manhood,  and  the  Jews  would  glorify  Him  too  if  they  were  the
Father's  true  children.  But  it  was  not  their  Heavenly  Father
alone  with  whom  the  Jews  were  at  variance.  The  earthly
ancestor  of  the  Jewish  race  might  be  invoked  to  rebuke  his
recreant  posterity.  *  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  My
day,  and  he  saw  it  and  was  glad.*  Abraham  had  seen  the  day  of
Messiah  by  the  light  of  prophecy,  and  accordingly  this  statement
was  a  claim  on  the  part  of  Jesus  to  be  the  true  Messiah.  Of
itself  such  a  claim  would  not  have  shocked  the  Jews ;  they
would  have  discussed  it  on  its  merits.  They  had  latterly  looked
for  a  political  chief,  victorious  but  human,  in  their  expected
Messiah ;  they  would  have  welcomed  any  prospect  of  realizing
their  expectations.  But  they  detected  a  deeper  and  to  them  a
less  welcome  meaning  in  the  words  of  Christ.     He  had  meant,

*  8t.  John  viii.  5a  :  ii»  ris  rhy  \iyov  rhv  ifxhp  Tjjp^<rj7,  Bdyaror  oh  fiii  0e«»-
M<n?  €iT  tbv  cuuya.


igo  'Before  Abraham  was,  I  am'

they  thought,  by  His  '  Day '  Bomething  more  than  the  years  of
His  Human  Life.  At  any  rate  they  would  ask  Him  a  question,
which  would  at  once  jnetiiy  their  suBpicious  or  enable  Him  to
clear  Himself.  '  Thou,'  they  said  to  Him,  '  art  not  yet  fifty  years
old,  and  hast  Thou  seen  Abraham  t'  Now  if  our  Lord  had  only
claimed  to  be  a  human  Messiah,  such  as  the  Jews  of  later  yean
had  learned  tfl  look  for,  He  must  have  earnestly  disavowed  any
fiucb  inference  fi'om  His  words.  He  might  have  replied  that  if
Abraham  saw  Him  by  the  light  of  prophecy,  this  did  not  of  itself
imply  that  He  was  Abraham's  contemporary,  and  so  that  He
had  Himself  literally  seen  Abraham.  But  His  actual  answer
more  than  justified  the  most  extreme  suspicions  of  His  examiners
as  to  His  real  meaning.  '  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Verily,  verily,  I
say  unto  you.  Before  Abraham  was,  /  aia!  In  these  tremendous
words  the  Speaker  institutes  a  double  contrast,  in  respect  both
of  the  duration  and  of  l^e  mode  of  His  existence,  between  Him-
self and  the  great  ancestor  of  Israel.  IT/jIv  'A^paa/i  yttiaSai.
Abraham,  then,  had  come  into  existence  at  some  given  point  of
time.  Abraham  did  not  exist  until  his  parents  gave  him  birlh.
But,  'E^i  (i/u.  Here  is  simple  existence,  with  no  note  of
beginning  or  ends.  Our  Lord  says  not,  'Before  AbrahaiD
was,  I  was,'  but '  I  am,'  He  claims  pre-existence  indeed,  but  He
does  not  merely  claim  pre-existence ;  He  unveils  a  conscious-
ness of  Eternal  Being.  He  speaks  as  One  on  Whom  time  has  no
efiect,  and  for  Whom  it  has  no  meaning.  He  is  the  I  AM  of
ancient  Israel ;  He  knows  no  past,  as  He  knows  no  future  ;  He
is  unbeginning,  unending  Being;  He  is  the  eternal  'Now.'
This  is  the  plain  sense  of  His  langaagel>,  and  perhaps  the  most
instructive  commentary  upon  its  force  is  to  bo  found  in  the
violent  expedients  to  which  Humanitarian  writers  have  been
driven  in  order  to  evade  it'.

■  St.  John  viii.  58.     Meyer  in  loc. :   '  Ebe  Atratam  ward,  bin  Ich,  alto

als  Abraham's  Werden  iat  meine  Eiiatenz.'     Stier  characterizes  our  Lonl'i

worda  aa  '  a  andden  [not  to  Himself]  flash  of  revelation  out  of  the  depths  of

His  own  Eternal  Conaoiousneea.'     That  Christ  ahoiild  finally  have  aptken

thus,  is  not,  Stier  ui^es,  to  be  wondered  at,  on  the  supposition  of  this

Eternal  Coneciouanega  ever  abiding  with  Him.    Bather  is  it  wooderfnl,

tbat  He  should  ordinarily,  and  aa  a  rule,  have  reatraiued  it  Bo  much.    Here

^e  restraina  Himaelf.    He  does  not  go  on  to  say,  as  aftermitda

interoeBsion— jrpji  roi  tV  kbsixov  sf™  (St.  John  ivu.  5).

Hist,  of  Christianity,  i.  349 :    '  The  awful  and  significant

identified  Him,  as  it  were,  vrith  Jehovah,  the  great  se1f<i-

Why  'aa  it  were'?
ronSt.  John  viii.  58;    '  Daa  fytl  (Ijii  isfc  abec  weder :   Ich  bin
as)  zu  deiiten  {Fattatus  Sociniis,  Pauhia,  ganz  contertwidiig),
[lect.


Christ  affirms  that  He  came  down/rom  heaven.  191

Here  agam  the  Jews  understood  our  Lord,  and  attempted  to
kill  Him ;  while  He,  instead  of  explaining  Himself  in  any  sense
which  would  have  disarmed  their  anger,  simplj  withdrew  from
the  temple  i.

With  this  statement  we  may  compare  Christ's  references  to
His  pre-existence  in  His  two  great  sacramental  Discourses.
Conversing  with  Nicodemus  He  describes  Himself  as  the  Son  of
Man  Who  had  come  down  from  heaven,  and  Who  while  yet
speaking  was  in  heaven  K  Preaching  in  the  great  synagogue  of
Capernaum,  He  calls  Himself  *the  Bread  of  Life  Which  had
come  down  from  heaven.*  He  repeats  and  expands  this  descrip-
tion of  Himself.  His  pre-existence  is  the  warrant  of  His  Hfe-
giying  power  \  The  Jews  objected  that  they  knew  His  father
and  mother,  and  did  not  understand  His  advancing  any  such
claim  as  this  to  a  pre-existent  Life.  Our  Lord  replied  by  saying
that  no  man  could  come  to  Him  unless  taught  of  God  to  do  so,
and  then  proceeded  to  re-assert  His  pre-existence  in  the  same
terms  as  before  ™.  He  pursued  His  former  statement  into  its
mysterious  consequences.  Since  He  was  the  heaven-descended
Bread  of  Life,  His  Flesh  was  meat  indeed  and  His  Blood  was
drink  indeed  *».  They  only  would  have  life  in  them  who  should
eat  this  Flesh  and  drink  this  Blood  o.  Life  eternal,  Besurrection
at  the  last  day  p,  and  His  own  Presence  even  now  within  the
soulq,  would  follow  upon  a  due  partaking  of  that  heavenly  food.
When  the  disciples  murmured  at  this  doctrine  as  a  *  hard  say-
ing r, '  our  Lord  met  their  objections  by  predicting  His  coming
Ascension  into  Heaven  as  an  event  which  would  justify  His  allu-
sions to  His  pre-existence,  no  less  than  to  the  life-giving  virtue
of  His  Manhood.  *  What  and  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man
ascend  up  where  He  was  before"]'     Again,  the  reality  of  our

noch  in  den  RathtchhuM  Gottes,  zu  verlegen  (Sam.  Crell,  OroHits,  Paultts,
B.  Crusvus),  was  schon  durch  das  Praes.  verboten  wird.  Nup  noch
geechichtHch  bemerkenswerth  ist  die  von  Faustus  Socinus  anch  in  das
Socinianifiche  Bekenntniss  (s.  Catech.  Bacov.  ed.  Oeder,  p.  144,  f.)  liberge-
gangene  Auslegung:  "Ehe  Abraham,  Abraham,  d.  i.  der  Vater  vieler
Volker,  wird,  bin  Ich  es,  namlich  der  Messias,  das  Licht  der  Welt."
Bamit  ermahne  Er  die  Juden,  an  Thn  zn  glauben,  so  lange  es  noch  Zeit
sei,  die  die  Gnade  von  ihnen  genommen  und  auf  die  Heiden  tibergetragen
werde,  wodurch  dann  Abraham  der  Vater  vieler  Volker  werde.'

^  St.  John  viii.  59.  ^  Ibid.  iii.  13,  *  Ibid.  vi.  33.

"*  Ibid.  vers.  44-51.  «»  Ibid.  ver.  55.

•  Ibid.  ver.  53.  p  Ibid.  ver.  54.

'  Ibid.  ver.  56.  '  Ibid.  ver.  60.

'  Ibid.  ver.  6a,  Strauss  thinks  it  *  difficult  but  admissible '  to  interpret
St.  John  viii.  58,  with  the  Socinian  Orell,  of  a  purely  ideal  existence  in  the


1 9  2     Pre-existence  alone,  does  not  imply  Divinity.

Lord's  pre-eiistence  lightens  up  such  mysterions  aayinge  as  th©
following  :  '  I  know  whence  I  came,  and  whither  I  go  ;  but  ye
ctuiDot  t«ll  whence  I  come,  and  whither  I  go t ; '  'I  am  frun
above  :  . .  ■  I  am  not  of  this  world  " ;'  '  If  ye  belieye  not  that  I
am  He,  ye  shall  die  in  your  ans^;'  'I  proceeded  forth  and  came
from  God  ' ; '  '  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into
the  world :  again,  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father ".'
Once  more,  how  foil  of  solemn  Hignificance  is  that  reference  to
'  the  glory  which  I  had  with  Thee  before  the  world  was  y '  in  the
great  intercession  which  onr  Incarnate  Saviour  offered  to  tlie
Eternal  Pother  on  the  eve  of  His  agony  1

Certainly  taken  alone,  our  Lord's  allusions  to  His  pre-existcuce*
need  not  imply  His  true  Divinity.  There  is  indeed  no  groamd
for  the  theory  of  a  Palestinian  doctrine  of  metempsychoeia ;  and
even  Strauss  shrinks  from  supposing  that  the  fourtJi  Evangelist
makes  Jesus  the  mouthpiece  of  Alexandrian  theories  of  which  a
Jewish  peasant  would  never  have  heard.  Arianism  however
would  argue,  and  with  reason,  that  in  some  of  the  passages  jnst
referred  to,  though  not  in  all,  our  Lord  might  conceivably  have
been  speaking  of  a  created,  although  pre-existent,  life.  Yet  if
we  take  these  passages  in  connection  with  onr  Lord's  assertion  of
His  being  One  with  the  Father,  each  truth  will  be  seen  to  sup-
port and  complete  the  other.  On  the  one  hand,  Christ  asserts
His  substantial  oneccEs  with  Deity,  on  the  other,  Hia  distinct

predetermination  of  God.  He  eonaidera  it  however  'scarcely  poeaibte  to
view  the  prajer  to  the  Father  (St.  John  ivii.  5)  to  oonfirm  the  %6t.a  which
Jesus  had  with  Him  before  the  woild  was,  as  an  entreaty  for  the  com-
mnnioation  of  a  glory  predestined  for  Jesus  from  etOTOily.'  He  adds  that
the  language  of  Jesna  (St.  John  vi.  Gi)  where  He  speaks  of  the  Son  of  Man
re-ascending  where  He  was  before,  im^lvftv  &rou  ^n  ri  irpiJTtpoii,  ia  'in
its  intrinsic  meaning,  as  well  as  in  that  which  ie  reflected  on  it  ftmn  otha
passages,  unequivocally  significatiTe  of  actual,  not  merely  of  ideal  pre-
exietence.'     Leben  Jesn,  pt.  ii.  kap.  4.  \  65.

Here,  as  Bometimes  elsewhere,  Strauss  incidentally  upholds  the  natural
and  Catholic  interpretation  of  the  teit  of  the  Gospels;  nor  are  we  now
concerned  with  the  theory  to  which  he  eventaally  applies  it.  It  may  be
farther  observed,  that  Strauss  might  have  at  least  inte^ireted  3t.  John  viii,
£3  by  the  light  of  St.  John  vi,  6a.

'  St.  John  viii.  14,  "  Ibid.  ver.  13.  '  Ibid.  var.  14.

*  Ibid.  ver.  41 :  ^7^  -^^  it.  roii   emv  i(,TiKioii  ml  %Ka.

»  Ibid.  rri.  a8.  >  Ibid.  ivii.  5.

"  St.  Luke  I.  18  would  be  a  weighty  addition  to  these  passages,  if  (k  tw
ohpavov  could  be  pressed,  against  the  apparent  requirements  of  the  context,
«o  as  to  refer  to  the  foil  of  the  rebel  angels.  In  that  case  iSt<ipoin'  wonld
be  an  act  of  the  Dre.Hxistent  Word*      So  many  Fathers,  and  Hofinann,


[lxct-


.J


Our  Lord's  testimony  when  before  the  San/iedrin.  193

pre-exigtent  Personality.  He  might  be  an  inferior  and  created
Bebg,  if  He  were  not  iJius  absolutely  One  with  God.  He  might
be  only  a  saintly  man,  and,  as  such,  described  as  an  '  aspect,'  a
*  manifestation'  of  the  Divine  Life,  if  His  language  about  His
pre-ezistence  did  not  clearly  imply  that  before  His  birth  of
Mary  He  was  already  a  Hying  and  superhuman  Person.

If  indeed,  in  His  dealings  with  the  multitude,  our  Lord  had
been  really  misunderstood,  He  had  a  last  opportunity  for  ex-
plaining Himself  when  He  was  arraigned  before  the  Sanhedrin.
Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that,  whatever  was  the  dominant
motive  that  prompted  our  Lord's  apprehension,  the  Sanhedrin
condemned  Him  because  He  claimed  Divinity.  The  members  of
the  court  stated  this  before  Pilate.  *  We  have  a  law,  and  by  our
law  He  ought  to  die,  because  He  made  Himself  the  Son  of  God  V
Their  language  would  have  been  meaningless  if  they  had  under-
stood by  the  ^  Son  of  God '  nothing  more  than  the  ethical  or
theocratic  Sonship  of  their  own  ancient  kings  and  saints.  If  the
Jews  held  Christ  to  be  a  flEilse  Messiah,  a  false  prophet,  a  blas-
phemer, it  was  because  He  claimed  literal  Divinity.  True,  the
Messiah  was  to  have  been  Divine.  But  the  Jews  had  secularized
the  Messianic  promises ;  and  the  Sanhedrin  held  Jesus  Christ
to  be  worthy  of  death  under  the  terms  of  the  Mosaic  law,  as  ex-
pressed in  Leviticus  and  Deuteronomy^.  After  the  witnesses
had  delivered  their  various  and  inconsistent  testimonies,  the
high  priest  arose  and  said,  *  I  adjure  Thee  by  the  living  God,
that  Thou  tell  us  whether  Thou  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.
Jesns  saith  unto  him.  Thou  hast  said :  nevertheless  I  say  unto
yon,  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  Man  sitting  on  the  right
hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven.  Then  the
high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  saying,  He  hath  spoken  blasphemy  0.'
The  blasphemy  did  not  consist,  either  in  the  assumption  of  the
title  Son  of  Man,  or  in  the  claim  to  be  Messiah,  or  even,  except-
ing indirectly,  in  that  which  by  the  terms  of  Daniel's  prophecy
was  involved  in  Messiahship,  namely,  the  conmiission  to  judge
the  world.     It  was  the  further  claim  ^  to  be  the  Son  of  Q<>d,

•  St.  John  XIX.  7.  '  Devant  ce  proouratenr, '  obsorvea  M.  Salvador, '  ohacnne
dee  parties  ^mit  line  parole  capitale.  Telle  fut  celle  du  conseil  ou  de  ses
d^^^ :  **  Nous  avons  une  loi ;  d'apr^  cette  loi  il  doit  mourir/*  non  parce-
(in^il  s'est  fait  Fils  de  Dien,  selon  1  expression  famili^  k  notre  langue  et
^  HOB  proplibtes ;  mais  parcequ*il  se  fait  ^gal  k  Dieu,  et  Dieu  mSme.*  Sal-
vador,  J^us-Christ,  ii.  p.  304.

**  Lev.  xxiv.  16 ;  Deut.  xiii.  5 ;  of.  Wilson,  BlaBtration  of  the  Method  of
Erolaiiung  the  New  Testament,  p.  26.  •  St.  Matt.  xxvi.  63-65.

^  Pressens^,  J^us-Christ,  pp.  341,  615.
IV]  0


£94    ^^  ^  condemned  for  claiming  to  be  Divine.

not  in  any  moral  or  theocratic,  but  in  the  natural  sense,  at  whicli
the  high  priest  and  his  coadjutors  profeSBed  to  be  so  deeply
ehocked.  The  Jews  felt,  as  our  Lord  intended,  that  the  Son  of
Man  in  Daniel's  prophecy  could  not  but  be  Divine ;  they  knew
■what  He  meant  by  appropriating  such  words  as  applicable  to
Himself.  Just  as  one  body  of  Jews  had  endeayoured  to  destroy
Jesus  when  He  called  God  His  Father  in  such  sense  as  to  claim
DiTinity  « ;  and  another  when  He  contrasted  His  Eternal  Being
with  the  fleeting  life  of  Abraham  in  a  distant  past  ^ ;  and  another
when  He  termed  Himself  Son  of  Ood,  and  associated  Himself
with  His  Father  as  being  dynamically  and  so  substantially  OneE;
— -just  as  they  murmured  at  His  pretension  to  '  have  come  down
from  Heaven  V  and  detected  blasphemy  in  His  authoritative  re-
mission of  sins'; — so  when,  before  His  judges,  He  admitted  that
He  claimed  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  all  further  discussion  was  at
an  end.  The  high  priest  exclaimed  '  Te  have  heard  H'«  blas-
phemy;' and  they  all  condemned  Him  to  be  guilty  of  death.
And  a  very  accomplished  Jew  of  our  own  day,  M.  Salvador,  has
shewn  that  this  question  of  our  Lord's  Divinity  was  the  real
point  at  issue  in  that  momentous  trial.  He  maintains  that
a  Jew  had  no  logical  alternative  to  belief  in  the  Godhead  of
T r\\ — :j.    J.  ^jjg  imperative  duty  of  putting  Him  to

lo  justice  to  the  significance  of  our  lord's

'  IMd.  yiii.  58,  59.  •  Ibid.  i.  30,  31,  39.

■  St.  Matt.  iz.  3  ;  St.  Lake  t.  20,  11.
iriet,  ii.  pp.  131,  133,  195:   'La  question  avait  nn
al  juif :  c'^taiC  la  r^Bietance  dn  Fila  de  Marie,  dam

ordrea  et  avertlBeeiceiits  dn  grand  ConBol.  An
Belon  la  loi,  Zisaa  ee  trouvfut  en  cauBe  poor  s'itre

Dien  Ini-menie.'  See  also  the  Eov.  W.  W"d«on'«
liod  of  Explaining  the  New  Teetsment,  p.  77,  aqq.
i  the  Sanhodrin  sincerelj  believed  our  Lord  to  be
lasphemy,  as  inseparable,  to  a  Jewish  apprehenatm,
Dirine.  Thie  is  aroued  (i)  from  the  r^nlarity  of
isnliedrin,  the  length  of  the  trial,  and  the  eamstt-
the  juices.  The  felse  witneeeea  ware  conaidered  u
:  Dur  Cord  wu  oondemned  on  Uie  strength  of  His
on  the  langnage  of  the  loenibeni  of  the  Sanhedrin
■  law  He  ought  to  die,  becaune  He  made  Himself
im  the  fact  that  the  membera  of  the  Sanhedrin  had
gain  by  pronoumnng  Jeans  gnilty,  vrithont  bcang
ality  in  claiming  to  be  a  Divine  Penoa.  Mr.  Wilion
nraia  by  appealing  to  our  Lord's  silence,  to  St.  Feta's
en  in  Acts  iii,  14-17,  and  to  (he  general  condoctol

[lict.


Chris fs  Self-assertion  and  His  character.     195

language  about  Himself  let  us  for  a  moment  reflect  on  our  very

fundamental  conceptions  of  His  character.     There  is  indeed  a

certain  seeming  impropriety  in  using  that  word  *  character*  with

respect  to   Jesus  Christ   at  all.      For  in  modem    language

*  character  *  generally  implies  the  predominance  or  the  absence

of  some  side  or  sides  of  that  great  whole,  which  we  picture  to

ourselves  in  the  background  of  each  individual  man  as  the  true

and  complete  ideal  of  human  nature.     This  predominance  or

absence  of  particular  traits  or  faculties,  this  precise  combination

of  active  or  of  passive  qualities,  determines  the  moral  flavour  of

each  individual  life,  and  constitutes  character.     Character  is

that  whereby  the  individual  is  marked  off  from  the  presumed

standard  or  level  of  typical  manhood.     Yet  the  closest  analysis

of  the  actual  Human  Life  of  Jesus  reveals  a  moral  Portrait  not

only  unlike  any  that  men  have  witnessed  before  or  since,  but

especially  remarkable  in  that  it  presents  an  equally  balanced  and

entirely  harmonious  representation  of  all  the  normal  elements  of

our  perfected  moral  nature  I    Still,  we  may  dare  to  ask  the

question :  What  are  the  features  in  that  perfectly  harmonious

moral  Life,  upon  which  the  reverence  and  the  love  of  Christians

dwells  most  constantly,  most  thankfully,  most  enthusiastically  %

I.  If  then  on  such  a  subject  I  may  utter  a  truism  without
irreverence,  I  say  first  of  all  that  Jesus  Christ  was  sincere.  He
possessed  that  one  indispensable  qualification  for  any  teacher,
specially  for  a  teacher  of  religion:  He  believed  in  what  He  said,
without  reserve;  and  He  said  what  He  believed,  without  regard
to  consequences.  Material  error  is  very  pardonable,  if  it  be
error  which  in  good  faith  believes  itself  to  be  truth.  But  evident
insincerity  we  cannot  pardon;  we  cannot  regard  with  any  other
sentiment  than  that  of  indignation  the  conscious  propagation  of
what  is  known  to  be  false,  or  even  to  be  exaggerated.  If  however
the  sincerity  of  our  Lord  could  be  reasonably  called  in  question,
it  might  suffice,  among  the  various  facts  which  so  irresistibly
establish  it,  to  point  to  His  dealings  with  persons  who  followed
and  trusted  Him.    It  is  easy  to  denounce  the  errors  of  men  who

*  Young,  Christ  of  History,  p.  317 :  *  The  difficulty  which  we  chiefly  feel
m  dealing  with  the  character  of  Christ,  as  it  unfolded  itself  before  men,
arises  from  its  absolute  perfection.  On  this  very  account  it  is  less  fitted  to
arrest  observation.  A  single  excellence  unusually  developed,  though  in  the
lieighboiirhood  of  great  faults,  is  instantly  and  universally  attractive.  Per-
fect symmetry,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  startle,  and  is  hidden  from
common  and  casual  observers.  But  it  is  this  which  belongs  emphatically  to
the  Christ  of  the  Gospels ;  and  we  distinguish  in  Him  at  each  moment  that
Precise  manifestation  which  is  most  natural  and  most  right.*
IV]  0  2


196  Sincerity  of  yesus  Christ.

oppose  us ;  but  it  ie  difficult  to  be  always  perfectly  outspokea
with  those  who  love  us,  or  who  look  np  to  ub,  or  whose  services
may  be  of  use  to  ns,  and  who  may  be  alienated  by  otir  out-
Bpokenn^s.  Kow  Jesus  Christ  does  not  merely  drag  forth  to
Uie  light  of  day  the  hidden  motives  of  TTjh  powerful  adversaries,
that  He  may  exhibit  them  with  so  merciiiilly  implacable  as  .
accuracy,  in  aU  their  baseness  and  pretension.  He  exposes,  with
equal  impartiality,  the  weakness,  or  the  unreality,  or  the  self-
deception  of  others  who  already  regard  Him  with  afTection  or
who  desire  to  espouse  His  cause.  A  disciple  addresses  him  as
'Good  Master.'  The  address  was  Id  itself  sufficiently  juStifiable;
but  our  Lord  observed  that  the  speaker  had  used  it  in  an  unreal
and  conventional  manner.  In  order  to  mark  His  displeasure  He
solemnly  asked,  '  Why  callest  thou  Me  good  I  There  is  none  good
but  One,  that  is,  God '".'  A  multitude  which  He  has  fed  miracu-
lously returns  to  seek  Him  on  the  following  day;  but  instead
of  silently  accepting  this  tacit  proof  of  His  popular  power,  He
observes,  '  Ye  seek  Me,  not  because  ye  saw  the  miracles,  but
because  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves  and  were  filled  ».'  On  another
occasion,  we  are  told,  'there  went  great  multitudes  with  Him.'
He  turns,  warns  them  that  all  human  affections  must  be  sacrificed
to  His  service,  and  that  none  conld  be  His  disciple  who  does  not
take  up  the  cross".  He  solemnly  bids  men  'count  the  cost'  before
they 'build  the  tower"  of  discipleshipp.  He  is  on  the  point  of  being
deserted  by  all,  and  an  Apostle  protests  with  fervid  exaggeration
that  he  is  ready  to  go  with  Him  to  prison  or  to  death.  But  onr
Lord,  instead  of  at  once  welcoming  the  affection  which  dictated
this  protestation,  pauses  to  shew  Simon  Peter  how  little  he  really
knew  of  the  weakness  of  his  own  heart  u.  With  the  woman  of
Samaria,  with  Simon  the  Pharisee,  with  the  Jews  in  the  temple,
with  the  rich  young  man,  it  is  ever  the  same ;  C^hrist  cannot
flatter,  He  cannot  disguise,  He  cannot  but  set  forth  truth  in  its
limpid  purity r.  Such  was  His  moral  attitude  throughout:  sin-
cerity was  the  mainspring  of  His  whole  thought  and  action ;  and
when  He  stood  before  His  judges.  He  could  exclaim,  in  thisasiu
a  wider  sense,  '  To  this  end  was  I  bom,  and  for  ttiis  cause  came
I  into  the  world,  that  I  should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth'.'
Surely  this  sincerity  of  our  Holy  Saviour  is  even  at  this  hour
a,  main  secret  of  His  attractive  power.     Men,  we  know,  may

"  St,  Mark  i.  18.  "  St.  John  vi.  aiS.  •  St.  Lnka  liv.  *6,  »7-

P  Ibid.  VBT.  j8.  1  St.  John  liii.  37,  38.

'  Cf.  Hewman,   ParooMal  Sermon^   vol.  v,  p.  37,  serm.  3:   'XIiii*»l
Wordfl.'  '  St.  Join  iviii.  37.

[lbct.


Unselfishness  of  Jesus  Christ.  197

flatter  and  deceive,  till  at  length  the  soul  grows  sick  and  weary
of  a  world,  which  Truth  in  her  stem  simplicity  might  some-
times seem  to  have  abandoned.  But  Jesus  Christ,  speaking  to  us
from  the  Gospel  pages,  or  speaking  in  the  secret  chambers  of
conscience,  is  a  Monitor  Whom  we  can  trust  to  tell  us  the  un-
welcome but  wholesome  truth ;  and  could  we  conceive  of  Him
as  false,  He  would  no  longer  be  Himself  in  our  thought ;  He
would  not  be  changed ;  He  would  simply  have  disappeared  \

2.  A  second  moral  truism :  Jesus  Christ  wsus  unselfish.  His
Life  was  a  prolonged  act  of  Self-sacrifice ;  and  sacrifice  of  self  is
the  practical  expression  and  measure  of  unselfishness.  It  might
have  seemed  that  where  there  was  no  sin  to  be  curbed  or  worn
away  by  sorrow  and  pain,  there  room  might  have  been  found  for
a  lawful  measure  of  self-satisfadtion.  But '  even  Christ  pleased
not  Himself.'  He  *  sought  not  His  own  glory;'  *He  came  not
to  do  His  Own  will  V  His  Body  and  His  Soul,  with  all  the
faculties,  the  activities,  the  latent  powers  of  each,  were  offered
to  the  Divine  WilL  His  friends,  His  relatives,  His  mother  and
His  home,  His  pleasure.  His  reputation,  His  repose,  were  all
abandoned  for  the  glory  of  God  and  for  the  good  of  His
brethren.  His  Self-sacrifice  included  the  whole  range  of  His
human  thought  and  affection  and  action ;  it  lasted  throughout
His  Life ;  its  highest  expression  was  His  Death  upon  the  Cross.
Those  who  believe  Him  to  have  been  merely  a  man  endowed
\wth  the  power  of  workiug  miracles,  or  even  only  with  the
power  of  wielding  vast  moral'  influence  over  masses  of  men,
camiot  but  recognise  the  rare  loveliness  and  sublimity  of  a  Life
in  which  great  powers  were  consciously  possessed,  yet  were
never  exercised  for  those  objects  which  the  selfish  instinct  of
ordinary  men  would  naturally  pursue.  It  is  this  disinterested-
ness ;  this  devotion  to  the  real  interests  of  humankind ;  this
ladical  antagonism  of  His  whole  character  to  that  deepseated
selfishness,  which  in  our  better  moments  we  men  hate  in  our-
eelyes  and  which  we  always  hate  in  others ; — it  is  this  complete

*  F^x,  J^BUB-Christ,  p.  316;  Channing,  Works,  ii.  55 :  'When  I  trace
the  unaffected  majesty  which  runs  through  the  life  of  Jesus,  and  see  Him
never  falling  below  His  sublime  claims  amidst  poverty,  and  scorn,  and  in
His  last  agony,  I  have  a  feeling  of  the  reality  of  His  character  which  I
c&iuiot  express.  I  feel  that  the  Jewish  carpenter  could  no  more  have  con-
ceived  and  sustained  this  character  imder  motives  of  imposture,  than  an
m&Qt's  arm  could  repeat  the  deeds  of  Hercules,  or  his  unawakened  in-
tellect comprehend  and  rival  the  matchless  works  of  genius.*

*  Kom.  XV.  3;  St.  John  ▼.  50,  vi.  58;  St.  Matt.  xxvi.  39.


Hiifnility  of  jfesus  .Christ.


renimciation  of  «11  that  has  no  object  bejond  self,  which  bsB  won
to  JesoB  Christ  the  heart  of  mankiDd.  Id  Jesus  Chriet  we  hail
the  One  Friend  Who  lores  perfectly;  "Who  expresses  perfect
lore  by  the  utter  smrender  of  Self;  Who  loves  even  imto  deatL
In  Jesus  Christ  we  greet  the  Good  Shepherd  of  hamanity ;  Be
is  the  Qood  Shepherd  under  Whrae  care  we  can  lack  nothing,
and  Whose  glory  it  is  that  He  'giveth  His  Life  for  the  sheep*.'

3.  A  third  moral  tmism;  Jesus  Christ  was  humble.  Hemight
have  appeared,  even  to  human  eyes,  as  '  One  naturally  con-
tented with  obscnrity ;  wanting  the  restless  desire  for  eminence
and  distinction  which  ia  so  common  in  great  men;  hating  to
pnt  forward  personal  claims;  disliking  competition  and  dis-
putes who  should  be  greatest ;  .  • .  fond  of  what  is  simple  and
homely,  of  children,  and  poor  people  1'  It  might  have  almost
seemed  as  if  His  preternatural  powers  were  a  source  of  distress
and  embarrassment  to  Him;  so  eager  was  He  to  economize
tbeir  exercise  and  to  veil  them  fi*om  the  eyes  of  men.  He  was
particularly  careful  that  His  miracles  should  not  add  to  Hie
reputation*.  Again  and  again  He  very  earnestly  enjoined  silence
on  those  who  were  the  subjects  of  His  miraculous  cures  '.  He
would  not  gratify  persons  whose  motive  in  seeking  His  com'
pany  was  a  vain  curiosity  to  see  the  proofs  of  His  power'*.
By  this  humility  is  Jesus  Christ  most  emphatically  distingnished
JTom  the  philoBopbers  of  the  ancient  world.  Whatever  else
^ey  may  bave  been,  they  were  not  humble.  But  Jesua  Christ
loses  His  individuality  if  you  separate  Him  in  thought  for  one
moment  from  His  '  great  humility.'  His  humility  is  the  key  to
His  whole  life ;  it  is  the  measuring-line  whereby  His  actions.  His
sufferings,  His  words.  His  very  movements  must  be  meted  in
order  to  be  understood.  '  Learn  of  Me,'  He  says,  *  for  I  am  meek
and  lowly  of  heart ;  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls".'

But  what  becomes  of  these  integral  features  of  His  character
if,  after  considering  the  language  which  He  actually  used  abont
Himself^  we  should  go  on  to  deny  that  He  ia  God )

Is  He,  if  He  be  not  Qod,  really  humble  1  Is  that  reiterated
Self-assertion,  to  the  accents  of  which  we  have  been  listening
this  morning,  consistent  with  any  known  form  of  creatorelj
humility !     Can  Jesus  thus  bid  ns  believe  in  Him,  love  Him,

■  St.  John  z.  II.  T  Ecce  Homo,  pp.  173,  179.

■  St.  Lake  Till.  51.

•  St.  Matt.  ix.  30:  ivfRfOki^istii;  lii.  16:  ^Ttrlfiijo-w  dtrors.
»  St.M>rk  viii.  II,  ij;  St.  Matt.  zri.  1,  41  St.  Luke  xi.  16;   St.Jolm
•  St.  Matt.  li.  19.

[lict.


Is  yesus  Christ  humble^  if  He  is  not  God  ?     1 99

obey  Him,  live  by  Him,  live  for  Him ;  can  He  tbus  claim  to
be  the  imiyersal  Teacher  and  the  universal  Judge,  the  Way,  the
Truth,  the  Life  of  humanity, — ^if  He  be  indeed  only  man?
What  is  humility  but  the  honest  recognition  of  truth  respecting
self  1  Could  any  mere  man  claim  that  place  in  thought,  in
society,  in  history,  that  authority  over  conscience,  that  rela-*
tionslup  to  the  Most  High ;  could  he  claim  such  powers  and
duties,  such  a  position,  and  such  prerogatives  as  are  claimed
by  Jesus  Christ,  and  yet  be  justly  deemed  'meek  and  lowly
of  heart'?  If  Christ  is  God  as  well  as  Man,  His  language  falls
into  its  place,  and  all  is  intelligible ;  but  if  you  deny*  His
Divinity,  you  must  conclude  that  some  of  the  most  precious
sayings  in  the  Gospel  are  but  the  outbreak  of  a  preposterous
self-laudation ;  they  might  well  seem  to  breathe  the  very  spirit
of  another  Lucifer  d.

If  Jesus  Christ  be  not  God,  is  He  really  unselfish  ?  He  bids
men  make  Himself  the  centre  of  their  affections  and  their
thoughts;  and  when  God  does  this  He  is  but  recalling  man
to  that  which  is  man's  proper  duty,  to  the  true  direction  and
law  of  man's  being.  But  deny  Christ's  Divinity,  and  what  will
you  say  of  the  diojiterestedness  of  His  perpetual  self-assertion®?

*  Mr.  F.  W.  Newman,  Phagea  of  Faith,  p.  154 :  'When  I  find  hia  high
satisfaction  at  all  personal  recognition  and  bowing  before  his  individuality,
I  almost  donbt  whether,  if  one  wished  to  draw  the  character  of  a  vain  and
vacillating  pretender,  it  wonld  be  possible  to  draw  anything  nearer  to  the
purpose  than  this.'  (p.  158), '  I  can  no  longer  give  the  same  human  reverence
as  before  to  one  who  has  been  seduced  into  vanity  so  egregious  [as  to  claim
to  be  the  Son  of  Man].*  So  our  Lord's  parabolical  sayings  are  said  (p.  153)
to  'indicate  vanity  and  incipient  sacerdotalism;*  (p.  157),  His  tone,  in  deal-
ingwith  the  rich  young  man,  is  'magisterial,  decisive,  and  final,*  so  as  to
keep  up  '  his  own  ostentation  of  omniscience  ;*  His  precept  bidding  men
receive  those  whom  He  sent  (Matt.  x.  40)  suggests  the  observation  that
inasmuch  as  the  disciples  'had  no  claims  whatever,  intrinsic  or  extrinsic,  to
reverence,  it  appears  to  me  a  very  extravagant  and  fanatical  sentiment  thus
to  couple  the  favour  or  wrath  of  Gk>D  with  their  reception  or  rejection*
(p.  157).    Compare  F^lix,  J^us-Ohrist,  pp.  301-333.

*  M.  Benan  accounts  for  our  Lord's  s^-assertion  in  the  following  manner :
'H  ne  prdchait  pas  ses  opinions,  il  se  prdchait  lui-mdme.  Souvent  des  &meB
trk-grandes  et  tr^s-d^sint^ress^es  pr^ntent,  associ^  k  beaucoup  d*^^vation,
ce  caract^  de  perp^tuelle  attention  k  elles-mdmes,  et  d'extrSme  suscepti-
hUiU  personnelU,  qui  en  giniral  ett  le  propre  des  femmes,  Leur  persuasion
que  IMeu  est  en  elles  et  s*oocupe  perp^tueUement  a  elles  est  si  forte  qu'elles
ne  craignent  nullement  de  8*imposer  aux  autres.*  (Vie  de  J^us,  p.  76.)
Accordingly,  we  are  told  that  *J4sua  ne  doit  pas  dtre  jug^  sur  la  rbgle  de
noB  petites  convenances.  L*admiration  de  ses  disciples  le  ddbordait  et  l*en-
traSnait.  H  est  Evident  que  le  titre  de  Babbi,  dont  il  s*^tait  d'abord  content^,
ne  lui  sufi&sait  plus;  le  titre  mdme  de  proph^te  ou  d'envoy^  de  Dieu  ne  r^

it]


200  Is  yesus  Christ  unselfish,  if  He  is  not  God  f

What  matters  It  that  He  teaches  the  '  enthusiasm  of  humam^,'
if  that  enthueiasm  was  ait«r  all  to  centre  in  a  merely  hninan
sel^  and  to  surround  His  human  presence  with  a  tribute  of
superhuman  honour  1  What  avails  it  that  He  proclaims  the  law
of  Belf-renonncement,  if  He  is  Himself  thns  guilty  of  its  signal
infraction )  Nay,  for  'what  generous  purpoBe  can  He  etUl  be  held
to  have  died  upon  the  Cross  1  The  Cross  is  indeed  for  Christians
the  symbol  and  the  throne  of  a  boundless  Love ;  but  it  is  only
each  to  those  who  believe  in  the  Divinity  of  the  Crucified.
Deny  the  truth  of  Christ's  account  of  Himself;  deny  the  over-
whebning  moral  necessity  for  His  perpetual  Self-assertion ;  and
His  Death  may  assume  another  aspect.  For  He  plainly  courted
death  by  His  last  denunciations  against  the  Pharisees,  and  by
His  presence  at  a  critical  moment  in  Jerusalem.  That  He  was
thus  voluntarily  slain  and  has  redeemed  us  by  His  Blood  is  indeed
tile  theme  of  the  praises  which  Christians  daily  offer  TTim  on
earth  and  in  paradise.  But  if  He  be  not  the  Divine  Victim
freely  offering  Himself  for  men  upon  the  altar  of  the  Cross,  may
He  not  be  what  Christian  lips  cannot  force  themselves  to  utter)
You  urge  that  in  any  case  He  would  he  a  man  freely  devoting
himself  for  truth  and  goodness.  But  it  is  precisely  here  that
His  excessive  self-assertion  would  impair  our  confidence  in  the
purity  of  His  motive.  Is  not  self-sacrifice,  even  when  pushed
to  the  last  extremity,  a  suspected  and  tainted  thing,  when  it
goes  hand  in  band  with  a  consistent  effort  to  give  unwarranted
prominence  to  self)  Have  not  men  ere  now  even  risked  death
for  the  selfish,  albeit  nnsubstantial,  object  of  a  posthumoni
renown'!  If  Jesus  was  merely  man,  and  His  death  no  more
than  the  fitting  close,  the  supreme  effort  of  a  life  consistently
devoted  to  the  assertion  of  self,  has  He  not  '  succeeded  beyond

pondut  pluB  &  aa  perta^e.  La  poeition  qn'il  a'attribnait  ^tiut  cells  d'mi  ttn
suthumsin,  et  U  voulait  qu'on  le  regoTdSt  coimae  ayant  Kvec  Siea  an  rap-
port pliu  Sifni  que  celiu  dee  autrea  homines, '     (Vie  de  J^ua,  p.  346.)

'  Newman,  PliaaeB,  p.  1 58  :  '  When  he  had  residTed  to  claim  Me«aiwiiliip
pnblidj,  one  of  two  reaulta  was  inevitable,  if  that  dtum  wu  iU-fonnded  :—
viz.,  either  he  mast  have  become  an  impostor  in  older  to  screm  hii  weak.
nesB  ;  or  hemnet  have  retracted  luBpieteiuiionB  amid  much  hmniliatdim  and
Lave  retired  into  privacy  to  learn  Bober  wiadom,  ^rom  theae  altemativft
there  wiu  eteape  aniji  2^  death,  and  upon  death  Jeaua  purpogelj-  rushed.'
(p.  361.)  'Does  my  Mend  deny  that  the  death  of  Jesus  was  wilfully  in-
corred)  The  "orthodox"  not  merely  admit  but  muntain  it.  Their  creed
jBBtifiea  it  by  the  doctrine  that  Us  death  wbb  b  '*  Bacaifioe "  bo  pleasing  to
QOD  aa  to  eipiate  the  sins  of  the  world.  TMa  honestly  meets  the  objeo-
tions  to  self-destruction ;  for  how  better  could  life  be  used  than  by  laying  it

[lect.


Is  yesus  Christ  sincere^  if  He  is  not  God  ?    201

the  dreams  of  the  most  delirious  votary  of  fame  %  li  the  blood
of  a  merely  human  Christ  was  the  price  which  was  deliberately
paid  for  glory  on  Mount  Calvary,  then  it  is  certain  that  the
sufferer  has  had  his  reward.  But  at  least  he  died,  only  as  others
have  died,  who  have  sought  and  found  at  the  hands  of  their
fellow-men,  in  death  as  in  life,  a  tribute  of  sympathy,  of  ad-
miration, of  honour.  And  we  owe  to  such  a  sufferer  nothing
beyond  the  compassionate  silence  wherewith  charity  would  fain
veil  the  violence,  of  selfishness,  robed  in  her  garments,  and
seeking  to  share  her  glory  and  her  power,  while  false  to  the  very
vital  principle  which  makes  her  what  she  is  8/

Once  more,  if  Jesus  Christ  is  not  God,  can  we  even  say  that
He  is  sincere  ^?  Let  us  suppose  that  it  were  granted,  as  it  is  by
DO  means  granted,  that  Jesus  Christ  nowhere  asserts  His  litersd
Godhead  1.  Let  us  suppose  that  He  wsus  after  all  merely  man,
and  had  never  meant  to  do  more  than  describe,  in  the  language
of  mysticism,  the  intertwining  of  His  human  Soul  with  the  Spirit
of  Gk)d,  in  a  communion  so  deep  and  absorbing  as  to  obliterate
His  sense  of  distinct  human  personality.  Let  this,  I  say,  be
supposed  to  have  been  His  meaning,  and  let  His  sincerity  be
taken  for  granted.  Who  then  shall  anticipate  the  horror  of  His
Bonl  or  the  fire  of  His  words,  when  He  is  once  made  aware  of
the  terrible  misapprehension  to  which  His  language  has  given

>  F^lix,  J^B-Christ,  p.  314 ;  Yonng,  The  Christ  of  History,  p.  339.

^  Newman,  Phases,  p.  154:  'It  sometimes* seems  to  me  the  picture  of  a
oonsdoufl  and  wilfiil  impostor.  His  general  character  is  too  high  for  thiti
and  I  thwefore  make  deductions  from  the  account.  Still  I  do  not  see  how
the  present  narrative  oould  haye  grown  up,  if  he  had  been  really  simple
and  straightforward  and  not  perrerted  by  his  essentially  false  position.*
Mr.  Newman  is  complaining  that  our  Lord  '  does  not  honestly  and  plainly
renounce  pretension  to  mirade,  as  Mr.  Martineau  would,*  but  his  language
obviously  suggests  a  wider  application,  (p.  158.)  'I  fed  assured,  k  priori,
that  such  presumption  [as  that  of  claiming  to  be  the  Son  of  Man  of  Dan.  vii.]
•Mfit  hvoB  entangled  him  into  evasions  and  insincerities,  which  naturally
end  in  crookedness  of  conscience  and  real  imposture,  however  noble  a  man*s
commencement^  and  however  nuBhrinlfiTig  his  sacrifice  of  goods  and  ease
and  life.*

*  M.  Benaa  indeed  says,  '  J^us  n*^nonce  pas  un  moment  Tid^  saorilbge
qn^il  soit  Dieu.*  (Vie  de  J^us,  p.  75.)  Yet,  *on  ne  nie  pas  qu'il  y  eftt
dans  les  afiSrmations  de  J^sus  U  aerme  ds  la  doctrine  qui  devait  plus  tard
£ure  de  lui  une  hypostase  divine.  (Ibid.  p.  247.)  M.  Kenan  even  explains
onrLord^s  language  as  to  His  Person  on  the  ground  that  Tid^alisme  trans>
eendant  de  J^us  ne  lui  permit  jamais  d*avoir  une  notion  bien  daire  de  sa
propre  perB<mnalit^.  it  est  9on  P^re^  son  Phre  est  luC  (p.  244.)  In
oihfir  wardB,  our  Lord  did  affirm  His  Divinity,  but  only  because  He  wa%
nnconadously  perhaps,  a  Pantheist  1

n]


202     Did  Christ  explain  away  His  claims  ?

rise  in  the  minda  around  Eiin  1  '  Thou  being  a  man,  makeet
Thyself  God.'  The  charge  waB  literally  true:  being  human,  He
did  make  Himself  God.  Christians  beliere  that  He  only  'made'
Himself  that  which  He  is.  But  if  He  is  not  Qod,  where  does
He  make  any  adeqoata  repudiation  of  a  construction  of  His
words  so  utterly  derogatory  to  the  great  Creator,  so  necessarily
abhorrent  to  a  good  man's  thonght  %

Is  it  urged  that  on  one  occasion  He  '  explained  Hie  claiiD  to
Divinity  by  a  quotatioa  which  implied  that  He  shared  that  claim
with  the  chiefs  of  the  theocracy  % '  It  has  already  been  shewn
that  by  that  quotation  our  Lord  only  deprecated  immediate
vioJenca,  and  claimed  a  bearing  for  iMignago  which  the  Jews
themselves  regarded  as  not  merely  allowable,  but  sacred.  The
quotation  justified  His  language  only,  and  not  His  full  meaning,
which,  upon  gaining  the  ear  of  the  people,  He  again  proceeded
to  assert.  Is  it  cout«iided  that  in  such  sayings  as  that  addressed
to  TTJH  disciples,  '  My  Father  is  greater  than  I  ^,'  He  abandoned
any  pretonsion  to  be  a  Person  internal  to  the  Essential  Life  of
God )  It  may  suffice  to  reply,  that  this  saying  can  have  no
such  force,  if  its  application  be  restricted,  as  the  Latin  Fathera
do  restrict  it,  and  with  great  appairent  probability,  to  our  Lord's
Manhood.  But  even  if  our  Lord  is  here  speaking,  as  the
Greeks  generally  maintain,  of  His  essential  Deity,  His  Worda
still  express  very  exactly  a  truth  which  is  recognised  and  re-
quired by  the  Catholic  doctrine.  The  Subordination  of  the
Everlasting  Son  to  the  Everlasting  Father  is  strictly  compatible
with  the  Son's  absolute  Divinity;  it  is  abundantly  imphed  in
our  Lord's  language ;  and  it  is  an  integral  element  of  the
ancient  doctrine  which  stoadily  represents  the  Father  as  Alone
Unoriginato,  the  Fount  of  Deity  in  the  Etomal  Life  of  the
Ever-hleseed  Trinity  l.

*  St.  Jolm  liv.  j8  !  wapiioiiai  irpii  rir  Tlitr4ptt'  Sri  t  Hai^p  pm  fuffi*

fMu  irrl.    For  PatriBtic  u^ments  sf^inst  the  Arian  abnsa  of  this  teiLw*

Rnicer.  Thes.  ii.  p.  i.^68.     The  iiiiiavimi  of  the  Father  U  refened  bj

St,  Athsnaaina,  St,  Chrjaostom,  St.  Basil  (who,  however,  Ep.  Tiii  ipi"

the  Latin  int.),  St.  Hilary,  to  the  Son's  being  the  Only-b^otten :  d.  iln

Pearaon  on  Cr.  L  J43 ;  Newman,  Pw.  Sarm.  vi.  60.    By  St.  Cyr.  Alex,  (if

Becta  Fide,  18  ;  Thee.  p.  91,  and  in  !oc.) ;   St.  AmbroBe  (in  Cone.  Aqnil.

i  36 ;  de  Pid.  ii.  6l)  ;  St.  Angnstine  (in  loo. ;   de  Trin.  i.  7 ;   Enchir.  x):

St.  Leo  (Ep.  nviii.  id  FU".  0.  4 :   and  in  the  Ath.  Creed,  to  the  Son'l

hninilifttion  ae  incarnate.     St.  Augnatine  nnitea  both  explanations  ill  D«

Rdeet  Sjmb.  0.9.    St.  Th.  Aq.  giTeeboth:  Summ.Theol.  i.33.  i ;  L^J-T-

»  Bull,  Def.  Pid.  Nio.  iv.  i.  I :   '  Decretnni  Hind  Synodi  Niraena,  qw

.   .   -.   ■  T>-.-.._.  -r..!  gggg  efJ*  i«  eeoC,  Deum  de  D«i,  sno  oaloulo  wid-

^tboUci,  turn  qui. ante  com  qiti  poit  Synodnm iBu"

[I.ECT.


Christy  if  sincere,  must  be  Divine.         203

—      — '  -     ■  _■

But  surely  an  admission  on  the  part  of  one  in  whom  men  saw
nothing  more  than  a  fellow-creature,  that  the  Everlasting  God
"was  'greater'  than  himself,  would  fail  to  satisfy  a  thoughtful
listener  that  no  claim  to  Divinity  was  advanced  by  the  speaker.
Such  an  admission  presupposes  some  assertion  to  which  it  stands
in  the  relation  of  a  necessary  qualification.  If  any  good  man  of
our  acquaintance  should  announce  that  God  was  *  greater'  than
himself,  should  we  not  hold  him  to  be  guilty  of  something  worse
than  a  stupid  truism  "^  %  Would  he  not  seem  to  imply  that  he
was  not  really  a  creature  of  God's  hand  %  Would  not  his  words
go  to  suggest  that  the  notion  of  his  absolute  equality  with  God
was  not  to  be  dismissed  as  altogether  out  of  the  question?
Should  we  not  peremptorily  remind  him  that  the  life  of  man  is
related  to  the  Life  of  God,  not  as  the  less  to  the  greater,  but
as  the  created  to  the  Uncreated,  and  that  it  is  an  impertinent
irreverence  to  admit  superiority  of  rank,  where  the  real  truth  can
only  be  expressed  by  an  assertion  of  radical  difference  of  natures?
And  assuredly  a  sane  and  honest  man,  who  had  been  accused  of
associating  himself  with  the  Supreme  Being,  couM  not  content
himself  with  admitting  that  God  was  greater  than  himself.
Knowing  himself  to  be  only  human,  would  he  not  insist  again  and
again,  with  passionate  fervour,  upon  the  incommunicable  glory
of  the  great  Creator  1  Would  not  a  purely  human  Christ  have
anticipated  the  burning  words  of  the  indignant  Apostles  at  the
gate  of  Lystra?  Far  more  welcome  to  human  virtue  most  surely
it  would  have  been  to  be  accused  of  blasphemy  for  meaning  what
was  never  meant,  than  to  be  literally  supposed  to  mean  it.  For
indeed  there  are  occasions  when  silence  is  impossible  to  a  sincere
8oul°.  Especially  is  this  the  case  when  acquiescence  in  false-
hood is  likely  to  gain  personal  reputation^  when  connivance  at  a

scrips^re.  Nam  illi  omnes  nno  ore  doonemnt  natnram  perfectionesqne
divinM,  Patri  Filioque  competere  non  ooUateraliter  aut  coordinate,  sed  sub-
ordinal^  ;  hoc  est,  FUimn  eandem  qnidem  naturam  divinam  cum  Patre  com-
mimem  habere,  sed  k  Patre  communicatam ;  ita  scilicet  ut  Pater  solus
Batoram  illam  divinam  a  se  habeat,  sive  k  nullo  alio,  Filius  autem  k  Patre ;
proinde Pa^er,  Ditnnitatis  qucB  inlSlio  ettffonSy  origo  ac principium  sit*
See  Bull's  remarks  on  the  error  of  calling  the  Son  avr60(os,  as  though  He
were  not  begotten  of  the  Father,  Ibid.  iv.  i.  7.  Also  Petavius,  De  Deo
Beique  proprietatibus,  ii.  3,  6.  Compare  Hooker's  Works,  vol.  i.,  Keble's
J^ace,  p.  Ixxxi.  When  St.  Athanasius  calls  our  Lord  a\no<ro<pla  (Orat.
^'  *l^t  iv.  34),  ahr6s  has  the  sense  of  *  full  reality '  as  distinct  from  that  of
'Self-origination ;'  the  idea  is  excluded  that  He  had  only  a  measure  of
Wisdom  or  Divinity.    See  Petavius  de  Trin.  vii.  1 1.

"  Coleridge,  Table-talk,  p.  35.

'  See  Dean  Alford  on  St.  John  xix.  9.


204    Insincerity  of  ike  Christ  of  M.  Renan.

miBappreheusion  may  aggrandize  self^  ever  so  slightly,  at  the  cost
of  others.  How  would  the  BLucerity  of  a  human  teacher  deserve
the  name,  i^  passively)  without  repudiatioa,  without  protest,  he
should  allow  language  expressive  whether  of  his  moral  elevation
or  of  his  mystical  devotion  to  be  popularly  construed  into  a
public  claim  to  share  the  Eank  and  Name  of  the  great  God  in
heaven  1

It  ie  here  that  the  so-termed  historical  Christ  of  M.  Kenan,
who,  as  we  are  informed,  is  still  the  moral  chief  of  humanity  *,
would  appear  even  to  our  natural  EngHsh  sense  of  honesty  to  be
involved  in  serious  mora)  difficulties.  M.  Eenan  indeed  assures
us,  somewhat  eagerly,  that  there  are  many  standards  of  sincerity^ ;
that  is  to  say,  that  it  is  possible,  under  certain  circniostances,  to
acquiesce  knowingly  in  what  is  false,  while  yet  being,  in  soma

■■  Benan,  Vie  de  J&ua,  p.  457:  'Cette  mblinM  penoime,  qui  chaqne
jour  preside  encore  an  deetin  du  moode,  il  eat  pennis  de  rappcder  diviiMt
aon  an  ce  Bens  que  J^us  ait  absorb^  tout  Is  divin,  ou  lui  ait  iXii  ad^iul
(poor  employer  reipreBmon  de  la  Bcolaetique)  mail  en  oe  sens  que  J^ma  cM
lindivida  qui  ji  faU  fair e  S-  ion  etfice  U  plui  grand  paw  vert  le  divim.
L'himiBjiitd  dans  son  enaemble  oSre  un  usambloge  d'fltrea  baa,  6golaU»,
Bup^eun  i,  I'animal  en  cela  eeul  que  leur  ^Isme  eat  plus  r^fl&hi.  Utat,
au  milieu  de  cette  uniforme  volgaritd,  dee  oolonnea  a'^vent  Tera  le  cid  M
attestant  uae  plus  noble  deatin^.  J4s\iB  eat  la  plua  haute  de  cea  colonnea
qui  monlreiit  Ik  rhomiue  d'oti  il  vient,  et  oil  il  doit  teudre.  En  lui  g'ect
condeiiiS  tout  ee  qu'il  y  a  de  bon  et  d'fleT^  dans  notre  natora.'  On  the
other  hand,  M.  Benan  ia  not  quite  comietent  with  himwelf,  aa  he  ii  (rf
opinion  that  certain  Pagani  and  unbelieven  were  in  aome  reapeota  ■aperioc
to  our  Lord.  '  L'honngta  et  Boave  Marc-Aurile^  lliumble  et  donz  Spinoa,
n't^aai  pat  cnt  an  miraele,  ont  iti  exempli  de  quelquei  erreurt  qim  Jiimt
parlagea,'  {Ibid.  p.  451.)  MoreoTec,  thia  auperiority  to  our  Iiocd  aeenu
to  be  shared  by  that  advanced  school  of  sceptical  enquirera  to  which
M.  Benan  himself  belongs.  '  Par  notrs  eitrSme  d^catease  dans  I'empld
dee  moyens  da  conviction,  par  «olre  tincMtA  abiolut  et  notre  Ofaoiir
diiinteretii  de  I'idie  pure,  noua  avons  fond^,  noua  tons  qui  avons  too^
notre  vie  \  la  science,  «»  nouvel  tdial  de  moraiiti.'  (Ibid.)  Indeed,  aa
regards  our  Lord,  M,  Benan  suggests  that  'il  est  probable  que  beauooup  dc
ses  fautee  ont  it&  dissimul^ea.'  (Ibid.  p.  458.)

V  Ibid.  p.  153  :  '  Four  noaB,  races  profinid^ment  sdrieuses,  la  convicUon
aiimiiie  la  sinc^t^  avec  Boi  meme.  Mais  la  ainc^t^  avec  Boi-m6me  n'a  pai
8  penplea  oiientaui,  peu  halutufs  aux  d^catemei
me  foi  et  impoBtura  eout  des  mots  qui,  dans  notre
ent  conune  deux  termes  inconmliablea.  En  Orient
ille  fuites  et  mille  d^urs.  Les  auteura  da  livres
"  d'  "Henoch,"  par  ezemple),  hommes  si  ex»It^
Aoae,  et  bien  caitunament  sans  ombre  de  acrupnls,
niona  on  faux.  Ia  v^t^  mat^eUe  a  trypan  ds
A\  tout  li  travera  ses  id^ea,  sea  inti^rSts,  sea  paaaioDi.
,  si  I'on  n'admet  haulemenb  qWil  y  a  pottr  la  tin-


Moral  defects  of  tJie  Humanitarian  Christ,  205

transcendental  sense,  sincere.  Thus,  just  as  the  Christ  of
M.  Renan  can  permit  the  raising  of  Lazarus  to  look  like  a
miracle,  while  he  must  know  that  the  whole  episode  has  been
a  matter  of  previous  arrangement Q,  so  he  can  apparently  use
language  which  is  generally  understood  to  claim  Divinity,  with-
out being  bound  to  explain  that  he  is  altogether  human''.  The
4deal  of  humanity'  contents  himself,  it  appears,  with  a  lower
measure,  so  to  call  it,  of  sincerity;  and  while  we  are  scarcely
embarrassed  by  the  enquiry  whether  such  sincerity  is  sincere  or
not,  we  cannot  hesitate  to  observe  that  it  is  certainly  consistent
neither  with  real  humiHty  nor  with  real  unselfishness  «.

Thus  our  Lord's  human  glory  fades  before  our  eyes  when  we
attempt  to  conceive  of  it  apart  from  the  truth  of  His  Divinity.
He  is  only  perfect  as  Man,  because  He  is  truly  Ood.    If  He  is

4  M.  Kenan  introduces  his  account  of  the  reBturection  of  Lazarus  by  ob-
serving that  'les  amis  de  J^us  d^siraient  un  grand  mirade  qui  firapp&t
viyement  IMncr^uIit^  hi^roeolymite.  La  resurrection  d*un  homme  connu  k
J^nualem  dut  parattre  ce  qu*il  y  avait  de  plus  oonvaincant.  II  faut  se  rap-
pder  lei  que  la  condition  essentielle  de  la  vraie  critique  est  de  oomprendre  la
diversity  des  temps,  et  de  se  d^pouiller  des  repugnances  instinotiyes  qui  sont
le  frmt  d^une  Education  purement  raisonnable.  II  faut  se  rappeler  aussi  que
dans  cette  ville  impure  et  pesante  de  Jerusalem  JhvM  n*Ha%tplu$  lui-mSme,
8a  conscience,  par  la  faute  des  homines  et  non  par  la  tienne,  avait  perdu
quelque  chose  de  sa  limpiditS primordiale,*  (Vie  de  J^sus,  p.  359.)  tinder
these  drcumstances,  '11  se  passa  k  B^thanie  quelque  chose  qui  fut  regard^
comme  une  resurrection.*  (p.  360.)  'Peut-Hre  Laaxte,  p&le  encore  de  sa
maladie,  se  fit-U  entourer  de  bandelettes  comme  un  mort,  et  enfermer  dans
son  tombeau  de  famllle.  • .  J^sus  d^sira  voir  encore  une  fois  celui  qu*U  avait
aim^,  et,  la  pierre  ayant  4X6  ecart^e,  Lazare  sortlt  avec  ses  bandelettes  et  la
tSte  entour^e  d*un  suaire.  Cette  apparition  dut  naturellement  dtre  regard^e
ipar  tout  le  monde  comme  une  resurrection.     La  fol  ne  connalt  d*autre  loi

que  I'mter^t  de  ce  qu*elle  croit  le  yrai Quant  k  Jesus,  11  n'etait  pas

pins  mattre  que  saint  Bernard,  que  saint  Fnm9ois  d* Assise  de  moderer
I'ayidite  de  la  foule  et  de  ses  propres  disciples  pour  le  mervellleuz.  La
moft,  d'ailleurs,  allait  dans  quelques  jours  lul  rendre  sa  llberte  divine,
et  Vofracher  aux  fatales  nScessitis  d*un  rdle  qui  chaquejour  devenaitplus
exigeantf  plus  difficile  ct  soutenir/  (p.  363.)

'  Sometimes  M.  Benan  endeavours  to  avoid  this  conclusion  by  repre-
senting our  Lord*8  self-proclamation  as  being  in  truth  the  result  of  a  vain
self-surrender  to  the  fanatical  adulation  of  His  followers,  the  reiteration
of  which  in  the  end  deceived  Himself.  (Vie  de  jesus,  p.  139) :  'Naturelle-
ment, plus  on  croyait  en  lui,  plus  U  crojait  en  lul-mdme.*  Accordingly
(p.  240)  'sa  legende  [I.e.  thfi  account  given  of  Him  in  the  Gospels  and  in
Uie  Apostles*  Creed,  and  specially  the  doctrine  of  His  Divinity]  etait  le
fruit  d*une  grande  conspiration  toute  spontanee  et  s^dlaborait  autour  de  lui
deson  vivant.*  Thus  (p.  238)  the  Christ  of  M.  Benan  first  allows  himself
to  be  falsely  called  the  Son  of  David,  and  then  '11  finlt^  ce  semble,  par
y  prendre  pliuslr.*    Cf.  p.  297,  note.

■  F^  jesuB-Christ,  p.  321.
IV]


2o6         '  Christus,  si  non  Deus,  non  bonus'

not  God,  He  is  not  a  humble  or  an  unselfish  man.  Kay,  He  is
not  even  sincere  ;  unless  indeed  we  have  recoiirBe  to  a  suppoa-
tion  upon  which  the  most  desperate  of  His  modem  opponents
have  not  yet  ventured,  and  say  with  His  jealous  kinsmen  In  the
early  days  of  His  Ministry,  that  He  was  beside  Himself*.  Cer-
tainly it  would  seem  that  there  roust  have  been  strange  method
in  a  madness  which  could  command  the  adoration  of  the  civilized
world ;  nor  would  any  such  supposition  bo  serionsly  entertained
by  those  who  know  under  what  conditions  the  very  lowest  forms
of  moral  influence  are  at  all  possible.  The  choice  really  liea
between  the  hypothesis  of  conscious  and  culpable  insincerity,
and  the  belief  that  Jesus  speaks  literal  truth  and  must  be  taken
at  His  word  ".

You  complain  that  this  is  one  of  those  alternatives  which
orthodoxy  is  wont  to  substitute  for  less  violent  arguments,  and
from  the  exigencies  of  which  you  piously  recoil )  But  under
certain  circumstances  such  alternatives  are  legitimate  guides  to
truth,  nay,  they  are  the  only  guides  available.  Certainly  we
cannot  create  such  alternatives  by  any  process  of  dialectical
manufacture,  if  they  do  not  already  exist.  If  they  are  not  mstr
ters  of  fact,  they  can  easily  be  convicted  of  inaccuracy.  We  who
stand  in  this  pulpit  are  not  makers  or  masters  of  the  eternal
harmonies ;  we  can  but  exhibit  them  as  best  we  may.  Truth,
even  in  her  severer  moods,  must  ever  be  welcome  to  sincerity,
and  she  does  us  a  service  by  reminding  us  that  it  is  not  always
possible  to  embrace  within  the  range  of  our  religious  negatioM
just  so  much  dogma  as  we  wish  to  deny,  and  to  leave  the  rest
really  intact.  It  is  no  hardship  to  reason  that  we  cannot  deny
the  conclusion  of  a  proposition  of  Euclid,  without  impugning
sis  of  its  demonstration.  It  is  do
innot  deny  the  Divinity  of  Jesns,
lis  Human  Character.     There  are

)  charge  of  an  extravBig^it,  Helf-deluding
id  on  JesoB.  Where  can  we  find  tt«w
\  them  in  the  calm  authority  of  Hie  [le-
{ficeat  spirit  of  HiB  religion ;  in  the  on-
e  in  which  He  nnfoldB  Hig  high  powen
:  or  in  the  good  aense,  the  knowledge  d
icovers  in  Hie  eetimate  and  tre&tment  of

horn  He  acted  I The  trath  is,  O*^

f  JesnB,  it  was  diitioguiahed  hy  nothiig
session.'    Cf  Appendix,  note  E.
Iseence  delaBeugionChx^tirame.  Paiiii

[lbct.


A


Christ* s  Godliead  warranted  by  His  character.  207

feital  inclines  in  the  world  of  religious  thought;  and  even  if  men
deem  it  courteous  to  ignore  them,  such  courtesy  is  scarcely
charitable.  If  our  age  does  not  guide  anxious  minds  by  its
loyal  adherence  to  God*s  Kevelation,  its  very  errors  may  have
their  uses ;  they  may  warn  us  off  ground,  on  which  Reason  can-
not rest,  and  where  Faith  is  imperilled,  by  enacting  before  our
eyes  a  reductio  ad  ahswrdum  or  a  reductio  ad  horrihile.

Of  a  truth  the  alternative  before  us  is  terrible;    but  can
devout  and  earnest  thought  falter  for  a  moment  in  the  agony
of  its  suspense?    Surely  it  cannot.     The  moral  Character  of
Christ,  viewed  in  connection  with  the  preternatural  facts  of  His
Human  Life,  will  bear  the  strain  which  the  argument  puts  upon
it^.    It  is  easier  for  a  good  man  to  believe  that,  in  a  world
where  he  is  encompassed  by  mysteries,  where  his  own  being
itself  is  a  consummate  mystery,  the  Moral  Author  of  the  wonders
around  him  should  for  great  moral  purposes  have  taken  to  Him-
self a  created  form,  than  that  the  one  Human  Life  which  realizes
the  idea  of  humanity,  the  one   Man  Who  is  at  once   perfect
strength  and  perfect  tenderness,  the  one  Pattern  of  our  race  in
Whom  its  virtues  are  combined,  and  from  Whom  its  vices  are
eliminated,  should  have  been  guilty,  when  speaking  about  Him-
self of  an  arrogance,  of  a  self-seeking,  and  of  an  insincerity
which,  if  admitted,  must  justly  degrade  Him  far  below  the  moral
level  of  millions  among   His  unhonoured  worshippers.     It  is
easier,  in  short,  to  believe  that  God  has  consummated  His  works
of  wonder  and  of  mercy  by  a  crowning  Self-revelation  in  which
mercy  and  beauty  reach  their  climax,  than  to  close  the  moral
eye  to  the  brightest  spot  that  meets  it  in  human  history,  and —
since  a  bare  Theism  reproduces  the  main  difficulties  of  Chris-
tianity without  any  of  its  compensations — to  see  at  last  in  man's
inexplicable  destiny  only  the  justification  of  his  despair.     Yet
the  true  alternative  to  this  frightful  conclusion  is  in  reality  a
frank  acceptance  of  the  doctrine  which  is  under  consideration  in

*  Channing,  Works,  ii.  6i :  *  I  know  not  what  can  be  added  to  heighten
the  wonder,  reverence,  and  love,  which  are  due  to  Jesus.  When  I  consider
Him,  not  only  as  possessed  wiih  the  consciousness  of  an  unexampled  and
^Uibomided  majesty,  but  as  recognising  a  kindred  nature  in  all  human
^mga,  and  living  and  dying  to  raise  them  to  a  participation  of  His  divine
glories;  and  when  I  see  Him  under  these  views  allying  Himself  to  men  by
^e  tenderest  ties,  embracing  them  with  a  spirit  of  humanity  which  no
JMult,  injury,  or  pain  could  for  a  moment  repel  or  overpower,  I  am  filled
with  wonder  as  weU  as  reverence  and  love.  I  feel  that  this  character  is  not
of  Imman  invention,  that  it  was  not  assumed  through  fraud  or  struck  out
by  enthusiasm ;  for  it  is  infinitely  above  their  reach.


2o8   The  Christ  of  history  is  the  Christ  of  dogma.

these  lectureeT.  For  Christianity,  both  as  a  creed  and  as  a  liie,
depends  absolutely  upon  the  Personal  Character  of  its  Founder.
Unless  His  virtues  were  only  apparent,  unless  His  miracles  were
nothing  better  than  a  popular  delusion,  we  most  admit  that  Hie
Self-aBBertion  is  justified,  even  in  the  full  measure  of  its  blessed
and  awful  import.  We  must  deny  the  antagonism  which  is  said
to  exist  between  the  doctrine  of  C^mst's  Divinity  and  the  history
of  His  human  manifestation.  We  must  beUeve  and  confees  that
the  Christ  of  history  is  the  Christ  of  the  Catholic  Creed.

Eteimal  Jesus  I  it  is  Thyself  Who  hast  thus  bidden  ns  eithsr
despise  Thee  or  worship  liee.  Thou  wouldest  hare  ub  despise
Thee  as  our  fellow-man,  if  we  will  not  worship  Thee  aa  our  God.
Gazing  on  Thy  Human  beauty,  and  listening  to  Thy  words,  we
cannot  deny  that  Thou  art  the  Only  Son  of  God  Most  H%h ;
disputing  Thy  Divinity,  we  oonld  no  longer  clearly  recognise
Thy  Human  perfections.  But  if  our  ears  hearken  to  Tby
revelations  of  Thy  greatness,  our  souls  have  already  been  won
to  Thee  by  Thy  truthfulneES,  by  Thy  lowliness,  and  by  Thy  love.
Convinced  by  these  Thy  moral  glories,  and  by  Thy  majestic
exercise  of  creative  and  healing  power,  we  believe  aJid  are  sure
that  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life.  Although  in  anveiliDg
Thyself  before  Thy  creatures,  Tholi  dost  stand  from  age  to  age
at  the  bar  of  hostile  and  sceptical  opinion ;  yet  assuredly  firran
age  to  age,  by  the  assaults-of  Thine  enemies  no  less  than  in  the
faith  of  Thy  believing  Church,  Thou  art  justified  in  Thy  sayings
and  art  clear  when  "fliou  art  judged.  Of  a  truth.  Thou  art  the
King  of  Glory,  0  Christ;  Thou  art  the  Everlasting  Son  of  the
Father.

at  seem  to  have  risen  for  a  moment  to  the  fnQ
iat  in  the  following  beautifol  words  ;  Works,  ii
.  escape  the  deadening  power  of  habit,  and  can
□ch  pavages  as  the  fijlowing  :  "  Come  onto  Me^
heavy  laden,  andlwill  give  yon  rest;"  "lam
that  which  was  lost;"  "He  that  confessetb  Me
ifees  before  My  Father  in  Heaven;"  "Whogo-
tfe  before  men,  of  him  shall  the  Son  of  Man  bo
in  the  glory  of  the  Father  with  the  holy  angeli ;"
ice  nj»Dy  manaions,  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  foi
ucceed  in  realising  the  import  of  such  passsgea,
being  each  as  never  before  and  never  sioca  spoke
1  awed  by  the  consciooBnesa  of  greatnesa  whioh
B ;  and  when  I  connect  thia  greatneas  with  tbc
,  I  am  compelled  to  apeak  with  the  centorion,
0od."'  Alaa  I  that  this  langaage  does  not  mean
00  certain  from  other  pasaages  in  hia  writiija.
^Jhriat  i»  a  being  diatinct  &om  the  one  Gon.'

[tKCT.


LECTUEE  V.

THE  DOCTBINE  OF  CHRISrS  DIVINITY  IN  THE
WBinNGS  OF  ST.  JOHN.


That  Which  was  from  the  heginning.  Which  we  have  heard.  Which  we
have  seen  with  our  eyes,  Which  we  have  looked  upon,  and  our  hands
have  handled,  of  the  Word  of  Life;  (for  the  lAfe  was  manifested,  and
we  have  seen  It,  and  bear  witness,  and  shew  unto  you  that  Eternal  Life,
JThich  was  with  the  Father,  and  was  manifested  unto  us;)  That  Which
toe  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you. — St.  John  i.  1-3.

An  attempt  was  made  last  Sunday  to  determine,  from  the  re-
corded language  of  Jesus  Christ,  what  was  the  verdict  of  His
Own  consciousness,  expressed  as  well  as  implied,  respecting  the
momentous  question  of  His  higher  and  Eternal  Nature.  But
we  were  incidentally  brought  face  to  face  with  a  problem,  the
fiiller  consideration  of  which  lies  naturally  in  the  course  of  the
present  discussion.  It  is  undeniable  that  the  most  numerous
and  direct  claims  to  Divinity  on  the  part  of  our  Lord  are  to  be
found  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.  While  this  fact  has  a  signi-
ficance of  a  positive  kind  which  will  be  noticed  presently,  it
also  involves  the  doctrine  before  us  in  the  entanglement  of  a
large  critical  question.  To  leave  this  question  undiscussed
would,  under  existing  circumstances,  be  impossible  To  discuss
it,  within  the  limits  assigned  to  the  lecturer,  and  even  with  a
very  moderate  regard  to  the  amount  of  details  which  it  neces-
sarily involves,  must  needs  make  a  somewhat  unwonted  demand,
as  you  will  indulgently  bear  in  mind,  upon  the  patience  and
attention  of  the  audience.

If  the  Book  of  Daniel  has  been  recently  described  as  the
battle-field  of  the  Old  Testament,  it  is  not  less  true  that
St.  John's  Gospel  is  the  battle-field  of  the  New.  It  is  well
understood  on  all  sides  that  no  question  of  mere  dilettante
criticism  is  at  stake  when  the  authenticity  of  St.  John's  Gospel
y]  p


2IO     Earliest  objections  to  St.  yokn's  Gospel.

is  challenged.     The  point  of  this  momeDtoua  enquiiy  lies  clow
to  the  very  heart  of  the  creed  of  Christendom ;
'  Neqne  enim  levia  ant  Indicra  petnntiir
Pnemia ;  sad  Tnmt  de  vit&  et  wmguine  oertant  *.'

Strange  and  monmfal  it  may  well  seem  to  a  Christian  that  the
pages  of  the  Eraugeliat  of  Divine  love  should  have  been  the
object  of  an  attack  so  energetic,  bo  persevering,  so  inventive,  so
unsparing  1  Strange  indeed  such  vehement  hostility  might  b«
deemed,  if  only  it  were  not  in  harmony  with  that  deep  instinct
of  our  nature  which  forbids  neutrality  when  we  are  face  to  faca
with  high  religious  truth;  which  forces  us  to  take  really,  if  not
avowedly,  a  side  respecting  it ;  vhlch  constrains  us  to  hate  or
to  love,  to  resist  or  to  obey,  to  accept  or  to  reject  it.  If  St,
John's  Gospel  had  been  the  documentary  illustration  of  BOmB
extinct  superstition,  or  the  title-deed  of  some  suppressed  founda-
tion, at  beat  capable  of  attracting  the  placid  interest  of  studioos
antiqaarianism,  the  attacks  which  have  been  made  on  it  might
well  have  provoked  our  marvel.  As  it  is,  there  is  no  room  for
legitimate  wonder,  that  the  words  of  the  Evangelist,  like  the
Person  of  the  Master,  should  be  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock
of  offence.  For  St.  John's  Gospel  is  the  most  conspicuooB
written  attestation  to  the  Godhead  of  Him  Whose  claims  upon
mankind  can  hardly  he  surveyed  without  passion,  whether  it  be
the  passion  of  adoring  love,  or  the  passion  of  vehement  and
determined  enmity.

I.   From  the  disappearance  of  the  obscure  heretics  called
Alogi,  in  the  later  suh-apostulic  agel>,  until  the  end  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  the  authenticity  of  St.  John's  Gospel  was  not
questioned.    'The  earliest  modem  objections  to  it  seem  to  have
been  put  forward  in  this  country,  and  to  have  been  based  on  the
aesumption  of  a  discrepancy  between  the  narrative  of  St.  Jdin
and  those  of  the  first  three  Gospels.      These  objections  wen
combated  by  the  learned  Leclerc ;  and  for  well-nigh  a  century
*l.fl  n„;„t  wo=  +t,„„™ht  to  have  been  decided ".     The  hrilliant
secured  attention  for  his  characteristic
Gospel  describes,  not  the  historical,  bnt
r  was  followed  by  several  German  writer^


hove  been  added  tha(  Evuuoq'b  attack  npis
ered  by  Di.  Friedtle;.


The  ^Probabilia  *  of  Bretschneider.         2 1 1

who  accepted .  conclusions   which   he   had  implied,   and  who
expressly  rejected  the  authenticity  of  the  fourth  Gospel  d.     But
these  negative  criticisms  were  met  in  turn  by  the  arguments  of
Boman  Catholic  divines  like  Hug,  and  of  critics  who  were  by  no
means  loyal  even  to  Lutheran  orthodoxy,  such  as  Eichhom  and
Koinoel.    By  their  labours  the  question  was  again  held  to  have
been  set  at  rest  in  the  higher  regions  of  German  scholarship  and
free-thinking.     This  second  settlement  was  rudely  disturbed  by
the  publication  of  the  famous  *  Probabilia  *  of  Bretschneider,  the
learned  superintendent  of  Gotha,  in  the  year  1820®.     Repro-
ducing the  arguments  which  had  been  advanced  by  the  earlier
negative  speculation,  and  adding  others  of  his  own,  Bretschneider
rekindled  the  discussion.    He  exaggerated  the  contrast  between
the  representation  of  our  Lord's  Person  in  St.  John  and  that  in
the  synoptists  into  a  positive  contradiction.     Protestant  Ger-
many was   then   fascinated  by  the   school  of  Schleiermacher,
which,  by  the  aid  of  a  combination  of  criticism  and  mysticism  ^,
was  groping  its  way  back  towards  the  creeds  of  the  Catholic
Church.     Schleiermacher,  as  is  well  known,  not  only  accepted
the  Church-belief  respecting  the  fourth  Gospel,  but  he  found
in  that  Gospel  the  reason  for  his  somewhat  reckless  estimate  of
the  other  three.    The  sharp  controversy  which  followed  resulted
in  Bretschneider's  retractation  of  his  thesis,  and  the  impression
produced  by  this  retractation  was  not  violently  interfered  with
until  1835,  when  Dr.  Strauss  shocked  the  conscience  of  all  that
was  Christian  in  Europe  by  the  publication  of  his  first  *  Life  of
Jesus.*    Dr.  Strauss*  position  in  respect  of  St.  John's  Gospel
was  a  purely  negative  one.     He  condoned  himself  to  asserting
that  St.  John's  Gospel  was  not  what  the  Church  had  always
believed  it  to  be,  that  it  was  not  the  work  of  the  son  of  Zebedee.
The  school  of  Tubingen  aspired  to  supplement  this  negative
criticism  of  Strauss  by  a  positive  hypothesis.    St.  John's  Gospel
was  held  to  represent  a  highly-developed  stage  of  an  orthodox
gnosis,  the  growth  of  which  presupposed  the  lapse  of  at  least  a
century  since  the  age  of  the  Apostles.     It  was  decided  by  the

^  Especially  by  Dr.  Ammon,   preacher  and  professor  of  theology  at
Erlangen  and  Dresden  successively.

*  I^babilia  de  Evangelii  et  Epistolarmn  Johannis  Apostoli  indole  et
origme.    LipsisB,  1830.

'  See  more  especially  Scbleiermacher^s  Glauhenslehre,  and  compare  Pro-
fessor Auberlen*s  account  of  the  process  through  which,  at  Tubingen,  he
'was  led  back,  among  other  things,  mainly  by  Schleiermacher's  mysticism,
BO  full  of  life  and  spirit,  to  the  sanctuary  of  religion,  and  learnt  to  sit  again
at  the  feet  of  the  Bedeemer.'  On  Divine  Bevelation,  pref.
V]  P  2


212        Theory  of  the  later  Tubingen  school,

leading  writere  of  the   Bchcrol   of  Tubingen,   liy   Dra.   Baur,

Schwegler,  and  Zeller,  that  the  fourth  Gospel  was  not  comjmeed
until  after  the  year  a.d.  i6o.  And,  although  this  opinion  may
hare  been  slightly  modified  bj  later  representstiveB  of  tie
Tubingen  school,  such  as  Hilgenfeld ;  the  general  posititm,  that
the  fourth  Gospel  was  not  written  before  the  middle  of  the
second  century,  ia  held  by  diBcipIes  of  that  school  as  one  of
its  very  fundamental  tenets.

Here  then  it  is  neceesary  to  enquire,  what  was  the  belief  of
the  second  century  itself,  as  to  tlie  date  and  authenticity  of
St.  John's  Gospel  s.

Now  it  is  scarcely  too  much  to  assert  that  every  decade  of  the
second  century  furniBhes  its  share  of  proof  that  the  four  Gospela
as  a  whole,  and  St.  John's  in  particular,  were  to  the  Chuixh  of
that  age  what  they  are  to  the  Church  of  the  preeent.  Beginning
at  the  end  of  the  century,  we  may  observe  how  general  at  that
date  was  the  reception  of  the  four  Gospels  throughout  the
Catholic  Church.  Writing  at  Lyons,  in  the  last  decade  of  the
century,  St.  Ireneeus  discourses  on  various  cosmical  and  Gpiritoal
analogies  to  the  fourfold  form  of  the  Gospel  narrative  ((uoyycXur
tfrpifiap^av)  in  a  Strain  of  mystical  reflection  which  implies  that
the  co-ordinate  authority  of  the  four  Gospels  had  been  already
long  established  \  St.  Irenieus,  it  is  well  known,  had  sat  at  the
feet  of  St.  Polyoarp,  who  was  himself  a  disciple  of  St.  John.
St.  IrenKUB,  in  his  letter  to  the  erring  Florinus,  records  with
reverent  affection  what  Folycarp  had  told  him  of  the  lessons
which  he  had  personally  learnt  from  John  and  the  other  disciples
of  Jesus '.    Now  is  it  barely  probable  that  Irensus  should  have

t  For  a  recent  and  complete  discussion  of  tliis  subject  Bee  Prof.  Westcott,
St,  John's  Gospel,  lotr.  pp.  nviii-mii,  London,  Murray.    [1881.]

'  St.Iremeus,  adv.  Hier.  iii.  II.  8;   i\  Siv  ^axtptm,  Sti  &  tAv  awinat

TtxvWiii  AifyoT,  b  Kod^fxtvoj  iwl  Tier  Xfpou^l^  Ked  ffvv4xon'  Tck  ircb^o,  ^aj/tpv-

Silt  Tois  ifffpi^oiSt  fScMCff  ^fur  vtrpiftop^inf  rb  fhoYfiKiaiif  kvl  S\  rfciiutrt

fpoir^l^  TtTpairp6aaira'    Kot  tA  irpJo'afTa  Av-

>S  TioB  ToB  e<ou.  .  .  Kol  T<k  tanryfAia  aZr

TB  Kpurris.

a ic<a  ri

i.  p.  81Z,  ed.  Stieren :  iTSoy  tip  <rf,  tiTi  it
i\VKiipTipt  >iatiirp&i  nrpiTTQirra  iw  Tp  ^offtKtit^
rop^  uvTor'  ^iaAA0»'  yap  t&  ti^c  Siofiyijfunvv
I  tH  iralJkir  iiB,9i)atis,  iniytti(oiifrai  rf  ^vj^,
I  tiirtTi'  Kal  Thr  riwor,  ir  $  Ka$f(6iiim  Su-
1  Tai  rpairiioas  nuroi'  ml  -riit  (I'rr^oui  xal  iV

O-^^TOI  tlt'ov  Kol   T^  ila^^{flT  &T    IxBUtTa

livvou  nvvariuiTpotfiir  ii  Mr/y*M,f,  mI  fii'

[lect.


Saint  yohris  Gospel  in  the  Second  Century.   2 1


.3


imagined  that  a  literary  forgery,  which  is  asserted  to  have  heen
produced  at  a  date  when  he  was  himself  a  boy  of  twelve  or  four-
teen years  of  age,  was  actually  the  work  of  the  Apostle  Johni  f
At  Carthage,  about  the  same  time,  TertuUian  wrote  his  great
work  against  the  heretic  Marcion  K     Tertullian  brought  to  the
discussion  of  critical  questions  great  natural  acuteness,  which
had  been  sharpened  during  his  early  life  by  his  practice  at  the
African  bar.     Tertullian  distinguishes  between  ^q  primary,  or
actually  apostolical  rank  of  St.  Matthew  and  St.  John,  and  the
lower  standing  of  St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke,  as  being  apostolical
men  of  a  secondary  degree  1 ;  but  he  treats  all  four  as  inspired
writers  of  an  authority  beyond  discussion  ™.    Against  Marcion's
mutilations  of  the  sacred  text  Tertullian  fearlessly  appeals  to  the
witness  of  the  most  ancient  apostolical  Churches.     Tertullian's
famous  canon  runs  thus :   *  Si  constat  id  verius  quod  prius,  id
prius  quod  et  ab  initio,  id  ab  initio  quod  ab  apostolis,  pariter
ubique  constabit,  id  esse  ab  apostolis  traditum,  quod  apud  eccle-
sias  apostolorum  fuerit  sacrosanctum  **.*     But  what  would  have
been  the  worth  of  this  appeal  if  it  could  have  been  even  suspected
that  the  last  Gospel  was  really  written  when  Tertullian  was  a
boy  or  even  a  young  man  t     At  Alexandria,  almost  contempo-
raneously with  Tertullian,  St.  Clement  investigated  the  relation

"fw  Xai-wuv  rwv  kapaxirav  rht^  K^piov,  icol  &s  dwtfxvrjfiSvfvt  rohs  \6yovs  au*
Twv*  jcal  vepl  rod  Kvplov  riva  Ijv  &  Top*  iKclvtov  dic7}K((ct,  Ktd  irtpl  twk  Huvdixfwv
^ov,  jcai  irepl  ryjs  biSa(TKa\tas,  &s  iraph.  rwv  ainovr&y  t^j  Cfarjs  rod  A6yov
*«yetATj^i$  6  TloK^KOpvos,  diriiyyeKKt  viina  (Tvfx<p<apa  reus  ypa<pa7s.  Of.  Eus.
Hist.  Eccl.  V.  20.  St.  Irenaeus  succeeded  St.  Pothinua  in  the  aee  of  Lyons.
Pothinus  wag  martyred  a.d.  177,  and  Irenseus  died  a.d.  aoa.

^  Adv.  Hser.  ill.  I.    St.  Irenseus  was  probably  bom  about  a.d.  liio.

*  Tertullian  was  bom  at  Carthage  about  a.d.  160.  Cave  places  nis  con-
versirn  to  Christianity  at  a.d.  185,  and  his  lapse  into  the  Montanist  heresy
»t  A.u.  199.  Dr.  Pusey  (Libr.  of  Fathers)  makes  his  conversion  later.
A.D.  195,  and  his  secession  from  the  Church  a.d.  201.

^  Adv.  Marc.  iv.  o.  a :  *  Constituimus  imprimis  evangelicum  instru-
mentum  apostolos  auctores  habere,  quibus  hoc  munus  evangelii  promul-
gandi  ab  Ipso  Domino  sit  impositum.  Si  et  apostolicos,  non  tamen  solos,
sed  com  apostolis  et  post  apostolos,  quoniam  prsedicatio  discipulorum
suspecta  fieri  posset  de  glorise  studio,  si  non  adsistat  illi  auctoritas  magis-
trorum,  immo  Christi,  quae  magistros  apostolos  fecit.  Denique  nobis  fidem
ex  apostolis  Joannes  et  Matthaeus  insinuant,  ex  apostolicis  Lucas  et  Marcus
iiistaurant.'

"  Adv.  Marc.  iv.  o.  5 :  *  Eadem  auctoritas  ecclesiarum  apostolicarum
ceteris  quoque  patrocinabitur  Evangeliis,  quae  proinde  per  illas  et  secun-
dum illas  habemus,  Joannis  dico  et  Matthsei,  licet  et  Marcus  quod  edidit
Petri  aflftrmetur,  cujus  interpres  Marcus.  Nam  et  Lucae  digest um  Paulo
adscribere  solent.     Capit  magistrorum  videri  quae  discipuli  promulgarint.*

"  Adv.  Marcion.  iv.  5.


214      Wiiness  borne  to  Saint  yokn's  Gospel

of  the  synoptic  Gospels  to  St.  John  ",  and  he  terms  the  latter
the  ilaYytkiov  mfv^anKovf.  It  is  mmecessaiy  to  say  that  the
intellectual  atmosphere  of  that  famous  Grceco-Egyptian  school
would  not  have  been  &TOurable  to  any  serious  countenance  of
a  really  suspected  document.  At  Borne  St.  John's  Gospel  wa>
certAiuly  received  as  being  the  work  of  that  Apostle  in  the  year
170.  This  is  clear  from  the  so'termed  Muratorian  firagmentii;
and  if  in  receiving  it  the  Eoman  Church  had  been  under  a  delu-
sion BO  fundamental  as  is  imphed  by  the  Tubingen  hypothesis,
St.  John's  own  pupil  Folycarp  might  have  been  expected  to  have
coiTected  bis  Boman  brethren  when  he  came  to  Borne  in  the
year  163  ^.  In  the  farther  East,  St.  John's  Gospel  had  already
been  translated  as  a  matter  of  course  into  the  Feschito  Syriac
version  K  It  had  been  translated  in  Africa  into  the  Latin  Versio
Itala  t.     At  or  soon  after  the  middle  of  the  centuiy  two  works

.  p.  119.      See  thi«
iti<     •    ■'     "■

aa  a  ChiutUn  Father  ander  Severus  and  CuwsalU,  ig'j-iio.

V  Eoa.  Hiat.  Eccl.  vi.  14,  coadengiog  Clement's  account,  s»jB,  t^  /Urni
'ludnniv  (axaTBr  myiiirra  Sti  ri  traifOTUci  in  rois  (uayrfXloit  SfS^Atrrm,
rpoTpvutiTa  iVA  riey  yvaplfMav,  llydfxa^i  dto^oprtSdyrOt  vrtufiortkhr  -iroi^rai

p.  214.  Tlie  Uuratoriau  fh^inient  daiiu  to
temponuj  of  Utis  I.,  who  probablj  ruled  tb<
A.  I>.  141  to  157.     '  FuBtorem  vero  nupgrrimt

Roma  Hennas  conecripsit,  eedente  cathedrl
icopo  fratre  ejus.'     Cf.  Hilgenfdd,  Dar  KMum

39.  Bqq-

1haabeenlatel7GxedinA.11. 155-6,  Ligbtfbo^
it  of.  Wordsworth's  Ch.  Hist,  to  Codu.  of  Nie,

ng  the  ezaot  date  of  the  Feschito  veidon  see
ratament,  pp,  136-143.  Beferring  (I)  to  tka
sttdio  Mi^n  at  Bdeesa,  repeated  b;  Gr^pnj
eoeeeary  eiiBtcnce  of  an  eaily  Sjnac  veraioii,
writjnga  of  Bardeaanes ;  (3)  to  the  qnotationi
iao,  rdated  b?  EueebioB  (Hist.  Eccl.  iv.  31);
iigu«;e  of  the  Feschito  as  compared  with  that
I  an^onty  in  which  this  venriou  was  held  t^
peal  and  general  nae  (rf  it  by  heretical  a«  w^
)  to  the  early  tnuielatians  made  bom  it ; — Dr.
the  abeence  of  more  copious  critical  reaoiun*
mine  the  date  of  this  version  on  philologicsl
:nt  reason  to  desert  the  i^inion  which  hai  ob-
oist competent  scholars,  that  ita  formation  ia  to
'  qf  the  second  centmy.'  (p.  343. )  Thatitwaa
b,  we  may  assume  without  risk  of  aerioos  anor.
been  made  before  A.B.  170.  'How  much  mote
[lxct.


by  Catholics  of  the  Second  Century.        215

were  publislied  which  implied  that  the  four  Gospels  had  long
been  received  as  of  undoubted  authority:  I  refer  to  the  Harmo-
nies of  Theophilus^,  Bishop  of  Antioch,  and  of  Tatian^  the  hete-
rodox pupil  of  St.  Justin  Martyr.    St.  John  is  quoted  by  either
writer  independently,  in  the  work  which  was  addressed  by  Theo-
philus  to  Autolycus  ^,  and  in  the  Apology  of  Tatian  ^.     When,
about  the  year  170,  ApoUinaris  of  Hierapolis  points  out  the
bearings  of  the  different  evangelical  narratives  upon  the  Quarto-
deciman  controversy,  his  argument  implies  a  familiarity  with
St.  John.   ApoUinaris  refers  to  the  piercing  of  our  Lord's  Side  7,
and  Polycrates  of  Ephesus  speaks  of  John  as  the  disciple  who
lay  on  the  bosom  of  Jesus  '.     Here  we  see  that  the  last  Oospel
muBt  have  been  read  and  heard  in  the  Christian  Churches  with
a  care  which  dwells  upon  its  distinctive  peculiarities.     It  is
surely  inconceivable  that  a  work  of  such  primary  claim  to  speak
on  the  question  of  highest  interest  for  Christian  believers  could
have  been  forged,  widely  circulated,  and  immediately  received
by  AMcans,  by  Eomans,  by  Gauls,  by  Syrians,  as  a  work  of  an
Apostle  who  had  passed  to  his  rest  some  sixty  years  before.
And,  if  the  evidence  before  us  ended  here,  we  might  flEtirly  infer
that,  considering  the  difficulties   of  communication   between
Chorches  in  the  sub-apostolic  age,  and  the  various  elements  of
moral  and  intellectual  caution,  which,  as  notably  in  the  case  of

ancient  it  really  is  cannot  yet  be  dlBCovered.  Not  only  is  the  character  of
the  Terdon  itself  a  proof  of  its  extreme  age,  but  the  mutual  relation  of  dif-
ferent parts  of  it  shew  that  it  was  made  originally  by  different  hands ;  and
if  8(^  it  is  natural  to  conjecture  that  it  was  coeval  with  the  introduction  of
Christianity  into  Africa,  and  the  result  of  the  spontaneous  effort  of  African
Christians.*  (Westcott  on  the  Canon  of  the  New  Testament,  p.  258.)  Br.
Westeott  shews  from  Tertullian  (Adv.  Praz.  c.  5)  that  at  the  end  of  the
ointury  the  Latin  translation  of  St.  John*s  Gospel  had  been  so  generally
cinmlated  in  Africa,  as  to  have  moulded  the  popular  theological  dialect.
(Ibid.  p.  351.)

^  At  l&test  Theophilus  was  bishop  from  A.D.  168  to  180.  St.  Jerome
Bays:  'Theophilus  .  .  .  quatuor  evangelistarum  in  unimi  opus  dicta  com*
pingens,  ingenii  sui  nobis  monumenta  dimisit.*  Epist.  121  (al.  151)  ad
Algae,  c.  6.

*  Eus.  Hist.  Eccl.  iv.  39 ;  Theodoret,  Hser.  Fab.  L  ao ;  Westcott,  Canon,  pp.
5^^»  323.  8qq.  The  recent  discovery  of  the  Commentary  of  St.  Ephrem  Syruf
onTatian's  THatessaron  adds  to  the  evidential  importance  of  that  work  [i  884].

'  Ad  Autol.  ii.  31,  p.  174,  ed.  Wolf.  Cf.  St.  John  i.  i,  3.  Theophilus  is
"^«  first  writer  who  quotes  St.  John  by  name,

*  Orat.  contr.  Grsec.  c.  4  (St.  John  iv.  24);  c.  5  (Ibid.  i.  i);  0.  13
Cn>id.i.  5);  c.  19  (Ibid.  i.  3).

'  Chron.  Pasch.  p.  14;  cf.  St.  Johnxiz.  34;  Bouth,  i.  160,  sq.;  Westcott,
Canon,  p.  228  and  note  i.
'  Apud  Eus.  V.  24.     Cf.  St.  John  xiii.  23,  xxi.  20.


2i6      Witness  borne  to  Saint  yohns  Gospel

the  EpiBtle  to  the  Hebrews,  were  likely  to  delay  the  oecumenical
reception  of  a  canonical  book,  St.  John's  Qospel  must  have  been
in  existence  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  centniy.

Bnt  the  evidence  does  not  desert  us  at  this  point.  Through
Tatian  we  ascend  into  the  earlier  portion  of  the  century  as
represented  by  St.  Justin  Martyr.  It  is  remarkable  that
St.  Justin's  second  Apology,  written  in  i6i,  contains  fewer
allusions  to  the  Gospels  tiian  the  earlier  Apology  written  in
138  *,  and  than  the  intermediate  composition  of  this  Father,  his
Dialogue  with  the  Jew  Trypho.  How  passing  by  recent  theories
respecting  a  Qospel  of  the  Hebrews  or  a  Gospel  of  Peter,  by
which  an  endeavour  has  been  made  to  weaken  St.  Justin's
witness  to  the  synoptic  Evangelists,  let  us  observe  that  bis
testimony  to  St.  John  b  particularly  distinct.  Justin's  emphatic
reference  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Logos  to  our  Lord^),  not  to
mention  his  qnotation  of  John  the  Baptist's  reply  to  the  mes*
sengers  of  the  Jews'^,  and  of  our  Ssvionx'e  language  about  the
new  birth  d,  makes  his  knowledge  of  St.  John's  Gospel  much
more  than  a  probability  «.  Among  the  great  Apostolic  fathers,
St.  Ignatius  alludes  to  St.  John  in  his  Letter  to  the  Bomans^,
and  St.  Polycarp  quotes  the  Apostle's  first  Epistle  s.  In  these
sub-apostolic  writings  there  are  large  districts  of  thought  and
expression,  of  a  type  unmistakeably  Johannean^,  which,  like

rdeD  nDBere  BTang^lieu  verfsaBt?   p.  16:

iif  Clinstna,  Ton  der  ons  kiuiie  Spnr  wedei

Jtesten  FsralleUcliTifteii  deiaeUwn  vorUcgt,

.  Johaimee  abzulaiten  ist.'

i.    Cf.  St.  John  i.  10.

pioT^T  tXirtv'    '^Ar  /iij  ij^^tn'TjSTfrf,  ob  fd)

■1  i/L^nu  ipai-tfit  Tcairlp  tirri.   Cf.  Wntcott,

.151.

m  of  tLe  New  Testament,  p.  145)  00  th>

g  quoted  in  apologetio  irritings  addneied

in  neverthelew  does  '  exMbit  typoB  of  Un-


[mediately  drawn  &om  St.  John  (wbj


Ln  ni.  49  in  Didog.  cum  Trjph.  0.  56 ;  1
bo  St.  John  TJi.  1 1  in  Dialrg-  c.  69 ;  M  Sc
Cf.  Liicke,  Couun.  Ev.  Job.  p.  34,  sqq.
ianuB,  p.  73.
3t.  John  vi.  31,  48,  53,  ivi.  1 1.

(of.  St.  John  iii.  14);  Henn.  Past.  Simil.
St.  Ignat.  ad  Philad.  7  (of.  Ibid,  iii  8);


by  Catholics  of  the  Second  Century.      217

^™*^"^^^^^^-^-"^^^— ^~~™^^i»^^^^^-^     ^-^— ^■^— ^—     ■^— ^— ^^— ^—     ^—^——^^^—  I

St.  Justin's  doctiine  of  the  Logos,  witness  no  less  powerfully  to
the  existence  of  St.  John's  writings  than  direct  citations.  The
Tubingen  writers  lay  emphasis  upon  the  fact  that  in  the  short
fragment  of  Papias  which  we  possess,  nothing  is  said  about
St.  John's  Gospel*.  But  at  least  we  have  no  evidence  that
Papias  did  not  speak  of  it  in  that  larger  part  of  his  writings
which  has  been  lost;  and  if  his  silence  is  a  valid  argument
against  the  fourth  Gospel,  it  is  equally  available  against  the
Gospel  of  St.  Luke,  and  even  against  each  one  of  those  four
Epistles  which  the  Ttlbingen  writers  themselves  recognise  as  the
work  of  St.  Pauli.

The  testimony  of  the  Catholic  Church  during  this  century  is
supplemented  by  that  of  the  contemporary  heretics.  St.  Ireiiaeus
has   pointed  out  how  the  system  of  the  celebrated  Gnostic,

ad  Tral.  8  (cf.  Ibid.  vi.  51) ;  ad  Magnes,  7  (cf.  Ibid.  xii.  49,  x.  30,  xiv.  1 1) ;
ad  Eom.  7  (cf.  Ibid.  vi.  3a),

'  Meyer,  Evan.  Johann.  Einl.  p.  14:  'Dass  das  Fragment  des  Papias
das  Evangel.  Job.  nicbt  erwahnt,  kann  nichts  verschlagen,  da  es  Uber-
banpt  keine  schrifUichen  Quellen,  aus  welchen  er  seine  Nachrichten
gesdiopft  babe,  aufiUbrt,  viehnehr  das  Yerfahren  des  Papias  dabin
bestimmt,  dass  er  bei  den  Apostelsobiilern  die  Aussagen  der  Aposfcel
erknndet  babe,  und  dessen  ausdrucklicben  Grundsatz  ausspricbt :  oh  yiip  t^
iK  r&¥  $ifiKio»v  TOffovrov  fit  u<pe\(7v  ^tKdfificofoVf  Ztrov  ret  vapii  ^<&<nti  (fwy^s
xai  fuvo^tms.  Papias  wirft  bier  die  damals  vorbandenen  evangeliscben
Scbriften  {rSiv  fii^Kimu)  deren  eine  Menge  war  (Luk.  i.  i)  alle  obne  Auswabl
zasaznmen,  nnd  wie  er  das  Evangel.  Mattbsei  und  das  des  Marcus  mit
daranter  b^riffen  bat,  welcbe  beide  er  spater  besonders  erwabnt,  so  kann  er
auch  das  Evangel.  Job.  mit  bei  rwv  pipxicov  gemeint  baben,  da  Papias  einen
Begriff  von  kanonischen  Evangelien  als  soloben  ofienbar  nocb  nicbt  bat  ( vergl.
Credn.  Beitr.  i.  p.  33),  und  diese  auszuzeicbnen  nicbt  veranlasst  ist.  Wenn
aber  weiterbin  Eusebius  nocb  zwei  Aussagen  des  Papias  uber  die  Evangelien
dea  Mark,  und  Mattbaus  anfUbrt,  so  wird  damit  unser  Evangelium  nicbt
ausgescblossen,  welcbes  Papias  in  anderen  Tbeilen  seines  Bucbs  erwabnt
baben  kann,  sondem  jene  beiden  Aussagen  werden  nur  desbalb  bemerklicb
gemacbt,  weil  sie  fiber  die  EnttUhung  jener  Evangelien  etwas  Absonder-
liches,  besonders  Merkwurdiges  entbalteUi  wie  aucb  das  als  besonders
bemerkenswertb  von  Eusebius  angefubrt  wird,  dass  Papias  aus  zwei  epi-
ttolischen  Scbriften  (i  Job.  u.  i  Petr.)  Zeugnisse  gebraucbe,  und  eine
Erzablung  babe,  welcbe  sicb  im  Hebraer-Evangel.  finde.*  Cf.  also  Westcott,
Canon,  pp.  76,  77  note  i.  Papias  is  stated  by  Eusebius  (iii.  39)  to  bave
quoted  St.  Jobn*s  First  Epistle.  This  be  could  bardly  bave  done,  without
acknowledging  St.  John's  Gospel.

J  Tbe  newly  discovered  5t5ax^  tcSv  lij^txa  ^woctSKcou  (ed.  Bryennios,
Constantinople,  1883)  appears  to  be  a  product  of  the  Judaising  party  when
almost  separating  from  tbe  Cburcb  at  tbe  close  of  tbe  first  century.  In
this  document  no  less  than  twenty  references  to  St.  Matthew's  Gospel  occur,
and  six  to  St.  Luke's,  but  there  is  not  a  single  quotation  from  tbe  writings
of  St.  Paul ;  c.  4  and  Eph.  vi.  5,  9,  and  c.  3  and  i  Thess.  v.  22  being  mere
coincidences.  That  it  should  contain  no  reference  to  St.  John  is  only
what  its  general  character  would  lead  us  to  expect.    [1884.]


2i8     Witness  borne  to  Saint  yohv!s  Gospel

Valentinus,  was  mainly  based  upon  a  perversion  of  St.  John's
Gospel  K  This  assertion  is  borne  out  by  that  remarkable  work,
the  Philosophumena  of  St.  Hippolytus,  which,  as  we  in  Oxford
well  remember,  was  discovered  some  few  years  since  at  Mount
Athos^.  Of  the  pupils  of  Valentinus,  Ptolemseus  quotes  from
the  prologue  of  St.  John's  Gospel  in  his  extant  letter  to  Flora  ™.
Heracleon,  another  pupil,  wrote  a  considerable  commentary
upon  St.  John^.  Heracleon  lived  about  150;  Valentinus  was
a  contemporary  of  Marcion,  who  was  teaching  at  Bome  about
1 40.  Marcion  had  originally  admitted  the  claims  of  St.  John's
Gospel,  and  only  denied  them  when,  for  the  particular  purposes
of  his  heresy,  he  endeavoured  at  a  later  time  to  demonstrate  an
opposition  between  St.  Paul  and  St.  John  o.  Basilides  taught
at  Alexandria  under  Adrian,  apparently  about  the  year  120.
Basilides  is  known  to  have  written  twenty-four  books  on  the
Gospel  P;  but  if  it  cannot  be  certainly  aflirmed  that  any  of
these  books  were  commentaries  on  St.  John,  it  is  certain  from
St.  Hippolytus  that  Basilides  appealed  to  texts  of  St.  John


^  St.  Irenseus  (Hser.  iii.  11.  7)  lays  down  the  general  position :  'Tanta  est
circa  Evangelia  hsec  firmitas,  ut  et  ipsi  hseretici  testimonium  reddant  eis,  et
ex  ipsis  egrediens  nnusquisque  eorum  conetur  suam  confirmare  doctrinam.*
After  illustrating  this  from  the  cases  of  the  Ebionites,  Marcion,  and  the
Cerinthians,  he  proceeds,  '  Hi  autem  qui  a  Valentino  sunt,  eo  [sc.  evangelio]
quod  est  secundum  Johannem  plenisstnU  utentes,  ad  ostensionem  conjuga-
tion am  suarum ;  ex  ipso  detegentur  nihil  rect^  dicentes.*  '  Die  Valentinian-
ische  Gnosis  (says  Meyer)  mit  ihren  Aeonen,  Syzygien  u.  s.  w.  verhalt  sich
zum  Prolog  des  Joh.  wie  das  kunstlich  Gemachte  und  Ausgesponnene  zuin
Einfachen  und  Schopferischen.'  (Einl.  in  Joh.  p.  12,  note.)  Eor  an  illus*
tration  cf.  St.  Iren.  adv.  Hser.  i.  8.  5.

*  Cf.  Hefut.  H8Br.  vi.  35,  init.,  for  Valentinus'  use  of  St.  John  x.  8.

"*  Apud  St.  Epiph.  adv.  Haer.  lib.  i.  tom.  i.  Hser.  33  ;  Ptol.  ad  Flor.  Cf.
St.  John  i.  3  ;  also  Stieren's  St.  Irenseus,  vol.  i.  p.  924.

^  Fragments  of  Heracleon's  Commentary  on  St.  John,  collected  ^m
Origen,  are  published  at  the  end  of  the  first  vol.  of  Stieren  s  edition  of
St.  Irenaeus,  pp.  938-971.  St.  John  iv.  is  chiefly  illustrated  by  these  remains
of  the  great  Valentinian  commentator.  Two  points  strike  one  on  perusal  of
them :  (i)  that  before  Heracleon*s  time  St.  John*s  Gospel  must  have  ac-
quired, even  among  heretics,  the  highest  authority ;  (2)  that  Heracleon  has
continually  to  resort  to  interpretations  so  forced  (as  on  St.  John  i.  3,  i.  18,
ii.  17 ;  cited  by  Westcott,  Canon,  p.  306,  note)  as  *  to  prove  sufficiently  that
St.  John*s  Gospel  was  no  Gnostic  work.*

•  Tertullian,  adv.  Marcion.  iv.  3 ;  De  Came  Christi,  0.  2  ;  quoted  by
Tischendorf,  Wann  wurden  unsere  Evangelien  verfasst?  pp.  35,  26.

P  Eusebius,  Hist.  Eccl.  iv.  7.  7  :  cis  fiev  rh  eifayyiKiov  riffaapa  irpby  rots
^Koai  (r6vTa^ai  $i^\ta.  Was  this  a  Commentary  on  the  Evangelists,  or
a  Life  of  Christ  in  the  sense  of  Basilides,  or  a  Dissertation  on  ti^e  Import
of  Christ^s  Life  ?   The  phrase  is  indecisive.

[lect.


by  Heretics  of  the  Second  Century*        219

in  favour  of  his  system  Q.  Before  Basilides,  in  the  two  first
decades  of  the  century,  we  find  Ophitic  Gnostics,  the  Naase-
nians^,  and  the  PeratsBS,  appealing  to  passages  in  St.  John's
Gospel,  which  was  thus  already,  we  may  say  in  the  year  no,  a
recognised  authority  among  sects  external  to  the  Catholic  Church.

It  may  further  be  observed  that  the  whole  doctrine  of  the
Paraclete  in  the  heresy  of  Montanus  is  a  manifest  perversion  of
the  treatise  on  that  subject  in  St.  John's  Gospel,  the  wide
reception  of  which  it  accordingly  presupposes*.  The  Alogi,
who  were  heretical  opponents  of  Montanism,  rejected  St.  John's
Gospel  for  dogmatic  reasons,  which  are  really  confirmatory  of
the  general  tradition  in  its  favour  ^.  Nor  may  we  forget  Celsus,
the  keen  and  satirical  opponent  of  the  Christian  £ekith,  who
wrote,  even  according  to  Dr.  Hilgenfeld,  between  160  and  170,
but  more  probably,  as  is  held  by  other  authorities,  as  early  as
150.  Celsus  professes  very  ostentatiously  to  confine  himself
to  the  writings  of  the  disciples  of  Jesus*;  but  he  refers  to
St.  John's  Gospel  in  a  manner  which  would  be  utterly  incon-
ceivable if  that  book  had  been  in  his  day  a  lately  completed,  or
indeed  a  hardly  completed  forgery  y.

This  evidence  might  be  largely  reinforced  from  other  quarters",

4  Befut.  Hser.  vii.  2a,  where  Basilides  uses  St.  John  i.  %  ii.  4.  That
Basilides,  not  his  disciples,  makes  the  citation,  see  Sanday,  Grospels  in
Second  Century,  pp.  298-301.

'  Refut.  Haer.  v.  6  sqq.,  8  (St.  John  i.  3,  4)  ;  c.  9  (Ibid.  iv.  21,  and  iv,
10)  :  quoted  by  Tischendorf.

■  Ibid.  V.  13  sqq.,  16  (St.  John  iii.  17,  i.  1-4) ;  c.  17  (Ibid.  viii.  44).

*  See  however  Meyer,  Einl.  in  Joh.  p.  13,  for  the  opinion  that  Montanism
originally  grew  out  of  belief  in  the  Parousia  of  our  Lord.  Baur,  Christenthum,
p.  213.  The  Paraclete  of  Montanus  was  doubtless  very  different  from  the
Paraclete  of  St.  John's  Grospel.  Still  St.  John's  Grospel  must  have  furnished
the  name ;  and  it  is  probable  that  the  idea  of  the  Montanistic  Paraclete  is
originally  due  to  the  same  source,  although  by  a  rapid  development,  con-
tortion,  or  perversion,  the  Divine  Gift  announced  by  our  Lord  had  been  ex-
changed for  Its  heretical  caricature.  The  rejection  of  the  promise  of  the
Paraclete  alluded  to  by  St.  Irenseus  (adv.  Haer.  iii.  11.  9)  proceeded  not
from  Montanists,  but  from  opponents  to  Montanism,  who  erroneously
identified  the  teaching  of  St.  John's  Grospel  with  that  heresy.

"  St.  Epiph.  Hser.  U.  3.    Cf.  Pressens^,  J^sus-Christ,  p.  227.

*  Origen,  contr.  Celsum,  ii.  74.

y  Ibid.  i.  67;  cf.  St.  John  ii.  18.  CJontr.  Gelsum,  ii.  31,  36,  55;  of.
St.  John  XX.  27.

«  E.  g.  the  Letter  of  the  Churches  of  Lyons  and  Vienne,  Eus.  v.  i,  which
quotes  St.  John  xvi.  2  as  an  utterance  of  our  Lord  Himself.  Athenagoras,
Leg.  pro  Christianis,  10 :  cf.  St.  John  i.  i-ii,  xvii.  21-23.  The  Clementine
Homilies,  xix.  22;  cf.  St.  John  ix.  2,  3,  iii.  52,  x.  9,  27.  Recognitions,
vi.  9 ;  cf.  St.  John  iii.  3-5,  ii.  48,  v.  23.   Ibid.  v.  12  ;  cf.  St.  John  viii.  34.

▼1


2  20     The  Fourth  Gospel  certainly  Saint  John's.

and  especially  by  an  examination  of  that  mass  of  apocryphil
titerstare  wliich  belongs  to  the  earlier  half  of  the  Becond  century,
and  the  relation  of  which  to  St.  John's  Qospel  has  lately
been  very  clearly  exhibited  by  an  accompliBhed  Boholar*.  Bat
we  are  already  in  a  position  to  admit  Uiat  the  facta  before  ne
force  back  the  date  of  St.  John's  Gospel  within  the  lineB  of  the
first  century  l>.  And  when  this  is  done  the  question  of  its
authenticity  is  practically  decided.  It  is  irrational  to  suppose
that  a  forgery  claiming  the  name  and  authority  of  the  beloved
diEciple  could  have  been  written  and  circulated  beneath  his  very
eyes,  and  while  the  Church  was  still  illuminated  by  hia  oral
teaching.  Arbitrary  theories  about  the  time  which  is  thought
necessary  to  develops  an  idea  cannot  rightly  be  held  to  ootinter-
balance  such  a  solid  block  of  historical  evidence  as  we  have  been
considering.  This  evidence  shews  that,  long  before  the  year
i6o,  St,  John's  Gospel  waa  received  throughout  orthodox  and
heretical  Christendom,  and  that  ita  recognition  may  be  traced
up  to  the  Apostolic  age  itself.  Ewald  ^all  supply  the  words
with  which  to  close  the  foregoing  conaiderations,  'Those  who
since  the  firet  discussion  of  this  question  have  been  really  con-
versant with  it,  never  could  have  had  and  never  have  had  a
moment's  doubt.  As  the  attack  on  St.  John  has  become  fiercer
and  fiercer,  the  truth  during  the  last  ten  or  twelve  years  has
been  more  and  more  solidly  established,  error  has  been  pursued
intfl  its  last  hidiog-placeB,  and  at  this  moment  the  facts  before
us  are  such  that  no  man  who  does  not  will  knowingly  to  choose
error  and  to  reject  truth,  can  dare  to  say  that  the  fourth  Gospel
is  not  the  work  of  the  Apostle  John  ".'

■  l^scbendoTf,  Wann  iTurden  UDsere  Evangelien  varfoestt  p.  35,  sqq.
That  the  Acta  Pilali  in  particular  were  composed  at  the  beginniug  of  Uia
■econd  CBDtury,  appears  certain  from  the  public  appeal  to  them  which
St,  Justin  msJieg  in  his  Apology  to  the  Boman  Emperor,  The  Acta  Pilati
'  presuppose  not  only  the  synoptiete,  but  particularl j  and  necessarily  the
Geepel  of  St.  John,  It  U  not  that  we  meet  with  a  passage  here  and  there
quoted  &om  that  Qoepel.  If  that  were  the  case  we  might  Buapect  later
interpolatioa.  The  whole  history  of  the  condemnation  of  Jeaua  is  bued
essentially  apon  St,  John's  narrative;  while  in  the  aooonnta  of  the  Crod-
fixioD  and  the  BesurreetioD,  it  is  rather  certain  passages  of  the  ijnoptiits
which  are  particinlarly  suggested.'

''  Fressens^,  J^auB-Christ,  p.  231.  'Bien  n'eat  plus  vaia  que  de  looloit
faire  sortir  du  mouvement  des  idieK  ao  second  sibcle  I'flvangile,  qni  a  pr^-
cis^ment  donnd  le  branle  &  ce  moovement,  at  le  domine  aprts  I'aTcnr
enfant^.'

"""'"*"        ■   Vie  de  J^ua,  in  the  Gottingen  Srasntific  Jonraal,
Gratry,  J&us-Chriat,  p.  1 19.

[lsct.


(i)  //  is  supplementary  to  the  first  three.     221

Certainly  Ewald   here   expresses  himself  with  vehemence.
Some  among  yourselves  may  possibly  be  disposed  to  complain
of  him  as  being  too  dogmatic.     For  it  may  be  that  you  have
made  impatience  of  certainty  a  part  of  your  creed ;  and  you
may  hold  that  a  certain  measure  of  cautious  doubt  on  all  sub-
jects is  inseparable  from  true  intellectual  culture.   You  may  urge
in  particular  that  the  weight  of  external  testimony  in  favour  of
St.  John's  Gospel  does  not  silence  the  difficulties  which  arise
upon  an  examination  of  its  contents.     You  point  to  the  use  of
a  mystical  and  metaphysical  terminology,  to  the  repetition  of
abstract  expressions,  such  as  Word,  Life,  Light,  Truth,  Para-
clete.    You  remark  that  St.  John's  Gospel  exhibits  the  Life  of
our  Lord  under  an  entirely  new  aspect.     Not  to  dwell  im-
moderately upon  points  of  detail,  you  insist  that  the  plan  of  our
Lord's  life,  the  main  scenes  of  His  ministry,  all  His  exhibitions
of  miraculous  power  save  two,  the  form  and  matter  of  His  dis-
courses, nay,  the  very  attitude  and  moral  physiognomy  of  His
opponents,  are  so  represented  in  this  Gospel  as  to  interfere  with
yoiu*  belief  in  its  Apostolical  origin.

But  are  not  these  peculiarities  of  the  Gospel  explained  when
we  consider  the  purpose  with  which  it  was  written  \

I.  St.  John's  Gospel  is  in  the  first  place  an  historical  sup-
plement. It  was  designed  to  chronicle  discourses  and  events
which  had  been  omitted  in  the  narratives  of  the  three  preceding
Evangelists.  Christian  antiquity  attests  this  design  with  re-
markable unanimity  d.  It  is  altogether  arbitrary  to  assert  that
if  St.  John  had  seen  the  works  of  earlier  Evangelists  he  would
have  alluded  to  them ;  and  that  if  he  had  intended  to  supply
the  omissions  of  their  narratives  he  would  have  formally  an-
nounced his  intention  of  doing  so  ®.  It  is  sufficient  to  observe
that  the  literary  conventionalities  of  modem  Europe  were  not
those  of  the  sacred  writers,  whether  of  the  Synagogue  '  or  of  the
Church.  An  inspired  writer  does  his  work  without  the  self-
consciousness  of  a  modem  composer;  he  is  not  necessarily
careful  to  define  his  exact  place  in  literature,  his  precise  obliga-
tions to,  or  his  presumed  improvements  upon,  the  labours  of  his

^  See  especially  the  remarkable  passage  in  Eus.  Hist.  Eccl.  lii.  24,
St.Epiph.  Haer.  ii.  51.

•  These  arguments  of  Lilcke  are  noticed  by  Bp.  "Wordsworth,  New  Test,
part  i.  p.  206.

'  *The  later  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  enlarge  upon  and  complete
the  prophecies  of  the  earlier.  But  they  do  not  mention  their  names,  or
declare  their  own  purpose  to  do  what  they  do,*  Townson,  pp.  134-147;
quoted  by  Bp.  Wordsworth,  ubi  supr.


(2)  Saint  yoktCs  Gospel  is


predecessors.     He  ia  the  organ  of  a  Higher  Intelligem


believed  to  originate


oweB  both  what  he  borrows  and  what  h

to  the  Mind  Which  inspires  him  to  originate,  or  Which  guides
him  to  select.  While  the  stream  of  saered  truth  is  flowing  forth
from  his  entranced  and  buniing  eonl,  and  is  being  forthwiUi
crystaUized  in  the  moulds  of  an  imperishable  language,  th«
eagle-eyed  Evangelist  does  not  stoop  from  heaven  to  earth  for
the  purpose  of  guarding  or  reserving  the  rights  of  authorship
by  displaying  his  care  to  acknowledge  its  obligations.  Certainly
St.  John  does  repeat  in  part  the  narratives  of  his  predecessors  E.
But  this  repetition  does  not  interfere  with  the  »u^leme>Uaty
character  of  his  work  as  a  whole  K  And  yet  his  Gospel  ia  not
only  or  mainly  to  be  regarded  as  an  historical  supplement.  B
exhibits  the  precision  of  method  and  the  orderly  development  of
ideas  which  are  proper  to  a  complete  doctrinal  essay  or  treatise.
It  is  indeed  rather  a  treatise  illustrated  by  history,  than  a  history
written  witb  a  theological  purpose.  Viewed  in  its  historical
relation  to  the  first  three  Gospels,  it  is  supplemental  to  them ;
but  this  relative  character  is  not  by  any  means  an  adequate
explanation  of  its  motive  and  function.  It  might  easily  have
been  written  if  no  other  Evangelist  had  written  at  all ;  it
has  a  character  and  purpose  which  are  strictly  its  own ;  it
is  part  of  a  great  whole,  yet  it  is  also,  in  its^,  organicaUj
perfect.

z.  St.  John's  Gospel  is  a  polemical  treatise.  It  is  addressed
to  an  intellectual  world  widely  different  from  that  which  had
been  before  the  minds  of  the  earlier  Evangelists.  The  earhest
forms  of  Gnostic  thought  are  recognisable  in  the  Judaizing
theoBOphists  whom  St.  Paul  has  in  view  in  his  Epistles  to  the
Ephesians  and  the  Colossians.  These  Epistles  were  written  at
the  least  some  thirty  years  before  the  fourth  Gospel.  "Die
fourth  Gospel  confronts  or  anticipates  a  more  developed  Gno-
sticism ;  although  we  may  observe  in  passing  that  it  certaiolj


"  M,  Een
attributes  to  the  ETangelirt  a.  motiye  of  perHonal  pi  ^
aimoyed  at  the  plAce  Assigned  to  Kimaelf  in  earlier  narratives  I  '  On  tfi
tentd  de  croire,  que  Jean,  dans  Bs  vieillesee,  ayant  In  lea  r&ita  ^vangfliqoa
qui  ciraulatent,  d'une  part,  j  remarqua  diverses  Jnexadjtudea,  de  Taatn
fut  froies^  de  Toir  qu'on  ne  lui  accardait  pas  dans  rbistoire  da  Christ  niw
aesez  gtande  place ;  qu'alors  il  coinmeo9a  it  dieter  une  foule  da  choeea  qn'il
flavait  mieui  que  lea  aatres,  avec  I'intention  de  monirer  que,  dans  ieowmf
de  cat  oi  on  «e  parlait  gwe  de  Pierre,  il  avait  fiquri  aveo  tt  avani  M.'
Vie  de  J^ns,  pp.  nvii.  uviii,

[lECT.


a  polemical  treatise*  223

does  not  contain  references  to  any  of  the  full-grown  Gnostic
systems  ^which  belong  to  the  middle  of  the  second  century.    The
fourth  Gospel  is  in  marked  opposition  to  the  distinctive  posi-
tions   of   Ebionites,  of  Docetae,  of  Corinthians.     But   among
these  the  Cerinthian  gnosis  appears  to   be  more  particularly
contemplated.     In  its  earlier  forms  especially,  Gnosticism  was
as  much  a  mischievous  intellectual  method  as  a  formal  heresy.
The  Gnostic   looked  upon  each  revealed  truth  merely  in  the
light  of  an  addition  to  the  existing  stock  of  materials  ready  to
his  hand  for  speculative  discussion.     He  handled  it  accordingly
with  the  freedom  which  was  natural  to  a  belief  that  it  was  in  no
sense  beyond  the  range  of  his  intellectual  grasp.      He  com-
mingled it  with  his  cosmical  or  his  psychological  theories ;  he
remodelled  it ;  he  submitted  it  to  new  divisions,  to  new  com-
binations.    Thus  his  attitude  toward  Christianity  was  friendly
and  yet  supercilious.     But  he  threatened  the  faith  with  utter
destruction,  to  be  achieved  by  a  process  of  eclectic  interpretation.
Cerinthus  was  an  early  master  of  this  art.      Cerinthus  as  a
Chiliastic  Judaizer  was  naturally  disposed  to  Humanitarianism.
A.B  an  eclectic  theorist,  who  had  been  trained  in  the  *  teaching  of
the  Egyptians  V  he  maintained  that  the  world  had  been  created
by  *  some  power  separate  and  distinct  from  Him  Who  is  above
all.*   Jesus  was  not  born  of  a  virgin ;  He  was  the  son  of  Joseph
and  Mary;   He  was  born  naturally  like  other  men.     But  the
-^n  Christ  had  descended  upon  Jesus  after  His  baptism,  in  the
form  of  a  dove,  and  had  proclaimed  the  unknown  Father,  and
had  perfected  the  virtues  of  Jesus.      The  spiritual  impassible
Christ  had  flown  back  to  heaven  on  the  eve  of  the  Passion  of
Jesus ;  the  altogether  human  Jesus  of  Cerinthus  had  suffered
and  had  risen  alone  \    To  this  fantastic  Christ  of  the  Cerinthian

*  St.  Hippolytus,  Refut.  Hser.  vii.  33.

'  St.  Irenseus,  i.  26 :  *  Et  Cerinthus  autem  quidam  in  Asi^  non  a  primo
Deo  factum  esse  mundum  docuit,  sed  a  virtute  qu4dam  valde  separate  et
^listante  ab  eft  principalitate,  quae  est  super  universa,  et  ignorante  eum  qui
^  super  omnia,  Deum.  Jesum  autem  subjecit,  non  ex  virgine  natum
(impossibile  enim  hoc  ei  visum  est) ;  fuisse  autem  Eum  Joseph  et  Manse
filium  similiter  ut  reliqui  omnes  homines,  et  plus  potuisse  justitift  et  pru-
dentift  et  sapientift  ab  hominibus.  Et  post  baptismum  descendisse  in  eum
ah  ea  principalitate  quae  est  super  omnia,  Christum  figurft  columbse ;  et
tunc  annuntiasse  incognitum  Patrem  et  virtutes  perfecisse ;  in  fine  autem
revoUsse  iterum  Christum  de  Jesu,  et  Jesum  passum  esse  et  resui'rexisse ;
Christum  autem  impassibilem  persever&sse,  existentem  spiritalem.*  When
St.  Epiphanius  represents  Cerinthus  as  affirming  that  Jesus  would  only  rise
at  the  general  resurrection,  he  seems  to  be  describing  the  logical  results  of
the  heresy,  not  the  actual  doctrine  which  it  embraced.     (Hser.  zxviii.  6.)

^1


224  (3)  Saint  John's


gaoBJB  St.  Joho  opposes  the  counteracting  truth  of  our  Lord's
Divine  and  Eternal  Nature,  as  manifested  in  and  throngh  His
human  life.  This  Nature  was  united  to  the  Manhood  of  Jceub
from  the  moment  of  the  Incarnation.  It  was  not  a  transient
endowment  of  the  Person  of  Jesus ;  eince  it  was  Itself  the  seat
of  His  Personality,  although  clothed  with  a  human  form.  This
Divine  Nature  was  'glonfied'  in  Christ's  Passion,  as  also  in
His  miracles  and  His  Besorrection.  St.  John  disentangles  the
Catholic  doctrine  from  the  negations  and  the  speculations  of
CerinthuB ;  he  proclaims  the  Presence  among  men  of  the  Divine
Word,  Himself  the  Creator  of  all  things,  incarnate  in  Jesui
Christ.

3.  Thus  St.  John's  Qospel  has  also  a  direct,  positive,  dogmatic
purpose.  It  is  not  merely  a  controversial  treatise,  as  it  is  not
merely  an  historical  appendix.  Its  teaching  is  far  deeper  and
wider  than  would  have  been  necessary,  in  order  to  refute  the
errors  of  Cerinthus.  It  teaches  the  highest  revealed  truth  con-
cerning the  Person  of  our  Lord.  Its  substantive  and  enduring
value  consists  in  its  displaying  the  Everlasting  Word  or  Son  at
God  as  historically  incarnate,  uid  as  uniting  Himself  to  His
Church.

The  peculiarities  of  St.  John's  Gospel  are  explained,  when
this  threefold  aspect  of  it  is  kept  in  view.     As  a  supplementary
narrative  it  presents  us,  for  the  most  part,  with  particulare
concerning  our  Blessed  Lord  which  are  unrecorded  elsewhere.
It  meets  the  doubts  which  might  naturally  have  arisen  in  the
later  Apostolical  age,  when  the  narratives  of  the  earlier  Evan-
gelists had  been  for   some   time    before    the   Church.      If  the
question  was  raised,  why,  if  Jesus  was  so  holy  and  so  super-
natural a  Person,  His  countrymen  and  contemporaries  did  not
believe  in  Him,  St.  John  shews  the  moral  causes  which  account
for  their  incredulity.      He  pourtraya  the  fierce   hatred   of  tie
Jews  against   the    moral  truth  which  they  had  rejected ;  ho
eshibits  this  hatred  as  ever  increasing  in  its  intensity  as  the
sanctity  of  Jesus  shines  out  more  and  more  brightly.     If  men
asked  anxiouslv  for  more  proof  that  the  Death  and  Eesoirection
ents,  St.  John    meets  that   demand  by
trience  as  an  eye-witness,  and  by  carefully
less  of  others.     If  it  was  objected  that
was  inconsistent  with  His  Divine  claims,
hat  it  was  strictly  voluntary,  and  even
rue   glorification  was  achieved.      If  tba
sties  and  of  those  who  were  sncceediag
[l£CI>


Peculiarities  in  Saint  yohn  explained.     225

them  was  popularly  depreciated  on  the  score  of  their  being
rude  and  illiterate  men,  St.  John  shews  from  the  discourse
in  the  supper-room  that  the  claims  of  Apostles  upon  the
dutiful  submission  of  the  Church  did  not  depend  upon  any
natural  advantages  which  they  possessed.  Jesus  had  promised
a  Divine  Comforter,  Who  was  to  guide  them  into  the  whole
truth,  and  to  bring  to  their  minds  whatever  He  had  said
to  them^.

As  a  polemical  writer,  St.  John  selects  and  marshals  his
materials  with  a  view  to  confuting,  from  historical  data,  the
Humanitarian   or  Docetic   errors  of  the  time.     St.  John  is
anxious  to  bring  a  particular  section  of  the  Life  of  Jesus  to
bear  upon  the  intellectual  world  of  Ephesus™.     He  puts  for-
ward an   aspect  of  the  original  truth  which  was  certain  to
command   present  and  local   attention;   he  is  sufficiently  in
correspondence  with  the  age  to  which  he  ministers,  and  with
the  speculative  temper  of  the  men  around  him.     He  had  been
led  to  note  and  to  treasure  up  in  his  thought  certain  phases
of  the  teaching  and  character  of  Jesus  with  especial  care.     He
Had  remembered  more  accurately  those  particular  discourses,
in  which  Jesus  speaks  of  His  eternal  relation  to  the  Father,
and  of  the  profound  mystic  communion  of  life  into  which  He
would  enter  with  His  followers  through  the  Holy  Spirit  and
the  Sacraments.    These  cherished  memories  of  St.  John's  earlier
years,  unshared  in  their  completeness  by  less  privileged  Apo-
stles, were  well  fitted  to  meet  the  hard  necessities  of  the  Church
duriDg  the  closing  years  of  the  beloved  disciple.     To  St.  John
the  gnosis  of  Cerinthus  must  have  appeared  to  be  in  direct
contradiction  to  the  sacred  certainties  which  he  had  heard  from
the  lips  of  Jesus,  and  which  he  treasured  in  his  heart  and
memory.     In  order  to  confute  the  heresy  which  separated  the
man  Jesus  from  the  '.ZElon '  Christ,  he  had  merely  to  publish  what
he  remembered  of  the  actual  words  and  works  of  Jesus  ^.     His
translation  of  those  divine  words  may  be  coloured  by  a  phrase-
ology current  in  the  school  which  he  is  addressing,  sufficiently
to  make  them  popularly  intelligible.     But  the  peculiarities  of
bis  language  have  been  greatly  exaggerated  by  criticism,  while
they  are  naturally  explained  by  the  polemical  and  positively
doctrinal  objects  which  he  had  in  view.     To  these  objects,  the

*  Cf.  Alford,  Greek  Test,  vol,  i.  Prolegom.  p.  60.       ^

*  St.  Ireiueiis  adv.  Hser.  iii.  I .  See  ^rard  a  discnssion  of  the  objectiona
which  have  been  urged  against  this  statement.  Gospel  History,  pt.  a,
<^^.  %t  §  127.  ^  Of.  Fressens^,  J^us^Christ,  p.  246.


226     Peculiarities  in  Saint  yohn  explained*

language,  the  historical  arrangement,  the  selection  from  con*
versations  and  discourses  before  unpublished,  the  few  deeply
significant  miracles,  the  description  of  opponents  by  a  generic
name — ^the  *  Jews* — ^which  ignores  the  differences  of  character,
class,  and  sect  among  them,  and  notices  them  only  so  fsur  as
they  are  in  conflict  with  the  central  truth  manifested  in  Jesu£^
— all  contribute.  But  these  very  peculiarities  of  the  fourth
Gospel  subserve  its  positive  devotional  and  didactic  aim  even
more  directly  than  its  controversial  oneo.     The   false   gnosis

*  The  internal  difficulties  urged  against  St.  John's  Grospel  appear  to  be
overborne  by  the  weight  of  the  ext^nal  testimony,  taken  in  conjunction
with  the  characteristics  and  necessities  of  the  later  Apostolical  age.     These
difficulties  may  however  be  very  briefly  summarized  as  follows : —
I.  As  to  time:
(a)  'The  fourth  Grospel  implies  a  long  Ministry,  with  festivals  for  its
landmarks.*     But  the  three  (Westcott,  Study  of  Goepels,  267)  at
least  allow  of  a  ministry  as  long  as  the  fourth  can  require ;  while
reference  to  the  festivals  was  natural  in  a  narrative,  the  main  scene
of  which  is  laid  at  Jerusalem.
O)  'The  fourth  Gospel  appears  to  place  the  crucifixion  on  Nisan  14,
the  three  on  Nisan  15.*    This  real  difficulty  has  been  explained  by
various  hypotheses,  as
e.g.  (i)  Of  an  anticipated  passover,  kept  by  our  Lord,  on  Nisan  13.
Westcott,  Int.  p.  319;  Ellicott,  Huls.  Lect.  p.  322,  and  others.
This  is  perhaps  tne  most  satisfactory.  The  objection  dravm  from  tha
observance  of  Nisan  14,  by  those  churches  in  the  second  century
which  inherited  St.  John*s  traditions,  assumes  that  such  observ-
ance was  commemorative  of  the  Last  Supper,  and  not,  as  is  prob-
able, of  our  Lord's  Death.     Cf.  Meyer,   Ev.  Joh.  Einl.  p.  18;
Mansel,  note  on  St.  Matt.  xxvi.  in  SpeiEUcer's  Commentary.

(2)  Of  a  paaBover postponed  by  the  chief  priests.  St.  Chrys. ;  Estins ;
Wordsworth.

(3)  Of  a  difference  of  computation,  as  to  the  true  day  of  the  Pass-
over, owing  to  the  variation  between  the  Solar  and  Lunar
reckonings.     Petavius,  qu.  by  Neale,  Int.  East.  Ch.  ii.  1054.

(4)  Of  a  possible  explanation  of  St.  John's  language  (xviii.  28,  &c.),
which  would  make  it*  consistent  with  the  date  of  Nisan  15,  as
that  of  the  cracifixion.  Diet,  of  Bible,  vol.  ii.  720;  Edersheim,
Life  and  Times  of  Jesus,  ii.  481,  507 ;  St.  Tho.  Sum.  p.  iii.  q.  46.  a.  9*

If  none  of  these  explanations  be  quite  unobjectionable,  they  may  fairly
warn  us  against  concluding  with  our  present  knowledge  that  tne  difficulty
is  by  any  means  insuperable.

a.  As  to  the  scene  of  Christ's  teaching: — 'St.  John  places  it  chiefly  in
Judsea ;  the  three  in  Galilee.*  But  no  Gospel  professes  to  be  a  complete
history  of  our  Lord's  actions,  and  records  of  a  Galilean  and  of  a  Judeu
ministry  respectively  leave  room  for  each  other.  Westcott  on  the  Gospel
p.  265.

3.  As  to  the  style  of  Christ's  teaching : — '  Si  J^us  parlait  oonune  le  vent
Matthieu,  il  n'a  pu  parler  comme  le  veut  Jean.*  But,  the  difference  of
subjects,  hearers,  and  circumstances  in  the  two  casea^  taken  in  conjunction

[lecx


Saint  yokns  depth  and  simplicity.         227

18  refated  by  an  exhibition  of  the  true.  The  true  is  set  forth
for  the  sake  of  Christian  souls.  These  things  *  are  written  that
ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God ;  and
that  believing  ye  might  have  life  through  His  Name  P.*

We  may  perhaps  have  wondered  how  a  Galilean  fisherman
could  have  been  the  author  of  a  subtle  and  sublime  theosophy,
how  the  son  of  Zebedee  could  have  appropiated  the  language
of  Athens  and  of  Alexandria  to  the  service  of  the  Crucified.
The  answer  is  that  St.  John  knew  from  experience  the  blessed
and  tremendous  truth  that  his  Lord  and  Friend  was  a  Divine
Person.      Apart    from  the   guidance   of   the   Blessed    Spirit,
St.  John's  mental  strength  and  refinement  may  be  traced  to
the  force  of  his  keen  interest  in  this  single  fact.     Just  as  a
desperate  moral  or  material  struggle  brings  to  light  forces  and
resources  unused  before,  so  an  intense  religious  conviction  fer-
tilizes intellect,  anddevelopes  speculative  talent,  not  unfrequently
in  the  most  unlearned.    Every  form  of  thought  which  comes
even  into  indirect  contact  with  the  truth  to  which  the  soul
clings  adoringly,  is  scanned  by  it  with  deep  and  anxious  interest,
whether  it  be  the  interest  of  hope  or  the  interest  of  apprehen-
sion.   St.  John  certainly  is  a  theosophic  philosopher,  but  he
is  only  a  philosopher  because  he  is  a  theologian ;   he  is  such
a  master  of  abstract  thought  because  he  is  so  devoted  to  the
Incarnate  God.     The  fisherman  of  Galilee  could  never  have
written  the  prologue  of  the  fourth  Gospel,  or  have  guided
the  religious  thought  of  Ephesus,  unless  he  had  clung  to  this
sustaioing  Truth,  which  makes  him  at  once  so  popular  and  so

with  the  differing  mental  peculiarities  of  the  Apostles  who  report  our  Lord's
words,  will  account  for  the  difference  of  style.  The  phrases  assumed  to  be
peculiar  to,  and  really  of  frequent  occurrence  in  St.  John  are  by  no  means
unknown  to  the  Synoptists.  E.g.  The  antithesis  between  Light  and
darkness.

4.  As  to  the  matter  of  Christ's  teaching : — Baur  begs  the  whole  question
by  saying  that  *  the  discourses  in  St.  John  could  not  be  historicsd,  since
they  are  essentially  nothing  more  than  an  explanatioik  of  the  Logos-idea
put  forth  by  that  writer.  This  might  be  true  if  the  doctrine  of  the
Logos  had  been  the  product  of  Gnostic  speculations.  But  if  Jesus  was
really  the  Divine  Son,  manifesting  Himself  as  such  to  men,  such  language
as  that  reported  by  St.  John  is  no  more  than  we  should  expect  Him  to
use  at  certain  times.  St.  John  never  represents  our  Lord  as  announcing
His  Divinity  in  the  terms  in  which  it  is  announced  in  the  Prologue  to
the  Gospel;  he  would  have  done  so,  had  he  really  been  creating  a  fic-
titious Jesus  designed  to  illustrate  a  particular  theosophic  speculation.
This  is  discussed  hereafter,  p.  27a.  See  Pressens^,  J^us-Christ,  p.  344;
Luthardt,  das  Johanneische  Evangelium,  pp.  26-35.

^  St.  John  zz.  31.


228  Doctrine  of  t lie  Eternal  Word

profound.  For  St.  John  is  spiritually  as  ^mple,  as  be  is
intellectually  majestic.  In  this  our  day  he  is  understood  by
the  religious  insight  of  the  unlettered  and  the  poor,  while  the
learned  can  sometimes  see  in  him  only  the  weary  repetition  of
metaphysical  abstractions.  The  poor  understand  tlus  sublime
revelation  of  God,  the  Creator  of  the  world,  as  pure  Light  and
Truth.  They  understand  the  picture  of  a  moral  darkness  which
commits  and  excuses  sin,  and  which  hates  the  light.  They
receive  gratefully  and  believingly  the  Son  of  Grod,  made  Man,
and  conquering  evil  by  the  laying  down  His  Life.  They  follow,
with  the  experience  of  their  own  temptations,  or  sins,  or  hopes,
or  fears,  those  heart-searching  conversations  with  Nicodemus,
with  the  Samaritan  woman,  with  the  Jews.  In  truth,  St.  John's
language  and,  above  all,  the  words  of  Christ  in  St.  John,  are
as  simple  as  they  are  profound.  They  still  speak  peace  and  joy
to  little  children ;  they  are  still  a  stumbling-block  to,  and  a
condemnation  o^  the  virtual  successors  of  Cerinthus.

n.  If  there  were  nothing  else  to  the  purpose  in  the  whole  of
the  New  Testament,  those  first  fourteen  verses  of  the  fourth
Gospel  would  suffice  to  persuade  a  believer  in  Holy  Scripture  of
the  truth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  absolutely  God.  It  is  a  mistake
to  regard  those  fourteen  verses  as  a  mere  prefatory  attack  upon
the  ^osis  of  Cerinthus,  having  no  necessa^^  conne^on  with^
narrative  which  follows,  and  representing  nothing  essential  to
the  integrity  of  the  Apostle's  thought.  For,  as  Baur  very  truly
observes,  the  doctrine  of  the  prologue  is  the  very  fundamental
idea  which  underlies  the  whole  'Johannean  theology  Q.*  It  is  not
enough  to  say  that  between  the  prologue  and  the  history  which
follows  there  exists  an  intimate  organic  connexion.  The  pro-
logue is  itself  the  beginning  of  the  history.  *  It  is  impossible,'
says  Baur,  *to  deny  that  "the  Word  made  flesh ^f"  is  one  and
the  same  subject  with  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  on  the  one  hand,
and  with  the  Word  Who  "  was  in  the  beginning.  Who  was  with
God,  and  Who  was  God,"  on  the  other  •.*

Taking  then  the  prologue  of  St.  John's  Gospel  in  connexion
with  the  verses  which  immediately  succeed  it,  let  us  observe  that
St.  John  attaches  to  our  Lord's  Person  two  names  which  to-
gether yield  a  complete  revelation  of  His  Divine  glory.  Our
Lord  is  called  the  *  Word,'  and  the  '  Only-begotten  Son.'  It  is
doubtless  true,  as  Neander  observes,  that  Hhe  first  of  these

«  VorleBungen,  p.  351.  '  St.  John  i.  14.

■  Baur,  ubi  sup.,  St.  John  i.  i,-

[LBCt.


in  the  Prologue  of  Saint  Johris  Gospel.     229

names  was'  put  prominently  forward  at  Ephesus,  *in  order  to
lead  those  who  busied  themselves  with  speculations  on  the
Logos  as  the  centre  of  all  theophanies,  from  a  mere  religious
idealism  to  a  religious  realism,  to  lead  them  in  short  to  a
recognition  of  God  revealed  in  Christ  *.*  It  has  already  '^  been
shewn  that  the  Logos  of  St.  John  differs  materially  fi:om  the
Logos  of  Flatonizing  Jews  in  Alexandria,  while  it  is  linked  to
great  lines  of  teaching  in  the  Old  Testament.  No  reason  can
be  assigned  why  St.  John  had  recourse  to  the  word  Logos  at
all,  unless  he  was  already  in  possession  of  the  underlying  fact
to  which  this  word  supplied  a  philosophical  form.  If  the  word
did  express,  in  a  form  familiar  to  the  ears  of  the  men  of  Ephe-
sus, a  great  truth  which  they  had  buried  beneath  a  heap  of
errors,  that  truth,  as  Bruno  Bauer  admits,  must  have  been
held  independently  and  previously  by  the  Apostle  ▼.  The
direct  expression  of  that  truth  was  St.  John's  primary  motive
in  using  the  word;  his  polemical  and  corrective  action  upon
the  Cerinthian  gnosis  was  a  secondary  motive.

By  the  word  Logos,  then,  St.  John  carries  back  his  history  of
onr  Lord  to  a  point  at  which  it  has  not  yet  entered  into  the
sphere  of  sense  and  time.  *In  the  four  Gospels,*  says  St.  Augus-
tine, '  or  rather  in  the  four  books  of  the  one  Gospel,  the  Apostle
St.  John,  deservedly  compared  to  an  eagle,  by  reason  of  his
spiritual  understanding,  bias  lift;ed  his  enunciation  of  truth  to  a
far  higher  and  sublimer  point  than  the  other  three,  and  by  this
elevation  he  would  fain  have  our  hearts  lifted  up  likewise.  For
the  other  three  Evangelists  walked,  so  to  speak,  on  earth  with
our  Lord  as  Man.  Of  His  Godhead  they  said  but  a  few  things.
But  John,  as  if  he  found  it  oppressive  to  walk  on  earth,  has
opened  his  treatise  as  it  were  with  a  peal  of  thunder ;  he  has
raised  himself  not  merely  above  the  earth,  and  the  whole  com-
pass of  the  air  and  heaven,  but  even  above  every  angel-host,  and
every  order  of  the  invisible  powers,  and  has  reached  even  to  Him
hy  Whom  all  things  were  made,  in  that  sentence,  "In  the  begin-
ning was  the  Word  x."  *

Instead  of  opening  his  narrative  at  the  Human  Birth  of  our
Lord,  or  at  the  commencement  of  His  ministry,  St.  John  places
himself  in  thought  at  the  starting-point  (as  we  should  conceive

'  Keander,  Kirchengeschichte,  p.  549 ;  quoted  by  Tholuck,  Ev.  Johan.
kap.  I.  n  p.  69.

^  Eritik  der  Evangel.  Geschichte  des  Joh.  p.  5 ;  quoted  by  Tholuck,  ubi
Biipra.

*  St.  Aug.  tr.  36  in  Johaa.


2  30  Doctrine  of  the  Eternal  Word

it)  of  all  time  y.  Nay  rather,  it  wonld  seem  that  if  HHSna  at  the
beginning  of  Crenesis  signifies  the  initial  moment  of  time  itself^
cv  a/>X$  rises  to  the  absolute  conception  of  that  which  is  anterior
to,  or  rather  independent  o^  time  '.  Then,  when  time  was  not,
or  at  a  point  to  which  man  cannot  apply  his  finite  conception  of
time,  there  was — ^the  Logos  or  Word.  When  as  yet  nothing  had
been  made,  He  vhjlb.  What  was  the  Logos  %  Snch  a  term,  in  a
position  of  such  moment,  when  so  much  depends  on  our  rightly
understanding  it,  has  a  moral  no  less  than  an  intellectual  claim
upon  us,  of  the  highest  order.  We  are  bound  to  try  to  under-
stand it,  just  as  certainly  as  we  are  bound  to  obey  the  command
to  love  our  enemies.  No  man  who  carries  his  morality  into  the
sphere  of  religious  thought  can  affect  or  afford  to  maintain,  that
the  fundamental  idea  in  the  writrngs  of  St.  John  is  a  scholastic
conceit,  with  which  practical  Christians  need  not  concern  them-
selves. And  indeed  St.  John's  doctrine  of  the  Logos  has  from
the  first  been  scrutinized  anxiously  by  the  mind  of  Christendom.
It  could  not  but  be  felt  that  the  term  Logos  denotes  at  the  very
least  something  intimately  and  everlastingly  present  with  Grod,
something  as  internal  to  the  Being  of  God  as  thought  is  to  the
soul  of  man.  Li  truth  the  Divine  Logos  is  God  reflected  in  His
own  eternal  Thought ;  in  the  Logos,  God  is  His  own  Object.
This  Lifinite  Thought,  the  reflection  and  counterpart  of  God,
subsisting  in  God  as  a  Being  or  Hypostasis,  and  having  a  ten-
dency to  self-conmiunication, — such  is  the  Logos.  The  Logos
is  the  Thought  of  God,  not  intermittent  and  precarious  lie
human  thought,  but  subsisting  with  the  intensity  of  a  personal

y  Meyer  in  loc.,  note:  'Vollig  unezegetisch  ist  die  Fassnng  der  So*
cinianer  (b.  Gatech.  Kacov.  p.  135,  ed.  Oeder):  kv  apx§  heisse  t»  initio
evangeliV

*  Meyer  in  loc. :  'Johannes  paralleUsirt  zwar  den  Anfang  seines  Evangel,
mit^dem  Anfange  der  Grenesis;  aber  er  steigert  den  historischen  Begriff
n^^3j  welcher  (Gen.  i.  i)  den  Anfangsmoment  der  Zeit  selbst  bedeutet,
zum  absoluten  Begriffe  der  Vorzeitlichkeit*  This  might  soffioe  to  refute
the  assertion  of  a  modem  writer  that  St.  John  does  not  teach  the  Eternity
of  the  Divine  Word.  'Une  des  theses  fondamentales  de  la  speculation
eccl^astique,  o'est  id^  de  IMtemit^  da  Verbe.  Depms  que  le  oondle
de  Nic^e  en  a  fait  nne  des  pierres  angulaires  de  la  th^logie  Gatholiqne,
sa  d^sion  est  rest^e  l*h€ritage  commun  de  tons  les  syst^mes  orthodoxee.
Eh  bien !  les  Merits  de  Jean  n'en  parlent  pas.*  Keuss,  Th^l.  Chret.  ii.  438.
The  author  is  mistaken  in  attributing  to  iy  dpxv  &  merely  relative  foice,
and  thence  arguing  that  if  the  Word  is  eternal,  the  world  is  eternal  also
(Gen.  i.  i).  Besides,  Behs  ^v  6  iiiyos.  How  is  the  Word  other  than
eternal,  if  He  is  thus  identified  with  the  ever-existing  Being?  Cf.  Dol-
linger,  Christenthum  und  Kirche  in  der  Zeit  der  Grunmegung;  p.  169.

[lect.


in  the  Prologue  of  Saint  yohns  Gospel.     231

form.     The  very  expression  seems  to  court  the  argument  of
Athenagoras,  that  smce  God  could  never  have  heen  SlKv^o^  ^,  the
Logos  must  have  heen  not  created  hut  eternal.    It  suggests
the  further  inference  that  since  reason  is  man's  nohlest  faculty,
the  Uncreated  Logos  must  he  at  least  equal  with  God.     Li  any
case  it  might  have  heen  asked  why  the  term  was  used  at  all,  if
these  ohvious  inferences  were  not  to  be  deduced  from  it;  hut  as
a  matter  of  fact  they  are  not  mere  inferences,  since  they  are
warranted  hy  the  express  language  of  St.  John.     St.  John  says
that  the  Word  was   *in  the  beginning.'      The  question  then
arises  :    What  was  His  relation  to  the  Self-existent  Being  %    He
was  not  merely  irap^  t^  e<a)  ^,  along  with  God,  but  vgh^  tov  Gf  w.
This  last  preposition  expresses,  beyond  the  fact  of  co-existence
or  immanence,  the  more  significant  fact  of  perpetuated  inter-
communion.    The  face  of  the  Everlasting  Word,  if  we  may  dare
so  to  express  ourselves,  was  ever  directed  towards  the  face  of  the
Everlasting  Father  ^,     But  was  the  Logos  then  an  independent
being,  existing  externally  to  the  One  God  1     To  conceive  of  an
independent  being,  anterior  to  creation,  would  be  an  error  at
issue  with  the  first  truth  of  monotheism  ;  and  therefore  Btos  ^v
0  Adyoff  d.    The  Word  is  not  merely  a  Divine  Being,  but  He  is  in
the  absolute  sense  God®.     Thus  from  His  eternal  existence  we


'  Athenag.  Suppl.  pro  Christ,  lo  (46  D.  ed.  Otto) :  c7xcv  aMs  Iv  iavrf
rhv  Aiyov,  hX^lws  \oyiKbs  &y,

^  St.  John  xvii.  5.

®  Meyer  in  loc. :  *irp6s  bezeichnet  das  Befindlichsein  dee  Logos  bei  Grott
im  Gesichtspunkte  der  Bichtung  der  Gemeinscliaft.*  Bemhardy,. Syntax,
p.  265.

*  The  omission  of  the  article  before  0e((y  is  explained  by  Meyer  in  loc. :
'Die  Nichtsetzung  des  Artikels  war  nothwendig,  weil  6  0€<js  nach  dem
Torherigen  irphs  rhv  S*6y  dem  Loffos  die  Identitat  der  Person  zngesprochen
hatte,  was  aber  eben,  nachdem  xpbs  rhy  &(6y  die  Verschiedenheit  der  Person
geeetzt  hat,  ungereimt  ware,  dagegen  das  Nichtartikulirte  6€6s  auf  diese
personliche  Verschiedenheit  der  Einheit  des  Wesens  tind  der  Nator  folgen
lasst.'    T^s  is  a  sufficient  reply  to  Winer,  Gr.  N.  T.,  iii.  §  19.  i.

*  Here  is  the  essential  difference  between  the  Logos  of  St.  John  and
the  Logos  of  Philo.  Meyer,  who  apparently  holds  Philo  to  have  definitely
considered  his  Logos  as  a  real  hypostasis,  states  it  as  follows,  in  his  note
on  the  words  kcO.  0e^T  ^y  6  Aoyos :  '  Wie  also  Johannes,  mit  dem  nich-
tartikulirten  6e6s  kein  niedrigeres  Wesen,  als  Gott  Selbst  hat,  bezeichnen
"will;  so  unterscheidet  dch  die  Johanneische  Logos-Idee  b€atimmt  von
derjenigen  bei  Philo,  welcher  dtos  ohne  Artikel  im  Sinne  wesentlicher
TJnterordnung,  ja,  wie  Er  Selbst  sagt,  4y  icoraxp^o'et  (i.  p.  655,  ed.  Mangey)
vom  Logos  prkdicirt ; — wie  denn  auch  der  Name  6  Sevrcpos  6€6s,  welchen
er  ihm  giebt,  nach  ii.  p.  625.  Euseb.  prsep.  Ev.  vii.  13,  ausdrttcklich
den  Begriff  eines  Zwischenwesens  zwischen  Gott  nnd  deni  Menschen


232  The  Divine  Mature,  hozv  represented  in  Si.yohn,

ascend  first  to  His  distinct  PerBonalitj,  and  then  to  the  full  truth
of  His  Buhstantial  Godhead.

Yet  the  LogoB  necessarily  enggests  to  our  minda  the  further
idea  of  communicatiTeaess ;  the  Logos  is  Speech  as  well  as
Thought''.  And  of  His  actual  self-commouication  St.  John
mentions  two  phases  or  fitagee  \  the  first  creatioit,  the  second
revdaiiim.  The  Word  unveils  Himself  to  the  sonl  through  the
mediation  of  ohjects  of  sense  in  the  physical  world,  and  He  also
unveils  Himself  immediately.  Accordingly  St.  John  sayB  that
'  all  things  were  made '  by  the  Word,  and  that  the  Word  Who
creates  is  also  the  Revealer:  'the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and
dwelt  among  us,  and  we  beheld  His  glory.'  He  possesses  86^
that  is,  in  St,  John,  the  totality  <S  the  Divine  attributes.  This
'  glory '  is  not  merely  something  belonging  to  His  Essential
Xature ;  since  He  allows  us  to  behold  It  through  His  yell  of
Flesh.

What  indeed  this  Boja  or  glory  was,  we  may  observe  by  con-
sideriBg  tliat  St.  John's  writings  appear  to  bring  God  before  ns,
at  least  more  particularly,  under  a  threefold  aspect.

I.  God  is  Life  (f^^).  The  Father  is  '  Hving  b  ;'  He  '  has  life
in  Himself  h.'  Qod  is  not  merely  the  living  Ood,  that  is,  the
real  God,  in  contrast  to  the  non-existent  and  feigned  deities  of
the  heathen :  God  is  Life,  in  the  sense  of  Self-csistent  Being ;
He  is  the  Focus  and  the  Fountain  of  universal  life.  In  Him
life  may  be  contemplated  in  its  twofold  activity,  as  issuing  from
its  source,  and  as  returning  to  its  object,  "the  Life  of  God
passes  forth  from  Itself;  It  lavishes  Itself  throughout  the  realms
of  nothingness ;  It  summons  into  being  worlds,  systems,  intelli-
gences,  orders  of  existences  unimaglned  before.  In  doing  this
It  obeys  no  necessary  law  of  self-expansion,  but  pours  Itself
forth  with  that  highest  generosity  that  belongs  to  a  perfect
freedom.  That  is  to  say,  that  Qod  the  Life  is  Qod  the  Creator.
On  the  other  hand,  Qod  is  Being  returning  into  Itself,  finding
in  Itself  Its  perfect  and  consummate  satisfaction.     God  is  thus

bezeiclmen  soil,  nscb  deeeen  Bilde  Gott  den  Menschen  geecbaSea  hit.
DUter  SuboidiaatianiBmiiB,  nnch  weldiem  der  Logos  zwsr  uf^ipios  tii  Oiov

■*■'—  -*■ -"    ■'-  ixirruv.  iiiBpdiTau  ti  Kpihrur  JBt  (i,  p. 683)  Ut  nictt

che,  weloher  vielmehr  die  ewige  WeBenaemheit  da»
Lnea  zur  Vorauseetzung  hat  (Phi.  ii.  6  ;  Kol.  i.  1 5  t),
ling  dea  letztera  in  deaeen  Abliimgigkeit  vom  Yata

Btam  der  Bibliscben  Fsycbologie,  p.  13S.


The  Divine  Nature^  how  represented  in  St.  John,  233

the  Object  of  all  dependent  Life ;  He  is  indeed  the  object  of  His
own  Life ;  all  His  infinite  powers  and  faculties  turn  ever  inward
with  tmcloyed  delight  upon  Himself  as  upon  their  one  adequate
End  or  Object.  We  cannot  approach  more  nearly  to  a  definition
of  pleasure  than  by  saying  that  it  is  the  exact  correspondence
between  a  faculty  and  its  object.  Pleasure  is  thus  a  test  of
vitality;  and  God,  as  being  Life,  is  the  one  Being  Who  is
supremely  and  perfectly  happy.

2.  Again,  God  is  Love  (ayaTri?)  *.  Love  is  the  relation  which
subsists  between  God  and  all  that  lives  as  He  has  willed.  Love
is  the  bond  of  the  Being  of  God.  Love  binds  the  Father  to  that
Only  Son  Whom  He  has  begotten  from  all  eternity  i.  Love
itself  knows  no  beginning;  it  proceeds  from  the  Father  and
the  Son  from  all  eternity.  God  loves  created  life,  whether  in
nature  or  in  grace ;  He  loves  the  race  of  men,  the  unredeemed
world  k;  He  loves  Christians  with  a  special  love^.  Li  beings  thus
extemsJ  to  Himself,  God  loves  the  life  which  He  has  given  them ;
He  loves  Himself  in  them ;  He  is  still  Himself  the  ultimate,
rightful,  necessary  Object  of  His  love.  Thus  love  is  of  His
eBsence ;  it  is  the  expression  of  His  necessary  delight  in  His
own  existence.

3.  Lastly,  God  is  Light  (c^wf).  That  is  to  say.  He  is  absolute
intellectual  and  moral  Truth;  He  is  Truth  in  the  realms  of
thought,  and  Truth  in  the  sphere  of  action.  He  is  the  All-
knowing  and  the  perfectly  Holy  Being.  No  intellectual  igno-
rance can  darken  His  all-embracing  survey  of  actual  and  possible
fact ;  no  stain  can  soil  His  robe  of  awful  Sanctity.  Light  is  not
merely  the  sphere  in  which  He  dwells :  He  is  His  own  sphere

of  existence ;  He  is  Himself  Light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness
atallm

*  1  St.  John  iv.  8 :  ^  ii^  iyear&pf  olic  iypm  rhv  Bt6v  tri  6  Behs  itydmi
^vrly.    Ibid.  ver.  l6l  6  Qtbs  irydwii  i<rrl,  Kot  6  fi4ymif  iv  rp  itydirfi,  iy  r^

^  St.  John  ill.  35  :  h  Uar^p  hyair^  rhv  Ttby  K<d  triana  i4iwKtp  iv  rp  x^^^
«^o5.  Ibid.  ▼.  20 :  6  yhp  Ilar^p  <pi\et  rhp  TihPt  icaX  xdpra  Zdicpvffiy  ahr^  &
«^^f  iroie?.     Ibid.  x.  17,  xv.  9.    Ibid.  xvii.  24:  iiydvTiads  fit  irph  KarafioKris

*  St.  John  iii.  16:  o0t«  yiip  fiydxriirfp  6  0(hs  rhy  xSafioy,  &<rr€  rhy  tibp
oSnw  rhy  /xoyoytpri  tZvHw.  I  St.  John  iv.  10 :  avrhs  iiydirriffty  rifjMS,  Ka\
STcVrciXc  rhy  Tlby  airov  tXcurf^hy  irtpl  r&v  afiapri&y  ^fuoy.  Ibid.  ver.  19 :
Vf-fif  iyaw&fity  ahrhyy  Zri  ainhs  wpSnos  iiydmiaey  iifias,

*  St.  John  xiv.  23,  xvi.  27.

™  I  St.  John  i.  5 :  ^  Behs  <t>&s  i<rrty  Ktd  tTKoria  iy  avr^  obK  tariy  obdtfita.
Ibid.  ver.  7  :  ainds  ieriy  iy  ry  ^wrL  Here  4y  does  not  merely  point  to  the
sphere  in  which  Grod  dwells.    In  St.  John  this  preposition  is  constantly


234      ^oo  reveal^  by  the  Word  Incarnate.


These  three  aspects  of  the  Dirice  Nature,  denoted  by  the
terms  Life,  Love,  and  Light,  are  ftttrihuted  in  St.  John's  writings
with  abundant  csplicitness  to  the  Word  made  flesh.

Thus,  the  Logos  is  Light.  He  in  tht  Light,  that  is,  the  Ligiit
Which  is  the  very  essence  of  God.  The  Baptist  indeed  preacha
truth  ;  but  the  Baptist  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  Liglit
Which  he  heralds".  The  Logos  ia  the  true  Light".  All  tiat
has  really  enlarged  the  atock  of  intellectual  truth  or  of  moral
goodness  among  men,  all  that  has  erer  lighted  any  soul  of  man,
has  radiated  iVom  Him  P.  He  proclaims  Himself  to  be  the  Light
of  the  world  1,  and  the  Truth';  and  His  Apostle,  speaking  (J
the  illumination  shed  by  Him  upon  the  Chnrcb,  reminds  Chria-
tians  that  'the  darkness  is  passing,  and  the  true  Light  now
shineth  '.'

The  Logos  is  Love.  He  refracts  upon  the  Father  the  fnlness
of  His  love '.  He  loves  the  Father  as  the  Father  loves  Himself
The  Father's  love  sends  Him  into  the  world,  and  He  obeys  out
of  love  ".  It  is  love  which  draws  Him  together  with  the  Father
to  make  His  abode  in  the  souls  of  the  faithful '.

und  to  denote  the  cloeeBt  possible  relationahip  between  (wo  gnbjecta,  cf,
w  here,  between  a.  subject  and  its  attribute.  Cf.  Beiua,  Thiiolc^s  Clir^
tienne,  ii.  p.  434,  for  this  u  well  u  many  of  the  above  observations  ud
references.

^  St.  John  i,  y  ;  O^Of  l|\0cr  eft  ^taprupiaVj  tva  fiapTvp^iffft  "P^  ^^i*  f  T^'
Ibid.  ver.  8  :  oix  ^r  tKfifoi  rh  ^ur,  kw'  Tra  fiaprvp^irp  rtpi  rov  ipmis.

*  IMd.  ver.  9 :  i}r  t^  <po!  -rb  ikriBivir.

V  Ibid.:  i  fuiTlffi  irrli^a  irdptaroi'  Ipx^f-'for  th  rhr  xiaiior.  'Du
^arl^tiv  nAvra  irdpatar,  ale  charakteriBtiache  WirkBamkeit  de>  w«hien
Lichla,  bleibt  wobr,  wenngleich  empirisch  diese  Ecleuchtung  von  Tielm
niobt  empfangen  wird.  Dak  empirieche  Verhaltnise  kommt  daxaof  smack :
quisquis  illuminatur,  ab  hao  luce  iUuminatm'.  (Beng.).'  HeyminJoh.
i.  9.  The  Evangelist  means  mrae  than  this  :  no  human  being  is  left  witli-
oat  a  certain  measure  of  natural  light,  and  this  light  is  given  07  the  Diviia
Logoa  in  all  cases.

1  St.  John  viii.  1 3  :  iy<i  tlfa  rb  ^m  tw  mfofiau*  i  iitoXevBav  i/ul,  oi  «4
TtpixarVd  in  Tp  OKOTuf,  i\A'  !(fi  ri  4>bc  t^(  fopflt.  Ibid.  iii.  19:  t*^
iXtlKvOii-  (ft  thv  iciTiuly,  that  is,  in  the  Inoamate  "Wotd.  Ibid.  iz.  5 :  frv  ^
Tfi  xi^iHf  &,  ipas  (ifu  tdG  nfiFfuiu.  Ibid.  zii.  ^6 :  ijii  f&i  lii  t^  tiaio'
i^-fihvBxi,  lya  vat  &  mrrt^w  *ts  ifiij  ty  rn  triani^  p-^  ^fra*  Oomp.
Eli.  V.  8.

'  St.  John  riv.  6.

*  I  St.  John  ii,  8  1  ^  aHvrla  rofdyrrai,  Knl  t1>  f  £i  rh  i\itBir)tr  Ijhi  ^nlm.
'  St.  John  riv,  31.

■  I  St.  John  iii.  16:  i^Toirifi  i7KSxoji«'T)|»  lydmiip  (the  absolute  olaritjX
Jti  i«(7yot  frrip  Ti/iav  rfti'  •I'uxh'  aAroD  (BriKf.     Of.  St.  John  iii.  16,

<  St.  John  liv.  33  :  iiv  Tit  i-ya^^  ^t,  rbv  Xifor  /itiv  Ti)|r4"S  "^  '  B'rlf
lioi/  AyaiHiVtt  {dirSVf  vol  vphs  atrrbr  iXtuffifitOOf  Jieol  /urjjr  waf^  ain^  rininfitf-
Ibid.  riii.  1,  iv.  9,

[LSCt.


The  Word  is  the  Only-begotten  Son,        235

The  Logos  is  Life.  He  is  the  LifeT,  the  eternal  Life",  the
Life  Which  is  the  Essence  of  God.  It  has  been  given  Him  to
have  life  in  Himself,  as  the  Father  has  life  in  Himself*.  He
can  give  life  ^ ;  nay,  life  is  so  emphatically  His  prerogative  gift,
that  He  is  called  the  Word  of  Life  «.

Thus  the  Word  reveals  the  Divine  Essence ;  His  Incarnation
makes  that  Life,  that  Love,  that  Light,  which  is  eternally  resident
in  God,  obvious  to  souls  that  steadily  contemplate  Himself.
These  terms,  Life,  Love,  Light — so  abstract,  so  simple,  so  sug-
gestive— meet  in  God;  but  they  meet  also  in  Jesus  Christ.
They  do  not  only  make  Him  the  centre  of  a  philosophy.  They
belong  to  the  mystic  language  of  faith  more  truly  than  to  the
abstract  terminology  of  speculative  thought.  They  draw  hearts
to  Jesus ;  they  invest  Him  with  a  higher  than  any  intellectual
beauty.  The  Life,  the  Love,  the  Light,  are  the  *  glory  *  of  the
Word  Incarnate  which  His  disciples  *  beheld,'  pouring  its  rays
through  the  veil  of  His  human  tabernacle  <*.  The  Light,  the
Love,  the  Life,  constitute  the  *  fulness*  whereof  His  disciples
received  ®.  Herein  is  comprised  that  entire  body  of  grace  and
truth  f,  by  which  the  Word  Incarnate  gives  to  men  the  right  to
become  the  sons  of  God  8.

But,  as  has  been  already  abundantly  implied,  the  Word  is  also
the  Son.  As  applied  to  our  Lord,  the  title  *  Son  of  God '  is
protected  by  epitiiets  which  sustain  and  define  its  unique  sig-
nificance. In  the  synoptic  Gospels,  Christ  is  termed  the
'well-beloved'  Son^.  In  St.  Paul  He  is  God's  *Own'  Soni.
In  St.  John  He  is  the  Only-begotten  Son,  or  simply  the  Only-


»  St.  John  XI.  as :  fy4  e^ui . . .  ^  f<»^.    Ibid.  xir.  6.

*  1  St.  John  ▼.  20 :  o5t<Jj  itmv . . .  ^  fcr))  aXd)»iOi,  The  oJtoj  is  referred
to  the  Father  by  LUcke  and  Winer.    But  eee  p.  24a,  note  '.

*  St.  John  T.  26 :  ISwicc  kcX  t^  T/^  (00^^  ix^iv  kv  lovrf .
^  Ibid.  i.  3»  4.

*  I  St.  John  1.  I :  A  \^%  T^j  f»^f.    Keiuss,  Th^ol.  Chr^t.  ii.  p.  445.

'  St.  John  i.  14 :  b  h&yoi  aiip^  iyivrro,  K(d  ^(TK^voxrcv  iv  Vfitv,  Kcd  iOfcurd'
luBa  T^y  96^ay  abrov,

*  Ibid.  yer.  16 :  iccA  ix  rod  irXripdfiaros  alrov  ^fich  trdyrts  i\d$ofi9y,
'  Ibid.  ver.  14 :  irX^pijj  x^^'^os  icoJ  dXriOttas,

'  Ibid.  i.  la:    Haoi  ih  ixafiov  ainhv,  ISwkcv  ainois  i^ovalcw  riiofa  Ocov

^  iyceinrr6s,  St.  Matt.  iii.  17,  xii.  18,  xvii.  5 ;  St.  Mark  i.  ii,  ix.  7,  »i.  6;
St.  Luke  iii.  a  a,  ix.  35.  Cod.  Alex,  reads  iKKe\€yfi4vovy  xx.  13;  cf.
a  St.  Peter  i.  17.

'  Rom.  yiii.  3a :  rod  Mov  TloD  ohx  ifflffwro.     Ibid.  ver.  3 :  rhv  iamov


236  '  Word'  and'Son'  complete  andguardeach  other.

begotten  \  This  last  epithet  surely  means,  not  merely  that  Qod
has  no  other  Each  Son,  but  that  Hip  Only-begotten  Son  is,  in
virtue  of  this  SonBhip,  a  partaker  of  that  iaconiinn  ni  cable  and
imperishable  Essence,  Which  is  Bundered  &om  all  created  life  by
an  impasBable  chasm.  If  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the  Besarrection  as
manifesting  this  Souship  to  the  vorld ',  the  sense  of  the  word
/unvyM^  remains  in  St.  John,  and  it  is  plainly  'defined  by  ita
context  to  relate  to  something  higher  than  any  eyent  occarring
in  time,  however  great  or  beneficial  to  the  bnman  race "".'  The
Only-begotten  Son "  ia  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  (4  &>■  tU  rf»
EoXirav  TOW  DorpiJt)  just  as  the  L<^os  is  npii  ror  Bt&r,  ever  con-
templafdng,  ever,  as  it  were,  moving  towards  TTiTn  in  the  ceaseless
activities  c^  an  ineffable  communion.  The  Son  is  His  Father's
eqnal,  in  that  He  is  partaker  of  His  natore :  He  is  His  Subordi-
nate, in  that  this  Equality  is  eternally  derived.  Bnt  the  Father
worketh  hitherto  and  the  Son  works ;  the  Father  bath  life  in
Himself,  and  has  given  to  tlie  Son  to  have  life  in  Himself;  all
men  are  to  hononr  the  Sou  even  as  they  honoDr  the  Fath«-°.
How  does  the  Son  of  Qod,  as  presented  to  as  in  Scriptnre,  difier
from  Him,  Whom  the  Church  knows  and  worships  as  God  the
SonT

Fach  of  these  ezpresmons,  the  Word  and  the  Son,  if  taken
alone,  might  have  led  to  a  fatal  misconception.  In  the  langnage
of  Chnrcb  history,  the  Lt^os,  if  nnhalanced  by  the  idea  of  Sonship^
might  have  seemed  to  sanction  Sabellianism.  The  Son,  withoat
the  Logos,  might  have  been  yet  more  sncceE&fally  pressed  into
the  service  of  Arianism.  An  Eternal  l^onght  or  Beaaon,  even
althongh  constantly  tending  to  ezpresE  itself  in  speech,  is  of  itself

k  StJohnL  14:  l»<ii«J^ifc  tV  Mf  tSrtiii,  Vtfoi  tn  /immytnnlt  nfi
_       ,      ™...  ,    _-     .  ,    —,,iiwtlsT^KiKnr-raEnirrfit.   Ibid.

itrarya^  Smt*.  Dud.  TO'.  iS :  iSi/ik
tmnw  «r  tI  tampA  tbv  fonytrois 'Cit£
Tiir  «t™i  Tir  /•mrwyai  iwirra^ir  I
iivi.  Tlieword  funtTir^t  ia  toed  bf
Kmd  (ni.  I  a  X  (^  As  daogliter  of  Jairm
e  man  who  met  our  Lnd  co  His  ocmii^
gnntka  (iz.  38).  In  Heb.  li.  17  it  ii
leadx^tLcaeeucs  '  tL*t  which  exiita
*  (11ialac^Oixnm.in  Joh-L  14.)  Gal
d  ntiLMiutj  ■■  Hii  Son.
SoofiATe  en  ihc  otb^  hand,  Beb.  v.  8.

I,  wlwn  the  Tat.  and  Sn.  HSS.  u>d

riTOMrdrfndiTUs.  Int.  N.  T.  ad.  3.  p.

Uftnlinkc       •  St.  John  t.  1 7, 13,  ]£.

[lsct.


...J


Manifestation  of  the  Word  in  history,      237

too  abstract  to  oblige  us  to  conceive  of  it  as  of  a  personal  Sub-
sistence.    On  the  other  hand,  the  filial  relationship  carries  with
it  the  idea  of  dependence  and  of  comparatively  recent  origin,
even  although  it  should  suggest  the  reproduction  in  the  Son  of
all  the  qualities  of  the  Father.     Certainly  St.  John's  language  in
his  prologue  protects  the  Personality  of  the  Logos,  and  unless
he  believed  that  God  could  be  divided  or  could  have  had  a
beginning,  the  Apostle  teaches  that  the  Son  is  co-eternal  with
the  Father.    Yet  the  bare  metaphors  of  *  Word*  and  *  Son,*  taken
separately,  might  lead  divergent  thinkers  to  conceive  of  Him  to
Whom  they  are  applied,  on  the  one  side  as  an  impersonal  quality
or  faculty  of  God,  on  the  other,  as  a  concrete  and  personal  but  in-
ferior and  dependent  being.    But  combine  them,  and  each  corrects
the  possible  misuse  of  the  other.     The  Logos,  Who  is  also  the
Son,  cannot  be  an  impersonal  and  abstract  quality;  since  such
an  expression  as  the  Son  would  be  utterly  misleading,  unless  it
implied  at  the  very  least  the  fact  of  a  personal  subsistence  dis-
tinct from  that  of  the  Father.    On  the  other  hand,  the  Son,  Who
is  also  the  Logos,  cannot  be  of  more  recent  origin  than  the
Father ;    since  the  Father  cannot  be  conceived  of  as  subsisting
without  that  Eternal  Thought  or  Eeason  Which  is  the  Son.    Nor
may  the  Son  be  deemed  to  be  in  any  respect,  save  in  the  order  of
Divine  subsistence,  inferior  to  the  Father,  since  He  is  identical
with  the  eternal  intellectual  Life  of  the  Most  High.     Thus  each
metaphor  reinforces,  supplements,  and  protects  the  other.    Taken
together  they  exhibit  Christ  before  His  Incarnation  as  at  once
personally  distinct  from,  and  yet  equal  with,  the  Father ;  He  is
That  personally  subsisting  and  'Eternal  Life,  Which  was  with
the  Father,  and  was  manifested  unto  us  p.*

St.  John's  Gospel  is  a  narrative  of  that  manifestation.  It
is  a  Life  of  the  Eternal  Word  tahemoiicling  in  Human  Nature
among  menQ.  The  Hebrew  schools  employed  a  similar  ex-
pression to  designate  the  personal  presence  of  the  Divinity
in  this  finite  world.  In  St.  John's  Gospel  the  Personality  of
Christ  makes  Itself  felt  as  Eternal  and  Divine  at  wellnigh  every
step  of  the  narrative  ^     Thus  even  the  Forerunner  describes

^  I  St.  John  i.  3.    Cf.  Newman*s  Arians,  ch.  ii.  sect.  3.

^  St.  John  i.  14 :  ia-itfivaxrtv  iv  rjfiiv.  The  image  implies  both  the  reality
and  the  transient  character  of  our  Lord's  manifestation  in  the  flesh.
Olshansen,  Meyer,  and  LUcke  see  in  it  an  allusion  to  the  *  Shekinah/  in
which  the  Divine  glory  or  radiance  ("ni3)  dwelt  enshrined.

*  Baur,  Dogmengeschichte,  i.  60a  :  'Was  das  johanneische  Evangelium
^trifiPt^  Bo  versteht  es  sich  ohnediess  von  selbst,  dass  das  eigentliche  Subject


238     Manifesiation  of  i/ie  Word  in  history,

a  Being  WLo  appearing  later  in  time  has  had  an  earlier  exist-
ence";  and  Who,  while  coining  &om  above,  is  yet  'above  all'.'
Each  diBcoorse,  each  miracle,  nay,  each  separate  word  and  act,
is  a  fresh  ray  of  glory  streaming  forth  &om  the  Peraoa  of  the
Word  tbrongh  the  veil  of  His  assumed  Humanity.  The  miracles
of  the  Word  Incarnate  are  irequently  called  His  works  1.  The
Evangelist  means  to  imply  that  'the  wonderful  is  only  the
natnral  form  of  working  for  Him  in  Whom  all  the  fulness  <rf
God  dwells.'  Christ's  Divine  Natore  must  of  necessity  bring
forth  works  greater  than  the  works  of  man.  The  Incarnation
is  the  one  great  wonder ;  other  miracles  follow  as  a  matter  of
course.  I^e  real  marvel  would  be  if  the  Incarnate  Being
should  work  no  miracles  ^ ;  as  it  is,  they  are  the  natural  results
of  His  presence  among  men,  rather  than  its  higher  manifest-
ation. His  true  glory  ib  not  perceived  except  by  those  who
gaze  at  it  with  a  meditative  and  reverent  intentiieES  *.  The
Word  Incarnate  is  ever  conscious  of  His  sublime  relationship
to  the  Father.  He  knows  whence  He  is^.  He  refers  not
nnfrequently  to  His  pre-esistent  LifeT.  He  sees  into  the
deepest  purposes  of  the  human  hearts  around  Him '.  He  has
a  perfect  Imowledge  of  all  that  concerns  God".  His  worke
are   simply  the   works  of  God'>.      To  believe  in  the  Father


der  PeraonlicliJteit  Chrieti  nvir  der  Logos  iet,  die  Mensohwerdnng  beateU
dsher  HUT  in  dem  (rifi(  ievfir9a.i. ;  dftss  der  Logos  FleiBoh  geworden,  im
Fteisch  erschieueu  ist,  ist  seine  menachliche  ErB(£eiDung.'  It  will  be  bonu
in  mind  that  <rif^,  in  its  full  Now  Testament  meaming,  certainlj  indndea
^<ixM  s«  well  as  the  animal  oi^aniem  (see  OlahauBen  on  Kom.  vii,  14),  azid
St.  John  attributes  to  the  Word  Incarnate  spiritual  experiences  which  most
have  had  their  seat  in  Hia  human  Soul  (zi.  33,  38,  xiii.  si).  But  Banr'a
general  positJon,  that  in  St.  John's  Gospel  the  Peisonalitf  of  the  Eternal
Word  is  perpetually  before  us,  is  unquestionably  true.

'  St.  John  i.  15 :  d  inina  fiou  ^^x^f *>'<'i>  fh'P'"'^'''  I""  fifii'fr,  Sri  tpStrii

^  Ibid.  iii.  31  :  6  &ifia9ei'  ipxAfiti^os  ivii'te  rdyraip  iffrif,
■  fpyo,  St.Johny.  .16,  vii.  31,  i.  J5,  3*,  38,  liv.  11,  i),  xv.  jj.  Cf.
word  is  applied  to  the  Old  Testament  miracles
T.YY  Cf.  Archbishop  Trench  on  the  Miracle^
ing  the  wider  use  of  liryBr  in  St.  John  xvij.  4,
io  mean  Christ's  miracles,  cT.  Trench,  Mir,  p.  i,

i.


i.  S5. 1.  IS-
[ixct.


This  explains  St.  yohris  point  of  view.     239

-"-rr I  I      I

is  to  believe  in  Him.  To  have  seen  Him  is  to  have  seen  the
Father.  To  reject  and  hate  Him  is  to  reject  and  hate  the
Father.  He  demands  at  the  hands  of  men  the  same  tribute
of  affection  and  submission  as  that  which  they  owe  to  the
Person  of  the  Father  c.

In  St.  John's  Gospel,  the  Incarnation  is  exhibited,  not  as
the  measure  of  the  humiliation  of  the  Eternal  Word,  but  as
the  veil  of  His  enduring  and  unassailable  glory.  The  angels  of
God  ascend  and  descend  upon  Him.  Nay,  He  is  still  in  heaven.
Certainly  He  has  taken  an  earthly  form;  He  has  clothed  Himself
with  a  human  frame.  But  He  has  thereby  raised  humanity  rather
than  abased  Himself.  In  St.  John  the  statits  inanitionisy  the
intrinsic  humiliation  of  Christ's  Incarnate  Life,  is  thrown  into  the
background  of  the  reader's  thought.  The  narrative  is  throughout
illuminated  by  the  never-failing  presence  of  the  Word  in  His
glory  ^.    Even  when  Jesus  dies.  His  Death  is  no  mere  humilia-

*  As  M.  Betiss  admits :  '  H  r^sulte  (from  the  prerogatives  ascribed  to
the  Word  Incarnate  in  St.  John*8  Gospel)  que  le  Verbe  r^v<51ateur  pouvait
demander  pour  lui-m6me,  de  la  part  des  hommes,  lee  mdmes  sentiments,
et  les  m^mes  dispositions,  qu*ils  doivent  avoir  k  regard  de  la  personne  du
P^re.    Ces  sentiments  sont  ezprim^  par  un  mot,  qui  contient  la  notion
d*mi  respect  profess^  pour  un  sup^rieur,  la  reconnaissance  d*une  dignit^
devant  laquelle  on  s*incline.    A  cet  ^gard,  il  y  a  igaiiU  des  deux  personnel
divinet  vis-a-vis  de  Vhomme.    On  ne  croit  pas  k  Tune  sans  croire  k  Tautre ;
qui  voit  Tune  voit  Tautre ;  rejeter,  hair  le  Fils,  c*est  rejeter  et  hair  le  Pfere.
(St.  Jean  iii.  33,  34,  zii.  44,  xv.  23).     Mais  dans  tout  ceci  (proceeds
M.  Eeuss)  il  ne  s'agit  pas  de  ce  qu*on  appele  le  culte  dans  le  langpige  pra-
tique de  r^^glise.     Le  culte  appartient  k  Dieu  le  P^,  et  lui  sera  offert
di^sormais  avec  d^autant  plus  d*empressement  qu*il  est  mieux  r^v^^,  et  que
rien  ne  s^pare  plus  de  lui  les  croyants.*  (Reuss,  Th^l.  Chr^t.  ii.  455.)  How
inconsequent  is  this  restriction !    If  the  Incarnate  Word  has  a  right  to  de-
mand for  Himself  the  same  'sentiments*  and  'cUspositions*  as  those  which
men  cherish  towards  the  Almighty  Father,  He  has  a  right  to  the  same
tribute  of  an  adoration  in  spirit  and  in  truth  as  that  wluch  is  due  to  the
Father.     What  is  worship  but  a  complex  act  of  such  'sentiments*  and
'dispositionB'  as  faith,  love,  self-prostration,  self-surrender  before  the  Most
Holy?  ,  If  Tfjtiav  (St.  John  v.  23),  within  the  general  meaning  of  due
acknowledgment,  includes  much  else  besides  adoration,  it  cannot  be  applied
to  the  duties  of  man  to  (jkxl  without  including  adoration.    Our  Lord*s
words  place  Himself  and  the  Father  simply  on  a  level ;  if  the  Son  is  not  to
be  adored,  neither  is  the  Father ;  if  the  father  is  to  be  adored,  then  must
the  Son  be  adored  in  the  same  sense  and  measure.     This  is  certainly  not
interfered  with  by  St.  John  iv.  20,  sqq. ;  while  the  best  practical  comment
upon  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  confession  of  St.  Thomas,  xx.  28 ;  on  which
lee  Lect.  Vn.
^  This  may  seem  inconsistent  with  (i)  St.  John  xiv.  28 :  b  liar^p  fitl(wp

luv  iarlv,    But  such  a  statement  would  be  '  unmeaning*  in  a  mere  man.

See  Lect.  IV.  pp.  202-204 »  (^)  S**  Jo^^i  *vii.  3 :  aSrij  U  iffriy  ri  olc^vtos


240     Chris  to  logy  0/  St.  yohns  First  Epistle.

tion ;  His  Death  is  the  crisis  of  His  exaltation®,  of  His  glory f.
Not  that  He  can  personally  increase  in  glory.  He  is  already
the  Son ;  He  is  the  Word.  But  He  can  gloidfy  and  exalt  that
Manhood  which  is  the  robe  through  which  His  movements  are
discernible:  He  can  glorify  Himself,  as  God  is  glorified,  by
drawing  towards  His  Person  the  faith  and  love  and  reverence
of  men.  It  were  folly  to  conceive  of  Him  as  enhancing  His
Divinity;  but  He  can  make  larger  and  deeper  that  measure
of  homage  which  ascends  towards  His  throne  from  human
understandings  and  from  human  hearts  s^.

m.  I.  But  does  St.  John's  teaching  in  his  earlier  writings  on
the  subject  of  our  Lord's  Person  harmonize  with  the  representa-
tions placed  before  us  in  the  fourth  Gospel  %  •  The  opening
words  of  his  first  Epistle^  might  go  far  to  answer  that  question.
St.  John's  position  in  this  Epistle  is,  that  the  Eternal  immaterial
Word  of  Life  resident  in  God  had  become  historically  manifest,
and  that  the  Apostles  had  consciously  seen,  and  heard,  and
handled  Him,  and  were  now  publishing  their  experience  to  tbe
world  K  The  practical  bearing  of  this  announcement  lay  in  the
truth  that  *  he  that  hath  the  Son  hath  the  Life,  and  he  that  hath
not  the  Son  hath  not  the  Lifei.'  For  *  God  hath  given  to  us  the
Eternal  Life,  and  this,  the  Life,  is  in  His  Son  \*  If  then  the
soul  is  to  hold  conmiunion  with  God  in  the  Life  of  Light  and

Xptffr6v,  But  here  a  Socinian  sense  is  excluded,  (a)  by  the  consideratiaa
that  'the  knowledge  of  God  and  a  creature  could  not  be  Eternal  Life'
(see  Alford  in  loc.);  (jb)  by  the  plain  sense  of  verse  i,  which  places  the
Son  and  the  Father  on  a  level :  '  What  creature  could  stand  before  his
Creator  and  say,  "  Glorify  me,  that  I  may  glorify  Thee  V*  *  Stier  apud  Alf. ;
(c)  by  verse  5,  which  asserts  our  Lord's  pre-ezistent  Sci^a.  It  foUows  thst
the  restrictive  epithets  fi6vov  &\ridiv6v  must  be  held  to  be  exclusive,  not  of
the  Son,  but  of  false  gods,  or  creatures  external  to  the  Divine  Essence.
See  Estius  in  loc.    Trench,  Synonyms  of  N.  T.,  p.  25,  §  viii.

*  St.  John  ill.  14:  {f^ud^vai  8ci  rhy  Tihv  rod  &y$p^irov.  Ibid.  viii.  28,
xii.  33.

'  Ibid.  xii.  33 :  iX-fiXvOcp  fi  &pa  Xva  Bo^ourOp  6  Vths  rod  dvdpt&wov.  Ibid,
xiii.  31.

'  Gf.  Beuss,  Th^ol.  Chr^t.  ii.  456 ;  although  the  statements  of  this  writer
cannot  be  adopted  without  much  qualification.

^  On  the  authorship  of  the  three  Epistles,  see  Alford,  Gk.  Test.  v(J.  ifn
Prol.,  chaps.  5,  6,  and  Westcott,  Epistles  of  St.  John,  p.  liii.  ff.  See  too
Appendix,  note  F.  ^  I  St.  John  i.  1-3.

i  Ibid.  V.  1 3 :  6  tx»v  rhv  tihp  $x^t  r^v  C«^»''  ^  M^  ^X«''  '»'*»'  *^*^''  '*"o«'  ®«»
r^v  C^^v  oi/K  Ix^t*

k  Ibid.  ver.  11 :  ical  afirri  iariv  ^  fiaorvpia  (i.e.  the  revealed  doctrine
resting  on  a  Divine  authority)  Srt  (wii^  tudnnop  tZwKtv  ^fuy  6  9^s,  koL  a9nf
17  (ooii  iy  rf  Tt{i  avrov  iffriy,

[lecte.


Christology  of  St.  yohns  First  Epistle.     241

Kighteousness  and  Love,  it  must  be^tbrough  communion  with
His  Divine  Son.  Thus  all  practically  depends  upon  the  attitude
of  the  soul  towards  the  Son.  Accordingly,  *  whosoever  denieth
the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father  ^ ; '  while  on  the  other
hand,  whosoever  sincerely  and  in  practice  acknowledges  the  Son
of  God  in  His  historical  manifestation,  enjoys  a  true  communion
with  the  Life  of  God.  *  Whosoever  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is
the  Son  of  God,  Gk>d  dwelleth  in  him  and  he  in  God  ™.'

St.  John  constantly  teaches  that  the  Christian's  work  in  this
state  of  probation  is  to  conquer  *  the  world  »*.'  It  is,  in  other
words,  to  fight  successfully  against  that  view  of  life  which
ignores  God,  against  that  complex  system  of  attractive  moral
evil  and  specious  intellectual  falsehood,  which  is  marshalled  and
organized  by  the  great  enemy  of  God,  and  which  permeates  and
inspires  non-Christianized  society.  The  world's  force  is  seen
especially  in  *  the  lust  of  the  flesl]^  in  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  in
the  pride  of  life.'     These  three  forms  of  concupiscence  manifest

^  I  St.  John  ii.  as  :  o&r<$s  ^(ttiv  b  durtxp^rros^  6  dpvo6fi€yos  rhv  TlaT4pa  K<d
rbr  TUv.  a  Humanitarian  might  have  urged  that  it  was  posedble  to  deny  the
Son,  while  confessing  the  Father.  But  St.  John,  on  the  around  that  the
Son  is  the  Only  and  the  Adequate  Manifestation  of  the  Fa&er,  denies  this :
vas  6  apvolfievos  tow  Ti6y  oh^h  r6v  Tlartpa  lx«.

*  Ibid.  iv.  15 :  hs  tttf  6fio\oyfi(rp  Uri  *Ii}<rovj  i<mv  6  Tl6s  rod  Btov,  6  St6s
iv  ahr^  f^^vfi,  koI  ahrds  iy  ry  8ey.

°  Ibid.  ii.  15 :  idy  ris  dyair^  rhv  K6(riJiov,  oIk  i(mv  ^  dydirti  tow  Uarpbs  4y
tAr^,  Compare  Martensen,  Christl.  Dogmat.  §  96 :  *  If  we  consider  the
effects  of  the  Fall  upon  the  course  of  historical  development,  not  only  in  the
case  of  individuals  but  of  the  race  collectively,  the  term  "world"  {KSfffios)
bears  a  special  meaning  different  from  that  which  it  would  have,  were
the  development  of  humanity  normal.  The  cosmical  principle  having  been
emancipated  by  the  Fall  from  its  due  subjection  to  the  Spirit,  and  invested
^th  a  false  indep^idence,  and  the  universe  of  creation  having  obtained
with  man  a  higher  importance  than  really  attaches  to  it,  the  historical
development  of  the  world  has  become  one  in  which  the  advance  of  the
kingdom  of  God  is  retarded  and  hindered.  The  created  universe  has,  in
a  relative  sense,  life  in  itself,  including,  as  it  does,  a  system  of  powers,
ideas,  and  aims,  tohich  possess  a  relative  value.  This  relative  indepen-
dence,  which  ought  to  be  subservient  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  has  become
a  fallen  **  world-autonomy ."  Hence  arises  the  scriptural  expression  "this
world"  (6  Kdfffxos  oZros).  By  this  expression  the  Bible  conveys  the  idea
that  it  regards  the  world  not  only  ontologically  but  in  its  definite  and
actual  state,  the  state  in  which  it  has  been  since  the  Fall.  "This
world"  means  the  world  content  with  itself,  in  its  own  independence,
its  own  glory;  the  world  which  disowns  its  dependence  on  Gk)d  as  its
Creator.  "This  world"  regards  itself,  not  as  the  Krln-is,  but  only  as  the
K6(rixos,  as  a  system  of  glory  and  beauty  which  has  life  in  itself,  and  can
give  life.  The  historic^  embodiment  of  "this  world"  is  heathendom,
which  honoureth  not  GkKl  as  God.'
V]  B


242     Ckrislology  of  Si.  yohns  First  Epistle.  ,

the  inner  life  of  the  worl^ " ;  if  the  Christian  would  reMrt  and
beat  them  back,  he  must  have  a  strong  faith,  a  laith  in  a  Divine
Saviour.  '  Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but  he  that
believeth  that  Jeaua  is  the  Son  of  GodPf  This  faith,  which
introduces  the  sonl  to  communion  with  Gkid  in  Light,  attamed
through  communion  with  Hi"  Blessed  Son,  exhibits  tbe  world
in  its  true  colours.  The  soul  spurns  the  world  ae  she  clii^
belieriugly  to  the  Divine  Son.

St.  John's  picture  of  Chriat's  work  in  tbis  first  Epistle,  wd
especially  his  pointed  and  earnest  opposition  to  the  specific
heresy  of  Cerinthuai,  leads  ua  up  to  tbe  culminating  statement  ,
that  Jesus  Himself  is  the  true  Ood  and  the  Eternal  Life'.
Throughout  this  Epistle  the  Apostle  has  been  writing  \a  those
'  who  believe  on  the  Name  of  the  Son  of  God,'  that  is  to  say,  m
the  Divine  Nature  of  Jesus  which  the  verbal  symbol  guards  snd

<■  I  St.  John  ii.  16:    nas  ri  ti  rfi  KiiiTfifi,  h  i-witu/tla  t^s  irajHAs,  ml  4    .
irtSofLla  T&v  0(p9ah,i5,v,  ical  i]  oAafavcla  rau  Alini,  iAk  fimv  U  rov  IlaT^>
ikx:  Ik  ■x^od  <6a^  tori.  ^   _       I

y  Ibid.  V.  4,  S ;  aSn)  IrrrXr  n  riict  V  I'lirfiTIwo  riy  K6i!)iov,  i)  wIoTU  w"*^
tIs  laTiv  i  riniir  rhr  Kitr/xor,  tl  nit  6  TiffTeiioty  Sri  'lijooSi  ^DTi>i  6  Till  "i

1  Speciallv  I  S6.  John  iv.  1,  3,  where  the  Apoatle'e  words  coDtvn  >
doabU  antithesiB  to  the  CerinthiiLn  gnosis,  which  taught  that  tbe  Sia
Christ  entered  into  the  Man  Jesus  at  His  baptiHm,  and  remained  willi
Him  nntil  His  Passion.  See  pp.  aaj,  134.  St.  John  aaaerta  in  oppo-
aition  (i)  that  Jeaua  and  the  Christ  aie  one  and  the  Eame  Person,  {i)
that  the  one  Lord  Jeans  Christ  came  'in'  not  'into  the  flesh.'  He
did  not  descend  into  an  slread}'  existing  man,  bnt  He  appeared  dottied
in  Human  Nature.     See  the  exhaustive  note  of  Ebrard,  Die  Briefe  >!«-

'  I  St.  John  V.  jo:  bItSs  tiTTw  i  i^TiBiri!  Sfhs,  Koi  ti  M  m'lSpiDt.  Aft«
having  distin^iehed  the  a\n0iviJsirom  His  Yi'ds,  St.  John,  bv  a  cbaraoteriilK
turn,  simply  identifies  the  Son  with  tlie  iWSiri!  e«(s.  To  refer  this  kd-
tence  to  the  Father,  Who  has  been  twice  called  i  i\!)eiyi!,  would  be  on-
meaning  repetition.  Moreover  the  previous  sentence  declared,  not  th»t  "«
are  in  God  as  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  but  that  we  are  in  God  as  being  id
His  Son  JesuB  Christ.  This  statement  is  justified  when  dutoj  is  referred  to
Xi0.  As  to  the  article  before  aX-tiSirds,  it  has  the  effect  of  stating,  nut
merely  Wliat,  but  Who  our  Lord  is;  it  says  not,  Christ  is  Divine,  brt.
Cbrist  is  God.    This  does  not  really  go  beyond  what  the  Apostle  bu

.1 — J !j  .!,„_.  .k.  A  <y„,  ^t  the  banning  of  this  Epiatle.    To  object

i  interpretation  cbGcures  the  distinction  betvFen
B  inaconrate ;  St.  John  does  not  say.  This  is  tlie
ae  God.  'O  (Uije.fii  &f6s  is  the  Divine  Essenw,
es.  The  Apoatio  does  not  enter  upon  the  question
e  Father  within  the  Divine  EsBenoe.  Our  berog
upon  our  being  in  Christ,  and  St.  John  denciffl
at  Christ  ib  the  true  God  Himself.  See  St.  Ai>-
St.  Cjril.  Tliea.  p.  30a ;  Waterland,  W1u.,il.  13a


Union  of  tenderness  with  decision  in  Si.  yohn.  243

suggests.  Throughout  this  Epistle  St.  John's  object  has  been
to  convince  believers  that  by  that  faith  they  had  the  Eternal
Life,  and  to  force  them  to  be  true  to  It  8.

In  each  of  St.  John's  Epistles*  we  encounter  that  special
temper,  at  once  so  tender  and  so  peremptory,  which  is  an  ethical
corollary  to  belief  in  an  Incarnate  God.      St.  John  has  been
named  the  Apostle  of  the  Absolute.     Those  who  would  concede
to  Christianity  no  higher  dignity  than  that  of  teaching  a  relative
and  provisional  truth,  will  fail  to  find  any  countenance  for  their
doctrine  in  the  New  Testament  Scriptures.     But  nowhere  will
they  meet  with  a  more  earnest   opposition  to  it  than  in  the
pages  of  the  writer  who  is  pre-eminently  the  Apostle  of  charity.
St.  John  preaches  the  Christian  creed  as  the  one  absolute  cer-
tainty.    The  Christian  faith  might  have  been  (mly  relatively
tme,  if  it  had  reposed  upon  the  word  of  a  human  messenger.
But  St.  John  specially  insists  upon  the  fact  that  God  has  re-
vealed Himself,  not  merely  through,  but  in,  Christ.     The  Abso-
lute Beligion  is  introduced  by  a  Self-revelation  of  the  Absolute
Being  Himself.     God  has  appeared,  God  has  spoken ;   and  the
Christian  faith  is   the  result.      St.  John  then  does  not  treat
Christianity  as  a  phase  in  the  history,  even  of  true  religion,  nor
as  a  religion  containing  elements  of  truth,  even  though  it  were
more  true  than  any  religion  which- had  preceded  it.     St.  John
proclaims  that  *  we  "  Christians  "  are  in  Him  that  is  True.'    Not
to  admit  that  Jesus  Christ  has  come  in  the  Flesh,  is  to  be  a  de-
ceiver and  an  antichrist.     St.  John  presents  Christianity  to  the
soul  as  a  religion  which  must  be  its  all,  if  it  is  not  really  to  be
worse  than  nothing  J^.     The  opposition  between  truth  and  error,
between  the  friends  and  the  foes  of  Christ,  is  for  St.  John  as
sharp  and  trenchant  a  thing  as  the  contrast  between  light  and

*  1  St.  John  V.  13:  ToCra  tr^ptx^o.  h\u.v  [toIj  •Ki<rr€iov<riv  €is  t^  tvoyia  rov
Tm  rov  Oeov,  Rec.]  %va  etSijT*  Srt  (u^v  Ix*''*  oX^viov,  koL  %va  iriarciriTt  [pi
^ictniovr^s,  Tisch.]  €ls  'rhij^voua  rov  Tlov  rov  ©eoO.

*  In  St.  John's  second  Epistle  observe  (i)  the  association  of  Christ  with
the  Father  as  the  source  of  Xf^P^h  ^A.€oj,  and  flp-hmi  (ver.  3) ;  (a)  the
denunciation  of  the  Gerinthian  doctrine  as  anti-Christian  (ver.  7) ;  (3)  the
significant  statement  that  a  false  progress  (6  wpodycov,  A.B.,  not  as  rec.
^  vapa^aivav)  which  did  not  rest  in  the  true  Apostolic  5t8ox^  rod  Xpi<rrov,
would  forfeit  all  communion  with  God.  We  know  Him  only  in  Christ
His  Blessed  Son,  and  to  reject  Christianity  is  to  reject  the  only  true  Theism
(vera.  8,  9).

*  I  St.  John  ii.  21 :  oIk  liypcx^a  hyiiv  2^rt  obK  oXSarc  rijv  iA^Ociai^,  &XX'  5ri
oWore  avr^v,  koI  $ri  ircat  if^cv^o;  4k  t^s  iiXriQ^ias  ovk  iaru  Ibid.  T,  10 :  h  fi^
^urrfiwv  ry  ©f y  i^eitrrnv  ir§iroivK€y  ahrdv*


244  "SV.  yohns  temper  a  product  of  his  doctrine.

darkness,  between  life  and  death  x.  This  is  the  temper  of  a  man
who  will  not  enter  the  public  baths  along  with  the  heretic  who
has  dishonoured  his  Lord  7.  This  is  the  spirit  of  the  teacher
who  warns  his  flock  to  beware  of  eating  with  a  propagator  of
false  doctrine,  and  of  bidding  him  Gk>d  speed,  lest  they  should
partake  of  his  *  evil  deeds  2.'  Yet  this  is  also  the  writer  whose
pages,  beyond  any  other  in  the  New  Testament,  beam  with  the
purest,  tenderest  love  of  humanity.  Side  by  side  with  this
resolute  antagonism  to  dogmatic  error,  St.  John  exhibits  and
inculcates  an  enthusiastic  affection  for  humankind  as  such,  which
our  professed  philanthropists  could  not  rivals.  The  man  who
loves  not  his  brother  man,  whatever  be  his  spiritual  estimate  of
himself  abideth  in  death  ^.  No  divorce  is  practically  possible
between  the  first  and  the  second  parts  of  charity:  the  man  who
loves  his  God  must  love  his  brother  also  <>.  Love  is  the  moral
counterpart  of  intellectual  light  ^.

It  is  a  modem  fashion  to  represent  these  two  tempers,  the
dogmatic  and  the  philanthropic,  as  necessarily  opposed.  This
representation  indeed  is  not  even  in  harmony  with  modem  ex-
perience ;  but  in  St.  John  it  meets  with  a  most  energetic  con-
tradiction. St.  John  is  at  .once  earnestly  dogmatic  and  earnestly
philanthropic;  for  the  Licamation  has  taught  him  both  the
preciousness  of  man  and  thopreciousness  of  truth.  The  Eternal
Word,  incarnate  and  dying  for  the  truth,  inspires  St.  John  to

*  I  St.  John  ii.  15 !  ^<Cv  rtj  kymt^  rhv  kSciulov  oIk  ttmv  ^  iydxri  rod  TlcerfAs
hf  (dn^.  Ibid.  ver.  19 :  ^{  rifiav  i^rjKBoy  [scil.  ol  avrixpi<rroi]  AAA*  ottK  ^trcv  ^
flfiMV  €l  yhp  ^<ra»  4^  yifiStv,  fiefi€jrfiKtt(rcty  tiy  fitO^  tiiacov'  dAA*  ?va  ^xxMtpttOiknp
iri  ohK  €la\  irdirres  i^  rifiuv.  Ibid.  ver.  32 :  oZt6s  i<my  6  iarrixpurros,  i
iLpvo6fitvos  rhy  Ilar4pa  Ktd  rhv  Tl6v*

7  St.  IrenseuB,  adv.  Hser.  iii.  3,  4 :  koI  cMv  ol  hnfKo^cs  oJrrov  (rod  IToXv*
xdpirov)  Bri  *lwdvyris  6  rod  Kuplov  /imiOtjt^jj,  iv  ry  'FApdirtp  Topcvdels  Kovaofffhit
jcol  iZdiV  t<rw  KiipipBoVf  i^iiXaro  rod  fiaKcweiov  fx^  \ovffd^€yos  &AA*  iirftirinf,
*^^wfjL€Vf  fi^  Kcii  rh  ^aXayeiov  ovfAir€(rpf  Mov  tyros  KriplvBou,  rov  r^s
itKriBtias  ix^pov.*    Gf.  Bus.  Hist.  Ecd.  iii.  28.

■  a  St.  John  10,  11 :  ^  ris  t^pxtrai  vphs  ^fiaSt*Kai  rairrjy  r^y  Bi^x^poh
<p4p€tj  fjL^  \c^xfidyer€  ainhv  els  olKlay,  koH,  xo^P^t''  ain^  fiij  \4yer€'  6  yhp  \4yw
auTf)  x^^^^^^f  KoiyuyeT  ro7s  ipyois  cdnov  rois  Tov7\pots»

*  I  St.  John  iii.  n.

*  Ibid.  ver.  14 :  ruitts  otHofiey  Uri  fierafie^'fiKOfity  ix  rod  Oavdrov  tls  iV
(to^y,  Srt  iyaraficy  rohs  iJ6e\<l>o6s'  6  ju^  &ymrwy  rhy  AdcA^bv  ii4yei  ip  rf
Bavdrtp,

*  Ibid,  It.  20,  21 :  6  fi^  kytvirav  rhv  A^cA^bv  ahrod  %y  Ic^poicc,  rb*  Ocir
%y  ohx  ^^po-Ke  vas  S6varai  iyarray ;  Kcd  ra^rrjy  r^y  iyro\^y  Ixoficv  ix*  cdtrodf
%va  6  kymray  rhv  ^ehv  irycnr^  Ka\  rhy  &li€\<l>hy  cArod,

^  Ibid.  ii.  9,  10 :  6  \4ynv  iv  r^  <f>wr\  etycu,  K<d  rhy  iJ(€\<phy  ahrov  fuffvy,
iy  T$  aKorl<f  iarly  lo»$  Hftru   6  &yaw&y  rhy  iJ8e\<f>hy  a^od  4y  r$  <pcrr\  ii(nu

[lbct.


Divinity  of  yesus  Christ  in  the  Apocalypse.  245

guard  it  with  apostolic  chivalry;  but  also,  this  revelation  of  the
Heart  of  God  melts  him  into  tenderness  towards  the  race  which
Jesus  has  loved  so  well  \  To  St.  John  a  lack  of  love  for  men
seems  sheer  dishonour  to  the  love  of  Christ,  And  the  heresy
which  mutilates  the  Person  or  denies  the  work  of  Christ,  does
not  present  itself  to  St.  John  as  purely  speculative  misfortune,
as  clumsy  negation  of  £9kct,  as  barren  intellectual  error.  Heresy
is  with  this  Apostle  a  crime  against  charity;  not  only  because
heresy  breeds  divisions  among  brethren,  but  yet  more  because  it
kills  out  from  the  souls  of  men  that  blessed  and  prolific  Truth,
which,  when  sincerely  believed,  cannot  but  fill  the  heart  with
love  to  God  and  to  man.  St.  John  writes  as  one  whose  eyes  had
looked  upon  and  whose  hands  had  handled  the  sensibly  present
form  of  Light  and  Love.  That  close  contact  with  the  Absolute
Truth  Licamate  had  kindled  in  him  a  holy  impatience  of  an-
tagonist error ;  that  felt  glow  of  the  Lifinite  Charity  of  God  had
shed  over  his  whole  character  and  teaching  the  beauty  and
pathos  of  a  tenderness,  which,  as  our  hearts  tell  us  while  we
read  his  pages,  is  not  of  this  world.

2.  This  ethical  reflection  of  the  doctrine  of  God  manifest  in
the  flesh  is  perhaps  mainly  characteristic  of  St.  John's  first
Epistle ;  but  it  is  not  wanting  in  the  Apocalypse  *".  The  repre-
sentation of  the  Person  of  our  Saviour  in  the  Apocalyse  is
independent  of  any  indistinctness  that  may  attach  to  the  in-
terpretation of  the  historical  imagery  of  that  wonderful  book  s.
In  the  Apocalypse,  Christ  is  the  First  and  the  Last;  He  is
the  Alpha  and  the  Omega;  He  is  the  Eternal;  He  is  the
Almighty  h.     He  possesses  tiie  seven  spirits  or  perfections  of

•  1  St.  John  ill.  16 :  iv  tointf  fyv^KOfitp  r^p  kydinjy  (i.  e.  abtolnte  charity),
on  iKftyos  Oirhp  rifiwv  r^v  ^ux^y  ainov  l(b}Ke*  K<d  ^/itU  6<f>fi\ofi€V  i/w^p  rHw
iit\^&y  riu  4^x^  riBivai,  Ibid.  iv.  9 :  iv  ro^^  i^aptp^^  ^  iydini  rod
®fo9  ip  fifup,  5t«  rhp  Tihp  abrov  rhp  fiovoytpr^  iiT4ara\K€y  6  Sfhs  •is  rhv
KiiTfioy^  %va  ffiffuficv  5t*  ahrov.

'  On  the  Johannean  authorship  of  the  Apocalypse,  see  Alford,  Gk.  Test,
vd.  iv.  pp.  198-239;  Wait's  remarks  in  the  pref.  to  Hug's  Introduction,
PP- 145-177 ;  Schaff,  Apoet.  Church,  ii.  89 ;  Loathes,  Witness  of  St.  John
toChrist,  pp.  134,  352.

s  In  the  Epistles  to  the  Angels  of  the  Seven  Churches,  the  language
lued  by  our  Lord  is  morally  inconsistent  with  any  conception  of  His  Person
but  the  highest:  Rev.  ii.  1-7,  8-1 1,  12,  13,  14,  16,  19,  20,  21-26,  28,
iii.  1-5,  7-13,  14-22.  Cf.  also  the  allusion  to  the  6py^  rod  dpWoi;,  vi.  16,
with  Ps.  vi.  4,  vii.  6,  xxi.  9;  Is.  ix.  19,  Ii.  17;  Jer.  iv.  8,  26,  xii.  13;
Lon.  i.  12 ;  Bom.  i.  18,  etc.

^  Bev.  i.  8,  iy&  tl/u  rb  A  icai  t6  CI:  Ibid.  6  &y,  teai  d  J^p,  teal  6  ipxafAtpos,
i  mPTO/cpdrojp :  xxi,  6,  xxii.  13,  dpx^  «ai  riKos.


246  Divinity  ofyesus  Christ  in  the  Apocalypse.

God*.  He  has  a  mysterious  Name  which  no  man  knows  Have
He  Himself  i.  His  Name  is  written  on  the  foreheads  of  the
faithful  J^;  He  is  the  giver  of  grace  and  victory  1.  In  the
Apocalypse,  His  Name  is  called  the  Word  of  God"i;  as  in
the  first  Epistle  He  is  the  Word  of  Life,  and  in  the  Gospel
the  Word  in  the  beginning.  As  He  rides  through  heaven  on
His  errand  of  triumph  and  of  judgment,  a  Name  is  written  on
His  vesture  and  on  His  thigh ;  He  is  *  King  of  kings,  and  Lord
of  lords  °.*  St.  John  had  leaned  upon  His  breast  at  supper  in
the  familiarity  of  trusted  friendship.  St.  John  sees  Him  but  for
a  moment  in  His  supramundane  glory,  and  forthwith  falls  at  His
feet  as  dead  o.  In  the  Apocalypse  especially  we  are  confronted
with  the  startling  truth  that  the  Lord  of  the  unseen  world  is
none  other  than  the  Crucified  One  p.  The  armies  of  heaven
follow  Him,  clothed  as  He  is  in  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood,  at
once  the  symbol  of  His  Passion  and  of  His  victory  <i.  But  of  all
the  teachings  of  the  Apocalypse  on  this  subject,  perhaps  none  is
so  frdl  of  significance  as  the  representation  of  Christ  in  His
wounded  Humanity  upon  the  throne  of  the  Most  High.  The
Lamb,  as  It  had  been  slain,  is  in  the  very  centre  of  the  court  oi
heaven  *•;  He  receives  the  prostrate  adoration  of  the  highest
intelligences  around  the  throne  ^ ;  and  as  the  Object  of  that
solemn,  uninterrupted,  awful  worship  *,  He  is  associated  with  the
Father,  as  being  in  truth  one  with  the  Almighty,  Uncreated,
Supreme  God  ^.

'  Key.  iii.  I :  h  tx'^v  t&  htrh.  xveifiara  rod  9«ou.

J  Ibid.  xix.  1 2  :  ^x""  Svofia  ycypafifi^vov  t  ob^As  ol^ev  tl  fi^  ahrSs*

^  Ibid.  iii.  1 2,  where  rh  tvoixd.  fxou  is  paralleled  with  rh  ivofjLu  rod  Ocov

U.OV,  although  our  Lord  is  speaking  as  Man.     Cf.  ii.  17.
'  Ibid.  xxii.  21,  iii.  ai.

™  Ibid.  xix.  13 :  KoAcTrat  t^  6vofxa  cArov  *0  A6yos  rov  &€ov,
"  Ibid.  ver.  16 :  ^x**  ^^  ^^  ifidrtov  Kdl  4ir\  rhv  titiphv  ahrov  rh  6voftayt-

ypofifxevoiff  BacrtAfvs  fiaaiXeotv  jccU  Kvpios  Kuplwv,     Cf.  I  Tim.  yi.  15.

*  Ibid.  i.  17  5  2t€  elSoy  avrhvt  lir€(ra  vphs  rods  irS^as  ahrov  &s  vcKpSs.

P  Ibid.  xii.  10 :  ri  4^ov<ria  rod  Xpurrov,  Ibid.  xiii.  8 :  rh  filfi\ioy  rijs  (mis
rod  apviov  rod  4(r<f>ayfA4yov.

«  Ibid.  xix.  13,  14.     Cf.  Is.  Ixiii.  i.

'  Rev.  V.  6 :  iv  fiecq)  rod  Qp6vov  ,  , .  *  Apviov  ^arriKhs  &s  i(r<payfi4vov,

■  Ibid.  V.  8 :  t^  T4<ra'apa  (aa  KoUt  ol  €iKo<rir4ff<rapes  irpea^vrepoi  Urtffor
4vd»mov  rod  'Apviov.  Cf.  i.  I :  rod  dyy4\ov  idnod.  The  Angel  was  His
property;  cf.  xxii,  16.

*  Ibid.  ver.  1 2  :  &^t6v  4(m  rh  *Apvtop  rh  4<r<l>ayfx4vov  \a$€7v  r^v  Sivaiuv  leal
irXovrov  Koi  (ro<l>lav  kc^  iffxhv  koX  rifi^v  jcol  S6^av  koL  €v\oylav»

*  Ibid.  V.  1 3 :  r^  Kad7iix4v<i>  4^1  rod  6p6vov  Koi  ry  *ApvlQ>  ri  tiXoyla  /cai  if
rifiTj  Ka\  7}  5(J|a  Koi  rh  Kpdros  els  rohs  cu^vas  rwv  <u(i>vQ>v,  Cf.  Ibid.  xvii.  14:
TO  'Apviov  viicfiffei  avrohs,  3ti  K{>pios  Kvplmv  4<rr\  Km  Bao-iAci/s  iSaoriAeajv.    See

[lect.


The  Christ  of  St.  John  and  of  the  Synoptists.   247

rV.  Whatever,  then,  may  have  been   the  interval  between

the  composition  of  the  Apocalypse  and  that  of  the  fourtli  Gospel,

we  find  in   the  two   documents  one  and  the  same  doctrine,

in  substance  if  not  in  terms,  respecting  our  Lord's  Eternal

Person ;  and  further,  this  doctrine  accurately  corresponds  with

that  of  St.  John's  first  Epistle.     But  it  may  be  asked  whether

St^  John,  thus  consistent  with  himself  upon  a  point  of  such

capital  importance,  is  really  in  harmony  with  the  teaching  of  the

earlier  Evangelists  1     It  is  granted  that  between  St.  John  and

the  three  first  Gospels  there  is  a  broad  difference  of  characteristic

phraseology,  of  the  structure,  scene,  and  matter  of  the  several

narratives.     Does  this  diflference   strike  deeper  *  still  %     Is  the

Christology  of  the  son  of  Zebedee  fundamentally  distinct  from

that  of  his  predecessors  ?     Can  we  recognise  the  Christ  of  the

earlier  Evangelists  in  the  Christ  of  St.  John  %

Now  it  is  obvious  to  remark  that  the  difference  between  the
three  first  Evangelists  and  the  fourth,  in  their  respective  repre-
sentations of  the  Person  of  our  Lord,  is  in  one  sense,  at  any
rate,  a  real  difference.  There  is  a  real  difference  in  the  point  of
view  of  the  writers,  although  the  truth  before  them  is  one  and
the  same.  Each  from  his  ovm  stand-point,  the  first  three  Evan-
gelists seek  and  pourtray  separate  aspects  of  the  Human  side  of
the  Life  of  Jesus.  They  set  forth  His  perfect  Manhood  in  all  Its
regal  grace  and  majesty,  in  all  Its  Human  sympathy  and  beauty,
in  all  Its  healing  and  redemptive  virtue.  In  one  Gospel  Christ
is  the  true  Fulfiler  of  the  Law,  and  withal,  by  a  touching  con-
trast, the  Man  of  Sorrows.  In  another  He  is  the  Lord  of  Nature
and  the  Leader  of  men ;  all  seek  Him ;  all  yield  to  Him ;  He
moves  forward  in  the  independence  of  majestic  strength.  In  a
third  He  is  active  and  all-embracing  Compassion;  He  is  the
Shepherd,  Who  goes  forth  as  for  His  Life-work,  to  seek  the
sheep  that  was  lost;  He  is  the  Good  Samaritan ▼.  Thus  the
obeience,  the  force,  and  the  tenderness  of  His  Humanity  are
successively  depicted ;  but  room  is  left  for  another  aspect  of  His
Life,  differing  from  these  and  yet  in  harmony  with  them.  If  we
may  dare  so  to  speak,  the  synoptists  approach  their  great  Sub-
ject from  without,  St.  John  unfolds  it  from  within.  St.  John
has  been  guided  to  pierce  the  veil  of  sense ;  he  has  penetrated

also  the  remarkable  expression  zx.  6,  t(rovTa\  Upets  rod  &€ov  koI  rod  Xpurrov,
which  clearly  associates  Christ  with  the  Father  in  the  h^'ghest  honour  which
man  can  render  to  God,  namely,  the  offering  of  sacrifice;   zxi.  22,  23,
xxii.  I,  2.
^  Cf.  Holtzmann,  Die  Synoptischen  Evangelien.


248  The  Christ  of  St.  John  and  of  the  Synoptists.

£ar  beyond  the  Human  features,  nay  even  beyond  the  Human
thought  and  Human. will  of  the  Eedeemer,  into  the  central
depths  of  His  Eternal  Personality.  He  sets  forth  the  Life  of
our  Lord  and  Saviour  on  the  eartl^  not  in  any  one  of  the  aspects
which  belong  to  It  as  Human,  but  as  being  the  consistent  and
adequate  expression  of  the  glory  of  a  Divine  Person,  manifested
to  men  under  a  visible  form.  The  miracles  described,  the  dis-
courses selected,  the  plan  of  the  narrative,  are  all  in  harmony
with  the  point  of  view  of  the  fourth  Evangelist,  and  it  at  once
explains  and  accounts  for  them.

Plainly,  my  brethren,  two  or  more  observers  may  approach
the  same  object  from  different  points  of  view,  and  may  be  even
entirely  absorbed  with  distinct  aspects  of  it ;  and  yet  it  does  not
follow  that  any  one  of  these  aspects  is  necessarily  at  variance
with  the  others.  Still  less  does  it  follow  that  one  aspect  alone
represents  the  truth.  Socrates  does  not  lose  his  identity,  because
he  is  so  much  more  to  Plato  than  he  is  to  Xenophon.  Each  of
yourselves  may  be  studied  at  the  same  time  by  the  anatomist
and  by  the  psychologist.  Certainly  the  aspect  of  your  complex
nature  which  the  one  study  insists  upon,  is  su£&ciently  remote
from  the  aspect  which  presents  itseK  to  the  other,  Li  the  eyes
of  one  observer  you  are  purely  spirit ;  you  are  thought,  affection,
memory,  will,  imagination.  As  he  analyses  you  he  is  almost  in-
different  to  the  material  body  in  which  your  higher  nature  is
encased,  upon  which  it  has  left  its  mark,  and  through  which  it
expresses  itself.  But  to  the  other  observer  this  your  material
body  is  everything.  Its  veins  aind  muscles,  its  pores  and  nerves,
its  colour,  its  proportions,  its  ftinctions,  absorb  his  whole  atten-
tion. He  is  nervously  impatient  of  any  speculations  about  you
which  cannot  be  tested  by  his  instruments.  Yet  is  there  any
real  ground  for  a  petty  jealousy  between  the  one  study  of  your
nature  and  the  other  %  Is  not  each  student  a  servant  whom  true
science  will  own  as  doing  her  work  1  May  not  each  illustrate,
supplement,  balance,  and  check  the  conclusions  of  the  other?
Must  you  necessarily  view  yourselves  as  being  purely  mind,  if
you  wlU  not  be  persuaded  that  you  are  merely  matter  %  Must
you  needs  be  materialists,  if  you  will  not  become  the  most  tran-
scendental of  mystics  %  Or  will  not  a  little  physiology  usefully
restrain  you  from  a  fanciful  supersensualism,  while  a  study  of
the  immaterial  side  of  your  being  forbids  you  to  listen,  even
for  a  moment,  to  the  brutalizing  suggestions  of  consistent  ma-
terialism 1

These  questions  admit  of  easy  reply;   each  half  of  the  truth

[lect.


The  title  'Son  of  God  in  the  Synoptists.     249

is  practically  no  less  than  speculatively  necessary  to  the  other.
Nor  is  it  otherwise  with  the  general  relation  of  the  first  three
Gospels  to  the  fourth.  Yet  it  should  he  added  that  the  Synop-
tists do  teach  the  Divine  Nature  of  Jesus,  although  in  the  main
His  Sacred  Manhood  is  most  prominent  in  their  pages.  More-
over the  fourth  Gospel,  as  has  been  noticed,  abundantly  insists
upon  Christ's  true  Humanity.  Had  we  not  possessed  the  fourth
Gospel,  we  should  have  known  much  less  of  one  side  of  His  Hu-
man Character  than  we  actually  know.  For  in  it  we  see  Christ
engaged  in  eameBt  conflict  with  the  worldly  and  unbeUeving
spirit  of  His  time,  while  surrounded  by  the  little  company  of  His
disciples,  and  devoting  HimseK  to  them  even  *  unto  the  end.'  The
aspects  of  our  Lord's  Humanity  which  are  thus  brought  into
prominence  would  have  remained,  comparatively  speaking,  in
the  shade,  had  the  last  Gospel  not  been  written.  But  that
'  symmetrical  conception'  of  our  Lord's  Character,  which  modem
critics  have  remarked  upon,  as  especially  distinguishing  the
fourth  Gospel,  is  to  be  referred  to  the  manner  in  which  St.  John
lays  bare  the  Eternal  Personality  of  Jesus.  For  in  It  the  scattered
rays  of  glory  which  light  up  tiie  earlier  Evangelists  find  their
point  of  unity.  By  laying  such  persistent  stress  upon  Christ's
Godhead,  as  the  true  seat  of  His  Personality,  the  fourth  Gospel
is  doctrinally  complemental  (how  marvellous  is  the  complement !)
to  the  other  three ;  and  yet  these  three  are  so  full  of  suggestive
implications  that  they  practically  anticipate  the  higher  teaching
of  the  fourth.

I.  For  in  the  synoptic  Gospels  Christ  is  called  the  Son  of
God  in  a  higher  sense  than  the  ethical  or  than  the  theocratic.
Li  the  Old  Testament  an  anointed  king  or  a  saintly  prophet  is
a  son  of  God.  Christ  is  not  merely  one  among  many  sons.  He
is  the  Only,  the  Well-beloved  Son  of  the  Father  x.  His  relation-
ship to  the  Father  is  unshared  by  any  other,  and  is  absolutely
unique.  It  is  indeed  probable  that  of  our  Lord's  contemporaries
many  applied  to  Him  the  title  ^  Son  of  God '  only  as  an  official
designation  of  the  Messiah;  while  others  used  it  to  acknowledge
that  surpassing  and  perfect  character  which  proclaimed  Jesus
of  Nazareth  to  be  the  One  Son,  who  had  appeared  on  earth,

*  Compare  the  Toioe  from  heaven  at  our  Lord's  baptism,  oln6%  iarty  6
Tt6s  fiov  6  ityamirU,  St.  Matt,  iii- J7>  repeated  at  His  transfiguration  (Ibid,
zvii.  5);  the  profound  sense  of  Bjs  question  to  the  Pharisees,  rlyos  vi6s
4<rrty;  [so.  6  Xpurrhs]  (Ibid.  xxii.  41).  And  that  as  the  Tih  rod  Btov,
jChrist  is  superhuman,  seems  to  be  implied  in  the  questions  ci  the  tempter
(Ibid.  iv.  3,  6 ;  St.  Luke  iv.  3,  9).


250     Significance  of  the  history  of  the  Nativity.


worthily  showing  forth  the  moral  perfections  of  our  Heavenly
Father.  But  the  official  and  ethical  senses  of  the  term  are
rooted  in  a  deeper  sense,  which  St.  Luke  connects  with  it  at  the
beginning  of  his  Gospel.  *The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon
thee/  so  ran  the  angel-message  to  the  Virgin-mother,  *  and  the
power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  thee :  therefore  also  that
Holy  Thing  Which  shall  be  bom  of  thee  shall  be  called  the  Son
of  God  y.'  This  may  be  contrasted  with  the  prediction  respecting
St.  John  the  Baptist,  that  he  should  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost
even  from  his  mother's  womb ».  St.  John  then  is  in  existence
before  his  sanctification  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  but  Christ's  Hu-
manity Itself  is  formed  by  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  In
like  manner  St.  Matthew's  record  of  the  angel's  words  asserts
that  our  Lord  was  conceived  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  *.
But  St.  Matthew's  reference  to  the  prophetic  name  Enunanuel^
points  to  the  frdl  truth,  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  as  being
of  the  Divine  Essence.

2.  Indeed  the  whole  history  of  the  Nativity  and  its  attendant
circumstances  guards  the  narratives  of  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Luke®
against  the  inroads  of  Humanitarian  interpreters.  Our  Lord's
Birth  of  a  Virgin-mother  is  as  irreconcileable  with  'an  Ebionitic
as  it  is  with  a  Docetic  conception  of  the  entrance  of  the  God-man
into  connexion  with  humanity^.'     The  worship  of  the  Infant

y  St.  Luke  i.  35,  where  the  abstract  t^  ycwJ^fitvov  S.yiov  points  to  a
superhuman  Being,  so  far  described  indefinitely.  But  His  Birth  results
from  the  ivuTKid^eiv  of  the  S^vctfiis  *Ttlflirrov,  and  He  is  presently  announced
to  be  Tihs  ©eoC.

■  Ibid.  ver.  15  :  Hve^fAaros  'Aylov  TXTjaB^fitrerat  ^ri  iK  KotXlas  firirphs  tdnov.

•  St.  Matt.  i.  30 :  rh  yitp  iv  ai/ry  yetnniOlv  ix  TlveifiarSs  iffriy  *Aylov,

^  Ibid.  ver.  23.  This  prophecy  was  fulfilled  when  our  Lord  was  called
Jesus.     Of.  Pearson  on  the  Creed  (ed.  Oxf.  1847),  art.  ii.  p.  89,  and  note.

^  For  a  vindication  of  these  narratives  against  the  mythical  theory  of
Strauss,  see  Br.  Mill's  Christian  Advocate's  Publications  for  1841,  1844,
reprinted  in  his  work  on  the  *  Mythical  Interpretation.*

^  Martensen,  Christl.  Dogm.  §  39  (Clark's  transl.)  :  '  Christ  is  bom,  not
of  the  will  of  a  man,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh ;  but  the  holy  Will  of  the
Creator  took  the  place  of  the  will  of  man  and  of  the  will  of  the  flesh.  That
is,  the  Creating  Spirit,  Who  was  in  the  beginning,  fulfilled  the  function  of
the  plastic  principle.  Christ  was  bom  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  the  chosen  woman
of  the  chosen  people.  It  was  the  task  of  Israel  to  provide,  not,  as  has  often
been  said,  Christ  Himself,  but  the  mother  of  the  Lord;  to  develope  the
susceptibility  for  Christ  to  a  point  where  it  might  be  able  to  manifest  itself
as  the  profoundest  unity  of  nature  and  spirit— an  unity  which  found  expres-
sion in  the  pure  Virgin.  In  her  the  pious  aspirations  of  Israel  and  of
mankind,  and  their  faith  in  the  promises,  are  centred.  She  is  the  pareet,
point  in  history  and  in  nature,  and  she  therefore  becomes  the  appointed

[LECT.


Significance  of  the  Evangelical  Canticles.     251

Christ,  in  St.  Matthew  by  the  wise  men,  in  St.  Luke  by  the
shepherds  of  Bethlehem,  represents  Jesus  as  the  true  Lord  of
humanity,  whether  Jewish  or  Gentile,  whether  educated  or  un-
lettered. Especially,  noteworthy  are  the  greetings  addressed  to
the  Mother  of  our  Lord  by  heavenly  as  well  as  earthly  visitants.
The  Lord  is  with  her;  she  is  graced  and  blessed  among  women®.
Her  Son  will  be  great;  He  will  be  called  the  Son  of  the  Highest;
His  kingdom  will  have  no  endf.  Elizabeth  echoes  the  angel's
words;  Mary  is  blessed  among  women,  and  the  Fruit  of  her
womb  is  Blessed.  Elizabeth  marvels  that  such  an  one  as  herself
should  be  visited  by  the  Mother  of  her  Lord  8.

The  Evangelical  canticles,  which  we  owe  to  the  third  Gospel,
remarkably  illustrate  the  point  before  us.  They  surround  the
cradle  of  the  Infant  Saviour  with  the  devotional  language  of
ancient  Israel,  now  consecrated  to  the  direct  service  of  the  In-
carnate Lord.  Mary,  the  Virgin-mother,  already  knows  that  all
generations  shall  call  her  blessed;  for  the  Mighty  One  has  done
great  things  unto  her  \  And  as  the  moral  and  social  fruits  of
the  Incarnation  unfold  themselves  before  her  prophetic  eye,  she
proclaims  that  the  promises  to  the  forefathers  are  at  length  ful-
filled, and  that  God,  *  remembering  His  mercy,  hath  holpen  His
servant  Israel  ^.'  Zacharias  rejoices  that  the  Lord  God  of  Israel
has  in  the  new-bom  Saviour  redeemed  His  people '^t  This
Saviour  is  the  Lord,  whose  forerunner  has  been  announced  by
prophecy  1 ;  He  is  the  Day-star  from  on  high,  bringing  a  new
morning  to  those  who  sat  in  the  darkness  and  death-shadows  of

mediimi  for  the  New  Creation.  And  while  we  must  confess  that  this  Virgin
Birth  is  enveloped  in  a  veil  impenetrable  to  physical  reasonings,  yet  we
ftffirm  it  to  be  the  only  one  which  fully  satisfies  the  demands  of  religion
and  theology.  This  article  t>f  our  Creed,  *  conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
bom  of  the  Virgin  Mary,'  is  the  only  sure  defence  against  both  the
Ebionitic  and  the  Docetic  view  of  the  entrance  of  the  Grod-man  into  con-
nexion with  humanity.*

*  St.  Luke  i.  28  :  x*"P*»  k<X*V*'''*"M^'^*  ^  Kvpios  /terA  ttov,  ehXoyrifiivri  ffv
4p  ywai^lv,

'  Ibid,  ver.  33  :  ovros  tl<rrai  fiiyas,  icol  vihs  inlfl^rov  icXriO'fifffTcu,  Ver.  33  :
T^j  BaaiXclas  avroU  ovk  ^<rrai  r4\os»

*  Ibid.  ver.  4a :  €b\oy7}fi4yri  ff^  iv  yvvat^f  koI  evKoyrifievos  d  Kapvhs  rTJs
•totXios  irov,     Ver.  43 :  Kcd  ir6dty  fwi  tovto,  tya  (£\6jf  ri  fiiirrip  rod  Kvplov  fiov

^  Ibid.  ver.  48 :  &irh  rod  vvv  ficucapioviri  fit  Tacai  al  yeveal'  Zri  4iroii\<ri  fxoi
Vi^aXua  6  SvvarSs,

*  Ibid.  vers.  51-55.  ^  Ibid.  ver.  68.

*  Ibid.  i.  69,  Christ  is  the  xipas  irwrnplas.  Ibid.  ver.  76 ;  to  St.  John
it  is  said,  TrpoKopevay  yap  vph  vpoadrirov  Kvpiov,  €TO(/i(£<rat  dSohs  ahrov,  C^
Mai.  iii.  i,  iv.  5.

y]


252  Our  Lord's  teaching  as  reported  bytheSynoptisU

the  world  ™.  Simeon  desires  to  depart  in  peace,  since  his  eyes
have  seen  his  Lord's  Salvation.  The  humble  Babe  Wliom  the
old  man  takes  in  his  arms  belongs  not  to  the  lowly  scenes  of
Bethlehem  and  Nazareth ;  He  is  the  destined  inheritance  of  the
world.  He  is  the  Divine  Saviour ;  all  nations  are  interested  in
His  Birth ;  He  is  to  shed  light  upon  the  heathen  ;  He  is  to  be
the  pride  and  glory  of  the  New  Israel  »*.

The  accounts  then  of  our  Lord*s  Birth  in  two  of  the  synoptic
Evangelists,  as  illustrated  by  the  sacred  songs  of  praise  and
thanksgiving  which  St.  Luke  has  preserved,  point  clearly  to  the
entrance  of  a  superhuman  Being  into  this  our  human  world.
Who  indeed  He  was,  is  stated  more  explicitly  by  St.  John;  but
St.  John  does  not  deem  it  necessary  to  repeat  the  history  of  His
Advent.     The   accounts  of  the  Annunciation  and  of  the  Mi-
raculous Conception  would  not  by  themselves  imply  the  Divinity
of  Christ.    But  they  do  imply  that  Christ  is  superhuman ;  they
harmonize  with  the  kind  of  anticipations  respecting   Christ's
appearance  in  the  world,  which  might  be  created  by  St.  John's
doctrine  of  His  pre-existent  glory.     These  accounts  cannot  be
forced  within  the  limits,  and  made  to  illustrate  the  laws,  of
nature.    But  at  least  St.  John's  narrative  justifies  the  mysteries
of  the  synoptic  Gospels  which  would  be  unintelligible  without
it ;  and  it  is  a  vivid  commentary  upon  hymns  the  lofty  strains
of  which  might  of  themselves  be  thought  to  savour  of  exag-
geration.

3.  If  the  synoptists  are  in  correspondence  with  St.  John's
characteristic  doctrine  when  they  describe  our  Lord's  Nativity
and  its  attendant  circumstances,  that  correspondence  is  even
more  obvious  in  their  accounts  of  His  teaching  and  in  the
pictures  which  they  set  before  us  of  His  Life  and  work.  They
present  Him  to  us  mainly,  although  not  exclusively,  as  the  Son
of  Man.  As  has  already  been  hinted,  that  title,  besides  its
direct  signification  of  His  true  and  representative  Humanity,  is
itself  the  *  product  of  a  self-consciousness,  for  which  the  being
human  is  not  a  matter  of  course,  but  something  secondary  and
superinduced  <>.'     In  other  words,  this  title  implies  an  original

■*  St.  Luke  i.  78 :  dTctrKcrlfaro  riixdis  &varo\^  i^  fitlfovs,  hrupayat  toIjt  ^r
ffKSrei  K<d  (TKi^  Bca/drov  Ka0rjix4vois'  rod  Kartvdvvai  rots  vS^as  rifiuy  us  6S^
fipiivrfs,  Isa.  iz.  i,  xHi.  7,  xliz.  9,  Ix.  2,  are  thus  applied  in  a  strictly
flpiritaal  sense.

"  St.  Luke  ii.  30-32  :  t^  trorr'fipiSv  <rovy  %  Tfrotuaaas  Korh  irpSireoiroy  rdrrup
rav  KoMV  <pS)s  els  aTroicdKvtlfiy  iBvSoVf  koX  h6fyuf  \aov  ffou  'Itrpo^X.  Ct  Isa.
XXV.  7,  xliv.  4.

0  Cf.  Doruer,  Person  Christi,  Einl.  p.  82  :  *  Von  einem  Selbstbewusstaeyn

[lbct.


implies  His  Divinity.  253

Nature  to  WMch  Christ's  Humanity  was  a  subsequent  accretion,
and  in  Which  His  true  and  deepest  Consciousness,  if  we  may
dare  80  to  speak,  was  at  home.     Thus,  often  in  the  synoptic
Gospels  He  is  called  simply  the  Son  p.     He  is  the  true  Son  of
Man,  but  He  is  also  the  true  Son  of  God.     In  Him  Sonship
attains  its  archetypal  form ;   in  Him  it  is  seen  in  its  unsullied
perfection.    Accordingly  He  never  calls  the  Father,  <ywr  Father,
as  if  He  shared  His  Sonship  with  His  followers.     He  always
speaks  of  My  Father  Q.     To  this  Divine  Sonship  He  received
witness  from  Heaven  both  at  His  Baptism  and  at  His  Trans-
figuration.    In  the  parable  of  the  vineyard,  the  prophets  of  the
old  theocracy  are  contrasted  with  the  Son,  not  as  predeces-
sors or  rivals,  but  as  slaves  ^     Thus  He  lives  among  men  as
the  One  True  Son  of  His  Father's  home.     He  is  Alone  free  by
birthright  among  a  race  of  bom  slaves.     Yet  instead  of  guard-
ing His  solitary  dignity  with  jealous  exclusiveness.  He  vouch-
safes to  raise  the  slaves  around  Him  to  an  adopted  sonship;  He
will  buy  them  out  of  bondage  by  pouring  forth  His  blood ;  He
will  lay  down  His  Life,  that  He  may  prove  the  generosity  of
His  measureless  love  towards  them  '.

The  synoptic  Gospels  record  parables  in  which  Christ  is
Himself  the  central  Figure.  They  record  miracles  which  seem
to  have  no  ascertainable  object  beyond  that  of  exhibiting  the
superhuman  might  of  the  Worker.  They  tell  us  of  His  claim  to
forgive  sins,  and  that  He  supported  this  claim  by  the  exercise  of
His  miraculous  powers*.  Equally  with  St.  John  they  represent
Him  as  claiming  to  be  not  merely  the  Teacher  but  the  Object  of

ans  muss  diese  Bezeiclmuiig  ausgepnlgt  seyn,  fUr  welches  das  Mensch-oder-
Menachensohnseyii  nicht  das  Nachstiiegende,  sich  von  selbst  unmittelbar
Verstehende,  sondem  das  Sectmdare,  Hinzngekommeiie,  war.  Ist  aber
Christi  Selbsfcbewusstseyn  so  geartet  gewesen,  dass  das  Menschseyn  ihm  als
das  Secnndare  sich  darstellte :  so  muss  das  Primare  in  Seinem  Bewusstseyn
ein  Anderes  seyn,  dasjenige,  was  sich,  z.  B.  bei  Johannes  xvii.  5  ausspricht ;
nnd  das  Urspriingliche,  worin  Sein  S^lbstbewusstseyn  sich  unmittelbar
Keimisch  weiss  (vgl.  Luc.  ii.  49)  muss  wenigstens  von  der  Zeit  an,  wo  Er
nch  selbst  ganz  hat,  wo  sein  Innerstes  Wirklichkeit  geworden  ist,  das
CrotUiche  gewesen  seyn.'
^  St.  Matt.  xi.  27,  zzviii.  20.

•  Ibid,  xviii.  10,  19,  35,  xr.  33,  xxvi.  53 ;  cf.  St.  Luke  xxiii.  46.

'  St.  Matt.  zxi.  34 :  dircorciXe  to\)s  hoiiKovs  ahrov  vphs  robs  yttcfryois.  Ibid.
^er.  56 :  ird\iy  &v4<rrfik€y  &Wovs  Mkovs,  Ibid.  ver.  37 :  ttrrepoy  8i  oire-
<mi\€  vphs  cdnohs  rhp  vihv  ainoVf  \4ytoy,  *  *Evrpairii(rovTai  rhu  vl6y  fiov*

•  Ibid.  XX.  38 :  ^A0e , , .  Sovpoi  r^y  ^vxv^  ahrov  \irpov  d,vr\  voWwv.  Ibid.
^xvi.  28 :  rh  aSfid  fiov,  rh  r^s  Kcuyris  SiaOifiicris,  rh  ir€p\  iroKKwp  iKXvv6fA€yoy  elf
^tffiv  afutpTi&p.

^  St.  Matt.  ix.  2-6 ;  St.  Luke  v.  20,  24.

^1


254      Our  Lord's  Person  in  the  Syjioptists.

His  religion.  He  insists  on  faith  in  His  own  Person^.  He
institutes  the  initial  Sacrament,  and  He  deliberately  inserts  His
own  Name  into  the  sacramental  formula ;  He  inserts  it  between
that  of  the  Father  and  that  of  the  Spirit  *.  Such  self-intrusion
into  the  sphere  of  Divinity  would  be  unintelligible  if  the  synop-
tists  had  really  represented  Jesus  as  only  the  teacher  and  founder
of  a  religious  doctrine  or  character.  But  if  Christ  is  the  Log(»
in  St.  John,  in  these  Gk)spels  He  is  the  Sophia  y.  Thus  He
ascribes  to  Himself  the  exclusive  knowledge  of  the  Highest
No  statement  in  St.  John  really  goes  beyond  the  terms  in  which,
according  to  two  synoptists,  He  claims  to  know  and  to  be  known
of  the  Father.  'No  man  knoweiii  the  Son  but  the  Father,
neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Father  save  the  Son,  and  he  to
whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal  Him  «.'  Here  then  is  a  recipro-
cal relationship  of  equality:  the  Son  alone  has  a  true  knowledge
of  the  Father  ;  the  Son  is  Himself  such,  that  the  Father  Alone
understands  Him.  In  these  Gospels,  moreover,  Christ  ascribes
to  Himself,  sanctity;  He  even  places  Himself  above  the  holiest
thing  in  ancient  Israel  *.  He  and  His  people  are  greater  than
the  greatest  in  the  old  covenant^.  He  scruples  not  to  proclaim
His  consciousness  of  having  ftdfilled  His  mission.  He  asserts
that  all  power  is  committed  to  Him  both  on  earth  and  in
heaven  «.  All  nations  are  to  be  made  disciples  of  His  religion^.
When  we  weigh  the  language  of  the  first  three  Evangelisis,
it  will  be  found  that  Christ  is  represented  by  it  as  the  Absolute
Good  and  the  Absolute  Truth  not  less  distinctly  than  in  St.
John.  It  is  on  this  account  that  He  is  exhibited  as  in  conflict
not  with  subordinate  or  accidental  forms  of  evil,  but  with  the
evil  principle   itself,  with  the  prince  of  evil®.     And,  as  the

»  St.  Matt.  xvi.  i6,  17.

•  Ibid,  xxviii.  19.  Cf.  Waterland's  Eighth  Sermon  at  Lady  Moyer's
Lecture,  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  171.

y  St.  Luke  vii,  35  :  ^8(Katc60i7 17  (ro<pla  ctirb  r&p  reKvav  ainfis  Tcarrav.  St
Matt.  xi.  19,  and  apparently  St.  Luke  xi.  49,  where  ^  (ro(pla  rov  Beov  corre-
eponds  to  4y^  in  St.  Matt,  xziii.  34.

■  St.  Matt.  xi.  37 :  ovBeh  imyipdcKei  rhv  Tihv  el  fi^  6  Uariip*  ohh^  rh
Uar4pa  r\s  iiriyiv^<rK€i,  el  fi^  6  Tihs,  Koti  $  iky  $o6\riTCU  6  Tibs  diroKdK^cu.
St.  I^uke  X.  22  :  ov^els  ywiffKci  rls  ia-riy  &  Tihs  el  fiif  6  Uariip,  koX  rls  itrrip
6  Uarripf  cl  jui)  6  Tihs,  Koi  f  ioiv  fio6\rirai  6  Tths  diroKoXin^cu,  See  Mill  on
Myth.  Interp.  p.  59.

•  St.  Matt.  xii.  6 :  x4y<o  8^  vfuv  Bri  rod  Upov  fi€iC6v  [Tisch.]  iffrtv  SSt,
*>  Ibid.  xi.  II,  xii.  41,  43,  xxi.  33,  sqq. ;  St.  Luke  vii.  28.

^  St.  Matt.  xi.  27 ;  St.  Luke  x.  22 ;  St.  Matt,  xxviii.  18 :  i^Sdri  fioi  rara
i^ovffia  iv  ovpavip  koL  ^irl  7^5.  <*  St.  Matt,  xxviii.  19.

•  St.  Luke  X.  18 :  4d€(i>povv  rhv  ^aravav  &s  dffTpairrjv  iK  rod  ohfiam
nffffyra,    St.  Matt.  iv.  i-ii,  xii.  27-29,  xiii.  38,  39.

[iBCl.


Our  Lord's  claims  in  tJie  Synoptists.      255

Absolute  Good,  Christ  tests  the  moral  worth  or  worthlessness  of
men  by  their  acceptance  or  rejection,  not  of  His  doctrine  but  of
His  Person.     It  is  St.  Matthew  who  records  such  sentences  as
the  following :  '  Neither  be  ye  called  Masters ;  for  One  is  your
Master,  even  Christ  ^; '   '  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more
than  Me  is  not  worthy  of  Me  R ; '   *  Whosoever  shall  confess  Me
before  men,  him  will  I  confess  also  before  My  Father ^ ;'  *Come
Tmto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour,  and  I  will  give  you  rest » ;  *    *  Take  My
yoke  upon  you  and  learn  of  Me  K*     In  St.  Matthew  then  Christ
speaks  as  One  Who  knows  Himself  to  be  a  universal  and  infallible
Teacher  in  spiritual  things;   Who  demands  submission  of  all
men,  and  at  whatever  cost  or  sacrifice;   Who  offers  to  man-
kind those  deepest  consolations  which  are  sought  from  all  others,
in  vain.     Nor  is  it  otherwise  with  St.  Luke  and  St.  Mark.     It
is  indeed  remarkable  that  our  Lord's  most  absolute  and  peremp-
tory claims  ^  to  rule  over  the  affections  and  wills  of  men  are
recorded  by  the  first  and  third,  and  not  by  the  fourth  Evan-
gelist.    These  royal  rights  over  the  human  soul  can  be  justified
upon  no  plea   of  human   relationships   between   teacher   and
learner,  between  child  and  elder,  between  master  and  servant,
between  friend  and  friend.     K  the  title  of  Divinity  is  more
explicitly  put  forward  in  St.  John,  the  rights  which  imply  it  are
insisted  on  in  words  recorded  by  the  earlier  Evangelists.     The
synoptists  represent  our  Lord,  Who  is  the  object  of  Christian
faith  no  less  than  the  Founder  of  Christianity,  as  designing  the
whole  world  for  the  field  of  His  conquests  ™,  and  as  claiming
the  submission  of  every  individual  human  soul.     All  are  to  be
brought  to  discipleship.     Only  then  will  the  judgment  come,
when  the  Gospel  has  been  announced  to  the  whole  circle  of  the
nations '».      CJhrist,  the  Good  and  the  Truth  Incarnate,  must
reign  throughout  all  time  °.    He  knows,  according  to  the  synop-
tists no  less  than  St.  John,  that  He  is  a  perfect  and  final  Reve-
lation of  God.     He  is  the  centre-point  of  the  history  and  of
the  hopes   of  man.     None   shall   advance  beyond  Him:   the


'  St.  Matt,  xxiii.  lo.  «  Ibid.  x.  37.

•^  Ibid.  ver.  32  ;  St.  Luke  xii.  8.  »  St.  Matt.  xi.  28.

*  Ibid.  ver.  29.  '  Ibid.  x.  39 ;  St.  Luke  xiv.  26.

™  St.  Matt,  xxviii.  19 :  irop€v$4vT€S  oZv  fxa&r\Ti{)<Tare  vdina  rb.  iBvr],  St.
Mark  xvi.  15  ;  St.  Luke  xxiv.  47.     Of.  St.  Matt.  xiii.  32,  38,  41,  xxiv.  14.

"  St.  Matt.  xxiv.  14 :  koI  icripvx^fftrcu  rovro  rh  ivayvihiov  r^i  jSoo-iAefoj
^v  5X»7  tJ  olKoviJ.4inj,  us  napr^iov  iraai  rciis  tBvtffi*  jcoi  t<)T€  fj{«  rb  riXoi,

*  St.  Luke  TTJi.  69 :  iirh  rov  vvv  Utrrcu  6  Tihs  rod  dyOp^ov  KoB^ififyos  in
^f^tSiy  T^$  ivv6fi€ws  TOW  0co2.

»1


256    The  tremendotis  claim  to  judge  the  world


pretension  to  snrpass  Him  is  but  the  symptom  of  disastrous
error  and  reaction  p.

The  Transfiguration  is  described  by  all  the  synoptists ;  and  it
represents  our  Lord  in  His  true  relation  to  the  legal  and  pro-
phetic dispensations,  and  as  visibly  invested  for  the  time  being
with  a  glory  which  was  rightfully  His.  The  Ascension  secures
His  permanent  investiture  with  that  glory;  and  the  Ascension
is  described  by  St  Mark  and  St.  Luke.  The  Resurrection  is
recorded  by  the  first  three  Evangelists  as  accurately  as  by  the
fourth;  and  it  was  to  the  Resurrection  that  He  Himself  appealed
as  being  the  sign  by  which  men  were  to  know  His  real  claim
upon  their  homage.  Li  the  first  three  Gk)spels,  all  of  Christ's
humiliations  are  consistently  linked  to  the  assertion  of  His  power,
and  to  the  constimmation  of  His  victory.  He  is  buffeted,  spat
upon,  scourged,  crucified,  only  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  third
dayQ ;  His  Resurrection  is  the  prelude  to  His  ascent  to  heaven.
He  leaves  the  world,  yet  He  bequeaths  the  promise  of  His
Presence.  He  promises  to  be  wherever  two  or  three  are  gathered
in  His  Name  ' ;  He  institutes  the  Sacrament  of  His  Body  and
His  Blood 8;  He  declares  that  He  will  be  among  His  people  eYen
to  the  end  of  the  world  *.

4.  But  it  is  more  particularly  through  our  Lord's  discourses
respecting  the  end  of  the  world  and  the  final  judgment,  as  re-
corded by  the  synoptists,  that  we  may  discern  the  matchless
dignity  of  His  Person.  It  is  reflected  in  the  position  which  He
claims  to  fill  with  respect  to  the  moral  and  material  universe,
and  in  the  absolute  finality  which  He  attributes  to  His  religion.
The  Lawgiver  Who  is  above  all  other  legislators,  and  Who
revises  all  other  legislation,  will  also  be  the  final  Judge  ^,    At

P  St.  Matt.  rriv.  23-26,  &c.

4  Ibid.  xz.  19 ;  St.  Mark  z.  3^1 ;  St.  Luke  zviii.  35.
'  St.  Matt,  zviii.  ao :  oS  7c£p  ckti  hito  ^  t^w  irvvriyfi4yoi  els  rh  ifihw  tvopa,
iKU  ilfiX  iv  ix4(r(p  avTWP,
■  Ibid.  zzvi.  26 ;  St.  Mark  ziv.  aa ;  St.  Luke  zzii.  19.

*  St.  Matt,  zzviii.  ao :  ^7^  fied*  v/jwy  ei/xi  wdtrcts  riks  7)fi4pas  t»s  rris  tfvrre-
\eias  rod  ouwyos,

*  Ibid.  vii.  aa:  iroXKol  ipovai  fioi  iy  iKeivp  ry  ^fi4p<f,  'K^pic,  K^pu,  oi
T^  (T^  hv6iJLari  Tpoetfyrirtia'afiep,  kcH  rf)  0*^  oyofian  icufi6pia  iiefidkofuVf  Kai
r^  <ry  6v6fiari  ^vvdfieis  woWdis  iiroi'fia'afiev  ;*  Koi  rSrf  bfjMXoyiiaoo  owtoTs,  Jrt
*  ouSeTTore  tyvwv  vjxas,  hiroxdopfiTt  &ir*  I/tow  ot  ipyai6fxfVoi  r^v  iatopiajf.
St.  Luke  ziii.  35.  St.  Matt.  xiii.  41 :  hTrotrreXei  6  Tths  rov  &p$p<&irov  rohs
&77^Aovs  cAtov,  Koi  (rvWt^ovffip  ix  rrjs  $a<ri\(las  ainov  trdma  rh.  (ricfirSaXa
Kol  roht  iroiovyras  Tfjp  dvofilav,  Koi  fioKovffiv  aJnohs  els  riiv  Kdfuyoy  rod  wvpis>
Ibid.  X.  33  :  St.  Mark  viii.  38.  St.  Matt.  zxiv.  31 :  dirotrreXei  rohs  dyytXeos
aitrov  fifrh.  ffoKviyyos  <l>«inis  fityd\ris,  K(d  ixiawf^ovffi  rohs  4k\€kt(^s  oitfTOV

[lsct.


^


prominently  reported  in  the  Sy  nop  lists.      257

that  last  awful  revelation  of  His  personal  glory,  none  shall  be
able  to  refuse  Him  submission.  Then  will  He  put  an  end  to  the
humiliations  and  the  sorrows  of  His  Church ;  then,  out  of  the
fulness  of  His  majesty,  He  will  •  clothe  His  despised  followers
with  glory;  He  will  allot  the  kingdom  to  those  who  have  be-
lieved on  Him ;  and  at  His  heavenly  board  they  shall  share  for
ever  the  royal  feast  of  life.  Certainly  the  Redeemer  and  Judge
of  men,  to  Whom  all  spiritual  and  natural  forces,  all  earthly  and
heavenly  powers  must  at  last  submit,  is  not  merely  a  divinely
gifted  prophet.  His  Person  '  has  a  metaphysical  and  cosmicsd
fflgnificance^.'  None  could  preside  so  authoritatively  over  the
history  and  destiny  of  the  world  who  was  not  entitled  to  share
the  throne  of  its  Creator.

The  eschatological  discourses  in  the  synoptists  do  but  tally
with  the  prologue  of  St.  John's  Gospel.  In  contemplating  the
dignity  of  our  Lord's  Person,  the  preceding  Evangelists  for  the
most  part  look  forward ;  St.  John  looks  backward  no  less  than
forward.  St.  John  dwells  on  Christ's  Pre-existence ;  the  synop-
tists, if  we  may  so  phrase  it,  on  his  Post-existence.  In  the
earlier  Evangelists  His  personal  glory  is  viewed  in  its  relation  to
the  future  of  the  human  race  and  of  the  universe ;  in  St.  John
it  is  viewed  in  its  relation  to  the  origin  of  created  things,  and  to
the  solitary  and  everlasting  years  of  God.  In  St.  John,  Christ
our  Saviour  is  the  First;  in  the  synoptists  He  is  more  especially
the  Last.

In  the  synoptic  Gospels,  then,  the  Person  of  Christ  Divine
and  Human  is  the  centre-point  of  the  Christian  religion.  Christ
is  here  the  Supreme  Lawgiver ;  He  is  the  Perfect  Saint ;  He  is
the  Judge  of  all  men.  He  controls  both  worlds,  the  physical  and
the  spiritual ;  He  bestows  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  the  Holy
Spirit;  He  promises  everlasting  life.  His  Presence  is  to  be
perpetuated  on  earth,  while  yet  He  will  reign  as  Lord  of  heaven.
'The  entire  representation,'  says  Professor  Dorner,  *of  Christ
which  is  given  us  by  the  synoptists,  may  be  placed  side  by  side
with  that  given  by  St.  John,  as  being  altogether  identical  with
it.  For  a  faith  moulded  in  obedience  to  the  synoptic  tradition
concerning  Christ,  must  have  essentially  the  same  features  in
its  resulting  conception  of  Christ  as  those  which  belong  to  the
Christ  of  St.  John  y.'     In  other  words,  think  over  the  miracles

h  rwv  reffffdpoop  dv4ficop,  dir*  liKpcoy  ohpavwv  ews  &Kpotp  abrav.  Ibid.  xxv.
34-46;  St,  Luke  xii.  35,  xvii.  30,  31.    See  Lect.  IV.  p.  176.

*  Martensen,  Christl.  Dogm.  §  128.

7  Dorner,  Person  Ghristi,  Einl.  p.  89:  'Das  synoptische  Totalbild  yod
V]  8


258       Christology  of  the  first  three  Gospels.

wrought  by  Christ  and  narrated  by  the  synoptiets,  one  by  one.
Think  over  the  discourses  spoken  by  Christ  and  recorded  by  the
synoptists,  one  by  one.     Look  at  iie  whole  bearing  and  scope
of  His  Life,  as  the  three  first*  Evangelists  describe  It,  from  His
supernatural  Birth  to  His  disappearance  beyond  the  clouds  of
heaven.     Mark  well  how  pressing  and  tender,  yet  withal  how
full  of  stem  and  majestic  Self-assertion,  are  His  words !      Con-
sider how  merciful  and  timely,  yet  also  how  expressive  of  imma-
nent and  unlimited  power,  are  His  miracles!     Put  the  three
representations  of  the  Hoyal,  the   Human,  and  the   Healing
Bedeemer  together,  and  deny,  if  it  is  possible,  that  Jesus  is
Divine*     If  the  Christ  of  the  synoptists  is  not  indeed  an  unreal
phantom,  such  as  Docetism  might  have  constructed,  He  is  far
removed  above   the  Ebionitic  conception  of  a  purely  human
Saviour.     If  Christ's  Pre-existence  is  only  obscurely  hinted  at
in  the  first  three  Gospels,  His  relation  to  the  world  of  spirits  is
brought  out  in  them  even  more  clearly  than  in  St.  John  by  the
discourses  which  they  contain  on  the  subject  of  the  Last  Judg-
ment.    If  St.  John  could  be  blotted  out  from  the  pages  of  the
New  Testament,  St.  John's  central  doctrine  would  still  live  on
in  the  earlier  Evangelists  as  implicitly  contained  within  a  his-
tory otherwise  inexplicable,  if  not  as  the  illuminating  truth  of
a  heavenly  gnosis.     There  would  still  remain  the  picture  of  a
Life  Which  belongs  indeed  to  human  history,  but  "Which  the
laws  that  govern  human  history  neither  control  nor  can  explain.
It  would  still  be  certain  that  One  had  lived  on  earth,  wielding
miraculous  powers,  and  claiming  a  moral  and  intellectual  place
which  belongs  only  to  the  Most  Holy ;  and  if  the  problem  pre-
sented to  faith  might  seem  for  a  moment  to  be  more  intricate,
its  final  solution  could  not  differ  in  substance  from  that  which
meets  us  in  the  pages  of  the  beloved  disciple.

V.  But  what  avails  it,  say  you,  to  shew  that  St.  John  is  con-
sistent with  himself,  and  that  he  is  not  really  at  variance  with
the  Evangelists  who  preceded  him,  if  the  doctrine  which  he
teaches,  and  which  the  Creed  re-asserts,  is  itself  incredible  %  You
object  to  this  doctrine  that  it '  involves  an  invincible  contradic-
tion.' It  represents  Christ  on  the  one  hand  as  a  Personal  Being,
while  on  the  other  it  asserts  that  two  mutually  self-excluding

Christus  dem  johanneischen  insofem  yoUkommen  an  die  Seite  setzen  kann,
als  der  durch  Yermittlung  der  synoptischen  Tradition  gebildete  Glaube
wesentlich  ganz  dieselben  Zlige  in  seinem  Christiifibegriff  haben  nrnsste,  wie
sie  der  jolumneische  Christus  hat.'  For  the  preceding  remarks,  see  Person
Christiy  Einl.  pp.  80-89.

f  LECT.


Christy  thus  God  and  Matty  in  One  Person.   259

Essences  are  really  united  in  Him.  How  can  He  be  personal,
you  ask,  if  He  be  in  very  truth  both  God  and  Man  \  If  He  is
thus  Gk)d  and  Man,  is  He  not,  in  point  of  fact,  a '  double  Being ;'
and  is  not  unity  of  being  an  indispensable  condition  of  person-
ality %  Surely,  you  insist,  this  condition  is  forfeited  by  the  very
terms  of  the  doctrine.  Christ  either  is  not  both  God  and  Man,
or  He  is  not  a  single  Personality.  To  say  that  He  is  One  Person
in  Two  Natures  is  to  affirm  the  existence  of  a  miracle  which  is
incredible,  if  for  no  other  reason,  simply  on  the  score  of  its
unmtelligibility  «.

This  is  what  may  be  said ;  but  let  us  consider,  first  of  all,
whether  to  say  this  does  not,  however  unintentionally,  caricature
the  doctrine  of  St.  John  and  of  the  Catholic  Creed.  Does  it  not
seem  as  if  both  St.  John  and  the  Creed  were  at  pains  to  make
it  clear  that  the  Person  of  Christ  in  His  pre-existent  glory,  in
His  state  of  humiliation  and  sorrow,  and  in  the  majesty  of  His
mediatorial  kingdom,  is  continuously,  unalterably  One  %  Does
not  the  Nicene  Creed,  for  instance,  first  name  the  Only-begotten
Son  of  God,  and  then  go  on  to  say  how  for  us  men  and  for  our
salvation  He  was  Himself  made  Man,  and  was  crucified  for  us
under  Pontius  Pilate  ]  Does  not  St.  John  plainly  refer  to  One
and  the  Same  Agent  in  such  verses  as  the  following)  'All
things  were  made-  by  Him,  and  without  Him  was  not  anything
made  that  was  made  V     '  He  riseth  from  supper,  and  laid  aside

■  Schenkel,  Charakterbild  Jesu,  p.  a :  'Eb  gehort  vor  AUem  zum  Begriffe
einer  Person,  dass  sie  im  Kerne  ilu-es  Wesens  eine  Einheit  bildet ;  nur  unter
dieser  Yoraussetzung  lasst  sie  filch  geechichtlich  begreifen.  Diese  Einheit
wird  durch  die  herkommliche  Lehre  in  der  Person  des  Welterlosers  aufge*
hoben.  Jesns  Ghristus  wird  in  der  kirchlichen  Glaubenslehre  als  ein  Doppel*
Wesen  daigestellt,  als  die  personliche  Yereinigung  zweier  Wesenheiten,  die
an  dch  nichts  mit  einander  gemein  haben,  sich  vielmehr  schlechthin  wider-
Bprechen  nnd  nur  vermoge  eines  alle  Begriffe  tibersteigenden  Wunders  in  die
oigste  und  unaufioslichste  Yerbindung  mit  einander  gebracht  worden  sind.
^  id  demzufolge  Mensch  und  Oott  in  einer  und  deraelhen  Person,  Die
Idrchlichen  l^eologen  haben  grosse  Anstrengungen  gemacht,  um  die  nnanf-
losliche  Yerbindung  von  Gott  und  Mensch  in  einer  Person  als  begreiflich
imdmoglichdarzustellen ;  sie  haben  sich  aber  zuletzt  doch  immerwleder  zu
dem  G^andnisa  genothigt  gesehen,  dass  die  Sache  unbegreifiich  sei,  und
dass  ein  undurchdnngliches  G^heimniss  ttber  dem  Personleben  Jesu  Ghristi.
schwebe.  Allein  eine  solche  Berufung  auf  Geheimnisse  und  Wunder  ist,  wo
es  anf  die  Erklarung  einer  geschichtliehen  Thatsache  ankommt,  fiir  die
Wissenschaft  ohne  alien  Werth ;  sie  offenbart  uns  die  Unfahigkeit  des  theo-
logiflchen  Denkens,  das  in  sich  Widersprechende  vorstellbar,  das  geschicht-
lich  TJnbegreifliche  denkbar  zu  machen.*  Gf.  Strauss,  Leben  Jesu^  §  146 ;
Schleiermacher,  Glaubenslehre,  ii.  §  96-98.

•St.  John  1.3.

y]  B  2


26o  Nestorians  deny  the  unity  of  Christ^ s  Person,

His  garments ;  and  took  a  towel,  and  girded  Himself.  After
that  He  poureth  water  into  a  bason,  and  began  to  wash  the
disciples'  feet,  and  to  wipe  them  with  the  towel  wherewith  He
was  girded  ^.'  If  St.  John  or  the  Creed  had  proceeded  to  intro-
duce a  new  subject  to  whom  the  circumstances  of  Christ's  eariMy
Life  properly  belonged,  and  who  only  maintained  a  mysterious,
even  although  it  were  an  indissoluble  connexion  with  the  Eternal
Word  in  heaven,  then  the  charge  of  making  Christ  a  *  doubk
Being  *  would  be  warrantable.  Nestorius  was  fairly  liable  to
that  charge.  He  practically  denied  that  the  Man  Christ  Jesus
was  One  Person  with  the  Eternal  Word.  In  order  to  heighten
the  ethical  import  of  the  Human  Life  of  Christ,  Nestorianism
represents  our  Lord  as  an  individual  Man,  Who,  although  He  is
the  temple  and  organ  of  the  Deity  to  which  He  is  united,  yet
has  a  separate  basis  of  personality  in  His  Human  Nature.  The
individuality  of  the  Son  of  Mary  is  thus  treated  as  a  distinct
thing  from  that  of  the  Eternal  Word ;  and  the  Christ  of  Nesto-
rianism  is  really  a  *  double  Being,'  or  rather  he  is  two  distinct
persons,  mysteriously  joined  in  one^.  But  the  Church  has
formally  condemned  this  error,  and  in  so  doing  she  was  merely
throwing  into  the  form  of  a  doctrinal  proposition  the  plain  im-
port of  Qie  narrative  of  St.  John's  Gospel  <*.

^  St.  Jolin  xiii.  4,  5,

«  Ap.  Marium  Merc.  p.  54 :  '  Non  Maria  peperit  Demn.  Non  pepott
creatura  increabilem,  sed  peperit  hominem  Deitatis  instrmnentmn.  Dirido
naturas,  sed  conjungo  reverentiam.'  Of.  Nestorii  Ep.  iii.  ad  Codestin.
(Mansi,  torn,  iv,  1 197):  rb  irpoeKdeiy  rhy  9fhv  A6yoy  ix  rijs  XP"^^^
irapd4pov  Topk  rrjs  OeUis  i^i^dx^riv  ypacjnis'  rh  8^  y^wi^^vai  Qehv  ^|  drrflj,
odSoftov  ihiBdx^v-  And  his  'famons'  Baying,  'I  will  never  own  a  child  d
two  months  old  to  be  God.'     (I^bbe,  iii.  506.)

^  St.  Leo  in  Epist.  ad  Leonem  Aug.  ed.  Ballerino,  165  :  '  Anathematizetiir
ergo  Nestorius,  qui  beatam  Virginem  non  Dei,  sed  hominis  tantmnmodo  oe-
didit  genitricem,  ut  aliam  personam  camis  faceret,  aliam  Deitatis ;  necimiim
Christum  in  Verbo  Dei  et  came  sentiret,  sed  separatum  atque  sejunctom
alterum  Filium  Dei,  alteram  hominis  prsedicaret.*  See  Confeesion  of  the
Easterns,  accepted  by  St.  Cyril,  Labbe,  iii.  1107 :  *Ofio\oyov/jL€P  rhv  K^
4\fiStv  *lfiffovv Xpitrrhyt  rhvTlhv  rod  Btov,  0€bv  r4\€ioy  koI  ivOpwirov  r4\fU0^
^XV5  ^oyitajs  /col  a'<&iJ.aTo$,  vph  aldavtav  fihy  ix  rod  Harphs  y^wrfiirra  «tfi
riiv  8«<^n7Ta,  4i^  icxdruy  ^h  rSov  ^fxtpcov  rhy  avrhv  iK  Mapias  Karii  ri^rirOp^'
T^rrira,  6fjLoo6<riov  T<p  Harpl  Kara  rijv  ©eifnTTo,  6fxoo6(riop  rifiiv  Korii  tiJf  dWp**
ir6r7jra*  8vo  yap  <p6(r€oov  eyuffis  yiyoyc,  Karii  radrriv  rijp  t^j  dffvyx^ff
kviSxrews  %woiay  d/xoKoyovfiep  rijp  aylap  Ilap64vop  0€or6KOP,  81A  t^  rhp  Scir
A6yov  (rapKwSrivat  leol  ivavBpayirrjtraif  Kot  4^  aifrTJs  rris  trvXX'fi^foos  4y&(rai  Uan^
rhv  4^  ahrris  \ri<f>04yra  poSp.  Tij  5^  eboYY^XiKhs  T€p\  rov  Kvpiov  ^y^  fo'/tfl'
robs  0€o\6yovs  &v^pas  r^s  fihp  Koivoiroiovvras  &s  4<f>*  4phi  irpoffdaftoVf  rhs  Ji
huupovpras  cbs  4ir\  h6o  <p6(r(up,  Koi  rits  fihv  deorpevfis  Karh.  rijp  BeSnfru  rev
Xpurrov,  rks  S^  rawfipas  Karii  n)y  dudpcnrdrrira  axtrov  irapa8i8<J»Tas.    The

[lkct.


The  ^ Communicatio  idiomatum*  261

Undoubtedly,  you  reply,  the  Church  has  not  allowed  her  doc-
trine to  be  stated  in  terms  which  would  dissolve  the  Bedeemer
into  two  distinct  agents,  and  would  so  altogether  forfeit  the
reality  of  redemption®.  But  the  question  is  whether  the  or-
thodox statement  be  really  successful  in  avoiding  the  error
which  it  deprecates.     Certainly  the   Church  does  say  that

definitioa  of  Chalcedon  is  equally  emphatio  on  the  subject  of  the  Hypostatic
Umon.    Eouth,  Scr.  Op.  ii.  78 ;  Bright,  Hist.  Ch.  p.  409.    The  title  Theo-
tokos,  assigned  to  the  Blessed  Virgin  by  eminent  Fathers  before  the  Nestorian
eontroversy  (see  Bright,  lb.  p.  30a),  and  by  the  whole  Church  ever  since  the
Council  of  Ephesus,  is  essentially  a  tribute  to  Christ's  personal  glory.    It  is
in  exact  accordance  with  that  w^-known  Scriptural  U9U$  loquendi,  whereby
CrOD  is  said  to  have  'purchased  the  Church  with  His  own  Blood*  (Acts  xx.
a  8,  see  Lect.  YI. ;  and  compare  i  Cor.  ii.  8),  as  conversely,  '  the  Son  of  Man,*
while  yet  on  earth,  is  said  to  have  been  '  in  heaven*  (St.  John  iii.  13).   This
'communicatio  idiomatum,*  Koiyairolri(ns  or  dyrlSoiris  (St.  John  Dam.  Orth.
Hd.  iii.  4),  as  it  is  technioJly  termed,  is  only  intelligible  on  the  principle
that  whatever  belongs  to  our  Lord  in  either  of  His  two  spheres  of  Existence
belongs  to  Him  as  l£e  One  Christ,  Who  is,  and  is  to  be  spoken  of  as,  both
God  and  Man.    In  other  words,  Uie  properties  of  both  His  Natures  are  the
properties  of  His  Person.  (Hooker,  E.  P.  v.  53 ;  St.  Thom.  Summ.  iii.  16, 4.)
In  the  same  sense  then  as  that  in  which  St.  Paul  could  attribute  '  crucifixion,*
and  'shedding  His  Blood,*  to  *GOD,*  that  is  to  sa^to  our  Divine  Saviour
in  His  Manhood,  the  Church  could  attribute  to  Him  Birth  of  a  human
Mother.    The  phrase  d€OT6Kos  is  implicitly  sanctioned  by  the  phrase  af/ua
Oeov.    It  presupposes  the  belief  that  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  Mary,  is  our
Lord  and  GoD ;  that  'the  Son  which  is  the  Wcnrd  of  the  Father,  begotten
from  everlasting  of  the  Father,  very  and  eternal  God,  took  Man*s  Nature
upon  Him  in  uie  womb  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  of  her  substance  ;*  art.  a.
In  sub-apostolic  language,  6  yhp  0ebs  rifiwv  *lri<rovs  6  Xpurrhs  iKvwpop^Br\  dtth
Mopfoj.  Jgn.  ad  Eph.  18.  Cf.  Bright's  observations,  Lat.Tr.  S.  Ath.  p.  150  sqq.
•  Jackson  on  the  Creed,  Works,  yol.  vii.  p.  294 :    '  That  proper  blood
wherewith  God  is  said  to  have  purchased  the  church,  was  the  blood  of  the
Son  of  Grod,  the  second  Person  in  Trinity,  after  a  more  peculiar  manner  than
it  was  the  blood  either  of  God  the  Father  or  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.   It  was
the  blood  of  God  the  Father  or  of  Grod  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  all  other  creatures
are,  by  common  right  of  creation  and  preservation.     It  was  the  blood  of
God  the  Son  alone  by  personal  union.     If  this  Son  of  Grod,  and  High  Priest
of  onr  souls,  had  off<^red  any  other  sacrifice  for  us  than  Himself,  or  Uie  Man-
hood thus  personally  united  unto  Him,  His  offering  could  not  have  been
satisfactory,  because  in  all  other  things  created,  the  Father  and  the  Holy
Ghost  had  the  same  right  or  interest  which  the  Son  had,  He  could  not  have
offered  anything  to  Them  which  were  not  as  truly  Theirs  as  His.   Only  the
Seed  of  Abraham,  or  Fruit  of  the  Virgin^s  womb  Which  He  assumed  into
the  Godhead,  was  by  the  assumption  made  so  His  own,  as  it  was  not
Theirs,  His  own  by  incommunicable  property  of  personal  union.   By  reason
of  this  incommunicable  property  in  the  woman's  seed,  the  Son  of  God  might
truly  have  said  imto  His  Father,  '  Lord,  Thou  hast  purchased  the  church,
yet  with  My  blood  :*  but  so  could  not  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  say  unto  the
Son  of  Grod,  'Lord,  Thou  hast  paid  the  ransom  for  the  sins  of  the  world,
yet  with  My  blood,  not  with  Thine  own.*


262   Christ's  Manhood  an  instrument  of  His  Deity,

'although  Christ  be  God  and  Man,  yet  He  is  not  two,  but
one  Christ/  But  is  this  possible  1  How  can  Godhead  and
Manhood  thus  coalesce  wi^out  forfeiture  of  that  unity  which
is  a  condition  of  personality  %

The  answer  to  this  question  lies  in  the  fact,  upon  which
St.  John  insists  with  such  prominence,  that  our  Lord's  Godhead
is  the  seat  of  His  Personality.  The  Son  of  Mary  is  not  a  distinct
human  person  mysteriously  linked  with  the  Divine  Nature  of
the  Eternal  Word  ^.     The  Person  of  the  Son  of  Mary  is  divine
and  eternal ;   It  is  none  other  than  the  Person  of  the  Word.
When  He  took  upon  Him  to  deliver  man,  the  Eternal  Word  did
not  abhor  the  Virgin's  womb.     He  clothed  Himself  with  man's
bodily  and  man's  immaterial  nature ;  He  united  it  to  His  Own
Divinity.     He  '  took  man's  Nature  upon  Him  in  the  womb  <rf
the  Blessed  Virgin,  of  her  substance,  so  that  two  whole  and  per-
fect Natures,  that  is  to  say,  the  Godhead  and  Manhood,  were
joined  together  in  One  Person,  never  to  be  divided,  whereof  is
One  Christ «.'     Thus  to  speak  of  Christ  as  a  Man,  at  least  with-
out explanation,  may  lead  to  a  serious  misconception ;  He  is  M«
Man,  or  rather  He  is  Man.    Christ's  Manhood  is  not  of  Itself  an
individual  being ;   It  is  not  a  seat  and  centre  of  personality;  It
has  no  conceivable  existence  apart  from  the  act  whereby  the
Eternal  Word  in  becoming  Incarnate  called  It  into  being  and
made  It  His  Own  \   It  is  a  vesture  which  He  has  folded  around
His  Person ;  It  is  an  instrument  through  which  He  places  Him-
self in  contact  with  men,  and  whereby  He  acts  upon  humanity*.

'  St.  Fill,  de  Fide  ad  Petr.  c.  17 :  *DeuB  Verbum  non  accepit  personam
hominis,  sed  naturam ;  et  in  setemam  personam  divinitatis  accepit  t^npora*
lem  substantiam  camis/  St.  Job.  Damasc.  de  Fid.  Orthod.  iii.  II :  6  0e^
A^os  capKcoBels  ov  r^v  4p  t^  etSei  d€(apovfiiv7)v,  oh  yhp  irdcras  riis  ^oarifni
aveXaS^V  dwh.  r)]v  4v  dr6fi^,  dvapxh^  tov  rifitr4pov  (pvpdfiaros,  oi  Kdff  ^av-
r^v  vnoffracay  koI  Arofiop  XRW^'^^^"^^"'^  vpSrepov,  Koi  oSras  6ir'  avrov  xpoir-
\r}<f>0€i(Tow,  dW*  4v  rp  avrov  hro(rrd<rti  vTcdp^acoWf  oStt;  y^p  rj  -^TrSoTOffts  to5
06oO  ASyov  iy4vero  r^  (rc^)K\  {m6ffraffis.  He  states  this  in  other  terms  (c.  9)
by  saying  that  our  Lord's  Humanity  had  no  subsistence  of  itself.  It  was  not
l^toaiararosy  nor  was  it  strictly  dwTrSa-raros,  but  4y  ahrf,  r^  rod  0€ow  A&ym
viro(rrd(r€i  vTroffrdffaj  ivvTr6<Traros,  He  speaks  too  of  Christ's  vv6(rTa(rts  clnh
deros.  Hooker,  E.  P.  v.  52.  3.  «  Art.  ii.

^  St.  Aug.  c.  Serm.  Arian.  c.  6 :  '  Nee  sic  assumptus  est  [homo]  ut  priiw
crearetur,  post  assumeretur,  sed  ut  in  ips4  assumptione  crearetur.'  St.  Leo,
£p.  25.3:  '  Natura  nostra  non  sic  assumpta  est  ut  prius  creata.,  post  as-
sumeretur;  sed  ut  ipsit  assumptione  crearetur.*  Newman's  Par.  Sermons,
ii.  32,  vi.  59.

*  Jackson  on  the  Creed,  Works,  vol.  vii.  p.  289 :  '  The  Humanity  of
Christ  is  such  an  instrument  of  the  Divine  Nature  in  His  Person,  as  the
hand  of  man  is  to  the  person  or  party  whose  hand  it  is.     And  it  is  well

[lect.


A  nalogy  from  the  composite  nature  of  man.   263

He  wears  It  in  heaven,  and  thus  robed  in  It  He  represents,  He
impersonates.  He  pleads  for  the  race  of  beings  to  which  It
belongs.  In  saying  that  Christ  *took  our  nature  upon  Him,'
we  imply  that  His  Person  existed  before,  and  that  the  Manhood
which  He  assumed  was  Itself  impersonal.  Therefore  He  did  not
make  Himself  a  *  double  Being '  by  becoming  incarnate.  His
Manhood  no  more  impaired  the  unity  of  His  Person  than  each
human  body,  with  its  various  organs  and  capacities,  impairs  the
unity  of  that  personal  principle  which  is  the  centre  and  pivot  of
each  separate  human  existence,  and  which  has  its  seat  within
the  soul  of  each  one  of  us.

'As  the  reasonable  soul  and  flesh  is  one  man,  so  God  and
man  is  one  Christ.'  As  the  personality  of  man  resides  in  the
soul,  after  death  has  severed  soul  and  body,  so  the  Person  of
Christ  had  Its  eternal  seat  in  His  Godhead  before  His  Incarna-
tion. Intimately  as  the  *  1,'  or  personal  principle  within  each
of  us,  is  associated  with  every  movement  of  the  body,  the  *  I  *
itself  resides  in  the  soul.  The  soul  is  that  which  is  conscious,
which  remembers,  which  wills,  and  which  thus  realizes  person-
ality i.  Certainly  it  is  true  that  in  our  present  state  of  existence
we  have  never  as  yet  realized  what  personal  existence  is,  apart
from  the  body.  But  the  youngest  of  us  will  do  this,  ere  many
years  have  passed.  Meanwhile  we  know  that,  when  divorced
from  the  personal  principle  which  rules  and  inspires  it,  the  body
is  but  a  lump  of  lifeless  clay.    The  body  then  does  not  superadd

observed,  whether  by  Aquinas  himself  or  no  I  remember  not,  bnt  by
VigaerinSy  an  accurate  summist  of  Aquinas*  sums,  that  albeit  the  intel-
lectual pi^  of  man  be  a  spiritual  substance,  and  separated  from  the  matter
or  bodily  part,  yet  is  the  union  betwixt  the  hand  and  intellectual  part  of
man  no  less  firm,  no  less  proper,  than  the  union  between  the  feet  or  other
oiganical  parts  of  sensitive  creatures,  and  their  sensitive  souls  or  mere
physical  forms.     For  the  intellectual  part  of  man,  whether  it  be  the  form
of  man  truly,  though  not  merely  physical,  or  rather  his  essence,  not  his
form  at  all,  doth  use  his  own  hand  not  as  the  carpenter  doth  use  his  axe,
that  is,  not  as  an  external  or  separated,  but  as  his  proper  united  instru-
ment :  nor  is  the  union  between  the  hand  as  the  instrument  and  intellective
part  as  the  artificer  or  commander  of  it  an  union  of  matter  and  form,  but
an  union  personal,  or  at  the  least  such  an  union  as  resembles  the  hypo-
statical  union  between  the  Divine  and  Human  Nature  of  Christ  much
better  than  any  material  union  wherein  philosophers  or  school-divines  can
make  instance.'    Gf.  Yiguerius,  Institutiones,  c.  30.  introd.  p.  259,  com-
menting on  St.  Thom.  3*.  q.  2.  a.  i.

J  Yet  when  we  contrast  man's  person  (ego)  and  his  nature,  we  under-
stand by  nature,  not  merely  the  body,  but  also  soul  and  spirit,  inasmuch
as  man  s  ^o  is  conceived  of  as  distinct  from  the  latter  not  less  than  firom
the  former,    Delitzsch,  Bibl.  Psych,  iv.  §  2,


264      The  reality  of  our  Lords  human  Will

a  second  peraonality  to  that  which  is  in  the  soul.  It  suppltea
the  personal  bouI  with  an  instnunent;  it  introduces  it  to  a
ephere  of  action ;  it  is  the  obedient  Blave,  the  plastic  ductile
form  of  the  personal  soul  which  tenants  it.  The  haad  is  raised,
the  voice  is  heard  ;  hut  these  are  acts  of  the  Eelfsame  persoaality
as  that  vhich,  in  the  invisible  Toiceless  recesses  of  its  imiuat«nal
sel^  goes  tluroDgb  intellectual  acts  of  inference,  or  moral  acts  of
aversion  or  of  love.  In  short,  man  is  at  once  animal  and  spirit^
but  his  personal  unity  is  not  thereby  impaired  :  and  Jesus  CSirist
is  not  other  thau  a  Single  Person,  although  He  has  united  tlie
Perfect  Nature  of  Man  to  His  Divine  and  Eternal  Being.
Therefore,  although  He  says  'I  and  the  Father  are  One,'  He
never  says  '  I  and  the  Son '  or  '  I  and  the  Word  are  One.'  For
He  is  the  Word  ;  He  is  the  Son.  And  His  Human  Life  is  not
a  distinct  self,  but  a  living  robe  which,  as  it  was  created,  ws«
forthwith  wrapped  around  His  Eternal  Personality^.

But  if  the  illustration  of  the  Creed  is  thus  suggestive  of  the
unity  of  Christ's  Person,  is  it,  you  may  fairly  ask,  altogether  in
harmony  with  the  Scriptural  and  Catholic  doctrine  of  Bjt
Perfect  Manhood  I  If  Christ's  Humanity  stands  to  Kit  Qod-
head  in  the  relation  of  the  body  of  a  man  to  his  soul,  does  not
this  imply  that  Christ  has  no  human  Soul ',  or  at  any  rate  no
distinct  human  Will )  You  remind  me  that '  the  truth  of  onr
Lord's  Human  Will  is  essential  to  the  integrity  of  His  Manhood,
to  the  reality  of  His  Incarnation,  to  the  completeness  of  His
redemptive  work.  It  is  plainly  asserted  by  Scripture ;  and  tbe
error  which  denies  It  has  been  condemned  by  the  Church.  If
Kestorius  errs  on  one  side,  Apollinaris,  Eutyches,  and  finally  the
Monothelites,  warn  us  how  easily  we  may  err  on  the  other.
Christ  has  a  Human  Will  as  being  Perfect  Man,  no  less  than  He
has  a  Divine  Will  as  being  Perfect  God,  But  this  is  not  sug-
gested by  the  analogy  of  the  union  of  body  and  soul  in  ruflD.
And  if  there  are  two  Wills  in  Christy  must  there  not  also  be  two

'  On  tbe  objection  that  the  illuBtnitioD  in  the  Athonasiiin  Creed  ftTOon
NestorianiBii),  of,  St.  Tho.  3*.  a.  5.  It  was  ficOBpted  by  St.  Cyril  himself,  but
ete.  Scholia.  8.  a8,  quo.  by  Bright, Lat,Tr.ofS.Atb.p.l6l,notei.
iliminary  form  of  the  objection  is  thna  notioed  by  the  MMler  d
ea,  Petr.  Lomb.  1.  iii.  d.  5  (858)  :  '  Non  aocepit  Verbnm  Da
amiuia,  sed  natv/ram.  E :  A  quibtudam  oppoaitor,  quod  par
t  perBonam.  Persona  enini  eet  nibitantiit  rotionalU  indiridiiB
I  antem  est  aDima.  Ergo  d  animam  usununt,  et  penoiiiiii.
on  geqnitnr,  quia  smma  non  eat  persona,  quando  alii  rei  nnit*
iter,  Bed  qnaJido  per  ee  est.  Qla  antem  acima  (onr  Lod'i)
it,  quia  eeset  alii  rei  conjuncta,'

[lbct.


does  not  make  His  Manhood  a  separate  Person.  265

Persons  1  and  may  not  the  Sufferer  Who  kneels  in  Gethsemane
be  another  than  the  Word  by  Whom  all  things  were  made  ]  *

Certainly,  the  illustration   of  thfe  Creed  cannot  be  pressed
closely  without  risk  of  serious  error.     An  illustration  is  gene-
rally used  to  indicate  correspondence  in  a  single  particular ;  and
it  will  not  bear  to  be  erected  into  an  absolute  and  consistent
parallel,  supposed  to  ^  in  all  respects  analogous  to  that  with
which  it  has  a  single  point  of  correspondence.     But  the  Creed
protects  itself  elsewhere  against  any  such  misuse  of  this  par-
ticular illustration.     The  Creed  says  that  as  body  and  soul  meet
in  a  single  man,  so  do  Perfect  Godhead  and  Perfect  Manhood
meet  in  one  Christ.     The  Perfect  Manhood  of  Christ,  not  His
Body  merely  but  His  Soul,  and  therefore  His  Human  Will,  is
part  of  the  One  Christ.     Unless  in  His  condescending  love  our
Eternal  Lord  has  thus  taken  upon  Him  our  fallen  nature  in  its
integrity,  that  is  to  say,  a  Human  Soul  as  well  as  a  Human
Body,  a  Human  Will  as  an  integral  element  of  the  Human  Soul,
mankind  would  not  have  been  really  represented  on  the  cross  or
before  the  throne.     We  should  not  have  been  truly  redeemed  or
sanctified  by  a  real  union  with  the  Most  Holy.

Yet  in  taking  upon  Him  a  Human  Will,  the  Eternal  Word
did  not  assume  a  second  principle  of  action  which  was  de-
structive of  the  real  unity  of  His  Person.  Within  the  precincts
of  a  single  human  soul  may  we  not  observe  two  principles  of
volition,  this  higher  and  that  lower,  this  animated  almost  en-
tirely by  reason,  that  as  exclusively  by  passion  %  St.  Paul  has
described  the  moral  dualism  within  a  single  will  which  is  cha-
racteristic of  the  approach  to  the  regenerate  life,  in  a  wonderful
passage  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Komans  °^.  The  real  self  is  loyal  to
God;  yet  the  Christian  sees  within  him  a  second  self,  warring
against  the  law  of  his  mind,  and  bringing  him  into  captivity  to
that  which  his  central  being,  in  its  loyalty  to  God,  energetically
rejects'^.  Yet  in  this  great  conflict  between  the  old  and  the  new
self  of  the  regenerate  man,  there  is,  we  know,  no  real  schism  of

"*  Bom.  vii.  14-25.  Origen,  St.  GhryBostom,  and  Theodoret  understand
this  passage  of  the  state  of  man  before  regeneration.  Bt.  Augustine  was  of
this  mind  in  his  earlier  theological  life  (Confess,  vii.  21 ;  Prop.  45  in  Ep.  ad
Bom.,  quoted  by  Meyer,  Bomer.  p.  246),  but  his  struggle  with  the  Pelagian
heresy  led  him  to  understand  the  passage  of  the  regenerate  (Betractat.  i.  23,
ii.  I ;  contr.  duas  Ep.  Pelag.  i.  10 ;  contr.  Faust,  xv.  8).  This  judgment
has  been  accepted  by  the  great  divines  of  the  middle  ages,  St.  Anselm  and
Aquinas,  and  largely  by  the  modems.  Of  late  years,  the  Greek  interpretation
has  been  again  widely  accepted,  as  doing  more  perfect  justice  to  the  lan-
guage of  the  Apostle.  "  Bom.  vii.  17,  32,  23.


266  Chrisfs  two  Wills  harmonious^  yet  distinct.

an  indivisible  person,  although  for  the  moment  antagonist  ele-
ments within  the  soul  are  so  engaged  as  to  look  like  separate
hostile  agencies.      The  man's  lower  nature  is  not  a  distmct
person,  yet  it  has  what  is  almost  a  distinct  will,  and  what  is
thus  a  shadow  of  the  Created  Will  which  Christ  assumed  along
with  His  Human  Nature.     Of  course  in  the  Incarnate  Christ,
the  Human  Will,  although  a  proper  principle  of  action,  was  not,
could  not  he,  in  other  than  the  most  absolute  harmony  with  the
Will  of  God  o.    Christ's  sinlessness  is  the  historical  expression  of
this  harmony.     The  Human  Will  of  Christ  corresponded  to  the
Eternal  WiU  with  unvarying  accuracy ;  because  in  point  of  feet
God,  Incarnate  in  Christ,  willed  each  volition  of  Christ's  Human
Will  P.     Christ's  Human  Will  then  had  a  distinct  existence,  yet
Its  free  volitions  were  but  the  earthly  echoes  of  the  Will  of  the
All-holy  <i.     At  the  Temptation  It  was  confronted  with  the  per-
sonal principle  of  evil ;  but  the  Tempter  without  was  seconded
by  no  pulse  of  sympathy  within.     The  Human  Will  of  Christ
was  incapable  of  willing  evil.     In  Gethsemane  It  was  thrown
forward  into  strong  relief  as  Jesus  bent  to  accept  the  chalice  of
suffering  from  which  His  Human  sensitiveness  could  not  bnt
shrink.     But  from  the  first  It  was  controlled  by  the  Divine  Will
to  which  It  is  indissolubly  united ;  just  as,  if  we  may  use  the
comparison,  in  a  holy  man,  passion  and  impulse  are  brought
entirely  under  the  empire  of  reason  and  conscience  ^.     As  God
and  Man,  our  Lord  has  two  Wills ;  but  the  Divine  Will  origi-
nates and  rules  His  Action ;  the  Human  Will  is  but  the  docile
servant  of  that  Will  of  God  which  has  its  seat  in  Christ's  Divine
and  Eternal  Person  ».     Here  indeed  we  touch  upon  the  line  at

®  This  was  the  ground  taken  in  the  Sixth  General  Council,  a.d.  ^%o,
when  the  language  of  Chalcedon  was  adapted  to  meet  the  error  of  the  Mono-
thelites.  Ai^  ^vvmhs  deXijo'ets  ijrot  deKifixara  iv  avr^  kcX  S^  <pv<rucks
ivtfyyeias  d^iaiperws,  drpeirras,  dfiepia'TooSf  dtrvyxOrots,  Kar^  r^y  rQv  aiyutp
tcarepoiv  ^idoffKokiav  Kripirrofiev,  Kal  8i^  <f>v(TiKii  dekiifiara  ovk  vir^pamia,  nh
yivoirOf  Ka.B<i)s  oi  daefieis  ^<f>rj(rap  cupeTiKol,  dW*  eirSfievov  rh  dvBpt&icivov  mnw
64\r)fia,  Kal  fi^  avriirlvToy,  ff  dvrtTraXcuov  fiaWov  fihv  odv  Koi  virora(r(r6ft€roF
ry  6€i^  avrov  Koi  vavffBevet  BeXiiixari,  Mansi,  torn.  xi.  p.  637.  Bouth,  Scr.
Op.  ii.  236;  Hooker,  E.  P.  v.  48.  9.

P  This  does  not  exclude  the  action  upon  our  Lord's  Manhood  of  the  HcJj
Spirit,  Who  is  One  with  the  Word  as  with  the  Father :  St.  Matt.  iv.  i ;
St.  Luke  iv.  18 ;  St.  John  iii.  34 ;  Acts  x.  38.

4  'In  ancient  language,  a  twofold  voluntas  is  quite  compatible  with
a  single  volitio.*     Klee,  Dogmengesch.  ii.  4.  6.

'  St.  Maximus  illustrates  the  two  harmonious  operations  of  the  Two
Wills  in  Christ,  by  the  physical  image  of  a  heated  sword  which  both  cut*
and  bums.     Disp.  cont.  Pyrrh.  apud  Klee,  ubi  sup.

■  St.  Ambros.  de  Fide,  v.  6 :    *  Didicisti,  quod  omnia  sibi  Ipsi  subjicere

[lect.


Mystery^  no  reasonable  bar  to  faith.        267


which  revealed  truth  shades  off  into  inaccessible  mystery.  We
may  not  seek  to  penetrate  the  secrets  of  that  marvellous  B^avhpuai
hipy^ia  \  but  at  least  we  know  that  each  Nature  of  Christ  is
perfect,  and  that  the  Person  which  unites  them  is  One  and  in-
dissoluble *.

For  the  illustration  of  the  Creed  might  at  least  remind  us
that  we  carry  about  with  us  the  mystery  of  a  composite  nature,
which  should  lead  a  thoughtful  man  to  pause  before  pressing
such  objections  as  are  urged  by  modem  scepticism  agionst  the
truth  of  the  Incarnation.  The  Christ  Who  is  revealed  in  the
Gospels  and  Who  is  worshipped  by  the  Chui'ch,  is  rejected  as
being  <an  unintelligible  wonder!'  True,  He  is,  as  well  in  His
condescension  as  in  His  greatness,  utterly  beyond  the  scope  of
our  finite  comprehensions.  *  Salv4  proprietate  utriusque  Natures,,
et  in  unam  coeunte  personam,  suscepta  est  a  majestate  humilitas,
a  virtute  infirmitas,  ab  fietemitate  mortalitas  ^.*  We  do  not  pro-
fess to  solve  the  mystery  of  that  Union  between  the  Almighty,
Omniscient,  Omnipresent  Being,  and  a  Human  Life,  with  its
bounded  powers,  its  limited  Imowledge,  its  restricted  sphere.
We  only  know  that  in  Christ,  the  finite  and  the  Infinite  are  thus
united.  But  we  can  understand  this  mysterious  union  at  least
as  well  as  we  can  understand  the  union  of  such  an  organism  as
the  human  body  to  a  spiritual  immaterial  principle  like  the
human  soul.  How  does  spirit  thus  league  itself  with  matter  %
Where  and  what  is  the  life-principle  of  the  body  ]  Where  is  the
exact  frontier-line  between  sense  and  consciousness,  between
brain  and  thought,  between  the  act  of  will  and  the  movement  of
muscle  1  Is  human  nature  then  so  utterly  commonplace,  and
have  its  secrets  been  so  entirely  unravelled  by  contemporary
science,  as  to  entitle  us  to  demand  of  the  Almighty  God  that
when  He  reveals  Himself  to  us  He  shall  disrobe  Himself  of

poBsit  secundam  operatioxiem  utiqae  Deitatis ;  disoe  nunc  quod  secundum
camem  omnia  subjecta  accipiat.*

*  St.  Leo,  Ep.  xxviii.  c.  4 :  *  Qui  verus  est  Dens,  idem  verus  est  Homo ;
et  nullum  est  in  hac  unitate  mendacium,  dum  invicem  sunt  et  humilitas
hominis  et  altitude  deitatis.  Agit  enim  utraque  forma  cum  alterius
communione  quod  proprium  est ;  Verbo  scilicet  operante  quod  Verbi  eet,  et
came  exsequente  quod  carnis  est.  XJnum  borum  ooruscat  miraoulis,  alteram
succumbit  injuiiis.*  St.  Job.  Damasc.  iii.  19 :  ©cow  4paydporirf)(ravrost  jcol  ri
difBpanriyii  aifTov  iv4py€M  $€ia  ^v,  ijyovv  r€$€cafi4yri,  Jcol  ohK  Afioipos  rrjs  0elai
cwTou  4p€pytlas'  iral  ^  dfla  ainov  4v4py€ia  ovk  (ifxoipos  rrjs  iivBpwifltnus  avrov
htpytlas'  i.\\'  kKaripa  <rhv  tJ  4T€poc  Oewpovfxeyii,  He  urges,  here  and  in
iii.  15,  that  Two  Natures  imply  Two  Energies  co-operating,  for  no  nature  is
&v€»ipyijros.   See  St.  Tho.  3*.  19.  i.

™  St.  Leo,  Ep.  xxviii.  c.  3.


268      Incarnation,  how  related  to  Creation.

mystery  f  If  we  reject  His  Self-revelation  in  the  Person  of
Jesus  Christ  on  the  ground  of  our  inability  to  understand  the
difficulties,  great  and  undeniable,  although  not  greater  than  we
might  have  anticipated,  which  do  in  fact  surround  it ;  are  we
also  prepared  to  conclude  that,  because  we  cannot  explain  how  a
spiritual  principle  like  the  soul  can  be  robed  in  and  act  through
a  material  body,  we  will  therefore  close  our  eyes  to  the  arffu-
ments  which  ce^  us  that  the  soul  is  an  imLterial  essen^.
and  take  refuge  from  this  oppressive  sense  of  mystery  in  some
doctrine  of  consistent  materialism  ^  %

Certainly  St.  John's  doctrine  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Word
Incarnate  cannot  be  reasonably  objected  to  on  the  score  of  its
mysteriousness  by  those  who  allow  themselves  to  face  their  real
ignorance  of  the  mysteries  of  our  human  nature.  Nor  does  that
doctrine  involve  a  necessary  internal  self-contradiction  on  such  a
ground  as  that '  the  Word  by  Whom  all  things  were  made,  and
Who  sustains  all  things,  cannot  become  His  Own  creature.'  Un-
doubtedly the  Word  Incarnate  does  not  cease  to  be  the  Word ;
but  He  can  and  does  assume  a  Nature  which  He  has  created,
and  in  which  He  dwells,  that  in  it  He  may  manifest  Himself
Between  the  processes  of  Creation  and  Incarnation  there  is  no
necessary  contradiction  in  Divine  revelation,  such  as  is  presumed
to  exist  by  certain  Pantheistic  thinkers.  He  who  becomes  In-
carnate creates  the  form  in  which  He  manifests  Himself  simul-
taneously with  the  act  of  His  Self-manifestation.  Doubtless
when  we  say  that  God  creates,  we  imply  that  He  gives  an  exist-
ence to  something  other  than  Himself.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is
certain  that  He  does  in  a  real  sense  Himself  exist  in  each  created
object,  not  as  being  one  with  it,  but  as  upholding  it  in  being.  He
is  in  every  such  object  the  constitutive,  sustaining,  binding  force
which  perpetuates  its  being.  Thus  in  varying  degrees  the
creatures  are  temples  and  organs  of  the  indwelling  Presence  of
the  Creator,  although  in  His  Essence  He  is  infinitely  removed
from  them.  If  this  is  true  of  the  irrational  and,  in  a  lower
measure,  even  of  the  inanimate  creatures,  much  more  is  it  true

^  The  true  lesson  of  such  uncompreliended  truths  has  been  stated  in
Dante's  imperishable  lines : —

'  Accender  ne  dovria  piti  il  disio

Di  veder  quella  essenzia,  in  che  si  vede
Come  nostra  natura  e  Dio  s*unio.
li  si  vedrk  cib  che  tenem  per  fede,
Non  dimostrato ;  ma  fia  per  se  noto,
Aguisa  del  yer  primo  che  Tuom  crede.*

Fabad.  ii.  40-45.

[  LECT.


Origin  of  belief  in  the  Godhead  of  Christ.    269

of  the  family  of  man,  and  of  each  member  of  that  family.  In
vast  inorganic  masses  God  discovers  Himself  as  the  supreme,
creative,  sustaining  Force.  In  the  graduated  orders  of  vital
power  which  range  throughout  the  animal  and  vegetable  worlds,
God  unveils  His  activity  as  the  Fountain  of  9.11  life.  In  man,  a
creature  exercising  conscious  reflective  thought  and  free  self-
determining  will,  God  proclaims  Himself  a  free  Intelligent
Agent.  Man  indeed  may,  if  he  will,  reveal  much  more  than
this  of  the  beauty  of  God.  Man  may  shed  abroad,  by  the  free
movement  of  his  will,  rays  of  God's  moral  glory,  of  love,  of
mercy,  of  purity,  of  justice.  Whether  a  man  will  thus  declare
the  glory  of  his  Maker  depends  not  upon  the  necessary  con-
stitution of  his  nature,  but  upon  the  free  co-operation  of  his  will
with  the  designs  of  God.  God  however  is  obviously  able  to
create  a  Being  who  will  reveal  Him  perfectly  and  of  necessity,
as  expressing  His  perfect  image  and  likeness  before  His  creatures.
All  nature  points  to  such  a  Being  as  its  climax  and  consumma-
tion. And  such  a  Being  is  the  Archetypal  Manhood,  assumed
by  the  Eternal  Word.  .  It  is  the  climax  of  God's  creation ;  It  is
the  climax  also  of  God's  Self-revelation.  At  this  point  God's
creative  activity  becomes  entirely  one  with  His  Self-revealing
activity.  The  Sacred  Manhood  is  a  creature,  yet  It  is  indis-
Bolubly  united  to  the  Eternal  Word.  It  differs  from  every  other
created  being,  in  that  God  personally  tenants  It.  So  far  then
are  Incarnation  and  Creation  from  being  antagonistic  concep-
tions of  the  activity  of  God,  that  the  absolutely  Perfect  Creature
only  exists  as  a  perfect  reflection  of  the  Divine  glory.  In  the
Incarnation,  God  creates  only  to  reveal,  and  He  reveals  perfectly
by  That  which  He  creates.  *The  Word  was  made  flesh  and
dwelt  among  us,  and  we  beheld  His  glory  ^.'

VI.  But  if  belief  in  our  Lord's  Divinity,  as  taught  by  St.
John,  cannot  be  reasonably  objected  to  on  such  grounds  as  have
been  noticed,  can  it  be  destroyed  by  a  natural  explanation  of  its
upgrowth  and  formation  ?  Here,  undoubtedly,  we  touch  upon  a
suspicion  which  underlies  much  of  the  current  scepticism  of  the
day;  and  with  a  few  words  on  this  momentous  topic  we  may
conclude  the  present  lecture.

Those  who  reject  the  doctrine  that  Christ  is  God  are  con-
fronted by  the  consideration  that,  after  the  lapse  of  eighteen
centuries  since  His  appearance  on  this  earth,  He  is  believed  in
and  worshipped  as  God  by  a  Christendom  which  embraces  the

^  On  this  subject,  see  Martensen,  Christl.  Dogmat.  §  133.


2  70      Theory  of  'Deification  by  entkusiasm!

most  civilized  portion  of  the  haman  fetmily.  The  question  arises
how  to  account  for  this  £eu;t.  There  is  no  difficulty  at  all  in
accounting  for  it  if  we  suppose  Him  to  he,  and  to  have  pro-
claimed Himself  to  he,  a  Divine  Person.  But  if  we  hold  Uiat,
as  a  matter  of  history,  He  helieved  Himself  to  he  a  mere  man,
how  are  we  to  explain  the  world-wide  upgrowth  of  so  extra-
ordinary a  helief  ahout  Him,  as  is  this  helief  in  His  Divinity  %
Scepticism  may  fold  its  arms  and  may  smile  at  what  it  deems
the  intrinsic  absurdity  of  the  dogma  believed  in ;  hut  it  cannot
ignore  the  existing  prevalence  of  the  belief  which  accepts  the
dogma.  The  belief  is  a  phenomenon  which  at  least  challenges
attention.  How  has  that  belief  been  spread  %  How  is  it  that
for  eighteen  hundred  years,  and  at  this  hour,  a  conviction  of  the
truth  of  the  Godhead  of  Jesus  dominates  over  the  world  of
Christian  thought  %  Here,  if  scepticism  would  save  its  intellec-
tual credit,  it  must  cease  from  the  perpetual  reiteration  of  doubts
and  negations,  unrelieved  by  any  frank  assertions  or  admissions
of  positive  truth.  It  must  make  a  venture ;  it  must  commit
itself  to  the  responsibilities  of  a  positive  position,  however  inexact
and  shadowy;  it  must  hazard  an  hypothesis  and  be  prepared  to
defend  it.

Accordingly  the  theory  which  proposes  to  explain  the  belief
of  Christendom  in  the  Godhead  of  Christ  maintains  that  Christ
was  '  deified '  by  the  enthusiasm  of  His  first  disciples.  We  are
told  that  'man  instinctively  creates  a  creed  that  diall  meet  the
wants  and  aspirations  of  his  understanding  and  of  his  heart  x.'
The  teaching  of  Christ  created  in  His  first  followers  a  passionate
devotion  to  His  Person,  and  a  desire  for  unreserved  submission
to  Hifl  dictatorship.  Not  that  Christ's  Divinity  was  decreed  Him
by  any  formal  act  of  public  honour ;  it  was  the  spontaneous  and
irregular  tribute  of  a  passionate  enthusiasm.  Could  any  expres-
sion of  reverence  seem  exaggerated  to  an  admiration  and  a  love
which  knew  no  bounds?  Could  any  intellectual  price  be  too
high  to  pay  for  the  advantage  of  placing  the  authority  of  the
Greatest  of  teachers  upon  that  one  basis  of  authority  which  is
beyond  assault?  Do  not  love  and  reverence,  centring  upon  a
friend,  upon  a  memory,  with  eager  intensity,  turn  a  somewhat
impatient  ear  to  the  cautious  protestations  of  the  critical  reason,
when  any  such  voice  can  make  itself  heard  %  Do  they  'Uot  pass
by  imperceptible  degrees  into  adoration?  Does  not  adoration
take  for  granted  the  Divinity  of  the  object  which  it  has  learned

*  Feuerbach,  Greist.  d.  Chiistenth.  EinL

[  LECT.


6V.  yokn^s  writings  fatal  to  the  theory.     271

imperceptibly  and  unreflectingly  to  adore?  The  enthusiasm
created  by  Jesus  Christ  in  those  around  Him,  thus  comes  to  be
credited  with  the  invention  and  propagation  of  the  belief  in  His
Divinity.  *  So  mighty  was  the  enthusiasm,  that  nothing  short
of  that  stupendous  belief  would  satisfy  it.  The  heart  of
Christendom  gave  law  to  its  understanding.  Christians  wished
Christ  to  be  God,  and  they  forthwith  thought  that  they  had
sufficient  reasons  for  believing  in  His  Godhead.  The  feelmg  of
a  society  of  affectionate  friends  found  its  way  in  process  of  time
into  the  world  of  speculation.  It  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  dia-
lecticians, and  into  the  hands  of  the  metaphysicians;  it  was
analysed,  it  was  defined,  it  was  coloured  by  contact  with  foreign
speculations ;  it  was  enlarged  by  the  accretion  of  new  intellectual
material.  At  length  Fathers  and  Councils  had  finished  their
graceless  and  pedantic  task,  and  that  which  had  at  first  been  the
fresh  sentiment  of  shnple  and  loving  hearts  was  duly  hardened
and  rounded  off  into  a  solid  block  of  repulsive  dogma.'

Now  St.  John's  writings  are  a  standing  difficulty  in  the  way
of  this  enterprising  hypothesis.  We  have  seen  that  the  fourth
Gospel  must  be  recognised  as  St.  John's,  unless,  to  use  the  words
of  Ewald,  '  we  are  prepared  knowingly  to  receive  falsehood  and
to  reject  truth.'  But  we  have  also  seen  that  in  the  fourth
Gospel,  Jesus  Christ  is  proclaimed  to  be  God  by  the  whole  drift
of  the  argument,  and  in  terms  as  explicit  as  those  of  the  Nicene
Creed.  We  have  not  then  to  deal  with  any  supposed  process  of
deification,  whereby  the  Person  of  Jesus  was  '  transfigured '  in
the  apprehension  of  sub-apostolic  or  post-apostolic  Christendom.
It  is  St.  John  who  proclaims  that  Jesus  is  the  Word  Incarnate,
and  that  the  Word  is  God.  How  can  we  account  for  St.  John's
conduct  in  representing  Him  as  God,  if  He  was  in  truth  only
man )  It  will  not  avail  to  argue  that  St.  John  wrote  his  Gospel
in  his  old  age,  and  that  the  memories  of  his  youthful  companion-
ship with  Jesus  had  been  coloured,  heightened,  transformed,
idealized,  by  the  meditative  enthusiasm  of  more  than  half  a
century.  It  will  not  avail  to  say  that  the  reverence  of  the
beloved  disciple  for  his  ascended  Master  was  fatal  to  the  accuracy
of  the  portrait  which  he  drew  of  Him.  For  what  is  this  but  to
misapprehend  the  very  fundamental  nature  of  reverence?  Truth
is  the  basis,  as  it  is  the  object  of  reverence,  not  less  than  of
every  other  virtue.  Reverence  prostrates  herself  before  a  great-
ness the  reality  of  which  is  obvious  to  her ;  but  she  would  cease
to  be  reverence  if  she  could  exaggerate  the  greatness  which  pro-
vokes her  homage,  not  less  surely  than  if  she  could  depreciate


272  Could  St.  John  have  *  deified*  a  human  friend^

or  deny  it.  The  sentiment  which,  in  contemplating  its  object
abandons  the  guidance  of  fetct  for  that  of  imagination,  is  disloyal
to  that  honesty  of  purpose  which  is  of  the  essence  of  reverence ;
and  it  is  certain  at  last  to  subserve  the  purposes  of  the  scomer
and  the  spoiler.  St.  John  insists  that  he  teaches  the  Church
only  that  which  he  has  seen  and  heard.  Even  a  slight  swerving
from  truth  must  be  painful  to  genuine  reverence;  but  what
shall  we  say  of  an  exaggeration  so  gigantic,  if  an  exaggeration
it  be,  as  that  which  transforms  a  human  friend  into  the  Ahnighty
and  Everlasting  God  ?  If  Jesus  Christ  is  not  God,  how  is  it
that  the  most  intimate  of  His  earthly  friends  came  to  beliere
and  to  teach  that  He  really  is  God  %

Place  yourselves,  my  brethren,  fairly  face  to  face  with  this
difficulty ;  imagine  yourselves,  for  the  moment,  in  the  position
of  St.  John.  Think  of  any  whom  you  have  loved  and  revered,
beyond  measure,  as  it  has  seemed,  in  past  years.  He  has
gone ;  but  you  cling  to  him  more  earnestly  in  thought  and
affection  than  while  he  was  here.  You  treasure  his  words,  you
revisit  his  haunts,  you  delight  in  the  company  of  his  Mends,  you
represent  to  yourself  his  wonted  turns  of  thought  and  phrase,
you  con  over  his  handwriting,  you  fondle  his  likeness.  These
things  are  for  you  precious  and  sacred.  Even  now,  there  are
times  when  the  tones  of  that  welcome  voice  seem  to  fell  with
living  power  upon  your  strained  ear.  Even  now,  the  outline
of  that  countenance,  upon  which  the  grave  has  closed,  flits,  as
if  capriciously,  before  your  eye  of  sense.  The  air  around  you
yields  it  perchance  to  your  intent  gaze,  radiant  with  a  higher
beauty  than  it  wore  of  old.  Others,  you  feel,  may  be  forgotten
as  memory  grows  weak,  and  the  passing  years  bring  with  them
the  quick  succession  of  new  fields  and  objects  of  interest,  press-
ing importunately  upon  the  heart  and  thoughts.  But  one  such
memory  as  I  have  glanced  at,  fades  not  at  the  bidding  of  time.
It  cannot  fade ;  it  has  become  a  part  of  the  mind  which  clings
to  it.  Some  who  are  here  may  have  known  those  whom  they
thus  remember;  a  few  of  us  assuredly  have  known  such.  But  can
we  conceive  it  possible  that,  after  any  lapse  of  time,  we  should
ever  express  our  reverence  and  love  for  the  unearthly  goodness,
the  moral  strength,  the  tenderness  of  heart,  the  fearlessness,  the
justice,  the  unselfishness  of  our  friend,  by  saying  that  he  was
not  an  ordinary  human  being,  but  a  superhuman  person  1  Can
we  imagine  ourselves  incorporating  our  recollections  about  him
with  some  current  theosophic  doctrine  elevating  him  to  the  rank
of  a  Divine  hypostasis  %    While  he  lies  in  his  silent  grave,  can

[lect.


Mankind  not  prone  to  ^deify^  human  virtue.    275

we  picture  ourselves  describing  him  as  the  very  absolute  Light
and  Life,  as  the  Licamate  Thought  of  the  Most  High,  as  stand-
ing in  a  relationship  altogether  unique  to  the  Eternal  and  Self-
existent  Being,  nay,  as  being  literally  Godi  To  say  that  *  St.  John
Hved  in  a  different  intellectual  atmosphere  from  our  own,'  does
not  meet  the  difficulty.  If  Jesus  was  merely  human,  St.  John's
statements  about  Him  are  among  the  most  preposterous  fictions
which  have  imposed  upon  the  world.  They  were  advanced  with
a  foil  knowledge  of  all  that  they  involved.  St.  John  was  at  least
as  profoundly  convinced  as  we  are  of  the  truth  of  the  unity  of
the  Supreme  Being.  St.  John  was  at  least  as  alive  as  we  can
be  to  the  infinite  interval  which  parts  the  highest  of  creatures
from  the  Great  Creator.  If  we  are  not  naturally  lured  on  by
some  irresistible  fascination,  by  the  poetry  or  by  the  credulity  of
our  advancing  years,  to  believe  in  the  Godhead  of  the  best  man
whom  we  have  ever  known,  neither  was  St.  John.  If  Jesus  had
been  merely  human,  St.  John  would  have  felt  what  we  feel  about
a  loved  and  revered  friend  whom  we  have  lost.  In  proportion
to  our  beKef  in  our  friend's  goodness,  in  proportion  to  our  loving
reverence  for  his  character,  is  the  strength  of  our  conviction  that
we  could  not  now  do  him  a  more  cruel  injury  than  by  entwining
a  blasphemous  fable,  such  as  the  ascription  of  Divinity  would
be,  around  the  simple  story  of  his  merely  human  life.  This
*  deification  of  Jesus  by  the  enthusiasm'  of  St.  John  would  have
been  consistent  neither  with  St.  John's  reverence  for  God,  nor
with  his  real  loyalty  to  a  merely  human  friend  and  teacher.
St.  John  worshipped  the  *  jealous'  God  of  Israel;  and  he  has
recorded  the  warning  which  he  himself  received  against  wor-
shipping the  angel  of  the  Apocalypse  y.  If  Christ  had  not  really
been  Divine,  the  real  beauty  of  His  Human  Character  would
bave  been  disfigured  by  any  association  with  such  legendary
exaggeration,  and  Christianity  would  assuredly  have  perished
within  the  limits  of  the  first  century.

The  theory  that  Jesus  was  deified  by  enthusiasm  assumes  the
existence  of  a  general  disposition  in  mankind  which  is  unwar-
ranted by  experience.  Generally  speaking  men  are  not  eager  to
believe  in  the  exalted  virtue,  much  less  in  the  superhuman  origin
or  dignity,  of  their  fellow-men.  And  to  do  them  justice,  the
writers  who  maintain  that  Jesus  was  invested  with  Divine
honours  by  popular  fervour,  illustrate  the  weakness  of  their  own
principle  very  conspicuously.    While  they  assert  that  nothing

»  Rev.  xxii.  9.
v]  X


274     Illuminative  Office  o/ilie  Holy  Ghost.

woe  more  easy  and  obvions  for  the  disciple  of  ihe  apostolic  age
than  to  believe  in  the  Divinitj  of  hifi  Master,  they  themselves
reject  that  trntb  with  the  greatest  poemble  obetinacj  and  deter-
mination ;  well-attested  though  it  be,  now  as  then,  by  hiBtorical
miracles  and  by  overwhelming  moral  considerations ;  bat  also
proclaimed  now,  as  it  was  not  then,  by  the  feith  of  eighteen  cen-
times, and  by  the  snffrageB  of  all  that  is  pnrest  and  truest  In
oar  existing  civilization.

But,  it  ia  suggested  that  the  apostolic  narrative  itself  bears
out  the  doctrine  that  Jesus  was  deified  through  euthasiaBni  by
its  account  of  the  functions  which  are  ascribed,  especially  in
St.  John's  Gospel,  to  Hie  Comforter.  Was  not  the  Comforter
sent  to  testiiy  of  Jesus  1  Is  it  not  said,  '  He  sbfill  gloriiy  Me' t
Does  uot  this  language  look  like  the  later  endeavour  of  a
religious  phrenzy,  to  account  for  exaggerations  of  which  it  is
conscious,  by  a  bold  claim  to  supernatural  illumination  1

Now  this  suggestion  implies  that  the  last  Discourse  of  onr
Lord  is  in  reality  a  foi^ry,  which  can  no  more  claim  to  repre-
sent His  real  thought  than  the  political  speeches  in  Thucydides
can  be  seriously  supposed  to  express  the  minds  of  the  speakers
to  whom  they  are  severally  attributed.     Or,  at  the  least,  it  im-
plies that  a  purely  human  feeling  is  here  clothed  by  language
ascribed  to  our  Lord  Himself  witi  the  attributes  of  a  Divine
Person.     Of  course,  if  St.  John  was  capable  of  deliberately
attributing  to  His  Master  that  which  He  did  not  say,  be  was
equally  capable  of  attributing  to  Him  actions  which  He  did  not
do ;    and  we  are  driven  to  imagine  that  the  closest  friend  of
Jesus  was  beUeved  by  apostolic^  Christendom  to  be  writing  a
history,  when  in  traih  he  was  only  composing  a  biograpHc&l
novel.     But,  as  Bousseau  has  observed,  iu  words  which  have
been  already  quoted,  the  original  inventor  of  the  Gospel  histtoy
would  have  beeu  as  miraculoos  a  being  as  its  historical  Sul^ect
And  the  moral  fascination  which  the  last  discourse  posseeses  &t
every  pure  and  tme  soul  at  this  hour,  combines  with  the  testi-
"  "     "       b  to  assure  us  that  it  could  have  been  spoien
an  lips,  and  that  it  la  beyond  the  inventiTt
lighest  human  genius.     Those  three  chapters
ronoouces  to  be  full  of  '  the  dryness  of  meta-
arknees  of  abstract  dogmas '  have  been,  aa  a
tored  by  the  t^ars  of  all  the  purest  love  mi
Christian  humanity  for  eighteen  centnriea.
Testament  more  able  t«  dispense  with  exten>al
[lkW.


Guidance  of  the  Spirit  and  natural  observation.  275

evidence  than  in  those  matchless  word^;  nowhere  more  than
here  is  it  sensibly  divine.

Undoubtedly  it  is  a  fact  that  in  these  chapters  our  Lord  does
promise  to  His  apostles  the  supernatural  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit.
It  is  true  that  the  Spirit  was  to  testify  of  Christ^  and  to  glorify
Christ  *,  and  to  guide  the  disciples  into  all  truth  ^.  But  how  ?
*  He  shall  take  of  Mine  and  shall  shew  it  unto  you©  ;*  *  He  shall
teach  you  all  things,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance
whatsoever  I  have  said  unto  you  d.*  The  Holy  Spirit  was  to
bring  the  words  and  works  and  character  of  Jesus  before  the
illuminated  intelligence  of  the  Apostles.  The  school  of  the
Spirit  was  to  be  the  school  of  reflection.  But  it  was  not  to  be
the  school  of  legendary  invention.  Acts,  which,  at  the  time  of
their  being  witnessed,  might  have  appeared  trivial  or  common-
place, would  be  seen,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit,  to  have
had  a  deeper  interest.  Words,  to  which  a  transient  or  local
value  had  been  assigned  at  first,  would  now  be  felt  to  invite
a  world-wide  and  eternal  meaning.  '  These  things  understood
not  His  disciples  at  the  first,'  is  true  of  much  else  besides  the
entry  into  Jerusalem  ®.  Moral,  spiritual,  physical  powers  which,
though  unexplained,  could  never  have  passed  for  the  product  of
purely  human  activity,  would  in  time  be  referred  by  the  Invisible
Teacher  to  their  true  source ;  they  would  be  regarded  with  awe
as  the  very  rays  of  Deity.

Thus  the  work  of  the  Spirit  would  but  complete,  systematize,
digest  the  results  of  previous  natural  observation.  Certainly  it
was  always  impossible  that  any  man  could  *  say  that  Jesus  is
the  Lord  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost  V  The  inward  teaching  of  the
Holy  Ghost  alone  could  make  the  Godhead  of  Jesus  a  certainty
of  faith  as  well  as  a  conclusion  of  the  intellect.  But  the  intel-
lectual conditions  of  belief  were  at  first  inseparable  from  natural
contact  with  the  living  Human  Form  of  Jesus  during  the  years
of  His  earthly  life.  Our  Lord  implies  this  in  saying,  *  Ye  also
shall  bear  witness,  because  ye  have  been  with  Me  from  the
beginning.'  The  Apostles  lived  with  One  Who  combined  an
exercise  of  the  highest  miraculous  powers  with  a  faultless  human

*  St.  John  XT.  a6 :  Inuvot  fiaprvfyfiaei  wepl  ifMVm

*  Ibid.  xvl.  14 :  iKtivos  4fih  8o|<i(r€i.

^  Ibid.  ver.  13 :  d^rry^trti  ifJMS  tls  ircurcty  r^v  &\^€iav.

*  Ibid.  vera.  I4,  15 :  iK  rod  ifiou  Kii^fTai,  ical  iufceyy*\eT  iiMf,
^  Ibid.  xiY.  26 :   iKuvos  byMS  8t8^ci  irianOf  koL  ^0fjLiHi<ru  ipus  irima  &

*  St.  John  xii,  14-16.
'  I  Car.  zii.  3 :  oitUls  ^irorai  clircir  K^pwit  'Itfirovp,  cl  ft^  h  li^tifuen  *Aylf*

V]  T  a


c


276  Bearing  of  St.yohns  intimacywith  our  Lord

character,  and  Who  averted  Himself  by  implication  and  ei-
pressly,  to  be  personally  God.  The  Spirit  strengthened  and
formalized  that  earlier  and  more  vague  belief  which  was  created
by  His  language ;  but  the  langnage  which  had  fallen  on  the
natural  ears  of  the  Apostles  was  His ;  and  it  was  the  genninal
principle  of  their  riper  faith  in  His  Divinity.

The  unbelief  of  our  day  is  naturally  anxious  to  evade  the
startling  fact  that  the  most  intimate  of  the  companions  of  Jesus
is  also  the  most  strenuous  assertor  of  His  Godhead.  There  is  a
proverb  to  the  effect  that  no  man's  life  should  be  written  by  his
private  servant.  That  proverb  expresses  the  general  conviction
of  mankind  that,  as  a  rule,  like  some  mountain  scenery  or  ruined
castles,  moral  greatness  in  men  is  more  picturesque  when  it  is
viewed  from  a  distance.  The  proverb  bids  you  not  to  scmtJDize
even  a  good  man  too  narrowly,  lest  perchance  you  should  dis-
cover flaws  in  his  character  which  will  somewhat  rudely  ehake
your  conviction  of  his  goodness.  It  is  hinted  that  some  un-
obtrusive weaknesses  which  escape  public  observation  will  be
obvious  to  a  man's  everyday  companion,  and  will  be  &tal  to  the
higher  estimate  which,  but  for  such  close  scrutiny,  might  have
been  formed  respecting  him.  But  in  the  case  of  Jesus  Christ
the  moral  of  this  cynical  proverb  is  altogether  at  fault.  Jeens
Christ  chooses  one  disciple  to  be  the  privileged  sharer  of  a
nearer  intimacy  than  any  other.  The  son  of  Zebedee  lies  upon
His  bosom  at  supper ;  he  is  '  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved.'
Along  with  St.  Peter  and  St.  James,  this  disciple  is  taken  to  the
holy  mount,  that  he  may  witness  the  glory  of  his  Transfigured
Lord.  He  enters  the  empty  tomb  on  the  morning  of  the  Hesor-
rection.  He  is  iu  the  upper  chamber  when  the  risen  Jesns
blessed  the  ten  and  the  eleven.  He  is  on  the  mount  of  the
Ascension  when  the  Conqneror  moves  np  visibly  into  heaven.
But  he  also  is  summoned  to  the  garden  where  Jesos  kneels  in
agony  beneath  the  olive  trees ;  and  alone  of  the  twelve  he  faces
the  fierce  multitude  on  the  road  to  Calvary,  and  stands  vitb
Mary  beneath  the  cross,  and  sees  Jesus  die.  He  sees  more  of
■'  "■  '  ■*'  '  ■'  ^Q  any  other,  more  of  His  glory,  more  (00
His  witness  is  pi'oportioned  to  his  nearer
n.  Whether  he  is  writing  Epistles  of  en-
ning,  or  narrating  heavenly  visions  tonch-
I  Church,  or  recording  the  experiences  of
enjoyed  that  intimate,  unmatched  com-
I,  beyond  any  other  of  the  sacred  writen,
d  and  teacher  of  our  Lord's  Divinity.


mr^^m^^^^^^^^mw^mmmg^^^^^m^mm^'^^^mKi^m^^^mfmm^m


on  the  Chris  to  logy  of  his  writings.         277

How  and  by  what  successive  steps  it  was  that  the  full  truth
embodied  in  his  Gospel  respecting  the  Person  of  his  Lord  made
its  way  into  and  mastered  the  soul  of  the  beloved  disciple,  who
indeed  shall  presume  to  say  9     Who  of  us  can  determine  the
exact  and  varied  observations  whereby  we  learn  to  measure  and
to  revere  the  component  elements  even  of  a  great  human  cha-
racter %     The  absorbing  interest  of  such  a  process  is  generally
fatal  to  an  accurate  analysis  of  its  stages.    We  penetrate  deeper
and  deeper,  we  mount  higher  and  higher,  as  we  follow  the
complex  system  of  motives,  capacities,  dispositions,  which,  one
after  another,  open  upon  us.     We  cannot,  on  looking  back,  say
when  this  or  that  feature  became  distinctly  clear  to  us.     We
know  not  now  by  what  additions  and  developments  the  general
impression  which  we  have  received  took  its  shape  and  outline.
St.  John  would  doubtless  have  learnt  portions  of  the  mighty
truth  from  definite  statements  and  at  specified  times.     The  real
sense  of  prophecy 8,  the  explicit  confessions  of  disciples!*,  the
assertions  by  which  our  Lord  replied  to  the  maHce  or  to  the
ignorance  of  His  opponents*,  were  doubtless  distinct  elements
of  the  Apostle's  training  in  the  school  of  truth.     St.  John  must
have  learned  something  of  Christ's  Divine  power  when,  at  His
■word,  the  putrid  corpse  of  Lazarus,  bound  with  its  grave-clothes,
moved  forward  into  air  and  life.     St.  John  must  have  learned
yet  more  of  his   Master's  condescension  when,  girded  with  a
towel,  Jesus  bent  Himself  to  the  earth,  that  He  might  wash  the
feet  of  the  traitor  Judas.   Each  miracle,  each  discourse  supplied
a  distinct  ray  of  light;  but  the  total  impression  must  have  been
formed,  strengthened,  deepened  by  the  incidents  of  daily  inter-
course, by  the  effects  of  hourly,  momentary  observation.     For
every  human  soul,  encased  in  its  earthly  prison-house,  seeks  and
finds  publicity  through  countless  outlets.    The  immaterial  spirit
traces  its  history  with  an  almost  invisible  delicacy  upon  the
coarse  hard  matter  which  is  its  servant  and  its  organ.    The  un-
conscious, involuntary  movements  of  manner  and  countenance,
the  unstudied  phrases  of  daily  or  of  casual  conversation,  the
emphasis  of  silence  not  less  than  the  emphasis  of  speech,  help  in
various  ways  to  complete  that  self-revelation  which  every  indi-
vidual character  makes  to  all  around,  and  which  is  studied  by

*  St.  John  xii.  41 :  ravra  tlirev  'Haraias,  5tc  €Z5€  tV  8^£ov  a&roS,  koI
AtUijo-e  irepi  cdnov,     Isa.  vi.  9.

^  St.  John  i.  49.  After  our  Lord's  words  implying  His  omnipresence,
Nathanael  says,  'Pafifil,  ah  c7  6  Tibs  tov  ecoi/.

'  St.  Jc^  yiii.  58,  &c.

^1


278  St.  J  alms  witness  based  on  personal  experience.

all  ia  each.  Not  otherwise  did  the  Incarnate  Word  reveal  Him-
self to  the  purest  and  keeneet  love  which  He  found  and  chose
&om  among  the  sons  of  men.  One  ffaw  or  fault  of  temper,  one
symptom  of  moral  impotence  or  of  moral  parvemon,  one  harty
word,  one  ill-considered  act,  would  have  shattered  the  ideal  for
ever.  But,  in  fact,  to  St.  John  the  Life  of  Jesus  was  as  the  liglit
of  heaven  ;  it  was  as  one  constant  unfailing  outflow  of  beauty,
ever  varying  its  illuminating  powers  as  it  falls  upon  the  leaves  of
the  forest  oak  or  upon  the  countless  ripples  of  the  ocean.  Intha
eyes  of  St.  John  the  Eternal  Person  of  Jesus  shone  forth  tiirou^
His  Humanity  with  translucent  splendour,  and  wove  and  folded
aroand  Itself,  as  the  days  and  weeks  passed  on,  a  moral  history
of  faultless  grandeur.  It  was  not  the  disciple  who  idealized  the
Master ;  it  was  the  Master  Who  revealed  Himself  in  His  majestic
glory  to  the  illumined  eye  and  to  the  entranced  touch  of  the
disciple.  No  treachery  of  memory,  no  ardour  of  temperament,
no  sustained  reflectiveness  of  soul,  could  have  compassed  the
transformation  of  a  human  friend  into  the  Almighty  and  Ever-
lasting Being.  Nor  was  there  room  for  serious  error  of  jndg-
ment  after  a  companionship  bo  intimate,  so  heart-searching, »
true,  a^  had  been  that  of  Jesus  with  St.  John.  And  thus  to  tie
beloved  disciple  the  Divinity  of  his  Lord  waa  not  a  scholastic
formula,  nor  a  pious  conjecture,  nor  a  controversial  thesis,  nor
the  adaptation  of  a  popular  superstition  to  meet  the  demands  0!
,  a  strong  enthusiasm,  nor  a  mystic  reverie.  It  was  nothing  lesa
than  a  fact  of  personal  experience.  '  That  Which  was  from  the
beginning,  Wbich  we  have  beard,  Which  we  have  seen  with  onr
eyes,  Which  we  have  looked  upon  and  our  hands  have  bandied,
of  tbe  Word  of  Life ;  (for  the  Life  was  manifested,  and  we  have
■ppii  Tt_  and  bfiar  witness,  and  shew  unto  you  that  Eternal  Life,
Father,  and  was  manifested  unto  us;)  That
and  heard  declare  we  unto  you.'


[lect.


LECTURE  VL

OUR  LORD'S  DIVINITY  AS  TAUGHT  BY  ST.  JAMES^

ST.  PETER,  AND  ST.  PAUL.


And  when  James,  Cephas,  and  John,  who  seemed  to  he  pillars,  perceived
the  grace  that  was  given  unto  me,  they  gave  to  me  and  Barnabas  the
right  hands  of  fellowship  ;  that  we  should  go  unto  the  heathen,  and  they
unto  the  circumcision; — Gal.  ii.  9.

The  meditative  temper  of  thought  and  phrase,  which  is  so.ob-
Bervable  in  St.  John,  may  be  thought  to  bear  in  two  different
manners  upon  the  question  before  us  in  these  lectures.  On  the
one  hand,  such  a  temper,  regarded  from  a  point  of  view  entirely
naturalistic,  must  be  admitted  to  be  a  guarantee  against  the  pre-
sumption that  St.  John,  in  his  enthusiastic  devotion  to  Jesus,
committed  himself  to  hasty  beliefs  and  assertions  respecting  the
Person  of  his  Friend  and  Master.  An  over-eager  and  undis-
criminating  admiration  would  not  naturally  express  itself  in
metaphysical  terminology  of  a  reflective  and  mystical  character.
But  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  asked  whether  too  much  stress
has  not  been  laid  by  the  argument  of  the  last  lecture  upon  the
witness  of  St.  John  1  Can  the  conclusions  of  a  mind  of  high-
strung  and  contemplative  temper  be  hel4  to  famish  reasons  on
which  the  Church  may  build  a  cardinal  point  of  belief  in  the
religion  of  mankind?  May  not  such  a  belief  be  inextricably
linked  to  the  moral  and  intellectual  idiosyncrasies  of  a  single
man )  The  belief  may  indeed  be  the  honest  and  adequate  result
of  that  particular  measure  and  kind  of  observation  and  reflection
which  one  saintly  mind  has  achieved ;  and  as  such  it  may  be
a  worthy  object  of  philosophical  interest  and  respect.  But  is  not
this  respect  and  interest  due  to  it  on  the  precise  ground  that  it
is  the  true  native  product  of  a  group  of  conditions,  which  co-
exist nowhere  else  save  in  the  particular  mind  which  generated
iti  Will  a  faith,  of  such  origin,  bear  transplantation  into  the
VI]


^%oSi.yckiisChrista!o^^karedhytheother  apostles.

moral  and  mpntal  eolI  ummdl  C^  it  be  noonsbed  and  handed
on  by  minds  of  *  diSeroit  calibre^  by  cbaracters  of  %  distinct  cast
from  that  in  «iuch  it  origuallf  gi^w  I  Dr-  Somoel  Jolmsoii,
for  instance,  bad  jHTrate  beliefe  which  wcte  obrionsly  due  to  the
tone  and  geiiiiis  iS  his  jwrticalar  character.  Theae  beliefs  go  far
to  coDstitTtte  tiie  cbana<tf  the  pietiire  with  which  w«  are  familiar
in  tbe  pages  of  BoewelL  Bat  our  respect  bs  Dr.  Johnson  does
Dot  force  Bs  to  accept  each  and  aQ  of  his  qnaint  coQTictioiia.
Tb^  are  peculiar  to  himself^  being  snch  as  be  was.  We  admire
than  aa  beh^^ing  to  the  attractire  and  eccentric  individnaltty
<i  the  nun.  We  do  not  Eoppoee  that  they  are  capable  of  being
d<RDesticated  in  the  gen»^  and  diicrsiSed  mind  of  England.

Now,  if  it  he  hinted  that  amne  rimn^r  estimate  ehonld  he
formed  respecting  St.  Jidin's  doctiii>e  fS  oar  Lord's  Dirinityj  the
jKesent,  for  obrioos  reasHU^  is  not  the  rounent  to  insist  npos  a
OHmdeiatiMi  vhieb  for  ns  Christians  most  have  paramoimt
weight,  namely,  that  St.  ZtAta  was  tangfat  by  an  infallible
Teacher,  I7  none  other  than  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  Bnt  let  09
remark,  fii^  of  aH,  the  bet  that  St.  John  did  conrey  to  a  large
circle  t£  minds  his  own  deep  conriction  that  hie  Friend  and
Master  was  a  Diyine  Person ;  paradcoical  as  that  conviction
most  at  fii^  have  seemed  to  than.  If  we  conld  have  traTelled
thrringh  Asia  Minor  at  tbe  end  «rf  the  first  centorj  of  onr  era,
we  shonld  hare  iaDen  in  with  a  nomber  of  perGons,  in  variooB
tanks  of  society,  who  so  entirely  believed  in  St.  John's  doctrine,
as  to  he  willing  to  die  for  it  withont  any  kind  of  hesitation*.
Bat  it  woold  have  been  a  mistake  to  sappoee  that  the  prevalence
of  the  doctrine  was  dne  only  to  the  activity  of  St.  John.  While
St.  John  was  teaching-  this  doctrine  under  tbe  form  which  he
had  been  gnided  to  adopt,  a  parallel  ctmunnnication  of  the  sob-
stance  of  the  doctrine  was  taking  place  in  several  other  qoartem
St.  John  was  supported,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  nse  sac^  an  ex-
preasion,  by  men  whose  minds  were  of  a  totally  distinct  natural
casL  and  who  emreseed  their  thonghts  in  a  religious  phraseolc^
rh  in  common  with  that  which  was  cnrrent

probably  writlAi  immediately  •fto'  Bonii^ui'i
ch.  Antipu  had  beeo  martTred  at  FergHuoa.
Bw  the  aonla  c€  martjn  who  had  been  behsaded

the  BoTTutfi  cnst«n  ai  exA^tJons.  In  t^e  perM^
ind  mere  cruel  kinds  of  death  had  been  in^ctel
I  (Ibid.  ii.  >3)  and  FluIadBlptiia  (Ibid.  iiL  8)  had
[leot  of  Bome  aUodea  to  the  violence  i^  this  paw-
The  Apostle  himsdf  wa«  banished  to  Patmoa.

[l£Ct


Doctrinal  bearings  of  the  meeting  at  Jerusalem.  281

in  the  school  of  Ephesus.  Nevertheless  it  will  be  our  duty  this
morning  to  observe,  how  radical  was  their  agreement  with
St.  John,  in  urging  upon  the  acceptance  of  the  human  race  the
doctrine  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God.

Very  ingenious  theories  concerning  a  supposed  division  of  the
Apostolical  Church  into  schools  of  thought  holding  antagonistic
beliefs  have  been  advanced  of  late  years.  And  they  have  had
the  effect  of  directing  a  large  amount  of  attention  to  the  account
which  St.  Paul  gives,  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  of  his  inter-
view with  the  leading  Apostles  at  Jerusalem  \  The  accuracy  of
that  account  is  not  questioned  even  by  the  most  destructive  of
the  Tubingen  divines.  According  to  St.  Irenaeus  and  the  great
majority  of  authorities,  both  ancient  and  modem,  the  interview
took  place  on  the  occasion  of  St.  Paul's  attendance  at  the  Apo-
stolical Council  of  Jerusalem.  St.  Paul  says  that  St.  James,
St.  Peter,  and  St.  John,  who  were  looked  upon  as  '  pillars '  of
the  Church,  among  the  Judaizing  Christians  as  well  as  among
Christians  generally,  gave  the  right  hands  of  fellowship  to  him-
self and  to  Barnabas.  *It  was  agreed,'  says  St.  Paul,  *that  we
should  go  unto  the  heathen,  and  they  unto  the  circumcision.'
Now  the  historical  interest  which  attaches  to  this  recorded
division  of  labour  among  the  leading  Apostles  is  sufficiently
obvious ;  but  the  dogmatic  interest  of  ^e  passage,  although  less
direct,  is  even  higher  than  the  historical.  This  passage  warrants
us  in  inferring  at  least  thus  much ; — ^that  the  leading  Apostles
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  were  not  hopelessly  at
issue  with  each  other  on  a  subject  of  such  central  and  primary
importance  as  the  Divine  and  Eternal  Nature  of  their  Master.

It  might  well  seem,  at  first  sight,  that  to  draw  such  an
inference  at  all  within  the  walls  of  a  Christian  church  was  itself
an  act  for  which  the  faith  of  Christians  would  exact  an  apology.
But  those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  imaginative  licence  of
recent  theories  will  not  deem  our  inference  altogether  im-
pertinent and  superfluous.  Of  late  years  St.  James  has  been
represented  as  more  of  a  Jew  than  a  Christian,  and  as  holding
in  reality  a  purely  Ebionitic  and  Humanitarian  belief  as  to  the
Person  of  Jesus.  St.  Paul  has  been  described  as  the  teacher  of
such  a  doctrine  of  the  Subordination  of  the  Son  as  to  be  prac-
tically Arian.  St.  Peter  is  then  exhibited  as  occupying  a  feeble
undecided  dogmatic  position,  intermediate  to  the  doctrines  of
St.  Paul  and  St.  James ;  while  all  the  three  are  contrasted  with

^  Gal.  ii  z-zo.
TI]


282  The  Apostles  fwt  indifferent  to  doctrinal  truth.

the  distinct  and  lofty  Christology  said  to  be  proper  to  the  gnosis
of  St.  John.  Now,  as  has  been  abready  remarked,  the  historical
trustworthiness  of  the  passage  in  the  Galatians  has  not  been
disputed  even  by  the  Tubingen  writers.  That  passage  repre-
sents St.  John  as  intimately  associated,  not  merely  with  St.  Peter
but  with  St.  James.  It  moreover  represents  these  three  apostles
as  giving  pledges  of  spiritual  co-operation  and  fellowship,  iioiox
their  common  basis  of  belief  and  action,  to  the  more  recent  con-
vert St.  Paul.  Is  it  to  be  supposed  that  St.  Paul  could  have
been  thus  accepted  as  a  fellow-worker  on  one  and  the  same
occasion  by  the  Apostle  who  is  said  to  be  a  simple  Humani-
tarian, and  by  the  Apostle  whose  whole  teaching  centres  in  Jesus
considered  as  the  historical  manifestation  of  the  Eternal  Word  %
Or  are  we  to  imagine  that  the  apostles  of  Christ  anticipated
that  indifference  to  doctrinal  exactness  which  is  characteristic
of  some  modem  schools  %  Did  they'  regard  the  question  of  our
Lord's  Personal  Godhead  as  a  kind  of  speculative  curiosity;  as
a  scholastic  conceit;  as  having  no  necessary  connexion  with
vital,  essential,  fundamental  Christianity  %  ^d  is  St.  Paul,  in
his  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  only  describing  the  first  great  ec-
clesJtical  compromise,  in  which  truths  of  primary  importance
were  sacrificed  for  an  immediate  practical  object,  more  ruthlessly
than  on  any  subsequent  occasion  %

My  brethren,  the  answer  to  these  questions  could  not  be
really  doubtful  to  any  except  the  most  paradoxical  of  modem
theorists.  To  say  nothing  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Jude,  St.  Paul's
general  language  on  the  subject  of  heresyc,  and  St.  John's  parti-
cular application  of  such  terms  as  '  the  liar'  and  '  antichrist  ^  *  to
Cerinthus  and  other  heretics,  make  the  supposition  of  such  in-
difference as  is  here  in  question,  in  the  case  of  the  apostles,
utterly  inadmissible.   If  the  apostles  had  differed  vitally  respect-

*  He  speaks  of  cupi<rcis  in  the  sense  of  sectarian  movements  tending  to  or
resulting  in  separation  from  the  Church,  as  a  form  of  evil  which  becomes
the  unwilling  instrument  of  good  (i  Cor.  zi.  19).  And  cdpeaeis  are  thus
classed  among  the  works  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  20).  Using  the  word  in  its
sense  of  dogmatic  error  on  vital  points,  St.  Paul  bids  Titus  reject  a  ' heretic*
affcer  two  warnings  fr^m  the  communion  of  the  Church :  alperuchv  JkvBp<airov
li^rh.  iiiau  KoX  demtpau  vovBeaiciy  wo^airov  (Tit.  iii.  lo).  On  the  inviolate
sacredness  of  the  apostolical  doctrine,  cf.  Gal.  i.  8 :  ^^i'  vfJ^eTs  fj  &77cX.os  ^|
ohpavov  ^hacYy^KlQiirai  hfuv  irap*  t  €V)777€Ai<r(i/i€0a  ifiiv,  i.v6^cfia  Iittw.  Cf.
a  Pet.  ii.  i.

*  I  St.  John  ii.  aa :  ris  i<mv  6  ^c^arrris,  ft  fi^  &  itpvo^jxeuos  8t»  'Iij<ro3s  oIk
toTT  IV  6  7ipi(rr6s  ;  ofnSs  iariv  6  iitrrlxpicrrosy  6  ipvoi/xevos  rhv  JJar^pa  Ktd  t6k
Ti6v.  iras  6  &pyo^fx€vos  rbv  Tibv,  ow5i  rhv  Tlarfpa  Ix**.  Cf.  Ibid.  iv.  3 ;
2  St.  John  7.

[tBCT.


T^he  Apostles  preach  one  Divine  Christ.     283

.„__« *

ing  the  Person  of  Christ,  they  would  have  shattered  the  work  of
Pentecost  in  its  infancy.  And  the  terms  in  which  they  speak  of
each  other  would  be  reduced  to  the  level  of  meaningless  or
insincere  conventionalities  ^.  Considering  that  the  Gospel  pre-
sented itself  to  the  world  as  an  absolute  and  exclusive  draught
of  Divine  truth,  contrasted  as  such  with  the  perpetually-shifting
forms  of  human  thought  around  it ;  we  may  deem  it  antecedently
probable,  that  those  critics  are  mistaken,  who  profess  to  have
discovered  at  the  very  fountain-head  of  Christianity  at  least  three
entirely  distinct  doctrines,  respecting  so  fundamental  a  question
as  the  personal  rank  of  Christ  in  the  scale  of  being.

Undoubtedly  it  is  true  that  as  the  Evangelists  approach  the
Person  of  our  Lord  from  distinct  points  of  view,  so  do  the
writers  of  the  apostolic  epistles  represent  different  attitudes  of
the  human  soul  towards  the  one  evangelical  truth  ;  and  in  this
way  they  impersonate  types  of  thought  and  feeling  which  have
ever  since  found  a  welcome  and  a  home  in  the  world-embracing
Church  of  Jesus  Christ.     St.  James  insists  most  earnestly  on  the
moral  obligations  of  Christian  believers ;  and  he  connects  the
Old  Testament  with  the  New  by  shewing  the  place  of  the  law,
now  elevated  and  transfigured  into  a  law  of  liberty,  in  the  new
life  of  Christians.     He  may  indeed  for  a  moment  be  engaged  in
refiiting  a  false  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  ^.     But  this  is
because  such  a  doctrine  prevents  Christians  from  duly  recogniz-
ing those  moral  and  spiritual  truths  and  obligations  upon  which
the  Apostle  is  most  eagerly  insisting.     Throughout  his  Epistle,


*  St.  Paul  assodates  himself  with  the  other  apostles  as  bearing  the  stress

of  a  common  confessorslup  for  Christ  (2  Cor.  xii.  12).     The  apostles  are,

together  with  the  prophets,  the  foundations  of  the  Church  (Eph.  ii.  20).

The  apostles  are  first  in  order  (Eph.  iv.  11).    Although  the  grace  of  God  in

himself  had  laboured  more  abundantly  than  all  the  apostles,  St.  Paul  terms

himself  the  least  of  the  apostolic  college  (i  Cor.  xv.  9).  The  equality  of  the

Gentile  believers  in  Christ  with  the  Jewish  believers  was  a  truth  made

known  to  St.  Paul  by  n)ecial  revelation,  and  he  called  it  his  Gospel ;  but

it  implied  no  properly  doctrinal  difference  between  himself  and  the  apostles

of  the  circumcision.    The  harmonious  action  of  the  apostles  as  a  united

spiritual  corporation  is  implied  in  such  passages  as  2  Pet.  iii.  2,  St.  Jude  17 ;

and  neither  of  these  passages  affords  ground  for  Baur's  inference  respecting

the  post-apostolic  age  of  the  writer.    In  2  St.  Pet.  iii.  15,  16,  St.  Peter

distinguishes  between  the  real  mind  of  'our  beloved  brother  Paul*  as

bdng  in  perfect  agreement  with  his  own,  and  the  abuse  which  had  been

made  by  teachers  of  error  of  certain  difficult  truths  put  forward  in  the

Pauline  Epistles :  duavSjird  nva,  &  oi  d,fiad€\s  Ka\  dLariipucroi  <rrp€fi\ov(riv  ws

Kol  rhs  \oiiriis  ypatphs,  irphs  r^v  18^  (xhr&v  iiirdoKfiay,

'  St.  James  ii.  14-26.


2  84    They  exhibit  distinct  types  of  the  one  doctrine.

doctrine  is,  comparatively  speaking,  thrown  into  the  background  ;
he  is  intent  upon  practical  considerations,  to  the  total,  or  well-
nigh  total,  exclusion  of  doctrinal  topics.  St.  Paul,  on  the  other
hand,  abounds  in  dogmatic  statements.  Still,  in  St.  Paul,  doc-
trine is,  at  least,  generally  brought  forward  with  a  view  to
•  some  immediate  practical  object.  Only  in  five  out  of  his  four-
teen Epistles  can  the  doctrinal  element  be  said  very  decidedly
to  predominate  ».  St.  Paul  assumes  that  his  readers  have  gone
through  a  course  of  oral  instruction  in  necessary  Christian  doc-
trine ^ ;  he  accordingly  completes,  he  expands,  he  draws  out  into
its  consequences  what  had  been  already  taught  by  himself  or  by
others.  St.  Paul's  fiery  and  impetuous  style  is  in  keeping  with
his  general  relation,  throughout  his  Epistles,  to  Christian  dogma.
The  calm  enunciation  of  an  enchained  series  of  consequences
flowing  from  some  central  or  supreme  truth  is  perpetually  in-
terrupted, in  St.  Paul,  by  the  exclamations,  the  questions,  the
parentheses,  the  anacoloutha,  the  quotations  from  hymns,  the
solemn  ascriptions  of  glory  to  the  Source  of  all  blessings,  the
outbursts  by  which  argument  suddenly  melts  into  stem  denun-
ciation, or  into  versatile  expostulation,  or  into  irresistible  appeals
to  sympathy,  or  into  the  highest  strains  of  lyrical  poetry.  Thus
it  is  that  in  St.  Paul  primary  dogma  appears,  as  it  were,  rather
in  flashes  of  light  streaming  with  rapid  coruscations  across  his
pages,  than  in  highly  elaborated  statements  such  as  might
abound  throughout  a  professed  doctrinal  treatise  of  some  later

«  And  yet  in  these  five  Epistles  an  immediate  practical  purpose  is  generally
discernible.  In  the  Komans  the  Apostle  is  harmonizing  the  Jewish  and
Gentile  elements  within  the  Catholic  Church,  by  shewing  that  each  section
is  equally  indebted  to  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  for  a  real  justification  before  God.
In  the  Gralatians  he  is  opposing  this  same  doctrinal  truth  to  the  destructive
and  reactionary  theory  of  the  Judaizers.  In  the  Ephesians  and  Colossians
he  is  meeting  the  mischievQus  pseudo-philosophy  and  Cabbalism  of  the
earliest  Gnostics,  here  positively  and  devotionally,  there  polemically,  by  in-
sisting  on  the  dignity  of  our  Lord's  Person,  and  the  mystery  of  His  relation
to  the  Church.  In  the  Hebrews,  written  either  by  St.  Paul  himself  or  by
St.  Luke  under  his  direction,  our  Lord's  Person  and  Priesthood  are  exhibited
in  their  several  bearings  as  a  practical  reason  agunst  apostasy  to  Judaism
(it  would  seem)  of  an  Alexandrian  type.

^  I  Thess.  iii.  10 :  vvkt^s  koU  7ifi4pas  6ir^p  ix  Tcpitrtrov  B^Sfifroi  els  rh  tSctr
{ffiwv  rh  irp6(rayK0Vf  Kcd  KaToprlffai  ra  iffrep^fiara  ttjs  vlcrrews  ^fiap.  The
Apostle  desires  to  see  the  Boman  Christians,  not  that  he  may  teach  them
any  supplementary  truths,  but  to  confirm  them  in  their  existing  belief  (els
rh  aTnpixOrjyai  iffias,  Rom.  i.  1 1)  by  the  interchange  of  spiritual  sympathies
with  himself.  See  I  Cor.  xv.  i ;  Gal.  i.  ii,  12,  iv.  13,  14;  I  Thess.  ii.  a;
2  Thess.  ii.  15.     Compare  i  St.  John  ii.  ai :  oifK  typa^a  iffiiv,  Uri  oitK  otdart

[lect.


•SV.  y antes  erroneously  deemed  Ebionitic.     285

age ;  and  yet  doctrine,  although  it  might  seem  to  be  introduced
incidentally  to  some  general  or  special  purpose,  nevertheless  is
inextricably  bound  up  with  the  Apostle's  whole  drift  of  practical
thought.    As  for  St.  John,  he  is  always  a  contemplative  and
mystical  theologian.     The  eye  of  his  soul  is  fixed  on  God,  and
on  the  Word  Incarnate.     St.  John  simply  describes  his  intui-
tions.    He  does  not  argue ;  he  asserts.     He  looks  up  to  heaven,
and  as  he  gazes  he  tells  us  what  he  sees.     He  continually  takes
an  intuition,  as  it  were,  to  pieces,  and  recombines  it ;  he  resists
forms  of  thought  which  contradict  it ;  but  he  does  not  engage
in  long  arguments,  as  if  he  were  a  dialectician, .  defending  or
attacking  a  theological  thesis.     Nor  is  St.  John's  temper  any
mere  love  of  speculation  divorced  from  practice.     Each  truth
which  the  Apostle  beholds,  however  unearthly  and  sublime,  has
a  directly  practical  and  transforming  power ;  St.  John  knows
nothing  of  realms  of  thought  which  leave  the  heart  and  con-
science altogether  untouched.     Thus,  speaking  generally,  the
three  Apostles  respectively  represent  the  moralist,  the  practical
dogmatist,  and  the  saintly  mystic  \  while  St.  Peter,  as  becomes
the  Apostle  first  in  order  in  the  sacred  college,  seems  to  blend
in  himself  the  three  types  of  Apostolical  teachers.     His  Epistles
are  not  without  elements  that  more   especially  characterize
St.  John ;   while  they  harmonize  in  a  y(ry  striking  manner
those  features  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  James  which  seem  most  nearly
to  approach  divergence.      It  may  be  added  that  St.  Peter*s
second  Epistle  finds  its  echo  in  St.  Jude.

I.  I.  The  marked  reserve  which  is  observable  in  St.  James'
Epistle  as  to  matters  of  doctrine,  combined  with  his  emphatic
allusions  to  the  social  duties  attaching  to  property  and  to  class
distinctions,  have  been  taken  to  imply  that  this  Epistle  repre-
sents what  is  assumed  by  some  theories  of  development  to  have
been  the  earliest  form  of  Christianity.  The  earliest  Christians
are  sometimes  referred  to,  as  having  been,  both  in  their  Christ-
ology  and  in  their  sociological  doctrines,  Ebionites.  But  St.
James'  Epistle  is  so  far  from  belonging  to  the  teaching  of  the
earliest  apostolical  age,  that  it  presupposes  nothing  less  than  a
very  widespread  and  indirect  effect  of  the  distinctive  teaching
of  St.  Paul.  St.  Paul's  emphatic  teaching  respecting  faith  as  the
receptive  cause  of  justification  must  have  been  promulgated  long
enough  and  widely  enough  to  have  been  perverted  into  a  parti-
cular gnosis  of  an  immoral  Antinomian  type.  With  that  gnosis
St.  James  enters  into  earnest  conflict.  Baur  indeed  maintains
that  St.  James  is  engaged  in  a  vehement  onslaught  upon  the


286  His  Epistle  belongs  to  the  later  Apostolical  age.

actual  teacliiiig,  npon  the  ijmssima  verha^  of  St.  Paul  himself*.
Now  even  if  yon  should  adopt  that  paradox,  you  would  still
obviously  be  debarred  from  saying  that  St.  James*  Epistle  is  a
sample  c^  the  earliest  Christianity,  of  the  Christianity  of  the  pre-
Pauline  age  of  the  Church  i.  But  in  point  of  fact,  as  Bishop  Bull
and  others  haye  long  since  shewn,  St.  James  is  attacking  an
eyil  which,  although  it  presupposes  and  is  based  upon  St.  Paul's
teaching,  is  as  foreign  to  the  mind  of  St.  Paul  as  to  his  own.
The  justification  by  faith  without  works  which  is  denounced  by
St.  James  is  a  corruption  and  a  caricature  of  that  sublime  truth
which  is  taught  us  by  the  author  of  the  Episties  to  the  Eomans
and  the  Qalatians.  Correspondent  to  the  general  temper  of  mind
which,  in  the  later  apostolical  age,  began  to  regard  the  truths  of
faith  and  morals  only  as  an  addition  to  the  intellectual  stock  of
human  thinkers,  there  arose  a  conception  of  fiadth  itself  which  de-
graded it  to  the  level  of  mere  barren  consent  on  the  part  of  the
speculative  £eu;ulty.  This  'fiadth'  had  no  necessary  relations  to
holiness  and  moral  growth,  to  sanctification  of  the  affections,  and
subdual  of  the  will  ^.    Thus,  for  the  moment,  error  had  imposed

*  Baur,  Vorlestmgen,  fiber  N.  T.  Theologie,  p.  277:  'In  dem  Brief
Jaoobi  dag^en  beg^^net  tms  nim  eine  auf  den  Mittelpunkt  der  paulinischen
Lehre  loegehende  Opposition.  Dem  pauliniachen  Hauptsats  Bom.  iii.  28 :
ZucatovirBat  Tltrrci  dvOp^ow^  X^fi^  ipyw  wSfAov  wird  nmi  hier  der  Satz  entge-
gengeBtellt,  Jac.  ii.  24 :  Sri  i^  tpyuv  Zucautvrai  &y9pcnros,  fcal  oinc  ix  Tlffrtws
ti6voy,  Alle  Yersache,  die  man  gemacht  hat,  nm  der  Anerkennnng  der
Thatsache  za  entgehen,  dass  ein  directer  Widerspmch  zwischen  dleeen
beiden  Lehrb^riffen  stattfinde  mid  der  Yerfasser  des  Jacobusbriefs  die
patdinische  Lenre  zmn  nnmittelbaren  Gregenstand  seiner  Pcdemik  mache,
sind  YoUig  vergeblich.'  In  his  Christenthmn  (p.  122)  Bamr  speaks  in
a  somewhat  less  peremptory  sense.  St.  James  'bekampft  eine  einseitige,
fUr  das  praktische  Christenuimn  nachtheilige  Aufiassmig  der  panlinischen
Lehre.'

^  Bam>,  Christenthmn,  p.  122 :  'Der  Brief  des  Jacobus,  wie  nnmoglich
verkannt  werden  kann,  die  paulinische  Kechtfertigangslehre  voranssetzt,  so
kann  er  auch  nor  eine  antipaulinische,  wenn  auch  nicht  nnmittelbar  gegen
den  Ajdob^  selbst  gerichtete  Tendenz  haben.*

^  ^  Messmer,  Erkl.  des  Jacobns-briefes,  p.  58 :  'Der  glaube  ist  bei  Jacobus
nichts  anders  als  die  Annahme,  der  Besitz  oder  auch  das  leere  Bekenntniss
der  chiistlichen  Wahrheiten  (sowohl  der  GUubens-als-Sitten-wahrheiten,)
Besultat  des  blossen  Horens  und  eigentUch  bloss  in  der  Erkenntniss  liegend.
....  Ein  solcher  Glaube  kann  fltr  sich,  wie  ein  unfruchtbarer  Keim,  voUig
wirkungslos  fltr  das  Leben  in  Menschen  liegen,  oder  auch  in  leeren  Grefiihlen
bestehen;    er  ist   nichts  als  Namen-und-Scheinchristenthum,   das  keine

Heiligkeit  hervorbringt Das,  was  diesem  Glauben  erst  die  Seele

einhaucht,  ist  die  gottliche  liebe,  durch  welche  der  Wille  und  alle
Krafte  dee  Menschen  zum  Dienste  des  Glaubens  ge£uigen  genommen
werden.

[lsct.


S/.  ^ arms  presupposes  Si.  Paul's  Christology.  287

apon  the  sacred  name  of  faith  a  sense  which  emptied  it  utterly  of
its  religious  value,  and  which  St.  Paul  would  have  disavowed  as
v^ehemently  as  St.  James.     St.  James  denies  that  this  mere  con-
sent of  the  intellect  to  a  speculative  position,  carrying  with  it  no
necessary  demands  upon  the  heart  and  upon  the  will,  can  justify
a  man  before  Gk)d.     But  when  St.  Paul  speaks  of  justifying
faith,  he  means  an  act  of  the  soul,  simple  indeed  at  the  moment
and  in  the  process  of  its  living  action,  but  complex  in  its  real
nature,  and  profound  and  far-reaching  in  its  moral  effect.     The
eye  of  the  soul  is  opened  upon  the  Redeemer :  it  believes.     But
in  this  act  of  living  belief,  not  the  intellect  alone,  but  in  reality,
although  imperceptibly,  the  whole  soul,  with  all  its  powers  of
love  and  resolution,  goes  forth  to  meet  its  Saviour.      This  is
St.  Paul's  meaning  when  he  insists  upon  justifying  faith  as  being
irioTts    dt*  ayaTrrfs  ivtpyovyiivT)^,      Faith,  according  to   St.  Paul,
when  once  it  lives  in  the  soul,  is  all  Christian  practice  in  the
germ.     The  living  apprehension  of  the  Crucified  One,  whereby
the  soul  attains  light  and  liberty,  may  be  separable  in  idea,
but  in   fact  it   is  inseparable  from  a  Christian  life.     If  the
apprehension  of  revealed  truth  does  not  carry  within  itself  the
secret  will  to  yield  the  whole  being  to  God*s  quickening  grace
and  guidance,  it  is  spiritually  worthless,  according  to  St.  Paul.
St.  Paul  goes  so  far  as  to  tell  the  Corinthians,  that  even  a  faith
which  was   gifted  with  the  power  of  performing   stupendous
miracles,  if  it  had  not  charity,  would  profit  nothing  m.     Thus
between  St.  Paul  and  St.  James  there  is  no  real  opposition.
When  St.  James  speaks  of  a  faith  that  cannot  justify,  he  means
a  barren  intellectual  consent  to  certain  religious  truths,  a  philo-
sophizing temper,  cold,  thin,  heartless,  soulless,  morally  impo-
tent, divorced  from  the  spirit  as  from  the  fruits  of  charity.
When  St.  Paul  proclaims  that  we  are  justified  by  faith  in  Jesus
Christ,  he  means  a  faith  which  only  realizes  its  life  by  love,  and
which,  if  it  did  not  love,  would  cease  to  live.     When  St.  James
contends  that  *by  works  a  man  is  justified,  and  not  by  faith
only,*  he  implies  fliat  faith  is  the  animating  motive  which  gives
to  works  their  justifying  power,  or  rather  that  works   only

*  Gal.  ▼.  6.

*  I  Cor.  xiii,  3 :  ih»  Hx^  waffoy  r^v  trl^mv^  &(rr€  tftri  fA^OiffrdvciPt  dydinjv
t^  H^  ix»,  ohZiv  ttfii.  The  yvwtris  of  I  Cor.  yiii.  I  seems  to  be  sabstantially
identic^  with  the  bare  vlaris  denounced  by  St.  James,  although  the  former
was  probably  of  a  more  purely  scientific  and  intellectual  character.  The
h^  of  I  Cor.  viii.  x  if  really  the  '^Icms  8i*  dydmis  ivtpyovfiirri  of  Gal.
T.6.


288  S/.  ^ antes  presupposes  St,  PauFs  Christology.

justify  as  beiog  the  expression  of  a  living  faith.  When  St.  Panl
argues  that  a  man  is  justified  neither  by  the  works  of  the  Jewish
law,  nor  by  the  works  of  natural  morality,  his  argument  shews
that  by  a  '  work'  he  means  a  mere  material  result  or  product,  a
soulless  act,  unenliyened  by  the  presence  of  that  one  supernatural
motive  which,  springing  from  the  grace  of  Christ,  can  be  indeed
acceptable  to  a  perfectly  holy  God.  But  if  on  the  question  of
justification  St.  James*  position  is  in  substance  identical  with
that  of  St.  Paul,  yet  St.  James*  position,  viewed  historically,  does
undoubtedly  presuppose  not  merely  a  wide  reception  of  St.  Paul's
teaching,  but  a  perverse  development  of  one  particular  side  of  it.
In  order  to  do  justice  to  St.  James,  we  have  to  contemplate  first,
the  fruitless  '  &ith'  of  the  Antinomian,  with  which  the  Apostle
is  immediately  in  conflict,  and  which  he  is  denouncing ;  next,
the  living  faith  of  the  Christian  believer,  as  insisted  upon  by
St.  Paul,  and  subsequently  caricatured  by  the  Antinomian  per-
version ;  lastly,  the  Object  of  the  believer's  living  faith,  Whose
Person  and  work  are  so  prominent  in  St.  Paul's  teaching.  It  is
not  too  much  to  say  that  all  this  is  in  the  mind  of  St.  James.
But  there  was  no  necessity  for  his  insisting  upon  what  was  well
understood ;  he  says  only  so  much  as  is  necessary  for  his  imme-
diate purpose.  His  Epistle  is  related  to  the  Pauline  Epistles  in
the  general  scheme  of  the  New  Testament,  as  an  explanatory
codicil  might  be  to  a  will.  The  codicil  does  not  the  less  repre-
sent the  mind  of  the  testator  because  it  is  not  drawn  up  by  the
same  lawyer  as  the  will  itself.  The  codicil  is  rendered  necessary
by  some  particular  liability  to  misconstruction,  which  has  be-
come patent  since  the  time  at  which  the  will  was  drawn  up.
Accordingly  the  codicil  defines  the  real  intention  of  the  testator ;
it  guards  that  intention  against  the  threatened  misconstruction.
But  it  does  not  repeat  in  detail  all  the  provisions  of  the  will,  in
order  to  protect  the  true  sense  of  a  single  clause.  Still  less  does
it  revoke  any  one  of  those  provisions ;  it  takes  for  granted  the
entire  document  to  which  it  is  appended.

The  elementary  character  of  parts  of  the  moral  teaching  of
St.  James  is  sometimes  too  easily  assumed  to  imply  that  that
Apostle  must  be  held  to  represent  the  earliest  stage  of  the  sup-
posed developments  of  apostolical  Christianity.  But  is  it  not
possible  that  in  apostolical  as  well  as  in  later  times,  'advanced'
Christians  may  have  occasionally  incurred  the  danger  of  forget-
ting some  important  precepts  even  of  natural  morality,  or  of
supposing  that  their  devotion  to  particular  truths  or  forms  of
thought,  or  that  their  experience  of  particular  states  of  feeling,

[lsgt.


Moral  truth  the  basis  of  dogmatic  faith,     289

constituted  a  religious  warrant  for  such  forgetfalness^  1  If  this
was  indeed  the  case,  St.  James'  Epistle  is  placed  in  its  true  light
when  we  see  in  it  a  healthful  appeal  to  that  primal  morality,
which  can  never  be  ignored  or  slighted  without  the  most  certain
risk  to  those  revealed  truths,  such  as  our  Lord's  plenary  Satis-
faction for  sin,  in  which  the  enlightened  conscience  finds  its  final
relief  fi:om  the  burden  and  misery  of  recognized  guilt.  If  the
sensitiveness  of  conscience  be  dulled  or  impaired,  the  doctrines
which  relieve  the  anguish  of  conscience  will  soon  lose  their
power.  St.  Paul  himself  is  perpetually  insisting  upon  the  nature
and  claims  of  Christian  virtue,  and  on  the  misery  and  certain
consequences  of  wilful  sin.  St.  James,  as  the  master  both  of
natural  and  of  Christian  ethics,  is  in  truth  reinforcing  St.  Paul,
the  herald  and  exponent  of  the  doctrines  of  redemption  and
justification.  Thus  St.  James'  moral  teaching  generally,  not  less
than  his  special  polemical  discussion  of  the  question  of  justifica-
tion, appears  to  presuppose  St.  Paul.  It  presupposes  St.  Paul
as  we  know  him  now  in  his  glorious  Epistles,  enjoining  the
purest  and  loftiest  Christian  sanctity  along  with  the  most  per-
fect acceptance  by  faith  of  the  Person  and  work  of  the  Divine
Redeemer.  But  it  also  presupposes  St.  Paul,  as  Gnostics  who
preceded  Marcion  had  already  misrepresented  him,  as  the
idealized  sophist  of  the  earliest  Antinomian  fancies,  the  sophist
who  had  proclaimed  a  practical  or  avowed  divorce  between  the
sanctions  of  morality  and  the  honour  of  Christ.  There  is  at
times  a  flavour  of  irony  in  St.  James*  language,  such  as  might
force  a  passage  for  the  voice  of  truth  and  love  through  the  dense
tangle  of  Antinomian  self-delusions.  St.  James  urges  that  to
listen  to  Christian  teaching  without  reducing  it  to  practice  is
but  the  moral  counterpart  of  a  momentary  listless  glance  in  a
polished  mirror®;  and  that  genuine  devotion  is  to  be  really
tested  by  such  practical  results  as  works  of  mercy  done  to  the

n  After  making  reference  to  Luther's  designation  of  this  Epistle  as  an
'Epistle  of  straw,  a  modem  French  Protestant  writer  proceeds  as  follows :
'Nou8-m§me8,  nous  ne  pouvons  consid^rer  la  doctrine  de  Jacques  ni  oomme
bien  logique,  ni  comme  suffisante ;  nous  y  voyons  la  grande  pens^  de  J^us
r^tr^e  et  appauvrie  par  le  principe  l^gal  du  mosalsme.  Le  christiamsme
de  Jacques  n  ^tait  qir  It  demi  ^mandp^  des  entraves  de  la  loi ;  c'^tait  un
degrd  inf^rieur  du  Ohristianisme,  et  qui  ne  oontenut  pas  en  germe  tons  lea
developpements  futurs  de  la  y^t^  chr^tienne.  II  est  douteuz  que  oette
l^pitre  ait  jamais  oonverti  personne.'  Premieres  TransformationB  aa  Chris-
tianisme,  par  A.  Goquerel  fils.  Paris,  1866.  (p.  65.)

*  St.  James  i.  33 :  cf  ris  dKpoarrijs  X&yov  iarl  Koi  oh  wonrn/is,  oZros  toiKw
iyhpi  KoravoovPTt  rh  irp6irwKov  r^y  ytw4a'tms  ahrov  ip  i(r6irTptf  Kartv6i^<T9  yiip
iavrhv,  ical  dircA^Av^c,  ical  €h$4ws  hteXdBrro  ^woios  tfy.
Tl]  U


290     Christianity  considered  as  the  New  Law.

aflflicted  and  the  poor,  and  by  conscientious  efforts  to  secure  the
inward  purity  of  an  unworldly  life  p.

2.  In  his  earnest  opposition  to  the  Antinomian  principle
St.  James  insists  upon  the  continuity  of  the  New  dispensation
with  the  Old.  Those  indeed  who  do  not  believe  the  representa-
tions of  the  great  Apostles  giyen  us  in  the  Acts  to  have  been  a
romance  of  the  second  century,  composed  with  a  view  to  recon-
ciling the  imagined  dissensions  of  the  sub-apostolical  Church,
will  not  fail  to  note  the  significance  of  St.  James'  attitude  at  the
Council  of  Jerusalem.  After  referring  to  the  prophecy  of  Amos
as  confirmatory  of  St.  Peter's  teaching  respecting  the  call  of  the
Gentiles,  St.  James  advises  that  no  attempt  should  be  made  to
impose  the  Jewish  law  generally  upon  iihe  Gentile  converts^
Four  points  of  observance  were  to  be  insisted  on,  for  reasons  of
very  various  kinds'*;  but  the  general  tenor  of  the  speech  proves
how  radically  the  Apostle  had  broken  with  Judaism  as  a  living
system.  Yet  in  his  Epistle  the  real  continuity  of  the  Law  and
the  Gospel  is  undeniably  prominent.  Considering  Christianity
as  a  rule  of  life  based  upon  a  revealed  creed,  St.  James  terms  it
also  a  Law.  But  the  Christian* Law  is  no  mere  reproduction  of
the  Sinaitic.  The  New  Law  of  Christendom  is  distinguished  by
epithets  which  define  its  essential  superiority  to  the  law  of  the
synagogue,  and  which  moreover  indirectly  suggest  the  true
dignity  of  its  Founder.  The  Christian  law  is  the  law  of  liberty
— wJ/Ltor  T^ff  iXivBeplas  ^,  To  be  really  obeyed  it  must  be  obeyed
in  freedom.  A  slave  cannot  obey  iiie  Christian  law,  because  it
demands  not  merely  the  production  of  certain  outward  acts,  but
the  living  energy  of  inward  motives,  whose  soul  and  essence  is
love.  Only  a  son  whom  Christ  has  freed  from  slavery,  and
whose  heart  would  rejoice,  if  so  it  might  be,  to  anticipate  or  to
go  beyond  his  Father's  Will,  can  offer  that  free  service  which  is
exacted  by  the  law  of  liberty.     That  service  secures  to  all  bis

P  St.  James  i.  27 :  Bpriaiceia  Ka0aph  koI  dfdtanos  iraph  r^  Be^  leol  TIarpi  aSrri
^arlv,  iviffKiirrecrdou  6p<pajfohs  lad  X^P^  ^^  "^  6\i^€i  ahrStv,  &<nriXor  lavrbr
Tijpetv  &k)>  rov  Kdcfiov,

«  Acts  XV,  14-19.  '  Ibid.  ver.  ao.

*  St.  James  i.  35 :  6  8^  vapeacli^as  €ls  pSfiow  r^Xeiov  rhy  rrjs  4\€v0€pia5f  Koit
vapc^xeiwaSf  otros  oifK  dxpoariis  iiriKrifffMyris  y€p6fi€yos,  dwk  woiririis  Hpyw,
oZros  fuucdpios  iv  t§  tcoiiitrei  ahrov  forcu.  Ibid.  ii.  la :  ofirte  XoXerre  ical  oSr»
iroictTf,  &s  5i^  v6fiov  i\€v0€plas  fi4xXovT€s  KpltfeaScu,  MessmOT  in  loc. :
'  Gresetz  der  Freiheit,  well  es  nicht  mehr  ein  bloss  aUsserliches  knechtendes
Grebot  ist,  wie  das  alte  Gesetz,  sondem  mit  dem  imierlich  mngewandelten
Willen  uebereinstimmt,  wir  also  nicht  mehr  aus  Zwang,  sondem  mit  freier
liebe  dasselbe  erfiillen.'


Christianity  both  a  Law  and  a  Doctrine.     291

faculties  their  highest  play  and  exercise ;  the  Christian  is  most
conscious  of  the  buoyant  sense   of  freedom  when  he  is  most
eager  to  do  the  Will  of  his  Heavenly  Parent.  •  The  Christian  law,
which  is  the  law  of  love,  is  further  described  as  the  royal  law —
vo^i  ^axrCkiKOi  *.     Not  merely  because  the  law  of  love  is  specifi-
cally the  first  of  laws,  higher  than  and  inclusive  of  all  other
laws  ^ ;  but  because  Cbrist,  the  King  of  Christians,  prescribes
this  law  to  Christian  love.   To  obey  is  to  own  Christ's  legislative
supremacy.     Once  more,  the  Christian  law  is  the  perfect  law —
vo'/ioff  reXeios  x.     It  is  above  human  criticism.     It  will  not,  like
the  Mosaic  law,  be  completed  by  another  revelation.     It  can
admit  of  no  possible  improvement.     It  exhibits  the  whole  Will
of  the  unerring  Legislator  respecting  man  in  his  earthly  state.
It  guarantees  to  man  absolute  correspondence  with  the  true  idea
of  his  life,  in  other  words,  his  perfection ;  if  only  he  will  obey  it.
In  a  like  spirit  St.  James  speaks  of  Christian  doctrine  as  the
word  of  truth — ^Xoyos  aktfi^lai  y.     Christian  doctrine  is  the  abso-
lute truth ;  and  it  has  an  effective  regenerating  force  in  the
spiritual  world,  which  corresponds  to  that  of  God's  creative
word  in  the  region  of  physical  nature.    But  Christian  doctrine  is
also  the  engrafted  word — ^Xoyos  e/i(/)VTos  \     It  is  capable  of  being

*  St.  James  ii.  8 :  tl  fiivroi  pSfiow  T€\f trf  fiaffiKuchy,  Korit  rijp  ypatp^v,
*kyaHia€is  rhy  rXriatop  <rov  &s  fftavrhPf  koKws  iroitire.  This  compendium  of
the  Christian's  whole  doty  towards  his  neighbour,  as  enjoined  by  our  Blessed
I/ird  (St.  Matt.  xzii.  39 ;  St.  Mark  zii.  51 ),  is  not  a  mere  republication  of
the  Mosaic  precept  (Lev.  zix.  18).  In  the  latter  the  'neighbour'  is  appa-
rently 'one  of  the  children  of  thy  people;*  in  the  former  it  includes  any
member  of  the  human  family,  since  it  embraced  even  those  against  whom
the  Jew  had  the  strongest  religious  prepossessions.  (St.  Luke  z.  29,  sqq.)
This  injunction  of  a  love  of  man  as  man,  according  to  the  measure  ohT  each
man's  love  of  self,  is  the  law  of  the  true  King  of  humanity,  Jesus  Christ
our  Lord.
*  Bom.  xiii.  9.
'  St.  James  i.  25.

'  Ibid.  Ter.  18 :  0ov\riOt\s  ArrcKhitrey  rifias  \6y<p  iiKfiBelaSf  cIs  rh  etvcu
i?tta$  ivapx'fl^  '''*»'<*  "^^^  avrov  KxifffiArtav.  hiroKveiv  is  elsewhere  used  of  the
female  parent.  Hence  it  indicates  the  tenderness  of  the  Divine  love,  as
shewn  in  the  new  birth  of  souls ;  just  as  $ov\r}6€is  points  to  the  freedom  of
the  grace  which  regenerates  them,  and  i.irapxhf'  Tiva  r&v  KTifffidTcop  to  the
end  and  purpose  of  their  regeneration.  Compare  St.  Johq  i.  12,  13 :  Zaoi
^  (Kc^op  ainhp  ,  .  ix  &€ov  iy€Ppii$ri(ray,

■  St.  James  i.  21 :  ip  trpaurriri  d4^a(r6f  rhp  l^fKpvrop  XSyop,  rhp  Zvvdfifpop
ffUffcu  T&s  i^x^^  vfiup,  Messmer  in  loc. :  '  Die  Offenbarung  heisst  hier  das
congepflanzte,  eingewachsene  Wort ;  namlich  bei  der  Wiedergeburt  durch
die  ohristliche  Lehre  eingepflanzt.  Wenn  nun  von  einem  Au&ehmen
'  r  dngepfianzten  Lehre  die  Bede  ist,  so  ist  das  natiirlich  nicht  die  erste
^lahme,  sondem  viebnehr  das  immer  innigere  Insichhineinnehmen  und

u  a


292  St,y ames^  direct  references  to  our  Blessed  Lord.

taken  up  into,  and  liyingly  united  with,  the  life  of  human  souls.
It  will  thus  hud  forth  into  moral  foliage  and  fruits  which,
without  it,  human  souls  are  utterly  incapable  of  yielding.  This
X070S  is  clearly  not  the  mere  texture  of  the  language  in  which
the  faith  is  taught.  It  is  not  the  bare  thought  of  the  believer
moulded  into  conformity  with  the  ideas  suggested  by  the  lan-
guage. It  is  the  very  substance  and  core  of  the  doctrine ;  it  is
He  in  Whom  the  doctrine  centres ;  it  is  the  Person  of  Jesus
Christ  Himself,  Whose  Humanity  is  the  Sprout,  Shoot,  or
Branch  of  Judah,  engrafted  by  His  Incarnation  upon  the  old
stock  of  humanity,  and  sacramentally  engrafted  upon  all  living
Christian  souls.  Is  not  St.  James  here  in  fundamental  agree-
ment not  merely  with  St.  Paul,  but  with  St.  John  ?  St.  James*
picture  of  the  new  law  of  Christendom  harmonizes  with  St.  Pad',
teaching,  that  the  old  law  of  Judaism  without  the  grace  of
Christ  does  but  rouse  a  sense  of  sin  which  it  cannot  satisfy,  and
that  therefore  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  has
made  Christians  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death  \  St.  James*
doctrine  of  the  Engrafted  Wprd  is  a  compendium  of  the  first,
third,  and  sixth  cliapters  of  St.  John's  Gospel ;  the  word  written
or  preached  does  but  unveil  to  the  soul  the  Word  Incarnate,  the
Word  Who  can  give  a  new  life  to  human  nature,  because  He  is
Himself  the  Source  of  Life.

It  is  in  correspondence  with  these  currents  of  doctrine  that
St»  James,  although  our  Lord's  own  first  cousin^,  opens  his
Epistle  by  representing  himself  as  standing  in  the  same  relation
to  Jesus  Christ  as  to  God.  He  is  the  slave  of  God  and  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  c.  In  like  manner,  throughout  his  Epistle,
he  appears  to  apply  the  word  Kvpios  to  the  God  of  the  Old
Testament  and  to  Jesus  Christ,  quite  indifferently.     Especially

Aneignen  derselben  und  das  Sichhineinleben  in  dieselbe.*  See  too  Dean
Alfoi^  in  loc. :  'The  Word  whose  attribute  and  ipcr-fi  it  is  to  be  ^/a^vtos,
and  which  is  tti^vros,  awaiting  your  reception  of  it,  to  spring  up  and  take
up  your  being  into  it  and  make  you  new  plants.*

*  Baur  achnits  that  'dem  Verfasser  des  Briefe  auch  die  paulinische
Yerinnerlichung  des  Gesetzes  nicht  firemd,  indem  er  nicht  bios  das  Gebot
der  laebe  als  konigliches  Gesetz  bezeichnet,  sondem  auch  von  einem  Gesetze
der  Freiheit  spridit,  zu  welchem  ihm  das  Gresetz  nur  dadurch  geworden
sein  kann,  dass  er,  der  Aeusserlichkeit  des  Gesetzes  gegeniiber  sioh  iIme^
lich  ebenso  frei  von  ihm  wusste,  wie  der  Apostel  Paulus  von  seinon
Standpunkt  aus.*    Christenthum,  p.  1 2  2 .

^  Comp.  St.  Matt,  zzvii.  56,  St.  Mark  xv.  40,  with  St.  John  xiz.  25.  See
Pearson  on  Greed,  Art.  iii. ;  Mill  on  Myth.  Int.  p.  226 ;  Bp.  EUioott,  Huls.
Lect.  pp.97,  354.

«  St.  James  i.  I :  'IdKwfios  Beov  icai  Kvpiov  *lii<rov  Xpurrov  HovXos.

fixer.


Reverential  reserve  of  St.  James.  293


noteworthy  is  bis  assertion  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the

Judge  of  men,  is  not  the  delegated  representative  of  an  absent

Majesty,  but  is  Himself  the  Legislator  enforcing  His  own  laws.

The  Lawgiver,  he  says,  is  One  Being  with  the  Judge  Who  can

save  and  can  destroy  <1;  the  Son  of  man,  coming  in  the  clouds  of

heaven,  has  enacted  the  law  which  He  thus  adbiinisters.     With

a  reverence  which  is  as  practical  as  his  teaching  is  suggestive,

St.  James  in  this  one  i^ort  Epistle  reproduces  more   of  the

words  spoken  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  than  are  to  be  found  in

all  the  other  Epistles  of  the  New  Testament  taken  together  0.

He  hints  that  all  social  barriers  between  man  and  man  are  as

nothing  when  we  place  mere  human  ^ninence  in  the  light  of

Christ's  majestic  Person ;  and  when  he  names  the  faith  of  Jesus

Christ,  he  terms  it  with  solemn  emphasis  the  '  faith  of  the  Lord

of  Glory,'  thus  adopting  one  of  the  most  magnificent  of  St.  Paul's

expressions^,  and  attributing  to  our  Lord  a  Majesty  altogether

above  this  human  world  %.     In  short,  St.  James'  recognition  of

the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Divinity  is  just  what  we  might  expect

it  to  be  if  we  take  into  account  the  mainly  practical  scope  of

his  Epistle.    Our  Lord's  Divinity  is  never  once  formally  proposed

as  a  doctrine  of  the  faith ;  but  it  is  largely,  although  indirectly,

implied.     It  is  implied  in  language  which  would  be  exaggerated

and  overstrained  on  any  other  supposition.     It  is  implied  in  a

reserve  which  may  be  felt  to  mean  at  least  as  much  as  the  most

demonstrative  protestations.    A  few  passing  expressions  of  the

lowliest  reverence  disclose  the  great  doctrine  of  the  Church

'  St.  James  iv.  la :  cTs  ^crrir  h  vofxoBerris  iccJ  Kpir^s  6  Zwdfitvos  truffoi  koU
iTo\4<rai,  (ical  Kpni^s  is  omitted  by  text  recept.,  inserted  by  A.  B.  K.)  So
BeWette:  'Einer  ist  der  Gesetzgeber  imd  Bichter,  der  da  Termag  zu
retten  nnd  zu  Terderben.*    Of.  Alfwd  in  loc.,  who  qnotes  this.

*  The  following  are  his  references  to  the  Sennon  on  the  Mount.  St.  James
i.  2 ;  St.  Matt.  v.  lo-i  a.  St.  James  i.  4 ;  St.  Matt.  ▼.  48.  St.  James  i.  5 ;
St.  Matt.  yii.  7.  St.  James  i.  9 ;  St.  Matt.  v.  3.  St.  James  i.  ao ;  St.  Matt.
▼.  33.  St.  James  ii.  13 ;  St.  Matt.  yi.  14,  15,  y.  7.  St.  James  ii.  14  sqq. ;
St.  Matt.  yii.  ai  sqq.  St.  James  iii.  17, 18 ;  St.  Matt.  ▼.  9.  St.  James  iv.  4 ;
St.  Matt.  yi.  24.  St.  James  iy.  10 ;  St.  Matt.  y.  3,  4.  St.  James  iy.  11;
St.  Matt.  yii.  i  sqq.  St.  James  y.  a ;  St.  Matt.  yi.  19.  St.  James  y.  10 ;
St. Matt.  ▼.  13.  St.  James  y.  la  ;  St.  Matt.  y.  33  sqq.  And  for  other  dis-
courses of  our  Lord :  St.  James  i.  14 ;  St.  Matt.  zy.  19.  St.  James  iy.  la ;
St.  Matt.  X.  a8.  Again,  St.  James  y.  1-6 ;  St.  Luke  yi.  34  sqq.  See  reff. ;
and  AlfOTd,  yol.  iv.  p.  107,  note.  '  i  Cor.  ii.  8.

'  St.  James  ii.  I :  iZtX^oi  fiov,  fi^  iy  irpoa'onroX'n^piais  ^x<^^  t^'^  irl<mp  rod
Kvplw  rinuy  *l7}(rov  Xpiffrov  rris  iS^ris.  Here  rrjs  B6^tis  is  best  explained  as
a  second  genitiye  goyemed  by  Kvplov.  Dean  Alford  suggests  that  it  may
be  an  epithetal  genitiye,  such  as  constantly  follows  the  mention  of  the
DiTine  Name.
VI]


294         Missionary  Sermons  of  Si.  Peter.

respecting  the  Person  of  her  Lord,  throned  in  the  background  of
the  Apostle's  thonght.  And  if  the  immediate  intereBts  of  hii
ministry  oblige  St.  James  to  confine  himBolf  to  condderations
which  do  not  lead  him  more  fully  to  exhibit  the  doctrine,  we  are
not  allowed,  as  we  read  him,  to  forget  the  love  and  awo  which
veil  and  treaeore  it,  so  tenderly  and  so  reTerently,  in  the  inmost
sanctuary  of  hia  illuminated  soul.

n.  Of  St.  Peter's  recorded  teaching  there  are  two  distinct
stages  in  the  N'ew  Testament.  He  first  is  represented  by  his
missionary  semionB  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles ;  the  second  by
his  general  Epistles.

I.  Although  Jesus  Christ  is  always  the  central  Subject  in  the
sermons  of  tiiis  Apostle,  yet  the   distinctness  with  which  he
exhibits  our  Lord  in  the  glory  of  His  Divine  Kature  seems  to
vary  with  the  varying  capacity  for  receiving  truth  on  the  part
of  luB  audience.    Like  Jeaus  Clrist  Himself,  St.  Peter  teaches  as
men  are  able  to  bear  his  doctrine ;  he  does  not  cast  pearls  before
swine.    In  his  missionary  sermons  he  is  addressing  persons  who
were  believers  in  the  Jewish  dispensation,  and  who  were  also
our  Lord's  contemporaries.     Accordingly,  his  sermons  conttun  a
double  appeal ;  first,  to  the  known  facts  of  our  Lord's  Life  and
Deatii,  and  above  all,  of  His  Resurrection  from  the  dead ;  and
secondly,  to  the  correspondence  of  these  facts  with  the  predictioiu
of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.     Like   St,  James,  St.  Peter  lays
especial  stress  on  the  continuity  subsisting  between  Judaism  sod
the  Gospel.    But  while  St.  James  insista  upon  the  moral  elfflnent
of  that  connexion,  St.  Peter  addresses  himself  rather  to  the  pro-
phetical.    Even  before  the  day  of  Pentecost,  St.  Peter  points
to  the  Psalter  as  foreshadowing  the  iall   of  Judas'.    When
preaching  to  the  multitude  which  had  just  witnessed  the  Pente-
costal gifts,  St.  Peter  observes  that  these  wonders  are  merely  a
realization  of  the  prediction  of  Joel  respecting  the  last  days^j
and  he  argues  elaborately  that  the  language  of  David  in  the
' '   "    '  n  could  not  have  been  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  the
himself,    still    lying  among  bis   people  in  his
ilcbre,  while  it  had  been  literally  fulfilled  by
Who  had  notoriously  risen  from  the  grave,    b
the  multitude  after  the  healing  of  the  lame  msa
f  Solomon,  St.  Peter  contends  that  the  sufierii^
been  '  shewed  before '  on  the  part  of  the  God  (€

'  Aote  i.  16,  ao.    Of.  Pg.  jJi.  9,  briz.  15.
-II ;  Joelii.  1S-31.  >  Act*  fi.  14-36-

[UCI.


Christ  the  chief  theme  of  Hebrew  prophecy.   295

Israel  by  the  mouth  of  all  His  prophets  ™,  and  that  in  Jesus

Christ  the  prediction  of  Moses  respecting  a  coming  Prophet,  to

Whom  the  true  Israel  would  yield  an  implicit  obedience,  had

received  its  explanation  ».   When  arraigned  before  the  Council  o,

the  Apostle  insists  that  Jesus  is  that  true  ^  Comer-stone '  of  the

temple  of  souls,  which  had  been  foretold  both  by  Isaiah  p,  and  by

a  later  Psalmist  <i;  and  that  although  He  had  been  set  at  nought

by  the  builders  of  Israel,  He  was  certainly  exalted  and  honoured

by  God.     In  the  instruction  delivered  to  Cornelius  before  his

kiptism,  St.  Peter  states  that  *  all  the  prophets  give  witness '  to

Jesus,  *that  through  His  Name,  whosoever  beBeveth  on  Him

shall  receive  remission  of  sins'/      And  we  seem  to  trace  the

influence  of  St.  Peter,  as  the  first  great  Christian  expositor  of

prophecy,  in  the  teaching   of  the  deacons   St.  Stephen   and

St.  Philip.     St.  Philip's  exposition  of  Christian  doctrine  to  the

Ethiopian  eunuch  was  based  upon  Isaiah's  prediction  of  the

Passion*.     St.  Stephen's  argument  before  his  judges  was  cut

short  by  a  violent  interruption,  while  it  was  yet  incomplete.

But  St.  Stephen,  like  St.  Peter,  appeals  to  the  prediction  in

Deuteronomy  of  the  Prophet  to  Whom  Israel  would  hearken  *.

And  the  drift  of  the  protomartyr's  address  goes  to  shew,  that

the  whole  course  of  the  history  of  Israel  pointed  to  the  advent

of  One  Who  should  be  greater  than  either  the  law  or  the  temple^,

—of  One  in  Whom  Israel's  wonderful  history  would  reach  its

natural  climax,-— of  that  *  Just  One  *  Who  in  truth  had  already

come,  but  Who,  like  prophets  before  Him,  had  been  betrayed

and  murdered  by  a  people,  still  as  of  old,  *  stifTnecked  and  un-

circumcised  in  heart  and  ears  ^.'

It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  in  the  teaching  of  the  earliest
Church,  as  represented  by  the  missionary  discourses  of  St.  Peter
and  the  deacons,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  very  soul  and  end  of  Jewish
prophecy.  This  would  of  itself  suggest  an  idea  of  His  Person
which  rises  above  any  merely  Humanitarian  standard.  St.  Peter
indeed  places  himself  habitually  at  the  point  of  view  which
would  enable  him  to  appeal  to  the  actual  experience  of  the
generation  he  was  addressing.  He  begins  with  our  Lord's
Humiliation,  which  men  had  witnessed,  and  then  he  proceeds  to
describe  His  Exaltation  as  the  honour  put  by  God  upon  His

"Acts iii.  18.  »  Ibid.  iii.  22-24;  I^®"*-  2^^^-  I5»  ^8,  19.

"  Acte  iv.  II.  P  laa.  zxviii.  10.

\  Pb.  czviii.  22..  Our  Lord  Bimself  claimed  the  raophecy,  St.  Matt,
na.  43.  '  Acts  x.  43.  ■  Ibid.  viii.  32-35.

*  Ibid.  vii.  37.  »  Ibid.  vi.  13.  *  Ibid.  vii.  51-53.


296  Christ  sHumanLifesuggestsHis  Higher JVature.

Human  Nature.  He  speaks  of  our  Lord's  Humanity  with  fearless
plainness  y.  The  Man  Christ  Jesus  is  exhibited  to  the  world  as
a  mirade-worker ;  as  Man,  He  is  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost
and  with  power  « ;  as  the  true  Servant  of  God,  He  is  glorified  by
the  God  of  the  patriarchs  ^ ;  He  is  raised  from  the  dead  by
Divine  Power  ^;  He  is  made  by  God  both  Lord  and  Christ «;
and  He  will  be  sent  by  the  Lord  at  *  the  times  of  refreshing  d '  as
the  ordained  Judge  of  quick  and  dead  ®.  But  this  general  repre-
sentation of  the  Human  Nature  by  Which  Christ  had  entered
into  Jewish  history,  is  interspersed  with  glimpses  of  His  Divine
Personality  Itself,  Which  is  veiled  by  His  Manhood.  Thus  we
find  St.  Peter  in  the  porch  of  Solomon  applying  to  our  Lord  a
magnificent  title,  which  at  once  carries  our  thoughts  into  the  very
heart  of  the  distinctive  Christology  of  St.  John.  Christ,  although
crucified  and  slain,  is  yet  the  Leader  or  Prince  of  Life — ^ApxjTyos
Tris  fa)j}r  ^.  That  He  should  be  held  in  bondage  by  the  might  of
death  was  not  possible  «.  The  heavens  rrmst  receive  Him  ^,  and
He  is  now  the  Lord  of  all  things  K  It  is  He  Who  from  His
heavenly  throne  has  poured  out  upon  the  earth  the  gifts  of
Pentecost  K  His  Name  spoken  on  earth  has  a  wonder-working
power  1;  as  unveiling  His  Nature  and  office,  it  is  a  symbol  which
faith  reverently  treasures,  and  by  the  might  of  which  the  ser-
vants of  God  can  relieve  even  physical  suffering  "*.  As  a  refuge
for  sinners  the  Name  of  Jesus  stands  alone ;  no  other  Name  has

y  Acts ii.  2a  :  *l7i(rovv  rhv'SaCotpcuop,  Mpa  [not  here  the  generic  fiyOpttwiuf]
&vh  rod  Qeov  airoBtZtvyfiivov  cis  t/fta;  Hwdftetri  jcol  r4pa<n  Ktd  inifitiou,  m
4troiri(r€  Si*  avrov  6  Qths  iv  iiifftp  ifiuv,

»  Ibid.  X.  38.  •  Ibid.  ill.  13.

*»  Ibid.  ii.  34,  ill.  15,  iv.  10,  ▼.  31,  x.  40.  ®  Ibid.  ii.  36.

d  Ibid.  iii.  19,  ao.  •  Ibid.  x.  42.  '  Ibid.  iii.  15.

*  Ibid.  ii.  24 :  tv  S  &ths  du^arriat,  Ximtcls  rhs  w^ivas  rod  6avdrov,  KoBiri
oifK  ^v  hwarhv  Kpar€7<r6cu  avrhv  ^*  ainou.  This  'impossibility*  depended
not  merely  on  the  &ct  that  prophecy  had  predicted  Christ's  resurrection,
but  on  the  dignity  of  Christ's  Person,  implied  in  the  existence  of  any  soch
prophecy  respecting  Him.

^  Ibia.  iii.  ai :  tv  Sei  obpayhv  filv  Ii4^cur6(u  &XP^  XP^^^^  &iroKaTcurr^c«s
vdvrwv,

*  Ibid.  X.  36 :  oZrSs  iffrt  icdmwv  Kiptos,

*  Ibid.  ii.  33 :  ^|^X**  'rovro  t  vvv  vfieis  fixhrere  lecti  iucoiert,

^  Ibid.  iii.  6 :  iv  r^  hvSfiari  *lriaov  Xpitrrov  rov  NaCupaiov,  ^yei^KU  ml  vrpf
irdrei.

™  Ibid.  ver.  16 :  Koi  M  ry  irltrrti  rov  hv6fxaros  abrov,  rovrov  hv  Oempwrt
Kotl  otdarCf  i<rr€piti><T€  rh  6vofia  avrov.  Ibid.  iv.  lo:  yvoxTrhv  (arta  vaffa
{ffjuy  Kol  iravrl  r^  \a^  'lcrpa^\,  Sri  iu  r^  6y6fxari  'IrjO'ov  Xpiarov  rov  Na-
^ofptdov,  tp.&iJ.e7s  iffraupt&aare,  hf  d  6cbf  1jyeip€V  in  "tKpwv,  ip  ro^ff  oirtt
vapeffrriKO'  iv^iop  ^fA&v  dyi^y.

[lect.


Christology  of  St.  Peter  s  general  Epistles.    297

—  ■

been  given  under  heaven  whereby  the  one  true  salvation  can  be
guaranteed  to  the  sons  of  men  ^.    Here  St.  Peter  clearly  implies
that  l^e  religion  of  Jesus  is  the  true,  the  universal,  the  absolute
religion.     This  implication  of  itself  suggests  much  beyond  as  to
the  true  dignity  of  Christ's  Person.     Is  it  conceivable  that  He
Who  is  Himself  the  sum  and  substance  of  His  religion,  Whose
Name  has  such  power  on  earth,  and  Who  wields  the  resources
and  is  invested  with  the  glories  of  heaven,  is  notwithstanding  in
the  thought  of  His  first  apostles  only  a  glorified  man,  or  only  a
Buper-angelic  intelligence  %  Do  we  not  interpret  these  early  dis-
courses most  naturally,  when  we  bear  in  mind  the  measure  of
reticence  which  active  missionary  work  always  renders  necessary,
if  truth  is  to  win  its  way  amidst  prejudice  and  opposition  ?  And
will  not  this  consideration  alone  enable  us  to  do  justice  to  those
vivid  glimpses  of  Christ's  Higher  Nature,  the  fuller  exhibition  of
Which  is  before  us  in  the  Apostle's  general  Epistles  1

2.  In  St.  Peter's  general  Epistles  it  is  easy  to  trace  the  same
mind  as  that  which  speaks  to  us  in  the  earliest  missionary  ser-
mons of  the  Acts.  As  addressed  to  Christian  believers  o,  these
Epistles  exhibit  Christian  doctrine  in  its  fulness,  but  with  an  eye
to  practical  objects,  and  without  the  methodical  completeness
of  an  oral  instruction.  Christian  doctrine  is  not  propounded  as
a  new  announcement :  the  writer  takes  it  for  granted  as  furnish-
ing a  series  of  motives,  the  force  of  which  would  be  admitted  by
those  who  had  already  recognized  the  true  majesty  and  propor-
tions of  the  faith.  St.  Peter  annoimces  himself  as  the  Aposljle
of  Jesus  Christ ;  he  is  Christ's  slave  as  well  as  His  Apostle  p.  In
his  Epistles,  St.  Peter  lays  the  great  stress  on  prophecy  which  is
80  observable  in  his  missionary  sermons.  Thus,  as  in  his  speech
before  the  Council,  so  in  his  first  Epistle,  he  specially  refers  ^  to
the  prophecy  of  the  Rejected  Comer-stone,  which  our  Lord  had
applied  to  Himself.  But  St.  Peter's  general  doctrine  of  our
Lord's  relation  to  Hebrew  prophecy  should  be  more  particularly
noticed.  In  our  day  theories  have  been  put  forward  on  this
subject  which  appear  to  represent  the  Hebrew  prophetical  Scrip-

■  Acta  iv.  13  :  ovk  tariv  ip  &\\^  ol^tvt  ri  ffwrripiar  ofSrt  yhp  6yo/xd  ianv
ercpov  {fith  rhv  ohpcwhp  rh  Sedofi^pop  4v  kvBfKlnrois,  iv  ^  8e<  trwdritfai  rifias,

•  I  St.  Pet.  i.  I,  a :  iicXficrois  irapeiriJ^ois  ^toffiropas, ....  Korh  vp&yvotatp
B€ov  Uarphs,  iv  ayicuTfi^  JJvtifiaTos,  els  {nrcuco^v  Kcd  payrifffihy  alfxaros  *Ii}(roS
XpMrroS.     2  St.  Pet.  i.  I :  rdis  icSrifiov  ifuv  AoxoCcri  vlcrriv,

'  I  St.  Pet.  i.  I :  itir6(rro\os  'Iriaov  Xpiarov.  a  St.  Pet.  i.  1 :  5ovAoj  koI
^T6ffTo\os  *Iij(rou  Xpitrrov,

«  I  St.Pet.  ii.  6.    Cf.  Acts  iv.  ii ;  Isa.  xxviii.  i6;  Ps.  cxviii.  aa.
VI]


298  A  Divine  Christ  implied  in  the  Christian  life,

■ ■

tures  as  little  better  than  &  large  dictionary  of  quotations,  to
which  the  writers  and  preachers  of  the  New  Testament  are  said
to  have  had  recourse  when  they  wished  to  illustrate  their  subject
by  some  shadowy  analogy,  or  by  some  yague  semblance  of  a
happy  anticipation.  St.  Peter  is  as  widely  removed  firom  iiia
position,  as  it  is  possible  to  conceive.  According  to  St.  Peter,
the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  did  not  only  utter  literal  pre-
dictions of  the  expected  Christ,  but  in  doing  this  they  were
Christ's  own  servants,  His  heralds,  His  organs.  He  Who  is  the
subject  of  the  Gospel  story,  and  the  living  Kuler  of  the  Church,
had  also,  by  His  Spirit,  been  Master  and  Teacher  of  the  pro-
phets. Under  His  guidance  it  was  that  they  had  foretold  His
sufferings.  It  was  the  Spirit  of  Christ  who  was  in  the  pro-
phets, testifying  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the
glories  that  would  follow  ^  The  prophets  did  not  at  first
learn  the  full  scope  and  meaning  of  the  words  they  uttered",
but  they  spoke  glorious  truths  which  the  Church  of  Jesos
understands  and  enjoys  \  Thus  the  proclamation  of  Christian
doctrine  is  older  than  the  Incarnation :  CSiristianity  strikes  its
roots  far  back  into  the  past  of  ancient  Israel.  The  pre-existent
Christ,  moulding  the  utterances  of  Israel's  prophets  to  proclaim
their  anticipations  of  His  advent,  had  indeed  reigned  in  the  old
theocracy;  and  yet  the  privileged  terms  in  which  the  members
of  God's  elder  kingdom  upon  earth  described  their  prerogatives
were  really  applicable,  in  a  deeper  sense,  to  those  who  lived
within  the  kingdom  of  the  Divine  Incarnation '>.  Indeed,
St.  Peter's  language  on  the  nature  and  privileges  of  the  Chris-
tian life  is  suggestive  of  the  highest  conception  of  Him  Who  is

'  I  St.  Pet.  i.  1 1 :  rh  iv  ahrols  TlveC/io  Xpitrrov,  TpofiaprvpSfievov  rh  «s
Xpiffrhv  iradiifiaTa,  koH  r^s  fifrit  'Aivra  8($|as.  Here  Xpiffrov  is  a  genitiye  of
the  subject.  Olshansen :  '  Christus  ist  dem  Petrus  vor  seiner  Eracheinuig
ein  real  Eidstirender,  nnd  wirkt  selbst  dorch  seinen  G^ist  in  den  Propheten
die  Weissagung  von  sich.*    See  Huther  and  Wiesinger  in  loo.

■  I  St.  Pet.  i.  10, 1 1 :  ircpl  ^5  fffOTTiplas  i^^Cfirria-av  lad  i^rfpc^ffouf  Tpoip^ai
ol  T€p\  rrjs  €15  &IJMS  xc^iTos  vpotp-tireiHrcanfSf  ipfvy&vres  eis  rlva  ^  rroiov  icatf^
4^\ov  rh  iv  ahro7s  Tlvev/io  Xpi(rrov,  Ibid.  ver.  I  a :  oTs  4ir€ico\^^>ftj  5ti  o6x
lavTois,  Vf^Tu  8^  SirjKSyovy  aitTii,  h  vvv  hnfyy4Ki\  ^fjuv,

*  2  St.  Pet.  i.  20:  irao'a  vpo<f>rirfia  yp(iuf>^$  Uiias  iiriXvffeus  oh  yiptrat.
The  Spirit  in  the  Church  understands  the  Spirit  speaking  by  the  prophets.

■  I  St.  Pet.  ii.  9,  10 :  i/ieis  8^  yevos  iKKeicrhv,  ficuriKtiou  iepdrevftOf  (Bros
Sryioy,  Kahs  fis  vepnrol'ria'iy,  Hvws  rcbj  itperhs  i^ayyelXrjre  rod  ix  ckStovs  ip^
Ka\4aayros  els  ro  Bavpxurrhv  ahrov  <pSos'  ol  iror^  oh  Kabs,  vvv  h\  Kcubs  Scod*
ol  ohK  ii\€ri/ji4voi,  vvv  Sh  i\eriB4vr€s.  Ibid.  ver.  5 :  &$  TdOot  fivr€S  ohcoSo-
fieitrdf,  oIkos  frvevfjuxruchs,  Updrevfia  &yi0Vy  iiveviyKeu  irycvfuxriic^  Ovaias
thTrpoaUierovs  ry  ©€^  Siit  ^Irjaov  Xpiarov,

[lect.


as  described  in  St  Peter's  First  Epistle.    299

its  Author  and  its  Object.     St.  Peter  speaks  of  conversion  from

Judaism  or  heathendom  as  the  '  being  called  out  of  darkness  into

Ood's  marvellous  light  x.'     It  is  the  happiness  of  Christians  to

suffer  and  to  be  revSed  for  the  Name  of  Christ  7.   The  Spirit  of

glory  and  of  Ood  rests  upon  them.     The  Spirit  is  blasphemed

by  -file  unbelieving  world,  but  He  is  visibly  honoured  by  the

&mily  of  God's  children  ■.     It  is  the  Person  of  Jesus  in  Whom

the  spiritual  life  of. His  Church  centres^.  The  Christians  whom

St.  Peter  is  addressing  never  saw  Him  in  the  days  of  His  flesh ;

they  do  not  see  Him  now  with  the  eye  of  sense.     Btit  they  love

Him,  invisible  as  He  is,  because  they  believe  in  Him.     The  eye

of  their  faith  does  see  Him.     The  Lord  Christ  is  present  in

their  hearts;  they  are  to  'sanctify*  Him  there,  as  God  was

*  sanctified*  by  the  worship  of  Israel  b.     They  rejoice  in  this

clear  constant  inward  vision  with  a  joy  which  language  cannot

describe,  and  which  is  radiant  with  the  glory  of  the  highest

spiritual  beauty.     They  are  in  possession  of  a  spiritual  sense  <)

whereby  the  goodness  of  Jesus  may  be  even  tasted ;  and  yet  the

truths  on  which  their  souls  are  fed  are  mysteries  so  profound

as  to  rouse  the  keen  but  baffled  wonder  of  the  intelligences  of

heaven  d.     Such  language  appears  to  point  irresistibly  to  the

existence  of  a  supernatural  religion  with  a  superhuman  Founder;

imless  we  are  to  denude  it  of  all  spiritual  meaning  whatever,  by

saying  that  it  only  reflects  the  habitual  exaggeration  of  Eastern

feryonr.     Why  is  the  intellectual  atmosphere  of  the  Church

described  as  *  marvellous  light  *  %    Why  is  suffering  for  Jesus  so

much  a  matter  for  sincere  self-congratulation  t     Why  does  the

'  X7U  supra.

y  I  St.  Pet.  iv.  135  fcoO^  K0iy(ovtir9  rois  tow  Xpurrov  iraOiifxaunf  x«^P«^«*
ImicaiipTg  &iroiea\^c(  ttjs  BS^tjs  aibrov  x<V^<  iyaXXi^fityoi,  El  hyeiitCfaBt
h  opSfiari  Xpurrmi,  /juucdpioi,

'  lincLyer.  14:  5rt  rh  rijs  5^i}$  letd  rh  rov  Ofov  nvcv/xa  i^*  6/tas  ivo'
rcriWoi*  jcar^  fiky  ahrohs  fiKofftprifiurou,  xarii  5i  ifias  9o^d(erau

•  Ibid.  i.  7,  8 :  'Iijo-oO  Xptorot^  ty  ohic  €t66r€S  itryairart,  €ij  %y  Hfnt  fi^
ipuvTtSf  ir(OTc<}oKTC5  B^,  iryakXuUrOt  x^$  &ycieXa\^y  K<d  BtHo^curfi^vp,

^  Ibid.  ill.  15 :  Kipioy  5i  rhy  Xpiarhy  aytdtrart  iy  reus  ieaf>Biais  Ifi&y.
That  Xpttrrhy  and  not  Sthv  ii  the  trae  reading  here,  see  Scrivener,  Introduo-
tion  to  Grit.  K.  T.  p.  456.  Cf.  Isa.  viii.  13.  Isaiah  is  quoted  again  in
I  St.  Pet.  ii.  8.

*  I  St.  Pet.  ii.  5 :  cfirco  4yt^our0t  Zrt  xpVf^'r^s  6  K^iot.  St.  Peter  is  nsing
the  Psalmist's  limgnage  in  reference  to  Jehoyab  (Ps.  zzziv.  8),  but  the
context  shews  him  to  be  speaking  of  Christ.  Cf.  Heb.  vi.  4 :  ytvffafi4yovs
T€  Tjjs  iuptas  rrjs  ixovpctyiou.  There  is  possibly  in  both  passages  an  indirect
reference  to  sacramental  communion.

^  I  St.  Pet.  L  la :  cit  &  iinBvfMvffiy  ^TycXei  irapaic^ai*
TI]


300      Si.  Peter  s  references  to  the  Passion

Divine  Spirit  rest  so  surely  upon  Christian  confessors  %  Why  is
the  Invisible  Jesus  the  Object  of  such  love,  the  Source  of  such
inexpressible  and  glorious  joy;  if,  after  all,  the  religion  of  Jesus
is  merely  a  higher  phase  of  human  opinion  and  feeling,  and  His
Church  a  human  organization,  and  His  Person  only  human,  or
at  least  not  literally  Divine  ?  The  language  of  St.  Peter  respect-
ing the  Christian  life®  manifestly  points  to  a  Divine  Christ.  And
if  the  Christ  of  St.  Peter  had  been  the  Christ,  we  will  not  say
of  a  Strauss  or  of  a  Benan,  but  the  Christ  of  a  Socinus,  nay,  the
Christ  of  8Cn  Arius,  it  is  not  easy  to  understand  what  diould
have  moved  the  angels  with  that  strong  desire  to  bend  from
their  thrones  abpve,  that  they  might  gaze  with  unsuccessful
intentness  at  the  humiliations  of  a  created  being,  their  peer  or
their  inferior  in  the  scale  of  creation.  Surely  the  Angek  must
be  longing  to  unveil  a  transcendent  mystery,  or  a  series  of  mys-
teries, such  as  are  in  fact  the  mystery  of  the  Divine  Incarnation
and  the  consequences  which  depend  on  it  in  the  kingdom  of
grace.  St.  Peter's  words  are  sober  and  truthful  if  read  by  tiie
light  of  faith  in  an  Incarnate  God ;  divorced  from  such  a  &ith,
they  are  fanciful,  inflated,  exaggerated. .

St.  Peter  lays  especial  stress  both  (m  the  moral  signiflcance
and  on  the  atoning  power  of  the  Death  of  Jesus  Christ.  Here
he  enters  within  that  circle  of  truths  which  are  taught  most
fully  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews ;  and  his  exhibition  of  the
Passion  might  almost  appear  to  presuppose  the  particular  Christ-
ological  teaching  of  that  Epistle.  St.  Peter  says  that  <  Christ
has  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might
bring  us  to  God  V  This  vicarious  suffering  depended  upon  the
fact  that  Jesus,  when  dying,  impersonated  sinful  humanity.  *  He
bare  our  sins  in  His  own  Body  on  the  tree  «.*  Stricken  by  the
anguish  of  His  Passion,  the  dying  Christ  is  the  consunmiate
Model  J*  for  all  Christian  sufferers,  in  His  innocence  i,  in  Hia
silencei,  in  His  perfect  resignation*^.   But  also  the  souls  of  men,

•  I  St.  Pet.  iii.  i6 :  r^v  iyoB^v  4v  Xpurr^  hfoarpo^v,     Cf.  v.  14.

'  Ibid.  ver.  18  :  'X.purrhs  &iraj^  vepl  ofiaprtcov  tieaBe,  Aixaios  ^Ip  iii'uuov,  Ua
rjixas  vpoaayAyy  r^  0ey.

'  Ibid.  ii.  34 :  hs  rhs  afjutprttu  ti/jl&v  ainhs  hrfpPtyiKV  iv  r^  v^fiari  ainw
M  rh  ^^\oy,

^  Ibid.  ver.  21 :  Xpiffrhs  HxaOev  iir^p  rifxav,  rifuv  ^oXifiirdycov  ^oypamthr,
tva  iircuco\ov6i}<rTiTe  rots  1x^^^^^  avrov,

1  Ibid.  ver.  22:  ts  afxapriav  ohx  ivoltitrtv^  oh^\  cdp^Oi;  $^\os  ir  rf  ffrSpafri
abrov.    Isa.  liii.  9 ;  2  Cor.  v.  ai ;  I  St.  John  iii.  5.

i  I  St.  Pet.  ii.  23 :  ^f  \ot^opo6/xfyos  oitK  i.vT€\oiB6p€i,  irdffx^f  ohit  iptftKtu
In  the  fnrefXet  there  lies  the  consciousness  of  power.

^  Ibid. :  Top^USov  5c  r^  Kpivovri  ^ucodots.

[lbct.


imply  a  superhuman  Sufferer.  30 1


wounded  by  the  shafts  of  sin,  may  be  healed  by  the  virtue  of  that
sacred  Painl;  and  a  special  power  to  wash  out  the  stains  of  moral
guilt  is  expressly  ascribed  to  the  Redeemer's  Blood.    The  Chris-
tian as  such  is  predestined  in  the  Eternal  Counsels,  not  merely
to  submission  to  the  Christian  faith,  but  also  to  <  a  sprinkling  of
the  Blood  of  Jesus  Christ  ™.*    The  Apostle  earnestly  insists  that
it  was  no  mere  perishable  earthly  treasure,  no  silver  or  golden
wares,  whereby  Christians  had  been  bought  out  of  their  old
bondage  to  the  traditional  errors  and  accustomed  sins  of  Judaism
or  of  heathenism.     The  mighty  spell  of  moral  and  intellectual
darkness  had  indeed  been  broken,  but  by  no  less  a  ransom  than
the  Precious  Blood  of  Christ,  the  Lamb  without  blemish  and
Immaculate  °.   Are  we  to  suppose  that  while  using  this  burning
language  to  extol  the  Precious  Blood  of  redemption,  St.  Peter  is
recklessly  following  a  rhetorical  impulse,  or  that  he  is  obscuring
the  moral  meaning  of  the  Passion,  by  dwelling  upon  its  details
in  misleading  language,  which  savours  too  strongly  of  the  sacri-
ficial ritual  of  the  temple?   Is  he  not  even  echoing  the  Baptist 0]
Is  he  not  in  correspondence  with  his  brother  apostles  1  Is  he  not
summarizing  St.  PaulP?     Is  he  not  anticipating  St.  John^i?
Certainly  this  earnest  recognition  of  Christ's  true  Humanity  as
the  seat  of  His  sufferings  is  a  most  essential  feature  of  the  Apo-
stle's doctrine  ' ;  but  what  is  it  that  gives  to  Christ's  Human  acts
and  sufferings  such  preterhuman  value  1  Is  it  not  that  the  truth
of  Christ's  Divine  Personality  underlies  this  entire  description  of

'  I  St.  Pet.  ii.  34 :  o?  r^  yMKwwt  ahrav  I60rirt,
"  Ibid.  i.  2  :  tis  inrcucoiiy  koH  pcanurithv  tdfiaros  *Vti(rov  Xpurrov,
■  Ibid.  Yen.  1 8,  19:    eU^Jrej  5ti  oh  ^9aprois,  ii.oyvpitf)  ^  xP^^Wf  ^^^
rpi^t  in  r^f  luirtdas  ifi&y  Avcurrpo^f  irarpoirapaSdrov,  &AA&  ti/a(^  cClfiari
its  ifivov  iifju&fiov  Kcd  it<rwt\ov  XpioTov,    Ezod.  zii.  5.

*  St.  John  i.  2g:  Vft  6  hfivhs  rod  Bcov,  6  dpoty  r^y  afxaprlaaf  rod  kS^ixov,
It  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  the  sacrificial  rather  than  the  moral  ideas
Msodated  with  the  'Lamb'  are  here  in  question.     See  Alford  in  loo.

P  Acts  XX.  a8 :  Toifuuvfiv  r^v  ^KKKriaiay  rod  Qtov,  V  ireptciroi^o-aro  9ih
rov  iUov  c^fxaros,  I  Cor.  Y.  7 :  rh  irAax"'  VM-^y  ir{Ari  Xptirr6s,  Heb.  ix.  la  :
81^  rod  iSiov  atfiaros  cld^Xtfcv  4(f>dirc^  tls  rh,  &yia,  alcovlav  KOrpwaiv  fipdficvos.
4  I  St.  John  i.  7  •  '''^  ^f*^  'Iritrod  Xpttrrod  rod  Tiod  ainod  Kadc^>l(fi  iffias
ianh  tcCoi};  ofjLaprlas,  ReY.  i.  5 :  rf  ityarrfiffaVTi  fifjuis  K<d  X^trovrt  r)fias  iiirh
ruy  ofiaprwy  ^fiQv  iv  r^  clXfiart  ainod  ....  abr^  ^  It6^a  koI  rh  Kpdros  els
rohs  cd&vas  ray  cd^t-'Ofy.  ifiiiy.  Ibid.  Y.  9 :  &^ios  cf  \afie7y  rh  0tfi\ioy,  koI
hoT^ai  tAs  a^payTJias  ainod*  Srt  iapdyris  Kctt  iiy6paa'as  r^  6c^  ri/xas  iy  r^
oTjuari  <rov.

^  '  St.  Peter  expressly  alludes  to  our  Lord's  Human  Body  (i  St.  Pet.  ii.  24,
iil  18,  iY.  i),  and  to  His  Human  Soul,  when  descending  to  preach  to
the  spirits  in  prison  (Ibid.  iii.  18),  after  Its  separation  from  His  Body  at
death.

VI]


302  Si.  Peter  on  the  euer-living  Word  of  God,

Hia  redemptive  work,  reBcaing  it  irom  the  exaggeration  and
torgiditf  with  whicli  it  would  be  iiiirlf  chargeable,  if  Chrigt
were  merely  htunan  or  less  than  God  1  That  this  is  in  fact  tiie
case  is  abosdsntlj  manifest  ■ ;  and  indeed  the  Person  of  Christ
appeare  to  be  hinted  at  in  St.  Fet«r'B  Epistle,  by  the  same  angiut
expressian  which  has  been  noticed  as  common  to  St.  James  and
to  St.  John.  The  Logos  or  Word  of  God,  living  and  abid-
ing for  ever ',  is  the  Author  of  the  soul's  new  birth :  and  ChriEt
Jesus  our  Lord  does  not  onlj  bring  us  this  Logos  &om  heaven;
He  is  this  Logos.  And  thus  in  His  home  of  glory,  angels  and
authorities  and  powers  are  made  subject  unto  Him" ;  and  He  is
not  said  to  have  been  taken  up  into  heaven,  but  to  have  gone
up  thither,  as  though  by  His  own  deed  and  will '.  And  when
St,  Peter  exhorts  Christians  to  act  in  such  a  manner  that  God
in  all  things  may  be  glorified  through  Jesus  Christ,  he  pauses
reverently  at  this  last  most  precious  and  sacred  Name,  to  add,
'  to  Whom  is  the  glory  and  the  power  unto  ages  beyond  ages  *.'
St.  Peter's  second  Epistle*,  like  his  firet,  begins  and  ends
with  Jesus  7.  Its  main  positive  theme  is  the  importance  of
the  higher  practical  knowledge  ■  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jeeos
Christ  *.  Jesoe  is  not  set  before  Christians  as  a  revered  uid
departed  Teacher  whose  words  are  to  be  gathered  up  sod
studied ;  He  is  set  forth  rather  as  an  Invisible  and  Living  Femn
Who  is  to  be  spiritoally  known  by  souls.  Along  with  this
practical  knowledge  of  Jesus,  as  with  knowledge  of  God,  there
will  be  an  increase  of  grace,  and  of  ito  resultant  inward  evidenca,

•  I  St.  Pet.  1.  30 :  ^affpaWiTot  implieB  Christ's  Pre-ez!stenos.

'  Ibid.  Tar,  »3 ;  i-rar^tytiiYmiiiiBi  aiiK  ix  mrojwi  ^iofriis,  iJui  hMi^nt,
111  xiyov  i^rrni  SfoS  Knl  nfvayrm  <>i  rir  alui^  By  identi^w  the  >Jyn
h«re  witb  the  ^li^a  (ver.  a5)thftt  procUkims  Him,  Batir  DOaiiituiia  hup  pvado^
that  in  St.  Peter's  Epiatlea  the  writt^  word  is  aabetitated  for,  and  does
the  wtak  of^  the  Pecson  of  Ohrist  in  St.  Faol'g  mitiiigB.  Vorieaunga^
p.  396.

^  I  St.  Pet.  ill.  3a  :  iirvrtrf4yTitr  nfrr^  irfylXuf  moI  i^ovtrm*  jnd  ZvtiftMar.

'  Ibid. :  3i  ioTiy  ir  S({i$  toS  Htov  npivBiit  tis  obparif.

*  Ibid.  iv.  II :  Int  ir  voiri  Eo{ilfi7Tat  i  9fbi  3ii  'IqiroO  X|>uiTiHi,  f  imr
4  Si^a  irol  T&  j<piiT0t  fit  Tohs  oi'Sriu  thv  ojiivarr.  ofi^r.  Here  $  is  natnnll;
mbnul  fn  l-™.»s  XpHTToK  whioh  immediately  pceoedea  it.    Se^  howerar,

iBtJtoi  of  the  ai^omeDts  which  have  been  niged  i^iiut
id  Buthentidtv  of  thia  Epistle,  see  Olshansen,  OpoKuli
IS,  and  Caaon'Cook'i  art.  'Peter,'  in  Siuith's  Diet.  KE


[lEOT.


Christ  as  the  object  of  the '  higher  knowledge^    303

spiritual  peace  ^.    For  this  practical  knowledge  of  Jesus  is  the
crowning   point   of  other   Christian   attainments  ^'^     It  is  the
consummate   result  both   of  faith   and   practice,  both  of  the
intellectual  and  of  the  moral  sides  of  the  Christian  life.     In
the  long  line  of  graces  which  this  special  knowledge  implies,  are
faith  €uid  general  religious  knowledge  on  the  one  hand,  and  on
the  other,  moral  strength,  self-restraint,  patience,  piety,  brotherly
love,  and,  in  its  broadest  sense,  charity  \    In  this  higher  know-
ledge of  Jesus,  all  these  excellences  find  their  end  and  their
completion.     On   any  \)ther   path,  the   soul  is  abandoned   to
spiritual  blindness,  tending  more  and  more  to  utter  forgetfalness
of  all  past  purifications  from  sin®.    For  this  higher  practical
knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  means  whereby  Christians
escape  from  the  polluting  impurities  of  the  life  of  the  heathen
world  ^.     It  raises  Christian  souls  towards  the  Unseen  King  in
His  glory;  it  secures  their  admission  to  His  everlasting  realms.
If  Christians  would  not  be  carried  away  from  their  steadfast
adherence  to  the  truth  and  life  of  Christianity  by  the  errors  of
those  who  hate  all  law,  let  them  endeavour  to  grow  in  this
blessed  knowledge  of  Jesus  ^.     The  prominence  given  to  the
Person  of  Christ,  in  this  doctrine  of  an  cV/yyaxn^  of  which  £Us
Person  is  the  Object,  leads  us  up  to  the  truth  of  His  real
Divinity.     If  Jesus,  thus  known  and  loved,  were  not  accounted
God,  then  we  must  say  that  God  is  in  this  Epistle  thrown
utterly  into  the  background,  and  that  His* human  messenger
has  ta^en  His  place.

Nor  is  the  negative  and  polemical  side  of  the  Epistle  much
less  significant  than  its  constructive  and  hortatory  side.  The
special  misery  of  the  false  teachers  of  whom  the  Apostle  speaks
as  likely  to  s^ct  the  Church,  will  consist  in  their  *  denying  the

^  a  St.  Pet.  i.  a :  X<^P<'  ^V^^  ^  <^*^  irXijOvrdc/i}  Iw  iiriyy^trtt  rod  6cov,
Koi  *lri<rov  rod  Kvplov  iifjL&y,

®  Ibid.  ver.  8  :  ravra  yhp  (that  is,  the  eight  graces  preyionsly  enumerated)
(fftlp  ^dpxovra  Koi  irXwydiovra,  oIk  itfryohs  o^h  iucd^ovs  KoBlffrriffuf  els  rj^y
rod  Kvplov  iifJMV  *lrtffov  Xpurrov  Myywffw,

*  Ibid.  vers.  5,  6,  7.

•  Ibid.  ver.  p.*

'  Ibid.  ii.  ao :  iLTo4>vy6yT9S  rk  jAvifffiara  rov  K6(rfjLov  iy  iinyy<&ir9i  rod
Kvpiov  Koi  ootTfjpos  'Iria'ov  Xpurrov*  Of.  Ibid.  i.  4:  ikiro<pvy6yr9S  r^i  4y
idffpx^  4y  hrtSvfilii^  ^Oopas.

'  Ibid.  i.  II :  o5tm  7^  T\ov<rtt0s  itrixopirfH^fftrai  tfity  ^  cYcoSoy  tis  t^»
ol^vtoy  fiao'ikeloaf  rod  Kvplov  ^fA&y  K<d  <rurripos  *li}0'ov  Xpurrod,

^  Ibid.  iii.  I7>  18 :  <f>v\dffa'€ffOt,  Xya  /a^  rp  rSy  Mffiuuv  irXcb^  <nfy<xwax9^v*
T«j,  iicirf<nir9  rod  tdlov  trrripiyfiod*  ab^dytr*  Bh  iy  x'^"^''  **^  yy(i>(Tu  rod
Kup/ov  Tip.Stv  KoX  awriipos  *Ii)(roD  Xpurrod,


304  Si.  Peter^s  later  Christology.

Sovereign  that  bought  them,'  and  so  bringing  on  themselves
swift  destruction*.  Unbelievers  might  contraid  that  the  apo'
stolical  teachings  respecting  the  present  power  and  future  coming
of  Jesus  were  cleverly-invented  myths  i ;  but  St.  Peter  had
himself  witnessed  the  majesty  of  Jesus  in  His  Transfiguration  k.
The  Apostle  knows  that  he  himself  wlQ  quickly  die;  he  has
had  a  special  revelation  from  the  Lord  Jesus  to  this  effect  I
Throughout  this  Epistle  the  Person  of  Jesus  is  constantly  before
us.  As  He  is  the  true  Object  of  Christian  knowledge,  so  He  is
the  Lord  of  the  future  kingdom  of  the  saints.  He  is  mocked  at
and  denied  by  the  heretics ;  His  Coming  it  is  which  the  scoflfing
materialism  of  the  age  derides;  His  judgments  are  foreshadowed
by  the  great  destructive  woes  of  the  Old  Testament.  Again
and  again,  as  if  with  a  reverent  eagerness  which  takes  pleasure
in  the  sacred  words,  the  Apostle  names  His  Master's  Name  and
titles.  He  is  Jesus  our  Lord™ ;  He  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ";
He  ifl  the  Lord  and  Saviour  ® ;  He  is  our  Lord  and  Saviour
Jesus  Christ  P ;  He  is  our  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  a.  Hia
power  is  spoken  of  as  Divine  ' ;  and  through  the  precious  things
promised  by  Him  to  His  Church  (must  we  not  here  especially
understand  the  sacraments  1)  Christians  are  made  partakers  of
the  Nature  of  God*.  To  Christ,  in  His  exalted  majesty,  a
tribute  of  glory  is  due,  both  now  and  unto  the  day  of  eternity*.
Throughout  this  Epistle  Jesus  Christ  is  constantly  named  where

I  2  St.  Pet.  ii.  I :  irapeio'd^ova'tv  alpiff^is  SirwAefa;,  icol  rhv  ayopd<rarra  ov*
Tbhs  AeoTrSTriv  ii.ppoifi€POi,  iirdyovrts  iavro7s  rax^h^  dirc&Xeiay.

i  Ibid.  i.  16 :  od  y^p  attrofpurfAevots  fiiOois  iicucoKovOiiirayTes  iywcfpltranip
ifjuv  T^v  rod  Kvplov  rifiav  *l9}<roO  Xpicrrov  ivyajxiv  koX  irapovffiay,

^  Ibid. ;  iv^Trrai  y€vri04vT€s  ttjs  iKcifov  fi€ya\€i6niTos,  Ibid.  ver.  18 :  A'
r^  6p€t  r^  ayi^,

*  Ibid.  ver.  14 :  elS^j  Zri  raxivh  iffrty  ^  htrSBeirts  rov  ffiaiy^iJiaris  /tov,
KaBSos  KdX  6  Kipios  riixav  *lri(rovs  Xpurrhs  i^'fi\ia<r4  fioi.  Here  raxiyh  seems  to
mean  'soon,*  'not  distant/  rather  than  'rapid.*  Cf.  St.  John  zzL  18;  but
some  independent  revelation,  made  shortly  before  these  words  were  written,
is  probably  alluded  to.  Hegesipptis,  de  Exddio  Hierosol.  lib.  iii.  a ;  St.  Am*
bros.  Serm.  contra  Anzentium,  de  Basilids  tradendis,  n.  13  in  Epist  31.

™  2  St.  Pet.  i.  2.    This  occurs  elsewhere  only  at  Bom.  iy.  24.

»  2  St.  Pet.  i.  14,  16.        •  Ibid.  iii.  2.        p  Ibid.  i.  II,  ii.  20,  iii.  18.

4  Ibid.  i.  I.    Cf.  Bp.  Middleton  on  Gr.  Art.  p.  433.

'  2  St.  Pet.  i.  3 :  rrjs  Betas  Svvdfiews  aurov  rh  irpds  fft>^y  Kcti  €v(r4pftB»  J«-
fSupTjfifvris.  avrov  apparently  refers  to  ^Irjffov  (ver.  2),  and  is  so  distingaiahed
from  the  Eternal  Father  rod  KdK4<rcanos  iiiMs  (ver.  3).

■  Ibid.  ver.  4 :  rlftta  kirtKyyiS4Ui,ra  ^e^^ipifrai,  Xva  M  roiruy  yir^tBt  Belas
Koivoovol  <p{MTews.

^  Ibid.  iii.  18 :  ahr$  ^  U^a  iuDLvw  kcSl^U  iifi4pw  ai&vof.  '  Tota  letermtM
ima  dies  est.*    Estius.

[lict.


Christology  of  St.  Jude.  305

we  should  expect  to  find  the  Name  of  God.  The  Apostle  does
not  merely  proclaim  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  in  formal  terms  ;  he
everywhere  feels  and  implies  it.

IXr.  Akin  to  St.  Peter's  second  Epistle  in  its  language  and
purpose  is  the  short  Epistle  of  St.  Jude.  Like  his  hrother
St.  James,  St.  Jude,  although  our  Lord's  first  cousin,  introduces
himself  as  the  slave  of  Jesus  Christ.  St.  Jude  does  not  also
term  himself  the  slave  of  God'*.  If  believing  Christians  are
sanctified  in  God  the  Father,  they  are  preserved  in  a  life  of
faith  and  holiness  by  union  with  Jesus  Christ  ▼.  The  religion
of  Jesus,  according  to  St.  Jude,  is  the  final  revelation  of  God,
the  absolute  truth,  the  true  faith.  Men  should  spare  no  efforts
on  behalf  of  the  true  faith.  It  is  the  faith  once  for  all  delivered
to  the  saints^.  The  Gnostics  alluded  to  in  this  Epistle,  like
those  foretold  by  St.  Peter,  are  said  to  *  deny  our  only  Sovereign
and  Lord,  Jesus  Christ  ^.*  They  are  threatened  with  the  punish-
ments awarded  by  Jesus  to  Israel  in  the  wilderness  7,  and  to  the
rebel  angels ;  they  will  perish  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrha  ■.  The
Book  of  Enoch  is  cited  to  describe  Jesus  coming  to  judgment,
surrounded  by  myriads  of  saints  ^.  The  authors  of  all  unholy
deeds  will  then  be  convicted  of  their  crimes ;  the  hard  things
spoken  against  the  Judge  by  impious  sinners  will  be  duly
punished.  Christians,  however,  are  to  build  themselves  up  upon
their  most  holy  faith  1>:  their  life  is  fashioned  in  devotion  to
the  Blessed  Trinity.  It  is  a  life  of  prayer :  their  souls  live  in
the  Holy  Spirit  as  in  an  atmosphere  0.  It  is  a  life  of  persevering
love,  whereof  the  Almighty  Father  is  the  Object  \  It  is  a  life
of  expectation :  they  look  forward  to  the  indulgent  mercy  which


^  St.  Jude  yer.  i :  'Iijo'oi)  Xpiorov  SovXof,  &8c\^f  Z\  *laK<&Bov.

*  Ibid. :  ro7$  iv  0cy  irarpi  ^tatriAivois  icol  *lfi<rov  Xpiar^  T€rrifnifi4yots
icXrjrois.

^  Ibid.  ver.  3 :  iraf)airaAci>y  hraywviiinrBai  Tp  &ira^  irapaZo6t((rp  rots  aylois

'  Ibid.  ver.  4:  rhv  fi6vov  At<nr6rriy  koX  Kipiop  fifxwv  'Iriffovp  Xpurrhp
apvovufvoi,

y  Ibid.  ver.  5,  whew  'Iritrovs  is  found  in  A,  B,  13,  Vulg.,  Copt.,  ^th.,
St.  Jer.,  Cyr.     'O  SeSs,  Kvpios,  and  6  Kiptos  are  less  fully  attested.

■  Ibid.  vers.  5-7.

*  Ibid.  ver.  14  :  ^\Be  K^pios  iv  fwpidfftv  ayiais  ahrov,  iroii)<rat  Kplffiv  Kai^
*Ainuv.    On  *  Enoch  *  see  Pusey,  Daniel  the  Prophet,  p.  393,  note  3.

^  Ibid,  ver.  ao :  i^/acis  He,  iryamirolf  Tp  ayuardrp  {ffxwy  itlffTU  iwoucoSo^
uovvrts  iauTo6s.

*  Ibid. :  iv  nvtifiart  'Ayitp  irpofftvx^M-^Poi.

*  Ibid.  ver.  21 :  favrohs  4p  itydwri  Qtov  rrfpiiauTt,


3o6  Chrisiology  of  Si.  Paul.

onr  Lord  Jeami  Chriet  will  eliew  them  at  His  coming  ».  Christ
ia  the  Being  to  whom  they  look  for  mercy ;  and  the  issue  of
Hie  compassion  is  ererleBtiiig  life.  Could  any  merely  hnman
Chirist  have  had  this  place  in  the  heart  and  &ith  of  ChriBtiam,
or  on  the  judgment-seat  of  God  %

IV,  But  it  b  time  that  we  should  proceed  io  consider,  how-
ever hriefly,  the  witness  of  that  great  Apostle,  whose  Epistles
form  BO  much  larger  a  contribution  to  the  sacred  volume  of  the
Mew  Testament  than  is  supplied  by  any  other  among  the  inspired
servants  of  Christ.

t.  In  comparing  St.  Paul  with  St.  John,  a  modem  author  has
remarked  that  at  first  sight  two  objects  stand  out  prominently
in  the  theological  teaching  of  the  beloved  disciple,  while  three
immediately  challenge  observation  in  the  writings  of  the  Apostle
of  the  Gentiles.  At  first  sight,  St.  John's  doctrine  appears  to
place  US  face  to  face  only  with  God  and  the  human  world.  Christ
as  the  Eternal  Logos  is  in  St.  John  plainly  identical  with  God;
although  when  we  contemplate  the  life  of  the  Godhead  He  is  dis-
cerned to  be  personally  distinct  from  the  Father.  Bat  we  cannot
really  understand  St.  John,  and  withal  establish  in  our  thonght
an  essential  separation  between  God  and  the  Word  Incarnate.
Although  Jesus  is  a  manifestation  of  God's  gloty  in  the  world
of  sense,  He  is  ever  internal  to  that  Divine  Essence  Whose  glory
He  manifests ;  He  is  with  God,  and  He  is  God.  In  St,  Paul,
on  the  other  hand,  we  are  confronted  more  distinctly  with  three
objects.  These  are,  God,  the  human  world,  and  between  tiie
two,  JesuB  Christ,  Divine  and  human,  the  One  Mediator  between
God  and  man.  Of  course  the  ^rim&  fane  impression  produced
on  the  mind  by  the  sacred  writers  is  ell  that  is  here  in  question,
and  this  impression  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  their  real
relations  to  each  other.  The  Christ  of  St.  John  is  as  truly
Human  as  the  Christ  of  St.  Paul  is  literally  Divine  ;  St  John
exhibits  the  Mediator  not  less  truly  than  St.  Paul,  St.  Paul  the
Divine  Son  of  the  Father  not  less  truly  than  St.  John.  But  the
observation  referred  to  enables  ua  to  do  justice  to  the  form  of
istology;  and  we  may  well  observe  in  his  writings
le  whidi  is  given  to  two  truths  which  supply  tie
side  and  on  that,  to  the  doctrine  oF  our  I^rd'g
lead.
.  insists  with  particular  earnestness  upon  the  truth

.  tV.  *po<rlixil^<yoi  ri  lAtoI  raC  Kuploa  finSr'IijaoS  Xpi^oi,


Stress  laid  on  our  LorcCs  Manhood.       307

of  our  Lord's  real  Humanity.     This  truth  is  not  impaired  by
such  expressions  as  the  *  form  of  a  servant  ^,'  the  '  fashion  of  a
man  k,'  the  *  likeness  of  sinful  flesh !»,'  which  are  employed  either
to  describe  Christ's  Humanity  as  a  mode  of  being,  or  to  hint  at
Its  veiling  a  Higher  Nature  undiscemed  by  the  senses  of  man,
or  to  mark  the  point  at  which,  by  Its  glorious  inaccessibility  to
sin,  It  is  in  contrast  with  the  nature  of  that  frail  and  erring  race
to  which  It  truly  belongs.     Nor  is  our  Lord's  Humanity  con-
ceived of  as  a  phantom,  when  the  Apostle  has  reached  a  point
of  spiritual  growth  at  which  the  outward  circumstances  of  Christ's
Life  are  wellnigh  forgotten  in  an  overmastering  perception  of
His  spiritual  and  Divine  glory  *.     St.  Paul  speaks  plainly  of  our
Lord  as  being  manifest  in  the  flesh  k ;  as  possessing  a  Body  of
material  flesh  1 ;  as  being  *  made  of  a  woman  "^ ;'  as  being  *  bom
of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  flesh 'i ;'  as  having  drawn
the  substance  of  His  Flesh  from  the  race  of  Israel  o.     As  a  Jew,
Jesus  Christ  was  bom  under  the  yoke  of  the  Law  P.     His  Hu-
man Life  was  not  merely  one  of  self-denial  ^  and  obedience ;  it
was  pre-eminently,  a  life  of  sharp  suffering  '.     The  Apostle  uses
energetic  expressions  to  describe  our  Lord's  real  share  in  our
physical  human  weakness  8,  as  well  as  in  those  various  forms
of  pain,  mental  and  bodily,  which  He  willed  to  undergo,  and
which  reached  their  climax  in  the  supreme  agonies  of  the  Pas-
sion t.    If  however  Christ  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the
death  of  the  cross  ^,  this,  as  is  implied,  was  of  His  own  free
condescension ;  and  St.  Paul  dwells  with  rapture  upon  the  glory
of  Christ's  risen  Body,  to  which  our  bodies  of  humiliation  will

'  Phil.  ii.  7  :  /xoptp^v  9o^\ov.

*  Ibid.  ver.  8 :  <rx^/AaTt  tvpcBels  &s  HvOpooiros,
^  Bom.  viii.  3 :  4v  dixoulifjLaTi  ffapKhs  &{iaprla5,

'  2  Cor.  Y.  16 :  flBh  icai  iyv^KOfitv  Kark  adpica  UpKrrhVf  iiWh  vOy  obx  Uti

^  I  Tim.  iii.  16 :  itparep^eri  tv  (rapid,

*  Col.  i.  22  :  iv  r^  cr^ixari  t^s  (TopKhs  ahrov,
■  Gal.  iv.  4 :  yepdfuyov  ix  yvvauKos,

°  Rom.  i.  3 :  tov  yevoixevov  4k  (nrdpfiaros  AajSlS  xarh  <rdpKcu

*  Ibid.  ix.  5  :  4^  &u  6  Xpurrhs  rh  Karh  adpKO,
'  Gal.  iv,  4 :  y€y6fjL€yov  vrh  v6yLoy,

'  Bom.  XV.  3 :  Koi  yhp  6  Xpiffrhs  oitK  iavrw  l^pftrey,

'  Heb.  V.  8  :  Kodircp  &v  vlhs,  ^fxadev  &</>*  &y  tirade  r^y  (nraKoiiy.

'  2  Cor.  ziii.  4 :  ^a-TavpdOri  4^  atrdeyelas.

*  Ibid.  i.  5  :  rek  vaOrifiara  rod  Xpiffrov.     Phil.  iii.  10 :  r^y  Koiywyiay  rSiv
''a^fidrtoy  avrov.     Col.  i.  24 :  rh  itrrepiiixara  ray  $\l}^€<oy  rod  Xpiffrov.

^  Phil.   ii.    8 :    4ra'irelyw(r€y  kavrhy,   ytySfifyos   inriiKoos  /icxpi   Bca^drov,
^oi^rov  $€  trravpov,

n]  X2


3o8         S^.  Paul  on  our  Lord's  Manhood.


1  their  degrees,  by  His  Almighty  Fover,  be  assimi-
Isted^.  Upon  two  features  of  our  Lord's  Sacred  Humamtj
does  St.  Paul  lay  eepecial  stress.  First,  Christ's  Manhood
clearly  Toid  of  sin,  both  in  Soul  and  Body;  and  in  this  respect
It  was  unlike  any  one  member  of  the  race  to  which  It  belonged'
This  siniesBness,  however,  did  but  restore  hainanity  '  in,  Christ'
to  its  original  type  of  perfection.  Thus,  secondly,  Christ's  Man-
hood is  representative  of  the  human  race ;  it  realizes  the  arche-
typal idea  of  humanity  in  the  Divine  Mind.  Christ,  the  Second
Adam,  according  to  St.  Paul,  stands  in  a  relation  to  the  regene-
rate family  of  men  analogous  to  that  ancestral  relationship  in
which  the  first  Adam  stands  to  all  his  natural  descendants.  Bnt
this  correspondence  is  balanced  by  a  contrast.  In  two  great
passages  St.  Paul  exhibits  the  contrast  which  exists  between  the
Second  Adam  and  the  first  r.  This  contrast  is  physical,  p^cho-
logical,  moral,  and  historical.  The  body  of  the  first  Adam  ia
corruptible  and  earthly;  the  Body  of  the  Second  Adam  ia
glorious  and  incorruptible '.  The  first  Adam  enjoys  natural
life ;  he  is  made  a  living  soul.  The  Second  Adam  ia  a  super-
natural Being,  capable  of  communicating  His  Higher  Life  to
others ;  He  is  a  quickening  Spirit ».  The  first  Adam  is  a  sinner,
and  his  sin  compromises  the  entire  race  which  springs  fi'oin
him.  The  Second  Adam  sins  not;  His  Life  is  one  mighty  act
of  righteousness  ^ ;  and  they  who  are  in  living  communion  with
Him  share  in  this  His  righteousness  o.  The  historical  conse-
quence of  the  action  of  the  first  Adam  is  death,  the  death  of  the
body  and  of  the  soul.     This  consequence  is  transmitted  to  Lis

'  Phil.  iU.  ai :  ti  ^vraaxn^tisti  rfc  nS^ui  rfli  TOir(icAr(»r  W"'*',  ■  ■  ■  ■

kbI  uTDTiifai  iavT^  tA  ■wivra.     I  Cor.  iv.  44 :  iruiia  nvtviutTuciii.

»  1  Cor.  T.  II :  riv  yif  pi)  yrima  aiiaprlay,  inip  iiiiiiv  kiioprier  Iwelnaa,
Gal.  ii.  1 7  :  Spa  Xpmris  afiapriai  SidKoros ;  ^j)  yimuTo.  '&iaa,  viii.  3 ;  A
Art.  IV.

'  Eoin.  T.  u-3r ;  i  Got.  rv.  45-49.

'  I  Cor.  IT.  47:  i  tpSnoi  HyBparo!  i*  y^s,  xoi'it^i'  *  Siirtpot  irtpimt
[i  Kipim],  ii  oipayoi.     Oht  i  xoi'^i.  TDiofrat  Kol  si  xoIhoI-  iu}  oIdi  i  im-

■  Ibid.  ver.  45 :  iyivira  6  TpSros  Siflpotroj  'AJV  <"  i^X^"  f"<™^  '
frxaTO!  'Aiiit  lit  rytv/ia  (aowaiovr.     Of.  TCTi.  II,  13.

''  SrraUfm,  Bom.  v.  18.

'  Rom.  T.  18,  19  :  i!pa  air  iis  Si'  lyiis  raparr^iiaTOS,  «j  wttn-ai  inSpimiii,
fit  KariKpi/ui-  sOria  nal  Si'  iylis  SiKau^iirrot,  dr  trivrot  ir€pAiriivl,  'if
Smaitnair  (v^s.  &initf  yif  Sih  t^i  Topantrlji  Tr>u  iris  irep^au  ifafntXii
KartinilBnirar  ol  nWal,  olha  Kal  Sli  Tqt  ^uto^i  rod  irii  SiKoau  nroim-
timrriu  «l  iro\Xal.

[leci.


Christ  is  Mediator  as  being  truly  Man,    309

descendants  along  with  his  other  legacy  of  transmitted   sin.
The  historical  consequence  of  the  action  and  suffering  of  the
Second  Adam  is  life ;   and  communion  with  His  living  right-
eousness is  the  gauge  and  assurance  to  His  faithful  disciples
of  a  real  exemption  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death  \     Such  a
contrast,  you  observe,  might  well  suggest  that  the  Second  Adam,
Representative  of  man's  race,  its  true  Archetype,  its  Restorer
and  its  Saviour,  is  Himself  more  than  man.     Certainly;   but
nevertheless  it  is  as  Man  that  Christ  is  contrasted  with  our  first
parent;   and  it  is  in  virtue  of  His  Manhood  that  He  is  our
Mediator,  our  Redeemer  o,  our  Saviour  from  Satan's  power,  our
Intercessor  with  the  Father  ^.     Great  stress  indeed  does  St.  Paul
lay  upon  the  Manhood  of  Christ  as  the  instrument  of  His  media-
tion between  earth  and  heaven,  as  the  channel  through  which
intellectual  truth  and  moral  strength  descend  from  God  into
the  souls  of  men,  as  the  Exemplar  wherein  alone  human  nature
has  recovered  its  ideal  beauty,  as  entering  a  sphere  wherein  the
Sinless  One  could  offer  the  perfect,  world-representing  sacrifice
of  a  truly  obedient  Will.      So  earnestly  and  constantly  does
St.  Paul's  thought  dwell  on  our  Lord's  mediating  Humanity,
that  to  unreflecting  persons  his  language  might  at  times  appear
to  imply  that  Jesus  Christ  is  personally  an  inferior  being,  ex-
ternal to  the  Unity  of  the  Divine  Essence  K.     Thus  he  tells  the
Corinthians  that  Christians  have  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  well
as  one  God  \     Thus  he  reminds  St.  Timothy  that  there  is  One

^  Bom.  y.  la:  Si*  kvh%  i,vBp<&irov  ri  ofxaprla  €is  rby  Kufffxov  eioijXOe,  xal
hh  rrjs  afiofnias  6  Bivaros.  Ibid.  ver.  17 :  el  yhp  4y  ^y\  [t^  rod  ivbsy  text,
rec.]  "Koftairrdtixari  6  ddvaros  ifiatrlx.wo't  tih  rod  iyhs,  iro\\^  fxaWov  oi  r^v
vipiffffday  r^s  x^P*^'*^  ^"^  '^^^  Bvptas  rrfs  fiiKaioffT&vrfs  Xc^fidyovrts,  iv  iu^
^affiXeiffovtrt  $i^  rod  ivhs  'Iriffov  Xpurrov.     Gf.  Ibid.  ver.  ai.

•  I  Tim.  ii.  5,  6 :  AyOpctvos  Xpitrrhs  'Irfffovs,  6  5oi>j  kcanhy  ivrlKurpov  iirhp
vdvTuv.

'  Heb.  ii.  14 :  ^irel  oZv  rh,  TratSla  KtKoiv^vriKt  ffapkhs  K<d  aXixaros,  Koi  avrhs
frapair\ri(rieos  fiereffx^  fSov  aifr&y,  tva  Stek  rod  daydrov  Karapy^crp  rbv  rh  Kpdros
fxovTo  rod  BavdroVf  rovrecri,  rhv  9idfio\ov.     Ibid.  v.  I ,

>  As  in  I  Cor.  iii.  33,  zi.  3.     Compare  Eph.  ii.  i8-ao.

^  I  Cor.  viii.  6 :  eh  K^pios  'Irjffods  Xpi<Tr6s,  Here  however  (i)  K^pios,  as
contrasted  with  Qehs,  implies  no  necessary  inferiority ;  else  we  must  say
that  the  Father  is  not  Kipios ;  cf.  St.  Chiys.  de  Incompr.  Dei  Nat.  v.  a ;
in  I  Cor.  x.  ao,  ai,  K^pios  is  used  of  Christ  in  contrast  with  the  demon-
gods  of  heathendom :  while  (a)  the  clause  St*  oV  rh.  ledvra,  roIX  tiiaus  Si*  ahrod,
(which  could  not  be  restricted  to  our  Lord's  redemptive  work  without
great  arbitrariness,  since  it  plainly  refers  to  His  creation  of  the  universe,)
places  Jesus  Christ  on  a  level  with  the  Father.  Compare  the  position  of
Ilk  between  41  and  eU,  Bom.  xi.  36 ;  cf.  Col.  i.  16.  Our  Lord  is  here  dis-
tinmshed  Irom  the  '  One  God,'  as  being  Human  as  well  as  Divine ;  cf.  the
Tl]


3IO  Fulure  'subjection  of  Our  Lord's  Humanity.

Ood  and  One  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  Man  Christ
JeBus,  Who  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for  all*.  Thua  he  looka
forward  to  a  day  when  the  need  for  Chriat'e  mediatorial  Kojalty
having  ceased,  His  Manhood,  shall  be  eubject  to  Hint  That
put  all  things  nnder  Him,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all  J.  It  is  at
least  certain  that  no  modem  Humanitarian  could  recognise  the
literal  reality  of  onr  Lord's  Hnmanity  with  more  explicitness
than  did  the  Apostle  who  had  never  seen  Him  on  earth,  and  to
whom  He  had  been  manifested  in  visions  which  a  Docetic  en-
thusiast might  have  taken  as  sufficient  warrant  for  denying  His
actual  participation  in  onr  flesh  and  blood  ^,

(p)  On  the  other  hand,  St.  Paul  is  as  strict  a  monotheist  as
any  unconverted  pupil  of  Gamaliel ;  he  does  not  merely  retain


relAtdon  of  iifvlrrii  to  8(^  in  I  Tim.  a.  5-  Bat  the  real  tuititliesia  lies  not
between  th  etht  and  fTs  Kfpigi,  but  between  the  th  ecili  i  IlaTlip  and  tlw
Bcel  ri>AAi>(  of  heaUieDdam,  and  the  <'i  Ki/noi  and  the  heathen  xipm
«-oAAd(:  cf.-ver.  5,  Banr'g  remarks  on  i  Cor.  viii.  6  (Torleeungen,  p.  193),
which  proceed  upon  the  UBumption  th»t  only  fonr  Epietlee  of  St.  Paul  we
extant,  and  therefore  that  Col.  i.  !&  17  is  nothing  to  the  pnrpcae,  and
which  nuHVOver  endeavoiir  to  impoee  the  pl^n  redemptive  reference  of
1  Cor.  V.  IT,  i3  apoD  Uua  passage,  are  m  cs|^cioaa  u  to  shew  veryte-
markably  tiie  atrength  and  truth  of  the  Cathtlia  intetpretation.  Cf.  Water'
Und,  Worka,  ii.  54.

I  I  "nm.  ii.  5, 6 ;  ih  yilp  9iiii,  iti  koI  fii irCnrt  etoii  koI  aripiray,  ii4ptim
Xpiffrhi  'IfjiTouT.     Of.  Wil1>erforce,  Doctr.  Inc.  pp.  aia-^ij^  ed.  5.

J  I  Cm',  it.  18:  hoF  Bi  itiarayv  ain^f  ri  wJwii,  Tiirt  koJ  oirii  6  Tih
^OToy^fftTai  T^  irword^airri  avrS  Ti  iri^a,  Xva  ^  i  9tbt  ri  'mAfira  iv  votfir.
That  OOT  Lwd'a  Humanity  ia  the  Bubject  of  iworaryliaFrai  is  the  opiniim  of
St.  Augustine  (de  Trin,  i.  c.  8),  St.  Jerome  (adv.  PeUg.  i.  6),  Theodoret  C"
loo.).     If  oftrit  6  TDis  means  the  Divine  Son  moat  naturally,  the  predlcata

1  Cor.  ii.  8 ;   Eom.  viii.  3a,  ii.  5 ;   Heb.  vi.  6 ;  St.  John  iii.  13)  ;  since  it

eon  only  apply  to  a  created  nature.    A  writer  who  believed  onr  Lord  le

'  be  literally  Grod  (Bom.  ix.  5)  could  not  have  euppoeed  that,  at  the  end  of

Hia  mediatorial  reign  as  Miui,  a  new  relation  woidd  be  introduced  betweea

the  PersMis  of  the  Qodhead.     The  snbordioatJMi  (xarli  riiir)  of  the  Sen

is  an  eternal  Gict  in  the  inner  Being  of  God.    See  Lect.  TV.  p.  201,    But

the  mtibU  BubjecdoD  of  His  Humanity  (with  Which  His  Church  is  m

M^anically  united  as  to  be  called  'Christ'  I  Cor.  rii.  11)  to  the  supremai^

lized  at  the  doee  of  the  pi«eent  dispensation.     AgiJIklt

ic  from  this  passage  an  ivrMirntrriHrii  of  men  and  devil^

;   and  agwnst  Pantheistic  inferences  &om  ra  Tim  b

iuller,  Lehre  von  d.  Sunde,  i.  p.  157,  quoted  ibid.

however,  to  b«  »  distinction  between  such  visions  and

1  Ow.  zii.  1-4;  Acts  iviii.  g;  nii.  17,  and  the  *pp«r-

st  at  midday,  at  St.  Paul's  convereion.  Acta  ii.  17.    Of

appears  to  speak  more ,  especially  in  i  Gia.  ix.  i,  and

LCTBon  on  the  Reemtection,  p.  33a.

[lkck


Si.  Paul  on  the  Divine  Unity.  311

his  hold  upon  the  priinal  truth  of  God's  inviolate  Unity ;  he  is
especially  devoted  to  it.

God  is  parted  from  the  very  highest  forms  of  created  life  by
a  measureless  interval,  and  yet  the  universe  is  a  real  reflection
of  His  Nature  1.  The  relation  of  the  creatures  to  God  is  three-
fold. Nothing  exists  which  has  not  proceeded  originally  from
Gbd's  creative  Hand.  Nothing  exists  which  is  not  upheld  in
being  and  perfected  by  God's  sustaining  and  working  energy.
Nothing  exists  which  shall  not  at  the  last,  whether  mechanically
or  consciously,  whether  willingly  or  by  a  terrible  constraint,  sub-
serve God's  high  and  resistless  purpose.  For  as  He  is  the
Creator  and  Sustainer,  so  He  is  the  One  last  End  of  all  created
existences.  Of  Him,  and  through  Him,  and  unto  Him,  are  all
things  ™.  So  absolute  an  idea  of  God  excludes  all  that  is  local,
transient,  particular,  finite.  God's  supreme  Unity  is  the  truth
which  determines  the  universality  of  the  Gospel ;  since  the  Gospel
unveils  and  proclaims  the  One  supreme,  world-controlling  God"*.
Hence  the  Apostle  infers  the  deep  misery  of  Paganism.  The
Pagan  representation  of  Deity  was  *  a  lie '  by  which  this  essential
truth  of  God's  Being  o  was  denied.  The  Pagans  had  forfeited
that  partial  apprehension  of  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God
which  the  physical  universe  and  the  light  of  natural  conscience
placed  within  their  reach.  They  had  yielded  to  those  instincts
of  creature- worship  P  which  mere  naturalism  is  ever  prone  to
indulge.  The  Incarnation  alone  subdues  these  instincts  by
consecrating  them  to  the  service  of  God  Incarnate ;  while  beyond

^  Bom.  i.  ao:  t&  ^^kp  hi^o.ttx  adroS  hicb  mitr^w  icSfffiov  ro7s  Tot'^fuuri
poovfieva  Kadoparau

"^  Ibid.  zi.  36 :  5ri  4^  abrov  ical  St'  alnov  Ktd  tls  ahrhv  rh  irdvrcu  'Alios
ist  out  Gott  ( Urgrund),  in  sofem  Allea  aus  Gottes  Schopferkraffce  hervor-
gegangen  ist;  durch  Oott  {Vermittelungsgrund),  in  Bofem  nichts  ohne
Gottes  Yermittelung  (continuirliche  Einwirkung)  existirt ;  filr  Oott  (teleO'
logische  Bestimmung),  in  sofem  AUes  den  Zwecken  Gottes  dient.*  Meyer
inloc.

"  Baor,  Vorlesungen,  p.  205 :  '  Auf  dieser  Auffassung  der  Idee  Gottes
bernlit  der  Universalismiis  des  Apostels,  wie  er  diess  in  dem  Satz  ausspricht,
dassGott  sowohl  der  Heiden  ak  der  Juden  Gott  sei.  Rom.  ii.  ii,  lii.  2%
X.  13.  Das  Ghristenthum  ist  selbst  nichts  anderes  (it  is  this,  but  it  is
1^  great  deal  more)  als  die  Aufhebung  alles  Particularistischen,  damit  die
feine  absolute  Gottes-Idee  in  der  Menschheit  sich  verwirkliche,  oder  in  ihr
zom  Bewusstsein  komme.'  The  Pantheistic  touch  of  the  last  phrase  does
oot  destroy  the  general  truth  of  the  observation.

•  Bom.  i.  35  :  /*€T^AAo{ay  r^v  kKi\9€uuf  rod  ©€oS  4v  ry  ^tl^u,

'  Ibid.  vers.  18-25 ;    especially  33 :    ¥t\Xa^caf  r^v  t6lay  rov  ktpOdprov
6fov  ip  djxoi^/JiaTi  €iK6yos  <p$aprov  ityBp^ov  K<d  laruvoov  kqHL  rerpaxd^wy
fol  ^pxeruv,  IC.T.A.
VI]


3 1 2  Monotkeism,opposedtoPaganismandGnostidsm.

the  Church  they  perpetoaUf  Uireaten  naturalistic  systems  with
an  utter  and  diWtrouB  subjection  to  the  empire  of  sense.  When
man  then  had  &ir]y  lost  sight  of  the  Unity  and  Spirituality  of
Qod,  Paganism  speedily  allowed  him  \a  sink  beneath  a  flood  of
namelesB  sensualitiee ;  he  had  abandoned  the  Creator  to  become,
in  the  moat  debased  sense,  the  creature's  slave  i.

At  another  tjme  the  Apostle's  thought  rests  for  an  instant
upon  the  elegant  but  impure  idolatries  to  which  the  imagination
and  the  wealth  of  Greece  had  consecrated  those  beautiAd  temples
which  adorned  the  restored  city  of  Corinth.  '  To  us  Christians,'
he  fervently  exclaims,  'there  is  but  one  God,  the  Father;  all
things  owe  their  existence  to  Him,  and  we  live  iist  His  purposes
and  HiH  gloiy  ','  In  after  years,  St.  Paul  is  writing  to  a  fellow-
labourer  for  Obrist,  and  he  has  in  view  some  of  those  Gnostic
imaginations  which  already  proposed  to  link  earth  with  heaven
by  a  gradaat«d  hierarchy  of  iElons,  thus  threatening  the  re-
introduction  either  of  virtual  polytheism  or  of  conscious  creature-
worship.  Against  this  mischievous  speculation  the  Apostle
utt«rB  his  protest ;  but  it  issues  from  bis  adoring  soul  npwardi
to  the  footstool  of  the  One  Supreme  and  Almighty  Being  in  the
richest  and  most  glorioos  of  the  doxologies  which  occur  in  his
Epistles.  Qod  is  the  King  of  the  ages  of  the  world ;  He  is  the
imperishable,  invisible,  only  wise  Being  >.  Qod  is  the  Biased
and  Only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords ;  Ha
only  has  from  Himself  and  originally,  immortality ;  He  dwelli
in  the  light  which  is  inaccessible  to  creatures ;  no  man  has  seen
Him ;  no  man  can  see  Him ;  let  honour  and  power  be  for
ever  ascribed  to  Him  ^

4  Bom.  i.  >4 :  irofi^Sisjitr  ai^ott  h  Silii  b>  toTi  JiriBu^fuij  t£v  (opliw
aSn&v  t\s  inaSapiriay.  Ibid.  Ter.  t6:  tit  nlft]  iri/itas.  Ibid.  ver.  i8:  (u
ilixipJiy  mvr.    See  tbe  whole  ooatext.

'  I  Cor.  Tiii.  5,  6 :  Kal  y^  ttirip  liirl  Keyipxroi  0iol,  <Tt<  it  ibparf,  if"
tw\  fris  (the  two  ipheres  of  poljtheiEtio  invendon)  Harip  <iol  Bid  ruMtl,
vol  xiptoi  iTDAAot'  &\X*  ilfJ-^y  (If  9ebf  6  nor^p,  i^  oS  rk  tAvto,  irol  inuit
,ls  airriy.

*  I  Tim.  i.  1 7 :  t^  Si  BajAu  tSv  aliimr,  i^Sapry,  iopdrtf  fiinf  ntt
&'f,  -riii^i  kbI  3i!{a  cii  Toiii  oiurai  rSr  aiimr.  Here  /torif  ra^  Sff  el-
dadee  cmrent  Gaoetjc  claimB  on  behalf  of  Mara ;  in  Bom.  zvi.  17  (iritli
which  oompora  St.  Jade  35)  it  cxmtraatB  the  IMrine  WiBdom  muifeslsd
in  the  plan  of  BedemptioD  tiiroiigh  JeBus  Christ  with  boman  adieinea  ud
theraiea,  nhether  Jewish  or  Gentile.

'  1  3^.  vi.  15,  iG :  i  itaxipioi  sol  n6rai  Eimtim)!,  t  ^wriAdr  Tmr  $<•"•
KtvirriaVf  Kal  Koptot  T&y  KvptfvirraVf  b  iiifos  txtov  iAwaatajt^  ^r  ffi«r
irpianiir,  %v  cRtcr  obttU  i^tpiniar,  oSSi  JSfiV  tirvtiu,  f  rifij)  Kol  tpiru
aiiriay,  ifiil'.

[lbot.


«l^i<S«^W9«P


Its  bearing  on  the  estimate  of  Christ's  Person.  313

St.  Paul  is,  beyond  all  question,  an  earnest  monotheist ;  his  faith
is  sensitively  jealous  on  behalf  of  the  supremacy  and  the  rights
of  God.     What  then  is  the  position  which  he  assigns  to  Jesus
Christ  in  the  scale  of  being  %     That  he  believed  Jesus  Christ  to
be  merely  a  man  is  a  paradox  which  could  be  maintained  by  no
careful  reader  of  his  Epistles.     But  if,  according  to  St.  Paul,
Christ  is  more  than  man,  what  is  He  )  Is  He  still  only  an  Arian
Christ  %  or  is  He  a  Divine  Person  %     In  St.  Paul's  thought  this
question  could  not  have  been  an  open  one.  His  earnest,  sharply-
defined  fiaith  in  the  One  Most  High  God  must  force  him  to  say
either  that  Christ  is  a  created  Being,  or  that  He  is  internal  to
the  Essence  of  God.     Nor  is  the  subject  of  such  a  nature  as  to
admit  of  accommodation  or  compromise  in  its  treatment.     In
practical  matters,  and  where  the  law  of  God  permits,  St.  Paul
may  become  all  things  to  all  men  that  he  may  by  all  means  save
some  ^.     But  he  cannot,  as  if  he  were  a  pagan  politician  of  old,
or  a  modern  man  of  the  world,  compliment  away  his  deepest
faith  3^.    He  cannot  ascribe  Divinity  to  a  fellow-creature  by  way
of  panegyrical  hyperbole ;  his  belief  in  God  is  too  powerful,  too
exacting,  too  keen,  too  real.     St.  Paul  may  teach  the  Athenians
that  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being  in  the  all-present,  all-
encompassing  Life  of  Gody ;  he  may  bid  the  Corinthians  expect
a  time  when  God  shall  be  known  and  felt  by  every  member  of
His  great  family  to  be  all  in  all*.   But  St.  Paul  cannot  merge  the
Maker  and  Ruler  of  the  universe,  so  gloriously  free  in  His  creative
and  providential  action*,  in  any  conception  which  identifies  Him
with  the  work  of  His  hands,  or  which  reduces  Him  to  the  level
of  an  impersonal  quality  or  force.    The  Apostle  may  contemplate
the  vast  hierarchy  of  the  blessed  angels,  ranging  in  their  various
degrees  of  glory  between  the  throne  of  Goji  and  the  children  of
men  *>.     But  no  heavenly  intelligence,  however  exalted,  is  seen
in  his  pages  to  trench  for  one  moment  upon  the  incommunicable
prerogatives  of  God.     St.  Paul  may  describe  the  regenerate  life
of  Christians  in  such  terms  as  to  warrant  us  in  saying  that
Christ's  true  members  become  divine  by  spiritual  communion
with  God  in  His  Blessed  Son  c.     But  the  saintliest  of  men,  the
most  exalted  and  majestic  of  seraphs,  are  alike  removed  by  an
infinite  interval  from  the  One  Uncreated,  Self-existent,  Incor-

■  I  Car.  ix.  aa.  «  a  Cop.  i.  i8,  ii.  17.  t  Acts  xvii.  a8.

■  I  Cor.  XV.  38.  •  Horn.  ix.  ai.

^  Col.  i.  16.     These  hierarchical  distinctions  appear  to  have  been  pre-
served  among  the  fallen  angels  (Eph.  vi.  la).

*  I  Oar.  iii.  16,  17;  vi.  19,  ao.
VI]


3 1 4  Si.PauVs  devotion  to  our  Lord's  condescension.

mptible  Essence  il.     There  is  no  room  in  St.  Paul's  thought  for

an  imaginary  being  like  the  Arian  Cbriet,  hovering  indiatinctlj
between  created  and  Uncreated  life ;  since,  where  God  is  b»-  \
lieved  to  be  so  utterly  remote  from  the  highest  creatures  beneatL
His  throne,  Christ  muat  either  be  conceived  of  as  purely  and
simply  a  creature  with  no  other  than  a  creature's  nature  and
rights,  or  He  must  be  adored  as  One  Who  is  for  ever  and  neces-
ssjily  internal  to  the  Uncreated  Life  of  the  Most  High.

a.  It  has  been  well  observed  by  the  author  of  'Ecce  Homo'
that '  the  trait  in  Christ  which  filled  St,  Paul's  whole  mind  waa
His  condeecenBion  ; '  and  that  '  the  charm  of  that  condescension
lay  in  its  being  voluntary  «.'  Certainly.  But  condesceuaiou  ia
the  act  of  bending  from  a  higher  station  to  a  lower  one ;  soil
the  question  is,  from  what  did  Christ  condescend  1  If  Christ  web
merdy  human,  what  was  the  human  eminence  from  which
St.  Paul  believed  Him  to  be  stooping  t  Was  it  a  social  emi-
nence 1  But  as  the  favourite  of  the  synagogue,  and  withal  as  pro-
tected by  the  majesty  of  the  Boman  franchisef,  St.  Paal  occupied
a  social  position  not  less  widely  removed  from  that  of  a  Qalileui
peasant  leading  a  life  of  vagrancy,  than  are  your  circumstance^
my  brethren,  who  belong  to  the  middle  and  upper  classes  of  tbia
country,  removed  fr^m  the  lot  of  the  homeless  multitudes  who
day  by  day  seek  rebef  in  our  workbouses.  Was  it  an  intellec-
tual eminence)  But  the  Apostle  who  had  sat  at  the  feet  of
Gamaliel,  and  bad  drawn  largely  from  the  fountains  of  Greek
thought  and  culture,  bad  at  least  eqjoyed  educational  advantBgea
whioh  were  utterly  denied  to  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth,  Was  it
then  a  moral  eminence  t  But,  if  Jesus  was  merely  Man,  was  He,  I
do  not  say  morally  perfect,  but  morally  eminent  at  all  1  Was  not
His  self-assertion  such  as  to  be  inconsistent  with  any  trnthW
recognition  whatever  of  the  real  conditions  of  a  created  eiistr
ence  )  But  was  the  eminence  from  which  Christ  condescended
angelical  as  distinct  from  human !  St.  Paul  has  drawn  tte
sharpest  distinction  between  Christ  and  the  angels ;  Christ  ia
related  to  the  angels,  in  the  belief  of  the  Apostle,  simply  aa  tl>e
Author  of  their  being  b  ;  while  the  appointed  duties  of  the
ship  His  Person  and  to  serve  His  servants  )■,
I  the  position  from  which  Christ  condescended!
ndesoension  are  Indeed  noted,  one  within  *nd


'  Acb)  zzii.  !()■


'tu


From  what  position  did  Christ  condescend?   315

one  beyond  the  limits  of  our  Lord's  Human  Life.     Being  found
in  fasliion  as  a  Man,  He  voluntarily  humbled  Himself  and  be-
came obedient  unto  death  K   But  the  earlier  and  the  greater  act
of  condescension  was  that  whereby  He  had  become  Man  out  of
a  state  of  pre-existent  glory  \    St.  Paul  constantly  refers  to  the
pre-existent  Life  of  Jesus  Christ.     The  Second  Adam  differs
from  the  first  in  that  He  is  *from  heaven  l'     When  ancient
Israel  was  wandering  m   the  desert,  Christ  had  been  Him-
self invisibly  present  as  Quardian  and  Sustainer  of  the  Lord's
people  °^.     St.  Paul  is  pleading  on  behalf  of  the  poor  Jewish
Churches  with  their  wealthier  Corinthian  brethren ;    and  he
points  to  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Who,  when  He
was  rich,  for  our  sakes   became   poor,  that  we   through  His
poverty  might  be  rich'i.     Here  Christ's  eternal  wealth  is  in
contrast  with  His  temporal  impoverishment.     For  His  poverty
began  with  the  manger  of  Bethlehem ;  He  became  poor  by  the
act  of  His  Licamation ;  being  rich  according  to  the  unbegun,
unending  Life  of  His  Higher  Nature,  He  became  poor  in  time  <>.
When  St.  Paul  says  that  our  Lord  was  *  manifested  in  the  flesh  p,*

^  Phil.  ii.  8 :  vyfwuxri  €i>p€0(ls  &s  dvOpeaxos,  irairtivtcffw  iavrhy,  yty6iJiwos
MiKooi  fifxpi  daydrov,  Oayarov  Sh  ffraupov.

^  Ibid.  vers.  6,  7 :  iy  fiop<pi  Ocov  ^dpxc»y,  •  .  iavrhy  iK€yc»tr€,  futp^^y
loiXov  Xafidy,

^  I  Cor.  ZY.  47 :  6  Sc^cpo^  ivBponros  [6  Kitpios]  i^  ohpayov,  Cf.  Tert.  ady.
Marc.  y.  10.

^  I  Cor.  z.  4 :  11  ^\  icirpa  [the  x4rpa  kKoKovBovtra  commemorated  by
Jewish  traditions]  ^y  6  Xpi<rr6s,  Ibid.  ver.  9:  ixrfi\  iiareipd(uney  rhy
Xpurrhv,  icaBdis  Kcurty^s  avrwy  iireipaaoa^,

^  3  Cor.  viii.  9 :  ytviSxrK^rt  ykp  r^y  x^^^  '''^^  Kvpiov  rificiy  'Jjiaov  Xpiffrov,
5rt  9t*  ifjMS  ^irrc^x^v^c  ir\o6ffios  ti>y,  Xya  6ixt7s  rp  iKtlyov  irr^x^^?  xKoV'

®  Baur  suggests  that  iirrd^x^ff*  need  mean  no  more  than  that  Christ  was
poor.  (Yorlesungen,  p.  193.)  But  'der  Aorist  bezeichnet  das  einst  gesche-
hene  JEintreten  des  Armseins  (denn  Trrcox^veiy  heisst  nicht  arm  werden,
sondem  arm  sein),  nicht  das  yon  Christo  gefuhrte  ^anze  Lehen  in  Armuth
und  Niedrigkeit,  wobei  er  gleichwohl  reich  an  Gnade  gewesen  sei.'  (Meyer
in  2  Cor.  yiii.  9.)

P  I  0^.  iii.  16:  4<l>ay€p(&0ri  4y  trapKL  Cf.  Bishop  Ellicott  in  loc.  The
bishop  pronounces  &s  to  be  the  reading  of  the  Codex  A,  'after  minute
personal  inspection,*  and  has  adopted  it  in  his  text.  Mr.  Scrivener  howeyer
has  examined  the  Codex  more  recently,  and  with  a  different  result.  '  On
holding  the  leaf/  he  says,  'up  to  the  light  one  singularly  bright  hour,
February  7,  1 861,  and  gazing  at  it  with  and  without  a  lens,  with  eyes
which  haye  something  of  the  power  and  too  many  of  the  defects  of  a  mi-
croscope, I  saw  clearly  the  tongue  of  the  €  through  the  attenuated  yellum,
crossing  the  circle  about  two  thirds  up,  (much  above  the  thick  modem
line),  &ie  knob  at  its  extremity  falling  without  the  oirde.  On  laying
VI]


3i6  Christ  is  'over  all

lie  at  leaBt  implieB  that  Christ  existed  before  this  manifestation ;
when  St.  Paul  definitely  aacribcB  to  our  Lord  the  fuaction  of  a
Creator  who  creates  not  for  a  Higher  Power  but  for  Himself,  ve
rise  from  the  idea  of  pre-esiatence  to  the  idea  of  a  relation^p
towards  the  uiuTeree,  which  can  belong  to  One  Being  alone.
This  will  presently  be  considered.

Certainly  St.  Paul  used  the  terms  '  form  of  Qod,'  '  image  of
God,'  when  speaking  of  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Chrieti.  Bat
these  terms  do  not  imply  that  Christ's  DiTinity  only  resembles
or  is  analogous  to  the  Divinity  of  the  Father.  They  do  not
mean  that,  as  Man,  He  represents  the  Divine  Perfections  in
an  inferior  and  partial  manner  to  our  finite  intelligence  which
is  incapable  of  raising  itself  suf&ciently  to  contemplate  the  trans-
cendent reality.  They  are  necessary  in  order  to  define  the
personal  distinction  which  exists  between  the  Divine  Son  and
the  Eternal  Father.  Certainly  it  is  no  mere  human  being  or
seraph  Whom  St,  Paul  describes  as  being  '  over  all,  God  blessed
for  ever'.'  You  remind  me  that  these  words  are  referred  by
some  modem  scholars  to  the  Eternal  Father,  Certainly  they
are :  but  on  what  grounds  %  Of  scbolarship  ?  What  then  is
St.  Paul's  general  purpose  when  he  uses  these  words  1  He  has
just  been  enumerating  those  eight  privileges  of  the  race  of
Israel,  the  thought  of  which  kindled  in  bis  true  Jewish  heart
the  generous  and  passionate  desire  to  be  made  even  anathema
for  \a&  rejected  countrymen.  To  these  privileges  he  subjoins  s
climax.     The  Israelites  were  they,  (|  ii*  o  XptoTut  ih  nara  adpia,

6   iiv  ciri  n-uWiuv  8(dr  tvXoyrjTos  tic  Tuis  idams.      It  was  from  the

blood  of  Israel  that  the  true  Christ  had  sprung,  so  far  as  His

"  ""^  '  concerned;  but  Christ's  Israelitic  descent  is,

B,  BO  consummate  a  glory  for  Israel,  because

ra  than  one  of  the  sons  of  men ;    because


unediaiely  After  Qiut  not  >t  tha  swma  moment)  the
d  ancient  diameter,  only  just  above  the  recent  one.'
e  wliola  maas  of  extemni  proof,  particululj  of  the
of  the  veniiODB  and  Fathers,  Mr.  Scrivener  decides
ending  iilthongh  'lie dares  not  pronounce  Biii  a  at-
fill!  Btatement  in  hig  '  Introduction  to  tha  Critioian
p,  637-643.  If  then  it  be  admitted  tliat  the  raiding
>e  absolutely  relied  on  ;  in  anj  c&ae  our  LordV  J^
'tpai^  (i  St.  John  i.  i),  which  cannot  without  vfoleDM
the  sense  of  Chnst'a  maniFestation  in  the  teacbing
1.  ae  distinct  from  His  maoifestation  in  hiatoij.


[lkct-


God  blessed  for  ever!  317

by  reason  of  His  Higher  Pre-existent  Nature  He  is  *  over  all,
God  blessed  for  ever.'  This  is  the  natural  ■  sense  of  the  pas-
sage. If  the  passage  occurred  in  a  profane  author  and  its  sense
and  structure  alone  had  to  be  considered,  few  critics  would
think  of  overlooking  the  antithesis  between  Xpi<rrhs  rb  Korh  aapxa
and  Gcoff  €v\oyrfT6s  *.  Still  less  possible  would  it  be  to  destroy
this  antithesis  outright,  and  to  impoverish  the  climax  of  the
whole  passage,  by  cutting  off  the  doxology  from  the  clause
which  precedes  it,  and  so  erecting  it  into  an  independent  ascrip-
tion of  praise  to  God  the  Father  ^.    If  we  should  admit  that  the

*  Beuss,  Th^l.  Ghr^t.  ii.  76,  note.   M.  Beuss  says  that  the  Catholic  inter-
pretation of  Bom  ix.  5  is  Texplication  la  plus  simple  et  la  plus  naturelle.*
'  Man  hat  hier  verschiedene  Auswege  gesucht,  der  Nothwendigkeit  zu  entge-
hen,  [d]  &v  M  irdmuy  Oc^s  auf  Christum  zu  beziehen ;  aber  bei  jedem  bieten
sie  solche  Schwierigkeiten  dar,  die  immer  wieder  auf  die  einfachste  und  von
der  Granunatik  gebotene  Auslegung  zuriickfUhren.*    (XJsteri,  Eivtwickelung
des  Paulinischen  Lehrbegriffes,  p.  309.)    That  the  text  was  understood  in
the  early  Church  to  apply  to  Jesus  Christ  will  appear  from  St.  Iron.  iii.  16. 3 ;
Tert,  adv.  Piux.  13,  15;   St.  Hipp.  c.  Noet.  6;   Origen  in  Bom.  vii.  13;
Cone.  Ant.  a.d.  269,  ap.  Bouth,  Beliq.  Sacr.  iii.  292;   St.  Athan.  Orat.
c.  Ar.  i.  10,  iv.  i,  sub  init. ;   Theodoret,  Hser.  Fab.  v.  14 ;   St.  Chrys.  de
Incompr.  Dei  Nat.  v.  2 ;   in  Joan.  hom.  xxxiii.  i ;   in  i  Cor.  hom.  xx.  3 ;
St.  Cyr.  Alex.  Contr.  Julianum,  x.  328.     It  seems  probable  that  any  non-
employment  of  so  striking  a  passage  by  the  Catholics  during  their  earlier
oontroYersial  struggles  with  the  Arians  is  to  be  attributed  to  their  fear
of  being  charged  with  construing  it  in  a  Sabellian  sense.     (Cf.  Olsh.  in
loo.;  Beiche,  Comm.  ii.  268,  note.)    The  language  of  the  next  age  was
unhesitating:    €l'ir€v  cArhy   *^l  vdtnwy*  .  .  .  *&€hy*  . .  .  * cifKoyrirhy^  .  .  .
^Xoi'rts  oZv  rhv  Xpttrrhu  Koi  6trra  Qehv  Koi  eifKoyyjrhv,  ahr^  irpoaKvirffacofxty,
St.  Prod,  ad  Arm.  (Labbe,  iii.  1 231.)    Wetstein  erroneously  assumed  thai?
those  early  fathers  who  refused  to  apply  6  iirl  irdmcoy  Qehs  to  Christ  would
have  objected  to  the  predicate  actually  employed  by  the  Apostle,  4vl  irdyrwy
^^6s.     (Cf.  Fritzsche,  Comm.  in  Bom.  i.  p.  262  sqq.)    And  indeed  Socinus
lumself  (see  Tholuck  in  loc.)  had  no  doubt  of  the  reference  of  this  passage
to  Christ;    although  he  explained  it  of  a  conferred,  not  of  a  'natural'
Divinity.     (Cat.  Bac.  159  sqq.)    See  too  Dr.  Vaughan,  Comm.  in  loc.,
against  the  'harsh,  evasive  and  most  needless  interpretation,*  which  applies
it  to  the  Father.

^  Observe  Bom.  i.  3,  wh^e  Sk  (rirtpfiaros  AaB\^  Karit  crdpKa  is  in  contrast
with  T/ov  0€oi;  .  .  ,  Kark  Uv^vixa  'Aytcoff^yris,  Here  as  <rdp^  designates  the
lower  human  Nature  in  Christ,  IIvcDfia  'Ayico(r{nnis  must  mean  His  Higher
Divine  Nature,  conceived  of  generally,  according  to  which  He  is  the  Son
of  God.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  nowhere  called  iryev/jLa  ayuaavyris  in  the  New
Testament,  while  iryevfia  is  used  of  the  Divine  Nature  in  St.  John  iv.  24 ;
a  Cor.  iii.  17 ;  Heb.  ix.  14.     See  Philippi  in  loc. ;  Lect.  VI.  p.  344,  note.

■  As  to  the  punctuation  of  this  passage  the  early  MSS.  themselves  of
course  determine  nothing ;  but  the  citations  and  versions  to  which  Lach-
niann  generally  appeals  for  the  formation  of  his  text  are  decisively  in  favour
^  referring  6  i^yto  Xptaros,  The  Sabellian  use  of  the  text  to  prove  that
TI]


31 8     Christ  is  ^over  all  God  blessed  for  ever.*

doctrine  of  Christ's  Godhead  is  not  stated  in  this  precise  form
elsewhere  in  St.  Paul's  writings  ^,  that  admission  cannot  be  held


the  Father  became  "Man,  and  the  orthodox  replies  shewing  that  this  was
not  the  sense  of  the  passage,  equally  assume  that  the  doxdlogical  clause
refers  to  Christ.  Nouiing  can  with  safety  be  inferred  as  to  the  received
reading  in  the  Church  from  the  general  and  of  course  prejudiced  statement
of  the  Emperor  Julian,  that  rhv  yovv  *lri<rovv  oCre  TlavKos  ir6\firf<T€v  elireTv
©€(Jy.  St.  Cyril,  cont.  Jul.  x.  init.,  Op.  torn.  vi.  p.  327.  Besides  CL  (Tisch,
ed.  8),  two  cursive  MSS.  of  the  twelfth  century  (5  and  47)  interpose  a
punctuation  after  ffdpKOf  and  so  raise  the  following  clause  into  an  inde-
pendent doxology  addressed  to  €kxl  the  Father.  But  the  construction
which  is  thus  rendered  necessaiy  (i)  makes  the  participle  ^i^  altogether
superfluous.  In  a  Cor.  xi.  31,  6  £v  fvKoynrhs  fls  rohs  od&uas  is  an  exactly
parallel  construction  to  that  of  Bom.  ix.  5.  (Cf.  also  Bom.  i.  25.)  It  is
instructive  to  observe  the  facility  with  which  the  natural  force  of  the
passage  is  at  once  recognised  in  the  former  and  denied  in  the  latter  case
(see  Prof.  Jowett  in  loc.,  and  Baur,  Vorlesungen,  p.  194,  who  begs  the
question,— .'Christus  ist  noch  wesenllich  Mensch,  nicht  Gott*).  There  is
no  authority  for  transposing  6  &v  into  Sv  6  (with  Schlichting,  Whiston,
and  Whitby),  in  order  to  evade  the  natural  force  of  the  participle.  (2)  The
construction  which  the  isolation  of  the  clause  renders  necessary  violates
the  invariable  usage  of  Biblical  Greek.  *  If  the  Apostle  had  wished  to
express  "(jod.  Who  is  over  all,  be  blessed  for  ever,  he  must,  according
to  the  unvarying  usage  of  the  New  Testament  and  the  LXX.  (which
follows  the  use  of  yra),  have  placed  €if\oyrir6s  first,  and  written  €v\oyrrrhs
6  &y  K.r.\,  There  are  about  forty  places  in  the  Old  Testament  and  five
in  the  New  in  which  this  formula  of  doxology  occurs,  and  in  every  case
the  arrangement  is  the  same,  ''Blessed  be  the  (rod  Who  is  over  iJl,  for
ever."  *  (Christ.  Bem.  April  1856,  p.  469.)  In  the  only  apparent  exception,
Ps.  Ixviii.  19,  LXX.  (cited  bv  Winer,  N.  T.  Gr.  Eng.  Tr.  p.  573),  K6pios
6  Qths  €v\oyriThSf  €v\oyrirhs  Kvpios,  the  first  €{f\oyrir6s  has  no  corresponding
word  in  the  Hebrew  text,  and  if  not  interpolated  is  a  paraphrastic  clause,
intended  to  concentrate  rhetorical  emphasis  on  the  doxology  of  the  usual
form,  which  follows.  Dean  Alford  observes  that  I  Kings  x.  6 ;  2  Cbron.
ix.  8;  Job  i.  21 ;  Ps.  cxii.  2,  are  not  exceptions;  'since  in  all  of  them
the  verb  ^rj  or  yivoiro  is  expressed,  requiring  the  substantive  to  follow  it
closely.'  We  may  be  very  certain  that,  if  ivl  rrdvrav  ®i6s  could  be  proved
to  be  an  unwarranted  reading,  no  scholar  would  hesitate  to  say  that  6  &y
€v\oy7irhs  K,r.\.  should  be  referred  to  the  proper  name  which  precedes  it.

*  Our  Lord  is  not,  we  are  reminded,  called  tvXoyyirSs  elsewhere  in  the
New  Testament.  But  €v\oyrifi4vos  is  certainly  applied  to  Him,  St.  Matt.
xxi.  9 ;  St.  Luke  xix.  28 ;  and  as  regards  ivKoyvr^s,  the  limited  number
of  the  doxologies  addressed  to  Him  might  account  for  the  omission.  The
predicate  could  only  be  refused  to  Him  on  the  ground  of  His  being,  in  the
belief  of  St.  Paul,  merely  a  creature ;  whereas  St.  Paul  calls  Him  &€6s,
Eph.  V.  5.  See  Lect.  YI.  p.  340,  note ;  Harless  and  Btickert  in  loc. ;  Col.
ii.  2,  rod  @€ov  Xptarrov ;  Tisch.  8th  ed.,  where  the  comma  before  Xpt<rrov  is
unwarranted ;  and  Tit.  ii.  1 3,  fityas  06(Js  (cf.  note  y,  p.  319).  It  is  arbitrary  to
maintain  that  no  word  can  possibly  be  applied  to  a  given  subject  because
there  is  not  a  second  instance  of  such  application  within  a  limited  series
of  books.     Even  if  the  application  of  6  &y  M  irAmtav  Qehs  (l\oyrir6s  to

[lbct.


*»    ^-■--  -^


Christ  is  *our  great  God  and  Saviour!     319

to  justify  us  in  violently  breaking  up  the  passage,  in  order  to
escape  from  its  natural  meaning,  unless  we  are  prepared  to  deny
that  St.  Paul  could  possibly  have  employed  an  iira^  XeySixcvov,
Nor  in  point  of  fact  does  St.  Paul  say  more  in  this  famous  text
than  when  in  writing  to  Titus  he  describes  Christians  as  *  look-
ing for  the  blessed  hope  and  appearing  of  the  glory  of  our  great
God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  Who  gave  Himself  for  usy.'
Here  the  grammar  apparently,  and  the  context  certainly,  oblige
us  to  recognise  the  identity  of  *  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ'  and
*our  Great  God.*  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Christians  are  not
waiting  for  any  manifestation  of  the  Father.     And  He  Who


3  an  ar,  \€y.,  it  would  be  justified  by  the  consideration  that  a
habitually  thinks  of  Christ  as  God  (Col.  i.  15,  i6, 17 ;  Eph.  i.  33 ;


Christ  were
writer  who

Bom.  i.  7 ;  I  Cor.  i.  3';  Bom.  x.  1 3 ;  Phil.  ii.  10, 11)  would  naturally  call  Him
Grod  in  a  passage  designed  to  express  in  the  most  vivid  terms  the  crowning
privilege  of  Israel.  Against  4vl  irdyrcov  06<Jy,  besides  the  foregoing  ob-
jection, it  is  further  u^^ed  that  it  cannot  be  applied  to  our  Lord,  Who,
although  consubstantial  with,  is  subordinate  to,  the  Eternal  Father,  and
withal  personally  distinct  fix)m  Him ;  cf.  Eph.  iv.  5 ;  i  Cor.  viii.  6,  where,
however,  see  p.  309,  note  h.  But  St.  Paul  does  not  call  our  Lord  6  M
irdvruv  Sehs;  the  article  would  lay  the  egression  open  to  a  Sabellian
construction;  St. Paul  says  that  (Sirist  is  ^l  irdvTup  &€6s,  where  the
Father  of  course  is  not  included  among  tA  irdvra,  i  Cor.  xv.  27 ;  and  the
sense  corresponds  substantially  with  Acts  x.  36,  Bom.  x.  12.  It  asserts
that  Christ  is  internal  to  the  Divine  Essence,  without  denying  His  personal
distinctness  from,  or  EEis  filial  relation  to,  the  Father.  Cf.  Alford  in  loc. ;
Usteri,  Entwickelung  des  Paulinischen  LehrbegriiFes,  p.  509  sqq. ;  01s-
hausen,  Comm.  in  loc.

^  Tit.  ii.  13 :  irpoffdex^f^f^oi  r^v  ficucaplap  i\TiSa  koI  iTrKpdvtiaw  rrjs  Z6^ris
rov  ix€ydKov  &€ov  koI  Sctfr^pos  rifiav  *lr}<rov  Xpiffrov,  ts  leZcoKfV  iavrhu  vwip
fin&p,  *Nicht  GU)tt  und  Christus,  sondem  bloss  Christus  gemeint  ist ;  denn
es  ist  von  der  herrlichen  Wiederkunft  Christi  die  Bede,  und  eine  lischei-
nung  Grottes  (of  the  Father)  anzunehmen.  Ware  ausser  aUer  Analogie ;  auch
bedttrffce  Oott  der  Yater  nicht  erst  des  erhebenden  und  preisenden  Epithets
fi^yas,  vielmehr  deutet  auch  dieses  auf  Christum.*  (Usteri,  Lehrbegriff,
p.  310.)  For  St.  Paul's  habitual  association  of  iirKpayela  rris  ^6^71$  with
Christ,  cf.  2  Thess.  ii.  8 ;  i  Tim.  vi.  14 :  2  Tim.  i.  10 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  i,  8.  To
these  arguments  Bishop  Ellicott  adds  that  the  subsequent  allusion  to  our
Lord's  profound  Self-humiliation  accounts  for  St.  Paul's  ascribing  to  Him,
by  way  of  reparation,  '  a  title,  otherwise  unusual,  that  specially  and  anti-
thetically marks  His  glory,'  and  that  two  ante-Nicene  writers,  Clemens
Alexandr.  (Protrep.  7)  and  St.  Hippolytus,  together  with  the  great  bulk
of  post-Nicene  fathers,  although  not  all,  concur  in  this  interpretation.
The  bishop  holds  that  grammatically  there  is  a  presumption  in  favour  of
this  interpretation,  but,  on  account  of  the  defining  genitive  ^fiav,  nothing
more.  Nevertheless,  taking  the  great  strength  of  the  exegetioal  evidence
into  account,  he  sees  in  this  text  a  'direct,  definite,  and  even  studied
declaration  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Eternal  Son.*  See  his  note;  Words-
worth in  loc. ;  Middleton,  Greek  Article^  ed.  Bose,  p.  393 ;  Pfleiderer
Paulinismus|y  Kap.  xi.  p.  474.

VI]


320  Christ  *  in  the  form  of  and  ^  equal  wiM  God.

gave  Himself  lor  ns  can  be  none  other  than  onr  Lord  Jesnt

Beference  h&a  already  been  made  to  that  most  soleniD  passage
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippiana,  which  in  read  by  the  Choieh
in  the  Conmnmion  Service  on  Palm  Sunday*,  in  order,  as  it
would  seem,  to  remind  Christiana  of  the  real  dignity  of  their
Bnfiering  Lord  Onr  Lord's  Divine  Nature  is  here  represented
as  the  seat  of  His  Eternal  Fersonality ;  His  Homait  Nature  is
a  clothing  which  He  fisEiuned  in  time.  '£»  fop^j  Biou  mrapjfi-,
. . .  iauriu'  itiwat,  fiop^ijo  BouXou  Xa&iav  ',  It  is  impossible  not  to
be  atmck  by  the  mysterions  statement  that  Christ,  being  in  tbe
fonn  of  Qod,  did  not  look  upon  equality  with  God  (ri  that  tiro
e*oi)  as  a  prize  to  be  seized  and  kept  hold  on''  (oOk  ipnajiila
rffii<rmo).  It  has  been  maintained  that  St.  Paul  ia  here  contrasting
the  apostolic  belief  in  our  Lord's  condeecending  love  with  an  earlj
Gnostic  speculation  respecting  an  jEon.  This  Mon  desired  by
an  immediate  and  violent  assault  to  lay  hold  on  the  invieibte  and
incomprehensible  God ;  whereas  God  could  only  be  really  known
to  and  contemplated  by  the  Houogeneg.  The  ambition  of  the
fabled  .^^n  is  thus  said  to  be  in  contrast  with  the  '  self-empty-
ing'  of  the  Eternal  Christ.  Such  a  contrast,  if  it  had  been  in
the  Apostle's  mind,  would  have  implied  the  Alwolute  Pre-eiiBt«iit
Divinity  of  Christ.  Christ  voluntarily  lays  aside  the  glory
which  was  Hia ;  the  fabled  Mon  would  violently  grasp  a  gloij

■  Ses  Epistle  for  Sundav  next  beTaie  Easter.

■  Phil.  ii.  6,  7.  'Die  Qnostiker  aprschen  von  einem  Aeon,  welcherdu
abeolnta  Weeen  Qottee  anf  unniittelbare  Weise  erhssan  wollte,  nnd  weC  a
BO  du  OIL  rich  Unmdgliche  erstrebta  auB  dem  rA^pu^a  in  daa  KFVu^iahenbfiel,
Diesflc  Aeon  begieng  bo  gleichsam  einen  Riinb,  weil  er,  der  in  der  Qmlilii
eineg  golQichen  Weeens  ui  nicli  die  FoMgkeit  batte,  Bii;ii  mit  dam  Abuduten
EU  vereinigen,  diese  Ideatitat,  weicha  eret  durch  den  ganzen  Weltpmoa
realisirt  werden  konnte,  gleichaam  gprnngweiBe,  mit  Sqbiq  Male,  dnrch
dnen  gawaltsDinen  Act,  oder  wis  dimli  einen  Raab  an  rich  reiuen  voUte.
So  erhklt  erst  die  bildliche  Vantellung  eines  opriry^di  ihre  eigentlidie
Bedentang.'  (Banr,  VOTlesuugen,  p.  166.)  Compare,  bowev^,  Meys,
Philippeibrief,  p.  68,  Anmerkung.  Baiir  has  epun  >  ^''^'^  '"■'^  <>"*  '^
fft.Irensua.  Adv.  Hier.  I.  a.  I.  t.     The  notion  that  the  ^n  eoitglit  to


n  loc. ;  and  in  Mia  t«  Futh,  p.  436 ;  DalUnger,  Pint
).  163.  (E.  T.)  renders  <u>i'tr)'|iSi'  as  'a  apoil  nbichni
id  of  which  He  might  be  deprived.'  apu.  is  dnHj
t  an  action.  "Ihiu  the  descriptioa  of  the  gloi7  from
lopad  ends  at  itifX'"''  >  the  deecriptjon  of  Eu  an-
th  ob-jt^  ifirayiibr,  and  i*X'  has  ita  full  force.

[imi.


Christ  Hhe  Image  of  the  Invisible  God!     321

which  could  not  rightfully  belong  to  him.  But  if  this  explana*
tion  of  the  energetic  negative  phrase  of  the  Apostle  should  not
be  accepted,  it  is  in  any  case  clear  that  the  force  of  St.  Paul's
moral  lesson  in  the  whole  passage  must  depend  upon  the  real
Divinity  of  the  Incarnate  and  Self-immolating  Christ,  The
point  of  our  Lord's  example  lies  in  His  emptying  Himself  of
the  glory  or  'form*  of  His  Eternal  Godhead.  Worthless  indeed
would  have  been  the  force  of  His  example,  had  He  been  in
reality  a  created  Being,  who  only  abstained  fro<i  grasping
tenaciously  at  Divine  prerogatives  which  a  creature  could  not
have  arrogated  to  himself  without  impious  folly  0.  Christians
are  to  have  in  themselves  the  Mind  of  Christ  Jesus;  but
what  that  mind  is  they  can  only  understand,  by  considering
what  His  Apostle  believed  Christ  Jesus  to  have  been,  before
He  took  on  Him  the  form  of  a  servant  and  became  obedient
unto  death.

Perhaps  the  most  exhaustive  assertion  of  our  Lord's  Godhead
which  is  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paul,  is  that  which
occurs  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  ^.  This  magnificent  dog-  .
matic  passage  is  introduced,  after  the  Apostle's  manner,  with  a
strictly  practical  object.  The  Colossian  Church  was  exposed  to
the  intellectual  attacks  of  a  theosophic  doctrine,  which  degraded
Jesus  Christ  to  the  rank  of  one  of  a  long  series  of  inferior  beings,
supposed  to  range  between  mankind  and  the  supreme  God.
Against  this  position  St.  Paul  asserts  that  Christ  is  the  fiKUiv  rov
eeov  rov  doparov — the  Lnage  of  the  Invisible  God®.  The  ex-
pression eUav  rov  ecov  supplements  the  title  of  *  the  Son.*  As
'  the  Son'  Christ  is  derived  eternally  from  the  Father,  and  He  is
of  One  Substance  with  the  Father.  As  *  the  Image,'  Christ  is,
in  that  One  Substance,  the  exact  likeness  of  the  Father,  in  all
things  except  being  the  Father.  Th&  Son  is  the  Image  of  the
Father,  not  as  the  Father,  but  as  God :  the  Son  is  *  the  Image

*  The  Arian  gloss  upon  this  text  was  this :  Urt  $fhs  ti>v  ^\drr»v  ohx  ^p^oa*
rh  thai  t<ra  rif  Oe^  r^  fi€ydXtf  koL  fitlCoyt,  St.  Chrysostom  comments  thus :
Kol  fAiKphs  Koia  fjL^yas  &€hs  llvi ;  JCoU  r^  *E\\riyiKit  ro7s  rrjs  iKK\7j<rlas  SAyficuTiv
iTrcurdytre ;  •  .  .  El  7^  fxiKphs,  vas  Koi  QfSs ;  (Hom.  vi.  in  loc.)  Mop<j>^  is
the  'manner  of  existence;*  and  only  God  could  have  the  'manner  of
existence*  of  God.  Trench.  Syn.  N.  T.  p.  248.  Cp.  5<J|o,  St.  John  xvii.  5.
Of  this  fiop<t>^  (as  distinct  from  Deity  Itself)  our  Lord  iKtyanrev  kaanSv,
The  word  virApx»v  points  to  our  Lord's  'original  subsistence*  in  the
splendour  of  the  Godhead.  The  expression  4v  iMptp-p  &€ov  ^dpxctv  is
virtually  equivalent  to  rh  thou  i<ra  dc$.  See  Dean  Alford*B  exhaustive
note  upon  this  passage.

*  Col.  i.  55-17.  •  C5f.  a  Cor.  iv.  4:  Us  i<rrty  tUSav  rod  ©coO,

^1  T


322     Christy  existing  ^before  every  creature!

Qii  QocL'  The  mmw  is  indeed  originally  God's  nnbegon,  nnending
reflection  of  Himself  in  Himself;  but  the  cucor  is  also  the  Organ
whereby  Gkxl,  in  His  Essence  invisible,  reveals  Himself  to  His
creatures.  Thus  the  cijccav  is,  so  to  speak,  naturally  the  Creator,
since  creation  is  the  first  revelation  which  God  has  made  of
Himself.  Man  is  the  highest  point  in  the  visible  universe ;  in
man,  God's  attributes  are  most  luminously  exhibited ;  man  is  the
image  and  glory  of  God  ^.  But  Christ  is  the  Adequate  Image
of  God,  Good's  Self-reflection  in  His  Own  thought,  eternally  pre-
sent with  Himself.  As  the  cucov,  Christ  is  the  vprnroroKos  wdaijg
tcritreas:  that  is  to  say,  noi  the  First  in  rank  among  created
beings,  hiU  bom  before  any  created  beings  s.  That  this  is  a
true  sense  of  the  expression  is  etymologically  certain  ^ ;  but  it
is  also  the  only  sense  which  is  in  real  harmony  with  the  relation
in  which,  according  to  the  context,  Christ  is  said  to  stand  to  the

'  I  Car.  zi.  7 :  €<k^  koL  Z6^a  deov.

»  trporr^oKos  was  apparently  preferred  by  St.  Paul  to  itpmr^rot,  tlie
favourite  Alexandrian  word,  because  it  suegested  that  Christ  was  the
true  Messiah  as  well  as  l^e  true  Logos.    Ligl^oot,  Colossians,  p.  aia.

^  As  cuc^r  here  defines  our  Lord*8  relation  to  God  the  Father,  so  irp«r^-
TOKOS  defines  His  relation  to  the  creatures.  /Sot^Acrcu  Sct^oi  Uri  irph  irdunis  riis
KrUrtdos  iffriv  6  Ti6s'  ir&s  &v ;  Zih  ytrrfiffcws'  oIkovv  jcol  r&v  ityydKtfw  irp6'
r€f>os,  Jcol  oSrofs,  &<rTe  koL  ainhs  ticnffiv  avro^s.  (Theophyl.  in  loc.)  Christ
is  not  the  first  of  created  spirits;  He  exists  before  item,  and  as  One
'begotten  not  made.*  *Der  ffenit,  vdurns  icTl<r€c»s  ist  nicht  Genit.  partUiv.
(obwohl  diess  noch  de  Wette  fUr  unzweifelhaft  halt),  weil  irwra  icrlats  nicht
die  ganze  Schdpfung  heisst,  mithin  nicht  die  Kategorie  oder  Q-etammtheU
aussagen  kann,  zu  welcher  Christus  als  ihr  erstgebomes  Individuum  gehore  :
es  heisst,  jeduoede*  Getch6pfi  vrgl.  z.  trdura  oucoBofi-fi,  Eph.  ii.  21),  sondem
es  ist  der  Genit.  comparat. :  der  JErstgehome  in  Vergleich  mU  jedem  Ge-
schSpfe  (s.  Bemhardy,  p.  139),  d.  h.  eher  geboren  als  jedes  Geschopf.  Vrgl.
Bahr  z.  St.  u.  Emesti  XJrsprung  d.  SUnde,  p.  241.  Anders  ist  das  Ver-
haltniss  Apoc.  i.  5 :  irpoyrSroKbs  ruv  yeicpcou,  wo  rwv  V€KpS>v  die  Elat^^rie
anzeigt,  vrgl.  xpunSroKos  iv  TroXKois  hZtKipols  (Kom.  viiL  29).  Unser  (xenit.
ist  ganz  zu  fassen  wie  der  vergleichende  Genit.  bei  vpuros  Joh.  i.  15,  30;
Winer,  p.  218 ;  Fritzsche  ad  Bom.  ii.  p.  421.  Das  Vergleichungs-Moment
ist  das  Verhaltniss  der  Zeit,  und  zwar  in  Betreff  des  Ursprungs :  da  aber
letzterer  bei  jeder  icriffis  anders  ist  als  bei  Christo,  so  ist  nicht  irporrSicTKrTos
oder  vpa>T6v\a(rros  gesagt,  welches  von  Christo  eine  gleiche  Art  der  Entste>
hung  wie  von  der  Creatur  anzeigen  wtLrde,  sondem  'irpcffr6roKos  gewahlt»
welches  in  der  Zeitvergleichung  des  Ursprungs  die  absonderliche  Art  der
Entstehung  in  Betreff  Chritti  anzeigt,  dass  er  namlich  von  Grott  nicht
getchaffen  sei,  wie  die  anderen  Wesen,  bei  denen  diess  in  der  Boiennung
icrCo'ts  Uegt,  sondem  geboren,  aus  dem  Wesen  Grottes  gleichartig  hervorge-
gangen.  Bichtig  Theodoret:  ovx  &s  dScX^v  ^X^''  ''^^  icriaiy,  &XX'  &s
wph  irdinis  Krla'€<fis  yfrrnOfis.  Wortwidrig  ist  daher  die  Arianische  Erkla-
rung,  dass  Christus  als  das  erste  Getchdpf  Qoties  bezeichnet  werde.*  Meya>
Kolosserbrief,  p.  184.    See  Xdghtfoot^  Colossians.  p.  212.  .

[lect.


Christy  the  A  uthor  and  the  End  of  created  life.  323

created  universe  \  That  relation,  according  to  St.  Paul,  is
threefold.  Of  all  things  in  earth  and  heaven,  of  things  seen  and
unseen,  of  the  various  orders  of  the  angelic  hierarchy,  of  thi-ones,
of  dominions,  of  principalities,  of  powers — it  is  said  that  they
were  created  in  Christ,  by  Christ,  and  for  Christ.     'Ev  avr^,

iKTiaOri  .  ,  ,  .  fit*  avTOv^  kcll  cis  avrov  €KTicrTaii,      In  Him,      There

was  no  creative  process  external  to  and  independent'  of  Him ;
since  the  archetypal  forms  after  which  the  creatures  are  modelled,
and  the  sources  of  their  strength  and  consistency  of  being,  eter-
nally reside  in  Him^^.  By  Him,  The  force  which  has  sum-
moned the  worlds  out  of  nothingness  into  being,  and  which
upholds  them  in  being,  is  His ;  He  wields  it ;  He  is  the  One
Producer  and  Sustainer  of  all  created  existence.  For  Him.
He  is  not,  as  Arianism  afterwards  pretended,  merely  an  inferior
workman,  creating  for  the  glory  of  a  higher  Master,  for  a  God
superior  to  Himself.  He  creates  for  Himself ;  He  is  the  End  of
created  things  as  well  as  their  immediate  Source  ;  and  in  living
for  Him  every  creature  finds  at  once  the  explanation  and  the
law  of  its  being.  For  *  He  is  before  all  things,  and  by  Him  all
things  consist  K*  .  After  such  a  statement  itr  follows  naturally

*  Schleiermaclier^B  desire  to  apply  to  the  new  creation,  what  is  here  said
of  the  natural,  illustrates  his  tendency  '  to  expound  the  Bible  by  the  verdict
of  his  consciousness,  instead  of  permitting  his  consciousness  to  be  regulated
by  the  Bible.'    Auberlen  on  the  Divine  Eevelation,  pt.  a,  iv,  2.  a.

J  Compare  Bom.  xi.  36 :  k\  ahrov  koI  5i*  odroD  wol  €(s  alnbv  rh.  vdma.
As  in  this  passage  the  Apostle  is  speaking  of  God,  without  hinting  at  any
distinction  of  Persons  within  the  Grodhead,  he  writes  ef  ainov,  not  e  v  airrtf.
The  Eternal  Father  is  the  ultimate  Soiirce  of  all  life,  both  intra  and  extra
Deum ;  while  the  production  of  created  beings  depends  immediately  upon
the  Son.  The  other  two  prepositions — ^the  last  being  theologically  of  most
import— correspond  in  the  two  passages.

*  iKriaQri  describes  the  act  of  creation ;  iKTurrm  points  to  creation  as
a  completed  and  enduring  fact.  In  ev  ahrtp,  the  preposition  signifies  that
*in  Christo  beruhete  (ursachlich)  der  Act  der  Schopfung,  so  .dass  die  Voll-
ziehung  derselben  in  Seinen  Ferson  hegrilndet  war,  und  ohne  ihn  nicht
geschehen  ware.*  Cf.  St.  John  i.  3 :  x<*'P^5  avrov  iyevero  ovde  Iv,  t  y4yov€v.
But  although  the  preposition  immecUately  expresses  the  dependence  of
created  life  upon  Christ  as  its  cause,  it  hints  at  the  reason  of  this  depend*
ence,  namely,  that  our  Divine  Lord  is  the  causa  exemplaris  of  creation,  the
K6(rfios  yorjrhsf  the  Archetype  of  all  created  things,  '  die  Dinge  ihrer  Idee
nach,  Selbst,  er  tragt  ihre  Wesenheit  in  sich.*     (Olshausen  in  loc.)

*  Col.  i.  1 7  I  Kcd  aifrSs  icTt  vph  vdvrwPf  K(d  rlk  vdpra  iv  ain^  ffvvio'rriKe.
Meyer  in  loc.  *Und  Er  (Er  eben),  durch  welchen  und  fiir  welchen  rot
vdtrra  ftieriffrai,  hat  eine  &uhere  Existenz  als  Alles,  und  das  Sammtliche

besteht  in  ihm vph  vdifrwy  wie  vparSroKos  von  der  Zeit,  nicht  vom

Bange ;  noiederholt  und  nachdrilclclich  betont  wird  von  P.  die  Praexistenz
Christ!.    Statt  ^ari  hatte  er  ^v  sagen  konnen  (Joh.  i.  i) ;  jenes  aber  ist

yi]  Y  2


324        Christ's  Divinity  in  Heb,  i.  5-14.

tbat  the  iMipafta,  tbat  is  to  eay,  the  entire  cycle  of  tfae
Divine  attribntes,  considered  as  a  series  of  powers  or  fonxs,
dwells  in  Jesna  Christ ;  and  this,  not  in  an;  merely  ideal  ot
transcendental  manner,  bnt  with  thatTactoal  reality  which  men
attach  to  the  presence  of  material  bodies  which  tiiey  can  feel
and  measure  through  the  organs  of  sense.  "Ei-auryKaroiwifriri
irX^pi»;«i  TTjs  SiintTos  aaniarinSit''^.  Although  throughout  thil
Epistle  the  word  >.6yos  is  never  introduced,  it  is  plain  that  ttw
titan  of  St.  Paul  is  equivalent  in  His  rank  and  fUnclions  to  the
Xrfyor  of  St.  John.  Each  exists  prior  to  creation ;  each  is  tla
one  Agent  in  creation  ;  each  is  a  Divine  Person ;  each  is  equal
with  Qod  and  shares  His  essential  Life ;  each  is  really  none
other  than  Qod.

Indeed  with  this  passage  in  the  ColossianB  only  two  otben
in  the  entire  compass  of  the  New  Testament  can,  on  the  whole,
be  compared,  AUnsion  has  already  been  made  to  the  prologue
of  St.  John's  Gospel ;  and  it  is  no  less  obvious  to  refer  to  the
opening  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  Host  of  those
writers  who  earnestly  reject  the  Pauline  authorship  of  thst
Epistle  admit  that  it  is  of  primary  canonical  authority,  and
assign  to  its  author  the  highest  place  of  honour  in  '  the  school
of  St.  Paul.'  There  are  reasoue  for  believing  that,  at  the  ubnaet,
it  is  not  more  distantly  related  to  his  mind  than  is  the  Gospel  of
St.  Luke  ;  if  indeed  it  does  net  furnish  a  crowning  instance  of
the  spiritual  versatility  of  the  great  Apostle,  addr^ing  himself
to  a  set  of  circumstauces  unlike  any  other  of  which  the  records
of  his  ministry  have  given  us  information  ■>.    Throughout  the


).  16.  n.  10.  gBBchieM.'  Cf.  St.  John  viii.  5S.
.  9  ;  irav  tS  ir^iiptiiia.  Moyer  in  loo. :  'Wirf  doroh  t^s  Btirtri"
— '  ~  relches  angiebt,  iciu  Beiner  ganieD  Fiille  nach,  d.  i.  nicht
■e.  ■midern  in  eeiner  Oeaammtheit,  in  Christo  Trolme. . . .
airi*  (Ladsn,  Icarom.  9;  Pint.  Mor,  p,  415,  C.)  it
%t6i,  iat  zu  ontencheiden  von  4  Bfiir-i)%  dem  Abstraetmii
30;  Sap.  xvlii.  g ;  Lncian  de  Column.,  17).  Jenei  ill
n'n,  d.  i.  die  gottliclie  Weienheit,  GoUheit;  dieeea  ibn
.  die  gettliche  Qualii&t,  OittUchkeit.'  So  Bengel :  'Km
[tea.  Bed  ipsa  dirina  natont.*  See  too  Abp.  Trenoli,  Sp-
ins in  this  poBBage  the  -rK^paiia  mntt  be  nnderstood  in
sense  of  the  Divine  Enenoe,  even  if  in  CoL  i.  ig  it  ii
Inem  of  Divine  grace.  Contrast  too  tlie  pemunent  ftct
)re«en(  wiTauHr  of  Uie  one  passage  with  the  hisbxiol
the  other.

lothorship  of  the  Epistle  has  been  guuntained  wiUi  gnat
-  -  [lsct.


Christ  ob^ed  and  worshipped  by  the  Angels.     325

Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  a  comparison  is  instituted  between
Christianity  and  Judaism ;  and  this  comparison  turns  partly  on
the  spiritual  advantages  which  belong  to  the  two  systems  respec-
tively, and  partly  on  the  relative  dignity  of  the  persons  who
represent  the  two  dispensations,  and  who  mediate  accordingly,
in  whatever  senses,  between  God  and  humanity.  Thus  our
Incarnate  Lord  as  the  one  great  High-priest  is  contrasted  with
Aaron  <>  and  his  successors.  Thus  too  as  the  one  perfect  Be-
vealer  of  God,  He  is  compared  with  Moses  p  and  the  Jewish
prophets.  As  the  antitype  of  Melchisedec,  Christ  is  a  higher
Priest  than  Aaron  4 ;  as  a  Son  reigning  over  the  house  of  God,
Christ  is  a  greater  Buler  than  the  legislator  whose  praise  it  was
that  he  had  been  a  faithful  seryant  f.  As  Author  of  a  final,
complete,  and  unique  revelation,  Christ  stands  altogether  above
the  prophets  by  whom  God  had  revealed  His  Mmd  in  many
modes  and  in  many  fragments,  in  revelations  very  various  as  to
their  forms,  and,  at  certain  epochs,  almost  incessant  in  their
occurrence  ".  But  if  the  superiority  of  Christianity  to  Judaism
was  to  be  completely  established,  a  further  comparison  was
necessary.  The  later  Jewish  theologians  had  laid  much  stress
upon  the  delivery  of  the  Sinaitio  Law  through  the  agency
of  angels  acting  as  delegates  for  the  Most  High  God*.  The
Author  of  Christianity  might  be  superior  to  Moses  and  the
prophets,  but  could  He  challenge  comparison  with  those  pure
and  mighty  spirits  compared  with  whom  the  greatest  of  the
sons  of  Israel,  as  beings  of  flesh  and  blood,  were  insignificant
and  sinful  1    The  answer  is,  that  if  Christ  is  not  the  peer  of  the

ability  by  Biesentlial,  '  Das  TroBtschreiben  des  Ap.  Fanlus  an  die  Hebnter/
Leipzig,  1878,  cf.  pp.  19-43  [1881].

*  Heb.  y.  4;  X.  II.     .  p  Ibid.  iii.  1-6,
4  Ibid.  vii.  i-aa.

'  Ibid.  iii.  5,  6 :  koI  Mwcr^s  yukw  nurrht  iv  SXy  r^  oXk^  cdnov,  &s  d^p^xuif,
....  Xptorhs  ^i,  &5  vihs  irl  rhv  oIkov  ahrov,  oZ  oIk6s  ifffx^if  ^fius*  The
preceding  words  are  yet  more  noteworthy :  Moses  and  the  bouse  of  Israd.
stand  to  Jesus  Christ  in  the  relation  of  creature  to  the  Creator.  irXtiopos
yhp  8<$|i7f  oZros  ircLph  Moxr^v  ^^iwrai,  Ka$*  tvov  irKtlova  rifi^y  lx<'  '''^^  oXkov  6
KaroffKfvdaas  ahrov.  iras  yhp  olKOi  itarcuriccvcC^crat  iir6  rivof  6  9h  rit  inirra
icar€urK€vd(ras  (so.  Jesus  Christ),  B€6u  So  too  the  &Trh  Beov  i^rros  of
ver.  1 2  refers  most  naturally  to  our  Lord,  not  to  the  Father.

*  Ibid.  i.  I :  troKviitpm  iced  iroAvrptJirws  irciAai  b  Gcbs  KaKiiiras  rots  irarpdtnv
iy  ro7s  irpo^rous.

*  Ibid.  iL  a :  6  9i*  &yy4\Mv  XaXri0€ls  \^os.  Acts  vii.  38 :  /tcri  rod
iiyyiXov  rov  XaXovvros  alr^  iv  ry  tpti  ^va.  Ibid.  ver.  53 :  oXriV€S  iXeljBcTf
rdv  v6ixo¥  kls  Ziarayh.5  kyyiXuv,  Gal.  iii.  19 :  6  p6fios  .  .  .  xpowriBri .  •  •
Siaroyels  8<'  kyyiXwy,

VI]


326      How  Christ  differs  from  the  Angels.

angels,  this  is  because  He  is  their  Lord  and  Master  ^.  The  angels
are  ministers  of  the  Divine  Will ;  they  are  engaged  in  stated
services  enjoined  on  them  towards  creatures  lower  than  them-
selves, yet  redeemed  by  Christ  \  But  He,  in  His  glory  above
the  heavens,  is  invested  with  attributes  to  which  the  highest
angel  could  never  pretend.  In  His  crucified  but  now  enthroned
Humanity,  He  is  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on
high  ^ ;  He  is  seated  there,  as  being  Heir  of  all  things  ^ ;
the  angels  are  themselves  but  a  portion  of  His  vast  inheritance.
The  dignity  of  His  titles  is  indicative  of  His  essential  ranky.
Indeed  He  is  expressly  addressed  as  Qod«;  and  when  He
is  termed  the  Son  of  God,  or  the  Son,  the  fiill  sense  of  that
term  is  drawn  out  in  language  adopted,  as  it  seems,  from  the
Book  of  Wisdom*,  and  not  less  explicit  than  that  which  we
have  been  considering  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  although
of  a  distinct  type.  That  He  is  One  with  God  as  having
streamed  forth  eternally  from  the  Father's  Essence,  like  a
ray  of  light  from  the  parent  fire  with  which  it  is  unbrokenly
joined,  is  implied  in  the  expression  oTravyac/ia  r^r  Wf?;^  ^.  That
He  is  both  personally  distinct  from,  and  yet  literally  equal
to.  Him  of  Whose  Essence  He  is  the  adequate  imprint,  is
taught  us  in  the  phrase  \apaKri\p  r^r  vTroorao-fo);  ^'^      By  Him,


™  Heb.  ii,  3 :  ffwrrjpias  .  • .  hpxhv  XajSoOtra  XaXclffBtu  Zik  rov  Kvplov,

^  Ibid.  i.  14:  \€iTovpyiK^  Tvevfiara,  eis  iicucoyiav  &,T0irr€?sX6fitva  Sih,  rohs

fA^Wovras  KXripovofietv  (raorriplav,

"  Ibid.  ver.  3 :    iKdBia-tp  iv  8€|i$  r^f  fxtyaKtur^irtis  iw  (r^Kois,    The

superiority  of  (Jurist  to  the  Angehi  is  already  implied  in  the  climax  at

Gal.  iv.  14,  while  the  elevation  of  Christ's  Manhood  above  all  orders  of

Angelic  life  is  taught  in  Eph.  i.  20^  ai.

*  Heb.  i.  a  :  K\'npov6fiov  vdvrav,

y  Ibid.  ver.  4 ;  roffo^r^  Kptlrrwv  yeySfitpos  r&p  hrfyiK<oov,  Zfftf^  liuul>op<&T€pov
vap*  avTohs  KeKK'ripov6fiinKtv  6yofj,a.  As  to  y€v6fi€vos,  it  will  be  borne  in  mind
that  the  subject  of  the  whole  passage  is  the  Word  now  truly  Incarnate,
and  not,  as  is  sometimes  assumed,  the  pre-existent  Logos  alone.  The
y(v6fi€vos  would  therefore  refer  to  the  exaltation  of  our  Lord's  Humanity.
(See  Ebrard,  Comm.  in  loc.)  St.  Cyril  observes  that  it  does  not  imply
that  in  Christ's  superior  nature  He  could  be  made  superior  to  angels,
Thes.  p.  199.

■  Heb.  i.  8 :  vphi  8^  rhv  tlhv,  '  6  6p6vos  trovy  6  0€hs,  cty  rhv  cdwva  rot
od&vos.*     Ps.  xlv.  6.

•  Wisd.  vii.  36 ;  cf.  Lect.  II.  p.  63.
^  Heb.  i.  3.

«  Ibid.  A.  V.  has  'Express  image  of  His  Person.'  *  So  Beza,  who  dreaded
Arianism,  and  accordingly  used  'Person'  instead  of  'Substance,*  from
an  apprehension  that  the  latter  rendering  would  here  im^dy  something
mconsistent  with  the  Homoousion.

[  LECT,


^J


ChrisfsDeiiy6oundupwtthSt,Paul'swholem{nd.'^2  7

therefore,  the  universe  was  made^;  and  at  this  moment  all
things  are  preserved  and  upheld  in  being  by  the  fiat  of  His
almighty  word®.  What  created  angel  can  possibly  compare
with  Him  1  In  the  Name  which  He  bears  and  which  unveils
His  Nature^;  in  the  honours  which  the  heavenly  intelligences
themselves  may  not  refuse  to  pay  Him,  even  when  He  is  enter-
ing upon  His  profound  Self-humiHation  s ;  in  the  contrast  be-
tween their  ministerial  duties  and  His  Divine  and  unchanging
Koyaltyli;  in  H!is  relationship  of  Creator  both  to  earth  and
Jbeaven  i ;  and  in  the  majestic  certainty  of  His  trumph  over
all  who  shall  oppose  the  advance  of  His  kingdom  \ — ^we  recog-
nise a  Being,  for  Whose  Person,  although  It  be  clothed  in  a
finite  Human  Nature  \  there  is  no  real  place  between  humanity
and  God.  While  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  lays  even  a
stronger  emphasis  than  any  other  book  of  the  New  Testament
upon  Christ's  true  Humanity  m,  it  is  nevertheless  certain  that
no  other  book  more  explicitly  asserts  the  reality  of  ELis  Divine
prerogatives  >>.

3.  Enough  will  have  been  said,  to  shew  that  the  Apostle  Paul
believed  in  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ,  not  in  the  moral  sense
of  Socinianism,  nor  in  the  ditheistic  sense,  so  to  speak,  of
Arianism,  but  in  the  literal,  metaphysical,  and  absolute  sense
of  the  Catholic  Church.  Those  passages  in  his  writings  which
may  appear  to  interfere  with  this  conclusion  are  certainly  to
be  referred  either  to  his  anxiety  to  insist  upon  the  reality  of
our  Lord's  Manhood,  or  to  his  recognition  of  the  truth  that
Christ's  Eternal  Sonship  is  Itself  derived  from  the  Person
of  the  Father.  From  the  Father  Christ  eternally  receives  an
equality  of  life  and  power,  and  therefore,  as  being  a  recipient,
He  is  so  £Btr  subordinate   to  the  Father.    We   have  indeed

^  Heb.  i.  a  :  Si*  oZ  ica2  rc^s  cdwvas  ixolriaev.  See  DelitzBch  and  Biesenthal,
in  loc.

*  Ibid.  vep.  3 :  <p4pco¥  r§  rk  irdjna  ry  ^fiari  rrjs  Zvpdfittos  cdtrov,
'  Ibid.  ver.  5  :  Tiis  /lov  €?  ct;.     See  Biesenthal,  in  loo.

'  Ibid.  ver.  6:    itpoo'Kuyria'droKraif  ainf  vdyrts  iyytKot  0eov,     Fsahn
'xcvii.  7.

^  Heb.  i.  7-9,  14,

*  Ibid.  ver.  10:  ah  kot'  &px^^>  Kipie,  r^v  yriv  iBtixtXitatras,  koX  tpya  r&v
X^^pSov  aov  tlaly  ol  ohpavoi,

*  Ibid.  ver.  13:  irpbs  rtya  5i  rSt¥  hryyiXwv  €XpriK4  xore,  'KdjOov  iK  5c|tei)v
fiov,  Zus  tuf  $60  roifs  ix^po^s  ffou  ^oirS^iov  ray  iroHcav  trov  ;*

*  Ibid.  iii.  2  :  Triarhy  tvra  ry  iroifiaavTi  a{n6¥,
™  Ibid.  ii.  14,  18,  iv.  15,  v.  7.    So  xiii.  ao.

^  Gf.  especiaJly  Heb.  ziii.  8,  than  which  no  stronger  language  conld  be
employed  to  describe  the  Alone  Unchangeable.

"J


328  Chris  to  logy  of  St.  Paul's  missionary  sermons.

already  seen  that  Christ's  eternal  derivation  from  the  Father  is
set  forth  nowhere  more  folly  than  in  the  (Gospel  of  St.  John,
and  hy  the  mouth  of  our  Lord  Himself.  But  the  doctrine
before  us,  as  it  lies  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paul,  is  not  to  be
measured  only  by  an  analysis  of  those  particular  texts  which
proclaim  it  in  terms.  The  evidence  for  this  great  doctrine
is  not  really  in  suspense  until  such  time  as  the  critics  may
have  finally  decided  by  their  microscopical  and  chemical  ap-
paratus, whether  the  bar  of  the  8  in  a  famous  passage  of
St.  Paul's  first  Epistle  to  Timothy  is  or  is  not  really  discernible
in  the  Alexandrian  manuscript.  The  doctrine  lies  too  deep  in  the
thought  of  the  Apostle,  to  be  affected  by  such  contingencies  <>.  You
cannot  make  St.  Paul  a  preacher  of  Humanitarianism,  without
warping,  mutilating,  degrading  his  whole  recorded  mind.  Par-
ticular texts,  when  duly  isolated  from  the  Apostle's  general
teaching,  may  be  pressed  with  plausible  effect  into  the  service
of  Arian  or  Humanitarian  theories ;  but  take  St.  Paul's  doctrine
as  a  whole,  and  it  must  be  admitted  to  centre  in  One  Wbo
is  at  once  and  truly  God  as  well  as  Man.

St.  Paul  never  speaks  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a  pupil  of  less
originality  and  genius  might  speak  of  a  master  in  moral  truth,
whose  ideas  he  was  recommending,  expanding,  defining,  defend-
ing, popularizing,  among  the  men  of  a  later  generation.  St.  Paul
never  professes  to  be  working  on  the  common  level  of  human
power  and  knowledge  with  a  master  from  whom  he  differed,  as
an  inferior  teacher  might  differ,  only  in  the  degree  of  his  capacity
and  authority.  St.  Paul  always  writes  and  speaks  as  becomes
the  slave  of  Jesus.  He  is  indeed  a  most  willing  and  enthusiastic
slave,  reverently  gathering  up  and  passionately  enforcing  all
that  touches  the  work  and  glory  of  that  Divine  Master  to  Whom
he  has  freely  consecrated  his  liberty  and  his  life.

In  St.  Paul's  earliest  sermons,  we  do  not  find  the  moral
precepts  of  Jesus  a  more  prominent  element  than  the  glories
of  His  Person  and  of  His  redemptive  work.     That  the  reverse


•  This  is  indirectly  recognised  by  those  writers  who  would,  for  instance,
deny  the  Pauline  authorship  of  such  Epistles  as  those  to  the  Ephesiana
and  Colossians,  for  this  reason  among  others,  that  our  Lord's  profound
relations  to  the  Church,  as  set  forth  in  these  Epistles,  involve  a  doctrine
of  His  Person,  which  they  reject ;  cf.  Baur,  Vorlesungen  Uber  N.  T.
Theolo^e,  272,  sqq.  Pfleiderer  regards  the  Epistle  to  the  Oolossians  as
due  to  the  later  influence  of  Alezandrianism  upon  St.  Paul's  doctrine ;
while  that  to  the  Ephesians,  he  says,  belongs  to  the  transition  stage  from
'Paulinism*  to  /  Callioliciam.*     'Paulinismus,'  1873.  pp.  366,  431  [1881].

[l^CT.


Discourses  at  Antioch  and  Athens.        329

is  the  case  is  at  once  apparent  from  a  study  of  the  great  dis-
course which  was  pronounced  in  the  synagogue  of  the  Pisidian
Antioch.  The  past  history  of  Israel  is  first  summarized  from  a
point  of  view  which  regards  it  as  purely  jireparatory  to  the
manifestation  of  the  anticipated  Saviour  p  ;  and  then  the  true
Messiahship  of  Jesus  is  enforced"  hy  an  appeal  to  the  testimony
of  John  the  Baptist^,  to  the  correspondence  of  the  circumstances
of  Christ's  Death  with  the  prophetic  announcements'",  and  to
the  historical  fact  of  His  resurrection  from  the  graved  which
had  been  witnessed  by  the  apostles  as  distinctly^  as  it  had  been
foretold  by  the  prophets  ™.  Thus  the  Apostle  reaches  his  prac-
tical conclusion.  To  believe  in  Jesus  Chnst  is  the  one  condition
of  receiving  remission  of  sins  and  (how  strangely  must  such
words  have  sounded  in  Jewish  ears!)  justification  from  all
things  from  which  men  could  not  be  justified  by  the  divinely-
given  law  of  Moses  V,  To  deny  Jesus  Christ  is  to  incur  those
penalties  which  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  denounced  against  scornful
indifference  to  the  voice  of  Qod  and  to  the  present  tokens  of
His  Love  and  Power  ^.

At  first  sight,  St.  Paul's  sermon  from  the  steps  of  the  Areo-
pagus might  seem  to  be  rather  Theistic  than  Christian.  St.  Paul
had  to  gain  the  ear  of  a  *  philosophical '  audience  which  imagined
that  *  Jesus  and  the  Besurrection '  were  two  *  strange  demons  ^,*
who  might  presently  be  added  to  the  stock  of  deities  already
venerated  by  the  Athenian  populace.  St.  Paul  is  therefore  eager
to  set  forth  the  lofty  spirituality  of  the  God  of  Christendom ;
but,  although  he  insists  chiefly  on  those  Divine  attributes  which
are  observable  in  Nature  and  Providence,  his  sermon  ends  with
Jesus.  After  shewing  what  God  is  in  Himself  y,  and  what  are
the  natural  relations  which  subsist  between  God  and  mankind  2,
St.  Paul  touches  the  conscience  of  his  Athenian  audience  by  a
'  sharp  denunciation  of  the  vulgar  idolatry  which  it  despised*,  and
he  calls  men  to  repent  by  a  reference  to  the  coming  judgment,

P  Actsziii,  17-33.  '  Ibid.  vera.  34,  35.  '  Ibid.  vers.  36-30.

•  Ibid.  vep.  30.  *  Ibid.  ver.  31.  '^  Ibid.  vers.  33-37.

^  Ibid.  vers.  38,  39 :  hih  roirou  tfiiv  &(p€(ns  afiapriwy  KaraYY4Wtrai'  kcH
airh  vdmcoy  Sty  ovk  ^8vi^%r€  4v  T9)  vSfjL^  Mw(r4w5  SiKoutaBrivou,  iv  rovrtf  vas
6  triffrt^uv  HiicaiovTCU,

^  Ibid.  ver.  40:  $\4ir^§  oZp  fi^  Mx0jii  i(p*  tfias  rh  tlfrntiivoy  4y  ro7s
frpo(l>iiT€us*  '"iScTc,  ol  Korcuppovrirai,  icol  9catiiAcraT%  koIjL  ikipayiffOrirt'  in  %pyov
4yii>  ipydCofteu.  iy  reus  ^fiipaus  liiSov*     Hab.  i.  5.

'  Acts  xvii.  18 :  ihuv  Saifioyiwy  8oicci  KarayyfXfbs  cTvoi.

y  Ibid.  vers.  34,  35.  ■  Ibid.  vers.  36-28,

*  Ibid.  vers.  39,  30.

VI]


330    Ckristolpgy  of  St  Paul's  apologetic  speeches.

'which  conEcience  iteelf  foreshadowed.  But  the  certainty  of  that
judgment  haa  been  attested  by  the  hitrtorical  feet  of  the  reBuirec-
tion  of  Jesus ;  the  risen  Jesas  is  the  future  Judge  b.

Or,  liaten  to  St,  Paul  as  with  fetherly  authority  and  tender-
nesB  he  is  taking  his  leave  of  his  feilow-labourets  in  Christ,  the
presbyters  of  Ephesus,  on  the 'strand  of  Miletus.  Here  the
Apostle's  address  moves  incessantly  round  the  Person  of  Jesiu.
He  protests  that  to  lead  men  to  repentance  towards  God  and
foith  towards  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ',  had  been  the  single  object
of  his  public  and  private  ministrations  at  Ephesns.  He  couata
not  his  life  dear  to  hijnself,  if  only  he  can  complete  the  mission
which  is  so  precious  to  him  because  he  has  received  it  &om  the
Iiord  Jesus ■!.  Q^e  presbyters  are  bidden  to  'shepherd  the
Church  of  God  which  He  has  purchased  with  His  Own  Blood';'
and  the  Apostle  concludes  by  quoting  a  saying  of  the  Lord
Jesus  which  has  not  been  recorded  in  the  Gospels,  but  which
was  then  reverently  treasured  in  the  Church,  to  tiie  effect  thtt
'  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  f.'

In  the  two  apologetic  discourses  delivered,  the  one  from  the
stairs  of  the  tower  of  Antonia  before  the  angry  multitude,  sad
the  other  in  the  council-chamber  at  Cesarea  before  King
Agrippa  U.  of  Cbalcis,  St.  Paul  justifies  his  missionary  activity
by  dwelling  upon  the  circnmstaiicea  which  accompanied  and
immediately  followed  his  conversion.  Everything  had  turned
upon  a  feet  which  the  Apostle  abundantly  insists  upon ;— lie
had  received  a  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  in  His  heavenly  gloij'
It  was  Jesus  Who  had  spoken  to  St.  Paul  from  heaven  e  ;  it  ma
Jeans  Who  had  revealed  Himself  as  persecuted  in  His  rafferii^
Church  •> ;  it  was  to  Jesus  that  St.  Paul  had  surrendered  ho
moral  liberty  *;  it  was  from  Jesus  that  he.  had  received  specific

*■  ActB  ifa.  31 ;  I  Then.  ii.  19.

'  Acta  IX.  II :  Siofiofn-uprl/icvat ....  'rile  (Ii  T&f  St&r  fUTtCixiKV,  ml  tEttw
TJji-  fit  -rhv  Kijpiu*  T\iiSni  'lijcroSt'  XfuffTrff.

^  Ibid.  Ter.  14.

•  Ibid.  ver.  33  :  iru^iolrtu'  ^\r  i*K%.i,aiia  raB  e<oC  [Kupfou,  Tbeh.  ill  If
nv/iKToiiiirflTo  ilk  Tou  tSfttLTos  TBv  iStau.  See  Dr.  WordBWOTth'i  note  in  W
In  the  third  edition  of  hU  Greek  Teetament,  Dean  AJford  nstored  tlx
reading  tou  Btoi,  whicli  he  had  abandoned  tat  Kvpiav  in  tha  two  torea
editions.  Sea  eepedaUy  the  note  in  hie  Gfth  edition.  For  Kuplw  m
A,  C,  D,  E;  for  SoS,  B,  »,  Syr.,  Yolg.  Ckimpare  ScriTener,  IntrodoclitB
to  Criticism  of  the  N.  T.,  ed.  3,  p.  6zo  Bqq.

'  Acts  XX.  35  :  liyititortifiv  ti  rSit  \6yuy  Tim  Kjiplou  'Iijirau,  Sri  ah-li  tin*
'KaxiptSy  iirri  iiihXar  StS6vai  ]}  KatiBiviai'

'  Ibid.  xzii.  7;  xxn.  14.      '  Ibid,  xzii,  S;  xiri.  15.      >  Ibid.  xxii.  10.

Flecc


Si.  Paul  teaches  Christ* s  Deity  implicitly.     331

orders  to  go  into  Damascus  ^ ;  Jesus  Iiad  commissioned  him  to

be  a  minister  and  witness  both  of  what  he  had  seen,  and  of  the

truths  which  were  yet  to  be  disclosed  to  him^;    it  was  by

Jesns  that  he  was  sent  both  to  Jews  and  Gentiles,  ^to  open

their  eyes,  and  to  turn  them  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from

the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,  that,'  continued  the  Heavenly

Speaker,  *  they  may  receive  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  inheritance

among  them  which  are  sanctified  by  fkith  that  is  in  Me  ™,'     It

was  Jesus  Who  had  appeared  to  St.  Paul  when  he  was  in  an

ecstasy  in  the  Temple,  had  bidden  him  leave  Jerusalem  suddenly,

and  had  sent  him  to  the  Gentiles'*.   The  revelation  of  Jesus  had

been  emphatically  the  turning-point  of  the  Apostle's  life ;  it  had

first   determined  the  direction  and  had  then  quickened  the

intensity  of  his  action.   He  could  plead  with  truth  before  Agrippa

that  he  had  not  been  disobedient  unto  the  heavenly  vision  o.

But  who  can  fail  to  see  that  the  Lord  who  in  His  glorified

Manhood  thus  speaks  to  His  servant  from  the  skies,  and  Who

is  withal  revealed  to  him  in  the  very  centre  of  his  Boul  p,  is  no

created  being,  is  neither  saint  nor  seraph,  but  in  very  truth  the

Master  of  consciences,  the  Monarch  Who  penetrates,  inhabits,

and  rules  the  secret  life  of  spirits,  the  King  Who  claims  the

fealty  and  Who  orders  the  ways  of  men  %

St.  Paul's  popular  teaching  then  is  emphatically  a  '  preaching
of  Jesus  Christ «.'  Our  Lord  is  always  the  Apostle's  theme ;
but  the  degree  in  which  His  Divine  glory  is  unveiled  varies  with
tiie  capacities  of  the  Jewish  or  heathen  listeners  for  bearing  the
great  discovery.  The  doctrine  is  distributed,  if  we  may  so  speak,
in  a  like  varying  manner  over  the  whole  text  of  St.  Paul's
Epistles.     It  lies  in  those  greetings'  by  which  the  Apostle


*  Actsrrii.  10.  *  Ibid.  xxvi.  i6.  »  Ibid.  vera.  17,  1 8.

A  Ibid.  xdi.  17 :  kylv^ro ....  vpotrtvxoyiivw  /uov  kv  rf  i^pVt  7c>'^<''^<u
ne  ip  iKffrdtret,  kojL  Ihtiv  alrhp  Ktyovrd  fMi,  SrcSo-or  ical  ^€\$t  iy  'rdx^t  ^1
'UpovtraX-flfi,     Ibid.  ver.  31 :  els  HOvri  fuucpitp  i^awoarrtXM  tre.

®  Ibid.  zxvi.  I^ :  ohK  iytvSftriv  &ir€iOiis  ry  ohpayitjp  hwrourlc^.

'  Gal.  i.  15,  10 :  eMicncrtp  6  Qths  ....  inroKoX^ai  rhyTlhp  ainov  iv  ifAoL

'  Acta  ix.  20,  xvii.  3,  18,  xxviii.  31  :  ii^dffKwv  tA  irepl  rod  Kvptov  *lri(rov.
Cf.  Ibid.  V.  42;  I  Cor.  i.  23;  2  Cor.  iv.  5;  Phil.  i.  15,  17,  18.  Hence
Bom.  xvi.  25  :  rh  idifwyfia  *l7i<rov  XpioTov,

'  Bom.  1.  7 :  x'^pis  iyuv  koHL  elp-fivrj  &irh  Btov  Uarphs  ^fiSov  ko),  Kvpiov  ^Vnaov
Xpiffrov.  I  Cor.  i.  3 ;  2  Cor.  i.  2 ;  Gal.  i.  3 ;  Eph.  i.  2  ;  PhU.  i.  2 ;  Col.  i.
2;  I  These,  i.  i ;  2  These,  i.  2 ;  Philemon  3.  In  i  Tim.  i.  2 ;  2  Tim.  i.  2 ;
^Afof  is  inserted  between  x^^^  c^d  cipiivri,  probably  because  Timothy,  on
account  of  his  ministerial  responsibilities,  needed  the  pitying  mercy  of  Grod
more  than  nnordained  Christians.

yi]


332    Christology  of  Benedictions  and  Hymns.

associates  Jesns  Christ  with  Ood  Uie  Father,  as  being  the  Bonice
no  less  than  the  channel  of  the  hi^est  spiritoal  blessings.  It  ia
pointedly  asserted  vh^i  the  Galatians  are  warned  that  St.  Paul
ia  '  an  Apostle  not  from  men  nor  by  man,  hut  by  Jesns  Chiist
and  Ood  the  Father  ■.'  It  is  implied  in  commands  and  benedic-
tions t  which  w«  pronounced  in  the  Name  of  Christ  withtwt
naming  the  Name  of  God  i.  It  nnderliea  thoflc  early  apostolical
hymns,  sung,  as  it  would  seem,  in  the  Bedeemer's  honour* ;  it

•  Gal.  L  I :  aW  is*  ktVf&mia  alAi  Si'  irBfAwna,  iAAl  Sih  'IqiTDu  Xpinsi
■a]  e»D  norpji.     Compara  Ten.  II,  II.

'  »  TheaB.  iii.  6,  la,

■  Bom.  iri.  to :  i^  v^pu  ""^  Kuplov  iiiuir  'I^iraii  Xfiiirrau  luff  tpmr.  I  Ctr.
zri.  13;  3  Cor.  •"",  13.  In  GaL  vL  18,  ^ftI  iti  rrfiiueroi  i/iAr.  FM.
iv.  33;    I  Theea.  t.  iS.      2  Th«B.  ii.  16:    aurii  St  S  Kipiai  ti/iir  'limit

uMviar  nol  A*Ua  Icfa^v  Iw  xiipiTi,  ■opaniAtiKu  hfiM  tM  luplllu,  sol  nv
^oi  £;iai  if  itiutI  >^7y  ml  fp^fi  otibSV'     '  Thesa.  iii.  18.

*  Such  aro  1  Tim,  1.  1 5,  from  a  hynui  <ri  redemption  :—

Xptffrhs  *li}cr«(is

And  Ibid.  iii.  16,  &om  a  hjnm  on  oar  Lord's  InoniaUoa  and  triampll^-
i^aiftpAdu  ir  rrufurl.

And  3  Tim.li.  11-13,  60m  &  hymn  on  the  gloria  of  mHtJTdam^~
ti  inmn0([nvur,  mil  irufAs'Aficr*
4f  bvotxh'oixfif,  KoJ  crtf^ao'iA«£iriiyur'

ti  oiHTTouf"'.  iittirot  mrrJt  fitni*

And  int.  iii.  4-7,  &om  a  hymn  on  ths  WBj  of  nJvation  ;  cf.  Eebls'i  8«nuM
Acad,  and  Occ.,  p.  i  Sa  : —

Srf  3i  q  ;i^rr}aT<fTfjs  jcol  ^  ^iXarflpHrfa  Irc^xtni  to?  Svr^pof  i^/ii^  8E0T,
«&■  ^f  tpyuii  ruf  ir  AinDuiKnyrjj  fir  iwotfttrafitii  vntli,
&AXik  Ksri  T^  e&toS  l\tor,  tamirir  ^laii.
Ilk  AovTpav  naXryytnalca,  ml  iramndrwi  nNCITMATOZ  'AflOT,
i^'  qfui  TAouofttf,  Eli  'IHSOT  XFISTOT  Tsu  2arr^t  ifiw,

Tm  EucwaffciTtfr  t^  intlifov  j(AptTi,
vdnoi  yffiifuBa  itar'  iKrlBa  C«^f  olarlou.
it.  iii.  4  SiTqpDi  Smi'  refan  to  the  Father,  it  ii  Jcnu  Cbriit
loogb  Whom  Ho  has  given  the  Spirit  mnd  the  KHmnaDl^
atification,  and  an  inheritance  of  eternal  life.  Jesus  ii  the
It  Sabject  of  the  hjmn.  Compare  the  fragment  c^  a  hym.
Iu^>tdam  or  on  penitence,  baaed  on  Iba.  Li.  i,  and  qnotad  in

[leci.


Implied  Christology  of  St.  PauHs  Epistles.  333

justifies  the  thankBgiyings  and  doxologies  wliich  set  forth  His
praise^.  It  alone  can  explain  the  application  of  passages,
which  are  used  in  the  Old  Testament  of  the  Lord  Jehovah,  to
the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ  ^ ;  such  an  application  would  have
been  impossible  imless  St.  Paul  had  renounced  his  belief  in  the
authori^  and  sacred  character  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  or  had
explicitly  recognised  the  truth  that  Jesus  Christ  was  Jehovah
Himself  visiting  and  redeeming  His  people.

Mark  too  how  the  truth  before  us  mingles  with  the  current
topics  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles ;  how  it  is  often  presupposed  even
where  it  is  not  asserted  in  terms.  Does  that  picture  of  the
future  Judge  Whose  Second  Coming  is  again  and  again  brought
before  us  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  befit  one  who  is
not  Divine  y  ]  Is  the  Justifier  of  humanity  in  the  Epistles  to
the  Bomans  and  the  Galatians,  to  Whom  the  whole  of  the  Old
Testament  points  as  its  fulfilment,  only  a  human  martyr  after
all » 1  Why  then  is  the  effect  of  His  Death  so  distinct  in  kind
from  any  which  has  followed  upon  the  martyrdom  of  His  ser-
vants*^ How  comes  it  that  by  dying  He  has  achieved  that
restoration  of  the  rightful  relations  of  man's  being  towards  God
and  moral  truth  ^,  which  the  law  of  nature  and  the  Law  of
Sinai  had  alike  failed  to  secure  %  Does  not  the  whole  repre-
sentation of  the  Second  Adam  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans
and  in  the  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  point  to  a  dignity
more  than  human  1  Can  He,  Who  is  not  merely  a  living  soul,
but  a  quickening  Spirit ;  from  Whom  life  radiates  throughout
renewed  humanity  c ;  from  Whom  there  flows  a  stream  of  grace
more  abundant  than  the  inheritance  of  sin  which  was  bequeathed

iyeipcu  6  KoBtlZwv

koSl  ivdara  iK  rSov  vtKpuv,

Koi  iTri^a^aei  aoi  6  XpKrrSs.
Gf.  Mtinter,  tlber  die  iQteste  Christliolie  Poesie,  p.  39.

^  Eom.  iz.  5 ;  and  perhaps  zvi.  37,  see  Ols.  in  loc. ;  i  Tim.  i.  la :  xcipiv
fx«*  "^V  fv^vyaf-<^(foy^^  At«  XpiffT^  *l'fj<rw  r^  Kvpltp  fifi&y  k.t.K   Of.  Heb.  xiii,  30.

*  e.  g.  certainljr  Joiel  ii.  33  in  Bom.  x.  13 ;  and  very  probably  Jer.  ix.
33,  34  in  I  Cor.  1.  31,  etc.

'I  Thess.  ii.  19,  iii.  13,  iv.  3,  6,  16,  17,  v.  33;  3  Thess.  i.  7,  8,  9,  10,
ii.  8.    Compare  Bom.  ziv.  10,  11,  13.

*  Bom.  X.  4 ;  Gal.  iii.  34.

*  Bom.  iii.  35,  36;  Gal.  ii,  16,  et6.  St.  Paul's  argument  in  Gal.  iii.  30
implies  our  Lord's  Divinity ;  since,  if  Christ  is  merely  hmnan.  He  would  be
a  mediator  in  the  same  sense  in  which  Moses  was  a  mediator.  Of  the  two
parties,  God  and  Israel,  the  fit<rirr\s  of  the  Law  cotdd  properly  represent
Israel  alone.     The  fictrirris  of  i  Tim.  ii.  5  is  altogether  higher,

**  ^iKcuoff^pri,     Comp.  Bom.  v,  i,  3,  1 1,

*  Bom,  V.  18,  19;  XT.  18.

to]


334        Implied  Christology  of  the  Epistles

by  our  fallen  parent  d, — can  He  be,  in  His  Apostle's  mind,  merely
one  of  the  race  which  He  thus  blesses  and  saves®  ?  And  if  Jesus
Christ  be  more  than  man,  is  it  possible  to  suggest  any  interme-
diate position  between  himianity  and  the  throne  of  God,  which
St.  Paul,  with  his  earnest  belief  in  the  God  of  Israel,  could  have
believed  Him  to  occupy  ?

In  the  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians  St.  Paul  is  not  especially
maintaining  any  one  great  truth  of  revelation ;  he  is  entering
with  practical  versatility  into  the  varied  active  life  and  pressing
wants  of  a  local  Church.    Yet  these  Epistles  might  alone  suffice
to  shew  the  high  and  unrivalled  honour  paid  to  Jesus  Christ  in
the  Apostle's  heart  and  thought.    Is  the  Apostle  contrasting  his
preaching  with  the  philosophy  of  the  Greek  and  the  hopes  of
the  Jewish  world  around  him  %     Jesus  crucified  ^  is  his  central
subject ;  Jesus  crucified  is  his  whole  philosophy ».     Is  he  pre-
scribing the  law  of  apostolic  labours  in  building  up  souls  or
Churches  1     *  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay '  tlmn  '  Jesus
Christ  ^.*     Is  he  unfolding  the  nature  of  the  Church  %    It  is  not
a  seK-organized  multitude  of  religionists  who  agree  in  certain
tenets,  but  *  the  Body  of  Christ  i.'     Is  he  arguing  against  sins
of  impurity  1     Christians  have  only  to  remember  that  they  are
members  of  Christ  J,     Is  he  deepening  a  sense  of  the  glory  and
of  the  responsibility  of  being  a  Christian  ?     Christians  are  re-
minded that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  them  except  they  be  reprobates  \
Is  he  excommunicating  or  reconciling  a  flagrant  ofiender  against
natural  law  1     He  delivers  to  Satan  in  the  Name  of  Christ ;  he

d  Kom.  V.  15;  XV.  29.

*  St.  Paul  styles  himself  in  Kom.  i.  i,  SoOAos  l^piaTov  'iT^croO:  and  his
value  for  this  designation  appears  &om  Gal.  1.  10,  €i  Irt  iivdpd^ois  IjptffKOP,
Xpiarov  Bod\o5  ovx  ^^  ^y-Wt  where  observe  the  antithesis  between  XpurroS
and  avdp<&irois:  cf.  Eph.  vi.  6.  With  these  compare  his  earnest  precept,
I  Cor.  vii.  23,  /u))  ylvea-Oc  BovXoi  avOpdoitav,  How  much  is  implied  too  in
the  stem  description,  Kom.  xvi.  18,  rip  Kupl^  rjfiwp  Xpiar^  ou  SouXtiowrv,
ciAA^  ry  eavrav  KOi\l^,     Cf.  Phil,  iii,  1 9.

'  I  Cor.  i.  23,  24:  r}fjL€7s  8^  K7)p6(r(rofify  Xpiarhy  iffTavpwfiiyou  •  •  •  .  ©cow
^vpa/aiv  Kol  ®€ov  <ro<piap.

*  Ibid.  ii.  2 :  ov  yb^  txpiva  tov  elSevou  ri  iv  ifup,  ei  /i^  'IijcroCy  Xpiffrhft
Koi  rovrov  iaravpufifvov.

^  Ibid.  iii.  1 1 :  Befx^Kiov  yhp  &\\ov  ov^icls  Bivarai  9€?vou  vuph,  rhv  Kc^eyov,
3s  iar ij/  *lri(rovs  6  XpKrrSs.     Isa.  zxviii«  16 ;  Eph.  ii.  20.

*  I  Cor.  xii.  27:  6fi€7s  Sc  eVre  <rafxa  Xpurrov  Kcd  /xcAt}  iK  fiepovs,  Thni
he  even  identifies  the  Church  with  Christ,  Ibid,  ver,  1 2  :  KOddvep  yhp  ri
awfia  €v  lo-Ti,  Kal  fieKri  ^x**  iroAA^  ....  oSra  koX  6  Xpi<Tr6s,

J  Ibid,  vi,  15 :  ovk  oX^are  Zri  ret  a^fxara  vfxS>v  fi4\7i  Xpiffrov  ioTiv ;

*  2  Cor.  xiii.  5 :  ^  ovk  iiriyiy^ffKere  iavrohs,  Zri  'Irjffous  Kpurrhs  h  hpa

[lsct*


to  the  Romans  and  the  Corinthians,        335

absolves  in  the  Person  of  Christ  1.     Is  he  rebuking  irreverence
towards  the  Holy  Eucharist  %   The  broken  bread  and  the  cup  of
blessing  are  not  picturesque  symbols  of  an  absent  Teacher,  but
veils  of  a  gracious  yet  awful  Presence ;  the  irreverent  receiver  is
guilty  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  the  Lord  Which  he  does  not
'discern™.'     Is  he  pointing  to  the  source  of  the  soul's  birth
and  growth  in  the  l2e  of  light  ?     It  is  the  'illumination  of  the
Gospel  of  the  Glory  of  Christ,  Who  is   the  Image  of  God ;  *
it  is  the  'illumination  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God
in  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ  «*.'     Is  he  describing  the  spirit
of  the  Christian  life  I     It  is  perpetual  self-mortification  for  the
love  of  Jesus,  that  the  moral  life  of  Jesus  may  be  manifested
to  the  world  in  our  frail  human  nature  <^.      Is  he  sketching
out  the  intellectual  aim  of  his  ministry?     Every  thought  is
to  be  brought  as  a  captive  into  submission  to  Christ  p.     Is  he
unveiling  the  motive  which  sustained  him  in  his  manifold  suf-
ferings %     All  was  undergone  for  Christ  Q.     Is  he  suffering  from
a  severe  bodily  or  spiritual  affliction  ?    Thrice  he  prays  to  Jesus
Christ  for  relief.    And  when  he  is  told  that  the  trial  will  not  be
removed,  since  in  possessing  Christ's  grace  he  has  aU  that  he
needs,  he  rejoices  in  the  infirmity  against  which  he  had  prayed,
*  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  tabernacle  upon  him '.'     Would
he  summarize  the  relations  of  the  Christian  to  Christ  1  To  Christ

*  I  Cor.  y.  4»  5 :  ^v  t4?  ovSfxan  rov  Kvpiov  rifioov  *liiffov,  ....  <rvu  t§
iwdfi€i  ToO  Kvpiov  Tjfioou  *lri(rov  XpiffTov  vc^xxZovvai  rhv  roiovrov  r^  ^arav^.
2  Car.  ii.  lo :  Kal  yhp  iy^  cf  ri  icexctpitTMai,  ^  k^x^P^^^H-^p  ^**  ^f^^s,  iv  vpoffcirirtp
Xptarov,  Xva  fi^  irkeoueKTridcafjLey  iirh  rod  Saravci.

™  Ibid.  X.  16 :  rh  voriipiov  tt)*  ^vKoyias  ft  ^v\oyovfi€V,  ovx).  Koivwvia  rov
oSfiaros  rod  Xpiarov  icri ;  rhv  &prov  tv  KXcofieu,  ovx^  Kotvwvia  rod  (rwfiaros
rov  Xpiarov  i(rri ;  Ibid.  zi.  37 :  hstiv  i<rdlri  rhv  &prov  rovrov  fj  irlvy  rh  vori)'
piov  rov  Kvpiov  iva^icoSf  tvoxos  e<rrai  rod  adi/xaros  Kcd  aX/xaros  rov  Kvpiov,
Ibid.  yer.  39:6  ykp  iadlcov  koI  tfIvoov  [ava^lus],  xpifia  iavr^  iadUi  Kcd  irlvti,
M^  Suucplvcov  rh  ff Sofia  rod  Kvpiov,

"  3  Cor.  iv.  4.  The  goii  of  this  world  has  blinded  the  thoughts  of  the
xmbelievers,  els  rh  fi^  avydaai  avrois  rhv  ipwrKrfihv  rod  evayy€\lov  ttjs  S6^r}s
rod  XpKTrodf  ^s  iariv  ciK&fV  rod  &€od.  On  the  other  hand,  God,  Who  bade
light  shine  out  of  darkness,  has  shined  in  the  hearts  of  believing  Christians,
vphs  tpwriffiibv  r^s  yvdtxrfws  rris  SS^rjS  rod  (d€od  iv  vpoadavtf  ^Vqaod  Xpiarod
(ver.  6).

•  Ibid.  yer.  10 :  Xva  Koi  ^  f«^  rod  'Irjaod  ^v  r^  (r^fiari  rifiwv  <f>av€p<o$fj,
P  Ibid.  X.  5 :  cdxfiaKcorliovres  vav  vSrifxa  tis  r^v  viraKo^v  rod  XpioTov,

4  Ibid.  zii.  10 :  tv^oxSo  iv  iurOevelais,  iv  Cfipea-iv,  iv  ^vdyKcus,  iv  Sicay/jLOis,
iv  (mvox^plf^^^  {nr\p  Xpiarod,

'  Ibid.  yers.  7-9  *•  i^^^V  ftot  aK6Ko^  tJ  0'ap/c2 ....  iJirJp  roinov  rpls  rhv
Kipiov  irap€Kd\€aa,  Xva  kvoary  kir*  ifiod'  koI  eXpJiK^  fxoi,  **ApK€7  aoi  rj  x<^"
pLOv'  71  yhp  Hvvofils  fiov  iv  itaBevelcf  rtXfiodrai,*  ^biara  otv  fioKKov  Kovx'haofiat
iv  reus  QurBeyelais  [mv,  Xva  iiriaicqv^arji  iit*  ifil  ^  ^ivcmis  rod  Xpiarod^


336        Implied  Christology  of  ike  Epistles

he  owes  liis  mental  philosophy,  his  justificatioii  before  God,  his
progressiye  growth  in  holiness,  his  redemption  from  sin  and
death".  Would  he  mark  the  happiness  of  instruction  in  that
*  hidden  philosophy '  which  was  tanght  in  the  Charch  among  the
perfect,  and  which  was  unknown  to  the  rulers  of  the  non-Chris-
tian world  %  It  might  have  saved  them  frx)m  crucifying  the  Lord
of  Glory  *.  Would  he  lay  down  an  absolute  criterion  of  moral
ruin  %  <  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christy  let  him  be
Anathema  Maran-atha  V  Would  he  impart  an  apostolical  bene-
diction %  In  one  Epistle  he  blesses  his  readers  in  the  Name  of
Christ  alone  ^ ;  in  the  other  he  names  the  Three  Blessed  Persons :
while  '  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ '  is  mentioned,  not  only
before  *  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost,'  but  before  *  the  love
of  God  w '

Here  are  texts,  selected  almost  at  random  from  those  two
among  the  longer  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  which  are  most  entirely
without  the  form  and  method  of  a  doctrinal  treatise,  dealing
as  they  do  with  the  varied  contemporary  interests  and  contio-
versies  of  a  particular  Church  z.  Certainly  some  of  these  texts,
taken  alone,  do  not  assert  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ.  But
put  them  together ;  add,  as  you  might  add,  to  their  number ;
and  consider  whether  the  whole  body  of  language  before  yon,
however  you  interpret  it,  does  not  imply  that  Christ  held
a  place  in  the  thought,  affections,  and  teaching  of  St.  Paul,
higher  than  that  which  a  sincere  Theist  would  assign  to  any
creature,  and,  if  Christ  be  only  a  creature,  obviously  inconsistent

*  I  Cor.  i.  30 :  %i  iy^r^Bii  ^fuy  troipia  kwh  Bcov,  Soccuoo^ni  re  jcal  ayuurithi
icai  ii.Tfo\{npw(ris,

*  Ibid.  ii.  8 :  €i  7&p  ^yroMroy,  ovk  ttr  rhp  K&piov  t^s  ^^iis  itrralpwroM,

*  Ibid.  xvi.  22 :  €%  ris  ou  ^iA.c(  thw  Kvputp  'Iriffovy  Xpurrhv,  ^«  iwaHfita,
floppy  add.

'  Ibid.  ver.  23.

^  2  Cot.  xiii.  13 ;  cf.  i  Cot.  i.  8 :  %s  icai  jScjSwl^fi  ifuis  teos  r4xovt.

^  Thus  to  the  passages  ahready  quoted  from  2  Cor.  may  be  added,  those
on  our  Lord's  ondiangeableness,  i.  19,  20,  comp.  Numb,  zadii.  19,  MaL  iii.
6,  St.  James  i.  17,  and  Heb.  ziii.  8 ;  His  being  the  Divine  Uycv/xa,  m.  17,
comp.  not^  P*  31 7  *  ^®  ^6fios  rov  Kvpiov,  with  refer^ice  to  His  coming  to
judgment,  v.  1 1 ;  the  explanation  of  ihr^p  Xpurrov  vptafifvoficr  by  &s  rov
Beou  -rapcucaXovtrros  81'  vfi&y,  v,  ao,  cf.  ver.  19;  Christ's  oondesoensioo,
viii.  9,  dT.  p.  314 ;  the  implied  force  of  ym..  19,  23 ;  Christ's  bestowal  of
i^ovala,  x.  8,  xiii.  10 ;  His  being  the  'boast'  of  Christians,  z.  17-18,  comp.
▼ers.  7,  14,  and  i  Cor.  i.  31,  although  this  reference  to  our  Lord  admits  of
being  disputed ;  His  being  Brid^iroom  of  the  Church,  xi.  2,  cf.  Bev.  xix.  7,
as  Jehovah  is  of  Israel  in  Ezek.  xvi.  8-14,  Is.  Ldi.  5,  etc. ;  the  adjurations^
xi.  10,  xii.  19,  cf.  Is.  Ixv.  16 ;  Christ's  q>eaking  in  His  servants,  xiii  3*
through  the  Holy  Spirit,  St.  Matt.  x.  ao.

[lect.


of  the  first  imprisonment.  337

witli  the  supreme  and  exacting  rights  of  God.  In  these  Epistles,
it  is  not  the  teaching,  but  the  Person  and  Work  of  Jesus  Christ,
upon  which  St.  Paul's  eye  appears  to  rest.  Christ  Himself  is,  in
St.  Paul's  mind,  the  Gospel  of  Christ ;  and  if  Christ  be  hot  God,
St.  Paul  cannot  be  acquitted  of  assigning  to  Him  generally  a
prominence  which  is  inconsistent  witi^  serious  loyalty  to  mono-
theistic truth.

Still  more  remarkably  do  the  Epistles  of  the  First  Imprison-*
ment  present  us  with  a  picture  of  our  Lord's  Work  and  Person
which  absolutely  presupposes,  even  where  it  does  not  in  terms
assert,  the  doctrine  of  His  Divinity.  The  Epistles  to  the  Ephe-
sians  and  the  Colossians  are  even  more  intimately  related  to
each  other  than  are  those  to  the  Eomans  and  the  Galatians.  They
deal  with  the  same  lines  of  truth ;  they  differ  only  in  method
of  treatment.  That  to  the  Ephesians  is  devotional  and  expository;
that  to  the  Colossians  is  polemical.  In  the  Colossians  the  dignity
of  Christ's  Person  is  put  forward  most  explicitly  as  against  the
speculations  of  a  Judaizing  theosophy  which  degraded  Christ
to  the  rank  of  an  archangel  2,  and  which  recommended,  as  a
substitute  for  Christ's  redemptive  work,  ascetic  observances,
grounded  on  a  trust  in  the  cleansing  and  halloing  properties
and  powers  of  nature  *.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  our
Lord's  Personal  dignity  is  asserted  more  indirectly.  It  is
implied  in  His  reconciliation  of  Jews  and  heathens  to  each
other  and  to  God,  and  still  more  in  His  relationship  to  the  pre-
destination of  the  saints  ^.     In  both  Epistles  we  encounter  two

■  Banr,  Vorlesungeii,  p.  274:  'Die  im  Coloeserbrief  gemeinten  Engels-
▼ereliFer  setzten  ohne  Zweifel  GhristnB  selbst  in  die  Classe  der  Engel,  als
&a  rSbv  apxorfY^^^v,  wie  diess  Eplphanius  als  einen  Lehrsatz  der  Ebioniten
angibt,  wogegen  der  Coloeserbrief  mit  allem  Nachdruck  auf  ein  solches
ffporciv  r^v  K64>a\V  dringt,  dass  alles,  was  nioht  das  Haupt  selbst  ist,  nwr
in  einem  absolute  A.hhdngigJceitS'VerhdUniss  zu  Ihm  stehend  ffedaoht
Mfird,  ii.  19,*

»  Ibid.  '  Eine  Lehre,  welche  den  Menschen  in  religioser  Hinsicht  von
Beinem  natiirlichen  biirgerlichen  Sein,  von  der  materiellen  Natur  abhangig
machte^  nnd  sein  religioses  Heil  durch  die  reinigende  und  heiligende  Kraft^
die  man  den  Elementen  und  Substanzen  der  Welt  zuscbrieb,  den  Einflusa
der  Himmels-corper,  das  natlirlich  Beine  im  TJnterschied  von  dem  fiir
unrein  Grehaltenen  vermittelt  werden  liess,  setzte  die  aroix^la  rov  K6<rfiov
an  dieselbe  Stelle,  welche  nur  Christus  als  Erloser  haben  sollte.  In  diesem
Sinne  werden  V,  8  die  croix^Ta  rod  RSaiiov  und  Christus  einander  gegenii-
bergestellt.  Das  ist  die  Pldlosophie  in  dem  Sinne  in  welchem  das  Wesen
der  Fhilosophie  als  Weltweisheit  bezeichnet  wird,  als  die  Wissenschaft,  die
ea  mit  den  (rrotxcuz  toO  KStrfiov  zu  thun  hat.  Als  solche  ist  sie  auch  nur
eine  fcec^  hrdrrif  eine  blosse  vc^dSoffis  rav  6.ydp^ira>y.*

^  Ibid.  p.  270 :  '  Der  transcendenten  Christologie  dieser  Briefe  und  ihrer

Vl]  Z


338        Implied  Chris  to  logy  of  the  Epistles

prominent  lines  of  thought,  each,  in  a  high  degree,  pointing  to
Christ's  Divine  dignity.  The  first,  the  absolute  (^racter  of
the  Christian  futh  as  contrasted  with  the  relative  character  of
heathenism  and  Judaism  <';  the  second,  the  re-creatiTe  pO¥rer
of  the  grace  of  Christ  d.  In  both  Epistles  the  Church  is  con-
sidered as  a  vast  spiritual  society  ^  which,  besides  embracing  as
its  heritage  all  races  of  the  world,  pierces  the  veil  of  the  unseen,
and  includes  the  families  of  heaven^  in  its  majestic  compass.
Of  this  society  Christ  is  the  Heads,  and  it  is  '  His  Body,  the
fiilness  of  Him  That  fiUeth  all  in  all.'  Christ  is  the  predestined
point  of  unity  in  which  earth  and  heaven,  Jew  and  Gentile,
meet  and  are  one  \  Christ's  Death  is  the  triumph  of  peace  in
the  spiritual  world,  t^eace  with  God  is  secured  through  the
taking  away  of  the  law  of  condemnation  by  the  dying  Christ,
Who  nails  it  to  His  Cross  and  openly  triumphs  over  the  powers
of  darkness  \  Peace  among  men  is  secured,  because  the  Cross
is  the  centre  of  the  regenerated  world,  as  of  the  moral  universe  i.


darauf  berolienden  Anschanimg  yon  dem  alles  mn^BSsenden  tind  liber  alles
tibeigreifeiiden  Charakter  des  Ohristenthums  ist  es  ganz  gemass,  dass  sie  in
der  Lehre  von  der  Beselig^ng  der  Menschen  auf  eine  tiberzeitliche  Yorher'
begjimmnng  zuriickgelieii,  Eph.  i.  4,  £.*

^  Baur,  y^rlesnngen,  p.  273 :  'So  ist .  .  .  auch  die  absolute  Erbabenlieii
des  Ghristenthnms  tiber  Judenthnm  und  Heidenthnm  ansgesprochen.  Beide
verhalten  sich  gleich  negativ  (but  by  no  means  in  the  same  d^ree)  xom
Christenthum,  das  ihnen  gegeniiber  6  KAyos  r^s  6LKt\d€ias  ist  £^h.  L  I3»
oder  ^5  im  Gegensatz  von  axSros  (y.  8).  Die  Juden  und  die  Heiden
waren  wegen  der  allgemeinen  SUndhaftigkeit  dem  gottlichen  Zom  ver*
fiiJlen,  Eph.  ii.  3.  Der  religiose  Charakter  des  Heidenthums  wird  noch
besonders  dadurch  bezeichnet,  dass  die  Heiden  &0€oc  iv  r^  fc^o>i^  and
(ii.  12),  iffKoroffi^yoi  t$  dutvoi^  6jnes  (iy.  1 8),  arniKKorpuofievoi  rijs  (to^srti
060V  8(^  T^v  iyyoiay  t^v  odo'cof  4v  ahrois  (iy,  18),  vepnrarouvres  icark  rir
alQva  rod  xAafiov  roirov  Karh.  rhv  Ikpxovra  r^s  i^ovfflas  rod  idpos  (ii.  2).
Baid^  Beligi<Hien  gegeniiber  ist  das  Christenthum  die  absolute  Bdigion.
J[>er  ahsolute  Charakter  des  Christenthumg  selbst  aber  ist  hedingt  dmrt^
die  Person  Christi.'

*  OoL  iii.  9 ;  Eph.  iv.  21  sqq. ;  cf.  Ibid.  ii.  8-10.  Baur,  YorlesuDgoo,
p.  270 :  'Die  Gnade  ist  das  den  Menschen  durch  den  Glauben  an  Chiwtai
neu  schaffende  Princip.  Etwas  Neues  muss  namlioh  der  Mensoh  durch
das  Ghristenthum  werden.*

*  Col.  i.  5,  6 :  rod  everyycXtov,  rod  icap6vros  €is  ifias,  KctBits  ical  iw  varrl
r^  KSfffup,  Kol  Her  I  icafnro(l>opoifxevov,  Eph.  i.  13.  '  Eph.  iii.  15.

'  Eph.  i.  22,  23 :  ottnhv  l$a)Kc  Kt<paX^v  t^^p  vdyra  ry  iKKKijaUj^  ^ts  4<ni
rh  o'&fjui  ahrod,  rb  TrKiipatfia  rod  trivra  iv  ira<ri  ir\ripoviii4i/ov,  v.  23,  30.

^  Ibid.  yer.  10 :  i.vaK€(paXauliffa(r0ai  t&  vdyra  iv  r^  Xpurrf,  rd  r€  iv  rah
ovpavois  K(d  tA  ^iri  ttjj  yrjs'  iv  abr^,  iv  $  not  iicKrip^drifiev,

*  Col.  ii.  14,  15.

J  Col.  i.  20,  21 :  9i*  airr^v  ii>iroKara?Oid^cu  r^  rrdi^a  cis  aurhw,  tlpuvoirotlins

[liECT.


of  the  first  imprisonment.  3  39

Divided  races,  religions,  nationalities,  classes,  meet  beneath  the
Cross ;  they  embrace  as  brethren ;  they  are  fased  into  one  vast
society  which  is  held  together  by  an  Indwelling  Presence,  re-
flected in  the  general  sense  of  bonndless  indebtedness  to  a
transcendent  LoveK  Hence  in  these  Epistles  such  marked
emphasiB  is  laid  upon  the  unity  of  the  Body  of  Christ  1 ;  since
the  reunion  of  moral  beings  shews  forth  Christ's  Personal  Glory.
CSirist  is  the  Unifier.  As  Christ  in  His  Passion  is  the  Combiner
and  Beconciler  of  all  things  in  earth  and  heaven ;  so  He  ascends
to  heaven.  He  descends  to  hell  on  His  errand  of  reconciliation
and  combination  ^.  He  institutes  the  hierarchy  of  the  Church  » ;
He  is  the  Boot  from  which  her  -life  springs,  ihe  Foundation  on

S(&  rov  cSfMTos  rod  arrctvpov  avrov,  8t'  a^ov,  elre  t^  ivl  rijf  yrjs,  ctre  rh,  ip
roTs  ohpopoTs.

^  Col.  ill.  II :  obx  ivi  ""EXKriv  koH  *lovBauos,  tr^piTOfx^  Kcd  iucpofiva-ria,  fidp-
Bapos,  1x60715,  dovKos,  4\€6d€pos'  itWh  rh  vdyra  koX  iv  vaai  Xpi<rr6s,  Ob-
Berre  the  moral  inferences  in  yen.  12-14,  the  measure  of  charity  being
KoBifs  Koi  6  Xpitrrhs  ixaplcaro  Ifiiv,  Espe^ally  Jews  and  GentUes  axe  re-
conciled beneath  the  Cross,  because  the  Cross  cancelled  the  obligatoriness  of
the  ceremonial  law.  Eph.  ii.  14-17 :  ainhs  ydp  i<mp  ri  tlpiivri  rifjL&v,  6  iroi4i<ras
rit  itfjuf>6T€pa  ty,  icol  rh  fxeffSroixov  rod  (ppayfiov  Xvcras,  rijv  tx'^P^'^  ^^  '^  ffopKl
avrov,  rhp  y6fioy  ray  ivro\S»v  iv  H^'^Muri,  KaTapyfiffas'  Ib^a  rohs  9io  Krl(rp  4r
iaur^  €is  tva  Kouvbv  Jkvdpogirov,  voiwv  elp^vrjv,  koX  itvoKaraWd^'p  robs  ^^-
ripovs  iy  ivl  (r<&fiari  r^  St^  8(^  rod  aravpov,  imoicrtiyas  r^y  tx^pojf  4y  aitr^.
Col.  iii.  15.

^  Baur,  Christenthxmi,  p.  1 19 :  '  Die  Einheit  ist  das  eigentliche  Wesen
der  Kirche,  diese  Einheit  ist  mit  alien  zu  ihr  gehorenden  Momenten  durch
das  Christenthum  gegeben,  es  ist  Ein  Leib,  Ein  Geist,  Ein  Herr,  Ein
Glanbe,  Eine  Taufe  u.  s.  w.  Eph.  iv.  4,  f .  .  .  .  .  Yon  diesem  Punkte  aus
steigt  die  Anschauung  hoher  hinauf,  bis  dahin,  wo  der  Grand  aller  Einheit
li^.  Die  einigende,  eine  allgemeine  G^meinschaft  stiftende  Kraft  des
Todes  Ohristi  lasst  sich  nur  daraus  begreifen,  doss  Christu$  ilherhaupt  der
alles  iragende  und  zusammenhaltende  Centralpunkte  dea  ganzen  Universwms
igt,  ....  Die  Christologie  der  beiden  Briefe  hangt  aufs  Innigste  zusammen
mit  dem  in  der  unmittelbaren  Gegenwart  gegebenen  Bedtii&iss  der  Eini-
gung  in  der  Idee  der  Einen,  alle  XJnterschiede  und  Gegensatze  in  sich  auf-
hebenden  Ejrche.  Es  ist,  wenn  wir  uns  in  die  Anschauungsweise  dieser
Briefe  hineinversetzen,  schon  ein  acht  katholisches  Bewusstsein  das  sich  in
ihnen  ausspricht.'  This  may  be  fully  admitted  without  accepting  Baur's
condnsions  as  to  the  date  and  authors^p  of  the  two  Epistles.

™  Eph.  iv.  10 :  6  Karafibs,  avr6s  iart  Koti  6  &ya)3^s  inrepAyu  trdyray  rSow
ovpaywVf  %va  vKripi&aji  tA  xdyra.  St.  Aug.  Ep.  1 87,  ad  Dardanum :  *  Christum
Dominum  •  . .  ubique  totum  prsesentem  esse,  non  dubites,  tanquam  Deum*

^  Eph.  iv.  II-13 :  Kol  cdnhs  ^Swkc  robs  fiey  iLiro(rr6\ovs,  robs  5^  rrpO"
tpiiiras,  robs  Sh  €ba'yy€\i(rriiSf  robs  Bh  voi/xeyas  Koi  BidourKdKovs,  vphs  rhy
Koraprto'/ibv  rSov  aytuy,  cis  l^pyoy  SiaKoylas,  els  oucoBo/x^y  rov  ff^fiaros  rod
Xpurrod*  fi^XP'^  Karavriiffoofity  ol  vdvres  els  tV  ^^qra  rris  iriffreus  ko*
T^j  hriyy(&<r€(i9S  rod  Tlod  rod  06oO,  els  &yBpa  r€\€ioy,  eis  fx4rpoy  riXiKlas  rod
r\7ip(&fMros  rod  XpiO^rov.     Compare  i  Cor.  xii.  28 :  i^dcro  6  0€6s,


340        Implied  Chris  to  logy  of  the  Epistles

which  her  saperstmctnre  rests  o ;  He  is  the  quickening,  organ-
izing, Catholicizing  Principle  within  her  P.  The  closest  of  natural
ties  is  the  chosen  symbol  of  Bjs  relation  to  her ;  she  is  His
bride.  For  her,  in  His  love.  He  gave  Himself  to  death,  that
He  might  sanctify  her  by  the  cleansing  virtne  of  ELis  baptism,
and  might  so  present  her  to.  HimseL^  her  Lord, — ^blameless,
immaculate,  glorious  <i.  And  thus  He  is  the  Standard  of  per-
fection with  which  she  must  struggle  to  correspond.  Her  mem-
bers must  grow  up  unto  Him  in  all  things.  Accordingly,  not
to  mention  the  great  passage,  already  referred  to,  in  the  Epistle
to  the  Colossians,  Jesus  Christ  is  said  in  that  Epistle  to  possess
the  inteUectual  as  well  as  the  other  attributes  of  Deity  ^  In
the  allusions  to  the  Three  Most  Holy  Persons,  which  so  remark-
ably underlie  the  structure  and  surfeice-thought  of  the  Epistle
to  the  Ephesians,  Jesus  Christ  is  associated  most  significantly
with  the  Father  and  the  Spirit".  He  is  the  Invisible  King,
Whose  slaves  Christians  are  ^.  Nay,  His  Bealm  is  termed  ex-
plicitly *the  kingdom  of  Him  Who  is  Christ  and  God^;*  the
Church  is  subject  to  Him  ▼.  He  is  the  object  of  Christian  study,
and  of  Christian  hope  x.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  it  ')&
expressly  said  that  all  created  beings  in  heaven,  on  earth,  and
in  heU,  when  His  triumph  is  complete,  shall  acknowledge  the

^  Col.  ii.  7 :  ippiO^fi^oi  Kcd  hroucoiiofio6fi€yoi  iy  cdn^,

'  Eph.  iv.  15,  l6 :  6  Xpurrhs,  i^  oZ  irop  rh  trufjui  avyapftoXoyo^troif  koI
avfifiifia(6fiepoy  Si^  irdtnis  k^s  r^s  4rixop7iylas,  tear*  4r4pytiay  ip  furp^
ii^s  iicdarov  fifpovs,  r^r  a0{i9<r<y  rov  a^futros  'roicircu  tls  oucoSo/uV  i<o'^^
hf  iyAinf,     GoL  ii.  I9.

4  Eph.  Y.  35-37 :  6  Xpurrhs  ^ry^cn^c  tV  iickkfialcaf,  lad  lovrbr  wctp^tM^
iw€p  avTfis'  lya  aMiP  ayidurp,  KaffapUrtis  r^  Xovrp^  rov  SSoros  4y  ^fwri.  In
vapcurHiaji  ovr^v  ^avr^  Hp^o^w,  t^p  iKkkriTtay,  fiii  fyovatuf  tntlXov  I1  fvrUa
^  Tc  r&p  roto^wy,  &AA'  Ira  ^  ayla  KCti  ifjieofAos.

'  CoL  ii.  3,  3 :  4p  f  etal  vdm-ei  ol  Brivaupot  r^s  ao(f>las  fco)  r^t  yyAffuis
kr6Kpwpoi,    Scrivener,  IntrocL  Crit.  N.  T.,  p.  451.    CoL  i.  19,  ii.  9.

*  Eph.  1.  3 :  noT^p  rov  Kvplov,  Ibid.  vex.  6 :  iy  r^  iiymnjfih^.  Ibid.
vep.  13 :  4(r^pceyia0rir€  r^  Ilycv/iari.  Ibid.  ii.  18 :  Bi*  avrov  fx^f^f^  ^'  ^P^'
aycryiiy  ol  itfupiirepoi  iy  iyi  Tly^vfuiri  irpibs  rhy  Tldrcpo.  Ibid.  iii.  6 :  ffvy-
icKiipSyofui,  Koi  ffwFffwfuty  lad  trv/xfieroxct,  where  the  Father  Whose  heiis  ve
are,  the  Son  of  Whose  Body  we  are  members,  the  Spirit  of  Whose  gifts  we
partake,  seem  to  be  glanced  at  by  the  adjectives  denoting  our  relatioiislup
to  the  iirayyfKla,     Cf.  Ibid.  id.  I4-17.

*  Ibid.  vi.  6 :  fiii  mar'  wpBaXfiodovKfiay  &5  iufBponnipfO'Kot^  &AA*  &S  SovXm
rov  Xpurrov,     Cf.  ver.  5  :  «s  ry  Xpurrf.     Cf.  p.  334,  note.

■  Ibid.  v.  5 :  iy  ry  fi€uri\fiti  rod  Xpiarov  icai  Qeov,  where,  'in  the  abeenoe
of  the  article  before  Sfov,  Christ  and  Grod  are  presented  as  a  single  conoep-
tion.*     See  Harless  in  loo.     Cc^  i.  13.

*  Eph.  V.  34 :  ^  iKKXritrla  ^orJurfftrcu  ry  Xpurr^,
»  Ibid.  iv.  30;  i.  12;  vi.  6-9.

[UCT.


■UKIBU  ,  a    ■        -•— ^^"       -"II  ■  ■•  III  ^^>^^>^^^^IMi^Hi^B^^«^^p^pi^«nBMi^w^^r-'^-B*>


of  the  first  imprisonment.  34  r

majesty  even  of  His  Haman  Nature  y.     The  preaching  of  the
Gospel   is  described  as  the  preaching  Christ  2.      Death  is  a;
blessing  for  the  Christian,  since  by  death  he  gains  the  eternal
presence,  of  Christ  *.     The  Fhilippians  are  specially  privileged
in   being  permitted,  not  merely  to  believe  on  Chiist,  but  to
Birffer  for  Him  ^.     The  Apostle  trusts  in  Jesus  as  in  Providence
to  be  able  to  send  Timothy  to  Philippic.     He  contrasts  the
selfishness  of  ordinary  Christians  with  a  disinterestedness  that
seeks  the  things  (it  is  not  said  of  God,  but)  of  Christ  ^.     The
Christian  *  boast*  centres  in  Christ,  as  did  the  Jewish  in  the
Liaw®;    the  Apostle  had  counted  all  his  Jewish  privileges  as
dung  that  he  might  win  Christ^;  Christ  has  taken  possession
of  hims ;  Christ  strengthens  him  ^ ;  Christ  will  one  day  change
this  body  of  our  humiliation,  that  it  may  become  of  like  form
with  the  Body  of  His  glory,  according  to  the  energy  of  His
ability  even  to   subdue   all  things   unto  Himself  *.      In  this
Epistle,  as  in  those  to  the  Corinthians,  the  Apostle  is  fax  from
pxirsuing  any  one  line  of  doctrinal  statement :  moral  exhorta-
tions, interspersed  with   allusions  to  persons  and  matters   of
interest  to  himself  and  to  the  Philippians,  constitute  the  staple
of  his  letter.    And  yet  how  constant  are  the  references  to  Jesus
Christ,  and  how  inconsistent  are  they,  taken  as  a  whole,  with
any  conception  of  His  Person  which  denies  His  Divinity  i  I

7  Phil.  ii.  10 :  Tva  Iv  r^  iySfiart  ^Irjirov  jcav  y6w  Kdfvp^  ijcovpcofiwv  nco)
ixiyeiwv  koX  KaraxOorloov,     Gf.  St.  Cyril  Alex.  Thes.  p.  128.

■  PhiL  i.  16:  rhv  Xpio'rhu  Karayy^Wwffiv,  Ibid.  ver.  18 :  Xpiffrhs  Kvray*
yiWercu,

*  Ibid.  ver.  23 :  iirtBvinlav  tx<»v  els  rh  kvaXvaai,  koH,  ffhv  Xpurr^  cTveu.
Cf.  a  Cor.  V.  8 ;  I  These,  iv.  17.

*  Phil.  i.  29 :  {tfiiv  ixapiffOri  rh  dir^p  Xpicrrovy  ob  fi6vov  rh  €is  ahrhv  vuT"
re6€iyt  &AAA  km  rh  ^hp  ahrov  vdcrx^iV'  Cf.  i.  20 :  fxtydKvvO'fifferai  Xpurrhs
ip  rtp  tr^fictrl  fiov,

^  Ibid.  ii.  19 :  iXTci^w  5h  iv  Kupi«p  'Irjaov,  Tifi60€OP  rax^cos  7r4fi^ou  bfuv,

*  Ibid.  vep.  21 :   ol  irdpres  yh,p  rh  iaur&y  (rirovinyf  06  tA  rov  Xpurrov

®  Ibid.  iii.  3 :  icawx**'/**''**  ^^  XpcoT^  'It/ctoC,^

'  Ibid.  ver.  8 :  hC  ttv  rh  vdyra  iCvfJ^tJ^V  ical  rfyovfiai  fficdfidKa  cTveu,  Xvm
Xpiarhv  K^p^ffw,  koL  eipeBv  4v  ahrip,  Cf.  St.  Matt.  z.  37,  39,  xiii.  44,  46 ;
St.  Lnke  idv.  33.

»  Ibid.  iii.  1 2  :  KareKfiipQriP  (frh  Xpurrov  'Iricov,

^  Ibid.  iv.  13 :  rrdpra  Iffx^  iy  r^  iv^vpofAOvpri  fi€  [Xpi<rrf],  Cf.  i.  19 :
irixopriyla  rov  Tlpevfiaros  *hitrov  Xpurrov.

^  Ibid.  iii.  20,  21 :  hs  /ieTao'x>7^T£(rci  t^  <r&fM  rrjs  rarctwt&o'etcs  rifiwp,  eh
rh  ycpecOcu  avrh  ffirfi/xoptpop  ry  {rd/pMri  r^s  8(J|ijs  ahrov,  Karh  r^ip  ip4py€iap
rod  BipcurOai  avrhp  xal  vvord^ai  ^avr^  rh  rrdvra.     Cf.  iv.  4 :  6  Kvpios  iyy&s.

i  It  should  be  added  that  in  the  Epistle  to  Philemon  our  Lord  is  asso-
dated  with  the  Father  as  the  source  of  grace  and  peace,  ver.  3,  while  fie

Vl]


342  Implied  Christology

The  Pastoral  Epistles  are  distinguished,  not  merely  by  tbe
specific  directions  which  they  contain  respecting  the  Ohiistian
hierarchy  and  religious  societies  in  the  apostolical  Church^,
but  also  and  especially  by  the  stress  which  they  lay  upon  the
vital  distinction  between  heresy  and  orthodoxy  \  Each  of  these
lines  of  teaching  radiates  from  a  most  exalted  conception  d
CSirist's  Person,  whether  He  is  the  Source  of  ministerial  power™,
or  the  Sun  and  Centre-point  of  orthodox  truth  i^.  In  stating
the  doctrine  of  redemption  these  Epistles  insist  strongly  upcm
its  universality  o.    The  whole  world  was  redeemed  in  the  inten-

is  represented  as  the  ob]ect  of  Obristian  faith  and  activity,  vers.  5,  6 ;  and
the  pregnant  phrases  iv  XpurT^,  iy  Kvpt^,  occur  four  times  in  this  short
Epistle.

*  I  Tim.  iii.  iv.  v. ;  Tit.  i.  5-9 ;  ii.  i-io,  etc.

^  St.  Paul's  language  implies  that  the  true  faith  is  to  the  soul  what  the
most  necessary  conditions  of  health  are  to  the  body.  tyiaJvovffa  ZiIiaffKa}da
(i  Tim.  i.  10 ;  IXt.  i.  9,  ii.  i) ;  so  \6yos  ^i^s  (Tit.  ii.  8),  kAyoi  ^udyorrts
(3  Tim.  i.  13).  Thus  the  orthodox  teaching  is  styled  fi  icoA.^  SiSmricaAits
(i  Tim.  iv.  6),  or  simply  rj  Si^curKoKla  (Ibid.  vi.  i),  as  though  no  other
deserved  the  name.  Any  deviation  (Jkrepo^iBcurKoXeaf,  Ibid.  i.  3  ;  vi.  3)  is
self-condemned  as  being  such.  The  heretic  prefers  his  own  self-cl^sen
private  way  to  the  universally-reoeived  doctrine ;  he  is  to  be  out  off,  after
two  admonitions,  from  the  communion  of  the  Church  (Tit.  iii.  10)  on  the
ground  that  i^4<rrpairrai  6  roiovros,  icol  afiaprdvei,  &y  cunoKardKpiros  (Ibid.).
Heresy  is  spoken  of  by  turns  as  a  crime  and  a  misfortune,  rrepl  r^v  Tiariy
iwaudyn^^ay  (l  Tim.  i.  19) ;  AireirAoi^di|<ro>'  oir^  t^^  witrrttos  (Ibid,  vi  10);
x€p\  r^v  &\^0ciay  iiarr6xn<^ay  (a  l^m.  ii.  1 8).  Deeper  error  is  characterized
in  severer  terms,  iiroariiaoyrcu  r^s  rrltrrtms,  irpocrcxovrcs  irveOfuun  irXAyoii
KoiX  ZihouTKoXious  hcufiovluy  ....  K€Kavrr\puuriiiyw  r^y  iZUxy  avvci^Tiavy.  icrA.
(l  1^.  iv.  I,  a) ;  oSroi  iufOltrrayrcu  ry  kKiiBelt^  &y$pwroi  KaTep0apfji4vot  t^
yovy,  &S6Ktfioi  ir€pl  r^y  iriariv  (2  Tim.  iii.  8) ;  &t5  t^s  iKriOelas  r^y  iuc(^
iiwoarph^otHrty,  M  8c  rohs  iiiiBovs  iicrpanrfiffoyrcu  (Ibid.  iv.  4).  Heresy  eatl
its  way  into  the  spiritual  body  like  a  gangrene,  6  \^os  aurSay  &s  yirf
ypatya  yofi^y  l^ei  (Ibid.  ii.  17).  It  is  obsearvable  that  throughout  tlkeie
Epistles  •jriffTis  is  not  the  subjective  apprehension,  but  the  objective  body
of  truth ;  not  fides  qud  eredUur,  but  the  Faith.  And  the  Church  is
ffr{/\.os  K<d  i^pcdcofia  rrjs  iXriOflas  (l  Tim.  iii.  15).  This  truth,  which  the
Church  supports,  is  already  embodied  in  a  {tworinrt^ais  iyi(uy6vrwy  xAywf
(a  Tim.  i.  13).

^  I  Tim.  i.  la:  04fi€yos  €ls  iuucoyiay.  a  l^m.  ii.  3:  trrpan^hiis  liiffov
Xpurrov,  So  when  ihe  young  widows  who  have  entered  into  the  Order
of  widows  wish  to  marry  again,  this  is  represented  as  an  oSenoet  against
Christ,  with  Whom  they  have  entered  into  a  personal  engag^nent,  hc9
ykp  Kcn-aoTpriyida'airi  rod  Xpi<rrovt  yofitur  B^Kovffiyy  ^X''^^^^*'  *^P^Mh  ^<  '^*
irp^nniy  iricmy  iiB^rntraiy  (l  Tim.  v.  11,  la).

A  I  l^m.  vi.  3,  where  moral  and  social  truth  is  specially  in  question.

^  Ibid.  ii.  3.  Intercession  is  to  be  offered  for  idl.  rovro  yhp  fca\^  <tal
iar6S€KToy  4y<&ieiov  rov  'Zornipos  vfi&y  Beov,  ts  vdyras  h.yBp<Snrovs  04\€i  o'tftf^
ic«l  elf  hriyyoariy  kknO^as  iXBeiy,    efs  7^  Behs,  «tr  lud  fi^irlrris  6eov  ko)

[lsct.


iWJUi*"!''  ■  yt  I  ^^^^^^m^^ma^mm^mgm^mmmm^mamtmt^m


of  the  Pastoral  Epistles.  343

tion  of  Christ,  however  that  intention  might  be  limited  in  effect
by  the  will  of  man.  As  the  theories,  Judaizing  and  Gnostic,
which  confined  the  benefits  of  Christ's  redemptive  work  to  races
or  classes,  were  more  or  less  Humanitarian  in  their  estimate
of  His  Person;  so  along  with  the  recognition  of  a  worid-
embracing  redemption  was  found  the  belief  in  a  Divine  Be-
deemer.  Accordingly  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles  the  Divinity
of  our  Lord  is  taught  both  in  express  terms  p  and  by  tacit
implication  4.  His  Aouictions  as  the  Awarder  of  indulgence  and
mercy  >*,  His  invisible  Presence  among  angelic  attendants  ',  His
active  providence  over  His  servants,  and  His  ready  aid  in
trouble  \  are  introduced  naturally  as  familiar  topics.  And  if
the  Manhood  of  the  One  Mediator  is  prominently  alluded  to
as  being  the  instrument  of  His  Mediation  u,  His  Pre-existence
in  a  Higher  Nature  is  as  clearly  intimated  ^.

After  what  has  already  been  said  on  the  prominence  of  the
doctrine  of  Christ's  Divinity  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,
it  may  suffice  here  to  remark  that  the  power  ^  of  His  Priestly

iaf9p<&www,  AyBpwros  Xpiffr}ts  'liiaovs,  6  Hohs  iavrhw  kprlXvrpov  (nc\p  Tdvrwy.
Of.  Ibid.  iv.  10 ;  Tit.  ii.  ii.^

P  l^t.  ii.  13;  rov  fi€yd\ov  Oeov  koI  ^ttrripos  rifi&¥  *lriarov  Xptarov,  Of.
p.  319,  note  y.

4  e.g.  3  Tim.  i.  i,  li.  i.  Cf.  St.  John!.  14,  16;  a  Tim.  i.  9,  10.  Gf.
Tit.  ii.  II,  iii.  4,  etc.

'  I  Tim.  i.  16:  9iit  rovro  iiKt-fiOriVytva  iv  i/JLo\  irpi&rtp  Mti^rrrai  ^Iritrovs
XpKrrhs  r^v  wcurav  fiaucpoBvfilav.  Gf.  yer.  13.  Compare  the  interoesdon  for
the  (apparently)  deceased  OnesiphoruB :  d^  avr^  6  K^tos  e^puv  lAcos  irapd
Kvplov  iv  iKiivxi  T§  ^/licp^  (a  Tim.  i.  18) ;  where  the  second  KOpios  also  is
Jesns  Christ  (Gen.  xix.  24;  St.  Luke  zi.  17;  St.  Matt.  xii.  a6)  the  Judge,
at  Whose  Hands  St.  Paul  himself  expects  to  receive  the  crown  of  right-
eousness (Ibid.  iy.  8,  14).

*  Observe  the  adjurations,  hafiapr^pofjuu  iv<&7riov  rod  8cod  lud  Kvplov
*Iij(rov  XpKTrov  Koi  rav  iicKeicr&v  &77^A,a)i'  (l  Tim.  v.  21) ;  irapayyiWot  <roi
ivtimnov  rov  ®€ow  rov  ^aoroiovvros  rh.  irdvra,  Koti  Xpiarov  *lri<rov  rov  fiaprvpii'
coarros  irrl  Hovriov  Ili\drov  rijv  KdK^v  byLoXayiaaf  (Ibid.  vi«  13).  Cf.
3  Tim.  iv.  I.

*  3  Tim.  iii,  II ;  iK  irdvrw  [so.  9io»yfMiv]  fit  ifp{Hrvro  6  Kipios.  Ibid.  iv.
17:  6  Sh  K6pi6$  fioi  irapiffriif  icai  iv€dvvifi6Mr4  fie.  Ibid.  ver.  18 :  ^^aerai
fit  b  K^pios  arch  vavrhs  tpyov  xovripov,  (yf.,  yet  more.  Ibid.  ii.  10 :  aurriplas
rrjs  iv  Xpiar^  *lri(rov,  fierh,  d<j|ij$  aiuviov.     Ci.  St.  J(^  X.  2  8,  xvii.  22.

«  I  Tun.  ii.  5.

^  Ibid.  iii.  16.  Baur,  Vorlesxmgen,  p.  351 :  'Mensch  wird  zwar  Christus
ausdriicklich  genannt  (i  Tim.  ii.  5)  aber  von  einem  menschlichen  Subject
kann  doch  eigentlich  nicht  gesagt  werden  i<f>av€p^odn  ^^  ffopKi,  Es  passt
diess  nur  fiir  ein  hoheres  libearmenschliches  Wesen.*

^  Heb.  vii.  25:  adiisiv  tis  rh  iravrt\h  H^arcu.  Ibid.  ix.  12:  cuavia*
\{np<aaiv,

VI]


!


344     Why  can  no  human  name  be  substituted  for

Mediatioii  as  there  insisted  on,  although  exhibited  in  His
glorified  Humanity,  does  of  itself  imply  a  superhuman  Person-
ality x.  This  indeed  is  more  than  hinted  at  in  the  terms  of
the  comparison  which  is  instituted  between  Melchisedec  and
His  Divine  Antitype.  History  records  nothing  of  the  parents^
of  the  descent,  of  the  birth,  or  of  the  death  of  Melchisedec;
he  appears  in  the  sacred  narrative  as  if  he  had  no  beginning
of  d&ys  or  end  of  life.  In  this  he  is  '  made  like  unto  the  Son
of  Gk>d,'  with  His  eternal  Pre-existence  and  His  endless  days  7.
This  Eternal  Christ  can  save  to  the  uttermost,  because  He
has  a  Priesthood  that  is  unchangeable,  since  it  is  based  on  His
Own  Everlasting  Being  ».

In  short,  if  we  bear  in  mind  that,  as  the  Mediator,  Christ  is
God  and  Man,  St.  Paul's  language  about  Him  is  explained  by
its  twofold  drift.     On  the  one  hand,  the  true  force  of  the  dis-
tinction between  *  One  God'  and  *  One  Lord'  or '  One  Mediator'
becomes  apparent  in  those  passages,  where  Christ  in  His  afr-
somed  Manhood  is  for  the  moment  in  contrast  with  the  Un-
incarnate  Deity  of  the  Father*.     On  the  other  hand,  it  is  only
possible  to  read  the  great  Christological  passages  of  the  Apostle
without  doing  violence  to  the  plain  force  of  h^  language,  when
we  believe  that  Christ  is  God.    Doubtless  the  Christ  of  St.  Paul
is  shrouded  in  mystery;   but  could  any  real  intercourse  be^
tween  God  and  man  have  been  re-established  which  should
be  wholly  unmysterious  1     Strip  Christ  of  His  Godhead  that
you  may  denude  Him  of  mystery,  and  what  becomes,  I  do  not
say  of  particular  texts,  but  of  all  the  most  characteristic  teach-
ing of  St.  Paul  %     Substitute,  if  you  can,  throughout  any  one
Epistle  the  name  of  the  first  of  the  saints  or  of  the  highest
among  the  angels,  for  the  Name  of  the  Divine  Bedeemer,  and
see  how  it  reads.     Accept  the   Apostle's  implied  challenge.
Imagine  for  a  moment  that  Paul  was  crucified  for  you;  that


*  That  it  was  our  Lord's  BiTiiie  Natnrs  which  gaTe  its  supreme  taloe
to  His  saciifioe  on  the  Gross  seems  to  be  taught  in  Heb.  ix.  14,  where
itv^^^M,  is  the  nature  of  God,  Who  is  Spirit;  see  Bom.  i.  4,  i  ISm.  iiL  16,
and  St.  J<dm  iv.  34.    G£.  Bisping  in  loc

7  Heb.  vii.  3 :  dbrdErtup,  ^^^lAgrvt^  hy^w^akirfirrtui'  /tfrrf  ipjA"  ^f^^P^t  P^^
(<sni5  WXm  I^x*^  i/p^tftmrnpi^s  tk  r^  tl^  rov  Beov.  Bei^ :  'Kon  didtar
IWns  Dei  aBHimflatns  Mdchised^o^  sed  contra.  Nam  Filiiis  Dei  est
antiqnior,  ei  archetypns.'

*  Heb.  vii.  34,  35 :    itik,  l^rh  /n^t^tm  mirk^  cis  rW  auh^  kwapdfiarW

*  xGor.  YiiL6;  ^fih.  iT.  5;  i  Tim.  iL  5.

[lsct.


the  I^ame  of  Jesus,  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paul?  345

you  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  Paul  ^ ;  that  wisdom,  holi-
ness, redemption,  come  from  the  Apostle ;  that  the  Church  is
not    Christ's,   but  Paul's^.     Conceive,   if  you   can,  that  the
Apostle  ascends  his  Master's  throne ;   that  he  says  anathema
to  any  who  loves  not  the  Apostle  Paul ;  that  he  is  bent  upon
bringing  every  thought  captive  to  the  obedience  of  Paul ;  that
be  announces  that  in  Paul  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom
and  knowledge ;   that  instead  of  protesting  '  We  preach  not
ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  and  ourselves  your  ser-
vants for  Jesus'  sake  c,'  he  could  say,  Paul  is  *  the  end  of  the
law  to  every  one  that  believeth  d,'  or  *  I  beseech  you  for  Paul's
sake  and  for  the  love  of  the  Spirit «.'     What  is  it  in  the  Name
of  Christ  which  renders  this  language,  when  applied  to  Him,
other  than  intolerable  1     Why  is  it  that  when  coupled  with
any  other  name,  however  revered  and   saintly,  the  words  of
Paul  respecting  Jesus  Christ  must  seem  not  merely  strained^
but  exaggerated  and  blasphemous  1     Is  it  not  that  truth  an-
swers to  truth,  that  all  through  these  Epistles,  and  not  merely
in  particular  assertions,  there  is  an  underlying  idea  of  Christ's
Divinity  which  is  taken  for  granted,  as  being  the  very  soul
and  marrow  of  the  entire  series  of  doctrines  ]  that  when  this
is  lost  sight  of,  all  is  misshapen  and  dislocated  1   that  when
this  is  recognised,  all  falls  into  its  place  as  the  exhibition  of
infinite  Power  and  Mercy,  clothed  in  a  vesture  of  humiliation
and  sacnfice,  and  devoted  to  the  succour  and  enlightenment
of  mani

4.  It  is  with  the  prominent  features  of  St.  Paul's  charac-
teristic teaching  as  with  the  general  drift  of  his  great  Epistles ;
they  irresistibly  imply  a  Christ  Who  is  Divine.

(a)  Every  reader  of  the  New  Testament  associates  St.  Paul
with  the  special  advocacy  of  the  necessity  of  faith  as  the  indis-
pensable condition  of  man's  justification  before  God.  What  is
this  '  faith '  of  St.  Paul  ]  It  is  in  experience  the  most  simple  of
the  movements  of  the  soul ;  and  yet,  if  analysed,  it  turns  out

*  I  Ck>r.  i.  13 :  /t^  TlaSi\o%  itrrttvpdiSi^  6ir^p  IfiQv ;  ^  tls  rb  6uofia  Ua6\ov

b  Bom.  zvi.  16:  al  iKKXritricu  Tcurcu  rov  Xpiarov,  Grfll.  i.  22.  Comp.
St.  Matt.  xvi.  18:  fiov  rV  iKKXritrlav.  The  more  usual  expression,  it  is
Bignificant  to  note,  is  4KK\ri<ria  rod  Beov.  i  Cor.  i.  2,  x.  32,  xi.  16,  22,
xv.  9 ;  3  Cor.  i.  i ;  Gal.  i.  13 ;  i  Tim.  iii.  5,  15.

o  a  CJot.  iv.  5.  d  Rom.  x.  4.

*  Bom.  XV.  30 :  irapaKaKu  9^  vfjuiSf  iL^eKtpoi,  9ik  rov  Kupiou  ijixay  *Ii}(rov
Xpiarov,  Kol  5id  rrjs  kydmis  rod  Hvtvfiaros,


346  A  Divine  Christ  implied

to  be  one  of  the  most  complex  among  the  religions  ideas  in
the  New  Testament.     The  word  vUrm  implies,  fii«t  of  all,  both
faithfhlness  and  confidence ';  but  religions  confidence  is  closely
allied  to  belief,  that  is  to  say,  to  a  persuasion  that  some  unseen
£Btct  is  true  s.     And  this  belief,  having  for  its  object  the  nnse^
is  opposed  by  St.  Paul  to  ^  sight  V     It  is  fed  by,  or  rather
it  is  in  itself  a  higher  intuition  than  any  of  which  nature  is
capable^;   it  is  the  continuous  exercise   of  a  new  sense  of
spiritual  truth  with  which  man  has  been  endowed  by  grace.
It  is  indeed  a  spiritual  second-sight;  and  yet  reason  has  an-
cillary duties  towards  it.     Beason  may  prepare  the  way  ol
faith  in  the  soul  by  removing  intellectual  obstacles  to  its
claims ;  or  she  may  arrange,  digest^  explain,  systematize,  and  so
express  the  intuitions  of  faith  in  accordance  with  the  needs  of
a  particular  locality  or  time.    This  active  intellectual  appre-
ciation of  the  object-matter  of  fiuth,  which  analyses,  discusses,
combines,  infers,  is  by  no  means  necessary  to  tiie  life  of  the
Christian  souL     It  is  a  special  grace  or  accomplishment,  which
belongs  only  to  a  small  fraction  of  the  whole  body  of  the
faithM.     llieir  faith  is  supplemented  by  what  St.  Paul  tenn%
in  this  peculiar  sense,  '  knowledge  J.'     Faith  itself,  by  which
the  soul  lives,  is  mainly  passive,  at  least  in  respect  of  its  in-
tellectual ingredients:   the  believing  soul  may  or  may  not
apprehend  with  scientific  accuracy  that  which  its   &iiii  re-
ceives.    The  '  word  of  knowledge,'  that  is,  the  power  of  analysis
and  statement  which  is  wielded  by  theological  science,  is  tiins
a  distinct  gift,  of  great  value  to  the  Church,  although  oer-

'  Bam.  iii.  3.  irfortf  Bcov  is  the  fiuthftdness  of  God  in  aocoftipliRhfag
His  promiBes.  Cfl  irurr^s  b  6c^,  i  Cor.  i.  9 ;  i  Thees.  t.  34.  iitrta  ii
confidence  in  God,  Bom.  !▼.  19,  ao ;  as  ircTlarcv/iaiy  '  I  h»ye  been  entrnsied
with' (GaL  ii  7 ;  I  T^m.  i  II).

c  The  tranflition  is  observable  in  Bom.  vi.  8 :  €t  tik  ievcBJofOfiey  ahw  Xpurrf,
wurreiSofuw  Uri  KaH  <rv(/i<ron€r  twr^.  For  belief  in  the  troth  of  an  woBem
tact  iqpon  hmnan  testiiiiony,  ct  i  Cor.  zL  18:  iucoim  axi^iuera  h  ^
iwdpx^i'^t  ic(d  fiepos  rt  Turrevet,

^  a  Cor.  y.  7 :  ^^  tIotcius  yiip  wepi-worovfitw,  ov  S<&  d(5ovf .

'  I  Cor.  zii.  3 :  oviels  9^arai  cnrcty*  Kiptos'lriirovs,  ci  fiii  iw  nv^^^AOfri *ky^*

i  I  Cor.  zii.  8 :  &AXy  54  pfSorcu]  Kiryos  yi^trtcts,  Korh  rh  tdnh  Ilrci^
a  Cor.  viii.  7  •  ^^  ircarri  w^puraeicTe,  -whrtt,  jccd  ^iy^  koI  yvt&aeu  So  in
I  Cor.  ziii.  a  wwra  ri  yinnns  evidently  means  intelleotual  appreciation  of
the  highest  revealed  truths,  of  which  it  is  said  in  ver.  8  that  Korapyti^enti.
Of  course  this  TFtfo-if  was  firom  the  first  capable  of  being  abused;  only,  when
it  is  so  abused,  to  the  hindrance  of  Divine  truth,  the  Apostle  maintaini
that  it  does  not  deserve  the  name  {iarn$4a§ts  t^s  i^ev&»y^ytov  yp^^ts,
I  Tim.  vi.  ao).

[lbot.


in  St.  PauVs  account  of  Faith.  347

tainly  not  of  absolute  necessity  for  all  Christians.  But  ^  with-
out faith'  itself  'it  is  impossible  to  please  God;'  and  in  its
simplest  forms,  Mth  pre-supposes  a  proclamation  of  its  object
by  the  agency  of  preachi^l^.  Sometimes  indeed  the  word
preached  does  not  profit,  'not  being  mixed  with  fiuth  in
them  that  hear  it^.'  But  when  the  soul  in  very  truth  re-
sponds to  the  message  of  God,  the  complete  responsive  act
c^  faith  is  threefold.  This  act  proceeds  simultaneously  from
the  intelligence,  from  the  heart,  and  from  the  will  of  the  be-
liever. His  intelligenee  recognises  the  unseen  object  as  a
fact  11^.  -His  heart  embraces  the  object  thus  present  to  his
understanding ;  his  heart  opens  instinctively  and  unhesitatingly
to  receive  a  ray  of  heavenly  light  ^.  And  his  will  too  resigns
itself  to  the  truth  before  it ;  it  places  the  soul  at  the  disposal
of  the  object  which  thus  rivets  its  eye  and  conquers  its  affec-
tions o.  The  believer  accordingly  merges  his  personal  existence
in  that  of  the  object  of  his  ^ith ;  he  lives,  yet  not  he,  but
Another  lives  in  him  P.  He  gazes  on  truth,  he  loves  it,  he
yields  himself  to  it,  he  loses  himself  in  it.  So  true  is  it,  that
in  its  essence,  and  not  merely  in  its  consequences,  faith  has
a  profoundly  moral  character.  Faith  is  not  merely  a  percep-
tion of  the  understanding ;  it  is  a  kindling  of  the  heart,  and
a  resolve  of  the  will;  it  is,  in  short,  an  act  of  the  whole
soul,  which,  by  one  simultaneous  complex  movement,  sees,  feels,
and  obeys  the  truth  presented  to  it.

Now,  according  to  St.  Paul,  it  is  Jesus  Christ  Who  is  emi-
nently the  Object  of  Christian  faith.  The  intelHgence,  the
heart,  the  will  of  the  Christian  unite  to  embrace  Him.     How

^  Bom.  X.  14-17 :  ^  t/otu  ^|  hxw^,    Gf.  \^o%  &ko^9,  i  Thees.  ii.  13.

*  Heb.  iv.  a.

*  I  Thees.  iv.  14,  Turrt^iv  is  used  of  reoognisizig  two  past  historical  facts ;
Bom.  vi.  S,  of  Teoognising  a  fnture  &ot;  a  Thess.  ii.  ii^  of  beHe-ving  that
to  be  a  fact  which  is  a  fabehood.

^  Kom.  X.  9,  10 :  iky  &fio\oy4\(rffs  iv  t{)  (rr6fiarl  <rov  Kipiov  *l7i(rovv,  koX
9urr€6<rps  iv  ry  Kap^i<(,  9ov  tri  6  Bths  abrhv  Ijyetptv  iK  vtKpaVf  awO^ff^^*  leapSia
tV  v'urrc^oi  tls  dticeuoir^vfiv.  Thus  ooinoideiitly  with  the  act  of  faith,  i
iydMyi  rod  B^ov  iiacixvreu  iv  reus  KopHicus  rifi&v  (Rom.  v.  5).  The  love  of
God  is  infused  into  the  heart  at  the  moment  when  His  truth  enters  the
understanding ;  and  it  is  in  this  co-operation  of  the  moral  nature  that  the
essential  power  of  faith  resides:  hence  faith  is  necessarily  9i*  iuydmis
ii'ffyovfi4vri.

*  Bom.  vii.  4 :  €ts  rh  ytviffBat  6fius  krippp,  ry  ^jc  vcKp&v  iytpBivri,  Ibid,
xiv.  8,  9 ;  a  Cor.  v.  15 ;  Col.  iii.  17.

P  Gal.  u.  20 :  C»  84  oifK  (hi  iy^y  (y  84  iv  i/ioi  Xpurr6s.  Phil.  i.  ai :  ifioi
y^  rh  (riv,  Xpurr6s,

n]


348  A  Divine  Christ  implied

versatile  and  many-sided  a  process  this  believing  apprehensicm
of  Christ  is,  might  appear  from  the  constantly  varied  phrase  d
the  Apostle  when  describing  it.  Yet  of  feiith  in  aU  its  aspects
Christ  is  the  legitimate  and  constant  Object.  Does  St.  Paul
speak  as  if  faith  were  a  movement  of  the  soul  towards  an  end  \
That  end  is  Christ<i.  Does  he  hint  that  faith  is  a  repose  of
the  soul  resting  upon  a  support  which  guarantees  its  safety  t
That  support  is  Christ  ^  Does  he  seem  to  imply  that  by  faith
the  Christian  has  entered  into  an  atmosphere  which  encircles
and  protects,  and  fosters  the  growth  of  his  spiritual  life  %  That
atmosphere  is  Christ  ■•  Thus  the  expression  '  the  •  fiBiith  of
Christ'  denotes  the  closest  possible  union  between  Christ  and
the  Mth  which  apprehends  Him^.  And  this  union,  affected
on  man's  side  by  fia.ith,  on  God's  by  the  instrumentality  of
the  sacraments^,  secures  man's  real  justification.  The  believer
is  justified  by  this  identification  with  Christ,  Whose  perfect
obedience  and  expiatory  sufferings  are  thus  transferred  to  him.
St.  Paul  speaks  of  belief  in  Christ  as  involving  belief  in  the
Christian  creed  ▼;  Christ  has  warranted  the  ventures  which
faith  makes,  by  assuring  the  believer  that  He  has  guaranteed
the  truth  of  the  whole  object-matter  of  faith  ^.  Faith  then
is  the  starting-point  and  the  strength  of  the  new  life;  and
this  faith  must  be  pre-eminently  fiedth  in  Christ  x.    The  precious

4  ThiB  seems  to  be  the  force  of  ^h  with  irurrc^tv.  Col.  ii.  5  r  rh  (rr€p4mna
rris  tis  Xpiarhy  iritrTtus  ifi&v,  PM.  i.  29 ;  Bom.  x.  14.  The  preposition
irphs  indicates  the  direction  of  the  soul's  gaze,  without  necessarily  implying
the  idea  of  movement  in  that  direction.  In  Philem.  5 :  r^v  wia-riy,  ^r  fy^u
xphs  [fls  A.  C.  D.]  rbv  Kvpiou  'iricrovy.     Cf.  i  Thess.  i.  8.

»  I  Tim.  i.  16 :  in<rr€^€iv  iir  abr^  (sc.  Jesus  Christ)  ciy  C^^^  cd^utv,
nitrrc^tv  4x1  is  used  with  the  aoc.  of  trust  in  the  Eternal  Father.  Ct
Rom.  iv.  5,  24.

*  Gral.  iii.  20 :  Tdprts  yhp  viol  &€ov  4<rr€  9th  r^s  trttrrtots  ip  Xpior^  *Ii)<rov.
Eph.  i.  15  :  iiKo^as  r^v  ieai9*  v/jms  irUrriv  4v  r^  Kvpt^  ^Irjtrov.  a  l^m.  iii.  15.
The  Old  Testament  can  make  wise  unto  salvation,  8i3t  vl<rrt»s  rris  itfXpurr^
*lri<rov»     I  Tim.  iii,  13:  napfiria-lay  4p  iritrrti  ry  4v  Xpurr^  *lri<rov,

*  Bom.  iii.  22 :  9 A  irltrrtas  'Irjaov  Xpi<rrov,  Gal.  ii.  16.  This  genitiTe
seems  to  have  the  force  of  the  construct  state  in  Hebrew.

«  Tit.  iii.  5 ;  I  Cor.  x.  16.

^  I  Tim.  iii.  16 :  4iri(rre&&ri  4v  K6<rfjup.  Christ's  Person  is  here  said  to  have
been  believed  in  as  being  the  Centre  of  the  New  Dispensation.

w  2  Tim.  i.  1 2 :  otSa  yiip  f  Ttiria-reuKa^  koI  ireireurfiat  5r(  Jiupar6s  4<m  r^
irapad^iKTiv  fiov  (^vXiJ^ai  tls  4Keivriv  rifu  Tifi4pav,     Bom.  i.  1 6.

*  Gal.  ii.  16 :  i\tiitis  tls  Xpitrrhy  'Iriaovu  4Turr€6(rati€Vf  fya  9iKai»B&fi€if  U
irlffrecos  Xpicrrov,  So  Bom.  i.  1 7 :  SiKouoariyri  fhp  Seov  4v  ahr^  (Christ*!
Grospel)  oKOKdK&irrtrai  4k  irlcrtws  els  irlariv.  In  like  maAner  the  Chiisfcian
is  termed  6  4k  wlarcas  *lri<rov :  his  spiritual  life  dates  from,  and  dq)eDd8

[lbct.


in  St.  PduVs  account  of  Faith.  349


Blood  of  Christ,  not  only  as  representing  the  obedience  of  His
Will,  but  as  inseparably  joined  to  His  Majestic^  Person,  is  itself
an  object  in  which  faith  £bids  life  and  nutriment ;  the  baptized
Christian  is  bathed  in  it,  and  his  soul  dwells  on  its  pardoning
and  cleansing  power.  It  is  Christ's  Blood ;  and  Christ  is
the  great  Object  of  Christian  faith  y.  For  not  Christ's  teaching
alone,  not  even  His  redemptiye  work  alone,  but  emphatically
ajd  beyond  all  else  the  Person  of  the  Divine  Bedeemer  is  set
forth  by  St.  Paul  before  the  eyes  of  Christians,  as  being  That
upon  "Which  their  souls  are  more  especially  to  gaze  in  an
ecstasy  of  chastened  and  obedient  love  z.

No"w  if  our  Lord  had  been,  in  the  belief  of  His  Apostle,  only
a  created  being,  is  it  conceivable  that  He  should  have  been  thus
put  forward  as  having  a  right  well-nigh  to  engross  the  vision,
the  love,  the  energy  of  the  human  soull     For  St.  Paul  does
expressly,  as  well  as  by  implication,  assert  that  the  hope  *  and
the  love  ^  of  the  soul,  no  less  than  its  belief,  are  to  centre  in
Christ.     He  never  tells  us  that  a  bare  intellectual  realization  of
Christ's  existence  or  of  Christ's  work  will  avail  to  justify  the
sinner  before  God.      By  faith  the  soul  is  to  be  moving  ever
towards  Christ,  resting  ever  upon  Christ,  living  ever  in  Christ.
Christ  is  to  be  the  end,  the  support,  the  very  atmosphere  of  its
life  c.    But  how  is  such  a  relation  possible,  if  Christ  be  not  God  ?
Undoubtedly  faith  does  perceive  and  apprehend  the  existence  of
invisible  creatures  as  well  as  of  the  Invisible  God.    Certainly  the
angels  are  discerned  by  faith ;  the  Evil  One  himself  is  an  object
of  faith.     That  is  to  say,  the  supernatural  sense  of  the  soul  per-
ceives these  inhabitants  of  the  unseen  world  in  their  different
spheres  of  wretchedness  and  bliss.     But  angels  and  devils  are

tipon  his  faith.  Bom.  iii.  26.  So,  oX  4k  iriirrews  (Gal.  iii.  7) ;  and,  with
an  allusion  to  the  Church  as  the  true  home  of  faith,  oiKeious  rijs  vlffTews
(Gal.  vi.  10.)

y  Bom.  iii.  25 :  dih  ttjs  irlffreas  iv  r^  ahrov  tdfxari.  We  might  have  ex-
pected ivX ;  and  St.  Paul  would  doubtless  have  used  it,  if  he  had  meant  to
express  no  more  than  confidence  in  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  Blood.

■  Thus  it  is  that  our  Lord  is,  in  the  fullest  sense,  rris  trianms  apxnyhs
Kol  T€A.€<(»T^s,  Heh.  xii.  2,  where  apxnyhs  means  not  'leader*  but
*  author,'  as  Acts  iii.  15,  ^xvy^s  rris  fw^s,  Heb.  ii.  10,  itpxny^s  rrjs  a-wr-npias.
He  is  kpxny^^  ttjs  ir(<rT€«y,  as  'docens  quae  credenda  sunt  et  donans  ut
credamus,*  and  He  is  Himself  the  object-matter  of  the  grace  which  is  His
gift,  and  which  He  will  reward  hereafter  with  the  vision  of  Himself.

»  I  Tim.  i.  I ;  I  Cor.  xv.  19;  Col.  i.  27;  i  Thess.  i.  3.

^  I  Cor.  xvi.  22.
'  •  2  Tim.  iii.  12.     The  phrase  evtre^ws  Cnt^  iv  Xpurr^  *Iij(rou  could  be  used
of  no  created  being,  'extra  Christum  nulla  pietas.'
VI]


350  A  Divine  Christ  implied

not  objects  of  the  faith  which  saves  humanity  from  sin  and
death.  The  blessed  spirits  command  not  that  loyalty  of  heart
and  will  which  welcomes  Christ  to  the  Christian  soul.  The  soul
loves  them  as  His  ministers,  not  as  its  end.  No  creature  can
be  the  legitimate  satisfaction  of  a  spiritual  activity  so  complex
in  its  elements,  and  so  soul-absorbing  in  its  range,  as  is  ilie
faith  which  justifies.  Ko  created  form  can  thus  be  gazed  at,
loved,  obeyed  in  that  inmost  sanctuary  of  a  soul,  which  is  con-
secrated to  the  exclusive  glory  of  the  great  Creator.  If  Chnei
were  a  creature,  we  may  dare  to  affirm  that  St.  Paul's  account
of  faith  in  Christ  ought  to  have  been  very  different  from  that
which  we  have  been  considering.  I^  in  the  belief  of  St.  Paul,
Christ  is  only  a  creature,  then  it  must  be  said  that  St.  Paul,
by  his  doctrine  of  faith  in  Christ,  does  lead  men  to  live  for  the
creature  rather  than  for  the  Creator.  In  the  spiritual  teaching
of  St.  Paul,  Christ  eclipses  God  if  He  is  not  God ;  since  it  is
emphatically  Chriist's  Person,  as  warranting  the  preciousness  of
His  work,  Which  is  the  Object  of  justifying  faith.  Nor  can  it
be  shewn  that  the  intellect  and  heart  and  will  of  man  could
conspire  to  give  to  God  a  larger  tribute  of  spiritual  homage
than  they  are  required  by  the  Apostle  to  give  to  Christ.

(iS)  Again,  how  much  is  implied  as  to  the  Person  of  Christ
by  the  idea  of  Begeneration,  as  it  is  brought  before  us  in  the
writings  of  St.  Paul !  St.  Paul  uses  the  word  itself  only  once  ^.
But  the  idea  recurs  continually  throughout  his  writings ;  it  is
not  less  prominent  in  them  thaji  is  the  idea  of  faith.  This  idea
of  regeneration  is  sometimes  expressed  by  th»  image  of  a  change
of  vesture®.  The  regenerate  nature  has  put  off  the  old  man,
with  his  deeds  of  untruthfulness  and  lust,  and  has  put  on  the
new  or  ideal  man,  the  Perfect  Moral  Being,  the  Christ.  Some-
times the  idea  of  regeneration  is  expressed  more  closely  by  the
image  of  a  change  of  formf.  The  regenerate  man  has  been
metamorphosed.      He  is  made  to  correspond  to  the  Form  <^


^  iraXi77<rc<rla,  T^t.  ill.  5.  In  St.  Matt.  xiz.  28  the  woid  has  a  modi
wider  and  a  very  distinct  senae.

*  OoL  ill.  9,  10 :   iiTfidiwrdfieroi,  rhw  mXtuhw  HjfOfmwev leai  hf^-

i/btcyo<  rhw  viop,    Eph.  iv.  22-24:  &vo6^<r0cu rhf  toXoi^  6tf0ptn»

rhw  ^$€tp^fifWow  Korik  rhs  hriBviilas  rijs  darJenis'  ianof^cwrBai  9k  rf  vp^ittutn
rov  yo^  hyAWf  kcDl  MwrcurBai  r}fw  Koat^w  6w0ponrow  rltw  Kork  Sehw  $crurB4ifTM
4w  Huauoir^ini  koI  dmirtirt  riis  &X3|(Ma$.  GaL  iii.  27 :  Xpurrhw  4re9^aff^
Rom.  ziii.  14.

'  Bom.  xii.  2 :  ficrofiofHpowrBt  t$  itwoKour^o'ei  rod  wohs  ifuiv.  Ibid.  viii.
29 :  06s  irpo4ypm,  mi  vpotipKrc  4rvfifi6p^ovs  rip  €uc6p9S  rov  Tiov  avrov,  Gt
CoL  iii.  10 :  jcctr*  €uc6wa  rov  Krunofros  ainiw,

[lkct.


in  St.  PauVs  account  of  Regeneration.      351

Christ  ;   he  is  renewed  in  the  Image  of  Christ ;  his  moral  being
is  reconstructed.     Sometimes,  however,  and  most  emphatically,
regeneration  is  paralleled  with  natural  birth.     Eegeneration  is
a  second  birth.     The  regenerate  man  is  a  new  creature  e ;  he  is
a  work  of  €k)d^;  he  has  been  created  according  to  a  Divine
standard  i.     But— and  this  is  of  capital  importance—he  is  also
said  to  be  created  in  Christ  Jesus  i ;  Christ  is  the  sphere  of  the
new  creation^.     The  instrument  of  regeneration  on  Christ's
part,  according  to  St.  Paul,  is  the  sacrament  of  baptism  \  to
which  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  its  efficacy,  and  which,  in  the  case  of
an  adnlt  recipient,  must  be  welcomed  to  the  soul  by  repentance
and  faith.      Eegeneration  thus  implies  a  double  process,  one
destructive,  the  other  constructive ;  by  it  the  old  life  is  killed,
and  the  new  life  forthwith  bursts  into  existence.     This  double
process  is   effected  by  the   sacramental   incorporation   of  the
baptized,  first  with  Christ  crucified  and  dead  11^,  and  then  with
Christ  rising  from  the  dead  to  life ;  although  the  language  of
the  Apostle  distinctly  intimates  that  a  continued  share  in  the
resurrection-life  depends  upon  the  co-operation  of  the  will  of
the  Christian^.     But  the  moral  realities  of  the  Christian  life,
to  which  the  grace  of  baptism  originally  introduces  the  Chris-
tian, correspond  with,  and  are  effects  o^  Christ's  Death  and
Besurrection.    Eegarded  historically,  these  events  belong  to  the
irrevocable  past.    But  for  us  Christians  the  Crucifixion  and  the
Besurrection  are  not  merely  past  events  of  history ;   they  are
energizing  facts  from  which  no  lapse  of  centuries  can  sever  us ;
they  are  perpetuated  to  the  end  of  time  within  the  kingdom
of  the  Bedemptiono.      The  Christian  is,  to  the  end  of  time,

«  Gal.  vi.  15 :  kom^  Kritrts.

^  Eph.  ii.  10 :  ainov  ydp  [so.  BfoS]  ifffitw  wolrifia,

*  Ibid.  iv.  24 :  rhv  xar^  Schv  Kritrdivra,

J  Ibid.  ii.  10 :  KriaQivrts  iv  Xpurr^  *l7i<rov  hr\  Kpyots  kyoBots,

^  2  Cor.  V.  17 ;  and  perhaps  i  Cor.  viii.  6,  where  vfieTs  means  'we  re-
generate Christians.'

^  Tit.  iii.  5 :  taacrev  vf^s,  9ih  Xourpov  Td\iyy€y€<jias  Koi  hfOKcuvJ^ttts
Hpfifuiros  *Aylov,  GaL  iii.  27 :  Haoi  yhp  tls  Xpi(rr\ty  i$airriff$Tire,  Xpurrhv
iytZiffcur$€.     I  Cor.  xii.  13.

™  Kom.  vi.  3,  4 :  fj  kyvoclrt  %ri  Saot  i$airrl(r0rifJL€v  €is  Xpurrhv  *Iij<row,  «lj
rhv  Bdvarov  canov  ifiaTrlffOrifiey ;  avyerdtprjfxcy  oZv  din^  9(^  roS  fiam-lfffiwros
us  rhy  O^arow.

*  Ibid.  vers.  4,  5 :  tua  Sxnrep  ^^pOri  Xpurrhs  4k  viKpS>v  Zih  rris  96^ris  rod
Tlqrobsy  oSrw  kc^  rjfitts  iv  Kaiv6rriri  Cf^rjs  Teptfrar'fiffwixev,  El  yiip  (r6fipvroi
yryovctfiev  r^  S/jLoidifiari  rod  Oavdrov  ainoVf  &\\h,  icol  rrjs  ^vourrdaeus  i<r6fit$cL

*  Benss, Th^L Chrdt. ii.  140 :  'La  r^g^n^ration en  tant qu*elle comprend
088  deux  ^^ments  d*iine  mort  et  d'une  renaissance,  est  tout  naturellement


352  A  Divine  Christ  implied

crucified  with  Christ  p  ;  he  dies  with  Christ  <i ;  he  is  buried  with
Christ  ^ ;  he  is  quickened  together  with  Christ  • ;  he  rises  with
Christ  * ;  he  lives  with  Christ  ^.  He  is  not  merely  made  to  dt
together  in  heavenly  places  as  being  in  Christ  Jesus  ▼,  he  is  a
memher  of  His  Body,  as  out  of  His  Flesh  and  out  of  His  Bones'.
And  of  this  profound  incorporation  baptism  is  the  original
instrument.  The  very  form  of  the  sacrament  of  regeneratiwi,
as  it  was  administered  to  the  adult  multitudes  who  in  the  early
days  of  the  Church  pressed  for  admittance  into  her  communion,
harmonizes  with  the  spiritual  results  which  it  effects.     Ab  the


miBe  en  rapport  direct  aveo  la  motrt  et  la  r^urrection  de  J^sns-Cbiist.  Ce
rapport  a  ^t^  compris  par  quelques  th^logiens  c<nmiie  si  le  £ut  histonqoe
^tait  un  symbole  du  fait  psychologique,  pour  lequel  il  anrait  foomi  la  ter-
minologie  figur^e.  Mais  assur^ment  la  pens^  de  Tapdtre  va  au  deld  <f  «•
simple  rapprochement  ideal  et  none  propose  lefait  d^une  relation  ohjeeiiM
et  rSelle,  Nous  nous  trouvons  encore  une  fois  sur  le  terrain  du  mysticisme
^vangelique ;  il  est  question  tr^s-positivement  cTune  identification  a/oee  la
mort  et  la  vie  du  Sauceur,  et  il  »'y  a  id  de  figuree  que  rexprettion,
puisqu'au  fond  il  ne  s'agit  pas  de  Texistence  physique  du  Chretien.  Ooi*
d*ap]^  Paul,  lo  croyant  meurt  avec  Christ,  pour  ressusciter  avec  Ini;  ^
cette  phrase  ne  s'explique  pas  par  oe  que  nous  pourrions  appeler  un  jen
de  mots  spirituel,  ou  un  rapprochement  ixig^nieux ;  elle  est  VappUct^iou
du  grand  principe  de  Vunion  personnelle,  ^aprhs  lequel  F existence  propn
de  Vhomme  cesse  riellement,  pour  se  confowire  avec  celle  du  Cknst,  qui
r^p^te,  pour  ainsi  dire,  la  sienne,  avec  ses  deux  fait£f  capitauz,  dans  chaqoe
individuality  se  donnant  k  lui.*    O  si  sic  omnia  1

9  Bom.  vl  6 :  6  iroXcubf  rjfiav  HyOpcaxos  cvrearavp^dri.  Gal.  ii.  20 :  Xf  urrf
avy€aTaipa»fjuu,

4  2  Tun,  ii  II :  ovvcareSdyofiev.    Bom.  vi.  8 :  awtOdvofitv  ahw  Xpurr^
'  Bom.  vi.  4:   avuerJufnifiev  oZv  aur^  Ztit  rod  fiqarriffiwrros*     CoL  ii  IS**
avvrapivrts  ovr^  iv  r^  fiairrlffiiaru

*  Eph.  ii  5:  (rvy€Cuoirolri<r€  r^  Xpurr^,  Col.  ii.  15:  <rwc^fl»<nron}(re  a^
cun-^.    The  Aorists  point  to  a  defimte  event  in  the  past.

*  Eph.  ii.  6 :  avvlrytipe  [r^  Xpurr^,  There  is  no  sufficient  reas(m  fc
understanding  Eph.  ii  5,  6  of  the  ftiture  resurrection  alone ;  although  in
that  passage  the  idea  of  the  future  resurrection  (cf.  ver.  7)  is  probably
combined  with  that  of  the  spiritual  resurrection  of  souls  in  the  kingdom
of  grace.  We  have  been  raised  with  Christ  here,  that  we  may  live  vHh
Him  hereafter.  Col.  ii  1 2 :  iv  $  koL  [sc.  h  Xpurr$'\  <rvvrty4pOifr€  81^  t^
wiarem  r^s  ivfpycias  rod  Bead.     Ibid.  iii.  I.

■  Bom.  vi.  8 :  avCfio'ofity  avr^,  2  Tun.  ii  II :  el  yhp  avvareOdyofuw,  wi
cv(fi(rofi€w.     I  Thess.  v.  10.

^  Eph.  ii  6 :  avvcKddurev  4w  rots  i-woupaylois  iy  Xpior^  *Ii}(rov.

^  Ibid.  V.  30 :  fi4\ri  i<rfi€v  rod  at&fiaros  ouroS,  ix  rrjs  aapxhs  axnov,  «l
Ik  r&v  oirreay  canov.  Although  omitted  by  K.  A.  B.,  this  passage  is  re-
tuned  by  K«.  D.  E.  F.  G.  L.  P.  and  versa,  except  Copt.  Ct  Meyer,  App.
Crit.  in  loc.  Cfl  Hooker,  Ecd.  Poi  v.  56,  7:  'We  are  of  Him  and
in  Him,  even  as  though  our  yeiy  flesh  and  bonea  should  be  made  ooa*
tinuate  with  His.*

[lsct.


in  St.  PauVs  account  of  Regeneration.     353


neophyte  is  plunged  beneath  the  waters,  so  the  old  nature  is

slain  and  buried  with  Christ.    As  Christ,  crucified  and  entombed,

rises  with  resistless  might  from  the  grave  which  can  no  longer

liold  Him,  so,  to  the  eye  of  faith,  the  Christian  is  raised  from

tlie  bath  of  regeneration  radiant  with  a  new  and  supernatural

life.     His  gaze  is  to  be  fixed  henceforth  on  Christ,  Who,  being

raised  from  the  dead,  dieth  no  more.    The  Christian  indeed  may

fail  to  persevere  ;  he  may  fall  from  this  high  grace  in  which  he

stands.     But  he  need  not  do  so ;  and  meanwhile  he  is  bound  to

account  himself  as  *  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God

through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord^.'

This  regenerate  or  Christian  life  is  further  described  by  two
most  remarkabje  expressions.      The  Apostle  speaks  sometimes
of  Christians  being  in  Christy;  sometimes  of  Christ  being  in
Christians  2.     The  most  recent  criticism  refuses  to  sanction  the
efforts  which  in  former  years  have  been  made  to  empty  these
expressions  of  their  literal  and  natural  force.     Hooker  has  ob-
served that  it  is  '  too  cold  an  interpretation  whereby  some  men
expound  being  in  Christ  to  import  nothing  else  but  only  that
the  selfsame  nature  which  maketh  us  to  be  men  is  in  Him,  and
maketh  Him  man  as  we  are.     For  what  man  in  the  world  ia
there  which  hath  not  so  far  forth  communion  with  Jesus  Christ^?'
Nor  will  it  suffice  to  say  that  in  such  phrases  as  are  here  in
question,  '  Christ '  means  only  the  moral  teaching  of  Christ,  and
that  a  Christian  is  *  in  Christ  *  by  the  force  of  a  mere  intellectual
loyalty  to  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.     The  expression  is  too
energetic  to  admit  of  this  treatment ;  it  resists  any  but  a  literal
explanation.     By  a  vigorous  metaphor  an  enthusiastic  Platonist
might  perhaps  speak  of  his  *  living  in'  Plato,  meaning  thereby
that  his  whole  intellectual  activity  is  absorbed  by  and  occupied
with  the  recorded  thought  of  that  philosopher.     But  he  would
scarcely  say  that  he  is  *  in '  Plato ;  since  such  a  phrase  would
imply  not  merely  an  intellectual  communion  with  Plato's  mind,
but  an  objective  inherence  in  his  nature  or  being.     Still  less


*  Bom.  VI.  TO,  II :  %  yhp  hiriOavt  [so.  6  X/ittrrbs],  t5  aiJ.apr[<f,  hridavev
€h(u  ry  aiMpricf,  (uvras  9^  rQ  Oe^  iv  Xptar^  'Irfffov  r^  KvpU^  TifjLwy,     C6L

y  Eom.  viii.  I ;  xii.  5 ;  xvi.  7,  11 ;  i  Cor.  i.  2,  30 ;  xv.  22 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  17 ;
y.  17;  xii.  19;  Gal.  i.  22;  iii.  26,  a8;  Eph.  i.  i,  3,  10;  ii.  10;  iii.  6;  Phil»
i.  I ;  I  Thess.  ii.  14 ;  iv.  16.    Comp.  St.  John  xv.  4,  5.

■  Rom.  viii.  10;  Gal.  ii.  20;  Eph.  iii.  17;  2  Cor.  xiii.  5 ;  Col.  i.  27.

»  Hooker,  EccL  Pol.  v.  56,  7.
Tl]     .  A  a


354     Fcdih  in  a  Divine  Christ  the  motive  of

possible  would  it  be  to  adopt  the  alternative  phrase,  and  say  thai
Plato  is  *  in '  the  student  of  Plato.  When  St.  Paul  uses  these
expressions  to  denote  a  Christian's  relation  to  Christ,  he  plainly
is  not  recording  any  subjective  impression  of  the  human  mind ;
he  is  pointing  to  an  objective  and  independent  fSact,  strictly  pecu-
liar to  the  kingdom  of  the  Incarnation.  The  regenerate  Chris-
tian is  as  really  *  in'  Christ,  as  every  member  of  the  human  family
is  *in'  our  first  parent  Adaml>.  Christ  is  indeed  much  more
to  the  Christian  than  is  Adam  to  his  descendants ;  Christ  is  the
sphere  in  which  the  Christian  moves  and  breathes ;  but  Christ  is
also  the  Parent  of  that  new  nature  in  which  he  shares :  Christ  is
the  Head  of  a  Body,  whereof  he  is  really  a  member ;  nay,  the  Body
of  which  he  is  a  member  is  itself  Christ «.  From  Christ,  risen,
ascended,  glorified,  as  from  an  exhaustless  storehouse,  there  flow
powers  of  unspeakable  virtue  d;  and  in  this  life-stream  the  be-
lieving and  baptized  Christian  is  bathed  and  lives.  And  con-
versely, Christ  lives  in  the  Christian ;  the  soul  and  body  of  the
Christian  are  the  temple  of  Christ ;  the  Christian  is  well  assured
that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  him,  except  he  be  reprobate  o.

My  brethren,  what  becomes  of  this  language  if  Jesus  Christ  be
not  truly  God  %  No  conceivable  relationship  to  a  human  teacher
or  to  a  created  being  will  sustain  its  weight.  If  it  be  not  a  mass
of  crude,  vapid,  worthless,  misleading  metaphor,  it  indicates  rek-
tionship  with  One  Who  is  altogether  higher  than  the  sons  of  men,
altogether  higher  than  the  highest  archangel.  It  is  true  that  we
are  in  Him,  by  being  joined  to  His  Human  Nature ;  but  what  is  it
which  thus  makes  His  Human  Nature  a  re-creative  and  world-
embracing  power  1  Why  is  it  that  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  there
is  a  new  creation  ^  of  his  moral  being  \  And  how  can  Christ
really  be  in  us,  if  He  is  not  one  with  the  Searcher  of  hearts)
Surely  He  only  Who  made  the  soul  can  thus  sound  its  depths,
and  dwell  within  it,  and  renew  its  powers,  and  enlarge  its  capa-
cities. If  Christ  b^  not  Qod,  must  not  this  renewal  of  man's
nature  rest  only  on  an  empty  fiction,  must  not  this  regeneration
of  man's  soul  be  but  the  ecstasy  of  an  enthusiastic  Reamer )

(y)  It  would,  then,  be  a  considerable  error  to  recognize  the
doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Divinity  only  in  those  passages  of  St.  Paul's
writings  which  distinctly  assert  it.   The  indirect  evidence  of  the

^  See  Olshausen  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Bomans,  §  %  'Parallel  betweeo
Adam  and  Christ/  chap.  v.  ia-2i|  Introductory  Eemarks.
«  I  Cor.  xii.  12.

*  Eph.  iv.  7 :  ^5(^01}  ^  x^*^  Kar\  rb  fiirpov  rrjs  Hwpfos  rod  Xpttrrov.

•  a  Cor.  xiii.  5.  '  Ibid.  v.  17  :  ^ris  iv  Xpiffrf,  Kotvii  KrUrts.

[lbci.


St  Paul's  opposition  to  the  Judaizers.     355

Apostle's  hold  upon  the  doctrine  is  much  wider  and  deeper  than
to  admit  of  heing  exhibited  in  a  given  number  of  isolated  texts ;
since  the  doctrine  colours,  underlies,  interpenetrates  the  most
cliaracteristic  features  of  his  thought  and  teaching.     The  proof
of  this  might  be  extended  almost  indefinitely;  but  let  it  suffice
to  observe  that  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Divinity  is  the  key  to
the  greatest  polemical  struggle  of  the  Apostle's  whole  life.     Of
themselves,  neither  the  importation  of  Jewish  ceremonial,  nor
even  the  disposition  to  sacrifice  the  Catholicity  of  the  Church  to
a  petty  nationalism,  would  fully  account  for  the  Apostle's  attitude
of  earnest  hostility  to  those  Judaizing  teachers  whom  he  encoun-
tered at  Corinth,  in  Galatia,  and,  in  a  somewhat  altered  guise,  at
Colossse  and  at  Ephesus.     For,  in  point  of  fact,  the  Judaizers
implied  more  than  they  expressly  asserted.     They  impHed  that
Christ's  religion  was  not  of  so  perfect  and  absolute  a  character
as  to  make  additions  to  it  an  irreverent  impertinence.     They
implied  that  they  did  its  Founder  no  capital  wrong,  when,  instead
of  recognizing  Him  as  the  Saviour  of  the  whole  human  family,
they  practicaUy  purposed  to  limit  the  applicabiUty  of  His  work
to  a  narrow  section  of  it.     They  implied  that  there  was  nothing
in  His  majestic  Person  which  should  have  forbidden  them  to
range  those  dead  rites  of  the  old  law,  which  He  had  fulfilled
and  abolished,  side  by  side  with  the  Cross  and  Sacraments  of
Bedemption.     The  keen  instinct  of  the  Apostle   detected  the
wound  thus  indirectly  but  surely  aimed  at  his  Master's  honour ;
and   St.  Paul's  love  for  Christ  was  the  exact  measure  of  his
determined  opposition  to  the  influence  and  action  of  the  Juda-
izers.    If  the  Judaizers  had  believed  in  the  true  Divinity  of
Jesus,  they  could  not  have  returned  to  the  *  weak  and  beggarly
elements'  of  systems  which  had  paled  and  died  away  before  the
glories  of  His  Advent.     If  they  had  fully  and  clearly  beheved
Jesus  to  be  God,  that  faith  must  have  opposed  an  insurmountable
barrier  to  these  reactionary  yearnings  for  *  the  things  which  had
been  destroyed.'     Their  attempt  to  re-introduce  circumcision
into  the  Galatian  Churches  was  a  reflection  upon  the  glory  of
Christ's  finished  work,  and  so,  ultimately,  upon  the  transcendent
dignity  of  His  Person.      They  knew  not,  or  heeded  not,  that
they  were  members  of  a  kingdom  in  which  circumcision  and
lUicircumcision  were  insignificant  accidents,  and  in  which  the
new  creation  of  the  soul  by  the  atoning  and  sacramental  gracei
of  the  Incarnate  Saviour  was  the  one  matter  of  vital  import  8.

•  Gral.  vi.  15 :  hf  yhp  Xpt<rr^  *lri(rov  otfr*  Ttpirofifi  ri  i<rxOei  oiht  itKpo$v<rria,
i^Xh  Koofii  Krlffis,    Here  regeneration  ia  viewed  from  withouti  on  the  side

Ti]  A  a  a


356  Contrasts  between  Apostles  enhance  the  force

Although  they  had  not  denied  Christ  in  terms,  yet  He  had
become  of  no  effect  to  them ;  and  the  Apostle  sorrowfally  pro-
claimed that  as  many  of  them  as  were  justifiied  by  the  law  had
fallen  from  grace  \  They  had  practically  rejected  the  plenary
efficacy  of  Christ's  saving  and  re-creating  power;  they  had
implicitly  denied  that  He  was  a  greater  than  Moses.  Their
work  did  not  at  once  perish  from  among  men.  For  the  Juda-
izing  movement  bequeathed  to  the  Churches  of  the  Lesser  Asia
many  of  those  theological  influences  which  were  felt  by  later
ages  in  the  traditional  temper  of  the  School  of  Antioch  ;  while
outside  the  Church  it  was  echoed  in  the  long  series  of  Humani-
tarian mutterings  which  culminated  in  the  blasphemies  of  Paulus
of  Samosata.  It  must  thus  be  admitted  to  figure  conspicuously
in  the  intellectual  ancestry  of  the  Arian  heresy;  and  St.  Paul,
not  less  than  St.  John,  is  an  apostolical  representative  of  the
cause  and  work  of  Athanasius.

Although  the  foregoing  observations  may  have  taxed  your
indulgent  patience  somewhat  severely,  they  furnish  at  best  only
a  sample  of  the  evidence  which  might  be  brought  to  illustrate
the  point  before  us.  But  enough  will  have  been  urged  to  dispose
of  the  suspicion,  that  St.  John's  belief  and  teaching  respecting
the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  was  only  an  intellectual  or  spiritual
peculiarity  of  that  Apostle.  If  the  form  and  clothing  of  St.  John's
doctrine  was  peculiar  to  him,  its  substance  was  common  to  aU
the  Apostles  of  Jesus  Christ.  Just  as  the  titles  and  position
assigned  to  Jesus  Christ  in  the  narrative  of  the  fourth  Grospel
are  really  in  harmony  with  the  powers  which  He  wields  and  with
the  rights  which  He  claims  in  the  first  three  Evangelists,  so
St.  John's  doctrine  of  the  Eternal  Word  is  substantially  one  with
St.  Paul's  doctrine  of  the  '  Image  of  the  Father,'  and  with  his
whole  description  of  the  redemptive  work  of  Christ,  and  of  the
attitude  of  the  Christian  soul  towards  Him.  St.  John's  fuller
statements  do  but  supply  the  key  to  the  fervid  doxologies  of
St.  Peter,  and  to  the  profound  and  significant  reverence  of
St.  James.  Indeed  from  these  Apostles  he  might  seem  to  differ
in  point  of  intellectual  temper  and  method,  even  less  than  he
differs  from  St.  Paul.    Between  St.  Paul  and  St.  John  how  great

of  the  Divine  Energy  Which  causes  it ;  in  Gal.  v.  6,  where  it  is  equally
contrasted  with  legal  circumcision,  it  is  viewed  from  within  the  soul,  ««
consisting  essentially  in  irlffris  9i  iLydmis  ivepyovfiimj,  Cf.  Lect.  VI.  p.  387.
^  Gal.  V.  4 :  KarripyffdriTt  ^irh  rov  XpitrroVf  otrives  iv  v6fi^  SucaiovaOt,  tijj
X^^'^os  i^€ir4(raT€,  Cf.  Ibid.  v.  a :  iiu^  xepirefivriaOe,  Xpiarhs  Ifuis  ovS^
utpeKiiaei.

[lect.


of  their  common  witHess  to  Christ* s  Divinity.  357


is  the  contrast  I  In  St.  Paul  we  are  struck  mainly  by  the  wealth
of  sacred  thought ;  in  St.  John  by  its  simplicity.     St.  Paul  is
versatile  and  discursive;    St.  John  seems  to  be  fbced  in  the
entranced  bliss  of  a  perpetual  intuition.  St.  Paul  is  a  dialectician
who  teaches  us  by  reasoning;   he  refutes,  he  infers,  he  makes
quotations,  he  deduces  corollaries,  he  draws  out  his  demonstra-
^ons  more  or  less  at  length,  he  presses  impetuously  forward,
reverently  bending  before  the  great  dogmas  which  he  proclaims,
yet  moving  in  an  atmosphere  of  perpetual  conflict.     St.  John
speaks  as  if  the  highest  life  of  his  soul  was  the  wondering  study
of  one  vast  Apocalypse :  he  teaches,  not  by  demonstrating  truths,
but  by  exhibiting  his  contemplations ;  he  states  what  he  sees ;
he  repeats  the  statement,  he  inverts  it,  he  repeats  it  once  more ;
he  teaches,  as  it  seems,  by  the  exquisite  tact  of  scarcely  disguised
but  uninterrupted  repetition,  which  is  justified  because  there  is
no  higher  attainable  truth  than  the  truth  which  he  repeats.
St.  Paul  begins  with  anthropology,  St.  John  with  theology;
St.  Paul  often  appeals  to  theology  that  he  may  enforce  'truths
of  morals ;  St.  John  finds  the  highest  moral  truth  in  his  most
abstract  theological  contemplations.    St.  Paul  usually  describes
the  redemptive  gift  of  Christ  as  Righteousness,  as  the  restoration
of  man  to  the  true  law  of  his  being ;  St.  John  more  naturally
contemplates  it  as  Life,  as  the  outflow  of  the  Self-existent  Being
of  God  into  His  creatures  through  the  quickening  Humanity  of
the  Incarnate  Word.     In  St.  Paul  the  ethical  element  predomi-
nates, in  St.  John  the  mystical.    St.  John  is  more  especially  the
spiritual  ancestor  of  such  fathers  as  was  St.  Gregory  Nazianzen ;
St.  Paul  of  such  as  St.  Augustine.     It  may  be  said,  with  some
reservations,  that  St.  Paul  is  the  typical  Apostle  of  Western,  as
St.  John  is  of  Eastern  Christendom ;  that  the  contemplative  side
of  the  Christian  life  finds  its  pattern  in  St.  John,  the  active  in
St.  Paul.   Yet  striking  as  are  such  differences  of  spiritual  method
and  temper,  they  are  found  in  these  great  apostles  side  by  side
with  an  entire  unity  of  teaching  as  to  the  Person  of  our  Lord.
'  Certainly,*  says  Neander,  with  deep  truth,  *it  could  be  nothing
merely  accidental  which  induced  men  so  differently  constituted
and  trained  as  Paul  and  John  to  connect  such  an  idea  [as  that
of  Divinity]  with  the  doctrine  of  the  Person  of  Christ.     This
must  have  been  the  result  of  a  higher  necessity,  which  is  founded
in  the  nature  of  Christianity,  in  the  power  of  the  impression
which  the  life  of  Christ  had  made  on  the  lives  of  men,  in  the
reciprocal  relation  between  the  appearance  of  Christ  and  the
archetype  that  presents  itself  as  an  inward  revelation  of  God  in

VI]


358  Faith  in  a  Divine  Christy

the  depths  of  the  higher  self-consciousnesB.  And  all  this  lias
found  its  point  of  connection  and  its  verification  in  the  maimer
in  which  Christ,  the  Unerring  Witness,  expressed  His  conscious-
ness of  the  indwelling  of  the  Divine  Essence  with  Him  i.'

This  is  indeed  the  only  reasonable  explanation  of  the  re-
markable fact  before  us,  namely,  that  the  persecutor  who  was
converted  on  the  road  to  Damascus,  and  the  disciple  who  bad
laid  on  Christ's  breast  at  supper,  were  absolutely  agreed  as  to
the  Divine  prerogatives  of  their  Master.  And  if  we,  my  bre-
thren, have  ever  been  tempted  to  think  that  a  creed  like  that
of  St.  John  befits  only  a  contemplative  or  mystic  life,  alien  to
the  habits  of  our  age  and  to  the  necessities  of  our  position,  let
us  turn  our  eyes  towards  the  great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  It
would  be  difficult,  even  in  this  busy  day,  to  rival  St.  Paul's
activity ;  and  human  weakness  might  well  shrink  from  sharing
his  burden  of  pain  and  care.  It  is  given  to  few  to  live  *in
joumeyings  often,  in  perils  of  waters,  in  perils  of  robbers,  in
perils  from  a  man's  own  countrymen,  in  perils  by  the  heathen,
in  perils  in  the  city,  in  perils  in  the  wilderness,  in  perils  in  the
sea,  in  perils  among  false  brethren^,'  for  a  purely  unselfish  object.
Few  rise  to  the  heroic  scope  of  a  life  passed  '  in  weariness  and
painfulness,  in  watchings  often,  in  hunger  and  thirst,  in  fastings
often,  in  cold  and  nakedness  1.'  But  this  is  certain, — ^that  at
many  lower  levels  of  moral  existence,  there  is  much  to  be  done,
and  much,  sooner  or  later,  to  be  endured,  which  we  can  only  do
manfully  and  bear  meekly  in  the  strength  of  the  Apostle's  great
conviction.     If  St.  Paul  can  suffer  the  loss  of  all  things  that  at

1  Planting  and  Training,  i.  505,  Bolm*8  edit.  Neander  adds:  'Had  tba
doctrine  of  Christ's  Eternal  Sonship,  when  it  was  first  promulgated  by
Paul,  been  altogether  new  and  peculiar  to  himself,  it  must  have  excited
much  opposition  as  contradicting  the  common  monotheistic  belief  of  the
Jews,  even  among  the  apostleSy  to  whom,  from  their  previous  habits,  such
a  speculative  theosophic  element  must  have  remained  unknown,  unless  it
had  found  a  point  of  connexion  in  the  lessons  received  from  Christ,  and
in  their  Christian  knowledge.*  Of  such  opposition,  direct  and  avowed,
there  is  no  trace.  CI  Meyer.  Ev.  Joh.  p.  49.  '  Die  Materie  der  Lehie  war
bei  Johannes,  ehe  er  in  jener  gnostischen  Form  die  entsprechende  Da^
stellnng  fand,  das  Fundlament  seines  Glaubens  und  der  Inhalt  sdner
Erkenntniss,  wie  sie  bei  Paulus  und  bei  alien  anderen  Aposteln  es  war,
welche  nicht,  (ausser  dem  Yerf.  des  Hebraerbriefs)  von  der  Logos-Speca*
lation  beruhrt  wurden ;  diese  Materie  der  Lehre  ist  schlechthin  auf  Chris-
tum selbst  zuriickzufUhren,  dessen  Erofihungen  an  seine  JUnger  und  dessen
unmittelbarer  Eindruck  auf  diese  (Joh.  i.  14)  ihnen  den  Stoff  gab,  welcber
sich  spater  die  versohiedenen  Formen  der  Darstellung  dienstb^  machte.*

*  a  Cor.  xi.  25,  a6.       *  Ibid,  ver,  27.   Cf.  Ibid,  vi,  4-10,  and  xi.  5  sqq.

[lect.


\-


the  strength  of  Apostles.  359

the  last  lie  may  win  Christ,  if  he  can  do  all  things  through
One  That  strengtheneth  him,  it  is  hecause  he  is  consciously
reaching  towards  or  leaning  on  the  arm  of  a  Saviour  Who  is  Ood
as  well  as  Man.  And  if  we,  looking  onward  to  the  unknown
changes  and  chances  of  this  mortal  life,  and  heyond  them,  to
death,  would  fain  live  and  die  like  Christians,  we  too  must  see
to  it  that  we  fold  to  our  inmost  souls  that  central  truth  of  the
Christian  creed  which  was  the  strength  and  joy  of  the  first
servants  of  Christ.  We  too  must  helieve  and  confess,  that  that
Human  Friend  Whose  words  enlighten  us.  Whose  Blood  cleanses
us.  Whose  Sacraments  have  renewed  and  even  now  sustain  us,
is  in  the  truth  of  His  Higher  Nature  none  other  and  no  less
than  the  Unerring,  the  All-merciful,  the  Almighty  Ood.


n]


LECTURE  Vn-


THE    HOMOOUSION.


Molding  fast  the  faithful  word  an  he  hath  been  taught,  that  he  mag  he
able  by  eound  doctrine  both  to  exhort  and  to  convince  the  gaintayert.

TlT.i.  9.


A  GBEAT  doctrine  whicli  claims  to  rule  the  thought  of  men  and
to  leave  its  mark  upon  their  conduct  must  of  necessity  enconnter
some  rude  and  probing  tests  of  its  vitality  as  it  floats  along  the
stream  of  time.  The  common  speech  of  mankind,  embodying
the  verdict  of  man's  experience,  lays  more  emphasis  upon  the
*  ravages '  than  upon  the  conservative  or  constructive  effects  of
time : —

^Tempus  edax  rermn,  tnqne  invidiosa  vetnstas.
Omnia  destruitis,  vitiataque  dentibus  mm
Paulatim  lenta  oonsmnitis  omnia  morte  *.*

The  destructive  force  of  time  is  no  less  observable  in  the' sphere
of  human  ideas  and  doctrines  than  in  that  of  material  and  social
facts.  Time  exposes  every  doctrine  or  speculation  to  the  action
of  causes  which,  if  more  disguised  and  subtle,  are  not  less  cer-
tainly at  work  than  those  which  threaten  political  systems  or
works  of  art  with  decay  and  dissolution.

A  doctrine  is  liable  to  suffer  with  the  lapse  of  time  from
without  and  from  within.  From  within  it  is  exposed  to  the  risk
of  decomposition  by  analysis.  When  once  it  has  been  launched
into  the  ocean  of  our  public  intellectual  life,  it  is  forthwith  sub-
jected, as  a  condition  of  its  acceptance,  to  the  play  and  scmtmy
of  many  and  variously  constituted  minds.  The  several  ingre-
dients which  constitute  it,  the  primary  truths  to  which  it  appeals

•  Ovid,  Met  zv.  234.  ">

[lect.


The  vitality  of  a  doctrine^  how  tested.      361

and  npon  which  it  ultimately  reposes,  are  separately  and  con-
stantly examined.     It  may  be  that  certain  elements  of  the  doc-
trine, essential  to  its  perfect  representation,  are  rejected  altogether.
It  may  be  that  all  its  constitutive  elements  are  retained,  while  the
proportions  in  which  they  are  blended  are  radically  altered.    It
may  be  that  an  impulse  is  given  to  some  active  intellectual  sol-
vent, hitherto  dormant,  but  from  the  first  latent  in  the  constitu-
tion of  the  doctrine,  and  likely,  according  to  any  ordinary  human
estimate,  to  break  it  up.     Or  some  point  of  attraction  between
the  doctrine  and  a  threatening  philosophy  outside  it  is  discovered
and  insisted  on;  and  the  philosophy,  in  a  patronizing  spirit,
proposes  to  meet  the  doctrine  half  way,  and  to  ratify  one  haK  of
it  if  the  other  may  be  abandoned.    Or  some  subtle  intellectual
poison  is  injected  into  the  doctrine ;  and  while  men  imagine  that
they  are  only  adapting  it  to  the  temper  of  an  age,  or  to  the
demands  of  a  line  of  thought,  its  glow  and  beauty  are  forfeited,
or  its  very  life  and  heart  are  eaten  out.     Then  for  awhile  its
shell  or  its  skeleton  lies  neglected  by  the  side  of  the  great  highway
of  thought ;  until  at  length  some  one  of  those  adventurers  who
in  every  age  devote  themselves  to  the  manufacture  of  eclectic
systems  assigns  to  the  intellectual  fossil  a  place  of  honour  in  his
private  museum,  side  by  side  with  the  remains  of  other  extinct
theories,  to  which  in  its  lifetime  it  was  fundamentally  opposed.

But  even  if  a  doctrine  be  sufficiently  compact  and  strong  to
resist  internal  decomposition,  it  must  in  any  case  be  prepared  to
encotmter  the  shock  of  opposition  from  without.  To  no  doctrine
is  it  given  to  be  absolutely  inoffensive  ;  and  therefore  sooner  or
later  every  doctrine  is  opposed.  Every  doctrine,  however  frail
and  insignificant  it  may  be,  provokes  attacks  by  the  mere  fact  of
its  existence.  It  challenges  a  certain  measure  of  attention  which
is  coveted  by  some  other  doctrines.  It  takes  up  a  certain  amount
of  mental  room  which  other  doctrines  would  fain  appropriate,  if
indeed  it  does  not  jostle  inconveniently  against  them,  or  contra-
dict them  outright.  Thus  it  rouses  against  itself  resentment,  or,
at  any  rate,  opposition ;  and  this  opposition  is  reinforced  by  an
appetite  which  is  shared  in  by  those  who  hold  the  opposed  doc-
trine no  less  than  by  those  who  oppose  it.  The  craving  for
novelty  is  by  no  means  peculiar  to  quickwitted  races  like  the  Athe-
nians of  the  apostolical  age  or  the  French  of  our  own  day.  It  is
profoundly  and  universally  human;  and  it  enters  into  our  appre-
ciation of  subject-matters  the  most  various.  Novelty  confers  a
charm  upon  high  efforts  of  thought  and  enquiiy  as  well  as  upon
works  of  art  or  of  imagination,  or  even  upon  fashions  in  amuse-
vu]


362       The  vitality  of  a  doctrine^  how  tested.

ment  or  in  dress.   To  treat  this  yearning  for  novelty  as  thongli  it
were  only  a  vicioos  Mvolity  is  to  overlook  its  profound  signifi-
cance.   For,  even  in  its  lowest  and  nnloveliest  forms,  it  is  a  living
and  perpetual  witness  to  the  original  nobility  of  the  sonl  of  man.
It  is  the  restlessness  of  a  desire  which  Chie  Being  alone  can
satisfy;  it  reminds  us  that  the  Infinite  One  has  made  us  for
Himself  and  that  no  object,  person,  or  doctrine,  that  is  merely
finite  and  earthly,  can  take  His  place  in  our  heart  and  thought,
and  bid  us  finally  be  still.   And  tiierefore  as  man  passes  through
life  on  his  short  and  rapid  pilgrimage,  unless  his  eye  be  fixed  on
that  treasure  in  heaven  which  *  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  cor-
rupt,' he  is  of  necessity  the  very  slave  of  novelty.     Each  candi-
date for  his  admiration  wins  from  him,  it  may  be,  a  passing
glance  of  aj^roval ;  but,  unsatisfied  at  heart,  he  is  ever  seeking
for  some  new  stimulant  to  his  evanescent  sympathies.    He  casto
to  the  winds  the  feided  flower  which  he  had  but  lately  stooped  to
gather  with  such  eager  enthusiasm;  he  buries  beneath  the  waves
the  useless  pebble  which,  when  his  eye  first  detected  it  sparkling
on  the  shore,  had  yielded  him  a  moment  of  such  bright  enjoy-
ment.  Nothing  hums£li  can  insure  its  life  against  the  attractions
of  something  more  recent  than  itself  in  point  of  origin;  no
doctrine  of  earthly  mould  can  hope  to  escape  the  sentence  of
superannuation  when  it  is  fairly  confronted  with  the  inteUectnal
creations  of  an  age  later  than  its  own.     A  human  doctrine  may
live  for  a  few  years,  or  it  may  live  for  centuries.  Its  duration  will
depend  partly  upon  the  amount  of  absolute  truth  which  it  em-
bodies, and  j»rtly  upon  the  strength  of  the  rivals  with  which  it
is  brought  into  competition.     But  it  cannot  always  satisfy  the
appetite  for  novelty ;  its  day  of  extinction  can  only  be  deferred.

ovK  %\vi  npoaeucdo'cu

wKriv  Aio^i  ct  rh  fwrav  air6  <f>povTiJ(kts  ^x^of
Xpr^  fidkciv  irriTVfJU&s.
ovd*  ooTis  irdpoiBev  ^v  fieyas^
irafifidx<j^  Opaaei  fipvioiff

KTTJpog  ot^crat  rvp^wy^.

So  it  must  ever  fare  with  a  religious  dogma  of  purely  hu*
man  authorship.      In  obedience  to  the  lapse  of  time  it  must

*  Mioh,  Ag.  163-171.


Doctrine  of  Chrisfs  Divinity^  how  tested.   363

of  necessity  be  modified,  corrupted,  revolutionized,  and  then  yield
to  some  stronger  successor.

'Our  little  syBtems  have  their  day.
They  have  their  day  and  cease  to  be.'

This  is  the  true  voice  of  human  speculation  on  Divine  things,
conscious  that  it  is  human,  conscious  of  its  weakness,  and  mind-
ful of  its  past  and  ever-accumulating  experience.  He  only,
*  with  Whom  is  no  variableness  neither  shadow  of  turning,'  can
be  the  Author  of  a  really  unchanging  doctrine ;  and,  as  a  matter
of  historical  fieict,  *•  His  truth  endureth  from  generation  to  genera-^
tion.*

When  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Divinity  entered  into  the
world  of  human  thought,  it  was  not  screened  from  the  operation
of  the  antagonistic  and  dissolvent  influences  which  have  just
been  noticed.  It  was  confronted  with  the  passion  for  novelty
beneath  the  eyes  of  the  Apostles  themselves.  The  passion  for
novelty  at  CoIosssb  appears  to  have  combined  a  licentious  fertility
of  the.  religious  imagination  with  a  taste  for  such  cosmical  specu-
lations as  were  current  in  that  age;  while  in  the  Galatian
Churches  it  took  the  form  of  a  return  to  the  discarded  cere-
monial of  the  Jewish  law.  In  both  cases  the  novel  theory  was
opposed  to  the  apostolical  account  of  our  Lord*s  personal  dig-
nity;  and  in  another  generation  the  wild  imaginings  of  a  Basilides
or  of  a  Yalentinus  illustrated  the  attractive  force  of  a  new
fashion  in  Ohristological  speculation  still  more  powerfully.
Somewhat  later  the  dialectical  habits  of  the  Alexandrian
writers  subjected  the  doctrine  to  a  searching  analysis,  while
the  neo-Flatonic  philosophy  brought  a  powerful  intellectual
sympathy  to  bear  upon  i^  which,  as  an  absorbing  or  distorting
influence,  might  well  have  been  feital  to  a  human  dogma.
Lastly,  the  doctrine  was  directly  opposed  by  a  long  line  of
Humanitarian  teachers,  reaching,  with  but  few  intermissions,
from  the  Ebionitic  period  to  the  Arian.

In  the  history  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Divinity  the  Arian
heresy  was  the  climax  of  difficulty  and  of  triumph ;  it  tested  the
doctrine  at  one  and  the  same  time  in  each  of  the  three  modes
which  have  been  noticed.  Arianism  was  ostentatiously  anxious
to  appear  to  be  an  original  speculation,  and  accordingly  it
taunted  the  Nicene  fathers  with  their  intellectual  poverty;  it
branded  them  as  d^cXeis  kcX  IdiSn-ai  because  they  adhered  to  the
ground  of  handing  on  simply  what  they  had  received.  Its  method
of  conducting  discussion  is  traceable  to  the  schools  of  the  Sophists
vn]


364  Effects  of  opposition,.

at  Antiocb ;  asd  by  tbis  method,  as  well  ae  by  the  aBsnmptiai
t^t  certain  philosophical  plaeita  were  granted,  ArianiBm  en-
deavoured to  Irill  t^  doctrine  from  within  by  a  destractiTs
analysis.  And  it  need  scarcely  be  added  that  ArianiBm  inherited
and  intensified  the  direct  opposition  which  had  been  offered  to
the  doctrine  by  earlier  heresies ;  Ariani'gm  ie  immortalized,  hoH-
ever  ingloriously,  in  those  snfFerings,  in  those  struggles,  in  tlii>se
victories  of  the  great  Athanasias,  of  which  itBOwn  bitter  hostility
to  our  Lord's  EWntial  Godhead  was  the  immediate  cause.

That  such  a  doctrine  bb  oar  Lord's  Divinity  should  be  tins
opposed  was  not  unnatural.   It  is  in  itself  so  startling,  so  awful ;
it  endows  the  man  who  honestly  and  intelligently  beUevet  it
with  a  conception  of  the  worth  and  drift  of  Christianity,  bo
altogether  unique ;  it  is  so  utterly  intolerable  if  you  admit  a
suspicion  of  its  being  false  ;  it  is  so  necessarily  exacting  when
once  yon  have  recc^nised  it  as  true ;    it  makes  such  large
and  immediate  demands,  not  merely  upon  the  reason  and  the
imagination,  but  also  upon  the  affections  and  the  will ;  that  a
specific  opposition  to  it,  as  distinct  from  a  professed  general
opposition  to  the  religion  of  which  it  is  the  very  heart  and  soul,
is  only  what  might  have  been  expected.    Certainly,  such  a  doc-
trine could  not  at  first  bring  peace  on  earth ;  rather  it  could  not
but  bring  division.     It  could  not  but  divide  families,  cities,
nations,  continents ;  it  could  not  but  arm  against  itself  the  edge
and  point  of  every  weapon  that  might  be  forged  or  whetted  by
the  ingenuity  of  a  passionate  animosity.     It  could  not  but  htm
collapsed  utterly  and  vanished  away  when  confronted  with  the
heat  of  oppositionwhich  it  provoked,  had  it  not  descended  from
the  Source  of  Truth,  had  it  not  reposed  upon  an  absolute  and
indestructible  basis.    The  Arian  controversy  broke  upon  it  as  an
violence  of  which  m^t  have  shattered  any
rhen  the  storm  had  spent  itself  the  doc-
B  conciliar  decisions  of  the  fourth  centnry
;t  as  it  had  been  when  it  was  procyned
bn.    Besistance  does  but  strengthen  trntb
lirow :  and  when  the  doctrine  had  defied
Jty,  the  disintegrating  force  of  hostile
aent  onslaught  of  passionate  denunciation,
ly  unlike  those  philosophical  speculations
confused  with  it  by  a  supei-ficial  obeeirer,
tered  ;  it  still  involved  and  excluded  pi^
Juded  and  involved  from  the  first.    But
held  with  a  clearer  recognition  of  its  real


Triumph  of  the  Doctrine.    The  Homoousion.   365

frontier,  and  with  a  stronger  sense  of  the  necessity  for  insisting
upon  that  recognition.  In  the  Homoousion,  after  such  hesitation
as  found  expression  at  Antioch,  the  Church  felt  that  she  had
lighted  upon  a  symbol  practically  adapted  to  tell  forth  the  truth
that  never  had  been  absent  from  her  heart  and  mind,  and  withal,
capable  of  resisting  the  intellectual  solvents  which  had  seemed  to
threaten  that  truth  with  extinction.  The  Homoousion  did  not
change,  it  protected  the  doctrine.  It  clothed  the  doctrine  in  a
vesture  of  language  which  rendered  it  intelligible  to  a  new  world
of  thought  while  preserving  its  strict  unchanging  identity.  It
translated  the  apostolical  symbols  of  the  Image  and  the  Word  of
God  into  a  Platonic  equivalent ;  and  it  remains  with  us  to  this
hour,  in  the  very  heart  of  our  Creed,  as  the  complete  assertion
of  Christ's  absolute  oneness  with  the  Essence  of  Deity,  as  the
monument  which  records  the  greatest  effort  and  the  greatest
defeat  of  its  antagonist  error,  as  the  guarantee  that  the  victorious
truth  maintains  and  will  maintain  an  unshaken  empire  over  the
thought  of  Christendom,

We  are  all  sufficiently  familiar  with  the  line  of  criticism  to
which  such  a  formula  as  the  Homoousion  is  exposed  in  our  day
and  generation.     A  contrast  is  depicted  and  insisted  upon  with
more  vehemence  than  accuracy,  between  the  unfixed  popular
faith  of  Christians  in  the  first  age  of  the  Church  and  the  keen
theological  temper  of  the  fourth  century.     It  is  said  that  the
Church's  earhest  faith  was  unformed,  simple,  vague,  too  full  of
childlike  wonder  to  analyse  itself,  too  indeterminate  to  satisfy
the  requirements  of  a  formalized  theology.    It  is  asserted  that  at
Alexandria  the  Church  learned  how  to  fix  her  creed  in  precise,
rigid,  exclusive  moulds ;  that  she  there  gradually  crystallized
what  had  once  been  fluid,  and  cramped  and  fettered  what  had
before  been  free.     And  it  is  insinuated  that  in  this  process,
whereby  the  fresh  faith  of  the  infant  Church  *  was  hardened  into
the  creed  of  the  Church  of  the  Councils,'  there  was  some  risk,  or
more  than  risk,  of  an  alteration  or  enlargement  of  the  original
feith.    *  How  do  you  know,'  men  ask,  *  that  the  formulary  which
asserts  Christ's  Consubstantiality  with  the  Father  is  really  ex-
pressive of  the  simple  faith  in  which  the  first  Christians  lived
and  died  ?    Do  not  probabilities  point  the  other  way  ?    Is  it  not
likely  that  when  this  effort  was  made  to  fix  the  expression  of
the  faith  in  an  unchanging  symbol,  there  was  a  simultaneous
growth,  however  unsuspected  and  unrecognised,  in  the  subject-
matter  of  the  faith  expressed  %     May  not  the  hopes  and  feelings
of  a  passionate  devotion,  as  well  as  the  inferential  arguments  of


364  Effects  of  opposition.

at  Antioch ;  and  by  this  method,  as  well  as  by  the  assumption
that  certain  philosophical  placita  were  granted,  Arianism  en-
deavoured to  kill  the  doctrine  from  within  by  a  destructive
analysis.  And  it  need  scarcely  be  added  that  Arianism  inherited
and  intensified  the  direct  opposition  which  had  been  offered  to
the  doctrine  by  earlier  heresies ;  Arianism  is  immortalized,  how-
ever ingloriously,  in  those  sufferings,  in  those  struggles,  in  those
victories  of  the  great  Athanasius,  of  which  its  own  bitter  hostihty
to  our  Lord's  Essential  Godhead  was  the  immediate  cause.

That  such  a  doctrine  as  our  Lord's  Divinity  should  be  thus
opposed  was  not  unnatural.  It  is  in  itself  so  startling,  so  awful ;
it  endows  the  man  who  honestly  and  intelligently  believes  it
with  a  conception  of  the  worth  and  drift  of  Christianity,  so
altogether  unique ;  it  is  so  utterly  intolerable  if  you  admit  a
suspicion  of  its  being  false ;  it  is  so  necessarily  exacting  when
once  you  have  recognised  it  as  true;  it  makes  such  large
and  immediate  demands,  not  merely  upon  the  reason  and  the
imagination,  but  also  upon  the  affections  and  the  will ;  that  a
specific  opposition  to  it^  as  distinct  from  a  professed  general
opposition  to  the  religion  of  which  it  is  the  very  heart  and  soul,
is  only  what  might  have  been  expected.  Certainly,  such  a  doc-
trine could  not  at  first  bring  peace  on  earth ;  rather  it  could  not
but  bring  division.  It  could  not  but  divide  families,  cities,
nations,  continents ;  it  could  not  but  arm  against  itself  Ihe  edge
and  point  of  every  weapon  that  might  be  forged  or  whetted  by
the  ingenuity  of  a  passionate  animosity.  It  could  not  but  have
collapsed  utterly  and  vanished  away  when  confronted  with  the
heat  of  opposition,  which  it  provoked,  had  it  not  descended  horn
the  Source  of  Truth,  had  it  not  reposed  upon  an  absolute  and
indestructible  basis.  The  Arian  controversy  broke  upon  it  as  an
intellectual  storm,  the  violence  of  which  must  have  shattered  any
human  theory.  But  when  the  storm  had  spent  itself,  the  doc-
trine emerged  from  the  conciliar  decisions  of  the  fourih  century
as  luminous  and  perfect  as  it  had  been  when  it  was  proclaimed
by  St.  Paul  and  St.  John.  Resistance  does  but  strengthen  truth
which  it  cannot  overthrow :  and  when  the  doctrine  had  defied
the  craving  for  novelty,  the  disintegrating  force  of  hostile
analysis,  and  the  vehement  onslaught  of  passionate  denunciation,
it  was  seen  to  be  vitally  unlike  those  philosophical  speculations
which  might  have  been  confused  with  it  by  a  supei-ficial  observer.
The  doctrine  was  unaltered ;  it  still  involved  and  excluded  pre-
cisely what  it  had  excluded  and  involved  from  the  first.  But
henceforth  it  was  to  be  held  with  a  clearer  recognition  of  its  real

[lbct.


Triumph  of  the  Doctrine.    The  Homoousion,   365

frontier,  and  with  a  stronger  sense  of  the  necessity  for  insisting
upon  that  recognition.  In  the  Homoousion,  after  such  hesitation
as  found  expression  at  Antioch,  the  Church  felt  that  she  had
lighted  upon  a  symbol  practically  adapted  to  tell  forth  the  truth
that  neyer  had  been  absent  from  her  heart  and  mind,  and  withal,
capable  of  resisting  the  intellectual  solvents  which  had  seemed  to
threaten  that  truth  with  extinction.  The  Homoousion  did  not
change,  it  protected  the  doctrine.  It  clothed  the  doctrine  in  a
vesture  of  language  which  rendered  it  intelligible  to  a  new  world
of  thought  while  preserving  its  strict  unchanging  identity.  It
translated  the  apostolical  symbols  of  the  Image  and  the  Word  of
God  into  a  Platonic  equivalent ;  and  it  remains  with  us  to  this
hour,  in  the  very  heart  of  our  Creed,  as  the  complete  assertion
of  Christ's  absolute  oneness  with  the  Essence  of  Deity,  as  the
monument  which  records  the  greatest  effort  and  the  greatest
defeat  of  its  antagonist  error,  as  the  guarantee  that  the  victorious
truth  maintains  and  will  maintain  an  unshaken  empire  over  the
thought  of  Christendom.

We  are  all  sufficiently  familiar  with  the  line  of  criticism  to
which  such  a  formula  as  the  Homoousion  is  exposed  in  our  day
and  generation.  A  contrast  is  depicted  and  insisted  upon  with
more  vehemence  than  accuracy,  between  the  unfixed  popular
faith  of  Christians  in  the  first  age  of  the  Church  and  the  keen
theological  temper  of  the  fourth  century.  It  is  said  that  the
Church's  earliest  faith  was  unformed,  simple,  vague,  too  full  of
childlike  wonder  to  analyse  itself,  too  indeterminate  to  satisfy
the  requirements  of  a  formalized  theology.  It  is  asserted  that  at
Alexandria  the  Church  learned  how  to  fix  her  creed  in  precise,
rigid,  exclusive  moulds ;  that  she  there  gradually  crystallized
what  had  once  been  fluid,  and  cramped  and  fettered  what  had
before  been  free.  And  it  is  insinuated  that  in  this  process,
whereby  the  fresh  faith  of  the  infant  Church  *  was  hardened  into
the  creed  of  the  Church  of  the  Councils,'  there  was  some  risk,  or
more  than  risk,  of  an  alteration  or  enlargement  of  the  original
fiedth.  *  How  do  you  know,'  men  ask,  *  that  the  formulary  which
asserts  Christ's  Consubstantiality  with  the  Father  is  really  ex-
pressive of  the  simple  faith  in  which  the  first  Christians  lived
and  died  ?  Do  not  probabilities  point  the  other  way  ?  Is  it  not
likely  that  when  this  effort  was  made  to  fix  the  expression  of
the  faith  in  an  unchanging  symbol,  there  was  a  simultaneous
growth,  however  unsuspected  and  unrecognised,  in  the  subject-
matter  of  the  faith  expressed  ?  May  not  the  hopes  and  feelings
of  a  passionate  devotion,  as  well  as  the  inferential  arguments  of


366  Tke  worship  of  Christ  a  witness  lo  Ike  Homoouston.

an  impetuous  logic,  have  contributed  something  _  to  fill  tip  the
outline  and  to  eahance  the  significance  of  the  original  and  re-
vealed germ  of  truth  t  May  not  the  Creed  of  Nicfea  be  thus  in
reality  a  creed  distinct  irom,  if  not  indeed  more  extenBive  than,
the  creed  of  the  apOBtolic  age  t'  Such  is  the  substance  of  manj
a  whispered  question,  or  of  mwiy  a  confident  assertion,  which
we  hear  around  na ;  and  it  is  necessary  to  enquire,  whether  the
admitted  difference  of  form  between  the  apostolic  and  Nicene
statements  does  really,  or  only  in  appearance,  involve  a  deeper
difference — a  difference  in  the  object  of  &ith.

I.  Let  it  then  be  considered  that  a  belief  may  he  profeesed
either  by  stating  it  in  terms,  or  by  acting  in  a  maimer  which
necessarily  implies  that  you  hold  it.  A  man  may  profess  a  creed
with  which  his  life  is  at  variance ;  bat  he  may  also  live  a  creed,
if  I  may  so  speak,  which  he  has  not  the  desire  or  the  skill  to
put  into  esact  words.  There  is  no  moral  difference  between  the
sincere  expression  of  a  conviction  in  language,  and  its  consistent
reflection  in  action.  There  is,  for  example,  no  difference  be-
tween my  saying  that  a  given  person  is  not  to  be  relied  upon
when  dealing  with  money  matters,  and  my  pointedly  declining
to  act  with  him  on  this  particular  trust,  when  I  am  asked  to
do  so.  It  is  not  necessary  that  I  should  express  my  complets
opinion  of  bis  character,  until  I  am  obliged  to  express  it.  I
content  myself  with  acting  in  the  only  manner  which  is  prudent
under  the  circumstances.  Meanwhile  my  line  of  action  speslu
for  itself;  its  meaning  is  evident  to  all  who  are  practically
interested  in  the  subject.  Until  I  am  challenged  for  an  expla-
nation J  until  the  assumption  upon  which  I  act  is  denied ;  then
is  no  aecesaity  for  my  putting  into  words  an  opinion  which  has
already  been  stated  in  the  language  of  action  and  with  such
nnmistakeable  decision.

Did  then  the  ante-Nicene  Church  as  a  whole — did  its  ccn-
gregatioDB  of  worshippers  as  well  as  its  councils  of  divines-
did  its  poor,  its  young,  its  unlettered  multitudes,  as  well  as  its
saints  and  doctors,  so  act  and  apeak  as  to  imply  a  belief  tlat
.Tb,.,,«  n>„H«t. ;«  B^*,,«iiy  God )

i  this  may  at  first  sight  seem  to  be  ditScnlt
of  the  one-sidedness  and  caprice  of  lustoiy.
part  concerns  herself  with  the  actions  aod
,t  and  the  distinguished,  that  is  to  say,  of
y,  or  on  particular  occasions,  she  may  glance
ind  the  region  of  conrts  and  battle-fields;
it  to  enable  na  readily  to  ascertain  the  real


yesus  Christ  not  only  *  admired*  but  *  adored!  367

currents  of  thought  and  feeling  which  have  swayed  the  minds  of
multitudes  in  a  distant  age.

Such  at  any  rate  is  the  rul6  with  secular  history;  but  the
genius  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  of  a  nature  to  limit  the  force
of  the  obseiration.  In  her  eyes,  the  interests  of  the  many,  the
customs,  the  deeds,  the  sufferings  of  the  illiterate  and  of  the
poor,  are,  to  say  the  least,  not  less  precious  and  noteworthy  than
those  of  kings  and  prelates.  For  the  standard  of  aristocracy
within  her  borders  is  not  an  intellectual  or  a  social,  but  a
moral  standard ;  and  her  Founder  has  put  the  highest  honour  not
upon  those  who  rule  and  are  of  reputation,  but  upon  those  who
serve  and  are  unknown.  The  history  of  the  Chnstian  Church
does  therefore  serve  to  illustrate  the  point  before  us;  and  it
proves  the  belief  of  Christian  people  in  the  Gk)dhead  of  Jesus  by
its  witness  to  the  early  and  universal  practice  of  adoring  Him.

The  early  Christian   Church   did  not  content  herself  with
*  admiring*  Jesus  Christ.     She  adored  Him.     She  approached
His  glorious  Person  with  that  very  tribute  of  prayer,  of  self-
prostration,   of  self-surrender,   by   which   all  serious   Theists,
whether  Christian  or  non-Christian,  are  accustomed  to  express
their  felt   relationship  as  creatures  to  the  Almighty  Creator,
For  as  yet  it  was  not  supposed  that  a  higher  and  truer  know-
ledge of  the  Infinite  God  would  lead  man  to  abandon  the  sense
and  the  expression  of  complete  dependence  upon  Him  and  of
umneasured   indebtedness  to   Him,  which  befits  a  reasonable
creature  whom  God  has  made,  and  whom  God  owns  and  can
dispose  of,  when  such  a  creature  is  dealing  with  God.     As  yet
it  was  not  imagined  that  this  bearing  would  or  could  be  ex-
changed for  the  more  easy  demeanour  of  an  equal,  or  of  one
deeming  himself  scarcely  less  than  an  equal,  who  is  intelligently
appreciating  the  existence  of  a  remarkably  wise  and  powerful
Being,  entitled  by  His  activities  to  a  very  large  share  of  specu-
lative attention <^.     The  Church  simply  adored  God;   and  she

*  Gf.  Lecky,  History  of  nationalism,  i.  309.  Contrastii^g  the  Cbristian
belief  in  a  God  Who  can  work  miracles  with  the  'scientific*  belief  in
»  god  who  is  the  slave  of  'law,'  Mr.  Lecky  remarks,  that  the  former  'pre-
^^K)Bes  ns  most  to  prayer,'  the  latter  to  'reverence  and  admiration.*
Here  the  antithesis  between  'reverence'  and  'prayer'  seems  to  imply  that
the  latter  word  is  used  in  the  narrow  sense  of  petition  for  specific  blessings,
u^Btead  of  in  the  wider  sense  which  embraces  the  whole  compass  of  ^e
Bonl'g  devotional  activity,  and  among  other  things,  adoration.  Still,  if
Mr. Lecky  had  meant  to  include  under  'reverence'  anything  higher  than
^e  ^idd  to  the  highest  forms  of  human  greatness,  he  would  scarcely  have
eonpled  it  with  'admiration.*


368  ^Admiration  and '  adoration.^

adored  Jesus  Christ,  as  believing  Him  to  be  God.  Nor  did  she
destroy  the  significance  of  this  act  by  conceiving  that  admi-
ration differs  from  adoration  only  in  degree ;  that  a  sincere
admiration  is  practically  equivalent  to  ad«  ration ;  that  adoration
after  all  is  only  admiration  raised  to  the  height  of  an  en-
thusiasm.

You  will  not  deem  it  altogether  unnecessary,  under  our
present  intellectual  circumstances,  to  consider  for  a  moment
whether  this  representation  of  the  relationship  between  admi-
ration and  adoration  be   strictly  accurate.     So  far  indeed  is
this  from  being  the  case,  that  adoration  and  admiration  are  at
one  and  the  same  moment  and  with  reference  to  a  single  object
mutually  exclusive  of  each  other.     Certainly,  in  the  strained
and  exaggerated  language  of  poetry  or  of  passion,  you  may
speak  of  adoring  that  on  which  you  lavish  an  unlimited  ad-
miration.    But  the  common  sense  and  judgment  of  men  refuses
to  regard  admiration  as  an  embryo  form  of  adoration,  or  as
other  than  a  fundamentally  distinct  species  of  spiritual  activity.
Adoration  may  be  an  intensified  reverence,  but  it  certainly  is
not  an  intensified  admiration.     The  difference  between  admi-
ration and  adoration  is  observable  in  the  difference  of  their
respective  objects ;  and  that  difference  is  immeasurable.    For,
speaking  strictly,  we  admire  the  finite ;  we  adore  the  Infinite.
Why  is  this  ?    It  is  because  admiration  requires  a  certain  as-
sumption of  equality  with  the  object  admired,  an  assumption  of
ideal,  if  not  of  literal  equality  \     Admiration  such  as  is  here
in  question  is  not  a  vague  unregulated  wonder ;  it  involves  a
judgment ;  it  is  a  form  of  criticism.    And  since  it  is  a  criticism,
it  consists  in  our  internally  referring  the  object  which  we  admire
to  a  criterion.     That  criterion  is  an  ideal  of  our  own,  and  the
act  by  which  we  compare  the  admired  object  with  the  ideal  is
our  own  act.    We  may  have  borrowed  the  ideal  from  another;
and   we   do    not   for  a  moment   suppose   that  we   ourselves
could  give  it  perfect  expression,  or  even  could  produce  a  rival
to  the  object  which  conomands  our  critical  admiration.    Yet,
after  all,  the  ideal  is  before  us ;  it  is,  by  right  of  possession,
our  own.     We  take  credit  to  ourselves  for  possessing  it,  and  for

^  It  is  on  this  acconnt  that  the  apotheosis  of  men  involves  the  capital
sin  of  pride  in  those  who  decree  or  sanction  not  less  than  in  those  who
accept  it.  The  worshipper  is  himself  the  *  fountain  of  honour ;'  and  in
'deifying*  a  fellow-creature,  he  deifies  human  nature,  and  so  byimplic*-
tion  himself.  Wisd.  xiv.  20;  Acts  xii.  23,  33;  xiv.  11-15;  xxviii.  6;
Bom.  i.  33.

[l^ct.


yesus  Christ  not  only  ^admired*  but  ^adored!  367

currents  of  thought  and  feeling  which  have  swayed  the  minds  of
multitudes  in  a  distant  age.

Such  at  any  rate  is  the  rule  with  secular  history;  but  the
genius  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  of  a  nature  to  limit  the  force
of  the  obseiration.  In  her  eyes,  the  interests  of  the  many,  the
customs,  the  deeds,  the  sufferings  of  the  illiterate  and  of  the
poor,  are,  to  say  the  least,  not  less  precious  and  noteworthy  than
those  of  kings  and  prelates.  For  the  standard  of  aristocracy
within  her  borders  is  not  an  intellectual  or  a  social,  but  a
moral  standard ;  and  her  Founder  has  put  the  highest  honour  not
upon  those  who  rule  and  are  of  reputation,  but  upon  those  who
serve  and  are  unknown.  The  history  of  the  Christian  Church
does  therefore  serve  to  illustrate  the  point  before  us;  and  it
proves  the  belief  of  Christian  people  in  the  Godhead  of  Jesus  by
its  witness  to  the  early  and  universal  practice  of  adoring  Him.

The  early  Christian  Church  did  not  content  herself  with
*  admiring*  Jesus  Christ.  She  adored  Him.  She  approached
His  glorious  Person  with  that  very  tribute  of  prayer,  of  self-
prostration,  of  self-surrender,  by  which  all  serious  Theists,
whether  Christian  or  non-Christian,  are  accustomed  to  express
their  felt  relationship  as  creatures  to  the  Almighty  Creator,
For  as  yet  it  was  not  supposed  that  a  higher  and  truer  know-
ledge of  the  Infinite  God  would  lead  man  to  abandon  the  sense
and  the  expression  of  complete  dependence  upon  Him  and  of
umneasured  indebtedness  to  Him,  which  befits  a  reasonable
creature  whom  God  has  made,  and  whom  God  owns  and  can
dispose  of,  when  such  a  creature  is  dealing  with  God.  As  yet
it  was  not  imagined  that  this  bearing  would  or  could  be  ex-
changed^ for  the  more  easy  demeanour  of  an  equal,  or  of  one
deeming  himself  scarcely  less  than  an  equal,  who  is  intelligently
appreciating  the  existence  of  a  remarkably  wise  and  powerful
Being,  entitled  by  His  activities  to  a  very  large  share  of  specu-
lative attention c.     The  Church  simply  adored  God;   and  she

*  Gf.  Leoky,  History  of  nationalism,  i.  309.  Contrastii^g  the  Cbristian
belief  in  a  God  Who  can  work  miracles  with  the  'scientific*  belief  in
»  god  who  is  the  slave  of  'law,'  Mr.  Lecky  remarks,  that  the  former  'pre-
di^>0Be8  ns  most  to  prayer,'  the  latter  to  'reverence  and  admiration.*
Here  the  antithesis  between  'reverence'  and  'prayer'  seems  to  imply  that
the  latter  word  is  used  in  the  narrow  sense  of  petition  for  specific  blessings,
iiiBtead  of  in  the  wider  sense  which  embraces  the  whole  compass  of  the
Bonl'g  devotional  activity,  and  among  other  things,  adoration.  Still,  if
Mr. Lecky  had  meant  to  include  under  'reverence'  anything  higher  than
^e  yield  to  the  highest  forms  of  human  greatness,  he  would  scarcely  have
eoupled  it  with  'admiration.*


3  ^o   The  adoration  ofjfesus  coeval  with  the  Church,

impertmence,  when  adoration  has  been  reached.  Every  man  of
intelligence  and  modesty  meets  in  life  with  many  objects  which
call  for  his  free  and  sincere  admiration,  and  he  himself  gains
both  morally  and  intellectually  by  answering  to  such  a  call.  But
while  the  objects  of  human  admiration  are  as  various  as  the
minds  and  tastes  of  men,

'Denique  non  omnes  eadem  mirantnr  amantqne,*

One  Only  Being  can  be  rightfully  adored.  To  'admii'e'  God
would  involve  an  irreverence  only  equal  to  the  impiety  of  ador-
ing a  fellow-creature.  It  would  be  as  reasonable  to  pay  Divine
worship  to  our  every-day  associates,  as  to  substitute  for  that
incommunicable  honour  which  is  due  to  the  Most  High  some
one  of  the  tranquil  and  self-satisfied  forms  of  a  favourable
notice  with  which  we  greet  accomplishments  or  excellence  in
our  fellow-men.  <When  I  saw  Him,'  says  St.  John,  speaking
of  Jesus  in  His  glory,  *  I  fell  at  His  feet  as  dead®.'  That  waa
something  more  than  admiration,  even  the  most  enthusiastic;
it  was  an  act,  in  which  self  had  no  part;  it  was  an  act  of  adoration.
If  Jesus  Christ  had  been  only  a  morally  perfect  Man,  He
would  have  been  entitled  to  the  highest  human 'admiration ;
although  it  may  be  questioned,  as  we  have  seen,  whether  He  can
be  deemed  morally  perfect  if  He  is  in  reality  only  human.  But
the  historical  £Eict  before  us  is,  that  from  the  earliest  age  of
Christianity,  Jesus  Christ  has  been  adored  as  God.  This  adora-
tion was  not  yielded  to  Him  in  consequence  of  the  persuasions
of  theologians  who  had  pronounced  Him  to  be  a  Divine  Person.
It  had  nothing  in  common  with  the  fulsome  and  servile  insin-
cerities which  ever  and  anon  rose  like  incense  around  the
throne  of  some  pagan  CsBsar  who  had  received  the  equivocal
honour  of  an  apotheosis.  It  was  not  the  product  of  a  spiritual
fascination,  too  subtle  or  too  strong  to  be  analyzed  by  those  who
felt  its  power,  but  easy  of  explanation  to  a  later  age.  You  can-
not trace  the  stages  of  its  progressive  development^.   You  cannot


•  Rev,  i.  17  J  2Jt6  cTSoi'  ahrbv^  tir^va.  irphs  robs  vSdas  avrov  &s  P€Kp6s,
'  The  expressions  Kvpicuchv  S€iTv6y,  I  Cor.  zi.  ao,  for  the  Holy  Eucharist,
and  Kvpicucri  rj/xcpa,  Be  v.  i.  10,  are,  in  this  connection,  significant.  In  hoih
cases  the  adjective  undoubtedly  refers  to  Jesus  Christ ;  while  the  Eucharist
corresponds  to  'the  Lord's  Passover,'  Ezod.  xii.  11,  and  the  Lord's  Day  to
the  'Sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God,'  Exod.  xx.  10.  The  Gro^  Rites  aw
to  the  Jewish  as  the  substance  to  the  shadow ;  but  their  very  names  suggest
that  Jesus  already  has  a  claim  upon  the  devotion  of  His  people  ooirespondiiig
to  that  of  Jehovah.

[lect.


Worship  of  Jesus  during  His  earthly  Life.    371

name  the  time  at  which  it  was  regarded  only  as  a  pious  custom
or  luxury,  and  then  mark  this  off  from  a  later  period  when  it  had
become,  in  the  judgment  of  Christians,  an  imperious  Christian
duty.  Never  was  the  adoration  of  Jesus  protested  against  in  the
Church  as  a  novelty,  derogatory  to  the  honour  and  claims  of  God.
Never  was  there  an  age  when  Jesus  was  only  *  invoked'  as  if  He
had  been  an  interceding  saint,  by  those  who  had  not  yet  learned
to  prostrate  themselves  before  His  throne  as  the  throne  of  the
Omnipotent  and  the  Eternal.  In  vain  will  you  endeavour  to
establish  a  parallel  between  the  adoration  of  Jesus  and  some
modem  *  devotion,*  unknown  to  the  early  days  of  Christendom,
but  now  popularized  largely  in  portions  of  the  Christian  Church ;
since  the  adoration  of  Jesus  is  as  ancient  as  Christianity.  Jesus
has  been  ever  adored  on  the  score  of  His  Divine  Personality,
of  Which  this  tribute  of  adoration  is  not  merely  a  legitimate  but
It  necessary  acknowledgment.

I.  During  the  days  of  His  earthly  life  our  Lord  was  surrounded
by  a  varied  homage,  extending,  as  it  might  seem,  so  far  as  the
intentions  of  those  who  offered  it  were  concerned,  from  the
wonted  forms  of  Eastern  courtesy  up  to  the  most  direct  and
conscious  acts  of  Divine  worship.  As  an  Infant,  He  was  *  wor-
shipped' by  the  Eastern  sages  s;  and  during  His  ministry  He
constantly  received  and  welcomed  acts  and  words  expressive  of
an  intense  devotion  to  His  Sacred  Person  on  the  part  of  those
who  sought  or  who  had  received  from  Him  some  supernatural
aid  or  blessing.  The  leper  worshipped  Him,  crying  out,  '  Lord,
if  Thou  wilt.  Thou  canst  make  me  clean *^.'  Jairus  worshipped
Him,  saying,  *My  daughter  is  even  now  dead:  but  come  and
lay  Thy  hand  upon  her,  and  she  shall  live*.'  The  mother
of  Zebedee's  children  came  near  to  Him,  worshipping  Him,
and  asking  EUm  to  bestow  upon  her  sons  the  first  places  of
honour  in  His  kingdom  i.  The  woman  of  Canaan,  whose
daughter  was  *  grievously  vexed  with  a  devil,*  *  came  and  wor-
shipped Him,  saying.  Lord,  help  me  k.'  The  father  of  the  poor
lunatic,  who  met  Jesus  as  He  descended  from  the  Mount  of
Transfigjiration,  'came,  kneeling  down  to  Him,  and  saying,

•  St.  Matt.  ii.  1 1 :  it^ffivr^t  irpoffeKtiurja'av  ahr^,

^  Ibid.  viii.  2 :  Kipie,  ihv  B4Kris,  h^vaurai  fie  Kadapitrat,

*  Ibid.  ix.  18:  irpoffeKwei  ahr^,  \4ywv,  '"On  ri  Ovydrrip  fiov  Apri  ireXe'S"
TTicrtp*  &AA&  i\0i)v  ixiBes  rijy  x^^P^  <fov  itr*  ain^i^,  Koi.  (fiffercu.*

i  Ibid.  xz.  ao :  7rpo(rri\0ey  ahr^  ri  fiiirrip  rSav  vlSav  ZcjSeSaiov  fxerh,  rwv  viSov
ahr^s,  vpoarKvuovffa  ica2  alrovffd  ri  irap*  airov,

^  Ibid.  ZY.  35 :  4  8^  i\0ovffa  vpofftidivei  avrf,  \4yovaa,  *  Kipu  fivfiOei  /xou*

vn]  Bb  a


372    Worship  of  Jesus  during  His  earthly  Life.

*  Lord,  have  mercy  on  my  son  1.*  These  are  instances  of  worship
accompanying  prayers  for  special  mercies.  And  did  not  the
dying  thief  offer  at  least  a  true  inward  worship  to  the  Crucified
Buler  of  the  unseen  world,  while  he  uttered  the  words,  *Itemem-
ber  me  when  Thou  comest  into  Thy  kingdom «» '  ?

At  other  times  such  visible  *  worship '  of  our  Saviour  was  an
act  of  acknowledgment  or  of  thanksgiving  for  mercies  received.
Thus  it  was  with  the  grateful  Samaritan  leper,  who,  *  when  he
saw  that  he  was  healed,  turned  back,  and  with  a  loud  voice
glorified  God,  and  fell  down  on  his  face  at  His  feet,  giving  Him
thanks^.'  Thus  it  was  when  Jesus  had  appeared  walking  on
the  sea  and  had  quieted  the  storm,  and  *  they  that  were  in  the
ship  came  and  worshipped  Him,  saying,  Of  a  truth  Thou  art
the  Son  of  God.'  Thus  too  was  it  after  the  miraculous
draught  of  fishes,  that  St.  Peter,  astonished  at  the  greatness  of
the  miracle,  *fell  down  at  Jesus*  knees,  saying.  Depart  from  me ;
for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  O  Lord®.*  Thus  the  penitent,  'when
she  knew  that  Jesus  sat  at  meat  in  the  Pharisee's  house,  brought
an  alabaster  box  of  ointment,  and  stood  at  His  feet  behind
Him  weeping,  and  began  to  wash  His  feet  with  tears,  and  did
wipe  them  with  the  hairs  of  her  head,  and  kissed  His  feet,  and
anointed  them  with  the  ointment  p.'  Thus  again  when  the  man
bom  blind  confesses  his  fi&ith  in  '  the  Son  of  God,'  he  accompa-
nies the  confession  by  an  act  of  adoration.  'And  he  said,  Lord,
I  believe.     And  he  worshipped  Him  ^     Thus  the  holy  women,


^  St.  Matt.  xvii.  14,  15:  irpoo-ijAdcy  ahr^  iyOpcnros  yoyuw^rwy  ahr^,  fcol
Kiytav,  *  Kuptt,  4\€rja6y  fiov  rhv  vi6p*

■»  St.  Luke  xxiii.  42  :  ^Aeye  ry  'Ir/croi;,  'Mv^o-^rf  /xov,  Kvpic  \^lri(rov,  Tisch.
ed.  8,  Tregell.]  Bray  l^hBrjs  4v  tJ  jSao-tXc^f  crow.'

^  St.L&exyii.  15,  16:  cfs  zi  c|  eun&v,  IZhv  tri  UBij,  iir4<rrpe^,  fttrk
fpwyrjs  fieydKrii  So^<i(o»y  rhy  Sf6y  icaX  lirco-cv  M  xp6(ronroif  Tapa  roi/s  wifku
auToO,  €vxapKTray  ain-^.  That  cdxapMrreo'  is  not  used  in  the  Apostolic
Epistles  with  reference  to  Christ  may  possibly  be  explained  as  an  early
anticipation  of  the  devotional  instinct  referred  to  in  Leot.  vii.  397.

«  St.  Matt.  xiv.  33,  33 :  Mirafftv  6  ftvc/uos*  ol  8c  4y  r^  vKo'up  i\$6rr(s
irpo<rtK^<r<uf  avr^,  Xiyovrts,  **A\ri0&s  Qeov  Tibs  el.*  St.  Luke  v.  8 :  liitv  84
"lifxtav  n^pos  irpoa^KftTe  rots  y6v€un  rov  *Iij(roO,  \^o»Vf  '"EleX^e  air*  ^/toD,  tiri
itv^p  afjiaprto\6s  elfii^  K6pie*

P  St.  Luke  vii.  37,  38 :  Ko/itcroura  ixdficurrpop  fi^pov,  koH  trratra  vaph  robs
irSHas  avrov  iirlffw  K\cdov(ra.,  ffp^oro  0p4xfiy  Tohs  'tr6^cts  cdnov  roTs  Hdxpucif  Kci
reus  Opi^l  TTis  K€il>akris  ahrris  4^4/xcur(r€,  Kcd  KaTt<f>l\€i  robs  xSias  cunoVf  «ral
ffA6(^€  T9)  fiipv*  These  actions  were  e^ressive  of  a  passionate  devotiim;
they  had  no  object  beyond  expressing  it.

«  St.  John  ix.  35-38 :  iJKovafy  6  *lri(rovs  5ti  4^4$a\oy  abrbp  li^w  icai  t^pinr
aurby,  clirci'  avr^,  *2w  7rtart{fus  tls  rby  Tiby  rou  Beovi    *AT€Kp(0ri  i/c^twos  Kot

[lect.


Gradations  in  the  worship  offered  to  Jesus.    373

"wlien  the  Bisen  *  Jesus  met  them,  saying,  "  All  hail,"  came  . .  .
and   held   Him  by  the  feet,  and  worshipped  HimV      Thus
apparently  Mary  of  Magdala,  in  her  deep  devotion,  had  motioned
to  embrace  His  feet  in  the  garden,  when  Jesus  bade  her  *  Touch
Me  not*.*     Thus  the  eleven  disciples  met  our  Lord  by  appoint-
ment on  a  mountain  in  Galilee,  and  '  when  they  saw  Him,'  as  it
wonld  seem,  in  their  joy  and  fear,  *they  worshipped  Him*/
Thus,  pre-eminently,  St.  Thomas  uses  the  language  of  adoration,
although  it  is  not  said  to  have  been  accompanied  by  any  corre-
sponding outward  act.  "When,  in  reproof  for  his  sc^ticism,  he  had
been  bidden  to  probe  the  Wounds  of  Jesus,  he  burst  forth  into
the  adoring  confession,  *  My  Lord  and  my  God  ^!     Thus,  when
the  Ascending  Jesus  was  being  borne  upwards  into  heaven,  the
disciples,  as  ^  thanking  Him  for  His  great  glory,  worshipped
Him ;  and  then  *  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great  joy  ^.*

It  may  be  that  in  some  of  these  instances  the  *  worship  *  paid
to  Jesus  did  not  express  more  than  a  profound  reverence.
Sometimes  He  was  'worshipped'  as  a  Superhuman  Person,  wield-
ing superhuman  powers;  sometimes  He  was  worshipped  by
those  who  instinctively  felt  His  moral  majesty,  which  forced
them,  they  knew  not  how,  upon  their  knees.  But  if  He  had
been  only  a  *  good  man,'  He  must  have  checked  such  worship  y.

c7ir€,  .'Tf$  ln'n^  K6pi€,  Xva  intrrtlffw  els  abrSv  ;'  ETire  Hh  ahr^  b  'Itjctovs,  'Kal
ii&ptucas  ahrhVf  koL  6  \a\av  /u€t&  <rov,  iKuv6s  iartv*  *0  Hh  $<prif  * TliffTtva,
K6pt€' '  Kot  vpotreKi^vriffev  ahr^,

'  St.  Matt,  zzviii.  9 :  6  *lrto'ovs  i.it'fiprTja'ejf  ahraus,  \4y(ov,  *  Xalpere,*  At
8i  vpoo'eXBova'cu  iKp<iTTi<rav  ahrov  rohs  ir6Sa5,  Kot  TcpofffKiiinia'ay  airr^,

*  St.  John  XX.  17.

*  St.  Matt,  xxviii.  1 7 :  koI  ili6vr€i  avrhp,  trpoffeicuvriffav  ahr^'  01  8^  ^5(<rTo-
trcuf.  If  some  doubted,  the  worship  offered  by  the  rest  may  be  presumed  to
have  been  a  very  deliberate  act.  For  the  use  of  vpoa-Kvytiy  in  the  strict
sense  of  adoring  the  Deity^  of.  St.  Matt.  iv.  9,  10 ;  St.  John  iv.  23,  34 ;
Eev.  xix.  10.

V  St.  John  XX.  a8 :  koI  kveKpldrj  6  QcofiaSf  Koi  elirev  ain^,  *  *0  Kvpi6s  fiow
jrcd  6  &€6s  fiov,*  Against  the  attempt  of  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia  and  others
to  resolve  this  into  an  ejaculation  addressed  to  the  Father,  see  Alford  in
loc. ;  Pye  Smith  on  Messiah,  ii.  53.    The  ain^  is  of  itself  decisive.

*  St.  Luke  xxiv.  51,  53 :  Kcd  iLV€<p4p€ro  tls  rhv  ohpav6v,  koI  ahroX  trpoa"'
Kuvinravres  abrhv^  xnriffrpi^aof  els  *Upov<ra\^fi  {lerh.  x<H>^^  fieydKris.

7  This  consideration  is  remarkably  overlooked  by  Channing,  who  might
have  been  expected  to  feel  its  force.  Channing  is  '  sure '  that  '  the  won^ip
paid  to  Christ  during  His  public  ministry  was  rendered  to  Him  only  as  a
Divine  Messenger.'  But  prophets  and  Apostles  were  messengers  from  Grod.
Why  were  they  not  worshipped  ?  Channing  insists  further  tiiat  such  titles
as '  Son  of  David/  shew  that  those  who  used  them  had  no  thought  of  Christ^s
being  'the  Self-existent  lofinite  Divinity.*    It  may  be  true  that  the  full

vnj


374  Adoration  of  Jesus  Glorified.


He  had  Himself  re-afl&rmed  the  foundation-law  of  the  religion
of  Israel:  *Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  Him
only  shalt  thou  serve  «.'  Yet  He  never  hints  that  danger  lurked
in  this  prostration  of  hearts  and  wills  before  Himself;  He  wel-
comes, by  a  tacit  approval,  this  profound  homage  of  which  He
is  the  Object.  His  rebuke  to  the  rich  young  man  impHes,  not
that  He  Himself  had  no  real  claim  to  be  called  *  Good  Master,'
but  that  such  a  title,  in  the  mouth  of  the  person  before  Him,
was  an  unmeaning  compliment^.  He  seems  to  invite  prayer
to  Himself,  eiFen  for  the  highest  spiritual  blessings,  in  such
words  as  those  which  He  addressed  to  the  woman  of  Samaria :

*  K  thou  knewest  the  gift  of  God,  and  "Who  it  is  that  saith  unto
thee,  Give  Me  to  drink ;  thou  wouldest  have  asked  of  Him,  and
He  would  have  given  thee  living  water  b.*  He  predicts  indeed
a  time  when  the  spiritual  curiosity  of  His  disciples  would  be
satisfied  in  the  joy  of  perfectly  possessing  Him ;  but  He  nowhere
hints  that*  He  would  Himself  cease  to  receive  their  prayers*^.
He  claims  all  the  varied  homage  which  the  sons  of  men,  in
their  want  and  fulness,  in  their  joy  and  sorrow,  may  rightfully
and  profitably  pay  to  the  Eternal  Father;    all  men  are  to

*  honour  the  Son  even  as  they  honour  the  Faiher.'

3.  Certain  it  is  that  no  sooner  had  Christ  been  lifted  up  from
the  earth,  in  death  and  in  glory,  than  He  forthwith  began
to  draw  all  men  unto  Him  \-  This  attraction  expressed  itself,

truth  of  His  Divine  Nature  was  not  known  to  tlieae  first  worshippers ;  but
it  does  not  hold  good  that  a  particular  title  employed  in  prayer  exhausts
the  idea  which  the  petitioner  has  formed  of  the  Person  whom  he  addresses.
Above  all  Ohanning  urges  the  indifference  of  the  Jews  'to  the  frequent
prostrations  of  men  before  Jesus.'  He  thinks  this  indifference  unintelligible
on  the  supposition  of  their  believing  such  prostrations  to  involve  the  pay-
ment of  divine  honours.  That  many  of  these  prostrations  were  not  designed
to  involve  anything  so  definite  is  freely  conceded.  That  the  Jews  suspected
the  intention  to  honour  Christ's  Divinity  in  none  of  them  would  not  prove
that  none  of  them  were  designed  to  honour  It.  The  Jews  were  not  present
at  the  confession  of  St.  Thomas  after  the  Resurrection;  but  there  is  no
reasonable  room  for  questioning  either  the  devotional  purpose  or  the  theo-
logical force  of  the  Apostle's  exclamation,  '  My  Lord  and  my  Grod.'  Bat
see  Channing,  Works,  ii.  194.
■  St.  Matt.  iv.  10.

•  See  Lect.  iv.  196.

^  St.  John  iv.  10 :  cJ  ^5€tj  r^v  Zupehv  rod  Qtov,  Kot  rts  i<my  6  Xiy»v  ffot,

*  A6s  fioi  irieiV,'  trh  Av  ^rritras  abrhv,  ical  I^Scokcv  &y  a'oi  S^wp  fwv.

*  Ibid.  xvi.  22 :  irdKiy  Se  ^^IfOfxai  iffias,  K(d  x<H>'h<^^'^o,i  ityL&v  ^  iropS^  ica2  r))r
Xapcliv  bfiSov  oh^iis  atpet  &(p*  ifi&v'  Koi  iv  iKfiyri  ry  ijfi^p<}  ifi^  ovk  ipwrfiffere
ohd4v.    Here  ipcDriio'ert  clearly  means  'question.'

^  Ibid.  xii.  3a.


U-.


Early  apostolic  prayers  to  Jesus  Glorified.    375

not  merely  in  an  assent  to  His  teaching,  but  in  the  worship
of  His  Person.  No  sooner  had  He  ascended  to  His  throne  than
there  burst  upwards  from  the  heart  of  His  Church  a  tide
of  adoration  which  has  only  become  wider  and  deeper  with
the  lapse  of  time.  In  the  first  days  of  the  Church,  Christians
-were  known  as  Hhose  who  called  upon  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ  ®.'  Prayer  to  Jesus  Christ,  so  far  from  being  a  devotional
eccentricity,  was  the  universal  practice  of  Christians;  it  was
the  act  of  devotion  which  specially  characterized  a  Christian.
It  would  seem  more  than  probable  that  the  prayer  offered
by  the  assembled  apostles  at  the  election  of  St.  Matthias,
was  addressed  to  Jesus  glorified^.    A  few  months  later  the

*  Thus  Ananias  pleads  to  our  Lord  that  Saul  'hath  authority  from  the
chief  priests  to  bind  •ici.inas  rovs  iviKaXovfi^vovs  rh  tvoixd  (rov.*  (Acts  ix.  14.)
On  St.  Paul's  first  preaching  in  Jerusalem,  '  All  that  heard  him  were  amazed,
and  said.  Is  not  this  he  that  destroyed  in  Jerusalem  rohs  imKoXovfifvovs
rh  oyofAa  toOto  ;*  (Ibid.  ver.  a  I.)  Thus  the  title  was  applied  to  Christians
both  by  themselves  and  by  Jews  outside  the  Church.  In  after  years  St.  Paul
inserts  it  at  the  beginning  of  his  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  which  is
addressed  to  the  Church  of  God  at  Corinth  <rhv  irao't  raits  4inK<i\oviJ.4pois  rh
Svo/jLu  rod  Kvplov  tj/huu  *lri<rov  Xpitrrov,  (i  Cor.  i.  a.)  The  expression  is
illustrated  by  the  dying  prayer  of  St.  Stephen,  whom  his  murderers  stoned
iviKoXovfievov  Koi  \eyoura,  *  KtJpie  *lT7<roC,  be^ai  rh  irvevfid  fiov,*  (Actsvii.  59.)
It  cannot  be  doubted  that  in  Acts  xxii.  16,  a  Tim.  ii.  2  a,  the  Person  Who
is  addressed  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  'EmKoKeTadcu  is  not  followed  by  an
accusative  except  in  the  sense  of  i^pealing  to  G-od  or  man.  Its  meaning
is  dear  when  it  is  used  of  prayer  to  the  Eternal  Father,  i  St.  Pet.  i.  1 7 ;
Acts  ii.  a  I  (but  cf.  Bom.  x.  13) ;  or  of  appeal  to  Him,  a  Cor.  i.  a3 ;  or  of
appeal  to  a  human  judge.  Acts  xxv.  11,  la,  ai,  35 ;  xxvi.  3a,  xxviii.  19.
Its  passive  use  occurs  in  texts  of  a  different  construction:  Acts  iv.  36;
X.  18;  xii.  la;  xv.  17 ;  Heb.  xi.  16;  St.  James  ii.  7.

'  Acts  i.  34 :  Ka\  vpoaev^d^^voi  tXvov,  '  "Xh  Kvpie  KapSioyvutrra  irdurau,  d.vd-
Hei^ou  iK  rovruv  rSov  Svo  eVo  ^i^  i^€\4^(o '  k.t.X,  The  selection  of  the  twelve
apostles  is  always  ascribed  to  Jesus  Christ.  Acts  i.  a :  ots  i^eke^aro.
St.  Luke  vi.  13 :  vpo(r€(f><&pr}a'€  rohs  fxadririis  ainov'  koI  iKke^dfituos  &ir'  avrwp
8fi68eica,  ots  iced  &iFoa'r6\ovs  a>v6fia(re»  St.  John  vi.  *jo\  ovk  4yii)  ifias  rohs
9<&S€Ka  i^cKe^d/xriy ;  Ibid.  xiii.  18 :  4y^  oUa  ots  i^eKe^dfiriy,  Ibid.  xv.  16 :
ovx  ^M'^'ts  fie  i^€\4^aad€^  &AA.*  4yi»  4^€\f^dfjfnv  t>fjias.  Ibid.  ver.  19:  4yw
4^€\€^dnrjv  vfias  4k  rod  KSfffiov,  Meyer  quotes  Acts  xv.  7 :  6  Qehs  4^€\4^aro
dtik  rod  {rr6tiar6s  /xov  &K0v<rai  Tcfc  ^Bini  rhu  hSyov  rov  (vayyeXiov,  in  order  to
shew  that  the  Eternal  Father  must  have  been  addressed.  But  this  assumes
that  0€<fs  can  have  no  reference  to  our  Lord.  Moreover  St.  Peter  is  clearly
referring,  not  to  his  original  call  to  the  apostolate,  but  to  his  being  directed
to  evangelize  the  Gentiles.  St.  Paul  was  indeed  accustomed  to  trace  up  his
apostleship  to  the  Eternal  Father  as  the  ultimate  Source  of  all  authority
(Gal.  i.  15 ;  a  Cor.  i.  i ;  Eph.  i.  i ;  a  Tim.  i.  i) ;  but  this  is  not  inconsistent
with  the  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  chose  and  sent  all  the  apostles,  and  in  par-
ticular himself:  i  Tim.  i.  1 2,  difievos  tls  Suucovicaf :  Bom.  i.  5,  di  ov  4\dfiofi€v
X^^v  Kol  tLTtoaroK'tiv,    The  epithet  Kap^ioyytUffrTjSt  and  still  more  the  word

vu]


376  The  dying  prayer  of  St.  Stephen.

dying  martyr  St  Stephen  passed  to  his  crown.  Hia  last  cry
was  ft  prayer  to  our  Lord,  moulded  upon  two  of  the  BCren
BayingB  which  our  Lord  Himself  had  uttered  on  the  Ctogs.
JesuB  had  prayed  the  Father  to  forgive  His  executionerB.  JesM
had  commended  His  Spirit  into  the  Father's  hands  t  The
words  which  are  addressed  hy  Jesus  to  the  Father,  are  by
St.  Stephen  addressed  to  Jesus.  To  Jesus  Stephen  turns  in
that  moment  of  supreme  agony ;  to  Jesus  he  prays  for  pardon
on  his  murderers;  to  Jesus,  as  to  the  King  of  the  world  of
spirits,  he  commends  his  parting  soul.  It  is  suggested  that
St.  Stephen's  words  were  '  only  an  ejaculation  forced  from  him
in  the  extremity  of  his  anguish,'  and  that  as  such  they  are
*  highly  unfitted  to  he  made  the  premiss  of  a  theological  in-
ference.' But  the  question  is,  whether  the  earliest  apostolical
Church  did  or  did  not  pray  to  Jesus  Christ.  And  St.  Stephen's
dying  prayer  is  strictly  to  the  point.  An  'ejaculation'  may
shew  more  clearly  than  any  set  formal  prayer  the  ordinary
currents  of  devotional  thought  and  feeling ;  an  ejaculation  ii
more  instinctive,  more  spontaneous,  and  therefore  a  truer  index
of  a  man's  real  mind,  than  a  prayer  which  has  been  used  foryeara
And  how  could  the  martyr's  cry  to  Jesus  have  heen  the  product
of  a  'thoughtlessimpulse')  Dying  men  do  not  cling  to  devotional
fancies  or  to  precarious  opinions ;  the  soul  in  its  last  agony
instinctively  falls  hack  upon  its  deepest  certainties.  Nor  can
the  unpremeditated  ejaculation  of  a  person  dying  in  shame  and
torture  he  credited  with  that  element  of  dramatic  artifice  which
may  in  rare  cases  have  coloured  parting  words  and  actions
when,  alas  t  on  the  brink  of  eternity,  men  have  thought  more
of  a  'place  in  history'  than  of  the  awful  Presence  into  which
they  were  hastening.  Is  it  hinted  that  St.  Stephen  was  a
recent  convert,  not  yet  entirely  instructed  in  the  complete  faith
and  mind  of  the  apostles,  and  not  unlikely  to  exaggerate  par-
ticular features  of  their  teaching  )  But  St.  Stephen  is  erpr^sly
described  as  a  man  'full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  GhostK'

Kipios,  are  equally  iq)pli(aiblo  to  the  Father  and  to  JeeuB  Christ,  Tor  iln
former,  see  St.  John  i.  49,  ii.  15,  -vi  64,  ivi.  30,  ixi.  ly  ;  Kev.  ii,  ij.  It
'was  natural  that  the  apoetles  should  thus  apply  Ui  Jeeas  Christ  (0  £11  op
the  Taoant  chair,  unless  they  had  believed  Him  to  be  out  of  the  reach  of
prayer  or  incapable  of  helping  them.  See  Alford  and  Ola.  in  \oe. ;  Baom-
gartan's  Apost.  Hiat.  in  loo. ;  Waterland,  Works,  ii.  555,

•  Acts  Tii.  59,  60:  iKiBiiB6>^tniii  -rhr  UTtipaiiay,  irura^oi/iffw  iml  f.tytim,
'  Kiptf  '1-riaaS,  S^foi  rh  ityedni  ^ou.'  Bdi  S\  rk  yivara,  txpaii  ^ur^  /nyit^f,
'Kipii,  /iJf  ffT^iTjji  aliroTt  rijir  a/iapruw  rairfiv'

'  Aoti  ri.  5 ;  irtpa  ■Alipii  ilffrtait  Hal  Uffiftam  'Aytai.

[lkct.


Prayer  of  A  nanias  to  Jesus  Christ.       377

As  such  he  had  recently  heen  chosen  to  fill  an  important  office
in  the  Church ;  and  as  a  prominent  missionary  and  apologist
of  the  Gospel  he  might  seem  almost  to  have  taken  rank  with  the
apostles  themselves  Is  it  urged  that  St.  Stephen's  prayer  was
offered  under  the  exceptional  circumstances  of  a  vision  of  Christ
vouchsafed  in  mercy  to  His  dying  servant  ^  ?  But  it  does  not
enter  into  the  definition  of  prayer  or  worship  that  it  must
of  necessity  be  addressed  to  an  invisible  Person.  And  the  vision
of  Jesus  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  Qod  may  have  differed
in  the  degree  of  sensible  clearness,  but  in  its  general  nature  it
did  not  differ,  from  that  sight  upon  which  the  eye  of  every  dying
Christian  has  rested  from  the  beginning.  St.  Stephen  would
not  have  prayed  to  Jesus  Christ  tlien^  if  he  had  never  prayed
to  Him  before;  the  vision  of  Jesus  would  not  have  tempted
him  to  innovate  upon  the  devotional  law  of  his  life ;  the  sight  of
Jesus  would  have  only  carried  him  in  thought  upwards  to  the
Father,  if  the  Father  alone  had  been  the  Object  of  the  Church's
earliest  adoration.  St.  Stephen  would  never  have  prayed  to
Jesus,  if  he  had  been  taught  that  such  prayer  was  hostile  to
the  supreme  prerogatives  of  God ;  and  the  apostles,  as  mono-
theists,  must  have  taught  him  thus,  unless  they  had  believed
that  Jesus  is  God,  Who  with  the  Father  is  worshipped  and
glorified.

Indeed  St.  Stephen's  prayer  may  be  illustrated,  so  far  as  this
point  is  concerned,  by  that  of  Ananias  at  Damascus.  To  Ananias
Jesus  appeared  in  a  vision,  and  desired  him  to  go  to  the  newly-
converted  Saul  of  Tarsus  '  in  the  street  that  is  called  Straight.*
The  reply  of  Ananias  is  an  instance  of  that  species  of  prayer  in
which  the  soul  trustfully  converses  with  God  even  to  the  verge
of  argument  and  remonstrancei,  while  yet  it  is  controlled  by  the
deepest  sense  of  God's  awful  greatness :  *  Lord,  I  have  heard  by
many  of  this  man,  how  much  evil  he  hath  done  to  Thy  saints  at
Jerusalem :  and  here  he  hath  authority  from  the  chief  priests
to  bind  all  that  call  on  Thy  Name  k.'     Our  Lord  overrules  the


>  So  apparently  Meyer  in  loc. :  'Das  Stephanns  Jesum  anrief,  war  hdchst
nattirlich,  da  er  eben  Jesum  fiir  ilin  bereit  stehend  geseben  hatte.'

i  For  siniilar  colloquies  with  God  in  prayers,  see  Gen.  xviii.  23-33;
Exod.  iv.  10-13;  I  Kings  xx.  14;  Jer.  i.  6-9;  Jonah  iv.  9,  10;  Acts  x.
13-15.  Compare  Ps.  Iznv.  i-ii ;  Ps.  xliv.  passim,  and  Lnitat.  Ghristi,
lib.  iii.  17,  etc.

^  Acts  ix.  13,  14:  K^ic,  hx^Koa  hnch  -koKKmv  Tcpl  tov  dv^phs  ro^ovy  Utra
KiuA  hrolfifft  To7s  ayiois  crov  4v  'Upov(ra\4ifi'  icol  £8c  Ixci  i^ovalav  irapik  ruk
kpxi€p4wy,  t^aai  xdyras  robs  4iriKdKovfi4yovs  rh  tyofxd  aov,

vn]


378  Si.  PauFs  first  prayers  io  yesus.

objectione  of  His  BerTant.  But  what  tnau  baa  not  at  times
prayed  for  esemption,  when  Qod  has  made  it  plain  that  He  wills
him  to  undertake  some  difficult  dutj,  or  to  embrace  some  sharp
and  heavy  cross  t  Who  has  not  pleaded  with  Qod  the  claims
of  Ris  interests  and  His  honoor  against  what  appears  to  be
His  Will,  BO  long  as  it  has  been  possible  to  doabt  whether
His  Will  is  really  what  it  seems  tobe  t  Ananias'  'remonstrance'
is  a  prayer ;  it  is  a  Bpiritual  colloqay;  it  is  a  form  of  prayer
which  implies  daily,  hourly  familiarity  with  ito  Object ;  it
is  the  language  of  a  soul  habituated  to  constant  commnQioD
with  Jesus.  It  shews  very  remarkably  how  completely  Jcbus
occupies  the  whole  field  of  vision  in  the  soul  of  His  servant
The  '  saints '  whom  Saul  of  Tarsus  has  persecuted  at  Jerusalem,
are  the  '  saints,'  it  is  not  said  of  Ood,  bnt  of  Jesus ;  the  Name
which  is  called  upon  by  those  whom  Saul  has  authority  to
bind  at  Damascus,  is  the  Name  of  Jesus.  Ananias  does  not
glance  at  One  higher  than  Jesus,  as  if  Jesus  were  lower  than
Qod ;  Jesus  is  to  Ananias  his  God,  the  liecipient  of  his  worship,
and  yet  the  Friend  before  Whom  he  can  plead  the  secret
thoughts  of  his  heart  with  earnestness  and  freedom.

But  he  to  whom,  at  the  crisis  of  a  far  greater  destiny,  Abs-
nias  brought  consolation  and  relief  from  Jesn^  was  himself
conspicuous  for  his  devotion  to  the  adorable  Person  of  our  Lord'.
Even  at  the  very  moment  of  his  conversion,  Sanl  of  Tarsiis
sought  guidance  from  Jesus  Christ  in  prayer,  as  from  the  lawfiJ
Lord  of  his  being.  'Lord,'  he  cried,  'what  shall  I  do"1*
And  when  afterwards  in  the  temple  our  Lord  bade  St,  Paul,
'  Make  haste  and  get  thee  quickly  out  of  Jerusalem,'  we  find  the
Apostle,  like  Ananias,  unfolding  to  Jesus  his  secret  thonghU,
his  fears,  his  regrets,  his  confessions ;  laying  them  out  before
Him,  and  waiting  for  an  answer  from  Jesus  in  the  secret
chambers  of  his  soul".  Indeed  St.  Paul  constantly  uses  lan-
guage which  shews  that  be  habitually  thought  of  Jesus  as  A
Divine  Provideuce  in  a  Human  Form,  watching  over,  befnendiig,
consoling,  guiding,  providing  for  him  and  his,  with  Infinite  fore-

1  That  Acts  ii.  11,  Mot  -yhf  irpocrtfixtTai,  rafera  to  prayera  addrMsed  lo
Chrisc  \%  rendered  at  leut  probable  by  the  pnyers  of  St.  Paul  at  liii  coi'
TerBion  and  in  the  temple.  Acts  iiii.  lO,  19,  lO.  For  the  me  of  ■»»»»■
XeirSai,  of  prayer  to  Chnst,  aeo  Aots  i.  14.

"  Acts  iiii.  10,  tI  iraikso,,  Kipit ;

'  Ibid.  vers.  19,  10:  Kipit,  odral  MirrarTiu,  Sri  f^  fitiir  ^uAonIfiir  vi
Stpaf  mri  Tcti  minryoyi!  rabt  rirrrtiarTas  inl  ai'  Kol  trt  l^tx'"'  ^bilfW
Irt^ijivv  Tov  fxdpTvpAs  aoOf  Kol  aitrir  ^hhp  i^ttrr^t  kbI  avvf^OKtii'  i^  ohu'
pdau  uttrev,  xol  ^uXdimaiii  Ti  liidria  T&r  lanupoinmi'  ainir.

[lbCT.


Prayer  to  Jesus  in  St  PauVs  Epistles.     379

Bight  and  power,  but  also  with  the  tenderness  of  a  human  sym-
pathy. In  this  sense  Jesus  is  placed  on  a  level  with  the  Father
in  St.  Paid's  two  earliest  Epistles.  '  Now  God  Himself  and  our
Father,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  direct  our  way  unto  you  o ; '
*  Now  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  and  God,  even  our  Father,
"Which  hath  loved  us,  and  hath  given  us  everlasting  consolation
aaid  good  hope  through  grace,  comfort  your  hearts,  and  stablish  you
in  every  good  word  and  work  p.*  Thus  Jesus  is  associated  with
the  Father,  in  one  instance  as  directing  the  outward  movements
of  the  Apostle's  life,  in  another  as  building  up  the  inward  life
of  the  recent  converts  to  Christianity.  In  other  devotional  ex-
pressions the  Name  of  Jesus  stands  alone.  *  I  trust  in  the  Lord
Jesus,*  so  the  Apostle  writes  to  the  Philippians,  *  to  send  Timo-
theus  shortly  unto  you  <i.'  *  I  thank  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,'  so
lie  assures  St.  Timothy,  *  Who  hath  given  me  power,  for  that  He
counted  me  faithful,  putting  me  into  the  ministry  V  Is  not
this  the  natural  language  of  a  soul  which  is  constantly  engaged
in  communion  with  Jesus,  whether  it  be  the  communion  of
praise  or  the  communion  of  prayer  ?  Jesus  is  to  St.  Paul,  not
a  deceased  teacher  or  philanthropist,  who  has  simply  done  his
great  work  and  then  has  left  it  as  a  legacy  to  the  world ;  He  is
God,  ever  living  and  ever  present,  the  Giver  of  temporal  and  of
spiritual  blessings,  the  Guide  and  Friend  of  man  both  in  man's
outward  and  in  his  inward  life.  If  we  had  no  explicit  records  of
prayers  offered  by  St.  Paul  to  Jesus,  we  might  be  sure  that  such
prayers  were  offered,  since  otherwise  the  language  which  he
employs  could  not  have  been  used.  But,  in  point  of  fact,  the
Apostle  has  not  left  us  in  doubt  as  to  his  faith  or  his  practice
in  this  respect.  *If,'  he  asserts,  *thou  shalt  confess  with
thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart
that  God  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved.
For  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness ;  and  with

*  I  Thess.  iii.  II :  Aur^s  %\  b  0e^j  iro)  TTar^p  ^luav^  koX  b  Kiuptos  Tifiutf
'Iriaovs  XpurrhSf  KarcvOtiycu  r^u  dBhu  rjfiuu  vphs  vfxas.

P  2  Thess.  ii.  l6,  175  avrhs  9^  b  K^pios  Tinajf  *lT)<rovs  Xpia-rhs,  ical  b  Qehs
Kott  Tlar^p  rifjicov,  b  ayairfi(ras  tj/jms  Koi  dobs  irctpaKKiiffiv  amviav  KoiX  iXiri^a
iryad^y  iv  x^^'^h  iFapojcaXiffai  v^lSov  rhs  Kapilas,  koX  arripi^cu  vfias  iv  vaml
X6yep  Koi  ^pyv  i.yad^,

«  Phil.  ii.  19 :  4\iflC(a  8i  iv  Kvplcp  *lri(rov,  Tifx6B€ov  raxfcos  ir€jUt|/oi.  'This
hope  was  iy  Kvpi^  *l7)a-ov  :  it  rested  and  centred  in  Him ;  it  arose  from  no
extraneous  feelings  or  expectations,  and  so  would  doubtless  be  fulfilled.'
Bp.  EUicott  in  loc.     Compare,  too,  Bp.  lightfoot  in  loc.

'  I  Tim.i.  12  :  koI  x^^^  ^X^  "^V  ivhwofid^a-avri  jU6  Xpiarf  *lri<rov  r^  Kupfy
7IIMCV,  5ti  TPtcrrSv  fif  7iyij<rarOy  $4jjl€vos  ets  Huucoylay,

vn]


380  Prayer  to  Jesus

the  mouth  confession  is  made  to  salvation.  For  the  Scripture
saith,  Whosoever  believeth  on  Him  shall  not  be  ashamed.  For
there  is  no  difference  between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek  :  for  the
Same  is  Lord  over  all,  rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  Him.  For
whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord  shall  be
saved  s.'  The  prophet  Joel  had  used  these  last  words  of  prayer
to  the  Lord  Jehovah.  St.  Paul,  as  the  whole  context  shews
beyond  reasonable  doubt,  understands  them  of  prayer  to  Jesus*.
And  what  are  the  Apostle's  benedictions  in  the  name  of  Christ
but  indirect  prayers  offered  to  Christ  that  His  blessing  might  be
vouchsafed  to  the  Churches  which  the  Apostle  is  addressing!
*  Grace  be  to  you  from  God  our  Father,  and  from  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ 'I.'  *The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be
with  you  all  ^.'  Or  what  shall  we  say  of  St.  Paul's  entreaties
that  he  might  be  freed  from  the  mysterious  and  humiliating
infirmity  which  he  terms  his  'thorn  in  the  flesh'!  He  telk
us  that  three  times  he  besought  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that
it  might  depart  from  him,  and  that  in  mercy  his  prayer  was
refused  ^.  Are  we  to  imagine  that  that  prayer  to  Jesus  was
an  isolated  act  in  St.  Paul's  spiritual  life!  Does  any  such
religious  act  stand  alone  in  the  spiritual  history  of  an  ear-
nest and  moderately  consistent  man!     Apostles  believed  that

■  Horn.  X.  9-13:  ^^v  Sixo\(tyfi(rps  iv  ry  crrSfAarl  trov  Kvpiov  'Irjcrovpt  Koi
riffTf^a-ps  4i/  rr}  Kap?ii<f,  ffov  %ri  6  Qehs  ainhv  fjyeipey  ix  veKpwVj  <rof0ii<r]f*  icapiiif
yhp  "KiffTc^erai  els  ^ucau>(r{nfr\v,  crrSfiari  8^  6iio\oyurai  eis  <rt9Ti)piav»  A^ytt
yhp  71  yphxff^,  *  lias  6  xum{wv  iv*  ain^  ob  Korouffxwd^a'ertuJ  Oh  yip  iffri
^ta<rro\)i  *lov^cdov  re  K<d  "EWriyos*  6  yhp  avrhs  K^pios  Trdvrwv,  irKovrm  <is
vdyras  rols  iiriKa\ovfA€vovs  ahr6v,  'Has  yhp  %5  Uv  iviKdK€<nirai  rh  ipoiu
Kvpiov,  <r<oB4]<T€rai,  Gf.  Isa.  zxviii.  1 6 ;  Joel  ii.  32.  Here  St.  Paul  applies
to  Jesus  the  language  which  prophets  had  used  of  the  Lord  Jehovah.  Cf.
Acts  ii.  31.

*  Cf.  Meyer  in  Bom.  x.  la :  6  yhp  alnhs  K^pios  vivruv,  'Dieser  Kitpm
ist  Ghristus,  der  avrds  ver.  ii  und  der  mit  diesem  avr6s  nothwendig  iden*
tische  Kvpios  ver.  13.  Ware  Gott  (i.e.  the  Father)  gemeint,  so  mtisste  man
grade  den  christlichen  Charakter  der  Beweisfiihrniig  erst  hinzutragen  (wie
Olsh, :  'Grott  in  Christo*),  was  aber  wiUktirlich  ware.*  For  Ktf  tos  irdmrnp,
see  Phil.  ii.  ii.    Cf.  St.  Chrys.  in  loc,

»  I  Cor.  i.  3.

'  Bom.  xvi.  ao ;  cf.  Bom.  i.  7.

^  a  Cor.  xii.  8,  9 :  ifvep  tovtov  rpls  rhv  Kvpiov  •irap€K<iX€<ra,  Tvo  Airotrrp  ii'
ifjiov'  Koi  ^pr}K4  fAoi,  '  *ApK€i  ffoi  71  X^P^^  f^^*  ^  y^P  ^vvofils  fjuov  iv  a(rdey((f
T€\6tovTai.'  ^'Burra  olv  iiaKKov  Kavx'fio'ofiai  iv  reus  iurBeyeuus  fiov,  ^b^a  hf
(naivdaffxi  iir*  ifih  ^  SvpofAis  rod  Xpiarov,  Meyer  in  loc. :  'rhv  Kvpioy,  nicht
Gott  (the  Father),  sondem  Christum  (s.  v.  9,  ^  Siivafxts  rod  Xpurrov),  der

ja  der  machtige  B^winger  des  Satan's  ist TTie  Paulus  die  Ant^ort,

den  xpVfMtfKrfi^s  (Matt.  ii.  la  :  Luk.  ii.  6:  Act.  x.  a  a)  von  Christo  emp>
fSEUigen  habe,  ist  una  vollig  unbekannt.'

[user.


.../■■


in  St.  Paul's  Epistles.  381

when  the  First-begotten  was  brought  into  the  inhabited  world,
the  angels  of  heaven  were  bidden  to  worship  Him^c.  They
declared  Him  y,  when  His  day  of  humiliation  and  sufFering  had
ended,  to  have  been  so  highly  exalted  that  the  Name  which  He
had  borne  on  earth,  and  which  is  the  symbol  of  His  Humanity,
was  now  the  very  atmosphere  and  nutriment  of  all  the  upward

*  Heb.  i.  6 :  Zraif  5i  iriXiv  ettraydyp  rhy  irpoor6roRov  €*!  t^i/  oIkov/x^vtjv,
Xey€t,  *  Kal  irpocntuvjiffiroiffav  avr^  vdvrts  &yy€Aoi  0«oi/.*  On  this  passage
Bee  the  exhaustive  note  of  Delitesch,  Comm.  zmn.  Br.  an  die  Hebraer,  pp.
34-39.     '  Die  TiXX.  libers,  hier  ganz  richtig  irpo<ncuvii<rare,  denn  ^inD^H  ist

ja  kein  praet.  comee,,  nnd  Augnstin  macht  die  den  rebhten  Sinn  treifende
Bchone  Bemerkan^ :  "  adorate  £um  ;**  cessat  igitar  adoratio  angelorum,  qui
non  adorantur,  sed  adorant ;  mali  angeli  volunt  adorari,  boni  adorant  nee  se
adorari  permittunt,  ut  vel  saltern  eorum  exemplo  idolatrise  cessent.*  Es  fragt
rich  nun  aber :  mit  welchem  Kechte  oder  auch  nur  auf  welohem  Grunde
bezieht  der  Verf.  eine  Stelle,  die  von  Jehova  handelt,  auf  Christum  ?*  After
discussing  some  unsatisfactory  replies,  he  proceeds :  '  Der  Grundsatz,  von
welchem  der  Verf.  ausgeht,  ist ... .  dieser :  TJeberall  wo  im  A.  T.  von  einer
endzeitigen  letztentscheidenden  Zukunfb  (Parusie),  Erscheinung  und  Erweis-
img  Jehova*s  in  seiner  zugleich  riohterliohen  und  heilwartigen  Macht  und
Herrlichkeit  die  Bede  ist,  von  einer  gegenbildlich  zur  mosaischen  Zeit  siph
verhaltenden  Offenbarung  Jehova'Si  von  einer  Selbstdarstellung  Jehova's  als
Konigs  seines  Beiches :  da  ist  Jehova  ^  Jesus  Christus ;  denn  dieser  ist
Jehova,  geoffenbaret  im  Fleisoh ;  Jehova,  eingetreten  in  die  Menscheit  und
ihre  Greschichte;  Jehova^  aufgegangen  als  Bonne  des  Heils  Uber  seinem
Volke.  Dieser  Grundsa^  ist  auch  unumstosslich  wahr ;  auf  ihm  ruht  der
heilsgeschichtliche  Zusammenhang,  die  tiefinnerste  Einheit  beider  Testa-
mento.  Alle  neutest.  Schrifbsteller  sind  dieses  Bewusstseins  voll,  welches
rich  gleich  auf  der  Schwelle  der  evangelischen  Greschichte  ausspricht ;  denn
dem  ^n  DV  soil  Elia  vorausgehn  Mai.,  iii.  23  f.  und  irph  irpoa't&irov  Kvplov
Johannes  Lc.  i.  76,  vgl.  17.  Darum  rind  auch  alle  Psalmen  in  welchen  die
Verwirklichung  des  welttiberwindenden  Konigthums  Jehova's  besungen
wird,  messianisch  und  werden  von  unserem  Yerf.  als  solche  betrachtet,  denn
die  schliessliche  Glorie  der  Theokratie  ist  nach  heilsgeschichtlichem  Plane
keine  andere  als  die  der  Ghristokratie,  das  Beich  J^ova'i  und  das  Beich
Christi  ist  Eines.*

^  Phil.  ii.  9,  10 :  6  9(hs  ainhv  ^Trcpt^oxrc,  Koi  ix^'-P^^^'^^  ahrip  tvofxa  rh
uirlp  itav  tvofia"  Xva  4v  rtp  hv6fiari  *h)<rov  vav  ySvv  Kdfiy^  iTovpca/icov  lad  ^in-
yeUov  Kcil  KoraxBovUcy'  KciH  vacra  ykufftra  i^ofjioXoyiitnjrai  ^Tt  KT&pios  'Irjffovs
Xpttrrhs  eis  i6^av  0€ov  Uarp6s.  See  Alford  in  loc. :  *  The  general  aim  of
the  passage  is  ...  .  the  exaltation  of  Jesus.  The  ds  d6^av  eeov  Tlarp6s
below  is  no  deduction  from  this,  but  rather  an  additional  reason  why  we
should  carry  on  the  exaltation  of  Jesus  until  this  new  particular  is  in-
traduced.  This  would  lead  us  to  infer  that  the  universal  prayer  is  to  be
to  Jesus.  And  this  view  is  confirmed  by  the  next  clause,  where  every
tongue  is  to  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Klpios,  when  we  remember  the
common  expression,  hrucaKeiffBai  rh  ivofJM  Kvpiov,  for  prayer.  Bom  x.  1 3  ;
I  Cor.  i.  3 ;  3  Tim.  ii.  32.'  For  4y  ry  ot^Sfiartf  comp.  i  Kings  viii.  44,  LXX ;
Ps.  xliv.  ip.  Bp.  lightfoot  in  loo. :  '  It  seems  dear  from  ^e  context  that
the  Name  of  Jesus  is  not  only  the  medium,  but  the  object  of  adoration.'

tn]  .


382      Si.  yokn  on  prayer  to  the  Son  of  God.

torrenta  of  prayer  which  rise  from  the  moral  world  beneath  Hii
throne ;  that  as  the  God-Man  He  was  worshipped  by  angela,  bj
men,  and  by  the  spiritE  of  the  dead.  The  practice  of  the  Apostles
did  but  illustrate  their  faith  ;  and  the  prayers  offered  to  Jesiu
by  His  servantB  on  earth  were  belieyed  to  he  but  a  reflection  of
that  worship  which  is  offered  to  Him  by  the  Charch  of  heaven.
If  this  belief  is  Ibbb  clearly  traceable  in  the  brief  EpistJeB  of
St.  Peter  ',  it  is  especially  observable  in  St.  John.  St.  John  is
speaking  of  the  Sou  of  Ood,  when  he  exclaims,  '  This  is  the  con-
fidence that  we  have  in  Him,  that,  if  we  ask  anything  according
to  His  Will,  He  heareth  us :  and  if  we  know  that  He  hear  as,
....  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  that  we  desired  of
Him  =.'  These  petitions  of  the  earthly  Church  correspond  f«  the
adoration  above,  where  the  wounded  Humanity  of  our  Lord  ia
throned  in  the  highest  heavens.  '  I  beheld,  and  loj  in  the  midst
of  the  throne  ....  stood  a  Lamb  as  It  had  been  slain  *>.'  Around
Him  are  three  concentric  circles  of  adoration.  The  inmost  pro-
ceeds from  the  four  mysterious  creatures  and  the  four  and  twenty
elders  who  '  have  harps,  and  golden  vials  full  of  odours,  which
are  the  prayers  of  the  saints".'  These  are  the  courtiers  who  are
placed  on  the  very  steps  of  the  throne ;  they  represent  mora
distant  worshippers.  But  they  too  fall  down  before  the  throne,
and  sing  the  new  song  which  is  addressed  to  the  Lamb  slain  tsA
glorified^ :  ' Thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by
Thy  Blood  oat  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and
nation  ;  and  hast  made  us  unto  our  God  Mugs  and  priests,  and
we  shall  reign  on  the  earth*.'      Around  these,  at  a  greater


oitaiur  Sri  fxot^tf  Tk  alTi^^ara  &  ^rffKafity  nt^r  a&roG.  The  tuUvral  con-
atructicm  of  thia  pagsage  aeems  to  oblige  lu  to  refer  nuroi;  and  t\i  SiKTHia  ts
the  Son  of  God  (ver.  13).  The  paSHBge  i  St.  Joha  iii.  31,  a  doM  not  fn-
bid  thiH ;  it  only  Hheirft  haw  fully,  in  Si.  Jolm'fl  mind,  the  honour  ud
pren)gatiTe«  of  the  Son  »re  tboee  of  the  Father.

''  Bev.  V.  6 ;  Ko!  eIJoi',  cat  ilab  Iv  itiai^  rod  6(i6you  ical  tut  rtoffifur  i&ut
fral  iv  ixitFtf  rav  irpfvQirTtpav,  Apvlar  jtm^irbs  &s  iiripvytxtvof,

°  Ibid.  ver.  S  :  l^x''^^'^  ZKtttrras  KiSApas,  leal  pii\tLS  )(fiuaas  ytfto^n  tvfatr
liiTier,  iS  iiair  ai  rfoirtuxal  rar  leylor,

*  rbid.;  (ittirov  iyditiBv  ToD  iprlov  , , . .  Kot  ^tourir  ifiiir  luurir.

*  Ihid.  ver.  9;  ia^dyjit,  keI  iiyipairas  rf  Sf0  iyias  ir  t$  d/tarl  m,  I*
riain  ipuAiis  kbI  ■r\(lHmii  not  Aaov  moI  tSyias,  mil  ixelnaiu  Jj/iat  ty  ^V  ^I'^
PaaAia  mil  Iiptlt'  nl  BaaAtireiuy  iwi  Tflt  tSi.

[lxct.


The  adoration  of  the  spotless  Lamb.       383

distance  from  the  Most  Holy,  there  is  a  countless  company  of

worshippers :  *  I  heard  the  voice  of  many  angels  round  about  the

throne  $ind  the  creatures  and  the  elders :  and  the  number  of

them  was  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand,  and  thousands  of

thousands ;  saying  with  a  loud  voice.  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  That

was  slain  to  receive  power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,

and  honour,  and  glory,  and  blessing  ^/     Beyond  these  again,  the

entranced  Apostle  discerns  a  thiid  sphere  in  which  a  perpetual

worship  is  maintained.     Lying  outside  the  two  inner  circles  of

conscious  adoration  offered  by  the  heavenly  intelligences,  there

is  in  St.  John's  vision  an  assemblage  of  all  created  life,  which,

whether  it  wills  or  not,  lives  for  Christ's  as  for  the  Father's

glory :  •^And  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on  the

earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in  the  sea,  and  all

that  are  in  them,  heard  I  saying.  Blessing,  and  honour,  and

glory,  and  power,  be  unto  Him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,

and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever «.'     This  is  the  hymn  of

the  whole  visible  creation,  and  to  it  a  response   comes  from

the  inmost  circle  of  adoring  beings,  ratifying  and  harmonizing

this  sublime  movement  of  universal  life :  *  And  the  four  creatures

said,  Amen^.'     And  how  does  the  redeemed  Church  on  earth

bear  her  part  in  the  universal  chorus  of  praise  %  *  Unto  Him

That  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  Own  Blood,

and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  His  Father ;

to  Him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen  1/     It

is  surely  impossible  to  mistake  the  force  and  meaning  of  this

representation  of  the  adoration  of  the  Lamb  in  the  Apocalypse.

This  representation  cannot  be  compared  with  the  Apocalyptic

pictures  of  the  future  fortunes  of  the  Church,  where  the  imagery

employed  frequently  leaves  room  for  allusions  so  diverse,  that  no

interpretation  can  be  positively  assigned  to  a  particular  symbol

without  a  certain  intellectual  and  spiritual  immodesty  in  the

'  Bev.  Y.  II,  la:  Kol  elSov,  xol  i^icovcra  ^wv^p  hyyiXuv  iroXXcuv  KUK\6BiP
Tov  Op6vw  KoX  rSev  C<^wv  K<d  tS>v  vp€<r$vT4pw, .  •  •  •  irol  xiAuiScs  x^^^^^t
X^oi^ey  <pw^  iieyiXjff  '''A|«Ji'  iari  rb  iipvlop  rh  i(r<payfi4yov  \afitiv  rijv  8^
POfup  Ktd  vKovrop  icol  ao<plav  icoi  lax^^  '^^  rifx^v  Kcd  !i6^av  Kcd  ch\oylay*

«  Ibid.  ver.  13:  ira2  irav  Krifffxa  8  itrriy  iy  r&  ohpav^,  koX  iy  tJ  yy,  koI
(nroKdrto  rris  yris,  Ktd  ivrl  r^s  OaXdco'Tis  &  iirri,  koI  t&  iv  oanois  trdvra,  ^Kovffa
^iyovras,  'T^  Koi$rifi4y<p  iitl  rod  Bp6vov  koX  rip  itpvitp  ri  tvKoyla  Kcd  ^  rifiii  iced
^  ^6^a  Kol  rh  Kpdros  els  rohs  aiuvas  rwv  aXdavoiv,     Cf.  vii.  9,  lo.

^  Ibid.  Yer.  14:  ica2  r&  rifftrapa  fwo  tXeyoy,  *Afi'fiy,

'  Ibid.  i.  5,  6:  r^  irYairfi<rcarri  iifias  ko^  \oi(rayri  tijums  &irb  ray  kfxapriSay
^pJSov  iy  r%  oSfxari  avrov*  koH  iirolri<rey  Vfias  $a(ri\(ts  K(d  iepeis  r^  Oe^  icoU
Tlarpl  a2rT«D*  avr^  ^  HS^a  Kcd  rh  Kpdros  ds  rohs  aiotyas  r&y  cu^yuw,  &fiV«


384  Characierislics  of  the  worship  of  Jesus  in  N.  T.

interpreter  who  essays  to  do  so.  You  may  in  vain  endeavour
satisfactorily  to  solve  the  questions  which  encompass  such  points
as  the  number  of  the  beast  or  the  era  of  the  millennium ;  bat
you  cannot  doubt  for  one  moment  "Who  is  meant  by  *  the  Lamb,*
or  what  is  the  character  of  the  worship  that  is  bo  solemnly
offered  to  Him.

But  upon  this  worship  of  Jesus  Christ  as  we  meet  with  it  in
the  apostolical  age,  let  us  here  make  three  observations.

a.  First,  then,  it  cannot  be  accounted  for,  and  so  set  aside,  as
being  part  of  an  undiscriminating  cultus  of  heavenly  or  super-
human beings  in  general.  Such  a  cultus  finds  no  place  in  tbe
New  Testament,  except  when  it,  or  something  very  much  re*
sembling  it,  is  expressly  discountenanced.  By  the  mouth  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  New  Testament  reaffirms  the  Sinaitic  law
which  restricts  worship  to  the  Lord  God  Himself  k.  St.  Peter
will  not  sanction  the  self-prostrations  of  the  grateful  ComeUus,
lest  Cornelius  should  think  of  him  as  more  than  human  I
When,  at  Lystra,  the  excited  populace,  with  their  priest,  desired
to  offer  sacrifice  to  St.  Paul  and  St.  Barnabas,  as  to  *  deities
who  had  come  down  to  them  in  the  likeness  of  men,'  the
Apostles  in  their  unfeigned  distress  protested  that  they  were  but
men  of  like  feelings  with  those  whom  they  were  addressing,  and
claimed  for  the  living  God  that  service  which  was  His  exclusive
right  ^.  When  St.  John  fell  at  the  feet  of  the  angel  of  the
Apocalypse,  in  profound  acknowledgment  of  the  marvellous
privileges  of  sight  and  sound  to  which  he  had  been  admitted,  he
was  peremptorily  checked  on  the  ground  that  the  angel  too  was
only  his  fellow-slave,  and  that  God  was  the  one  true  Object  of
worship^.  One  of  the  most  salient  features  of  the  Gnostico-
Jewish  theosophy  which  threatened  the  faith  of  the  Church  d
C0I0SS8B  was  the  worshipping  of  angels ;  and  St.  Paul  censures

*  St.  Matt.  iv.  10;  Deut.  vi.  13 ;  x.  ao.    See  Lect.  1,  27 ;  II.  95.

^  Acts  X.  25 :  trwavT'fia'as  avr^  6  KopviiKtos,  ir^a^v  iirX  rohs  iti^aa  vpon*
K6tni(r€y,  6  8e  Tl4rpos  avrhv  Ijyeipe  Xiyoop,  '  'AvdarriBi'  lUkyiif  cJnhs  ivOpitwit
eifit.*

™  Ibid.  xiv.  14,  15:  Hiaf^^can-ts  rh  in&ria  ahr&y  €l<riirffifiirw  tU  rk
^X^o*'*  Kpd(ovT€S  icol  \4yoyr(s,  '"AvSpes,  ri  ravra  voitire ;  Ktd  iifitTs  hiun»-
iraBM  ia/xev  vfuy  &pdpwToi,  tiKKyyt\i^6fi€uoi  t^/ios  inrh  ro'lnwv  rw  luerainf
iri<rrp4<l>ftv  4ir\  rhv  Qcbv  rhv  C&vra,*

^  Kev.  xxii.  8, 9 :  irol  iyii>  'Iwdvvris  6  fi\4irwv  ravra  ica2  htoitnr  kcH  8r«  ffjcowra
KoX  t^Ke^oLt  %v€(ra  7rpo<nevvri(rai  tfXTrpotrBtv  rSov  icd^Siv  rov  iiyy4\ou  rod  Scoc-
piovrds  fioi  ravra.  ical  \4yti  fioi,  '"Opa  fiii'  <HnfSov\6s  aov  ydp  ttfu  icat  T»r
oScX^wv  (Tov  rwjf  irpo<l>rir60Vy  Koi  rw  rjipoinnwv  rohs  Xiyovs  rov  fitfihiov  tov>
ToV  Ty  0«y  vpoffKvyriffoVt


k


(a)  No  instances  of  secondary  worship  in  theN.  7".  385

it  because  it  tended  to  loosen  men's  hold  upon  the  incommu-
nicable prerogatives  of  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  o.  Cer-
tainly the  New  Testament  does  teach  that  we  Christians  have
close  communion  with  the  blessed  angels  and  with  the  sainted
dead,  such  as  would  be  natural  to  members  of  one  great  and
really  undivided  family.  The  invisible  world  is  not  merely
above,  it  is  around  us;  we  have  come  into  it;  and  Christ's
kingdom  on  earth  and  in  heaven  p  forms  one  supernatural  whole.
But  the  worship  claimed  for,  accepted  by,  and  paid  to  Jesus,
stands  out  in  the  New  Testament  in  the  sharpest  relief.  This
relief  is  not  softened  or  shaded  off  by  any  instances  of  an  in-
ferior homage  paid,  whether  legitimately  or  not,  to  created  beings.
We  do  not  meet  with  any  clear  distinction  between  a  primary
and  a  secondary  worship,  by  which  the  force  of  the  argument
might  have  been  more  or  less  seriously  weakened.  Worship  is
claimed  for,  and  is  given  to,  God  alone ;  and  if  Jesus  is  wor-
shipped, this  is  simply  because  Jesus  is  God  <i.

^.  The  wordiip  paid  to  Jesus  in  the  apostolic  age  was  cer-
tainly in  many  cases  that  adoration  which  is  due  to  the  Most
High  God,  and  to  Him  alone,  from  all  His  intelligent  creatures.
God  Himself  must  needs  have  been,  then  as  ever,  the  One
Object  of  real  worship.    But  the  Eternal  Son,  when  He  became

*  Col.  ii.  18:  /Ai^Scls  v[M.i  KaTa$pa$€v4r69  d4\w  iv  rairtivo^potr^rvrf  ical
efyriCKetcf.  rS>v  wyyi\<av.  The  Apostle  condemns  this  (i)  on  the  moral  ground
that  the  Gnostic  teacher  here  alluded  to  claimed  to  be  in  possession  of
truths  respecting  the  unseen  world  of  which  he  really  was  ignorant,  t  \jjl^
O.  !K.  L.]  kt&pcucey  ifi^areluv,  tliai  (f>vtno{fix€vos  ivh  rod  vohs  rfjs  aapKhs
avTov :  (2)  On  the  dogmatic  ground  of  a  resulting  interference  with  due
recognition  of  the  Headship  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  One  Source  of  the  super-
natural life  of  the  Church,  koH  oh  Kparuv  rV  K€<paX^v,  4^  oh  vay  rh  (rcofxa
dih  rS>v  oupStv  Ktd  avvdeo'fxofu  ivixoprr^ovfiivov  koIX  avfifitfia^dfieyoy,  aH^ei  rijy
oJj^rjfrtu  rov  0€ov,

P  Heb.  xii.  2  a :  irpoo'eXriX^daTt  ^i^v  6p€i,  ko^  irSKei  Beov  (Svros,  *Upov'
(TaX^fx  ivovpoufi^,  K(d  fivptdfftv  iirfy^KwVt  vamiyvpei  Koi,  iKicKriffiq,  TcparoTSKtav
kv  ohpavots  ikToytypaixiuLfvaPf  K(d  Kpiry  &(^  irAifTwv,  Ktd  truf^fiaffi  ZiKoiav
r€Tt\€icofiev(oVf  koX  Siad^KrjS  vias  fie<riTy  *lri<rov,

4  The  'worship*  of  Buddha  has  sometimes  been  compared  to  that  of
our  Divine  Lord,  as  if  Buddha  were  regarded  as  a  real  divinity  by  his  fol-
lowers. But  'le  Bouddha  reste  homme,  et  ne  cherche  jamais  k  d^passer  les
limites  de  Thumanit^,  au  delk  de  laquelle  il  ne  con9oit  rien.  L*enthousiasme
de  ses  disciples  a  6i6  aussi  r^serv^  que  lui-mSme :  dans  le  culte  innocent
qu'ils  lui  rendaient,  leur  forveur  s^adressait  d  un  souvenir  consolateur  et
fortifiant;  jamais  leur  superstition  interessee  ne  s'adressait  cL  sa  puis-
sance •  .  .  .  X^i  Torgueil  de  ^^kyamouni,  ni  le  fanatisme  des  croyants,  n*a
oon9u  un  sacril^e ;  le  Bouddha,  tout  grand  qu^il  se  oroit,  n*a  point  risqu^
Tapoth^ose;  ....  jamais  personne  n'a  song^  k  en  faire  un  dieu.*  Saint-
Hilaire,  Le  Botiddha^  p.  168.  .

VU  ]  .  C  C


386  (/8)  yestcs  worshipped  with  adoration  due  to  God.

Man,  ceased  not  to  be  Ood.  As  God,  He  received  from  those
who  believed  in  Him  the  only  worship  which  their  faith  could
render  ^  This  is  clear  from  the  representations  of  heavenly  wor-
ship in  the  Apocalypse,  which  we  have  been  considering,  even
if  we  take  no  other  passages  into  account.  The  Apocalyptic
worship  of  our  glorified  Lord  is  not  any  mere  honorary  aclmow-
lodgment  that  His  redemptive  work  is  complete.  Even  at  the
moment"  of  His  Incarnation  worship  is  addressed  to  Christ's
Divine  and  Eternal  Person.  Doubtless  the  language  of  devotion
to  Him  which  we  find  in  the  Gospels  represents  many  postures
of  the  human  soul,  ranging  between  that  utter  seK-prostration
which  we  owe  to  the  Most  High,  and  that  trustful  familiarity
with  which  we  pour  our  joys  and  sorrows,  our  hopes  and  fears
into  the  ear  of  a  human  friend.  Such  '  lower  forms '  of  worship
lead  up  to,  and  are  explained  by,  the  higher.  They  illustrate
the  condescension  and  purpose  of  the  Incarnation.  But  the
familiar  confidence  which  the  Incarnation  invites  cannot  be
pleaded  against  the  rights  of  the  Incarnate  God.-  A  free,  trust-
ful, open-hearted  converse  with  Christ  is  compatible  with  the
lowliest  worship  of  His  Person;  Christian  confidence  even  4eans
upon  His  breast  at  supper,'  while  Christian  faith  discerns  BLis
Glory,  and  '&lls  at  His  feet  as  dead.'

y.  The  apostolic  worship  of  Jesus  Christ  embraced  His
Manhood  no  less  than  it  embraced  His  Godhead  ^.   According  to

»  Meyer's  remarks  are  veiy  far  from  satisfactory.  'Das  Anrufen  Christi
ist  nicht  das  Anbeten  schlechthin,  wie  es  nur  in  Betreff  des  Vaters,  als  des
einigen  absoluten  Gottes  (t)  geschieht,  wohl  aber  die  Anbetung  nach  der
dxach  das  Verhaltniss  Ghristi  zum  Vater  (dessen  wesensgleioher  Sohn,
Ebenbild,  Throngenosse,  Vermittler,  und  Ftirsprecher  fUr  die  Menschen
n.  s.  w.  er  ist)  bedingten  Kelativitat  im  betenden  Bewusstsein  ....  Der
Christum  Anrnfende  ist  sich  bewusst,  er  mfe  ihn  nicht  als  den  schlech-
thinigen  Gott,  sondem  als  den  gottmenschlichen  Vertreter  und  Mittler
Gottes  an.*  In  Bom.  x.  la  our  Lord  is  represented  as  being  equal  with
the  Father  (p.  380,  note),  and  equally  with  Him  entitled  to  adoration.
Adoration  is  strictly  due  to  the  Uncreated  Substance  of  God,  and  to  Jesus
Christ  as  being  personally  of  It.  The  mediatorial  functions  of  His  Man-
hood cannot  affect  the  bearings  of  this  truth.  See  Waterland's  profound
remarks  on  '  Scripture's  seeming  in  some  places  to  found  Christ's  title  to
worship  not  so  much  upon  what  He  is  in  Himself,  as  upon  what  He  has
done  for  us.*    Works,  vol.  i.  p.  435.

■  Cat.  Bac.  p.  164.

*  Cf.  Pearson,  Minor  Theological  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  307:  'Chiistus  sive
Homo  Ble  Qui  est  Mediator,  adoratus  est.  Heb.  i.  6;  Apoc.  v.  11,  la.
Hffic  est  plenissima  descriptio  adorationis.  Et  hie  Agnus  oocisus  erat  Homo
iUe,  Qui  est  Mediator ;  Ergo  Homo  Die,  Qui  est  Mediator  est  adorandus.
St.  Greg.  Nazianzen«  Epist.  ci.:  Eins  ix^  vpoffKW€i  rdv  IffTavpwjJiivf^,  &yd0€/M

[lsct.


■H


(y)  Adoration  of  the  Sacred  Manhood  of  Jesus.  38  7

V

St«  Paul  His  Human  Name  of  Jesus,  that  is,  His  Human  Nature,
is  worshipped  on  earth,  in  heaven,  and  among  the  dead.  It
is  not  the  Unincamate  Logos,  but  the  wounded  Humanity  of
Jesus,  Which  is  enthroned  and  adored  in  the  vision  of  the
Apocalypse.  To  adore  Christ's  Deity  while  carefully  refusing
to  adore  His  Manhood  would  be  to  forget  that  His  Manhood
is  for  ever  joined  to  His  Divine  and  Eternal  Person,  Which  is
the  real  Object  of  our  adoration.  Since  He  has. taken  the
Manhood  into  Qod,  It  is  an  inseparable  attribute  of  His  Per-
sonal Qodhead;  every  knee  must  bend  before  It;  henceforth  the
angels  themselves  around  the  throne  must  adore,  not  as  of  yore
the  Unincamate  Son,  but  '  the  Lamb  as  It  had  been  slain.'

3.  Thus  rooted  in  the  doctrine  and  practice  of  the  apostles,
the  worship  of  Jesus  Christ  was  handed  down  to  succeeding  ages
as  an  integral  and  recognised  element  of  the  spiritual  life  of  the
Church.  The  early  Fathers  refer  to  the  worship  of  our  Lord  as
to  a  matter  beyond  dispute.  The  apostolic  age  had  scarcely
passed,  when  St.  Ignatius  bids  the  Boman  Christians  *put  up
supplications  to  Christ'  on  his  behalf,  that  he  might  attain
the  distinction  of  martyrdom^.  St.  Polycarp's  Epistle  to  the
Philippians  opens  with  a  benediction  which  is  in  fact  a  prayer
to  Jesus  Christ,  as  being,  together  with  the  Almighty  Father,
the  Giver  of  peace  and  mercy  ^.  Polycarp  prays  that  *the  Qod
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  Eternal  Priest
Himself,  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  would  build  up  his
readers  in  faith  and  truth  and  in  all  meekness,  •  •  .  and  would
give  them  a  part  and  lot  among  the  saints  y.'     And  at  a  later

^(TTa,  Ktii  rerdxOw  fierh  rQv  OeoKTSvwv*  Cf.  also  Ibid.  p.  308:  'Christus,
qu&  est  Mediator,  est  nnidt  adoratione  oolendus.  Concil.  Gen.  V.  GoUat.
viii.  can.  9.  Si  quis  adorari  in  duabus  naturis  dicit  Christmn,  ex  quo  duas
adorationes  introducat,  semotim  Deo  Verbo,  et  semotim  Homini:  aut  si
quis  .....  adorat  Christum,  sed  non  und  adoratione  Deum  Verbum  Incar-
natum  cum  Ejus  Game  adorat,  extra  quod  sanctse  Dei  ecclesise  ab  initio
traditum  est ;  talis  anathema  sit.*  See  the  whole  of  this  and  the  preceding
'Deteimination.*  And  compare  St.  Cyril's  8th  Anathema ;  Damaso.,  iv.  5 ;
Hooker,  E.  P.  v.  54,  9.

»  St.  Ign.  ad  Bom.  4 :  \irapei(rar€  rhv  Xpurrhv  [rhv  K^piov  ed.  Dressel^
which,  however,  must  here  mean  our  Lord]  ifirep  4fjL0Vf  tya  8ick  twv  opydycoy
To^atv  [Qe^  ed.  Dressel]  dvffia  tipeOQ,     Cf.  ad  Magn.  7.

'  St.  Polyc.  ad  Phil,  i :  ^\€os  ifuv  Koi  tlpiitrfj  Tap^  &€ov  TcanoKpdropos
Ktd  Kvplov  *lTi<rov  XpiiTTOv  rod  2»rripos  iifiSiv  icKniBvvBtin,

f  Ibid.  I  a :  'Deus  autem  et  Pater  Domini  nostri  Jesu  Christi,  et  ipse
Sempitemus  Pontifex,  Dei  Filius  Jesus  Christus,  sdificet  vos  in  fide  et

veiitate  et  in  omni  mansuetudine, et  det  vobis  sortem  et  partem

inter  sanctos  suos.*

vn]  c  0  a


388  Theworship  of  Jesus  in  the  subapostolu  Fathers;

day,  standing  bound  at  the  pyre  of  martyrdom,  he  cries,  'For  all
thmgs,  O  God,  do  I  praise  and  bless  and  glorify  Thee,  together
with  the  Eternal  and  Heavenly  Jesus  Christ,  Thy  well-beloved
Son,  with  Whom,  to  Thee  and  the  Holy  Ohost,  be  glory,  both
now  and  for  ever.     Amen  *.*     After  his  death,  Nicetas  begged
the  proconsul  not  to  deliver  up  his  body  for  burial,  'lest  the
Christians  should  desert  the  Crucified  One,  and  should  begin  to
worship  this  new  martyr  *.'    The  Jews,  it  appears,  employed  an
argument  which  may  have  been  the  language  of  sarcasm  or  of
a  real   anxiety.     'They  know  not,*   continues  the  encyclical
letter  of  the  Church  of  Smyrna,  '  that  neither  shall  we  ever  be
able  to  desert  Christ  Who  suffered  for  the  salvation  of  all  who
are  saved  in  the  whole  world,  nor  yet  to  worship  any  other.
For  Him  indeed,  as  being  the  Son  of  God,  we  do  adore ;  but
the  martyrs,  as  disciples  and  imitators  of  the  Lord,  we  worthily
love  by  reason  of  their  unsurpassed  devotion  to  Him  their  own
King  and  Teacher.     God  grant  that  we  too  may  be  fellow-
partakers  and  fellow-disciples  with  them  ^.*    The  writers  of  this
remarkable  passage  were  not  wanting  in  love  and  honour  to  the
martyr  of  Christ.      'Afterward,'  say  they,  'we,  having  taken
up  his  bones,  which  were  more  precious  than  costly  stones,  and
of  more  account  than  gold,  placed  them  where  it  was  fitting «.'
But  they  draw  the  sharpest  line   between   such  a  tribute  of
affection  and  the  worship  of  the  Redeemer;   Jesus  was  wor-
shipped as  'being  the  Son  of  God.'     The  Apologists  point  to
the  adoration  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  well  as  to  that  of  the  Father,
when  replying  to  the  heathen  charge  of  atheism.     St.  Justin
protests  to  the   emperors  that  the   Christians  worship   God
alone  d.    Yet  he  also  asserts  that  the  Son  and  the  Spirit  eJiare  in
the  reverence  and  worship  which  is  offered  to  the  Father®;   and

■  Mart.  St.  Polyc.  c.  14,  apud  Hefele,  Patr.  Ap.  p.  131.

*  Ibid.  c.  17:   /A^,  ^i\a\v^   a^ivr^i  rhv  ioTavpcoficvov,  rovrov  Ap^uprtu

^  Ibid. :  &yvoovvT€S,  thi  ofire  rhv  Xpt<rr6v  trort  KaraXiiretv  ivyfie6fie6a  rhv
iw^p  rTJs  Tov  TFcanhs  KSfffiov  r&v  ffcoCo/i^vcov  cwniplas  xaB6vra,  oCre  erepov
Tiva  <r4fi€<r0ai,  rovroy  fi^y  ykp  Tihv  6vra  tov  Beov  Tpoffievvovfiev*  roifs  S^
fxdpTvpaSt  &s  fiaBryriis  icol  fiifiyjrits  rod  KuploVf  &yairw/Atv  d^ias^  cvcica  twoltu
kvtncfpfiK'iyTOv  t^s  tis  rhv  Xfiiov  ficurt\4a  kcU  BiHio'KaXoM'  &¥  yiyoiro  leai  ^/jms
avyKoivo»voij$  re  koH  crvfifiaOririis  yepicBat,

•  Ibid.  c.  18.

*  Apol.  i.  §  17,  p.  ^,  ed.  Otto.  After  quoting  St.  Luke  xx.  aa-35  he
proceeds :  80€v  Qehv  fi€v  fi6vov  irpoaKwovfify,  vfuy  8c  rrpibs  T<i  &Wa  x<'t^'^es
inniptrov/xev,

•  Ibid.  L  §  6,  p.  14,  ed.  Otto :  Kol  ifxoKoyovfiep  tQp  roto{nuv  yofAt(o/i4votp
6euy  &0CO1  elycu,  dW*  oitxl  tov  iLKf^BeoTdrov  Ktd  rrarphs  9ucatoff^yfis  KaHi  o'enffpo'

[lkct.


in  SS.  y  us  tin,  Irenceus,  and  Clement  Alex,    389

in  controversy  with  Tryplio  he  especially  urges  that  prophecy
foretold  the  adoration  of  Messiah  *!.  St.  Irenseus  insists  that  the
miracles  which  were  in  his  day  of  common  occurrence  in  the
Church  were  not  to  be  ascribed  to  any  invocation  of  angels,  nor
yet  to  magical  incantations,  nor  to  any  form  of  evil  curiosity.
They  were  simply  due  to  the  fact  that  Christians  constantly
prayed  to  God  the  Maker  of  all  things,  and  called  upon  the
Name  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  ?.  Clement  of  Alexandria  has
left  us  three  treatises,  designed  to  form  a  missionary  trilogy.
In  one  he  is  occupied  with  converting  the  heathen  from  idola-
try to  the  faith  of  Christ ;  in  a  second  he  instructs  the  new
convert  in  the  earlier  lessons  and  duties  of  the  Christian  faith;
while  in  his  most  considerable  work  he  labours  to  impart  the
higher  knowledge  to  which  the  Christian  is  entitled,  and  so  to
render  him  *the  perfect  Gnostic*  In  each  of  these  treatises,
widely  different  as  they  are  in  point  of  practical  aim,  Clement
bears  witness  to  the  Church's  worship  of  our  Lord.  In  the
first,  his  Hortatory  Address  to  the  Greeks,  he  winds  up  a  long

<Thvy\i  Kol  Twv  tXXnv  ap€r&y,  avevifxlicrov  T€  Kaxlas  6€ov*  iL\\*'iK(iv6v  re,  icai
rhv  vap*^  aifTOv  Tibp  i\66ma  Koi  diBd^cana  rifias  toCto  koI  rhy  twv  ISlKKo»v,
4irofi€Vf0V  Kcd  i^Ofioiovfifvatv  &yaJd&y  iuyyiXtev  (rrparhVf  nyevfid  re  rh  irpo<f>rjri-'
Kov  ffefiSfxeOa  Kcd  vpotnevyovfity  \6y^  K<d  iihrjBfl^  rifiuyrfs.  With  regard  to
the  clause  of  this  passage  which  has  been  the  subject  of  so  much  controversy
(koI  rhy  rS>y  HKKtav  ....  ayyiXxoy  arparhy),  (i)  it  is  impossible  to  make
arparhy  depend  upon  <refi6fi€Ba  Koi  vpoaicvyovfify  without  involving  St.  Justin
in  self-contradiction  (cf.  the  passage  quoted  above),  and  Bellarmine's  argu-
ment based  on  this  construction  (de  Beatitud.  Sanctor.  lib.  i.  c.  13)  proves,
if  anything,  too  much  for  his  purpose,  viz.  that  the  same  worship  was  paid  to
the  s^els  as  to  the  Persons  of  the  Blessed  Trinity.  Several  modems
(quoted  by  Otto  in  loc.)  who  adopt  this  construction  use  it  for  a  very
different  object.  (2)  It  is  difficult  to  accept  Bingham's  rendering  (Ant.
bk.  13,  c.  2,  §  a)  which  joins  &yy4\<ioy  arparhy  and  fjfias  with  StScJlayro,
and  makes  Christ  the  Teacher  not  of  men  only  but  of  the  angel  host.
This  idea>  however,  seems  to  have  no  natural  place  in  the  passage,  and
we  should  have  expected  radra  rjficis  not  fffias  ravra,  (3)  It  seems  better,
therefore,  with  Bull,  Chevallier  (Transl.  p.  15a),  Mohler  (Tubing.  Theol.
Quartalsch.  1833,  Fasc.  i.  p.  53  sqq.,  quoted  by  Otto)  to  make  ayyiXwv
arparhy  and  ravra  together  dependent  upon  ^iSd^ayra:  'the  Son  of  God
taught  us  not  merely  about  these  (viz.  evil  spirits,  cf.  §  5)  but  also  con-
cerning the  good  angels,'  &c. ;  rhy  &,Yy4\coy  arparhy  being  elliptically  put
for  ri  irtpl  rod  .  .  .  &yy4\(oy  arparov,

'  Dial,  cum  Tryph.  c.  68 :  ypacphs,  at  5*o^^^5ijv  rhy  Xpiarhy  #ca2  vadrirhy
Koi,  xpoaKvyqrhy  koIX  %ehy  kirotfiKv^tovaiv*  Ibid.  c.  *j6',  Ka2  AaulS  .  •  •  •
Bihy  taxvphy  koX  vpoaicuvrjrhy,  Xpiarhy  6yra,  ^S^Xoxrc.

*H8Br.  ii.  §  3a:   'Ecclesia nomen  Domini  nostri  Jesu  Christi

invocans,  virtutes  ad  utilitates  hominum,  sed  non  ad  seductionem,  perfidt.*
Observe  too  the  argument  which  follows.

vu]


390  References  to  the  worship  ofyesus  in  TertuIUan.

argomeiitative  mvective  against  idolatiy  with  a  bunt  of  fenid
entreatj  :  'Believe,  O  man,'  be  exclaims,  'in  Him  Wlio  is  boUi
Han  and  God ;  believe,  O  man,  in  the  living  God,  Who  suffered
&nd  Wbo  is  adored  <>.'  The  FKdagogns  concludes  with  a  prayer
of  singular  beauty  ending  in  a  doxoli^j  i,  and- in  these  the  Son
is  womiipped  and  praised  aa  the  EquaJ  of  the  Father.  In  tlw
Stromata,  as  might  be  expected,  prayer  to  Jesus  Christ  is  ratlier
taken  for  granted ;  the  Christian  life  is  to  be  a  continnons
worship  of  the  Word,  and  through  Him  of  the  Father^.  Ter-
tnllian  in  hia  Apology  grapples  with  the  taunt  that  the  Chris-
tians worshipped  a  Man  Who  bad  been  condemned  by  the
Jewish  tribunals  1.  Tertullian  does  not  deny  or  palliate  the
charge  ;  he  justifies  the  Christian  practice.  Whatever  Cbrigt
might  be  in  the  opinion  of  the  pagan  world.  Christians  knew
Him  to  be  of  one  eubetsnce  with  the  Father™.  The  adoration
of  Christ,  then,  was  not  a  devotional  eccentricity ;  it  was  an
absolute  duty.  In  one  passage  Tertullian  argues  against  miied
marriages  with  the  heathen,  because  in  these  cases  there  could  be
no  joint  worship  of  the  Redeemer " ;  elsewhere  he  implies  that
the  worship  of  Jesus  was  co-extensive  with  faith  in  ChriBtianit^^.
Origen's  erratic  intellect  may  have  at  times  betrayed  hijn,  on
this  as  on  other  subjects,  into  language  i>,  more  or  leas  incoii'

*  Pratrept.  o.  X.  p.  84,  ed.  Potter;  Tdrrnxrar,  iuBfrnrt,  irifAnf  nl  etr"

irdrrnnriw,  irSpamt,  rf  nBSim  ical  rpairiaircuiiU^  %f^  fum-  narfitwrt  il
(oSAoi  T^  r«tp$'  rirrii  irepmai,  TivTiiinrrt /iinf  T^  rifTurdyBii^wiirBif'

1  Pffidagog,  Ub.  iii.  0.  7,  p.  311,  ed.  Potter:  Inp  otr  f^nhr  M  niAj
ranryift'i  I'D!!  Arj^ou.  rf  Aiyif  rpaiiTu(<iiitSii'  *Ua9i  TD?r  miii,  mitr/irii.
nuilwt,  ItffHif),  i/rtox'  'Iirju^A,  Tit  koI  Uariip,  'Ev  S/ufm  K6pu,    tht  !i  4^

Toil  aoTl  Iroiiiroii  rapar/yi^/iairi  rb  jfiolvfin  itATipSoBi nuvCrriu  li-

XapuTTtiii,  [lixfi'Toihrras]  olviTv,  rfi  liirtf  norpl  jral  Tiy,  Ti(l  ut  Uarfi,
waiiayiry0  koI  Siimrrii-if  Yi'f,  /rbr  wol  T$  a-fUf  nyti/um,  rirra  r^  "t.iA,  hf
T(t  wiina.  Si'  tv  ^i.  Tina  Ev,  .  .  ,  f  ^  M{a  jial  nr  nil  Ei't  cdmras.

*  See  the  fine  pueage,  Stromst.  lib.  vli.  o.  7,  ad  init.  p.  851,  ed.  Potts.
'  Apoli^.  o.  31 :  '  Sed  et  valgus  jam  gdt  Chiietani  ut  nomiDom  iHqno,

qnalem  Jud»i  jadicaTeruiit,  quo  faciliua  quia  nos  homiiUB  cnltoreB  eiBliiii'
Bverit.  Verum  Deque  de  Chnsto  arnbeacomaa,  enni  aub  nomine  ejm  depu-
tail  et  damnari  jurat.'

"  Ibid. :  '  Hune  ei  Deo  prolatnm  didicimnB,  et  prolati<me  geDantiUD,  «1
iddroa  flliiim  Dei  at  Deum  dicttim,  ex  unilata  Subilanlia,'

"  Ad  TJior.  lib.  ii.  0.  6:  '  Aadlat .  .  .  de  ganeft.  Qus  Dei  mentiel  qiK
Chtistimvocatio?'

*  Adv.  Jud.  e.  7 :  'TJbiqno  ereditur,  sb  omnibua  gentibuB  BOpA  enciina>
atJH  csilitnr,  ubiqna  regnat,  nbique  adorator.'

I'  FuiJcularlj  !□  the  treatise,  De  Oratioue,  a.  15,  voL  i.  ed.  Ben.  p,  llj:
r£t  hi  oiiK  lari  Kori  rhr  ttv6m-    'T(  /u  Kiyiit  iyaSdy;  viStli  iyofti  t(  it


References  to  the  worship  of  Jesus  in  Origen.    391

fidstent  with  his  own  general  line  of  teaching,  by  which  it  must
in  fairness  be  interpreted.  Origen  often  insists  upon  the  worship
of  Jesus  Christ  as  being  a  Christian  duty  Q ;  he  illustrates  this
duty,  especially  in  his  Homilies,  by  his  personal  example  ' ;  he
bases  it  upon  the  great  truth  which  justifies  and  demands  such
a  practiced  acknowledgment  ■•     It  is  in  keeping  with  this  that

ctr  b  6c^s,  b  TlceHip*^  clrciv  &y'  Ti  4fjLoi  vpofftixO  *  ^^^V  f^  TlarpX  irpoa*
w^etrOau  xphf  f  lAyit  Tpofft^xofuu*  liwtp  Biii  r&v  kyluv  ypeup&v  fxayBdytTM'
*Apx<cpc'  7^  '''V  ^^P  ^/Mtfy  K«raffTa04yri  iirh  rod  Tlarp6s,  Kot  vapoKX^^
ivh  rov  Ilarphs  cfveu  \a$6im,  c((x«''^<u  TifMS  oh  Uti,  bXKit  5i*  iipxifp^^ts  koU
wapoKKiiTov  K,r,K,  This  indefensible  language  was  a  result  of  the  line  taken
by  Origen  in  opposing  the  Monarchians.  'As  the  latter,  together  with  the
distinction  of  substance  in  the  Fathw  and  the  Son,  denied  also  that  of  the
Person,  so  it  was  with  Origen  a  matter  of  practical  moment^  on  account  of
the  systematio  connexion  of  ideas  in  his  philosophical  system  of  Christianity,
to  maintain  in  opposition  to  them  the  personal  independence  of  the  Logos.
Sometimes  in  this  controyersy  he  distinguishes  between  unity  of  substance
and  personal  unity  or  unity  of  subject,  so  that  it  only  concerned  him  to
oontrorert  the  latter.  And  this  certainly  was  the  point  of  greatest  practical
moment  to  him ;  and  he  must  have  been  well  aware  that  many  of  the
Fathers  who  contended  for  a  personal  distinction  held  firmly  at  tne  same
time  to  a  unity  of  substance.  But  according  to  the  internal  connexion  of
his  own  system  (Neander  means  his  Platomo  doctrine  of  the  rh  hv)  both
fell  together;   wherever  he  spoke,  therefore,  from  the  position  of  that

rsm,  he  affirmed  at  one  and  the  same  time  the  irtpSrris  rris  oitalas  and
irtp^nis  rris  iirofrrdirtws  or  rod  biroK€ifi4yov.*  Neander,  Gh.  Hist.  ii.
311,  31a.  From  this  philosophical  premiss  Origen  deduces  his  practical
inference  above  noticed:  cl  7^  tripos,  &s  iy  Ahkois  Sclxivrai,  tear*  ovclouf
icat  ^oietlfifv6s  iffrof  b  *Ttbs  rod  Tlarphs,  Ijroi  xpoffHwrnriov  r^  T<$  icol  oh  r^
Tlvrpi,  ^  ififfHyrdpois,  fl  rtp  Tlarpi  lUvtf,  De  Orat.  o.  15,  sub  init.  p.  222.
Although,  ih^  Origen  expresses  his  conclusion  in  Scriptural  terminolofi;y,
it  is  a  conclusion  wMoh  is  traceable  to  his  philosophy  as  distinct  from  ms
strict  religious  belief,  and  it  is  entirely  contradicted  by  a  large  number
of  other  passages  in  Ids  writings.

«  Contr.  Gels.  t.  12,  sub  fin.  voL  i.  p.  587.  Also  Ibid.  viii.  la,  p.  750  (in
juxta-position  with  some  inconsistent  language) :  %va  olv  Ocbv,  &s  &iro8c5i6-
KOfiev,  rhy  TlaT4pa  icoi  rhy  Tihy  O€pairthofi€y  km  fi4yfi  ^fuy  b  irphs  robs  ftXXovs
i,r€y^s  \Syos*  Kcd  oh  rhy  Myayx^s  7c  ^yiyra,  &s  Tp6r€poy  ohx  tyro,  bmtpm
BpflCK^^ofiey,  Ibid.  vilL  26 :  fi6y<p  yh.p  trpoatvicrioy  r^  inl  xaffi  Bc^),  ical
upoaevier^oy  ye  r^  MoyoyeytT,  Kot  Tlp(oror6K^  'ird(n}s  lerlatws,  h6iytp  6coO.

'  See  his  prayer  on  the  furniture  of  the  tabemade,  as  spiritually  ex-
plained,  Hom.  13  in  Exod.  xxxv.  p.  176 :  'Domine  Jesu,  prsesta  mihi,  ut
aliquid  monumenti  habere  merear  in  tabemaculo  Tuo.  Ego  optarem  (si
fieri  posset),  esse  aliquid  meum  in  iUo  auro,  ex  quo  propitiatonum  fabrioatur,
Tel  ex  quo  area  contegitur,  vel  ex  quo  candelabrum  fit  luminis  et  lucemse.
Ant  si  aurum  non  habeo,  argentum  saltem  aliquid  inveniar  offerre,  quod
TOoficiat  in  columnas,  vel  in  bases  earum.  Aut  certe  vel  aeris  aliquid  ....
Tantum  ne  in  omnibus  jejunus  et  infecundus  inveniar.*  Of.  too  Hom.  i.
in  Lev.,  Hom.  v.  in  Lev.,  quoted  by  Bingham,  AxA.  xiii.  2,  %  3.

•  Comm.  in  Bom.  x.  lib.  viii.  vol.  4,  p.  624,  ed.  Ben.,  quoted  by  Bingham,
nbi  supra :  '  [Apostolus]  in  prinoipio  EpistdsB  quam  ad  Corinthios  soribit,

vu]


392  The  worship  of  Jesus  in  O  rig  en  and  Novatian,

Origen  explains  the  franMncense  offered  by  the  wise  men  to
our  Infant  Saviour  as  an  acknowledgment  of  His  Godhead;  since
such  an  action  obviously  involved  that  adoration  which  is  due
only  to  God*.  This  explanation  could  not  have  been  put  for-
ward by  any  but  a  devout  worshipper  of  Jesus.  In  the  work  on
the  Trinity «,  ascribed  to  Novatian,  in  the  treatises  and  letters*
of  St.  Cyprian,  in  the  apologetic  works  of  Amobius  y  and  Lac-

ubi  dicit,  **  Cum  omnibus  qni  invocant  nomen  Domini  nostri  Jesn  Christi,
in  omni  loco  ipsorum  et  nostro"  emn  cujus  nomen  invocatnr,  Dominmn
Jesum  Christum  esse  pronuntiat.  Si  ergo  et  Enos,  et  Moyses,  et  Aaron,
et  Samuel,  "invocabant  Dominum  et  ipse  exaudiebat  eos/*  sine  dabio
Christum  Jesum  Dominum  invocabant ;  et  si  invocare  nomen  Domini  et
orare  Dominum  unum  atque  idem  est ;  sicut  invocatur  Deus;  invocandus
est  Christus ;  et  sicut  oratur  Deus,  ita  et  orandus  est  Christus ;  et  dent
offerimus  Deo  Patri  primo  omnium  orationes,  ita  et  Domino  Jesu  Christo ;
et  sicut  offerimus  postulationes  Patri,  ita  offerimus  postulationes  et  Filio ;
et  sicut  offerimus  gratiarum  actiones  Deo,  ita  et  gratias  offerimus  Salvatori.
TJnum  namque  utrique  honorem  deferendum,  id  est  Patri  et  Filio,  di^inns
edocet  sermo,  cum  didt:  "Ut  omnes  honorificent  Filium,  sicut  honori*
ficant  Patrem.**  *

*  Contr.  Cels.  i.  60,  p.  375 :  (f>€popr€s  fi^v  9&pa,  A  (Tv*  oSrus  iyonAffw)
ffvvBlr^  riA  4k  0€ov  koX  avdpt&irov  Ovryrov  irpoa^veyKay,  a{ffi$oKa  fiky,  &s
ficuriXu  rhy  ^pvcrbv,  &s  Se  .Te0vri^ofi4yqf  r^v  <rfi6pvctVf  &s  8^  0€^  rhv  \t$ayicT6ir
irpoer^yry/cov  S^,  /xa66yTcs  rhy  rSvov  t^s  ytyeffecos  avrov.  *AAA*  .^irci  0c^
^y,  6  inr^p  rohs  fioniBovyras  &yBp<&irois  irYy4\ovs  4yvTdpxtioy  'Hoyr^p  rod  y4yovs
T&y  iyOp^ircoy,  &yy eXos  ^/ieiif^aro  i^y  ray  ftdytoy  4v\  rrpoo'Kvyfia'ou  rhy  'Iijcwr
€{nr4fi§iayf  xpVf""'^^^^^  cArois  *  fi^  fjKtty  irphs  rhy  *Hp6BTiy,  &W*  ixwtkdfof
&Wri  68^  tis  rk  otxcia.'     Cf.  St.  Iren.  adv.  Haer.  iii.  9.  a.

*  Novat.  de  Trin.  c.  14,  quoted  by  Bingham:  'Si  homo  tantummodo
Christus,  quomodo  adest  ubique  invocatus,  quum  hsec  hominis  natura  non
sit,  sed  Dei,  ut  adesse  omni  loco  possit  ?  *

'  St.  Cyprian,  de  Bono  Patientis,  p.  220,  ed.  Fell. :  'Pater  Deus pnecepit
Filium  suum  adorari :  et  Apostolus  Paulus,  divini  prsecepti  memor,  ponit  et
dicit :  **  Deus  exaltavit  ilium  et  donavit  illi  nomen  quod  est  super  omne
nomen ;  ut  in  nomine  Jesu  omne  genu  flectatur,  coelestium,  terrestrium,  et
infemorum : "  et  in  Apocalypsi  angelus  Joanni  volenti  adorari  se  resistit  et
dicit :  "  Vide  ne  feceris,  quia  conservus  tuus  sum  et  fratrum  tuorum ;  Jesum
Dominum  adora."  Quails  Dominus  Jesus,  et  quanta  patientia  ejus,  ut  qui
in  coelis  adoratur,  necdum  vindicetur  in  terris  ?  In  Rev.  zx.  9,  St.  Cyprian
probably  read  r^  Kvpltp  instead  of  t^  06$.  See  his  language  to  Ludns,
Bishop  of  Borne,  who  had  recently  been  a  confessor  in  a  sudden  persecution
of  GaJlus,  A.n.  252  (£p.  61,  p.  145,  ed.  Fell.):  'Has  ad  vos  Uteras  mit-
timus, firater  carissime,  et  reprsesentantes  vobis  per  epistolam  gaudium
nostrum,  fida  obsequia  caritatis  expromimus ;  hie  quoque  in  sacrifidis  atque
in  orationibus  nostris  non  cessantes  Deo  Patri,  et  Christo  FiHo  Ejus  Domino
nostro  gratias  agere,  et  orare  pariter  ac  petere,  ut  qui  perfectus  est  atque
perficiens,   custodiat  et  perficiat  in  vobis   confessionis  vestrse  gloriosam


ooronam.'


f  Amobius  adv.  Grentes,  i.  36:  'Quotidianis  supplicationibus  adoratiB.*
And  Ibid.  i.  39 :  '  Neque  [Christus]  omni  illo  qui  vel  nuudmus  potest  ex«
cogitari  divinitatis  afficiatur  cultu  ?'  [ed.  Oehler].

f*LECT.


Value  of  Hymns  as  expressingChrisiian  doctrine.  393

■     -  L

tantius^,  references  to  the  subject  are  numerous  and  decisive.
But  onr  limits  forbid  any  serious  attempt  to  deal  with  the
materials  which  crowd  upon  us  as  we  advance  into  the  central
and  later  decades  of  the  third  century;  and  at  this  point  it  may
be  well  to  glance  at  the  forms  with  which  the  primitive  Church
actually  approached  the  throne  of  the  Redeemer.

It  is  clear  that  Christian  hymnody  has  ever  been  prized  and
hated   for   its   services  in  popularising  the  worship  of  Jesus
Christ.     Hymnody  actively  educates,  while  it  partially  satisfies,
the  instinct  of  worship ;  it  is  a  less  formal  and  sustained  act  of
worship  than  prayer,  yet  it  may  really  involve  transient  acts
of  the  deepest  adoration.     But,  because  it  i^  less  formal ;   be-
cause in  using  it  the  soul  can  pass,  as  it  were,  unobserved  and
at  will  from  mere  sympathetic  states  of  feeling  to  adoration,  and
from  adoration  back  to  passive  although  reverent  sympathy ; —
hymnody  has  always  been  a  popular  instrument  for  the  ex-
pression   of  religious   feeling.     And   from   the  first   years   of
Christianity  it  seems  to  have  been  especially  consecrated  to  the
honour  of  the  Kedeemer.    We  have  already  noted  traces  of  such
apostolical  hymns  in  the   Pauline  Epistles;   but   some   early
Humanitarian  teachers  did  unintentional  service,  by  bringing
into  prominence  the  value  of  hymns  as  witnesses  to  Christian
doctrine,  and  as  efficient  means  of  popular  dogmatic  teaching.
When  the  followers  of  Artemon  maintained  that  the  doctrine
of  Christ's  Godhead  was  only  brought  into  the  Church  during
the  episcopate  of  Zephyrinus,  a  Catholic  writer,  quoted  by  Euse-
bius,  observed,  by  way  of  reply,  that  *the  psalms  and  hymns
of  the  brethren,  which,  from  the  earliest  days  of  Christianity,
had  been  written  by  the  faithful,  all  celebrate  Christ,  the  Word
of  God,  proclaiming  His  Divinity*.*     Origen  pointed  out  that
hymns  were  addressed  only  to  God  and  to  His  Only-begotten
Word, -Who  is  also  God  ^.    And  the  practical  value  of  these  hymns
as  teaching  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Deity  was  illustrated  by  the
conduct  of  Faulus  of  Samosata.     He  banished  from  his  own
and  neighbouring  churches  the  psalms  which  were  sung  to  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  he  spoke  of  them  contemptuously  as  being
merely   modem   compositions.     This   was   very  natural   in    a
prelate  who  *  did  not  wish  to  confess  with  the  Church  that  the

*  Lactantins,  Div.  Inst.  iv.  1 6.

*  Eqb.  Hist.  Eod.  v.  28 :  ^aK\jLQl  l\  Zffoi  ical  ^5al  &$€A4>wi/  dir'  apxvs  (nrh
wtfrreov  ypa^tiaai,  rhv  A6yov  rod  &§ov  rhv  Xpurrhy  (tfivovffi  deoKoyovvrts,

"  Oontr.  Celfl.  viii.  67 :  Sfwovs yhp  tls  fi6vov rhv  iirlTa<ri \4yofiev  Sehv,  koL  rhv
fiovoyevrj  a^rov  A6yov  jcoi  6c<^y  koX  vfiyovfiiv  yt  Sthy  Ktd  rhv  Movoycyfj  ainov»
VII  ]


394     Christ  adored  in  the  Gloria  in  Excelsis^

■

Son  of  God  had  descended  from  heaven  c;'  but  it  shews  how
the  hynmody  of  the  primitiye  Church  protected  and  proclaiined
the  truths  which  she  taught  and  cheri^ed.

Of  the  early  hymns  of  the  Church  of  Christ  some  remain  to
this  day  among  us  as  witnesses  and  expressions  of  her  faith  in
Christ's  Divinity.  Such  are  the  Tersanctus  and  the  Gloria  in
Excelsis.  Both  belong  to  the  second  centuiy ;  both  were  intro-
duced, it  is  difficult  to  say  how  early,  into  the  Eucharistic  Office;
both  pay  Divine  honours  to  our  Blessed  Lord.  As  each  morning
dawned,  the  Christian  of  primitive  days  repeated  in  private  the
Gloria  in  Excelsis ;  it  was  his  hymn  of  supplication  and  praise
to  Christ.  How  wonderfully  does  it  blend  the  appeal  to  our
Lord's  human  sympathies  with  the  confession  of  His  Divine
prerogatives  I  *  O  Lord  God,  Lamb  of  God,  Son  of  the  Father,
That  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world,  have  mercy  upon  us.'
How  thrilling  is  that  burst  of  praise,  which  at  last  drowns
the  plaintive  notes  of  entreaty  that  have  preceded  it,  and  hails
Jesus  Christ  glorified  on  His  throne  in  the  heights  of  heaven  I
*For  Thou  only  art  holy;  Thou  only  art  the  Lord;  Thou
only,  O  Christ,  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  art  most  high  in  the  glory
of  God  the  Father.'  Each  evening  too,  in  those  early  times,  the
Christian  o£Pered  another  hymn,  less  known  among  ourselves^
but  scarcely  less  beautiful.  It  too  was  addressed  to  Jesus  in
His  majesty : —

'  Hail !  gladdening  Taght,  of  His  pure  gloiy  pooredy
Who  ia  th*  ImmortiEil  Father,  heavenly,  blest^
Holiest  of  Holies — ^Jesns  Christ  our  Lord  t
Now  we  are  come  to  the  stin*s  hour  of  rest^
The  lights  of  evening  round  ns  shine,
We  hymn  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  Divine!
Worthiest  art  Thoa  at  all  times  to  be  sung

With  nndc^ed  tongue,
Son  of  our  God,  Giver  of  life.  Alone !
Therefore  in  all  the  world,  Thy  glories.  Lord,  they  own  V

*  Eus.  Hist.  Ecd.  vii.  30 :  ^a\fiohs  5^  rohs  yikv  els  rhv  Kfytop  rificiy*hi<rovw
Xpiffrhv  %awras,  &s  Hh  ffoyr^povs  Kot  ytMT4pwp  &vZp&y  irvyypdfifutrcu  The
account  continues :  tls  iaurhv  5^  4v  fi4irp  rp  iKKKticUff  rp  fieydXtf  rod  vdax^
^fi4p<f  if'oXfi^dctK  yvraucas  TapaffKfvd(wv,  &v  Kcd  iucolffas  &y  ris  <^pi|ci€y.  They
seem  to  have  sung  in  this  prelate's  own  presence,  and  with  his  appro-
bation, odes  which  greeted  him  as  'an  angel  who  had  descended  hojp.
heaven,'  although  Paulus  denied  our  Lord's  pre-exiBtence.  Vanity  and
unbelief  are  naturally  and  generally  found  together.  The  historian  adds  ex-
pressly: rhv  fiky  yip  Tihp  rod  6€ov  oh  /SovAcroi  awofio\oyuy  i^  ovptufoO
Kar§\'ri\v$4vcu,

^  Of.  Lyra  Apostdica,  No.  63.  The  original  is  given  in  Bonth's  Beliquiss
Sacr.  ill.  p.  515 :— .

[lect.


and  in  the J>rimitive  Evening  Hymn.      395

A  yet  earlier  illustration  is  afforded  by  the  ode  with  which  the
Alexandrian  Clement  concludes  his  Psedagogus.  Although  its
phraseology  was  strictly  adapted  to  the  *  perfect  Gnostic*  at
Alexandria  in  the  second  century,  yet  it  seems  to  have  been
intended  for  congregational  use.  It  celebrates  our  Lord,  as
*  the  Dispenser  of  wisdom,*  *  the  Support  of  the  suffering,*  the
'  Lord  of  immortality,*  *  the  Saviour  of  mortals,*  *  the  Mighty
Son,*  *  the  Gk)d  of  peace.'  It  thrice  insists  on  the  *  sincerity  *  of
the  praise  thus  offered  Him,    It  concludes : —

*  Sing  we  sincerely
The  Mighty  Son;
We,  the  peaceful  choir.
We,  the  Christ-begotten  ones.
We,  the  people  of  sober  life.
Sing  we  together  the  God  of  peace  •.'

Nor  may  we  forget  a  hymn  which,  in  God's  good  providencej
has  been  endeared  to  all  of  us  &om  childhood.  In  its  present
form,  the  Te  Deum  is  clearly  Western,  whether  it  belongs  to  the
age  of  St.  Augustine,  with  whose  baptism  it  is  connected  by  the
popular  tradition,  or,  as  is  probable,  to  a  later  period.  But  we
can  scarcely  doubt  that  portions  of  it  are  of  Eastern  origiuj  and
that  they  carry  us  up  wellnigh  to  the  sub-apostolic  period.  The
Te  Deum  is  at  once  a  song  of  praise,  a  creed,  and  a  supplication.
In  each  capacity  it  is  addressed  to  our  Lord.  In  the  Te  Deum
how  profound  is  the  adoration  offered  to  Jesus,  whether  as  One

'^ui%  XXaobv  hryias  96^ris  i^Owdrou  Tlterphs
ohpayioVf  ayiov,  fidKapos,
*l7ieov  Xpurr^,
i\d6vTts  hrl  rov  ri\lov  Hiaof,
tSSvres  ^as  iffirepivhv,
Ifivovfiey  Uar^pa,  KctX  Tihv,  Kctt  "kyiov  TlveviM  Oeov.
Hios  cT  iv  iraiTi  Kaipots  (ifxvuffQai  <pa>vais  6<rlais,

Bih  6  KSa-fios  <r€  9o^d(€i,

St.  Basil  quotes  it  in  part,  De  Spir.  Sanct.  73.  It  is  still  the  Vesper  Hymn
of  the  Greek  Church.

*  Clem.  Alex.  Peed.  iii.  la,  fin.  p.  313 ;  Daniel,  Thesaurus  Hymnologicus,
torn.  iii.  p.  3.  '  Der  Ton  des  laedes  ist  .  .  .  .  gnostisch  vendnnlichend.
(Fortlage  Gesange  Christlicher  Vorzeit,  p.  357,  qu.  by  Daniel)  :—

vcuSa  Kpar€p6Vf
Xopi>9  tip^vris

ol  xp^^^^^^^h
Xahs  ad^pwPf

vn]


396      Adoration  of  Christ  in  the  Te  Deum,

of  the  Most  Holy  Three,  or  more  specially  in  His  Personal  dis-
tinctness as  the  King  of  Glory,  the  Father's  Everlasting  Son!
How  touching  are  the  supplications  which  remind  Him  that
when  He  became  incarnate  'He  did  not  abhor  the  Yirgin's
womb,'  that  when  His  Death-agony  was  passed  He  '  opened  the
kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers ! '  How  passionate  are  the
pleadings  that  He  would  '  help  His  servants  whom  He  has  re-
deemed with  His  most  precious  Blood,'  that  He  would  *  make
them  to  be  numbered  with  His  saints  in  glory  everlastiDg!'
Much  of  this  language  is  of  the  highest  antiquity ;  all  of  it  is
redolent  with  the  fi:agrance  of  the  earliest  Church ;  and,  as  we
English  Christians  use  it  still  in  our  daily  services,  we  may  rejoice
to  feel  that  it  unites  us  altogether  in  spirit,  and  to  a  great  extent
in  the  letter,  with  the  Church  of  the  first  three  centuries  ^

The  Apostolical  Constitutions  contain  ancient  doxologies
which  associate  Jesus  Christ  with  the  Father  as  '  inhabiting  the
praises  of  Israel,'  after  the  manner  of  the  Gloria  Patri  8.  And
the  Eyrie  Eleison,  that  germinal  type  of  supplication,  of  which
the  countless  litanies  of  the  modem  Church  are  only  the  varied
expansions,  is  undoubtedly  sub-apostolic.  Together  with  the
Tersanctus  and  the  Gloria  in  Excelsis  it  shews  very  remarkably,
by  its  presence  in  the  Eucharistic  Office,  how  ancient  and  deeply
rooted  was  the  Christian  practice  of  prayer  to  Jesus  Chnst
For  the  Eucharist  has  a  double  aspect :  it  is  a  gift  from  heaven
to  earth,  but  it  is  also  an  offering  from  earth  to  heaven.  In  the
Eucharist  the  Christian  Church  offers  to  the  Eternal  Father  the
merits   and  Death  of  His  Son  Jesus   Christ ;'  -  since  Christ

'  On  this  subject,  see  Daniel,  Thesanr.  Hymnolog.  torn.  ii.  pp.  279-299.

'  Constitutiones,  viii.  la  (vol.  i.  p.  482,  ed.  Labbe),  quoted  by  Bingham:
irapaKa\ovfi€V  ere  . .  .  .  Zvcos  &vavTas  rifxas  Sianjpiiffas  iv  rp  eha^fitii^  hf
cvvaydyris  kv  rf  /ScuriAef^  rov  Xpiarov  ffov  rod  Qeov  Trda-rjs  cuaditrris  icol
vorjrrjs  <^tJ(r€«*,  tow  ficuriKecos  rifiavy  itrpcvrovSt  iLficfivrovSt  iMtyieX'tiTovs'  5ti
ffoi  iraaa  ^6^a,  a4fias  icol  €vxctpi<rTla,  rifx^  koI  irpoa-K^vriffis  r^  Harpl,  fcal  ry
Ti$,  Koi  T^  'Ayt^  nve^/iari  Kot  vvv  Koi  del  Koi  fls  rohs  aveKKnirus  icol  ArcAfv*
riiTovs  cu&pas  t«v  cu^pcov.  Ibid.  13  (p.  483):  Swk  rov  Xpitrrov  trov'  fi€tt  ov
ffoi  Z6^a,  TifJt'^,  alvos,  ^o^oKoyla,  ebxcLptCTia,  Kcd  r^  'Ayi^  Tlv€{>fiaTi,  fis  rchs
aicovas,  afi'f)v.  Ibid. :  €v\oyrifi€vos  6  ipx^fJ^^vos  iv  ovSiiart  Kvplou  6cb$,
K^pios,  Kol  iir4<f>av€v  rifuy'  ^Caavv^  iv  roh  ^IffrOis.  Ibid.  14  (p.  486) :
^avrobs  r^  €)e^  r^  fiSytp  kycvvifTtp  @€^,  koI  t^  Xpio'r^  ahrov  trapad^fuBiu
Ibid.  15  (p.  486) :  vdvras  ^/xaj  ivi<rvvdyay€  fls  r^v  rwv  ohpcw&v  fiatriXdv,
iv  Xpiar^  *lri(rov  r^  Kvp'up  r}fi&V  fied*  oS  (roi  8<({a,  rifi^  koI  (r4fias  xol  rf
^Ayltf  HveifiMTi  tls  rohs  cu&vaSf  ifvfiv.  Ibid.  (p.  487) :  Sti  troi  ^6^0,  aW,
fA€ya\oirp€ir€iaf  (refias,  TcpoffKinrr^ffis,  koDl  r^  a^  ircuZl  *lrf(rov  r^  Xpiar^  ffov  rf
Kvpi^  fjfi&v  Kcd  0€^  Koi  fia(ri\€7,  koX  r^  'Ayitp  nyei^fwrif  vvv  koL  oel  koI  fir
rohs  cucovas  rcov  (dd>vaVf  afiiiv,

[lect,


Eucharistic  prayers  to  Jesus  Christ.       397

Himself  has  said,  *Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me.*  The
canon  of  Carthage  accordingly  expresses  the  more  ancient  law
aaid  instinct  of  the  Church :  *  Cum  altari  adsistitur,  semper  ad
Patrem  dirigatur  oratio  ^/  Yet  so  strong  was  the  impulse  to
offer  prayer  to  Christ,  that  this  canon  is  strictly  observed  by  no
single  liturgy,  while  some  rites  violate  it  with  the  utmost  con-
Histency.  The  Mozarabic  rite  is  a  case  in  point:  its  collects
^tness  to  the  Church's  long  struggle  with,  and  final  victory
over,  the  tenacious  Arianism  of  Spain  i.     It  might  even  appear

*  Cone.  Carth.  iii.  c.  23,  Labbe,  vol.  ii.  p.  11 70.

'  Taking  a  small  part  of  the  Mozarabic  Missa!,  firom  Advent  Sunday  to
!Epiphany  inclusive,  we  find  sixty  cases  in  which  prayer  is  offered,  during  the
altar  service,  to  our  Lord.  These  cases  include  (i)  three  '  niations  *  or  Fre-
feuies,  for  the  third  Sunday  in  Advent,  Circumcision,  and  Epiphany  (and  part
at  least  of  this  Mass  for  the  Epiphany  is  considered  by  'Dr,  Neale  in  his
Essays  on  liturgiology,  p.  138,  to  be  at  least  not  later  'than  the  middle  of
the  fourth  century');  also  (2)  several  prayers  in  which  our  Lord's  agency
in  sanctifying  the  Eucharistic  sacrifice,  or  even  in  receiving  it,  is  implied —

e.g.  '  Jesu,  bone  Fontifex sanctifica  hanc  oblationem ;'  or,  in  a  '  Post

Pndie'  for  fifth  Sunday  in  Advent :  'Hsec  oblata  Tibi benedicenda

assume  libamina  (.  .  .  .  tui  AdventtUi  gloriam,  &c.).*  (Miss.  Moz.  p.  17.)
So  again,  on  Mid-Lent  Sunday :  '  Ecce,  Jesu  .  .  .  deferimus  Tibi  hoc  sacri-

ficium  nostrsB  redemptionis accipe  hoc  sacrificium  ;*  on  which  Leslie

quotes  St.  Fulgentius,  de  Fide,  c.  19 :  '  Cui  (i.  e.  to  the  Incarnate  Son)
cum  Patre  et  Spiritu  Sancto  ....  sacrificium  panis  et  vini  ....  Ecdeda
....  offerre  non  cessat.*  Again,  in  the  Mass  for  Easter  Friday,  in  an
'Alia  Oratio:'  'Ecce,  Jesu  Mediator  ....  hanc  Tibi  afferimus  victimam
sacrificii  singularis.'  From  Palm  Sunday  to  Easter  Day  inclusive,  the
prayers  offered  to  Christ,  according  to  this  Missal,  are  twenty-nine.  The
zeal  of  the  Spanish  Church  for  the  Divinity  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  remarkably

shewn  in  a  'Post  Pridie'  for  Whitsunday:    'Suscipe Spiritus

Sancte,  omnipotens  Deus,  sacrificia;*  on  which  Leslie's  note  says,  'Ariani
n^abant  sacrificium  debere  Dei  Filio  offerri,  aut  Spiritui  Sancto ....  contra
quos  Catholici  Gotho-Hispani  Filio  et  Spiritui  Sancto  sacrificium  Eucharisti-
cum  distinct^  offerunt;'  and  he  proceeds  to  quote  another  passage  from
Fulgentius  that  worship  and  sacrifice  were  offered  alike  to  all  the  Three
Persons,  '  hoc  est,  Sanctse  Trinitati.'  The  Gallican  Liturgies,  though  in  a
less  degree,  exhibit  the  same  feature  of  Eucharistic  prayer  to  our  Lord.  In
the  vei^  old  series  of  fragmentary  Masses,  discovered  by  Mone,  and  edited
by  the  Kev.  G.  H.  Forbes  and  Dr.  Neale  (in  Ancient  Liturgies  of  the  GtJ-
lican  Church,  part  i.),  as  the  '  Missale  Richenovense'  (from  the  abbey  of
Beichenau,  where  they  were  found),  there  are  four  cases  of  prayer  to  Christ ;
one  of  them,  in  the  ninth  Mass,  being  in  a  '  Contestatio '  or  Preface.  In
the  'Crothic'  (or  southem-GtJlic)  Missal,  prayer  is  made  to  Him  about
seventy-six  times.  Some  of  these  cases  are  very  striking.  Thus  on  Christmas
Day,  '  Suscipe,  ....  Domine  Jesu,  omnipotens  Deus,  sacrificium  laudis  ob-
latum.'  (Muratori,  Int.  Bom.  ii.  521 ;  Forbes  and  Neale,  p.  35.)  The
'Immolatio'  (another  term  for  the  Contestatio)  of  Palm  Sunday  is  ad-
dressed to  Christ.  The  '  Old  Gallican '  Missal,  belonging  to  central  Gaul,
has  sixteen  cases  of  prayer  to  Him,  including  the  '  Immolatio '  of  Easter

vn]


398       Eucharistic  prayers  to  Jesus  Christ

to  substitute  for  the  rule  laid  down  at  Carthage,  the  distinct
but  (considering  the  indivisible  relation  of  the  Three  H0I7
Persons  to  each  other)  perfectly  consistent  principle  that  the
Eucharist  is  offered  to  the  Holy  Trinity.  This  too  would  seem,
to  be  the  mind  of  the  Eastern  Church  \  It  is  unnecessary  to
observe  that  at  this  day,  both  in  the  Eucharistic  Service  and
elsewhere,  prayer  to  Jesus  Christ  is  as  integral  a  feature  of  the
devotional  system  of  the  Church  of  England,  as  it  was  of  the
ancient,  or  as  it  is  of  the  contemporary  Use  of  Western
Christendom!,

Nor  was  the  worship  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  early  Christians
an  esoteric  element  of  their  religious  activity,  obvious  only  to
those  who  were  within  the  Church,  who  cheri^ed  her  creed,  and
who  took  part  in  her  services.    It  was  not  an  abstract  doctrine,

SatTirday.  The  'Grallicaii  Saorameiitary'  (called  alio  the  Sacramentarimn
Bobiense,  and  by  Mr.  Forbes,  the  Missal  of  Besan^ou)  has  twenty-eight
such  cases,  including  three  Contestations.  The  Canon  of  the  Ambrosian
Bite  has  prayers  to  Christ.

^  The  principle  affirmed  in  the  old  Spanish  rite,  that  the  Eucharist  was
to  be  offered  to  the  whole  Trinity,  and  therefore  to  the  Son,  is  also  affirmed
in  the  daily  Liturgy  of  the  Eastern  Church.    The  prayer  of  the  Chenibic
Hymn,  which  indeed  was  not  originally  a  part  of  St.  Chrysoetom's  liturgy,
haying  been  inserted  in  it  not  earlier  tluoi  Justinian's  reign,  has  this  ocm-
elusion:   26  7^  cT  b  Tpociffdpwp  km  7rpoa<p9p6fi€vos,  koH  irpoaitx&yxvoi,  Koi
5ta8i8({/icirof,  XpiffT^  6  Bths  ilifi&y,  km   (rol  r^v  8^|ay  &vair^/uiro/i6V  ic.t.X.
About  1 1 55  a  dispute  arose  as  to  irpoaZ^x^fityos,  and  Soterichus  Panten-
genus,  patriarch-^eot  of  Antioch,  who  taught  that  the  sacrifice  was  not
offered  to  the  Son,  but  only  to  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  was  ocm-
demned  in  a  council  at  Constantinople,  11 56.     'This,*  says  Neale  (Introd.
to  East.  Church,  i.  454),  'was  the  end  of  the  controversy  that  for  more
than  seven  hundred  years  had  vexed  the  Church  on  the  subject  of  the
Incarnation.*    Between  this  event  and  the  condemnation  of  Monothelitism,
Neale  reckons  the  condemnation  of  Adoptionism,  in  794.    Compare  also,  in
the  present  Liturgy  of  St.  James,  a  prayer  just  before  the  '  Sa:ncta  Sanctis,*
addressed  to  our  Lord,  in  which  the  phrase  occurs,  '  Thff  holy  and  bloodless
sacrifices.*    The  same  Liturgy  has  other  prayers  addressed  to  Him.     In
St.  Mark's  Liturgy,  among  oUier  prayers  to  Christ,  one  runs  thus,  '  Shew
Thy  face  on  this  bread  and  these  cups.*    After  the  Lord*s  Prayer,  the
Deacon  says,  'Bow  your  heads  to  Jesus,*  and  the  response  is,  'To  Thee^
O  Lord.*    In  fact,  the  East  seems  never  to  have  accepted  the  maxim  that
Eucharistic  praver  was  always  addressed  to  the  Father.    Our  '  Prayer  of
St.  Chrysostom,  addressed  to  the  Son,  is  the  'prayer  of  the  third  Antiphon'
in  lit.  St.  Chrys. ;   and  the  same  rite,  and  the  Armenian,  have  the  re-
markable prayer,  'Attend,  0  Lord  Jesus  Christ  our  God  .....  and  come
to  sanctify  us,*  &c.     In  the  Coptic  Liturgy  of  St.  Basil,  our  Lord  is  be-
sought to  send  down  the  Spirit  on  the  elements.    The  present  Boman  rite
has  three  prayers  to  Christ  between  the  'Agnus  Dei*  and  the  'Panem
coelestem.*

^  See  Note  G  in  Appendix.

[lect.


...^.Jm


Pagan  observations  on  the  worship  of^esus.  399

but  a  living  and  notorious  practice,  daily  observed  by,  and
reoommended  to,  Christians.     As  such  it  challenged  the  ob-
servation of  the  heathen  from  a  very  early  date.     It  is  probable
indeed  that  the  Jews,  as  notably  on  the  occasion  of  St.  Poly-
carp's  martyrdom  ™,  drew  the  attention  of  pa&fan  mainstrates  to
theVorsHp  of  3^  in  order  to  stir  up  contempt  Ld  hatred
against  the  Christians.     But  such  a  worship  was  of  itself  calcu-
lated to  strike  the  administrative  instincts  of  Roman  magistrates
as  an  unauthorized  addition  to  the  registered  religions  of  the
empire,  even  before  they  had  discovered  it  to  be  irreconcileable
with  public  observance  of  the  established  state  ceremonies,  and
specially  with  any  acknowledgment  of  the  divinity  of  the  reign-
ing emperor.    The  younger  Pliny  is  drawing  up  a  report  for  the
eye  of  his  imperial  master  Trajan ;  and  he  writes  with  the  cold
impartiality  of  a  pagan  statesman  who  is  permitting  himself  to
take  a  distant  philosophical  interest  in  the  superstitions  of  the
lower  orders.      Some  apostates  from    the    Church   had   been
brought  before  his  tribunal,  and  he  had  questioned  them  as  to
the  practices  of  the  Christians  in  Asia  Minor.    It  appeared  that
on  a  stated  day  the  Christians  met  before  daybreak,  and  sang
among  themselves,  responsively,  a  hymn  to  Christ  as  God"*.
Here  it  should  be  noted  that  Pliny  is  not  recording  a  vague
report,  but  a  definite  statement,  elicited  from  several  persons  in
cross-examination,  moreover  touching  a  point  which,  in  dealing
with  a  Eoman  magistrate,  they  might  naturally  have  desired
to  keep  in  the  background  ®.    Again,  the  emperor  Adrian,  when
writing  to  Servian,  describes  the  population  of  Alexandria  as
divided   between  the  worship   of  Christ  and  the  worship  of
SerapisP.     That  One  Who  had  been  adjudged  by  the  law  to

™  Martyr.  St.  Polyc,  o.  17.

^  Plin.  £p.  lib.  z.  ep.  97 :  '  Alii  ab  indice  nominati  esse  se  Christianos
dixenmt,  et  mox  negaverunt;  fuisse  quidem  sed  desiisse;  quidam  ante
tnezmioniy  quidam  ante  plures  annos,  non  nemo  etiam  ante  viginti  quoque.
Omnes  et  imaginem  tuam,  deorumque  simulacra  venerati  sunt,  ii  et  Christo
maledixerunt.  Adfirmabant  autem,  hano  fuisse  summam  vel  culpse  sus
yd  erroris,  quod  essent  soliti  state  die  ante  lucem  convenire,  carmenque
ChriBto,  quasi  Deo,  dicere  secum  invicem,  seque  sacramento  non  in  scelus
aliquod  obstringere,  sed  ne  furta,  ne  latrocinia,  ne  adulteria  commit-
terent.*

^  That  the  'carmen'  was  an  incantation,  or  that  Christ  was  saluted
as  a  hero,  not  as  a  Divine  Person,  are  glosses  upon  the  sense  of  this
passage,  rather  than  its  natural  meaning.  See  Augusti,  Denkwtirdigkeiten,
torn.  V.  p.  33.

p  Apud  Lamprid«  in  vitft  Alex.  Severi:  'ab  aliis  Serapidem,  ab  aliifl
adorari  Christum.*

vn]


400  Sarcastic  remarks  of  Ltuian.

death  as  a  criminal  Bhould  receive  Divine  honours,  must  bate
been  sufficiently  perplexing  to  the  Eoman  official  mind ;  but  it
was  much  less  irritating  to  the  statesmen  than  to  the  philoso-
phers. In  his  life  of  the  fanatical  cynic  and  apostate  Christiaii,
Peregrinus  Proteus,  whose  voluntary  self-immolation  he  himself
witnessed  at  Olympia  in  a.d.  165,  Lucian  gives  vent  to  the  con-
temptuous sarcasm  which  was  roused  in  him,  and  in  men  like
him,  by  the  devotions  of  the  Church,  'The  Christians,*  he
says,  *are  still  worshipping  that  great  man  who  was  gibbeted
in  Palestine  4.'  He  complains  that  the  Christians  are  taught
that  they  stand  to  each  other  in  the  relation  of  brethren,  as  soon
as  they  have  broken  loose  from  the  prevailing  customs,  and
have  denied  the  gods  of  Greece,  and  have  taken  to  the  adoration
of  that  impaled  Sophist  of  theirs  ^  The  Celsus  with  whom  we
meet  in  the  treatise  of  Origen  may  or  may  not  have  been  the
friend  of  Lucian".  Celsus,  it  has  been  remarked,  represents
a  class  of  intellects  which  is  constantly  found  among  the
opponents  of  Christianity;  Celsus  has  wit  and  acuteness  without
moral  earnestness  or  deptli  of  research ;  he  looks  at  things  (mlj
on  the  sur&ce,  and  takes  delight  in  constracting  and  putting
forward  difficulties  and  contradictions*.  The  worship  of  our
Lord  was  certain  to  engage  the  perverted  ingenuity  of  a  mind  of
this  description;  and  Celsus  attacks  the  practice  upon  a  variety
of  grounds  which  are  discussed  by  Origen.  The  general  position
taken  up  by  Celsus  is  that  the  Christians  had  no  right  to
denounce  the  polytheism  of  ^^  pagan  world,  since  their  own
worship  of  Christ  was  essentially  polytheistic.  It  was  absurd
in  the  Christians,  he  contends,  to  point  at  the  heathen  gods  as
idols,  whilst  they  worshipped  one  who  was  in  a  much  more
wretched  condition  than  the  idols,  and  indeed  was  not  even  an
idol  at  all,  since  he  was  a  mere  corpse  ^.      The  Christians,  he

4  De  Marte  Per^rini,  e.  11 :  rhv  iiiyaof  oZv  iKcTpoy  ^rt  trdfiovatp  ijfOfwtw,
rhp  iv  TlaX-aiffrlirp  kva^KoXoiriffQ^vra.

'  Ibid.  c.  13 :  iiceiZkv  &ira(  irapa$dvT€Si  Oeohs  fiev  *KKKriviKohs  iarapv4fimv
TOi,  rhv  8*  &ve<rKo\aKiff/x4votf  iKtwoy  <ro(f>ia'T^v  cdnuy  irpoffKvvSxn,

*  Neander  decides  in  the  negative  (Ch.  Hist.  i.  225  sqq.),  (i)  on  tbe
ground  of  the  vehemence  of  the  opponent  of  Origen,  as  contrasted  with
the  moderation  of  the  friend  of  Lucian;  (2)  because  the  friend  of  Lqcub
was  an  Epicurean,  the  antagonist  of  Origen  a  neo-Platonist.

*  See  the  remarks  of  Neander,  Gh.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  227,  ed.  Bohn.

"  Contr.  Oels.  vii.  40,  p.  722 :  %va  fii)  ircandircuriy  ^rt  Karay4\acroi  rmt
filv  &WovSf  Tohs  Hencwfxtyovs  Ofohs,  &5  cTSwAa  fiXcurifnifiovvres*    rhp  8i  ai

a'4fiovrts,  Kal  Uardpa  Hfioioy  avr^  CrirovyTes,

[lect.


Contemptuous  sneers  of  Celsus.  40 1

urges,   worshipped  no  God,  no,  not  even  a  demon,  but  only
a  dead  man  ^.     If  the  Christians  were  bent  upon  religious  in-
novations ;  if  Hercules,  and  iEscuIapius,  and  the  gods  who  had
been  of  old  held  in  honour,  were  not  to  their  taste  ;  why  could
they  not  have  addressed  themselves  to  such  distinguished  mortals
as  Orpheus,  or  Anaxarchus,  or  Epictetus,  or  the  Sibyl?    Nay,
would  it  not  have  been  better  to  have  paid  their  devotions  to
some  of  their  own  prophets,  to  Jonah  under  the  gourd,  or  to
Daniel  in  the  lions'  den,  than  to  a  man  who  had  lived  an  infa-
mous life,  and  had  died  a  miserable  death  y?    In  thus  honouring
a  Jew  who  had  been  apprehended  and  put  to  death,  the  Chris-
tians were  no  better  than  the  Getse  who  worshipped  Zamolxis,
than  the  Cilicians  who  adored  Mopsus,  than  the  Acamanians
who  prayed  to  Amphilochus,  than  the  Thebans  with  their  cultus
of  Amphiaraus,  than  the  Lebadians  who  were  so  devoted  to
Trophonius  '.     Was  it  not  absurd  in  the  Christians  to  ridicule
the  heathen  for  the  devotion  which  they  paid  to  Jupiter  on  the
score  of  tiie  exhibition  of  his  sepulchre  in  Crete,  while  they
themselves  adored  one  who  was  himself  only  a  tenant  of  the
tomb  *  %    Above  all,  was  not  the  worship  of  Christ  fatal  to  the
Christian  doctrine  of  the  Unity  of  God?     If  the  Christians
really  worshipped  no  God  but  One,  then  their  reasoning  against
the  heathen  might  have  had  force  in  it.    But  while  they  offer  an
excessive  adoration  to  this  person  who  has  but  lately  appeared
in  the  world,  how  can  they  think  that  they  commit  no  offence
against  God,  by  giving  such  Divine  honours  to  His  servant^?
In  his  replies  Origen  entirely  admits  the  fact  upon  which

*  Contr.  Cels.  vii.  68,  p.  742  :  Zi^Xiyxovrai,  ffatpQs  ov  Qehv,  itW*  oitSh
^cdfiova  aXA^  V€Kphv  ffifiovres,

f  Ibid.  vii.  53,  p.  732 :  ir<J(ry  5*  ^v  vfitv  ^ixtvifov,  ivei^Oi  ye  KaiyoTOfi^cal
T(  iiredvfjL'fia'are,  vepl  HWou  riuh  r&u  yevvatas  airo6av6muv,  Koi  0€7oy  fxvBov
ZilwrBai  ^vvafx4voov,  (nrovSAffoi ;  ^^p€,  ct  /u^  iipetrxev  'Hpaic\7}S,  K(d  *A(ric\rivib5t
Kot  ol  vAKai  Se^o^offfi^voi,  *Op<l>4a  eifxcTC  k.t.X.     Cf.  57.

■  Ibid.  iil.  34,  p.  469 :  fierh  raOra  *  TrapavK'fia'iov  rifias  *  oUtch  '  irevoirjKcvai,*
rhv  (JS>5  <pi7)(nv  &  KfXffoi)  aK6vra  koX  iiiro6caf6ina  6pri<rK€^VTaSf*  to7s  rerous
(Ti^ovffi  rhv  ZdfioK^iv,  koL  Kihi^i  rhy  MSipov,  Koi  'AKopvaai  rby  *hfi<pl\oxoi',
KoX  Srifiodois  rhv  *AfA(f>idp€cov,  Kal  AefitiSlois  rhy  Tpo<f><&yioy,*

»  Ibid.  iii.  43,  p.  475 ;  ftercfe  ravra  \4yet  vepl  iifiwy  '  $ti  KaToycXafiev
rS>v  Tpo(FKuvo{)VTwy  rhv  Aia,  iwel  rdc^os  ainov  iy  Kp^Tj?  ^€Ikvutcu*  koI  oitdkv
^TTOV  ffefiofiey  rbv  iirb  rov  Td<pov  *  k.t.X,

•*  Ibid.  viii.  13,  P.  750»  5<Jioi  8*  &v  rts  i^rj^  roirois  iridav6v  ri  Ka6*  rifiwu
\eyuv  iv  ry,  *  El  fJi€V  8^  firi^eva  &\Xov  iOepdirevov  ovroi  vX^v  Uva  @ebv,  ^v  6m
rts  avrdis  itrcos  vphs  Tohs  &Wovs  Atcv^s  \6yos'  vvvl  8^  rhv  tvayxos  paveyra
rovrov  iir€p0pTi<TK€{>ov<rif  Kot  ^fifos  ovSey  Tc\rififi€\€iv  yofil^ovffi  vepl  rhv  &fhy,  €4
Kot  vv7ip4rrjs  ainov  d€pair€v0ii<rercu,*

vn]  p  d


402      The  worship  of  Christ  defended  by  Origen,

CelauB  commentB  in  this  lively  epirlt  of  raillery.  He  does  Dot
merely  admit  that  prayer  to  Chnst  waB  the  imiTerEal  practice
of  the  Church;  he  energetically  juatifies  it.  Whea  confronting
the  heathen  opponent  of  his  Master's  hononr,  Origen  writes  aa
the  Christian  believer,  rather  than  aa  the  philosophizing  Alex-
andrian 0.  He  deals  with  the  language  of  CelsoB  patiently  and
in  detail.  The  objects  of  heathen  worship  were  unworthy  of
worship ;  the  Jewish  prophets  had  no  claim  to  it ;  Christ  was
worshipped  as  the  Son  of  God,  as  God  Himself.  'If  CelBUS,'
he  says,  'had  understood  the  meaning  of  this,  "I  and  the  Father
are  One,"  or  what  the  Son  of  God  says  in  Hia  prayer,  "As  I  and
Thou  are  One,"  he  would  never  have  imagined  that  we  worship
any  but  the  God  Who  is  over  all ;  for  Christ  says,  «  The  Father
is  in  Me  and  I  in  Him  ^." '  Origen  then  proceeds,  although  by
a  questionable  analogy,  to  guard  this  language  against  a  Sabelliao
construction :  the  worship  addressed  to  Jesus  was  addressed  to
Him  as  personally  distinct  from  the  Father.  Origen  indeed,  in
vindicating  thig  worship  of  our  Lord,  describes  it  elsewhere  ae
prayer  in  an  improper  sense  ^  on  the  ground  that  true  prayer  is
offered  to  the  Father  only.  This  has  been  explained  to  relate
only  to  the  mediatorial  aspect  of  His  Manhood  as  our  High
Priest  f ;  and  Bishop  Bull  further  understands  him  to  argue  tiit
the  Father,  as  the  Source  of  Deity,  is  ultimately  the  Obgect  trf
all  adoration  s.  But  Origen  entirely  admits  the  broad  fact  that
Jesus  received  Divine  honours ;  and  he  defends  such  worship  erf
Jesus  as  being  an  integral  element  of  the  Church's  life  \

The  stress  of  heathen  criticism,  however,  still  continued  to
be  directed  against  the  adoration,  of  our  Lord.  '  Our  gods,'  bo
ran  the  heathen  language  of  a  later  day,  'are  aot  displeased


■  See  howevflf  Contr.  Cela.  v.  ii,  gub  fin.  P.5S6,  where,  neverthde^
the  condueion  of  the  passage  shews  Mb  real  mind  in  De  Orat.  0.  15,  qaoted

;o:  ^vtp  vfmfiKti  i  K4\(riis  rS'  '"&)*  nl  i

H  liintiidyoy  friri  tou  TioC  Tofi  ©(oO  Iv  Tf"  ''d

^FTB  iifms  Kol  &\Xov  0tp<tirf6tty,  tb^  t^  hi

ijfflf,  '  ir  ifiol,  lAyii  ir  t^  narpi.'

rujris  irupioXejfoi  Kot  ytoraxp^ws.

tuT  de  Christo,'  says  Bishop  Bull,  'nt  SamsM

•  9.  '."i-

ii.  c.  9,  n.  15  ;  '  Sin  Filium  intveam*r  nUH,

ktre  trahjt  ori^nem,  torn  runiuB  certnm  wt,

em,  quern  ipsi  daferimua,  od  Patrent  ndim-

tiJnjTBt  nltiiiio  referri.'

ig.  de  Orat.  |  15.


by  Lactantius  and  Arnobius.  403

with  yon  Christians  for  worshipping  the  Ahnighty  God.     But
you  maintain  the  Deity  of  One  Who  was  bom  as  a  man,  and
Who  "was  put  to  death  by  the  punishment  of  the  cross  (a  mark
of  in&tiny  reserved  for  criminals  of  the  worst  kind) ;  you  believe
Him  to  be  still  alive,  and  you  adore  Him  with  daily  suppli-
cations */     *The  heathen,'  observes  Lactantius,  'throw  in  our
teeth  the  Passion  of  Christ ;  they  say  that  we  worship  a  man,
and  a  man  too  who  was  put  to  death  by  men  under  circum-
stances of  ignominy  and  torture^.'     Lactantius  and  Arnobius
reply  to  the  charge  in  precisely  the  same  manner.     They  admit
the  truth  of  Christ's  Humanity,  and  the  shame  of  His  Passion ;
but  they  earnestly  assert   His   literal   and  absolute  Godhead.
However  the  heathen  might  scorn,  the  Godhead  of  Christ  was
the  great  certainty  upon  which  the  eye  of  His  Church  was
persistently  fixed ;  it  was  the  truth  by  which  her  practice  of
adoring  Him  was  necessarily  determined  1.

If  the  Gospel  had  only  enjoined  the  intellectual  acceptance  of
some  philosophical  theistic  theory,  its  popular  impotence  would
have  earned  the  toleration  which  is  easily  secured  by  cold,
abstract,  passionless  religions.  Li  that  case  it  would  never
have  provoked  the  earnest  scorn  of  a  Lucian  or  of  a  Celsus.
They  would  have  condoned  or  passed  it  by,  even  if  they  had
not  cared  to  patronize  it.  But  the  continuous  adoration  of
Jesus  by  His  Church  made  the  neutrality  of  such  men  as  these
morally  impossible.     They  knew  what  it  meant,  this  worship  of

*  Amob.  adv.  Gentes,  i.  36 :  *  Sed  non  idcirco  Dii  vobis  infesti  sunt,  qnod
omnipotentem  colatis  Deum :  sed  quod  hominem  natum,  et  (quod  personis
infame  est  vilibus)  crucis  supplicio  interemptum,  et  Deum  fuisse  contenditis,
et  Buperesse  adhuc  creditis,  et  quotidianis  supplicationibus  adoratis.'

*  ILiact.  Div.  Inst.  iv.  16:  *Venio  nunc  ad  ipsam  Passionem,  quae  velut
opprobrium  nobis  objectari  solet,  quod  et  hominem,  et  ab  hominibus  insigni
supplicio  adfectum  et  excruciatum  oolamus:  ut  doceam  eam  ipsam  Pas-
nonem  ab  Eo  cum  magnft  et  divin&  ratione  susceptam,  et  in  e^  B0I&  et
virtutem,  et  veritatem,  et  sapientiam  contineri.'

^  Amob.  adv.  Gentes,  i.  42  :  '  Natum  hominem  colimus.  Etiamsi  esset
id  verum,  locis  ut  in  superioribus  dictum  est,  tamen  pro  multis  et  tam
liberalibus  donis,  quse  ab  eo  profecta  in  nobis  sunt,  Deus  dici  appellarique
deberet.  Cum  vero  Deus  sit  re  certd,  et  sine  ullius  rei  dubitationis  am-
biguo,  inficiaturos  arbitramini  nos  esse,  quam  maxime  ilium  a  nobis  coli,
et  prsesidem  nostri  corporis  nuncupari?  Ergone,  inquiet  aliquis  furens,
iratus,  et  percitus,  Deus  ille  est  Chnstus  \  Deus,  respondebimus,  et  interi-
Drum  potentiarum  Deus;  et  quod  magis  infidos  acerbissimis  doloribus
torqueat,  rei  Tnayimae  causft  a  summo  Hege  ad  nos  missus.*  Lact.  Div.
Inst.  iv.  29 :  '  Quum  dicimus  Deum  Patrem  et  Deum  Eilium,  non  diver-
sum  didmuB,  nee  utrumque  secemimus:  siquidem  nee  Pater  sine  Filio
nuncupari,  neo  Filius  potest  sine  Patre  generari.*
vn]  D  d  2


404  Pagan  caricature  of  the  adoration  of  Jesus.

the  Crucified ;  it  was  too  intelligible,  too  soul-enthraUing,  to  be
ignored  or  to  be  tolerated.  And  the  lowest  orders  of  the  popu-
lace were  for  many  long  years,  jost  as  intelligently  hostile  to  li
as  were  the  philosophers.  Witness  that  remarkable  caricatuie
of  the  adoration  of  our  crucified  Lord,  which  was  discovered  not
long  since  beneath  the  ruins  of  the  Palatine  palace  ™.  It  is  a
rough  sketch,  traced,  in  all  probability,  by  tiie  hand  of  some
pagan  slave  in  one  of  the  earHest  years  of  the  third  century  of
our  era  ^*     A  human  figure  with  an  ass*s  head  is  represented  as

^  See  'Deux  Monuments  des  Premiers  Slides  de  PJ^glise  ezpliqn^  par
le  P.  Baphael  Gurraod/  Bome,  1862.  He  describes  the  discoveiy  sod
appearance  of  this  'Graffito  Blasfemo'  as  follows : — 'Comme  tant  d'antres
ruines,  le  palais  des  G^ars  r^c^ait  anssi  de  nombreuses  inscriptions  dict^
par  le  caprice.  Apr^  avoir  recueilli  celles  qui  couvraient  les  parois  de  toote
mie  salle,  nous  arriv&mes  k  trouver  quelques  paroles  grecques,  inscrites  aa
sommet  d*un  mur  enseveli  sous  les  d^mbres.  Ge  fut  Ik  nn  pri^euz  indioe
qui  nous  fit  poursuiTre  nos  recherches.  Bientdt  appamt  le  contour  d'tme
t^te  d'animal  sur  un  corps  humain,  dont  les  bras  itaient  ^tendus  oomme
ceux  des  orantet  dans  les  Gataoombes.  La  decouverte  paraissait  ayoir  un
haut  int^r^t :  aussi  Mgr.  Milesi,  Ministre  des  travauz  publics,  nous  ao-
torisa-t-il,  avec  sa  bienveillance  accoutum^,  k  faire  enlever  la  terra  et  les
d^ris  qui  encombraient  cette  chambre,  le  11  Novembre,  1857.  Noob  do
tard^mes  point  k  oontempler  une  image  que  ces  ruines  avaient  conservee
intacte  k  travers  les  si^es,  et  dont  nous  pthnes  relever  un  caique  fiddle.

'  Elle  r^pr^nte  une  croix,  dont  la  forme  est  celle  du  Tau  grec,  sunnont^
d*une  che'^e  qui  porte  une  tablette.  Un  homme  est  attachi  k  cette  croiz,
mais  la  t^te  de  cette  figure  n'est  point  humaine,  c*est  celle  du  cheval  00
plutdt  de  Tonagre.  Le  crucifix  est  revStu  de  la  tunique  de  dessous,  qae  les
anciens  d^signaient  sous  le  nom  ^interula,  et  d*une  autre  tunique  sans
ceinture ;  des  bandes  appeldes  orwales  enveloppent  la  partie  inf^enre  des

{'ambes.  A.  la  gauche  du  spectateur,  on  voit  nn  autre  personnage,  qui  boqi
e  mSme  vStement,  semble  converser  avec  la  monstrueuse  image,  et  Ahn
vers  elle  sa  main  gauche,  dont  les  doigts  sont  separ^.  A  droite,  aa  dewu
de  la  croix,  se  lit  la  lettre  T ;  et  au  dessous,  Tinscription  suivante :

AAEEAMENO:S  2EBETE  (pour  2EBETAI)

©EON
Alexamenos  adore  son  Dieu.*

For  the  reference  to  this  interesting  paper  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindnen
of  Professor  Westwood.  See  Wordsworth's  Tour  in  Italy,  ii.  p.  143 ;  and
for  engravings  of  the  Graffito,  Tyrwhitt's  Art  Teaching  of  the  Priimtive
Ghurch,  p.  7 ;  Northcote  and  Brownlow,  Boma  Sotterranea,  p.  ii,  p.  $46.
Ghampfleury,  Histoire  de  la  Garicature  Antique,  c.  xxiv.  p.  287,  sqq.

^  P.  Garucci  fixes  this  date  on  the  following  grounds :  (i)  Inscriptions  on
tiles  and  other  fragments  of  this  part  of  the  Palatine  palace  shew  that  it
was  constructed  during  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Adrian.  The  dates  123
and  1 26  are  distinctly  ascertained.  (Deux  Monuments,  &c.,  p.  10.)  The
inscription  therefore  is  not  earlier  than  this  date.  (2)  The  CiEdunmy  of  the
worship  of  the  ass's  head  by  the  Ghristians  is  not  mentioned  by  any  of  the
Apologists  who  precede  TertuUian,  nor  by  any  who  succeed  Minudufl

[leci.


IThe  ' graffito  blasfemo"  of  the  Palatine.     405

fixed  to  a  cross ;  while  another  figure  in  a  tunic  stands  on  one
side.     This  figure  is  addressing  himself  to  the  crucified  monster,
and  is  making  a  gesture  which  was  the  customary  pagan  ex-
pression of  adoration.     Underneath  there  runs  a  rude  inscrip-
tion :  Alexamenos  adores  his  Ood,  Here  we  are  face  to  face  with
a  touching  episode  of  the  life  of  the  Boman  Church  in  the  days
of  Severus  or  of  Caracalla.     As  under  Nero,  so,  a  century  and  a
half  later,  there  were  worshippers  of  Christ  in  the  household  of
the  Caesar,     But  the  paganism  of  the  later  date  was  more  in-
telligently and  bitterly  hostile  to  the  Church  than  the  paganism
which  had  shed  the  blood  of  the  Apostles.     The  Gnostic  invec-
tive which  attributed  to  the  Jews  the  worship  of  an  ass,  was
applied  by  the  pagans  with  facile  indifference  both  to  Jews  and
Christians.  Tacitus  attributes  the  custom  to  a  legend  respecting
services  rendered  by  wild  asses  to  the  Israelites  in  the  desert  ^ ;
'  and  so,  I  suppose,'  observes  Teitullian,  *  it  was  thence  presumed
that  we,  as  bordering  on  the  Jewish  religion,  were  taught  to
worship  such  a  figure  p.'    A  story  of  this  kind  once  current,  was

Felix;  which  may  be  taken  to  prove  that  this  misrepresentation  of  Chris-
idan  worship  was  only  in  vogue  among  pagan  critics  in  Borne  and  Africa
at  the  <dose  of  the  second  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  century.
(3)  It  is  certain  from  Tertullian  that  there  were  Christians  in  the  imperial
palace  daring  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Severus :  '  Even  Severus  himself,
the  father  of  Antoninus,  waa  mindful  of  the  Christians ;  for  he  sought  out
Proculus  a  Christian,  who  was  sumamed  Torpacion,  the  steward  of  Euodia^
who  had  once  cured  him  by  means  of  oil,  and  kept  him  in  his  own  palace,
even  to  his  death :  whom  also  Antoninus  very  well  knew,  nursed  as  he
was  upon  Christian  milk.*  Ad  Scapulam,  c.  4.  Caracalla's  playmate  was
a  Chnstian  boy ;  see  Dr.  Pusey's  note  on  Tertull.  p.  148,  Oxf.  Tr.  libr.
Fath.  (4)  '  Bien  dans  le  monument  du  PaJatin  ne  contredit  cette  opinion,
ni  la  psd^ographie,  qui  trahit  la  mdme  ^poque,  tant  k  cause  de  Tusage
eimultan^  de  Tb  carr^  et  de  Tb  semicirculaire  dans  la  m6me  inscription,
que  par  la  forme  g^n^rale  des  lettres;  ni  moins  encore  Tortographe,  car
on  sait  que  le  changement  de  Tai  en  b  a  plus  d'un  exemple  k  Bome,  mSme
8ur  les  monuments  grecs  du  rbgne  d'Auguste.  Enfin  les  autres  inscrip-
tions grecques  de  cette  chambre,  qui  sans  prejudice  pour  notre  thbse,
pourraient  Stre  d'une  autre  temps,  ne  font  naltre  aucune  difficult^  sdrieuse,
etant  parfaitement  semblables  ^  celle  dont  nous  nous  occupons.'  Garuod,
Ibid.  p.  13.

•  Tac,  Hist.  V.  c.  4.  He  had  it  probably  from  Apion :  see  Josephus,  c.
Ap.  ii.  10.  It  is  repeated  by  Plutarch,  Symp.  iv.  5  :  rhv  ovov  avcupiivaarra
vanois  inry^v  ii^aros  rifiwa-i.  And  by  Democritus:  XpvffTJv  6yov  kc^oA^v
vpoffiKdvovv,     Apud  Suidas,  voc.  ^lovBds,

P  Apolog.  16.  Tertullian  refutes  Tacitus  by  referring  to  his  own  account
of  the  examination  of  the  Jewish  temple  by  Cn.  Pompeius  after  his  capture
of  Jerusalem;  Pompey  'found  no  image*  in  the  temple.  For  proof  that
the  early  Christians  were  constantly  identified  with  the  Jews  by  the  pagan
world,  see  Dr.  Pusey*s  note  on  Tert.  ubi  supra^  in  the  Oxf.  Tr.  Libr.  Fath.
VII  ]


4o6     yesus  Christ  adored  by  early  Martyrs.

easily  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  a  pagan  caricaturist.  Wheiihear
from  ignorance  of  the  forms  of  Christian  worship,  or  in  order  to
make  his  parody  of  it  more  generally  intelligible  to  the  pagan
public,  the  draughtsman  has  ascribed  to  Alexamenos  the  gestures
of  a  heathen  devotee  <i.  But  the  real  object  of  this  coarse  caii-
cature  is  too  plain  to  be  mistaken.  Jesus  Christ,  we  may  be  sore,
had  other  confessors  and  worshippers  in  the  imperial  palace
¥^  knelt  side  by  side  with  Alexamenos.  The  moral  pressure
of  the  advancing  Church  was  malnTig  itself  felt  throughout
all  ranks  of  pagan  society;  ridicule  was  invoked  to  do  the
work  of  argument ;  and  iiie  social  persecution  which  crowned
all  true  Christian  devotion  was  often  only  the  prelude  to  a
sterner  test  of  that  loyalty  to  a  crucified  Lord,  which  could  meet
heathen  scorn  with  tibe  strength  of  patient  Mth,  and  heathen
cruelty  with  the  courage  of  heroic  endurance.

The  death-cry  of  the  martyrs  must  have  familiarized  the
heathen  mind  with  the  honour  paid  to  the  Bedeemer  by  Chris-
tians. Of  the  worship  offered  in  the  Catacombs,  of  the  stern
yet  tender  discipline  whereby  the  early  Church  stimulated,
guided,  moulded  the  heavenward  aspirations  of  her  children,
paganism  knew,  could  know,  nothing.  But  the  bearing  and
the  exclamations  of  heroic  servants  of  Christ  when  arraigned
before  the  tribunals  of  the  empire,  or  when  exposed  to  a  death
of  torture  and  shame  in  the  amphitheatres,  were  matters  of
public  notoriety.  The  dying  prayers  of  St.  Stephen  expressed
the  instinct,  if  they  did  not  provoke  the  imitation,  of  many  a
martyr  of  later  days.  What  matters  it  to  Blandina  of  Lyons
that  her  pagan  persecutors  have  first  entangled  her  limbs  in
the  meshes  of  a  large  net,  and  then  have  exposed  her  to  the
fury  of  a  wild  bull  I  She  is  insensible  to  pain ;  she  is  entranced
in  a  profound  communion  with  Christ '.  What  matters  it  to
that  servant-boy  in  Palestine,  Porphyry,  that  his  mangled  body
is  '  committed  to  a  slow  fire  ) '  He  does  but  call  more  earnestly
in  his  death-struggle  upon  Jesus".  Felix,  an  African  bishop,
after  a  long  series  of  persecutions,  has  been  condemned  to  he
beheaded  at  Yenusium  for  refosiug  to  give  up' the  sacred  boob


\  Job  zzzi.  27.    St. Blenmym.  in  Oseam,  e.  13:    'Qni  adosant  soleiii
deoflcabui  mannin  saam.'    Comp.  Minuc.  Fed.  Oct.  c.  a.

r  EoB.  Hist.  Ecc  T.  I :  c&t  yh^ptBov  &Kifiiiiaa,  rwb^  TopcjBA^-  koI  kom

*  Ibid.  Mart.  Pal.  Il :  KaBwf'OfUpris  aurov  riis  ^Xoybs  chrcj^^i}|c  fM^,  rh
Tlbr  rav  Ocov  *Ii}(rovy  fiortfihv  ivtfiod/ifpos,

[lsct.


The  Martyrs  pray  to  Jesus  in  their  agony.    407

to  the    proconsul.     '  Eaising  his  eyes  to  heaven,  he  said  with  a

clear  voice  .  . .  "  O  Lord  God  of  heaven  and  earth,  Jesu  Christ,

to  Theo  do  I  bend  my  neck  by  way  of  sacrifice,  O  Thou  Who

abidest   for  ever,  to  Whom  belong  glory  and  majesty,  world

without  end.  Amen*." '  Theodotus  of  Ancyra  has  been  betrayed

by  the  apostate  Polychronius,  and  is  joining  in  a  last  prayer  with

the  sorrowing  Church.      *Lord  Jesu  Christ,'  he  cries,  'Thou

Hope  of  the  hopeless,  grant  that  I  may  finish  the  course  of  my

conflict,  and  offer  the  shedding  of  my  blood  as  a  libation  and

sacriflce,  to  the  relief  of  all  those  who  suffer  for  Thee.    Do  Thou

lighten  their  burden ;  and  still  this  tempest  of  persecution,  that

all  who  believe  in  Thee  may  enjoy  rest  and  quietness  ^.'     And

afterwards,  in  the  extremity  of  his  torture,  he  prays  thus :  'Lord

Jesu  Christ,  Thou  Hope  of  the  hopeless,*  hear  my  prayer,  and

assuage  this  agony,  seeing  that  for  Thy  Name's  sake  I  suffer

thus  ^.'     And  when  the  pain  had  failed  to  bend  his  resolution,

and  the  last  sentence  had  been  pronounced  by  the  angry  judge,

*0  Lord  Jesu  Christ,'  the  martyr  exclaims,  *Thou  Maker  of

heaven  and  earth.  Who  forsakest  not  them  that  put  their  hope

in  Thee,  I  give  Thee  thanks  for  that  Thou  hast  made  me  meet

to  be  a  citizen  of  Thy  heavenly  city,  and  to  have  a  share  in  Thy

kingdom.   I  give  Thee  thanks,  that  Thou  hast  given  me  strength

to  conquer  the  dragon,  and  to  bruise  his  head.     Give  rest  unto

Thy   servants,  and  stay  the  fierceness  of  the  enemies  in  my

•

*  Boinart,  Acta  Martyrom  Sincera,  ed.  Verona9,  1731,  p.  314.  Acta
8.  Felids  Episcopi,  anno  303 :  '  Felix  lEpiaoopus,  elevans  oculos  in  coelum,
clar&  Toce  cQxit,  Dew,  gratias  Tibi,  Quinquaginta  et  sex  annos  habeo  in
hoc  siBculo,  Virginitatem  cusfodivi,  Evangelia  servavi,  Jidem  et  veritatem
prcsdicavi,  Domine  Deus  caU  et  terra,  Jesu  Christe,  Tibi  cervicem  meam
ad  victimamjlecto,  Quipermanes  in  atemum;  Cui  est  claritas  et  magni-
ficentia  in  scecula  saculorum.    Amen,*

■  Ibid.  p.  303,  Passio  S.  Theodoti  Ancyrani,  et  septem  virginum :  *  Theo-
dotus, valedicens  &atribus,  jubensque  ne  ab  oratione  cessarent,  sed  Demn
orarent  ut  corona  ipsi  obtingeret,  praeparavit  se  ad  verbera  sustinenda.
Simul  igitur  perstiterunt  in  oratione  cum  martyre,  qui  prolize  precatus,
tandem  ait :  Domine  Jesu  Christe,  spes  desperatorumj  da  mihi  certaminis
cursum  perfic&re,  et  sanguinis  effusionem  pro  sacrificio  et  libatione
offerre,  omnium  eorum  causd  qui  propter  Te  ajffliguntur.  Alleva  onus
eorum;  et  compesce  tempestatem,  ut  requie  et  profundd  tranquilUtate
potiantur  omnes  qui  in  Te  credunt*

'  Ibid.  p.  307:  'Videns  ergo  Prsesea  se  firastra  laborare,  et  fatigatos
tort(»«fi  deficere,  depositum  de  ligno  jussit  super  ignitas  testulas  collocari.
Quibus  etiam  interiora  corporis  penetrantibus  gravissimum  dolorem  sentiens
Theodotus,  oravit  dicens,  Domine  Jesu  Christe,  spes  desperatorum,  exaudi
orationem  meam,  et  cruciatum  huno  mitiga ;  quia  propter  Nomen  Sanc-
tum Tuum  ista  potior/

vn]


4o8     The  Martyrs  pray  to  yesus  in  their  agony.

person.  Give  peace  onto  Thy  Chtircb,  and  set  her  frae  from
the  tyranny  of  tiie  devil  r.'

'  Thus  it  was  that  the  martyrs  prayed  and  died.  Their  voices
reach  ns  acroBS  the  chasm  of  iutenrenitig  centuries;  hot  time
cannot  impair  the  moral  majesty,  or  weaken  the  accents  of  their
strong  and  simple  conTiction.  One  after  anol^er  their  piercing
words,  in  which  the  sharpest  human  agony  is  bo  entwined  with
a  superhuman  faith,  &11  upon  oar  ears.  '  O  Christ,  Thoa  Sen
of  God,  deliver  Thy  servants  >.'  'O  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  we  are
ChriBtians ;  Thee  do  we  serve ;  Hon  art  our  Hope  ;  Thoa  art
the  Hope  of  Chriatians -,  O  God  Most  Holy,  O  God  Meet
High,  O  God  Almighty".'  '0  Christ,'  cries  a  martyr  again
and  again  amidst  Ins  agonies,  '0  Christ,  let  me  not  be  con-
founded b.'  'Help,  I  pray  Thee,  0  Christ,  have  pity.  Pre-
serve my  soul,  guard  my  spirit,  tiiat  I  be  not  ashamed.  I  pray
Thee,  0  Christ,  grant  mo  power  of  endurance  '.'    '  I  pray  Thee,

T  Bniiurt,  Acta,  p.  307 :  '  Cumque  ad  loenm  pcrveniasent,  oran  oiE[nt
Martyr  in  hsec  verba :  iionine  Jet*  CiritCe,  cali  Itrraque  eondUor,  gut
DOS  dereliaquii  tperantei  in  Te,  gratiai  Tihi  ago,  qitiafecitti  me  digjHHt
caUttii  Tva  Urbit  deem,  Ttiiqtit  rtgni  cotuorteBi,  Qratiat  Tibi  <^o,
quia  donaeU  miM  draconem  vincere,  tt  oopni  ejtu  conlerere.  Da  reqtiem
MTvii  Tail,  algue  in  mt  titte  dolentiiait  iniancomm.     Da  Ecaleeia  T*a

'  Ibid.  p.  340;'  Acts  SS.  SatnTnim,  Dativi,  et  aliorom  pIiirimOTim
martymm  in  AiricS,  a.  304 :  '  Thelica  martyr,  medii  de  ipti  camiGcniD
rabie  hujaemodi  preces  Domina  cum  gratiarum  actione  eff undebat :  Dm
gratiBB.     la  yomiae  Ttio,  Chritte  Dei  Pili,  libera  tervoi  Tuea.'

'  Ibid.:  'Cnm  idJbuB  angolaiiim  concussa  fbrtina  lat«ra  Balcuentm.
pTofluenique  gan^nia  Qoda  violeotia  tcactibiu  emanaret,  ProooQeulcm  obi
dicentsm  audivit:  IndpieB  sentire  qan  voe  pati  oporteat.  Et  adjedt:  ^d
gioriam.  GraUa*  ago  Deo  regnorvm.  Apparet  regnum  tatemum,  rigiKm
iacormplam,  Domine  Jetv  Chrisie,  Chriatiani  tvmut;  Tibi  lervinw;
Tu  ei  ipei  nattra;  Tn  et  tpee  Chrietianorvm i  Dau  tanctittine ;  Dm
aUiiaimei  Deta  ommpolem:

''  Ibid.  p.  341 :    'Advolabant    trucea   manua  jiUEis   velodbiu  lerirao,

eecretaque  pectoris,  (Sieriiptia  cutlbus,  vjeceribusqae  divulsis,  nehadii  td-

EpectibuB  prDfanorum  adnexS  crudelitat«  pajidabont.     Inter  tuec  Martnii

Uena  immobilis  pentat:  et  licet  membra  rmnpantor,  diTellantnr  viscen.

len  martyris  integer,  incoiiciusasqae  p^dsrtt.

JIT  Dativns,  qni  et  Senator,  tali  voce  jxeat

te  fundebat:    O  Chritta  Domine,  non  «»

martyr,  inter  vulnerum  cmciatuB  ssvieaiiiKa

onsm:  Rogo,  ut,  Chritte,  nan  confiindar.'

interea  Dativna  iMiienain  corporiB  eni  potioi

jminiun  mena  aiumuBqne  peudebat,  nlbildiJ-

^antum  ad  Dominom  precabatur,  diceiu ;  S>^

item.  Serva  a»imam  meant ;  eutiodi  eptrilni

•>go,  Chritte,  da  tv^ereuiiam.'  '

[leCT.


^he  Martyrs  pray  to  Jesus  in  their  agony.    409

Christ,  Lear  me.  I  thank  Thee,  my  God ;  command  that  I  he
beheaded.  I  pray  Thee,  Christ,  have  mercy;  help  me.  Thou
Son  of  God  <^.'  *  I  pray  Thee,  O  Christ :  all  praise  to  Thee.
Deliver  me,  O  Christ ;  I  suffer  in  Thy  Name.  I  suffer  for  a
short  -while ;  I  suffer  with  a  willing  mind,  O  Christ  my  Lord :
let  me  not  be  confounded®.'

Or  listen  to  such  an  extract  from  an  early  document  as  the
following : — *  Calvisianus,  interrupting  Euplius,  said,  "  Let  Eu-
plius,  -who  hath  not  in  compliance  with  the  edict  of  the  emperors
given  up  the  sacred  writings,  but  readeth  them  to  the  people,  be
put  to  the  torture."     And  while  he  was  being  racked,  Euplius
said,  "  I  thank  Thee,  O  Christ.     Guard  Thou  me,  who  for  Thee
am  suffering  thus."     Calvisianus  the  consular  said,  "  Cease,  Eu-
plius, firom  this  folly.     Adore  the  gods,  and  thou  shalt  be  set
at  liberty."     Euphus  said,  "  I  adore  Christ ;  I  utterly  hate  the
demons.     Do  what  thou  wilt :  I  am  a  Christian.     Long  have
I  desired  what  now  I  suffer.     Do  what  thou  wilt.    Add  yet
other  tortures :  I  am  a  Christian."    After  he  had  been  tortured
a  long  while,  the  executioners  were  bidden  hold  their  hands.
And  Calvisianus  said,  "  Unhappy  man,  adore  the  gods.     Pay
worship  to  Mars,  Apollo,  and  -<Esculapius."     Euplius  said,  "I
worship  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost.     I  adore
the  Holy  Trinity,  beside  Whom  there  is  no  God.     Perish  the
gods  -who  did  not  make  heaven  and  earth,  and  all  that  is  in
them.     I  am  a  Christian."    Calvisianus  the  prsefect  said,  "  Offer
sacrifice,  if  thou  wouldest  be  set  at  liberty."     Euphus  said,  "  I
sacrifice  myself  only  to  Christ  my  God :  more  than  this  I  can-
not do.     Thy  efforts  are  to  no  purpose;    I  am  a  Christian."
Calvisianus  gave  orders  that  he  ^oidd  be  tortured  again  more
severely.      And  while  he  was  being  tortured,  Euphus   said,
"  Thanks  to  Thee,  O  Christ.     Help  me,  O  Christ.     For  Thee  do
I  suffer  thus,  O  Qirist."     And  he  said  this  repeatedly.     And  as
his  strength  gradually  failed  him,  he  went  on  repeating  these
or  other  exclamations,  with  his  lips  only — his  voice  was  gone  ^.*

^  Ada,  p.  342  :  '  Ne  inter  moras  torquenfcium  exclusa  anima  corpus  sup-
plicio  pendente  desereret,  tali  voce  Dominum  presbyter  precabatur :  Tiogo
Christe,  exaudi  me,  Qratiaa  Tihi  ago,  Deut :  juhe  me  decollari,  Rogo
Christe,  miserere.     Dei  Fili,  euhveni*

•  Ibid.  p.  343 :   *  Emeritus  martyr  ait : Rogo,  Christe,  Tihi  lau-

des:  libera  me,  Christe,  patior  in  Nomine  Tuo.  Breviter  jpatior,  libenter
potior,  Christe  Domine;  non  confundar'

'  Buinart,  p.  363  ;  Acta  S.  Euplii  Diaconi  et  Martyris,  a.  304 :  *  Calvisi-
anus interlocutus  dixit:  JSuplius  qui  secundum  Edictum  JPrincipum  non
iradid/ii  8cripturas,  sed  legit  populo,  torqueatur.    Oumque  torqueretur,

vn]


4 1  o  Prayers  of  the  martyrs  not  chance '  efacu/atums'

You  CEumot,  as  I  have  already  urged  e,  dismiss  horn  your  con-
sideration  auch  prayers  aa  these,  on  the  ground  of  their  being
'mere  ejacolationB.'  Do  serioaa  men,  who  know  they  are  dying,
'  ejaculate '  at  random  1  Is  it  at  the  hour  of  death  that  a  man
would  natntally  iimoTste  upon  the  devotional  habits  of  a  life-
time 1  Is  it  at  such  an  hoar  that  he  would  make  hitherto  nn-
attempted  enterprises  into  the  unseen  world,  and  address  himself
to  beings  with  whom  he  had  not  before  deemed  it  lawful  or
possible  to  hold  spiritual  communion  t  Is  not  the  reverse  of
this  supposition  notoriouEly  the  case  1  Surely,  those  of  ns  who
have  witnessed  the  last  hours  of  the  servants  of  Christ  cannot
hesitate  as  t«  the  answer.  As  the  soul  draws  nigh  to  the  gate
of  death,  the  solemnities  of  the  eternal  future  are  wont  to  cost
their  shadows  upon  the  thought  and  heart ;  aud  whatever  b
deepest,  truest,  most  aBsured  and  precious,,  thenceforth  engroaaes
every  power.  At  that  dread  yet  blessed  hour,  the  soul  oUnga
with  a  new  intensity  and  dehheration  to  the  most  certain  truths,
to  the  most  prized  and  familiar  words.  The  mental  creations  of
an  intellectual  over-subtlety,  or  of  a  thoughtless  enthusiasm,  or
of  an  unbridled  imagination,  or  of  a  hidden  perversity  of  will,
or  of  an  unsuspected  unreality  of  character,  fade  away  or  tie
discarded.  To  gaze  upon  the  naked  truth  is  the  one  necesaity;
to  plant  the  feet  upon  the  Bock  Itself  the  supreme  demre,  in
that  awful,  searching,  sifting  moment.  Often,  too,  at  a  man'a
last  hour,  will  habit  strangely  assert  its  mysterious  power  ot
recovering,  as  if  from  the  grave,  thoughts  and  memories  whicb
seemed  to  have  been  lost  for  ever.  Truths  which  have  been
half  forgotten  or  quite  forgotten  since  childhood,  and  prayers

dint  Eupliua:    Oraiiai  Ttbi,  Cltritte.     Me  cuaiodi  qui  propter  Tt  iac

patior.     Dixit  CalviaiannB  CiiiigiilaiiB :    Desiste,  EupH,  ab  imanid  lUc.

J>eo*  adora  it  liberaberii.    EupliuB  diiit ;  Adoro  ChrUitim,  delator  da-

moaia.     Foe  jttod  vie,  CiritiianM  turn.     Scee  diu  optatii.    Foe  ^utd

vie.     Adde  alia,  Ciriatiantit  turn.     Poatqnam  diD  tortus  esset,  jusd  nmt

ceagftTB  oamificea.    Et  dint  CalTiBianos :  JKijM",  adora  deos  .■  Marten  edit,

Apollinem  et  ^iimlapitim.     Diiit  Eaplias  ;  Fatrem  ef  JVitma  et  Bpiri-

titm  Saaotum  adoro :   Sanciam  Trinitateia  adoro,  praiier  quam  not  ai

Devt.     Fereatit  dii  qui  non/eeervni  caiUim  et  lerram,  et  qua  in  eit  tiat.

Chrieliamie  rum.    CalvisinnuB  pnefectas  dixit  ^  Sacriflea,  ei  rtie  liierari.

0  OSRISTO  DEO  me  ipevm :  quid  uUn

a    conarit:    Chriitiaaut  mm.     CalTisinni

i6».     Cmnqne  torqneretur,   dixit  Euplini;

■evrre,  Chriate.    Premier   T»  hac  patior,

i  deficientibus  Tiribus,  dieeb&t  labiia  tantom,

[Lscr.


The  A  rian  invocation  of  Christ.  411

which  were  learned  at  a  mother's  knee,  return  upon  the  soul

with  resistless  persuasiveness  and  force,  while  the  accumula-

tions  of  later  years  disappear  and  are  lost  sight  of.     Depend

ux>on  it,  the  martyrs  prayed  to  Jesus  in  their  agony  because  they

had  prayed  to  Him  long  before,  many  of  them  from  infancy;

because   they  knew  from  experience   that  such  prayers  were

hlessed  and  answered.     They  ha^d  been  taught  to  pray  to  Him ;

they  had  joined  in  prayers  to  Him ;  they  had  been  taunted  and

ridiculed  for  praying  to  Him ;  they  had  persevered  in  praying

to  Him ;  and  when  at  last  their  hour  of  trial  and  of  glory  came,

they  had  recourse  to  the  prayers  whidi  they  knew  full  well  to  be

the  secret  of  their  strength,  and  those  prayers  carried  them  on

through  their  agony,  to  the  crown  beyond  it.

And,  further,  you  will  have  remarked  that  the  worship  of
Jesus  by  the  martyrs  was  full  of  the  deepest  elements  of
worship.  It  was  made  up  of  trust,  of  resignation,  of  self-
surrender,  of  self-oblation.  Nothing  short  of  a  belief  in  the
absolute  Godhead  of  Jesus  could  justify  such  worship.  The
Homoousion  was  its  adequate  justification.  Certainly  the  Arians
worshipped  our  Lord,  although  they  rejected  the  Homoousion.
So  clear  were  the  statements  of  Scripture,  so  strong  and  so
universal  was  the  tradition  of  Christendom,  that  Arianism  could
not  resist  the  claims  of  a  practice  which  was  nevertheless  at
variance  with  its  true  drift  and  principle.  For,  as  St.  Atha-
nasius  pointed  out,  the  Arians  did  in  reality  worship  one  whom
they  believed  to  be  a  being  distinct  from  the  Supreme  God.
The  Arians  were  creature- worshippers  not  less  than  the  heathen  h.
Some  later  Arians  appear  to  have  attempted  to  retort  the  charge
of  creature-worship  by  pointing  to  the  adoration  of  our  Lord's
Humanity  in  the  Catholic  Church.  But,  as  St.  Athanasius
explains,  our  Lord's  Manhood  was  adored,  not  as  a  distinct  and
individual  Being,  but  only  as  inseparably  joined  to  the  ador-
able Person  of  the  Everlasting  Word^.  A  refusal  to  adore
Christ's  Manhood  must  imply  that  after  the  Licamation  men
could  truly  conceive  of  It  as  separate  from  Christ's  Eternal

^  St.Athanas.  Epist.  ad  Adelphimn,  §  3:  oh  tcrifffAa  irpoffKvvovfjicv,  fiii
yhoirOf  idviK&y  yhp  Koi  *Ap€iav&v  rj  roui^m)  irhApri*  &AA.cb  rhy  KOpiov  t^j  lerf-
fftms  irapKtoBhna  rhv  rov  %iOv  hSyov  irpofftcvvovfity,

'  Ibid. :  el  yhp  ica2  ^  vhp^  ainii  koB*  ican^y  fxepos  iffrl  rwv  KTifffidrwyf  &AA&
9fov  yiyoye  ffwfia,  Koi  oUre  rh  roiovroy  a&fia  xaO'  iavrh  Bia^>ovyT€s  &irb  rod
liAyov  irpoiTKvyovfify,  oiht  rhy  hSyoy  irpocKwija'ai  04\oyTes  fiaKp^yofitv  ahrhp
krh  rris  aapK6s'  i\X*  elZSreSf  xaOh  vpoeivofiev,  rh  '  6  A6yo5  ffkp^  iy4v^ro,*
TovToy  Ktd  iy  trapKl  yey6fX€yov  iviyiy^ffKo/iey  SeSy,

vn]


412         Early  Socinian  worship  of  Christ

PerBoaJ.  There  was  no  real  analogy  between  this  worship  and
the  Arian  worship  of  a  being  who  was  in  ito  wise  associated
with  the  Essence  of  God ;  and  Arianiam  was  either  Tirtnallf
ditbeistic  or  conBciouely  idolatroua.  It  was  idoUtrooB,  if  Cbrift
was  a  created  being ;  it  was  ditbeistic,  if  He  was  cosceired  of
Bs  really  Divine,  yet  distinct  in  essence  from  the  Essence  of  tlie
Father  k.

The  same  phenomenon  of  the  vital  principle  of  a  heresy  being
orerridden  for  a  while  by  the  strength  of  the  tradition  of
universal  ChriBtendom  waB  reproduced,  twelve  centmies  later,  in
the  case  of  Socinianism.  The  earliest  Socinians  taught  that  the
Son  of  Qod  was  a  mere  man,  who  was  conceived  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  was  therefore  called  the  Son  of  God.  But  they  also
maintained  that  on  account  of  His  obedience,  He  was,  after
finishing  His  work  of  redemption,  exalted  to  Divine  dignity  and
honour'.  Christians  were  to  treat  Him  as  if  He  were  Qod:
they  were  to  trust  Him  implicitly;  they  wore  to  adore  Him".
FanstuB  SocinUB "»  zealoiisly  insisted  upon  the  duty  of  adoring
JesuB  Christ ;  and  the  Bacovian  Catecbism  expressly  aaserta
that  those  who  do  not  call  upon  or  adore  Christ  are  not  to  be

J  St.  Atbanas.  Epiet.  tA  Adelphium,  §  3 :  rlt  Tocyapovf  dSthi  i.^fvi  i<n\i
is  Xiyiiy  T$  KapUf,  oWiTto  awi  toS  (Tii/caToi  fpo  «  irpooKui^ff* ;  k.tJ^.  Com'
pare  Ibid,  j  5 ;  Iva  k at  tsA^uo-i  Xiytir  (aa.  Ariani),  ai  irpoiriairBuiJLir  ^^11  lir
K^iot*  ftfTct  T^r  trapKhs,  &XAd  Sicupov/nv  ri  tr^fia  kbI  fiivip  Tovrtp  XaTpt&oiur-

*  St.AtJiaiiag.oantr.  Arian.  Orat.  ii.  S  I4.8abfiii.p.48i.  Orat.iilji6,
p.  565,  ei  70P  ;iJ)  opTBi  (xf,  iW  i(  out  imtiy  inrl  kt/o/ki  kkI  irsliiiia  i
A&ytii,  1)  ats  firri  Stis  oAit^ivbi,  3>it  rb  timi  ovtIv  era  rar  mtaiiATiir,  %  ti
&t)iv  ainbp  AvaiidCovair  lyrpeirAfxtifOi  rapii  Tan  ypaipiiv,  avdymi  Ktrfetr  ofrnif
Sit  etoti?,  tra  fiiv  leriimjr,  rlur  Si  trifav  ktiitt^,  kbI  iio  Kvploit  karpriio,

irl  fitv  iTO^TB,  T^  ti  irepif  ytrr)T^  ic<d  vrlaiiaTi oBrm  !1  ^ipamrtil

■(ii-riBi  Kal  »A(loiiai  ouKdlioi'iri  fleoii"  tooto  yif  raf  iKtrnrSmt  i»i  rti  Wf
Stou  ri  irixitpTi/ta.  Siirrt  oir  ol  'Apuarol  rmavTa  \oyiiinfroi  md  rmnliTti
oil  {n/rapiB/imiru'  laifTBhs  lifri  tuv  'EAX^vuv  ;

'  Socin.  de  Jnatif.  Bibl,  Pr,  Pol,  torn.  i.  fol.  601,  col.  r.

"■  Cat.  Bacov. ;  'Qn.  336.  Quid  prttierei  Dominta  Jetug  Tuiie  pro-
eepto  addidill  Kesp.  Id  quod  tliam  Domitnim  Jetma  pro  Deo  agmucin
ienemur,  id  at,  pro  to,  qui  ia  not  jioletiatem  habet  dininam,  ef  cut  ma
divinum  ex&ibert  Aoaorem  ohstricH  tvmu*.  Qu.  137.  In  q»o  it  iottr
divimit   Chriato    debilui   cotaiatilt    Besp.  in   eo,    qvod    ;u«iiaJinoiI»

-J fc.' —  jj^.-^A -trosequi  fffnemur,  ita  in  omaibux  necexrit^ibiit

irare  potsuvtut.  Adoramua  verb  emu  propUr
nam  ejtu  poteilattm.'     Cf.  MUhler,  Symbolii.


Oliriatiaii  practice  may  be  still  more  remaritiblj
b-ciy  of  Servetui,  as  (fiveii  in  a  MS.  aooouat  of
lecoe,  Life  of  Leo  X,  c.  I  g.     '  Ipse  hcxTendO  nm


[lsct.


abandoned,  as  resting  on  antiquarian  feeling.  413

skccounted  Christians  <>.  But  this  was  only  the  archseology,  or  at
most  the  better  feeling  of  Socinianism.  Any  such  mere  feeling
^^^ras  destined  to  yield  surely  and  speedily  to  the  logic  of  a  strong
<iestructive  principle.  In  vain  did  Blandrata  appeal  to  Faustus
Socinus  himself  P,  when  endeavouring  to  persuade  the  Socinians
of  Transylvania  to  adore  Jesus  Christ:  the  Trapsylvanians
"would  not  be  persuaded  to  yield  an  act  of  adoration  to  any
creature  <i.  In  vain  did  the  Socinian  Catechism  draw  a  dis-
tinction between  a  higher  and  a  lower  worship,  of  which  the
former  was  reserved  for  the  Father,  while  the  latter  was  paid  to
Christ  r.  Practically  this  led  on  to  a  violation  of  the  one
positive  fundamental  principle  of  Socinianism ;  it  obscured  the
incommunicable  prerogatives  of  the  Supreme  Being.  Accord-
ingly, in  spite  of  the  texts  of  Scripture  upon  which  their
Mrorship  of  Christ  was  rested  by  the  Socinian  theologians,  such
worship  was  soon  abandoned;  and  the  later  practice  of  So-
cinians ^  has  illustrated  the  true  doctrinal  force  and  meaning  of

•  Cat.  Racov. :  '  Qu,  246.  Q;aid  verb  sentis  de  its  hominihut,  qui  Chris-
tum non  invocant,  nee  adorandum  censentf  Besp»  Prors'ds  non  esse
Christianos  sentio,  cum  Christum  non  haheant,  Et  licet  verbis  id  n^are
non  andeant,  reipsd  negant  tamen.'  In  his  sennon  on  'Satan  Trans-
formed,' South  quotes  Socinus  as  saying  that  'Prsestat  Trinitaiium  esse,
quam  asserere  Christum  non  esse  adorandum.'

^  See  Socinus*  tractates,  Bibl.  Frat.  Pol.  ii.  p.  769,  sqq.

«  Cf.  Mohler,  Symbolik,  p.  609 ;  Bp.  Pearson,  Minor  Works,  vol.  i.
p.  300,  and  note.  Coleridge  s  Table  Talk,  2nd  ed.  p.  304 :  '  Faustus
Socinus  worshipped  Jesus  Christ,  and  said  that  Grod  had  given  Him  the
power  of  being  omnipresent.  Davidi,  with  a  little  more  acuteness,  urged
that  mere  audition  or  creaturely  presence  could  not  possibly  justify  worship
from  men ; — that  a  man,  how  glorified  soever,  was  no  nearer  Grod  than  the
most  vulgar  of  the  race.  Prayer  therefore  was  inapplicable.'  On  the  re-
sponsibility of  Socinus  for  Davidi's  subsequent  persecution  for  this  negation,
see  Priestley,  Corr.  of  Christ.,  Part  i.  §  11.  For  himself  Coleridge  says
(Ibid.  p.  50),  '  In  no  proper  sense  of  the  term  can  I  call  Unitarians  and
Socinians  believers  in  Christ ;  at  least  not  in  the  only  Christ  of  Whom
I  have  read  or  know  anything.*

'  Cat.  Eac. :  *  Qu,  245.  JSrgo  is  honor  et  cultus  ad  eum  modum  trihuitur,
vt  nullum  sit  inter  Christum  et  Deum  hoc  in  genere  discrimen  ?  Besp.
/mo,  permagnum  est.  Nam  adoramus  et  colimus  Deum,  tanquam  causam
primam  salutis  nostra;  Christum  tanquam  causam  secundam;  out  ut
own  Paulo  loquamur,  Deum  tanquam  Sum  ex  quo  omnia,  Christum  ut
eum  per  quern  omnia.*  Cf.  Bibl.  Frat.  Pol.  tom.  ii.  fol.  466,  qu.  by  Mohler,
Symbolik,  p.  609.  Mohler  observes  that  '  man  sieht  dass  an  Christus  eine
Art  von  Invocation  gerichtet  wird,  die  mit  der  Katholischen  Anrufung
der  Heiligen  einige  Aehnlichkeit  hat.*

•  Cf.  Priestley,  Corr.  of  Christ.,  Part  i.  §  1 1 :  *  It  is  something  extraor-
dinary that  the  Socinians  in  Poland  thought  it  their  duty,  as  Christians,
and  indeed  essential  to  Christianity,  to  pray  to  Jesus  Christ,  notwithstanding

vn]


4 1 4    Explicit  confessions  of  Christ^ s  Divinity

that  adoration  which  Socinianism  refuses,  but  which  the  Church
unceasingly  offers  to  Jesus,  the  Son  of.  God  made  Man.  Of
this  worship  the  only  real  justification  is  that  full  belief  in
Christ's  Essential  Unity  with  the  Father  which  is  expressed  by
the  Homoousion.

II.  But  the  Homoousion  did  not  merely  justify  and  explain
the  devotional  attitude  of  the  Church  towards  Jesus  Christ :  it
was,  in  reality,  in  keeping  with  the  general  drift  and  sense  of
her  traditional  language.

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  prayers  of  the
primitive  martyrs;  but  the  martyrs  professed  in  terms  their
belief  in  Christ's  divinity,  as  frequently  as  they  implied  that
belief  by  their  adorations  of  Christ.  This  is  the  more  observ-
able because  it  is  at  variance  with  the  suggestions  by  which
those  who  do  not  share  the  faith  of  the  martyrs,  sometimes
attempt  to  account  for  the  moral  spectacle  which  martyrdom
presents.  It  has  been  said  that  the  martyrs  did  not  bear  witness
to  any  definite  truth  or  dogma ;  that  the  martyr-temper,  so  to
term  it,  was  composed  of  two  elements,  a  kind  of  military  en-
thusiasm for  an  unseen  Leader,  and  a  strange  unnatural  desire
to  brave  physical  suffering;  that  the  prayers  uttered  by  the
martyrs  were  the  product  of  this  compound  feeling,  but  that
such  prayers  did  not  imply  any  defined  conceptions  respecting
the  rank  and  powers  of  Him  to  Whom  they  were  addressed.
Now,  without  denying  that  the  martyrs  were  sustained  by
a  strictly  supernatural  contempt  for  pain,  or  that  their  devotion
to  our  Lord  was  of  the  nature  of  an  intense  personal  attach-
ment which  could  not  brook  the  least  semblance  of  slight  or
disloyalty,  or  that  they  had  not  analysed  their  intellectual  appre-
hension of  the  truth  before  them  in  the  maimer  of  the  divines
of  the  Nicene  age,  I  nevertheless  affirm  that  the  martyrs  did
suffer  on  behalf  of  a  doctrine  which  was  dearer  to  them  than
life.  The  Christ  with  Whom  they  held  such  close  and  passionate
communion,  and  for  Whose  honour  they  shed  their  blood,  was
not  to  them  a  vague  floating  idea,  or  a  being  of  whose  rank  and
powers  they  imagined  themselves  to  be  ignorant.  If  there  be
one  doctrine  of  the  faith  which  they  especially  confessed  at
death,  it  is  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Divinity.  This  truth  was
not  only  confessed  by  bishops  and  presbyters.     Philosophers,

that  they  believed  Him  to  be  a  mere  man,  whose  presence  with  them,  and
whose  knowledge  of  their  Bituation,  they  could  not  therefore  be  assured
of.'    This  work  appeared  in  1782.

[liBCT.


by  the  primitive  martyrs.  415

like  Justin^;  soldiers,  such  as  Maurice^,  and  Tarachus^,  and
Theodorus  ^ ;  young  men  of  personal  beauty  like  Peter  of  Lamp-
sacnsy,  or  literary  friends  of  high  mental  cultivation  as  were
Epipodius  and  Alexander^;  widows,  such  as  Symphorosa^ ;  and


^  Buinart,  Acta,  p.  49:  *^go  quidem  ut  homo  imbeeillia  sum,  et  longi
minor  quam  ut  de  infinitd  illius  Deitate  aliquid  magnum  dicere  posavm :
Frophetarum  munus  hoc  essefafeor,'

^  Ibid.  p.    243:    *  Milites  sumus,  Imperator,  tui:  sed  tamen  servi,

quod  libere  confltemur,  Dei Sahes  hie  nos  eonfltentes  Deum

Patrem  auetorem  omnium;  et  Filium  Ejus  Jeswn  Christum  DEUM
oredimus.'

^  Ibid.  p.  377  '*  Tdpaxos  tlvtv*  *  Nvi/  i.\7j0ois  ^povifju&rtpSv  fit  iiroiriffast  reus
irKriyous  4y5uvafA^<ras  fie,  ^ti  fiaWov  jc^ToiBcvai  fit  iv  ry  bvSfiaTi  rov  &€ov  Kcd
rod  Xpi<Trov  ainou.*  Ma|t/tos  riyt/iiDV  eJveW  '^Apoffic&rare  Koi  rptffKardpare,
vcos  Bvffl  deaiis  \arpeifis,  Kot  avrhs  6/Ao\oywv,  rohs  Oeobs  ipvy;*  Tdpaxos  ttirtV
*  *E7«i)  Qehu  6fio\oy&  rhu  6vr<os  6ma.*  Md^ifMS  rryffiiov  elvey'  *  Kal  fi^y  Kcd
Xpi(Tr6u  riva  ll<fnjs  elvai  0e6y.*  Tdpaxos  elirev  '  O0t«s  ^x«**  avrhs  ydp  iariy
6  Xpiarhs  6  Tihs  rod  &eov  rod  (&yros,  rj  4\vls  r&y  Xpurriaycoy,  5t*  hy  Ka\
irdffxoyres  (r(a(6fjL€0a*

*  Ibid.  p.  425 :  '  Vos  autem  erratis  qui  damonas  fallaces  et  impostores
Dei  appellatione  honoratis  ;  mihi  vero  Deus  est  Christus,  Dei  Unigenitus
Filius.  Pro  pietate  igitur  atque  confessione  Istius,  et  qui  vulnerat  inci-
dat ;  et  qui  verberat  laceret ;  et  qui  cremat  Jlammam  admoveat ;  et  qui
his  vocihus  meis  offenditur,  linguam  eximat*

y  Ibid.  p.  135  :  *  Comprehensus  est  quidam,  Petrus  nomine,  viJdfe  qnidem
fortis  in  fide ;  pulcher  animo  et  speciosus  corpore.  Proconsul  dixit :  Hdbes
ante  oculos  decreta  invictissimorum  principum,  Sacrifica  ergo  magnm
detB  Veneri.  Petrus  respondit:  Miror,  si  persuades  mihi,  optime  Pro-
consul, sacrificare  impudicce  mulieri  et  sordida,  qua  talia  opera  egit  ut
oonfusio  sit  enarrare  ....  Oportet  ergo  me  magis  Deo  vivo  et  vero,  Regi
sceculorum  omnium  Christo  sacrificium  offerre  orationis  deprecationis,
compunctionis  et  laudis,  Audiens  hsec  Proconsul  jussit  eum  adbuc  setate
adolescentulum  tendi  in  rotd,  et  inter  ligna  in  cirouitu  posita^  vinculis
ferreis  totum  corpus  ejus  fecit  constringi:  ut  contortus  et  oonfractus[?]
minutatim  ossa  ejus  oomminuerentur.  Quanto  autem  plus  torquebatur
famulus  Dei,  tanto  magis  fortior  apparebat.  Constans  vero  aspectu,  et
ridens  de  ejus  stultiti^,  conspiciens  in  coelum  ait:  IHbi  ago  gratias,
Domine  Jesu  Christe,  qui  mihi  hano  tolerantiam  dare  dignatus  es  ad
tnncendum  nequissimum  tgrannwn.  Tunc  Proconsul  videns  tantam  ejus
perseverantiam,  et  neo  his  quidem  defeoisse  tonnentis,  jusrit  eum  gladio
percuti,

■  Acta,  p.  65,  circ.  a.  178 :  'Ita  Uteris  eruditissimi,  concordid  crescente,

adeo  provecti  sunt : ad  li»o  beatus  Epipodius Sempitemum

vero  Dominum  nostrum  Jeswn  Christum  quern  crucifixum  memoras,  re-
surrexisse  non  nosti,  qui  ineffabiU  mysterio  homo  pariter  et  Deu8,famulis

suis  tramitem  immortalitatis  instituit, Christum  cum  Patre  ac

Spiritu  Sancto  Deum  esse  conjiteor,  dignumque  est  ut  ilU  animam  fneam
refundam,  qui  mihi  et  Creator  est  et  Medemptor'

•  Ibid.  p.  21,  a.  120:  'Si  pro  nomine  Christi  Dei  mei  incensa  fuero,
illos  damones  tuos  magis  exuro/

vn]


4 1 6     Expluil  confessions  of  Christ's  Divinity


poor  women  lile  Domnina^;  and  elaves  such  as  yitalia*^;  and
jDimg  bojB  Each  as  MartJaUsd ; — ^the  learned  and  the  illiterate,
tfae  young  and  the  old,  the  noble  and  tlie  lowl;,  the  slave  uid
hia  master,  anit«d  in  this  confession.  Sometimes  it  is  wrimg
from  the  martyr  relnctantly  by  croes-examinatioii ;  Bometimes  it
is  proclaimed  as  a  trntb  with  which  the  Christiaii  heart  is  M
to  banting  and  which,  oat  of  the  heart's  abundance,  the  Cbrie-
tian  month  cannot  but  speak.  Sometimes  Christ's  Divinity  is
professed  as  belonging  to  the  great  Christian  contradiction  of
the  polytheism  of  the  heatbes  world  aronnd ;  sometimes  it  is
explained  as  inTolving  Christ's  Unity  with  the  Father,  agaio^
the  pAgan  impntation  of  ditheiEm';  Eometimes  it  is  proclaimed
as  JDstifyii^  the  wotship  which,  as  the  heathens  knew.  Chris-
tians paid  to  Christ.  The  martyrs  look  paganism  in  the  lace,
and  m»int«in  that,  although  Christ  was  cmcified,  yet  neTertheless
Christ  is  God ;  that  eren  whUe  His  very  Name  is  cast  ont  u


^  BmnBt,  Acta,  p.  i ji; :  '  iO  ib  igmtm  aiemam  inddam,  el  t&rBOfa
ptrpeiua,  Deam  mIh  ti  Ciritlmm  tJKt,  ^i  fecit  ealim  et  terram.'

'  IbiiL  p.4io(c{.  St.  Ambr.de  Exh.  Virgin,  ci),  dro.  >.304:  'Hai^'
mniHi  A^ickJa  «t,  cm  Yiulia  aema  fait  ante,  nima  consors  et  cdl^p
maityrii.  Piauuit  auiiui  nt  [aoviden^  locum ;  seeiitaB  est  domintu  . . .
cnrnqoe  nnctaa  Titalis  ecgoetur  >  p«(seqac3itibiiB  nt  Chiistam  negirat,  <l
ille  ampUbs  pitfceretor  Dcminam  Dnatnun  Jesnm  Chrinnm,  omnia  to^

Tohiere  locos,  ormlioitan  fndit  ad  Dmiminn  dicena ;  Domiiu  Jetu  Ckruie,
S*l*«tor-  aiflu,  et  J*e%t  meut ,-  j*i»  nBeipi  tpiriliM  tHeam ;  quia  jam
^■n"<ttn>  *rf  aetipiam  e</romam,  qiuim  mmyelMt  Hiu  taiKlr*  on'Ai  orimfit


'  IlsA,  Pa^o  S.  Felidtaria  et  Septcan  Klimrnn  Ejii^  p.  13:  'Hoe
qnoqneamoWk  jofsit  H^iDmDmHartulaiiiDgiet^  eiqae  dixit:  CnidditMit
TcMiv  bctons  elfecti,  AagaMomm  imtitata  coDtemnitiB,  et  in  Testrt  pv
nkio  pomaaetia.  Bespoudit  Martialii :  O  n  noeiet  qma  patut  idelanm
nl/oriiat  formtm  naf  /  Sed  adhmc  differ*  Demt  tram  nam  in  ON  <<
irfo/«  rArfra  demuHuirart,  Ommes  eaw  qmi  aoa  eomJUmniur  ChbIBIDK
TESUX  to*  Dew  la  igmem  artar  mam  miUfniar.'
*  Itfld.  p.  Ill:    'Poat  iaee  earn  addants  hand  procol  Asctqnide,

— r^  jz —  : : .  rn^i-m^^  eeflioetj  rflapaiidit  AsclepiadeH,  Ci™-

eojFl  Aadtji-fa":  CatioUca.  Folcmoi:
::  Cinitam.  PdaiMn:  Quid  ergol  iitt
mi  i^m  tr^o*  •^  ip"  paallo  aale  cM/mi


[tKT.


by  the  primitive  martyrs.


evil,  Christ  is  really  Master  of  the  fortunes  of  Rome  and  Dis-
poser of  the  events  of  history;  that  the  pagan  empire  itself
did.  bnt  unwittingly  Bubaerve  His  purposes  and  prepare  His
triumph  f;  that  He  Who  is  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth.
CEUi  afford  to  wait,  and  is  certain  of  the  future.  This  was  the
faith  which  made  any  compromise  with  paganism  impossible  K.

jnplification  of  tha  last  pnijer  of
io  value,  at  any  rate  may  be  taken
to    tepresent  the   primitive  Cliristian   sentiment   respecting   the   relation
of  J«eaB  Christ  to  the  pagan  empire.     It  should  be  noticed  that  neither
St-  Ambrose  nor  St,  Angnetine,  in  their  aocounts  of  the  martyidom,  report
anything  of  this  kind  \  Prudenticie  may  have  followed  a  distinct  and  tnut-
WOTthy  tradition.    The  martyr  is  interoeding  for  Bome : —
'0  Chriate,  numen  nnioum,
O  splendor,  0  virtua  Patria,
O  factor  orbis  et  poli,
Atque  AQCtor  horum  mceuium  t
Qui  aceptra  Ronue  in  vertica
Remm  locasti,  nandens
Mundiim  Quirinali  togs
Servire,  et  armia  cedere
Ut  digorepantnm  gentium
Xorea,  et  observantiam,
Linguasque  et  ingenia  et  sacnt
TTnia  domarea  tegibne.
En  omns  sub  regnum  Ben.!
Mortale  concessit  genas:
Idem  loquuntur  diBsoni
Bitoa,  id  ipsum  sanoiunt.
Hoc  deatinatnm  quo  magis
Jni  Christiani  nominie,
Qaodcumqae  terrarum  jacet
TJno  illigaret  vinculo.
Da,  Chriate,  Romania  tois
Sit  ChrieUana  at  oivitas:
Per  quem  dediati,  nt  catena
Hena  una  sacrorum  foret.'

FerUfep\.  3,  41
'  Fmd.  Periateph.  Hymn.  5.  57 ;  qu.  by  Ruinart,  Acta,  p.  330.
Tincentii  martyrio : —

Vol  nostra  qnie  nt  acdpe.
Eat  Christua  et  Pater  Deua;
Servi  hajus  ac  testes  sumui ;
Extorque  u  potes  fidem.
TM-menta,  career,  nngola
Sbridensque  flammia  lamina
Atqne  ipsa  pcenamm  ultima}
Mora  Christianis  Indus  est.'

ml


4 1 8  Didthe' higher  minds' accept  thefaithofthepeopUf

'WLat  God  dost  thoD  wonUpt'  enquired  the  judges  of  the
Qiristiiui  Pionins.  *  I  woraliip,'  replied  Fionias,  '  Him  WLc
mftde  the  he»TeiiB,  and  Who  beautified  them  with  stars,  and
Who  ha«  enriched  the  earth  with  flowers  and  trees.'  'Dost
tbon  mean,'  asked  the  magiBtratcs, '  Him  Who  was  cmcified ) '
'Certainly,'  replied  Fionins;  'Him  Whom  the  Father  Bent  for
the  salTation  of  the  world  )■.*

"Hie  point  before  us  notoriooslj  admits  of  the  most  copiona
illustration  * :  and  it  is  impoedble  to  mifitake  its  significance.
If  the  dying  words  of  this  or  that  martyr  are  misreported,  or
exaf^rated,  or  coloured  by  the  phraseology  of  «  later  age,  the
general  phenomenon  cannot  but  be  admitted,  as  a  fact  beyond
dispute.  Hie  martyrs  of  the  primitiTe  Church  died,  in  a  great
number  of  cases,  expreaJy  for  the  dogma  of  Chriirt's  Divinity.
"Hie  confenions  of  the  martyrs  explain  and  justify  the  {Hvyen
of  the  martyrs ;  the  Homoonsion  combines,  snmmarizea,  fixes
the  sense  of  their  confessions.  The  martyrs  did  not  pray  to  or
co&fen  a  creature  external  to  the  Essence  of  Qod,  howerer
dignified,  howerer  powerfnl,  however  august.  They  piuyed  to
Christ  as  God,  they  confemed  that  Christ  is  Ood,  they  died  for
Christ  as  Qod.  Tbey  prayed  to  Him  and  they  spoke  of  Him  i.%
of  a  distinct  Person,  Who  yet  was  oue  with  God.  Does  not  tliis
mmple  &ith  of  the  Christian  people  cover  the  same  area  as  tlie
more  clearly  defined  feith  of  the  Nicene  fathers  1  Or  could  it  be
mors  fairly  or  more  accurately  sonunarized  by  any  other  symbol
than  it  is  by  the  Homoonsion  I

But  yon  admit  that  the  Nicene  decision  did  very  fairly  embody
and  fix  in  a  symbolical  form  the  popular  creed  of  earlier  cen-
turies. *  This,'  you  say,  *  is  the  very  pith  of  our  objection ;  it
was  the  popular  creed  to  which  the  Council  gave  the  sanction  of
its  authority.'  You  suggest  that  althou^  a  dying  martyr  may
be  an  interesting  ethical  study,  yet  that  the  moral  force  which
carries  him  through  his  anfierings  is  itself  apt  to  be  a  form  of
fanaticism  hostile  to  any  severely  intellectual  conception  of  the
worth  and  bearings  of  bis  creed.     You  admit  that  the  martyr

M  mterim  diienmt:  Queiii  Dtam  eoliiiit
caeUtm  Jecit,  et  tideHbu*  ornavity  ^t  terram
tqiia  dtcoratiil ;  qui  ordimroit  eirtuufii*
TiDiiuimm  eel  lUomm  lege  tii/navit.  Tnm
at  etti    Et  FionioB :  Illam  dieo  jiim  jm


i  PP-  *74.  3'*


ChT^ist's Divinity  taught  by  sub-apostolic  Fathers.  4 1 9

represents  the  popular  creed ;  but  then  you  draw  a  distinction
beirween  a  popular  creed,  as  such,  and  the  ideas'  of  the  Hhinkers.'
'  What  is  any  and  every  creed  of  the  people,'  say  you,  *  but  the
child  of  the  wants  and  yearnings  of  humanity,  fed  at  the  breast
of  mere  heated  feeling,  and  nursed  in  the  lap  of  an  ignorance
more  or  less  profound  1 '   A  popular  creed,  you  admit,  may  have
a  restricted  interest,  as  affording  an  insight  into  the  intellectual
condition  of  the  people  which  holds  it ;  but  you  deem  it  worth-
less as  a  guide  to  absolute  truth.     The  question,  you  maintain,
is  not.  What  was  believed  by  the  primitive  Christians  at  large  %
The  question  is.  What  was  taught  by  the  well-instructed  teachers
of  the  early  Church  %     Did  the  creed  of  the  people,  with  all  its
impulsiyeness  and  rhetoric,  keep  within  the  lines  of  the  grave,
reserved,  measured,  hesitating,  cautious  language  of  the  higher
minds  of  primitive  Christendom  %

Now  here,  my  brethren,  I  might  fairly  take  exception  to  your

distinction  between  a  popular  and  an  educated  creed,  as  in  fact

inapplicable  to  the  genius  and  circumstances  of  early  Christianity.

Are  not  your  criteria  really  derived  from  your  conceptions  of

modem  societies,  political  and  religious  %  It  was  once  said  of  an

ancient  state,  that  each  of  its  citizens  was  so  identified  with  the

corporate  spirit  and  political  action  of  his  country,  as  to  be  in

fact  a  statesman.     And  in  the  primitive  Church,  it  was  at  least

approximately  true  that  every  Christian,  through  the  intensity

and  intelligence  of  the  popular  faith,  was  a  sound  divine.   Men

did  not  then  die  for  rhetorical  phrases,  any  more  than  they

would  do  so  now;  and  if  the  martyrs  were,  as  a  rule,  men  of  the

people,  it  is  also  notorious  that  not  a  few  among  them  were

bishops  and  theologians  of  repute.     But  that  we  may  do  justice

to  the  objection,  let  us  enquire  briefly  what  the  great  Church

teachers  of  the  first  three  centuries  have  taught  respecting  the

Higher  and  Eternal  Nature  of  Jesus  Christ.

And  here  let  us  remark,  first  of  all,  that  a  chain  of  representa-
tive writers,  reaching  from  the  sub-apostolic  to  the  Nicene  age,
does  assert,  in  strong  and  explicit  language,  the  belief  of  the
Church  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God.

Thus  St.  Ignatius  of  Antioch  dwells  upon  our  Lord's  Divine
Nature  as  a  possession  of  the  Church,  and  of  individual  Chris-
tians ;  he  calls  Jesus  Christ '  my  God,* '  our  God.*  *  Jesus  Christ
our  God,*  he  says,  *  was  carried  in  the  womb  of  Mary  K*     The

^  Ad  Eph.  18:  6  7&P  9€5f  r\\iMv  'Iijo'ovs  h  Xpicrhs  iicvoipopifiii  Hh  Maplas*
Cf.  Ibid.  7 :  4p  aeipiti  yw6iinvos  0t6s,

yu  ]  £  e  a


420    Chris  fs  Deity ^  kom  taught  by  fathers  of

Blood  of  Jesus  is  the  Blood  of  God^.  Ignatius  desires  to
imitate  the  sufFerings  of  his  God  "*.  The  sub-apostolic  author  of
the  Letter  to  Diognetus  teaches  that  *  the  Father  hath  sent  to
men,  not  one  of  His  servants,  whether  man  or  angel,  but  the
very  Architect  and  Author  of  all  things,  by  Whom  all  has  been
ordered  and  settled,  and  on  Whom  all  depends.  • .  •  He  has  sent
Him  as  being  God  n.*  And  because  He  is  God,  His  Advent  is
a  real  revelation  of  God ;  He  has  shewn  Himself  to  men,  and
by  faith  men  have  seen  and  known  their  God  o.  St.  Polycarp
appeals  to  Him  as  to  the  Everlasting  Son  of  GodP ;  all  things  on
earth  and  in  heaven,  all  spirits  obey  Him  4 ;  He  is  the  Author
of  our  justification ;  He  is  the  Object  of  our  hope  J^.  Justin
Martyr  maintains  that  the  Word  is  the  First-born  of  God,  and  so
God « ;  that  He  appeared  in  the  Old  Testament  as  the  God  of
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  ^ ;  that  He  is  sometimes  called  the
Glory  of  the  Lord,  sometimes  the  Son,  sometimes  the  Wisdom,
sometimes  the  Angel,  sometimes  God  v.  St.  Justin  argaes
against  Tryphon  that  if  the  Jews  had  attentively  considered
what  the  prophets  have  written,  they  would  not  have  denied
that  Christ  is  God  and  the  Only  Son  of  the  Unbegotten  God  ^.
He  maintains  that  the  Word  is  Himself  the  witness  to  His  own


^  Eph.  I :  &i^^anrvp^<ravTef  ^v  alfiari  rod  Bcov,
™  Rom.  6 :  iTrirpi^^ari  fioi  fiifirir^v  ehat  rod  irdOovs  rov  Ocov  fiov,
^  £p.  ad  Dipgn.  7  •  aifrhs  6  iroanoKpdrtcp  Ktd  wamoKrlffrris  KoUt  kipans
Bfhs  .....  ov  KaOdiTfp  &v  ris  (ucdafitv,  avOpdirois  6inip4rriv  riv^  Tc/ufrcu  |
liyyeKoVf  fj  dpxoyra,  fj  riv^  r&v  BieirSuroov  ra  iviyeiOf  ^  rwk  r&v  veinarfo-
fidvuy  riis  iv  obpavoTs  SioiK'^trcis,  &A.X*  abrhv  rhu  Texc^Ti}v  ical  ^rifuovpyhr  rik
S\uv  ,  ,  .  ,  &s  Behv  l[irefi}^ev,  &s  irphs  iLV0p<&irovs  tirtyLi^fv,  S»s  ffi&Cctp  txtp^^a.

®  Ep.  ad  Diogn.  o.  8 :  ris  ykp  5a«s  avBpdnwuv  iiwlararo  rl  xor*  itrrl  Btht,
irplp  ahrhy  iXOtTy  .  •  •  .  kvOp^Trtav  84  ovSds  ofire  e7$€V  ofire  kyvd>pi(rtVf  mnh  U
iavrhv  ^ir^ei^fv,  hre^ei^e  84  dih  irlcrreooSf  ^  fi6pp  Bthv  ISctv  avyK€x<iflTiu,
V  Eplst.  Ecd.  Smym.  de  Mart.  S.  Polyc.  n.  14.

*  Ad  Phil,  a :  ^{li  virerdyri  ret  xdvra  hrovpdvia  Koil  iTcly^ia'  f  irwro  ncHi
Xarp€{i€i,    In  Phil.  6 :  rod  Kvpiov  Koi  Btov  apparently  refers  to  Christ.

'  Ibid.  8  :  &8taA.c(rrws  olv  vpocKoprtpufiev  ry  i\iriii  rifi&y  koI  r$  iif^afiin
rijs  BiKaiocrvvris  yi^iSaVf  Zs  iari  Xptarhs  'Iricrovs,

*  Apol.  i.  n.  63 :  t>s  A6yos  fcol  irp(cr6roKos  &v  rod  Q€o9,  koL  Oe^s  ^dpxtu

*  Ibid.

"  See  the  alignment  of  the  whole  passage,  Gontr.  Tryph.  57-61 :  &f>xV
irph  irdvrfev  r&v  Kria/idrtov  6  &€hs  yty4vvr)Ke  hvvayiiv  riva  i^  iavrod  AoyixVi
fjfTts  Kcti  B6^a  Kvpiov  iirh  rod  Uve^fiaros  rod  *Aylov  KoXeiraif  nrorh  84  Ti^s,  tot)
84  ISoipta,  vorh  84  "AyytKos,  irorh  84  9€<Jj.

*  Ibid.  126 :  ci  vevoiiKarf  rh  eiprifidva  ^h  rSov  irpoipitroov,  ohx  tip  i^fipw(2ff9t
ahrhv  elvau  Sehv  rod  fidvov  Koi  kytvv^ov  Qeod  Ti6y.  Cf.  Ibid.  63 :  TpoaKvni'
r6s — Koi  ee6s.  Justin  expresses  the  truth  of  our  Lord^s  distinct  Personality
by  the  phrase  &fhs  trtpos  iLpiOfi^  &\\*  ob  yrd^ftrf  (Ibid.  56).

[lect.


L


the  second  and  third  centuries.  42 1

Divine  Generation  of  the  Father  y ;  and  that  the  reality  of  His
Souship  is  itself  a  sufficient  evidence  of  His  True  Divinity  2.
Tatian  is  aware  that  the  Greeks  deem  the  faith  of  the  Church
utter  folly;  hut  he  nevertheless  will  assert  that  God  has  ap-
peared on  earth  in  a  human  form^,      Athenagoras  proclaims
with  special  emphasis  the  oneness  of  the  Word  with  the  Father,
as  Creator  and  Ruler  of  the  universe  ^.   Melito  of  Sardis  speaks
of  Jesus  as  heing  hoth  God  and  Man  ^ :  '  Christians/  he  says,
'  do  not  worship  senseless  stones,  as  do  the  heathen,  but  God  and
His  Christ,  Who  is  God  the  Word  <^.'     St.  Irenseus  perhaps  re-
presents the  purest  and  deepest  stream  of  apostolic  doctrine
which  flowed  from  St.  John  through  Polycarp  into  the  Western
Church.     St.  Irenseus  speaks  of  Christ  as  sharing  the  Name  of
the  only  true  God.     He  maintains  against  the  Yalentinians  that
the  Divine  Name  in  its  strictest  sense  was  not  given  to  any
angel ;  and  that  when  in  Scripture  the  Name  of  God  is  given  to
any  other  than  God  Himself  there  is  always  some  explanatory
epithet  or  clause  in  order  to  shew  that  the  full  sense  of  the  word
is  not  intended  ®.     None  is  dii'ectly  called  God  save  God  the
Father  of  all  things  and  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  ^.     In  hoth  Testa-
ments Christ  is  preached  as  God  and  Lord,  as  the  King  Eternal,
as  the  Only-begotten,  as  the  Word  Incarnates^.    If  Christ  is

7  Contr.  Tryph.  6i :  fxaprvpifaet  S4  fioi  6  A6yos  ri^s  co^las  aMs  tiv  oZros
i  Schs  ivh  rov  Ilarphs  ruv  tKo»v  ytpyriBtls.

■  Ibid.  136;  Apolog.  i.  63.

»  Adv.  Grsec.  0.  ai :  oh  yhp  fuopatvofi€v,  Mpts^EWrivts,  ouB^  X^povs  hray-
y4\\ofji(y,  0€hp  4v  kvBp^ov  fiop<py  y^yovivau,  Ci,  Ibid.  n.  13:  tow  'K€x6i^
Boros  ©eov.

*>  Legat.  n.  10 :  irpbj  ourov  7^^  jcal  ZC  avrov  irdma  iyivero,  ivhs  tvros  rov
Ilarphs  KoiX  rov  Tlov,

«  See  Eus.  Hist.  Eccl.  ▼.  a8.  Compare  the  magnificent  passage  fifom
St.  Melito*s  treatise  on  Faith,  given  in  Cureton*s  Spicilegimn  Syiiaoum,
pp.  53,  54,  and  quoted  by  Westcott  on  the  Canon,  p.  196.

d  Apol.  apud  Auct.  Chron.  Pasch.  (Gall.  tom.  i.  p.  678) :  obK  iafily  \iBoiv
ou^efdav  ai<TBi\<Tiv  ix^i^roov  dtpavtvraif  &Wh  fiSvov  &(ov  rod  xph  vavrav  km
«irl  irdvrav,  Kol  tri  rov  Xpitrrov  ahrov  6pros  &€0V  A6yov  wph  Mpa>v  iffp.€V
dfrfiffKevrai     Bouth,  Bel.  Sacr.  i.  1 1 8,  133.

•  Adv.  Haer.  iii.  6,  n.  3.  t^     .

'  Ibid.  iii.  6,  n.  a:  'Nemo  igitur  alius  Deus  nominatur,  aut  Ppmmus
appellatur  nisi  qui  est  omnium  Deus  et  Dominus,  qui  et  Moysi  dixit,  Ego

sum  Qui  sum, et  Hujus  Filius  Jesus  Christus.'     Cf.  iii.  8,  n.  3 :  *  Deus

Solus.'

«  Ibid.  iii.  19,  n.  a:  'Quoniam  autem  Ipse  propria  pweter  omnes  qm
fuerunt  tunc  iomines,  Deus,  et  Dominus,  et  Rex  ^ternus  et  UnigemtuB,
et  Verbum  Incamatum  prsedicatur,  et  a  prophetis  omnibus  et  apostolis,  et
ah  ipso  Spiritu,  adest  videre  omnibus  qui  vel  modicum  veritatis  attigerint.'

vnj


422  Christ's  Deity  taught  by  Origen^

worshipped  \  if  Christ  forgives  sins  *,  if  Christ  is  Mediator  be-
tween God  and  man^  this  is  because  He  is  really  a  Divine
Person.

And  if  from  Gaul  we  pass  to  Africa,  and  from  the  second  to
the  third  century,  the  force  and  number  of  primitive  testimonies
to  the  Divinity  of  our  Lord  increase  upon  us  so  rapidly  as  to
render  it  impossible  that  we  should  do  more  than  glance  at  a
few  of  the  more  prominent.  At  Alexandria  we  find  Clement
speaking  of  That  Living  God  Who  suffered  and  Who  is  adored  >;
of  the  Word,  Who  is  both  God  and  man,  and  the  Author  of  all
blessings'"^ ;  of  God  the  Saviour >>,  Who  saves  us,  as  being  the
Author  and  Archetyper  of  all  existing  beings.  Clement  alludes
to  our  Lord's  Divinity  as  explaining  His  equality  with  the
Father  o.  His  prescience  during  His  Human  Life  p,  His  revela-
tion of  the  Father  to  men<i.  Origen  maintains  Christ's  true
Divinity  against  the  contemptuous  criticisms  of  Celsus  ^  Origen
more  than  once  uses  the  expression  'the  God  Jesus'.'  He
teaches  that  the  Word,  the  Image  of  God,  is  God  t ;  that  the
Son  is  as  truly  Almighty  as  the  Father  ^ ;  that  Christ  is  the
Very  Word,  the  Absolute  Wisdom,  the  Absolute  Truth,  the
Absolute  Eighteousness  Itself^.  Christ,  according  to  Origen,
possesses  all  the  attributes  of  Deity T;  God  is  contemplated  in

^  Adv.  Hser.  iii.  9,  j.     '  ThuB  [obtulenmt  magi]  quoniam  Dens.*

»  Ibid.  V.  17,  n.  3.  *  Ibid,  iii  18,  7.

^  Protrept.  10,  §  106 :  xlareuffov,  livBpwv§,  ityOp^w^  icol  Oc^,  r^  ro$6m  aol
irpo<rKurov(i4v<ip  9c^  (uyrt,

™  Ibid.  i>  §  7  *  oifrhs  oZros  6  A6yos,  6  ia6pos  &ti<t>«»,  B96S  re  jcol  Mfmns,
atrdyrtop  ri/i7v  cCtrios  hyaBSav.

^  Strom,  ii.  9i  §  45  :  9f ^  r^  2toT7ipi ;  Ibid.  v.  6,  §  38 :  6  Bths  Swr^  KHckit
fi4vos,  ii  T&v  Z\(cv  ikpxhf  I^Tis  inreiKSyurrcu  fi^p  ix  rod  Scov  rov  itopJtrov  npArm
Koi  irph  aXdavuv,  rer^nruKtv  8^  rk  /xiff  iavr^v  Sirayra  y€v6ufp<i,

^  Protrept.  lo,  §  1 10 :  6  ^ay€p<iraTos  6vtus  0€hSf  6  rf  Ac<nr^  rmp  Z\m

P  Quia  Div.  Salv.  6 :  irpoeTSe  &s  Qehst  &  fJL^Wei  Si€potrrid4i<rtff$ai,
4  P»d.  i.  8.    We  know  God  from  our  knowledge  of  Jesiui — iic  tptnins
IcroifOfvovs,

*  Oontr.  Cels.  ii.  9,  16  sqq. ;  vii.  53,  eto.  But  iii.  28  is  less  satis&ctofj.
■  &€hv  *lri(rovv,  Ibid.  v.  51 ;  vi.  66.  *  Select,  in  Gen.  In  Gen.  ix.  6.
^  Prino.  I.  ii.  n.  10 :  ' Ut  autem  unam  eandemque  Omnipotentiain  Patiif

et  Filii  esse  cognoscas,  sicut  unus  atque  idem  est  cum  Patina  Deus  et  Domi-
nus,  audi  hoc  modo  Johannem  in  Apooalypsi  dicentem :  Hso  dixit  Dominof
Deus,  qui  est  ei  qui  erat,  et  qui  venturus  est,  Onmipotens ;  qui  enim  Yen>
turuB  est,  quia  est  alius  nisi  CSiristus.'

*  Contr.  Cels.  iii.  41 :  a{n6\oyo5,  ahroffotpia,  ahroaX^Otia,  Ibid.  T.  39:
ahrotiiKatoirivris.

J  In  Jerem.  Horn.  viii.  n.  a :   vdrra  yhp  Ztra  rov  ecov,  rouivra  h  o^f

[UECT.


and  Tertulltan.  423


t^lie  contemplation  of  Christ  2.     Christ's  Incarnation  is  like  the
economical  language  of  parables  which  describe  Almighty  Ood
a.s  if  He  were  a  human  being.     So  real  is  Christ's  Deity,  that
Sis  assumption  of  our  Nature,  like  the  speech  of  a  parable,  is
'to  be  looked  upon  as  only  a  condescension  to  finite  intelligences °.
There  is  no  Highest  Good  in  existence  which  is  superior  to
Christ  ^ ;  as  Very  God,  Christ  is  present  in  all  the  world ;  He
is    present  with   every  man^.      Origen  continually  closes  his
Homilies  with  a  doxology  to  our  Lord ;  and  he  can  only  account
for  refusal  to  believe  in  His  Divinity  by  the  hypothesis  of  some
kind  of  mental  obliquity^.      TertuUian's  language  is  full  of
Punic  fire,  but  in  speaking  of  Christ's  Divinity  he  is  dealing
-with  opponents  who  would  force  him  to  be  accurate,  even  if
there  were  not  a  higher  motive  for  accuracy.     Tertullian  antici-
pates the  Homoousion  in  terms :  Christ,  he  says,  is  called  God,
by  reason  of  His  oneness  of  substance  with  God  ^.    Christ  alone
is  begotten  of  God  f ;  He  is  God  and  Lord  over  all  men  8.     Ter-
tullian argues  at  length  that  an  Incarnation  of  God  is  possible^ ;
he  dwells  upon  its  consequences  in  language  which  must  appear
paradoxical  to  unbelief  or  half-belief  but  which  is  natural  to  a
sincere  and  intelligent  faith  in  its  reality.     Tertullian  speaks  of

%<m,  6  XpurrSs  iffri  aotpla  rov  Oeov  •  •  .  •  ainhs  hiroKxnpoxris,  ahrhs  ^p6initris
kari  BeoS.

'  In  Joan.  t.  xmrii.  n.  l8 :  Btnopurtu  yhp  iv  r^  A.6yqi,  6m  Be^  koI  uk6vi
rod  Beov  iopdrov,

*  In  Matt.  t.  zvii.  n.  ao :  &<rK€p  6  Bths  hvQpdnrovs  oiKovofiQr  &s  iv  trapa-
fioKcus  Ikvdpwnos  \4ytrat,  rdxa  94  ircos  Koi  yliferou*  ofhias  Kol  6  ^orriip  xporiyov'
fi4p»s  Tibs  &v  rod  Seov  Kal  0€6s  itrriVt  koX  Ttbs  rris  itrydinis  ainov,  km  €Ik&>p
rod  OcoS  rod  iu>pdrov'  ob  ixivu  tk  iv  f  itrri  xpoijyovixivus,  dAXck  ylverai  tear*
olKOVOfilay  rov  iv  irapafioKaTs  \€yofi4vov  dy0p<&xov  6vrus  8c  Btov,  tlhs  dvBpdhrov
Korit  rh  fUfitiirOai,  Ihav  dvBpdnrovs  olKOVOft^f  rhv  B€dv  KeySfitvoy  4v  xapo^o\ais
KoX  yiySfityov  dvBpwwov,

^  In  Joan.  t.  i.  n.  II :  oh  ffiwinfr4ov  .  • .  rhv  fitra  rhv  Tlar4pa  r&v  ZKoov
Behy  liiyoVf  oi/Ucvhs  yhp  iharrov  kyaBov  KtiL  rovro  rh  &ya$6v,

^  Ibid.  t.  vi.  n.  15 :  80(0X07(0^  irepi  rrjs  Trponyovfi4vTjs  oixrlas  Xpiarov  8117-
■ycTrcu,  Zri  S^vafiiv  ro<ra{mi)V  tx^h  ^^  '^^  k6paros  fXvcu.  Tp  BeiSrriri  abrov,
irapitv  iravri  kvBpdnc^,  iravrX  8^  fcol  r^  t\<^  Kdcrfi^  avfiirapticr€iy6fi€vos,

^  Gontr.  Celfl.  iii.  39.

*  Apol.  c.  ai :  'Hunc  ex  Deo  prolatum  didicimus,  et  prolatione  genera-
tmn,  et  idcirco  Filimn  Dei|  et  Deum  dictum  ex  unitate  substantuB.*  See
Lect.  Vn.  p.  590.  Ibid. :  '  Quod  de  Deo  profectum  est,  Deus  est,  et  Dei
!F^UB,  et  UnuB  ambo.'  Adv.  Prax.  4:  'Filium  non  aliunde  deduco,  sed
de  substantia  Patris.*  Ibid.  3:  'Consortibus  [Filio  et  Spiritu  Sancto]
Bubstantise  Patris.'

'  Adv.  Prax.  7 :  'Solus  ex  Deo  genitus.'

s  Adv.  Jud.  7 :  'Ghristus  omnibus  Deus  et  Dominus  est.*    Oft  0.  I  a.

^  Of.  De  Came  Ghristi,  c.  3i  4.

vn]


424  Various  indirect  testimonies  of  the  third  century,

a  Crucified  God  * ;  of  the  Blood  of  God,  as  the  price  of  our  re-
demption ^.  Christians,  he  says,  believe  in  a  God  Who  was  dead,
and  Who  nevertheless  reigns  for  ever^.  St.  Cyprian  argues
that  those  who  believe  in  Christ's  power  to  make  a  temple  of
the  human  soul  must  needs  believe  in  His  Divinity;  nothing
but  utter  blindness  or  wickedness  can  account  for  a  refusal  to
admit  this  truth  i^.  St.  Hippolytus  had  urged  it  against  Jews
and  Sabellians  ^ ;  A^^^^^^b  determines  to  indent  it  upon  the
pagan  mind  by  dint  of  constant  repetition  <».  Theonas  of  Alex-
andria instructs  a  candidate  for  the  imperial  librarianship  how
he  may  gradually  teach  it  to  his  pagan  master  p.  Dionysins
of  Alexandria  vehemently  repudiates  as  a  cruel  scandal  the
report  of  his  having  denied  it  <i.  St.  Peter  of  Alexandria  would
prove  it  from  an  examination  of  Christ's  miracles'.  For  the
rest,  St.  Methodius  of  Tyre  may  represent  the  faith  of  western

*  Adv.  Marc.  ii.  27:  'Deum  crucifixmn.'

^  Ad  Uxor.  ii.  3 :  'Non  smnus  nostri,  sed  pretio  empti,  et  quali  pretio!
Sanguine  Dei.'

^  Adv.  Marc.  ii.  16:  '  Christianorum  est  etiam  Deum  mortnum  credere^
et  tamen  viventem  in  sevo  sevorum.*

™  £p.  73,  ad  Jubaianum,  13 :  'Si  peccatorum  remissam  consecutiu  est
.  . .  et  templum  Dei  factum  est,  qusro  cujus  Dei  f  Si  Creatoris,  non  potuit
in  eum  qui  non  credidit.  Si  Christi,  nee  ejus  fieri  potest  templum  qui
n^^t  Deum  Christum.'  Gf.  Ep.  74,  c.  6 ;  '  Quae  ver6  est  anims  cflBoitas,
quse  pravitas,  iidei  unitatem  de  Deo  Patre,  et  de  Jesu  Christi  Domini  et
Dei  nostri  traditione  venientem  nolle  agnoscere,'  &c.

B  Adv.  Jud.  c.  6 :  Bcbs  tav  a.\i\Qkvm.  Contr.  Noet.  c.  6 :  otnoi  b  hv  kw\
vavTOiv  Bcos  iffriv  Aeyet  yhp  ovra  iitrh.  wa^^rifflas'  Tldvra  fioi  xafKiS^Sorou
virh  rov  Ilarp6s.  *  6  titv  iirX  wdyrtov  Bths  (hXayrfrhs,*  yey4vriTcu,  Koi  &y0p»wos
ytv6ii€V0St  Qf6s  itrriv  tis  robs  alapos.  Apud  Kouth,  Opusc.  1.  p.  59.  And
c.  17:  &€hs  A6yo5  &ir*  obpav&v  Kar^KB^v  tis  r^p  ayiay  vapB4vov,  Adv.
Beron.  et  Helic.  n.  2  :  6  tUv  t\cov  0€os  is  later:  of.  Doll.  Hipp,  and CaU.
E.  T.  p.  295.     In  Eus.  V.  28,  He  is  called  our  tUvirKarYXVos  0€^y.

^  Adv.  Gent.  ii.  60 :  '  Ideo  Ghristus,  licet  vobis  invitis,  Deus ;  Dens
inquam  Christus — hoc  enim  ssepe  dicendum  est,  ut  infidelium  disdli&t  et
disrumpatur  auditus — Dei  principis  jussione  loquens  sub  hominis  fonn&.*
^id.  i.  53:  'Deus  iUe  sublimls  fuit;  Deus  radice  ab  intim&,  Deus  ab
incognitis  regnis,  et  ab  omnium  principe  Deus  sospitator  est  missus.'

P  Apud  Bouth,  Rel.  Sacr.  iii.  p.  443 ;  Ep.  ad  Lucian.  Cubicul.  Prspos.
u.  7 :  'Interdum  et  divinas  scripturas  laudare  conabitur  ....  laudabitur  et
interim  Evangelium  Apostolusque  pro  divinis  oraculis:  insurgere  potent
Christi  mentio,  ezplicabitur  paullatim  ejus  sola  Divinitas.*

4  Ep.  ad  Dionys.  Kom.  apud  S.  Athan.  Op.  tom.  i.  p.  255 :  koL  ZC  iXkv
iwiaroKiis  fypmlfo^  ip  oh  1l\€y^a  Kcd  t  xpo<p4pov(riv  lyieAi^/txa  kot^  if^ov,  if'cvSor
hp,  &s  ov  \4yopros  rhp  Xpiarrhv  dfioobffiop  flpcu  r^  06^.

'  Apud  Bouth,  Rel.  Sac.  iv.  48 :  rb,  8^  (rnfieia  irJana  K  iTroirjat  Kai,  al
Svpdntts  ^tucpvcrip  avrhp  0€bv  cXpou  ipavOponrfiffoanti,  rit  <rvP€ifMp6T€pa  n^n/w
BciKvvTtu'  tri  0€by  ^p  tpbffti,  Kcd  yeyopfp  kpBptavos  ^iau*

[lect.


.*


Is  the  language  of  the  Fathers  *  mere  rhetoric '  f  425

Asia  »  ;  the  martyred  Felix  that  of  the  Koman  chair  * ;  and,
to  omit  other  illustrations  ^,  the  letter  of  the  Council  to  Paulus
of  Samosata  summarizes  the  belief  both  of  eastern  and  western
Christendom  during  the  latter  half  of  the  third  century  ^.

This  language  of  the  preceding  centuries  does  in  effect  and
Eubstance  anticipate   the   Nicene  decision.     When   once  the
question  of  Christ's  Divinity  had  been  raised  in  the  metaphysical
form  which  the  Homoousion  presupposes,  no  other  answer  was
possible,  unless  the  Nicene  fathers  had  been  prepared  to  renounce
the  most  characteristic  teaching  of  their  predecessors.   Certainly
it  did  not  occur  to  them  that  the  Catholic  language  of  earlier
writers  had  been  *  mere  rhetoric,*  and  could,  as  such,  be  disre-
garded.    What  is  the  real  meaning  of  this  charge  of  *  rhetoric  *
which  is  brought  so  freely  against  the  early  Christian  fathers  %
It  really  amounts  to  saying  that  a  succession  of  men  who  were
at  least  intelligent  and  earnest,  were  nevertheless,  when  writing
upon  the  subject  which  lay  nearest  to  their  hearts,  wholly  unable
to  conunand  that  amount  of  jealous  seK-control,  and  cautious
accuracy  in  the  use  of  language,  which  might  save  them  from
misrepresenting  their  most  fundamental  convictions.      Let  us
ask  ourselves  whether   this  judgment  be   morally  probable  1
Doubtless  the  fathers  felt  strongly,  and,  being  sincere  men,  they
wrote  as  they  felt.      But  they  were  not  always  exhorting  or
declaiming  or  perorating :  they  wrote,  at  times,  in  the  temper  of
cold  unimpassioned  reasoners,  who  had  to  dispute  their  ground
inch  by  inch  with  pagan  or  heretical  opponents.     Tertullian  is
not  always  '  fervid ' ;  St.  Chrysostom  is  not  always  eloquent ;
Origen  does  not  allegorize  under  all  circumstances ;  St.  Ambrose
can  interpret  Scripture  literally  and  morally  as  well  as  mystically.
The  fathers  were  not  a  uniform  series  of  poets  or  transcenden-
taHsts.     Many  of  them  were  eminently  practical,  or,  if  you  will,

■  De  Symeon.  et  AnnA,  n.  6 :  2^  6cbs  irpZros,  MfiirpotrO^v  trov  ovk  iytvirfiOri
Oehs  &AAos  ix  0€ov  UarphSf  K(d  fifra  ffov  oi/K  ^ffrai  &?^os  tihs  r^  Harpl
ifiooiicrtos  Kol  &fi6rifios.  n.  8 :  8ieb  rod  fiouoyevovs  koI  airapaWdKTov  Koi
iixoovtrlov  HcudSs  aov  ri}V  Xirrpooffiv  rjfiiv  iroiriffdufvos.  n.  I4:  <f>&s  aKriOivhy
4k  (poyrhs  iL\rj0ivov,  Sths  iKfjOivhs  in  0609  oKriBiPov.     Quoted  by  Klee.

*  Ep.  ad  Maximin.  Epp.  et  Gler.  Alex. :  '  De  Yerbi  autem  Incamatione
et  fide  credimuB  in  Dominum  nostrum  Jesum  Christum,  ex  Virgine  MariA
natum,  quod  Ipse  est  sempitemus  Dei  FiHus  et  Yerbum,  non  autem  homo
a  Deo  assumptus,  ut  alius  sit  ab  Bio ;  neque  enim  hominem  assumpsit  Dei
i^us,  ut  alius  ab  ipso  exsistat.  Sed  cum  perfectus  Deus  esset,  factus  est
■imul  Homo  Perf^us  ex  Virgine  Incamatus.'  Labbe  et  Coss.  Cone.  iii.  51 1.

«  C£  more  especially  St.  Greg.  Thaumaturgus,  Orat.  Panegyp.  in  Ori-
genem,  n.  4;  Lact.  Div.  Inst,  iv,  32,  39.

*  Labbe  et  Coss.  i.  845-850.

vn]


426    Doubtful  statements  in  ante-Nicene  writers.

prosaic ;  and  they  continually  wrote  in  view  of  hostile  criticism,
as  well  as  in  obedience  to  strong  personal  convictions.  To  men
like  Justin,  Origen,  and  Cyprian  the  question  of  the  Divinity  of
our  Lord  was  one  of  an  interest  quite  as  pressing  and  practical
as  any  that  moves  the  leaders  of  political  or  conmiercial  or  scien-
tific opinion  in  the  England  of  to-day.  And  when  men  write
with  their  lives  in  their  hands,  and  moreover  believe  that  the
endless  happiness  of  their  fellow-creatures  depends  in  no  slight
degree  upon  the  conscientious  accuracy  with  which  they  express
themselves,  they  are  not  likely  to  yield  to  the  temptation  of
writing  for  the  miserable  object  of  mere  rhythmical  effect ; — ^they
may  say  what  others  deem  strong  and  startling  things  without
being,  in  the  depreciatory  sense  of  the  term,  *  rhetorical.*

But, — ^to  be  just, — ^those  who  insist  most  eagerly  upon  the
*  rhetorical  *  shortcomings  of  the  fathers,  are  not  accustomed  to
deny  to  them  under  all  circumstances  the  credit  of  writing  with
intelligence  and  upon  principle.  If,  for  example,  a  father  uses
expressions,  however  inadvertently  or  provisionally,  which  appear
to  contradict  the  general  current  of  Church  teaching,  he  is  at
once  welcomed  as  a  serious  writer  who  is  entitled  to  marked  and
respectful  attention.  Critics  who  lay  most  stress  upon  the
charge  of  unprincipled  rhetoric  as  brought  against  the  fathers
are  often  anxious  to  take  advantage  of  the  argument  which
screens  the  fathers  and  which  they  themselves  reject.  *  Give
that  argument,'  they  say, '  its  full  and  honest  scope.  If  the  Nicene
fathers  were  not  mere  rhetoricians,  neither  were  the  ante-Nicene.
If  Athanasius,  Basil,  and  the  Gregories  are  to  be  taken  at  their
word,  so  are  Justin  Martyr,  Clement,  Origen,  and  their  contem-
poraries. If  the  orthodox  language  of  one  period  is  not  rhetoric,
then  the  doubtful  or  unorthodox  language  of  another  period  is
not  rhetoric.  If  for  the  moment  we  admit  the  principle  upon
which  you  are  insisting,  we  claim  that  it  shall  be  applied  impar-
tially,— ^to  the  second  century  as  to  the  fourth,  to  the  language
which  is  said  to  favour  Arius,  no  less  than  to  the  language  which
is  insisted  upon  by  the  friends  of  Athanasius.'

*  Is  it  not  notorious,'  men  ask,  *  that  some  ante-Nicene  writers
at  times  use  language  which  falls  short  of,  if  it  does  not  contra-
dict, the  doctrine  of  the  Nicene  Council  %  Does  not  St.  Justin
Martyr,  for  instance,  speak  of  the  Son  as  subserving  the  Father's
Will  y  ?  nay,  as  being  begotten  of  Him  at  His  Will  ^  ?    Does  not

7  Tryph.  126:    imipiT&v  rp  fiovXy  ainov.    Of.  Atlian.  Treat,  i.  118,
note  n.
■  Ibid.  128.    But  cf.  Athan.  Treat,  ii.  p.  486,  note  y.

[lect.


Doubtful  statements  in  ante-Nicene  writers.    427

Justin  even  speak  of  Christ  as  "  another  God  under  the  Creator®  1 "
Do  not  Athenagoras,  Tatian,  Theophilus,  and  St.  Hippolytus
apply  the  language  of  Scripture  respecting  the  generation  of  the
Word  to  His  manifestation  at  the  creation  of  the  world,  as  a  dis-
tinct being  from  God  %  Do  they  not  so  distinguish  between  the
Xoyoff  €pdiad€Tog  and  the  \6yos  irpotfyopiKos  as  to  imply  that  the
Word  was  hypostatized  only  at  the  creation  b?  Does  not  Clement
of  Alexandria  implicitly  style  the  Word  the  Second  Principle  of
things  ^  ?  Does  he  not  permit  himself  to  say  that  the  Nature  of
the  Son  is  most  close  to  the  Sole  Almighty  One  ^  1  Although
Origen  first  spoke  of  the  Saviour  as  being  "  ever-begotten  «,"  has
he  not,  amidst  much  else  that  is  questionable,  contrasted  the
Son,  as  the  immediate  Creator  of  the  world,  with  the  Father  as
the  original  Creator^?  Did  not  Dionysius  of  Alexandria  use
language  which  he  was  obliged  to  account  for,  and  which  is  re-
pudiated by  St.  Basil  s  ?  Was  not  Lucian  of  Antioch  excommu-
nicated, and,  martyr  though  he  was,  regarded  as  the  founder  of
an  heterodox  sect  ^  ?  Is  not  Tertullian  said  to  be  open  to  the
charge  that  he  combated  Fraxeas  with  arguments  which  did
the  work  of  Arius  *  ?  Has  he  not,  in  his  anxiety  to  avoid  the
Monarchianist  confusion  of  Persons,  spoken  of  the  Son  as  a
"  derivation  from,  and  portion  of,  the  whole  Substance  of  the
Father  k,"  or  even  as  if  He  once  was  not  ^  ?  Does  any  Catholic
writer  undertake  to  apologise  for  the  expressions  of  Lactan-
tins.    Has  not  recent  criticism  tended  somewhat  to  enhance  the

•  Dial,  contr.  Tryph.  c.  56 :  Bths  tnpos  inrh  rhv  voiyirfiv,

^  Petav.  3.  6 ;  Newman's  Arians,  p.  106.  But  see  Athan.  Treat,  i.  115,
note  «;  and  Bull,  Def.  Fid.  Nic.  iii.  5.  6.  7,  8.

•  Strom,  lib.  vii.  3,  p.  509,  apud  Pet. ;  he^epov  aXnov,

•  Ibid,  a,  p.  504 :  i\  Ttov  ^vcris,  ^  ry  fi6v<jp  UcLyroKpdropi  irpocrtx^^^^^V-
Bull,  Def.  Fid.  Nic.  ii.  6,  6.

•  6  XcDT^p  i^el  yevvarai,    Apud  Bouth,  Bel.  Sacr.  iv.  354.

'  Orig.  contr.  CeLs.  vi.  60,  apud  Petav.  de  Trin.  i.  4,  5  :  rhv  fi\p  irpo<rtx^s
ZtlpMvpyhv  ttycu  rhv  Tihv  rod  0eod  A6yov  Kcd  &(nr€p€\  abrovpyhv  rov  K6<rpov'
rhv  tk  ncircpa  .  .  .  fivai  lep^oas  drjfitovpySv,

s  Cf.  Pet.  de  Trin.  i.  4,  10;  St.  Bas.  Ep.  9.    But  cf.  Athan.  Sent.  Dion.

^  Alexander  ap.  Theodoret.  Hist.  lib.  i.  c.  4;  Pet.  de  Trin.  i.  4,  13.

•  Petavius  attacks  him  especially  on  the  score  of  this  treatise.  De  Trin.
i.  5,  a :  '  Opinionem  ezplicat  suam,'  says  Petavius,  '  quae  etiam  Arianorum
hseresim  impietate  et  absurditate  superat.'  For  a  fairer  estimate,  see  Klee,
Dogmengeschichte,  ii.  c.  a.

^  Adv.  Prax.  c.  9 :  'Pater  enim  tota  Substantia  est,  Filius  verb  deriyatio
totius  et  portio.*  See  the  remarks  of  Baur,  Dogmengeschichte,  i.  444,  to
which,  however,  a  study  of  the  context  will  yield  a  sufficient  answer ;  e.  g.
c.  8 :  '  Sermo  in  Patre  semper  ....  nunquam  separatus  a  Patre.'

^  Adv.  Hermog.  c.  3.    See  BuU,  Def.  iiL  10.    Gomp.  Ibid.  ii.  7.

vn]


^2%Someante-Nicenewriterswhoheldtheperfecifaitk

repatation  of  Petavius  at  the  ezpeuse  of  Bishop  Bull  <"  %  Kay,  is
net  Bull's  great  work  itself  an  illustration  of  what  is  at  least  the
)>rinKl  yiwie  state  of  the  easel  Does  it  not  presuppose  a  oonHider-
able  apparent  discrepancy  between  some  ante-Niceue  and  tlie
post-Niceae  writers  t  Is  it  not  throughout  explanatory  and
apologetic  )  Can  we  deny  that  out  of  the  long  lirt  of  writers
whom  Bull  reviews,  he  has,  for  one  cause  or  another,  to  explun
the  langnage  of  nearly  one-half  t '

This  line  of  argument  in  an  earlier  guise  has  been  discussed
BO  fully  by  a  distinguished  predecessor"  in  the  present  Lecture,
that  it  may  suffice  to  notice  very  summarily  the  considerations
which  must  be  taken  into  account,  if  justice  is  to  be  done,  both
to  its  real  force  and  to  the  limits  which  ought  to  he,  bat  which
ai'e  not  always,  assigned  to  it.

(a)  Undoubtedly,  it  should  be  frankly  granted  that  some  of
the  ante-Nicene  writers  do  at  times  employ  terms  which,  judged
by  a  Niceue  standard,  must  be  pronounced  unsatisfactory.   Yon


night  add  to  the  illustrati
and  you  might  ui^  that, '
tion,  they  do  not  always


lb  which  have  already  been  quoted ;
,  if  they  admit  of  a  Catholic  interprets-
I  invite  one.  For  in  truth  these  ante-
Kicene  fathers  were  feeling  their  way,  not  towards  the  substance
of  the  faith,  which  they  possessed  in  its  fulness,  but  towards
that  intellectnal  mastery  both  of  its  relationship  to  outer  forms
of  thought,  and  of  its  own  internal  harmonies  and  system,  which
is  obviously  a  perfectly  distinct  gift  from  the  simple  poaseaaion
of  the  faith  itself.  As  Christians  they  possessed  the  faith  itseE
The  faith,  delivered  once  for  all,  had  been  given  to  the  Churcli
in  its  completeness  by  the  apostles.  But  the  finished  intellectn&l
survey  and  treatment  of  the  faith  is  a  superadded  acqairement;
it  is  the  result  of  conflict  with  a  hostile  criticism,  and  of  deroat
reflections  matured  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  Trutt.
Knowledge  of  the  drift  and  scope  of  particular  lines  of  specols-
tion,  knowledge  of  the  real  force  and  value  of  a  new  terminalDg;,
comes,  whether  to  a  man  or  to  a  society,  in  the  way  of  education
and  after  the  discipline  of  partial  and  temporary  fEulnre.  HeK<7
'    '  ■      ' '  •  ■'  utg,)  to  form  the  Church's  mind :  it  gave  point

current  conceptions  of  truth  by  its  mutilstiou
lustrated  the  iatal  tendencies  of  novel  lines  of
en  of  misleading  terms ;  it  unwittingly  forced

elfwottldoD  no  acconct  be  nnderstood  to  assent  to  tin
ritioidng  Bull,  Dr.  Newman  admits  that  he  dma  loi
'    Developm.  p.  159.  »  Dr.  BartMi.


had  not  mastered  all  its  intellectual  bearings.  429

on  an  elucidation  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Church  by  its  subtle
and  varied  opposition.  But  before  heresy  had  thus  accomplished
its  providential  work,  individual  Church  teachers  might  in  per-
fect good  faith  attempt  to  explain  difficulties,  or  to  win  op-
ponents, by  enterprising  speculations,  in  this  or  that  direction,
which  were  not  yet  shewn  to  be  perilous  to  truth.  Not  indeed
that  the  Universal  Church,  in  her  collective  capacity,  was  ever
committed  to  any  of  those  less  perfect  statements  of  doctrine
which  belong  to  the  ante-Nicene  period.  Particular  fathers  or
schools  of  thought  within  her  might  use  terms  and  illustrations
which  she  afterwards  disavowed ;  but  then,  they  had  no  Divine
guarantee  of  inerrancy,  such  as  had  been  vouchsafed  to  the  entire
body  of  the  faithful.  They  were  in  difficult  and  untried  circum-
stances ;  they  were  making  experiments  in  unknown  regions  of
thought ;  their  language  was  tentative  and  provisional.  Com-
pared with  the  great  fathers  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries,
who  spoke  when  collective  Christendom  had  expressed  or  was
expressing  its  mind  in  the  (Ecumenical  Councils,  and  who  there-
fore more  nearly  represented  it,  and  were  in  a  certain  sense  its
accepted  organs,  such  ante-Nicene  writers  occupy  a  position
inferior,  if  not  in  love  and  honour,  yet  certainly  in  weight  of
authority.  If  without  lack  of  reverence  to  such  glorious  names
the  illustration  is  permissible,  the  Alexandrian  teachers  of  the
second  and  third  centuries  were,  relatively  to  their  successors  of
the  age  of  the  Councils,  in  the  position  of  young  or  haK-educated
persons,  who  know  at  bottom  what  they  mean,  who  know  yet
more  distinctly  what  they  do  not  mean,  but  who  as  yet  have  not
80  measured  and  sounded  their  thoughts,  or  so  tested  the  instru-
ment by  which  thought  finds  expression,  as  to  avoid  misrepre-
senting their  meaning  more  or  less  considerably,  before  they
succeed  in  conveying  it  with  accuracy.  When,  for  example,
St.  Justin,  and  after  him  Tertullian,  contrast  the  visibility  of  the
Son  with  the  invisibility  of  the  Father,  all  that  their  language  is
probably  intended  to  convey  is  that  the  Son  had  from  everlasting
designed  to  assume  a  nature  which  would  render  Him  visible.
When  again  St.  Justin  speaks  of  the  Son  as  a  Minister  of  God,
this  expression  connects  Him  without  explanation  with  the
ministering  Angel  of  the  Old  Testament.  Yet  it  need  involve
nothing  beyond  a  reference  to  His  humiliation  in  the  days  of  His
Flesh.  A  like  interpretation  may  fairly  be  put  upon  the  ultra-
subordinationist  terms  used  by  Origen  and  Tertullian  in  dealing
with*  two  forms  of  heretical  Monarchianism ;  and  upon  the  mis-
construed phrases  of  the  saintly  Dionysius  which  expressed
vn]


^^fiAnte-Nicenesubordinationistlanguageexplainei

his  resistance  to  a  full-blo¥m  Sabellianism  o.  Language  wai
employed  which  obviously  admitted  of  being  misunderstood.  It
would  not  have  been  used  at  a  later  period.  '  It  may  be,'  sayi
St.  Jerome,  with  reference  to  some  of  the  ante-Nicene  fathers,
'  that  they  simply  fell  into  errors,  or  that  they  wrote  in  a  sense
distinct  from  that  which  lies  on  the  surface  of  their  writings,
or  that  the  copyists  have  gradually  corrupted  their  writings.
Or  at  any  rate  before  that  Anus,  like  *'  the  sickness  that  de-
stroyeth  in  the  noonday,"  was  bom  in  Alexandria,  these  writers
spoke,  in  terms  which  meant  no  harm,  and  which  were  less
cautious  than  such  as  would  be  used  now,  and  which  accord-
ingly are  open  to  the  unfriendly  construction  which  ill-disposed
persons  put  upon  them  p.'

Indeed  it  is  observable  that  the  tentative  and  perplexing
Christologieal  language  which  was  used  by  earlier  fathers,  at
a  time  when  the  quicksands  of  religious  thought  had  not  yet
been  explored  by  the  shipwrecks  of  heresfy,  does  not  by  any
means  point,  as  is  sometimes  assumed,  in  an  Arian  direction
exclusively.  If,  for  instance,  a  few  phrases  in  St.  Justin  may
be  cited  by  Arianism  with  a  certain  plausibility,  a  similar  appeal
to  him  is  open  from  the  opposite  direction  of  Sabellianism.  In
his  anxiety  to  discountenance  Emanatist  conceptions  of  the
relation  of  the  Logos  to  the  Father,  Justin  hastily  refers  the
beginning  of  the  Personal  Subsistence  of  the  Word  to  revelation
or  to  the  creation,  and  he  accordingly  speaks  of  the  Word  ai
being  caused  by  the  Will  of  God.  But  Justin  did  not  place  the
Son  on  the  footing  of  a  creature ;  he  did  not  hold  a  strict
subordinationism  Q ;  since  he  teaches  distinctly  that  the  Logos
is  of  the  Essence  of  God,  that  He  is  a  Power  eternally  begotten
of  God  Himself  I*.  Thus  St.  Justin's  language  at  first  sight  seems
to  embrace  two  opposite  and  not  yet  refuted  heresies:  both
can  appeal  to  him  with  equal  justice,  or  rather  with  equal
want  of  it  ■.

•  Petav.  de  Trin.  5.  4,  10.

P  Apolog.  adv.  Euffin.  ii.  Oper.  torn.  iv.  p.  ii.  p.  409,  apud  Petav.  de  TWn.
i.  I :  '  Fieri  potest,  ut  vel  cdmpliciter  erraverint,  vel  alio  senBU  tcripeerint,
vel  a  librariis  imperitis  eorum  paullatim  scripta  cormpta  sint.  Ycd  oerU,
antequam  m  Alezandxdft,  quasi  dsemonium  meridianum.  Alius  nasceretur,
innocenter  qusedam  et  minus  caut^  locuti  sunt,  et  quae  non  possint  penre^
Borum  hominum  calumniam  declinare.'    Of.  St.  Athan.  oontr.  Ar.  iiL  59.

«  Domer,  Person  Ghristi,  Erster  Theil,  p.  426,  n.  aa.

'  Contr.  Tryph.  c.  61 :  irpb  irdmoov  rSov  Krifffidrwy  &  Bths  y€y4pinim  JA'c^ti^
riva  iji  iauTov  \oyiicfiv,

•  Domer,  Person  Christi,  Erster  Theil,  p.  426.  See  the  whole  passage
in  which  this  is  very  ably  argued  aga'nst  Semisch.

Flect.


by  the  Churcfis  duties  towards  Polytheism.   43 1

(3)  Eeflect  further  that  a  doctrine  may  be  held  in  its  integrity,
and  yet  be  presented  to  men  of  two  different  periods,  under
aspects  in  many  ways  different.     So  it  was  with  the  doctrine  of
Christ's  Divinity,  in  the  ante-Nicene  as  compared  with  the  post-
Nicene  age  of  its  promulgation.     When  the  Gospel  was  still
struggling  with  paganism  throughout  the  empire,  the  Church
undoubtedly  laid  the  utmost  possible  stress  upon  the  Unity  of
the  Supreme  Being.     For  this  was  the  primal  truth  which  she
had  to  assert  most  emphatically  in  the  face  of  polytheism.     In
order  to  do  this  it  was  necessary  to  insist  with  particular  em-
phasis upon  those  relations  which  secure  and  explain  the  Unity
of  the  Divine  Persons  in  the  Blessed  Trinity.      That,  in  the
ineffable  mystery  of  the  Divine  Life,  the  Father  is  the  Fount  or
Source  of  Godhead,  from  Whom   by  eternal   Generation  and
Procession  respectively,  the  Son   and   the  Spirit  derive  their
Personal  Being,  was  the  clear  meaning  of  the  theological  state-
ments of  the  New  Testament.     When,  then,  Origen  speaks  of
the  Father  as  the  *  first  God  V  he  means  what  the  Apostle  meant
by  the  expression,  *  One  God  and  Father  of  all.  Who  is  above
all.'     He  implicitly  means  that,  independently  of  all  time  and
inferiority,  the  Son's  Life  was  derived  from,  and,  vn  that  sense,
subordinate  to  the  Life  of  the  Father.     Now  it  is  obvious  that
to  speak  with  perfect  accuracy  upon  such  a  subject,  so  as  to
express  the  ideas  of  derivation  and  subordinateness,  while  avoid-
ing the  cognate  but  false  and  disturbing  ideas  of  posteriority  in
time  and  inferiority  of  nature,  was  dif&cult.     For  as  yet  the
dogmatic  language  of  the  Church  was  comparatively  unfixed,
and  a  large  discretion  was  left  to  individual  teachers.    They  used
material  images  to  express  what  was  in  their  thoughts.     These
images,  drawn  from  created  things,  were  of  course  not  adequate
to  the  Uncreated  Object  Which  they  were  designed  to  illustrate.
Yet  they  served  to  introduce  an  imperfect  conception  of  It^.

*  Contr.  Cels.  ▼?.  47 :  ^  irparos  Koi  M  ira<n  StSs,

"  '  In  Bome  instances  [of  ante-Nicene  language]  which  are  urged,  it  is
quite  obvionB  on  the  surface  that  the  writer  is  really  wishing  to  express  the
idea  of  the  Son's  generation  being  absolutely  coeval  with  the  Eternal  Being
of  the  Father,  and  is  using  the  examples  from  the  natural  world,  where
the  derivation  is  most  immediately  consequent  upon  the  existence  of  the
thing  derived  from,  in  order  broadly  to  impress  that  idea  of  coeval  upon
the  reader's  mind.  ''The  Son/*  says  St. Clement  of  Alexandria,  "issues
from  the  Father  quicker  than  light  from  the  sun."  Here,  however,  the
very  aim  of  the  illustration  to  express  simultaneousness  is  turned  against
it,  and  special  attention  is  called  to  the  word  "  quicker"  as  if  the  writer
had  only  degrees  of  quickness  in  his  mind,  and  only  made  the  Son^s


432  Real  mind  of  ttu  ante-Nicene  Chu  rch  declared^

The   fathers  who   employed   them,  having   certain   Smanatist
theories  in  view,  repeatedly  urged  that^the  Son  is  derived  fix)m
the  Father  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  attributes  of  Will  and
Power.     Looking  to  our  human  experience,  we  conceive  of  will
as  prior  to  that  which  it  calls  into  being;   but  in  Grod  the
Eternal  Will   and  the  Eternal  Act  are  coincident;     and   the
phrase  of  St.  Justin  which  refers  the  existence  of  the  Logos  to
the  Divine  Will  is  only  misunderstood  because  it  is  construed  in
an  anthropomorphic  sense.   In  like  manner  the  Alexandrian  dis-
tinction between  the  X6yos  Min0€TOf  and  the  \6yos  TrpoipoptKos
fell  in  naturally  with  the  subordinationist  teaching  in  the  ante-
Nicene  Church.    It  could,  in  a  sense,  be  said  that  the  Son  left  the
Bosom  of  the  Father  when  He  went  forth  to  create,  and  the  act
of  creation  was  thus  described  .as  a  kind  of  second  generation  of
the  Son.     But  the  expression  did  not  imply,  as  it  has  been  un-
derstood to  imply,  a  denial  of  His  eternal  Generation,  and  of  His
unbegotten,  unending  Subsistence  in  God.    This  indeed  is  plain
from  the  very  writers  who  use  it^.     Generally  speaking,  the
early  fathers  are  bent  on  insisting  on  the  subordination  (Kara
Td$ip)  of  the  Son,  as  protecting  and  explaining  the  doctrine  of
the  Divine  Unity.     If  some  of  these  expressed  themselves  too
incautiously  or  boldly,  the  general  truth  itself  was  never  dis-
credited in  the  Church.     Subordinationism  was  indeed  allowed
to  fall  somewhat  into  the  shade,  when  the  decline  of  paganism
made  it  possible,   and    the   activities   of  Arianism   made   it
necessary,  to  contemplate  Jesus  Christ  in  the  absoluteness  of
His  Personal  Godhead  rather  than  in  that  relation  of  a  sub-
ordinate, in  the  sense  of  an  eternally  derived  subsistence,  in
which  He  also  stands  to  the  Eternal  Father.   But  Bishop  Bull  has
shewn  how  earnestly  such  a  doctrine  of  subordination  was  also
taught  in  the  Nicene  period ;  and  at  this  day  we  confess  it  in
the  Nicene  Creed  itself.    And  the  stress  which  was  laid  upon  it
in  the  second  and  third  centuries,  and  which  goes  far  to  explain
much  of  the  language  which  is  sometimes  held  to  be  of  doubtful
orthodoxy,  is  in  reality  perfectly  consistent  with  the  broad  fact
that  from  the  first  the  general  current  of  Church  language  pro-
claims the  truth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God.

(y)  For  that  truth  was  beyond  doubt  the  very  central  feature
of  the  teaching  of  the  ante-Nicene  Church,  even  when  Church

generation  from  His  source  "quiclcer**  than  that  of  light  from  its  sonroe,
and  not  absolutely   coevaL^      Mozley  on  the  Theory  of  I>evelopment»
p.  183.
*  See  the  examination  of  passages  in  Newman*s  Arians,  pp.  ai5>ai8.

[l«£CT«


J


whenever  Chris  f s  Godhead  was  calledin  question.  433

teachers  had  not  yet  recognised  all  that  it  necessarily  involved,
and  had  not  yet  elaborated  the  accurate  statement  of  its  rela-
tionship to  other  truths  around  it.  The  writers  whose  less-
considered  expressions  are  brought  forward  in  favour  of  an
opposite  conclusion  do  not  sustain  it.  If,  as  we  have  seen,
Justin  may  be  quoted  by  those  who  push  the  Divinity  of  Christ
to  the  denial  of  His  Personal  distinction  from  the  Father  y,  no
less  than  by  Arianizers ;  so  also,  as  Petavius  himself  admits  2,  do
both  Origen  and  Tertullian  anticipate  the  very  language  of  the
Nicene  Creed.  Nor,  when  their  expressions  are  fairly  examined,
can  it  be  denied  that  the  writers  who  imported  the  philo-
sophical category  of  the  \6yos  MioBcros  and  irptxfiopiKhs  into
Christian  theology  did  really  believe  with  all  their  hearts  in  the
eternal  Generation  of  the  Word.  For  it  should  especially  be
remarked  that  when  the  question  of  our  Lord's  Divinity  was
broadly  proposed  to  the  mind  of  the  ante-Nicene  Church,  the
answer  was  not  a  doubtful  or  hesitating  one.  Any  recognised
assault  upon  it  stirred  the  heart  of  the  Church  to  energetic
protest.  When  Victor  of  Kome  excommunicated  the  Quarto-
decimans,  his  censures  were  answered  either  by  open  remon-
strance or  by  tacit  disregard,  throughout  Gaul  and  the  East«.
When  he  cut  off  Theodotus  from  the  communion  of  the  Church,
the  act  commanded  universal  acquiescence  ;  the  Christian  heart
thrilled  with  indignation  at* '  the  God-denying  apostasy '  of  the
tanner  of  Byzantium  ^.  When  Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  writing
with  incautious  zeal  against  the  Sabellians,  was  charged  with
heterodoxy  on  the  subject  of  our  Lord's  Divine  Nature,  he  at  once
addressed  to  Dionysius  of  Rome  an  explanation  which  is  in  fact
an  anticipation  of  the  language  of  Athanasius  c.  When  Paulus
of  Samosata  appeared  in  one  of  the  first  sees  of  Christendom,
the  universal  excitement,  the  emphatic  protests,  the  final,  mea-
sured, and  solemn  condemnation  which  he  provoked,  proyed  how
deeply  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  was  rooted  in  the  heart  of  the
Church  of  the  third  century.  Moreover,  unless  Christ's  absolute
Godhead  had  been  thus  a  matter  of  Catholic  belief,  the  rise
of  such  a  heresy  as  that  of  Sabellianism  would  have  been  im-
possible. Sabellianism  overstates  that  which  Arianism  denies.
Sabellianism  presupposes  the  truth  of  Christ's  Godhead,  which,
if  we  may  so  speak,  it  exaggerates  even  to  the  point  of  rejecting

y  Petav.  de  Trin.  i.  6,  6.  «  Ibid.  i.  4,  6 ;  5,  3.

•  Eus.  Hist.  Eccl.  V.  24.

^  Eus.  Hist.  Eccl.  V.  28 :  t^$  kpvn<nd4ov  &wo<Trafflas.   Epiphan.  Hser.  54,
<'  See  St.  Athan.  de  Sent  Dionysii,  c.  4,  sqq.

vn]  rf


434       Argument  of  'ike  Little  Labyrinth'.

His  PerBonal  ditriinctnefiB  from  the  Father.  If  the  belief  of  the
ante-Nice&e  Church  had  been  reallj  Ariaoizmg,  Noetns  coold
not  baTe  appealed  to  it  as  he  did,  while  pervertiug  it  to  a  denisl
of  hypostatic,  distinctions  in  the  Qodheod^;  and  Arias  bimeelf
might  have,  onlj  passed  for  a  representative  of  the  gabordina-
tionism  of  Origen,  and  of  the  literalism  of  Antioch,  instead  of
being  condemned  as  a  sophistical  dialectician  who  had  broken
aHogeUier  wiUi  tlie  historical  tradition  of  the  Church,  h;
daring  to  oppose  a  central  truth  of  her  unchanging  faitL

The  idea  tbat  our  Iiord'a  Divinity  was  introduced  into  the
belief  and  lafigoage  of  the  Church  at  a  period  subsequent  to  Uk
death  of  the  apostles,  was  indeed  somewhat  adventurouslj  pnl
forward  by  some  early  Humanitarians.  Eeference  has  akead;
been  made  in  another  connection  to  an  important  passage,  which
is  quoted  by  Eusebius  from  an  anonymous  writer  who  appears
to  have  flourished  in  the  early  part  of  the  third  century  «.  Thi(
passage  enables  us  to  observe  the  t^uper  and  method  of  treat-
ment encountered  by  auy  sueh  theory  in  aute-Nicene  times.

The  Humanitarian  Artemon  seems  to  have  been  an  accom-
plished philosopher  and  mathematician ;  and  he  maintained  that
the  Divinity  of  Christ  was  imported  into  the  Church  during  the
episcopate  of  Zephyrinua,  who  succeeded  Victor  in  the  Bomui
chair.  Now  if  this  story  could  have  been  substantiated,  it  would
have  been  necessary  to  suppose,  either  that  the  Church  was  tLe
organ  of  a  continuous  and  not  yet  completed  revelation,  or  else
that  the  doctrine  was  a  human  speculation  unwarrantably  added
to  the  simpler  creed  of  an  earlier  age.  But  the  writer  to  whom
I  have  r^erred  meets  the  allegation  of  Artemon  by  denying
it  point-blank.  'Perchance,'  he  archly  observes,  'what  they
[the  Artemonites]  say  might  be  credible,  were  it  not  tbat  'Cat
Holy  Scriptures  contradict  them ;  and  then  also  there  are  works
of  certain  brethren,  older  than  the  days  of  Victor,  worb
written  in  defence  of  the  truth,  and  against  the  heresies  then
prevailing.  I  speak  of  Justin  and  Miltiades,  and  Tation  and
Clement,  and  many  others,  by  all  of  whom  the  Divinity  of  '
Christ  is  asserted.  For  who,'  he  continues,  '  knows  not  the  '
works  of  IreuKUB  and  Helito,  and  the  rest,  in  which  Christ  ie
announced  as  Ood  and  Man  f  1 '     This  was  the  argument  npos

*  St.Hippol.  oontr.  Hier.Noeti,  c.  l:  h  I'k  hYTitraTo  Kf^av,  'TioJimuJt
iroiu  to\i.^ay -rbv :!R.piFriv ;'  Soe  also  Bpipliuiiiu,  Heer.  57.

•  Of.  Loot.  Vir.  p.  393,  note.

'  EoB.  Hut.  Ecd.  V.  aS.  It  in  probable  tbat  St.  ElpptJytiu  wrote  'T^
Little  Labyrinth.'

(lwt.


JVas  the  Hontoousion  a  *  development '  ?     435

which  the  Church  of  those  ages  instinctively  fell  back  when  she
was  accused  of  adding  to  her  creed.  Particular  writers  might
have  understated  truth ;  or  they  might  have  ventured  upon
expressions  requiring  explanation ;  or  they  might  have  written
economically  as  in  view  of  particular  lines  of  thought,  and  have
been  construed  by  others  without  the  qualifications  which  were
present  to  their  own  minds.  But  there  could  be  no  mistake
about  the  continuous  drift  and  meaning  of  the  belief  around
which  they  moved,  and  which  was  always  in  the  background  of
their  ideas  and  language.  There  coidd  be  no  room  for  the
charge  that  they  had  invented  a  new  dogma,  when  it  could  be
shewn  that  the  Church  from  the  beginning,  and  the  New  Testa-
ment itself,  had  taught  what  they  were  said  to  have  invented.

III.  Of  the  objections  to  which  the  Homoousion  is  exposed
in  the  present  day,  there  are  two  which  more  particularly
demand  our  attention.

(a)  'Is  not  the  Homoousion,'  it  is  said,  *a  development?
Was  it  not  rejected  at  the  Council  of  Antioch  sixty  years  before
it  was  received  at  Nicsea  1  Is  not  this  fact  indicative  of  a  forward
movement  in  the  mind  of  the  Church  %  Does  it  not  shew  that  the
tide  of  dogmatic  belief  was  rising,  and  that  it  covered  ground
in  the  Nicene  age  which  it  had  deliberately  left  untouched  in
the  age  preceding  %  And,  if  this  be  so,  if  we  admit  the  prin-
ciple of  a  perpetual  growth  in  the  Church's  creed,  why  should
we  not  accept  the  latest  results  of  such  a  principle  as  un-
equivocally as  we  close  with  its  earlier  results  ?  If  we  believe
that  the  Nicene  decision  is  an  assertion  of  the  truth  of  God,
why  should  we  hesitate  to  adopt  a  similar  belief  respecting  that
proclamation  of  the  sinless  conception  of  the  Blessed  Virgin
which  startled  Christendom  twelve  years  ago,  and  which  has
since  that  date  been  added  to  the  official  creed  of  the  largest
section  of  the  Christian  Church  ]  *

Here,  the  first  point  to  be  considered  turns  on  a  question  of
words.  What  do  we  mean  by  a  doctrinal  development  %  Do  we
mean  an  explanation  of  an  already  existing  idea  or  belief,  pre-
sumably giving  to  that  belief  greater  precision  and  exactness  in
our  own  or  other  minds,  but  adding  nothing  whatever  to  its
real  area  8 1     Or  do  we  mean  the  positive  subsfantial  growth  of

K  In  this  sense  a  Development  of  Doctrine  must  necessarily  be  admitted.
When  the  life  of  the  individual  soul  is  vigorous  and  healthy,  there  must  be
a  continuously  increasing  knowledge  of  Divine  Truth.  St.  Aug.  in  Joan.  Ev.
Tract,  xiv.  c.  3.  n.  5 :  '  Orescat  ergo  Deus  qui  semper  perfectus  est,  crescat
in  te.  Quantb  enim  ma^  intelligis  Deum,  et  quantb  magis  capis,  videtur  in
VU  ]  F  f  2


o


6  True  sense  of  the  New  Testament


the  belief  itseli',  whether  through  an  enlargement  from  within,
just  as  the  acorn  deyelopes  into  the  oak,  or  through  an  accretion
from  without  of  new  intellectual  matter  gathered  around  it,  hie
the  aggrandisements  whereby  the  infant  colony  deyelopes  into
the  powerful  empire  %

Now  if  it  be  asked,  which  is  the  natural  sense  of  the  word
'  development,'  I  reply  that  we  ordinarily  mean  by  it  an  actual
enlargement  of  that  which  is  said  to  be  developed.  And  in  that
sense  I  proceed  to  deny  that  the  Homoousion  was  a  develop-
ment. It  was  not  related  to  the  teaching  of  the  apostles  as  an
oak  is  related  to  an  acorn.  Its  real  relation  to  their  teaching
was  that  of  an  exact  and  equivalent  translation  of  the  langniige
of  one  intellectual  period  into  the  language  of  another.  The
New  Testament  had  taught  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Lord  of
nature^  and  of  men^,  of  heaven,  and  of  the  spiritual  world i;

te  crescere  Deus ;  in  se  autem  non  cresdt.  Bed  semper  perfectns  est.  Intel-
ligebas  lieri  modicmu ;  intelligis  hodi^  ampliiiB,  inteUiges  eras  multb  ampliiis:
lumen  ipsum  Dei  crescit  in  te ;  ita  velut  Deus  crescit,  qui  semper  peifeckai
manet.  Quemadmodum  si  curarentur  alicujus  oculi  ex  pristine  csedtate,  et
indperet  videre  paululum  lucis,  et  alilt  die  plus  videret,  et  tertift  die  ampliiu^
videretur  illi  lux  crescere :  lux  tamen  perfecta  est,  sive  ipse  videat,  siye  nco
videat.  Sic  est  et  interior  homo :  proficit  quidem  in  Deo,  et  Deus  in  iUo
videtur  crescere ;  ipse  tamen  minuitur,  ut  h,  gloria  su&  decidat,  et  in  gloriam
Dei  surgat.'  A  somewhat  analogous  progress  in  the  knowledge  of  Trath,
received  from  Christ  and  His  Apostles,  is  found  in  the  collective  Christian
Society.  Vincent.  Lirinens.  Commonit.  c.  28 :  'Nullusne  ergb  in  Ecdesi&Dei
profectuB?  Habeatur  plan^  et  mazimus :  nam  quis  iUe  est  tarn  invidus  homi*
nibus,  tam  exosus  Deo,  qui  illud  prohibere  conetur  ?  Crescat  ig^tur  (^rtet»
et  multum  vehementerque  proficiat  tam  singulorum  quam  omnium,  tam
unius  hominis  quam  totius  ecdesise  setatum  ac  sseculorum  gradibas^  in*
telligentilt,  scientist,  sapientilt.'  Not  that  this  increasing  appreheusian  ci
the  true  force  and  bearings  of  the  truth  revealed  in  its  fulness  once  far
all  involves  any  addition  to  or  subtraction  &om  that  one  unchanging  body
of  truth.  Commonit.  c.  30 :  '  Fas  est  enim  ut  prisca  ilia  coelestis  philo-
Bophise  dogmata  processu  temporis  excurentur,  limentur,  poliantur;  Bed
nefas  est  ut  commutentur,  nefas  ut  detruncentur,  nefas  ut  mutilentnr.
Accipiant  licet  evidentiam,  lucem,  distinctionem ;  sed  retineant  necesse
est  plenitudinem,  integritatem,  proprietatem.'  There  is  then  no  real  in*
crease  in  the  body  of  truth  committed  to  the  Church,  but  only  a  clearer
perception  on  the  part  of  the  Church  of  the  force  and  bearings  of  that
truth  which  she  had  possessed  in  its  completeness  &om  the  first.  Witb
some  few  drawbacks,  this  is  &tirly  stated  by  Staudenmaier.  Wetzer  and
Welte's  Diction.  Encyd. ;  art.  Dogma.

^  St.  John  V.  17 ;  St.  Matt.  viii.  3,  13 ;  ix.  6,  22,  25,  29 ;  St.  John  iv.  50;
V.  8.  This  power  over  nature  He  ddegated  to  others:  St. Matt.  x.  i,  8;
St.  Mark  xvi.  17;  St.  Luke  x.  17 ;  St.  John  xiv.  1 2  ;  Acts  iii.  6, 12, 16 ;  ii.
34;  xvi.  18.  *  St.  Matt,  xxviii.  18-20;  St.  John  v.  21,  22  ;  xvii.  2.

i  St.  Matt.  vii.  21,  23;  xviii.  18;  xxvi.  64;  St.  John  i.  51 ;  xx.  12,  etc

[lew.


^^jfe_


embodied  in  the  Homoousion.  437

tliat  He  is  the  world's  Legislator,  its  King  and  its  Judge  ^ ;  that
He  is  the  Searcher  of  hearts  \  the  Pardoner  of  sins  ™,  the  Well-
spring  of  life  ^ ;  that  He  is  Giver  of  true  blessedness  and  salva-
tion ^,  and  the  Baiser  of  the  dead  p  ;  it  distinctly  attributed  to
Him  omnipresence <!,  omnipotence'^,  omniscience";  eternity*,
absolute  likeness  to  the  Father  u,  absolute  oneness  with  the
Father  X,  an  equal  share  in  the  honour  due  to  the  Father  7,  a  like
claim  upon  the  trust  2,  the  faith  <^,  and  the  love  ^  of  humanity.
The  New  Testament  had  spoken  of  Him  as  the  Creator  ^^  and
Preserver  of  the  world  \  as  the  Lord  of  all  things,  as  the  King
of  kings  %  the  Distributor  of  all  graces  ^,  the  Brightness  of  the
Father's  Glory  and  the  Impress  of  His  Being  s ;  as  being  in  the
form  of  God  \  as  containing  in  Himself  all  the  fulness  of  the
Gknlhead  \  as  being  God  \  This  and  much  more  to  the  same
purpose  had  been  said  in  the  New  Testament.  When  therefore
the  question  was  raised  whether  Jesus  Christ  was  or  was  not
'  of  one  substance  with '  the  Father,  it  became  clear  that  of  two
courses  one  must  be  adopted.  Either  an  afi&rmative  answer
must  be  given,  or  the  teaching  of  the  apostles  themselves  must

k  St.  Matt,  v.-vii. ;  xi.  29,  30 ;  xv.  18 ;  xviii.  19 ;  xxv.  34,  40 ;  St.  John
viii.  36;  xiv.  21 ;  xv.  12 ;  xx.  23,  etc.

>  St.  John  i.  47-50;  ii.  24,  25;  iv.  17,  18;  vi.  15,  70;  xvi.  19,  32;  Rev.
ii.  23.

"^  St.  Matt.  ix.  2,  6 ;  St.  Luke  ▼.  20,  24 ;  vii  48 ;  xxiv.  47 ;  and  St.  John
XX.  23,  where  He  delegates  the  absolving  power  to  others.

n  St.  John  iv.  13,  14;  V.  21,  26,  40;  vi.  47,  51-58;  x.  28.

•  St.  Matt.  vii.  ai  sq. ;  St.  John  vi.  39,  40 ;  x.  28 ;  Acts  iv.  12;  Heb.
ii.  10,  14.

P  St.  John  V.  21,  25 ;  xi.  25.    Christ  raises  Himself  from  death :  St.  John
ii.  19;  x.  18.
«  Ibid.  iii.  13 ;  St.  Matt,  xviii.  20.
•"  St.  Matt,  xxviii.  18 ;  Phil.  iii.  21 ;  Heb.  i.  3.
»  St.  Matt.  xi.  27;  St.  John  iii.  11-13;  vi.  46;  x.  15;  OoL  ii.  3.

*  St.  John  viii.  58 ;  xvii.  5 ;  Rev.  i.  8 ;  ii.  8  ;  xxii.  12,  13.
"  St.  John  V.  17,  19,  21,  26;  X.  28,  29;  xiv.  7.

«  Ibid.  X.  28,  30 ;  xiv.  10.  '  Ibid.  v.  23.

■  Ibid.  xiv.  I ;  xvi.  33 ;  Col.  I  27 ;  St.  Matt.  xii.  21.

*  St.  John  vi.  27 ;  i  St.  John  iii.  23 ;  Acts  xvi.  31 ;  xx.  21.
*>  I  Cor.  xvi.  22 ;  St.  John  xiv.  23.

«  St.  John  i.  3 ;  Col.  i.  16;  Heb.  i.  2,  10.
^  Col.  i.  17;  Heb.  i.  3.

•  Acts  X.  36;  Jude4;  Rev.  xvii.  14;  xix.  16.
'  St.  John  i.  12,  14^  16,  17;  2  Thess.  ii.  16.

«  Heb.  i.  3 ;  Col.  i.  15 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4.

*»  Phil.  ii.  6.  *  Col.  ii.  9 ;  St.  John  i.  14,  16.

^  St.  John  i.  I ;  Acts  xx.  28 ;  Rom.  ix.  5 ;  Titus  ii.  13 ;  I  St.  John  v.  20.
Compare  Rom.  viii.  9-1 1  with  Rom.  xiv.  10-12.

VII  J


438         Why  the  Homoousion  was  rejected

be  explained  away  1.     As  a  matter  of  fact  the  Nicene  fathers
only  affirmed,   in   the  philosophical   language   of  the   fourth
century,  what  our  Lord  and  the  apostles  had  taught  in  the
popular  dialects   of  the  first.      K  then  the  Nicene  Council
developed,  it  was  a  development  by  explanation.    It  was  a  deve-
lopment which  placed  the  intrinsically  unchangeable  dogma,
committed  to  the  guardianship  of  the  Church,  in  its  true  relation
to  the  new  intellectual  world  that  had  grown  up  around  Chris-
tians in  the  fourth  century.     Whatever  vacillations  of  thought
might  have  been  experienced  here  or  there,  whatever  doubtful
expressions  might  have  escaped  from  theologians  of  the  inter-
vening period,  no  real  doubt  could  be  raised  as  to  the  meaning
of  the  original  teachers  of  Christianity,  or  as  to  the  true  drift
and  main  current  of  the  continuous  traditional  belief  of  the
Church.     The  Nicene  divines  interpreted  in  a  new  language  the
belief  of  their  first  fathers  in  the  faith.     They  did  not  enlarge
it ;  they  vehemently  protested  that  they  were  simply  preserving
and  handing  on  what  they  had  received.    The  very  pith  of  their
objection  to  Arianism  was  its  novelty :  it  was  false  because  it
was  of  recent  origin  ™.   They  themselves  were  forced  to  say  what
they  meant  by  their  creed,  and  they  said  it.    Their  explsmation
added  to  the  sum  of  authoritative  ecclesiastical  language,  but  it
did  not  add  to  the  number  of  articles  in  the  Christian  fiaith :  the
area  of  the  creed  was  not  enlarged.   The  Nicene  Council  did  not
vote  a  new  honour  to  Jesus  Christ  which  He  had  not  before
possessed :  it  defined  more  clearly  the  original  and  unalterable
bases  of  that  supreme  place  which  from  the  days  of  the  apostles
He  had  held  in  the  thought  and  heart,  in  the  speculative  and
active  life  of  Christendom.

The  history  of  the  symbol  Homoousion  during  the  third
century  might,  at  first  sight,  seem  to  favour  the  position,  that
its  adoption  at  Nicsea  was  of  the  nature  of  an  accretive  develop-
ment. Already,  indeed,  Dionysius  and  others  (perhaps  Origen)
had  employed  it  to  express  the  faith  of  the  Church ;  but  it  had
been,  so  to  speak,  disparaged  and  discoloured  by  the  patronage
of  the  Yalentinians  and  the  Manichaeans.    In  the  Catholic  theo-

^  Mohler,  Symbolik,  p.  6io :  '  Waren  sie  (the  Socinians)  scharfere  Denktf
gewesen,  so  mussten  sie  zur  Einsicht  gelangen,  dass,  wexrn  das  EyaDgeHom
den  Sohn  als  ein  personliches  Wesen,  und  zugleich  als  Grott  darstellt,  wie
die  Socinianer  nlcht  latigneten  (Christ.  Belig.  institut.  bibl.  frat.  PoL  torn.  i.
p.  655.  Es  wird  Joh.  i.  i ;  xx.  21  citirt.),  kein  anderes  Yerhaltniss  zwischen
ihm  nnd  dem  Yater  denkhar  sei,  als  jenes,  welches  die  katholische  Eiicbe
von  Anfang  an  geglaubt  hatte.*  «>  Socr.  Hist.  Eccl.  i.  6.

[lect.


at  Antioch  and  adopted  at  Niccea.         439

logy  the  word  denoted  full  participation  in  the  absolute  self-
existing  Individuality  of  God  "*.  Besides  this,  the  word  suggested
the  distinct  personality  of  its  immediate  Subject ;  unless  it  had
suggested  this,  it  would  have  been  tautologous.  In  ordinary
language  it  was  applied  to  things  which  are  only  similar  to  each
other,  and  are  considered  as  one  by  an  abstraction  of  our  minds.
No  such  abstraction  was  possible  in  the  contemplation  of  God.
His  ovo-Mi  is  HimseK,  peculiar  to  Himself  and  One ;  and  there-
fore to  be  ofjMovaios  with  Him  is  to  be  internal  to  that  Uncreated
Nature  Which  is  utterly  and  necessarily  separate  from  all  created
beings.  But  the  Yalentinians  used  the  word  to  denote  the
relation  of  their  ^Eons  to  the  Divine  Pleroma ;  and  the  Mani-
chseans  said  that  the  soul  of  man  was  Sixoovaiov  r^  6«<^)  in  a
materialistic  sense.  When  then  it  was  taken  into  the  service  of
these  Emanatist  doctrines,  the  Homoousion  implied  nothicg
higher  than  a  generic  or  specific  bond  of  unity  o.  These  uses  of
the  word  implied  that  ovaia  itself  was  something  beyond  God,
and  moreover,  as  was  suggested  by  its  Manichsean  associations,
something  material.  Paulus  of  Samosata  availed  himself  of  this
depreciation  of  the  word  to  attack  its  Catholic  use  as  being  really
materialistic.  Paulus  argued  that  '  if  the  Father  and  the  Son
were  ^/loovtrtoi,  there  was  some  common  oia-ia  in  which  they
partook,'  higher  than,  and  '  distinct  from,  the  Divine  ^Persons
themselves  p.*  Firmilian  and  Gregory  were  bent,  not  upon  the
philological  object  of  restoring  the  word  ofioovaios  to  its  real
sense,  but  upon  the  religious  duty  of  asserting  the  true  relation
of  the  Son  to  the  Father,  in  language  the  meaning  of  which
would  be  plain  to  their  contemporaries.  The  Nicene  Fathers,
on  the  other  hand,  were  able,  under  altered  circumstances,  to
vindicate  for  the  word  its  Catholic  meaning,  unaffected  by  any

n  St.  Cyril  of  Alexandria  defines  oMa  as  wpayfia  ah06irapicToy,  fA^i  Mficyoy
ir4pov  irpby  t^p  iavrov  tr^ffrouriv,  Apud  Suicer,  in  voc.  oMa,  As  oiaia
meant  sometimes  individuality  or  personality,  6fioo6<riov  had  for  some
minds  even  a  Sabellian  import.

^  'Ofioo{Hnos  properly  means  of  the  same  nature— i.  e.  under  the  same
general  nature  or  species.  It  is  applied  to  things  which  are  but  similar  to
each  other,  and  are  considered  as  one  by  an  abstraction  of  our  minds.  Thus
Aristotle  speaks  of  the  stars  being  '  dfioo^aut  with  each  other.'  Newman,
Ajnans,  p.  203.  'Yalentinianism,  he  says  (p.  206),  'applied  the  word  to
the  Creator  and  His  creatures  in  this  its  original  philosophical  sense.  The
Manichees  followed ....  they  too  were  Emanatists/  &c.  But  such  a  usage
offends  against  '  the  great  revealed  principle  *  of  *  the  incommunicable  ....
Individuality  of  the  Divine  Essence  :*  according  to  which  principle  dfio-
olnrioSf  as  used  of  the  Son,  defined  Him  as  *  necessarily  included  in  That
Individuality.'  See  Dr.  Newman's  valuable  note  on  St.  Athanasius'  Trea>
Uses,  i.  152,  note  a  (libr.  Fath.) ;  Ibid.  35,  note  t;  and  Soc.  i.  8.

p  Newman,  Arians,  p.  209.    See  the  whole  passage.

VII  ]


440  Adoption  of  the  Homoousion  fiot  to  be  paralleled

Emanatist  gloss ;  and  accordingly,  in  their  hands  it  protected
the  very  truth  which  at  Antiocl^  sixty  years  earlier,  it  would
have  obscured.  St.  Athanasius  tells  us  that  *•  the  fathers  who
deposed  the  Samosatene  took  the  word  Homoousion  in  &
corporeal  sense.  For  Paulus  sophisticated  by  saying  that  if . . ..
Christ  was  consubstantial  with  the  Father,  there  must  necessarily
be  three  substances,  one  which  was  prior  and  two  others  spring-
ing from  it.  Therefore,  with  reason,  to  avoid  that  sophism  of
Paulus,  the  fathers  said  that  Christ  was  not  consubstantial,  that
is,  that  He  Was  not  in  that  relation  to  the  Father  which  Paulus
had  in  his  mind.  On  the  other  hand,'  continues  St.  Athanasius,
'  those  who  condemned  the  Arian  heresy  saw  through  the  cunning
of  Paulus,  and  considered  that  in  things  incorporeal,  especially
in  God,  "  consubstantial "  did  not  mean  what  he  had  supposed ;

so  they,  knowing  the  Sop  to  be  begotten  of  the  Substance,

with  reason  called  Him  consubstantial  <i.'  Paulus,  as  a  subtle
and  hardheaded  dialectician,  had  endeavoured  to  connect  with
the  term  a  sense,  which  either  made  the  Son  an  inferior  being
or  else  destroyed  the  Unity  of  God.  He  used  the  word,  so  St.
Hilary  says,  as  mischievously  as  the  Arians  rejected  the  use  of  it';
while  the  fathers  at  Antioch  set  it  aside  from  a  motive  as  loyal
to  Catholic  truth  as  was  that  which  led  to  its  adoption  at  Nicaea^.
Language  is  worth,  after  all,  just  what  it  means  to  those  who
employ  it.  Origen  had  rejected  and  TertuUian  had  defended  the
TrpoPdkri  from  an  identical  theological  motive ;  and  the  opposite
lines  of  action,  adopted  by  the  Councils  of  Antioch  and  Nicsea
respectively,  are  so  far  from  proving  two  distinct  beliefs  respect-
ing the  higher  Nature  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  when  closely  examined,
they  exhibit  an  absolute  identity  of  creed  and  purpose  brought

«  St.  Athan.  De  Synodia,  §  45 ;  cf.  Cave,  Hist.  lit.  i.  134.     'Nan  aliud
didt  Athanasiaa  quam  Paulum  ex  detorto  Catholicomm  vocabulo  sophis-
ticum  argumentmn  contra  Christi  Divinitatem  ezcogitasse;   nempe,  ma
coufiteremnr  Christum  ex  homine  Deum  factum  esse,  sequeretur  ipsom
Patri  esse  dfioo^ioy,  ac  proinde  tres  esse  substantias,  unam  quidem  pri*
mariam,  duas  ex  ill4  derivatas :  (ra/xariKus  enim  et  crasso  sensu  yocabalam
accepit,  quasi  in  essentia  diving,  perinde  ac  in  rebus  corporeis  usu  venit^
ut  ab  unk  substantial  altera,  eaque  diversa,  derivetur.     Quocirca,  ne  hac
voce   hseretid   ulteriiis   abuterentur,   silentio   supprimendam   censnenmt
patres  Antiocheni :  non  quod  Catholicum  yocis  sensum  dainnar^it,  sed  ot
omnem  sophistic^  cavillandi    occasionem    hsereticis    prseriperent,  nt  ex
Athanasio,  Basilic,  aliisque,  abunde  liquet.'

'  St.  Hil.  de  Syn.  86 :  '  Malb  Homoousion  Samosatenus  confessus  est,  sed
nunquam  melitis  Ariani  negaverunt.'

■  Routh,  Eel.  Sacr.  iii.  360,  ed.  1846.     See  too  Dr.  Newman^s  note  t,  in
St.  Athanasius'  Select  Treatises,  i.  p.  166.     (Oxf.  libr.  Fath.).

[lect.


with  the  definition  of  the  Immaculate  Conception.  44 1

face  to  face  witli  two  distinct  sets  of  intellectual  circumstances.
The  Mth  and  aim  of  the  Cliurch  was  one  and  unchanging.  But
the  question,  whether  a  particular  symbol  would  represent  her
mind  with  practical  accuracy,  received  an  answer  at  Antioch
-which  would  have  been  an  error  at  Nicaea.  The  Church  looked
hard  at  the  Homooumon  at  Antioch,  when  heresy  had  perverted
its  popular  sense ;  and  she  set  it  aside.  She  examined  it  yet
more  penetratingly  at  Nicsea ;  and  from  then  until  now  it  has
been  the.  chosen  symbol  of  her  unalterable  faith  in  the  Hteral
Godhead  of 'her  Divine  Head.

Therefore  between  the  imposition  of  the  Homoousion  and  the
recent  definition  of  the  Immaculate  Conception,  there  is  no  real
correspondence.  It  is  not  merely  that  the  latter  is  accepted  only
by  a  section  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  was  promulgated  by
an  authority  whose  modem  claims  the  fathers  of  Nicsea  would
have  regarded  with  sincere  astonishment.  The  difference  between
the  two  cases  is  still  more  fundamental ;  it  lies  in  the  substance
of  the  two  definitions  respectively.  The  Nicene  fathers  did  but
assert  a  truth  which  had  been  held  to  be  of  primary,  yital  import
from  the  first ;  they  asserted  it  in  terms  which  brought  it  vividly
home  to  the  intelligence  of  their  day.  They  were  explaining  old
truth ;  they  were  not  setting  forth  as  truth  that  which  had  before
been  matter  of  opinion.  But  the  recent  definition  asserts  that  an
hypothesis,  unheard  of  for  centuries  after  the  first  promulgation
of  the  Gospel,  and  then  vehemently  maintained  and  as  vehe-
mently controverted  *  by  theologians  of  at  least  equal  claims
to  orthodoxy,  is  a  fact  of  Divine  revelation,  to  be  received  by  all
who  would  receive  the  true  faith  of  the  Eedeemer.  In  the  one
case  an  old  truth  is  vindicated  by  an  explanatory  reassertion;  in
the  other  the  assertion  of  a  new  fact  is  added  to  the  Creed.  The
Nicene  fathers  only  maintained  in  the  language  of  their  day
the  original  truth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God  :  but  the  question
whether  the  Conception  of  Mary  was  or  was  not  sinless  is  a
distinct  question  of  fact,  standing  by  itself,  with  no  necessary
bearing  upon  her  office  in  the  economy  of  the  Incarnation,  and
not  related  in  the  way  of  an  explanatory  vindication  of  any
originally  revealed  truth  beyond  it.  It  is  one  thing  to  reassert
the  revealed  Godhead  of  Jesus ;  it  is,  in  principle,  a  fundament-
ally distinct  thing  to  *  decree  a  new  honour*  to  Mary.    The  Nicene

^  Gf.  especially  the  treatise  of  tlie  Dominican,  John  de  Torqnemada,
Cardinal  de  Turrecremata,  entitled,  Tractatus  de  Veritate  Conceptionis  B.
Virginis.   Romae,  1547,  4to;  Oxon.  1869.  ed.  Pusey.     Note  H  in  App.

Vll  J


442  Explanations  ofy  and  additions  to,  the  Faith.


decision  is  the  act  of  a  Cliurch  believing  itself  commissioned  to
guard  a  body  of  truth  which  had  been  delivered  from  heaven
in  its  integrity,  once  for  alL  The  recent  definition  appears  to
presuppose  a  Church  which  can  do  more  than  guard  the  ancient
faith,  which  is  empowered  to  make  actual  additions  to  the  num-
ber of  revealed  certainties,  which  is  the  organ  no  less  than  the
recipient  of  a  continuous  revelation «,  It  is  one  thing  to  say
that  language  has  changed  its  value,  and  that  a  particular  term
which  was  once  considered  misleading  will  now  serve  to  .vindicate
an  acknowledged  truth ;  it  is  another  thing  to  claim  the  power  of
transfiguring  a  precarious  and  contradicted  opinion,  resting  on
no  direct  scriptural  or  primitive  testimony,  and  impugned  in
terms  by  writers  of  the  date  and  authority  of  Aquinas  ^c,  into  a
certainty,  claiming  submission  from  the  £skith  of  Christendom  on
nothing  less  than  a  Divine  authority.  There  is  then  no  real  rea-
son for  the  statement  that  those  who  now  reject  the  Immaculate

«  I  have  been  reminded  that  Koman  Catholics  do  not  admit  this  (see  the
'Month,*  Nov.  1867),  and,  at  the  instance  of  my  reviewer,  I  quote  with
pleasure  the  following  language  of  the  Bull  Ineffabilig,  whi^  is  Bub*
stantially  that  of  Vincent  of  Lerins,  and  which  will  command  the  assent
of  English  Churchmen.    The  Church  of  Christ,  says  the  Bull,   'sedula
depositorum  apud  se  dogmatum  custos,  et  yindez,  nihil  in  his  nnqusm
permutat,  nihil  minuit,  nihil  addit,  sed  omni  Industrie  yetera  fidditer
sapienterque  tractando  si  quk  antiquitiis  informata  sunt,  et  Patrom  fides
sevit,  ita  limare  ezpolire  studet,  ut  prisca  ilia  coelestis  doctrinse  dogmata
acdpiant  evidentiam,  lucem,  distinctionem,  sed  retineant  plenitu(£nem,
integritatem,  proprietatem,  ao  in  suo  tantum  genere  crescant,  in  eodem
scilicet  dogmate,  eodem  sensu,  elldemque  sententi^,'  p.  11.    But  the  ques-
tion is  whether,  if  the  principle  thus  stated  had  been  really  adhered  to,
the  Immaculate  Conception  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary  could  have  been
defined  to  be  an  artide  of  necessary  faith.    It  is  one  thing  to  propose
a  new  and  necessary  definition  or  explanation  of  a  truth  which  has  been
confessed  from  the  first ;  it  is  another  thing  to  say  that  a  fact,  the  truth
of  which  has  been  controverted  by  a  series  of  writers  of  the  highest  aa*
thority,  is  now  so  certain  that  it  must  be  received  as  matter  of  £uth.
Should  not  the  'nihil  addit*  of  the  Bull  alone  have  sufficed  to  render  the
definition  impossible  ?   See  Observations  d*un  Th^ologien  sur  la  Bnlle  de
Pie  IX,  relative  k  la  Conception  de  la  Sainte  Vierge,  Paris,  1855,  pp.  38-38;
La  Croyance  k  Tlmmacul^e  Conception  de  la  Sainte  Vierge  ne  peut  deyenir
dogme  de  foi,  par  M.  TAbb^  Laborde,  Paris,  1854,  pp.  77-83.    Can  the
assertion  that  the  Immaculate  Conception  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  is  a  cer-
tainty of  faith,  be  really  rested  upon  any  other  ground,  than  an  assnmptioQ
in  the  modem  Church  of  some  power  to  discern  and  proclaim  truths  which
were  altogether  unknown  to  the  Church  of  the  Apostles  ?

*  Sum.  Th.  iii.  a.  27,  q.  2  :  *B.  Virgo  contraxit  quidem  originale  pec-
catimi,  sed  ab  eo  fuit  mundata  antequam  ex  utero  nasceretur.*  Cf.  St.
Bernard.  Ep.  174;  Durandus,  Bationale  Divinorum  Officiorum,  vii.  7. 4;
St.  Bonaventur.  Sent.  iii.  Dist.  3,  pars  i.  art.  i.  qusest.  a.

[1.ECT.


TVas  the  Nicene  definition  necessary  ?     443

Conception  would  of  old  have  rejected  the  Homoousion.  There
is  nothing  to  shew  that  those  who  how  with  implicit  faith  before
the  Nicene  decision  are  bound,  as  a  matter  of  consistency,  to
yield  the  same  deference  of  heart  and  thought  to  the  most
modem  development  of  doctrine  within  the  Latin  portion  of
Catholic  Christendom.

(^)  But  it  may  be  rejoined :  *  Why  was  a  fresh  definition
deemed  needful  at  Nicsea  at  all  ?  Why  could  not  the  Church  of
the  Nicene  age  have  contented  herself  with  saying  that  Jesus
Christ  is  God,  after  the  manner  of  the  Church  ,of  earlier  days )
Why  was  the  thought  of  Christendom  to  be  saddled  with  a
metaphysical  symbol  which  at  least  transcends,  if  it  does  not
destroy,  the  simplicity  of  the  Church's  first  faith  in  our  Lord's
Divinity  % '

(i)  Now  the  answer  is  simply  as  follows.  Li  the  Arian  age
it  was  not  enough  to  say  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God,  because  the
Arians  had  contrived  to  impoverish  and  degrade  the  idea  con-
veyed by  the  Name  of  God  so  completely  as  to  apply  that  sacred
word  to  a  creature  y.  Of  course,  if  it  had  been  deemed  a  matter
of  sheer  indifference  whether  Jesus  Christ  is  or  is  not  God,  it
would  have  been  a  practical  error  to  have  insisted  on  the  truth
of  His  real  Divinity,  and  an  equivocal  e:i(pression  might  have
been  allowed  to  stand.  If  the  Church  of  Christ  had  been,  not
the  school  of  revealed  truth,  in  which  the  soul  was  to  make
knowledge  the  food  and  stimulant  of  love,  but  a  world-wide  de-
bating club,  '  ever  seeking  and  never  coming  to  the  knowledge
of  the  truth,'  it  would  then  have  been  desirable  to  keep  this  and
all  other  fundamental  questions  open*.  Perhaps  in  that  case
the  Nicene  decision  might  with  truth  have  been  described  as  the
<  greatest  misfortune  that  has  happened  to  Christendom.'  But
the  Church  believed  herself  to  possess  a  revelation  from  God,
essential  to  the  eternal  well-being  of  the  soul  of  man.  She
further  believed  that  the  true  Godhead  of  Jesus  Christ  was  a
clearly-revealed  truth  of  such  fundamental  and  capital  import,

7  In  the  same  way  modem  Socinians  'believe  in  the  Divinity  of  Christ.'
Channing,  Objections  to  Unitarian  Christianity  Considered,  Works,  vol.  ii.
p.  361.  Yet  tiiey  also  believe  that  Christ  'is  a  Being  distinct  from  the  one
Grod.'  Ibid.  p.  510.  Such  a  confession  of  Christ's  'Divinity'  implies  of
course  no  more  than  might  be  said  of  St.  John,  and  shews  how  completely
language  may  be  emptied  of  its  original  value.     Cf.  Lect.  I.  p.  26.

'  See  the  letter  addressed  in  Constantino's  name  to  St.  Alexander  and  to
AriuB  (Soc.  i.  7),  in  which  the  writer — probably  Eusebius  of  Nicomedia —
insists  'that  tne  points  at  issue  are  minute  and  trivial.'  Bright's  Hist.  Ch.
p.  30.    Neale,  Hist.  Alex.  i.  134.

VIl]


444       Practical  temper  of  St.  A  tkanasius.

Uiat,  divorced  from  it,  the  creed  of  Christendom  muet  peruli
ontright.  Plainly  therefore  it  vaa  iJie  Chimsb's  dnty  to  assert
this  truth  in  such  language  u  might  be  tmmistaksbly  expreesiTe
of  it.  !Now  this  result  was  Becnred  by  the  Homooosioii.  It
was  at  the  time  of  its  first  imposition,  and  it  has  been  ever  einee,
a  working  criterion  of  real  belief  in  the  Qodhead  of  oar  Lord.'  It
excluded  the  Arian  sense  of  the  word  Ood,  and  on  this  accoont
it  was  adopted  bj  the  orthodox.  How  much  it  meant  wu
proved  by  the  resistance  which  it  then  encountered,  and  by  the
subsequent  efforiits  which  have  been  made  to  destroy  or  to  evade
it.  The  sneer  of  Gibbon  about  the'  iota  which  separates  die
semi- Arian  &om  the  Catholic- symbol^ (Homoiousion&om Homo-
onsion)  is  naturally  repeated  by  those  who  believe  that  nothing
was  n^ly  at  stake  beyond  the  emptiest  of  abstractions,  and  who
can  speak  of  the  fourth  century  as  an  age  of  meaningless  logo-
machies. But  to  men  who  are  concerned,  not  with  words,  bat
with  the  truths  which  they  enshrine,  not  with  the  mere  hi^oiie
setting  of  a  great  struggle,  but  with  the  vital  question  at  isiie
in  it,  the  full  importance  of  the  Nicene  symbol  will  be  sufficiently
obvious.  The  difference  between  Homoiousion  and  Homoousion
convulsed  the  world  for  the  simple  reason,  that  in  that  difference
lay  the  whole  question  of  the  real  tmli  or  falsehood  of  oor
Lord's  actual  Divinity.  If  in  His  Essence  He  was  only  like  God,
He  was  still  a  distinct  Being  &om  God,  and  therefore  eitkec
created,  or  {per  itnpossibile)  a  second  God.  In  a  great  engage-
ment, when  man  after  man  is  laid  low  in  defence  of  tbe  colours
of  his  regiment^  it  might  seem  to  a  l^stander,  unacquainted  with
the  forms  of  war,  a  prodigious  absurdity  that  so  great  a  sacrifice
of  life  should  be  incurred  for  a  piece  of  silk  or  cotton  of  a  parti-
cular hue ;  and  he  might  make  many  caustic  epigrams  at  the
expense  of  the  struggling  and  suffering  combatants.  But  s
soldier  would  tell  him  that  the  flag  is  a  symbol  of  the  honour
and  prowess  of  his  country ;  and  that  he  is  not  dying  for  a  few
yards  of  coloured  material,  but  for  the  moral  and  patriotic  idea
which  the  material  represents.  If  ever  there  was  a  man  who
iguage,  who  had  his  eye  upon  ideu,
nade  language  submissively  do  their
great  Bt.  Atiianasius.  He  advocated
I,  because  he  was  convinced  that  it  wu
[7  symbol  and  safeguard  of  the  tressuiB

ler  might  be  levelled,  on  Pantlieisiia  giDnndi,
1  diBtinguishea  '  Creature '  from  '  Ciestor.'
[lbct.


Value  of  Creeds  at  the  present  day.        445

of  truth  committed  to  the  Church:  hut  years  afterwards,  he
would  not  press  it  upon  semi- Arians  whom  he  knew  to  he  at  heart
loyal  to  the  truth  which  it  protected^.  He  was  sure  that,  if  he
gave  them  time,  they  would  end  by  accepting  it.  And  during
fifteen  centuries  experience  has  not  shewn  that  any  large  num-
ber of  real  believers  in  our  Saviour's  Godhead  have  objected  to
the  Nicene  statement ;  while  its  efficacy  in  guarding  against  a
lapse  into  Arian  error  has  amply  confirmed  the  far-sighted  wis-
dom, which,  full  of  jealousy  for  the  rightful  honour  of  Jesus©,
and  of  charity  for  the  souls  of  men,  has  incorporated  it  for  ever
with  the  most  authoritative  profession  of  faith  in  the  Divinity  of
Christ  which  is  possessed  by  Christendom.

(2)  It  may  indeed  be  urged  that  freedom  from  creeds  is
ideally  and  in  the  abstract  the  highest  state  of  Christian  com-
munion. It  may  be  pleaded  that  a  public  confession  of  faith
will  produce  in  half^amest  and  superficial  souls  a  formal  and
mechanical  devotion ;  that  the  exposure  of  the  most  sacred
truth  in  a  few  condensed  expressions  to  the  scepticism  and
irreverence  of  those  who  are  strangers  to  its  essence  will  lead  to
inevitable  ribaldry  and  scandal.  But  it  is  sufficient  to  reply
that  these  liabilities  do  not  outweigh  the  necessity  for  a  clear
•form  of  sound  words,'  since  formalists  will  be  formal,  and
sceptics  will  be  irreverent,  with  or  without  it.  And  those  who
depreciate  creeds  among  us  now,  do  not  really  mean  to  recom-
mend that  truth  should  be  kept  hidden,  as  in  the  first  centuries,
in  the  secret  mind  of  the  Church :  they  have  far  other  purposes
in  view.  Eousseau  might  draw  pictures  of  the  superiority  of
simple  primitive  savage  life  to  the  enervated  civilization  of
Paris ;  but  it  would  not  have  been  prudent  in  the  Parisians  at
the  end  of  the  last  century  to  have  attempted  a  return  to  the
barbaric  life  of  their  ancestors,  who  had  roamed  as  happy
savages  in  the  great  forests  of  Europe.  The  Latitudinarians
who  suggest  that  the  Church  might  dispense  with  the  Catholic

**  De  Synod.  41 :  Tipb^  5^  'rohi  &vo^€XOfi4yov5  rh,  /x^y  2i\Aa  irdma  ray  iy
NiKoiff  ypcup€yro»y,  irepl  Sh  fiSyoy  rh  'Ofioo^ffioy  iifKptfidWoyras,  XP^  A*^  ^^
irph^  ixdpohs  SiaKfTaSai  ....  &AA.'  as  a5€\<po\  irphs  &S(\<pobs  dtoKeyoixtda,  r^y

avri}y  fi^y  riiuy  Bidyouiy  l^x^^^^^t  '"'^P^  ^^  '''^  6yofia  ix6yoy  Surrd^oyras Ov

fuucpdy  eiffiy  6.voS4^a(rdai  xal  r^y  rod  *Ofioov<rlov  \€^iy.  He  repeatedly  declares
that  the  Homoousion  in  its  Nicene  sense  is  intended  to  guard  the  reality
of  the  Divine  Sonship  as  being  uncreated.    Ibid.  39,  45,  48,  54.

*^  St.  Athanasius'  'zeal  for  the  Gonsubstantiality  had  its  root  in  his
loyalty  to  the  Consubstantial.  He  felt  that  in  the  Nicene  dogma  were
involved  the  worship  of  Christ  and  the  life  of  Christianity.'  Bright'a
Hist.  Ch.  p.  149.

vu]


446       Especial  claims  of  the  Nicene  Creed,

creeds,  advise  us  to  revert  to  the  defencelessness  of  ecclesiastical
childhood.  But,  alas  I  they  cannot  guarantee  to  us  its  innocence,
or  its  immunities.  We  could  not,  if  we  would,  reverse  the
thought  of  centuries,  and  ignore  the  questions  which  heresy  has
opened,  and  which  have  heen  oecumenically  decided.  We  might
not  thus  do  despite  to  the  kindly  providence  of  Him,  Who,  with
the  temptations  to  fjBiith  that  came  with  the  predestined  course
of  history,  has  in  the  creeds  opened  to  us  such  '  a  way  to  escape
that  we  may  be  able  to  bear  them.'

Certainly  if  toil  and  suffering  confer  a  value  on  the  object
which  they  earn  or  preserve ;  if  a  country  prizes  the  liberties
which  were  baptized  in  the  blood  of  her  citizens;   if  a  man
rejoices  in  the  honour  which  he  has  kept  unstained  at  the  risk
of  life ;  then  we,  who  are  the  heirs  of  the  ages  of  Christendom,
should  cling  with  a  peculiar  loyalty  and  love  to  the  great  Nicene
confession  of  our  Lord's  Divinity.     For  the  Nicene  definition
was  wrung  from  the  heart  of  the  agonized  Church  by  a  denial  of
the  truth  on  which  was  fed,  then  as  now,  her  inmost  life.     In
the  Arian  heresy  the  old  enemies  of  the  Gospel  converged  as  for
a  final  and  desperate  effort  to  achieve  its  destruction.      The
carnal,  gross,  external,  Judaizing  spirit^  embodied  in  the  finigid
literalism  of  the  school  of  Antioch ;  the  Alexandrian  dialectics,
substituting   philosophical  placita  for  truths  of  faith ;   nay,
Paganism  itself,  vanquished  in  the  open  field,  but  anxious  to
take  the  life  of  its  conqueror  by  private  assassination  ; — ^these
were  the  forces  which  reappeared  in  Arianism  d.    It  was  no  mere
exasperation  of  rhetoric  which  saw  Porphyry  in  Arius,  and
which  compared  Constantius  to  Diocletian.     The  life  of  Athana-
sius  after  the  Nicene  Council  might  well  have  been  lived  before
the  Edict  of  Milan.     Arianism  was  a  political  force ;  it  ruled  at
court.      Arianism  was  a  philosophical  disputant,  and  was  at
home  in  the  schools.     Arianism  was,  moreover,  a  proselytizer ;
it  had  verses  and  epigrammatic  arguments  for  the  masses  of
the  people ;  and  St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  in  a  passage  ®  which  is

^  St.  Greg.  Nyssa,  contr.  Eunom.  xii.  p.  728.  Arianism  is  v  rris  'lov^eux^s
iirdTTis  trviHjyopoSf  4x^^^^  t»  'f*^  "^V^  *EWr]vucvis  hSftas,  So  St.  Gregory
Nazianz.  (Orat.  i.  vol.  i.  p.  16)  describeB  the  Arian  conception  of  the  Diyine
Nature  as  marked  by  an  'lovSotic^  irtvla,  meaning  the  hard  abstract  mono-
theism of  the  later  Jewish  creed.  Quoted  by  Banr,  Lehre  von  der  Brd-
einigkeit.  i.  pp.  352,  353,  note.

*  See  Dr.  Newman's  translation  of  it  in  Athan.  Treatises,  i.  ai3,  note  a:
'  Men  of  yesterday  and  the  day  before,  mere  mechanics,  off-hand  dogmatisti
in  theol<^,  servants  too,  and  slaves  that  have  been  flogged  ....  are
solemn  with  us  and  philosophical  about  things  incomprehensible.  .  .  .  Ask

[UECT.


Especial  claims  of  the  Nicene  Creed.        447

classical,  has  described  its  extraordinary  success  among  the
lower  orders.  Never  was  a  heresy  stronger,  more  versatile,
more  endowed  with  all  the  apparatus  of  controversy,  more  sure,
as  it  might  have  seemed,  of  the  future  of  the  world.  It  was  a
long,  desperate  struggle,  by  which  the  original  faith  of  Christ
conquered  this  fierce  and  hardy  antagonist.  At  this  day  the
Creed  of  Nicsea  is  the  living  proof  of  the  Church*s  victory^;  and
as  we  confess  it  we  should,  methinks,  feel  somewhat  of  the  fire
of  our  spiritual  ancestors,  some  measure  of  that  fresh  glow  of
thankfulness,  which  is  due  to  God  after  a  great  deliverance,
although  wrought  out  in  a  distant  age.  To  unbelief  this  creed
may  be  only  an  ecclesiastical  *  test,'  only  an  additional  *  incubus,'
weighing  down  *  honest  religious  thought.'  But  to  the  children
of  faith,  the  Nicene  confession  must  ever  furnish  the  welcome
expression  of  their  most  cherished  conviction.  Let  us  hence-
forth repeat  it,  at  those  most  solemn  moments  when  the  Church
puts  it  into  our  mouths,  with  a  renewed  and  deepened  sense  of
gratitude  and  joy.  Not  as  if  it  were  the  mere  trophy  of  a  con-
troversial victory,  or  the  dry  embodiment  of  an  abstract  truth
in  the  language  of  speculation,  should  we  welcome  this  glorious
creed  to  our  hearts  and  lips.  Rather  let  us  greet  it,  as  the
intellectual  sentinel  which  guards  the  shrine  of  faith  in  our
inmost  souls  from  the  profanation  of  error ;  as  the  good  angel
who  warns  us  that  since  the  Incarnation  we  move  in  the  very
ante-chamber  of  a  Divine  Presence ;  as  a  mother's  voice  re-
minding us  of  that  tribute  of  heartfelt  love  and  adoration,
which  is  due  from  all  serious  Christians  to  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  our  Saviour  and  our  God.

about  pence,  and  he  will  discuss  the  Generate  and  Ingenerate;  inquire
the  price  of  bread,  he  answers,  "Greater  is  the  Father,  and  the  Son  is  sub-
ject;" say  that  a  bath  would  suit  you,  and  he  defines  that  the  Son  is  out
of  nothing/  See  also  St.  Athan.  Orat.  An.  i.  22,  on  the  profane  questions
put  to  boys  and  women  in  the  Agora ;  and  Ibid.  4  sqq.  on  the  '  Ijialia '  of
Anus.  Cf,  also  St.  Greg.  Nyssen,  De  Deitate  Filii  et  Sp.  SanctL  0pp.  iii.  466.
'  The  stress  here  laid  upon  the  Nicene  Creed  will  not  be  supposed  to
imply  forgetfulness  of  the  great  daims,  in  its  due  place,  of  the  symbol
Qwumnque,  Coleridge,  indeed,  has  said  that  the  Athanasian  Creed  is,  in
his  judgment,  'heretical  in  the  omission  or  implicit  denial  of  the  FUial
BubOTdination  in  the  Godhead,  which  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Nicene  Creed.*
(Table-Talk,  p.  41.)  But  when  the  Athanasian  Creed  asserts  that  the
Son  is  'of  the  Father,'  it  virtually  affirms  the  Subordination;  and  when
the  Nicene  Creed  calls  the  Son  'Very  Grod'  and  'Consubstantial,'  it  em-
phatically confesses  the  Coequality.  Coleridge's  judgment  can  only  be
sustained  by  supposing  that  the  Nicene  Creed  teaches  a  doctrine  of  Sub-
ordination in  which  the  Nicene  Council  would  assuredly  have  detected
Arianism.  See  Bright,  Sermons  of  St.  Leo,  note  99.
vn]


LECTURE  Vni.


Me  That  tpartd  not  Hit  Oa>»  Son,  hut  delivered  Him  up  for  w  oil,  liw
tkaU  He  not  with  Sim  alia  freely  give  w  ail  lAins*t—RoU.  nil.  31.

Of  lata  years  we  have  been  familiarized  witli  cautions  and
protests  against  what  ba.s  bwn  termed  by  way  of  disparagement
'  Inferential  Theology.'  And  no  one  would  deny  that  in  all
agee  of  the  Church,  the  field  of  theology  has  been  the  scene  of
hasty,  unwarrantable,  and  misleading  inferences.  False  con-
clusions have  been  drawn  from  true  premisses ;  and  very  donbt-
fal  or  falsa  premiaseH  have  been  occasionally  assumed  if  not
asserted  to  be  true.  Moreover,  some  earnest  believers  luTe
seemed  to  forget  that  in  a  subject-matter  such  as  the  creed  of
Ghristendom,  they  are  confessedly  below  truth  and  not  above  it.
They  have  forgotten  that  it  is  given  us  here  to  see  a  part  onlj,
and  not  the  whole.  In  reality  we  can  but  note  the  outskirts  of
a  vast  economy,  whose  body  and  substance  stretch  far  away  fnm
our  gaze  into  infinitude.  Many  an  intercepting  truth,  not  tk
less  true  because  unseen  and  unsuspected,  ought  to  arrest  tbe
hardy  and  confident  logic,  which  insists  upon  this  or  thst
particular  conclusion  as  following  necessarily  upon  these  of
those  premises  of  which  It  is  already  in  possession.  But  thii
caution  has  not  always  been  kept  in  view.  And  when  onM
pious  affection  or  devout  imagination  have  seized  the  reing  d
religious  thought,  it  is  easy  for  individuals  or  scboola  to  wander
far  from  the  beaten  paths  of  a.  clear  yet  sober  faith,  into  some
theoli^cal  wonderland,  the  airiest  creation  of  tbe  liveliest  fane;,
where,  to  the  confusion  and  unsettlement  of  souls,  the  wildest
fiction  and  the  highest  truth  may  be  inextricably  intertwined  in
an  entanglement  of  hopeless  and  bewildering  disorder.

[lect


Is  Theology  ^  inferentiaV  ?  449

But  if  this  should  be  admitted,  it  would  not  follow  that
theology  is  in  no  sense  *  inferential.'  Within  certain  limits,  and
under  due  guidance,  *  inference '  is  the  movement,  it  is  the  life  of
theology.  The  primal  records  of  revelation  itself,  as  we  find
them  in  Scripture,  are  continually  inferential ;  and  it  is  at  least
the  business  of  theology  to  observe  and  marshal  these  revealed
inferences,  to  draw  them  out,  and  to  make  the  most  of  them.
The  Dluminated  reason  of  the  collective  Church  has  for  ages
been  engaged  in  studying  the  original  materials  of  the  Christian
revelation.  It  thus  has  shaped,  rather  than  created,  the  science
of  theology.  What  is  theology,  but  a  continuous  series  of  ob-
served and  systematized  inferences,  respecting  God  in  His
Nature  and  His  dealings  with  mankind,  drawn  from  premises
which  rest  upon  God*s  authority?  Do  you  say  that  no  *  in-
ference '  is  under  any  circumstances  legitimate ;  that  no  one
truth  in  theology  necessarily  implies  another ;  that  the  Christian
mind  ought  to  preserve  in  a  jealous  and  sterile  isolation  each
proposition  that  can  be  extracted  from  Scripture  1  Do  you
suppose  that  the  several  truths  of  the  Christian  creed  are  so
many  separate,  unsuggestive,  unfruitful  dogmas,  Ijaving  no
traceable  relations  towards  each  other?  Do  you  take  it  for
granted  that  each  revealed  truth  involves  nothing  that  is  not
seen  plainly  to  he  on  the  very  surface  of  the  terms  which
express  it]  In  short,  are  the  doctrines  of  the  Church  to  be
regarded  now  as  only  so  many  barren  abstractions,  which  a
merely  human  speculation  on  divine  things  has  from  age  to  age
drawn  out  into  form  and  system  ]  If  so,  of  course  it  is  natural
enough  to  deprecate  any  earnest  scrutiny  of  the  worth  and
consequences  of  these  abstractions;  you  deprecate  it  as  in-
terfering with  moral  and  practical  interests ;  you  deem  an
inferential  theology  ahke  illusory  and  mischievous.  If  I  here
touch  the  secret  of  your  thought,  at  least,  my  brethren,  I  admit
its  consistency;  but  then  your  governing  premise  is  of  a  character
to  put  you  out  of  all  relations  with  the  Christian  Church,  except
those  of  fundamental  opposition.  The  Christian  Church  believes
that  God  has  really  spoken ;  and  she  assumes  that  no  subject
can  have  a  higher  practical  interest  for  man  than  a  consideration
of  the  worth  and  drift  of  what  He  has  said.  Of  course  no  one
would  waste  his  time  upon  systematizing  what  he  believed  to  be
only  a  series  of  abstract  phantoms.  And  if  a  man  holds  a  doc-
trine with  so  shght  and  doubtful  a  grasp  that  it  illuminates
nothing  within  him,  that  it  moves  nothing,  that  it  leads  on  to
nothing  beyond  itself,  he  is  in  a  fair  way  to  forfeit  it  altogether,
inn]  G  g


450    IV^ai  does  faith  in  Christ's  Divinity  involve?

We  scan  anxiously  and  croeE-queEtion  keenly  only  that  which  we
really  poBBess  and  cherish  as  solid  truth  :  a.  living  faith  is  pretty
certeon  to  draw  inferences.  The  seed  which  has  not  shriTelted
up  into  an  empty  huek  cannot  hut  sprout,  if  you  place  it  beneath
the  sod ;  the  living  belief  which  has  really  been  implanted  in
the  soil  of  thought  and  feeling,  cannot  but  bear  its  proper  Sower
and  fruit  in  the  moral  and  intellectual  life  of  a  thoughtlul  and
earnest  man.  If  you  would  arrest  the  growth  of  the  seed,  yon
must  cut  it  off  from  contact  with  the  soil,  and  so  in  time  yoo
must  kill  it :  you  may,  for  awhile,  isolate  a  religious  conviction
by  some  violent  moral  or  intellectual  process  ;  but  bo  sure  that
the  conviction  which  cannot  germinate  in  your  heart  and  mind
id  already  condemned  to  death  ■.

If  theology  is  inferential,  she  infers  under  guidance  and  within
restricted  limits.  If  the  eccentric  reasonii^  of  individual  minds
are  to  be  received  with  distrust,  the  consent  of  many  minds,  of
many  ages,  of  many  schools  and  orders  of  thought,  may  com-
mand at  least  a  respectful  attention.  If  we  reject  conclosioiia
drawn  professedly  from  the  substance  of  revelation,  but  rea%
enlai^ing  instead  of  explaining  it,  it  does  not  follow  that  we
should  reject  inferences  which  are  simply  explanatory,  or  which
exhibit  the  bearing  of  one  revealed  truth  upon  another.  This
indeed  is  the  most  fruitful  and  legitimate  province'of  inference
in  theological  enquiry.  Such  '  inference '  brings  out  the  meaning
of  the  details  of  revelation.  It  raises  this  feature  to  pro-
minence ;  it  throws  that  into  the  shade.  It  places  language  to
which  a  too  servile  literalism  might  have  attributed  the  highest
force,  in  the  lower  rank  of  metaphor  and  symbol ;  it  elicits
pregnant  and  momentous  truths  from  incidents  which,  in  the
absence  of  sufficient  guidance  or  reflection,  may  have  been
thought  to  possess  only  a  secondary  degree  of  significance.

To-day  we  reach  the  term  of  those  narrow  limits  within  wHch
some  aspects  of  a  subject  in  itself  exhaustleES  have  been  w
brieflv  and  imperfectly  discussed.  And  it  is  natural  for  any
imself — '  If  I  believe  in  Christ's  Divinity,
nvolve !  Is  it  possible  that  such  a  faith
.bstraction,  having  no  real  influence  upc«i
it  and  action  %  If  this  great  doctrine  be
sn  I  am  satisfled  of  its  truth,  stilt  Bome-
les  proving  it )     Can  it  be  other  than  a

iverwty  Sermons,  by  Hev.  B.  Scott,  D.D.,  Muln
I.-176.  The  rejection  of  'mferential  theologj'
)  of  Sadduceeisia.

[lecx


-^ — Ji_  |_    "•  *_P    ■«».  I  _   .  _i-L   _,  ■  var^^a^BaBMWTFww^


Fruitfulnessof  the  Doctrine  of  Christ's  Divinity,  45 1

practical  folly,  to  have  ascertained  the  truth  that  Jesus  is  God,
and  then  to  consign  so  momentous  a  conclusion  to  a  respectful
oblivion  in  some  obscure  comer  of  my  mind,  as  if  it  were  a  well-
bound  but  disused  book  that  could  only  ornament  the  shelves  of
a  library  ?     Must  I  not  rather  enshrine  it  in  the  very  centre  of
my  soul's  life  %     Must  I  not  contemplate  it,  nay,  if  it  may  be,
penetrate  it,  feed  on  it  by  repeated  contemplation,  that  it  may
illuminate,  sustain,  transfigure  my  whole  inward  being  %     Must
I  not  be  reasonably  anxious  till  this  great  conviction  shall  have
moulded  all  that  it  can  bear  on,  or  that  can  bear  on  it — all  that
I  hold  in  any  degree  for  religious  truth  %    Must  not  such  a  faith
at  last  radiate  through  my  every  thought!     Must  it  not  in-
vigorate with  a  new  and  deeper  motive  my  every  action  %    If
Jesus,  Who  lived  and  died  and  rose  for  me,  be  indeed  God,  can
my  duties  to  Him  end  with  a  bare  confession  of  His  Divinity  1
Will  not  the  greatness  of  His  Life  and  of  His  Death,  will  not
the  binding  force  of  His  commands,  will  not  the  nature  and
reality  of  His  promises  and  gifts,  be  felt  to  have  a  new  and
deeper  meaning,  when  I  survey  them  in  the  light  of  this  glo-
lious  truth  %     Must  not  all  which  the  Divine  Christ  blesses  and
sanctions  have  in  some  sense  about  it,  the  glory  and  virtue  of
His  Divinity  ? '

Undoubtedly,  brethren,  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Godhead  is,
both  in  the  sphere  of  belief  and  in  that  of  morals,  as  fruitful  and
as  imperious  as  you  anticipate.  St.  Paul's  question  in  the  text
is  in  substantial  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  your  own.  St.  Paul
makes  the  doctrine  of  a  Divine  Christ,  given  for  the  sins  of  men
to  a  Life  of  humiliation  and  to  a  Death  of  anguish,  the  premise
of  the  largest  consequences,  the  warrant  of  the  most  unbounded
expectations.  *He  That  spared  not  His  Own  Son,  but  gave
Him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give
us  all  things  %  *  Let  us  then  hasten  to  trace  this  somewhat  in
detail ;  and  let  us  remark,  in  passing,  that  on  the  present  oc-
casion we  shall  not  be  leaving  altogether  the  track  of  former
lectures.  For  in  studying  the  results  of  a  given  behef,  we  may
add  to  the  number  of  practical  evidences  in  its  favour ;  we  may
approach  the  belief  itself  under  conditions  which  are  more
favourable  for  doing  justice  to  it  than  those  which  a  direct
argument  supphes.  To  contemplate  such  a  truth  as  the  God-
head of  our  Lord  in  itself^  is  like  gazing  with  open  eyelids  at
the  torturing  splendour  of  the  noon-day  sun.  We  can  best
admu'e  the  sun  of  the  natural  heavens  when  we  take  note  of  the
beauty  which  he  sheds  over  the  face  of  the  world,  when  we  mai'k
vin]  G  g  2


452        The  doctrine  protects  Theistic  truth.

the  floods  of  light  which  stream  from  him,  and  the  deep
shadows  which  he  casts,  and  the  colours  and  forms  which  he
lights  up  and  displays  before  us.  In  like  manner,  perchance,
we  may  most  truly  enter  into  the  meaning  of  the  Divinity  of  the
Sun  of  Righteousness,  by  observing  the  truths  which  depend
more  or  less  directly  on  that  glorious  doctrine, — truths  on  which
it  sheds  a  significance  so  profound,  so  unspeakably  awful,  so
unspeakably  consoling.

There  are  three  distinct  bearings  of  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's
Divinity  which  it  is  more  especially  of  importance  to  consider.
This  doctrine  protects  truths  prior  to  itself,  and  belonging  both
to  natural  and  to  revealed  theology.  It  also  illuminates  the
meaning,  it  asserts  the  force  of  truths  which  depend  upon  itself!
which  are,  to  speak  humanly,  below  it,  and  which  can  only  be
duly  appreciated  when  they  are  referred  to  it  as  justifying  and
explaining  them.  Lastly,  it  fertilizes  the  Christian's  moral  and
spiritual  life,  by  supplying  a  motive  to  the  virtues  which  are
most  characteristically  Christian,  and  without  which  Christian
ethics  sink  down  to  the  level  of  Pagan  morality.

I.  Observe,  first,  the  conservative  force  of  the  doctrine.  It
protects  the  truths  which  it  presupposes.  Placed  at  the  centre
of  the  faith  of  Christendom,  it  looks  backward  as  well  as
forward ;  it  guards  in  Christian  thought  the  due  apprehension
of  those  fundamental  verities  without  which  no  religion  what-
ever is  possible,  since  they  are  the  postulates  of  all  religious
thought  and  activity.

I.  What,  let  us  ask,  is  the  practical  relation  of  the  doctrine
before  us  to  the  primal  truth  that  a  Personal  God  really  exists)

(a)  Both  in  the  last  century  and  in  our  own  day,  it  has  been
the  constant  aim  of  a  philosophical  deism  to  convince  the  world
that  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being  would  be  more  vividly,
constantly,  practically  realized,  if  the  dogma  of  His  existence
were  detached  from  the  creed  of  Christendom.  The  pure
Theistic  idea,  we  are  told,  if  it  were  only  freed  from  the  earthly
and  material  accessories  of  an  Incarnation,  if  it  were  not  em-
barrassed by  the  *  metaphysical  conception '  of  distinct  personal
Subsistencies  within  the  Godhead,  if  it  could  be  left  to  its  native
force,  to  its  spirituality  of  essence,  to  its  simplicity  of  form, —
would  exert  a  prodigious  influence  on  human  thought,  if  not  on
human  conduct,  l&s  influence  is  said  to  be  practically  im-
possible, so  long  as  Theistic  truth  is  overlaid  by  the  'thick
integument  *  of  Christian  doctrine.  Accordingly  a  real  beHef  in
God  is  to  be  deepened  and  extended,  and  atheism  is  to  be

[lect.


^he  idea  of  God  not  really  guarded  by  Deism.  45  3


expelled  from  the  minds  of  men,  by  the  destruction  of  dogmatic
Cliristianity.    But  has  any  such  anticipation  as  yet  been  realized
by  deism  %  Is  it  in  the  way  to  be  realized  at  this  hour  %  Need  I
remind  you,  that  throughout  Europe,  the  most  earnest  assaults  of
infidelity  upon  the  Christian  creed  within  the  last  ten  years
liave   been  directed  against   its  TJteistic,  as  distinct   from  its
peculiarly  Christian  elements  1    When  the  possibility  of  miracle
is  derided ;  when  a  Providence  is  scouted  as  the  fond  dream  of
man's  exaggerated  self-love ;  when  belief  in  the  power  of  prayer
is  treated  as  a  crude  superstition,  illustrative  of  man's  ignorance
of   the  scientific  conception  of  law;   when  the  hypothesis  of
absolutely  invariable  law,  and  the  cognate  conception  of  nature
as  a  self-evolved  system  of  self-existent  forces  and  self-existent
matter,  are  advancing  with  giant  strides  in  large  departments  of
the  literature  of  the  day ; — ^it  is  not  Christianity  as  such,  it  is
Theism,  which  ig,.  really  jeopardized  and  insulted.     Among  the
forces  arrayed  against  Christianity  at  this  hour,  the  most  for-
midable, because  the  most  consistent  and  the  most  sanguine,
is   that  pure  materialism,  which  has  been   intellectually  or-
ganized in  the  somewhat  pedantic  form  of  Positivism.     To  the
Positivist  the  most  ethereahzed  of  deistic  theories  is  just  as
much  an  object  of  pitying  scorn  as  the  creed  of  a  St.  John  and
a  St.  Athanasius.    Botii  are  relegated  to  '  the  theological  period '
of  human  development.     And  if  we  may  judge  from  the  present
aspect  of  the  controversy  between  non-Christian  spirituaHsts  and
the  apostles  of  Positivism,  it  must  be  sorrowfully  acknowledged
that  the  latter  appear  to  gain  steadily  and  surely  on  their  op-
ponents.    This  fact  is  more  evident  on  the  continent  of  Europe
than  in  our  own  country.    It  cannot  be  explained  by  supposing
that  the  spiritualistic  writers  are  intellectually  inferior  to  the
advocates  of  materialism.      Still  less  is  an  explanation  to  be
sought  in  the  intrinsic  indefensibihty  of  the  truth  which  the
spiritualists  defend ;   it  is  really  furnished  by  the  conditions
under  which  they  undertake  to  defend  it.     A  living,  energetic,
robust  faith,  a  faith,  as  it  has  been  termed,  not  of  ether,  but  of
flesh  and  blood,  is  surely  needed,  in  order  to  stand  the  reiterated
attacks,  the  subtle  and  penetrating  misgivings,  the  manifold
wear  and  tear  of  a  protracted  controversy  with  so  brutal  an
antagonist.     Can  deism  inspire  this  faith  1     The  pretension  of
deists  to  refine,  to  spiritualize,  to  etherealize  the  idea  of  God
almost  indefinitely,  is  fatal  to  the  living  energy  of  their  one  con-
viction.    Where  an  abstract  deism  is  not   killed  out  by  the
violence  of  atheistic  materialism,  it  is  apt,  although  left  to  itself,
vm]


454  True  idea  of  God,  which  Deism  cannot  guard,

to  die  by  an  unperceived  process  of  evaporation.     For  a  living
faith  in  a  Supreme  Being,  the  human  mind  requires  motives,
corollaries,  consequences,  supports.     These  are  not  supplied  by
the  few  abstract  considerations  which  are  entertained  by  the
philosophical  deists.   Whatever  may  be  the  intellectual  strength
of  their  position  against  atheism,  the  practical  weakness  of  that
position  is  a  matter  of  notoriety;  and  if  this  weakness  is  ap-
parent in  the  case  of  the  philosophers  themselves,  how  much
more  patent  is  it  when  deism  attempts  to  make  itself  a  home  in
the  heart  of  the  people  1     That  abstract  and  inaccessible  being
who  is  placed  at  the  summit  of  deistic  systems  is  too  subtle  for
the  thought  and  too  cold  for  the  heart  of  the  multitudes  of  the
human  family.     When  God  is  regarded  less  as  the  personal
Object  of  affection  and  worship  than  as  the  necessary  term  of  an
intellectual  equation,  the  sentiment  of  piety  is  not  really  satis-
fied;  it  hungers,  it  languishes,  it  dies.     And  this  purely  in-
tellectual manner  of  apprehending  God,  which  kills  piety,  is  so
predominant  in  every  genuine  deistic  system  as  to  bring  about,
in  no  long  lapse  of  time,  its  impotence  and  extinction  as  a
popular  religious  force.     The  Supreme  Agent,  without  whom
the  deist  cannot  construct  an  adequate  or  satisfactory  theory  of
being,  is  gradually  divested  of  all  personal  characteristics,  and  is
resolved  into  a  formula  expressing  only  supreme  agency.     His
moral  perfections  fall  into  the  background  of  thought,  while  he
is  conceived  of,  more  and  more  exclusively,  as  the  Universal
Mind.     And  his  intellectual  attributes  are  in  turn  discarded,
when  for  the  Supreme  Mind  is  substituted  the  conception  of
the  Mightiest  Force.     Long  before  this  point  is  reached,  deistic
philosophy  is  nervously  alarmed,  lest  its  God  should  still  be  sup-
Josed  to  ^netrate  as  a  living  Providence  down  into  this  human
world  of  suffering  and   sin.      Accordingly,   professing  much
anxiety  for  his  true  dignity  and  repose,  deism  weaves  around
his  liberty  a  network  of  imaginary  law;  and  if  he  has  not  beeii
previously  destroyed  by  the  materialistic  controversialists,  he  is
at  length  conducted  by  the  cold  respect  of  deistic  thinkers  to  the
utmost  frontier  of  the  conceivable  universe,  where,  having  been
enthroned  in  a  majestic  inaction,  he  is  as  respectfully  abandoned.
As  suggesting  a  problem  which  may  rouse  a  faint  spasmodic  in-
tellectual instinct,  his  name  may  still  be  mentioned  from  time  to
time  in  the  world  of  letters.     But  the  interest  which  he  creates
is  at  the  best  on  a  level  with  that  of  the  question  whether  the
planets  are  or  are  not  inhabited.  As  an  energetic,  life-controlhng,
life-absorbing  power,  the  God  of  deism  is  extinct.

[lect.


protected  by  faith  in  the  Divine  Incarnatio?i.    455

Now  the  doctrine  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  the  Incarnate
God  protects  this  primal  theistic  truth  which  non-Christian
deism  is  so  incapable  of  popularizing,  and  even  of  retaining.
The  Incarnation  bridges  over  the  abyss  which  opens  in  our
thought  between  earth  and  heaven ;  it  brings  the  Almighty,
Allwise,  Illimitable  Being  down  to  the  mind  and  heart  of  His
reasonable  creatures.  The  Word  made  Flesh  is  God  con-
descending to  our  finite  capacities ;  and  this  condescension  has
issued  in  a  clear,  strong  sense  of  the  Being  and  Attributes  of
God,  such  as  is  not  found  beyond  the  bounds  of  Christendom.
The  last  prayer  of  Jesus,  that  His  redeemed  might  know  the
only  true  God,  has  been  answered  in  history.  How  profound,
how  varied,  how  fertile  is  the  idea  of  God,  of  His  Nature  and  of
His  attributes,  in  St.  John,  in  St.  Paul,  in  St.  Gregory  Nazianzen,
in  St.  Augustine  !  How  energetic  is  this  idea,  how  totally  is  it
removed  from  the  character  of  an  impotent  speculation  I  How
does  this  keen,  strong  sense  of  God's  present  and  majestic  Life
leave  its  mark  upon  manners,  literatures,  codes  of  law,  national
institutions,  national  characters  1  How  utterly  does  its  range  of
energy  transcend  any  mere  employment  of  the  intellect ;  how
does  it,  again  and  again,  bend  wills,  and  soften  hearts,  and
change  the  current  and  drift  of  lives,  and  transfigure  the  souls  of
men  I  And  why  is  this  %  It  is  because  the  Incarnation  rivets  the
apprehension  of  God  on  the  thought  and  heart  of  the  Church,
so  that  within  the  Church  theistic  truth  bids  defiance  to  those
influences  which  tend  perpetually  to  sap  or  to  volatilize  it  else-
where. Instead  of  presenting  us  with  «ome  fugitive  abstraction,
inaccessible  to  the  intellect  and  disappointing  to  the  heart,  the
Incarnation  points  to  Jesus.  Jesus  is  the  Almighty,  restraining
His  ilUmitable  powers ;  Jesus  is  the  Incomprehensible,  volun-
tarily submitting  to  bonds ;  Jesus  is  Providence,  clothed  in  our
own  flesh  and  blood ;  Jesus  is  the  Infinite  Charity,  tending  us
with  the  kindly  looks  and  tender  handling  of  a  human  love ;
Jesus  is  the  Eternal  Wisdom,  speaking  out  of  the  depths  of
infinite  thought  in  a  human  language.  Jesus  is  God  making
Himself,  if  I  may  dare  so  to  speak,  our  tangible  possession ;  He
is  God  brought  '  very  nigh  to  us,  in  our  mouth  and  in  our
heart ; '  we  behold  Him,  we  touch  Him,  we  cling  to  Him,
and  lo  I  we  are  6da^  Koiuavoi  </)v(r€6)9  ^,  partakers  of  the  Nature
of  Deity  through  our  actual  membership  in  His  BodyC;  we
dwell,  if  we  will,  evermore  in  Him,  and  He  in  us.

*  2  St.  Pet.  i.  4.  •  I  Cor.  xii.  27.

vm]


456  Tke  doctrine  a  safeguard  against  Pantheism.

Thia  then  is  the  result  of  the  Divine  Incarnation:  it  brings
Qod  close  to  the  iamoet  being  of  man,  jet  without  forfeiting,
nay,  rather  while  guarding  moat  carefully,  in  man's  thought,  the
apiritnality  of  the  Divine  Essence.  Nowhere  ia  the  popular
idea  of  Ood  more  refined,  more  ^iritual,  than  where  faith  in
the  Divinity  of  Jesua  is  clearest  and  strongeat.  No  writers
have  explained  and  asserted  the  immateriality,  the  simplicity,
the  indivisibility  of  the  Easence  of  Ood  more  earnestly,  than
those  who  have  moat  earnestly  asserted  and  explained  the
doctrines  of  the  Holy  Trinity  and  of  the  Divine  Incarnation.
For  if  we  know  our  happinesa  in  Christ,  we  Christians  are
united  to  Qod,  we  possesa  Ood,  we  conacionaly  live,  and  move,
and  have  our  being  in  Ood.  Our  intelligence  and  our  heart
alike  apprehend  God  in  His  majestic  and  beautiful  Life  so  truly
and  couatantly,  becauae  He  has  taken  poasession  of  our  whole
nature,  intellectual,  moral,  and  corporeal,  and  has  warmed
and  illuminated  and  blessed  it  by  the  quickening  Manhood
of  Jeaus.  We  cannot  reflect  upon  and  rejoice  in  our  omon
with  Jesus,  without  finding  ourBelves  face  to  face  with  the
Being  and  Attributes  of  Him  with  Whom  in  Jesns  we  are  made
one.  Holy  Scripture  has  traced  tbe  failure  and  nuBery  of  all
attempts  on  the  part  of  a  philosophical  deism  to  create  or  to
maintain  in  the  aoul  of  man  a  real  communion  with  our
heavenly  Parent,  '  Whosoever  denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath
not  the  Father  d.'  And  the  Christian's  practical  secarity  against
those  speculative  difficulties  to  which  his  faith  in  a  living  God
may  be  exposed,  lies  in  that  constant  contemplation  of  and
communion  with  Jeaus,  which  ia  of  the  eaaence  of  the  Chriatian
life.  '  O04I,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,
hath  shined  in  our  hearts,  to  give  t£e  light  of  the  knowledge  of
the  glory  of  Ood  in  the  Face  of  Jeaus  Christ  *.'

(fS)  But  if  belief  in  our  Saviour's  Godhead  protects  Christian
thought  against  the  iutellectual  dangers  which  await  an  arid
Deism,  doea   it   afford   an  equally  effective   safeguard    against
Pantheism  1     In  conceiving  of  God,  the  choice  before  a  pan-
theist lies  between  alternatives  from  which  no  genius  has  as  yet
real  escape.      Ood,  the    pantheist  must   assert,  is
erything ;  Ood  is  the  whole  material  and  spiritual
Se  ia  humanity  in  all  its  manifeatations ;  He  is  by
irery  moral  and  immoral  agent ;  and  every  form  and
>n  of  moral  evil,  no  less  than  every  variety  of  moral


St-Jolm


[lkct.


The  idea  of  God  destroyed  by  Pantheism,     457

excellence  and  beauty,  is  part  of  the  all-pervading,  all-compre-
hending movement  of  His  Universal  Life.      If-  this  revolting
blasphemy  be  declined,  then  the  God  of  pantheism  must  be  the
barest  abstraction  of  abstract  being;   He  must,  as  with  the
Alexandrian  thinkers,  be  so  exaggerated  an  abstraction  as  to
transcend  existence  itself;  He  must  be  conceived  of  as  utterly
unreal,  lifeless,  non-existent;   while  the  only  real   beings  are
these  finite  and  determinate  forms  of  existence  whereof  *  nature '
is  composed  f.    This  dilemma  haunts  all  the  historical  transform-
ations of  pantheism,  in  Europe  as  in  the  East,  to-day  as  two
thousand  years  ago.    Pantheism  must  either  assert  that  its  God
is  the  one  only  existing  being  whose  existence  absorbs  and  is
identified  with  the  universe   and  humanity;   or  else  it  must
admit  that  he  is  the  rarest  and  most  unreal  of  conceivable  ab-
stractions ;  in  plain  terms,  that  he  is  no  being  at  all.     And  the
question  before  us  is,  Does  the  Incarnation  of  God,  as  taught
by  the  Christian  doctrine,  expose  Christian  thought  to  this
dilemma?     Is  God  *  brought  very  nigh  to  us'  Christiana  in
such  sort,  as  to  bury  the  Eternal  in  the  temporary,  the  Infinite
in  the  finite,  the  Absolute  and  Self-existent  in  the  transient  and
the  relative,  the  All-holy  in  the  very  sink  of  moral  evil,  unless,
in  order  to  save  His  honour  in  our  thought,  we  are  prepared  to
attenuate  our  idea  of  Him  into  nonentity  %

Now,  not  merely  is  there  no  ground  for  this  apprehension,
but  the  Christian  doctrine  of  an  Incarnate  God  is  our  most  solid
protection  against  the  inroads  of  pantheistic  error.

The  strength  of  pantheistic  eystems  lies  in  that  craving  both
of  the  intellect  and  of  the  heart  for  union  with  the  Absolute
Being,  which  is  the  most  legitimate  and  the  noblest  instinct  of
our  nature.  This  craving  is  satisfied  by  the  Christian's  union
with  the  Incarnate  One.  But  while  satisfying  it,  the  Incar-
nation raises  an  effective  barrier  against  its  abuse  after  the
fashion  of  pantheism.  Against  the  dogma  of  an  Incarnate  God,
rooted  in  the  faith  of  a  Christian  people,  the  waves  of  panthe-
istic thought  may  surge  and  lash  themselves  and  break  in
vain.  For  the  Incarnation  presupposes  that  master-truth  which
pantheism  most  passionately  denies.  It  presupposes  the  truth
that  between  the  finite  and  the  Infinite,  between  the  Creator
and  the  Cosmos,  between  God  and  man,  there  is  of  necessity  a
measureless  abyss.  On  this  point  its  opposition  to  pantheism
is  as  earnest   as  that  of  the  most  jealous   deism;    but   the

'  Saisset,  Philosophie  Keligiense,  i.  i8i ;  ii.  368.

vmj


458  Christ' s Divinity  thesafeguardagainst Pantheism.

Christian  creed  escapes  from  the  deistic  conception  of  an  omni-
potent moral  being,  surveying  intelligently  the  vast  accmnn*
lation  of  sin  and  misery  wHch  we  see  on  thia  earth,  yet  vdtlud
remaining  unmoved,  inactive,  indifferent.     The  Christian  creed
spans  this  gulf  which  yawns  between  earth  and  heaven,  by  pro-
claiming that  the  Everlasting  Son  has  taken  our  nature  upon
Him.      In  His  Person   a   Created  Nature   is  joined  to  the
Uncreated,  by  a  union  which  is   for  ever  indissoluble.      Bat
what  is  that  truth  which  underlies  this  transcendent  mystery  \
What  sustains  it,  what  even  enhances  it,  what  forbids  it  to  melt
away  in  our  thought  into  a  chaotic  confusion  out  of  which
neither  the  Divine  nor  the  Human  could  struggle  forth  into
the  light  for  distinct  recognition  1    It  is,  I  reply,  the  truth  that
the  Natures  thus  united  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  are  radically,
by  their  essence,  and  for  ever,  distinct.     It  is  by  reason  of  this
ineffaceable  distinctness  that  the  union   of  the  Gk>dhead  and
Manhood  in  Jesus  is  such  an  object  of  wondering  and  thankful
contemplation  to  Christians.    Accordingly,  at  the  very  heart  of
the  creed  of  Christendom,  we  have  a  guarantee  against  the
cardinal  error  of  pantheism ;  while  yet  by  our  living  fellowship
as  Christians  with  the  Divine  and  Incarnate  Son,  we  realize  the
aspiration  which  pantheism  both  fosters  and  perverts.     Chris-
tian intellect,  so  long  as  it  is  Christian,  can  never  be  betrayed
into  the  admission  that  God  is  the  universe;  Christian  futh
can  never  be  reduced  to  the  extremity  of  choosing  between  a
denial  of  moral  distinctions  and  an  assertion  that  Gk>d  is  the
parent  of  all  immoral  action,  or  to  the  desperate  endeavour  to
escape  this  alternative  by  volatilizing  God  into  non-existence.
And  yet  Christian  love,  while  it  is  really  Christian,  cannot  for
one  moment  doubt  that  it  enfolds  and  possesses  and  is  united  to
its  Divine  Object.     But  this  intellectual  safeguard  and  this
moral  satisfaction  alike  vanish,  if  the  real  Deity  of  Jesus  be
denied  or  obscured :  since  it  is  the  Deity  of  our  truly  human
Lord  which  satisfies  the  Christian  heart,  while  it  protects  the
Christian  intellect  against  fatal  aberrations.    Certainly  a  deism
which  would  satisfy  the  heart,  inevitably  becomes  pantheistic
in  its  awkward  attempts  to  become  devotional ;  and  althou^
pantheism   should   everywhere   breathe  the  tenderness  which
almost  blinds  a  reader  of  Spinosa's  ethics  to  a  perception  of
their  real  character,  still  pantheism  is  at  bottom  and  in  its
results  not  other  than  a  graceful  atheism.     But  to  partake  of
the  Divine  Nature  incarnate  in  Christ  is  not  to  .bury  God  in  the
filth  of  moral  pollution,  nor  is  it  to  transcendentalize  Him  into

[lect.


Christ^ s  Divinity  guards  mans  true  dignity.  459

an  abstraction,  which  mocks  us,  when  we  attempt  to  grasp  it,  as
an  unsubstantial  phantom  «.

2.  One  more  sample  fihall  be  given  of  this  protective  efficacy
of  the  doctrine  before  us.  If  it  guards  in  our  thought  the
honour,  the  majesty,  the  Life  of  God,  it  also  protects  the  true
dignity  and  the  rights  of  man.  The  unsettled  spirit  of  our
time,  when  it  has  broken  with  the  claims  of  faith,  oscillates,
whether  from  caprice  or  in  bewilderment,  between  the  most
inconsistent  errors.  If  at  one  while  its  audacity  would  drive
the  Great  God  from  His  throne  in  heaven  to  make  way  for  the
lawless  intellect  and  will  of  His  creature,  at  another  it  seems
possessed  by  an  infatuated  passion  for  the  degradation  of  man-
kind. It  either  ignores  such  features  of  the  higher  side  of  our
complex  being  as  are  the  powers  of  reflection  and  of  inference,
or  it  arbitrarily  assumes  that  they  are  only  the  products  of
civilization.  It  fixes  its  attention  exclusively  upon  the  gradu-
ated variety  of  form  perceptible  in  a  long  series  of  crania  which
it  has  arranged  in  its  museum,  and  then  it  proclaims  with
enthusiasm  that  a  Newton  or  a  Herschel  is  after  all  only  the
cultivated  descendant  of  a  grotesque  and  irrational  ape.  It  even
denies  to  man  the  possession  of  any  spiritual  nature  whatever ;
thought  is  asserted  to  be  inherent  in  the  substance  of  the  brain  ;
belief  in  the  existence  of  an  immaterial  essence  is  treated  as  an
unscientific  and  superstitious  prejudice ;  virtuous  and  vicious
actions  are  alluded  to  as  alike  results  of  purely  physical  agen-
cies ^ ;  man  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes  a  soulless  brute.  My
brethren,  you  will  not  suppose  that  I  am  desiring  to  derogate,
however  indirectly,  from  the  claims  of  that  noble  science  which
patiently  investigates  the  physiology  of  our  animal  nature ;  I
am  only  protesting  against  a  rash  and  insulting  hypothesis,  for
which  science,  if  her  sons  could  speak  with  one  voice,  would  be
loath  to  make  herself  responsible,  since  by  it  her  true  utterances

>  M.  Kenan's  firequent  mention  of  'God*  in  lu's  'Tie  de  J^sns*  does  not
imply  that  he  believes  in  a  Supreme  Being.  '  God  *  means  with  M.  Benan
only  '  the  category  of  the  ideal/  and  not  any  existing  personal  being  what-
ever. Questions  contemporaines,  p.  224:  'Les  sciences  historiques  ne  dif-
ferent en  rien  par  la  m^thode  des  sciences  physiques  et  math^matiques :
elles  Bupposent  qu*aucun  agent  sumaturel  ne  vient  troubler  la  marche  de
rhumanite ;  que  cette  marche  est  la  r^sultante  imm^iate  de  la  liberty  qui
est  dans  l*homme  et  de  la  fatality  qui  est  dans  la  nature ;  qu*il  n*y  a  pas
d*dtre  libre  sup^eur  k  Thomme  auquel  on  puisse  attribuer  une  part  ap-
pr^able  dans  la  conduite  morale^  non  plus  que  dans  la  conduite  mat^rielle
de  runivers.'

*»  Cf.  M.Tain^,  Histoire  de  la  Litt^rature  Anglaise,  Introduction,  p.  xv:
'Le  vice  et  la  vertu  sont  des  produits  comme  le  sucre  et  le  vitriol.*

vm]


460  Christ^ s  Divinity  guards  mans  true  dignity.

are  piteously  caricatured.  It  cannot  be  said  that  such  a  theory
is  a  harmless  eccentricity  of  over-eager  speculation;  for  it
destroys  that  high  and  legitimate  estimate  of  Grod's  natural
gifts  to  man  which  is  an  important  element  of  earnest  and
healthy  morality  in  the  individual,  and  which  is  still  more
essential  to  the  onward  march  of  our  social  progress.

But  so  long  as  the  Christian  Church  believes  in  the  true
Divinity  of  our  Incarnate  Lord,  it  is  not  probable  that  theories
which  deny  the  higher  aspects  of  human  nature  will  meet  with
large  acceptance.  We  Christians  can  bear  to  be  told  that  the
skull  of  tlus  or  that  section  of  the  human  family  bears  this  or
that  degree  of  resemblance  to  the  skull  of  a  gorilla.  We  know,
indeed,  that  as  receivers  of  the  gift  of  life  we  are  simply  on  a
level  with  the  lowest  of  the  lower  creatures ;  we  owe  all  that  we
are  and  have  to  God.  Do  we  not  thank  Him  for  our  creation,
preservation,  and  all  the  blessings  of  this  life  1  Might  He  not
have  given  us  less  than  we  have  %  Might  He  not  have  given  us
nothing?  What  have  we,  what  are  we,  that  we  have  not
received  ]  The  question  of  man's  place  in  the  universe  touches
not  any  seK-achieved  dignity  of  our  own,  but  the  extent  and
the  nature  of  the  Divine  bounty.  But  while  we  believe  the
creed  of  Christendom,  we  cannot  view  such  a  question  as  open,
or  listen  with  any  other  feelings  than  those  of  sorrow  and
repugnance  to  the  arguments  of  the  apostles  of  human  degrada-
tion. We  cannot  consent  to  suppose  ourselves  to  be  mere
animal  organisms,  without  any  immaterial  soul  or  future  des-
tiny, parted  by  no  distinctive  attribute  from  the  perishing  beasts
around  us.  For  the  true  nobility  of  our  nature  has  received  the
seal  of  a  recognition,  which- forbids  our  intellectual  complicity
with  the  physics  or  the  *  psychology '  of  materialism.  Do  not
we  Christians  call  to  mind,  often,  every  day  of  our  lives,  that
God  has  put  such  high  and  distinctive  honour  upon  our  common
humanity  as  to  clothe  Himself  in  it,  and  to  bear  it  to  heaven
in  its  glorious  and  unsullied  perfection,  that  for  all  eternity
it  may  be  the  partner  of  His  throne?

Tremunt  videntes  angeli
Versam  vicem  mortalium;
Feccat  caro,  mimdat  Caro,
Kegnat  Deus  Dei  Garo.

But  this  exaltation  of  our  human  nature  would  be  the  wildest
dream,  unless  Jesus  were  truly  God  as  well  as  Man.  His
Divinity  is  the  warrant  that  in  Him  our  race  is  '  crowned  with
glory  and  honour,'  and  that  in  taking  upon  Him  '  not  the  nature

[lsct.


Christ,  as  being  God,  is  infallible.         46 1

of  angels,  but  the  seed  of  Abraham,'  He  was  vindicating  our
individual  capacity  for  the  highest  greatness.  Apart  from  the
phenomena  of  reflection  and  reason,  the  hopes  which  are  raised
"by  the  Incarnation  utterly  forbid  speculations  that  would  de-
grade man  to  the  level  of  a  brute  incapable  of  any  real  morality.
If  we  are  told  that  such  hopes  are  not  direct  replies  to  the
arguments  of  physiology,  we  answer  that  physiology  can  and
does  often  correct  by  her  scientific  demonstrations,  the  eccen-
tricities of  those  who  would  force  her  to  take  part  against
man's  best  hopes  and  instincts.  But,  as  a  practical  matter  of
fact,  Christendom  maintains  its  faith  in  the  dignity  of  man
amidst  the  creatures  of  God  by  its  faith  in  the  Incarnation  of
the  Divine  Son.  *  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God,  and  it
doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be  :  but  we  know  that,
when  He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him ;  for  we  shall  see
Him  as  He  is*.'

II.  These  are  but  a  few  out  of  many  illustrations  of  the
protection  afforded  by  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Divinity  to
sundry  imperilled  truths  of  natural  religion.  Let  us  proceed  to
consider  the  illuminative  or  explanatory  relation  in  which  the
doctrine  stands  to  truths  which  are  internal  to  the  Christian
revelation,  and  which  themselves  presuppose  some  definite  belief
respecting  the  Person  of  Christ.

Now  our  Lord's  whole  Mediatorial  work,  while  it  is  dis-
charged through  His  assumed  Humanity,  is  ejficacious  and
complete,  simply  because  the  Mediator  is  not  merely  Man  but
God.  As  a  Prophet,  His  utterances  are  infallible.  As  a  Priest,
He  offers  a  prevailing  sacrifice.  As  a  Kling,  He  wields  an  autho-
rity which  has  absolute  claims  upon  the  conscience,  and  a  power
which  will  ultimately  be  proved  to  be  resistless.

(a)  A  sincere  and  intelligent  belief  in  the  Divinity  of  Jesus
Christ  obHges  us  to  believe  that  Jesus  Christ,  as  a  Teacher,  is
infallible.  His  infallibihty  is  not  a  irift,  it  is  an  original  and
necessary  endowment  of  His  higher  Nat^e.  If  indeed  Christ
had  been  merely  man,  He  might  still  have  been  endowed  with
an  infaUibility  such  as  was  that  of  His  own  apostles.  As  it  is,
to  charge  Him  with  error  is  to  deny  that  He  is  God.  Unless
God's  wisdom  can  be  foolishness,  or  His  veracity  can  be  sullied
by  the  suspicion  of  deceit ;  unless  God  can  Himself  succumb  to
error,  or  can  consent  to  deceive  His  reasonable  creatures;  a
sincere  believer  in  the  true  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  will  bow
before  His  words  in  all  their  possible  range  of  significance,

>  I  St.  John  ili.  a.
vmj


462  Modern  dental  of  our  Lords  Infallibility.

aa  before  the  words  of  a  literally  infallible  Maeter.  So  obviouB
au  inference  would  only  be  disputed  under  circumstancea  of  an
essentially  tranaitional  character,  each  as  are  those  which  haTs
perplexed  the  Church  of  England  during  the  last  few  years.
Deny  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Qod,  and  you  may  or  may  not  pro-
ceed to  deny  that  He  is  infallible.  But  confess  His  Godhead,
and  the  commoii  sense  of  men  of  the  world  will  concur  with  the
judgment  of  divines,  in  bidding  you  avoid  the  irrational  as
well  as  blasphemous  conception  of  a  fallible  Deity.  To  main-
tain, on  the  one  band,  that  Jeeus  Christ  is  Qod,  and,  on  the
other,  that  He  is  a  teacher  and  propagator,  not  of  trivial  and
unimportant,  but  of  far-reaching  and  eubstantial  errora ; — this
would  have  appeared  to  ancient  Christendom  a  paradox  ao  sin-
gular aa  to  be  absolutely  incredible.  But  we  have  lived  \a  hear
men  proclaim  the  legendary  and  immoral  character  of  con-
siderable portions  of  those  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  upon
which  our  Lord  has  set  the  seal  of  His  infallible  authority^.
And  yet,  side  by  side  with  this  rejection  of  Scriptures  so
deliberately  sanctioned  by  Christ,  there  is  an  unwillingness
which,  illogical  as  it  is,  we  must  sincerely  welcome,  to  profess
any  explicit  rejection  of  the  Church's  belief  in  ChtiBt'B  Divinity.
Hence  arises  the  endeavour  to  intercept  a  conclusion,  whidi
might  otherwise  have  seemed  so  plain  as  to  make  arguments  in
its  favour  an  intellectual  impertinence.  Hence  a  series  of  sin-
gular refinements,  by  which  Christ  is  presented  to  the  modem
world  as  really  Divine,  yet  as  subject  to  fatal  error ;  as  Founder
of  the  true  religion,  yet  as  the  credulous  patron  of  a  volume
replete  with  worthless  legends ;  as  the  highest  Teacher  aod
Leader  of  humanity,  yet  withal  as  the  ignorant  victim  of  the
prejudices  and  follies  of  an  unenlightened  age.

those  who  impugn  the  trustworthiness
liout  denying  in  terms  the  Divinity  of
resentation  as  the  foregomg  does  them  a
istice.     They  do  not  wish  to  deny  that

euch,  voL  iii.  p.  633:    '[In  Matt,  iv,  4.  y,  10]

.....       __!..         .  ..j_     jg.      ^         ...      _        ,_  ...    1       -     !_

the  GrosDels  ai ^ ,

H  ezpreaaly
tbe  words  in  queBtion*  s.g.  Acta  iii.  ti ;  Rom.
fue  ttat,  in  the  tezte  abuve  quoted,  the  word)
0  Mosea,  but  are  tnerel;  introduced  with  the
D  Matt.  lii.  1  tbe  Fhaiieecs  refer  to  a  passage  in
Mea  ;  and  our  Lord  in  His  reply,  Ter.  8,  repeal*
Uy  adopts  it  aa  correct,  and  makes  it  Hii  own.
[l£CT.


t  '


Our  Lord  said  to  be  fallible  as  Man.      463

Christ,  as  the  Eternal  Son  of  God,  is  infallible.     But  the  Christ
WJio   speaks  in  the  Gospels  is,  they  contend,  *a  Son  of  man,*
and  as  such  He  is  subject  to  the  human  infirmities  of  ignorance
and   error  1.     '  Does  He  not  profess  Himself,*  they  ask,  *  in  the
plainest  words,  ignorant  of  the  day  of  the  last  judgment  ?   Does
not  His  Evangelist  assure  us  that  He  increased  in  "  wisdom  "  as
vrell  as  in  stature  %     This  being  so,  was  not  His  human  know-
ledge limited;    and  was  not  error  possible,  if  not  inevitable,
when  He  passed  beyond  the  limits  of  such  knowledge  as  He
possessed  %     Why  should  He  be  supposed  to  speak  of  the  Pen-
tateuch with  a  degree  of  critical  acumen,  to  which  the  foremost
learning  of  His  day  and  country  had  not  yet  attained  ?     Take
care,*  so  they  warn  us,  *  lest  in  your  anxiety  to  repudiate  Arius
and  Nestorius/  you  deny  the  reality  of  Christ's  Human  Soul,  and
become  the  unconscious  associate  of  Apollinaris  or  of  Eutyches.
Take  care,  lest  you  make  Christianity  answer  with  its  life  for
the  truth  of  a  "  theory  **  about  the  historical  trustworthiness  of
the  Old  Testament,  which,  although  it  certainly  was  sanctioned
and  put  forward  by  Jesus  Christ,  yet  has  been  as  decidedly  con-
demned by  the  "higher  criticism*'  of  the  present  day.*

Let  us  remark  in  this  position,  first  of  all,  the  indirect  ad-
mission that  Christ,  as  the  Eternal  Son  of  God,  is  strictly
iofaUible.  Obvious  as  such  a  truth  should  be  to  Christians,
Arianism,  be  it  remembered,  did  not  confess  it.  Arianism  held
that  the  Word  Himself  was  ignorant  of  the  day  of  judgment.
Such  a  tenet  was  perfectly  consistent  with  the  denial  that  the

*  Colenso  on  the  Pentateuch,  vol.  i.  p.  xxxi:  *It  is  perfectly  consistent
with  the  most  entire  and  sincere  belief  in  our  Lord's  Divinity  to  hold,
as  many  do,  that,  when  He  vouchsafed  to  become  a  ".Son  of  Man,"  He
took  our  nature  fully,  and  voluntarily  entered  into  all  the  conditions  of
humanity,  and,  among  others,  into  that  which  makes  our  growth  in  all
ordinary  knowledge  gradual  and  limited.  We  are  expressly  told,  in  Luke
ii.  52,  that  "Jesus  increased  in  wisdom,^^  as  well  as  in  "stature."  It  is
not  supposed  that,  in  His  human  nature,  He  was  acquainted,  more  than
any  educated  Jew  of  the  age,  with  the  mysteries  of  all  modem  sciences ;
nor,  with  St.  Luke's  expressions  before  us,  can  it  be  seriously  maintained
that,  as  an  infant  or  young  child,  He  possessed  a  knowledge  surpassing
that  of  the  most  pious  and  learned  adults  of  His  nation,  upon  the  subject
of  the  authorship  and  age  of  the  different  portions  of  the  Pentateuch.  At
what  period,  then,  of  His  life  upon  earth,  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  He  had
granted  to  Him,  as  the  Son  of  Man,  supernaturally,  full  and  accurate
information  on  these  points,  so  that  He  should  be  expected  to  speak  about
the  Pentateuch  in  other  terms  than  any  other  devout  Jew  of  that  day  would
have  employed?  Why  should  it  be  thought  that  he  would  speak  with
certain  Divine  knowledge  on  this  matter,  more  than  upon  other  matters
of  ordinary  science  or  history  !*

vm]


_  i


464  St.  Luke  ii.  52  considered.

Word  was  consubstantial  with  the  Omniscient  God;  but  it
was  utterly  at  variance  with  any  pretension  honestly  to  believe
in  His  Divinity  ^,  Yet  it  must  be  recorded  with  sorrow,  that
some  writers  who  would  desire  nothing  less  than  to  uphold
the  name  and  errors  of  the  opponent  of  Athanasius,  do  never-
theless at  times  seem  to  speak  as  if  it  were  seriously  possible
that  the  Infallible  could  have  erred,  or  that  the  boundless
knowledge  of  the  Eternal  Mind  could  be  really  limited.  Let
us  then  note  and  welcome  the  admission  that  ihe  Eternal  Son
of  God  is  literally  infallible,  even  though  it  be  made  in  quarters
where  His  authority,  as  the  Incarnate  Christ,  teaching  unerringly
substantial  truth,  is  directly  impugned  and  repudiated.

It  is  of  course  urged  that  our  Lord's  Human  Soul  is  the  seat
of  that '  fallibility '  which  is  insisted  upon  as  b^g  so  fatal  to
His  authority  as  a  Teacher.  Let  us  then  enquire  what  the
statements  of  Scripture  on  this  mysterious  subject  would  really
appear  to  affirm.

I.  When  St.  Luke  tells  us  that  our  Lord  increased  in  wisdom
and  stature  ^,  we  can  scarcely  doubt  that  an  intellectual  develop-
ment of  some  kind  in  Christ's  human  Soul  is  indicated.  This  de-
velopment, it  is  implied,  corresponded  to  the  growth  of  His  bodily
frame.  The  progress  in  wisdom  was  real  and  not  merely  apparent,
just  as  the  growth  of  Christ's  Human  Body  was  a  real  growth.  If
only  an  increasing  manifestation  of  knowledge  had  been  meant,  it
might  have  been  meant  also  that  Christ  only  manifested  increase
of  stature,  while  His  Human  Body  did  not  really  grow.  But
on  the  other  hand,  St.  Luke  had  previously  spoken  of  the  Child

^  St.  Athanasius  comments  as  follows  upon  St.  Mark  ziii.  3  a,  ohtk  6  Ti6s.
Contr.  Arian.  Or.  iii.  c.  44 :  Sth  rovro  Kcd  irepl  hryyiKuv  \4ywy  ovk  ^tpniKiv
iTravafiaiymVf  Srt  oifJih  rh  llvevixa  rh  ayiov,  &AA*  dirK&miirf,  deuofvs  Kara  8^
toCto,  Bti  6t  T^  Hvcvfia  oTBev,  iroW^  fiaWov  d  A6yos  p  A6yos  icrrly  oUie,  weip*
ov  Kcd  rh  ITvev/ia  Kafx^Av^i,  Kol  8t(  TrtpX  rov  lipf-bfiaros  (nwHia-as  <pay€phv
V€VoiriK€Vf  dri  irtpl  ryjs  kvdp(aviv7]S  outoC  KuTovpyias  lAeyeV  ow5^  6  ti6s'  kcUl
rovTov  rtKfi'fipiov,  Bri  SLvdpanriyofS  €ipriK&>s,  oUde  d  Tihs  olde,  SelKVufftv  tiuti
0€iKas  iavrhv  rh  vdma  eiB^a,  hv  yiip  Aeyet  Tihy  r^p  fj/xtpop  fi^  etScVcu,  rovrop
eiSepou  key€i  rhp  Tlar4pa*  ovhels  yh.p,  <^<rl,  yip<jo(TKii  rhp  Tiar4pa  ei  /lij  6  Tt6i.
rras  84  vK^p  rSop  *Apucafoop  (rvpofxoKoyfi<r€i€Pf  &s  d  rhp  Tlarcpa  yivt&tncwp  woXk^
fiaWcp  o7$€V  rrjs  Krla-ews  rh  Z\op,  ip  84  ry  B\(p  Kcd  rh  r4\os  4(rrl  TcriJnys.

Olshausen  observes,  in  Ev.  Matt.  zxiv.  36,  Comm.  i.  p.  909 :  '  Ist  ab^
vom  Sohne  Grottes  hier  die  Bede,  so  kann  das  von  ihm  pradicirte  Nichtwissen
der  7ifi€pa  und  &pa  kein  absolutes  seyn,  indem  die  Wesenseinheit  des  Voters
und  des  Sohnes  das  Wissen  des  Sohnes  und  des  Yaters  nicht  specifisch  zn
trennen  gestattet ;  es  muss  vielmehr  nur  von  dem  Zustande  der  xdrwris  dei
Herm  in  Stande  seiner  Niedrigkeit  verstanden  werden.*

"  St.  Luke  ii.  52  :  'Irjaovs  irpoeKoirre  aoipltf  icoi  ^Xiicif .

[lect.


Oitr  LorcTs  *  growth  in  knowledge^       465

Jesus  as  '  being  filled  with  wisdom  0/  and  St.  John  teaches  that
&s  the  Word  Lacamate,  Jesus  was  actually  *  full  of  truth.'     St.
John  means  not  only  that  our  Lord  was  veracious,  but  that  He
'w^s  fully  in  possession  of  objective  truth  P.    It  is  clearly  implied
tHat,  according  to  St.  John,  this  fulness  of  truth  was  an  element
of  that  glory  which  the  first  disciples  beheld  or  contemplated  <i.
This  statement  appears  to  be  incompatible  with  the  supposition
that  the  Human  Soul  of  Jesus,  through  spiritual  contact  with
Which  the  disciples  'beheld'  the  glory  of  the  Eternal  Word,
-was  Itself  not  '  full  of  truth.'     St.  John's  narrative  does  not
admit  of  our  confining  this  *  fulness  of  truth '  to  the  later  days
of  Christ's  ministry,  or  to  the  period  which  followed  His  Re-
surrection.    There  are  then  two  representations  before  us,  one
suggesting  a  limitation  of  knowledge,  the  other  a  falness  of
knowledge  in  the  human  soul  of  Christ.    In  order  to  harmonize
these  statements,  we  need  not  fall  back  upon  the  vulgar  ration-
alistic expedient  of  supposing  that  between  St.  John's  represen-
tation  of  our  Lord's  Person,  and  that  which  is  given  in  the  three
first  Gk)spels,  there  is  an  intrinsic  and  radical  discrepancy.     If
"we  take  St.  John's  account  together  with  that  of  St.  Luke,
might  it  not  seem  that  we  have  here  a  special  instance  of  that
tender  condescension,  by  which  our  Lord  willed  to  place  Him-
self in  a  relation  of  real  sympathy  with  the  various  experiences
of  our  finite  existence )     If  by  an  infused  knowledge  He  was,
even  as  a  Child,  '  full  of  truth,*  yet  that  He  might  enter  with
the  sympathy  of  experience  into  the  various  conditions  of  our
intellectual  life.  He  would  seem  to  have  acquired,  by  the  slow
labour  of  observation  and  inference,  a  new  mastery  over  truths
which  He   already,  in  another  sense,  possessed.      Such  a  co-
existence of  growth  in  knowledge  with  a  possession  of  all  its
ultimate  residts  would  not  be  without  a  parallel  in  ordinary
human  life.     In  moral  matters,  a  living  example  may  teach
with  a  new  power  some  law  of  conduct,  the  truth  of  which  we
have  before  recognised  intuitively.     In  another  field  of  know-
ledge, the  telescope  or  the  theodolite  may  verify  a  result  of
which  we  have  been  previously  informed  by  a  mathematical
calculation  ^     We  can  then  conceive  that  ^'^  reality  of  our

^  St.  Luke  ii.  40 :  irKripoi/itvop  (ro<l>las.

P  St.  John  i.  Ia:  vX-fipris  x^^t^os  Kal  aXridflas.

4  Ibid. :  idtcuraixeda  r^v  h6^av  avrov,

^  In  the  same  way,  every  man*s  stock  of  opinions  is  of  a  twofold  character ;
it  is  partly  traditional  and  partly  acquired  by  personal  investigation  and
thought.  The  traditionally  received  element  in  the  mind,  may  be  held,
>  as  such,  with  the  utmost  tenacity;  and  yet  there  is  a  real  'increase  in
vni]  H  h


466    Our  Lord's  statement  in  St.  Mark  xiii.  32,

Iiord'fi  intollectoal  development  would  not  necegMrily  be  id-
GOnedBteut  with  the  BimaltaiieoTiB  perfectioa  of  His  knowledge.
Aa  Man,  He  might  have  received  an  infused  knowled^  of  all
truth,  and  yet  have  taken  possession  through  experience  and  in
detail  of  that  which  was  latent  in  Hi  a  mind,  in  order  to  corre-
spond with  the  intellectual  conditions  of  ordinary  hnintui  life.
But,  let  UB  suppose  that  this  explanation  be  rejected  ■,  that  St.
John's  statement  be  leil  out  of  sight,  and  that  St.  Lake's  woidi
be  understood  to  imply  simply  that  our  Lord's  Human  Soul  ac-
quired knowledge  which  It  did  not  in  any  sense  possess  before.
Does  even  any  such  '  increase  in  wisdom '  as  this  during  Christ's
early  years,  warrant  our  Baying  that,  in  the  days  of  His  miii-
istry,  our  Lord  was  still  ignorant  of  the  real  claims  and  worth
of  the  Jewish  Scriptures )  Does  it  enable  us  to  go  further,  and
to  maintain  that,  when  He  made  definite  statements  on  the
subject.  He  was  both  the  victim  and  the  propagator  of  serious
error  %  Surely  such  inferences  are  not  less  unwarranted  by  the
statements  of  Scripture  than  they  are  destructive  of  Chnst's
character  and  authority  as  a  teacher  of  truth  1

a.  But  it  may  be  pleaded  that  our  Lord,  in  declaring  His
ignorance  of  the  day  of  the  last  judgment,  does  positively  assigii
a  specified  limit  to  the  knowledge  actually  possessed  by  His
Human  Soul  during  His  ministry.  '  Of  that  day,'  He  says,  '  and
that  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no,  not  the  angels  which  are  is
heaven,  neither  the  Son,  but  the  Father  ','    *  If  these  words,'  you

wudom,'  when  this  element  ia,  bo  to  epeak,  taken  pcMseedon  <rf  a  Woood
time  by  meanB  of  peraoDal  inquiiy  uid  reBection.  This  is,  of  oodim,
a  ver^  remote  mjialogj  to  tfae  Sacred  Subjeat  disoaBsed  in  the  text,  bot
it  nuy  Berre  to  Bu^eat  how  tlie  facts  of  an  inftiBed  knowledge  and  a  ml
'wpoixautt  ao^^  in  our  Lord's  Human  Soul  ma;  bavs  been  compatible.
•  The  foUowing  remarks  of  Dr.  Klee  will  be  read  with  interest.  Dogmstik,

5 .511:  'Der  Menschheit  Chriati  kami  keine  abeolnte  Tollendnng  nod
mperfeotibilitat  der  Eckenntnisa  von  Anfong  ui  zugelegt  werden,  vol
dum  Christng  im  Eingange  in  seine  Glorie  in  Bezug  auf  sie  nnvo-heiriiclil
eeblieben  ware,  wu  nicht  wohl  angenotnmen  werden  kann ;  weil  ttraa
dann  in  Chriato  eine  wabihafte  AJlwisBenheit  uigenomBtea  werden  mUsMB,
was  mit  der  menachlichen  Nator  und  dem  menschlichen  Willen  aieht  mU
an  vereinbaren  ist ;  und  wenn  Einige  sich  damit  belfen  sn  konnen  glaubten,
dan  diege  Allwisaenheit  immer  nur  eine  auB  Gnade  roi^etheilte  wire,  n
ist  dag^en  lu  bemerken,  dasB  die  Menschheit  dann  aos  Gnsde  aacli  die
andem  gottlichen  Attribute,  i.  B.  Allmacht  baben  kdnnte,  nikd  wenn  mu
dieses  mit  der  Gntge^nng  aiu  dem  Felde  m  schUgen  glanbt,  dasi  die
AUmaoht  die  Qottheit  selbst,  mithin  absolnt  incommunindjel  ist,  so  miiv
'■widert  werden,  dasa  die  Allwissanh^t  ebenso  Gottea  Wesen  sdbst,  ta^
uittheilbar  iat.'
St.  Mark  xiii.  31 :  »pl  »  tris  tiffpas  ixttmis  hI  rqi  2p«,  sMdi  tUf,
ii  Sryyt^M  ol  ir  ospary,  oMi  i  TJit,  ti  ni  i  IJnr^

[lict.


how  understood  by  great  Western  Fathers*     46  7

urge,  '  do  not  refer  to  His  ignorance  as  God,  they  must  refer  to
His  ignorance  in  the  only  other  possible  sense,  that  is  to  say,  to
HIb  ignorance  as  Man.'

Of  what  nature  then  is  the  *  ignorance '  to  which  our  Lord
alludes  in  this  much-controverted  text  %  Is  it  a  real  matter-of-
fact  ignorance,  or  is  it  an  ignorance  which  is  only  ideal  and
hypothetical  %  Is  it  an  ignorance  to  which  man,  as  man,  is  na-
turally subject,  but  to  which  the  Soul  of  Christ,  tiie  Perfect  Man,
was  not  subject^  since  His  human  intelligence  was  always  illu-
minated by  an  infused  omniscience  ^ )  or  is  it  an  economical  as
distinct  from  a  real  ignorance  1  Is  it  the  ignorance  of  the
Teacher,  who  withholds  from  His  disciples  a  knowledge  which
He  actually  possesses,  but  which  it  is  not  for  their  advantage
to  acquire  ^1  or  is  it  the  ignorance  which  is  compatible  with
implicit  knowledge  ?  Does  Christ  implicitly  know  the  date  of
the  day  of  judgment,  yet,  that  He  may  rebuke  the  forwardness
of  His  disciples,  does  He  refrain  from  contemplating  that  which
is  potentially  within  the  range  of  His  mental  vision  ?  Is  He
deliberately  turning  away  His  gaze  from  the  secrets  which  are
open  to  it,  and  which  a  coarse,  earthly  curiosity  would  have
greedily  and  quickly  investigated  y  ?

With  our  eye  upon  the  literal  meaning  of  our  Lord's  words,
must  we  not  hesitate  to  accept  any  of  these  explanations  %  It  is
indeed  true  that  to  many  very  thoughtful  and  saintly  minds,
the  words,  'neither  the  Son,'  have  not  appeared  to  imply  any

*  ignorance '  in  the  Son,  even  as  Man.  But  antiquity  does  not
furnish  any  decisive  consent  in  favour  of  this  belief;  and  it
might  seem,  however  involuntarily,  to  put  an  undue  strain  upon
the  plain  sense  of  the  passage.  There  is  no  suf&cient  ground
for  questioning  the  correctness  of  the  text^ ;  and  here,  as  always,

*  if  a  literal  explanation  will  stand,  the  furthest  from  the  letter
is  commonly  the  worst.'  If  elsewhere,  in  the  course  of  these
lectures,  we  have  appealed  to  the  literal  force  of  the  great  texts  in

■  St.  Greg.  Magn.  Epist.  lib.  z.  39.  ad  Eulog. :  '  J»  naturft  quidem  hu-
manitatis  novit  diem  et  horam  judidi,  sed  tamen  hunc  non  ex  nature
hnmanitatig  novit.*

^  St.  Aug.  de  Trin.  i.  la :  'Hoc  enim  nescit,  quod  nescientes  facit,  id  est,
quod  non  ita  sciebat  ut  tunc  diBcipulis  indicaret.*  St.  Ambros.  de  Fide,  v.
§  222  :  'Nostrum  assumpsit  affectum,  ut  nostrft  ignoratione  nescire  se
diceret,  non  quia  aliquid  ipse  nesciret.*  St.  Hil.  de  Trin.  ix.  62.  See  the
passages  accumulated  by  Dr.  Newman,  Select  Treatises  of  St.  Athanasius,
p.  464,  note/,  lib.  Fath.

^  So  Lange,  Leben  Jesn,  ii.  5,  p.  1280.

*  St.Ambr.  de  Fid.  v.  $  193:  'Primum  veteres  non  habent  codices
CrTsed,  quia  nee  Filius  scit.*

vm]  H  h  2


468     Our  Lord's  statement  in  St.  Mark  xiil.  32,

St.  John  and  St.  Paul,  as  yielding  a  witnees  to  the  Catholic  doc-
trine, can  we  sabetitute  for  the  literal  sense  of  the  passage  before
ns,  a  sense  which,  to  say  the  least,  is  not  that  stiggested  \ij  the
letter )  If  then  we  should  understand  that  our  Lord  in  Bis
Human  Soul  was,  at  the  time  of  His  speaking,  actaally  igDOnnt
of  the  day  of  the  last  judgment,  we  shall  find  onrselyea  sheltered
by  Fathers  of  unquestioned  orthodoxy^.  St.  Irenieus  discOTei?
in  our  Lord's  Human  ignorance  a  moral  argument  against  ttie
intellectual  self-assertion  of  his  own  Gnostic  contemporaries'';
while  he  attributes  Omniscience  to  the  Divine  Nature  of  Christ
in  the  clearest  terms.  St.  Athanasius  insists  that  the  explanation
which  be  gives,  restricting  our  Lord's  ignorance  to  His  Hmtuiii
Soul,  is  a  matter  in  whit^  the  faithiiil  are  well  instructed'.
He  is  careful  to  assert  again  and  again  our  Lord's  omniscience
as  God  the  Word ;  he  attributes  Christ's  '  ignorance '  as  Mui
to  the  condescending  lore  by  which  He  willed  to  be  like  onto
us  in  all  things  \  and  compares  it,  accordingly,  to  His  hnnger

■  Ele«  Bay* :  '  It  wu  impostrible,  in  virtue  of  the  Hypostatio  Unin,  to
ascribe  to  tie  Hnman  Soiil  of  ChriBt  an  obeoluta  scieitce  and  >  JP"'*^
knowledge.  On  this  subject^  however,  there  is  a  very  marked  diffemue
between  the  Fatken.'  DcgmengoBohiclite,  ii.  4. 7.  OftheFatheredtedbj
KJee  the  majoiitj  aaent  a  limitation  of  knowle(u;e  in  onr  Lord's  Human  SooL

**  St.  lien.  adv.  Hier.  ii.  iS,  6 :  ■  Imttion&binter  kutem  inflati,  ■odidta'
inenarrabilia  Dei  myeteriA  Htnre  voe  dicitia ;  qnandoqaideni  et  Dominnt,  ipn
FiliOB  Dm,  ipsniu  judioii  diem  et  horam  conoeeait  scire  solum  Patrem,  miiii'
festb  dicens,  "  De  die  autem  illft  et  \aA  nemo  ecit,  neqae  PilioH,  aed  Fater
BoIaB."  (Marc.  liii.  31.)  Si  igitur  acientiam  diei  illius  Filing  non  erabmt
refeire  ad  Patrem,  sed  dixit  quod  venim  est ;  neque  nos  erubescamns,  que
sunt  in  qutestionibus  majora  seoundum  nos,  reservare  Deo.  Nemo  enitn
super  Magiatmm  est.'  That  St.  IrenEeoe  is  here  referritig  to  onr  IjstSi
humanity  is  clear  from  the  appeal  to  Hia  example.  Of  His  Divinity  hr
saya  (ii.  1%,  •f):  'Spiritua  SalvatoriB,  qni  in  eo  est,  scrutatur  omnii^  el
■Ititudines  Dei.'    Cf.  Bull,  Def.  Hd.  Nio.  ii.  5,  8.

*  St.  Athan.  contr.  Aiian.  Orat.  iii.  c  45 :    ol  Et  ^ixiy^parrai  tau  yfr't-

irtpor  itiicpi;!,  Sri  r&r  kvSpAwuy  fSiiv  ion  ^i  trfmir,
yirttiiraTO,tv^S,ri,apKai&il\tycr.  Dr.  Mill  nMBti
when  even  an  Athanasios  could  speak  (with  iie
aattiioD  of  human  knowledge  in  the  iDCamtte
dIc^  of  later  times  is  entitled  to  cenaun  the  Kati-
laching  His  Divine  Personality .'    On  the  Natun  at

H  \(yar  in  rip  tbryyikCif  npl  roS  Kari  fh  irBpiwao
'  4  SjKt'  Saiarir  aov  rhv  Tldr-  KiKos  itrrir  Sri  ml  t^
t  &paP  Sn  1x11/  A6yos  yivdfirmj,  £pt  Si  &y0p«eirof  iyrvi'
fyrotiPf  Kot  /uEAiirra  tovto-  dAAA  koI  rovro  rTjs  ^lAor-
NiJ.  twiiiii  yhp  yfyartr  iySpmroi,  bbk  iravrxirfr''  I"
'a*  tlwfii,  oiK  iJSii,  Ira  I(({p  Iti  <IMi  £t  8(ii  I7TH'

[leci.


explained  by  SS,  AtJtanasius  and  Cyril  Alex.  469

and  thirst «.  *To  whom,'  exclaims  St.  Gregory  Nazianzen,  'can
it  be  a  matter  of  doubt  that  Christ  has  a  knowledge  of  that  hour
as  God,  but  says  that  He  is  ignorant  of  it  as  Man^?  *  St.  Cyril
of  Alexandria  argues  that  our  Lord's  '  ignorance '  as  Man  is  in
keeping  with  the  whole  economy  of  the  Incarnation.  As  God,
Christ  did  know  the  day  of  judgment ;  but  it  was  consistent
with  the  law  of  self-hunuliation  prescribed  by  His  infinite  love
that  He  should  assume  all  the  conditions  of  real  humanity,  and
therefore,  with  the  rest,  a  limitation  of  knowledge.  There  would
be  no  reasonable  ground  for  offence  at  that  which  was  only  a
consequence  of  the  Divine  Incarnation  «.  You  will  remark,  my
brethren,  the  significance  of  such  a  judgment  when  advanced  by
this  great  father,  the  uncompromising  opponent  of  Nestorian
error,  the  strenuous  assertor  of  the  Hypostatic  Union,  the  chief

aoLpKiKws,  o^K  eXfyrtKt  yovf,  ovSl  6  Tibs  rod  0€ov  otSev,  tva  fi^  7}  BeSrris  ayvo-
ovaa  <pcdvrirou'  dAA*  air\cos,  *  ohSh  6  Tlos,*  %va  rov  i^  &,vdp<&ita>y  yeyofi^yuv  Tlov
17  &yvoia  ^.

*  St.  Athan.  contr.  Arian.  Orat.  iii.  o.  46 :  &(nr€p  ykp  Ih^Opttiros  yeySfitvos
fierh  avdpilffvcoy  ireipq,  Kcd  $ii|<$  Ktd  ircio'xei,  odrws  fieri,  fikv  ray  kvdpdnrwv  &s
&y9puwos  ohx  olSe,  Bi'iK&s  8^  4y  r^  Harp\  tiv  A6y os  K(d  ^o<pia  olfif,  icol  ohB^y
iariy  h  hryvofi,    Cf.  ad  Serap.  ii.  9.

'  St.  Greg.  Naz.  Orat.  xzx.  15 :  Koiroi  irm  hyyou  rt  rStv  6yrwv  ri  ^wpla  6
woiTir^s  ray  cu<&ywv,  6  ffvyreKcirr^s  Koi  fitrawoirir^Sf  rh  iripas  r&v  yfyofi4ytov ;
.  .  •  ^  wcuriy  eH^riXoy,  Bri  yiy^axti  fi^y,  &5  Sebs,  kyvouy  d4  ipniffiy,  Sts  HyBpoftros,
6,v  ris  rb  (paiySfityoy  x^p'^^  '''^^  yoov/i4yov ; .  ...  &ffrt  r^y  &yy6iay  vwo\afi»
fidyeiv  4v\  rh  €V(r€fi4<rr€poyf  r<p  ivBpomivtf,  fii,  rf  Sfl^  ravrriy  \oyi(oix4yovs,

t  St.  Cyril.  Alex.  Thesaurus,  Op.  torn.  y.  p.  2ai :  &(nr€p  oZv  trvyicex^^fcey
^avrbv  &5  liydpairov  y€y6fifyoy  /icrck  dyBpt^wy  koX  irtiv^y  koH  dix^fyy  icol  rh  &\Aci
T<£<rx€iv  Sirep  ^ptfrcu  T€p\  a^ov,  rbv  canby  S)}  rp6iroy  ajc6XovOoy  fi^  ffKoyBoKl^f'
aOou  Khy  &s  fkvQpoynos  A^7]7  fierh  kyBptSneay  ayyotTy,  Srt  r^y  avr^y  tj/juv  4ip6p^ff€
adpKa'  o75€  fihv  yhp  cbs  'io<pla  icol  Aiyos  &v  ^i'  Xiarpl*  fi^  €id4yai  94  (fyrjai  St*  rjfJLOS
Kcd  fieff  fffi&y  &s  (iyBpairos,  But  see  the  whole  discussion  of  the  bearing  of
St.  Mark  xiii.  5  a  upon  the  Homoousion  (Thesaurus,  pp.  a  1 7-u  24).  Certainly
St.  Cyril  refers  to  the  oiKoyofiia,  and  he  speaks  of  Christ's  '  saying  that  He
did  not  know,  on  our  account  and  of  His  professing  not  to  know  *  humanly.*
But  this  language  does  not  amount  to  saying  that  Christ  really  did  know,  aa
Man,  while  for  reasons  of  His  own,  which  were  connected  with  His  love  and
ipiXcafBponria,  He  said  He  knew  not.  St.  Cyril's  mind  appears  to  be,  that  our
I^rd  did  know  as  Grod,  but  in  His  love  He  assimied  all  that  belongs  to  real
manhood,  and,  therefore,  actual  limitation  of  knowledge.  The  word  olKoyofiia
does  not  seem  to  mean  here  simply  a  gracious  or  wise  arraugement,  but
the  Incarnation,  considered  as  involving  Christ's  submission  to  human
limitations.  The  Latin  translator  renders  it  '  administrationi  sive  Incar-
nation!.* St.  Cyr.  Op.  V.  p.  a  18.  St.  Cyril  does  not  say  that  Christ  really
did  know  as  Man ;  he  must  have  said  so,  considering  the  bearing  of  wa
argument,  had  he  believed  it.  He  thus  states  the  principle  which  he  kept
in  view :  oSt»  yhp  cKcurroy  ray  \eyoix4yay  4y  ry  oticei^  t<£|€i  Keitreraf  olir^
ray  ^(Ta  irpeicei  yvfiy^  r^  liAy(p  Kara<p€poin4yay  cis  rb  kvBp^iyoyf  oUre  fi^y  rm
aydpairlyay  aya$aiy6yruy  €tf  rby  rqs  Btdrriros  \6yoy,    Thes.  p.  2^^,

vin]


470  The  heresy  of  the  Agnoeta.

inheritor  of  all  that  is  most  characteristio  in  the  theolc^cal
mind  of  St.  Athanasios.  It  is  of  course  true  that  a  different  belief
was  already  widely  received  within  the  Church :  it  is  enough  to
point  to  the  *  retractation '  of  Leporios,  to  which  St.  Augustine
was  one  of  the  subscribing  bishops  \  But  although  a  contrary
judgment  subsequently  predominated  in  the  West,  it  is  certain
that  the  leading  opponents  of  Arianism  did  not  shrink  from  re-
cognising a  limitailon  of  knowledge  in  Christ's  Human  Soul,  and
that  they  appealed  to  His  own  words  as  a  warrant  for  doing  so^
<  But  have  we  not  here,'  you  ask,  *  albeit  disguised  under  and
reconunended  by  the  sanction  of  great  names,  the  old  heresy  of
the  AgnoetsB?'  No.  The  AgnoetsB  attributed  ignorance  not
merely  to  our  Lord's  Human  Soul,  but  to  the  Eternal  Word.
A  sect  of  the  Monophysites,  they  imagined  a  confusion  of
Natures  in  Christ,  after  the  Eutychian  pattern,  and  then  attri-
buted ignorance  to  that  Divine  Nature  into  Which  His  Human
Nature,  as  they  held,  was  absorbed  k.  They  were  thus,  on  this
point,  in  agreement  with  the  Arians :  while  Eulogius  of
Alexandria,  who  wrote  against  them,  admitted  that  Catholic
fathers  before  him  had  taught  that,  as  Man,  Christ  had  been
subject  to  a  certain  limitation  of  knowledge  \

^  Quoted  by  Petayins,  De  Inoam.  zi. ;  e.  i,  $  14.  Leporius  appears  to
have  answered  the  Arian  objections  by  restricting  the  ignorance  to  oar
Lard*s  Human  Soul,  after  the  manner  of  St.  Athanasius.  He  retracts  as
follows :  '  X7t  autem  et  hinc  nihil  cuiquam  in  suspicione  derelinquaiDy  tunc
dizi,  immb  ad  objecta  respondi,  Dominum  nostrum  Jesum  Ghristom  secmb
dum  hominem  ignorare:  sed  nunc  non  solum  dicere  non  prsesmno,  verom
etiam  priorem  anathematize  prolatam  in  h&c  parte  sententiam.*  Ijepoxius,
however,  seems  really  to  have  anticipated  Nestorius  in  teaching  a  complete
separation  of  our  Lord*s  Two  Natures.    Elee,  Dogmengesch.  ii.  4.  4.

'  Compare  Bi^op  Forbes  on  Nic.  Greed,  p.  146,  and  ed.   And  see  St.  HiL
in  Matt.  Comm.  c.  26,  n.  4 ;  Theodoret  in  Ps.  xy.  §  7,  quoted  by  Klee.

.  ^  See  Suicer  in  toc.  'ATvorrrol,  i.  p.  65 :  'Ha  docebant  divinam  Chiisti
naturam  (hanc  enim  solam  post  Unionem  agnoscebant,  tanquam  abeorpta
esset  planb  humana),  qusedam  ignor&sse,  ut  horam  extremi  judicii.*  Sulogios
of  Alexandria,  who  wrote  against  them,  denied  any  actual  limitation  <^
knowledge  in  Christ's  Manhood,  but  admitted  that  earlier  Fathers  bad
taught  ^8,  irpbs  r^v  r&y  *ApeicafS)V  fjuxviow  6.VTi<p€p6ix€voi ;  but,  as  he  thinks,
because  olKovofiucdortpov  ihoKlfxeuray  iwl  rris  iiy6ponr6T7jro5  ravra  it>4pctp  %
Tapaxu>p€iy  iKfivovs  fA€64Xx€iv  ravra  Kark  'rrjs  Be6r^ro5,  Apud  Photiom,
Cod.  230,  ed.  Bekker.  p.  284,  6,  sub  fin.  Klee  distingmshes  between  the
teaching  of  those  Fathers  who  denied  that  the  Human  Soul  of  Christ
possessed  unlimited  knowledge,  and  that  of  the  Agnoetse,  who  'speaking
of  the  Person  of  Christ  without  any  limitations,'  maintained  that  He  did
not  know  the  day  of  judgment.     Dogmengeschichte,  ii.  4.  §  7.

^  It  is  remarkable  that '  die  Ansicht  dass  Christi  MenscUieit  gleich  nadi
der  Vereinigung  mit  dem  Logos  Alles  wusste,  als  Irrthum  dee  Arnold  yon

[  UBCT.


Omniscience  and  limited  knowledge.       471

*  At  any  rate,'  you  rejoin,  *if  our  Lord's  words  are  to  be  taken
literally,  if  they  are  held  to  mean  that  the  knowledge  of  His
Human  Soul  is  in  any  degi^ee  limited,  are  we  not  in  danger  of
Nestorian  error  1  Does  not  this  conjunction  of  "  knowledge  "  and
"  ignorance  "  in  one  Person,  and  with  respect  to  a  single  subject,
dissolve  the  unity  of  the  God-man  ™  1  Is  not  this  intellectual
dualism  inconsistent  with  any  conception  we  can  form  of  a  single
personality  %  Cannot  we  understand  the  indisposition  of  later
theologians  to  accept  the  language  of  St.  Athanasius  and  others
without  an  explanation,  even  although  a  sense  which  it  does  not
of  itself  suggest  is  thereby  forced  upon  it  % '

The  question  to  be  considered,  my  brethren,  is  whether  such
an  objection  has  not  a  wider  scope  than  you  intend.  Is  it  not
equally  valid  against  other  and  undisputed  contrasts  between
the  Divine  and  Human  Natures  of  the  Incarnate  Son  9  For
example,  as  God,  Christ  is  omnipresent ;  as  Man,  He  is  present
at  a  particular  point  in  space  ^.  Do  you  say  that  this,  however
mysterious,  is  more  conceivable  than  the  co-existence  of  igno-
rance and  knowledge,  with  respect  to  a  single  subject  in  a  single
personality  1  Let  me  then  ask  whether  this  co-existence  of  igno-
rance and  knowledge  is  mor^  mysterious  than  a  co-existence  of
absolute  blessedness  and  intense  suffering?  If  the  Scriptural
words  which  describe  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  are  understood
literally,  without  establishing  Nestorianism ;  why  are  we  in
danger  of  Nestorianism  if  we  understand  Him  to  be  speaking  of
His  Manhood,  when  He  asserts  that  the  Son  is  ignorant  of  the
day  of  judgment  %  If  Jesus^  as  Man,  did  not  enjoy  the  Divine
attribute  of  perfect  blessedness,  yet  without  prejudice  to  His
full  possession  of  it,  as  God ;  why  could  He  not,  in  like  manner,
as  Man,  be  without  the  Divine  attribute  of  perfect  knowledge  1
If  as  He  knelt  in  Gethsemane,  He  was  in  one  sphere  of  existence
All-blessed,  and  in  another  '  sore  amazed,  very  heavy,  sorrowful
even  unto  death ; '  might  He  not  with  equal  truth  be  in  the

Yillanova  1309  fbrmlich  vemrtlieilt  worden.'  Elee,  Dogmatik,  p.  511.
Arnold  attempted  to  maintain  that  his  opinion  was  a  necessary  consequence
of  the  Hypostatic  Union.  '  Quantum  cit6  anima  Christi  fait  unita  Di^ini-
tati,  statim  ipsa  anima  scivit  omnia,  qu8B  Deus  scit ;  quia  alias,  ut  dicebat,
non  fdisset  cum  eSL  una  persona^  prsecipu^  quia  scire  est  circumstantia  per-
tinens  ad  suppositum  individuale,  et  non  ad  naturam.*  Eimeric.  XHreot.
inquis.  ii.  qu.  ii.  qu.  by  Klee,  Dogmengesch.  ii.  4,  8.

™  Stier,  Beden  Jesu  in  Matt.  xxlv.  36.

^  Scotus  Erigena  first  taught  the  ubiquity  of  our  Lord's  Manhood ;  in
more  recent  times  it  was  prominently  put  forward  by  Luther,  as  an  expla-
nation of  his  teaching  on  the  Eucharist.    See  Hooker,  E.  P.  ▼.  55.  a- 7.

vm]


472  Superhuman  range  of  our  LorcTs  knowledge.

one  Omniscient,  and  in  the  other  subject  to  limitations  of  know-
ledge %  The  difficulty  ®  is  common  to  all  the  contrasts  of  the
Divine  Incarnation ;  but  these  contrasts,  while  they  enhance  our
sense  of  our  Lord's  loye  and  condescension,  do  not  destroy  our
apprehension  of  the  Personal  Unity  of  the  Incarnate  Christ  p.
His  Single  Personality  has  two  spheres  of  existence ;  in  the  one
It  is  all-blessed,  undying,  and  omniscient ;  in  the  other  It  meets
with  pain  of  mind  and  body,  with  actual  death,  and  with  a  cor-
respondent liability  to  a  limitation  of  knowledge.  No  such  limit-
ation, we  may  be  sure,' can  interfere  with  the  completeness  of  His
redemptive  office.  It  cannot  be  supposed  to  involve  any  ignorance
of  that  which  the  Teacher  and  Saviour  of  mankind  should  know;
while  yet  it  suffices  to  place  Him  as  Man  in  a  perfect  sympathy
with  the  actual  conditions  of  the  mental  life  of  His  brethren  4.

If  then  this  limitation  of  our  Lord's  human  knowledge  be
admitted,  to  what  does  the  admission  lead  %  It  leads,  properly
speaking,  to  nothing  beyond  itself.  It  amounts  to  this :  that  at  the
particular  time  of  His  speaking,  the  Human  Soul  of  Christ  was
restricted  as  to  Its  range  of  knowledge  in  one  particular  direction.

For  it  is  certain  from  Scripture  fiiat  our  Lord  was  constantly
giving  proofs,  during  His  earthly*life,  of  an  altogether  super-
human range  of  knowledge.  There  was  not  merely  in  Him  the
quick  and  penetrating  discernment  of  a  very  holy  soul, — ^not
merely  *that  unction  from  the  Holy  One'  whereby  Christians
instinctively  'know  all  things'  that  concern  their  salvation.    It

®  Bishop  Ellicottj  in  Aids  to  Faith,  p.  445 :  'Is  there  really  any  greats
difficulty  in  such  a  passage  [as  St.  Mark  ziii.  32]  than  in  John  xi.  33,  35,
where  we  are  told  that  those  holy  cheeks  were  still  wet  with  human  tears^
while  the  loud  Voice  was  crying,  "  Lazarus,  come  forth  I  '*  *

V  See  Leibnitz's  reply  to  Wissowatius,  quoted  by  Lessing,  SammtL
Schrifb.  iz.  2*1*1  \  'Potest  quis  ex  nostrft  hypothesi  simul  esse  ille  qui  nescit
diem  judicii,  n^npe  homo,  et  ille  qui  est  Deus  Altissimus.  Quse  hypothesis
nostra,  quod  idem  simul  possit  esse  Deus  et  homo,  quamdiu  non  evertitur,
tamdiu  contrarium  argumentum  petit  principium.'

4  See  Klee,  Dogmatik,  p.  51 1 :  '  Auch  das  kann  nicht  gesagt  werden,  dass
die  menschliche  Natur,  wenn  sie  nicht  absolut  voUkommen  imd  imperfectibel
ist,  dann  mit  XJnwissenheit  behaffcet  ist;  denn  nicht-allwissend  ist  nicht
unwissend,  sonst  war  Adam  vor  seinem  FaJle  schon,  und  sind  die  Engel  und
Heiligen  in  ihrer  Glorie  immerfort  in  der  XJnwissenheit.  XJnwissenheit  ist
Negation  des  nothwendigen  und  ziemenden  Wissens,  und  solche  ist  in  der
Menschheit  Ghristi  nicht,  in  welche  die  ihr  verbundene  Gottheit  alles  zu
ihrem  Berufe  gehorige  und  durch  sie  alles  zmn  Heile  der  Menschheit  ge-
horige  tiberstromte.  Darum  war  auch  die  Steigerung  der  Wissenschaft  der
Menschheit  keine  Erlosung  derselben,  und  fallt  der  Einwand,  dass,  wenn
die  Menschheit  etwas  nicht  gewusst  hatte,  sie  eine  erlosungsbedtucftige
gewesen  ware,  was  doch  nicht  angenommen  werden  konne,  weg.'


••*  J


Superhuman  rangeofChrist^s  knowledgeasMan.  47


'y


was  emphatically  a  knowledge  of  hard  matters  of  fact,  not
revealed  to  Him  by  the  senses,  and  beyond  the  reach  of  sense.
Thus  He  knows  the  exact  coin  which  will  be  found  in  the  mouth
of  the  first  fish  which  His  apostle  will  presently  take'.  He
bases  His  discourse  on  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  on
an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  secret  communings  in  which  His
conscience-stricken  disciples  had  indulged  on  the  road  to  Caper-
naum B.  He  gives  particular  instructions  to  the  two  disciples
as  to  the  finding  of  the  ass  on  which  He  will  make  His  entry
into  Jerusalem  *.  He  is  perfectly  cognizant  of  the  secret  plot-
tings  of  the  traitor,  although  no  human  informant  had  disclosed
them  ".  Nor  is  this  knowledge  supematurally  communicated  at
the  moment ;  it  is  the  result  of  an  actual  supra-sensuous  sight
of  that  which  He  describes.  *  Before  that  Philip  called  thee,'
He  says  to  Nathanael,  *  when  thou  wast  under  the  fig-tree,  I  saw
thee^.'  Do  you  compare  this  to  the  knowledge  of  secrets
ascribed  to  Elishay,  to  Daniel «,  to  St.  Peter  *1  In  these  in-
stances, as  eminently  in  that  of  Daniel,  the  secret  was  revealed
to  the  soul  of  the  prophet  or  apostle.  In  the  case  of  Christ  we
hear  of  no  such  revelation ;  He  speaks  of  the  things  of  heaven
with  a  calm  familiarity,  which  is  natural  to  One  Who  knows
them  as  beholding  them  *  in  Himself  b,*

Indeed,  our  Lord's  knowledge  embraced  two  districts,  each
of  which  really  lies  open  only  to  the  Eye  of  the  Most  High.
We  will  not  dwell  on  His  knowledge  of  the  unsuspected  future,
a  knowledge  inherent  in  Him,  as  it  was  imparted  to  those
prophets  in  whom  His  Spirit  had  dwelt.  We  will  not  insist  on
His  knowledge  of  a  strictly  contingent  futurity,  such  as  is
involved  in  His  positive  assertion  that  Tyre  and  Sidon  would
have  repented  of  their  sins,  if  they  had  enjoyed  the  opportunities
of  Chorazin  -and  Bethsaida  ^ ;  although  such  knowledge  as  this,
considering  the  vast  survey  of  motives  and  circumstances  which
it  implies,  rrmst  be  strictly  proper  to  God  alone.  But  He  knew
the  secret  heart  of  man,  and  He  knew  the  hidden  thought  and
purpose  of  the  Most  High  God.  Such  a  'discemer'  was  He
*  of  the  thoughts  and  intents'  of  human  hearts <^,  so  truly  did  His

»  St.  Matt.  xvii.  a;.

*  St.  Luke  iz.  47 :  tScbv  r^v  ^laKoyuriJubv  r^s  Kop^las  airSov,
^  St.  Matt.  zxi.  2  ;  St.  Mark  zi.  a ;  St.  Luke  xiz.  30.

"  St.  John  xiii.  11.  *  Ibid.  i.  49.  ^  a  Kings  vi.  9,  3a.

*  Dan.  ii.  19.  •  Acts  v.  3.  *>  St.  John  vi.  61 :  h  kam^
'^  St.  Matt.  zi.  ai.

^  Heb.  iy.  la :  Kpiruths  ivSv/i-fja-^wv  icol  iyvoiQv  KopSlas,

vm]


474     Superhuman  range  of  Chrisfs  knowledge.

Apocalyptic  title,  the  *  Searcher  of  the  reins  and  hearts®,'  belong
to  Him  in  the  days  of  His  historical  manifestation,  that  *  He
needed  not  that  any  should  testify  to  Him  of  men,  for  He  knew
what  was  in  man  V  This  was  not  a  result  of  His  taking  careful
note  of  peculiarities  of  action  and  character  manifested  to  the
eye  by  those  around  Him,  but  of  His  '  perceiving  in  His  Spirit'
and  'knowing  in  Himself  s^'  the  unuttered  reasonings  and  yoli-
tions  which  were  taking  shape,  moment  by  moment,  within  the
secret  souls  of  men,  just  as  clearly  as  He  saw  physical  facts  not
ordinarily  appreciated  except  by  sensuous  perception.  This  was
the  conviction  of  His  apostles.  *  We  are  sure,'  they  said^  '  that
Thou  knowest  all  things  V  *  Lord,  Thou  knowest  all  things,'
cries  St.  Peter,  *  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee  *.*  Yet  more,
in  the  Eternal  Father  Jesus  encounters  no  impenetrable  mys-
teries^ for  Jesus  no  clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him,
nor  is  His  way  in  the  sea,  nor  His  path  in  the  deep  waters,  nor
His  footsteps  unknown.  On  the  contrary,  our  Lord  reciprocates
the  Father's  knowledge  of  Himself  by  an  equivalent  knowledge
of  the  Father.  *  As  the  Father  knoweth  Me,  even  so  know  I
the  Father  V  *No  Man  knoweth  Who  the  Son  is,  but  the
Father ;  and  Who  the  Father  is,  but  the  Son,  and  he  to  whom
the  Son  will  reveal  Him  1.'  Even  if  our  Lord  should  be  speak-
ing, in  this  passage,  primarily  at  least,  of  His  Divine  omniscience,
He  is  also  plainly  speaking  of  a  knowledge  infused  into  and
possessed  by  His  Human  Soul,  and  thus  His  words  supply  the
true  foil  to  His  statement  respecting  the  day  of  judgment.  If
that  statement  be  construed  literally,  it  manifestly  describes,  not
the  normal  condition  of  His  Human  Litelligence,  but  an  excep-
tional restriction.  For  the  Gospel  history  implies  that  the
knowledge  infused  into  the  Human  Soul  of  Jesus  was  ordinarily
and  practically  equivalent  to  omniscience.  *  We  may  conjecture,*
says  Hooker,  'how  the  powers  of  that  Soul  are  illuminated,
Which,  being  so  inward  unto  God,  cannot  choose  but  be  privy
unto  all  things  which  God  worketh,  and  must  therefore  of
necessity  be  endued  with  knowledge  so  far  forth  universal,
though  not  with  infinite  knowledge  peculiar  to  Deity  Itself"*.*

*  Bev.  ii.  23.  The  message  from  Jesus  to  each  of  the  angels  of  the  seven
Churches  begins  with  the  word  oi^a,  as  if  in  order  to  remind  these  bishops
of  His  soul-penetrating  omniscience.

'  St.  John  ii.  25 :  ov  XP^^^^  ^^X^^  ^^^  "^^^  ixufnvp4\(rp  irepl  rov  iufOp^ov*
mlnhs  yhp  ^yiraxrKe  rl  ^v  iy  r^  h,vQpdnrtp.  '  St.  Mark  ii.  8  ;  ▼.  30.

*  St.  John  xvi.  30  :  vvv  ot^aficv  Bri  otdas  vdtna,

*  Ibid.  xxi.  1 7 :  Kvpte,  (rh  irdirra  oldas'  <rw  ytvttxTKtis  <ht  <l>i\S  o"f,

^  Ibid.  X.  15.  1  St.  Luke  x.  22.  "»  Sod.  Pol.  v.  54.  7.

[lect.


'«


Limitation  of  knowledge  is  not  fallibility ,    475

St.  Paul's  assertion  that  *  in  Christ  are  hidden  all  the  treasures
of  wisdom  and  knowledge "/  may  practically  he  understood  of
Christ's  earthly  life,  no  less  than  of  His  life  of  glory.  If  then
Sis  Human  Intellect,  flooded  as  it  was  hy  light  streaming  from
His  Deity,  was  denied,  at  a  particular  time,  knowledge  of  the
date  of  one  future  event,  this  may  be  compared  with  that  de-
privation of  the  consolations  of  Deity,  to  which  His  Human
affections  and  wiU  were  exposed  when  He  hung  on  the  Cross.
•  If  *  the  Divine  Wisdom,'  as  Bishop  Bull  has  said,  *  impressed
its  effects  upon  the  Human  Soul  of  Christ  'j^o  temporum  rcUione,
in  the  degree  required  by  particular  occasions  or  emergencies®,'
this  would  be  only  one  application  of  the  principle  recognised
by  St.  Irenseus  and  Theodoret,  and  rendered  feimiliar  to  us  by
Hooker.  *As  the  parts,  degrees,  and  offices  of  that  mystical
administration  did  require,  which  He  voluntarily  undertook,
the  beams  of  Deity  did  in  operation  always  accordingly  restrain
or  enlarge  themselves  p.'  If  we  cannot  specify  the  motive  which
may  have  determined  our  Lord  to  deny  to  His  Human  Soul  at
one  particular  date  tlie  knowledge  of  one  fact ;  we  may  presume
that  it  belonged  to  that  love  which  led  Him  to  become  *  in  all
things  like  unto  His  brethren  Q.'  That  he  was  ever  completely
ignorant  of  aught  else,  or  that  He  was  ignorant  on  this  point  at
any  other  time,  are  inferences  for  which  we  have  no  warrant,
and  which  we  make  at  our  peril.

But  it  is  not  on  this  account  alone  that  our  Lord's  Human
ignorance  of  the  day  of  judgment,  if  admitted,  cannot  be  made
the  premiss  of  an  argument  intended  to  destroy  His  authority,
when  He  sanctions  the  Mosaic  authorship  and  historical  trust-
worthiness of  the  Pentateuch.  That  argument  involves  a  con-
fusion between  limitation  of  knowledge  and  liability  to  error ;
whereas,  plainly  enough,  a  limitation  of  knowledge  is  one  thing,

^  Col.  ii.  $:  iv  f  elai  vavris  ol  Orjixavpci  r^s  ao^as  icat  rijs  yv^idiots
avSfcpwpot,

o  Bull,  Def.  Fid.  Nic.  ii.  5,  8  :  "Quippe  divinam  Sapientiam  menti  hn-
manse  Clunsti  effectus  suos  impressisse  pro  temporum  atione,  Christuinque,
qu^  Homo  fait,  irpoic6if/ou  ao^l(f,  profecisse  sapientia  (Luc.  ii.  52)  adeoque
pro  tempore  suse  dTroffToKrjs,  quo  ist&  scienti&  opus  non  habebat  (this  seems  to
hint  at  more  than  anything  which  the  text  of  the  New  Testament  warrants)
diem  judicii  universalis  ignorare  potuisse,  nemini  sano  absurdum  videbitur.'

P  Hooker,  Eccl.  Pol.  v.  54. 6.  See  Mr.  Keble's  references  from  Theodoret
(Dial.  iii.  t.  4,  pars.  i.  232)  and  St.  Iren.  Hser.  iii.  c.  19.  3.

4  Petavius  ventures  on  a  suggestion,  De  Inc.  lib.  xi.  a.  i  :■  'Fieri  potuit
nt  lUe,  cseteroqui  scientia  perfusus  et  gratia,  hoc  unum  ignoraret  ad
tempus ;  ita  dispensante  Divina  Sapientia,  quo  tolerabiliorem  hominibui
praedicando  faeeret  diei  ejusdem  inscitiam.*

Tin]


476  Recent  assailants  of  the  Pentateuch  make  Our

and  fallibility  is  another.  St.  Paul  says  that  '  we  know  in
part  ^  and  that '  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly  *".'  Yet  St.  Paul
ifi  so  certain  of  the  truth  of  that  which  he  teaches,  as  to  exclaim,
'  If  we  or  an  angel  from  heaven  preach  any  other  Gospel  to  you
than  that  which  we  have  preached  unto  you,  let  him  be
accursed  V  St.  Paul  clearly  believed  in  his  own  infallibility  as
a  teacher  of  religious  truth ;  and  the  Church  of  Christ  has  ever
since  regarded  his  Epistles  as  part  of  an  infallible  literature.
But  it  is  equally  clear  that  St.  Paul  believed  his  knowledge  of
religious  truth  to  be  limited.  Infallibility  does  not  imply  omni-
science, any  more  than  limited  knowledge  implies  error.  Infal-
libility may  be  conferred  on  a  human  teacher  with  very  limited
knowledge,  by  a  special  endowment  preserving  him  from  error.
When  we  say  that  a  teacher  is  infallible,  we  do  not  mean  that
his  knowledge  is  encyclopaedic,  but  merely  that,  when  he  does
teach,  he  is  incapable  of  propounding  as  truth  that  which,  in
point  of  fact,  is  not  true  *.

Now  the  argument  in  question  assumes  that  Christ  our  Lord,
when  teaching  religious  truth,  was  not  merely  fallible,  but
actually  in  serious  error.  If  indeed  our  Lord  had  believed
Himself  to  be  ignorant  of  the  authorship  or  true  character  of
the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  we  may  presume  that  He  would  not
have  fallen  below  the  natural  level  of  ordinary  heathen  honesty,
by  speaking  with  authority  upon  a  subject  with  which  He  was
consciously  unacquainted.  It  is  admitted  that  He  spoke  as
believing  Himself  to  be  teaching  truth.  But  was  He,  in  point
of  fact,  not  teaching  truth  %  Was  that  which  He  believed  to  be
knowledge  nothing  better  than  a  servile  echo  of  contemporary
ignorance?  Was  His  knowledge  really  limited  on  a  subject-
matter,  where  He  was  Himself  unsuspicious  of  the  existence  of
a  limitation  %   Was  He  then  not  merely  deficient  in  information,

*  I  Cop.  xiii.  9 :  ^k  fi4povs  yh.p  yiv^aKOfiey,

*■  Ibid.  ver.  1 2 :  /3X€iro/i€v  yh,p  &pri  5t*  iaSirrpou  iv  tdvlyfiaru

•  Gal.  i.  8,  9.

*•  Of.  Bishop  H.  Browne,  Pentateuch  and  Elohistic  Psalms,  p.  13 :  'Igno-
rance does  not  of  necessity  involve  error.  Of  course  in  our  present  state  of
being,  and  with  our  propensity  to  lean  on  our  wisdom,  ignorance  is  ex-
tremely likely  to  lead  to  error.  But  ignorance  is  not  error :  and  there  is
not  one  word  in  the  Bible  which  could  lead  us  to  suppose  that  our  blessed
Lord  was  liable  to  error  in  any  sense  of  the  word  or  in  any  department
of  knowledge.  I  do  not  say  that  we  have  any  distinct  statements  to  the
contrary,  but  there  is  nothmg  like  a  hint  that  there  was  such  a  liability :
whereas  His  other  human  infirmities,  weakness,  weariness,  sorrow,  fear,
suffering,  temptation,  ignorance,  all  these  are  put  forward  prominently,
and  many  of  them  frequently,'

[  LECT.


k


Lord  both  fallible^  and  a  teacher  of  actual  error.  477

but  fallible ;  not  merely  fallible,  but  actually  in  error  ?  and  has
it  been  reserved  for  the  criticism  of  the  nineteenth  century  to
iset  Him  right  %  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  our  Lord's  state-
ment respecting  the  day  of  judgment  will  not  avail  to  sustain
a  deduction  which  supposes,  not  an  admitted  limitation  of
knowledge,  but  an  unsuspected  self-deception  of  a  character
and  extent  which,  in  the  case  of  a  purely  human  teacher,
would  be  altogether  destructive  of  any  serious  claim  to  teach
substantial  truth™.

Nor  is  this  all.  The  denial  of  our  Lord's  infallibility,  in  the
form  in  which  it  has  come  before  us  of  late  years,  involves  an
unfavourable  judgment,  not  merely  of  His  intellectual  claims,
but  of  the  penetration  and  delicacy  of  His  moral  sense.  This  is
the  more  observable  because  it  is  fatal  to  a  distinction  which
has  been  proieeted,  between  our  Lord's  authority  as  a  teacher  of
spiritual  or  moral  truth,  and  His  authority  when  dealing  with
those  questions  which  enter  into  the  province  of  historical
criticism.  If  in  the  latter  sphere  He  is  said  to  have  been  liable
and  subject  to  error,  in  the  former,  we  are  sometimes  told.  His
instinct  was  invariably  unerring.  But  is  this  the  case,  if  our
Lord  was  really  deceived  in  His  estimate  of  the  Book  of  Deuter-
onomy, and  if  further  the  account  of  the  origin  and  composition
of  that  book  which  is  put  forward  by  His  censors  be  accepted  as
satisfactory  ?  Our  Lord  quotes  Deuteronomy  as  a  work  of  the
highest  authority  on  the  subject  of  man's  relations  and  duties
to  Grod  ^.  Yet  we  are  assured  that  in  point  of  fact  this  book
was  nothing  better  than  a  pious  forgery  of  the  age  of  Jeremiah,
if  indeed  it  was  not  a  work  of  that  prophet,  in  which  he  em-
ployed the  name  and  authority  of  Moses  as  a  restraint  upon  the
increasing  polytheism  of  the  later  years  of  king  Josiah  y.     That


*  If  a  human  teacher  were  to  decline  to  speak  on  a  giTen  subject,  by
saying  that  he  did  not  know  enough  about  it,  this  would  not  be  a  reason
for  disbelieving  him  when  he  proceeded  to  speak  confidently  on  a  totally
distinct  subject,  thereby  at  least  implying  that  he  did  know  enough
to  warrant  his  speaking.  On  the  contrary,  his  silence  in  the  one  case
would  be  a  reason  for  trusting  his  statements  in  the  other.  The  argument
which  is  under  consideration  in  the  text  would  have  been  really  sound,
if  our  Saviour  had  fixed  the  date  of  the  day  of  judgment,  and  the  event
had  shewn  Him  to  have  been  mistaken.

*  St.  Matt.  iv.  4,  Deut.  viii.  3;  St.  Matt.  iv.  7,  Deut.  vi.  16;  St.  Matt.
iv.  10,  Deut.  vi.  13,  and  x.  20.

y  Golenso  on  the  Pentateuch,  vol.  ii.  p.  427 :  'Supposing  (to  fix  our  ideas)
that  Jeremiah  really  wrote  the  book,  we  must  not  forget  that  he  was  a
prophet,  and,  as  such,  habitually  disposed  to  regard  all  the  special  impulses

vm]


478     Could  our  Lord  detect  a  pious  fraud?

hypothesis  has  been  discussed  elsewhere  and  by  others  Oin  its
own  critical  merits.  Here  it  may  suffice  to  observe,  that  if  it
could  have  been  seriously  entertained  it  would  involve  our  Lord
in  something  more  than  intellectual  fallibility.  If  Deuteronomy
is  indeed  a  forgery,  Jesus  Christ  was  not  merely  ignorant
of  a  fiict  of  literary  history.  His  moral  perceptions  were  at
fault.  They  were  not  sufficiently  fine  to  miss  the  consistency,
the  ring  of  truth,  in  a  document  which  professed  to  have  come
from  the  great  Lawgiver  with  a  Divine  authority;  while,  ac-
cording to  modem  writers,  it  was  only  the  '  pious'  fiction  of
a  later  age,  and  its  falsehood  had  only  not  been  admitted  1^
its  author,  lest  its  *  effect'  should  be  counteracted  z.

When,  in  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century,  the  pseudo-
Isidorian  decretals  were  first  brought  firom  beyond  the  Alps  to
Home,  they  were  almost  immediately  cited  by  Nicholas  I.  in

of  his  mind  to  religions  activity  as  direct  inspirations  from  the  Divine  Source
of  Truth.  To  ns,  with  our  inductive  training  and  scientific  habits  of  mind,
the  correct  statement  of  facts  appears  of  the  first  necessity;  and  consciously
to  misstate  them,  or  to  state  as  fact  what  we  do  not  know  or  believe  firom
external  testimony  to  be  fact,  is  a  crime  against  truth.  But  to  a  man  who
believed  himself  to  be  in  immediate  communication  with  the  Source  of  all
Truth,  this  condition  must  have  been  reversed.  The  inner  voice,  which  he
believed  to  be  the  voice  of  the  Divine  Teacher,  would  become  all-powerful
— would  silence  at  once  all  doubts  and  questionings.  What  it  ordered  him
to  do,  he  would  do  without  hesitation,  as  by  direct  command  of  Gk>d,  and
all  considerations  as  to  morality  or  immorality  would  either  not  be  enter-
tained at  all,  or  would  only  take  the  form  of  misgivings  as  to  whether,
possibly,  in  any  paiiicular  case,  the  command  itself  was  really  Divine.

'  Let  us  imagine,  then,  that  Jeremiah,  or  any  other  contemporary  seer,  medi-
tating upon  the  condition  of  his  country,  and  the  means  of  weaning  his  people
from  idolatry,  "became  possessed  with  the  idea  of  writing  to  them  an  addr^,
as  in  the  name  of  Moses,  of  the  kind  which  we  have  just  been  considering,  in
which  the  laws  ascribed  to  him,  and  handed  down  from  an  earlier  age,  which
were  now  in  many  respects  unsuitable,  should  be  adapted  to  the  present  cir*
cumstances  of  the  times,  and  re-enforced  with  solemn  prophetical  utterances.
This  thought,  we  may  believe,  would  take  in  the  prophet's  mind  the  form  of
a  Divine  command.    All  question  of  deception  orfratis  pia  would  vanish.'

'  Colenso  on  the  Pentateuch,  vol.  ii.  p.  439 :  '  Perhaps,  at  first,  it  wu
felt  to  be  difficult  or  undesirable  to  say  or  do  anything  which  might  act  as
a  check  upon  the  zeal  and  energy  which  the  king  himself  exhibited,  and  in
which,  as  it  seems,  he  was  generally  supported  by  the  people,  in  putting
down  by  force  the  gross  idolatries  which  abounded  in  his  longdom.  That
impulsive  effort,  which  followed  immediately  the  reading  of  the  "Bo(^"
might  have  been  arrested,  if  he  had  been  told  at  once  the  true  origin  of
those  awful  words  which  had  made  so  strong  an  in^ression  on  him.  They
were  not  less  awful,  indeed,  or  less  true,  because  uttered  in  the  name  of
Moses  by  such  a  prophet  as  Jeremiah.  But  still  it  is  obvious  that  their
effect  teas  likely  to  he  greatly  intensified  under  the  idea  that  they  were
the  last  utterances  of  Moses  himself.*

[lect.


One  proved  error  fatal  to  Chrisfs  authority.  479

reply  to  an  appeal  of  Hincmar  of  Kheims,  in  order  to  justify
And  extend  the  then  advancing  claims  of  the  Boman  Chair  ">•
"We  most  then  either  suppose  that  this  Pope  was  really  in-
capable of  detecting  a  forgery,  which  no  Boman  Catholic  writer
-would  now  think  of  defending^,  or  else  we  must  imagine  that,  in
order  to  advance  an  immediate  ecclesiastical  object,  he  could
<x)ndescend  to  quote  a  document  which  he  knew  to  have  been
recently  forged,  as  if  it  had  been  of  ancient  and  undoubted
authority.  The  former  supposition  is  undoubtedly  most  Wel-
come to  the  common  sense  of  Christian  charity;  but  it  is  of
course  fetal  to  any  belief  in  the  personal  infallibility  of  Pope
Nicholas  I.  A  like  dilemma  awaits  us  in  the  Gbspel  history,
if  the  unhappy  theories  about  the  Pentateuch  to  which  reference
has  been  made  are  seriously  adopted.  Here  is  no  mere  question
as  to  whether  Christ's  knowledge  was  or  was  not  limited ;  the
question  is,  whether  He  taught  that  which  is  not  true,  and
which  a  finer  moral  sense  than  His  might  have  seen  to  be  false ;
whether  He  was  a  trustworthy  teacher  of  religious  no  less  than
of  historical  truth.  The  distinction  between  a  critical  judgment
of  historical  or  philological  facts,  and  a  moral  judgment  of
spiritual  and  moral  truths,  is  inapplicable  to  a  case  in  which
the  moral  judgment  is  no  less  involved  than  the  intellectual.
We  have  really  to  choose  between  the  infallibility,  moral  no
less  than  intellectual,  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  on  the  one  hand,
and  the  conjectural  speculations  of  critics,  of  whatever  degree  of
critical  eminence,  on  the  other.

Indeed,  as  bearing  upon  this  vaunted  distinction  between
s{»ritual  truth,  in  which  our  Lord  is  still,  it  seems,  to  be  an
authority,  and  historical  truth,  in  which  His  authority  is  to  be
set  aside,  we  have  words  of  His  own  which  prove  how  truly  He
made  the  acceptance  of  the  lower  portions  of  His  teaching  a
preliminary  to  belief  in  the  higher.  *  If  I  have  told  you  earthly
things,  and  ye  believe  not,  how  shall  ye  believe  if  I  tell  you  of
heavenly  things  ^^T  How  indeed  %  If,  when  He  sets  the  seal  of
His  authority  upon  the  writings  of  Moses  as  a  whole,  and  upon
the  most  miraculous  incidents  which  they  relate  in  detail,  He
is  really  only  the  uneducated  Jew  who  ignorantly  repeats  and
reflects  the  prejudice  of  a  barbarous  age  ;  how  shall  we  be  sure
that  when  He  reveals  the  Character  of  God,  or  the  precepts
of  the  new  life,  or  the  reality  and  nature  of  the  endless  world,

»  Milman,  Latin  Christianity,  vol.  ii.  p.  379  ;  of.  Mansi.  xv.  694.

^  Gp.  Walter,  Lehrb.  des  Kirdienrechts,  pp.  206-a  10.      ®  St.  John  ill.  i  a.

VIII  ]


480      Christ's  Deity  illuminates  His  Passion.

He  is  really  truBtworthy— trnstworthy  as  an  Authority  to  whom
we  are  prepared  to  cling  in  life  and  in  death  1  You  Bay  that
h^re  your  conacience  ratifies  Eia  teachiiig.  la  then  yoar  con-
science the  ultimate  and  only  teacher  %  Have  you  anticipated,
and  might  you  dispense  with,  the  teaching  of  Christ  1  And
what  if  your  conscience,  as  ia  surely  not  impossible,  has  itself
been  warped  or  misled  1  What  if,  in  surreung  even  the  moral
elements  of  His  doctrine,  yon  still  assame  to  eserciae  a  'verifying
faculty,'  and  object  to  this  precept  aa  ascetic,  and  to  that  com-
mand as  exacting,  and  to  yonder  most  merciful  revelation  of  an
endless  woe  as  '  Tartarology!'  Brethren,  the  descent  into  unbe-
lief is  only  too  easy.  There  are  broad  highways  in  the  life  <^
faith,  aa  in  the  life  of  morality,  which  a  man  cannot  leave  without
losing  his  way  in  a  trackleas  wilderness.  To  deny  onr  laird's  in-
fallibility, on  the  precarious  ground  of  a  single  known  limitatum
of  knowledge  in  His  human  intellect,  is  not  merely  an  inconsC'
quence ;  it  is  inconsistent  with  serious  belief  in  Hia  real  Divinity.
The  common  sense  of  faith  assures  us  that  if  Christ  is  really  Divine,
His  infallibility  follows  as  a  thing  of  course.  The  man  who  sin-
cerely believes  that  Jesns  Christ  is  God  will  not  doubt  that  His
every  word  standeth  sure,  and  that  whatever  has  been  sanctioned
by  His  supreme  authority  is  independent  o^  and  unassailable  by,
the  fallible  judgment  of  His  creatures  respecting  it  \

(p)  If  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Divinity  implies  Ihat  as  a
teacher  of  truth  He  is  infallible,  it  also  illuminates  Hjr  suffering
death  upon  the  Cross  with  an  extraordinary  Eignificonce.

The  degrees  of  importance  which  are  attributed  to  the  several
events  and  etagea  of  our  Lord's  life  on  earth,  will  natarally
vary  with  the  variations  of  belief  reapecting  TTia  Person.  WilJi
the  Humanitarian,  for  instance,  the  dominant,  almost  the  ex-
clusive, interest  will  be  found  to  centre  in  Christ'a  Ministry,  aa
affording  the  largest  illustrations  of  His  Human  Character  and
of  His  moral  teaching.  The  mysteries  which  surround  His  en-
ia  departure  from  our  human  world,  will  have
the  background  as  belonging  to  questions  <^

nm  Lord  to  be  in  error  when  He  teicheB  nn  whnt  lo
restament  ought  to  ftirmBb  a  criterion  of  Hia  in&IU-
TTim  to  be  ever  iDfaUibla.  On  wliat  leliDJoiu  anttjecti
t  on  all?  When  did  He  bcsin  to  he,  if  He  ww  not
)t.  Moridnenn  enlargee  on  the  sappoaed  adTtuitsgei  ot
I  'in  a  religiom  guide :  Seat  of  Aatliorit^  in  Beligicn,
I  by  advaotagea  in  ialse  teaching  OD  leligions,  or  sDj

[lbct.


Humanitarian  estimate  of  the  Passion.    48 1

a  very  inferior  degree  of  importance,  or  possibly,  as  at  best
serving  to  illustrate  the  legendary  creativeness  of  a  subsequent
age.  Perhaps  a  certain  historical  and  chronological  value  will
Bull  be  allowed  to  attach  to  Christ's  BirtL  Perhaps,  if  His
Besurrection  be  admitted  to  have  been  a  matter  of  historical
occurrence,  a  high  evidential  significance  will  continue  to  be
assigned  to  it,  such  as  was  recognised  by  Priestley  and  by  all
Socinians  of  the  last  generation.  And  to  a  Humanitarian,  the
interest  of  Christ's  Death  will  be  of  a  yet  higher  kind.  For
Christ's  Death  enters  into  His  moral  Self-manifestation ;  it  is
the  heroic  climax  of  His  devotion  to  truth ;  it  is  the  surest  seal
which  a  teacher  can  set  upon  his  doctrine.  Thus  a  Humani-
tarian will  admit  that  the  dying  Christ  saves  the  world  by
enriching  its  stock  of  moral  Ufe,  by  setting  before  the  eyes  of
men,  for  all  future  time,  the  example  of  a  transcendent  sacri-
fice of  self.  But  in  the  bare  fact  that  Jesus  died,  Humani-
tarianism  sees  no  mystery  beyond  that  which  attaches  to  the
death  of  any  ordinary  man.  The  Crucifixion  is  simply  regarded
as  a  practical  appendix  to  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  And
thus  to  the  Socinian  pilgrim,  the  mountain  of  the  beatitudes
and  the  shores  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  will  always  and  naturally
appear  more  worthy  of  reverence  and  attention,  than  the  spot
on  which  Mary  brought  her  Son  into  the  world,  or  than  the
hill  on  which  Jesus  died.

Far  otherwise  must  it  ever  be  with  a  sincere  believer  in  our
Saviour's  Godhead.  Not  that  he  can  be  insensible  to  the  com-
manding moral  interest  which  the  Life  and  teaching  of  the
Perfect  Man  ever  rouses  in  the  heart  of  Christians.  That  Life
and  that  teaching  have  indeed  for  him  a  meaning  into  which
the  Humanitarian  cannot  enter ;  since  the  believer  knows  that
it  is  God  Who  lives  and  speaks  in  Jesus.  But  contemplating
Jesus  as  the  Licamate  God,  he  is  necessarily  attracted  by  those
points  in  our  Lord's  earthly  Life,  at  which  the  contrast  is  most
vividly  marked  between  His  Divine  and  Eternal  Nature  and
His  state  of  humiliation  as  Man.

This  attraction  is  reflected  in  the  believer's  religious  thought,
in  his  devotions,  in  the  instinctive  attitude  of  his  interest  towards
the  Life  of  Jesus.  The  creed  expresses  the  thought  of  the  whole
company  of  the  faithful.  After  stating  that  the  Only-begotten
Son,  consubstantial  with  the  Father,  for  us  men  and  for  our
salvation  came  down  from  heaven  and  was  made  Man,  the  creed
proceeds  to  speak  of  His  Crucifixion,  Sufferings,  Burial,  Resur*
rection,  and  Ascension.  The  creed  makes  no  allusion  to  His
vin]  li


482    Christ's  Person  the  measure  of  His  Passion.

example,  or  to  the  nature  and  contents  of  His  doctrine.  In  an
analogous  sense  the  Litany  gives  utterance  to  the  devotion  of
the  collective  Church.  In  the  Litany,  Jesus,  our  '  Good  Lori'
is  entreated  to  deliver  us  *  by'  the  succeBSive  mysteries  of  Es
earthly  Self-manifestation.  Dependent  on  the  mystery  of  His
holy  Incarnation  are  His  '  holy  Nativity  and  Circomciaion,'
His  'Baptism,  Fasting,  and  Temptation,'  TTjb  'Agony  and
Bloody  Sweat,'  His  '  CroBS  and  Passion,'  His  '  precious  Death
and  Burial,'  His  '  glorious  Resurrection  and  Ascension.'  Here
again  there  is  no  reference  to  His  sinlem  example,  or  to  His
words  of  power.  Why  is  this  I  Is  it  not  because  the  thought
of  the  Church  centres  most  persistently  upon  the  Person  of
Jesus  t  His  teaching  and  His  example,  although  they  pre-
suppose His  Divinity,  yet  in  mai^  ways  appeal  to  oa  indepen-
dently of  it.  But  the  siffnifioance  of  His  birth  into  the  world,
of  His  varied  sufferings  d,  of  His  death,  of  His  rising  from  the
tomb,  and  of  His  ascent  to  heaven,  resides  chiefly,  if  not  al-
together, in  the  fact  that  Hie  Person  is  Divine.  That  truth
illuminates  these  features  of  His  earthly  Self-manifestation,
which  else  might  be  thrown  into  the  shade  by  the  moral  beauty
of  His  example  or  of  His  doctrine.  The  birth  and  death  of  a
mere  man,  and  even  the  resurrection  and  glorification  of  a  mere
man,  would  only  be  the  accessories  of  a  higher  interest  centring
in  the  range  uid  influence  of  his  ideas,  in  the  force  and  con-
sistency of  his  conduct,  in  the  whole  bearing  of  his  moral  and
intellectual  action  upon  the  men  of  bis  time.  But  when  He
Who  is  bom,  Who  suffers.  Who  dies,  Who  rises  and  ascends,  is
known  to  be  personally  and  literally  Glod,  it  is  inevitable  that
the  interest  of  thought  and  devotion  should  take  a  direction  in
vhich  the  *  mystery  of  godliness'  is  most  directly  and  urgently
felt.  Christian  devotion  necessarily  hovers  around  those  criticu
turning-points  in  the  Self-manifestation  of  the  Infinite  and  Al-
mighty Being,  at  which  His  gracious  and  immeasurable  Self-
humiliation  most  povrerfnlly  illustrates  His  boundless  love,  \sj
the  contrast  which  it  yields  to  the  majesty  of  Hi"  Divine  and

"' '  " No  one  would  care  for  the  birthplace  or  gran

:r,  when  he  could  visit  the  scene  of  his  in-
s ;  but  the  Christian  pilgrim,  in  aU  ages  of
Bs  riveted  by  the  lake-side  and  moantains  of
lioee  sacred  sites,  where  his  God  and  Saviour

BctioD  Eeb.  X.  i<),  whera  an  *poet&ta  frcnn  the  Failll
If  Tibr  toi  e«au  nriiTin^aiu,  ud  I  Ccr.  iL  S,  rlr

[lsct.


All  the  Evangelists  describe  the  Passion  in  detail.  483

first  drew  human  breath  and  where  He  poured  forth  His  Blood
upon  the  Cross  of  shame.

Let  us  imagine,  if  we  can,  that  our  Lord's  life  had  been
written,  not  by  the  blessed  Evangelists,  but  by  some  modern
Socinian  or  Humanitarian  author.  Would  not  the  relative  pro-
portions assigned  to  the  several  parts  of  His  life  have  been  very
different  from  those  which  we  find  in  the  New  Testament  %  We
should  have  been  presented  with  an  analytical  exposition  of  the
moral  greatness  of  Christ,  in  its  several  bearings  upon  the  indivi-
dual and  social  life  of  man ;  and  His  teaching  would  have  been
insisted  upon  as  altogether  eclipsing  in  importance  any  questions
which  might  be  raised  as  to  His  *  origin '  or  His  *  place  in  the
world  of  spirits.'  As  for  His  Death,  it  would  of  course  have
been  introduced  as  the  natural  result  of  His  generous  conflict
with  the  great  evils  and  corruptions  of  His  day.  But  this
closing  episode  would  have  been  treated  hurrieiy  and  with
reserve.  The  modem  writer  would  have  led  us  to  the  foot  of
Calvary.  There  he  would  have  left  us  to  our  imagination,  and
all  that  followed  would  have  been  summarized  in  a  couple  of
sentences.  The  modem  writer  would  have  avoided  any  appear-
ance of  giving  prominence  to  the  'physical  aspects'  of  the
tragedy,  to  the  successive  insults,  cruelties,  cries,  which  indicated
so  many  distinct  phases  of  mental  or  bodily  agony  in  the  sufferer.
He  would  have  argued  that  to  dwell  intently  on  these  things  was
unnecessarily  harrowing  to  the  feelings,  and  moreover,  tiiat  it
might  distract  attention  from  the  general  moral  interest  to  which
the  Death  of  Jesus  was,  in  his  judgment,  only  subsidiary.  Clearly
he  would  not  have  followed  in  the  track  of  the  Evangelists.
For  the  four  Evangelists,  while  the  plan  and  materials  of  their
several  narratives  present  many  points  of  difference,  yet  concur
in  assigning  an  extraordinary  importance,  not  merely  to  the
general  narrative  of  the  Passion,  but  to  its  minute  details.  This
is  more  in  harmony  with  the  genius  of  St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke
than  with  that  of  St.  Matthew ;  but  considering  the  scope  and
drift  of  the  fourth  Gospel,  it  is  at  first  sight  most  remarkable  in
St.  John.  For  instead  of  veiling  the  humiliations  of  the  Word
Incarnate,  St.  John  regards  them  as  so  many  illustrations  of  His
*  glory ; '  and,  indeed,  each  of  the  four  evangelical  narratives,
however  condensed  may  be  its  earlier  portions,  expands  into  the
minute  particularity  of  a  diary,  as  it  approaches  the  foot  of  the
Cross.

Now  this  concurrent  disposition  of  the  four  Evangelists  is
eminently  suggestive.  It  implies  that  there  is  a  momentous
vin]  I  ia


484  Christ  *$  Divinity  explains  Apostolical  language

interest  attaching,  not  merely  to  the  Death  of  Christ  as  a  whole,
bat  to  each  stage  and  feature  of  the  great  agony  in  detaiL  It
implies  that  this  interest  is  not  merely  moral  and  human,  bat  of
a  higher  and  distinct  kind.  The  moral  reqairements  of  the
history  would  haye  been  satisfied,  had  we  been  compendiously
informed  that  Christ  died  at  last  in  attestation  of  the  mond
truth  which  He  taught ;  but  this  detailed  enumeration  of  the
successiye  stages  and  shades  of  sufiEering,  both  physical  and
mental,  leads  the  devout  Christian  insensibly  to  look  beneath
the  varying  phases  of  protracted  agony,  at  the  unruffled,  august,
eternal  Person  of  the  insulted  Sufferer;  and  thus  Cbristiaii
thought  rests  with  more  and  more  of  anxious  intensity  upon
the  possible  or  probable  results  of  an  event  so  stupendous  as
the  Death  of  Cluist.

Upon  such  a  problem,  human  reason,  lefb  to  itself  could  shed
no  light  whatever.  It  could  only  be  sure  of  this : — ^that  much
more  must  be  involved  in  the  Death  of  Christ  than  in  the  death
of  the  best  of  men.  Had  Christ  been  merely  human,  greater
love  among  men,  greater  enthusiasm  for  truth  as  truth,  greater
devotion  to  the  sublimest  of  moral  teachings  and  to  the  Will  of
the  Universal  Father,  greater  contempt  for  pleasure  i^hen  plea-
sure is  in  conflict  with  duty,  and  for  pain  when  pain  is  recom-
mended by  conscience,  would  certainly  have  followed  upon  His
Death.  These  effects  follow  in  varying  degrees  upon  every
sincere  and  costly  act  of  human  self-renouncement;  and  the
moral  kingdom  of  €k)d  is  a  vast  treasure-house  of  saintly  and
living  memories,  in  which  the  highest  place  of  honour  is  for
ever  assigned  to  those  who  exhibit  the  most  perfect  sacrifice  of
sel£  Nor,  most  assuredly,  is  any  the  least  and  lowest  act  of
sacrifice  destined  to  perish :  it  thrills  on  in  its  undying  force
through  the  ages ;  it  kindles,  first  in  one  and  then  in  another
unit  of  the  vast  company  of  moral  beings,  a  new  devotion  to
truth,  to  duty,  to  man,  to  Gbd.  But  when  we  know  that  Jesus
Christ  is  Qod,  we  are  prepared  to  hear  that  scmiething  much
more  stupendous  than  any  moral  impulse,  however  strong  and
enduring,  must  have  resulted  from  His  Death — something  (as
yet  we  kaow  not  what)  reaching  far  beyond  the  sphere  and  laws
of  history,  beyond  the  world  of  sense  and  of  time,  of  natural
moral  sequence,  and  of  those  ascertainable  or  hidden  influences
which  pass  on  from  man  to  man  and  from  age  to  age.

Nowhere  is  the  illuminative  force  of  Christ's  Divinity  more
felt  than  here.  The  tremendous  premiss,  that  He  Who  died
upon  the  Cross  is  truly  God,  when,  seriously  and  firmly  be-


respecting  the  efficacy  of  His  Death.       485

.  I    I     ■  III

lieved,  avails  to  carry  the  believer  forward  to  any  representation
of  the  efficacy  of  His  Death  which  rests  upon  an  adequate
authority.

*No  person,'  says  Hooker®,  *was  bom  of  the  Virgin  but  the
Son  of  God,  no  person  but  the  Son  of  Qod  baptized,  the  Son  of
God  condemned,  the  Son  of  Gk)d  and  no  other  person  crucified ;
which  one  only  point  of  Christian  belief,  tha  infinite  worth  of  the
Son  of  Ood,  is  the  very  ground  of  all  things  believed  concerning
life  and  salvation  by  that  which  Christ  either  did  or  suffered
as  man  in  our  behall'  *  That,'  says  Bishop  Andrewes,  *  which
setteth  the  high  price  upon  this  Sacrifice  is  this,  that  He  which
offereth  it  to  God,  is  God  V  *  Marvel  not,'  says  St.  Cyril  of
Jerusalem,  *  if  the  whole  world  has  been  redeemed,  for  He  Who
has  died  for  us  is  no  mere  man,  but  the  Only-begotten  Son  of
God  8.'  *  Christ,'  says  St.  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  'would  not  have
been  equivalent  [as  a  sacrifice]  for  the  whole  creation,  nor  would
He  have  sufficed  to  redeem  the  world,  nor  have  laid  down  His
life  by  way  of  a  price  for  it,  and  poured  forth  for  us  His  precious
Blood,  if  He  be  not  really  the  Son,  and  God  of  Go^  but  a
creature  \*

This,  as  has  been  already  noticed,  is  St.  Peter's  meaning  when
he  says  that  we  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as
silver  and  gold,  but  with  the  precious  Blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a
Lamb  without  blemish  and  immaculate^.  This  underlies  St.
Paul's  contrast  between  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  and  the

•  Ecd.  Pol.  V.  5a.  3.

'  Second  Sermon  on  the  Passion.  For  other  references,  see  Bev.  W.
Bright's  Sermons  of  St.  Leo,  p.  89.

'  Gatech.  13.  a :  fi^  Bavfid^s  ei  nSfffios  Z\os  iXinpSdv,  oh  yhp  ^v  fivBpairos
\lfi\hs,  &W*  Vlhs  6€oD  lAOvoyfv^s  6  iir€pmrodpiiaKwy»  St.  Frodlus,  Horn,  in
Incam.  o.  5 :  ^c  Toiwv  9voiy  Bdrepoy,  fj  trciffiy  ^ax^ycu  rhy  ix  rris  KaToiSiiais
Odvaroy,  ivetfiii  Ktd  -wdtfres  ^/jutfyroy  ^  rotovroy  ZoBj\vou  irphs  kyrl^otriy  rlfirijxa,
f  vay  Mjpx^  ^iKcUcofjtaiFphs  wctpalrri(ny,  ''AyOponros  fi^y  oiy  ffSoffcu  ohx  li^^varo,
vic4k€ito  yhp  T^  XP^**  ''^y  htiiaprlas.  "AyytXos  i^ayopdffourBcu  t^v  &y$ponr6nifra
ovK  fdrxvcp,  ^Topcc  7^  Toto^ov  Xdrpov,  Aonrhy  oZy  6  ityofidprriros  Bfhs  ^Ip
tQv  rnjLapT7iK6rrtay  itirodaveTv  &<l>fi\€y  oSn)  yhp  i\€lirrro  fi6yri  rod  kokov  fi  \6<ru,
c.  6 :  &  rQy  fieydkwy  vpceyfidruy  1  itXAois  hrparffiart^ffaro  rh  hBdyaroy,  ahrhs
yhp  iinipxfv  hBdyaros,  roiovros  yhp  AKKos  Kar^  ohcovofjlaof  oUrt  yeyovtv,  otht
ijv,  o(h€  lo-Tot  vorh,  ^  /iSyos  iic  riis  irapdfyov  rcx^cls  Behs  K(d  Jkvdpwiros*  oIk
hvriraXoan^iovfffUf  li6yoy  %x^^  '^^  hJ^ioat  r^  ir\4\Bti  r&y  6wo9lKo»y,  iwh  ical
irdffeus  i^^ois  ^€p4xov<ray,  0.  9:  AyOpwros  r^tkhs  trStffcu  oIk  X<rxvff  Oc^s
yvfiybs  iraBeTy  oIk  ^S^oro.  ri  oZy\  o&r^i  ii>y  6c^i  6  'EfifxayoviiK,  yiyoyty
iyOpwiros.     (Labbe,  iii.  13  sq.)

^  St.  Cyril.  Alex,  de  Sanot&  Trinitate,  dial.  4,  torn.  v.  pp.  508,  509.  See
too  Ad  BeginaSy  i.  0.  7 ;  Labbe^  iii.  11  a.

1  I  St.  Pet.  i.  19.

vm]


486  Christ's  Ddty  explains  the  power  of  His  Death.

Blood  of  Clirist  offering  Himself  witboat  spot  to  God).  This
IB  tlie  snbBtEmce  of  St.  Jolm'a  announcement  that  the  Blood
of  JeBns  Chriet  the  Son  oif  God  cleanseth  ae  from  all  mn*.
Apart  tiam  tbie  iUamiustisg  doctriue  of  the  Godhead  of  Jesiis
Christ  crucified,  haw  overstrained  and  exaggerated  are  the
New  Testament  representations  of  the  effects  of  TfiH  Death!
He  has  redeemed  man  from  a  moral  and  epiritnal  Blaveiyl;
He  has  made  a  propitiation  for  our  BinB°^;  He  has  really  recon-
ciled God  and  Hie  creatures  ".  But  how  is  each  a  redemption
possible,  unless  the  price  be  infinitely  costly )  How  could  such
a  propitiation  be  offered,  save  by  One  Whose  intrinsic  worUi
might  tender  some  worthy  offering  from  a  boundless  Love  to  a
perfect  Justice )  How  was  a  real  reconciliation  between  God
and  His  creatures  ia  be  effected,  unless  the  BecoucUer  bad
some  natural  capacity  for  mediating,  unless  He  could  represent
God  to  man  no  less  truly  than  man  to  God  %  How  could  He
'exchange'  Divine  glory  for  hnntan  misery,  or  raise  man  in
his  miseiy  to  companionship  with  God,  unless  He  were  Him-
self  Divine  I  Alas  I  brethren,  if  Jesus  Christ  be  not  God,  the
promisee  of  redemption  to  which  penitent  and  dying  sinners
cling  with  such  thankful  tenacity,  forthwith  diBsolre  into  tin
evanescent  fosrms  of  Jewish  modes  of  thought,  and  unsubstantial
misleading  metaphors.  If  Jesus  be  not  God,  we  stand  face  to
fiuse  in  the  New  Testament,  not  with  the  unsearchable  riches,
the  boundless  mercy  of  a  Divine  Saviour,  able  '  to  save  to  the
uttermost  those  that  come  onto  God  by  Him,'  but  only  with
the  crude  and  clinging  prejudices  of  His  uneducated  or  semi-
educated  followers.  But  if  it  be  certein  that '  in  this  was  mani-
fested the  love  of  God  towards  ns,  because  that  God  sent  His
Only-begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we  might  live  through

'  Heb.  ii.  13,  15.    See  Lect.  TI,  p.  344,  note  x,

'  "Axo\i1t(»htu  preanppoees  the  slavery  of  hnmanity,  from  wludi  Chrirt
oar  Lord  redeemi  qb  by  iba  Xinprir  at  TTU  predona  Blood.  St.  Matt,  n^  iS ;
I  Cor.  i.  30;  Eph.  i.  7, 14;  It.  30.  The  idea  of  pojclutse  aatot  bondaga
ii  vividly  BxprsBsed  by  tiia  TBcb  ifyrfopiiw.  Gal.  iii.  13;  iv.  5.

the  nnezpiated  ran  of  hnmudtf,  fio'  whid  Chrirt
[  St.  John  ii.  3  ;  iv.  10;  Eeb.ii.17.  Our  I>ad
a  tpaaipopi  (Eph.  v.  a-;  Heb.  i.  1 3) ;  Ha  i«  tbg
is  the  sacrifioial  ifivot  (St.  John  i.  39,  36 ;  I  St.
luD  l^prior  (Eov.  V.  6,  8,  11,  13 ;  vi.  i),
lea  the  BxiBteiiGB  of  ui  emoity  between  God  ud
by  Chriat'a  'eichsnging'  His  glory  for  our  nUMiy
n»  His  gloij.    !EDm,  v.  10;  1  Cor.  v.  18,  19.

[lsot.


B earing  of  Christ^ s  Dimnity  on  the  Sacraments.  48  7

Him  o,*  then  the  disclosures  of  revelation  respecting  the  efficacy
of  His  Death  do  not  appear  to  be  excessive.  Vast  as  is  the  con-
clnsion  of  a  world  of  sinners  redeemed,  atoned  for,  reconciled,  the
premiss  that  Jesus  Crucified  is  truly  God  more  than  warrants  it.
And  the  accompaniments  of  the  Passion  are  such  as  might  have
been  anticipated  by  the  faith  of  the  Church.  Why  those  darkened
heavens?  Why  that  rent  veil  in  the  temple  1  Why  those  shattered
rocks  %  Why  do  those  *  bodies  of  the  saints  which  slept '  return
from  the  realms  of  death  to  the  city  of  the  living  %  Nature,  could
she  speak,  would  answer  that  her  Lord  is  <5rucified.  But  her
convulsive  homage  before  the  Cross  of  Christ  is  as  nothing  when
compared  to  a  moral  miracle  of  which  the  only  sensible  symp-
toms are  an  entreaty  and  a  promise,  uttered  alike  in  human
words.  *  Not  when  Christ  raised  the  dead,  not  when  He  rebuked
the  sea  and  the  winds,  not  when  He  expelled  the  devils, — ^but
when  He  was  crucified,  pierced  with  the  nails,  insulted,  spit
upon,  reproached,  reviled, — ^had  He  strength  to  change  the  evil
disposition  of  *the  robber,  to  draw  to  Himself  that  soul,  harder
though  it  were  than  the  rocks  around,  and  to  honour  it  with  the
promise,  *  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  Paradise  p.*  That
promise  was  a  revelation  of  the  depth  and  height  of  His  redemp-
tive power ;  it  was  a  flash  of  His  Godhead,  illuminating  the  true
meaning  of  His  hmniliations  as  Man.  If  then  we  believe  Him
to  be  God,  we  bow  our  heads  before  His  Cross,  as  in  the  presence
of  fathomless  mystery,  while  we  listen  to  His  apostles  as  they
unfold  the  results  of  His  Death.  If  we  are  perplexed  with  some
difficulties  in  contemplating  these  results,  we  may  remember  that
we  are  but  hovering  on  the  outskirts  of  a  vast  economy  of  mercy
reaching  far  away  beyond  our  furthest  sight,  and  that  the  seen  will
one  day  be  explained  by  the  unseen.  But  at  least  no  magnitude  of
redemptive  mercies  can  possibly  surprise  us,  when  the  Eedeemer
is  known  to  be  Divine ;  we  say  to  ourselves  with  St.  Paul,  *  If
God  spared  not  His  Own  Son,  but  freely  gave  Him  up  for  us  all,
how  shall  He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ? '

(y)  As  our  Lord's  Divinity  is  the  truth  which  illuminates  and
sustains  the  world-redeeming  virtue  of  His  death,  so  in  like
manner  it  explains  and  justifies  the  power  of  the  Christian
Sacraments,  as  actual  channels  of  supernatural  grace.

To  those  who  deny  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God,  the  Sacraments
are  naturally  nothing  more  than  '  badges  or  tokens '  of  social  co-

^  I  St.  John  iy.  9.     Compare  Eph.  it.  3a  :   6  Bcbs  iv  Xpitrr^  ixV^^^'''^
Ifjuv,     Tit.  ii.  II ;  iii.  4.

P  St.  Chrysoflt.  Be  Cruce  et  Latrone,  Horn.  i.  §  a.  torn.  ii.  404.

vm]


488  Sacraments  not  only  signs,  but  -means,  of  Grace.

operation  %  The  one  Sacrament  IB  only  '  a  sign  <£  profesEdon
and  mark  of  difference,  whereby  Christian  men  are  diBcemed
from  others  that  be  not  christened  '.'  The  other  is  at  beat  '  only
a  sign  of  the  love  that  Christians  ought  to  hare  ooe  towards
another  ■.*  Thus  sacraments  are  viewed  as  altogether  hiunan
acts ;  God  ^ves  nothing  in  them  ;  He  has  no  spec^  relation  to
them  *.  They  are  regarded  as  purely  external  ceremonies,  which
may  posrably  snggest  certain  moral  ideas  by  recalling  the  memory
of  a  Teacher  who  died  many  centnriea  ago  ".  They  help  to  save
His  name  from  dyisg  out  among  men.  Thus  they  dischai^  \he
functions  of  a  public  monument,  or  of  a  ribbon  or  medal  imply-
ing membership  in  an  association,  or  of  an  anniversary  festival
instituted  to  celebrate  the  name  of  some  departed  historical
worthy.  It  cannot  be  said  that  in  point  of  effective  moial  power
they  rise  to  the  level  of  a  good  statue  or  portrait ;  since  a  merely
outward  ceremonial  cannot  recall  character  and  suggest  moral
sympathy  as  effectively  as  an  accurate  rendering  of  the  human
countenance  in  stone,  or  colour,  or  the  lines  (tf  an  engraving.
Kites,  with  a  function  so  purely  historical,  are  not  Hkely  to
survive  any  serious  changes  in  human  feelings  and  associations.
Men  gradually  determine  to  commemorate  the  object  of  their
regard  in  soma  other  way,  which  may  perhaps  be  more  in  har-
mony with  their  personal  tastes ;  they  do  not  admit  that  this
particular  form  of  commemoration,  although  enjoined  by  the
Author  of  Christianity,  binds  their  consciences  with  the  force  of
any  moral  obligation ;  they  end  by  deciding  that  it  is  just  as  well
to  neglect  such  commemorations  altogether.

If  the  Socinian  and  Zwinglian  estimate  of  the  Sacraments  had
been  that  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  the  Sacraments  would  long
ago  have  been  abandoned  as  useless  ceremonies.  But  the
Church  has  always  seen  in  them  not  mere  outward  signs
addressed  to  the  taste  or  to  the  imagination,  nor  even  signs
(as  Calvinism  asserts)  which  are  tokens  of  grace  received  iude-

4  Art.  XXV.  ooDdemnB  this  Zwinglian  kcoonnt  of  Sacmn^ibs  geuerall;.


B,  licet  a  Don


n  coniineiuV
^tuieti  institutnm  nt  fideles  ipriiu  pansm  fhtnniit  «l
^ibuit,  moiidB  ipaioB  umontiuulBe  oaosA.'  Ibid.  3J7:
t>  quun  cffinam  uutilnit  DMnino*,  inpoeett  Nolla
•  Udltal  ezoc^tarint.'


Christ's  Godhead  and  the  grace  of  Sacraments.  489

pendently  of  them  ^,  but  signs  which,  through  the  power  of  the
promise  and  words  of  Christ,  effect  what  they  signify.  They
are  *  effectual  signs  of  grace  and  Gk)d's  good- will  towards  us,  by
the  which  He  doth  work  invisibly  in  usy/  Thus  in  baptism
the  Christian  child  is  made  'a  member  of  Christ,  a  child  of
God,  and  an  inheritor  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  2/  And  *  the
Body  and  Blood  of  Christ  are  verily  and  indeed  taken  and
received  by  the  fEiithful  in  the  Lord's  Supper  *.'

This  lofty  estimate  of  the  effective  power  of  the  Christian
Sacraments  is  intimately  connected  with  belief  in  the  Divinity
of  the  Incarnate  Christ.  The  importance  attached  to  the  words
in  which  Christ  institutes  and  explains  the  Sacraments,  varies
concomitantly  with  belief  in  the  Divinity  of  the  Speaker.  If
the  Speaker  be  held  to  be  only  man,  then,  in  order  to  avoid
imputing  to  hirn  the  language  of  inflated  and  thoughtless  folly,
it  becomes  necessary  to  empty  the  words  of  their  natural  and
literal  force  by  violent  exegetical  processes  which,  if  applied
generally,  would  equally  destroy  the  witness  of  the  New  Testa-
ment to  the  Atonement  or  to  the  Divinity  of  Christ.  But  if
Christ  be  in  very  truth  believed  to  be  the  Eternal  Son  of  God,
then  the  words  in  which  He  provides  for  the  communication  of
His  life-giving  Humanity  in  His  Church  to  the  end  of  time  may
well  be  allowed  to  stand  in  all  the  force  and  simplicity  of  their
natural  meaning.  Baptism  will  then  be  the  laver  of  a  real
regeneration  ^ ;  the  Eucharist  will  be  a  real '  communion  of  the

*  See  Cartwright,  quoted  by  Hooker,  Eod.  Pol.  ▼.  60.  3,  note.

'  Art.  XXV.  Cf.  P.  Lombard,  lib.  iv.  d.  i.  a :  '  Sacramentum  est  in-
Tisibilifl  gratia  vinbilis  forma. .  •  .  Ita  ngnum  est  gratia  Bei,  et  invisibilis
gratia  forma^  nt  ipsins  imaginem  ger^t  et  causa  existat.'  Church  Cate-
chism: 'An  outward  and  visible  sign  of  an  inward  and  spiritual  grace
given  unto  us,  ordained  by  Christ  Himself,  as  a  means  whereby  we  receive
the  same,  and  a  pledge  to  assure  us  thereof.'  See  Martensen,  Christ.
Dogm.  p.  418,  Clark's  Transl. :  'The  essential  difference'  [between  Ptayer
and  Saoraments]  'consists  in  this :  the  sacred  tokens  of  the  New  Covenant
contain  also  an  cuitual  communication  of  the  Being  and  Life  of  the  risen
Christ,  Who  is  the  Bedeemer  and  Perfecter,  not  only  of  man's  spirituskl,
but  of  man's  corporeal  nature.  In  Prayer  there  is  only  a  unto  mystica,
a  real,  yet  only  spiritual,  psychological  union :  but  in  the  Sacraments  the
deepest  mystery  rests  in  the  truth  that  in  them  Christ  communicates
Himself,  not  only  spiritually,  but  in  His  glorified  corporeity.'

*  Church  Catechism.  •

*  Ibid.  Mr.  Fisher  observes  that '  out  of  twenty-five  questions  of  which
the  Catechism  now  consists,  no  less  than  seventeen  relate  exclusively  to  the
nature  and  efficacv  of  the  Sacraments.'    Liturgical  Purity,  p.  393,  ist  ed.

^  Tit.  iii,  5 :  81a  \ovrpov  -woLKiyytuwias*  Common  Prayer-book,  Office  of
Private  Baptism:  'This  child,  who  being  bom  in  original  tin  and  in  the

vin]


490        Faith  in  Christ's  Divinity  forbids

Body  and  Blood'  of  the  Incaniate  Jesus <).  If,  with  our  eye
upon  Christ's  actual  Godhead,  we  carefully  weigh  the  moment-
ous sentences  in  which  He  ordained  d,  and  the  still  more
explicit  terms  in  which  He  explained  o,  His  institutions ;  if  we
ponder  well  His  earnestly  ei^orced  doctrine,  that  they  who
would  have  part  in  the  Eternal  Life  must  be  branches  of  that
Living  Vine^  whose  trunk  is  Himself;    if  we  listen  to  His

WTath  of  Grod,  is  now  by  the  layer  of  regeneration  in  Baptism  reoeiyed  into
the  number  of  the  children  of  Grod.*  For  the  connection  between  Baptismal
grace  and  our  Lord's  Diyinity^  see  St.  Cyril  Alex,  de  Bect&  Fide,  c.  37 :  Ti
ip^Sf  &  oZros,  KuroKOfdiwv  tih&v  €is  t^p  r^v  i\ir(^ ;  fitfiarrUrfitBa  yiip  ovic
f  ts  &y6penrov  awXas,  &A\*  els  Btbp  ivnv9p%oin\K6ra,  iced  iofihna  tolv^s  koI  tS»v
^X"^^  euTiofuiTftfr  rohs  r^v  tls  ainhv  irlffrw  iKZe^eyfJi-^vovs  ....  itwoKiwv
ykp  a^iaprlas  rbv  ahr^  irpoffKeifitvov,  t&  tSUp  \otirhv  jcaraxp^ci  irvt^fiari'  Swep
4vlri<ri  fi^vahrhSf  &s  ix  0€ov  IlaTpbs  A6yo5,  koX  i^  i^las  rifuviufainiydiCet^^aewu
He  quotes  Bom.  yiii.  9,  10.

*  I  Cor.  X.  16 :  Koivuvla  rov  afjuaros  rod  Xpicrrov  .  •  .  Kowwyla  rod  <n&-
fiaros  rov  Xptarov.  St.  Just.  Mart.  Apol.  i.  66 :  Ov  yhp  its  Koivhv  &prov  ovih
Koivhy  TrSfia  ravra  \afifidvofitV  iXK*  hv  rp&KOV  81^  A6yov  6coD  (rapKOiroiridcU
'IijflToOs  Xpiffrhs  6  2fl0T^p  ^fi&y  Kal  <rdpKa  Ktd  cUfw  inrhp  comiplas  rifi&v  i<rx^^f
othws  tad  r^v  5i'  tvxvs  \6yov  rov  trap*  oJnov  thxctpiarriOeiffap  rpo^^v,  i^  ^s
dtfM  HoL  adpK€5  Karh,  /icrajSoXi^v  rp4<poirrai  rifiMV,  ixelyov  rod  <rapKoiroiri64vros
*lri<rov  Kol  ffdpKa  Ktd  oTjua  iHi^dx^riixtv  clvcu,  Cf.  Domer,  Person  Christi,
Erster  Theil,  p.  435,  note  47 :  'Justin  denkt  sich  den  ganzen  Christns  in
Yerbindung  mit  dem  Abendmahl.  Auch  so  kann  er  sich  diese  unter  dem
Bilde  der  Incarnation  denken,  indem  Christus  die  Elemente  zum  sichbaren
Organ  seiner  Wirksamkeit  und  Selbstmittheilung  macht»  und  das  dorch
seine  Erhohung  yerlome  Moment  der  Sichtbarkeit  seiner  objectiyen  £r-
scheinung  sich  in  jedem  Abendmahl  durch  Assumtion  der  sichtbaren
Elemente  wieder  herstellt.'  For  the  connection  between  the  Holy  Eu-
charist and  our  Lord's  Diyinity,  see  St.  Cyril  Alex.  Epist.  Synod,  ad
Nestorium,  c.  7  »  T^»'  i^vcdfAoucrov  iv  reus  iKK\rialaus  rtXovfiev  0v<riay,  trpSai-
Ijl4v  tc  oStci)  reus  fivcriKOis  tbKoylcus  Ktd  orfia^6fiiBaf  fi4roxoi.yfv6fA€yoi  rrjs  r«
ayicis  aapKhs,  Ktd  rov  rifilov  cSfiaroF  rod  vdmrav  rifiay  ^orr^pos  Xpurrov'  lad
obx  &s  adpna  koiptiv  S€x6fi€Vot  {fi^  y4votro)  o1h€  fi^v  &5  AvSphs  rtyuurfitpov
Ktd  avycuf>$4vros  r^  A6y<p  xarii  r^v  iv6rrtra  rrjs  i^laSf  ^ovv  &s  Bfica^  itfol-
KfiiTiv  iaxw^oSf  &AA*  cbs  (faoiroibv  hKriBcos  Ktd  iZltw  ahrov  rov  A6yov,  TmHi
yiip  tiv  Karh  <f>baiv  &s  Behs,  iircid^  ytyovtv  tv  irphs  t^v  iavrov  adpKci,  Cowiroihp
kir4<l>r}V€v  avrrw.  This  epistle,  giyen  in  Bouth,  Scr.  Opusc.  ii.  17,  ed.  3,
was  written  Noy.  430,  and  read  with  tacit  approysd,  as  it  seems,  at  the
General  Council  of  Ephesus  in  431.  (See  Bright's  Hist.  Ch.  pp.  336,  333.)
A  similar  passage  is  in  St.  Cyril's  Explanatio  xii.  Capitum  (tom.  yi.  p.  156),
to  the  effect  that  the  Body  and  Blood  in  the  Holy  Eucharist  are  ovx  ^vhs
rSov  KOJBt  riftas  Ktd  iofBpdticov  Kotvov,  but  l^iov  trSofia  km  cJfia  rov  rh  irdyra  (ooo-
yovovvros  A&yov*  koiv^  yhp  trhp^  ^uowoieTv  oh  8^i/arat,  Ktd  roinov  fidprvs  civrhs
6  'Sior^pf  K4yoiVf  '*H  <rhp^  oIk  «^€A.€i  ov^\if,  rh  vpevfid  itrri  rh  ^(woiroiovv.*
So  in  his  Comm.  in  Joan.  lib.  iy.  (tom.  iy.  p.  361)  he  says  that  as  Christ's
Flesh,  by  union  with  the  Word,  Who  is  essentially  Life,  (wovoihs  y4yoy€,
therefore,  Zrcuf  abr^s  awoyevffSfifOOf  r6re  r^v  ^ta^v  Ij^o/icv  4v  icwrots,

*  St.  Matt,  xxyiii.  19 ;  xxyi.  a6.

*  St.  John  iii.  5 ;  vi.  53  sqq.  '  St.  John  xy.  I  sqq.

[liSCT.


depreciation  of  the  Christian  Sacraments.     49 1

Apostle  proclaiming  that  we  are  members  of  His  Body,  from
His  Flesh  and  from  His  Bones  s ;  then  in  a  sphere,  so  inacces-
sible to  the  measurements  of  natural  reason,  so  absolutely
controlled  by  the  great  axioms  of  faith,  it  will  not  seem  incre-
dible that '  as  many  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ  *  should
really  '  have  put  on  Christ  ^*  or  that  *  the  Body  of  Jesus  Christ
which  was  given  for  us '  should  now,  when  received  sacrammi-
tally,  *  preserve  our  bodies  and  souls  unto  everlasting  life  *.'  In
view  of  our  Lord's  Divinity,  we  cannot  treat  as  so  much
profitless  and  vapid  metaphor  the  weighty  sentences  which
Apostles  have  traced  around  the  Font  and  the  Altar,  any  more
than  we  can  deal  thus  lightly  with  the  precious  hopes  and
promises  that  are  graven  by  lie  Divine  Spirit  upon  the  Cross.
The  Divinity  of  Christ  warrants  the  realities  of  sacramental
grace  as  truly  as  it  warrants  the  cleansing  virtue  of  the  Atoning
Blood.  If  it  forbids  our  seeing  in  the  Great  Sacrifice  for  sin,
nothing  higher  than  a  moral  exemplar,  it  also  forbids  our
degrading  the  august  institutions  of  the  Divine  Eedeemer  to  the
level  of  the  dead  ceremonies  of  the  ancient  law.  And  con-
versely, belief  in  the  reality  of  sacramental  grace  protects  belief
in  a  Christ  Who  is  really  Divine.  Sacraments,  if  fully  believed
in,  furnish  outworks  in  the  religious  thought  and  in  the  daily
habits  of  the  Christian,  which  necessarily  and  jealously  guard
the  prerogatives  and  honour  of  his  adorable  Lord.

That  depreciation  of  the  Sacraments  has  often  been  followed
by  depreciation  of  our  Lord's  Eternal  Person  is  a  simple  matter
of  historyj.  True,  there  have  been  and  are  earnest  believers  in
our  Lord's  Divinity  who  deny  the  realities  of  sacramental  grace.
But  experience  appears  to  shew  that  their  position  may  be  only
a  transitional  one.  History  illustrates  the  tendency  to  Huma-
nitarian declension  even  in  cases  where  sacramental  belief,  al-
though imperfect,  has  been  far  nearer  to  the  truth  than  is  the
bare  naturalism  of  Zwingli^.  Many  English  Presbyterian  congre-

»  Eph.  v.  30.    See  Lect.  VI,  p.  352,  note  w,  ^  Gal.  iii.  37.

*  Oommtmion  Service.

^  Mill,  University  Sermons,  p.  190;  Gladstone  on  Church  Principles^
p.  185.

^  Zwingli  de  Yerft  et  Falsft  Belig.  Op.  iii.  p.  363.  n.  A :  'Est  ergo  sive
encharistia  sive  synazis,  sive  coena  dominica  nihil  aliud  quam  commemoratio,
quft  ii,  qui  se  Ghristi  morte  et  sanguine  firmiter  credunt  patri  recondliatos
esse,  ha^c  vitalem  mortem  annunciant,  hoc  est  laudant,  gratulantur  et
prsedicant.  Jam  ergo  sequitur,  quod  qui  ad  hunc  usum  aut  festivitatem
conveniunt  mortem  domini  commemoraturi,  hoc  est  annunciaturi,  sese  unius
corporis  esse  membra^  sese  unum  panem  esse  ipso  facto  testentur  •  •  •  •  •

vm]


492  Sacraments  preserve  faith  in  Chris fs  Divinity.

gations,  founded  by  men  who  fell  away  from  the  Chnrcli  in  the
seyenteenth  century,  were,  during  the  eighteenth,  absorbed  into
Arianism  or  Socinianism  \  The  pulpit  and  the  chair  of  Calym
are  filled  by  teachers  who  have,  alas  I  much  more  in  conmuHi
with  the  Bacovian  Catechism  than  with  the  positive  elements  of
the  theology  of  the  Institutes™.  The  restless  mind  of  man  cannot
but  at  last  press  a  principle  to  the  real  limit  of  its  application,
even  although  centuries  should  intervene  between  the  premiss
and  the  conclusion.  If  we  imagine  that  the  Sacraments  are  only

Qui  ergo  cnm  Chiistianis  •ommeat,  qunm  mortein  domim  aTinnntiant,  qui
simul  Bymbolicum  panem  aut  camem  edit,  is  nimirum  post^  secmulum
Christi  pnsscriptum  vivere  debet,  nam  ezperimentum  dedit  aliis,  qnod
Ohristo  fidat.*  Here  Grod  does  and  gives  nothing ;  the  ceremony  described
is  not  a  '  means  of  grace  *  but  only  and  simply  an  act  of  man,  a  hunan
ceremonial  action,  expressive  of  certain  ideas  and  ctmvictions,  shared  by
those  who  take  part  in  it.  It  is  substantially  the  same  account  as  tbat
vi^hich  is  given  in  the  formal  documents  of  early  SocinianSsm.  (Cat.  Bac.
<1^*  334>  335}  337')  I^  would  be  an  extreme  injustice  to  Calvin  to  identiff
his  bdief  on  the  subject  with  these  unspiritual  errors.  Calvin  even  says:
'  Quioquid  ad  exprimendam  veram  suhstantialemque  corporis  ac  sangumii
Domini  communicationem,  qus9  sub  sacris  coensB  symbolis  fidelibus  exlii*
betur,  libenter  recipio ;  atque  ita  ut  non  imaginatione  duniaxat  €tut  meuiii
intelligeiUid  percipere,  sed  ut  re  ipsa  frui  in  alimentum  vitce  €stenuB  ia*
telUgantwr'  Instit.  iv.  17,  19.  The  force  of  this  language  was,  however,
practically  destroyed  by  Calvin*s  doctrine  of  Divine  decrees,  which  made
sacramental  grace  wholly  depetident  upon  the  sense  of  election,  that  is  to
say,  upon  the  subjective  state,  upon  the  feelings,  of  the  believer,  instead
of  upon  the  promise  and  word  of  Christ.  Thus  it  happened  that  humble
minds  among  Calvinists  would  naturally,  in  virtue  of  their  very  self-
distrust,  tend  to  adopt  a  Zwinglian  estimate  of  the  Eucharist :  and,  his*
torically  speaking,  Calvinism  has  in  this  matter  shewn  a  consistent  dia*
position  to  degenerate  in  a  Zwinglian  direction.  Belief  in  the  reality  of
Sacramental  grace  is  only  secured,  when  men  believe  that  such  grace
depends  not  on  themselves  but  on  the  promise  and  words  of  their  Saviour,
in  other  words,  that  it  is  objective.  And  the  objectivity  of  Sacramental
grace  implies  of  necessity  an  Omnipotent  Saviour,  Whose  grace  it  is.
St.  Augustine's  famous  saying,  'Accedit  verbum  ad  elementom,  et  fit
Sacramentum,'  is  hopelessly  unintelligible,  unless  He  who  institutes  the
Sacrament  and  warrants  its  abiding  efficacy  be  indeed  Divine.

^  See  Bogue  and  Bennett's  History  of  Dissenters,  iii.  240,  319 ;  It.  319^
383;  and  the  Law  Magazine,  vol.  xv.  (May,  1836,)  p.  348.  In  our  owa
country,  other  Calvinistio  communions  have  in  general  been  happily  pi«>
served  from  such  a  fall.  But  the  case  of  EngUsh  Presbyterianism  mdi
parallels  in  Geneva^  in  Holland,  in  iFrance,  and  in  America.  Such  lose
of  truth  by  others  can  never  give  Churchmen  any  'controversial'  satia*
faction ;  the  more  truth  is  held  by  Dissenters,  the  better  both  for  them,
and  for  tiie  honour  of  Christ.  But  the  subject  may  suggest  wamingi  to
oursdves.

™  Laing's  Notes  of  a  Traveller,  pp.  324-5,  quoted  in  Chr.  Bern.  July,
1863,  p.  247.

[iJSCT.


Priesthood  and  Royalty  of  the  Divine  Christ.  49  3

picturesque  memorials  of  an  absent  Christ,  we  are  already  in
a  fair  way  to  believe  that  the  Christ  Who  is  thus  commemorated
as  absent  by  a  barren  ceremony  is  Himself  only  and  purely
human.  Certainly  if  Christ  were  not  Divine,  tiie  efficacy  of
Sacraments  as  channels  of  graces  that  flow  from  His  Manhood
would  be  the  wildest  of  fancies.  Certainly  if  Sacraments  are
not  thus  channels  of  His  grace,  it  is  difficult  to  shew  that  they
have  any  rightful  place  in  a  dispensation,  from  which  the  dead
forms  and  profitless  shadows  of  the  synagogue  have  been
banished,  and  where  all  that  is  authorized  is  instinct  with  the
power  of  a  heavenly  life.  The  fact  that  such  institutions  as  the
Sacraments  are  lawful  in  such  a  religion  as  the  Gospel,  of  itself
implies  their  real  efficacy :  their  efficacy  points  to  the  Godhead
of  their  Founder.  Instead  of  only  reviving  the  thought  of  a
distant  past,  they  quicken  all  the  powers  of  the  Christian  by
union  with  a  present  and  living  Saviour ;  they  assure  us  that
Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  to  us  at  this  moment  what  He  was  to
His  first  disciples  eighteen  centuries  ago ;  they  make  us  know
and  feel  that  He  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,
unchanging  in  His  human  tenderness,  because  Himself  the
unchanging  God.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Divinity  to
which  tiiey  point,  and  which  in  turn  irradiates  the  perpetuity
and  the  reality  of  their  power.

(d)  It  is  unnecessary  for  us  to  dwell  more  at  length  upon  the
light  which  our  Lord's  Divinity  sheds  upon  His  Priestly  office.
We  know  that  as  £[i8  promise  and  presence  make  poor  human
words  and  simple  elements  the  channels  of  His  mercy,  by  takiiig
them  up  into  His  kingdom  and  giving  them  a  power  which  of
themselves  they  have  not,  so  it  is  His  Divinity  which  makes
His  Intercession  in  Heaven  so  omnipotent  a  force.  He  inter-
cedes above,  by  His  very  presence;  He  does  not  bend  as  a
suppliant  before  the  Sanctity  of  God ;  He  is  a  Priest  upon  His
Tlurone  ^.  Nor  may  we  linger  over  the  bearings  of  His  Divinity
upon  His  Kingly  office.  The  fact  that  He  rules  with  a  bound*
less  power,  may  assure  us  that,  whether  willingly  or  by  con-
straint, yet  assuredly  in  the  end,  all  moral  beings  ^hall  be  put
under  Him  o.  But  you  do  not  question  the  legitimacy  of  this
obvious  inference.    And  time  forbids  us  to  linger  upon  the

A  Zeoh.  tI.  13.  Christ*!  perpetual  presentation  of  Himself  before  the
Father  is  that  which  constitutes  His  Intercession.  It  lasts  until  the  Judg-
menty  as  the  enduring  antitype  to  the  High  Priest's  presentation  of  the
victim's  blood  in  the  Holy  of  Holies.    Heb.  Till.  3 ;  ix.  24.

^  I  Cor.  XV.  25 ;  Heb.  ii.  8.

vni]


494  Objection  to  Chrisfs  Divinity  on  moral  grounds.

topic,  suggestiye  and  interestmg  as  it  is.  We  pass  then  to
consider  an  objection  which  will  have  been  taking  shape  in
many  minds  daring  the  course  of  the  preceding  discussion.

TTT.  Ton  admit  that  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Godhead  illumi-
nates the  force  of  other  doctrines  in  the  Christian  creed,  a/id
that  it  explains  the  importance  attributed  to  her  sacramental
ordinances  by  the  Christian  Chnrch.  But  yon  have  the  interests
of  morality  at  heart ;  and  yon  are  concerned  lest  this  doctrine
should  not  merely  £ul  to  stimulate  the  moral  life  of  men,  but
should  eyen  depriye  mankind  of  a  powerful  incentive  to  moral
energy.  The  Humanitarian  Christ  is,  you  contend,  the  most
precious  treasure  in  the  moral  capital  of  the  world.  He  \&  the
Perfect  Man ;  and  men  can  really  copy  a  life  which  a  brother
man  has  lived.  But  if  Christ's  Godhead  be  insisted  on,  you
contend  that  His  Human  Life  ceases  to  be  of  value  as  an
ethical  model  for  humanity.  An  example  must  be  in  some
sense  upon  a  level  with  those  who  essay  to  imitate  it.  A  model
being,  ^e  conditions  of  whose  existence  are  absolutely  distinct
from  the  conditions  which  surround  his  imitators,  will  be
deemed  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  any  serious  imitation.  If
then  the  dogma  of  Christ's  Godhead  does  illuminate  and  sap-
port  other  doctrines,  this  result  is,  in  your  judgment,  purchased
at  the  cost  of  practical  interests.  A  merely  human  saviour
would  at  least  be  imitable ;  and  he  would  thus  better  respond
to  the  immediate  moral  necessities  of  man.  For  man  is,  after
all,  the  child  of  common  sense ;  and  before  he  embarks  upon  a
serious  enterprise,  he  desires  to  be  reasonably  satisfied  that  be
is  not  aiming  at  the  impracticable.

I.  Now  this  objection  is  of  an  essentially  b,  priori  character.
It  contends  that,  if  Christ  is  God,  His  Manhood  must  be  out  of
the  reach  of  human  imitation.  It  does  not  deny  the  fieict  that
He  has  been  most  closely  imitated  by  those  who  have  believed
most  entirely  in  His  true  Divinity.  In  fact  it  seems  to  leaye
out  of  sight  two  very  pertinent  considerations.

(a)  The  objector  appears  to  forget,  on  the  one  hand,  that
according  to  the  terms  of  the  Catholic  doctrine,  our  Lord  is
truly  and  literally  Man,  and  that  it  is  His  Human  Nature  which
is  proposed  to  our  imitation.  His  Divinity  does  not  destroy
the  reality  of  His  Manhood,  by  overshadowing  or  absorbing  ii
Certainly  the  Divine  attributes  of  Jesus  are  beyond  our  imita-
tion ;  we  can  but  adore  a  boundless  Intelligence  or  a  resistless
Will.  But  the  province  of  the  imitable  in  the  Life  of  Jesus  is
not  indistinctly  traced.   As  the  Friend  of  publicans  and  sinners,

[lect.


Christ's  Manhood  imitable,  but  through  Grace,  495

as  the  Consoler  of  those  who  suffer,  and  as  the  Helper  of  those
■who  want,  Jesus  Christ  is  at  home  among  us.  We  can  copy
Him,  not  merely  in  the  outward  activities  of  charity,  hut  in  its
inward  temper  ;  we  can  copy  the  tenderness,  the  meekness,  the
patience,  the  courage,  which  shine  forth  from  His  Perfect
Manhood.  His  Human  Perfections  constitute  indeed  a  fault-
less Ideal  of  Beauty,  which,  as  moral  artists,  we  are  hound  to
keep  in  view.  What  the  true  and  highest  model  of  a  human
life  is,  has  been  decided  for  us  Christians  by  the  appearance  of
Jesus  Christ  in  the  flesh.  Others  may  endeavour  to  reopen
that  question.  For  us  it  is  settled,  and  settled  irrevocably.
Kor  are  Christ's  Human  Perfections  other  than  human ;  they
are  not,  after  the  manner  of  Divine  attributes,  out  of  our  reach ;
they  are  not  designed  only  to  remind  us  of  what  human  nature
should,  but  cannot,  be.  We  can  approximate  to  them,  even
indefinitely.  That  in  our  present  state  of  imperfection  we
should  reproduce  them  in  their  fulness  is  indeed  impossible;
but  it  is  certain  that  a  close  imitation  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  at
once  our  duty  and  our  privilege.  For  God  has  *  predestinated
us  to  be  conformed '  by  that  which  we  do,  not  less  than  by  that
which  we  endure,  to  the  Human  Image  of  His  Blessed  Son,

*  that  He  might  be  the  Firstborn  among  many  brethren  p.*

(j3)  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  may  it  be  forgotten  that  if  we  can
thus  copy  our  Lord,  it  is  not  in  the  strength  of  our  fallen  nature.
Vain  indeed  would  be  the  effort,  if  in  a  spirit  of  Pelagian  self-re-
liance, we  should  endeavour  to  reproduce  in  our  own  lives  the  like-
ness of  Christ.  Our  nature  left  to  itself,  enfeebled  and  depraved,
cannot  realize  the  ideal  of  which  it  is  a  wreck,  until  a  higher
power  has  entered  into  it,  and  made  it  what  of  itself  it  cannot  be.
l^erefore  the  power  of  imitating  Jesus  comes  from  Jesus  through
His  Spirit,  His  Grace,  His  Presence.    Now,  as  in  St.  Paul's  day,

*  Jesus  Christ  is  in  us '  Christians,  *  except  we  be  reprobates  ^.'
The  *  power  that  worketh  in  us '  is  no  mere  memory  of  a  distant
past.  It  is  not  natural  force  of  feeling,  nor  the  strength  with
which  self-discipline  may  brace  the  will.  It  is  a  living,  ener-
gizing, transforming  influence,  inseparable  from  the  presence  of  a
'  quickening  Spirit  '*  such  as  is  in  very  deed  our  glorified  Lord.
If  Christ  bids  us  follow  Him,  it  is  because  He  Himself  is  the
enabling  principle  of  our  obedience.  If  He  would  have  us  be
like  unto  Himself  this  is  because  He  is  willing  by  His  indwelling
Presence  to  reproduce  His  likeness  within  us.    If  it  is  His  Will

!> Rom.  viii.  39.  «  2  Cop.  xiii.  5,  'I  Cor.  xv.  45.

vni]


49^  Moral fruitfulness  of  faith  in  Christ's  Godhead.

that  we  ahonld  grow  np  auto  Him  in  all  things  Who  is  the  Head,
wwa  Christ  ■ ;  tliis  ia  because  His  life-giving  and  life-anstaining
power  is  really  distributed  throoghont  die  body  of  His  members  >.
Of  ourselves  we  are 'miserable,  and  poor,and  blind,  and  uskedV
But  we  take  counsel  of  Him,  and  hny  of '  "ffii;  gold  tried  in  the
fire ; '  and  forthwith  we  '  can  do  all  things  through  Him  That
Btrengtheaeth'  va^.  -  It  is  the  Spiritual  Presence  (d  Christ  in  the
Church  and  in  Christian  sonls  which  makes  the  systematic  imi-
tation of  Christ  something  else  than  a  waste  of  energy ».  But  if
the  Christ  "Whom  we  imitate  be  truly  tnman,  the  Christ  Who
thus  creates  and  fertilizes  moral  power  within  us  must  be  Divine.
His  Divinity  does  not  disturb  tLe  ontline  of  that  model  which
is  supplied  by  His  Manhood ;  while  it  does  furnish  us  with  a
stock  of  inwfu^  force,  in  the  absence  of  which  an  imitation  of
the  Perfect  moral  Being  would  be  a  fruitless  enterprise,

2.  Indeed,  it  is  precisely  this  beLef  in  the  Divinity  of  onr
Lord  which  has  enriched  human  life  with  moral  virtuea  snch  as
civilized  paganism  could  scarcely  have  appreciated,  and  which  it
certainly  could  not  have  created.  The  fruitfulness  of  this  great
doctrine  in  the  sphere  of  morals  will  be  more  immediately  appa-
rent, if  we  consider  one  or-  two  samples  of  its  produdiTeneas.

(a)  When  Greek  thoi^ht  was  keenest,  and  Greek  art  most
triumphantly  creative,  and  Greek  political  life  so  organized  as
to  favour  in  a  degree  elsewhere  unknown  among  men  the  play
of  man's  highest  natural  energies,  Greek  society  was  penetrated
through  and  through  by  an  invisible  enemy,  more  fatal  in  its
ravages  to  thought,  to  art,  to  freedom,  than  the  sword  of  any
Persian  or  Macedonian  foe  *.  And  already  in  the  age  of  the  early
Cesars,  Rome  carried  in  her  bosom  the  secret  of  her  impending
decline  and  fell  in  the  coming  oentnrieB.  Christian  moralists
detected  and  exposed  it  in  terms  7  which  are  fully  borne  out  by
writers  devoted  to  the  old  p^an  society.  The  life-blood  of
a  race  may  be  drained  away  less  nobly  than  on  the  tattle-field.
Every  capacity  for  high  and  generous  exertion,  or  for  the  cheer-
ful endurance  of  suffering  at  the  bidding  of  duty,  all  the  stock  <^
mnral  fiiivo  im  nrlilch  ft  oouutry  Can  rely  in  its  hour  of  trial,  may
3d,  annihilated  by  a  domestic  .traitor.  So  it
.  Borne.  The  fate  of  the  great  empire  was  not
he  Khine  or  on  \h.e  Danube.    Before  the  bar*

*  Ibid.  i.  83 ;  iv.  i6.  ■  E«t.  iii.  t;.

"  Eph.  iv.  is-»4-
[entliam  and  Judentbiuii,  bk.  g.  i.  3.  p.  6S4,  elo.
Cf.  Lect.  m,  p.  14a.

[iSCT.


Its  relation  to  the  grace  of  Purity,        49  7

barians  had  as  yet  begun  to  muster  their  savage  hordes  along  the
frontiers  of  ancient  civilization,  their  work  had  wellnigh  been
completed,  their  victory  had  been  won,  in  the  cities,  the  palaces,
nay,  in  the  very  temples  of  the  empire.  And  upon  what  resources
could  the  old  Pagan  Society  fall  back,  in  its  alarm  at,  and  strug-
gle with  this  formidable  foe  1  It  could  not  depend  upon  the  State.
The  Emperor  was  the  State  by  impersonation ;  and  not  unfre-
quently  it  happened  that  the  Emperor  was  the  public  friend  and
patron  of  the  State's  worst  enemy.  Nor  could  any  reliance  be
placed  upon  philosophy.  Doubtless  philosophy  meant  well  in  some
of  its  phases,  in  some  of  its  representatives.  But  philosophy  is
much  too  feeble  a  thing  to  enter  the  lists  successfully  with,  animal
passion ;  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  philosophy  has  more  than  once
been  compelled  or  cajoled  into  placing  her  intellectual  weapons
at  the  disposal  of  the  sensualist.  Nor  did  religion  herself,  in
her  pagan  guise,  supply  the  needed  elemei^t  of  resistance  and
cure.  Her  mysteries  were  the  sanction,  her  temples  the  scene,
her  priests  the  ministers  of  the  grossest  debaucheries :  and  the
misery  of  a  degraded  society  might  have  seemed  to  be  complete,
when  the  institutions  which  were  designed  to  shed  some  rays  of
light  and  love  from  a  higher  sphere  upon  the  woes  and  brutalities
of  this  lower  world,  did  but  consecrate  and  augment  the  thick
moral  darkness  which  made  of  earth  a  very  hell  \

Now,  that  Jesus  Christ  has  breasted  this  evil,  is  a  matter  of
historical  fact.  His  victory  is  chronicled,  if  not  in  the  actual
practice,  yet  in  the  conventional  standard  of  modem  society.
Certainly  the  evil  in  question  has  not  been  fairly  driven  beyond
the  frontiers  of  Christendom ;  the  tone  of  our  social  intercourse,
the  sympathies  of  our  literature,  the  proceediiigs  of  our  law-courts,
would  remind  us  from  time  to  time  '  that  the  Canaanite  is  yet  in
the  land.*  But  if  he  is  not  yet  expelled  from  our  borders,  at
least  he  is  forced  to  skulk  away  from  the  face  of  a  society  which
still  names  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  most  advanced
scepticism  among  us  at  the  present  day  does  not  venture  with
impunity  to  advocate  habits  which  were  treated  as  matters  of
course  by  the  friends  of  Plato :  even  the  licence  of  our  sensuous
poetry  does  not  screen  such  advocacy  from  earnest  and  general
indignation.  This  is  because,  far  beyond  the  circle  of  His  true
worshippers,  Jesus  Christ  has  created  in  modem  society  a  pub-
lic opinion,  sternly  determined  to  discountenance  and  condemn
morsd  mischief,  which  yet  it  may  be  unable  wholly  to  prevent.

■  Bollinger,  Heidenthuin  nnd  Judenthum,  bk.  9.  ii.  4  p.  718  sqq.
Tm]  K  k


498   Purity  created  by  finth  in  a  Divine  Christ.

This  poblic  opimon  is  Bometimes  tempted  to  disown  its  real
parentage  and  ita  undonbted  obligatione.     Instead  of  rejoicing
to  confesB  itself  the  pnpil  of  Christ,  it  imagines   schemes  <^
independent  morality  framed  altogether  bj  homan   ibinken,
wfaidi  may  reliere  it  of  its  sense  of  indebtedness  to  oar  Lord.
Bnt  as  a  matter  of  fact,  all  that  is  thus  tme  and  wholesome  in  the
national  mind  is  an  intellectual  radiation  from  that  actual  masi
of  living  parity,  wherewith  the  Healer  of  men  has  beautified  the
lives  of  millions  of  Christians.     And  how  baa  Jesus  made  men
purel  Did  He  insist  upon  prudential  andhygienic  considenktional
Did  He  prove  that  the  laws  of  the  physicsl  world  cannot  be
strained  or  broken  with  physical  imponity  %    No.    For,  at  least,
He  knew  human  natore  well;  and  experience  does  not  justiiytha
antidpatioo  that  scientific  demonstrations  of  Uie  physical  conse-
quences of  sensual  indulgence  will  be  equal  to  the  task  of  check'
ing  the  surging  impetuosity  of  pasmon.     Did  Christ,  then,  call
moi  to  purity  only  by  the  beauty  of  His  Own  example  1  Did  He
only  confront  them  with  a  living  ideal  of  purity,  so  bri^t  and
beaatifol  as  to  shame  them  into  hatred  of  animal  degradation  t
Again  I  say,  Jesna  Christ  knew  hnman  nature  well-     If  He  had
only  ofiered  an  example  of  perfect  purity.  He  would  bat  have
repeated  the  work  of  the  ancient  Law  ;  He  would  have  given  ni
an  ideal,  without  the  capacity  of  realizing  it ;  He  would  have  at
best  created  a  torturing  sense  of  shortcoming  and  pollntion,
stimulated  by  the  vision  of  an  unattainable  standard  of  perfection.
Therefore  He  did  not  merely  sfibrd  us  in  a  Homan  form  a  fault-
less example  of  chaste  humanity.     He  did  more.     He  did  that
»k;..i.  Hn  ^n.^^A  «ni™  j^  gg  being  in  truth  the  Almighty  Qod.
rith  our  human  nature,  that  He  might
;gh  its  contact  with  His  Divinity.     Ee
tmal  Person ;  He  made  it  His  own ;  He
;onld  qnicken  and  restore  ns.    And  thai,
t,  and  by  sacramental  joints  and  bands,
e  bound  us  through  it  to  Himself ;  nay,
'  it  He  entered  into  us,  and  made  our
nceforth,  then,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is
IS  regenerati  fit  caro  CrucifixL*    Henoe-
y  is  to  be  conscious  of  a  Presence  within
Dclean  spirit  cannot  choose  but  shrink
amed  ^    The  Apostle's  argument  to  Uw


The  grace  of  Humility.  499

Corinthian  Christians  expresses  the  language  of  the  Christian
conscience  in  presence  of  impure  temptations,  to  the  end  of  time.
*  Know  ye  not  that  your  bodies  are  the  members  of  Christ  %  shall
I  then  take  the  members  of  Christ,  and  make  them  the  members
of  an  harlot  f  God  forbid  «.'  From  that  day  to  this,  the  recoil
from  an  ingratitude  which  a  Christian  only  can  exhibit,  the  dread
of  an  act  of  sacrilege  which  a  Christian  only  can  commit,  the
loving  recognition  of  an  inward  Presence  which  a  Christian  only
can  possess — ^these  have  been  the  controlling,  sustaining,  hallow-
ing motives  which  by  God's  grace  have  won  i£e  victory.  But  these
motives  are  rooted  in  a  doctrine  of  Christ's  sacramental  union
with  His  people,  which  is  the  veriest  fable  unless  the  indwelling
Christ  be  truly  God.  The  power  of  these  motives  to  sustain  us
in  purity  varies  with  our  hold  on  the  master-truth  which  they  so
entirely  presuppose.  Such  motives  are  strong  and  effective  when
our  faith  in  a  Divine  Christ  is  strong ;  they  are  weak  when  our
faith  in  His  Divinity  is  weak ;  they  vanish  from  our  moral  life,
and  leave  us  a  prey  to  our  enemy,  when  the  Godliead  of  Jesus  is
explicitly  denied,  and  when  the  language  which  asserts  the  true
incorporation  of  an  Almighty  Saviour  with  our  frail  humanity  is
resolved  into  the  fantastic  drapery  of  an  empty  metaphor.

(/3)  If  the  civilized  pagan  was  impure,  he  was  also  proud  and
self-asserting.  He  might  perhaps  deem  overt  acts  of  pride  an
imprudence,  on  the  ground  that  they  were  likely  to  provoke  a
Nemesis  from  some  spiteful  deity.  The  fates  were  against  con-
tinued prosperity ;  and  it  was  unwise  to  boast  of  that  which
they  waited  to  destroy, —

'Invida  fatomm  series^  fnunmiflqiie  n^attnn
Stare  diii,  nimioqiie  graves  sab  pondere  lapsus  ^'

But  when  this  prudential  consideration  did  not  weigh  with  him,
the  pagan  gave  full  scope  to  the  assertion  of  self  in  thought,
word,  and  act.  The  sentiment  of  pride  was  not  in  conflict  with
his  higher  conscience,  as  would  be  the  case  with  Christians.  He
indulged  it  without  scruple,  nay  rather  upon  principle,—

'Seomidas  fartanas  deoent  snperbisB'.'

He  was  utterly  unable  to  see  intrinsic  evil  in  it ;  and  it  pene-
trated in  a  subtle  but  intense  form  into  the  heart  of  those  better
ethical  systems  which,  hke  the  later  Stoicism,  appeared  most
nearly  to  rival  the  moral  glories  of  the  Gk)spel.  Pride  indeed
might  seem  to  have  been  the  misery  of  paganism  rather  than  its

•  I  Cor.  vi.  15.  '  Lucan  i.  70.  »  Plant.  Stich.  ii.  i.  27.

Vra  J  K  k  2


500  The  grace  of  Humility  how  far  a  product

fault.  For  man  cannot  detach  himself  from  himself.  Man  ia
to  himself,  under  all  circnmetances,  an  ever-present  Babject  of
thought;  hut  whether  this  thought  is  humbly  to  correspond  to
the  real  conditions  of  his  existence,  or  is  to  assume  the  propor-
tions of  a  turgid  and  miserable  exaggeration,  will  depend  on  the
question  whether  man  does  or  does  not  see  constantly  and  tmly
That  One  Being  Who  alone  can  reveal  to  him  his  true  place  in
the  moral  and  intellectual  universe.  Paganism  was  not  humble,
because  to  paganism  the  true  God  was  but  a  name.  The  whole
life  and  thought  of  the  pagan  world  was  therefore  very  natoral);
based  on  pride.  Its  literature,  Its  governments,  its  religioui
institutions,  its  social  organization  and  hierarchy,  its  doctrines
about  human  life  and  human  duty— all  alike  were  based  on  tiie
principle  of  a  boundless  self-assertion.  They  were  based  on  that
cruel  and  brutal  principle  which  in  the  end  bands  over  to  the
keenest  wit  and  to  the  strongest  arm  the  sceptre  of  a  tyranny,
that  knows  no  bounds,  save  those  of  its  strongest  lust,  checked
and  controlled  by  the  most  lively  apprehensions  of  its  selfish
foresight.  Now  how  did  Jesus  ChriBt  coniront  this  power  of
pride  thus  dominant  in  the  old  pagan  world  t  By  precept  1  Un-
doubtedly. '  The  kings  of  the  Gentiles,'  He  said  to  His  followen,
'exercise  lordship  over  them;  and  they  that  exercise  authority
upon  them  are  called  benefactors.  But  ye  shall  not  be  soV
'  Whosoever  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased  ;  and  he  that  bnm-
bleth  himself  shall  be  exalted ','  By  example  %  Let  us  listen  to
Him.  '  Leai-n  of  Me  ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and
ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls  ^.'  '  If  I  your  Lord  and  Master
have  washed  your  feet,  ye  ought  to  wash  one  anothei's  feetl.'

But  why  was  His  example  so  cogent  %  What  was  it  in  Jeeni
Christ  which  revealed  to  man  the  moral  beauty  and  the  moral
power  of  the  humiliation  of  self)  Was  it  that  being  a  Man,
Who  had  within  His  grasp  the  prizes  which  are  at  the  command
of  genius,  or  the  state  and  luxuries  which  may  be  bought  by
wraith.  He  put  these  things  from  Him )  If  He  was  only  Man,
did  He  really  forego  wealth  and  station  t  Were  they  ever — at
least  on  a  great  scale — within  Hia  reach !  Even  if  it  be  thought
that  they  were,  was  His  renunciation  of  them  a  measure  of
'  that  mind  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  ">,'  to  which  St.  Paul  directo
the  gaze  of  the  practical  Christian  J  St.  Paul,  as  we  have  seea,
meant  something  iar  higher  than  Uie  refusal  of  any  earthly

"  St.Luknxzii.  as.  '  Ibid.ziv.li.  *  St.  Matt.  li.  aj.

■  St.  John  ziii.  14.  <°  Phil.  ii.  j.

[lect.


of  faith  in  the  Divinity  of  Christ.         501

greatness  when  he  drew  attention  to  the  self-renunciation  of  his
Lord  and  Master.     *  Being  in  the  form  of  God,  .  • .  He  emptied
Himself  of  His  glory,  and  took  on  Him  the  form  of  a  slave  ^.*
Historically  speaking,  it  is  not  Christ's  renunciation  of  earthly
advantages  which  has  really  availed  to  make  Christians  humble.
The  strongest  motives  to  Christian  humility  are,  first,  the  nearer
sight  of  God*s  Purity  and  Blessedness  which  we  attain  through
communion  with  His  Blessed  Son,  and  next,  or  rather  especially,
as  the  Apostle  points  out,  the  real  scope  and  force  of  Christ's
own  example.      Christ  left  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the
Father  before  the  world  was,  to  .become  Man.     He  '  took  upon
Him  our  flesh,  and  suffered  death  upon  the  Cross,  that  all  man-
kind might  follow  the  example  of  His  great  humility  <>.'    There-
fore the  manifestations  of  humility  in  Christendom  have  varied,
on  the  whole,  correspondingly  with  earnestness  of  belief  in  that
pre-existent  gloiy  from  which  the  Redeemer  bent  so  humbly  to
the  Cross  of  shame.      Certainly,  in  Jesus  this  deepest  of  hu-
miliations was  the  fruit  of  His  charity  for  souls ;  whereas,  in  us,
humble  thoughts  and  deeds  are  the  necessary  because  the  just
expression  of  a  true  self-knowledge.      Yet,  nevertheless,  the
doctrine    of   Christ's   true   Godhead,'  discerned  through   the
voluntary  lowliness  and   sufferings   of  His   Manhood,  braces
humility,  and  rebukes  pride  at  the  bar  of  the  Christian  con-
science.    Can  men  really  see  God  put  such  honour  on  humility,
and  be  as  though  they  saw  it  not  ]     Can  a  creature,  who  has
nothing  good  in  him  that  he  has  not  received,  and  whose  moral
evil  is  entirely  his  own,  behold  the  Highest  One  thus  teaching
him  the  truthful  attitude  of  a  created  life,  without  emotion,  with-
out shame,  without  practical  self-abasement  %  What  place  is  there
for  great  assertions  of  self  in  a  man  who  sincerely  believes  that
he  has  been  saved  by  the  Death  of  the  Incarnate  Son  of  God  1
Who  has  the  heart  to  vaunt  his  own  opinion,  or  to  parade  his
accomplishments,  or  to  take  secret  pleasure  in  income  or  station
or  intellectual  power,  when  he   reflects  upon  the  astonishing
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Who,  when  He  was  rich,  for  our
sakes  became  poor  p  ?  It  is  the  Incarnation  which  has  confronted
human  pride,  by  revealing  God  clearly  to  the  conscience  of  men,
but  also,  and  especially,  by  practically  setting  the  highest  possible
honour  upon  extreme  self-humiliation.     It  is  the  Incarnation
which  has  led  men  to  veil  high  gifts,  and  to  resign  places  of

»  Phil,  ii.  6,  7.  o  Collect  for  Sunday  before  Easter.

^  A  Cor.  viii.  9,

vni]


502     The  grace  of  charity  how  far  a  product

influeitce,  and  to  forego  the  advautageE  of  wealth  and  birth,  that
they  might  have  some  part,  boweTer  fractionally  small,  in  the
moral  glories  of  Bethlehem  and  Calvary,  It  ia  tiie  Incamatim
which  has  thos  saved  Bociet;  again  and  again  from  the  rero-
lutionary  or  deepotic  violence  of  nnbridled  amhitiona,  by  bringing
into  the  field  of  political  activity  the  corrective,  compeneatiDg
force  of  active  seu-deuial.  An  enthueiaBm  for  withdrawal  from
the  general  struggle  to  aggrandise  seK  has  fascinated  those  vor-
shippere  of  an  Bicamate  Qod,  who  have  learnt  from  Him  tiie
tme  glory  of  taking  the  lowest  place  at  the  feast  of  htunan  UJe.
But  the  motive  for  such  repression  of  self  is  powerful  only  80
far  aa  faith  in  ChriBt'e  Godhead  is  clear  and  strong.  The  cnltme
of  humility  does  not  enter  into  the  ordinary  schemee  of  natural
ethics ;  and  Humanitarian  doctrines  are  found,  as  a  rule,  to
accompany  intellectual  and  social  self-assertion.  It  has  bera
tme  from  the  first,  it  is  true  at  this  hour,  that  a  sincere  &ith
(vhich  recognises  in  the  Son  of  Mary,  laid  in  His  manger  and
nailed  to  TTip  Cross,  none  other  than  the  Only-begotten  8011  <A
God,  is  the  strongest  incentive  to  conquer  the  natural  pride  of
the  human  heart,  and  to  learn  the  bearing  of  a  little  child  4 —
that  true  note  of  predefined  nobility — in  the  Kingdom  of
Heaven.

(y)  Let  us  take  one  more  iUustratioD  of  the  moral  firuitfulnesi
of  a  ^ith  in  the  Divinity  of  our  Saviour,  There  is  a  grace,  to
which  the  world  iteelf  does  homage,  and  which  those  who  bend
neither  heart  nor  knee  before  the  world's  Bedeemer  admit  to  be
the  consequence  of  His  appearance  among  men.

Heathenism,  as  being  impnre  and  proud,  was  consistentlj

unloving.     For  as  the  one  vice  eats  ont  the  delicacy  and  heart

of  all  true  tendemesfi,  so   the   other  systematically  enthronei

self  upon  the  ruins  of  the  unselfish  affections.      Despito  tita

Utopian  sketches  which  have  been  drawn  fay  the  philosophers  of

the  last  cental?,  the  sentiment  of  '  humanity '  is  too  feeble  a

thing  to  create  in  os  a  true  love  of  man  as  man.    Uan  does  noti

in  his  natural  state,  love  his  brother  man,  except  it  be  Iron

"'  iterest  or  blood-relationship.    Nay,  man  regards  all

thus  related  to  him  as  forming  the  great  company

*1  rivals  and  enemies,  irom  whom  he  has  nothing  to

that  which  the  might  or  'Uie  prudence  of  self-interest


[leck


of  faith  in  the  Divinity  of  Christ.         503

rh  yap  oIk€iop  irU^a

viofff  6pM^    €if6vs  d*  dirfifAo>v  Kpadla

fcodoff  dfi(f>*  dXX^rptoy  ^,

Such  is  the  voice  of  imchristianized  nature :  man's  highest  love
is  the  love  of  self,  varied  by  those  subordinate  affections  which
minister  to  self-love :  and  society  is  an  agglomeration  of  self-
loving  beings,  whose  ruling  instincts  are  i^ped  by  force  or  by
prudence  into  a  pplitical  whole,  but  who  are  ever  ready,  as  op-
portunity may  arise,  to  break  forth  into  the  excesses  of  an
unchecked  barbarism.  Ck)ntempt  for  and  cruelty  towards  the
slave,  hatred  of  the  political  or  literary  rival,  suspicious  aversion
for  the  foreigner,  disbelief  in  the  reality  of  human  virtue  and  of
human  disinterestedness,  were  recognized  ingredients  in  the
temper  of  pagan  times.  The  science  of  life  consisted  in  solving
a  practical  equation  between  the  measure  of  evil  which  it  was
desirable  to  inflict  upon  others,  and  the  amount  of  suffering
which  it  might  be  necessary  to  endure  at  their  hands.  Love  of
mankind  would  have  seemed  folly  to  a  society,  the  recognised
law  of  whose  life  was  selflshness,  and  whose  vices  culminated  in
a  mutual  hatred  between  man  and  man,  class  and  class,  race
and  race,  thinly  veiled  by  the  hollow  conventionalisms  which
distinguish  Pagan  civilization  from  pure  barbarism  >.

How  did  Jesus  Christ  reform  this  social  corruption  )  He  gave
the  New  Commandment*  '  This  is  My  coilmiandment,  that  ye
love  one  another,  as  I  have  loved  you  *.'  But  was  His  love  merely
the  love  of  a  holy  man  for  those  whose  hearts  were  too  dull  and
earthly  to  love  Him  in  return  f  Could  such  a  human  love  as
this  have  availed  to  compass  a  moral  revolution,  and  to  change
the  deepest  instincts  of  mankind  1  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  .Christians
have  measured  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  as  man  measures  all  love,
by  observing  the  degree  in  which  it  involves  the  gift  of  self  I
Love  is  ever  the  gift  of  self.  It  gives  that  which  costs  us  some-
thing, or  it  is  not  love.  Its  spirit  may  vary  in  the  degree  of
intensity,  but  it  is  ever  the  same.  It  is  always  and  everywhere
the  sacnflce  of  self.  It  is  the  gift  of  time,  or  of  labour,  or  of
income,  or  of  affection ;  it  is  the  surrender  of  reputation  and  of
honour ;  it  is  the  acceptance  of  sorrow  and  of  pain  for  others.

'  Pind.  Nem.  i.  83.

'  Tit.  iii.  3 :  ^fity  ydp  irore  Ka\  ^fieis  iLvSriroi,  &irci9cif,  ir\ap6iJ.eyoit  9ou'
K€^VT€s  iirtdvfiiais  KciL  rjiovcus  irouclKouSf  iy  Kouclf  Kcd  tpBdv^  didyovTis,
aruytfroi,  fii(rovmes  itW-^Xovs

*  St.  John  XY.  la.

vin]


504  Ckariiy,  a  product  of  faith  in  Chris  fs  Divinity.

The  warmth  of  the  spirit  of  love  varies  with  the  felt  greatness
of  the  sacrifice  which  expresses  it  and  which  is  its  life.  There-
fore the  love  of  the  Divine  Christ  is  infinite.  *  He  loved  me,'
says  an  apostle,  *  and  gave  Himself  for  me  ^.*  The  *  Self*  which
He  gave  for  man  was  none  other  than  the  Infinite  God:  the
reality  of  Christ's  Godhead  is  the  truth  which  can  alone  measure
the  greatness  of  His  love.  The  charities  of  His  earthly  life  are
but  so  many  sparks  from  the  central  column  of  flame,  which
bums  in  the  Self-devotion  of  the  Eternal  Son  of  God.  The
agonies  of  His  Passion  are  illuminated  each  and  all  with  a  moral
no  less  than  a  doctiinal  meaning,  by  the  momentous  truth  that
He  Who  is  crucified  between  two  thieves  is  nevertheless  the
Lord  of  Glory.  From  this  faith  in  the  voluntary  Self-immolation
of  the  Most  Holy,  a  new  power  of  love  has  streamed  forth  into
the  soul  of  man  \  Of  this  love,  before  the  Incarnation,  man  not
only  had  no  experience ;  his  moral  education  would  not  have
trained  him  even  to  admire  it.  But  the  Infinite  Being  bowing
down  to  Self-chosen  humiliation  and  agony,  that,  without  violat-
ing His  essential  attributes.  He  might  win  to  Himself  the  heart
of  His  eriing  creatures,  has  provoked  an  answer  of  grateful  love,
first  towards  Himself,  and  then  for  His  sake  towards  His  crea-
tures. Thus  *  with  His  Own  right  Hand,  and  with  His  holy
Arm,  He  hath  gotten  Himself  the  victory  ^t '  over  the  selfishness
as  over  the  sins  of  man.  *  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved
us  y.'  If  human  life  .  has  heen  brightened  by  the  thousand
courtesies  of  our  Christian  civilization ;  if  human  pain  has  been
alleviated  by  the  unnumbered  activities  of  Christian  charity;  if
the  face  of  Christendom  is  beautified  by  institutions  which  cheer
the  earthly  existence  of  millions ;  these  results  are  due  to
Christian  faith  in  the  Charity  of  the  Redeemer,  which  is  infinite
because  the  Redeemer  is  Divine.  And  thus  the  temples  of
Christendom,  visibly  perpetuating  the  worship  of  Christ  from
age  to  age,  are  not  the  only  visible  witnesses  among  us  to  His
Divine  prerogatives.  The  hospital,  in  which  the  bed  of  anguish
is  soothed  by  the  hand  of  science  under  the  guidance  of  love ;
the  penitentiary,  where  the  victims  of  a  selfish  passion  are  raised
to  a  new  moral  life  by  the  care  and  delicacy  of  an  unmercenary
tenderness ;  the  school,  which  gathers  the  ragged  outcasts  of  our
great  cities,  rescuing  them  from  the  ignorance  and  vice  of  which

*  Gal.  ii.  30.

"*  Phil.  i.  8,  where  note   Iv  air\dyxyois  *lri<rov  Xpia-rov,  and  compare
St.  Luke  i.  78.

»  Ps.  xcviii.  a.  '  i  St.  John  iv.  19.

[lect.


\


Recapitulation.  505


else  they  must  be  the  prey; — what  is  the  fountain-head  of  these
blessed  and  practical  results,  but  the  truth  of  His  Divinity,  Who
has  kindled  man  into  charity  by  giving  Himself  for  man  %  The
moral  results  of  Calvary  are  what  they  are,  because  Christ  is
God.  He  Who  stooped  from  heaven  to  the  humiliations  of  the
Cross  has  opened  in  the  heart  of  redeemed  man  a  fountain  of
love  and  compassion.  No  distinctions  within  the  vast  circle  of
the  human  family  can  narrow  or  pervert  its  course ;  nor  can  it
cease  to  flow  while  Christians  believe,  that  Christ  crucified  for
men  is  the  Only-begotten  Son  of  God.

It  is  therefore  an  error  to  suppose  that  the  doctrine  of  our
Lord's  Divinity  has  impoverished  the  moral  life  of  Christendom
'  by  removing  Christ  from  the  category  of  imitable  beings.'  For
on  the  one  hand,  the  doctrine  leaves  His  Himianity  altogether
intact ;  on  the  other,  it  enhances  the  force  of  His  example  as  a
model  of  the  graces  of  humility  and  love.  Thus  from  age  to  age
this  doctrine  has  in  truth  fertilized  the  moral  soul  of  human  life,
not  less  than  it  has  guarded  and  illuminated  intellectual  truth.
How  indeed  could  it  be  otherwise  %  *  If  God  spared  not  His
Own  Son,  but  freely  gave  Him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  He  not
with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ^  *  Who  shall  wonder  if
wisdom  and  righteousness  and  sanctification  and  redemption  are
given  with  the  gift  of  the  Eternal  Son  ?  Who  shall  wonder  if  by
this  gift,  a  keen,  strong  sense  of  the  Personality  and  Life  of  God,
and  withal  a  true  estimate  of  man's  true  dignity,  of  his  capacity,
through  grace,  for  the  highest  forms  of  life,  are  guarded  in  the
sanctuary  of  human  thought  ?  Who  shall  gainsay  it,  if  along
with  this  gift  we  inherit  a  body  of  revealed  and  certain  truth,
reposing  on  the  word  of  an  Infallible  Teacher ;  if  we  are  washed
in  a  stream  of  cleansing  Blood,  which  flows  from  an  atoning
fountain  opened  on  Calvary  for  the  sin  and  uncleanness  of  a
guilty  world ;  if  we  are  sustained  by  sacraments  which  make  us
really  partakers  of  the  Nature  of  our  God ;  if  we  are  capable  of
virtues  which  embellish  and  elevate  humanity,  yet  which,  but  for
the  strength  and  example  of  our  Lord,  might  have  seemed  too
plainly  unattainable  ]

For  the  Divinity  of  God's  Own  Son,  freely  given  for  us
sinners  to  sufier  and  to  die,  is  the  very  heart  of  our  Christian
faith.  It  cannot  be  denied  without  tearing  out  the  vitals  of  a
living  Christianity.  Its  roots  are  sti-uck  far  back  into  the  pro-
phecy, the  typology,  the  ethics,  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  alone
supplies  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  moral  attitude  of  Jesus
Christ  towards  His  contemporaries.  It  is  the  true  key  to  His
vin]


5o6    Christ^ s  Divinity  the  strength  of  His  Church,

teaching,  to  His  miracles,  to  the  leading  mysteries  of  His  life,  to
His  power  of  controlling  the  issues  of  history.  As  such^  it  is
pnt  forward  by  apostles  who,  differing  in  much  besides,  were
made  one  by  this  faith  in  His  Divinity  and  in  the  truths  which
are  bound  up  with  it.  It  enters  into  the  world  of  speculative
discussion ;  it  is  analysed,  criticised,  denounced,  proscribed,  be-
trayed ;  yet  it  emerges  from  the  crucible  wherein  it  has  been
exposed  to  the  action  of  every  intellectual  solvent  that  hostile
ingenuity  could  devise ;  it  has  lost  nothing  from,  it  has  added
nothing  to,  its  original  significance ;  it  has  only  been  clothed  in
a  symbol  wHch  interprets  it  to  new  generations,  and  which  Uves
in  the  confessions  of  the  grateful  Church.  Its  later  history  is
explained  when  we  remember  the  basis  on  which  it  really  r^Bts.
The  question  of  Christ's  Divinity  is  the  question  of  the  Iruth  or
falsehood  of  Christianity.  *  If  Christ  be  not  God,'  it  has  been
truly  said,  *  He  is  not  so  great  as  Mohammed.'  But  Christ's
moral  relation  to  Mohammed  may  safely  be  left  to  every  un-
sophisticated conscience ;  and  if  the  conscience  owns  in  Him  the
Moral  Chief  of  humanity,  it  must  take  Him  at  His  word  when
He  unveils  before  it  His  superhuman  glory.

But  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Divinity  does  not  merely  bind  ub
to  the  historic  past,  and  above  all  to  the  first  records  of  Chris-
tianity;  it  is  at  this  hour  the  strength  of  the  Christian  Church.
There  are  forces  abroad  in  the  world  of  thought  which,  if  they
could  be  viewed  apart  from  all  that  counteracts  them,  might  well
make  a  Christian  fear  for  the  future  of  humanity.  It  is  not
merely  that  the  Church  is  threatened  with  the  loss  of  possessions
secured  to  her  by  the  reverence  of  centuries,  and  of  a  place  of
honour  which  may  perhaps  have  guarded  civilization  more  effec-
tively than  it  can  be  shewn  to  have  strengthened  religion.  The
Faith  has  once  triumphed  without  these  gifts  of  Providence;
and,  if  God  wills,  she  can  again  dispense  with  them.  But  never
since  the  first  ages  of  the  Gospel  was  fundamental  Christian
truth  denied  and  denounced  so  largely,  and  with  such  passionate
animosity,  as  is  the  case  at  this  moment  in  each  of  the  most
civilized  nations  of  Europe.  It  may  be  that  Gk)d  has  in  store
for  His  Church  greater  trials  to  her  faith  than  she  has  yet
experienced ;  it  may  be  that  along  with  the  revived  scorn  of  the
old  pagan  spirit,  the  persecuting  sword  of  pagan  hatred  will  yet
be  un^eathed.  Be  it  so,  if  so  He  wills  it.  The  holy  city  is
strong  in  knowing  '  that  God  is  in  the  midst  of  her,  tiierefore
shall  she  not  be  removed;  God  shall  help  her,  and  that  right
early.     The  heathen  make  much  ado^  and  the  kingdoms  are

[lect.


and  a  rallying-pointfor  disunited  Christendom.  507

moTed ;  but  God  hath  shewed  His  Voice,  and  the  earth  shall
melt  away/  When  the  waters  of  human  opinion  rage  and  swell,
and  the  mountains  shake  at  the  tempest  of  the  same,  our  Divine
Lord  is  not  unequal  to  the  defence  of  His  Name  and  His
Honour.  If  the  sky  seem  dark  and  the  winds  contrary;  if  ever
and  anon  the  strongest  intellectual  and  social  currents  of  our
civilization  mass  themselves  threateningly,  as  if  to  overwhelm
the  holy  bark  as  she  rides  upon  the  waves ;  we  know  Who  is
with  her,  unwearied  and  vigilant,  though  He  should  seem  to
sleep.  His  presence  forbids  despondency;  His  presence  assures
us  that  a  cause  which  has  consistently  conquered  in  its  day  of
apparent  failure,  cannot  but  calmly  abide  the  issue.  *  Although
the  fig-tree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be  in  the  vines ;
the  labour  of  the  olive  shall  fetil,  and  the  fields  shall  yield  no
meat ;  the  flocks  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold,  and  there  shall  be
no  herd  in  the  stalls :  yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy
in  the  God  of  my  salvation.'

Would  that  these  an^eties  might  in  God's  good  providence
work  out  a  remedy  for  the  wounds  of  His  Church  I  Would
that,  in  presence  of  the  common  foe,  and  yet  more  by  clinging
to  the  common  faith.  Christians  could  learn  to  undei^stand  each
other  1  Surely  it  might  seem  that  agreement  in  so  stupendous
a  belief  as  the  Divinity  of  our  Crucified  Lord  might  avail  to
overshadow,  or  rather  to  force  on  a  reconciliation  of  the  differ-
ences which  divide  those  who  share  it.  Is  it  but  the  indulgence
of  a  fond  dream  to  hope  that  a  heartier,  more  meditative,  more
practical  grasp  of  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  will  one  day  again  unite
His  children  in  the  bonds  of  a  restored  unity )  Is  it  altogether
chimerical  to  expect  that  Christians  who  believe  Christ  to  be
truly  God,  will  see  more  clearly  what  is  involved  in  that  faith,
and  what  is  inconsistent  with  it ;  that  they  will  supply  what  is
wanting  or  will  abandon  what  is  untenable  in  their  creed  and
practice,  so  that  before  men  and  angels  they  may  openly  unite
in  the  adoring  confession  of  their  Divine  Head)  The  pulse
quickens,  and  the  eyes  fill  with  tears,  at  the  bare  thought  of
this  vision  of  peace,  at  this  distant  but  blessed  prospect  of  a
reunited  Christendom.  What  dark  doubts  would  it  not  dispel  t
What  deep  consolations  would  it  not  shed  forth  on  millions  of
souls !  What  fascination  would  not  the  spectacle  of  concordant
prayer  and  harmonious  action  among  the  servants  of  Christ
exert  over  the  hearts  of  sinners  I  With  what  majestic  energy
would  the  reinvigorated  Church,  *  terrible  as  an  army  with
banners,'  address  herself  forthwith  to  the  heartier  promotion  of
vm]


5o8  Conclusion,

huui'b  best  InterestB,  to  the  richer  development  of  the  ChrtBtian
life,  to  more  energetic  labouTB  for  the  conversioii  of  the  world  I
But  we  maj  not  dwell,  except  in  hope  and  prayer,  npon  the
aecretB  of  Divine  Providence.  It  may  be  our  Lord's  purpose  1»
Ehew  to  Eifi  servants  of  this  generation  only  His  work,  and  to
reserve  for  their  children  the  vision  of  HiB  glory.  It  must  be
our  duty,  in  view  of  His  revealed  Will,  and  with  a  simple  faith
in  His  Wisdom  and  His  Power,  to  pray  our  Lord  '  that  all  they
that  do  confess  God's  Holy  Name,  may  agree  in  the  truth  of
His  Holy  Word,  and  live  in  unity  and  godly  love.'

But  here  we  must  close  this  attempt  to  reassert,  agaiugt  some
misapprehensionB  of  modem  thought,  the  great  truth  which
guards  the  honour  of  Christ,  and  which  is  the  most  precious
feature  in  the  intellectual  heritage  of  Christians.     And  for  yon,
dear  brethren,  who  by  your  generous  interest  or  by  your  warm
sympathies  have  so  accompanied  and  sustained  him,  what  can
the  preacher  more  fittingly  or  more  sincerely  desire,  than  that
any  clearer  sight  of  the  Divine  Person  of  our  glorious  and  living
Lord  which   may  have  been  granted   yon,  may  be,  by  Him,
blessed  to  your  present  sanctification  and  to  your  endless  peace)
If  you  are  intellectually  persuaded  that  in  confessing  the  true
Godhead  of  Jesus  you  have  not  followed  a  cunningly-devised
fable,  or  the  erode  imagination  of  a  semi-barbarous  and  distant
age,  then  do  not  allow  yourselves  to  rest  content  with  this  intel-
lectual perEuasion.    A  truth  so  sahlime,  SO  imperious,  has  other
work  to  do  in  you  besides  shaping  into  theoretic  compactness  a
certain  district  of  your  thought  about  the  goodness  of  Qod  and
the  wants  of  man.     The  Divine  Christ  of  the  Gospel  and  the
Chorch  is  no  mere  actor,  though  He  were  the  greatest,  in  the
great  tragedy  of  human  history;   He  belongs  not  exclusively
or  especially  to  the  past ;  He  is  '  the  Same  yesterday,  to-day,
and  for    ever.'      He    is   at    this   moment    all    that  He  was
eighteen  oenturies  ago,  all  that  He  has  been  to  our  fathers,
e  will  be  to  our  children.     He  is  the  Divine  and
!eacher,  the  Healer  and  Pardoner  of  sin,  the  Source
es,  the  Conqueror  of  Satan  and  of  death — now,  u
.  as  in  years  to  come.     Now  as  heretofore.  He  it
Lve  unto  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God
DOW,  as  on  the   day  of  His   triumph  over  death,
the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  to  all  believers;'  now,
irst  age  of  the  Church,  He  it  is  '  that  hath  the  kef
that  openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth;  and  sbntteth,


Conclusion.  509


and  no  man  openeth  z/  He  is  ever  the  Same ;  but,  as  the
children  of  time,  whether  for  good  or  evil,  we  move  onwards  in
perpetual  change.  The  hours  of  life  pass,  they  do  not  return ;
they  pass,  yet  they  are  not  forgotten ;  *  pereunt  et  imputantur/
But  the  present  is  our  own ;  we  may  resolve,  if  we  will,  to  live
as  men  who  live  for  the  glory  of  an  Incarnate  God.  Brethren,
you  shall  not  repent  it,  if,  when  life's  burdens  press  heavily,  and
especially  at  that  solemn  hour  when  human  help  must  fail,  you
are  able  to  lean  with  strong  confidence  on  the  arm  of  an
Almighty  Saviour.  May  He  in  deed  and  truth  be  with  you,
alike  in  your  pilgrimage  through  this  world,  and  when  that
brief  journey  is  drawing  to  its  close  I  May  you,  sustained  by
His  Presence  and  aid,  so  pass  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow
of  death  as  to  fear  no  evil,  and  to  find,  at  the  gate  of  the  eternal
world,  that  all  the  yearnings  of  faith  and  hope  are  to  be  more
than  satisfied  by  the  vision  of  the  Divine  *  King  in  His
Beauty  l'

»  Bev.  ill.  7.


TIII.J


NOTES.


NOTE  A,  ON  Lbctubb  L

The  works  upon  the  Life  of  our  Lord  alluded  to  in  the  text  are

the  following.

I.  Das  Leben  Jesu,  von  Dr.  F,  D.  StrausSy  1835.  This  work
passed  through  several  editions,  and  in  1864  was  followed
up  by  Daa  Leben  Jeeu,  fil/r  das  Deutsche  Yolk  hearbeitet,
Leipsig,  Brockhaus.

Strauss'  argument  is  chiefly  concerned  with  the  difiPerences
between  the  Evangelists,  and  with  the  miraculous  features  of
their  narratives.  He  regards  the  miracles  as  *  myths,'  that  is  to
say,  as  pui*e  fictions.  His  position  is,  that  the  speculative  ideas
about  Jesus  which  were  circulating  in  the  first  century  were
dressed  up  in  a  traditional  form,  the  substance  of  which  was
derived  firom  the  Messianic  figures  of  the  Old  Testament.  This
violent  supposition  was  really  dictated  by  Strauss'  philosophy.
Denying  the  possible  existence  of  miracle,  of  the  supernatural,  of
the  invisible  world,  and  even  the  existence  of  a  personal  living
God,  Strauss  undertakes  to  explain  the  Gospel-history  as  the
natural  development  of  germs  previously  latent  in  the  world
of  human  life  and  thought.  Upon  the  ground  that  nothing  is
absolute,  that  all  is  relative,  Strauss  will  not  allow  that  any  one
man  can  absolutely  have  realized  the  '  idea '  of  humanity.  The
sanctity  of  Jesus  was  only  relative ;  and,  speaking  historically,
Jesus  fell  far  below  the  absolute  Idea  to  which  the  thought  of  the
Apostolical  age  endeavoured  to  elevate  Him  by  the  *  mythical  *
additions  to  His  *  Life.'  Thus  Strauss'  criticism  is  in  reality  the
application  of  Hegel's  doctrine  of  '  absolute  idealism '  to  the
Gospel  narratives.     'It  is,'  observes  Dr.  Mill,  'far  more  from  a


5 1 2       Note  A.     On  'Lives'  of  Our  Lord.

desire  of  working  out  on  a  historical  ground  the  philosophical
principles  of  his  master,  than  from  any  attachment  to  mythical
theories  on  their  own  account,  that  we  are  clearly  to  deduce  the
destructive  process  which  Strauss  has  applied  to  the  Life  of
Jesus.'     (Myth.  Interpr.  p.  II.)

Strauss*  later  work  is  addressed  not  to  the  learned,  but  to  the
German  people,  with  a  view  to  destroying  the  influence  of  the
Lutheran  pastors.  He  observes  in  his  Preface  :  *  Wer  die  Pfaffen
aus  der  Kirche  schaffen  will,  der  muss  erst  das  Wunder  aus  der
Religion  schaffen.'  (Vorrede,  p.  xix.)  With  this  practical  object
he  sets  to  work ;  and  although  the  results  at  which  he  arrives
are  perhaps  more  succinctly  stated  than  in  his  earlier  book,  the
real  difference  between  them  is  not  considerable.  He  makes
little  use  of  the  critical  speculations  on  the  Gospels  which  have
been  produced  in  Protestant  and  Rationalistic  Germany  during
the  last  thirty  years.  Thus  he  is  broadly  at  issue  with  the  later
Tubingen  writers  on  the  subject  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel;  he
altogether  disputes  their  favourite  theory  of  its  *  originality,'  and
views  it  as  only  a  colourless  resmn^  of  the  narratives  of  St.  Mat-
thew and  St.  Luke.  His  philosophical  theory  still,  however,
controls  his  religious  speculations :  Jesus  did  for  religion  what
Socrates  did  for  philosophy,  and  Aristotle  for  science.  Although
the  appearance  of  Jesus  in  the  world  constituted  an  epoch.  He
belonged  altogether  to  humanity:  He  did  not  rise  above  it;
He  might  even  be  surpassed.  The  second  book,  like  the  first,  is
an  elaboration  of  the  thesis  that  *  the  idea  cannot  attain  its  fall
development  in  a  single  individual  of  the  species;'  and  to  this
elaboration  there  are  added  some  fierce  attacks  upon  the  social
and  religious  institutions  of  Europe,  designed  more  particularly
to  promote  an  anti-Christian  social  revolution  in  northern
Germany.

2.  Das  Chardkterhild  Jesu^  ein  hihltscher  Versuch,  von  Dr,
Daniel  SchenkeL     2^  Auflage.     Wiesbaden,  1864.

Dr.  Schenkel  begins  by  insisting  upon  the  *  irrational*  cluk
racter  of  the  Church's  doctrine  of  the  Union  of  two  Natures  in
our  Lord's  Person.  Nothing,  he  thinks,  short  of  the  oppression
with  which  the  mediaeval  Church  treated  all  attempts  at  fi^
thought  can  account  for  the  perpetuation  of  such  a  dogma.  The
Reformers,  although  they  proclaimed  the  principle  of  free  enquiry,
yet  did  not  venture  honestly  to  apply  it  to  the  traditional  doc-
trine of  Christ's  Person ;  primitive  Protestantism  was  afraid  of


Note  A.     On  'Lives '  of  Our  Lord.       5 1 3

the  consequences  of  its  fundamental  principle.  The  orthodojc
doctrine  accordingly  outlived  the  Reformation ;  but  the  older
Bationalism  has  established  a  real  claim  upon  our  gratitude  by  in-
sisting upon  the  pure  Humanity  of  Christ,  although,  Dr.  Schenkel
thinks,  it  has  too  entirely  stripped  Him  of  His  '  Divinity,*  that
is  to  say,  of  the  moral  beauty  to  which  we  may  still  apply  that
designation.  As  for  the  Christ  of  Schleiermacher,  he  is  a  pro-
duct of  the  yearnings  and  aspirations  of  that  earnest  and  gifted
teacher,  but  he  is  not,  according  to  Schenkel,  the  Jesus  of
history.  Strauss  does  in  the  main  represent  Jesus  such  as  He
was  in  the  reality  of  His  historical  life;  but  Strauss'  repre-
sentation is  too  much  tinged  with  modem  colourings ;  nor  are
his  desolating  negations  sufficiently  counterbalanced  by  those
positive  results  of  this  thoroughgoing  *  criticism'  upon  which
Dr.  Schenkel  proposes  to  dwell.  For  the  future,  faith  in  Christ
is  to  rest  on  more  solid  bases  than  *  auf  denen  des  Aberglaubens,
der  Priesterherirschaft,  und  einer  mit  heiteren  oder  schreckenden
Bildem  angefiillten  Phantasie.*     (p.  11.)

Dr.  Schenkel  makes  the  most  of  the  late  Tubingen  theory  of
the  *  originality,'  as  it  is  called,  of  St.  Mark,  and  of  the  non-
historical  character,  as  he  maintains,  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  John ;
although  he  deals  very  'freely'  with  the  materials,  which  he  re-
serves as  still  entitled  to  historical  consideration.  Dr.  Schenkel
does  not  hold  that  the  Evangelistic  account  of  Christ's  miracles
is  altogether  mythical ;  it  has,  he  thinks,  a  certain  basis  of  fact.
He  admits  that  our  Lord  may  have  possessed  what  may  be
termed  a  miraculous  gift,  even  if  this  should  be  rightly  explained
to  be  only  a  rare  natui'al  endowment.  He  had  a  power  of  calm-
ing persons  of  deranged  mind ;  His  assurances  of  the  pardon  of
their  sins,  acting  beneficially  on  their  nervous  system,  produced
these  restorative  effects.  Dr.  Schenkel  holds  it  to  be  utterly
impossible  that  Jesus  could  have  worked  any  of  the  *  miracle^  of
nature  ;*  since  this  would  have  proved  Him  to  be  truly  God.  All
such  narratives  as  His  calming  the  storm  in  the  lake  are  there-
fore part  of  that  *  torrent  of  legend '  with  which  the  historical
germ  of  His  real  Life  has  been  overlaid  by  later  enthusiasms.
The  Resurrection,  accordingly,  is  not  a  fact  of  history ;  it  is  a
creation  of  the  imaginative  devotion  of  the  first  disciples.  (See
p.  314.)  Dr.  Schenkel  considers  the  appearances  of  our  Risen
Lord  to  have  been  only  so  many  glorifications  of  His  character
in  the  hearts  of  those  who  believed  in  Him.  To  them  He  was
manifested  as  One  who  lives  eternally,  in  that  He  has  founded
His  kingdom  on  earth  by  His  word  and  His  Spirit.

Ll


514       Note  A.     On  'Lives'  of  Our  Lord.

The  main  idea  of  Dr.  Schenkers  book  is  to  make  the  Life  of
Jesus  the  text  of  an  attack  upon  those  who  are  Conservatiyes  in
politics  and  orthodox  Lutherans  in  religion.  It  is  not  so  much
a  biography,  or  even  a  sketch  of  character,  as  a  polemical
pamphlet.  The  treatment  of  our  Lord's  words  and  actions,  and
rtiill  more  the  highly-coloured  representation  of  the  Pharisees,
are  throughout  intended  to  express  the  writer's  view  of  schools
and  parties  in  Lutheran  Germany.  The  Pharisees  of  course  are
the  orthodox  Lutherans;  while  Jesus  Christ  is  the  political
demagogue  and  liberal  sceptic.  With  some  few  exceptions,  the
etiquette  of  history  is  scrupulously  observed ;  and  yet  the  really
historical  interest  is  as  small,  as  the  polemical  references  are
continuous  and  piquant.  The  woes  which  Jesus  pronounces
against  the  Pharisees  are  not  directed  simply  against  hypocrisy
and  formalism ;  *  the  curse  of  Christ,*  we  are  told,  *  like  the
trumpet  of  the  last  Judgment,  lights  for  ever  upon  every  church
that  is  based  upon  tradition  and'  upon  the  ascendancy  of  a
privileged  clergy.'  *  Der  Weheruf  Jesu  ist  noch  nicht  verklungen.
Er  trifft  noch  heute,  wie  eine  Posaune  des  Gerichts,  jedes  auf  die
Satzungen  der  Ueberlieferung  und  auf  die  Herrschafb  eines  mit
Vorzugsrechten  ausgestatteten  Klerus  gegriindete  Kirchenthmn.'
(p-  254*)  Perhaps  the  most  singular  illustration  of  profane  reck-
lessness in  exegesis  that  can  easily  be  found  in  modem  literature
is  Dr.  Schenkel's  explanation  of  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost
This  sin,  he  tells  us,  does  not  consist,  as  we  may  have  mistakenly
supposed,  in  a  deliberate  relapse  from  grace  into  impenitence;  it
is  not  the  sin  of  worldly  or  unbelieving  persons.  It  is  the  sin  of
orthodoxy;  it  is  a  *  Theologisch-hierarchischer  Verhartung  mid
Yerstockung ;'  and  those  who  defend  and  propagate  the  ancient
faith  of  Christians,  in  spite  of  rationaUstic  warnings  against  doing
so,  are  really  guilty  of  it.     (Charakt.  p.  106.)

Dr.  Schenkel  has  explained  himself  more  elaborately  on  some
points  in  his  pamphlet  *  Die  Protestantische  Freiheit,  in  ihrem
gegenwartigen  Kampfe  mit  der  kirchlichen  Reaktion'  (Wies-
baden, 1862).  He  fiercely  demands  a  Humanitarian  Christology
(p.  153).  He  laments  that  even  Zwingli's  thought  was  still
fettered  by  the  formulae  of  Nicsea  and  Qialcedon  (p.  152),  nay,
he  remarks  that  St.  Paul  himself  has  assigned  to  Christ  a  rank
which  led  on  naturally  to  the  Church-belief  in  the  Divinity  of
His  Person  (p.  148).  That  belief  Dr.  Schenkel  considers  to  be
a  shred  of  heathen  superstition  which  had  found  its  way  into  the
circle  of  Christian  ideas  (ibid.) ;  while  he  sorrowfully  protests
that  the  adoration  of  Jesus,  both  in  the  public  Services  of  the


Note  A.     On  ^Lives'  of  Our  'Lord.       5 1 5

Church  and  in  the  Christian  consciousness,  has  superseded  that
of  God  the  Father.  *  Vom  fUnf ten  Jahrhundert  bis  zur  Reforma-
tion (he  might  have  begun  four  centuries  earlier  and  gone  on  for
three  centuries  later)  wird  Jesus  Christ  durchgangig  als  der
Herrgott  verehrt'  (p.  149).  Indeed,  throughout  this  brochure
Dr.  Schenkel's  positions  are  simply  those  of  the  old  Socinianism,
resting  however  upon  a  Eationalistic  method  of  treatment,  which
in  its  more  logical  phases  regards  much  of  what  Socinianism
jtself  retains,  as  the  yoke  of  an  intolerable  orthodoxy.

3.  Geschiehte  Chmslus'  und  Seiner  Zeit,  von  Helnrich  JSwcUd*
Gottingen,  1857.     2*©  Ausgabe.

This  work  is  on  no  account  to  be  placed  on  the  level  of  those
of  Strauss  or  Schenkel,  to  which  in  some  most  vital  particulars
it  is  opposed.  Indeed,  Ewald*s  defence  of  St.  John's  Gospel,  and
his  deeper  spirituahty  of  tone,  must  command  a  religious  in-
terest, which  would  be  of  a  high  order,  if  only  this  writer
believed  in  our  Lord's  Godhead.  That  this,  unhappily,  is  not
the  case,  will  be  apparent  upon  a  careful  study  of  the  concluding
chapter  of  this  volume  on  *  Die  Ewige  Verherrlichung,'  pp.  496—
504, — beautiful  as  are  some  of  the  passages  which  it  contains.
His  explanation  of  the  titles  *  Son  of  God'  and  *  Word  of  Gk)d,'
p.  502,  is  altogether  inadequate ;  and  his  statement  that  '  nie
hat  Jesu  als  der  Sohn  und  das  Wort  Gottes  sich  mit  der  Vater
tmd  Gotte  Selbst  (from  whom  Ewald  accordingly  distinguishes
our  Lord)  verwechselt  oder  vermessen  sich  selbst  diesem  gleich-
gestellt,'  is  simply  contradicted  by  St.  John  v.  and  x.

4.  Die  Menschliche  Entvdc^elung  Jpftu  Chrtstiy  von  Th.  Keim^
Ztirich,  1861.  Die  geschichtliche  WiirdeJesUy  von  Th.Keim,
Zurich,  1864.  Der  geschichtliche  Christus,  Eine  Eeihe  von
Vortrdgen  mit  Quellenheweis  vmd  Chronologie  dea  Lehena
Jesu^  von  Th.  Keim,     Zurich,  1866.

Dr.  Keim,  although  rejecting  the  fourth  Gospel,  retains  too
much  of  the  mind  of  Schleiermacher  to  be  justly  associated  with
Drs.  Strauss  or  Schenkel.  Dr.  Keim,  indeed,  sees  in  our  Lord
only  a  Man,  but  still  an  eminently  mysterious  Man  of  incom-
parable grandeur  of  character.  He  recognises,  although  in-
adequately, the  startling  self-assertion  of  our  Lord ;  and  he
differs  most  emphatically  from  Strauss,  Schenkel,  and  Benan  in
recognising  the  real  sinlessness  of  Jesus.  He  admits,  too,  the
historical  value  of  our  Lord's  eschatological  discourses  \  he  does

Lla


5 1 6      Note  A.     On  'Lives'  of  Our  Lord.

not  regard  Uia  miracles  'of  nature'  as  abeolutel;  impossible;
and  he  heartily  believes  in  the  reality  of  Chriet's  own  Besmrec-
tion  from  the  dead.  He  cannot  accotmt  for  the  phenomenon  of
the  Church,  if  the  Kesurrection  be  denied.  Altogether  he  seems
to  consider  that  the  Life  of  Jeeus  as  a  spiritual,  moral,  and,  in
some  respects,  soperoatural  fact,  is  unique ;  hut  an  intellectnal
spectre,  the  assumed  invariability  of  historical  laws,  ae  we  con-
ceive them,  seems  to  intorpoae  so  as  to  prevent  him  from
drawing  the  otherwise  inevitable  inference.  Yet  for  such  as
lie  is,  let  UB  hope  much.

5.  La  Fie  de  Jisui,  par  E.  Itenan.  Paris,  1863.
Of  this  well-known  hook  it  may  suffice  here  to  say  a  very  few
words.  Its  one  and  only  excellence  is  its  incomparable  style.
From  every  other  point  of  view  it  is  deplorable.  Historically,  it
deals  most  arbitrarily  with  the  data  upon  which  it  professes  to
be  hasedL  Thns  in  the  different  pictures  of  Christ's  aim  and
action,  during  what  are  termed  the  second  and  the  third  periods
of  His  Ministry,  a  purely  artificial  contrast  is  presented.  Theo-
logically, this  work  proceeds  throughout  on  a  really  atheistic
assumptiou,  disguised  beneath  the  thin  veil  of  a  pantheistii;
phraseology.  It  assumes  that  no  such  being  (is  a  personal  Qod
exists  at  aO.  The  'god'  with  whom,  according  to  M.  Renan,
Jesus  had  such  uninterrupted  communion,  but  from  whom  he  is
so  entirely  distinct,  is  only  the  '  category  of  the  ideal.'  It  is,
however,  when  we  look  at  the  '  Vie  de  J^sus '  from  a  moral  point
of  view,  that  its  shortcomings  are  most  apparent  in  their  length
and  breadth.  Its  hero  is  a  fanatical  impostor,  who  pretends  to
be  and  to  do  that  which  be  knows  to  be  beyond  him,  hut  who
nevertheless  is  held  up  to  our  admiration  as  the  ideal  of  hu-
manity. In  place  of  the  Divine  and  Human  Christ  of  the
Gospels,  M.  Benan  presents  as  with  a  character  devoid  of  any
real  majesty,  of  any  tolerable  consistency,  and  even  of  the  con-

.i.;i — •  .1 ^g  of  moral  goodness.     If  M.  Renan  himself  does

at  the  object  of  his  enthusiasm  is  simply  an
healthy  conscience,  this  is  only  an  additional
ire  needed,  of  the  fatal  influence  of  pantheistic
le  most  gifted  natures.  It  destroys  the  Bensitive-
il  nerve.  Enough  to  say  that  H.  Benan  presents
it  who  in  his  Gethsemane  was  possibly  thinking
lies  qvi  aoraient  peut-gtre  consenti  k  I'aimer.'


Note  A.     On  'Lives'  of  Our  Lord.       517

It  ought  perhaps  here  to  be  added  that  M.  de  Pressense's
work,  *  J^sus-Christ,  son  Temps,  sa  Vie,  son  CEuvre,*  Paris,  1865,
although  failing  (as  might  be  expected)  to  do  justice  to  the
sacramental  side  of  our  Lord's  Incarnation  and  Teaching,  is  yet
on  the  whole  a  most  noble  contribution  to  the  cause  of  Truth,
for  which  the  deep  gratitude  of  all  sincei'e  Christians  cannot  but
be  due  to  its  accomplished  author.

6.  Ecce  Homo ;   a  Surmy  of  the  Life  and  Woric  of  Jesus
Christ,     London  and  Cambridge,  Macmillan,  i866.

Every  one  who  reads  *  Ecce  Homo '  must  heartily  admire  th^
generous  passion  for  human  improvement  which  glows  through-
out the  whole  volume.  And  especial  acknowledgment  is  due  t*/
the  author  from  Christian  believers,  for  the  emphasis  with
which  he  has  insisted  on  the  following  truths : —
,        Christ's  moral  sublimity.

Christ's  claim  of  supremacy.

Christ's  success  in  His  work.
Incidentally,  moreover,  he  has  brought  out  into  their  true
prominence  some  portions  of  the  truth,  which  are  lost  sight  of
by  popular  religionists  in  England.  As  an  example  of  this,  his
earnest  recognition  of  the  visibility  of  the  Society  founded  by
Christ  may  be  instanced.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  this  writer
has  carefully  avoided  all  reference  to  the  cardinal  question  of
Christ's  Person ;  and  he  tells  us  that  he  has  done  this  deliber-
ately. (Pref.  to  5th  Ed.  p.  xx.)  The  result  however  is,  that  his
book  is  pervaded,  as  it  seems  to  many  of  his  readers,  by  an  es-
sential flaw.  It  is  not  merely  that  our  Lord's  claims  cannot  be
■morally  estimated  apart  from  a  clear  estimate  of  His  Person.
The  author  professes  to  be  answering  the  question,  *  What  was
Christ's  object  m  founding  the  Society  which  is  called  by  His
Name  ?  *  Now  to  attempt  to  answer  this  question,  while  dis-
missing all  theological  consideration  of  the  dignity  of  Christ's
Person,  involves  the  tacit  assumption  that  the  due  estimate  of
His  Person  is  not  relevant  to  the  appreciation  of  His  Work ;  in
other  words,  the  assumption,  that  so  far  as  the  evidence  yielded
by  the  work  of  Christ  goes,  the  Christology  of  the  Nicene  Creed  is
at  least  uncertain.  The  author  of  *  Ecce  Homo'  is  however  either
a  Humanitarian,  or  he  is  a  believer  in  our  Lord's  Divinity,  or
he  is  undecided.  If  he  is  a  Humanitarian,  then  the  assumption
is,  as  far  as  it  goes,  in  harmony  with  his  personal  convictions ;
only  it  should,  for  various  and  obvious  reasons,  have  been  more


5i8       Note  A.     O71 '  Lives' of  Our  Lord.

plainly  stat«d,  since,  inter  alia,  it  embarrassed  hia  viev  of  our
Lord's  claima  and  character  with  difficnlties  which  he  does  not
recognise.  If  he  believes  in  Christ's  Divinity,  then  in  his  forli-
comiDg  volume  (besideB  rewriting  such  chapterB  as  chap,  z,  on
The  Temptation)  he  will  have  to  enlarge  very  seriously,  or
rather  altogether  to  recast,  the  account  which  he  has  actually
given  of  Chiist'a  work.  If  the  writer  be  himself  in  doubt  as  to
whether  Christ  is  or  is  not  God,  then  surely  he  is  cot  in  a
position  to  give  any  account  whatever  of  Christ's  work,  which
is  within  the  limits  of  human  capacity  on  one  hypothesis,  and  as
utterly  transcends  them  on  the  other.  In  short,  it  is  imposaible
for  a  man  to  profess  to  give  a  real  answer  to  the  question,  what
Christ  intended  to  accomplish,  until  he  has  told  us  who  and
what  Christ  was.  That  fragment  of  Christ's  work  of  which  we
gather  an  account  from  history  contributes  its  share  to  the
solution  of  the  question  of  Christ's  Person ;  but  our  Lord's
Personal  Bank  is  too  intimately  bound  up  with  the  moral
justification  of  His  language,  and  with  the  real  nature  and  range
of  His  action  upon  humanity,  to  hear  the  adjournment  which
the  author  of '  Ecce  Homo '  has  thought  advisable.

There  are  several  errors  in  the  volume  which  might  seem  (o
shew  that  the  author  is  himself  unfamiliar  with  the  faith  of  the
Church  ;  as  they  would  not  have  been  natural  in  a  person  who
believed  it,  but  who  was  throwing  himself  for  the  time  being
into  the  mental  position  of  a  Humanitarian  in  order  the  better
to  do  justice  to  his  arguments.     For  instance,  the  author  con-
founds St.  John's  Baptism  with  Christ's.      He  supposes  that
Nicodemus  came  to  Jesus  by  night  in  order  to  seek  a  dispen-
sation from   being  publicly  baptised,   and  Bo  admitted  into
Christ's  Society.     He  imagines  tiiat  Christ  prayed  on  the  Cross
only  for  the  Koman  soldiers  who  actually  crucified  Him,  and
not  for  the  Pharisees,  against  whom  (it  is  a  moBt  painful  as  well
as   an   unwarranted   suggestion)  He   continued   to  feel  fierce
indignation.     This  indeed  is  an  instance  of  the  author's  ten-
dency to  identify  his  own  imaginations  with  the  motives  and
lus  Christ,  where  Scripture   is  either  silent  or
opposite   direction.      The  author  ie  apparently
by  his  earnest  indignation  against  certain  ibrma
insincere  vice,  such   as  Pharisaism ;    nor  is  he
m  the  disposition  so  to  colour  the  past  as  to  make
fgestively  his  own  feelings  about  persons  and
present  day.    The  naturalistic  tone  of  his  thought'
his  formula  of  '  enthosiasm,'  as  the  modem  equi-


r


Note  A.     On  'Lives'  of  Our  Lord,       519

Talent  to  inspiration  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  in  hiff
general  substitution  of  the  conception  of  anti-social  vice  for  the
deeper  Scriptural  idea  of  sin ;  and  in  his  suggestion  that  Chris-
tians may  treat  the  special  precepts  of  Christ  with  the  same
*  boldness '  with  which  He  treated  those  of  the  law  of  Moses.

Of  the  practical  results  of  his  book  it  is  difficult  to  form  an
estimate.  In  some  instances  it  may  lead  to  the  contented  sub-
stitution of  a  naturalistic  instead  of  a  miraculous  Christianity,
of  philanthropic  '  enthusiasm '  instead  of  a  supernatural  life,  of
loyalty  to  a  moral  reforming  hero,  instead  of  religious  devotion
to  a  Divine  Saviour  of  the  world.  But  let  us  also  trust  that  so
fearless  a  recognition  of  the  claims  of  Christ  to  be  the  King
and  Centre  of  renewed  humanity,  may  assist  other  minds  to
grasp  and  hold  the  truth  which  alone  makes  those  claims,  taken
as  a  whole,  justifiable ;  and  may  recruit  the  ranks  of  our  Lord's
true  worshippers  from  among  the  many  thoughtful  but  unin-
structed  persons  who  have  never  faced  the  dilemma  which  this
volume  so  forcibly,  albeit  so  tacitly,  suggests.

*  *  «  «

Since  these  words  were  written,  the  volume  under  discussion
has  £ound  an  apologist,  whose  opinion  on  this,  as  on  any  other
subject,  is  a  matter  of  national  interest*.  If  the  present  writer
has  been  guilty  of  forming  and  propagating  an  unjust  estimate
of  a  remarkable  work,  he  may  at  least  repair  his  error  by
referring  his  readers  to  pages,  in  which  genius  and  orthodoxy
have  done  their  best  for  the  Christian  honour  of  '  Ecce  Homo.^
These  pages  must  indeed  of  necessity  be  read  with  sympathy
and  admiration,  if  not  with  entire  assent,  by  all  who  do  not
consider  a  theological  work  to  have  been  discredited,  when  it  is
asserted  to  uphold  some  positive  truth.  But  it  may  also  be  a
duty  to  state  briefly  and  respectfully  why,  after  a  careful  con-
sideration of  such  a  criticism,  the  present  writer  is  unable
to  recognise  any  sufficient  reason  for  withdrawing  what  he
has  ventured  to  say  upon  the  subject.  Unquestionably,  as
Mr.  Gladstone  urges,  it  is  allowable  in  principle  to  teach  only
a  portion  of  revealed  truth,  under  circumstances  which  would
render  a  larger  measure  of  instruction  likely  to  perplex  and
repel  the  learners.  But  then  such  teaching  must  be  loyally
consistent  with  the  claims  of  that  portion  of  the  truth,  which  is,
provisionally,  left  untaught ;  and  this  condition  does  not  appear

*  *Ecoe  Homo,'  by  the  Bight  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone.    Strahan  k  Co.
London,  1868.     [Eeprinted  from  *  Good  Words.*]


520       Note  A.     On  'Lives  of  Our  Lord.

to  be  satisfied  by  *  Ecce  Homo,*  if  it  be,  as  we  may  hope,  only  a
preparation  for  a  second  volume  which  will  assert  in  plain  lan-
guage the  Deity  of  our  Adorable  Lord.  The  crucial  chapter  on
the  Temptation  altogether  ignores  our  Lord's  true  and  Divine
Personality;  as  it  also  appears  to  ignore  the  personal  presence
of  the  Tempter.  'What  is  called  Christ's  Temptation  is  the
excitement  of  His  Mind  which  was  caused  by  the  nascent  con-
sciousness of  supernatural  power,'  p.  12.  Such  a  description
fails  altogether  to  do  justice  to  the  real  issues  iuTolved;  it
might  apply  with  equal  propriety  to  a  struggle  in  the  soul  of
an  apostolic  man.  Even  if  this  chapter  does  not  imply  Christ's
inward  sympathy  with  outward  solicitations  to  accept  a  wrong
choice,  it  could  never  have  been  written  by  a  person  who  kept
clearly  before  his  mind  the  truth  of  our  Lord's  Divinity.

Mr.  Gladstone  draws  out  and  insists  upon  an  analogy  between
the  original  function  of  the  three  Synoptic  Evangelists  in  the
first  propagation  of  the  Faith,  and  the  present  function  of '  Ecce
Homo.*  But  this  analogy  would  appear  to  be  disturbed  by  the
following  considerations.  First,  there  is  nothing  in  '  Ecce  Homo'
which  corresponds  to  the  great  Christological  texts  in  the  Synop-
tists.  To  these  texts  Mr.  Gladstone  has  indeed  referred,  but
they  do  not  readily  harmonize  with  his  representation  of  the
gradual  unveiling  of  Christ's  Person.  Lideed  they  teach  a  doc-
trine of  Christ's  Person  which  is  virtually  identical  with  that  of
St.  John.  Are  there  any  passages  in  '  Ecce  Homo '  which,  like
St.  Matt.  xi.  27,  or  St.  Luke  x.  22,  place  the  Christological  belief
of  the  writer  beyond  reach  of  question  1  Secondly,  the  ethical
atmosphere  of  *  Ecce  Homo '  differs  very  significantly  from  that
of  the  Gospels.  The  Gospels  present  us  with  the  Scriptural  idea
of  Sin,  provoking  God's  wrath  and  establishing  between  God
and  man  a  state  of  enmity :  and  this  idea  points  very  urgently-
at  least  in  a  moral  universe, — ^to  some  awful  interposition  which
shall  bring  relief.  But  the  Biblical  idea  of  sin  is  a  vitally
distinct  thing  from  the  impoverished  modem  conception  of
anti-social  vice,  in  which  man  and  not  God  is  the  insulted
and  offended  person,  and  by  which  the  protection  of  individual
rights  and  the  well-being  of  society  are  held  to  be  of  more
account  than  the  reign  of  peace  and  purity  within  the  soul.
The  idea  of  sin  points  to  a  Divine  Hedeemer :  the  idea  of  anti-
social vice  points  to  an  improved  system  of  human  education.
Thirdly,  the  first  and  third  Evangelists  preface  their  records  of
the  Ministry  with  an  account  of  the  Nativity.  That  account
clearly  attributes  a  Superhuman  Personality  to  Christ ;  and  thai


Note  B.    On  the  word  ^ Elohim  in  the  O.T.  521

it  pkices  the  Bubsequent  narrative  in  a  light  altogether  different
from  that  suggested  by  the  opening  chapter  of  *  Ecce  Homo.'  And
the  first  verse  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel  is  sufficiently  explicit  to  range
him  as  to  this  matter,  side  by  side  with  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Luke.
The  real  needs  of  our  time  are  more  likely  to  be  known  to
public  men  who  come  in  contact  with  minds  of  every  kind  than
to  private  clergymen.  But  it  would  have  appeared  to  the
present  writer  that  an  economical  treatment  of  the  Faith  which
might  have  been  possible  and  natural  in  the  first  age  of  its  pro-
mulgation, must  fail  of  its  effect  at  the  present  day.  Whether
men  believe  the  Qospel  or  not,  its  real  substance  and  con-
tents are  now  fairly  before  the  world;  and  it  is  increas-
ingly felt  that  the  question  whether  Christ  is  or  is  not  Qod,
is  really  identical  with  the  question  of  His  moral  character.
[Since  these  lines  were  written  the  publication  of  'Natural
Religion,'  by  the  author  of  *Ecce  Homo'  has  shewn,  among
other  things,  that  Mr.  Gladstone's  estimate  of  tbe  latter  work
was  too  generous.  No  true  religion  can  be  *  adapted '  to  meet
the  requirements  of  hostile  thought  with  entire  impunity.]


NOTE  B,  ON  Lectubb  H.

The  word  *  Elohim  *  is  used  in  the  Old  Testament —

(i)  Of  the  One  True  God,  as  in  Deut.  iv.  35,  i  Kings  xviii.
21,  etc.,  where  it  has  the  article ;  and  without  the  article.
Gen.  i.  a,  xli.  38 ;  Exod.  xxxi.  3,  xxxv.  31 ;  Numb.  xxiv.
a,  etc.

(2)  Of  false  gods,  as  Exod.  xii.  12;  a  Chron.  xxviii.  23;
Josh.  xxiv.  15  ;  Judg.  vi.  10,  etc.

(3)  Of  judges  to  whom  a  person  or  matter  is  brought,  as
representing  the  Divine  Majesty  in  the  theocracy,  yet  not
in  the  singular,  Exod.  xxi.  6,  xxii.  7,  8,  (in  Deut.  xix.  1 7
it  is  said  in  the  like  case  that  the  parties  ^  shall  stand
before  the  Lord,'  TWS) ;  and  in  allusion  to  the  passages  in
Exodus,  Ps.  Ixxxii.  i,  6,  'Recte  Abarbenel  observavit,
judices  et  magistratus  nusquam  vocari  CD\17K  nisi  respectu
loci  judicii,  quod  ibi  Dei  judicia  exerceant.'   (Ges.)


522     Note  C.    On  Our  Lord's  Temptation^

(4)  Hiere  is  no  case  in  which  the  word  appears  from 'the
context  to  be  certainly  applied,  even  collectively,  to  EUper-
bamati  beinge  external  to  the  Divine  Ewence.  'HuUm
ezstat  locDB,'  Bays  Qesenios,  'in  quo  haec  eignificatio  vel
necessaria  vel  pne  cteteris  apta  sit.'  In  Fb.  Ixxxii.  I,  the
word  ia  explained  by  verseB  3  and  6  of  the  *  bods  of  God,'
i.e.  JTidgeB ;  c£  cBpecially  verse  8.  Yet  in  Pa.  xcviL  7,  the
LXX,  Vulg.,  Syr.  translate  'angels';  the  Cbaldee  para-
phrases 'the  worshippers  of  idoU' ',  in  Pb.  cxxzviiL  i,  the
LXX  and  Vtilg,  render  'angeb,'  the  Chald.  'jndges,'  the
Syr.  '  kings' ;  in  Ps.  viii.  2,  ibe  Cbald.  too  renders  '  angels,'
and  is  followed  by  Baahi,  Kimchi,  and  Abenezra  (who
quotes  Elahin,  Dan.  ii.  11),  and  others.  It  ib  possible  that
the  earlier  Jewish  writers  had  a  traditional  knowledge  that
□•n^N  might  be  taken  as  crn^((-'j3,  Job  i.  6 ;  IL  I ;  xxrriii.
7,  and  Q'V'f^^^'

(5)  But,  however  this  may  be.  It  remains  certain  that  Elohim
is  nowhere  used  with  the  singular  of  any  except  Almighty
God.


NOTE  C,  ON  Lectobb  VT.

On  our  Lord's  Temptation,  viewed  in  Its  bearing
upon  His  Person.

The  history  of  our  Lord's  temptation  has  been  compared
to  an  open  gateway,  through  which  Socinianism  may  enter
at  will  to  take  possesion  of  the  Gospel  History.  This  langnoge
proceeds  upon  a  mistaken  idea  of  what  our  Lord's  temptetion

A.  How  far  could  Jesus  Christ  be  'tempted'!  How  far
could  any  suggestion  of  Satan  act  upon  His  Manhood  %

I.  Here  we  must  distinguish  between

(a)  Direct  temptation  to  moral  evil,  i.e.  an  appeal  to  a
capacity  of  self-will  which  might  be  quickened  into
active  disobedience  to  the  Will  of  God ;  and

{i3)  What  may  be  termed  indirect  temptation;  that  ig,
an  appeal  to  instincts  per  m  innocent,  as  belonging  to
man  in  his  un&llen  state,  which  can  make  obedience
wear  the  form  of  a  painful  efibrt  or  sacrifice.


Note  C.     On  Our  Lord's  Temptation.     523

2.  Now  Jesus  Christ,  according  to  the  historians  of  the
Temptation,  was —

(a)  Emmanuel,  St.  Matt.  i.  23.  That  this  word  is  used
by  St.  Matthew  to  mean  *  God  is  with  us,'  as  a  title  of
Christ,  like  *  Jehovah  nissi,'  appears  partly  from  the
parallel  of  Isa.  ix.  6,  partly  from  the  preceding  avros
(ver.  22),  used  with  reference  to  Jesus.  Mary's  Son  is
to  be  Jesus,  not  as  witnessing  to  a  Divine  Saviour
external  to  Himself  (as  was  the  case  when  Joshua  bore
the  name),  but  as  being  Himself  God  the  Saviour.

(jS)  Wht  Gfov,  St.  Luke  i.  35.     This  title  is  directly  con-
'  nected  with  our  Lord's  supernatural  Birth,  and  so,  al-

though  applied  to   His  Manhood   {^o  yewafievou),   yet
implies  a  pre-existent  superhuman  Personality  in  Him.

3.  This  Union  of  the  Divine  and  Human  Natures  in  Christ
was  not  fatal  to  the  full  perfection  of  either*  In  particular
it  did  not  destroy  in  Christ's  Manhood  those  limitations  which
belong  properly  to  creaturely  existence.  A  limitation  of  know-
ledge in  Chrisfs  Human  Intelligence  would  correspond  to  a
limitation  of  power  in  His  Human  Will.

But  it  was  inconsistent  with  the  presence  of  anything  in
Christ's  Manhood  that  could  contradict  however  slightly  the
Essence  of  the  Perfect  Moral  Being,  in  other  words,  the  Holi-
ness of  God.  This  would  have  been  the  case  with  falsehood  in
Christ's  Human  Intelligence,  or  with  any  secret  undeveloped
propensity  to  self-will,  that  is  (in  a  creature),  to  moral  evil,  in
Christ's  Human  Will.  If  the  Incarnate  Christ  could  have  erred
or  sinned,  the  Incarnation,  we  may  dare  to  say,  would  have
been  a  phantom.

The  connection  between  Christ's  Personal  Godhead,  and  the
complete  sinlessness  of  His  Manhood  was  well  understood  by
Christian  antiquity.  Thus  TertuUian :  *  Solus  homo  sine  pec-
cato  Christus,  quia  et  Deus  Christus*  (De  An.  c.  13).  Thus  in
the  synodical  letter  of  Dionysius  of  Alexandria  to  Paulus  of
Samosata,  it  is  argued  that  tl  fi^  yap  rjv  6  Xpiarbs  avros  6  ti>v  Qcos
AoyoSf  ovK  ^dvvaro  tlvai  dpafjLafynjTOS,  Ovdeh  yap  avapApTrjfros  ft  p-r)
6*9  6  Xpiarhs  ods  Ka\  6  Uar^p  rod  Xpiorrov,  koi  to  "Aywy  Uvevpa
(Labbe,  Cone.  i.  p.  855).  So  St.  Augustine,  still  more  explicitly,
teaches:  *Ut  autem  Mediator  Dei  et  hominum  homo  Christus
Jesus  non  faceret  propriam,  qu8B  Deo  adversa  est,  voluntatem,
non  erat  tanttmi  homo,  sed  Deus  et  homo :  per  quam  mirabilem


524     Note  C.     On,  Our  Lord's  Tentptation.

eingnlaremque  gratiam  bumanEi  in  illo  gme  peccato  nllo  pOEfet
CBse  natura.  Propter  hoc  erg&  ait,  Descendi  da  ccel(^  non  nt
faciam  Tolnntatem  meam,  sed  voluutatem  ejua  qui  me  misit
(Joh.Ti.  38) :  ut  ea  causaa  eeset  tanta  obedientim  que  onmini)
einS  ullo  peccato  eeset  homiuia  quae  gerebat,  qiii^  de  ccelo  de-
Bcenderat ;  boc  eet,  non  tantam  homo,  Tenim  etiam  Dens  erat '
(Contr.  Sermon.  Arianor.,  c,  vii.  c.  6).  Again,  '  Ista  nativitas
profectd  gratuita  coujouxit  in  unttate  pei'sonte  bominem  Deo,
camem  Verbo.  .  .  .  Neque  enim  metnendom  erat,  ne  iato  in-
effabili  modo  in  uuitat«iii  perEosee  k  Verbo  Deo  natura  bumana
guBcepta,  nullum  in  se  motum  malce  voluntatis  adroitteret'  (De
Correp.  et  Grat.,  c.  xi.  n.  30).  Again,  be  gives  as  a  reason  for
the  Divine  Incarnation,  '  Ut  int«lligant  homines  per  eandem
gratiam  ae  juatiiicari  ^  peccatis,  per  quam  iactnm  est  nt  bomo
Cbristna  vmUum  habere  poaei  peeeatum'  (Enchir.  ad  Laur.,
c.  36,  Q.  II ;  compare  £ncb.  c.  40.  See  also  tbe  paesagee  from
St.  Atbanaains  and  St.  Cyril  Alex.  qu.  hj  Fetav.,  De  Incamat.,
lib.  xi.  c.  10,  §  6).  Tbeodonia  of  Mopsuestia  waB  anathematized
at  tbe  Fifth  (Ecumenical  Council  of  Constantinople,  a.d.  553,
for  maintaining  among  other  things  that  our  Lord  was  uiri

)-np6patv  Karit  ftiKpQt^  JCAtpiCofxtvolTf  Hai  ovTur  tK  jipOTpoirrjs  tpywr
filXTIaiBtiTO,    tai    ft   iroXtrtin;    a/iaiiov  KoBiimiyTa    (Con.    Const.,  ii.

«an.  xii. ;  Labbe,  v.  p.  575)-  The  language  of  Theodoras  was
felt  to  ignore  tbe  consequences  of  tbe  Personal  Union  of  the
Two  features :  it  wa^  practically  Nestorianism.

Our  Lord's  Manhood  then,  by  tbe  uniqne  conditions  of  its
existence,  was  believed  to  be  wholly  exempt  from  any  pro-
pensity to,  or  capacity  oft  sinful  Belf-wiU.  When,  as  in  the
temptation  on  the  mountain,  He  was  beset  by  solicitatitms
to  evil  from  without,  He  met  them  at  once  in  a  manner  which
fibewed  tjiat  no  element  of  His  Human  K'atnre  in  any  degree  re-
sponded to  them.    For,  as  St.  Athanasius  says,  fie  was  Six"  "V"

KiKau  Be\^fx6TUir  ml  XoyiCfi^r  dp^/uHTd^ff  ip  tiK6i/t  Kaiv6rrjTOs  (CoDtr,

Apollinar.,  lib.  ii.  c.  10).  The  sharpest  arrows  of  tbe  tempter
J — 1,  xi;~  im(^  jjjjg  darts  lighting  v.pon  a  hard  polished
;lanced  aside.  Moreover,  as  it  would  seem,  the
1  of  the  Two  Natures  in  our  Lord  involved,  at
of  the  Beatific  Vision  by  onr  Lord's  Humanity:
)t  conceive  of  the  blessed  as  sinning  while  tbey
1  the  throne,  much  less  can  we  conceive  it  in
'dwelt  all  tbe  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.'
ect  temptation  to  evil  He  was  simply  inaccessible,


Note  C.     On  Our  Lord's  Temptation.     525

to  Whom  alone  the  words  fully  belong,  *  I  have  set  God  always
before  Me,  for  He  is  on  My  right  Hand,  therefore  I  shall  not
fall.'

4.  But  the  Personal  Union  of  our  Lord's  Manhood  with  His
Godhead  did  not  exempt  It  from  simple  human  instincts,  such
as,  for  example,  a  shrinking  from  bodily  pain.  For,  '  As  Man's
Will,  so  the  Will  of  Christ  hath  two  several  kinds  of  operation ;
the  one  natural  or  necessary,  whereby  it  desireth  simply  what-
soever is  good  in  itself,  and  shunneth  as  generally  all  things
which  hurt ;  the  other  deliberate,  when  we  therefore  embrace
things  as  good,  because  the  age  of  understanding  judgeth  them
good  to  that  end  which  we  simply  desire. .  .  •  These  different
inclinations  of  the  will  considered,  the  reason  is  easy  how
in  Christ  there  might  grow  desires,  seeming  but  being  not  in
deed  opposite,  either  the  one  of  them  unto  the  other  or  either
of  them  unto  the  Will  of  God'  (Hooker,  E.P.  v.  48,  9;  cf.
St.  John  xii.  27).  Upon  our  Lord's  Hunian  Will  in  its  inchoate
or  rudimentary  stage  of  Desire,  uninformed  by  Eeason,  an  ap-
proaching trial  might  so  far  act,  as  a  temptation,  as,  for  instance,
to  produce  a  wish  that  obedience  might  be  compatible  with
escape  from  suffering.  But  it  could  not  produce,  even  for  one
moment,  any  wish  to  be  free  from  the  law  of  obedience  itself ;
since  such  a  wish  could  only  exist  where  the  capacity  for  sinful
self-will  was  not  absolutely  excluded.  The  utmost  that  tempta-*
tion  could  do  with  our  Lord,  was  to  enhance  the  sacrificial  cha-
racter  of  obedience,  by  appealing  to  an  innocent  human  instinct
which  ran  counter  to  its  actual  requirements.

B.  This  statement  of  the  matter  will  perhaps  suggest  some
questions.

I.  Is  it  altogether  consistent  with  the  Scripture  language
which  represents  our*  Lord  as  icoro  itavra  rois  db(\<t>ois  6yuoia>6fU

(Heb.  ii.  I7)>  ftS  7r(ir€ipafi€V0g  Kara  irdvra  Kaff  6fioi6rTiTa  (Heb.  iv.

15) ;  as  One  Who  tfiadtv  d(f)*  S)v  €7ra6t  t^v  viraKofjv  (Heb.  v.  7)1
Yes.   For  Holy  Scripture  qualifies  this  language  by  describing

Him  as  x®P<^  afiaprias  (Heb.  iv.  15))    ^S  oaiosj  aKQKOSf  dixiavroSf

Kcx'u^pt'fTiuvoi  anh  rSitv  dfiapT<a\S>v  (Heb.  vii.  26) ;  and  by  connect-
ing His  manifestation  as  the  Saviour  with  the  entire  absence  of
any  sinful  element  within  Himself:  (Ketyos  €(^avfpa>^,  lua  rhs  dfiap-

Tias  riii&v  &pr}f  Koi  dfjutpria  iv  avr^  ovk  cort  ( I  St.  John  iii.  5)*      It

is  clear  that  Holy  Scripture  denies  the  existence,  not  merely  of  any
sinful  thinking  or  acting,  but  of  any  ultimate  roots  and  sources
of  sin,  of  any  propensities  or  inclinations,  however  latent  and
rudimentary,  towards  sin,  in  the  Incarnate  Christ.     When


526     Note  C.     On  Our  Lord's  Temptatioiu

tberefore  Scripture  speaks  of  HU  perfect  assuuilation  to  as,
to  our  condition,  our  trials,  our  e^)eriei]ces,  this  language
must  be  understood  of  physical  and  mental  pain  in  all  their
forms.  It  cannot  be  understood  of  anj  moral  assinulatian ;
He  is,  according  to  Scripture,  the  absolutely  Sinless  One ;  we
are,  by  nature,  corrupt.

2.  'Is  this  account  consiBtent  with  tiie  exigencies  tS  our
Lord's  Bedemptive  Work!'  Did  He  conquer  sin  for  as,  wbeu
His  victory  was  won  under  conditions  difiering  from  oar  own  I

Cert&inly.  He  is  not  less  truly  representatiye  of  our  race,
because  in  Him  it  bos  recovered  its  perfection.  His  victory  is
none  the  less  real  and  precioDs,  because,  morally  speaking,  it
was  inevitable.  Nay,  this  perfect  internal  sinlessnesa,  which
rendered  Christ  inaccessible  to  direct  temptation  to  evil,  was
itself  essential  to  His  redemptive  relationship  to  the  human
family.  It  accordingly  was  deliberately  secured  to  Him  by  His
Virgin'Birth,  which  cut  off  the  entail  of  inward  corruption.
He  could  not  have  been  the  Sinless  Victim,  offered  freely  for
a  sinful  world,  Suaut  vwip  ailtaa  (l  St.  Pet.  iiL  18),  nnlera
He  had  been  thus  superior  to  the  moral  infirmities  of  His
brethren.

3.  But  does  not  such  an  acconnt  impur  the  full  force  of  our
Lord's  examplel

Certainly  an  example  is  in  a  sense   more  powerlol   when

it  is  set  by  one  who  is  under  exactly  the  same  moral  circam-

stances  as  ourselves.     And,  if  Christ  oar  Lord  had  been  »

sinner,  or  at  any  rate  had  had  sinful  dispositiona  witbin  Him,

He  would  so   fitr  have   been   more  entirely  what  we  really

are ;   although   He  would  have  been  unable  to  redeem   as.

If,   like    Pi"  apostle,  He   had   beheld  'another  law   in    His

members  warring  against  tbe   law  of  His  mind,'  Ha  would

have  come  not  in  *  the  likeneffl  of  sinfiil  flesh,*  bnt  in  flesh

that  was  actually  sinful,  and  so  exactly  like  our  own.     But

then   He  took   our  nature  upon   Him,  precisely  in  order  to

expel  sin  altogether  from  it,  and  thus  to  shew  us  of  what  it  was

capable,  by  shewing  us  Himself.     The  absence  of  an  absolute

:  jn«(.;(«  r.t  ~.^ral  circumstances  between  Him'  and  onraelvcsi  is

npensated  by  our  possession  of  what  else  we  could

,  a  Perfect  Model  of  Humanity.     We  gain  in  the

the  Moral  Ideal   thus  placed  before  us,  to  say

be  perfection  of  the  Mediator  between  Qod  and

an  we  can  lose  in  moral  vigonr,  upon  discovering

dience  was  wrought  out  in  %  Natore  naliko  oar


Note  D.    Unity  of  the  Father  and  t/te  Son.   527

own  in  the  one  point  of  absolute  purity.  And  by  His  grace,
we  ourselves  are  supernaturalized,  and  '  can  do  all  things.*

4.  But  does  not  such  an  account  reflect  upon  the  moral
greatness  of  our  Lord  %  Is  not  an  obedience  *  which  could  not
but  be,*  less  noble  than  an  obedience  which  triumphs  over
pronounced  disinclination  to  obey  ?  In  other  words,  does  not
this  account  practically  deny  Christ's  moral  liberty  ?

No.  The  highest  liberty  does  not  imply  the  moral  capacity
of  doing  wrong.  God  is  the  one  perfectly  free  Being ;  yet  God
cannot  sin.  ^e  free  movement  of  a  moral  being,  who  has  not
fallen,  is  not  an  oscillation  between  sin  and  moral  truth;  it
is  a  steady  adherence  to  moral  truth.  To  God  sin  is  im-
possible. To  created  natures  sin  is  not  impossible;  but  it
is  always,  at  first,  a  violation  of  the  law  of  their  being ;  they
must  do  violence  to  themselves  in  order  to  sin.  So  it  was  in
Eden ;  so  it  is,  in  its  degree,  with  the  first  lie  a  man  tells  now.
Our  Lord's  inaccessibility  to  sin  was  the  proof  and  glory  of  His
Moral  Perfection.  *  Nonne  de  Spiritu  Sancto  et  Virgine  Maria
Dei  Filius  unicus  natus  est,  non  camis  concupiscentia  sed
singulari  Dei  munere  ?  Numquid  metuendum  fait,  ne  accedente
aetate  homo  ille  libero  peccaret  arbitrio  ?  An  ideo  in  illo  non
libera  voluntas  erat ;  ac  non  tantb  magis  erat,  quantb  magis
peccato  servire  non  poterat?'  (S.  Aug.,  De  Prsedestinatione
Sanctorum,  c.  15,  n.  30.)

The  real  temptation  of  a  sinless  Christ  is  not  less  precious
to  us  than  the  temptation  of  a  Christ  who  could  have  sinned,
would  be.  It  forms  a  much  truer  and  more  perfect  contrast  to
the  failure  of  our  first  parent.  It  occupies  a  chief  place  in  that
long  series  of  acts  of  condescension  which  begins  with  the
Nativity,  and  which  ends  on  the  Cross.  It  is  a  lesson  for  all
times  as  to  the  true  method  of  resisting  the  tempter.  Finally,
it  is  the  source  of  that  strength  whereby  all  later  .victories  over
Satan  have  been  won :  Christ,  the  sinless  One,  has  conquered
the  enemy  in  His  sin-stained  members.  '  By  Thy  Temptation,
good  Lord,  deliver  us.'

NOTE  D,  ON  Lectubb  IV.

On  '  Moral '  explanations  of  the  Unity  of  the  Father

and  the  Son.

Beferring  to  a  passage  whi6h  is  often  quoted  to  destroy  the
dogmatic  significance  of  St.  John  x.  30,  Professor  Bright  has  well
observed  that/ the  comparigon  in  St.  John  xvii.  21,  and  the


528     Note  E.   The  T/uory  0/ Hallucination.

unity  of  Christians  with  each  other  in  the  Son  haa  eometimes
heen  abused  ih  the  interests  of  heresy.'  '  The  aecond  unity,'  it
ha«  been  aaid,  '  is  simply  moral ;  therefore  the  first  is  so."  Bat
the  second  is  not  Bimply  moral ;  it  is,  in  its  basis,  essential,  for
we  are  members  of  His  body,  of  Hie  flesh,  and  of  Hie  boaes ;  it
is  the  mysteriouB  incorporation  into  His  Sacred  Mtmhood  which
causes  the  oneness  of  afTectiouB  and  of  will.  Thus  also  in  the
higher  sphere,  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  one  in  purpose,
because  They  are  consubBtantial,  '  Those,'  says  Olshausen  on
St.  John  X.  30, '  who  would  entertain  the  hypotheEia — at  once
Arian,  Socinian,  and  Bationalistic — that  <>>  tlvtu  refers  only  to
unity  of  will,  not  of  nature,  shonld  not  forget  that  true  unity  of
will  without  unity  of  nature  is  something  iuconceivable.  Hence,
if  Christ  speaks  of  unity  of  will  between  Himself  and  His
people,  this  can  Bubsiat  only  so  far  as  such  unity  of  will  has
been  rendered  possible  to  them  by  a  previous  communication
of  His  nature'  (Eighteen  Sermons  of  St.  Leo,  p.  132).


NOTE  E,  ON  Lbctuke  IV.
The  Theory  of  Hallucination.

It  is  said,  apparently  on  good  authority,  that  the  language  in
which  our  LonI  asserts  His  claims  upon  mankind  is  among  the
modem  Jews  often  attributed  to  hallucination.  The  old  re-
proach '  Thou  hast  a  devil,'  becomes  in  our  day  a  theory  that  in
the  Prophet  of  Nazareth  '  fanatical  enthusiasm  reached  a  point,
at  which  it  could  not  be  distinguished  from  mental  aberration.'

As  the  GoB]iels  are  the  only  source  of  the  knowledge  which
we  possess  about  our  Lord,  wo  cannot  discuss  such  a  question
as  that  beforj  us,  without  referring  to  them.  And  surely  the
impression  which  they  leave  on  minds  of  very  different  character
and  sympathies  is  a  sufficient  answer  to  the  criticism.  Channing,
who  represents  the  most  thoughtful  elements  of  American
fjocinianism,  has  already  been  quoted.  Dr.  John  Young  obserrea
that,  '  If  the  origin  of  our  Lord's  language  about  Himself  was
enthusiasm  at  all,  it  must  have  been  the  very  insanity  of  en-
thusiasm, and  His  grave  and  meek  life  decisively  forbids  this
supposition.  There  was  nothing  either  in  His  sayings  or  doings
incoherent,  contradictory,  wild.  '  Both  manifested  entire  selt-
poBsession  and  the  calmest  wisdom  *.'      With  the  judgment  (rf

■  The  Oliriat  of  History,  p.  108,  ed.  1869.


ISTote  F.  The  Presbyter  John  and  the  Apostle.  529

this  cool-hedded  Scotchmaiij  we  may  compare  the  language  of  a
typical  French  Protestant :  *  D'od  vient  ce  calme  auguste  dont
8ont  empreints  ses  discours  et  qui  fait  dire  en  T^coutant :  C'est
le  maitre  %  N'est-ce  pas  de  la  possession  parfaite  de  lui-m^me,
de  sa  s^r6nit6  constante  et  de  Tharmonie  de  tout  son  ^tre.
Xlien  dans  son  enseignement  ne  rappelle  Texaltation  ou  Texci-
tation  extraordinaire  du  sentiment,  parce  qu'il  n'est  jamais
hers  de  lui  ou  au-dessus  de  lui-mtoe ;  la  vie  en  Dieu  n'est  pas
pour  lui  un  6tat  exceptionnel,  un  ravissement  d'esprit,  un
Bommet  rarement  attaint  ou  Taurait  enlev6  I'inspiration  extra-
ordinaire d'une  heure  favoris^e ;  c'est  sa  condition  hahituelle  :
aussi  ne  se  rev^le-t-elle  pas  comme  chez  le  proph^te  par  ces  mots
brulants,  par  ces  m6taphores  hardies  qui  traversent  le  discours
comme  des  Eclairs ;  elle  se  manifeste  comme  une  lumiere  douce
et  vive  qui  ^mane  d'un  foyer  toujours  6gal  ^  lui-m6me  V

^  *  J^suB-Christ,  Son  temps,  Sa  vie,  Son  oeuvre/  par  £.  do  Pressens^^
Paris,  MeyrueiB,  pp.  355,  356.

NOTE  F,  ON  Lbctubb  V.

*  The  Presbyter  John '  and  the  Apostle.

Who  was  the  author  of  the  Second  and  Third  Epistles  attri-
buted to  St.  John  the  Evangelist  in  the  present  Canon  of  the
New  Testament  \

I.  The  existence  of  a  *  Presbyter  John/  a  contemporary  of  the
Apostle,  depends  on  the  following  evidence  : —

(i.)  Papias  in  Eus.  iii.  39  names  him  with  Aristion  separately
from  St.  John,  as  a  disciple  of  the  Lord.  Eusebius  adds
that  this  confirms  the  report  of  (a)  two  Johns  in  Asia  who
had  been  in  close  relations  with  our  Lord,  ($)  two  tombs
at  Ephesus  both  bearing  the  name  of  John.

(ii.)  Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  in  Eus.  vii.  25,  ascribes  the
author^p  of  the  Apocalypse  to  *the  Presbyter  John,'
as  Eusebius  himself  was  inclined  to  do.  Dionysius  repeats
the  story  of  the  two  tombs.

(iii.)  According  to  the  *  Apostolical  Constitutions '  (vii.  47)  a
second  John  was  made  Bishop  of  Ephesus  by  the  Apostle
St.  John.

(iv.)  St.  Jerome  (Catal.  Script,  c.  9  and  18)  makes  a  state-
ment to  the  same  effect :  he  says  that  John  the  Presbyter's

H  m


530  Note  F.   Ths  Presbyter  yohn  and  the  Apo%th.

tomb  is  still  Bhewn  at  EpfaesuB,  although  Bome  maintained
that  both  tombs  were  memorials  of  St.  John  the  Etui-
gelist.
Dr.  DSllinger  admita  that  the  Presbyter  John  lived  as  r  con-
temporary of  the  Evangelist,  and  that  hie  grave  oonld  be  seen  at
EphesuB  next  to  St.  John's.     (First  Age  of  the  Church,  p.  113,
Eng.  trass.,  2nd  edit.)

n.  But  this  admission  would  not  necessarily  involve  the
further  admisBion  that  the  Presbyter  John  was  the  aatbor  of
the  Second  and  Third  Epistles  ascribed  to  the  Apostle.  All
that  can  be  advanced  in  favour  of  the  Presbyter's  authorship  is
stated  by  Ebrard  (Eicleitung) ;  tbe  ordinary  belief  being  de-
fended by  Lacke,  Euther,  Wordsworth,  AJford  and  Weotcott.
Among  re^sona  for  it  are  the  following : —

i.  Th6  argiatuMt  Jtoth  ttyle.  The  difierences  upon  which
Ebrard  lays  such  tttees  may  fairly  be  accounted  for  by  tbe
distinct  character  and  object  of  the  two  Epistles ;  while  their
general  type  of  language  and  thought  is  nnmistakeably  Johan-
nean.  Bretechneider  denied  that  the  Apostle  had  written  aoy
one  of  tbe  three  Epistles.  Yet  he  had  no  doubt  of  the  tct
that  all  three  had  been  written  by  a  single  author.

ii.    C^Mreh-tradilion.

(n)  The  great  authority,  in  this  matter  especially,  of  St.  Irs-
ufBUs;  Hcer.  i.  16.  3;  iii.  16.  8.  (See  Alford.)  Neither
St.  Irenieus  nor  Folycrates  bad  ever  heard,  it  would  ap-
pear, of  the  Presbyter  John,  which  shews  at  least  that
he  cannot  have  been  an  eminent  person  in  the  Church.

(|3)  That  of  Clement  and  Dionyaius  of  Alexandria  (see
Alford) ;  Aurelius,  quoted  by  St.  Cyprian  in  Cone.
""^       t-j.    Jerome,  c£  Ep.  2    ad  Paulinnm,  Ep.  ad

tber  hand,  Origen  was  doubtful  about  the
as  about  many  other  tbings.  (£us.  vi.  25.)
pistles  are  not  even  mentioned  by  Tertullian
■et.  They  were  rtijected,  together  with  the
alio  Epistles,  by  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia.
reception  of  the  two  Epistles  into  the  canon
■  Churches  may  be  accounted  for,  according
by  (i)  their  private  character;  (a)  the  fact


Note  G.     The  Worship  of  Jesus  Christ,     531

that  one  was  addressed  to  a  woman;  (3)  the  amount
of  matter  in  them  common  to  the  first  Epistle  (?).  The
verdict  of  the  Muratorian  Fragm.  is  doubtful.  The
Peschito  probably  did  not  contain  either.  Eusebius
reckons  them  among  the  Antilegomena ;  yet  his  own
opinion  appears  in  Dem.  Ev.  iii.  5.     (See  Alford.)

iii.  Nothing  against  the  apostolic  authorship  can  be  inferred
from  the  title  6  np€a'&vTfpog,  St.  Paul  calls  himself  6  npta^vrtjs
(Philem.  9),  and  St.  Peter  ,6  trvixTrpfo-^vrepog  (i  Pet.  v.  i).
Probably  *  the  Presbyter '  John  did  not  assume  the  title  until
after  the  death  of  the  Apostle.  St.  John  may  have  used  it
in  his  private  correspondence,  either  to  hint  at  his  age,  or  as
a  formal  title  the  force  of  which  was  at  once  recognized  and
admitted.  Surely  the  Presbyter  would  have  added  to  6  irpta-
^vT€posy  his  name  'loKzwi/r.  An  Apostle  could  afford  to  omit
his  name.  The  authority  too,  of  which  the  writer  of  the  third
Epistle  is  conscious  in  his  reference  to  Diotrephes,  seems  incon-
sistent with  the  supposition  of  a  non-apostolical  authorship.

NOTE  G,  ON  Lectube  VII.

The  worship  of  Jesus  Christ  as  prescribed  by  the  Authorized

Services  of  the  Church  of  England.

A.  In  a  letter  to  the  Editor  of  the  '  Times,'  dated  August  9,
and  published  in  that  journal  on  September  26, 1866,  Dr.  Colenso
writes  as  follows : —

*I  have  drawn  attention  to  the  fact  that  out  of  180  collects
and  prayers  contained  in  the  Prayer-book,  only  three  or  four  at
most  are  addressed  to  our  Lord,  the  others  being  all  addressed
through  Christ  to  Almighty  God.  I  have  said  that  there  are
also  ejaculations  in  the  Litany  and  elsewhere  addressed  to
Christ.  But  I  have  shewn  that  the  whole  sjnrit  and  the  general
practice  of  our  Liturgy  manifestly  tend  to  discourage  such  wor-
ship and  prayer,  instead  of  making  it  the  "  foundation-stone  "
of  common  worship.'

'  It  appears,'  Dr.  Colenso  further  observes,  *  that  the  practice
in  question  is  not  based  on  any  Scriptural  or  Apostolical
authority,  but  is  the  development  of  a  later  age,  and  has  very
greatly  increased  within  the  Church  of  England  during  the
last  century,  beyond  what  (as  the  Prayer-book  shews)  was  the
rule  at  the  time  of  the  Beformation — chiefly,  as  I  belie ve,
through  the  use  of  unauthorized  hymns.'

Kin  2


532     Note  G.     The  Worship  of  yesus  Christ

I.  Now  here  it  is  to  be  obeerred,  first  of  all,  that  pray«r  to
our  Lord  is  either  right  or  wrong.  If  it  is  right,  if  Jesas  Christ
does  indeed  hear  and  answer  prayer,  and  prayer  to  Him  ia
agreeable  to  the  Diriiie  Will,  then  three  or  foor  hundred  collects
addressed  to  Him  (sapposing  the  nee  of  them  not  to  imply  a
lack  of  deTotion  to  the  Eternal  Father  and  to  the  Holjr  Spirit)
are  quite  as  justifiable  as  three  or  four.  If  Buch  prayer  is  wrong,
if  Jesus  Christ  does  not  hear  it,  and  it  is  opposed  to  the  real
Will  of  Qod,  then  a  single  ejaculation,  a  single  Christe  Eleison,
carries  with  it  tLe  whole  weight  of  a  wrongfiil  act  of  worship,
and  ia  immoral,  as  involving  a  violation  of  the  rights  of  Ood.

Dr.  Colenso  says  that  prayer  to  Jesua  Christ  ia  '  not  based  oa
Scriptural  or  Apostolical  authority,  but  is  the  development  of  a
later  age.'  He  does  not  mean  to  assert  that '  development '  is  a
sufficient  justification  of  a  Christian  doctrine  or  practice ;  since
he  is  assigmug  a  reason  for  the  disoonragement  which  he  feela
it  to  be  lus  duty  to  offer  to  the  practice  of  prayer  to  our  Loid.
But,  if  his  reaEOU  be  valid,  ought  it  not  to  make  any  one  Bach
prayer  utterly  out  of  the  question  1  It  is  not  easy  to  understand
the  principle  upon  which,  after  admitting  that  'three  or  four
CollectB*  in  the  Prayer-book  are  addressed  to  our  Lord,  Dr.
Colenso  adds, '  I  am  prepared  to  use  the  Liturgy  of  the  Church
of  England  as  it  etauda.'

To  a  clear  mind,  unembarrassed  by  the  difGcnlties  of  ao  unten-
able position,  this  painful  inconsistency  would  be  impossible.
Either  Jesus  Christ  is  Qod  or  He  is  not;  there  is  no  third
alternative.  If  He  is  Qod,  then  natural  piety  makes  prayer  to
Pim  inevitable :  to  call  Him  Gtod  is  to  call  TTim  adorable.
If  He  is  not  Qod,  then  one-tenth  part  of  the  worship  which
the  Church  of  England  in  her  authorized  formularies  ofiers  to
Him  is  just  as  idolatrous  as  a  hundred  litanies,  such  as  ours,
would  be.  Dr.  Colenso  would  not  explain  Ma  use  of  '  Christ,
have  mercy  upon  us '  as  Eoman  Catholics  eiplain  an  '  Ora  pro
nobis.'     If  one  such  'ejaculation'  is  right,  then  prayer  to  our

lour  together  is  right  also.     In  short,  it  is  not  a

lore  or  fewer  prayers  to  Christ ;  the  qnestioo  is,

ly  worship, Him  at  aU}

lenso  maintains  that  *  the  whole   spirit  and   the

tice  of  our  Liturgy  manifestly  tend  to  discourage'

■Lord.

eant  by  the  '  whole  spirit '  of  our  Liturgy  t   If  this
intended    to  describe    some    sublimated   essence,

stinct  irom  the  actual  words  of  the  Prayer-book,


in  the  Services  of  tlie  Church  of  England.     533


it  is  of  course  very  difficult  to  say  what  it  may  or  may  not
'  tend  *  to  *  discourage.'  But  if  the  *  whole  spirit  *  of  a  document
be  its  intellectual  drift  and  purpose  as  gathered  from  its  actual
"words,  and  from  the  history  of  its  formation,  then  we  may  say
that  Dr.  Colenso's  assertion  is  entirely  opposed  to  the  facts  of
the  case.

(a)  The  devotional  addresses  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  alont
in  the  Church  Service  are  as  follows : —


Daily  Service^  Morning  and  Evening — ►

Verses  of  the  Te  Deum  .

*  Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us  *
Prayer  of  St.  Chrysostom       •

Litany —

Invocation,  *  0  God  the  Son  *  •

*  Remember  not,  Lord  *  •         •
Deprecations         •        •        •
Obsecrations  .         .        »
'  Li  all  time  of  our  tribulation '
Petitions       ....

*  Son  of  God,  we  beseech  Thee,'  etc
« O  Lamb  of  God,  That,'  etc.  .

*  O  Christ,  hear  us  *

*  Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us '
Preces,  *  From  our  enemies '  •
Prayer  of  St.  Chrysostom       •

Collects —

Third  Sunday  in  Advent        •

St.  Stephen's  Day .

First  Sunday  in  Lent    •        •


Communion  Office —

Of  the  three  parts  of  the  Gloria  in  Excelsis

Solemnization  of  Maf/rimony —

*  Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us  *         •        »

Visitation  of  the  Sick —

*  Bemember  not.  Lord '  .         .         .         .

*  Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us  *

*  O  Saviour  of  the  world,  Who  by  Thy  Cross '


16
2
2


I
I

5
2

I

21

I
2
I
I
10
I


I
I
I


I
I
I


534     ^oU  G.      The  Worship  of  Jesus  Christ

Burial  o/lAe  Dead —

*  In  the  midEt  of  life,'  etc       •         .         .         .  i

'  Christ,  bave  mercy  ap«m  as '         .         .         .  i

Charcftrng  of  ITomen —

'Christ,  have  mercj  aponns'         ...  i

Commination —

'  Christ,  have  mere;  upon  ns '          •        .         .  i

Prayers  to  he  uied  at  Sea —

'  0  blessed  SaTionr,  l^t  didst  save '      .         .  i

'  Christ,  have  mercy  upon  ns '          .         .         .  i

'  O  Christ,  hear  as '       ....        .  i

83

(S)  Devotional  addresses  to  our  Lord  conjointly  vith  the
Eternal  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost;—

Daily  Morning  and  Evening  Serviee»,  not  inclnding

the  Palms — Gloria  Patri  at  least       .         ,  6

AtAanaeian  Creed — Gloria  Patri    ....  i

'OHoly,Bles8ed,and  Glorious  Trinily'          .  t

Gloria  Patri          ......  i

Cofleei  for  Trinity  Sunday i

ComxKimxon  Office —

Preface  for  Trinity  Sunday     ....  i

Ter  Sanctns  .......  1

Malrinumy — Gloria  Patri     .....  r

Viailalioit  of  tJia  Siek—Qloiia,  Patri         ...  i

Sui-ial  of  the  Dead — Gloria  Patri  at  leatt       .         .  i

C/iurehing  of  Women — Gloria  Patri       ...  i

Commination — Gloria  Patri  .....  r

Psalter — Gloria  Patri 171

Prayera  to  be  used  at  Sea —

Gloria  Fatri .......  4

•God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,'  etc        .        .  1


in  the  Services  of  the  Church  of  England.     535

Besides  this,  there  are  at  the  end  01  Collects  seven  ascriptions
of  Glory,  addressed  to  Christ  our  Lord  with  the  Father  and  the
Holy  Spirit.  In  one  Collect  (Ordering  of  Deacons)  such  an
ascription  is  addressed  to  Christ  alone.

(y)  It  should  further  be  added,  that  in  each  of  the  Ordina-
tion Services  the  whole  of  that  large  part  of  the  Litany  which
is  addressed  to  our  Lord  is  repeated,  with  the  exception  of
the  Prayer  of  St.  Chrysostom;  while  in  the  Doxology,  twice
repeated,  at  the  end  of  the  Veni  Creator,  Christ  is  praised  with
the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  Nor  should  the  solemn  Bene-
dictions in  the  name  of  the  Three  Blegsed  Persons  which  occur
in  the  Communion,  theCpnfirmation,  and  the  Marriage  Services,
be  forgotten  in  estimating  the  devotional  attitude  of  the  Church
towards  our  Lord.  For  a  view  of  the  real  amount  of  change
in  the  Prayer-book  which  would  be  necessary  in  order  to  expel
from  it  the  worship  of  our  Lord,  see  *  The  Book  of  Common
Prayer  of  the  Church  of  England  adapted  for  general  use  in
other  Protestant  Churches*;  London,  William  Pickering,  1852.
This  compilation  appears  to  have  been  the  work  of  a  Socinian,
as  those  Protestant  Dissenters  who  believe  in  the  Godhead  of
our  Lord  would  regard  most  of  its  'adaptations'  as  shocking
to  their  dearest  convictions.

(5)  Of  the  Collects  for  Sundays  or  Holy-days  now  addressed
to  the  Father,  only  two  (those  for  the  Fourth  Sunday  in  Advent
and  Sunday  after  Ascension)  were,  in  the  pld  Ritual,  prayers  to
Christ.  Yet  of  these,  it  happens  that  the  former  was,  in  its
original  form,  as  it  stood  in  the  Saoramentary  of  Gelasius,  ad-
dressed to  the  Father  (Muratori,  Lit.  Bom.  i.  680) :  and  the
latter  was  not  originally  a  Collect,  but  an  antiphon  for  the  second
vespers  of  the  Ascension,  which  Ven.  Bede  sang  shortly  before
his  death.  Another  prayer,  beginning  *  Hear  us,'  in  the  Visita-
tion Office,  was  a  prayer  to  our  Lord  until  1661.  On  the  other
hand,  of  the  three  Collects  now  addressed  to  our  Lord,  that  for
the  First  Sunday  in  Lent  dates  from  1549,  that  for  the  Third
Sunday  in  Advent  from  1661,  while  that  for  St.  Stephen's  Day,
originally  a  prayer  to  the  Father,  became  a  prayer  to  the  Son
in  1549,  and  was  enlarged  and  intensified,  as  such,  in  166 1.
The  Office  for  Use  at  Sea,  containing  prayers  to  Christ,  also
belongs  to  1661.

In  order  to  do  justice  to  the  spirit  of  the  Beformers  of  the
sixteenth  century  on  this  subject,  two  facts  should  be  noted :

I.  Prayers  to  our  Lord  abound  in  the  semi-authorized  Primers
which  were  put  out  at  that  period.     In  Edward  the  Sixth's


536     Note  G.     The  Worship  of  yesus  Christ

Primer  of  1553  there  are  Bixteen.  In  Elizabeth's  Primer  of
1559  there  are  twenty-two.  In  one  portion  of  the  Preces  Pri-
yatsB  of  1564  there  are  twenty-one,  Li  the  *  Christian  Prayers*
of  1578  there  are  fifty-five.

2.  On  the  other  hsmd,  firom  all  of  these  manuals,  as  from  the
public  services  of  the  Chnrch,  all  addresses  to  any  created  being
were  rigorously  excluded.  And  one  effect  of  the  expulsion  of
antiphons  and  hymns  addressed  to  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  other
Saints  from  the  Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England,  has  been  to
throw  the  praises,  prayers,  and  adorations,  which  the  Church  of
England  publicly  addresses  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  into  a
sharper  prominence  than  belonged  to  such  prayers  in  pre-
Reformation  times,  or  than  belongs  to  them  now  in  the  Church
of  Home.

The  old  Puritanism  would  have  shrunk  with  horror  frtnn
the  discouragement  of  prayer  to  our  Lord.  Witness  the  speech
of  Sir  E.  Bering  in  the  Long  Parliament  of  1641,  after  an  order
of  the  House  of  Commons  forbidding  men  to  bow  at  the  Name
of  Jesus: —

'  Was  it  ever  heard  before,  that  any  men  of  any  religion,  in
Ai^y  &g^  ^d  ^▼^i'  c^^  short  or  abridge  any  worship,  upon  any
occasion,  to  their  GM  t  Take  heed,  Sir,  and  let  us  all  tsike  heed,
whither  we  are  going.  If  Christ  be  Jesus,  if  Jesus  be  God,  all
reverence,  exterior  as  well  as  interior,  is  too  little  for  Him.
I  hope  we  are  not  going  up  the  back  stairs  to  Socinianism  I'
(Southey,  Book  of  the  Churdi,  p.  462.)

«  «  «  «  «

B.  The  worship  of  Christ  our  Lord  in  the  Litany  has  lately
been  explained  by  a  very  popular  and  accomplished  writer^,
upon  principle^  which,  if  they  could  be  admitted,  would  deny  to
it  the  significance  assigned  to  it  in  these  Lectures.  After  com-
menting on  the  historical  origin  of  Litany-worship  in  the  fifth
century,  and  on  the  compilation  of  our  own  Litany  at  the
Beformation,  Dean  Stanley  observes  that  the  Litany  forms  the
most  remarkable  exception  to  the  ordinary  practice  of  the
Church,  in  respect  of  addressing  prayers  to  Qod  the  Father.
The  Dean  then  proceeds : —

'  It  is  not  perhaps  certain  that  all  the  petitions  are  addressed
to  Christ  our  Saviour^ ;  but)  at  any  rate,  a  large  portion  are  so

••  'The  Litany/  by  the  DeMi  of  Westminster.  In  'Good  Wards'  for  July,
1868,  p.  433.

^  'We  beseech  thee  to  hesr  ns,  O  Lord,'  is  in  the  older  Litanies  addressed
to  Grod  (Martene^  iiL  53),  and  so  it  woold  seem  to  be  in  some  of  the  petitions


in  tlu  Services  of  the  Church  of  England,    537

addressed.  It  stands  in  this  respect  almost  isolated  amidst  the
rest  of  the  Prayer  Book.  Now,  what  is  the  reason — what  is
the  defence  for  this)  Many  excellent  persons  have  at  times
felt  a  scruple  at  such  a  deviation  from  the  precepts  of  Scripture
and  from  the  practice  of  ancient  Christendom.  What  are  we
to  say  to  explain  it  %  The  explanation  is  to  be  sought  in  the
original  circumstances  under  which  the  litany  was  introduced.
When  the  soul  is  overwhelmed  with  difficulties  and  distresses,
like  those  which  caused  the  French  Christians  in  the  fifth  cen-
tury to  utter  their  piteous  supplications  to  God — ^it  seems  to
be  placed  in  a  different  posture  from  that  of  common  life.  The
invisible  world  is  brought  much  nearer — ^the  language,  the
feelings  of  the  heart  become  more  impassioned,  more  vehement,
more  urgent.  The  inhabitants,  so  to  speak,  of  the  world  of
spirits  seem  to  become  present  to  our  spirits;  the  words  oi
common  intercourse  seem  unequal  to  convey  the  thoughts  which
are  labouring  to  express  themselves.  As  in  poetry,  so  in  sorrow,
and  for  a  similar  reason,  our  ordinary  forms  of  speech  are
changed.  So  it  was  in  the  two  exceptions  which  occur  in  the
New  Testament.  When  Stephen  was  in  the  midst  of  his
enemies,  and  no  help  for  him  left  on  earth,  then  "  the  heavens
were  opened;  and  he  saw  the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the
right  hand  of  God,"  and  thus  seeing  Him,  he  addressed  his
petition  straight  to  Him—"  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit, — ^Lord,
lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  When  St.  Paul  was  deeply
oppressed  by  the  thorn  in  the  flesh,  then  again  his  Lord  ap-
peared to  Mm  (we  know  not  how),  and  then  to  Him,  present
to  the  eye  whether  of  the  body  or  the  spirit  (as  on  the  road  to
Damascus),  the  Apostle  addressed  the  threefold  supplication,
"  Let  this  depart  from  me,"  and  the  answer,  in  like  manner,  to
the  ear  of  the  body  or  spirit,  was  direct — "  My  grace  is  suffi-
cient for  thee."  So  is  it  in  the  Litany.  Those  who  wrote  it,
and  we  who  use  it,  stand  for  the  moment  in  the  place  of  Stephen
and  Paul.  We  knock,  as  it  were,  more  earnestly  at  the  gates
of  heaven — ^we  "  thrice  beseech  the  Lord  "• — and  the  veil  is  for
a  moment  withdrawn,  and  the  Son  of  Man  is  there  standing  to
receive  our  prayer.  In  that  rude  time,  when  the  Litany  was
first  introduced,  they  who  used  it  would  fain  have  drawn  back
the  veil  further  still.  It  was  in  the  Litanies  of  the  Middle
Ages  that  we  first  find  the  invocations  not  only  of  Christ  our

in  the  English  Litany.  But  perhaps  the  most  natural  interpretation  is  to
regard  the  whole  as  addressed  to  Christ."  Note  by  Dean  Stanley  in  'Good
Words.'


538     Note  G.     The  Worship  of  Jesus  Christ

Savioar,  but  of  those  earthly  Baints  who  have  departed  with
Him  into  that  other  world.  These  we  have  now,  with  »  wise
caution,  ceased  to  address.  Bat  the  feeling  which  induced
men  to  call  upon  them  ie  the  same  in  kind  aa  that  which  mns
through  this  exceptional  service ;  namely,  the  endeavour,  under
the  pressure  of  strong  emotion  and  heavy  calamity,  t«  bring
ourselves  more  nearly  into  the  presence  of  the  Invisible.  Christ
and  the  saints  at  such  times  seemed  to  come  out  lilte  stars,
which  in  the  daylight  cannot  be  seen,  bat  in  the  darknesB  of
the  night  were  visible.  The  saints,  like  falling  stars  or  passing
meteors,  have  again  receded  into  the  darkness.  We  by  increased
reflection  have  been  brought  to  feel  that  of  them  and  of  their
state  we  know  not  enough  t«  justify  this  invocation  of  their
help.  But  Christ,  the  Lord  and  King  of  the  Saints,  still  re-
mains— the  Bright  and  Morning  Star,  more  vicdble  than  all  the
rest,  more  bright  and  more  cheering,  as  the  darkness  of  the
night  becomes  deeper,  as  the  cold  becomes  more  and  more  chill.
'  We  justly  acquiesce  in  the  practice  of  our  Reformed  Church,
which  has  excluded  those  lesser  mediators.  But  this  one
remarkable  exception  of  the  Litany  in  favour  of  addressing  oar
prayers  to  the  one  great  Divine  Mediator  may  be  Eurely  allowed,
if  we  remember  that  it  ie  an  exception,  and  understand  the
grounds  on  which  it  is  made.  In  the  rest  of  the  Prayer  Book
we  follow  the  ancient  rule,  and  our  Saviour's  express  command,
by  addressing  our  Father  only.  Here  in  the  Litany,  when  we
express  our  most  urgent  needs,  we  may  well  deviate  from  that
general  rule,  and  invite  the  ever-present  aid  of  Jesus  Christ,  at
once  the  Son  of  Man  and  Son  of  God°.'

I.  K^ow,  first  of  all,  it  cannot  be  admitted  that  any  '  defence '
or  'explanation'   of  the  worship   of  our  Lord  in  the  Litany
ought  to  be  required  by  any  pei-son  who  sincerely  believes  in
Christ's  Godhead ;  while  as  to  those  who  do  not  believe  in  it,  the
■noo,>'=  =>.«innnt|QQ  ^Qgg  mjt  touch  the  real  point  of  their  objec-
y  excellent  persons  have  at  times  felt  a  scruple
,tion  from  the  precepts  of  Scripture  and  from  the
ient  Chrietendom,'  they  ought  to  have  been  told
uple  was   based  on  a  misapprehension.     As  to
y  precept  in  the  Gospel  on  the  subject  is  in  har-
govemed  by  the  primal  law :  '  Thou  shalt  wor-
thy God,  and  Him  only  shalt  thou  serve.'     This
once   positive   and   negative :    It  prescribes  the

•  'Good  Words,'  p.  432,


in  the  Services  of  the  Church  of  England.     539

adoration  of  God,  and  it  excludes  the  adoration  of  beings  ex-
ternal to  the  Godhead.  The  one  practical  question  then  is  whether
Jesus  Christ  is  internal  to  the  Divine  Essence,  or  a  created
being  outside  It.  If  the  former,  then  not  merely  may  we  adore
Him :  we  must.  If  the  latter,  then  no  poetry,  no  feeling,  can
relax  the  rule:  we  dare  not.  If  Christ  is  God,  the  Litany
does  not  require  an  apology.  If  He  is  only  a  creature,  it  does
not  admit  of  one.

And  as  concerns  *the  practice  of  the  ancient  Church*  the
scruple  in  question  is  very  unnecessary.  CertaiiJy,  in  the
greatest  public  act  of  Christian  worship,  the  Eucharist,  the  rule
was,  as  defined  at  Carthage,  to  address  prayer  to  the  Father.
This  rule  however  resulted  from  the  specific  belief  of  the  ancient
Church  respecting  the  Eucharist,  namely,  that  it  was  a  sacrificial
presentation  of  Christ,  once  for  all  sacrificed  on  Calvary,  to  the
Eternal  Father.  The  rule  did  not  govern  ancient  Christian
practice  in  respect  of  non-Eucharistic  prayer.  The  Litanies  of
the  fifth  century  did  but  repeat  and  expand  devotions  which
had  long  been  ancient  and  popular;  such  as  were  the  Kyrie
Eleison  and  the  Gloria  in  Excelsis; — ^both  of  them  containing
prayers  to  Christ  our  Lord,  and  both  ultimately  finding  their
way  into  the  Eucharistic  Service.  Prayer  to  our  Lord  had  long
been  the  natural  resource  of  the  Christian  soul.  Not  to  repeat
examples  which  have  been  cited  in  the  text  of  these  lectures,  let
two  be  instanced  which  shew  that  prayer  to  Christ  did  not  first
become  popular  in  the  ancient  Church,  when,  under  the  pressure
of  public  calamities.  Bishop  Mamertus  instituted  Litanies  in  the
diocese  of  Vienne.  Such  prayer  was  already  the  common  and
ancient  practice  of  Christendom.  A  century  earlier  St.  Athan-
asius  is  vindicating  his  loyalty  to  Constantius:  'I  had  only
to  say,*  he  observes,  *Let  us  pray  for  the  safety  of  the  most
religious  Emperor,  Constantius  Augustus;  and  all  the  people
immediately  cried  with  one  voice,  "O  Christ,  send  Thy  help
to  Constantius."  And  they  continued  praying  for  some  time.'
(Apol.  ad  Constant.  §  10.)  Again,  St.  Augustine  is  describing  a
spontaneous  burst  of  fervid  prayer  from  the  Christian  multitude
— They  exclaimed,  'Exaudi  Christe,  Augustine  vita:'  and  he
adds — *  dictum  est  sexties  decies.*  (Ep.  213.)  These  great  fathers
would  no  more  have  thought  that  prayer  to  our  Lord  had  to  be
justified  before  well-informed  Christians,  than  they  would  have
hoped  to  justify  it,  let  us  say,  to  intelligent  but  unconverted
Jews.

2.  Dean  Stanley's  'explanation*  of  the  worship  of  our  Lord


540     Note  G.     The  Worship  of  Jesus  Christ

in  the  Lituiy  refers  it  to  '  difficulties  and  distresees  like  those
which  caused  the  French  Christians  in  the  fifth  century  to  utter
their  piteons  supplications  to  God.'  He  traces  it  back  t«  the
passion,  the  vehemence,  the  nrgency  of  a  great  sorrow  ;  to  '  the
endeavonr,  under  the  pressure  of  strong  emotion  and  heavy
calamity,  to  bring  ourselves  more  nearly  into  the  presence  of  the
Invisible.'  Now  there  is  no  donht  that  calamities,  whether
public  or  private,  do  very  greatly  enlarge  and  intensify  the  life
of  prayer  in  Christian  souls.  Scripture  teaches  us,  in  various
ways,  that  this  is  one  of  the  providentially-intended  results  of
such  calamities ;  and  upon  no  point  is  Scripture  more  in  har-
mony with  experience.  But  sorrow,  of  itself,  does  not  make
the  prayers  which  it  multiplies  or  intensifies  either  lawful  or
availing.  Sorrow  may  quicken  the  instincts  of  superstition  not
less  than  those  of  revealed  truth.  Sorrow,  as  such,  is  not
a  revelation;  it  does  not  ensure  progress  in  tmtb;  it  may
bring  a  Christian  more  sensibly  into  God's  Presence ;  it  may
throw  pagan  multitudes  at  the  feet  of  a  debasing  and  odious
idol.  Whether  the  practices  which  it  leads  ns,  in  our  agony,
to  adopt,  are  wholesome  and  defensible,  must  be  determined
independently  of  it.  If  a  practice  is  indefensible,  on  groundi
.  of  faith  or  grounds  of  reason,  sorrow  cannot  consecrate  it.
If  it  was  in  any  sense  or  degree  wrong  to  pray  to  Jeeos
Christ,  St.  Stephen's  dying  agony,  and  St!  Paul's  mental  dis-
tress under  the  thorn  in  the  flesh,  could  not  justify  their
prayers  to  Him ;  if  they  were  right  in  praying  to  Hirn  then,
they  were  right  in  praying  to  Him,  as  we  know  St.  Paul  did
pray  to  Him,  at  other  times.  If  the  prayers  to  our  Lord  in
the  Litany  were  really  a  '  deviation  from  the  precepts  of  Scrip-
ture and  from  the  practice  of  ancient  Christendom,'  then  neither
the  difficulties  and  distreBsea  of  Southern  France  in  the  fifth
century,  nor  the  '  extremity  of  perplexity"!'  which  men  felt  at
the  convulsions  of  the  Eeformation-period,  nor  any  public  or
private  sorrows  or  emotions  of  modem  times,  can  avail  to  justiiy
such  a  *  deviation.'  It  is  indeed  natnral  for  Christians  in  times
nf  snrmw  +n  nnpeal  in  prayer  to  our  Lord's  Human  sympathies,
than  in  the  brighter  hours  of  life.  But  assuredly
to  Christ  are  wronj^  no  amoont  of  mental  agony
I  right ;  and  whether  they  are  right  or  wrong  is
etermined  by  Christ's  having  or  not  having  any
eceive  human  adoration,  and  any  real  capacity  i£

*  '  Good  Word*,'  p.  411.


in  the  Services  of  the  Church  of  England,     541


hearing  and  answering  the  cries  of  His  worshippers.  If  this
right  and  this  capacity  are  once  estahlished,  the  duty  of  ador-
ing Jesus  Christ  is  placed  on  a  basis  which  does  not  admit  of
OTir  restricting  it  to  times  of  sorrow.  If  they  are  not  established,
human  sorrow  cannot  really  affect  the  unseen  realities,  and
St.  Stephen  and  St.  Paul  did  but  beat  the  air.

If  the  Psalter  teaches  us  any  one  great  lesson  with  respect
to  sorrow,  it  is  that  we  should  be  driven  by  it  to  renounce  all
merely  human  aids  and  hopes,  and  to  cling  more  trustfully,
exclusively,  perseveringly,  to  God  as  the  true  help  and  shield
and  strength  of  souls.  And  the  Christian  Bishop  of  the  fifth
century  was  not,  we  may  be  sure,  unmindful  of  the  teaching  of
David,  or  rather  he  was  not  notoriously  false  to  it.  The  whole
Church  of  his  day,  as  the  Church  before  him,  adored  Jesus
Christ  as  Very  God,  and  the  Litanies  of  Vienne  only  elaborated
into  a  new  form  a  devotion  which  was  based  not  on  the  panic
of  certain  rural  Christians,  but  on  the  broad  and  assured  faith
of  Christendom.

3.  But  the  Dean's  expressions  respecting  the  relation  of  the
adoration  of  our  Lord  to  the  cultus  of  the  saints  in  pre-
Keformation  times,  present  the  most  serious  difficulties  of  this
perplexing  passage.  In  times  of  sorrow,  he  says,  *  Christ  and
the  saints  seemed  to  come  out  like  stars,  which  in  the  daylight
cannot  be  seen,  but  in  the  darkness  of  the  night  were  visible.'
The  saints  *have  again  receded  into  the  darkness.*  *We  by
increased  reflection  have  been  brought  to  feel  that  of  them  and
of  their  state  we  know  not  enough  to  justify  this  invocation  of
their  help.  But  Christ,  the  Lord  and  King  of  the  Saints,  still
remains  '....*  We  justly  acquiesce  in  the  practice  of  our  re-
formed Church,  which  has  excluded  these  lesser  mediators.
But  this  one  remarkable  exception  of  the  Litany  in  favour  of
addressing  our  prayers  to  the  one  great  Divine  Mediator  may
be  surely  allowed,  if  we  remember  that  it  is  an  exceptiony  and
understand  the  grounds  on  which  it  is  made.'

This  language  seems  to  imply  that  the  prayers  to  our  Lord
in  the  Litany  are,  in  principle,  identical  wifli  the  prayers  which
in  mediaeval  times  have  been,  and  in  Roman  Catholic  countries
still  are,  addressed  to  the  saints.  There  is  indeed  some  confu-
sion in  speaking  of  the  retention  of  prayer  to  the  one  great
Divine  Mediator  as  constituting  a  *  remarkable  exception  *  to  the
proscription  of  prayers  to  the  saints.  For  if  the  Great  Mediator
is  *  Divine,'  in  the  natural  sense  of  being  personally  God,  and
not  only  in  the  sense  in  which  good  men  are  said  to  be  '  divine,'


542     Note  G.     The  Worship  of  Jesus  Christ.

as  posseEsiog  in  »  high,  the  highest  known  degree,  Eome  moral
qu^ties  of  Qod ;  then  the  word  '  exception '  is  inapplicable  to
Uie  case  before  as.  If,  on  the  contrary,  Christ  is  not  truly  God,
then,  no  doubt,  the  retention  of  wor^ip  addressed  to  Him  is  a
'remarkable  exception'  to  tbeeipulgionof  all  other  'worship'  of
the  kind  from  the  Prayer-book  of  the  English  Church.  But  it
will  hardly  be  contended  that  the  English  Keformers  retained
the  old  prayero  to  Christ  our  Lord,  and  added  new  onea  of
their  own,  on  such  a  ground  as  this.  Had  they  done  so,  tbey
would  have  been  false  to  a  principle  to  which  Uiey  profcEsed  a
deroted  loyalty,  and  by  means  of  which,  so  to  speak,  tbey  made
their  way; — the  principle  of  restricting  all  prayer  t«  God.
They  uotoriouBly  believed  the  adoration  of  Christ  to  be  identical
with,  inseparable  from,  the  adoration  of  Ood  \  to  be  guarded,
justified,  enforced  by  the  first  two  commandments  of  the  deca-
logue, just  as  truly  as  is  the  adon.tion  of  the  Father,  and  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  '  Who  with  the  Father  and  tbe  Son  together,
is  worshipped  and  glorified '.'  And,  whatever  may  be  said  of
tbe  language  used  in  popular  Boman  Catholic  derotions  to
the  saints,  it  is  certain  that  no  Roman  Catholic  divine  would
for  one  instant  coordinate  in  word  or  tbought  the  adoration
paid  to  Jesus,  with  tbe  '  relative  honour '  pa^il  to  His  glorified
servants.  In  short,  neither  Roman  Catholic  nor  Reformer  re-
garded the  adoration  of  Christ  retained  in  our  Prayer-book,  aa
an  '  exception '  to  the  general  proscription  at  the  Reformation
of  the  cnltuB  of  the  saints.  Had  the  Reformers  done  so,  they
would  have  had  to  reconstroct,  not  the  Litany,  but  the  Kicene
Creed;  they  must  also  have  re-written  the  second  Article  in
a  Socinian  sense,  and  altered  a  clause  of  tbe  twenty-second.
Had  the  Roman  Catholics  done  so,  they  would  certainly  Iiave
availed  themselves  of  a  vantage  ground  which  would  have  en-
abled them  to  deal  with  the  Reformation  as  with  a  manifest  revolt
against  the  most  fundamental  truths  of  the  Christian  revela-
tion. Whether  the  Roman  invocations  of  the  saints  did  or  did
not  in  any  way  wrong  the  Divine  Prerogatives,  was  a  point
brmersand  their  opponents  difiered  seriously;
fectly  agreed  in  justiiying  such  language  aa
by  referring  it  to  a  truth  which  tbey  held
J  earnestness ; — the  truth  that  JesuB  Christ

ibrase, '  caro  Domini  honorem  Deitatii  asn-

•  Kcenc  Ctevd.


Note  H.    Cardinal  de  Turrecrematds  work.  543


mit  ;*  if,  as  a  consequence  of  the  Hypostatic  Union,  our  Lord's ,
Manhood  rightly  and  necessarily  shares  in  the  adoration  offered
to  Deity,  this  is  because  His  Divine  Person  is  ultimately  and  in.
reality,  the  object  adored.  *  O  God  the  Son,  Kedeemer  of  the
world,  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners.'  *0  Lamb  of
God,  That  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world,  have  mercy  upon
us.'  Li  either  case  it  is  Christ's  Eternal  Person  which,  claims
our  adoration ;  that  Person,  with  Which  His  Manhood  is  now
for  ever  joined,  as  an  attribute  of  It.  And  Christ's  Person  is
adored,  for  precisely  the  same  reason  as  that  which  leads  us  to
adore  the  Father;  nor  could  such  adoration  be  offered  to  any
created  personality  whatever,  without  repudiating  altogether
the  first,  the  most  sacred,  prerogative  of  Deity.


NOTE  H,  ON  Lectubb  VII.

Cardinal  de  Turrecremata's  work  on  the  Conception  of  the

Blessed  Virgin.

The  only  copy  of  this  work  which  I  have  seen  is  in  the
Mazarine  Library  at  Paris,  where  it  is  numbered  12 144.  Its
full  title  is,  ^Triittatus  de  Veritate  Conceptionis  Beatisdmce
Virginia,  pro  fctciendd  relatione  coram  jyatribue  Concilii  Ba*
sUeensiSj  Anno  Drd.  M,GGGO,XXX,VIL  Menee  Jidio.  De
tnandato  Sedia  Apostolicm  Legatorwm^  eidem  sacro  ConcUio
proBsidentium  comjxUatua*  Per  Reverendum  Patremy  Frai/rem
Joannem  de  Twrrecremataf  aacrce  Theologice  profeasorem^  ordinia
Prcedicatory/mf  tunc  aacri  apostoUct  PaLatii  Magistrum,  Poated,
Illuatriaaimv/m  et  Beverendisaimum  S,  E,  JScclesim  Cardinalem
Epiacopum  Poriuenaem,  nunc  primo  im/rresstia,  Bonuz  apud
Antonium  Bladv/m  AauLanwm,  M.D.XLVII!

The  book  opens  with  a  Preface  by  ^Frater  Alhertua  Duimiua
de  CaiharOy  ordinia  prcedicatorum^  Sacrrn  Theologian  profeaaor:
et  in  Sapientid  u/rbia  Romaiy  divince  apeculationia  interpreaf
addressed  'aincerm  veritatia  amaiorihuaJ  After  reviewing,
chiefly  in  the  language  of  Scripture  itself,  the  grounds,  nature,
and  obligations  of  the  Christian  faith,  he  proceeds : — '  Est  autem
prse  caeteris  a  sacris  literis  admodum  aliena  et  Christi  evangelio
dissona  humana  qusedam  inventio,  nostro  infelici  sbvo  ita  errata,
at  posthabitis  sacrse  scripturse  clarissimis  testimoniis,  spretis
etiam  ecclesise  sanctonimque  .patrum  veterumque  ecclesise  doc-
torum  salutaribus  monitis  et  doctrinis,  cujusdam  vanss  devo-
tionis  prfietextu,  sanctissimam  Dei  genetricem  virginem,  coeli


544  ^ote  H.    Cardinal  de  Turrecre^nata  s  work

reginam,  angelorum  atque  hominum  dominam,  propriis  quibus-
dsmi  adinventis  laudibus  celebrare  cupiens,  earn  non  fuisse  Adse
peccato  obnoxiam,  ac  perinde  Christi  sanguinis  pretio  non
indiguisse,  ineptiiis  dogmatizare  praesumpserit,  ut  hinc  liceret
aliquibus  (qui  sacris  abuti  consuev^re)  liberius  vorare  domos
viduarum,  seducereque  corda  simplicium  longd  oratione  oranti-
bus,  existimantibusque  qusestum  esse  pietatem.  Quorum  audacia
divus  Bemardus  abbas,  beatse  virgini  super  onines  devotissinius,
aeries  reprehendit  dicens:  Miramur  satis  quod  visum  fuerit
hoc  tempore  quibusdam  voluisse  mutare  colorem  ecclesise  op-
timum, noyam  inducendo  celebritatem,  quam  ritus  ecclesise
nescit,  non  probat  ratio,  non  commendat  antiqua  traditio.
Numquid  patribus  doctiores  aut  devotiores  sumus  %  Fericulos^
prsesumimus  quicquid  ipsorum  prudentia  prseterivit.  Virgo
regia  falso  non  eget  bonore  veris  bonorum  titulis  cumulata,  et
infulis  dignitatum.  Non  enim  indiget  Deus  nostro'  mendacio.
Hanc  autem  fore  sanctorum  patrum  et  ecclesisB  luminarium
doctrinam,  quam  Augustinus  innumeraque  antiquorum  multi-
tudo  pradicavit,  quamque  posteriores  sancti  doctrina  et  moribus
probatissimi  amplexati  sunt,  quam  Tbomas  Aquinas  sustinet,
Divusque  Bonaventura  Minoritani  ordinis,  S.  E.  E.  Episcopus
Cardinalis,  fortissim6  tueatur,  luce  clarius  patere  poterit,  opus
hoc  Cbristianfi  mente  legentibus.  Horum  autem  sequacium
tetigit  Deus  corda,  ut  veluti  fortissimi  milites  Cbristi,  sacram
Scripturam  in  sui  simplicitate  et  candore  tuerentur  et  con-
servarent.  Inter  alios  autem,  qui  ex  sacro  Prsedicatorum  ordine
(patrum  imitati  vestigia),  huic  se  militiae  devoverunt,  Reverend-
issimus  olim  sacri  Apostolici  Falatii  Magister,  ac  postea  (sic
exigentibus  virtutum  mentis)  S.  E.  E.  Cardinalis  Episcopus
Fortuensis,  D.  Joanes  de  Turrecremata  Hispanus,  jussa  et  man-
dato  sedis  apostolicse,  prsesenti  relatione  scripta  disseruit.  Opus
quidem  ita  sincerum  et  cbristiansB  pietati  conveniens,  ut  nus-
quam,  vel  humansB  inventionis  tenebrsB,  vel  proprisB  opinionis
affectus  appareant,  sed  undique  evangelicsB  veritatis  candor
splendere  videatur.  Opus  inquam,  summ6  necessarium  sed
bactenus  rarissimum,  et  id  quidem  scriptorum  inscitiS  in-
numeris  mendis  respersum  foedatumque,  neglectu  penitus  babe-
batur.  Quietior  namque  erat  omnium  nostrum  mens  et  animus,
et  bujusmodi  qusestionibus  obHtis,  necessariora  fidei  dogmata
tueri  animo  insederat,  et  temporum  opportunitas  exigebat.  Sed
immoderatior  quorundam  audacia,  dum  apud  doctos  et  ver^
Tbeologos  minoris  se  existimationis  advertunt,  vulgarem  de-
biliumque  mentium   aoram   jamdiu    sepultis  novitatibus  af-


on  the  Conception  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.     545

fectantes,  in  TridentinS  synodo,  de  hujusmodi  humani  conceptils
immunitate  verbum  facere  verita  non  est.  Quo  factum  est  ut
Reverendus  pater  frater  Bartholomeus  Spina  Pisanus  ordinis
praedicatonim,  sacrsd  TheologisB  professor,  et  sacri  apostolici
Palatii  magister,  zelo  fidei  accensus,  opus  hoc  erroribus  ex-
purgari,  typisque  excussum,  in  publicum  prodire,  magno  labors
curaret.  Accessit,  (Deo  fiavente)  sanctissimi  D.  N,  D,  Pauli
PapcB  Tertii  consensus  et  favor.'

For  these  reasons,  and  under  these  auspices,  the  work  was
printed  at  Rome  in  1547.  Towards  the  conclusion  of  his  pre-
face, the  editor  contrasts  the  theological  aim  and  spirit  of  Tur-
recremata  with  that  of  his  opponents  in  such  terms  as  these : —

*Non  enim  alio  tendit  ista  disparitas,  quam  ut  hinc  sacrse
Bcriptursd  germana  Veritas,  et  ecclesise  sanctorumque  patrum  et
doctorum  adprobata  doctrina,  laudatissima  pietas,  et  vera  re-
ligio,  illinc  autem  quaedam  vulgarium  affectata  devotio,  sacris
literis  et  doctoribus  non  admodum  consona,  quinimo  (ut  qui-
busdam  visum  est,)  repugnans,  et  ab  aliqui^  ecclesise  con-
suetudine  aliena,  defendatur.  Hinc  Christi  universalis  re-
demptio,  et  super  alios  omnes  SacrseHumanitatis  Ejus  excellentisB
prserogativae,  illinc  sequalitas  virginis  sacratissimsB  et  pisB  Dei
genetricis,  ad  Filium  Dei  Hominem  Deum,  et  ^  reatu  inimicitisd
Dei,.et  naturali  captivitate  peccati  immunitas,  pro  pietate  de-
fenduntur.  Illis,  quod  vulgaribus,  quodque  muliercularum  auri-
bus  gratum  judicaverint  pietatem  adstruentibus ;  nobis  e  contra
nil  pium,  nil  devotum,  nilque  Christian^  celebritate  dignum
existimantibus,  quod  non  ex  sacris  literis  auctoritatem  habere
comprobatur.'

lie  work  itself  is  divided  into  thirteen  parts.  The  first
deals  with  the  principles  which  are  to  govern  the  discus-
sion. In  the  second,  are  considered  those  passages  of  the  Old
and  New  Testament  which,  as  interpreted  by  the  Gloss  and  by
the  explanations  of  the  saints,  assert  that  Christ  alone  was  free
in  His  Conception  from  the  taint  of  original  sin.  In  the  third
part,  Holy  Scripture  and  the  Fathers  are  quoted  to  shew  that
all  human  beings  without  exception  who  descend  from  Adam  by
way  of  natural  propagation,  are  conceived  in  original  sin.  The
fourth  part  is  devoted  to  a  consideration  of  the  attempts  of
opponents  to  set  aside  the  inferences  drawn  from  Rom.  iii.  22,
V.  12  ;  Gal.  iii.  22  ;  St.  Matt.  ix.  13  ;  St.  Luke  xix.  10 ;  I  Tim.
i.  15,  ii.  5  ;  2  Cor.  v.  14.  In  the  fifth  part,  Scripture,  saints,
and  doctors,  are  cited  to  prove  that  *  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary

did  in  fact  contract  original  sin.'     St.  Luke  i.  47  is  interpreted

»  n


546  Note  H.    Cardinal  de  TurrecrematcCs  work.

as  implying  this.  The  subject  is  pursued  in  the  sixth  part;
passages  from  St.  Leo  the  Great,  St.  John  of  Damascus,  St.
Gregory,  St.  Ansehn,  Hugh  of  St.  Victor,  and  especially  St.  Ber-
nard's Letter  to  the  Canons  of  Lyons,  and  the  deliberate  deci-
sion in  the  Summa  of  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  whose  doctrine  had
been  endorsed  by  the  University  of  Paris,  are  passed  in  review.
Lest  opposition  to  the  doctrine  should  be  supposed  to  be  only
a  Dominican  peculiarity,  an  appeal  is  made  to  Minorite,  Augns-
tinian,  Carmelite,  Carl^usian,  and  Cistercian  theologians.  In
the  seventh  part,  the  weight  of  ancient  authority  is  pressed
against  the  opinion  of  the  ^  modem  doctors ' ;  the  conduct  of  the
Dominican  theologians  is  justified  in  detail ;  and  the  truth  of
their  doctrine  is  argued,  from  an  examination  of  the  prerogative
glories  of  our  Lord,  especially  in  His  Conception,  and  from  the
real  limits  of  the  *  privileges '  commonly  ascribed  to  the  Blessed
Virgin.  The  eighth  part  is  an  argument  from  the  universality
of  our  Lord's  redemption  to  man's  universal  need  of  it ;  '  omnis
redemptus  per  Chnistum  fuit  aliquando  peccati  servitute  cap-
tivus : '  while,  in  the  ninth,  our  Lord's  titles  of  Mediator,
Eeconciler,  Healer,  Justifier,  Sanctifier,  Cleanser,  Shepherd,  and
Priest  of  His  people  are  successively  expanded  in  their  relation
to  the  doctrine  of  the  absolute  universality  of  human  sin.  Li
the  tenth,  the  author  attacks  the  arguments  and  authorities
which  were  cited  to  prove  the  h  jyriori  position,  that  God  ought
to  have  preserved  the  Blessed  Virgin  from  original  sin;  here
too  he  criticises  the  Scotist  theory  of  the  reason  for  the  Incar-
nation. In  the  eleventh  he  assails  in  detail  the  arguments
which  were  adduced  to  prove  that  the  Blessed  Virgin  was  in
point  of  fact  preserved  from  the  taint  of  original  sin ;  in  the
twelfth,  those  which  were  brought  forward  to  shew  that  she  was
thus  preserved  by  a  prevenient  grace  of  sanctification.  The
last  part  of  the  work  recapitulates  the  disputed  propositions ;
discusses  the  opinion  that '  pejus  sit  stare  per  unum  instans  in
originali  peccato  quam  etemaliter  esse  damnatum;'  meets  the
allegation  of  miracles  wrought  to  prove  the  Immaculate  Concep-
tion by  alleging  miracles  wrought  to  disprove  it;  examines
the  bearing  of  the  established  festival  of  the  Conception  cm  the
faith  of  the  Church;  and  finally  insists  that  between  those  who
asserted  and  those  who  denied  the  Immaculate  Conception  of
the  Blessed  Virgin  there  were  not  less  than  twenty  points  of
difference.

At  the  end  of  the  book,  Turrecremata  subjoins  a  personal
explanation.     He  states  that  on  presenting  himself  at  Basle,


on  the  Conception  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.     547

with  a  view  *  ad  faciendam  relationem  mihi  injunctam,*  he  was
told  by  the  Cardinal  Legate  who  presided,  that  the  Fathers  were
80  occupied  with  the  questions  raised  by  the  arrival  of  the
Greeks,  that  he  could  not  be  heard.  He  remained  at  Basle  for
some  months,  but  to  no  purpose.  Upon  the  outbreak  of  the
disagreement  between  the  Legates  of  Eugenius  and  'patres
aliquos  Basilese  residentes,'  Turrecremata  returned  to  Borne
with  his  book.  He  adds  with  reference  to  the  later  proceedings
of  the  Council  in  the  matter  of  the  Lnmaculate  Conception :
'Ex  his  apertissim^  intelliget  quisque  doctus  quod  vacua  et
invalida  sit  determinatio  quam  in  material  prsefata  conceptionis
beatissimse  virginis  factam  quidam  aiunt  post  recessum  meum
Basilesl.  Livalida  quidem  est  veritate,  cum  facta  sit  manifesto
contra  apertissima  sanctorum  patrum  ecclesiae  testimonia,  ac
contra  doctrinam  expressam  principalium  doctorum  tam  divini
juris  quam  humani,  sicut  ex  praefato  opere  luce  clariiis  videri
potest.'  •  A  further  reason  for  this  invahdity  he  finds  in  the
previous  departure  of  the  papal  legates  and  the  proclamation
of  the  transference  of  the  Council  to  Bologna.

Such  a  work  as  Turrecremata's  has  only  to  be  described,  and
it  speaks  for  itself.  Here  is  an  elaborate  treatise  of  between
700  and  800  closely-printed  pages;  abounding  in  appeals  to
authority,  the  most  ancient  and  the  most  modem ;  full  of  hard,
scholastic  argument ;  scarcely  less  full,  at  times,  of  passionate
rhetoric  It  shrinks  from  no  encounter  with  the  maintainers  of
the  doctrine  which  it  impugns ;  it  traverses,  with  fearless  con-
fidence, and  according  to  the  learning  and  methods  of  its  day,
with  exhaustive  completeness,  the  whole  field  of  the  controversy.
"Whether  it  has  been  really  answered  or  not  by  the  arguments
of  Bellerini,  of  F^rrone,  of  Passaglia,  is  not  here  the  question.
Enough  to  say  that  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1437,  it  represented
the  mind  of  the  reigning  Pope,  the  mind  too  of  the  Theologian
who  in  his  *  Apology  for  Eugenius  lY.'  most  stoutly  maintained
the  extreme  papal  claims  against  the  superiority  of  a  General
Council,  as  asserted  at  Basle.  Turrecremata  had  no  tinge  of
what  afterwards  became  *  Gallicanism ' ;  he  was  a  hearty  Ultra-
montane, and  in  the  confidence  of  the  Pontiff.  He,  if  any  one,
could  speak  on  behalf  of  the  Western  Church,  of  its  learning,  of
its  piety,  of  its  central  authority,  in  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth
century.  And  his  work  against  the  Lnmaculate  Conception  is
perhaps  the  mosi;  remarkable  of  the  many  documents,  which
make  any  real  parallel  between  the  claims  of  the  truth  asserted  at

Nicaea,  and  thoi^e  of  the  definition  of  Dec.  8,  1854,  impossible.

N  n  2


548  Note  H.    Cardinal  de  Turrccrematd s  work

A  high  Roman  Catholic  aathoritj  has  said  that  ^  they  who
ask  why  the  Immacalate  Conception  has  been  defined  in  the
nineteenth  century,  would  have  asked  why  the  ^  hcnnoousion "
was  defined  in  the  fourth  C  If  they  had  done  so,  they  would
have  received  in  the  fourth  century  an  answer  for  which  in  the
nineteenth  they  must  wait  in  vain.  In  the  fourth  century  they
would  have  been  told  that  the  substantial  truth  defined  at  Nicsea
had  always  been  believed  as  a  fundamental  truth  of  the  Oospel ;
that  those  who  had  denied  it  had  been  accounted  heretics,  from
the  days  of  the  Apostles  downwards ;  that  Arius  was  accounted
a  heretic,  on  first  broaching  his  novel  doctrine ;  that  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  time  demanded  for  the  old  unchanging  truth
the  protection  of  a  new  definition ;  but  that  the  definition  added,
could  add,  nothing  to  the  faith  which  had  been  held  ia  its
fulness  from  the  first — ^the  faith  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Qod.  In
the  nineteenth  century  they  are  told  that  the  definition  oi  the
Immaculate  Conception  had  the  effect  of  raising  to  a  certainty
of  faith  that  which  was,  before  Dec.  8,  1854,  only  a  matter  <^
pious  opinion ;  that  those  who,  before  that  date,  had  denied
this  opinion  were  so  far  &om  being  accounted  heretics,  that  they
were  expressly  protected  from  censure  by  the  highest  authority;
that  although  the  newly-defined  truth  had  been  taught  to  the
Church  by  the  Apostles  themselves  and  had  all  along  been  latent
in  her  mind,  yet  that  her  most  representative  divines  and  doctors
had  again  and  again,  with  perfect  impunity,  nay  with  the  highest
sanctions,  expressly  repudiated  and  condemned  it.

It  will  be  said  that  the  same  authority  speaks  at  Home  which
spoke  at  Nicsea.  Upon  that  most  important  question  we  do
not  here  and  now  enter.  But  with  a  book  like  Turrecremata's
before  us,  we  cannot  decline  the  conclusion  that  in  a.d.  325  and
1854  two  entirely  different  things  were  done;  unless  it  can
be  diewn  that  some  hitherto  unknown  writer  of  the  highest
consideration  and  of  unsuspected  orthodoxy  in  the  ante-Nicene
period  maintained  against  others  who  defended  the  Homoousion,
and  by  an  appeal  to  a  vast  accumulation  of  authorities,  the  precise
doctrine  for  which  Arius  was  condemned.  That  would  be  a
real  counterpart  to  the  position  of  Cardinal  Turrecremata  in
relation  to  the  recent  definition  of  ihe  Immaculate  Conception :
as  it  is,  the  doctrinal  and  historical  'parallel'  upon  which
some  Roman  Catholics  and  many  opponents  of  the  Christian
Revelation  now  lay  so  much  stress,  is  not  sufficiently  accurate

'  The  Beanion  of  Christendom,  a  Pastoral  Letter  to  the  Clergy,  by  Henry
Edward,  Archbishop  of  Westminster.    London,  Longmans,  1 8^6,  p.  51,


.J


Note  /.    On  Two  Criticisms  of  this  Work.    549

to  justify  either  of  the  opposite  conclusions  which  it  is  put
forward  in  order  to  recommend.


NOTE  T.      On  Two  Ceiticisms  of  this  Wobk.    [1881.]

After  this  work  had  been  revised  for  the  second  and  stereo-
typed edition,  two  notices  of  it,  among  others,  appeared,  under
the  following  titles: — An  Examination  of  Canon  Liddon*8
Bamjpton  Lectures  on  the  Divinity  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour
Jesus  Christy  by  a  Clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England.
(London,  Triibner) ;  and  The  Bible  and  Pojndar  TlucHogy :  a
Jiestatement  of  Truths  and  Principles,  with  special  reference  to
recent  works  of  Dr,  Liddon,  Lord  Uatherley,  the  Rigid  Hon.
W.  E,  Gladstone,  and  others;  by  O.  Vance  Smith,  B.A,,  Ph,D.j
Minister  of  St.  Saviowrgate  Cluipel,  York.  (London,  Longmans.)

At  the  time  when  these  publications  came  into  his  hands  the
Lecturer  had  made  up  his  mind  that  his  book  had  taken  its  final
form ;  and  that,  if  he  was  to  deal  with  the  great  subject  discussed
in  it  again,  this  must  be  done  in  another  work,  and  on  a  more
comprehensive  scale.  It  is  unnecessary  to  enter  on  the  reasons
which  have  made  such  a  project  less  and  less  easy  of  accom-
plishment. Suffice  it  to  say,  that,  another  edition  of  the  Bampton
Lectures  having  been  asked  for,  the  Lecturer  thinks  it  better
no  longer  to  defer  a  reconsideration  of  his  work,  in  the  light
of  these  and  one  or  two  other  criticisms  which  he  has  had  the
advantage  of  consulting.

While  the  Bampton  Lecturer  is  under  an  obligation  to  both
his  critics  in  some  matters  of  detail,  he  is  unable  to  follow  them
at  all  generally,  and  for  a  reason  which  makes  a  full  examina-
tion of  their  criticisms  superfluous.  He  and  they  disagree,  not
merely  or  chiefly  in  questions  of  detail,  but  as  to  first  prin-
ciples. The  province  of  discussion  is  to  shew  either  that  persons
who  differ  ought  to  agree,  or  that  they  cannot  hope  io  agree.
They  ought  to  agree,  if,  while  both  parties  appeal  to  the  same
premises,  the  true  force  of  these  premises  is,  for  whatever  reason,
not  apparent  to  one  of  the  parties;,  the  duty  of  discussion
being  to  remove  obscurities,  and  so  to  make  agreement  logically
imperative.  But  they  cannot  agree  if  they  are  really  appealing
to  different  first  principles;  when  this  is  the  case,  discussion
can  only  make  the  inevitable  disagreement  conscious  and  pro-


550    Note  I.    On  Two  Criticisms  of  this  Work.

noonced,  by  clearing  away  interceptiBg  matter  which  obscures
the  tme  force  of  the  contradiction.

Now  our  Lord's  Divinity  is  a  truth  which  we  must  learn  from
Beyelation,  if  we  are  to  learn  it  at  all.  Nature,  measured  by  ex-
perience, and  interpreted  by  conscience  and  reason,  has  nothing
to  say  to  it.  The  first  question  then  is,  whether  a  Beyelation
has  been  really  given,  and  the  second  where  it  is  to  be  found.
And  if  it  is  agr^d  that  God  has  really  spoken  in  the  Jewish
and  Christian  Revelations,  and  that  the  Bible  tells  us  what
He  has  said^  a  further  question  arises  as  to  the  trustworthiness
of  the  record.  Unless  this  trustworthiness  is  also  recognized,
it  is  impossible  to  discuss  the  contents  of  the  Beyelation  with
any  hope  of  arriving  at  solid  results.  For  any  statement  con-
taining matter  which  is,  for  whatever  reason,  unwelcome  to
either  party,  may  be  at  once  challenged  on  h  'priori  grounds,
and  rejected ;  and  disputants  may  thus  find  themselves  as  little
in  possession  of  a  common  premise,  as  if  they  had  not  agreed
that  a  Bevelation  from  God  had  been  made,  or  recorded  at  alL

This  then  is  the  issue,  as  between  the  Lecturer  and  his  present
critics.  He  does,  and  they  do  not,  believe  in  the  trustworthi-
ness of  the  Bible.  They  believe,  no  doubt,  in  the  trustworthiness
of  certain  parts  of  it, — such  parts  of  it  as  are  in  agreement  with
opinions  which,  for  independent  reasons,  they  accept.  But  they
do  not  treat  the  Bible  as  a  trustworthy  whole ;  they  accept  or
reject  its  statements  at  pleasure,  or  for  reasons  which  appear  to
them  to  be  sufficient ;  and,  as  a  consequence,  it  is  not  enough
Ibr  them  if  a  doctrine  is  contained  in  the  Bible,  unless  it  be  con-
tained in  those  parts  of  the  Bible  which  they  think  it  right  to
accept.

The  two  writers  under  consideration  are  indeed  unlike  each
other  in  more  respects  than  one.  The  *  Clergyman  of  the  Church
of  England '  appidars  to  be  the  better  scholar ;  Dr.  Vance  Smith
the  more  reverent  and  philosophical  mind.  Dr.  Vance  Smith
shews  his  hand,  and  is  intent  upon  vindicating  such  portions  of
truth  aS|^e  accepts.  The  *  Clergyman's*  attitude  is  throughout
critical ;  he  tells  us  what  he  considers  to  be  the  real  teaching
of  the  New  Testament  about  our  Lord's  Person,  but  he  does  not
say  that  he  believes  it.  Dr.  Vance  Smith  however  welcomes
him  as  on  the  whole  a  useful  ally ;  he  describes  the  '  Examination
etc. '  as  *  a  careful  and  effective  reply  to  all  the  principal  por-
tions of  Dr.  Liddon's  Lectures,  and,  so  far  as  may  be  judged
from  a  cursory  perusal  of  parts,  one  of  the  most  powerful
modem  treatises  on  the  Unitarian  side  of  this   controversy.'


Note  I.    On  Two  Criticisms  of  this  Work.    551

He  adds,  *  The  marvel  attending  it  is,  that  the  author  should
announce  himself,  on  his  title-page,  as  a  "  Clergyman  of  the
Church  of  England  a." '

I.  The  *  Clergyman,'  then,  holds  that  *  the  Christian  percep-
tion which  Christ's  teaching  and  example  have  enlightened,  must
be /red  to  weed  the  records  concerning  Him^.*  In  other  words,
certain  portions  of  the  Gospel  narrative,  which  approve  them-
selves  to  modern  taste,  are  put  forward  as  a  reason  for  rejecting
other  and  equally  authenticated  portions.  Thus  the  Baptismal
formula,  St.  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20,  is  said  to  be  'a  passage  too
uncertain  to  be  quoted  in  a  controversial  work  without  some
attempt  to  vindicate  its  genuineness  from  the  very  grave  doubts
which  other  portions  of  the  New  Testament  compel  us  to  enter-
tain c  ;*  and  the  *  Clergyman '  ventures  to  add  that  *  the  words
are  not  really  His  [our  Lord's],  although  found  in  every  known
MS.  and  version  of  the  First  Gospel  ^.*  In  the  same  spirit  he
objects  to  St.  Mark  xvi.  15,  as  belonging  to  *that  concluding
section  which  every  scholar  knows  to  be  an  extremely  question-
able fraction  of  the  Second  Gospel «,'  although  Dean  Burgon's
work  on  *  The  liast  Twelve  Verses  of  the  Gospel  according  to
St. Mark'  (Oxford,  Parker,  187 1),  contains  facts  and  arguments
which  might,  at  the  least,  have  counselled  a  less  peremptory
judgment.  We  are  told  that  the  application  of  Isaiah  vii.  14  in
St.  Matt.  i.  22,  23  is  *in  no  respect  decisive^.'  Assuming  a
contradiction  to  exist  between  the  Synoptists  and  St.  John,  the
'Clergyman'  is  'unavoidably  conducted  to  an  unfavourable  appre-
ciation of  the  Fourth  Gospel's  historical  fidelity,  and  is  confiirmed
in  the  suspicion  that  the  writer  made  many  statements  from
a  speculative  and  ideal,  rather  than  from  a  properly  historical
point  of  view 8.'  'The  Word'  is  said  to  be  'a  speculative,
nebulous  title  ^,'  and  the  Last  Discourse  is  at  least  possibly
*a  compilation  of  the  Evangelist's  from  loose  and  imperfect
data*.'  Our  Lord's  promise  in  St.  John  xiv.  26  is  *an  antici-
patory explanation  and  apology  for  the  production  of  matter  so
distinct  from  what  the  common  oral  tradition  and  the  existing
written  memoirs  embriaced^.'  Speaking  of  the  Last  Discourse,
the  '  Clergyman '  anticipates  a  time  when  '  passages,  from  which
it  is  next  to  impossible  to  elicit  any  clear  consistent  sense,  will


•  The  Bible  and  Popular  Theology,  Pref.  p.  iv.  note.

»»  Examination,  p.  77,  note.  «  Ibid.  p.  78.  *  Ibid.  p.  343.

•  Ibid.                                               '  Ibid.  p.  63.  *  Ibid.  pp.  87,  88L
>^  Ibid.  p.  84.                                 i  Ibid.  p.  214.  i  Ibid.  p.  43.


552    Note  I.    On  Two  Criticis7ns  of  this  Work.

no  longer  be  pronounced  profoundly  epiritual  and  fall  of  beauty  ^^/
The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  ^  is  criticized  with  contemptuous
severity.  The  *  Clergyman '  finds  that  *  the  writer  of  this  Epistle
did  not  think  deeply,  and  knew  too  little  of  his  theme  to  treat
it  consistently  >i^ ;'  that  he  made  erroneous  applications  of  the
Old  Testament i^,  and  that  his  'description  of  Melchizedek  (Heb.
viL  3)  is  singularly  fanciful  and  exaggerated;'  although  the
*  errors  into  which  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  has  fallen '  '  do  not
justify  us  in  pronouncing  him  altogether  speculative,  visionary,
and  imreasonable®.*  The  *  Clergyman '  protests  against  the  belief
that  '  every  sentence  of  the  Bible  is  identical  with  the  word  of
God,*  as  a  'hobbling  crotchet  p  ;'  he  has  learnt  *to  substitute  an
intelligent  loyalty  to  his  Great  Master  for  an  indiscriminating
adhesion  to  every  scrap  of  Evangelical  testimony  respecting
HimQ;'  he  even  avows  that  'the  concurrence  of  all  ancient
MSS.  would  scarcely  suffice '  to  warrant  a  reading  to  which  he
objects  on  subjective  grounds  '.

Dr.  Vance  Smith,  with,  as  it  appears,  a  stronger  interest  in
the  positive  worth  of  the  Bible,  arrives  at  a  practical  estimate
of  it  which  does  not  much  differ  from  that  of  the  '  Clergyman/
The  Bampton  Lecturer  had  referred  to  the  unity  of  Scripttire;  and
for  a  moment  Dr.  Vance  Smith  is  attracted  towards  this  truth
as '  an  interesting  and  suggestive  idea.'  But  he  presently  gives  a
list  of  books  of  Holy  Scripture  between  which,  as  he  thinks, '  the
only  relation  existing  is  simply  one  of  incompatibility,  or  of
marked  antagonism ;  or  else  again  there  is  no  sort  of  describable
relation  at  all,  the  one  book  simply  standing  apart  in  absolute
independence,  and  ignoring  the  existence  of  the  other  ■.'  If
this  be  an  accurate  statement,  it  is  natural  to  enquire  on  what
defensible  ground  we  continue  to  speak  of  this  collection  of
books  as  '  the  Bible,*  or  '  Holy  Scripture,'  and  whether  such
titles  do  not  suggest  a  unity  of  purpose  and  design,  which,  as
we  are  now  told,  does  not  in  fact  exist  %  When  Dr.  Vance  Smith
says  that,  '  in  all  probability  the  whole  [of  the  Old  Testament]
was  in  great  measure  the  growth  or  accumulation  of  successive
ages,  without  much  design  on  the  part  of  any  person  con-

k  Ezaminaticm,  p.  44.  *

1  Reference  has  already  been  made  to  Biesenthal's  recent  Trostschretben
des  Apostel*  Paulus  an  die  Hebrder,  Leipsig,  1878,  Einl.  iii.  7,  for  a
powerful  argument  in  favour  of  the  Pauline  authorship  of  this  Epistle.

«  Examination,  p.  115.  n  Ibid.  p.  115.  •  Ibid.  p.  116.

P  Ibid.  p.  199.  4  Ibid.  p.  aoa.  '  Ibid.  p.  151.

•   The  Bible  and  Popuhir  Theology,  pp.  8,  16,  17.


Note  I.    On  Two  Criticisms  of  this  Work.    553

cemed  ^,*  and  that  the  Old  Testament  comes  before  us  *  simply
as  being  the  whole  of  the  remaining  literature  of  the  nation,
-written  in  their  ancient  language  ^/  it  is  obvious  that  he  differs
fundamentally  from  the  Apostolic  judgments  that  *  whatsoever
things  were  written  aforetime  were  written  for  our  learning,
that  we  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  might
have  hope  ^,'  and  that  *  all  Scripture,'  namely  of  the  01(J  Testa-
ment, *  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God  ^.'  Indeed,  his  theories
as  to  the  dates  and  worth  of  the  Old  Testament  books  ^  seem  to
be,  not  seldom,  as  in  the  case  of  Daniel,  inconsistent  with  belief
in  the  inspired  writer's  Uterarjr  honesty ;  and,  in  the  same  way,
he  holds  that  ^  some  of  the  minor  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  are  ex-
tremely doubtful,  or  almost  certainly  not  from  the  pen  of  the
great  Apostle,  according  to  the  judgment  of  the  most  competent
and  freeminded  modem  investigators  7.'  He  leaves  it  doubtful
whether  he  fully  accepts  Baur's  estimate  of  the  New  Testament
in  detail  and  as  a  whole ;  but  he  holds  that  *  the  larger  niimber
of  the  New  Testament  writings  may  be  said  to  be  of  doubtful
or  unknown  authorship  «.'

It  is,  perhaps,  in  keeping  with  Dr.  Vance  Smith's  theory  of
the  date  and  origin  of  St.  John's  Gospel  that  he  observes  that
*the  peculiar  conceptions  of  the  Fourth  Evangelist  are  alto-
gether alien  to  the  others  ^.'  Here  he  is  naturally  embarrassed
by  our  Lord's  solemn  words  which  are  reported  in  St.  Matt,
xi.  27,  St. Luke  x.  22.  'The  verse,'  he  says,  *in  both  Evange-
lists interrupts  the  strain  of  the  Gospel,  and  looks  strangely  out
of  place,  though  it  would  have  been  perfectly  suitable  to  John  ^.'
*  A  singular  verse,*  he  exclaims,  in  a  later  passage,  '  which  looks
as  if  by  some  chance  it  had  been  transferred  from  the  Fourth
Gospel  c.*  Yet  there  it  is,  in  the  Synoptists ;  and,  as  we  may
observe,  in  those  two  Evangelists  who  describe  our  Lord's  mira-
culous Conception  and  Birth  of  a  Virgin  Mother.  But,  according
to  Dr.  Vance  Smith,  these  portions  of  the  Gospel  narrative  *  are
most  probably  to  be  regarded  as  non-authentic  additions  to  the
original  form  of  the  two  Gospels,  although  it  is  nevertheless

*  The  Bible  and  Popular  Theology,  p.  6.  «  Ibid.  p.  6.

'  Rom.  XV.  4.  ^2  Tim.  iii.  16.

*  The  Bible  and  Popular  Theology,  pp.  2,  3.  Dr.  Vance  Smith  appears
generally  to  follow  Dr.  S.  Davidson.  ^  Ibid.  p.  5.

»  Ibid.  pp.  4,  5.  In  saying  that  '  nearly  the  whole  of  the  N.  T.  belongs
to  the  first  century,  with  the  exception  of  St.  John,*  Dr.  Vance  Smith,  of
course,  declines  to  accept  the  more  advanced  Tubingen  theory.

^  Ibid.  p.  178.  *>  Ibid.  p.  109,  note.  •  Ibid.  p.  178,  note.


554    Note  I.    On  Two  Criticisms  of  this  Work.

true  that  they  are  found  in  all  existing  manuscripts  and  ver-
sions  of  those  Gospels  <l.'

After  this  it  is  perhaps  not  surprising  to  find  that  our  Lord
was  too  ignorant,  in  the  judgment  of  our  critic,  to  be  a  safe
guide  as  to  the  worth  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.    '  There
can,'  he  says, '  be  no  good  reason  to  think  that  the  knowledge  or
the  ignorance  of  Christ  was  not  of  the  same  character  which
belonged  to  his  age  and  country,  or  that  he  did  not  participate
in  the  prevailing  ideas  and  feelings  respecting  the  ancient  Smp-
lures  and  the  use  that  might  be  made  of  them  ®/     Accordingly,
Dr.  Vance  Smith  proceeds  to  infer  that  Christ  *  would  accept  the
statements  of  the  Old  Testament  in  popular  senses ;  would  take
passages  as  Messianic  because  such  was  their  usual  acceptation,
and  because  as  the  son  of  devout  parents,  fieaniliar  with  the
sacred  books  of  their  people,  he  had  been  educated  to  do  so.  We
may  further  understand  how  it  was  that  he  could  apply  passages
usually  considered  Messianic  to  the  incidents  of  his  own  career.
So  to  do  was  in  accordance  with  the  common  habit  of  the  time,
was  justified  by  it,  was  its  inevitable  consequence.     It  was,  we
may  believe,  with  Jesus  Christ  much  as  with  a  religious  man  of
our  own  day  and  nation.   Such  a  person,  trained  from  childhood
to  believe  the  popular  theology  of  the  time,  will  necessarily  ex-
press himself  on  religious  subjects  in  accordance  with  his  b^ef,
and  quote  the  words  of  either  Testament  according  to  the  mean-
ing which  he  has  been  taught  to  put  on  them,  and  this  he  will
do  with  perfect  truthfulness  and  innocence  V

If  our  Divine  Master  was  thus  ignorant,  both  of  the  real
worth  and  character  of  the  Old  Testament  and  of  the  use  to  he
made  of  it,  a  similar  or  greater  ignorance  might  naturally  he
expected  in  the  case  of  the  Apostles.  Dr.  Vance  Smith  there-
fore devotes  the  fourth  and  two  following  chapters  of  his  work
to  this  subject,  with  the  general  result  of  rejecting,  as  uncritical,
the  estimate  oif  the  Old  Testament  which  Christians  are  taught
to  entertain  by  the  writers  of  the  New  8.


<*  The  Bible  and  Popular  Theology,  pp.  102,  103.

•  Ibid.  p.  63.  '  Ibid.  p.  64.

'  Dr.  Vance  Smith's  repeated  reference  to  the  '  wise  men  *  as  quoting  the
prophet  Micah  (p.  54),  seems  to  the  present  writer  a  less  serious  kind
of  mistake  than  that  which  underlies  such  a  passage  as  the  following  \~^
'The  "Blood"  of  "God"  may  have  been  a  bearable  expression  to  the
Bishops  and  Fathers  who  assembled  at  Nicsea.  It  is  most  probable  that
the  nineteenth  century  will  increasingly  revolt  from  it,  and  come  at  last
to  see  that  even  the  authority  of  the  two  oldest  manuscriptB  ia  insufficient


Note  I.    On  Two  Criticisms  of  this  Work.    555

It  is  no  part  of  the  Lecturer's  object  to  exhibit  the  opinions
of  his  critics  in  an  invidious  light.  In  our  day,  assuredly,
no  writer  loses  caste  by  expressing  his  disbelief  in  the  Divine
authority  of  Holy  Scripture.  But  enough  has  been  said  to
shew  that  the  Lecturer  and  his  critics,  in  appealing  to  the  Bible,
do  not  appeal  to  a  common  premise :  and  that  their  criticism
upon  his  Lectures,  in  effect,  amounts  to  saying  that  he  has  made
a  mistake  in  the  choice  of  a  subject.  In  order  to  convince  them,
he  ought  to  have  discussed, 'not  the  Divinity  of  our  Lord  as
taught  in  Holy  Scripture,  but  the  reasonableness  and  trust-
worthiness of  Holy  Scripture  itself;  and  to  do  this  ^t  all
adequately,  as  matters  stand,  would  take  not  one  but  several
sets  of  Bampton  Lectures.

II.  The  *  Clergyman'  maintains  that  the  Bampton  Lecturer  is
open  to  the  charge  of  professing  to  appeal  to  Scripture  reasonably
interpreted,  while  in  reality  he  is  guided  by  the  Creeds  and
doctrinal  teaching  of  the  Catholic  Church.  *  The  Lecturer,'  he
says,  *  proffers  his  dogma  to  be  tested  by  the  Bible,  thoroughly
investigated  and  reasonably  understood.  To  prove  his  confidence
justified  and  his  conclusions  sustained  by  the  Bible  is  the  one
great  end  of  his  carefully  compiled,  and,  from  his  own  side,
virtually  exhaustive  pleadings.  If  he  had  not  chosen  to  stand
thus  on  indefensible  ground,  I  should  not  have  ventured  to
criticise  his  lectures.  Against  the  evidence  for  the  doctrine  of
our  Lord's  Deity  regarded  as  a  revelation  through  the  Church,
or  as  resting  on  ecclesiastical  authority,  I  have  said  nothing.
The  Christian  Church  is  as  grand  a  fact  in  the  world's  history
as  is  the  Bible,  and  with  reference  to  the  doctrine  under  con-
sideration, the  mind  of  the  Church  Universal  has  long  displayed
a  perspicuity,  explicitnese,  and  uniformity  of  expression,  of
wluch  the  Bible  is  conspicuously  destitute  \

This  criticism  is  repeated  by  the  *  Clergyman  *  in  other,  and
sometimes  less  temperate,  language  elsewhere  ^.

Thus,  for  example:  *I  only  contend  that  in  Scripture  alone,  it
[the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Divinity]  has  no  adequate  logical
basis,  and  cannot  possibly  be  deduced  by  methods  of  rational
interpretation.  Assume  there  Js  in  the  Church  .an  authority,
co-ordinate  with,  and  in  some  respects  superior  to.  Scripture,
and,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  the  controversy  is  at  an  end.    I

to  justify  its  acceptance*  (p.  184).    This  reading  is  retained  by  Westcott
and  Hort,  New  Test.,  Cambr.  1881.
i»  Examination,  p.  a.  *  Ibid.  pp.  3,  37.


y


556    Note  L    On  Two  Criticisms  of  this  Work.

do  not  wifih  to  enter  upon  the  question  whether  the  clauns  of
Church  authority  can  be  satisfieuitorily  vindicated.  Mr.  Liddon
exposes  himself  to  criticism  by  not  avowing  that  he  interprets
from  the  ground  of  ecclesiastical  Hght  and  prerogative,  not  from
the  ground  of  reason.  He  wants  to  be  thought  rational  when  he
is  ecclesiastical,  but  the  two  conditions  are  different ;  the  latter
is  held  by  many  to  be  the  nobler  and  more  enlightened  condition,
but  it  is  specifically  distinct  from  the  formeri.'

Here,  perhaps,  it  might  be  soffi'cient  to  reply  that,  as  might
be  inferred  from  what  has  been  already  said,  the  real  fiault  of
the  Lectures  in  the  'Clergyman's'  eyes  is,  that  they  assume  that
trustworthiness  of  Scripture  which  their  critic  impugns : — *  In
assuming  the  Gospels,  and  more  especially  the  last  of  tiiem,  to
furnish  verbally  correct  accounts  of  Christ's  sayings,  Mr.  Liddon
has  followed  a  method  which  vitiates  all  his  reasonings.  With
the  essentially  Protestant  and  rational  criticism  by  which  time-
honoured  assimiptions  about  the  Bible  have  been  besieged  and
curtailed,  he  makes  only  a  semblance  of  grappling  V

Again:  'Unless  we  are  content  to  resign  our  reason  and
judgment  in  deference  to  some  higher  authority,  a  choice  between
the  guidance  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  and  the  prior  narrations  is
here  forced  upon  us.  From  which  are  we  to  collect  our  dogmatic
knowledge  of  Christ's  personal  rank?  The  writer  ^  the  last
Gospel  does  more  than  supplement  his  predecessors:  if  the
orthodox  interpretation  of  his  language  is  right,  he  corrects  them,
and  takes  ground  which  convicts  them  not  merely  of  reservation,
but  of  ignorance  and  blundering  on  a  vital  point.  For  Protest-
ants who  hold  Scripture  to  be  the  Divine  and  sufficient  Bule  ^
Faith,  there  is  no  way  of  escape :  they  must  either  esteem  the
Logos  doctrine  a  misty  speculation,  or  depress  other  portions  of
the  New  Testament,  while  they  exalt  what  they  conceive  to  be
a  contribution  from  St.  John  ^.*

It  may  be  needless  to  say  that  the  Lecturer  does  not  accept
this  account  of  the  relation  of  St.  John  to  the  earlier  Evangelists,
and  for  reasons  which  appear  to  him  to  be  very  sufficient.  He
quotes  this  and  the  preceding  passage  in  order  to  shew  the  real
character  of  his  difference  with  the  'Clergyman.'  That  differ-
ence mainly  turns,  not  as  the  '  Clergyman '  suggests,  upon  the
existence  and  character  of  the  Church's  authority  in  questions  of
doctrine,  but  upon  the  trustworthiness  of  Scripture  as  the  most
authoritative  source  of  our  knowledge  of  doctrine.   The '  Clergy-

i  Examination,  p.  iiS.  »  Ibid.  p.  44.  »  Ibid.  p.  86.


Note  /.     On  Two  Criticisms  of  this  Work,    557

man '  at  the  same  time,  but  unintentionally,  misrepresents  the
attitude  of  the  Bampton  Lecturer  towards  Church  authority.  K
the  Lecturer  had  learnt  from  the  Church  of  England  that '  Holy
Scripture  containeth  all  things  necessary  to  salvation  J"/  he  had
also  learnt  from  her  that  the  Church  *hath  authority  in  con-
troversies of  faith  J^';  and,  in  view  of  the  real  history  of  the
formation  of  the  Canon  of  the  New  Testament,  the  last  proposi-
tion is  at  least  as  reasonable  and  as  certain  as  the  first.

To  accept  the  Church's  guidance  in  recognising  the  contents
and  the  authoritative  character  of  the  Canon  of  Scripture,  and
then  to.  refuse  her  any  voice  whatever  in  its  interpretation,
seems  to  the  present  writer  impossiblia ;  and  if  he  has,  in  his
Lectures,  appealed  to  the  natural  force  of  Scripture  language,
this  has  not  been  in  any  spirit  of  fancied  independence  of  Church
authority,  but  because  he  sincerely  believes  that  there  is  no  real
antithesis  between  the  judgments  of  that  authority  in  ages  when
it  was  still  unimpaired  by  division,  and  an  honest  criticism  of
the  Sacred  Text.  The  function  of  Church  authority,  as  it  was
understood  by  such  writers  as  St.  Lrenseus,  was  not  to  add  new
doctrine  to  the  Apostolic  deposit,  as  the  *  Clergyman'  apparently
supposes,  but  to  shew  what  the  Apostolic  deposit  really  does
contain ;  to  take  mankind,  as  it  were,  by  the  hand  when  ex-
ploring the  vast  field  of  Scripture ;  to  call  attention  to  expres-
sions, or  occurrences,  or  lines  of  thought  which  might  otherwise
escape  observation ;  and  thus  to  furnish  the  reader,  not  with
additional  material,  but  with  a  true  point  of  view,  and  a  sym-
pathetic intellectual  and  moral  temper,  for  discovering  those
profound  unities  and  truths  for  the  sake  of  which  alone  the
Church  sets  value  on  Scripture  at  all.  The  Christian  Revelation
was  in  £Eict  committed,  not  only  to  the  pages  of  a  Sacred  Book,
but  to  the  guardianship  of  a  Sacred  Society;  and  the  second
factor  can  just  as  little  be  dispensed  with  as  the  first.  If  the
Church  may  not  contradict  or  exceed  the  teaching  of  the  Book,
the  true  authority  and  import  of  the  Book  cannot  be  long  upheld
apart  from  that  illuminated  consciousness  of  the  Church,  which
originally  recognised  it  as  being  the  Word  of  God.

This  consideration  will  perhaps  explain  a  feature  of  the
Lectures  on  which  the  *  Clergyman '  has  felt  it  to  be  his  duty  to
comment,  again  and  again,  with  much  severity.  The  Lecturer
has  called  attention  very  deliberately,  not  only  to  the  great
dogmatic  passages  in  which  Our  Lord's  Divinity  is  expressly

■  Art.  VI.  »  Art.  XX


558    Note  I.    On  Two  Criticisms  of  this  Work.

taught,  but  to  that  much  larger  number  of  passages  or  even
paragraphs  in  which  it  is  so  £eir  implied  that,  while  of  themselves
they  do  not  prove  the  doctrine,  they  look,  so  to  speak,  towards  it,
and  are  read  most  naturally,  if  we  assume  that  it  is  true.  The
'  Clergyman  *  often  discusses  the  reference  made  to  such  passages
in  the  Lectures,  as  if  the  Lecturer  had  appealed  to  them  as  dit^
probanHa,  and  had  thus  put  a  strain  on  them  which,  obviously,
they  cannot  bear.  Their  real  place  in  the  argument  is  supple-
mental and  subsidiary ;  and  if  they  were  not  accompanied  or
rather  introduced  by  explicit  statements  of  another  character,
they  could  not  be  appealed  to  at  all.  But,  as  the  Lecturer  con-
ceives, their  cumulative  force  is  very  great,  and  as  the  *  Clergy-
man' truly  observes,  the  Lecturer  cannot  be  *  charged  with
originating  the  use  o '  which  he  has  made  of  them.  He  has  learnt
this  *  use '  from  the  authority  to  which  alone  he  owes  it  that  he
receives  the  Bible  as  the  Word  of  God,  in  any  serious  sense,  at
all ;  while  reflection  has  not  brought  with  it  any  distrust  eillier
of  his  teacher  or  her  lessons.

At  the  same  time  the  writer  must  not  shrink  from  professng
his  conviction  that,  if  there  were  no  Church  at  all  to  guide  him,
the  natural  sense  of  such  passages  as  Bom.  ix.  5,  or  of  CoL  i.
15-17,  or  of  St.  John  i.  1-14,  is  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Clirist  is
of  one  Substance  with  the  Failier,  Very  and  Eternal  God.  If  the
*  Clergyman '  would  consider  Philippics  p  commentary  on  the  first
of  these  passages,  or  Bishop  Lightfoot's  <i  on  the  second,  or
Professor  Westcott's  '  on  the  third,  he  would  perhaps  feel  that
there  is  n^ore  to  be  said  in  &vour  of  this  conclusion  than  he  has
hitherto  been  able  to  admit.  But,  in  the  absence  of  faith  in  the
trustworthiness  of  Scripture,  no  critical  insight  into  the  real
scope  of  its  language  would  be  of  much  service.  According  to
the  *  Clergyman,'  the  *  really  Scriptural  position '  is, '  that  Clmst
fills,  in  the  scale  of  being,  a  place  not  perfectly  defined,  but  cer-
tainly above  man,  and  as  certainly  beneath  God  K'  This,  as  he
elsewhere  says,  is  the  Arian  Creed;  and  it  is  open,  as  has  be^
urged  in  these  Lectures,  to  the  grave  objection  that  it  could
not  have  been  held  by  serious  Monotheists,  such  as  were  the
Apostles  of  our  Lord.  But  in  a  note  the  *  Clergyman '  explains
that  the  formula  above  cited  is  only  tenable  '  if  every  statement

*  ExamixiAtioii,  p.  44.  P  Comment,  on  the  Bomans  in  loo.
«  Epistle  to  the  GoloBsians  in  loc.

'  Gospel  of  St.  John  (Speaker's  Commentaiy),  in  loe,

•  Eramination,  p.  348.


;i-


Note  I.    On  Two  Criticisms  of  this  Work.    559

of  Scripture  is  accepted  in  its  natural  rational  meaning  wiU)
unquestioning  acquiescence.*  He  adds  'The  Christ  of  an  un-
critical Biblical  Protestantism  is  an  Arian,  superhuman  Christ.
The  Christ  of  a  critical  Protestantism  is  a  merely  human,  but
extraordinarily  endowed  Christ*.*  It  is  difficult  to  see  why  he
shoidd,  upon  the  *  Clergyman's*  principles,  be  even  as  much  as
this :  but  the  avowal  shews  that,  even  after  the  sense  of  Scrip-
ture has  been  minimized  by  negative  criticisms  to  a  point  which
is  fatal  to  all  that  is  most  precious  in  the  Christian  Creed,  the
little  that  remains  is  afker  all  peremptorily  rejected,  and  we  are
left  with  an  estimate  of  the  Divine  Saviour  of  the  world  which
might  have  been  gathered  not  less  readily  from  the  Koran  than
from  the  New  Testament.

Enough,  perhaps,  has  been  said  to  shew  that  the  Lecturer  has
carefully  considered  what  his  critics  have  had  to  say  about  him.
He  has  indeed  read  them  through  attentively.  And  if  he  does
not  &rther  accompany  them,  they  will  believe  that  this  is  not
from  any  disrespect,  but  partly  because  a  large  book  would  be
needed  in  order  to  discuss  some  far-reaching  questions  which  they
severally  raise,  and  partly  because,  as  has  been  already  suggested,
a  large  proportion  of  his  differences  with  them  in  detail  are  due
to  earlier  and  deeper  differences  of  principle.  But  there  are
some  matters  of  detail  which  he  has  been  led  to  reconsider  in
the  light  of  their  criticisms,  and  it  is  a  pleasure  to  express  his
obligation  to  both  of  them,  but  especially  to  the  *  Clergyman,'
for  corrections  which  his  book  thus  owes  to  them,  in  its  pre-
sent form«

^  Examination,  p.  34S,  notAi


INDEX


The  nmmeraU  refer  to  the  Lecturee,  the  figuree  to  the  pagee.


Abraham,  promise  to,  ii.  46 ;  Diyine
manifestations  to,  53  ;  '  Seed '  of,
79 ;  his  seeing  the  day  of  Christy
iv.  189.

Adam,  the  first  and  the  Second,  vi.
308.

Adoration,  distinguished  from  'ad-
miration,* vii.  368 ;  of  Chidst  in
the  New  Testament,  ▼.  239,  245 ;
vii.  371  sq. ;  not  a  '  secondary  wor-
ship,'  383;  embraced  His  Man-
hood, 387 ;  referred  to  by  early
Fathers,  ib.  sq. ;  embodied  in
hymns,  392  sq. ;  offered  in  the
Eucharistio  office,  396;  noticed
by  Pagans,  398  sq. ;  defended  by
CHiristian  writers,  401  sq. ;  carica-
tured in  'Graffito  blasfemo,*  403 ;
offered  by  Martyrs,  405  sq. ;  even
by  Arians,  41 1 ;  and  by  early  So-
cinians,  41 2;  in  the  English  Church
Service,  i.  40 ;  viii.  482 ;  Note  G.

Adrian,  on  worship  of  Christ,  vii.

398.
MonB,  ▼.  223;   vi.  312,  320;   vii,

437-
Agnoetae,  heresy  of,  viii.  470.

'Alexamenos  adores  his  God,*  vii.

404.
Alexandria,    real    function    of    its

TheoBophv,  ii.  71 ;  Eclectic  school

of,  vii.  303;  Christian  school  of,

429.
Alford,  Dean,  v.  239,  240;  vi.  291,

a93t  318,  321,  330,  notes.
Alogi,  rejected  St.  John's  Gospel,

V.  210,  219.


Ambrose,  St.,  as  a  oonmientator,  iL
,46,  vii.  425.

Ananias,  prayer  of,  to  Christ,  vii.  377.

Andrewes,  Bishop,  on  Christ's  Sacri-
fice, viii.  485.

'  Angel  of  the  Lord,*  the,  ii.  53  sq.

Angels,  the  holy,  vi.  300,  313,  326,

349»  385.

Ante-Nicene  Fathers,  their  testi-
mony to  Divinity  of  Christ,  vii.
419;  their  language  not  'mere
rhetoric,'  425  ;  doubtful  state-
ments alleged  £rom,  426  sq. ;  ten-
tative position  of,  428;  their  real
mind  shewn  when  the  doctrine
was  questioned,  432.

Anticlurist,  the  token  of,  L  23;  v.
244.

Anti-dogmatic  moralists,  i.  37.

Antinomianism,  vi.  288,  289.

Antioch,  Council  of,  its  rejection  of
the  'Homoousion,*vii.44o;  School
of,  356,  446.

Apocalypse,  the,  at  one  with  St
John's  G<)8pel  in  its  Christdogy,
V.  245 ;  the  Lamb  adored  in,  ib. ;
vii.  382 ;  probable  date  of,  vi.  280.

Apocrypha,  the,  of  second  century,
V.  220.

Apollinarianism,  i.  25  ;  v.  264;  viiL

463.

Apollinaris  of  Hierapolis,  v.  215.

'Apostasy, the  God-denying;*  vii  433.

Apostles,  theories  as  to  disagree-
ment of,  vi.  281 ;  with  differences
of  method,  preach  one  Divine
Christ,  283,  356  sq. ;  all  sent  by
Christ,  vii.  375.


Index.


561


Apotheosis,  among  Boinans,  no  pa-
rallel to  worship  of  Christ,  1.  27 ;
V.  271 ;  vli.  370.

Arianism,  its  conception  of  Christ,
i.  16,  26,  32 ;  vi.  314;  viii.  463 ;
its  worship  of  Him,  idolatrous  in
principle,  vii.  411 ;  its  inference
from  received  belief  as  to  Theo-
phanies,  ii.  57  ;  its  view  of  *  Wis-
dom *  as  created,  61 ;  its  connec-
tion with  early  Judaizing  move-
ment, vi.  356 ;  vii.  446 ;  and  with
Greek  dialectical  method,  363;
various  antichristian  forces  com-
bined in  it,  446 ;  its  popularity,
446.

Amobius,  on  Christ's  Divinity,  vii.
424.

Artemon,  his  allegation  as  to  doc-
trine of  Christ's  JDivinity,  vii.  434.

Articles  of  Beligion,  the,  on  the  In-
carnation, V.  261 ;  on  the  Sacra-
ments, viii.  487  sq.

Athanasian  Creed,  i.  24 ;  v.  263 ;
vii.  447.

Athanasius,  St.,  his  analysis  of  Ari-
anism,  i.  18  ;  his  use  of  avr<$^eof,
iv.  203 ;  on  adoration  of  Christ,
vii.  41 1  ;  on  limitation  of  human
knowledge  in  Him,  viii.  468 ;  on
Council  of  Antioch,  vii.  440 ;  why
he  contended  for  Homoousion,
444  ;  on  prayers  to  Christ  for  the
emperor,  Note  G.

Athenagoras,  on  the  Logos,  v.  231 ;
vii.  42 1 ;  on  the  'Generation,*  42  7.

Atonement,  doctrine  of,  dependent
on  Christ's  Divinity,  vii.  480  sq.

Augustine,  St.,  on  doctrinal  terms,
i*  33  \  on  Theophanies,  ii.  57 ;  on
the  variety  of  ecclesiastical  cus-
toms, iii,  122,  note ;  on'^Ev  Ij/acv,
iv.  186;  on  St.  John's  Gospel,  v.
229;  on  St.  Paul's  description  of
a  moral  dualism,  265 ;  on  Sacra-
ments, viii.  492.

B.

Balaam,  prophecy  of,  ii.  80.
Baptism,  i.  31  j  v.  254;   vi.  351;

viii.  488.
•  Basil,  St.,  viii.  427,
Basilides,   cognizant  of  St.  John's

Grospel^  V.  218.


Baur,  admissions  of,  i.  27 ;  iv.  176;

V.   228,    237;    ignores   dogmatic

character  of  Christ's  teaching,  i.  3 ;

on  *  Son  of  Man,*  i.  7 ;  on  Hebrew

monotheism,  ii.  96 ;   on  Fourth

Gospel,  V.  212,  228,  note;  on  St.

James    and  Paul,   vi.   285 ;    on

number,  of  Pauline  epistles,  310 ;

on  apnra'yii6vf  320,  note.
Beryllus,    denies    Christ's   human

Soul,  i.  25.
Blandrata^  vii.  413.
Boethius,  on  *  Person,*  i.  33.
Boileau,    on   phenomenon    of    the

Church,  iii.  120.
Bretschneider,  his  *  Probabilia,*  v.

211.
Browne,  Bishop  Harold,  on  human

limitations  in  Christ,  viii.  476,

note.
Bruno  Bauer,  v.  229.
Buddhism,  its  spread  not  parallel  to

that  of  Christianity,  iii.  135, 136 ;

does  not  aim  at  universality,  123;

does  not  deify  Buddha,  vii.  385.
Bull,  Bishop,  on  Subordination,  iv.

202,  note;  on  St.  Paul  and  St.

James,  vi.  286 ;  on  Origen,  vii.

402;  against  Petavius,  427;  on

Christ's  human  knowledge,  viii.

475-
Buslmell,   on  boldness  of  Christ's

'plan,'  iii.  118,  note.
Butler,  Bishop,  on  the  moral  obliga-
tions created  by  revealed  truth,
i.  41.

C.

Cabbalism,  vi.  284.

Csesarea  Philippi,  i.  i.

Cakya-Mouni,  iii.  135 ;  vii.  385.

Calixtus,  ii.  52.

Calvinism,  Sacramental  teaching  of,
viii.  488 ;  downward  progress  of,
492.

Canticles,  the  Evangelical,  their  sig-
nificance, V.  251.

Catechism,  Church,  Sacramental
teaching  of  the,  viii.  489.

Cave,  on  Council  of  Antioch,  vii,
440,  note.

Celsus,  as  an  opponent  of  Christi-
anity, V.  219 ;  vii.  400;  on  idea
of  a  universal  leligion,  iii.  1I9;


0  0


56a


Index.


on  Christians*  worship  of  Christ,
iii.  145 ;  yii.  400 ;  refers  to  St.
John's  Gospel,  v.  319.

Cerinthiu»  heresy  of,  ▼.  223, 228, 242.

Chaloedon,  Council  0^  its  dogmatic
langasge,  i.  35 ;  ▼.  261,  note.

Chanmng,  why  anti-dogmatic,  i.  38 ;
his  position  criticised  by  Kenan,
iy.  160;  his  use  of  the  phrase —
'  Christ's  Divinity,*  vii.  443  ;  ex-
plains  away  worship  paid  to  Him,
'^'  373  >  on  obsecrations  in  li-
tany, i.  40;  on  authoritativeness
of  Christ's  teaching;  iii.  118;  on
His  'plan,*  114,  note;  on  His
charactei^  iv.  197,  208  sq.

Charity,  in  St.  John,  v.  245  ;  a  pro-
duct of  the  Incarnation,  viii.  502
sq.

Chbist,  His  person  an  object  of
perpetual  interest,  i.  1 1  sq. ;  how
viewed  by  modem  philosophers,
13;  lives  of,  15,  and  Note  A;
His  Manhood  real,  i.  18  sq.;  vi.
306  sq. ;  His  condescension,  vi.
314, 31 5 ;  His  Nativity,  according
to  Synoptists,  v.  250  sq. ;  His
early  life,  iii.  109  sq. ;  vi.  315 ;
His  ten^tation.  Note  C;  His
Human  Will,  v.  264  sq. ;'  His
Human  Knowledge,  i.  22 ;  viii.
464  sq. ;  Moral  p^ection  of  His
Character,  i.  23 ;  iv.  167, 195  sq. ;
His  sense  of  Sinlessness,  105  sq. ;
vastness  of  His  self-assertion,  169
sq. ;  and  of  His  claims,  175  sq. ;
V.  253  sq.;  the  Messiidi  of  Pro-

Shecy,  ii.  79  sq.;  iii.  117;  His
'caching,  iv.  i64sq.;  v.  252  ;  its
Infallibility,  viii.  461  sq. ;  His
Priesthood  and  Atonement^  viii.
484  sq. ;  His  position  as  Founder
of  a  Kingdom,  iii.  102 ;  His  'Plan,'
107  sq. ;  and  its  realization,  120
sq. ;  His  Example,  i.  26  ;  viii.  494
sq.,  note  C  ad  fin. ;  His  Sympathy,
i.  26 ;  His  Miracles,  iv.  155  sq. ;
V.  238;  His  Transfiguration,  v.
256 ;  vi.  304 ;  Hi*  Agony,  i,  21 ;
v.  266,  276 ;  viii.  471 ;  His  Death,
i.  22 ;  iv.  200 ;  vi.  300 ;  viii.  480
sq. ;  His  Besurrection,  iii.  147 ;
iv.  156  sq. ;  v.  256 ;  viii.  481 ;
His  Ascension,  v.  256;  Hislnter-


cessioiiS  i.  26  ;  viii.  493  ;  His  office
as  Second  Adam,  vi.  308 ;  as  Me-
diator, vi.  306,  309;  viii.  461;
Incorporation  into  Him,  vi.  292,
351 ;  bearing  of  His  Maiihood  <m
our  inner  life,  i.  26;  viii.  489;
Christianity  concentrated  in  Him,
iii.  129;  vi.  337;  His  living
power,  i.  36 ;  His  Presence  in
and  with  Christians,  vi.  343,  348,

353.  353;  viii-  490»  496,  498;
His  intense  hold  on  souls,    iii.

1 2 7, 1 28  ;  His  moral  creativeness,
iii.  131 ;  viii.  496  sq. ;  Hisfiiture
retunii  as  Judge,  iv.  175  ;  wor-
ship paid  to  Him,  in  His  earthly
life  and  after  it,  see  'Adoration* ;
His  Grodhead,  the  seat  of  His
Single  Personality,  i.  23,  note ;  v.
224,  229  sq. ;  implies  Co-equiJity
and  Consubstantiality,  iv.  184;
co-existent  with  His  perfect  Man-
hood, i.  24,  n. ;  V.  265  sq. ;  viii.
458;  intimated  and  affirmed  in
Old  Testament,  ii.  49  sq. ;  gradu-
ally unfolded,  i.  40 ;  v.  277 ;  im-
plied in  much  of  His  language,  ir.
175  sq. ;  explicitly  revealed  by
Hhn,  1 79  sq. ;  titles  expressing  It,
vi.  310  sq. ;  in  fact  necessary  to
His  moral  excellence,  iv.  199  sq.,
308 ;  vi.  314;  attested  by  Svnop-
tists  as  by  St.  -John,  v.  246  sq. ;
proclaimed  by  Apostles,  liect.  v.
and  vi. ;  vii.  ^37;  not  imagined
by  '  enthusiasm,*  v.  270 ;  con-
fessed by  the  early  Churdb,  vii.
414  sq. ;  protects  truths  of  natural
religion,  viii.  452  sq. ;  supports
other  truths  of  faith,  iii.  148 ;  vi.
303;  viii.  461  sq.

Christianity,  social  results  o^  iii.
132;  viii.  496  sq. ;  causes  of  its
success,  iii.  134  sq.

Christian  life,  the,  dependent  on
Christ,  iii.  129.

Chronology  of  St.  John  and  the
Synoptists,  v.  226,  note.

Chrysostom,  St.,  as  a  commentator,
vii.  425 ;  on  Arianism,  vi.  3a  i,
note.

Church,  the,  not  a  'republic,*  iii.
102 ;  originality  of  its  conception,
112;  continuous  progress  0^  120


Index.


S^i


Bq. ;  present  prospects  of,  12.^;
viii.  507 ;  universality  of,  vi.  338  ;
losses  and  divisions  of,  iii.  123
sq. ;  recuperative  powers  of,  133  ;
sustained  by  faith  in  a  Divine
Christ,  147  ;  viii.  506 ;  super-
natural life  of,  vi.  334,  338  sq.

Cicero,  scepticism  of,  iii.  141.

Clarke,  Dr.,  Arianism  of,  i.  1 7,  n.,  18.

Clement  of  Alexandria,  St.,  on  St.
John's  Gospel,  v.  3 1 3 ;  on  worship
of  Christ,  vii.  390,  395  ;  on  His
Divinity,  432 ;  inaocurate  lan-
guage of,  427,  431.

Clement  <^  Bome,  St.,  on  Nero's
persecution,  vi.  280.

Colenso,  Dr.,  rejects  Deuteronomy,
viii.  477,  478;  denies  Christ's
infallibility,  ib.  and  462,  463;
his  objections  to  worship  of  Christy
NoteG.

Coleridge  on  Socinian  worship  of
Christ,  vii.  413  ;  criticises  Atha-
nasian  Creed,  447.

Colossians,  Epistle  to,  character  of,
vi.  284,  note;  337.

Common  Prayer,  Book  of,  i.  40 ;
viii.  482,  489;  NoteG.

'  Communicatio  idiomatum,*  v.  361 ;
vi.  310,  note.

Comte,  his  philosophy  and  ritual,
iii.  136.

Conception,  the  I^amaculate,  defini-
tion of,  not  parallel  to  that  of
Homoousion,  vii.  435  sq. ;  im-
pugned and  on  what  grounds  by
Cardinal  Turrecremata,  Note  H..

Confucianism,  spread  of,  not  paral-
lel to  that  of  Christianity,   iii.

136.
Constitutions,  the  Apostolical,  vii.

396.
Coquerel  on  St.  James,  vi.  389,  note.
Corinthians,  Epistles  to,  character

of,  vi.  334  sq.
Council,  Fifth  General,  vii.  387,  note ; '

Sixth  General,  v.  266,  note.
Councils,  i.  25,  37 ;  vii.  429.
Creation,    how  Incarnation  is  re-
lated to  it,  V.  368;  ascribed  to

Christ,  vi.  321.
Creator,  prerogatives  of  the,  i.  30 ;

iv.  203;  V.  336;  vii»  367.
Creeds,  scope  of  modem  objections


to,  i.  35  sq. ;  lasting  necessity  of,
vii.  445  sq.
Criticisms  of  this  work,  see  Note  I.

P-  549-
Crucifixion,  the,  a  stumbling-block,

iii.  140,  144.

Cyprian,  St.,  on  Christ's  Divinity,
vii.  424.

Cyril  of  Alexandria,  St.,  on  limita-
tion of  human  knowledge  in
Christ,  viii.  469 ;  on  His  Sacrifice,
485 ;  on  Sacraments,  490,  notes.

Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  St.,  on  reality
of  Christ's  Manhood,  i.  36;  on
efficacy  of  His  Death,  viii.  485.

D.

Daniel,  Book  of,  on  'Son  of  Man/
i.  6;  iv.  175,  193;  on  Christ's
dominion,  ii.  90 ;  iii.  113.

Davidic  period  of  Prophecy,  ii.  80  sq.

Decretals,  the  False,  viii.  479.

'  Definition,*  theological^  objected
to,  i.  35.

Deism,  unable  to  guard  the  idea  of
God,  viii.  453  sq.

Deutero-canonical  books,  ii.  62  sq.

Deuteronomy^  recognized  by  Christ,
viii.  476.

'Development,'  doctrinal,  sense  of
the  term,  vii.  435  sq.

DiognetuB,  letter  to,  vii.  420.

Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  St.,  ortho-
dox although  misunderstood,  vii.
434  sq.,  433,  438 ;  on  the  Pres-
byter John,  Note  F.

Dionysius  of  Rome,  St.,  vii.  433.

Divinity  of  our  Lord,  see  'Christ.*

Docetism,  i.  19,  34,  35 ;  ii.  70 ;  v.
333*  250.

Doctrinal  position  of  Lectures,  i.  34.

Doctrine  and  morals,  in  Apostolic
writings,  vi.  384,  391.

'  Doctrine  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,'
a  Judaizing  work,  v.  3 1 7,  note  K

Dogma^  modem  diedike  of,  i*  37 ;  v.
371;  inseparable  from  religion,  i.  3,
4 ;  Christ  of,  identical  with  Christ
of  history,  iv.  154.   See  '  Creeds.'

Dollinger,  on  'apotheoses'  at  Rome^
i.  37,  note;  on  Stoicism,  iii.  146,
note ;  on  &pnayfi6v,  vi.  320,  note ;
on  John  Presbyter,  Note  F.


0  0  a


5^4


Index,


9

Domer,  on  Schleiennaoher,  i.  i6 ;  on
Jewish  Tlieology^  u*  7i ;  on  'Son
of  Man,'  v.  252 ;  on  St.  John  and
the  Synoptists,  257;  on  Justin
Martjr,  yii.  430.

E.

Ebionitism,  i.  15 ;  ▼.  223,  250.
'£coe  H(HnOy'  i.  15  ;  Note  A;  on

Christ's  foundation  of  a  Society,

ill.  1 1 2 ;  on  His  miracles,  iv.  163 ;

on  Bjs  humility,  198;   on  His

condescension,  yi.  314.
Eodesiasticus^  date  of,  ii.  65.
•  El,'  ii.  89.
Elizabeth,  her  greeting  of  Mary,  v.

£llioott»  Bishop,  on  passages  in
St.  Paul,  vi.  315,  319,  notes;  on
human  limitations  in  Christy  viii.
472,  note.

'Elohim,'  ii.  49 ;  Note  B.

Emanatists,  yii.  439.

'  Emmanuel,*  ii.  90 ;  v.  250.

Enoch,  Book  of,  i.  7  ;  vi.  305.

Enthusiasm^  Ohrist  not  deified  by,
V.  270.

Ephesians,  Epistle  to,  vi.  284,  note^

337.
Ephesus,  Council  of,  ▼.  201.

Eucharist^  the  Holy,  iv.  159;  ▼.  256;

▼i.  335  ;  '^.  397  »  '^'  489*
Eulogius,  against  A^oetse,  viii.  470.

Eutychianism,  ▼.  264 ;  viii.  470.

Evangelists,  fundamentally  at  one

in  Sieir  representations  of  Christ,

V.  247  sq.
Ewald,  his  view  of  Christ,  i.  15,  16;

Note  A ;  on  St.  John's  Grospel,  v.

220,  171.
'  Examination '  of  these  Lectures,  by

a  Clergyman,  Note  I.  549  sq.
Ezekiel,  sense  of  'Son  of  Man'  in,

LS.

P.

Faith,  grace  of,   as   described  by

St.  Paul,  vi.  346  sq.
Faith,    the,    once    delivered,    vii.

435  «1-
*  Fountain  of  Deity,'  a  title  of  God

the  Father,  iv.  184,  202 ;  vii.  431.

Felix,  on  originality,  iii.  io8.


Feuerbach,  his  view  of  Christ,  i.  13 ;

his  naturalistic  theory  of  religion,

V.  270.
Fichte,  his  definition  of  religion,  i

3 ;  his  view  of  Christ,  13.
flnnilian,  vii.  439.
Freewill  in  man,  v.  269.

6.

Galatians,  Epistle  to,  vi.  332,  333,

355.
'Generation,  Eternal,    of  the  Son,

iv.  184;  vii.  431.
Grenesis,    its   early  intimations    of

plurality  of  Per8<ms  in  the  Grod-

head,  ii.  49.
Gresenius^  ii.  62.
Gibbon,  his  'five  causes,*  iii.  137;

his  sneer  at  'the  iota,'  vii.  444.
Gladstone^      on      '  Eoce     Homo,'

Note  A.
'  Gloria  in  excelsis,'  the,  vii.  394.
'  Glory,'  in  St.  John's  Grospel,  v.  232.
Gnosticism,  ii.  70 ;  v.  222, 224, 242 ;

vi.  284,  note,  312.
God,  the  true  idea  of,  i.  30;  viii.

455 »  i^ot  secured  by  Deism,  452

sq. ;    Pantheistic  misuse  of  the

Name,  i.  30 ;  viii.  459,  note.
Goethe,  on  originality,  iii.  108 ;  his

admiration  of  the  heathen  mind,

ii.77.

Grace,  vi.  235.

Gregory  of  Nazianzen,  St.,  on  Arian-

ism,  vii.  446,  note ;  on  'ignorance,'

viii.  469.
Gregory  of  Nyssa^  St.,  on  A  nanism,

vii.  446,  note.
Guizot,   on  originality  of  Christ's

'plan,'  iii.  114.

H.

Hallucination  of  our  Lord  asserted  by

some  modem  Jews, Note  E.  p.  528.

Hebrews,  Epistle  to,  vi.  284,  not^

3^5 ;  552.

Hegd,  his  definition  of  religion,  i.  3  ;

his  view  of  Christ,  13.
Hengstenbeig^  ii.  88,  90.
Heracleon,  v.  218.
Herder,  on  St.  John's  Gkspel,  t.  2 10.
Heresy,  how  viewed  by  St.  John,

V.  245 ;  by  St.  Paul,  vi.  282, 342.


Index,


565


Hilary,  St.,  on  HomoouBioiiy  vii.
440,  note.

HippoljtuSy  St.,  '  Philosoplimnena'
of,  V.  a  18;  on  Christ's  Divinity,
vii.  434 ;  inaccurate  language  of,
427.

Historical  sestheticism,  its  objec*
tion  to  dogma.,  i.  34;  'historical
spirit^'  the,  iv.  153.

'Homoiousion,*  the,  vii.  444.

'Homoousion,'  histoiy  of  the  term,
i.  3a ;  vii.  435  sqq. ;  see  Lect.VlI. ;
how  criticised  by  modems,  365 ;
explains  early  Church's  worship
of  Christ,  366  sq. ;  summarizes
her  Christology,  414  sq. ;  a  'de-
velopment* only  by  explanation,
435  sq. ;  why  rejected  by  Council
of  Antioch,  438.

Hooker,  on  'b^ng  in  Christ,*  vi.
353;  on  human  limitations  in
dbirist,  viii.  475 ;  on  Hypostatic
Union,  485.

Hope,  its  necessity  and  uses,  ii.  73 ;
Israel  sustained  by,  75.

'Humanity,*  era  of,  ill.  13a;  idea
of,  protected  by  the  Incarnation,

■^i"-  459»  502.

Humanitariamsm,  i.  15,  25 ;  vi.  295 ;
338,  343;  vii.  434;  viii.  481.

Humanity  of  our  Lord,  see  *  Christ.'

Humility,  Christ's  Incarnation  the
great  motive  to,  viii.  499  sq.

Hymns,  fragments  of,  in  the  Epi-
stles, vi.  331  sq. ;  value  of,  as
expressing  Christian  doctrine,  vii.

393  sq-
*  Hypostasis,*  history  of  the  term,

i.  33.
'Hypostatic  Union,*  i.  17,  23,  note;

v.  260  sq. ;  viii.  472,  485.


Ignatius,  St.,  alludes  to  St.  John,
V.  216;  on  worship  of  Christ,  vii.
387 ;  on  His  Divinity,  419.

'Ignorance*  and  'error/  not  iden-
tical, viii.  476.

'Image  of  Grod«*  a  title  of  Christ,
vi.  321.

Incarnation,  the,  illustrated  by
mysteries  in  our  present  being,
v.  263 ;  how  related  to  Creation^


268;  secures  belief  in  a  living
Grod,  viii.  455;  protects  dignity
of  man,  459.     See  '  Christ.*

'  Inferential  Theology,*  viii.  448  sq..

Inspiration,  ii.  46 sq.;  v.  aai.

Irenseus,  St.,  i.  8;  on  the  Four
GrospelSy  V.  212;  on  Christ's  Di-
vinity, vii.  421 ;  on  His  human
'  ignorance,*  468.

Isaiidi,  prophecy  o(  its  Messiania
richness,  and  its  unity,  ii.  84  sq. ;
his  self-abasement,  iv.  166.

Israel,  Messianic  hopes  of,  ii.  75  sq. ;
a  Theocracy,  iii.  ioi»


J.


Jackson,  Dr.,  on  Hypostatic  Union,
T,  261,  26a,  notes.

Jacobi,  his  view  of  Christ,  i.  13.

James,  St.,  Epistle  of,  vi.  281,  283^
285  sq.,  289.

Jehovah,  name  of,  ii.  90.

Jeremiah,  prophecy  of,  ii  85,  90,
loi.

Jerome,  St.,  on  Christian  society,
iii.  127,  note;  on  Ante-nicenes,
vii.  430.

Jerusalem,  council  of,  vi.  281,  290.

Jesus,  Name  of,  ii.  90 ;  v.  250,  notes.

Jews,  their  history  a  witness  to
Christ,  iii.  99;  hostility  of,  to
Christianity,  139.

Job,  'Wisdom'  referred  to  in,  ii.
60.

John  Baptist,  St.,  iii.  113.

John  Damascene,  St.,  on  Hypostatic
Union,  v.  261,  262,  notes;  on
Two  Energies,  v.  267,  note.

John  the  Evangelist,  St.,  see  Lect.
Y. ;  life  and  (Siaracter  of,  243  sq.,
273,  276  sq. ;  compared  with  St.
Paul,  vi.  285,  356 ;  Gospel  of,  its
authentidty,  v.  209  sq. ;  its  three
purposes,  221  sq. ;  internal  diffi-
culties urged  against  it,  /  226,
note;  its  relation  to  the  other
Gospels,  247  sq. ;  Epistles  of,  240
sq. ;  vii.  382,  Note  F ;  Bevelation
of,  see  'Apocalypse.*

John  Presbyter,  Note  F.

Jowett,  Prof.,  on  Philo,  ii.  68,  69,
notes.

'  Joyful  light,'  hymn,  vii.  394.


566


Index.


JadaicerB,  vi  385,  337,  356.

Jade,  St.,  GhrUtology  oC  M.  305.

JustiJQcatioii,  i  41 ;  yi  345.

Justin  Martyr,  St.,  on  *  the  Angel
of  the  Lor4*  ii.  56 ;  his  testimony
to  St.  John's  Grospel,  ▼.  ai6;  <ni
warship  of  Christ,  vii  388;  on
Christ  8  Divinity,  420 ;  difficolties
in  his  language,  426  sq.

Javenaly  iii.  14a.


Kant,  his  definition  of  religion,  L  3 ;

his  view  of  Christ,  L  1 2.
Keble,  iii.  132 ;  on  '  Son  of  Man,*

L  8,  note.
Keim,  iii.  115,  note ;  Note  A.
'Kingdom  of  Heaven,*  foundation

and  laws  of  the,  iii.  loi  sq.    See

'Church.*
Klee,  on  question  of  'ignorance,*

viii.  466  sq.,  notes.
Kuhn,  ii.  64.
'  Kyrie  Eleison,*  the,  vii.  396.

L.

Lactantius,  on  worship  of  Christ,
vii  403;  inaccurate  language  of,
427.

Latitudinarians,  on  Creeds,  vii.  445.

Law,  Christianity  a  new,  vi.  291.

Lazsurus,  raising  o^  iv.  159,  205 ;  v.
277.

Lecky,  on  originality  of  Christ's
teaching,  iii.  112,  note ;  on  '  reve-
rence,' vii.  367,  note.

Leibnitz,  on  human  'ignorance*  in
Christ,  viii.  472,  note.

Leo,  St.,  on  Hypostatic  Union,
V.  a6i,  note.

Litany,  the,  i.  40;  viii.  482.

'Little  Labyrinth,*  the,  vii.  434,
note.

Liturgies,  Mozarabic  and  Eastern,

vii.  397*  398.

Logos,  the,  in  Philo,  ii.  63  sq. ;  in
St.  John,  V.  229  sq. ;  in  St.  James,
vi.  291 ;  in  St.  Peter,  302 ;  \vhia.-
OtTos  and  irpfxpopiKoi^  vii.  427.

Lucian,  scoffs  at  worship  of  Christ,
vii.  400.

Lucian  of  Antioch,  vii.  427.

Luke,  St.,  his  narrative  of  the
Nativity,  v.  250.


Lather,  asserts  the  'ubiquity'   of
Christ's  manhood,  viii  471.

M.

Manhood  of  our  Lord,  see  '  Christ.*

Manichsans,  vii.  438.

Mansel,  Prof.,  on '  Beason '  in  Plato^

ii  65,  note.
Mardon,  v.  213,  ai8.
Martensen,  v.  241,  250,  notes;  viii

489,  note.
Martini,  Pugio  fldei,  ii  93.
Martyrs,    the,    iv.    147;    jway  to

Christ  in  their  agony,  vii.  407

sq.,  414  sq.
Mary,  the  B.  V.,  L   19;  iv.  168;

V.  250,  260,  261 ;  vii.  441.
Materialism,  viii.  459.
Matthew,  St.,  his  narrative  of  the

Nativity,  v.  250.
Melchizedec,  vi.  325.
Melito,  St.,  on  Christ's  Divinity,

vii  421,  434.
'Memra,'  the,  ii.  64,  71.
Messiah,  hope  of  the,  ii  70,  78  ;  its

debasement,  93.     See  'Christ.'
'  Metaphysics,'  inseparable  firom  re>

ligion,  i.  ^2  ;  viii.  452.
Meyer,  on  ffop^,  i.  19,  note ;  on  Philo,

V.  231,  note;  on  dignity  and  pre-

existence  of  Christ,  iv.  184,  186,

190;  V.  230;  vi.  323,  notes.
Mill,  Dr.,  on  narratives  of  Nativity,

V.   250,  note;    on   limitation  of

Christ's  human  knowledge,  viii

469,  note  ;  on  Strauss,  note  A.
'Ministration,'  ascribed  to  Christ,

vii.  429.
Miracles,  evidence  from,  iii.  147;  of

Christ,  iv.  155  sq.
Mohammedanism,  based  on  a  dogma,

i.  4 ;  its  spread  no  parallel  to  that

of  Christianity,  iii.  135.
Monarchianism,  vii.  429.
Monophysitism,  i.  25.
Monotheism,  of  Isi^,  ii.  68,  77,

96;  of  Christianity,  v.  273;  vi.

311  sq.
Monothelitism,  i.  25 ;  v.  264.
Montanism,  v.  219.
Moses,  ii.  48,  54.

Muratorian  Fragment,  the,  v.  214.
Mystery  no  bar  to  faith,  v.  267.


Index.


567


Mysticism,  iv.  188,  201;  in  St.  John,

vi.  357'

N.

*  Name  of  God,'  sense  of,  ii.  51.
Napoleon  I.  on  Christ's  Divinity,

iii.  150,  151.
Nathanael,  Christ's  words  to,  viii.

473 ;  confession  of,  i.  11 ;  iy.  180;

V.  277.
Naturalism,  li.  77,  91;  iii.  no;  vi.

3".
'Natures'  of  Christ,  the  Two,  v.

261  sq.

Neander,  on  Christ  as  Pattein
Man,  i.  8,  note;  on  preparations
for  Christianity,  ii.  72 ;  on  the
Logos,  V.  229;  on  SS.  Paul  and
John,  vi.  357 ;  on  Celsus,  vii.  400,
note.

Neighbour,  idea  of,  vi.  291,  note.

Neo-platonism,  vii.  363.

Nestorianism,  i.  23,  note;  iii.  123;
V.  261 ;  viii.  471,

New  Testament,  Christology  of,
summarized,  vii.  437.

Newman,  Dr.,  on  vfpixojprjcriSt  i.  34,
note ;  on  Bp.  Bull,  vii.  427,  note ;
on  Homoousion,  439,  note.

Newman,  F.  W.,  his  *  Phases  of
Faith,'  i.  42 ;  denies  Christ's  moral
perfection,  i,  23;  iv.  168,  200,
notes;  on  His  claim  to  be  the
Judge,  175;  on  His  Self-assertion,
200,  note;  on  His  death,  201,
note.

Nicsea,  Council  of,  ii.  97 ;  vii.  435,
sq. ;  Creed  of,  i.  18 ;  iv.  202,  note;
V.  259;  vii.  366,  418,  439,  441
sq. ;  viii.  481.

Nicholas  I.,  his  use  of  False  Decre-
tals, viii.  479.

NoetuB,  i.  15 ;  vii.  434.

Nonconfc»rmists,  iii.  126.

Novatian,  on  progressive  revelation,
ii.  48;  on  prayer  to  Christ,  vii.
39a.

0.

Ollivant,  Bp.,  on  Isaiah,  ii.  85.
Olshausen,  i.  6 ;  vi.  354,  note.
Omniscience,  in   Christ,  viii.  464,

474-

*  Only-begotten,  the,  v.  235  sq.


'Operations'  in  Christ,  two,  v.  266,
267,  notes.

Ophites,  the,  v.  219.

Origen,  as  a  commentator,  vii.  425 ;
on  worship  of  Christ,  391,  400
sq.;  on  Christ's  Divinity,  422,
425,  427  ;  questionable  language
of,  427  sq.

Original  sin,  i.  23.

Orthodoxy,  in  the  Pastoral  £pistles»
vi.  342  sq.

P.

Paganism,  its  hostility  to  Chris-
tianity, iii.  141  sq. ;  St.  Paul's
judgment  of,  vi.  311  sq. ;  its  no-
tice of  the  worship  of  Christ,  vii.
399,  sq.;  its  moral  corruption,
i.  2  ;  iii.  142  ;  viii.  496  sq.

Pantheism,  i.  26  sq. ;  viii.  456  sq.

Papias,  V.  217.

'Parables  of  the  Kingdom,*  iii.
105   sq.

Paraclete,  the  Montanists^  v.  219,
note.

Passion,  vast  significance  of  the,
viii.  480  sq. ;  its  virtue  dependent
on  Christ  B  Divinity,  vi.  301 ;
viii.  484  sq.

Pastoral  Epistles,  the,  vi.  342  sq.

Patripassianism,  i.  15,  16.

Paul,  St.,  has  been  eddied  the  creator
of  Christianity,  i.  14;  his  conver-
sion, iii.  141 ;  his  interview  with
the  leading  apostles,  vi.  281 ;
characteristics  of  his  style,  28^ ;
his  teaching  on  Christ's  Manhood,
306  sq. ;  on  the  Divine  Unity,
311  sq. ;  on  Divinity  of  Christ,
explicitly,  315  sq. ;  and  implicitly,
327  sq. ;  his  account  of  faith,
287,  346  sq. ;  of  regeneration,
351  sq. ;  his  opposition  to  Ju-
daizers,  356  sq. ;  contrast  between
him  and  St.  John,  356  sq.

Paulus  of  Samosata,  i.  25 ;  vii.  433 ;
rejected  the  worship  of  Christ,
vii.  394;  his  cavil  at  Homoousion,
439  sq.

Paiilus,  rationalist,  i.  42.

Peace,  secured  by  Christ,  vi.  338.

Pearson,  Bp.,  on  adoration  of  Christ,
vii.  386,  note.

Pelagianism,  viii.  495.


568


Index.


Pentateadi,  quoted  by  Christ,  viii.

46a  sq.
UtpixwfnjiTts,  i.  34,  note.
Penecutioii,  Pagan,  iii.  146.
'  Person,*  use  of  the  term,  i.  33,  33 ;

of  Christ,   One   and  Divine,   t.

359  Bq-

Personality,  idea  ci,  ii.  68,  note;
of  Grod,  i.  30 ;  viii.  45a  sq.

Persons  in  ^e  Godhead,  intimated
in  Old  Testament,  ii  49  sq.

Peschito,  the,  v.  a  14.

Petaviug,  ii  68 ;  vii.  437,  430.  433 ;
viii.  475.

Peter  LK>mbard,  v.  364,  note;  viii
489,  note.

Peter,  St.,  his  confession,  i.  10,  11 ;
Christology  of  his  sermons,  vi.
394  sq. ;  of  his  Epistles,  397  sq.

Pharisaism,  iv.  164.

Philanthropy,  Christian,  iii.  132 ;
viii.  503  sq. ;  spirit  o^  in  St.  John,
V-  244,  345.

Philip  the  Apostle,  St.,  his  question
to  Christ,  IV.  180,  181.

Philip  the  Deacon,  St.,  on  Isaiah's
prophecy,  vi.  391;.

Philippians,  EpisUe  to,  vi.  340  sq.

Philo,  his  theory  of  the  luogoB  con-
trasted with  St.  JohD*B  doctrine,
ii.  63  sq. ;  v.  331,  note;  his  in-
difference to  Messianic  hopes,  ii.
70, 93 ;  on  Law  of  Moses,  iii.  139.

Plidlosophy,  Christianity  not  a  mere,
iii.  129;  Gentile,  how  far  a  pre-
paration for  Christianity,  ii.  71 ;
moral  weakness  of,  iii.  146,  note ;
viii.  496 ;  language  of,  how  used
by  the  Church,  vii.  438.

Pietism,  i.  43  sqq.

'  Plan '  of  Christ,  characteristics  of
the,  iii.  117  sq.

Platonism,  ii.  65 ;  vi.  353.

Pliny,  the  elder,  iii.  141.

Pliny,  the  younger,  testimony  of,  to
worship  of  Christ,  vii.  299.

Poetry,  Greek,  a  sadness  m,  ii.  77.

Polycarp,  St.,  testimony  of,  to  St.
John,  V.  316;  on  Divine  dignity
of,  and  wor^p  of,  Christ,  vii.
387,  ^3o.

Polytheism,  ii.  49;  iii.  135.

Position  taJsen  in  the  Lectures,  i.

34-


Positivism,  iii.  137,  note;  viii.  453.
Practical  knowledge  of  Christ,  vi

30a.
Piazeas,  Monarchianism  oif,  i.  15,

16;  vii.  437.
Prayer  offered  by  Christ,  as  man,

i  33  ;  to  Christ,  see  'Adoration.*
Pre-existence  of  Christ,  iv.  189  sq.;

taught  by  St.  John,  v.  331 ;   by

St.  Peter,  vi.  398 ;  by  St.  Jude,

305;  1^  St.  Paul,  315  sq.
Presence  of  God,  in  souls,  i.  33 ;  iv.

188.
Pressens^,    Note    A,    on    Christ's

'plan,'  iii.  115,  117,  note;  on  St.

John's  Gospel,  v.  2  20,  note ;  on  our

Lord's  calmness,  Note  E.  529.
Priesthood  of  Christ,  vi.  344;  viii.

493.
Priestley,  viii.  481.

Priestly  blessing,  the,  in  the  Law,

ii.  51.
Prophecy,  Messianic,  three  stages

of,  ii.  79  sq. ;  St.  Peter's  use  of,

vi.  398.
Prophet,  Christ  the  great,  ii.  80.
Prophets,  the,  ii  75,  78,  80,  92,  94;

vi.  395 ;  their  sense  of  personal

sinfulness,  iv.  166.
Protevangelium,  the,  ii.  79.
Proverbs,  *  Wisdom '  in  the,  ii.  60^

61.
Providence,  Divine,   iv.  181,  183;

viii.  455.
Prudentius,  hymns  o^  vii.  416,  417,

notes.
Psalms,  the  Messianic,  ii.  81  sq.
Purity,  Christian  grace  of,  viii.  498,

499-
Pusey,  Dr.,  on  Book  of  Enoch,  i.  7,

note;    on  Messianic  prophecies,

ii.  81,  83,  89  sq.,  notes;  on  Ter-

tullian,  V.  313,  note.

R.

Kabbi,  title  of,  iii.  ill.
Babbinical    schools,    ii.   76;    their

Messianic  doctrine,  93  ;  their  later

invention  of  a  double  Messiah,  88.
Bacovian  Catechism,  vi.  317;   vii.

413,413,488.
Bationalism,  the  older,  i.  13,  14;

Note   A,   p.  511;     mod«m,  iii.

133  sq.


Index.


569


Becapitulation    of  the    argument,

^^^'  505  sqq-

Kedemption,  vi.  301,  315,  344;  yiii.
485.  486.

Kegeneration,  St.  Paul's  doctrine
d^  vi.  351  sq. ;  viii.  498.

Keign  of  Christ,  i.  36;  ii.  85;  ill.
127.

Heligion,  definitions  of,  i.  3,  4;  its
object  a  Person,  37.  Bee  'Dog-
ma.*

Kenan,  Note  A ;  his  view  of  Christ,
i.  15 ;  on  Hillel,  iii.  109 ;  on  Ga-
lilsean  influences,  no;  his  expla-
nation of  Christ's  success,  138  sq. ;
how  he  differs  from  Strauss,  14^ ;
on  the  Gospel  miracles,  iv.  i^,
205,  note;  denies  Christ's  Be-
surrection,  156 ;  criticises  Chan-
ning,  160,  note;  denies  that
Christ  claimed  to  be  Cod,  181,
201,  note ;  on  His  Self-assertion,
199,  205,  notes ;  on  His '  sincerity,*
204 ;  on  St.  John*s  Grospel,  v.  222,
note,  274;  his  use  of  the  word
*  God,*  viii.  459,  note.

Kesurrection  of  Christ,  the,  Christi-
anity based  on  truth  of,  iv.  156
sq. ;  preached  by  SS.  Peter  and
Paul,  vl.  296,  329,  330.

Keuss,  on  prologue  of  St.  John,  v.
230,  234,  239,  240,  notes;  on  b
&v  ,  , , .  cdSfvas,  vi.  317;  on  re-
generation, 35 1,,  note.

Kevelation,  the  Christian,  i.  2 ;  vii.
441 ;  belief  in,  necessitates  a  the-
ology,  viii.  449.

Keverence,  necessarily  truthful,  ▼.
271 ;  Lecky's  use  of  the  word,
vii.  367,  note.

'Bhetoric,*  charge  of,  against  the
Fathers,  vii.  425.

Bichter,     J.  P.,    on    Christ,     iii.

151-
Bitual,  Jewish,  impressed  a  sense

of  sin,  ii.  78.

Bomans,  Epistle  to,  vi.  286,  333.

Bousseau,  on  the  Gospel  history,
iii.  135;  ▼.  274;  on  early  propa-
gation of  Christianity,  iii.  151,
note;  on  possibility  of  miracles,

iv.  157-
Buinart,   his    'Acta   Sincera^*  vii.
407  sq.,  notes.


S.

Sabbath,  Christ's  claim  to  work  on,

iv.  182  sq.
Sabellianism,  i.   15,  33,   note;  iv.

186;  V.  236;  vi.  319,  note;  vii.

430,  433-

Sacraments,  iii.  130;  v.  225;  vi.
304,  348,  351,  355,  359;  viii.
487  sq.,  409,  505.

Sacrifice  of  Christ,  viii.  485, 486, 491.

Salvador,  on  Christ's  claim  to  for-
give sins,  iv,  177,  note;  to  work
on  Sabbath,  182,  note;  on  His
testimony  before  the  High  Priest,

193,  194-
Sanhedrin,  the,  iv.  193.

Saviour,  C^ist  the  IMvine,  iii.  152 ;

V.  252 ;  viii.  508.
Scepticism,  in  middle  ages,  iii.  125.
Schellinff,  his  definition  of  religion,

i.  3 ;  ids  view  of  Christ,  13 ;  on

Indian  'incarnations,*  28.
Schenkel,   Note   A;    his    view  of

Christ,  i.  15;  on  Hillel,  iii.  no;

his  theory  of  a  growth  in  Christ's

claims,   117;   rejects  the  Gospel

miracles,   iv.   155,    156;    denies

possibility  of  Hypostatic  Union,

V.  259.
Schleiermacher,  theological  position

of,  i.  16;  V.  211;  vi.  323,  note;

his  definition   of  religion,  i.  4;

allows  Christ's  originality,  iii.  1 10;

accepts  St.  John's  Gospd,  v.  211.
Scotists,  the,  ii.  57.
Smpture,  Holy,  its  sense  often  se-
cured by  non-scriptural  terms,  i.

42 ;  its  organic  unity,  ii.  45  sq.
Scrivener,   on    Codex    A,  vi.  316,

note.
Self-assertion  of  Christ,  i.   5;    iii.

128;  iv.  165  sq. ;  v.  258.
Semi-Arians,  vii.  444,  445.
Seraphim,  the,  in  Isaiah,  ii.  52.
Sermon  on  the  Mount,  the,  i.  31 ;

iii.  103  sq. ;  iv.  164, 1 70 ;  vi.  293,

note.
Sermons,    the  Apostolical,  iL    8a;

vi.  294  sq.,  328  sq.
Servetus,  vii.  412,  note.
*  Shekinah,*  the,  v.  237,  note.
'Shiloh,*  ii.  80.
Simeon,  ii.  94 ;  song  of,  v.  25a.


570


Index.


Sin,  Bense  o(  ii.  69,  77;  iv.  165;

Note  A.
Smlessness  of  Christ,  i.  a$ ;  iv.  167;

V.  266 :  Ti.  309.
Smith,  Dr.  Pye,  on  Isaiah,  ii.  82,

note.
Smith,  Dr.  Vance,  on  'Bible  and

Popular  Theology,*  Note  I.  549

■q. ;   his  estimate  of  the  Bible,

550 ;  on  our  Lord's  ignorance,  554.
Society,  Christ  the   Founder  of  a

spiritnal,  iii  101  sq.,  133 ;  yi.  338.
Socinianism,  L  15,  26,  31,  40;  iv.

156,  160,  note,  183,  ipi, note;  v.

340,  note ;  Tii.  413 ;  vfii.  481,  488.
Socinus,  i.  15;   iv.  191,  note;  yi.

317,  note;  vii  413.
Solomon,  ii.  8a.
'  Son  op  God,'  meaning  of  the  title,

i.  10;  ii  81;  iv.  193,   194;  V,

336  sq.,  349,  350,  353.
'  Son  op  Man,*  i.  6  sq. ;  iv.  175, 193.
•Sons  of  God,*  i.  10,  note.
Soul,  the  human,  v.  363;  nobility

of  the,  vii.  363 ;  in  Christ,  i.  31,

^5;  ▼•  238,  note,  364,  265;  vi.

301,  note.
Spener,  i.  43.
Spheres  of  Christ's  existence,  two,

v.  361,  note;  viii.  469,  471.
Spinosa,  viii.  458.
Spirit,  the  Holt,  office  of,  iiL  130,

134;  V.  274  sq. ;  vi.  298.
'Sprout*  of  David,  Christ  the,  ii.

85;  vi.  393.
Stephen,  St.,  his  speech,  vi.  295;

lus  dying  prayer  to  Christ,  vii,

376,  377.
Stier,  on  *  self-restraint '  in  Christ  s

teaching,  iv.  190,  note.
Stoicism,  iii.  1 19,  note,  149 ;  viii.  499.
Strauss,  Note  A ;  his  view  of  Christ,

i.  13 ;  iii.  148 ;  on  texts  implying

Christ's  pre-existence,  iv.  191;  on

Fourth  Grospel,  v.  311.
'Subordination'  of  the  Son,  iv.  302;

vi.  310,  note,  337;  vii.  429  sq.,

447,  note.
'  Subsistences  *  in  the  one  Godhead,

i.  33.
Suffering,  a  note  of  the  Messiah,  ii.

87,  88 ;  ignored  by  Jews,  94.

*  Supernatural,*  the,  in  life  of  Christ,

i.  13;  iv.  154.


Sympathy  of  Chnst,  i.  36.
Synoptist  Grospels,  doctrinal  agree-
ment of  with  St.  John's,  v.  347  sq.

T.

Tacitus,  iii.  141,  143 ;  vii.  405.

Targums,  ii.  79,  83.

Tatian,  v.  315 ;  vii.  437,  434.

*  Te  Deum,*  tiie,  vii.  396.

Teacher,  ideal  of  a,  iv.  170,  171;
Christ  the  In&lliblet,  viii.  461  sq.,
508.

Temptation,  the,  of  Christ;  its
bearing  upon  the  doctrine  (^  His
Person,  Note  C ;  its  real  limits,  ib.

'  Tersanctus,*  the,  vii.  394.

Tertullian,  date  of,  v.  313,  note;  on
Christ's  true  Manhood,  i.  35,  36 ;
on  martyrdoms,  iii.  146,  147 ;  on
the  four  Gospels,  v.  313;  on  the
worship  of  Jesus,  vii.  390 ;  a-
gainstTacitus,vii.  405;  onChri8t*8
Divinity,  433;  questionable  lan>
guage  o^  437,  439.

ecav5pi>n)  'Eyipytia,  v.  367.

Theism,  i.  15 ;  vi.  336 ;  viii.  452  sq.

Theodoret,  viii.  475.

Theodotus  of  Bysantium,  i.  16 ;  vii.

43,V

Theology,  necessary  to  religion,  L
3  sq. ;  viii.  449.

'Theophanies,'  the,  in  Old  Testa-
ment, ii.  52  sq.

Theophilus  on  St.  John's  Grospe!,  r.
315;  questionable  language  ot,
vii.  427.

Theosophy,  Alexandrian,  ii.  70 ;  Jo*
daizing,  vi.  337.

'  Theotokos,*  the,  v.  361,  note.

Thessalonians,  Epistles  to,  vi.  333.

Thomas,  Apostle,  St.,  his  oonfesdony

▼ii.  373.
Thomas  Aquinas,  St.,  on  the  Incar«

nation,  V.  361,  363,  notes ;  against

Immaculate  Conception^  vii.  442,

note.
Thomas  k  Kempis,  teaching  ci,  v.

188,  note.
Tischendor^  on  St.  John's  Grospel,

V.  216,  2  30,  notes.
Transfiguration,  the,  v.  256 ;  vi.  304,
Trench,  Abp.,  on  Christ's  'works,'

V.  238,  note.


Index.


51  r


Trinitarianism,  i.  34,  note;  ii.  50.
Tbinitt,  immanence  of  the,  i.  16;
.  early  intimations  of  the,  ii.  51 ;
referred  to  by  St.  Paul,  vi.  336,

340-
Truth,  Christ  the,  iii.  128,  144.

Tubingen  School,  the,  v.  21  a,  217;

vi.  281 ;  Note  A,  p.  512.
Turrecremata,    Cardinsd,    vii,   441,

note;    account  of   his   work  on

the  Conception  of   the    Blessed

Virgin  Mary,  Note  H.

U.

Ullmann,  on  Christ^s  sinlessness,  iv.

167;  on  Thomas  k  Kempis,  188,

note.
Unbelief,    modem,    strength    and

weakness  of,   iii.  125   sq. ;   viii.

506.
Union  of  Christ  with  His  people,

iii.  129;  iv.  187,  188;  vi.  340,

353  sq.

XTnity  of  Christ  s  Person,  see  *  Hy-
postatic Union* ;  of  the  Godhead,
see  '  Monotheism  * ;  of  the  Father
and  the  Son,  essential,  iv.  184  sq. ;
on  the  '  moral  *  unity,  see  Note  G- ;
of  Scripture,  ii.  45  sq. ;  of  Christ's
members,  vi.  338,  339 ;  of  Christ-
endom, iii.  1 24 ;  viii.  507.

Universality  of  Christ's  work,  vi.

355-

V.

Valentinians,  v.  218 ;  vii.  363,  438.


Virginal  birth  of  Christ,  i.  15,  23;
ii.  90,  note.

Virtues  flowing  from  Christ's  Hu-
manity, i.  25 ;  vi.  354;  viii.  489.

W.

"Waterland,  i.  18,  42,  note.
Westcott,  on  St.  John's  Gospel,  v,

212  sq.,  214,  226,  notes.
Wetstein,  v.  317,  note.
Will  of  God,  the,  i.  30.
Wills  in  Christ,  two,  v.  264  sq.
Wilson,  W.,  on  the  trial  of  Christ,

iv.  193,  note.
'Wisdom,'  in  Old  Testament,  ii.  60

sq.
Wisdom,  Book  of,  ii.  63 ;  vi,  326.
'Word,'  see  'Logos.*
'  Works,'  Christ's  miracles  so  called,

iv.  158;  V.  238,  note.
'World,'  the,  in  St.  John,  v.  241.
Worship,  see  *  Adoration.*

Y.

Young,  on  Christ's  character,  iv.
195, note  ;  on  His  self-posseBsion,
Note  E.  p.  528.

Z.

Zacharias,  song  of,  v.  251.

Zealots,  the,  iii.  139.

Zechariah,  Messianic  language  o^

ii.  85,  86,  90.
Zephyrinus,  vii.  434.
Zwinglianism,  viii.  48S  sq.


INDEX  OF  PASSAGES  IN  HOLY  SCRIPTUBE
QUOTED  OR  REFERRED  TO.


GSHBSIS.

5.  I  ii.  49  ;  V.  230

i.  a  ii.  64;  531

*•  20  ,,»,,,,,,, 11.  50

L  27  ii.  50

iii.  8  ii.  52

iii.  15    ii.  79

iii.  32    ii.  51

vi.  2    i.  10

ix.  26     ii.  79

xi.  7  ii.  50

xiv.  19  ii.  63

xvi-  II  ii.  53

xvii.  1-3    ii.  53

xvii.  8 ii.  53

Xvii.  ly  ...•••«••..«  11.  53

xviii.  I  ii.  53

xviii.  10-18  ii.  53

xviii.  22    ii.  53

xviii. 23-33... ii. 53;  vii

377
sdx.  I ii.  53

xix«  mq   ....•..••.«•  u»  53
xix.  34.. .ii.  53,  56;  vi.

343

xxii.  II ii.  53

xrii.  13 ii.  53

xxii.  18  ii.  54,  79

xxviii.  13 ii.  54

xxxi.  11-13  ii.  54

xxxii*  I  •••.••••••••  11*  54

xu.  30  ..•.•••*•••*«..  5*^

xlviii.  15  ii.  54

xlviii.  16  ii.  54

xlix.  10 ii.  80

Exodus.

111.  I  11.  54

iii.  3    ii.  54,  56

iii.  4 "•  54

iii.  5  ii.  55

...  ^  ••

m.  0  11.  54

"i-  7-14    ii.  54


111.  ID     11.  54  I

iv.  10-13  vii.  377

iv.  22,  23   i.  10

xii.  5  vi.  301

xii.  II    vii.  370

xii.  12  521

xiv.  19  ii.  54

XX.  10    vii.  370

xxi.  6   531

xxii.  7,  8 .531

xxiii.  20 ii.  54

xxiii.  21     ii.  54

xxiii.  23 ii.  54,  55

xxviii.  3    ii.  60

^.  ^  ,,,.,,..,..,  11.  00

34   •••••••••  n.  54

xxxiii.  2    ii.  54

xxxiii.  3    ii.  54

xxxiii.  14 ii.  55

xxxv.  31  531

xxxvL  I ii.  60

xxxvi.  2 ii.  60

Leviticus.

vi.  2  ii.91

xviii.  20    , ii.  91

xix.  II  ii.  91

xix.  15  ii.  91

xix.  17  ii.  91

xix.  18    vi.  391

xxiv.  16 iv.  193

xxiv.  19 ii.  91

XXV.  14 ii.  91

■xiv.  15  *•••••.«*...  11.  9*
XXV.  17 iL  91

Numbers.
vi.  23-26  ii.  51

^ ^»  ^ Y  ************** *  *^*  5^

XX.  16    ii.  54

xxiii.  19...  i.  8;  vi.  336

xxiv.  2 521

xxiv.  17 ii.  80


Deuteronomy.

^'.  "  ••.•.•..«......  11.  00

iv.  16-18  ii.  95

* •  •  O^* ••  •**•••••••••  ^^»   / jj

iv.35  ii.  95;  S^i

»*•  4  *••*• •••••  11.  95

vi.  16  ...  viii.  462,  477
vi.  13...  vii.  384;  viii

462,477
viii.  3  ...  viii.  462,  477
X.  20  ...  vii.  384;  viii.

463,  477

xiii.  5 iv.  193

xiv.  15    i.  10

xiv.  17    i.  10

xiv.  19 i.  10

xviii.  1 5... 11.  80;  vi.  295
xviii.  18... ii. 80;  vi.  295
xviii.  19... ii.  80;  vi.  295

xix.  17 521

xxiv.  I viii.  46a

xxiv.  8 viii.  462

xxxii,  5  , 1. 10

xxxii.  6  ii.  60,  62

xxxii.  39. .  .ii.  95 ;  iv.  183

Joshua.

▼.  13-15 ii-54»55

^.  a ii.  55

xxiv.  15 521

Judges.

^»  *""5    ••••••••••••  11.  55

V;  23 ii.  55

vi.  10   521

vi.  ti-22  ii.  55

**•      ^  *«         ^

xiii.0-22  11.50

1  Samuel.

ii.  6 iv.  182

2  Samuel.

vii.  14 i.  II

vii.  16  ii.  81


Index  of  Texts,


573


xxiu.  4  u.  83

xzui.  5  u.  81

I  Kings.

iii.  38    li.  60

iv.  32 ii.  60

iv.  33 ii.  60

iv.  34 ii.  60

viii.  44 vii.  381

X.  4    ii.  60

X.  6 vi.  318

xviii.  21   521

XX.  14    vii.  377

a  Kings.

vi.  9 viii.  473

vi.  32    viii.  473

1  Chboniclbs.
xvii.  17 ii.  81

2  Chbontoles.

IX.  8    VI.  318

xxviii.  23 521

Job.

i.  6    i.  10;  522

i.  21    vi.  318

ii.  I i.  8;  522

xii.  12    ii.  60

xii.  13    ii.  60

XXV.  6  i.  8

xxviii.  12  ii.  60

xxviii.  23-27 ii.  60

xxviii.  28  ii.  60

xxxi.  27 vii.  406

XXXV.  8 i.  8

xxxviii.  7  ...  i.  10;  522

Psalms.

U.     m        ...............    Xl.    OX

XX.  U      •.•*•.••....•..   XX.  o3

ii.  7    i.  10;  ii.  81

ii.  8    ii.  81

ii.  9    ii.  81

ii.  12  i.  10;  ii.  81

▼i.  4 V.  245

vii.  6    V.  245

viii.  2  ,. 522

viii.  4,  5   i.  8

viii.  6 i.  24

viii.  8.^,..,. i.  24


xxi.  9  V.  245

xxii.  1-21 ii.  87

xrii.  27   ii.  87,  93

xxix.  4  ii.  52

xxix.  5  ii.  52

xxix.  7  ii.  52

xxix.  8  ii.  5a

xxxiii.  6  ...  ii.  64  (bis.)

xxxiv.  8 vi.  299

xxxvii.  30 ii.  60

xli.  9 vi.  394

xliv.  ao vii.  381

xlv.  3 i.  33

xlv.  6 vi.  336

li.  6   ii.  60

Ixviii.  19    vi.  318

box.  35  vi.  394

burii »  ii.  83

IxxLii.  15    i.  10

Ixxiv.  i-ii vii.  377

Ixxx.  17    i.  8

Ixxxii.  I  521,  522

Ixxxii.  6...i.  10;  iv.  187,

5"

Ixxxix.  36 ii.  81

Ixxxix.  37 ii.  81

xc.  8   iv.  167

xciv.  9 ,,...  V.  238

xcvi.  1-8  ii.  52

xcvi.  5  ii.  95

xcvii.  7  ...  vi.  327,  522

xcviii.  2   viii.  504

ex.  1-4 ii.  84

cxi.  10   ii.  60

cxii.  2 vi.  318

cxv.  4-8    ii.  96

cxv.  9-11  ii.  52

cxviii.  2-4 ii.  5a

cxviii.  lo-ia ii.  5a

cxviii.  15  ii.  53

cxviii.  16 ii.  53

cxviii.  33...vi.  395,  397

cxxxviii.  I   53a

cxxxix.  13 ii.  63

oxlvii.  15  ii.  64

Pbovebbs,

i.  I    ii.  60

viii.  32    ii.  46,  61

ix.  13-18  ii.  61

X.  31  ii.  60

XXV.  26 i.  10

^^^«  4     ••••••»*«•••  !•  **


Isaiah.

i.  a i.  10

iv.  2  , ii.  85

vi.  2-8  ii.  52

vi.  5    iv.  166

vi.  9 V.  277

vii.  14... i.  19;  ii. 90;  551
viii.  13  vi.  299

ix.  6  ...  ii.  56,  57,  89,

ix.  19  T.  245

xi.  I     ...  ii.  85;  V.  253

xi.  3 ii.  86

xi.  4  ii.  86

•  ••      G£1

xi.  6-8  ii.  86

xi.  9  iL  86

xi.  10  ...  ii.  86;  vii  336

xu.  3 u.  85

xii.  19 vi.  336

xiii.  3 vi.  336

XXV.  7 V.  252

xxviii.   16  ...  vi.  295,

397.  334  i  ^^'  380
XXX.  1,9 i.  10

XXXV.  4 ii.  89

xxxvii.  19 ii.  96

xl.  3    ...  ii.  89;  iii.  113

xl.  9  ii.  89

xl.  10    ii.  89

xHi.  I    ii.  85

xlii.  7  V.  35a

xlii.  8    ii.  95

xliii.  6    i.  10

xliii.  10-13   ii.  95

xliv.  4     V.  35a

xliv.  6   ii.  89

xliv.  6-8   ii.  95

xliv.  9-ao ^..  ii.  96

xlv.  5 ii.  95

xlv.  6    ii.  95

xlv.  18  ii.  95

xlv.  31  ii.  95

xlv.  31-34    iL  89

xlv.  33 ii.  95

xlvi.  5   ii.  96

xlviii.  II,  la ii.  95

xlviii.  ta  ii.  89

xlviii.  13  ii.  89

xlviii.  17  ii.  89

xlix.  I    ii.  85

xlix.  6   ii.  85

xlix.  7   ii.  86

Klix.  9 ,..  V.  35a


574

li.  17    T.  245

lii.  14 ii.  87

m.  IS U.86

lui.  I   T.  246

liii.  3 ii.87

uii*  4  •••••••••••••••  *^*  ^7

uii.  5  •»•••••••••••••  ^^*  ®7

liii.  6 ii.87

lui.  7 u.  87

liii.  9 vi.  300

liU.  II   u.  88

liu.ia ii.  87,88

Iv.  II    ii.  64

liz.  ao  ii.  85

Ix.  I   ...  ii.  86 ;  vi.  33a
Ix.  2    ...  ii.  86;  v.  252

Ix.  19 ii.  86

Ix.  20 ii.  86

bd.  I U.85

Ixii.  5 vi.  336

bdii.  I   ii.  88

bdii.  9   ii.  55

bdii.  16 i.  10

lxv.i6...ii.86:  vi.336

JiBBMUH.

i.  6-9 vii.  377

ii.  27 ii.  96

ii.  28 ii.  9^

iii.  14 i.  10

iv.  8 V.  245

iv.  26  V.  245

ix.  23,  24   vi;  333

X-  3-6    ii.  96

X.  8-10 ii.  96

X.  14 ii.  96

X.  16 ii.  96

xii.  13 ▼.  245

xxiu.  5  ...  ii.  85,  86.  89

XXX.  8    ii.  86

XXX.  9    ii.  86

xxxi.  20 i.  10

xxxi.  31-35  ii*  85

aum.  31-34    ...  iii.  loi
xxxiii.  15    ...  ii.  85,  89

Lamentations.
i.  la V.  245

EZEKIEL.

i.  26 i.  6

xvi.  8-14   vi.  3.=^6

xxxiv.  23  ii.  85

xxxiv.  24 ii.  85


Index  of  Texts.

Daniel.

i.  17  ii.  60

ii.  19    viii.  473

iii.  25    i.  6

V.  II  ii.  60

vii.  9-15    iii.  102

vii.  13  i.  6

vii.  14   ii.  90

ix.  24 ii.  86

HOSEA.

i.  7 ii*  ^4»  ^9

iii.  5  ii-  H

xi  I    i.11

Joel.

ii.  28-31    vi.  294

ii.33...vi.333;  vii.380

Jonah.
iv.  9,  ID    vii.  377

MiOAH.

iv.  7  ii.  90

V.  2    ii.  90

V.  4    , ii.  90

Habakkuk.

ii.  18 ii.9^

ii.  19 ii.96

Hagoai.

••  g^  ••  _»

..  ..     —

11.  9  •.••••.•*.•...•  u.  9

Zeohabiah.

ii.  10-13   ii.  91

iii.  8  ii.  85

vi.  12     ii.  85

yi.  I3...ii.  85;  viii.  493
IX.  9  ..•••.........•  "■*  ^7

ix.  10 ii.  87

xi.  12,  13 11.  91

xii.  10    11.  9^

xiii.  7 ii.  90

Malachi.

iii.  I  ...ii.57,91;  V.251

iii.  6   vi.  336

iv.  2   ii.  91

iv.  5 V.  351

TOBIT.

iv.  15 iii.  no

xiv.  6    •••  ii.  93

Jav.  7 ii.  93


Wisdom.

i.  4    ii.  64

i.  5    ii-64

i.  7    ii.  64

ii.  12 iii.  147

ii.  15 iii  147

vu.  7 U.04

vii.  22,  25 ii.  63

vii.  26  ...ii63;  vi.  326
vii.  29   ii.  63

VUl.  I      11.  48

ix.  I  ii.  64

IX.  a  11.64

ix.  10 ii.  64

ix.  17 ii64

X.  15-20    ii64

xii.  13    ii.  95

XIU,  XIV u.  96

xiv.  20  vii  368

ECCLESIASTTOUS.

i  i-io    ii.  63,  64

i8    ii.95

i  14-17    ii.  63

xxiv.  3  ii.  64

xxiv.  5-8  ii.  63

xxiv.  8-12 ii.  62

xxiv.  9  ii.  63

xxiv.  10-18  ii  63

xxiv.  13-18  ii.  62

xxiv.  23     ii.  62

xxiv.  25-28  ii.  63

xliii.  26 ii64

li.  10  ill

Babuch.

111.  14    u.  03

iii.  15    ii63

iii  29-32 ii  63

iii-  35-37 ii-9»

m.  35    .11.63

iii.  36    ii63

iii.  37    ii-^i

St.  Matthew.

i  18    ii9

i  20 i.  19;  V.  250

i  23  ...  ii.  90;  V.  350;

523*  551
i25    ii9

ii  II     vii.  371

ii.  12 vii.  380

li  15  in


Index  of  Texts.

vii.  29     iv.  169

TiiL  a    vii.  371

viii.  3    vii.  436

viii.  13 vii.  436

viii.  20 i.  8

viii.  23   .........  iv.  178

viii.  24 i.  20

ix.  2   vii.  437

ix.  2-6 V.  253

ix.  3    iv.  194

ix.  6  iv.  177;  vii.

436.  437
ix.  9 iv.  178

ix.  13    545

ix.  18 vii.  371

ix.  22 vii.  436

ix.  25 vii.  436

ix.  29 vii.  436

ix.  30 iv.  198

ix.  36 i.  21

X.  I vii.  436

X.  5-42  iii.  105

X.  8    vii.  436

X.  12-15 iv.  178

X.  20 vi.  236

X.  33 1.7

X.  28  vi.  293

X. 32  ...iii.  104;  V.  255,

356
x.37...iv.i78;  V.255;

vi.  341
X.  39  ...v.255;  vi.  341

X.  40  iii.  104

xi.  7 V.  238

xi.  \i   V.  254

xi.  19  V.  356

xi.  21    viii.  473

ad.  27 ▼.353,254;

vii.  437 ;  653

xi.  28  ▼.  255

xi.  29...  iv.  198;  v.255;

vii.  437 :  viii.  500

xii.  5-8 ii.48

xii.  8  iv.  187

xii.  16 iv.  198

xii.  18 V.  235

xii.  21 vii.  437

xii.  36 vi.  343

xii.  37-29    V.  254

xii.  28 iv.  159

xii.  39    ...  iii,  148 ;  iv.

'57
xii.  40 IV.  157

xii.  41 -42    ▼•354


575


iii.  2   iii.  113

iii.  3   • iii.  113

111.  8-10 111.  113

iii.  11-14  iii.  ^^3

iii.  13 iii.  113

iii.-iv V.  335>  249

iv.  i-ii  V.  254

iv.  I V.  266

iv.  a    i.  20

iv.  3 ▼.  349

iv.  4 viii.  462, 477

iv.  6 V.  249

iv.  7 viii.  462,477

iv.  9  vii.  373

iv.  10  ...  vii.  373,  374,

384 ;  viii.  462,  477
iv.  17 iii.  107;  iv.

164

iv.  19 iv.  178

v.-vii  ...  iii.  102,  103;

vii.  437

V.  3 vi.  293

V.  4 vi.  293

V,  7 *,...vi.  293

V.  9 vi.  293

V.  IO-I3 vi.  393

V.  13   vi.  293

V.  21  ii.  48

V.  22  ...  ii.  48;  vi.  293
V.  27  ...  ii.  48;  iv.  109

V.  28 ii.  48

V.  33  ...  ii.  48;  vi.  293

V.  34 ii.  48

V.  48...iv.i65;  vi.  293

vi.  1-8 i.  6

vi.  4 i.  3

vi.  6 i.  3

vi.  9-13 iii.  104

vi.  14    ...  i.  3 ;  vi.  293
vi.  16 iii.  104;  vi.

393
vi.  19 vi.  393

vi.  24 vi.  293

vi.  25-30 i.  4

vi.  35-33   iv.  165

vi.  36    i.  3

vi.  30    i.  3

vii.  I  vi.  393

vii.  7  vi.  393

vii.  13 iii.  no

viL  31-23 vii.  436

vii.  21  ...  i.  3;  vi293;

vii.  437
vii.  23  ..i...i.  3;  V.  256


xiii.  3-8 111.  105

xiii.  19-23 iii.  105

xiii.  24-30 iii.  105

xiii.  31    iii.  106

xiii.  32    ...  iii.  106 ;  v,

255
xiii.  33  111.  100

xiii.  36-43 iii.  105

xiii.  37-41    i.  7

xiii.  38 v.255

xiii.  38-39  V.  254

xiii.  41 V.  255.  256

xiii.  43  iii.  loi

xiii.  44  ...  iii.  106;  vi*

341
xiii.  45  111.  100

xiii.  46  ..,  iii.  106 ;  vi.

341
xiu.  47   111.  106

xiii.  50  iii.  106

xiv.  19   iv.  159

xiv.  33-33 vii.  372

XV.  18    vii.  437

XV.  19 vi.  293

XV.  25    vii.  371

xvi.  1 iv,  198

xvi.  4 iv.  198

xvi.  13 i.  7

xvi.  16,  17  V.  254

xvi.  18  ...  i.  2  ;  iii.  118,

133;  iv.  180;  vi.  345

xvi.  19    iv.  177

xvi.  24   iii.  144

xvii.  5 V.  235,  249

xvii.  14 vii.  372

xvii.  15 vii.  373

xvii.  22  i.  23

xvii.  25-27  ..4 i.  33

xvii.  37    viii.  473

xviii.  3 viii.  503

xviii.  9  iii.  144

xviii.  10 V.  353

xviii.  18 vii.  436

xviii.  19  ...  V,  253  ;  vii.

437
xviii.  30  ...  V.  356  :  vii.

4.'^7
xviii.  35  V.  353

xix.  7    viii.  462

xix.  21    iv.  178

xix.  28    vi.  350

XX.  19......  iii.  118;  V.

256

XX.  20    •• vii.  371


576

XX.  33  ...  i.  34  J  ^*  253
XX.  28    ...  V.  253 ;  viii.
486

xxi.  2    viii.  473

xxi.  9 vi.  318

xxi.  12-17 iv.  168

xxi.  17-22 iv.  168

xxi.  18    i.  20

^xi.  33  .»»•••••••••  V.  254

xxi.  34 V.  253

xxi.  36 V.  253

xxi.  37     V.  253

xxi.  42    vi.  295

xxi.  43   iii.  loi

xxii.  21  i.  22

xxii.  39  vi.  291

xxii.  41-45   ii.  84

xxii.  41    V.  249

xxui.  8  .........  lu.  102

xxiii.  TO V.  255

xxiii.  34  V.  254

xxiii.  53 i.  24

xxiv.  14  V.  255

xxiv.  23-26 V.  256

xxiv.  30    i.  7

xxiv.  31   V.  256

xxiv.  35 iii.  118

xxiv.  36 . . .  viii.  462, 471
XXV.  31-46 iv.  175

XXV.  S4 ^-437

XXV.  34-4^ ▼•  ^57

XXV.  40 vii.  437

xxvi.  13 iii.  118

xxvi.  26  ...  iv.  150;  V.
256 ;  viii.  490

xxvi.  28  V.  253

xxvi.  29 iii.  loi

xxvi.  39 iv.  197

xxvi.  53  V.  253

xxvi.  63-65    ...  iv.  193

xxvi.  63 i.  II

xxvi.  64 ...  i.  7 ;  vii.  436

xxvii.  29    i.  20

xxvii.  30 i.  20

xxvii.  46 i.  22

xxvii.  56 vi.  292

xxviii.  9    vii.  373

xxviii.  17 vii.  373

xxviii.  18-20 ...  vii.  436
xxviii.  18 ...  V.  254 ;  vii.

437
xxviii.  19 iii.  104,

107;    T.    254,    255;
viii.  490;  551


Index  of  Texts.


xxviii.  20  ...  iii.  107 ;
118  ;  V.  253,  256


St.  Mask.

.  3 iii-  113

.  4 iii.  113

.  7 .....iii.  113

.  II V.  235

.  35    i-  32

1.  8  viii.  474

i.  10  iv.  177

i.  14  iv.  178

i.  28  iv.  182

ii.  5    L  21

V.  30 viii.  474

viii.  II    iv.  198

viii.  12   iv.  198

vui.  31  ui.  118

viii.  34  ...  iii.  144;  iv.

159

▼iii.  35    iv.  159

viii.  38    , V.  256

ix.  7 V.  235

ix.  47 iii.  144

X.  18 i.  23;  iv.  196

X.  21   i.  21

X.  34    V.  256

xi.  2 viii.  473

xi.  5    i.  21

xii.  6    V,  235

xii.  31 vi.  291

xiii.  31    iv.  172

xiii.  32...  viii.  464,  466

xiv.  9 iii.  118

xiv.  22 V.  256

xiv.  32    i.  20

xiv.  33    i.  22

XV.  40 vi.  292

xvi.  15  ...  v.  255  ;  551
xvi.  17  vii.  436

St.  Luke.

.  15 ▼.  250

.  28 v.  251

.  31    i- 19

.  33 ▼•  351

.33 V.  251

.  35..i«33;  v.25o;523

.  43 v.,  251

.43 ▼.'351

•47 545

.  48 V.  251

.  51-55 ▼•  351

.  68 V.  251


i.  69 V.  251

i.  76 V.  251

i.  78. ..V.  252 ;  viii.  504

ii.  6    vii.  380

ii.  7 i.  19

ii.  II  i.  19

ii.  13  i.  19

ii.  21 i.  19

ii.  28  i  19

ii.  30-33 V.  252

ii.  40  ...i.  19,  33;  viii.

465
ii.  41-53 iv.  168

ii.  51  i.  32

ii.  53  ...i.  19,  33;  Tiii

463.  464

111.  3   m.  113

m.  4  111.  113

iii,  10-14  iii.  113

111.  16 111.  113

iii.  17 iii.  113

iii.  33  V.  235

iv.  2    i.  20

iv.  3 V.  249

iv.  9 V.  249

iv.  18 i.  34;  V.  266

iv.  19 i.  24

iv.  33   viii  498

V.  8    viL373

V.  30,  31  ...  iv.  194;  V.

355 ;  vii.  437
V.  24... v.  253;  vii.  437

V.  37  iv.  178

V.  29  i.  19

vi.  Z3 vii.  375

vi.  24 vi.  293

vi.  31 iii.  no

vii.  12 V.  236

vii.  28 V.  254

vii.  34 i.  28    .

vii.  35 V.254    K

vii.  36 L  19    *

vii.  37    vii.  373

vii.  38...  i.  30;  vii.  373

Vll.  4^-».»»^««. •»••.•  !•  20

vii.  48    .........  vii.  437

viii.  43 .7,236

viii.  51    Iv.  198

ix.  35  V.  235

ix.  38  V.  236

IX.  47    V111.473

ix.58    i.8

ix.  59-62    iv.  178

x.  16  ., iii.  104


Index  of  Texts.


577

iv.  6    i.  20

iv.  10 Til.  374

iv.  13 vii.  437

iv.  14... iv.  173;  vii.437
iv.  i7..,v.  338;  vii.437

iv.  18 vii.  437

iv.  20  V.  239

iv.  23 vii.  373

iv.  24  ...  Vi.  317,  344;

vii.  373
iv.  50 vii.  436

V.  8...iv.  182;  vii  436

V.  9 iv.  182

V.  14    V.  238

V.  17.. .iv.  182,  194;  V.

236;  vii.  436,  437

V.  18  iv.  182

V.  19... iv.  183 ;  vii.  437

V.  20    V.  233

V.  2i...iv.  182;  vii  436,

437
V.  22...iv.  184;  vii.  436

V.  23. ..iv.  174,  184;  V.

236;  vii.437

V.  25... iv.  182;  vii.437

V.  26.. .iv.  172;  V.  232,

m,  336;  vii.437

V.  27 i.  8;  iv.  177

V.  28  iv.  173,  182

V.  29 iv.  173,  182

V.  30  iv.  197

V.  36    V.  238

V.  40...iv.  172;  vii.437

V.  42    V.  238

vi.  14 ii  80

vi.  15. ..V.  238;  vii.437
vi.  26 iv.  196

vi.  26-59    *'^'  '59

vi.  27 vii.  437

vi  29  iv.  174

vi.  30 iv.  19S

vi.  32  V.  216,  217

vi.  33-6a   iv.  191

vi.  35 iv.  17a

vi  38-40  iii.  133

vi.  38 iv.  197

vi.  39...iv-i73;  vii  4.^7
vi  40    ...  iv.  174;  vii

437
vi.  42 iv.  194

vi.  46 vii.  437

vi.  47   ...  iv.  172,  174;

vii.437
vi.  48.«.1y.  17a;  v.  216


X.  17 vii.  436

X.  18...  iv.  192 ;  V.  254

X.  21   i  21

X.22...V.254;  viii.474;

553
X.  29  vi.  291

xi.  16 iv.  198

».  17 ▼!•  343

xi.  20 iv.  159

xi.  27  .^ i  19

xi.  49  V.  254

xii.  8...  iii.  104;  v.  255

xii.  35 V.  257

xii.  51-53 iv.  178

xiii.  25 V.  256

xiv.  n viii.  500

xiv.  26...  iv.  178,  196;

V.  255

xiv.  37    iv.  196

xiv.  28    iv.  196

xiv.  33    vi.  341

xvii.  15,  16  ...  vii  372

xvii.  20 iii.  105

xvii.  21  iii.  105

xvii  30,  31 V.  257

xviii.  19 i.  23

xviii.  33  V.  256

xix.  10 545

xix.  28    vi.  318

xix.  30 viii.  473

xix.  41    i.  21

XX.  13 V.  235

xxii.  8-15  i  20

xxii.  19... i.  20;  iii.  104;

V.  256

xxii.  25 viii.  500

xxii.  41  i.  20

xxii.  42-44 i.  22

xxii.  42  i  22

xxii.  44    i.  20,  22

xxii  69    V.  255

xxiii.  34 i  22

xxiii.  42    vii.  372

xxiii.  46...  i  22  ;v.  253

dv.  34 iv.  157

39 !•  21

40 i  20

xxiv.  47  ...  iii  107;  V.

355 ;  vii-  437
xxiv.  51,  52  ...  vii.  373

St.  John.

i  I vii  437

La  Y.  337


i  3  ...  V.  235»  359;  vi
323;  vii.437

i  4  ▼•  335

i  7  V.  334

i.  8  v.  234

i.  9  ▼•234

i  12...  V.  216,  235;  vi.

291 ;  vii.  437
i  13...  V.  216;  vi  291
i  14...  i  19;  ii.  92;  V.

228,  235,  236,  237;

vi.  343;  vii.  437;  viii.

465;  558
i  15...  iii.  113;  V.  238

i  16... V.  235;  vi.  343;

^.  437

ii7  vu.  437

ii8 u.  57;  V.  237

i  20 V.  2  6

i  21  ii.  80

i  23   iii  113

i  26    iii  113

i  27    iii.  113

i  29... iii.  113;  vi.  301;

viii.  486

i.  30-34 ^'  "3

i  36... iii.  113 ;  viii.  486

i43    iv.  178

i.  47-50 vii  437

i  49.. .i  11;  iv.  180;  V.
277;  vii.  376;  viii.

473

i  51  vii.  436

ii  a i.  19

ii.  18 V.  219

ii  i9...iv.  173;  vii.437
ii.  24... V.  238;  vii.  437
ii.  25  ...  vii.  376,  437;

viii.  474
iii.  5. ..iii.  164;  viii.  490

iii  8 V.  216

iii  11-13 vii  437

iii.  la  viii.  479

iii.  13... iv.  191;  V.238;

vi.  310;  vii.437

iii.  14 V.  216,  240

iii.  10... iii  133;  v.  233,

334,  336
iii.  i8...iv.i8o;  V.  236,

261

iii.  19  V.  234

iii  31  V.  238

iii  34  .....' V.  266

iii  35  V.  233


578

▼i  51-58  lii  437

▼i.  5i...iv.  17a;  V.  217
▼i.  53...Sii.  104;  V.  316;

▼i.  57  T.  133

▼i.61   ▼iii.47a

▼L  6a...iT.  19a ;  ▼.  338

Ti  64 yVL  376

▼i.  70    ...  vii  375,  437

▼ii.  13 T.  aio

▼ii.15 iiLiii

▼ii  ai V.  338

▼iii.6 i.  ao

▼iii.  13  ...  It.  173;  v.

334
Tin.  14  ...  It.  193 ;  y.

338
Tiii.  33  ...  iv.  173, 193

Tiii.  34  iT.  193

Tiii.  a6  It.  167

▼liL  a8  ...  iy.  183;  y.

340

Tiii  39 ir.  167

▼iii.  36 Yii  437

Tiii.  40  i«  19

Tiii.  43  ...  iT.  174,  193
Tiii.  46  ...i.  33;iT.  107

Tiii.  53  iT.  189

Tiii.  55    ▼.  338

Tiii.  58  ...iT.  190,  194;

▼.  338,  377;  Ti  334;

Tii.437
Tiii.  59  ...  iT.  193,  194

ix.  4 T.  338

ix.  5 T,  334

ix.  35-38  Tii.  373

X.  8 iT.  173

X.  9  ...  iT.  173;  T.  316

X.  II  It.  173,  198

X.  14  iT.  173

X.  15  ...  T.  338;  Tii.

437 ;  Tiu.  474
X.  17    T.  333

X.  18.. .IT.  173;  Tii.437
X.  33    iT.  185

X.  33  iT.  185

X.  35  ...  iT.  185;  T.  338

X.  37  iT.  178,  185

X.  a8.  ...  Ti.  343;  Tii.

437       ,
X.  29  ...  iT.  179,  185,

186;  Tii.  437

X.  30  ...  iT.  185,  194;

T.317;  vii.437;5a7


Index  of  Texts.

X.  31 iy.  187,  194

X.  33      T.  338

X.  33  iT.  187

X.  38  iT.  187

xi.  35  ...It.  173;  ▼. 335

▼ii.437
xL  33-35    i.  31

xi.  33  T.  338

xi.  38  ▼.  338

xiL  a  L  19

xii.  14-16  T.  376

xiL  33 T.  940

xii.  37 i.  31:535

xiL  33  ...  iT.  173;  ▼.

340 ;  TiL  374

xii  34  iiSi

xii.  41 T.  377

xii  46 .••...  T.  334

xii  48  ii8o

xii  49  ...ii.8o;T.  316,

317

xiii  I  ▼.  334

xiii.  4 T.  360

xiii  5 T.  360

xiii  II Tiii.  473

xiii  14 Tiii.  500

xiii  18 Tii  375

xiii  31  ...  i  31 ;  t.  338

xiii  33 ▼.  315

xiii  31 ▼.  340

xiii.  34  iii  14^

xiii  37  IT.  196

xiii  30  .........  iT.  196

xiT.  I  „.  iT.  174;  Tii

437
xiT.  6  ...  iii.  ia8,  144;

IT.  173,  173;  T.  316,

«34

»▼.  7 ▼M.437

xiT.  9,10  ...  iT.  180;

▼.  338 ;  Tii  437

xiT.  II ...  i34;  t.  317,

338
xiT.  13  ...  ▼.  338;  Tii

436
xiT.  14   .........  iT.  173

xiT.  15    iT.  174

xiT.  30  i.  34

xiT.  31  Tii.  437

xiT.  23  ...  iT.  180;  T.

nZf  334;  ^'A17
xiT.  26  ...  T.  275 ;  551

xiT.  28   ...  i  34;   iT.

303;  T.  339


XIT.  31 T.  33^

XT.  I  ...  IT.  173;  Tiii

490

3^.4  ▼i-353

XT.  5  ...  iii.  139;  IT.

173;  ▼!.  353
XT.  6  iT.  173

3CV.  9    ▼•  nZf  334

XT.  13  ...  Tii.  437 ;  Tiii
503

XT.  16   Tii  375

XT.  19   Tii  375

XT.  33... iT.  174;   T.  338
XT.     26      ▼.  275

XTi  a  T.  319

XTi  II       T.  316

XTi  13   i4o

XTi.  13  ...  iii  118;  T.

375

XTi  14 T.375

xri  15 ▼.275

XTi  19 ▼ii-437

xri  23  Tii  374

XTi.  37  ...  iT.  174;  T.

?33

XTi.   38    ...  IT.    193;  T.
338

XTi  30 ...  Tii.  376;  Tiii

474

XTI.  33 "vii.  437

XTi.  33  ...  iT.  174;  Tii

437
XTii.  I .....i33

XTii.  3 Tii  436

xrii  3 ▼.239

XTii.  4 ▼.238

XTii  5  ...  iy.  190, 192;

▼.  331,  238;  Ti32i;

▼ii.437
xrii  II  ,  iT.  186

XTii.  21 i  34;  527

XTii.  22  ...  IT.  186;  Ti

343
xrii.  23  . . .  i  34 ;  iT.  1 86

xrii.  24   ▼.  233

xriii.  36...iii. loi,  105

xriii.  37 iT.  196

xix.  7 iT.  193

xix.  9 IT.  303

xix.  25    Ti.  292

xix.  38  ...  i  30;  T.  239

xix.  30     i  30

xix.  33    i  20

3^34-37.........  ii.9»


ix.  34  ...  i.  30 ;  t.  215

ix.  39,  40 i.  20

42   i.  ao

la  vii.  436

17  V".  373

23  ...  iv.  177;  vii.

437
XX.  35 iv.  157

27  ...  i.  ai;  V.  ai9

38  vii.  373

.  31  V.  337

i.  13,  13 i.  3o

i.  17  ...  vii  376;  viii.

474
xxi.  18  vL  304

xxi.  3o T.  315

Acts.

i.  a  vii.  375

1.  8 m.  107

i.  16 vi.  394

i.  3o  vL  394

i.  33  iv.  157

i.  34 vu.  375,  378

ii.  14-31  vi.  394

ii.  31 vii.  375,  380

ii.  33  vi.  396

ii.  34-36 vi.  394

ii.  34... iv.  157;  vi.  390

ii.  3«  !▼.  157

ii.  33 ▼i-  ^9^

ii.  36  vi.  396

iii.  6  ...  vi.  396;  vii

436

iii.  13  vii  436

iii.  13 vi.  396

iii.  14  ...  i  33;  iv.  194
iii  15  ...  iv.  157;  vi.

390,  349
iii.  16  ...  vi.  396;  vii.

436
iii.  17 i  33

iii.  18 vi.  395

iii.  19 vi.  396

iii  30 vi.  396

iii.  31 vi.  396

iii.  aa  ...ii.8o;  via95;

viii.  46a

iii  34 vi.  395

iv.io  ...iv.  157;  vi.396

iv.  II vi.  395

iv.  13  ...  vi  397;  vii.

437
iv.  35 vi  38a


Index  of  Texts.

iv.  36 vi.  383

iv.  3^    vii.  375

▼.  3  viii  473

V.  30  iv.  157

▼.  31  vi.  395

vi.  5  vii.  376

vi.  7   iU.  136

vi  13 vi.  395

vii  37  ...ii.  80;  vi.  395

vii.  38    vi.  335

vii.  51-53  ...  vi  395,

335
vii.  56 i6,  7

vii.  59  ...  vii  375,  376

vii.  60    vii.  376

viii.  33-35 vi  395

ix.  II    vii  378

ix.  13    vii.  377

ix.  14    ...  vii  375,  377

ix.  17 » vi.  310

ix.  20 vi.  531

ix.  31 vii.  371

ix.  34 vii.  436

X.  13-15    vii  377

X.  18 vii.  375

X.  33 vii.  380

X,  35 vii.  384

X.  36  ...  vi.  356,  319;

vii.  437
X.  38  ...  V.  366;  vi396
X.  40...iv.  157;  vi396
X.  43   vi.  396

X.43  vi-apS

xii.  la  vii.  375

xii.  aa   vii  368

xii.  33   vii.  368

xiii.  17-33 vi.  339

xiii.  34  vi  339

xiii  35    vi  339

xiii.  36-30 vi  33p

xiii  30  ...  iv.  157;  VI.

339
xiii  31    vi.  339

xiii.  33-37 vi  339

xiiL33...iio;iv.i57;
V.  336

xiii  34  iv.  157

xiii  38   •  vi.  339

xiii  39  vi  339

xiii.  40   vi.  339

xiii  50  iii  136

xiv.  5 iii.  136

xiv.  H-15 vii.  368

xiv.  14  vii.  384

P  p  2


579

xiv.  15  ,„ vii.  384

xiv.  19  iii  136

XV.  7 vii  375

XV.  14-19  vi.  390

XV.  17    vii.  375

XV,  3o vi.  390

xvii.  3    vi.  331

xvii  5 iii.  136

xvii.  13 iii  136

xvii.  18...  vi  339,  331;

vii.  436

xvii.  34 vi.  339

xvii  35  vi.  339

xvii  30 vi  339

xvii  38  ...  vi  313,  3:^

xvii  39 vi  329

xvii.  30  vi.  339

xvii.  31  ...  iv.  157;  vi

330;  vii  437

xviii.  9  vi.  310

xviii.  13 iii.  136

xix.  9 iii.  136

XX.  31    ...  vi  330;  vii.

XX.  24 vi.330

XX.  38 V.  361;  vi.

301,310, 330;  vii.437

XX.  35 , vi.  330

xxii.  7 vi.330

xxii.  8 vi.330

xxii  9 vi.  314

xxii.  10 ...  vi  330, 331 ;

vii  378

xxii.  17  vi.  310

xxii  19 vii  378

xxii.  3o vii.  378

xxii  31  iii.  136

xxii.  33  ...  iii  136 ;  vii

375
xzui.  I    iii.  103

XXV.  II vii.  375

XXV.  I  a vii.  375

XXV.  31 vii  375

XXV.  35 vii  375

xxvi.  14 ,.„  vi.  330

xxvi.  15 vi  330

xxvi.  16 vi.  331

xxvi.  17 vi.  331

xxvi.  18...  iv,  174;  vi

331

xxvi.  19 vi  331

xxvi  31 vi.  331

xxvi.  3a vii.  375

xxviii.  6 vii  368


58o

xxviii.  19 vii.  375

xxviii.  31    ^  vi.  331

smii.  4a   yi.  331

BOIIANS.

i.  I ▼!.  334

i.  3...  ▼i.307»  317.340

i.  4...i.  40;  ii.  8a;  iii.

148;  ▼.236;  ▼i.344

i.  5 vii.  375

i.  7  ...  vi.  319;  vii.  380

i.  II    vi  284

i.  16   ^ vi.  348

i.  17    ▼!•  348

i.  18-25 vi.  311

i.'i8 V.  245

i  2o...i.2;vi3ii,  324

i.  23  vii,  368

i.  24-32   viii.  496

i.  24. ..iii  142;  vi.  312

i  25 vi  311,  318

i.  26    vi.  31a

i  28    vi  312

i  25-32    viii.  496

i  24  ...iii  142;  vi.  312

i  25   vi.  311,  318

i  26 vi.  312

i28 vi3ia

iii.  II vi.  310

iii  22 vl.  348;  545

iii  H ▼i-333,  349

iii.  26 vi.  333,  349

iv.  5    vi.  348

iv.  19 vi.  346

iv.  20 vi.  346

iv.  24 vi.  304,348

V.  I vi.  333

V.  a vi.  333

▼.  5 ▼!•  347

V.  10 viii.  480

V.  II   vi.  333

V.  la-ai vi.  308

V.  la vi.  309;  545

V.  14 ii  81

V.  15  ^-  334

V.  18  vi  308,  333

V.  19 vi.  308,  333

T.  ai vi.  309

vi.  3    vi.  351

vi.  4   vi.  35a

vi.  5    vi.  351

vi.  6    vi.  35a

vi.8...vi346,347,35a

vi.  10 vi.  353


Index  of  Texts.

vi.  II  : vi.  353

▼ii.  4  ^-  347

vii.  14-25    V.  205

vii.  17 V.  265

vii.  22 V.  265

vii  23 V.  265

viii  I vi.  353

viii.  3  ...  i  23 ;  v.  235 ;

vi.  307*  308.
viii.  9-1 1    ...vii.  437;

viii.  490

viii  10   vi.  353

viii  29 ...vi.  322,  350;

viii.  495
viii32...v.  235;  vi.  310
ix.  5 i  2  ;  vi.  307,

3io»  3i6>  333;    vii«

.  437 ;  558

IX.  21  VI.  313

X.  4  ...  ii  48 ;  vi.  333,

345
X.  9-13 vii.  380

«.9 vi.  347

X.  10  vi.  347

X.  12 vi.  319;  vii

380,  381,  385
X.  13 vi.  319,  333;

vii- 375

X.  14-17 ^-347

X.  14  vi.  348

xi.  .^4-36    vi.  314

xi.  36    ...  vi.  309,  311,

323
xii  2  vi.  350

xii  5  vi  353

xiii.  9 vi  291

xiii  14  vi  350

xiv.  8 vi.  347

xiv.  9 vi.  347

xiv.  10   vi.  333

xiv.  10-12 vii.  437

xiv.ii...ii.  89;  vi.333

xiv.  12  vi.  333

XV.  3 ...  iv.  197 ;  vi.  307

XV.  4 ii.  49

XV.  18 vi.333

XV.  29 vi.  334

XV.  30 ^.345

xvi.  7 vi.  353

xvi.  16    vi.  345

xvi.  18    vi.  334

xvi.  20 ...  ii.  79;  vi  332 ;

vii.  380

xvi.  27  ...  vi.  312,  333


I  C0BINTHIAN8.
i  2  ...  vi.  345,    353;

vii.  375.  381
i  3...  vi.  319;  vii  380
i.  8 vi  336

i.  9 vi.  346

i.13 vi.345

i  23  iii.  144;   vi

33i>  334

i-  H    vi.334

i.  30 vi  336,  353;

viii.  486

i.  31    vi.333,  336

ii  2  ...iii.  144;  vi.  334
ii.  8  ...  V.  261 ;  vi  293,

310,  336
ii  II   ...  i34;  vi.  334

ii.  16  vi  333

iii.  8 iv.  186

iii.  16 vi.  313

iii.  17 vi  313

iii  20 vi.  333

iii  23 vi.  309

V.  4.5 vi335

V.  7 vi.  301;  viii

486

vi.  15   ...  vi  334;  viii

.499

VI.  19 VI.  313

vi.  20 vi.  313

vii  23 vi.334

vui.  I VI.  287

viii.  5 vi  31a

viii.  6    ...  vi.  309,  31a,

319.  344.  351
ix.  I ...  iv.  157  ;  vi  310

ix.  aa vi.  313

X.4 vi  315

X.  9 vi  315

X.  16    .„  vi  348  ;  viii

490

X.  20  vi.  309

X.  21  vi  309

X.  32 vi  345

xi.  2    vi.  336

xi.  3    vi.  309

xi.  7    vi.  32a

xi.  16 vi.  345

xi.  18 vi  346

xi.  19 vi  282

xi.  20 vii.  370

xi.  22 vi  345

xi.  24 iii.  104

xii3...v.  276;  vi.  346


Index  of  Texts.

V.  19 viii.  486

V.  21  ...  i.  33;  vi  300,
308

▼i.  4-10 vi-  358

viii.  7 vi.  346

viii.  9  ...  vi.  315;  viii.

501
X.  5...iii.  102, 128;  vi.

335
X.  16   vi.  335

xi.  5    vi.  358

xi.  25 vi.  358

xi.  26 vi.  358

xi.  27 vi.  335,  358

xi.  29 vi.  335

xi.  31  vi.  318

xii.  1-4  vi.  310

xii.  2  iv.  157

xii.  7-9  ...vi.  335;  vii.

380

xii.  10 vi.  335

xii.  12 vi.  283

xii.  19 vi.  353

xiii.  4  ...  i.  22;  vi.  307
xiii.  5    ...  vi.  334,  353,

354;  viii.  495,  498
xiii.  13  ...  vi.  332,  336

Galatians.

i.  I vi.  333

i.  3 ^'  331

i.  8...vi.  282;  viii.  476

i.  9   viii.  476

i.  10    vi.  334

i.  II    vi.  284

i.  12    vi.  284

i-  13    vi.345

i.  15. ..vi.  331;  vii.  375

i.  16 V.  331

i.  22    vi.  353

ii-  7 vi.  346

ii.  16  vi.  348

ii.  20...iii.  130;  vi.347,

352,  353 ;  viii.  504

iii.  7    vi.  349

111.  13  viu.  480

111.  10    11.  79

iii.  19...  ii.  59;  vi.  325

iii.  22    545

iii.  23-25  ii.  48

iii.  24 vi.  333

iii.  26 vi.  348,  353

iii.  27  ...  vi.  350,  351 ;

viii.  491

PP3


581


xii  8  vi.  346

xii.  12  ...  ii.  90 ;  vi.  310,

334.  354
xii.  13 vi.351

xii.  27  ...  vi.  334;  viii.

455
xii.  28 vi.  339

xiii.  2 vi.  287,  346

xiii.  9  viii.  476

xiii.  12 viii.  476

XV.  I   vi.  284

XV.  6  iv.  157

XV.  8  vi.  310

XV.  9  vi.  283,  345

XV.  14 iv.  157

XV.  18 iv.  157

XV.  19 vi.  349

XV.  21 vi.  308

XV.  22 vi.  353

XV.  -25  viii.  493

XV.  27 vi.  319

XV.  28    ...  vi.  310,  313

XV.  44 vi.  308

XV.  45    ...  iii.  129;  vi.

308 ;  viii.  495

XV.  45-47 ii.  81

XV.  47    ...  vi.  308,  315
xvi.  23  ...  iii.  128  ;  vi.

336,  349 ;  vii.  437
xvi.  23  ...  vi.  332,  336

2  Corinthians.

.  I ...  vi.  345;  vii.  375
.  2 vi.  331

.  5 vi.  307

.  18    vi.  313

.  19   •.. vi.  336

.  20    vi.  336

•  23  vii.  375

i.  10  vi.  335

i.  17 vi.  313,  353

ii.  17 vi.  317

V.  4  ...  ii.  63;  vi  321,

335 ;  vii.  437

V.  5    vi.  345

V.  6...vi  335;  viii  456

Tv.  10 vi.  335

V.7 vi.  346

V.  8 vi.  341

V.  14 545

V.  15   vi.  347

V.  16 vi.  307

V.  17.. , vi.351,  353,  354
V.  i8 viii.  486


iii.  28 vi.  353

iv.  4...i  19;  ii  79;  vi

307
iv.  5 viii  486

iv.  14 vi.  326

V.  2 vi.  356

V.  4 vi.  356

V.  6 '...  vi.  287,  356

V.  20  vi.  283

vi.  10 vi.  349

vi.  15 vi  351,  355

vi.  18 vi.  332

Ephesians.

i  I ...  vi.  353;  vii  375

i  2 vi.  331

»•  3 vi  340i353

i  4 vi.  338

i  6 vi.  340

i.  7   viii  486

i.  10   vi.  338,  353

i  12    vi.  340

i.  13   vi.  338,  340

i.  14 viii.  486

i  15    vi.  348

i  20    vi.  326

i  21    vi.  326

i  23    ...  vi.  319,  338:

viii.  496

ii  2 vi  338

ii.  3 vi.  338

ii  5 vi.  352

ii  6 vi.  352

ii  8-10  vi.  338

ii  10 vi.  351,  353

ii.  12  vi.  338

ii  14-17 vi.  339

ii.  18-20 vi.  309

ii  18  vi.  340

ii  20 vi.  283,  334

ii  21  vi.  322

iii.  6  vi  340,  353

iii  14-17   vi.  340

iii.  15 vi.  338

iii.  17 vi.  353

iv.  5    vi.  319,  344

iv.  7    vi.  354

iv.  10 vi.  339

iv.  II vi.  383

iv.  11-13    vi.  339

iv.  15-16    ...  vi.  340;

viii.  496

iv.  15-24 viii.  496

iv.  18 vi.  338


58a


Index  of  Texts.


It.  30 vi.  340

iv.  ai vi.  338

iv.  33-34   vi.  350

iv.  34 vi.  350,  351

iv.  30   viii.  486

iv.  3a   viii.  487

V.  a  viii.  486

V.  5    vi.  318,  340

V.  8...  vi  334;  vi.  338

V.  14  vi.  333

V.  33  ...  ii.  90;  vi.  338

V.  34  vi.  340

V.  35-37 vi.  340

V.  3o...ii.  90;  vi.  338,
353 ;  viii.  491

vi.  5    vi.  340

vi.  6  vi.  334,  340

vi  6-9    vi.  340

vi.  la vi  313

Philippians.

i  I vi.  353

i  3 vi  331

i.  8    viii.  504

i  16    vi.  341

i  18    vi.  341

i  i9...iii  139;  vi  341

i  20    vi.  341

i  31    vi.  347

i  33    vi.  341

i  37   iii.  103

i  39  ^-  341*  .H8

ii.  5  viii  500

ii.  6...  V.  233;  vi.  315,

316,  318;  vii.  437;

viii.  501
Ii.  7...vi.307,3i5,3i8;

viii.  501

ii  8    vi.  307,  315

ii.  9   vii  381

ii.  10...  ii  89;  vi3i9,

341 ;  vii  381
ii.  ii...vi.  319;  vii.  380

ii.  19 ^i-  379

iii.  3   "^^  341

iii.  8  vi.  .^41

iii.  10 vi.  307

iii.  13 vi.  341

iii.  19 ^*  334

iii.  3o...iii.  io3  ;  vi.  341

iii  31  ...  vi.  308,  341 ;

vii.  437
iv.  4    vi.  341


iv.  13    ...  iii.  129;  vi.

341 ;  viii.  496
iv.  33 vi.  333

COLOSSIANS.

i  a vi.  331

i  10-14 iii  133

i  13    vi.  340

i  15  ...  V.  333;  vi.  316,

319,  331;  vii  437;

1.  16  ...  vi.  309,  313,

314*  319;  vii  437

i  17  ...  vi.  319,  331,

333;  vu.  437;  558

i  19  vi-  324»  340

i  30    vi.  338

i  31    vi.  338

i.  33  i.  33;  vi.  307

i  37  ...  vi.  349,  353 ;

vii  437 ;  viii.  498
ii.  3  ...  i  33;  vi.  340;

vii  437,  viii.  475

ii  5     vi  348

ii.  7    vi.  340

ii.  9  ...  vi.  334,  340;

vii.  437
ii.  13  vi.  353

•  •  •

!*•  ^3  ••••••••••••  »!•  oi> •

ii  14  vi.  338

ii.  15  ▼!•  338

ii.  18 vii.  385

ii  19  ...  vi.  340;  viii.
498

iii  I    vi.  353

iii.  3   vi.  353

iii  4  vi.  353

iii  9  vi  338,  350

iii  10 vi.  350

iii  II  vi339

iii.  13-14  vi.  339

iii  15 vi.  339

iii  17 vi.  347

I  Thessalonians.

i  I vi  331

i.  3 vi.  349

i  8 vi.  348

ii.  3     vi.  284

ii  13  vi.  347

ii.  14  vi.  353

ii.  15  iii.  140


u.  10  111.  140

ii  19  vi.  333

iii.  10 vi.  384

iii.  II    vii.  379

iii.  13 vi.  333

iv.  3   4 vi.  333

iv.  6   vi.  333

iv.  14 vi347

iv.  16 vi.  333,  353

iv.  17 vi.  333,341

V.  10  vi.  353

V.  23   vi.  333

V.  34  vi.  346

V.  38  vi.  333

a  THBSSAL0NIAN3.

i.  2 vi.  331

i-7 vi.  333

1.  8 vi  333

i.  9  ..- vi  333

1.  10  vi.  333

i  II,  13 iii  137

ii.  8  vi.  319,  333

ii.  II  vi.  347

ii  15  vi.  384

ii.  16  ...  vi  332;  vii.

379»  437

ii  17 vii.  379

ii.  19  vi.  330

iii  6  vi.  333

iii  13  vi.  333

iii.  18 vi.  333

I  Timothy.

i.  I  .*..  vi.  331, 349

i  3 vi.  331

i  3 vi.  343

i  10  vi.  342

i  II  vi.  346

i  13  ...  vi.  333,  342;

vii.  375»  379

i.  13  vi.  343

i.  15  vi.  333;  545

i  16  vi.  343,  348

i  17 i  37;  vi.  313

i  19  vi.  343

i  3o  iv.  156

ii  3  vi  34a

ii.  5  ...  i  19;  vi  309,

3io»  333»  343,  344;
545
ii.  6  vi.  309,  310

iii.  5  vi.  345

iii.  13 vi.  348


Index  of  Texts.

ii.  21 viii.  487

iii.  3 ''^ii*  503

iii.  4»  7  vi*  332

iii.  4  ...  vi.  333,  343;

viii.  487
iii.  5  ...  vi.  348,  350,

351 ;  viii.  489
iii.  lo vi.  34a

Philemon.

3 vi.  331,  343^

5 vi.  342,  348

6 vi.  343

Hebrews.

i.  I ii.  5a;  vi.  325

i.  a   ...  vi.  326,  327;

vii.437
i.  3  ...  ii.  63;  vi.  326,

327;  vii.437

i.  4 vi.  326

i.  5  ...  i.  10,  11;  ii.82;

vi.  327
i.  6  ...  vi.  314,    337;

vii.  381

i.  7 vi.  327

i.  8 ii.  83 ;  vi.  326

1-9 vi.  327

i.  10  ...  vi.  327;    vii.

437

i.  13    vi.  327

i.14...  vi.314,  326,  327

ii.  2     vi.  325

ii.  3 vi.  326

ii.  6-10  i.  24

ii.  8  viii.  493

ii.  10  ...  vi.  349;  vii.  437

ii.  II   i.  32

ii.  14  ...  i.  22;  ii.  79;

vi.  309»327»  vii.  437

ii.  16  i.  23

ii.  17...  i.  22  ;  viii.  486;

525
ii.  18  vi.  327

iii.  1-6   vi.  325

iii.  a    vi.  337

iii.  5    vi.  335

iii.  6    vi.  325

iii.  9   vi.  23S

iii.  10 vi.  283

iii.  17 vi.  336

iv.  2    vi.  347


583


"1.  15 VI.  342,345

iii.  16  ...  vi.  307,  315,

332,  343»  344»  348
iv.  I    ,.. vi.  34a

iv.  2    vi.  342

iv.  6 vi.  34a

iv.  10 vi.  343

V.  II  vi.  343

V*  la  vi.  34a

V.  31   vi.  343

vi.  I    vi.  343

vi.  3    vi.  343

vi.  10 vi.  343

vi.  13 vi.  343

vi.  14 vi.  319

vi.  15  ...V.  346;  vi.312

vi.  16 vi.  31a

vi.  ao vi.  346

a  Timothy.

i.  I  ...  vi.  343  ;  vii.  375
i.  a vi.  331

i.  9 vi  343

i.  10  vi.  319,  343

i.  la    vi.  348

1.  13    ••.....••.••  VI.  342
i.  18    vi,  343

ii.  3    vi.  34a

ii.  10  vi.  343

ii.  11-13     vi.  33a

ii.  II  vi.  35a

ii.  17  vi.  34a

ii.  i8...iv.  156;  vi.34a

ii.  33 vii.  375,  381

iii.  8   vi.  343

iii.  II vi.  343

iii.  13 vi.  349

iii.  15 vi.  348

iv.  I   vi.  319,  343

iv.  4   vi.  343

iv.  8   vi.  319,  343

IV.  14  ••••••*••...  VI.  ,■^43

iv.  17 vi.  343

iv.  18 viv  343

Titus.

i.  5-9 ••  vi.  342

1.9 vi.  343

ii.  i-io  vi.  343

ii.  I     vi.  34a

ii.  8    vi.  34a

ii.  II  vi.  343

ii.  13  ...  vi.  318,  319,
343 ;  vii.  437


iv.  13    viii.  473

iv.  15  ...  i.  8,  33,  33;

vi.  327;  525
V.  I     vi.  309

V.  4     vi.  335

V.  5     i.  10

y.  7  ...  i.  33;  vi.  337;

525
▼.  8  ...  i.  33;  V.  336;

vi.  307

V.  II   vi.  336

V.  19  vi.  336

V.  30  vi.  336

vi.  4   vi.  399

vi.  o    vi.  310

vi.  13     ii.  54

vi.  14    ii.  54

vii.  1-33 vi.  335

vii.  3 vi.  344;  55a

vii.  34    vi.  344

vii.  35    ...  vi.  343,  344
vii.  36 ...  i.  33 ;  iv.  167  ;

525
vii.  37 IV.  167

viii.  3   viii.  493

viii.  8-11 iii.  loi

viii.  9 vi.  336

viii.  13  , u.  48

viii.  19  vi.  336

viii.  23   vi.  336

ix.  12 vi.  301,343

ix.  13   viii.  486

ix.  14 vi.  317,  344

ix.  15   viii.  486

ix.  24   viii.  493

X.  7 vi.  336

X.  8 vi.  336

X.  II   vi.  325

X.  12     viii.  486

X.  14  vi.  336

X.  17  vi.  336

X.  18  vi.  336

X.  29     viii.  48a

xi.  10 iii.  loa

xi.  16  ...  iii.  loa;  vii.

375
xi,  17  V.  236

xii.  a vi.  349

xii.  33  ...  iii.  103 ;  viL

385
xiii.  8 vi.  337,  336

xiii.  10    vi,  336

xiii.  14 iii.  loa

xiii.  3o  ...  vi.  337,  333


584


Ittdex  of  Texts.


i-5

vi.  193

"i-  "93

Ti.  "93

i.  l8    tL  J9I

i.23    ....

Tii89

;-'5

vi.  290.  191

li.  1  ::;:

::::;:  ri.,^

ii.  7

ii.  13  ....

"■  393

ii.  i4-a6

.  -vi.  383,  J93

IHift

Ti.  393

tT.4    ....

Ti.  393

Ti.  »93

'i-  J9i

T.  1-6....

»i-»93

1ST

Pbtbb.

Ti.    lOT

1:1:;:::::     """"^

i.  i....ii)

U3!vi.»98

Ti.  298,  »99

i.  i9...i

i3 :  vL  301 i

TiiL  48.1;.  486

vi.  301

Ti.  30J

vi.  30J

1-  J99

vi.  3<».  3°"

"■  300

U.  i4 "■  1°°'  SO'

iii.  14 ■n.yx,

iii.  15 vi.  199

iii.  16 vi.  300

iii.  18  ...  I.  al;  vi.300,

301 ;  sj6

i"-  >    vi-  3°"

i».  II    ...  vi.  J97,  3oJi

vii.  383

iv.  13 vi.)99

iv.  14 VI.  399

'  a  Si.  Petbb.

1.1  .,.vi.  197,301,303,

304

1.  J  ...VI. 301,301  304

i-3 "-304

L4     ...  1.  31!  vi.  303,

304 ;  viii.  455

».  5 vi.  303

1.0 vi.  303

i-7 vi.  303

i.  8 tL  303,303

1.9 "-SOS

i.  II   vi.  303,  304

i-H   vi.  304

i-  15    vi.  304

1-  n V.13J

i-i8    VL304

i.  so    vl.  »98

ii.  1    vi.  iSi,  304

ii  10     ...  vi,  303,  303,

304

iii.  »  vi.  a83,  304

Iii.  15 vi.  a83

iii.  16 vi.  383

"i-17 vi.  303

iii.  Iii   ...".303,303,

304;  vii.  383

t  Si.  John.

i.  I   V.  »35

!-  '-3  T-  "40

>■> VI.  316

i.  S  v-»33

i  7     ■  V.  J33;vi30i;
viii.  4S6

ii.  3 viii.  486

"-8 v.  334

"■9- V.344

"■  'o    v.344

4-  '6    v.  341,  344

'i>9    T.  144


ii.3i...v.a43;vi384
ii.3*     ...  v.  a4i,  344;

vi  38a
ii  S3    viii  456

ia.a   viii.  461

111.5. ..1.33 J  Ti-3«>i

iii- 8 ii.;9

!?|"  '"-M

"i-  14 »■  »44

iii-  10 V.  334,  343

iii-"    vii.  38a

iii."    ™-38i

lit  13    vii,  437

iv.  a i.  33;t.  »4>

It.  3  ...T.ii6,34iiTi
383

lv.8 V.333

iv-?  V.  136,  345;

_   i4ii.487

IV.  10     ...v.333;  VIll.

4S6

iv.  i5-'6    i34

iv-  15  V.  340

iv.  16  V,  133

iv.  19    ...  V,  333;  viii.

504
iv-JO T.  a44;viL

437
V-4 V.  J43

V.  10    V.  343

v."    V.  340

V.    13      V.  340

V.  13    V.  343

V.  13-15    vii  381

V.  30   ...  i.  34i  V,  335,
343

a  St.  Joan.

3  V.  14J

6 iv..74

7 1.13;  vi-i83

8  V.  343

9  '-MJ

10    v-a4(

"     v->44

St.  Juds.

I Ti30S

3 vi.30S

4 vi.  305  ;  vii.  437

S vi.  30s

5-7 vi.30S

'4    vi-3oi


Index  of  Texts.

ii.  28    V.  245

iii.  1-5    V.  245

iii.  I     V.  246

iii.  7 viii.  509

iii.  7-13  V-  245

iii.  «   vi.  280

iii.  12  V.  246

iii.  14-22     V.  245

lu.  17  ,,..„..,  vui.  490

iii.  21  V.  246

V.  6    V.  246;  vii.

382 ;  viii.  486
T.  8    V.  246;  vii.

38a ;  viii.  486
V.  9   vi.  301 ;  vii.

383
v.  II vii.  383

v.  12  T.  246;  vii.

383 ;  viii.  486

▼.  14 vii.  383

vi.  I     viii.  486

vi.  16  V.  245

vii.  9-10  vii.  382

xi.  15     iii.  106

xii.  10 V.  246

xiii.  8  ,.... V.  246


585


17   vi.  283

20  .,. vi.  305

21   vi.  305.  306

25   vi.  312

Revelation.

1.5  ...  ^'  301 ;  vii'3S3

i.6    vii.  383

i.  7     ii.  91

i.  8  ...  V.  245  ;  vii.  437

i.  10  vii.  370

i.  13 i.  6

i.  17  ...V.  246;  vii.  370

ii.  1-7-? "^«  245

ii.  8-11    v.  245

ii.  8...  V.  245;  vii. 437

ii.  12    V.  245

ii.  13  ...  V.  245 ;  vi.  280

ii.  14    ▼.  245

ii.  16    V.  245

ii.  17    V.  246

ii.  19    '^^  245

ii.  20    V.  245

ii.  21-26 V.  245

ii.  23  ...  vii.  376,  437;
viii.  474  '


xiv.  14 i.  6

xvii.  14  ...  V.  246;  vii.

437
adx.  7 VI.  336

xix.  10  vii.  373

xix.  12     V.  246

xix.  13    V.  246

xix.  14    V.  246

xix.  16  ...  V.  246;  vii.

437
XX.  4  vi.  280

XX.  6    V.  247

XX.  9 vii.  392

xxi.  3   viii.  498

XXI.   O     ••...•r*....     »•    245

xxi.  22 V.  247

xxi.  23     .„„....  V.  247

xrii.  1-2 V.  247

xxii.  8   vii.  384

xxii.  9    ...  V.  273;  vii.

384
xxii.  12 vii.  437

xxii.  13  ...  V,  245 ;  vii.

437
xxii.  16   V.  246

xxii.  21 V.  246


Oxford:  Horace  Hart,  Printer  to  the  Unhtersity,


A  Catalogue  of  Works


IN


THEOLOGICAL  LITERATURE

PUBLISHED  BY

Messrs.  LONGMANS,  GREEN,  df  CO.

39  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.


Li  U  J      If  ■        I     V


Abbey  and  Overton.— THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH  IN  THE

EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  By  Charles  J.  Abbey,  M. A.,  Rector
of  Checkendon,  Reading,  and  John  H.  Overton,  M.A..  Rector  of
Epwortb,  Doncaster,  Rural  Dean  of  Isle  of  Axholme.     Crown  Svo.

Adams.— SACRED  ALLEGORIES.  The  Shadow  of  the  Cross
—The  Distant  Hills— The  Old  Man's  Home— The  King's  Messengers.
By  the  Rev.  William  Adams,  M.A.     Crown  Sva,    3s,  6d.

The  Four  Allegories  may  be  had  separately,  with  Illustrations.
i6$no.  IS.  each.  Also  the  Miniature  Edition,  Four  Vols,  $2mo,
IS.  each;  in  a  box,  sj.

Aids  to  the  Inner  Life.

Edited   by  the    Rev.   W.    H.    HUTCHINGS,    M.A.,   Rector  of  Kirkby
Misperton,  Yorkshire.    Five  Vols,    ^^mo,  cloth  limp,  6d.  each;  or  cloth
extra,  is,  each.    Sold  separately.
Also  an  Edition  with  red  borders,  2s,  each,

OF  THE  IMITATION  OF  CHRIST.     By  THOMAS  A  Kbmpis.     In
Four  Books.

THE  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.

THE  DEVOUT  LIFE.    By  St.  Francis  de  Sales.

THE  HIDDEN  LIFE  OF  THE  SOUL.    From  the  French  of  Jean
Nicolas  Grou.

THE  SPIRITUAL  COMBAT.    By  Lawrence  Scupoli.

Bathe.— Works  by  the  Rev.  Anthony  Bathe,  M.A.

A  LENT  WITH  JESUS.  A  Plain  Guide  for  Churchmen.  Conttdning
Readings  for  Lent  and  Easter  Week,  and  on  the  Holy  Eucharist.
3a#t#,  IS. ;  or  in  paper  cover ^  6d,

WHAT  I  SHOULD  BELIEVE.  A  Simple  Manual  of  SclMnstruction
for  Church  People.     Crown  Bvo.     y,  6d,


A  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS


Bickersteth.— Works  by  Edward  Henry  Bickersteth,  D.D.,
Bishop  of  Exeter.

THE  LORD'S  TABLE ;  or,  A^editations  on  the  Holy  Communion
Office  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.     i6mo.    is. ;  or  cloth  extra,  zs.

YESTERDAY.  TO-DAY,  AND  FOR  EVER  :  a  Poem  in  Twelve  Books.
'~     t>Ht  Shilling  Edition,  iSmo:     With  red  borders,  idmo^^.^di
The  CroTVH  Svo  Edition  (^r.)  may  still  be  had.

Blunt,— Works  by  the  Rev.  John  Henry  Blunt,  D.D.

THE  ANNOTATED  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER:  Being  an
Historical,  Ritual,  and  Theological  Commentary  on  the  Devotional
System  of  the  Church  of  England.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  John  Henry
Blunt,  D.D.    ^o.    21  j.

THE  COMPENDIOUS  EDITION  OF  THE  ANNOTATED  BOOK
OF  COMMON  PRAYER :  Forming  a  concise  Commentary  on  the
Devotional  System  of  the  Church  of  England.     Edited  by  the  Rev.

•    John  Henry  Blunt,  D.D.     Crown  Svo.     10s.  6d.

DICTIONARY  OF  DOCTRINAL  AND  HISTORICAL  THEOLOGY.
By  various  Writers.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  John  Henry  Blunt,  D.D.
Imperial  Svo.     21J.

DICTIONARY  OF  SECTS,  HERESIES,  ECCLESIASTICAL  PAR-
TIES AND  SCHOOLS  OF  RELIGIOUS  THOUGHT.  By  various
Writers.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  John  Henry  Blunt,  D.D.  Imperial
8zv.    21J.

THE  BOOK  OF  CHURCH  LAW.  Being  an  Exposition  of  the  Legal
Rights  and  Duties  of  the  Parochial  Clergy  and  the  Laity  of  the  Church
of  England.  Revised  by  Sir  Walter  G.  F.  Phillimore,  Bart.,
D.C.L.     Crown  Svo.    7s.  6d.

A  COMPANION  TO  THE  BIBLE:  Being  a  Plain  Commentary  on
Scripture  History,  to  the  end  of  the  Apostolic  Age.  Two  vols,  small
Svo.    Sold  separately.

The  Old  Testament.  3J.  6d.        The  New  Testament,  y.  6d.

HOUSEHOLD  THEOLOGY :  a  Handbook  of  Religious  Information
respecting  the  Holy  Bible,  the  Prayer  Book,  the  Church,  the  Ministry,
Divine  Worship,  the  Creeds,  etc.  etc.  Paper  cover,  i6mo.  is.  Also
the  Larger  Edition,  3^.  6d.

Body.— Works  by  the   Rev.   George  Body,  D.D.,   Canon  of
Durham.

THE  SCHOOL  OF  CALVARY  ;  or.  Laws  of  Christian  Life  revealed
from  the  Cross.  A  Course  of  Lectures  delivered  in  substance  at  All
Saints',  Margaret  Street     Small  Svo.    $s.  6d,

THE  LIFE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  :  a  Series  of  Lectures  deUvered  in
substance  at  All  Saints',  Margaret  Street.    i6mo.    2s.  6d.

THE  LIFE  OF  TEMPTATION*:  a  Course  of  Lectures  delivered  in
substance  at  St  Peter's,  Eaton  Square  ;  also  at  All  Saints',  Margaret
Street.     i6mo.    2s.  6d.


IN  THEOLOGICAL  LITERATURE.


Boidtbee.— A  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  THIRTY-NINE
ARTICLES  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND.  By  the  Rev.
T.  P.  BouLTBEE,  formerly  Principal  of  the  London  College  of  Divinity,
St.  John's  Hall,  Highbury.    Crown  Bvo.    6s,

Bright.— Works  by  William  Bright,  D.D.,  Canon  of  Christ
Church,  Oxford.

LESSONS  FROM  THE  LIVES  OF  THREE  GREAT  FATHERS :
St  Athanasius,  St  Chrysostom,  and  St.  Augustine.     Crown  Bvo,    6s,

THE  INCARNATION  AS  A  MOTIVE  POWER.     Crown  Bvo.    6s.

FAITH  AND  LIFE:  Readings  for  the  greater  Holy  Days,  and  the
Sundays  from  Advent  to  Trinity.  Compiled  from  Ancient  Writers.
Small  Bvo.     $s.

lONA  AND  OTHER  VERSES.    Small  Bvo.    ^.  6d.

HYMNS  AND  OTHER  VERSES.    Small  Bvo.    51.

Bright  and  Medd.— LIBER  PRECUM  PUBLICARUM  EC-
CLESIiE  ANGLICANiE.  A  Gulielmo  Bright,  S.T.P.,  et  Petro
Goldsmith  Medd,  A.M.,  Latine  redditus.  [In  hac  Editione  con-
tinentur  Versiones  Latinse — i.  Libri  Preciun  Publicarum  Ecclesise
Anglicanse ;  3.  Liturgiae  Primse  Reformatse ;  3.  Litiu-giae  Scoticanae  ;
4*  Liturgise  Americans.]    Small  Bvo.    js.  6d.

Browne.— AN  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  THIRTY-NINE
ARTICLES,  Historical  and  Doctrinal  By  E.  H.  Browne,  D.D.,
formerly  Bishop  of  Winchester.    Bvo,    16s.

Oampion  and  Beamont.— THE  PRAYER  BOOK  INTER-
LEAVED. With  Historical  Illustrations  and  Explanatory  Notes
arranged  parallel  to  the  Text  By  W.  M.  Campion,  D.D.,  and  W.  J.
Beamont,  M.  A.    Small  Bvo.    7s,  6d.

darter.— Works  edited  by  the  Rev.  T.  T.  Carter,  M.A.,  Hon.
Canon  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford.

THE  TREASURY  OF  DEVOTION :  a  Manual  of  Prayer  for  General
and  Daily  Use.  Compiled  by  a  Priest.  iBmo.  2s,  6d. ;  clolh  limp,
2s.  ;  or  bound  witk  the  Book  ^  Common  Prayer,  35.  6d,  Large-Type
Edition,     Crown  Bvo,   ^,  6a,

THE  WAY  OF  LIFE :  A  Book  of  Prayers  and  Instruction  for  the  Young
at  School,  with  a  Preparation  for  Confirmation.  Compiled  by  a  Priest
iBmo,    IS,  6d.

THE  PATH  OF  HOLINESS  :  a  First  Book  of  Prayers,  with  the
Service  of  the  Holy  Communion,  for  the  Young.  Compiled  by  a
Priest    With  Illustrations.    i6mo.    is.  6d. ;  cloth  limp,  u.

THE  GUIDE  TO  HEAVEN  :  a  Book  of  Prayers  for  every  Want.  (For
the  Working  Classes.)  Compiled  by  a  Priest.  iBmo.  is,  6d,  ;
cloth  limpt  IS,  Large'  Type  Edition.  Crown  Bvo,  is,  6d. ;  cloth
limPt  IS,

[continued.


A  CA  TALOGUE  OF  WORKS


GAlter.— Works  edited  by  the  Rev.  T.  T.  Carter,  M.A^  Hon.
Canon  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford — continued.

SELF-RENUNCIATION,  ifmo.  2S.  (uL  Also  ike  Larger  Edition,
Small  8v0.     y,  6d.

THE  STAR  OF  CHILDHOOD ;  a  First  Book  of  Prayers  and  Instnic-
tioQ  for  Children.  Compiled  by  a  Priest.  With  Illustrations.  i6mo,
2s.  6d.

Oartor.— MAXIMS  AND  GLEANINGS  FROM  THE
WRITINGS  OF  T.  T.  CARTER,  M.A.  Selected  and  arranged  for
Daily  Use.     Crown  i6mo.    is.

Ohaildler.— THE  SPIRIT  OF  MAN  :  An  Essay  in  Christian
Philosophy.  By  the  Rev,  A.  Chandler,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Poplar,  E.
Crown  %vo.    y.

Oonybeare  and  HowBon.— THE  LIFE  AND  EPISTLES  OF

ST.  PAUL.    By  the  Rev.  W.  J.  Conybeare,  M.A,  and  the  Very
Rev.  J.  S.  HOWSON,  D.D.    With  numerous  Maps  and  Illustrations.

Library  Edition.     Two  Vols.    Zvo.    2w.

Student's  Edition.     One  Vol.    Crown  Bvo.    6s.

Orafce.— HISTORY  OF  THE  CHURCH  UNDER  THE
ROMAN  EMPIRE,  A.D.  30-476.  By  the  Rev.  A.  D.  Crake,  B.A.
Crown  Bvo.    ys.  6d.

Devotional  Series,  16mo,  Bed  Borders.    EacA  2s.  6d.

BICKERSTETHS  YESTERDAY.  TO-DAY.  AND  FOR  EVER.
CHILCOrS  TREATISE  ON  EVIL  THOUGHTS.
THE  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.
DEVOTIONAL  BIRTHDAY  BOOK.
HERBERTS  POEMS  AND  PROVERBS.
KEMPIS*  (A)  OF  THE  IMITATION  OF  CHRIST.
ST.  FRANCIS  DE  SALES'  THE  DEVOUT  LIFE.
WILSON'S  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.    Large  type.
♦TAYLOR'S  JEREMY)  HOLY  LIVING.

♦ HOLY  DYING.

*  These  two  in  one  Volume.    $s.

Devotional  Series,  I81110,  without  Bed  Borders.    Each  is.

BICKERSTETH'S  YESTERDAY,  TO-DAY.  AND  FOR  EVER.
THE  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.
HERBERT'S  POEMS  AND  PROVERBS.
KEMPIS*  (A)  OF  THE  IMITATION  OF  CHRIST.
ST.  FRANCIS  DE  SALES*  THE  DEVOUT  LIFE.
WILSON'S  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.    Large  type.
♦TAYLOR'S  (JEREMY)  HOLY  LIVINa

• HOLY  DYING.

*  These  two  in  one  Volume,     ar,  drf.


IN  THEOLOGICAL  LITERATURE.


5


EdersheinL— Works  by  Alfred  Edersheim,  M.A.,  D.D.,  Ph.D.,
sometime  Grinfield  Lecturer  on  the  Septuagint,  Oxford.

THE  LIFE  AND  TIMES  OF  JESUS  THE  MESSIAH.  Two  Vols,
Svo.    S4r.

JESUS  THE  MESSIAH  :  being  an  Abridged  Edition  of  *  The  Life  and
Times  of  Jesus  the  Messiah.'    Crown  Svo.    js.  6d,

PROPHECY  AND  HISTORY  IN  RELATION  TO  THE  MESSIAH  :
The  Warburton  Lectures,  1880-1884.    Zvo,    los,

TOHU-VA-VOHU  ('Without  Form  and  Void'):  being  a  collection  of
Fragmentary  Thoughts  and  Criticism.     Crown  Svo.    6s.

EUicott.— Works  by  C.  J.  Ellicott,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Gloucester
and  Bristol

A  CRITICAL  AND  GRAMMATICAL  COMMENTARY  ON  ST.
PAULS  EPISTLES.  Greek  Text,  with  a  Critical  and  Grammatical
Commentary,  and  a  Revised  English  Translation.    8v».


I  Corinthians.    i6j.
Galatians.    Sj.  6d.
Ephesians.    8j.  6d,
Pastoral  Epistles.    lof.  6d.


Philippians,  Colossians,  and

Philemon.    lor.  6d.
Thessalonians.    7s,  6d.


HISTORICAL    LECTURES    ON    THE    LIFE   OF    OUR
JESUS   CHRIST.    Svo.    i2j.


LORD


Epochs  of  Church  History.    Edited  by  Mandell  Creighton,
D.D.,  LL.D.,  Bishop  of  Peterborough.  Fcap.  Svff.  2s.  6d.  each.


CHURCH    IN
BylheRev.  H.W.


THE  ENGLISH
OTHER  LANDS.
Tucker,  M.A.

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  RE-
FORMATION IN  ENGLAND.  By
die  Rev.  Geo.  G.  Perry,  M.A.

THE  CHURCH  OF  THE  EARLY
FATHERS.  By  the  Rev.  Alfred
Plummbr,  D.D.

THE  EVANGELICAL  REVIVAL  IN
THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.
By  the  Rev.  J.  H.  Overton,  M.A

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD.
By  the  Hon.  G.  C.  Brodrick,  D.CL.

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CAM-
BRIDGE.  By  J.  Bass  Mullingbr,
M.A

THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH  IN  THE
MIDDLE  AGES.  By  the  Rev.  W.
Hunt,  M.A.


THE  CHURCH  AND  THE
EASTERN  EMPIRE.  By  the  Rev.
H.  F.  TozBR,  M.A.

THE  CHURCH  AND  THE  ROMAN
EMPIRE.    By  the  Rev.  A  Carr.

THE  CHURCH  AND  THE  PURI-
TANS,  i57o-i66a  By  Hbnrt  Opplbv
Wakeman,  M.A

HILDEBRAND  AND  HIS  TIMES.
By  the  Rev.  W.  R.  W.  Stephens,  M.A.

THE  POPES  AND  THE  HOHEN-
STAUFEN.    By  Uco  Bal2ani.

THE  COUNTER.RE  FORMATION.
By  Adolphus  William  Ward,  Litt.  D.

WYCLIFFE  AND  MOVEMENTS
FOR  REFORM.  By  Reginald  L.
Poole,  M.A

THE  ARIAN  CONTROVERSY.  By
H.  M.  GwATKiN,  M.A


A  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS


Posbtry.— Works  edited  by  the  Rev.  Thomas  Vincent  Fosbery,
M.A.,  sometime  Vicar  of  St  Giles's,  Reading.

VOICES  OF  COMFORT.     Cheap  Edition.    Small  Bvd.    y-  6d,
Tkg  Larger  Edition  (js.  6d.)  may  stiU  be  had,

HYMNS  AND  POEMS  FOR  THE  SICK  AND  SUFFERING.  In
connection  with  the  Service  for  the  Visitation  of  the  Sick.  Selected
from  Various  Authors.    Small  Svo,    31.  6d,

Oarland.— THE  PRACTICAL  TEACHING  OF  THE  APO-
CALYPSE.    By  the  Rev.  G.  V.  Garland,  M.  A.    Svo,    16s.

Gore.— Works  by  the  Rev.  Charles  Gore,  M.A.,  Principal  of  the
Pusey  House ;  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford.

THE  MINISTRY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH.    Svo.     tos.  6d.

ROMAN  CATHOLIC  CLAIMS.     Crown  Svo.    y.  6d.

GonlbnriL—Works  by  Edward  Meyrick  Goulburn,  D.D.,
D.C.L.,  sometime  Dean  of  Norwich.

THOUGHTS  ON  PERSONAL  RELIGION.  Small  Svo,  6s.  6d. ;
CMeap  Edition,  y.  6d. ;  Presentation  Edition,  2  vols,  small  Svo,  10s.  6d.

THE  PURSUIT  OF  HOLINESS :  a  Sequel  to  *  Thoughts  on  Personal
Religion.'    Small  Svo.     $s.     Cheap  Edition,  y.  6d.

THE  CHILD  SAMUEL :  a  Practical  and  Devotional  Commentary  on
the  Birth  and  Childhood  of  the  Prophet  Samuel,  as  recorded  in
I  Sam.  i.,  ii.  1-27,  iiL    Small  Svo.    2s.  6d,

THE  GOSPEL  OF  THE  CHILDHOOD :  a  Practical  and  Devotional
Commentary  on  the  Single  Incident  of  our  Blessed  Lord's  Childhood
(St.  Luke  ii.  41  to  the  end).     Crotvn  Svo.    2s.  6d,

THE  COLLECTS  OF  THE  DAY:  an  Exposition,  Critical  and  Devo-
tional, of  the  Collects  appointed  at  the  Communion.  With  Preliminary
Essays  on  their  Structure,  Sources,  etc.    a  vols.    Crown  Svo.    Ss,  each,

THOUGHTS  UPON  THE  LITURGICAL  GOSPELS  for  the  Sundays,
one  for  each  day  in  the  year.  With  an  Introduction  on  their  Origin,
History,  the  Modifications  made  in  them  by  the  Reformers  and  by  the
Revisers  of  the  Prayer  Book.    2  vols.     Crown  Svo.   'i6s.

MEDITATIONS  UPON  THE  LITURGICAL  GOSPELS  for  the
Minor  Festivals  of  Christ,  the  two  first  Week-days  of  the  Easter  and
Whitsun  Festivals,  and  the  Red-letter  Saints'  Days.   Crown  Svo,   Ss.  6d.

FAMILY  PRAYERS  compiled  from  various  sources  (chiefly  from  Bishop
Hamilton's  Manual),  and  arranged  on  the  Liturgical  Principle.  Crown
Svo.    y.  6d.     Cheap  Edition.     i6mo.     is.

Harrison.— PROBLEMS  OF  CHRISTIANITY  AND  SCEPTI-
CISM ;  Lessons  from  Twenty  Years'  Ebcperience  in  the  Field  of  Christian
Evidence.  By  the  Rev.  Alexander  J.  Harrison,  B.D.,  Lecturer
of  the  Christian  Evidence  Society.    Crotvn  Svo.    7s.  6d,


IN  THEOLOGICAL  LITERATURE,


Hernaman.— LYRA  CONSOLATIONIS.     Ftom  the  Poets  of

the  Seventeenth,  Eighteenth,  and  Nineteenth  Centuries.    Selected  and
arranged  by  Claudia  Frances  Hernaman.    Small  Svo,   6s.

Holland.— Works  by  the  Rev.  Henry  Scott  Holland,  M.A.,
Canon  and  Precentor  of  St.  PauPs.

CREED  AND  CHARACTER  :  Sermons.     Crown  Bvo,    7s.  6d.

ON  BEHALF  OF  BELIEF.  Sermons  preached  in  St  Paul's  CathedraL
Crown  Svo,    6s.

CHRIST  OR  ECCLESIASTES.  Sermons  preached  in  St  Paul's
Cathedral.     Crown  Bvo.    y.  6d.

GOOD  FRIDAY.  Being  Addresses  on  the  Seven  Last  Words,  delivered
at  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  on  Good  Friday.     Small  Bvo.    as.

LOGIC  AND  LIFE,  with  other  Sermons.     Crown  Bvo.    fs.  6d,

Hopkins.— CHRIST  THE  CONSOLER.  A  Book  of  Comfort
for  the  Sick.     By  Ellice  Hopkins.    Small  Bvo.    as.  6d,

Ingram.— HAPPINESS  :  In  the  Spiritual  Life;  or,  *The  Secret
of  the  Lord.'  A  Series  of  Practical  Considerations.  By  the  Rev.  W.
Clavell  Ingram,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  St.  Matthew's,  Leicester.  Crown
Bvo,    7s.  6d.

INHERITANCE,  THE,  OF  THE  SAINTS;  or,  Thoughts  on
the  Communion  of  Saints  and  the  Life  of  the  World  to  come.  Col-
lected chiefly  from  English  Writers  by  L.  P.  With  a  Preface  by  the
Rev.  Henry  Scott  Holland,  M.A.     Crown  Bvo.    js.  6d.

Jameson. — Works  by  Mrs.  Jameson.

SACRED  AND  LEGENDARY  ART,  containing  Legends  of  the  Angels
and  Archangels,  th&  Evangelists,  the  Apostles.  With  19  etchings  and
187  Woodcuts.     Two  Vols.    Clotk,  gilt  top,  aos,  net.

LEGENDS  OF  THE  MONASTIC  ORDERS,  as  represented  in  the
Fine  Arts.  With  11  etchings  and  88  Woodcuts.  One  Vol,  Cloth,
gilt  top,  los.  net.

LEGENDS  OF  THE  MADONNA,  OR  BLESSED  VIRGIN  MARY,
With  27  Etchings  and  165  Woodcuts.    One  Vol.   Cloth,  gilt  top,  lor.  net,

THE  HISTORY  OF  OUR  LORD,  as  exempUfied  in  Works  of  Art
Commenced  by  the  late  Mrs.  Jameson  ;  continued  and  completed  by
Lady  Eastlake.  With  31  etchings  and  a8i  Woodcuts.  7W  Vols,
Bvo,     aos,  net.

Jennings.-ECCLESIA  ANGLICANA.  A  History  of  the
Church  of  Christ  in  England  from  the  Earliest  to  the  Present  Times.
By  the  Rev.  Arthur  Charles  Jennings,  M.A    Crown  Bvo.    js,  6d,


3  A  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS


JukM.— Works  by  ANDREW  Jukes.

THE  NEW  MAN  AND  THE  ETERNAL  LIFE.      Notes  on   the
Reiterated  Amens  of  the  Son  of  God.     Crown  Bvo.    6s.

THE  NAMES  OF  GOD  IN  HOLY  SCRIPTURE:    a  Revelation  of
His  Nature  and  Relationships.    Crown  Zvo,    41.  6df.

THE  TYPES  OF  GENESIS.     Croum  9vo,    7s.  6d.

THE  SECOND  DEATH  AND  THE  RESTITUTION  OF  ALL
THINGS.     Crown  Svo.    y.  6d.

THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE  KINGDOM.     Croitm  Svo,    2J.  6rf.

Kebla.— MAXIMS  AND  GLEANINGS  FROM  THE  WRIT-
INGS  OF  JOHN  K£BLE»  M.A.  Selected  and  Arranged  for  DaUy
Use.     By  C.  M.  S.     Crowm  i6mo,    is,

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF  JOHN  KEBLE.  MA.
Crown  Bvo.    31.  6d.

Kwmaway.-CONSGLATIO ;   OR,  COMFORT  FOR  THE

AFFLICTED.    Edited  by  the  late  Rev.  C.  £.  Kbnnawat.    i6»to.
as.  6d,

King,— DR.  LIDDON'S  TOUR  IN  EGYPT  AND  PALES-
TINE IN  1886.  Being  Letters  descriptive  of  the  Tour,  written  by  his
Sister,  Mrs.  King.    Croum  Bvo,    y,

Knox  Little.— Works  by  W.  J.  Knox  Little,  MJV.,  Canon
Residentiary  of  Worcester,  and  Vicar  of  Hoar  Cross.

THE  CHRISTIAN   HOME.     Crown  Bvo,    ts.  6d.

THE  HOPES  AND  DECISIONS  OF  THE  PASSION  OF  OUR
MOST  HOLY  REDEEMER.     Crown  Bvo,    y.  6d.

THE  THREE  HOURS*  AGONY  OF  OUR  BLESSED  REDEEMER.
Being  Addresses  in  the  form  of  Meditations  delivered  ia  St  Alban's
Church,  Manchester,  on  Good  Friday.  Small  Bvo,  2j.  ;  or  in  Paper
Cover^  IS,

CHARACTERISTICS  AND  MOTIVES  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN
LIFE.  Ten  Sermons  preacbed  in  Manchester  Cathedral,  in  Lent
and  Advent.     Crown  Bvo,    y.  6d,

SERMONS  PREACHED  FOR  THE  MOST  PART  IN  MANCHES-
TER.    Crown  Bvo,     y,  6d,

THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE  PASSION  OF  OUR  MOST  HOLY
REDEEMER.     Crown  Bvo.    y.  6d,

THE  WITNESS  OF  THE  PASSION  OF  OUR  MOST  HOLY
REDEEMER.     Croim  Bvo.     y.  td,

THE  LIGHT  OF  LIFE.  Sermons  preached  on  Various  Occasions.
Crown  Bvo,    y,  6d,

SUNLIGHT  AND  SHADOW  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.
Sermons  preached  for  the  most  part  m  America.     Crown  Bvo,     y.  6d.


IN  THEOLOGICAL  LITERA  TV  RE.


Lear^— Works  by,  and  Edited  by,  H.  L.  Sidney  Lear.

FOR  DAYS  AND  YEARS.  A  Book  containing  a  Text,  Short  Reading,
and  Hymn  for  Every  Day  in  the  Church's  Year.  i6mc,  9J,td*  Also  a
Cheap  Edition^  ^2mo.     is. ;  or  cloth  gilt^  is.  6d,

FIVE  MINUTES.  Daily  Readings  of  Poetry  i6mo.  y.  6d,  Also  a
Cheap  Edition,     2^mo,     is.  ;  or  cloth  gilt,  is.  6d.

WEARINESS.  A  Book  for  the  Languid  and  Lonely.  Larjre  Type,
Small  Svo.    y.

THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  CONSCIENCE.    i6sho,    as.  6d.
cloth  limp,  6d.

Nine  Vols.    Crown  Svo.    y,  6d,  each.
The  Revival  of  Priestly  Life


38Ma.    is.


CHRISTIAN  BIOGRAPHIEa

Madame  Louise  de  France.
Daughter  of  Louis  xv.,  known
also  as  the  Mother  T6rtee  de
St.  Au^stis.

A  Dominican  Artist  :  a  Sketch  of
the  Life  of  the  Rev.  P^e  Beason,
of  the  Order  of  St.  Dominic.

Henri  Perreyvb^  ByA.  Gratry.

St.  Francis  de  Sales,  Bishop  and
Piince  of  Geneva.


IN  THE  Seventeenth  Century
in  France.
A  Christian  Painter  of  the
Nineteenth  Centvry.

BOSSUET  AND  his    CONTEMPORA-
RIES.

F^nelon,  Archbishop  op  Cam-

BRAI.

Henri  Dominique  Lacordaire.


DEVOTIONAL  WORKS.     Edited  by  H.  L.  Sidney  Lear.
Uniform  Editions.   Nine  Vols.    i6mo.    2s.  6d.  each.

FfeNELON's  Spiritual  Letters
TO  Men.

F^nblon's  Spiritual  Letters
TO  Women.

a  Selection  from  the  Spiri-
tual Letters  of  St.  Francis
de  Sales.


The  Spirit  of  St.  Francis  de
Sales.


New  and


The  Hidden  Life  of  the  Soul.

The  Light  of  the  Conscience.

Self-Renunciation.     From  the
French.

St.  Francis  de  Sales'  Of  the
Love  of  God.


Selections
Thoughts.


FROM      Pascal's


Idbrary  of  Spiritual  Works  for  English  Oatliolies.    Original

Edition.    With  Red  Borders.    Smallhvo.    s^.each.    New  and  Cheaper
Editions.     i6mo.    2s.  6d.  each.


OF     THE     IMITATION    OF
CHRIST.

THE  SPIRITUAL   COMBAT.
By  Laurence  Scupoli.

THE  DEVOUT  LIFE.    By  St.
Francis  de  Sales.


OF  THE  LOVE  OF  GOD.     By
St.  Francis  de  Sales.

THE  CONFESSIONS   OF   ST.
AUGUSTINE.   In  Ten  Boohs.

THE  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.    y.
Edition  only.


lo  A  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS

Idddon.— Works  by  Henry  Parry  Liddon,  D.D.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D;,
late  Canon  Residentiary  and  Chancellor  of  St  Paul's.

SERMONS  ON  OLD  TESTAMENT  SUBJECTS.     Crovm  Svo,    5s.

SERMONS  ON  SOME  WORDS  OF  CHRIST.    Crazm  Svo,

THE  DIVINITY  OF  OUR  LORD  AND  SAVIOUR  JESUS  CHRIST.
Being  the  Bampton  Lectures  for  1866.     Crown  Svo.    5s.

ADVENT  IN  ST.  PAUL'S.  Sermons  bearing  chiefly  on  the  Two
Comings  of  our  Lord.  Two  Vols.  Crown  Svo.  y,  6d.  each.  Cheap
Edition  in  one  Volume.     Crown  Svo.    $s.

CHRISTMASTIDE  IN  ST.  PAUL'S.  Sermons  bearing  chiefly  on  the
Birtb  of  our  Lord  and  the  End  of  the  Year.     Crown  Svo.    ^r.

PASSIONTIDE  SERMONS.    Crown  Svo.    5J.

EASTER  IN  ST.  PAUL'S.  Sermons  bearing  chiefly  on  the  Resurrec-
tion of  our  Lord.  Two  Vols.  Crown  Svo.  y.  6d.  ^ach.  Cheap
Edition  in  one  Volume.    Crown  Svo.    $s.

SERMONS  PREACHED  BEFORE  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF
OXFORD.  Two  Vols.  Crown  Svo.  3X.  f>d,  each.  Cheap  Edition  in
one  Volume,    Crovm  Svo.    5J.

THE  MAGNIFICAT.    Sermons  in  St  Paul's.    Crown  Svo.    as.  6d.

SOME  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGION.  Lent  Lectures.  Small  Svo.
2s.  6d.  ;  or  in  Paper  Cover,  is.  6d,

The  CroTvn  Svo  Edition  (5s.)  may  still  be  had.

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF  H.  P.  LIDDON,  D.D.
Crown  Svo,    3^.  6d.

MAXIMS  AND  GLEANINGS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF  H.  P.
LIDDON,  D.D.    Selected  and  arranged  by  C.  M.  S.    Crown  i6mo.   xs.


DR.  LIDDON'S  TOUR  IN  EGYPT  AND  PALESTINE  IN  1886.
Being  Letters  descriptive  of  the  Tour,  written  by  his  Sister,  Mrs.  King.
Crown  Svo,    5J.

Luckock.— Works  by  Herbert  Mortimer  Luckock,  D.D.,
Canon  of  Ely.

AFTER  DEATH,  An  Examination  of  the  Testimony  of  Primitive
Times  respecting  the  State  of  the  Faithful  Dead,  and  their  Relationship
to  the  Living.     Crown  Svo.    6s.

THE  INTERMEDIATE  STATE  BETWEEN  DEATH  AND
JUDGMENT.     Being  a  Sequel  to  .<4/?!fr  ^mM.    Crown  Svo.    6s.

FOOTPRINTS  OF  THE  SON  OF  MAN.  as  traced  by  St  Mark.  Being
Eighty  Pordons  for  Private  Study,  Family  Reading,  and  Instruc-
tions  m  Church.  Two  Vols,  Crown  Svo,  12s.  Cheap  Edition  in  one
Vol.     Crown  Svo.     5/.

\continued.


IN  THEOLOGICAL  LITERATURE,  ii

Liickock.--Works  by  Herbert  Mortimer  Luckock,  D.D.,
Canon  of  Ely — continued.

THE  DIVINE  LITURGY.  Being  the  Order  for  Holy  Communion,
Historically,  Doctrinally,  and  Devotionally  set  forth,  in  Fifty  Portions.
Crown  Bvo,    6s,

STUDIES  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  COMMON
prayer.  The  Anglican  Reform— The  Puritan  Innovations— The
Elizabethan  Reaction — The  Caroline  Settlement.  With  Appendices.
Crown  Svo,    6s,

THE  BISHOPS  IN  THE  TOWER.  A  Record  of  Stirring  Events
affecting  the  Church  and  Nonconformists  from  the  Restoration  to  the
Revolution.     Crown  Bvo,    6s,

LYRA  APOSTOLICA.  Poems  by  J.  W.  Bowden,  R.  H.
Froude,  J.  Keble,  J.  H.  Newman,  R.  I.  Wilberforce,  and
I.  Williams  ;  and  a  New  Preface  by  Cardinal  Newman.  i6mo.
With  Red  Borders.    2s,  6d.

LYRA  GERMAN  I CA.  Hymns  translated  from  the  German  by
Catherine  Winkworth.    Small  Bvo.    5J.

MacOoU.— CHRISTIANITY  IN  RELATION  TO  SCIENCE
AND  MORALS.  By  the  Rev.  Malcolm  MacColl,  M.A.,  Canon
Residentiary  of  Ripon^    Crown  Bvo,    6s,

Mason.— Works  by  A.  J.  Mason,  D.D.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity
College,  Cambridge.

THE  FAITH  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  A  Manual  of  Christian  Doctrine.
Crown  Bvo.  js.  6d.  Also  a  Large-Paper  Edition  for  Marginal  Notes.
4to.     12s,  6d,

THE  RELATION  OF  CONFIRMATION  TO  BAPTISM.  As  taught
in  Holy  Scripture  and  the  Fathers.    Crown  Bvo,    7s.  6d,

Merder.— OUR  MOTHER  CHURCH:  Being  Simple  Talk
on  High  Topics.    By  Mrs.  Jerome  Mercier.    Small  Bvo,    3s.  6d.

Moberly.— Works  by  George  Moberly,  D.C.L.,  late  Bishop  of
Salisbury.

PLAIN  SERMONS.     Preached  at  Brighstone.     Crown  Bvo.    y.

THE  SAYINGS  OF  THE  GREAT  FORTY  DAYS,  between  the
Resurrection  and  Ascension,  regarded  as  the  Outlines  of  the  Kingdom
of  Grod.     In  Five  Discourses.     Crown  Bvo,    51.

PAROCHIAL  SERMONS.  Mostly  preached  at  Brighstone.  Crown  Bivo.
'js.  6d.

SERMONS  PREACHED  AT  WINCHESTER  COLLEGE.  Two  Vols.
Small  Bvo.    6s.  6d,  each.     Sold  separately.


12  A  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS

llosley.— Woiics  by  J.  B.  Mozley,  D.D.,  late  CaiKm  of  Christ
Church,  and  Regius  Professm*  of  Divinity  at  OxfonL

ESSAYS,  HISTORICAL  AND  THEOLCXSICAL.    Two  Vols,   8w.   241.

EIGHT  LECTURES  ON  MIRACLES.  Being  the  Bunpton  Lectures
fior  1865.    CrtewM  8fv.    ^s,  6d,

RULING  IDEAS  IN  EARLY  AGES  AND  THEIR  RELATION  TO
OLD  TESTAMENT  FAITH.  Lectures  delivered  to  Graduates  of
the  University  of  Oxford,    dvo.    10s,  6d.

SERMONS  PREACHED  BEFORE  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF
OXFORD,  and  on  Various  Occasions.    Crown  Zvo.    js,  6d.

SERMONS.  PAROCHIAL  AND  OCCASIONAU     Crvmrn  8w.    7s.  6d.

Moday.— Works  by  the  Rev.  T.  Mozley,  M.A.,  Author
of  'Reminiscences  of  Oriel  College  and  the  Oxford
Movement'

THE  WORD.     Crozmt  Bvo.    7s,  6d.

THE  SON.    Crown  9vo.    7s,  6d,

LETTERS  FROM  ROME  ON  THE  OCCASION  OF  THE
(ECUMENICAL  COUNCIL  1869-1870.     Two  Vols,     Cr,  Svo,    i8j.

Newbolt.— Works  by  the  Rev.  W.  C.  E.  Newbolt,  M.A.,  Canon
Residentiary  of  St.  Paul's.

THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  SPIRIT.  Being  Ten  Addresses  bearing  on
the  Spiritual  Life.     Crown  8vo,    2s.  6iL

THE  MAN  OF  GOD.  Being  Six  Addresses  delivered  during  Lent
1886,  at  the  Primary  Ordination  of  the  Right  Rev.  the  Lord  Alwyne
Compton,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Ely.    Small  Zvo,    is,  6d,

THE  VOICE  OF  THE  PRAYER  BOOK.  Being  Spiritual  Addresses
bearing  on  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.     Crown  9vo,    sj.  6d,

NewidtUlL.— THE  ALL-FATHER:  Sermons  preached  in  a
Village  Church.  By  the  Rev.  H.  P.  Newnham.  With  Preface  by
Edna  Lyall.    Crown  Bvo,    4;.  6d,

NtwnhaHL— ALRESFORD  ESSAYS  FOR  THE  TIMES.  By
Rev.  W.  O.  Newnham,  M.  A. ,  late  Rector  of  Alresford.  Co»tents  :—
Bible  Story  of  Creation— Bible  Story  of  Eden— Bible  Story  of  the
Deluge — ^Aifter  Death— Miracles  :  A  Conversation — Eternal  Punishment
— The  Resurrection  of  the  Body.    Crown  Svo,    6j.


IN  THEOLOGICAL  LITERATURE.  13

Newman.— Works  by  John  Henry  Newman,  B.D.,  sometime
Vicar  of  St  Mary's,  Oxford.

PAROCHIAL  AND  PLAIN  SERMONS.  Eight  Vols,  Cabinet  EdiHon.
Crown  Svo.  5J.  tacA,  Popular  Edition,  Eight  Vols,  Crown  Bvo,
y.  6d,  each,

SELECTION,  ADAPTED  TO  THE  SEASONS  OF  THE  ECCLE-
SIASTICAL YEAR,  from  the  'Parochial  and  Plain  Sormons.'
Cabinet  Edition,  Crown  Svo,  5s,  Popular  Edition,  Crown  %vo,
y.  td,

FIFTEEN  SERMONS  PREACHED  BEFORE  THE  UNIVERSITY
OF  OXFORD,  between  a.d.  1826  and  1843.     Crown  %vo,     5s,

SERMONS  BEARING  UPON  SUBJECTS  OF  THE  DAY.  Cabinet
Edition,   Crown  %w.  $s.  Popular  Edition,  CrawnZvo,  y.6d

LECTURES  ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION.  Crown
Svo,     $s,

THE  LETTERS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE  OF  JOHN   HENRY
NEWMAN  DURING  HIS  LIFE  IN  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH
With  a  Brief  Autobiographical   Memoir.     Arranged  and  Edited  by
Anne  Mozley.     Two  Vols,  Svo,    301.  net,
\*  For  other  Works  by  Cardinal  Newman,  see  Messrs.  Longmans  d  Co.*s  Catalogue

of  Works  In  General  Literature,

Csborne.— Works  by  Edward  Osborne,  Mission  Priest  of  the
Society  of  St  John  the  Evangelist,  Cowley,  Oxford.

THE  CHILDREN'S  SAVIOUR.  Instructions  to  Children  on  the  Life
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.    Illustrated.    i6mo,    as,  6d,

THE  SAVIOUR-KING.  Instructions  to  Children  on  Old  Testament
Types  and  Illustrations  of  the  Life  of  Christ.  Illustrated,   i6mo,  as,  6d,

THE  CHILDREN'S  FAITH.  Instructions  to  Children  on  the  Apostles'
Creed.    Illustrated,    i6mo,    as,  6d,

Oxenden.— Works  by  the  Right  Rev.  Ashton  Oxenden,  for-
merly Bishop  of  Montreal.

THE  HISTORY  OF  MY  UFE  :  An  Autobiography.    Crown  Svo,    5^.

PEACE  AND  ITS  HINDRANCES.    Crown  Svo,    is,  \  sewed,  as,,  cloth,

THE  PATHWAY  OF  SAFETY  ;  or,  Counsel  to  the  Awakened.  Fcap,
Svo,  large  type.    as.  6d,    Cheap  Edition,    Small  tj^pe,  limp,    is,

THE  EARNEST  COMMUNICANT.  New  Red  Rubric  Edition,  ^mo,
cloth,    as.    Common  Edition,    ^amo*  is,

OUR  CHURCH  AND  HER  SERVICES.    Reap.  Svo.    as,  6d.

[continued.


14  A  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS


Oxenden.— Works   by  the    Right    Rev.   Ashton   Oxenden,
formerly  Bishop  of  Montreal — continued.

FAMILY  PRAYERS  FOR  FOUR  WEEKS.    First  Series.    Fcap,  Sw.
aj.  6d.    Second  Series.    P^^-  ^vo.     as.  6d.
Labgb  Type  Edition.   Two  Series  in  one  Volume.   Crown  ^vo.   6s,

COTTAGE  SERMONS ;  or,  Plain  Words  to  the  Poor.  Fcap:  Svc,  2s.  6d,

THOUGHTS  FOR  HOLY  WEEK.     i6mo,  cloth,     w.  6</.

DECISION.    \^mo,    \s,  6d.

THE  HOME  BEYOND  ;  or,  A  Happy  Old  Age.    Fcap,  8w.     is.  6tL

THE  LABOURING  MANS  BOOK.     i8»w,  large  type,  cloth,     is.  6d.

Paget— Works  by  Francis  Paget,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Christ  Church,
Oxford.

THE  SPIRIT  OF  DISCIPLINE :  Sermons.     Crown  Zvo.    6s,  6d.

FACULTIES    AND    DIFFICULTIES    FOR    BELIEF   AND    DIS-
BELIEF.    Crown  8w.    6s.  6d.

THE  HALLOWING  OF  WORK.    Addresses  given  at  Eton,  January
16-18,  1888.     Small  Zvo.     2s.

PRACTICAL  REFLECTIONS.  By  a  CLERGYMAN.  With
Prefeces  by  H.  P.  Liddon,  D.D.,  D.C.L.     Crown  Bvo.

VoL  I.— The  Holy  Gospels.    4*.  6d.
Vol.  II.— Acts  to  Revelation.    6s.
The  Psalms,    sj.

PRIEST  (THE)  TO  THE  ALTAR ;  Or,  Aids  to  the  Devout
Celebration  of  Holy  Communion,  chiefly  after  the  Ancient  English
Use  of  Sarum.    Jfoyal  Bvo,     12s.

Pusey.— Works  by  E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.

PRIVATE  PRAYERS.   With  Preface  by  H.  P.  LiDDON,  D.  D.   3^mo.  is.

PRAYERS  FOR  A  YOUNG  SCHOOLBOY.  With  a  Preface  by
H.  P.  LiDDON,  D.D.     a^tno.     is.

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF  EDWARD  BOUVERIE
PUSEY,  D.D.     Crown  Bvo.     y.  6d.

MAXIMS  AND  GLEANINGS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF
EDWARD  BOUVERIE  PUSEY,  D.D.  Selected  and  Arranged  for
Daily  Use.     By  C.  M.  S.     Crown  i6mo.    is.

Reynolds.— THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  of  IMMORTALITY.
By  the  Rev.  J.  W.  Reynolds,  M.A,  Prebendauy  of  St.  Paul's.
Crown  Bvo*    js,  6d,


IN  THEOLOGICAL  LITERATURE,  15

BichmoncL— CHRISTIAN   ECONOMICS.    By  the  Rev.

Wilfrid  Richmond,  M.A.,  sometime  Warden  of  Trinity  College,
Glenalmond.     Crown  Svo.    dr.

Sanday.— THE  ORACLES  OF  GOD  :  Nine  Lectures  on  the
Nature  and  Extent  of  Biblical  Inspiration  and  the  Special  Significance
of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  at  the  Present  Time.  By  W.
Sanday»  M.A.,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Dean  Ireland's  Professor  of  Exegesis
and  Fellow  of  Exeter  College.     Cr&wn  Svo,    4s.

Seebohm.— THE  OXFORD  REFORMERS— JOHN  COLET,

ERASMUS.  AND  THOMAS  MORE :  A  History  of  their  FeUow-
Work.    By  Frederic  Sebbohm.    Svo.    14J.

Stanton.— THE  PLACE  OF  AUTHORITY  IN  MATTERS
OF  RELIGIOUS  BELIEF.  By  VtNCENT  Henry  Stanton,  D.D.,
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Ely  Professor  of  Divinity,  Cambridge.
Crown  Svo.    6s.

Stephen.— ESSAYS    IN   ECCLESIASTICAL   BIOGRAPHY.

By  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  J.  Stephen.     Crotun  Svo.    7s.  6d.

Swayne.— THE  BLESSED  DEAD  IN  PARADISE.  Four
All  Saints'  Day  Sermons,  preached  in  Salisbury  Cathedral.  By  R.  G.
Swayne,  M.A.    CroTvn  Svo.    y.  6d.

Tweddell.— THE  SOUL  IN  CONFLICT.  A  Practical  Exami-
nation of  some  Difficulties  and  Duties  of  the  Spiritual  Life.  By
Marshall  Tweddell,  M.A,  Vicar  of  St.  Saviour,  Paddington.
Crown  Svo.    6s.

Twells.— COLLOQUIES    ON    PREACHING.      By   Henry

TwELLS,  M.A.,  Honorary  Canon  of  Peterborough.     Crown  Svo.    ^.

Wakeman.— THE  HISTORY  OF  RELIGION  IN  ENGLAND.
By  Henry  Offley  Wakeman,  M.A.    Small  Svo.    is.  6d.

Welldon.  — THE  FUTURE  AND  THE  PAST.  Sermons
preached  to  Harrow  Boys.  By  the  Rev,  J.  E.  C.  Welldon,  M.A.,
Head  Master  of  Harrow  School.     Crown  Svo.    -js.  6d,

Williams.— Works  by  the  Rev.  Isaac  Williams,  B.D.

A   DEVOTIONAL  COMMENTARY   ON  THE  GOSPEL  NARRA-
TIVE.   Eight  Vols.    Crown  Svo.    51.  eacA.    Sold  separately.


Thoughts  on  the  Study  op  the
Holy  Gospels.

A  Harmony  of  the  Four  Gospels.

Our  Lord's  Nativity,

Our  Lord's  MiNisTRY(Secoiid  Year).


Our  Lord's  Ministry  (Third  Year).

The  Holy  Week.

Our  Lord's  Passion.

Our  Lord's  Resurrection.


FEMALE   CHARACTERS   OF    HOLY   SCRIPTURE.     A  Series  of
Sermons.     Crown  Svo.    sj.

\continued.


i6        WORKS  IN  THEOLOGICAL  LITERATURE.

'^nmiiuiu.— Works  by  the  Rev.  Isaac  Williams,  B,D.,  formerly
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford — continued,
THE  CHARACTERS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.    A  Series  of

SennoDt.    Cratm  tvo.    sf.
THE  APOCALYPSE.    With  Notes  and  Reflections.    Crvwrt  8m,    51.
SERMONS  ON  THE  EPISTLES  AND  GOSPELS  FOR  THE  SUN-
DAYS AND  HOLY  DAYS  THROUGHOUT  THE  YEAR.     Tm
Vail.     CrvuH  81W.     51.  lacA.
PLAIN  SERMONS  ON  THE  CATECHISM.     Two  Volt.    Cnnuii  S»>.

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF  ISAAC  WILLIAMS,
aiX    Crmm  Bvo,    31.  6tl.

Woed&rd. — Works   by   James   Russexl    Woodford,   D.O.,
sometime  Lord  Bishop  of  Ely.

THE  GREAT  COMMISSION.  Twelve  Addresses  on  the  OrdioaL
Edited,  with  an  lalroduclioo  on  the  Ordinations  of  his  Episcopate,  by
HuiBERT  MOETIMER  LucKOCK,  D.D,     Cmtan  8™.     51.


Wooitnff.  — THE    CHILDREN'S     YEAR.    Verses   for    the

Sundays  and  Holy  Days  throughout  the  Year.  By  C,  H,  WoODRUEF.
aCL.  With  an  Introduction  by  the  LORD  Bishop  of  Southwell.
Fcap.  8w.     33.  6tf.

WonlswortlL

Ff  Ult  af  Wtrkt  bu  tilt  Ittt  Olirlttaphtr  Wanlsmrtli,  D.O.,  Slthap  a}
LliKOln,  M*  Mestri,  Lonamaiu  A  Co.'s  Cntalagut  of  Jhtalegloal  Worka,
83  pp.     Salt  pett  frit  on  application,

WordswOTth.— Works  by  Elizabeth  Wordsworth,  Principal
of  Lady  Margaret  Hall,  Oxford.
ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  THE  CREED.     Cnrnn  Sw.    s*-
CHRISTOPHER  AND  OTHER  POEMS.     Cmvm  Ova.     61.

Tonn^iubajid.— Works  by  Frances  Younghusband.

THE  STORY  OF  OUR  LORD,  lold  in  Simple  Language  for  Children.

With  95  Illustrations  from  Pictures  by  the  Old  Masters.     CrmiiH  ivo.

n.  f^
THE  STORY  OF  GENESIS,  lold  in  Simple  Language  for  ChUdrea.

OvKUt  Siw.     SI.  dd.
THE   STORY    OF    THE    EXODUS,   fold  in    Simple    Language  tat
Children.     With  Map  and  ag  Uluslratltuis.     Ctvwn  Svo.     31,  6d.      .


A  Ssis;


n


df.


vM
